LIBRAEY 

OF   THE 

Theological    Seminary, 

PRINCETON,     N.    J. 

gw...  ISS:         Divisi   

Melf         -  Sect.on I 

Book  No 


PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS 


THE    PSALMS 


By  J.  N.   I) 


JoUvn      Ne-1'oOvn    JJcnr-b»Y  "I 


LONDON: 
ROBERT  L.  ALLAN',   15  PATERNOSTER  ROW 5 

And  76  SAUOHIEHALL  STREET,  GLASGOW. 
DUBLIN:   TRACT   DEPOT,    13   Wbibtlahd    Bow. 

«.l'l  i:\SKV:  .1.  TUNLEY,   KM   VlOTOBU   BOAD. 

BOSTON,   i.s.:  p.  i;.   BROWN,  3  Tbbmoht  Bow. 


/</ 


PREFACE. 


PROBABLY  no  part  of  Scripture  has  been  so  little  generally 
understood  in  its  true  application  and  interpretation  as  the  Book 
f  Psalms.  And  yet  but  few  portions  have  been  more  the  solace 
of  the  heart,  in  giving  a  voice  to  the  exercises  of  souls  of  the  saints 
of  God  in  all  ages  than  they.   . 

"With  the  true  understanding,  in  recent  years,  of  the  calling  and 
hopes  of  the  Church  of  God,  has  also  been  unfolded  that  of  Israel ; 
and  with  this,  the  understanding  of  those  touching  and  heart  feel- 
in  ;■  plaints  which  came  from  the  pen  and  heart  of  the  Shepherd- 
King  of  Israel,  as  of  others  too — many  of  them  the  fruit  of  those 
moments  of  his  sufferings,  under  the  hand  and  during  the  reign 
of  Saul. 

•  1 I avid  and  all  his  afflictions,"  touches  and  moves  the  heart's 
affections  more  than  "  Solomon  in  all  his  glories."  A  greater  than 
David  was  there  in  spirit,  giving  a  voice  to  those  blessed  and 
divine  songs.  As  an  inspired  writer  in  the  New  Testament 
when  using,  under  the  direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  one  of  these 
divine  songs,  (Ps.  viii.)  in  unfolding  the  glories  of  the  Son  of  Man, 
i  II.'!'.  ii.)  would  not  say.  "  David"  in  a  certain  place  testified,  but 
"One  in  a  certain  place  testified;"  for  he  knew  that  a  greater 
than  David  was  there  ! 

\Yc  road  in  Isaiah,  (c.  lxiii.)  li  In  all  their  afflictions  lie  was 
afflicted:"  and  we  know  of  a  day  which  approaches  fast,  when 
Jacob's  time  of  trouble  comes,  (Jer.  xxx.  7)  and  unlike  his  former 
troubles  "he  shall  he  saved  out  of  it."    lie  will  then  have  to  pass 


IV.  PREFACE. 

through  his  sorrow  in  the  great  tribulation,  under  the  government 
of  God  in  the  earth.  These  divine  plaints  will  find  a  response  in  his 
heart  when  passing  through  the  furnace  of  affliction  in  that  day. 
Jesus  had  been  through  theni  before  him,  "  in  all  their  afflictions 
.  .  .  afflicted."  And  the  godly  Remnant  of  Israel  will  thus  learn 
morally,  the  heart  and  affections  of  Jehovah-Messiah ;  before 
their  eyes  behold  Him ;  and  they  look  upon  Him  whom  they 
pierced,  and  mourn,  as  one  rnoumeth  for  an  only  son ;  and  say, 
What  are  these  wounds  in  thine  hands?  And  He  shall  answer, 
Those  with  which  I  was  wounded  in  the  house  of  my  friends. 
(Zech.  xii.,  xiii.) 

All  this  has  been  treated  in  the  way  of  prophetic  interpretation 
by  the  writer  of  this  book.*  This  treatise  does  not  therefore  so 
much  take  up  the  Psalms  in  this  way;  but  with  the  view  of 
the  profit  to  the  souls  of  the  saints,  in  their  moral  teaching. 
apart  from  direct  prophetic  interpretation. 

Still,  while  sweet  and  blessed  lessons  are  to  be  gathered  here 
as  in  all  parts  of  the  word  of  God  ;  they  do  not  contain  the  true 
experience  of  Christians,  in  the  known  and  enjoyed  relationship 
ministered  to  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven ; 
unless  so  far  as  we  are  partakers  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  We 
possess  four  things,  as  Christians,  which  are  never  found  in  the 
Psalms.  They  are,  a  purged  conscience  through  the  finished 
work  of  the  cross.  The  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
knowledge  of  the  Father,  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Son :  and  out- 
standing in  divine  righteousness  by  the  gospel,  in  contrast  to  the 
"  forbearance,"  under  which  the  saints  of  old  stood  before  God. 
(See  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.) 

*  Synopsis  of  the  Books  of  the  Bible.    Vol.  ii.    Morrish  ;  London. 


PREFACE.  V. 

When  at   peace  with   God,  the  heart  turns   back   from  the 

Epistles,  whore  the  work  of  Christ  is  unfolded,  and  all  needed 
to  sot  the  soul  at  rest  and  peace  with  God  is  made  known; 
it  turns  back  to  the  Gospels  to  learn  the  ways,  and  thoughts 
anil  actions  of  Him  who  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us. 
It  turns  hack  still — when  rightly  informed  as  to  the  true  meaning 
of  the  Psalms, — to  them,  and  learns  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  how 
His  sympathies  enter  into,  and  give  a  voice  to  the  exercises  of  His 
people's  hearts.  He  "learned"  all  this  when  in  divine  grace,  He 
entered  into  that  order  of  suffering,  especially  at  the  close  of  His 
life  on  earth,  in  order  to  be  able  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him 
who  is  weary.  It  learns  too  the  plaint  of  His  own  heart,  at 
moments  when  no  human  heart  could  ever  fathom  the  deep 
waters  of  anguish  His  holy  soul  passed  through. 

May  the  reader  learn,  by  His  Gracious  Spirit,  and  as  at  peace 
with  God,  to  discern  the  things  that  differ,  and  to  gather  from 
every  line  of  Scripture  those  lessons  by  which  the  heart  is 
enlarged  in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  ;  that  so,  while  he  knows  the 
true  and  direct  application  of  the  Book  of  Psalms,  as  intended  of 
God,  he  may  also  find  in  them  sweet  food  for  his  own  soul,  and 
solace  and  comfort  in  the  sorrows  and  trials  of  the  way;  and 
more  truly  apprehend  the  dealings  and  government  of  God,  which 
never  changes  in  its  direct  application;  though  never  displayed 
unless  on  its  true  platform — His  ancient  people  Israel,  now  set 
aside  nationally  for  a  time;  but  hereafter  to  be  restored,  and  to  be 
the  platform  for  His  open  and  manifest  government  of  the  world. 

P.  G.  P. 

BliAl  BBOCK,  1870. 


ERRATA. 

Page   25,  line  9,. for  which  he  has  brought,  read  which  He  has  brought. 
,,      35,  line  4  from  foot,  for  His  .  .  .  place  as  man  in  glory,  read 

His  .  .  .  place  as  man  is  glory. 
,,      46,  line  11  from  foot,  for  He  that  loves  Him,  read  he  that  loves 

Him. 
,,      50,  line  2  from  foot,  delete  period  after  "  and  at  thy  right  hand." 
,,      50,  line  17,  for  does  so  to,  read  does  so  too. 
.,      59,    ,,    18,   ,,  for  his  living  heard,  read  for  his  being  heard. 
„      63,    ,,    13,  ,,  which  he  lias,  read  which  He  has. 
,,      60,    ,,     9,  insert  in  before  xxi. — 9. 

60,    ,,    11.  delete  "  in  which." 
,,      71,    .,     4  from  foot. /or  forsaken,  r<w?  forsaking. 
.,      71,  last  line,  for  enclouded,  read  unclouded. 
,,      82,  line    1,/or  for  He  knew  Jehovah,  read  for  he  knew  Jehovah. 
„      90,  line  8  from  foot,  for  scheol,  read  scheol. 
.,     97,  line  2,  for  come  upon  Him  that  cries,  read  come  upon  him  that 

cries. 
,,    129,  lino  9  from  foot,  delete  "  is"  before  "  in  chastening." 
„   345,  line  15,/or  God's  ways  revealing,  read  God's  way  revealing. 


INDEX. 


Psalm  i.. 
[., 

iii. 
iv., 


VUl., 

ix..  x..     • 

xi.. 

xii., 

xiii., 

xiv., 

xv., 

xvi.. 

xvii.. 

xviii., 

xix.. 

xx..  xxi.. 

xxii., 

xxiii., 

xxiv.. 

xxv., 

xxvi.. 

xxvii..    - 

xxviii., 

xxix.. 

xxx., 

xxxi., 

xxxii..     - 

xxxiii., 

xxxiv.,     - 

xwv.. 


PAD]  . 

I'ai.k. 

10 

Psalm  xxxvi.,    - 

-      112 

11 

xxxvii.. 

-      120 

11 

..     xxxviii.. 

-      125 

13 

.,      xxxix.. 

-      129 

N 

..      xl.. 

-      129 

16 

,.      xli., 

-      136 

is 

.,      xlii.. 

-      138 

19 

,,     xliii.. 

-      143 

19 

..     xliv.. 

-      146 

20 

,.     xlv., 

-      153 

25 

„  )  xlvi..       - 

-      156 

2G 

xlvii., 

-       157 

28 

,.     xlviii..  xlix.. 

-      158 

29 

29 

.,     li.,  - 

-      1G2 

54 

58 

„     Hii., 

-      169 

61 

..      liv.. 

-      171 

65 

..     lv..- 

-      171 

67 

..     lvi.. 

-      174 

7f. 

„     lvli.,       - 

-      177 

78 

.,     lviii.. 

-      179 

80 

„     lix., 

-        ISO 

86 

..     Ix.,  - 

-      181 

86 

..      lxi.. 

-      182 

90 

,,     lxii.. 

-      183 

92 

,.      lxiii.. 

-      186 

98 

„      lxiv.. 

-      191 

% 

..      Ixv.. 

-      193 

98 

.,     lxvi..       - 

195 

106 

lxvii.. 

-       197 

106 

..      Ixviii..    - 

-      197 

no 

..      lviw.       - 

-      198 

INDEX. 


Psalm  Ixx., 

PAGE. 

-   198 

I  Psalm  exv., 

PAGE. 

-   266 

,,  lxxi., 

-   198 

,,  cxvi., 

-   268 

.,  lxxii., 

-   198 

.,  cxvii.,  - 

-   270 

,,  lxxiii.,  - 

-   198 

,,  cxviii.,  - 

-   270 

lxxiv.,  - 

-   203 

„  cxix., 

-   -   271 

.,  lxxv., 

-   204 

,,  cxx., 

-   314 

,,  lxxvi.,  - 

-   204 

,,  exxi.,  - 

-   -   314 

.,  lxxvii.,  - 

-   205 

exxii.,  - 

-   315 

,,  lxxviii.,  - 

-   207 

,.  exxiii.,  - 

-   315 

,,  Ixxix..  -   -   , 

-   209 

.,  exxiv.,  - 

-   316 

.,   lxxx.,  - 

-   210 

exxv.,  - 

-   316 

,,  Ixxxi.,  - 

-   215 

exxvi.,  - 

-   316 

.,  Ixxxii.,  -   -   - 

-   217 

exxvii.,  - 

-   318 

Ixxxiii.,  - 

-   217 

,,  exxviii., 

-   318 

,,  Ixxxiv.,  -   -   - 

-   218 

,,  exxix..  - 

-   319 

„  lxxxv.,  - 

-   222 

.,  exxx.,  - 

-   32o 

,,  lxxxvi.,  - 

-   227 

,,  exxxi.,  - 

-   321 

,,  Ixxxvii., 

-   229 

.,  exxxii.,  - 

-   321 

.,  lxxxviii., 

-   230 

,,  exxxiii., 

-   326 

„  lxxxix.,  - 

-   233 

,,  exxxiv., 

-   327 

,,  xc,    ... 

-   235 

,,   exxxv.,  - 

-   328 

,,  xci.,   ... 

-   238 

,,  exxxvi.,  - 

-   320 

,,  xcii.,   ... 

-   240 

,,  exxxvii., 

-   331 

,,  xciii.,   - 

-   241 

,.  exxxviii., 

-   331 

,,  xciv.,   - 

-   245 

,,  exxxix., 

-   334 

,,  xcv.— cii.. 

-   253 

,,  cxl., 

-   330 

ciii.,   - 

-   256 

,,  cxli., 

-   336 

„  civ.,   ... 

-   256 

,,  cxiii.,  - 

-   338 

,,  cv.,  evi.,  cvii., 

-   257 

,,  exliii.,  - 

-   338 

„  cviii.,  ... 

-   260 

,,  cxliv 

-   340 

,,  cix.,   ... 

-   261 

,,  cxlv., 

-   340 

„  ex.,    - 

-   262 

cxlvi.,  - 

-   343 

,,  cxi.,   ... 

-   263 

„  cxlvii.,  - 

-   343 

,,  cxii.,   ... 

-   264 

,,  cxlviii.,  - 

-   345 

cxiii.,   ... 

-   265 

„  cxlix.,  - 

-   346 

.,  cxiv.,   ... 

-   266 

PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  PSALMS. 


My  purpose  in  this  series  of  papers  is  not  to  interpret 
the  Psalms,  but  to  draw  from  them  some  portion  of 
the  spiritual  instruction  and  edification  they  afford 
our  souls.  The  interpretation  has  been  sought  to  be 
given  elsewhere.  The  Psalms  afford  us  special  light 
on  the  government  of  God  and  the  sympathies  of  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  with  His  people.  This,  in  the  first 
instance,  has  the  Jews  for  its  object  and  centre  of  dis- 
play. Still,  in  making  allowance  for  the  difference  of 
their  state  and  ours,  and  of  the  relationship  of  a  people 
with  Jehovah  and  children  with  a  Father,  God's  ways 
in  government  apply  to  us  Christians  also.  If  it  is 
not  the  highest  ground  on  which  a  Christian  is  viewed, 
for  that  is  heavenly,  it  is  a  most  important  and 
interesting  one,  and  brings  out  all  the  tenderest 
displays  of  divine  care,  the  care  of  Him  who  counts 
the  very  hairs  of  our  head,  and  the  seriousness  and 
vigilance  required  in  walking  before  God,  who  never 
swerves  from  His  holy  ways,  who  is  not  mocked,  nor 
withdraws  His  eyes  from  the  righteous,  though  all  be 
the  mil)  istration  of  His  grace  for  perfecting  us  according 
to  these  ways  before  Him.  Of  this  application  of  the 
government   of    God    to   the    Christian's   ways,    the 


10         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Epistles  of  Peter  are  more  especially  the  witness. 
See,  for  example,  1  Peter  i.  17 ;  iii.  10 — 15,  and  the 
spirit  and  tenor  of  the  whole  Epistle.  This  govern- 
ment in  the  2nd  Ep.  is  carried  on  to  the  consummation 
of  all  things.  The  first  is  more  the  government  of 
the  righteous,  the  second  the  judgment  of  the  wicked, 
though  that  judgment,  as  closing  the  power  of  evil 
and  the  deliverance  of  the  just,  be  alluded  to  in  the 
first  also.  He  was  the  apostle  of  the  circumcision, 
and  this  subject  came  specially  under  his  eye  in 
teaching. 

Psalm  i.  This  government  in  the  earth  is  plainly 
pointed  out  in  the  first  Psalm  and  the  character  of 
those  whom  that  government  blesses.  He  it  is  who 
keeps  separate  from  the  wicked  in  his  way,  and 
delights  in  the  law  of  Jehovah  and  meditates  on  it. 
Submission  to  the  Christ,  as  the  depositary  of  this 
government  in  God's  counsels  at  the  close  of  this  time 
of  trial,  is  the  subject  of  the  second.  Only  a  few 
words  on  the  first  of  these  two  Psalms,  which  lay  the 
basis  of  all  the  rest.  The  counsel  of  the  ungodly,  the 
way  of  sinners,  and  the  seat  of  the  scornful  are  avoided. 
While  here  connected  with  human  responsibility  in  Avalk, 
yet  it  is  being  kept  from  the  evil.  I  do  not  desire  to 
spin  out  the  force  of  the  words,  but  a  few  remarks  may 
be  made  on  these  words.  The  ungodly  have  plans,  coun- 
sels of  their  own  will,  their  own  way  of  viewing  things 
and  arrangements  to  obtain  their  purpose.  There  the 
just  is  not  found.  The  sinner  has  a  path  in  which  he 
walks,  pleasing  himself  there  :  the  just  does  not  walk 
with  him.     The  scornful  are  at  ease,  despising  God. 


THE  rSALMS. — PSALM   II.,   III.  11 

There  the  just  will  not  sit.  Judgment  will  come  and 
sucli  will  not  be  allowed  to  stand  in  the  congregation 
of  the  just  then  brought  to  rest  by  the  glory  of  God. 

Psalm  ii.  This  Psalm  announces  the  establishment 
of  Christ's  earthly  triumph  and  royalty  in  Zion,  when 
the  heathen  shall  be  given  Him  for  an  inheritance. 
This  La  not  fulfilled.  The  Government  of  God  does 
qoI  secure  the  good  from  suffering  as  it  will  then,  but 
turns  suffering  to  spiritual  blessing  and  restrains  the 
remainder  of  wrath,  giving  a  glorious  reward  for  our 
little  sorrows.  But  for  us  a  Father's  name  is  revealed 
in  them.  We  call  on  the  Father  who,  without  respect 
of  persons,  judges  according  to  every  man's  work,  and 
we  pass  the  time  of  our  sojourning  here  in  fear,  know- 
ing that  we  are  redeemed.  Here  kings  are  called  on 
to  siilniiit  before  the  coming  judgment  of  the  earth. 
But  this  is  not  yet  executed,  and  Ave  have  to  learn  our 
own  lesson  in  patience.    This  the  Psalms  will  teach  us. 

Psalm  hi.  Let  us  see  the  lessons  of  the  first  Psalms 
which  follow.  Troublers  are  multiplied,  but  the  first 
thought  of  faith  is  "Lord."  There  the  spirit  is  at 
home  and  looks  at  troublers  from  thence.  Jehovah  is 
thus  trusted.  When  '•Lord"  comes  in  the  heart  before 
those  that  trouble  me,  all  is  well.  Our  spirit  sees  Him 
concerned  ill  matters  and  is  at  peace,  lie  is  a  glory, 
shield,  and  lifter  up.  Another  point  is,  it  is  not  a  lazy, 
listless  view  of  evil  and  good,  nor  listless  confidence. 
Desire  and  dependence  are  active,  the  links  of  the  soul 
with  Jehovah.  I  cru  d  and  He  heard.  That  is  certain. 
That  is  the  confidence  that  if  we  ask  anything  accord- 


12  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

ing  to  His  will  He  hears,  and  if  He  hears,  Ave  have 
the  petition.  We  do  not  desire,  if  sincere,  to  have 
anything-  not  according  to  His  will ;  but  it  is  an  im- 
mense thing,  in  the  midst  of  trial  and  difficulty,  to  be 
sure  of  God's  hearing,  and  God's  arm,  in  what  is 
according  to  His  will.  Hence  rest  and  peace.  I  laid 
me  down  and  slept :  I  awaked  :  for  the  Lord  sustained 
me.  How  emphatic  and  simple  !  Is  it  so  with  you 
reader  ?  Does  all  trouble  find  your  heart  resting  on 
God  as  your  Father  that,  when  it  is  multiplied,  it 
leaves  your  spirit  at  rest,  your  sleep  sweet,  lying-  down 
sleeping  and  rising  as  if  all  was  peace  around  you  be- 
cause you  know  God  is  and  disposes  of  all  things? 
Is  He  thus  between  you  and  your  troubles  and 
troublers  ?  And  if  He  is,  what  can  reach  you  ?  The 
thousands  of  enemies  make  no  difference  if  God  is 
there.  The  Assyrian  is  gone  before  he  can  arise  to 
trouble  or  execute  the  threats,  which,  after  all, 
betray  his  conscious  fear.  We  are  foolish  as  to  diffi- 
culties and  trials,  measuring  them  by  our  strength 
instead  of  God's,  who  is  for  us  if  we  are  His.  What 
matter  that  the  cities  of  Canaan  were  walled  up  to 
heaven,  if  the  walls  fell  at  the  blast  of  a  ram's  horn  ? 
Could  Peter  have  walked  on  a  smooth  sea  better 
than  on  a  rough  one  ?  Our  wisdom  is  to  know  that 
we  can  do  nothing  without  Jesus — with  Him,  every- 
thing that  is  according  to  His  will.  The  secret  of 
peace  is  to  be  occupied  with  Him  for  His  own  sake, 
and  we  shall  find  peace  in  Him  and  through  Him,  and 
be  more  than  conquerors  when  trouble  comes,  not  that 
we  shall  be  insensible  to  trial,  but  find  Him  and  His 
tender  care  with  us  when  trouble  comes. 


THE   PSALMS.— PSALM   IV.  13 

Psalm  iv.  This  Psalm  affords  us  another  most  import- 
ant principle,  the  effect  of  a  good  conscience  in  calling 
upon  God  in  our  distress.  It  is  not  here  a  good  con- 
acience  as  justified  from  sin,  but  a  practically  good 
conscience,  giving  confidence  towards  God.  If  our 
heart  condemn  us  not,  says  the  apostle,  then  have  we 
confidence  towards  God.  Hear  me  when  I  call,  0 
God  of  my  righteousness.  He  does  not  say,  Justify 
me,  0  God  of  my  righteousness  ;  but  hear  me.  The 
soul  is  in  trouble,  yet  had  been  enlarged,  had  had 
experience  of  God's  faithful  lovingkindness.  His 
glory  and  honour  was  from  God.  How  true  this  was 
of  Christ  !  Man  turned  it  into  shame  and  sought 
after  vanity.  Still  it  remained  unalterably  true,  in  the 
divine  government  of  Him  who  cannot  deny  Himself 
that  He  has  set  apart  the  godly  for  Himself.  They 
are  thine,  says  Christ.  We  are  a  peculiar  people  to 
Himself.  Now  this  is  always  true,  but  in  walking  in 
godliness  we  have  the  present  confidence  of  it,  and 
our  eye  sees  God  brightly,  and  we  know  then  He  will 
hear  us.  We  have  not  lost  the  perception  of  what 
Ee  is  ;ii  the  present  moment  for  us.  Our  soul  is  not 
beclouded,  and  nothing  is  so  soon  clouded  as  present 
dependence  on  and  confidence  in  God.  Integrity 
when  there  is  dependence,  gives  courage.  It  is  not 
that  God  will  not  hear  us  from  the  depths  of  contri- 
tion— but  that  is  another  thing.  Integrity  of  heart 
gives  confidence  in  the  day  of  trouble,  because  God  is 
seen  by  the  spirit.  The  eye  is  then  fixed  on  Him 
across  all  the  trouble.  And  so  it  is  here:  Commune 
with  your  own  hear!  and  be  still;  worship  God  in  in- 
tegrity, without  fear,  and  trust  in  Him.     In  what  is 


14  PKACTICAL  EEFLECTIONS   ON 

around  us,  many  might  say,  Where  is  any  good  to  be 
found?  and  discouraged  and  disheartened,  despair  of 
finding  any ;  but  in  and  through  all  circumstances  the 
light  of  God's  countenance  is  the  secure  and  unchange- 
able good.  His  favour  is  better  than  life.  Besides, 
it  secures  good.  The  power  of  evil  is  below  the  power 
of  God.  He  disposes  of  it,  removes  it,  turns  it  to 
blessing,  annuls  it  as  He  sees  fit.  The  light  of  His 
countenance  does  this  for  faith.  And  the  soul  rises 
above  evil  and  rejoices  in  God.  Hence  there  is  more 
joy  than  in  temporal  blessings.  They  may  be  taken 
away  :  besides,  they  are  not  God  Himself,  and  the 
light  of  His  countenance  in  trouble  is  altogether 
Himself,  and  gives  the  secret  to  the  soul  of  His  being 
for  us.  Hence  he  lays  down  in  peace  and  sleeps — 
does  not  disquiet  himself  in  anxious  watchfulness 
against  evil,  for  after  all  it  is  God  only  that  secures 
him  in  joy  or  trouble. 

Psalm  v.  furnishes  the  occasion  of  saying  a 
word  on  the  calls  for  judgment  which  are  many  times 
found  in  the  book,  and  with  that  I  shall  pass  it  over. 
There  is  constancy  of  cry  in  the  presence  of  enemies. 
It  is  to  Jehovah,  the  tried  one  looks  ;  but  it  is  on  the 
ground  of  that  righteous  character  and  government  of 
God  which  makes  it  impossible  for  Him  to  look  on 
evil  complacently.  He  will  destroy  the  violent  and 
deceitful  man.  And  this  is  right.  The  Christian 
feels  God  ought  not  to  let  successful  evil  go  on  for 
ever.  When  his  mind  rests  on  the  government  of 
God,  he  looks  for  the  removal  of  evil  by  judgment, 
and  rejoices  in  it ;  not  in  thinking  of  the  evil  doer,  but 


THE   PSALMS. — rSALM  V.  15 

of  the  righteousness  and  the  result.  Vengeance  be- 
longs to  God.  But  it  is  in  no  way  the  element  He 
liv.  -  in.  The  Jew  having  his  portion  in  the  earth — 
"for  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth  and  shall  delight 
themselves  in  the  abundance  of  peace  " — looks  for  the 
removal  of  the  violent  and  deceitful  man  in  order  to 
his  own  comfort  and  rest.  Not  so  the  Christian,  lie 
leaves  the  violent  man  here  and  goes  to  heaven.  He 
walks,  as  to  his  personal  walk,  in  the  time  of  grace 
and  leaves  it  for  glory.  Even  in  the  millennium,  when 
government  will  be  exercised  and  the  wicked  cut  off, 
his  distinctive  place  is  grace.  The  river  of  water 
Hows  out  of  the  city ;  the  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life,  of 
which  he  eats  the  full  ripe  fruit,  are  for  the  healing  of 
the  nations.  Noiv  his  place  is  wholly  grace  and 
patience.  He  does  well,  suffers  for  it,  and  takes  it 
patiently,  and  knows  this  is  acceptable  with  God. 
He  w<  raid  i  iveicome  evil  with  good.  He  sees  the  evil, 
knows  it  will  be  judged  that  the  judgment  shall  de- 
vour the  adversaries,  and,  viewed  as  adversaries,  can 
be  glad  that  they  are  removed  from  hindering  good. 
Righteous  judgment,  I  repeat,  his  soul  owns  and 
acquiesces  in.  But  he  looks  not  for  it  for  his  own 
gain  or  liberty.  He  is  above  this  in  grace.  And  this 
was  Christ's  place.  He  will  execute  judgment,  nis 
Spirit  culls  in  these  Psalms  for  judgment.  But  as 
walking  on  earth,  in  which  He  was  a  personal  pattern 
for  US,  lie  did  not  call  for  judgment  On   J  lis   enemies. 

"  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do,"  was  II is  word  when  their  violence  was  directed 
againsl  Himself;  and  in  judgment  He  opened  not 
His  mouth. 


16  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

Now  the  fifth  Psalm  takes  up  the  call  for  judgment 
according-  to  God's  government  of  the  earth,  founded 
on  Jehovah's  immutable  character,  and  looks  for  the 
happiness  and  joy  of  Jehovah's  people  flowing  from 
it.  And  so  it  will,  but  not  ours,  because  our  joy  is  in 
heaven,  where  such  deliverances  are  not  needed.  We 
leave  the  earth.  Hence  while  the  spirit  sees  and  feels 
the  lightness  of  this  Psalm,  I  do  not  give  it  as  in  any 
way  the  experience  of  a  Christian,  save  that  his  cry  in 
difficulty  and  trial  is  undivideclly  and  actively  directed 
to  the  Lord — we  may  say  to  the  Father. 

Psalms  vi.  and  vii.  both  partake  of  this  character 
and  call  for  judgment.  But  the  sixth  is  on  very 
different  ground  from  the  fifth,  and  in  certain  respects 
will  afford  us  experimental  light  for  the  Christian. 
When  the  believing  soul  is  under  trial,  the  recurrence 
to  God  as  its  resource  and  hope  is  the  natural  move- 
ment of  faith.  The  great  grace  of  God  in  being  for 
us  and  the  sense  that  there  is  nothing  like  this 
love,  the  confidence  which  accompanies  submission 
of  heart,  draw  out  the  heart  towards  Him.  Nor 
is  there  a  sweeter  time  for  the  soul  that  trusts 
Him  than  the  time  of  trial.  This  supposes  indeed  the 
will  to  be  broken,  and  the  heart  subject,  and  God's 
love  to  be  known.  When  this  is  not  the  case  the 
trial  through  grace  works  submission  and  is  then  re- 
moved, or  the  soul  finds  its  happiness  in  the  wise  and 
holy  will  of  God,  and  in  the  fruit  it  bears.  But  there 
is  another  case  where  trial,  though  ever  salutary  and 
gracious,  has  another  element  in  which  it  makes  con- 
fiding love  to  God  more  difficult.     I  mean  where  the 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM   VI.  17 

trial  has  its  source  in  the  conduct  of  the  person  suf- 
fering. If  I  have  brought  trial  on  myself  by  sin,  how 
difficult  to  see  love  in  it !  how  difficult  not  to  groan  in 
the  consciousness  that  it  is  the  fruit  of  sin  and  just 
rebuke  for  it,  and  hence  that  we  have  no  right  to  think 
of  love  in  it !  Yet  where  can  we  turn  but  to  Him, 
and  how  look  to  Him  to  deliver  whom  we  have 
offended?  Such  is  the  real  and  distressing  difficulty 
of  a  soul  which,  feeling  thai  it  has  brought  sorrow  on 
itself,  feels  it  has  no  right  to  look  for  deliverance.  It 
is  indeed  almost  tempted  to  despair  and  sink  under 
the  sense  of  hopelessness.  This  was  the  force  of  our 
Lord's  intercession  for  Peter,  that  his  faith  might  not 
fail,  his  confidence  in  Christ,  and  his  love  and  hope  of 
divine  favour  not  be  lost,  or  he  might  fall  into  the 
hands  cf  Satan  through  despair  and  remorse.  In  his 
case  it  was  not  trial  or  chastening,  but  the  danger  was 
the  same.  Faith  hinders  this  despairing  feeling  but  it 
does  not  take  away  the  sense  of  sin  nor  of  the  justness 
of  rebuke;  but  it  trusts  God  and  His  love  and  good- 
ness, which  now  take  the  character  of  mercy  to  the 
spirit  of  the  sufferer.  The  sense  of  sin  is  deeper,  the 
dread  of  consequences  less,  and  God  is  trusted  with 
a  humbled  heart  in  spite  of  all.  Still  it  is  felt  that 
rebuke  is  deserved — nay,  the  soul  may  be  in  a  measure 
under  it.  This  is  the  state  brought  before  us  in  the 
sixth  Psalm.  It  pleads  the  distress  and  desolateness 
under  which  it  IS  lying,  and  looks  for  mercy,  and 
pleads  that  the  rebuke  may  not  be  in  anger.  It  has 
confidence  in  (.'od.  though  in  presence  of  the  thoughl 
that  the  rebuke  of  I  lis  auger  would  be  but  the  natural 

Consequence.     It  owns  the  justness  of  this,  yet  resting 


18         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

in  faith  on  grace  says,  How  long  ?  God  cannot  cast 
off  for  ever  those  who  trust  hi  Him :  light  will  spring 
up.  There  is  relationship  with  God  and  faith  counts 
on  it.  So  that  the  heart  can  plead  its  extreme  sorrow 
and  trial  with  a  God  whose  compassions  are  known. 
The  last  three  A'erses  express  this  confidence  fully. 
"We  see  how  the  government  of  God  applies  to  this 
world,  so  that  death  has  the  character,  in  that  govern- 
ment, when  so  falling  on  anyone,  of  cutting  off.  This 
was  full}7  true  with  the  Jew,  as  we  see  in  Hezekiah  and 
even  in  Job.  But  it  is  true  in  a  measure  as  to  the 
Christian.  There  are  sins  unto  death,  and  death  may 
have  the  character  of  discipline,  as  1  Cor.  xi.,  and  may 
be  arrested,  as  we  read  in  James'  and  John's  Epistles. 
The  Psalm  does  not  look  beyond  it,  save  into  dark- 
ness, nor  does  the  government  of  God  either.  When 
the  believer  has  peace,  he  looks  at  discipline,  even 
when  justly  severe,  in  the  sense  of  certain  divine 
favour.  Hence  his  horror  of  sin  is  of  a  much  purer 
kind,  for  it  abhors  the  sin  and  not  its  consequences. 
It  may  be  that  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  reach  him 
or  that  dread  threatens  him  at  least.  He  looks 
through  it  to  God's  mercy  and  faithfulness.  His  faith 
through  Christ's  intercession  does  not  fail.  Still  this 
is  a  terrible  state ;  but  the  heart  clings  to  God  and 
can  say,  How  long  ? 

Psalm  vii.  is  a  full  and  elaborate  appeal  to  righteous- 
ness and  vengeance,  and  faith  in  that  judgment.  Thus 
the  congregations  of  the  peoples  of  the  earth  will  own 
Jehovah  and  compass  Him  about. 

He  looks  for  God's   amrer  on   the  wicked   as  he 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  VIII.  ID 

deprecated  it  for  himself,  and  he  expects  it  with  a 
certain  faith.  This  we  do  and  own  it  all  to  be  most 
right  and  excellent ;  but  I  cannot  give  the  Psalm  as 
presenting  anything-  of  the  experience  of  the  Christian, 
save  the  consciousness  of  integrity  and  the  fact  of 
trusting  God.  It  is  all  true  and  certain;  but  it  is  for 
those  who  are  in  the  distress  produced  by  the  haughty 
wicked,  and  look  for  deliverance,  and  not  to  suffer 
like  and  with  Christ  that  they  may  be  glorified 
together,  that  the  Psalm  provides  an  expression  of 
feeling. 

Psalm  viii.  is  the  celebration  of  Jehovah's  millennial 
dominion  and  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  man  in  con- 
nexion with,  and  in  the  mouth  of,  the  Jewish  people. 

I  pass  over  the  9th  and  10th  Psalms — the  former 
celebrating  the  judgment  of  the  enemies  of  Israel, 
the  latter  descriptive  of  (he  wickedness  of  their 
oppressors.  They  express  the  consciousness  during 
the  oppression  that  God  does  see  it,  and  does  not 
forget  the  humble;  and  then,  on  the  deliverance, 
celebrate  the  faithfulness  of  Jehovah.  The  world  is 
judged  in  righteousness,  and  Jehovah  known  by  the 
judgment  which  lie  executes.  I  have  only  to  draw 
the  reader's  Berious  attention  to  the  judgment  of  the 
world  here  spoken  of,  and  the  main  scene  of  it  in  the 
laud  of  Israel  ;  while,  in  every  case,  the  humble  soul 
in  oppression  and  trial  may  walk  in  peaceful  assurance 
that  God  sees  it.  and  that  its  cause  is  in  the  hands  of 
(iod.  Veil,  what  is  more  difficult,  that  when  it  has 
brought  it  on  itself,  if  truly  humbled,  it  may  count  on 


20         PBACTICAL  EEFLECTIONS  ON 

God.  I  now  turn  to  the  expression  of  the  feeling 
of  those  who  are  in  tire  trial  before  the  deliverance 
comes,  and  while  they  have  to  possess  their  souls 
in  patience. 

Psalm  xi.  sees  distinctly — as  is  always  true,  though 
not  publicly  manifested  as  at  that  time — that  there  is 
no  hope  from,  no  reliance  on,  man  on  the  earth — that 
nothing  earthly  is  stable,  and  that  evil  has  brought  in 
ruin.  The  foundations  are  cast  down,  and  what  are 
the  righteous  to  do  ?  This,  for  faith,  is  true,  since 
the  tune  that  Christ  was  rejected  on  earth ;  only  the 
restraining  hand  of  God  checks  the  power  of  evil,  as 
long  as  patience  can  be  exercised,  and  there  are  souls 
yet  to  be  drawn  out  to  the  fellowship  of  Christ.  It 
will  be  openly  the  case  when  the  wicked  one  wields 
power  in  the  earth,  before  God  arises  to  judgment, 
and  to  help  all  the  meek  of  the  earth.  Cases  of 
peculiar  trial  bring  us  often  into  analogous  circum- 
stances in  our  own  little  sphere.  Only  we  must 
remember  that  we  have  to  do  with  a  Father  known  as 
such,  who  disciplines  us  for  our  profit,  for  our  heavenly 
and  eternal  gain,  with  a  well-known  love  which  has 
not  spared  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us. 

The  question  put  in  the  Psalm  is:  If  the  foundations 
be  cast  down,  what  can  the  righteous  do? — what  they 
might  refer  to  as  of  divine  stability ;  for  good  does 
not  exist,  and  the  wicked  are  disturbed  by  no  scruple 
of  conscience  and  with  fraud  of  heart  seek  to  destroy 
the  righteous.  There  is  a  time  when  the  Lord  warns 
to  flee,  when  no  action  and  no  patience  is  of  any  avail. 
This  is  not  the  case  here.     It  is  only  so  when  God 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XI.  ->\ 

delivers  up  all  to  the  wicked  for  a  time.  Fear  and 
unbelief  would  urge  flight,  as  a  bird,  away  from  the 
scene  to  a  place  of  refuge  and  human  security.  Faith 
looks  higher.  u  In  Jehovah  put  I  my  trust."  Trust 
in  the  Lord,  who  is  above  all,  to  whom  nothing  is 
unknown,  whom  nothing  escapes,  whose  faithfulness 
is  unchangeable,  without  whom  nut  a  sparrow  falls  to 
the  ground,  who,  after  all,  orders  everything-,  what- 
ever man's  plans  are,  who  is  our  Father.  Trust  in 
Ilim  is  the  resource  and  peace-giving  feeling  of  the 
righteous.  This,  in  its  nature,  gives  a  perfect  walk 
and  calmness  at  all  times;  because  circumstances  do 
not  govern  the  feelings,  and  the  soul  has  no  motive  to 
lead  it  but  the  will  of  God,  and  can  have  boldness  to 
do  it  when  called  on,  through  confidence  in  Him.  It 
gives  calmness,  too,  because  God  is  trusted  for  every 
result. 

But  the  simple  fact  of  this  confidence  is  not  all  flu- 
Psalm  teaches  us.  All  is  subverted  and  in  confusion 
on  earth.  No  security  for  the  righteous  there.  But 
Jehovah  is  in  His  holy  temple.  His  throne  is  in 
heaven.  And  His  eyes  behold,  His  eyelids  try,  the 
children  of  men.  lie  does  not  slumber  nor  sleep; 
the  righteous  may  leave  his  cause  to  Ilim.  But  there 
is,  besides  this,  an  explanation  of  God's  ways  in  the 
time  of  sorrow.  Jehovah  tries  the  righteous.  When 
His  eyelids,  who  sees  all  things  according  to  His  own 
purity,  try  the  children  of  men,  lie  has  an  object  as 
regards  the  righteous:  He  proves  and  sifts  them. 
This  is  a  most  important  truth — the  activity  of  God 
in  dealing  with  the  righteous,  to  accomplish  His  own 
gracious  purposes  as  to  them,  to  manifest  His  own 


22  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

character,  to  judge,  and  lead  them  to  judge,  all  that  is 
not  according  to  it,  and  thus  give  them  the  intelli- 
gence of  what  He  is,  and  conform  them  morally  to  it 
— at  the  same  time  subjecting  their  will,  and  engaging 
their  affections,  by  the  sense  of  His  faithfulness  and 
love.  The  breaking  of  the  will  is  a  great  means  of 
opening  the  understanding. 

But  His  temple  and  His  throne  govern  all  this. 
In  His  temple  everyone  speaks  of  nis  honour.  It  is 
the  place  where  man  approaches  Him,  where  His 
nature  and  character  are  revealed,  for  man  to  be  asso- 
ciated with  Him  according  to  them.  And  the  throne 
orders  all  things,  to  associate  us  rightly  with  the 
temple.  The  flesh,  of  course,  cannot  always  like  it ; 
but  this  dealing  with  it  is  just  what  is  profitable  in 
the  matter.  He  tries  the  children  of  men.  Their 
actions  do  not  escape  His  eye.  All  things  are  naked 
and  open  to  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to 
do,  and  He  judges  of  them  all.  But  more  particularly 
He  tries  the  righteous.  This  is  in  contrast  with  His 
hatred  of  the  wicked,  on  whom  He  will  pour  out 
judgment.  In  His  trial  of  the  righteous,  one  must 
first  think  of  God's  own  character  and  glory.  This  He 
maintains.  For,  however  His  countenance  beholds 
the  upright,  however  much  He  delights  in  them  in 
love,  He  cannot  deny  Himself.  lie  will  conform 
them  to  what  He  is,  but  not  relinquish  that.  He 
maintains  his  character  in  government.  lie  has  let 
the  earth  know,  in  Israel,  that  He  will  not  have 
wickedness.  The  nearness  of  a  people  to  Him  is  only 
an  additional  motive  for  this.  "  Thee  only  have  I 
known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth,  therefore  will 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XL  23 

I  punish  you  for  your  iniquities."  And  now,  what- 
ever Ilis  grace,  God  is  not  mocked:  what  a  man  sows 
he  will  reap.  The  passages  are  numberless  in  which 
this  principle  is  applied  to  Israel.  It  is  carefully 
maintained.  (Rom.  ii.  G,  and  following-  verses.)  The 
epistles  of  Peter  particularly  unfold  this  righteous 
government  of  God — the  first,  as  regards  the  righte- 
ous; the  second,  as  against  the  wicked.  In  trying 
the  righteous,  God  vindicates  and  maintains  His 
character  in  those  near  Him. 

But  it  is  for  the  profit  also  of  those  who  are  tried, 
the  precious  proof  of  the  constant  watchful  care  of 
God.  "  He  withdraws  not  his  eyes  from  the  righte- 
ous," says  Elihu.  It  is,  if  need  be,  that  we  are  in 
heaviness  through  manifold  temptations  or  trials.  "We 
are  to  count  it  even  all  joy  (James)  when  we  fall  into 
divers  temptations,  seeing  that  they  work  patience. 
And  mark  the  fruit:  "Let  patience  have  its  perfect 
work,  that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  complete  in  all  the 
will  of  God."  "We  are  to  glory  in  tribulations ; 
(Rom.  v. ;)  they  work  patience;  and  this  brightens, 
in  its  result,  our  hope,  the  love  of  God  being  shed 
abroad  in  the  soul — the  true  key  to  all  that  comes. 

The  love  of  God  in  the  chastening  itself  leads  to 
two  conclusions,  expressed  in  ITeb.  xii. — not  to  despise 
the  chastening ;  for  there  must  be  a  reason  for  it  in 
us,  if  love  does  it ;  and  not  to  faint,  because  it  is  love 
which  does  it. 

There  are  (wo  causes  which,  as  we  are  taught  in 
the  Book  of  Job,  bring  trial  on  the  saint.  First,  God 
shows  the  transgressions  in  which  man  has  exceeded, 
that  is,   positive    faults.      Secondly,   He   withdraws 


24  PKACTICAL  BEFLECTIONS   ON 

man  from  his  purpose,  and  hides  pride  from  him. 
(Job  xxxiii.  1G,  17;  xxxvi.  7 — 9.)  This  book  gives 
us  full  diviue  instruction  as  to  God's  ways  in  trying* 
the  righteous.  There  we  learn  another  truth,  impor- 
tant to  exercised  souls,  who  often  dwell  on  secondary 
causes  :  that  God  is  the  cause,  and  moves  in  all  these 
exercises.  The  origin  of  all  Job's  trials  was  not 
Satan's  accusation,  but  God's  word,  "  Hast  thou 
considered  my  servant  Job.-"  God  had,  and  saw 
that  he  needed  this.  The  instruments  were  wicked, 
or  disasters  caused  by  Satan ;  but  God  had  considered 
His  servant,  tried  the  righteous,  but  measured  exactly 
the  trial — stayed  His  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the 
east  wind,  debated  in  measure :  and  when  He  had 
done  His  own  work,  (which  Satan  could  not  do  at 
ail,)  and  shown  Job  to  himself,  blessed  him  abundantly. 

He  humbles  us  and  proves  us,  that  we  may  know 
what  is  in  our  heart — feeds  us  with  the  bread  of  faith. 
But  it  is  to  do  us  good  in  our  latter  end. 

When  the  trial  is  met  in  the  truth  and  power  of 
spiritual  life,  it  develops  and  brings  out  much  more 
softness  and  maturity  of  grace — a  spirit  more  sepa- 
rated from  the  world  to  God,  and  more  acquainted 
with  God.  Where  it  is'  met  by  or  meets  the  flesh, 
the  will  of  this,  its  rebellion,  is  brought  to  light,  the 
conscience  becomes  sensible  of  it  before  God,  and,  by 
the  discipline  itself,  the  self-will  is,  even  insensibly, 
destroyed. 

Trial  cannot  in  itself  confer  grace ;  but,  under 
God's  hand,  it  can  break  the  will,  and  detect  hidden 
and  unsuspected  evils ;  so  that  the  new  life  is  more 
fully  and  largely  developed.     God  has  a  larger  place 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XII.  25 

in  the  heart,  there  is  more  intelligence  in  His  waj-s 
more  lowly  dependence,  more  consciousness  that  the 
world  is  nothing-,  more  distrust  of  flesh  and  self.  The 
saint  is  more  emptied  of  self  and  filled  with  the  Lord. 
Wli;it  is  eternal  and  true,  because  divine,  has  a  much 
larger  place  in  the  soul ;  what  is  false,  is  detected  and 
set  aside.  There  is  more  ripeness  in  our  relationship 
with  Cod.  We  dwell  more  in  the  eternal  scenes  into 
which  he  has  brought  our  souls.  We  can  look  back, 
then,  and  see  the  love  which  has  brought  us  through 
it  all,  and  bless  God  with  dependent  thanksgiving  for 
every  trial.  Such  only  purge  away  the  dross,  and 
confirm  us  in  brighter,  fuller,  and  clearer  hope,  and 
increase  our  knowledge  of  God — self  being  propor- 
tionately destroyed. 

Psalm  xii.  It  is  evident  that  is  written  under  the 
pressure  of  extreme  wrong  and  violence  and  the  feel- 
ing of  being  isolated.  Human  power,  and  those  that 
have  confidence  in  it,  are  all  against  the  soul.  It  is 
rare  to  be  in  such  a  case  rightly — that  is,  to  have 
occasion  to  suffer  as  is  here  described.  But  it  may 
come.  Individual  Christians  may  find  themselves 
isolated  and  pressed  down.  The  fifth  verse  introduces 
Jehovah's  judgments,  which  will  put  an  end  to  it. 
This  lb-  often  does  still  in  His  government,  but  it  is 
not  the  direct  proper  hope  of  the  Christian.  For  him 
to  do  well,  suffer  for  it  and  take  it  patiently,  is  accept- 
able with  God.  His  rest  is  elsewhere,  where  God  is 
perfectly  glorified;  so  it  was  with  Christ,  and,  there- 
fore, with  us.  lie  surely  did  well,  Buffered  forit  here 
on  the  earth — was  not  delivered.     How  acceptable  it 

c 


26  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

was  with  God  I  need  not  say.  It  behoved  Christ  to 
suffer.  It  is  our  profit;  so  that  we  can  glory  in 
tribulations  also,  because  of  their  fruits,  a  far  higher 
fruit  than  ease  or  repose  here,  and  which  ripens  in 
heaven,  in  our  being  fitted  for  enjoying  God  more 
deeply;  and  if  we  suffer  for  righteousness'  and  Christ's 
sake,  we  can  say,  happy  are  we.  The  Spirit  of  glory 
and  of  God  rests  on  us.  But  in  many  cases  of  detail, 
deliverance,  if  we  wait  patiently  for  it,  comes  even 
here.  At  any  rate,  and  this  is  the  point  of  the  psalm, 
the  words  of  Jehovah  are  pure  words ;  they  prove  all 
that  is  in  man,  but  they  may  be  thoroughly  relied  on 
as  genuine.  He  will  hold  good  in  holiness,  but  make 
good  in  power  all  that  His  mouth  hath  uttered.  Our 
wisdom  is  to  hold  fast  by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  come 
what  will.  Outward  trials  are  but  instruments  of  puri- 
fication and  of  trying  the  heart  as  to  faith.  The  word 
is  the  test  of  all  for  the  soul,  the  inward  measure  of 
its  condition  before  God,  and  the  infallible  ground  of 
confidence.  If  it  tries  the  heart,  if  the  circumstances 
we  are  in  try  the  heart,  it  is  only  to  free  it  from  all 
that  would  hinder  our  leaning  on  and  appropriating 
every  word  that  has  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  God. 
We  shall  surely  live  by  it. 

Psalm  xiii.  continues  the  expression  of  the  workings 
of  a  soul  under  the  trials  we  have  seen  referred  to  in 
psalm  x.  We  have,  comparatively  speaking,  less  to 
do  with  it.  Yet  the  Christian  may  be  tried  by  the 
momentary  and  apparent  triumph  of  the  power  of 
evil.  And  in  such,  can  look  to  the  Lord  for  deliver- 
ance, not  to  be  left  as  if  God  did  not  care  for  him. 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM  XIII.  27 

We  see  the  difference  of  the  Jewish  remnant  here  and 
Christ,  for  outwardly  He  vis  left  in  the  hand  of  the 
wicked;  whereas,  (though,  indeed,  some  of  the  wise 
Avill  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy  in  that  day,  obtain- 
ing a  better  resurrection,  but,)  in  general,  they  will 
be  spared  and  delivered ;  but  onr  object  now  is  the 
moral   lesson.     In   the  midst,   not  only  of  heartless 
and  conscienceless  enemies,  but  apparently  forgotten 
of  God,  the  soul  trusts  in  His  mercy,  counts  on  Himself 
in  goodness  and  faithfulness  of  mercy  so  as  to  rejoice 
in  deliverance  by  His  power  before  it  comes.     So  Ave 
thank  God,    when  we    pray,  before  we  receive  the 
answer,  because  knowing  in  our  hearts,  by  faith,  that 
God  has  heard  and  answered  us,  Ave  bless  Him  before 
His  answer  comes  outwardly,  and  this  is  just  the  proof 
of  faith.      This  confidence  giATes  Avonderful  peace  in 
the  midst  of  trials ;  Ave  ma)-  not  knoAv  hoAv  God  Avill 
deliver,  but  Ave  are  sure  He  will,  and  rightly.     He  has 
all   at   Ills  disposal.     It   is  Himself  AAre  trust,  and  in 
looking  to  Him  the  heart  rcceiATes  a  real  answer  on 
which  it  relies.     The  circumstances  and  the  AArord  try 
the  heart.     Confidence  and  divine  deliverance  rejoice 
the  spirit.      One  knows,  and  before  the  deliA^erance 
comes,  that  Cod  is  for  us.     The  taking  counsel  in  the 
heart  is  vny  natural,  but  not  faith.     It  Avears  and  dis- 
tresses the  spirit.     The  sorroAV  tends  to  work  death. 
The  soul,  even  though  submit  tin--,  preys  on  itself;   it 
is  turning  to  the  Lord  which  lightens  the  soul.     The 
consciousness  that  it  is  the  enemy  who  works  against 
us,  helps  the  soul  to  confidence.     It  is  a  solemn,  and 
for  man  would  he  an  appalling,  thought,  but  with  the 
Lord  is  a  ''round  of  being  assured  of  deliverance. 


28         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Psalm  xiv.  is  an  eminent  example  of  the  principle 
of  very  frequent  application :  how  psalms,  or  other 
passages  of  scripture,  clearly  applicable  literally  to 
the  Jews  in  the  last  days,  and  events  then  occurring-, 
are  used  as  great  principles,  deciding  morally  on  im- 
portant troths  at  all  times,  truths  which  are  then  pub- 
licly and  judicially  brought  to  light.  The  ajuostle 
applies  this  psalm  as  the  expression  of  the  divine 
judgment  on  the  state  of  the  Jews,  as  declared  in 
their  own  scriptures,  and  proving  the  need  of  a  righte- 
ousness not  their  own.  I  have  not  much  to  remark 
on  it  here.  We  may  expect  to  meet  with  difficulties 
which  arise  from  a  total  absence  of  the  fear  of  God  in 
those  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  It  is  hardly  credible 
for  one  that  fears  God,  that  this  can  be  so,  that  there 
should  be  no  compunction ;  nothing  that  stays  the 
heart  in  wickedness,  at  least,  in  deliberate  wickedness. 
But  we  must  expect  this  sometimes,  where  we  should 
least  expect  it.  But  the  Lord  sees  all  this.  This  is 
our  confidence.  He  may  take  time,  be  patient  with 
evil,  or,  at  least,  with  evil  doers,  and  exercise  us,  but 
He  sees  it  all.  Not  only  so,  but  God  Himself  is  in 
the  generation  of  the  righteous.  There  is  an  influ- 
ence produced  by  the  presence  of  God  with  the 
righteous,  which  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  feel,  and 
which  in  the  righteous  is  known  only  by  faith.  We 
may  see  an  example  in  what  Rahab  evidently  saw 
among  the  Canaanites,  Joshua  ii.  9.  The  same  feeling- 
is  referred  to  in  Phil.  i.  28.  This  feeling  of  fear,  in 
those  who  oppose  the  truth,  may  be  accompanied  with 
boasting  and  violence ;  but  when  faith  has  confidence 
in  the  Lord,  the  wicked,  even  if  they  succeed,  have 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XV.  29 

always  fear.  So  even  the  Jews,  when  they  had  cruci- 
fied Christ,  feared  lest,  after  all,  His  absence  from  the 
tomb  should  make  matters  worse  than  before.  But 
there  must  be  the  sense  of  God's  presence  for  the 
righteous  to  be  thus  sustained. 

Psalm  xv.  shows,  evidently,  that  the  direct  applica- 
tion of  these  psalms  is  to  the  dews  in  the  last  days. 
Still,  there  is  a  present  government  of  God  which  it 
is  well  for  saints  to  remember.  It  is  developed  in 
the  Epistles  of  Peter — in  the  first  in  favour  of  the 
righteous,  in  the  second  in  the  judgment  of  the 
wicked.  (See  1  Pet.  iii.  10 — 15,  showing"  the  Christian 
application  of  the  principles  on  which  God  dealt  with 
the  Jews  as  a  people,  and  will  still  more  absolutely  in 
the  last  days,  but  which  have  their  application  to  the 
time  of  our  sojourn  here  below.) 

Thus,  though  this  psalm  be  strictly  Jewish  in  its 
character,  we  have  principles  to  act  on.  Thus,  ver.  -I 
gives  what,  in  principle,  pleases  the  Lord  at  all  times. 

Psalm  xvi.  With  these  few  remarks,  I  pass  on 
io  psalm  xvi.,  which  applies  directly  to  Christ,  but 
in  which  we  shall  find  the  sweetest  instruction  also 
for  ourselves.  It  is  essentially  Christ  taking  the 
place  of  a  man,  and  pointing  out  the  path  of 
life  before  him  through  death,  since  He  came  for 
us,  but  trusting  in  Jehovah,  into  His  presence, 
where  is  fulness  of  joy.  We  must  not  lose  sight  of 
the  direct  prophetic  character;  still  this  path  is  an 
example  for  us.  The  Good  Shepherd  has  gone  before 
the  Bheep.     The  great  principle  proposed  in  the  psalm 


30         PEACTICAL  EEFLECTIONS  ON 

is  trust  in  the  Lord,  even  in  death. — the  place  of 
dependent  obedience,  and  the  Lord  Himself's  being 
the  whole  portion  of  man,  excluded  all  inconsistent 
with  this.  We  may  add,  having-  II im  always  in  view. 
These  are  the  great  principles  of  divine  life,  and  of 
divine  life  come  into  the  scene  of  sin  and  death.  No 
doubt  we  should  speak  of  communion  with  the  Father 
and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  in  this  path  of  life ;  but 
the  great  moral  principles,  the  subjective  state  of 
soul,  is  brought  out  before  us  here,  and  that  in  Christ 
Himself.  And  note  here,  it  is  His  perfection  as  man 
and  before  God  and  towards  God.  It  is  not  divine 
perfection — God  manifested  to  man ;  but  what  He 
was  as  man  dependent  on  God.  We  have  not  even 
His  offering  Himself,  in  which  we  have  also  to  follow 
Him;  (1  John  iii.  16  ;)  but  His  place  as  man  in  per- 
fection. It  is  perfectness  before  God — the  principle 
that  governed  Him.  Hence,  even  the  word,  My  good- 
ness extendeth  not  to  thee,  has  its  application  also  to 
us.  That  our  goodness  does  not  actually  reach  God  it 
might  seem  almost  absurd  to  affirm ;  but  when  it  is 
applied  to  Christ  as  man,  who  was  absolutely  perfect, 
it  affords  us  an  apprehension  of  the  nature  of  this 
goodness,  a  principle  which  we  can  apply  to  ourselves, 
and  which  puts  us  in  our  place.  It  is  man's  perfection 
towards  God— the  new  path  of  which  Christ  is  the 
perfection  and  example  in  the  earth.  But  this  thought 
shows  the  unspeakably  blessed  place  which  we  have 
as  Christians — though  in  our  own  case  in  the  midst, 
not  only  of  weakness,  but  of  internal  conflicts,  which 
were  not  in  Christ,  in  whom  was  no  sin.  But  Christ's 
place  is  the  perfect  expression  of  our  place  before  God. 


THE  PSALM8. — PSALM  XVI.  ol 

This  is  fully  unfolded  at  the  close  of  the  Gospel  of 
John,  and  particularly  in  the  17th  chapter. 

The  Epistle  of  John,  too,  which  first  presents 
Christ  as  the  manifestation  ou  earth  of  that  eternal 
life  which  was  with  the  Father,  its  manifestation  in  a 
man  whom  their  hands  had  touched,  teaehes  that  this 
was  true  in  Christians  as  in  Him,  (1  John  ii.  8,)  and 
unfolds  the  character  of  this  life  in  righteousness  and 
in  love,  adding  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
through  which  we  can  dwell  in  God  and  God  in  us. 
We  have  this  eternal  life  which  is  come  down  from 
heaven,  but  is  only  said  to  be  in  the  Son;  and  he  who 
has  the  Son  has  it.  Indeed,  this  gives  it  all  its  value. 
No  doubt  the  Epistle  of  John  unfolds  it  in  all  its  extent 
and  value,  as  it  cannot  be  unfolded  in  the  Psalms:  still 
in  this  psalm  we  have  Christ  taking  the  place  itself  as 
amongst  the  excellent  of  the  earth.  I  may  remark 
here,  that  the  writings  of  John,  though  intimating  it, 
and  just  showing  that  we  shall  be  with  Christ  above, 
do  not  pursue  this  life  to  its  presentation  in  glory 
before  God.  This  is  Paul's  office.  Indeed,  he  had 
only  so  seen  Christ.  John  presents  the  life  in  itself, 
and  manifested  on  earth.     The  life  is  the  light  of  men. 

I  have  already  made  some  allusion  to  a  restriction 
which  we  must  put,  in  speakiug  of  this  psalm,  to  the 
development  of  the  life  of  Christ  on  earth.  But  this 
restriction  only  brings  out  more  directly  and  blessedly 
in  its  place,  that  part  of  Christ's  life,  which  is  the 
subject  of  the  psalm  itself.  Christ  was  the  manifesta- 
tion of  God  Himself  (I  speak  of  the  divine  traits  of 
His  character,  not  of  His  divine  nature  and  title)  in 
His  path  in  this  world.     Perfect  love  was  seen  there 


32         PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

— perfect  holiness  and  righteousness.  He  was  the 
truth  in  the  revelation  of  all  that  God  is.  And  this 
is  most  blessed.  And  in  this  we  have  to  imitate  Him. 
(See  Eph.  iv.  32;  v.  1,  2;  Col.  hi.  10.)  But  this  is 
not  the  aspect  in  which  the  psalm  views  Him.  It 
depicts  His  place  as  the  dependent  devoted  man.  It 
depicts  Him  as  taking"  His  place  among  the  remnant 
of  Israel,  in  contrast  with  the  idolatry  of  that  people. 
But  on  that  I  do  not  dwell  now.  The  character  of 
the  blessed  Lord's  life  will  alone  occupy  our  thoughts. 
The  expression,  My  goodness  extendeth  not  to  thee, 
would  not  suit  the  divine  manifestation  of  goodness 
on  the  earth.  But  taking  His  place  entirely  as  a  man 
here,  the  Lord  shows  us  the  true  place  of  man  living 
to  God — not  in  his  innocence,  not  surely  in  sin,  but 
the  very  opposite  ;  but  perfect,  in  a  world  of  sin, 
in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  having  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  tempted,  but  separate 
from  sin  and  sinners,  not  made  higher  than  the 
heavens,  but  fit  for  it  in  the  desires  of  his  nature, 
and  in  the  path  towards  it :  dependent,  obedient, 
taking  no  place  with  God,  but  before  Him  as  respon- 
sible as  man  upon  earth,  and  looking  towards  the 
place  of  perfect  blessedness  as  man  with  God  by  being 
in  His  presence,  which  would  be  fulness  of  joy  for 
him,  a  place  which,  when  having  His  nature,  we  can 
have  with  Christ.  It  is  man  trusting  God,  deriving 
his  pleasure  and  joy  from  God,  living  by  faith  and  in 
that  sense  apart  from  Him- — not  God  manifested  in 
the  flesh,  which  we  know  was  also  true  of  the  blessed 
Lord.  This,  while  it  is  our  place  on  earth  as  sanctified 
through  the  truth,  is  above  the  place  of  the  Jewish 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XVI.  33 

remnant.  We  have  another  in  the  consciousness  of 
union  with  Christ  through  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
Lord  takes  the  place  we  are  considering'  when  He  says 
to  the  young-  man,  Why  tallest  thou  me  good?  there 
is  none  good  but  one,  that  is  God.  If  thou  wilt  enter 
into  life,  keep  the  commandments.  Thus  far  it  went 
outwardly  well  with  the  young  ruler,  but  there  was 
more  than  this  to  characterize  this  life  where  divine 
life  was,  in  a  world  of  sin  and  sinners,  in  its  path 
towards  the  place  of  the  fulness  of  joy — what  had 
been  shown  in  Abraham  and  in  the  saints  of  God,  in 
the  Davids  and  the  prophets.  The  Lord  is  the  portion 
of  mine  inheritance.  Having  the  Lord  Himself  as  that 
which  governed  and  led  the  heart,  Go  sell  what  thou 
hast  and  give  to  the  poor,  and  come,  follow  me.  But 
the  Lord  was  not,  at  any  rate  then,  the  portion  of  his 
inheritance.  Only  one  knows  not  what  may  have 
become  afterwards  his  state  through  grace. 

The  state  described  in  this  psalm  is  that  of  man 
considered  apart  from  God;  (I  do  not  mean  of  course 
morally  separated,  nor  touch  upon  the  union  of  the 
divine  and  human  nature  in  Christ;)  but  it  is  man 
partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  for  so  only  it  could  be, 
but  having  God  for  his  object,  his  confidence,  as  alone 
having  authority  over  him,  entirely  dependent  on  God, 
and  perfect  in  faith  in  Him.  This  could  only  be  in 
one  personally  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  God 
Himself  in  man,  as  Christ  was,  or  derivatively  as  in 
one  born  of  God;  but,  as  we  have  seen,  Christ  is  not 
here  viewed  in  this  aspect  nor  the  believer  as  united 
to  Him.  The  divine  presence  in  Him  is  viewed  not 
in  the  manifestation  of  God  in  Him,  but  in  its  effect 


34  PKACTICAL  KEFLECTIONS   ON 

iu  His  absolute  perfection  as  man.  lie  is  walking  as 
man  morally  in  view  of  God.  Christ  here  depends  on 
Jehovah  for  His  resurrection.  He  says,  Thou  wilt  not 
leave,  though  He  could  say,  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in 
three  days  I  will  raise  it  up.  Yet  He  could  say,  as 
perfect  man,  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commeud  my 
spirit.  As  Peter  among  the  Jews  could  say,  He  hath 
made  Him,  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and 
Christ ;  while  Thomas  could  say,  My  Lord  and  my 
God.  Indeed  Peter  never  leaves  this  ground — the 
rejected  man,  the  Messiah  exalted  by  God — nor 
preaches  the  Son  of  God  as  Paul  did  at  once  in  the 
synagogues,  though  the  first,  by  divine  revelation,  to 
confess  Him  such.  Hence  Christ  is  a  perfect  model 
for  us — shows  what  the  perfect  man  is.  The  first 
great  principle,  and  that  which  characterizes  the  whole 
psalm,  is  the  referring  Himself  entirely,  and  with 
confidence,  to  the  care  of  God.  He  does  not  preserve 
Himself,  take  care  of  Himself,  nor  depend  at  all  on 
Himself :  He  refers  to  God.  "  Preserve  me  0  God, 
for  iu  thee  do  I  put  my  trust."  But  this  goes  far. 
As  God,  Christ  could  have  preserved  Himself ;  but 
He  did  not  come  for  that.  In  that  sense  it  was 
impossible.  He  came  in  love  to  suffer,  obey,  and  so 
by  grace  also  save — but  glorify  God.  From  this, 
morally  speaking,  He  could  not  swerve  ;  but  as  to 
power,  He  could  have  preserved  Himself,  or  as  to 
title  to  favour  as  Son,  He  could  have  asked  and  had 
twelve  legions  of  angels.  But  thus,  as  He  says,  He 
could  not  have  fulfilled  the  counsels,  the  revealed 
counsels,  of  God. 

It  was  free  submission  and  dependence,  but  perfect 


THE   TSALMS. — PSALM   XVI.  35- 

submission  and  dependence — the  one  right  thing  in 
the  position  which  ILe  had  taken.  This  was  perfect 
faith.  He  was  the  leader  and  completer  of  faith, 
absence  of  self,  dependence,  and  confidence  :  and  we 
may  add,  the  word  of  God  was  the  revelation  on 
which  Bfe  acted,  that  which  He  obeyed,  the  weapon 
He  used,  as  we  see  in  His  temptation  in  the  desert. 
He  was  the  word  and  the  truth  personally,  and  all  He 
said  expressed  what  He  was.  (John  viii.  25.)  But  it 
is  not  less  true  that  He  used  and  acted  on  and  obeyed 
the  Scriptures  as  man.  But  here  He  takes  the  place 
of  dependence  and  confidence.  As  man  He  says, 
'"  Preserve  me,  0  God.     In  thee  do  I  put  my  trust." 

The  next  point,  partly  necessarily  anticipated  in 
what  I  have  said,  is  entire  subservience  to  the  will  of 
God.  Here  to  God,  as  revealed  among  the  Jews, 
Jehovah  :  to  us  it  would  be  the  Father  and  the  Son — 
one  God,  even  the  Father,  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
'•'rin  m  hast  said  unto  Jehovah,  Thou  art  my  Lord." 
Remark,  '•  Thou  hast  said."  He  had  taken  this  place. 
He  was  Jehovah,  but  not  taking  that  place  at  all  here 
in  J  lis  path.  In  the  form  of  God,  thinking  it  no 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  He  had  taken  the  form 
of  a  servant,  and  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man. 
Freely  taken,  perfectly  preserved  in,  through  death, 
His  taken  place  is  humiliation.  Freely  to  take  it  is  a 
divine  title  and  action.  Creatures  have  to  keep  their 
own  ;  though  when  not  kept  by  God,  none  have  done 
so.  His  given,  but  deserved,  place  as  man  in  glory. 
(John  xvii.)  lie  humbles  Himself,  and  is  highly 
exalted.  He  had  said  to  Jehovah,  "Thou  art  my 
Lord;"  that  is.  I  am  subservient  to  Thee,     lie  had 


36         TEACTICAL  KEFLECTIOXS  OX 

taken  a  place,  while  never  ceasing  to  be  God,  and 
which  Godhead  alone  could  fulfil  the  conditions  of, 
outside  Godhead ;  but  in  which  as  man  to  satisfy 
God,  to  glorif}7  God  in  an  earth  of  apostacy  and  sin, 
indeed  with  all  on  earth,  and  Satan's  power  against 
Him — at  the  close,  even  God's  wrath,  if  to  fulfil  His 
glory  in  righteousness.  Hence  He  says,  My  goodness 
extendeth  not  to  thee — up  to  thee.  He  was  to  fulfil 
man's  place  in  the  condition  in  which  God's  glory  was 
now  concerned  in  it.  A  perfect  man,  when  a  perfect 
man,  was  alone  in  perfectness ;  none  to  sustain — none 
even  to  have  compassion  on  Him.  He  must  trust 
God  in  life  and  through  death — yea,  through  wrath. 
But  here  it  is  in  the  path  of  life,  and  even  this 
shown  Him.  (Ver.  11.)  But,  further,  there  were 
objects  of  divine  favour  from  which  He  did  not  disso- 
ciate Himself.  But  He  does  not  speak  of  them  as 
■chosen  by  Himself  here — as  in  John  of  His  disciples, 
"  You  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you," — 
(though  there  also  for  service,)  nor  as  chosen  of  God  in 
grace,  but  as  objects  of  divine  delight  in  the  path  they 
trod,  as  manifested  morally — those  who  were  in  the  path 
He  had  to  tread  in — the  saints  that  are  in  the  earth,  the 
excellent.  This  is  fiul  of  interest.  It  is  still  His  moral 
place  as  man,  delighting  in  what  God  delighted  in,  as 
becomes  one  perfect  with  God,  as  we  see  in  full  figure 
in  Moses.  (Heb.  xi.  24 — 26.)  He  takes  His  place 
with  the  saints — those  really  sanctified  to  God.  This 
we  see  in  fact,  and  in  the  way  of  the  most  perfect 
obedience  and  humiliation,  in  that  the  Saviour  went 
to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  John,  when  those 
moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  humble  themselves 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM  XVI.  37 

went  there.  In  the  first  ami  lowest  step  of  divine 
life,  that  of  the  heart  giving-  itself  up  to  God  in  the 
acknowledgment  of  sin,  lie  who  knew  no  sin  went 
with  those  who  owned  it;  for  their  owning  it  was 
divine  life,  and  it  was  consecrating  themselves  to  God. 
They  were  the  true  excellent  of  the  earth.  How 
sweet  and  consoling  in  the  wilderness  to  see  Christ 
treading  this  path,  victorious  over  all  temptation  in  it, 
as  shown  directly  after  His  baptism  by  John  ;  binding- 
the  strong  man,  in  life  possessed  and  victorious  over 
all  the  power  of  the  enemy.  One  sees  easily  here, 
that  though  it  be  the  divine  life,  the  fruit  of  grace,  it 
is  not  in  se  God  manifesting  Himself,  a  goodness  in  its 
character  in  itself  reaching  to  God;  for  it  was  owning 
sin,  though  it  was  divine  grace  in  Christ  to  do  it.  Just 
as  it  was  not  properly  of  God,  as  such,  to  die ;  though 
nothing  but  the  perfect  love,  that  is,  one  who  was  God 
Himself  could  have  died  as  Christ  did,  given  Himself, 
laid  down  His  life,  given  a  motive  to  His  Father  to 
love  Him,  for  what  He  did.  We  see  one  acting  as 
man  in  man's  place,  (only  absolutely,  perfectly,  and 
freely  as  loving  the  Father,  which  He  could  not  have 
done  if  not  divine),  before  God  and  towards  God  as 
men  had  to  act.  That  a  divine  person  should  do  this 
has  a  value  beyond  all  thought,  and  it  is  what,  as 
much  else,  the  blessed  Saviour  did  for  us,  a  man  in 
our  place,  that  is  in  the  perfection  of  it  as  God's 
delight,  and  according  to  what  it  ought  to  be,  in 
the  midst  of  this  sinful  world,  what  glorified  God 
in  it.  And  it  is  of  all  importance  for  us  to  see 
Christ  thus  an  object  of  delight,  adoring  delight, 
for  instruction  and  confirmation  to  the  soul.     It  is  a 


38         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

path  the  vulture's  eye  has  not  seen  and  that  no  man's 
thought  could  have  traced,  if  Christ,  the  perfect  One, 
had  not  walked  in  it.  We  have  it  in  life — in  a 
person — as  it  only  so  could  be,  the  path  of  life  in  a 
living  one  who  was  the  thing  to  be  loved.  No  doubt 
the  written  word  gives  us  the  elements  of  this  life  in 
all  details,  but  at  the  same  time  it  gives  much  of  it, 
however  many  blessed  precepts  direct  our  path,  in  the 
life  of  Christ  Himself ;  so  that  this  life  is  understood 
according  to  the  degree  of  spirituality  which  apprehends 
that  life  as  depicted  in  the  gospels  or  other  parts  of 
Scripture,  its  motives  or  rather  its  motive  and  nature. 
Even  in  precept  we  find  a  direction  to  walk  worthy  of 
the  Lord,  unto  all  pleasing.  How  evidently  does  this 
require  the  true  knowledge  of  what  He  is.  The  view 
which  we  have  taken  of  this  divine  life,  perfect  in 
itself,  but  displayed  in  a  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 
and  proved  in  the  midst  of  evil — in  us  renewed  in 
knowledge  according  to  the  image  of  Him  that  created 
us — is  brought  out  distinctly  in  positive  separation 
from  evil,  but  especially  in  the  motive  and  spring  of 
life,  the  confession  of  Jehovah.  He  (ver.  4)  repels  all 
that  can  be  called  another  God.  He  will  have  nothing 
at  all  to  say  to  it.  It  is  absolute  rejection.  He 
cleaves  to  Jehovah.  Fidelity  to  Jehovah  characterizes 
the  life  of  Christ  as  so  walking  on  earth.  We  can  say 
fidelity  to  Christ  Himself.  Christ  is  all  and  in  all. 
Jehovah  is  not  only  Lord  to  obey,  He  is  the  portion 
of  his  inheritance.  He  sought  nought  else ;  as  of  the 
priest  of  old  and  yet  better,  as  in  heart  and  desire, 
the  Lord  was  his  inheritance  and  the  portion  of  his 
cup,  his  lot  here,  which  he  had  to  drink.     His  enjoy- 


THE  TSALMS. — rSALM  XVI.  39 

ment  in  hope,  his  portion  by  the  way.  This  I  appre- 
hend is  the  difference  between  heritage  and  cup ; 
the  inheritance  is  the  permanent  portion  of  the  soul, 
the  cup  what  its  feelings  are  occupied  with,  what 
comes  to  a  man  to  occupy  his  spirit  by  the  way.  He 
gives  the  cup  of  wrath  to  the  wicked  to  drink  ;  the 
blessed  Lord  had  to  drink  the  cup  of  wrath  on  the 
cross.  My  cup  runneth  over — was  filled  to  overflow 
with  blessing  ;  so  we  say,  habitually,  it  was  a  bitter 
cup.  It  is  not  merely  the  circumstances  we  pass 
through,  unless  the  soul  be  subject  to  them  ;  but  that 
which  we  taste  in  the  circumstances,  what  our  spirits 
feel,  that  which  presses  on  them  in  the  circumstances. 
Thus,  in  psalm  xxiii.,  the  circumstances  were  all  sor- 
rowful, but  the  Lord  being  shepherd  all  through  them 
his  cup  ran  over  with  joy  and  blessing.  Thus  Jehovah 
was  the  permanent  portion  of  the  heart  of  Christ, 
and.  as  walking  through  this  world,  that  on  which 
His  heart  rested  ;  what  formed  and  characterized  His 
feelings  umre  than  the  sorrow  He  went  through,  save 
on  the  cross.  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that 
sent  me,  and  to  finish  His  work.  Man,  no,  not  even 
His  disciples,  never  entered  into  His  thoughts.  One 
who  sat  at  His  feet  once  in  affection  felt  that  to  which 
ne  could  give  a  voice  but  only  to  bring  out  more 
Badly  the  failure  of  all  else  ;  "but  He  had  meat  to  eat 
they  knew  not  of.  Jehovah  was  the  portion  of  His 
cup,  nearer  than  all  circumstances  which  otherwise 
could  have  pressed  upon  His  heart  as  man,  and  which 
lie  fully  fell,  if  we  except  the  cross,  or  rather,  indeed, 
more  than  ever  there,  for  it  was  the  wrath  of  Jehovah 
Himself  that  pressed  upon  His  soul  in  the  cup  He 


40  PEACTICAL   KEFLECTIONS   ON 

then  drank.  But  otherwise  so  truly  was  Jehovah  the 
great  circumstance  and  substance  of  His  life  in  and 
through  everything,  that  He  could  only  wish  that  His 
joy  might  be  fulfilled  in  His  disciples.  But,  then,  it 
was  from  Jehovah  only,  and  therein  His  perfection  ; 
the  world  was  absolutely  a  dry  and  thirsty  land,  where 
no  water  was,  but  Jehovah's  favour  was  better  than 
life ;  and  was  nis  life,  practically,  through  a  world 
where  all  was  felt,  but  felt  with  Jehovah  realized ; 
Jehovah  and  His  favour,  the  life  of  His  soul,  between 
Him  and  all.  So  the  Christian,  forsaken,  perhaps, 
and  imprisoned.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway,  and, 
again  I  say  rejoice.  Nature  has  circumstances  be- 
tween itself  and  God  ;  faith  has  God  between  the 
heart  and  circumstances.  And  what  a  difference ! 
No  peace  like  the  peace,  which  hiding  in  the  taber- 
nacle from  the  provokings  of  all  men  gives.  But  this 
is  a  divine  life  through  the  world.  Jehovah — we  say 
the  Father  and  the  Son,  a  brighter  development 
through  the  Son  Himself — the  permanent  portion  of 
the  soul,  its  inheritance.  Jehovah,  the  present  joy 
and  strength  that  fills  the  soul  and  gives  its  taste  to 
life.  (Comp.  lxiv.  and  xxiii.)  And,  thirdly,  the 
blessed  confidence  that  Jehovah  maintains  our  lot ;  we 
trust  not  ourselves,  not  favourable  circumstances,  not 
a  mountain  which  the  Lord  Himself  has  made  strong, 
but  Jehovah  Himself.  Delight  thyself  in  the  Lord, 
He  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart.  Faith 
leans  on  Jehovah,  on  the  Father's  love  and  Jesus'; 
for  the  securing  iufallibly  happiness  and  peace  we 
need  not  look  to  circumstances,  save  to  pass  through 
them  with  Him.     This   was  perfect  in  Christ.     He 


THE  TSALMS. — PSALM  XVI.  -41 

had  only  this,  nor  looked  for  aught  else.  We  see  it 
brightly  manifested  in  Paul.  In  principle,  it  is  the 
path  of  every  Christian  ;  and  some  time  or  other  he 
is  exercised  in  it.  The  life  of  faith  is  this :  God 
Himself  the  portion  of  our  inheritance  and  of  our 
cup:  He  maintaineth  our  lot.  This  is  blessedly  de- 
veloped for  us  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  But  the  great  principle  is  the  same.  It  is 
the  life  of  Christ,  and  this  is  enjoyed  in  contrast  with 
and  to  the  exclusion  of  all  else  that  could  become  the 
confidence  or  the  portion  of  the  heart;  expressed  here 
in  Jewish  relationship,  but  always  essentially  true. 

I  may  here  remark  a  distinct  characteristic  of  this 
psalm  which  comes  into  greater  relief  by  the  contrast 
of  the  one  which  follows.  It  touches  on  no  circum- 
stances, tin  nigh  it  supposes  them.  It  is  divine  life  with 
God  and  knows  and  lives  in  the  present  consciousness 
of  only  Him.  We  find  that  there  must  have  been 
death,  hades,  and  the  grave,  but  they  are  only  men- 
tioned as  the  occasion  of  the  power  and  faithfulness  of 
Jehovah.  The  psalm  is  man  living  through,  Avith,  and 
in  view  of  God  in  this  world,  and  so  enjoying  Him  for 
ever  in  spite  of  death.  Circumstances  are  but  cir- 
cumstances, aud  not  the  subject  of  the  psalm  ;  divine 
life  never  passes  away.  ;-  While  we  look  not,"  says  the 
apostle,  ••  at  the  tilings  that  are  seen,  but  at  the  things 
that  are  not  seen ;  for  the  things  that  are  seen  are 
temporal,  hut  the  things  that  are  not  seen  are  eternal." 
Sueh  is  the  Christian  expression  of  this.  The  former 
part  of  the  phrase,  which  I  do  not  cite,  tells  the  effect 
of  this  as  to  circumstances,  and  is  to  be  compared 
rather  with  the  following  psalm.     The  apostle  beauti- 

D 


42         PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

fully  expresses  life  itself  in  one  word :  "  for  to  me 
to  live  is  Christ ;  to  die,"  no  wonder,  was  "  gain." 
But  it  is  important  to  remember,  that  there  is  an  in- 
ward divine  life  which  dwells  and  joys  in  God,  having 
nothing  to  do  with  circumstances,  though  enabling  us 
to  go  through  them,  and  in  us  helped  by  them,  be- 
cause annulling  the  flesh  and  the  will,  so  that  we  live 
more  entirely  of  the  inward  life  with  God. 

But  the  consequence  in  the  soul,  is  the  deep  con- 
sciousness of  blessing.  "  The  lines  are  fallen  unto 
me  in  pleasant  places."  Christ  could  not  have  said 
that  in  the  same  way,  had  He  had  the  kingdom  living 
on  earth  ;  nor  could  we,  were  we  in  the  garden  of 
Eden,  or  the  world  at  our  disposal.  This  living  re- 
lationship with  God  casts  a  light,  a  halo  on  all ;  lights 
the  soul  up  with  such  a  direct  consciousness  of  divine 
blessing  that  nothing  is  like  it,  save  the  full  realiza- 
tion of  it  in  the  presence  of  God.  A  man  with  God, 
enjoying  Him  in  a  nature  capable  of  doing  so 
with  all  the  necessary  conscious  result  Avhere  it 
shall  be  fulfilled  without  a  cloud,  a  man  as  Christ 
was  in  this  world  with  God  —  is  the  most  perfect 
joy  possible,  save  the  everlasting  fulfilment  of  all 
known  and  felt  in  it.  It  is  not  Messiah's  por- 
tion, it  is  that  joy  of  which  Christ  speaks  when 
He  says,  "that  they  may  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in 
themselves."  No  doubt;  He  will  inherit  all  things: 
but  I  do  not  think  this  to  be  the  thought  here.  This 
was  not  the  joy  set  before  Him  for  which  He  endured 
the  cross  and  despised  the  shame.  There  is  "  an  in- 
heritance incorruptible,  undefined,  and  that  fadeth  not 
away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  us."     This  is  known  in 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM  XVI.  43 

joying  in  God.     Life  has  its  delight  there.     In  Cud's 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy. 

The  lines  fallen  in  pleasant  places,  I  believe  to  be 
His  joy  as  man  in  God,  and  in  what  was  before  God. 
Compare  Col.  iii.  1 — 3.     In  what  follows  we  have  the 
active  expression  of  this  life,  in  reference  to  God.     "I 
will  bless  Jehovah  who  giveth  me  counsel."     We  need 
in  divine   life   the   positive  instruction   of  wisdom — 
counsel;  wisdom,   a  divine  clue   and  direction  in  the 
confusion  of  evil  in  this  world — to  be  wise  Concerning 
that  which  is  good.     Not  as  fools,  but  as  Avise,  re- 
deeming the  time;    not  unwise,  but  understanding 
what  the  wrill  of  the  Lord  is.     Jehovah  gives  counsel. 
So  if  any  man  lack  wisdom  let  him  ask  <  of  God,  who 
giveth   to   every   man   liberally  and   upbraideth   not. 
There  is  the  immense  privilege  of  the  positive  direc- 
tion and  guidance  of  God.     The  interest  He  feels  in 
guiding  the  godly  man  aright,   in   the  true  path  suited 
to  Cod  Himself,  across  Hie  wilderness  where  there  is 
no  way.      For  innocence  enjoying  the  blessings  of 
God,  there  Avas  no  need  of  a  way.  In  a  world  departed 
from  Coil,  what  way  can  be  found.'     It  would  be  |  i 
return,  but  that  is  impossible;    do  sinner  ever  returned 
to  innocence.    The  way  of  the  tree  of  life  is  shut  up 
mi  (hat  side — but  how  a.  way  in  a  world  without  God  .' 
But  God  can  make  a  way,  if  He  gives  a  new  life,  with 
a  new    object,    to    that    life — Ilimself    as    known    in 
heaven — if  there  is  a  new  creation  and  we  are  new 
created.    Now  Christ  is  a  new  life,  and  passes  through 
the  world,  according  to  this  life.  t<>  a  new  place  given 
to  man,  and  lie  does  bo  as  man,  dependent  man.    God 
has  prepared  the  path  for  man  endowed  with  this  life. 


44         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

and  so  for  Christ,  who  was  this  life,  and  so  the  light 
of  men.  He  has  even  prepared  the  special  works 
suited  to  it — "  good  works  which  He  hath  afore  pre- 
pared that  we  should  walk  in  them."  This  last  thought 
indeed  goes  somewhat  beyond  our  psalm.  It,  at  any 
rate,  includes  the  activity  of  divine  nature  in  man,  and 
is  not  limited  to  the  right  and  holy  path  of  man  having 
this  life  before  God,  a  thing  as  important  in  its  place 
as  the  other.  So  Moses  asks  not,  "  Show  me  a  way 
across  the  desert,"  but  "  Show  me  thy  way  that  I  may 
know  thee,  and  that  I  may  find  grace  in  thy  sight." 
What  Moses  sought  Jehovah  gives — the  counsel  and 
guidance  of  nis  love.  So  Christ  walked;  so  He 
guides  His  sheep,  going  before  them ;  and  now  we  are 
led  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  ourselves  sons  of  God. 
It  is  the  divine  path  of  wisdom  which  the  vulture's 
eye  has  not  seen :  the  path  of  man,  but  of  man  with 
the  life  of  God,  going  towards  the  presence  of  God, 
and  the  incorruptible  inheritance,  in  an  uncorrupted 
way — the  path  of  God  across  the  world;  but  God 
gives  counsel  for  it.  There  is  dependence  on  God 
for  this,  and  Christ  walked  in  it.  "  Thou  shalt  guide 
me  by  thy  counsel,"  says  even  the  remnant  of  Israel ; 
and,  psalm  xxxii.,  "  I  will  guide  thee  by  mine  eye."  I 
repeat,  He  is  interested  in  the  guidance  of  the  man  of 
God,  and  the  soul  blesses  Him.  In  this  path  Christ 
trod.  The  written  word  is  the  great  means  of  this  ; 
still  there  is  the  direct  action  of  God  in  us  by  nis 
Spirit.  But  there  is  also  divine  intelligence.  "  My 
reins  instruct  me  in  the  night  season."  The  divine  life 
is  intelligent  life.  I  do  not  separate  this  from  divine 
grace  in  us,  but  it  is  different  from  counsel  given. 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM  XVI.  45 

We  can  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  will  in 
all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding-.  Col.  i.  9,  10. 
••  Why  even  of  yourselves,  (says  the  Lord  to  the  Phari- 
sees,) judge  ye  not  that  which  is  right?"  Thus,  when 
removed  from  external  influences,  the  secret  workings 
and  thoughts  of  the  heart  show  what  is  suited  to  the 
path  and  way  of  God  in  the  world.  A  man  is  spirit- 
ually minded  and  discerns  all  things.  It  is  the  work- 
ing of  life  within  (in  us  through  grace)  on  divine 
things,  and  in  the  perception  of  the  divine  path,  what 
is  well  pleasing.  In  Christ  this  was  perfect,  in  us  in 
the  measure  of  our  spirituality ;  but  that  to  which  the 
Christian  has  to  give  much  heed,  that  he  neglect  not 
the  holy  suggestions  and  conclusions  of  the  divinely 
instructed  life  when  freed  from  the  influence  of  sur- 
rounding circumstances.  It  may  seem  folly,  but  if 
found  in  humbly  wailing  on  Cod  will  in  the  end  prove 
His  wisdom.  It  can  always  be  discerned  from  an 
exalted  imagination. 

In  the  first  place,  the  state  of  the  soul  is  exactly 
the  opposite,  for  pretension  to  special  spiritual  guidance 
is  never  humble.  But  besides,  the  controlling  judg- 
ment of  God's  word  which  overrules  the  whole  divine 
life  is  there  to  judge  false  pretensions  to  it.  T<>  this, 
divine  life  is  always  absolutely  subject.  Christ  who 
was  this  life,  yea,  was  the  Word  and  Wisdom  ;  yet, (and 
because  He  was)  always   wholly  honoured  the  written 

word  as  the  guidance  and  authority  of  God  lor  man. 
But  guidance  by  the  Lord  is  not  quite  all  the  practical 
process  of  the  exercise  of  divine  life.  It  looks  en- 
tirely to  the  Lord.  "  1  have  set,  (says  Christ,  walking 
as  man  on  earth.)  Jehovah  a&mys  before  me."   Eekepl 


46         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Him  always  in  view.  How  have  our  hearts  to  own 
that  this  is  not  always  so  !  How  withdrawn  from  all 
evil — how  powerful  morally  in  the  midst  of  this  world 
should  we  be,  were  it  always  so !  There  is  nothing  in 
this  world  like  the  dignity  of  a  man  always  walking 
with  God,  Yet  nothing  is  farther  from  failure  in 
humility :  indeed  it  is  here,  it  is  perfect,  ^elf- 
exaltation  is  neither  possible  nor  desired  in  the 
presence  and  enjoyment  of  God.  What  absence  of 
self,  what  renouncement  of  all  will,  what  singleness  of 
eye,  and  hence  bright  and  earnest  activity  of  purpose, 
Avhen  the  Lord  is  the  only  object  and  end  !  I  say  the 
Lord,  for  no  other  such  object  can  command  and 
.sanctify  the  heart.  All  Avould  go  against  duty  to  Him. 
lie  alone  can  make  the  whole  heart  full  of  light  when 
duty  and  purpose  of  heart  go  together  and  are  but 
<  me.  Indeed  this  is  what  James  calls  "  the  perfect  law 
of  liberty"- — -perfect  obedience,  yet  perfect  purpose  of 
heart,  as  Jesus  says,  "  that  the  world  may  know  that  I 
love  the  Father,  and  as  the  Father  hath  given  me 
commandment,  so  I  do."  We  say,  as  Christians,  Christ 
is  all,  and  lie  that  loves  Him  keeps  His  commandments. 
Thus  Jesus  set  Jehovah  always  before  His  face.  This 
is  man's  perfection  as  man.  This  is  the  measure  of 
our  degree  of  spirituality,  the  constancy  and  purity 
with  which  we  do  this.  But  if  Jesus  did  this,  surely 
Jehovah  could  not  fail  Him  nor  us.  So  walking,  He 
maintains  the  saint  in  the  path  which  is  His  own.  "  I . 
set  Jehovah  always  before  my  face  :  He  is  on  my  right 
hand,  so  that  I  shall  not  fall."  This  is  known  by  faith. 
He  may  let  us  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake — Christ 
did  so — be  put  to  death — Christ  was ;  but  not  a  hair 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM    XVJ.  17 

of  our  head  can  He  let  fall  to  the  ground,  nor  fail  id 
making  us  enter  into  life  according-  to  the  path  in 
which  we  walk,  but  here  it  is  confidence  in  Jehovah 
Himself.  It  is  faith,  not  the  question  of  righteousness  in 
Jehovah,  which  is  in  the  next  psalm.     Faith  in  walking 

in  the  path  of  man,  according  to  I  rod's  will  and  towards 
God  solely  as  the  sanctifying  end  and  object,  knows 
thai  (jod  is  at  its  right  hand.  Jehovah  will  serine. 
How,  or  through  what,  is  not  the  question.  It  will 
be  Jehovah's  security.  What  strength  this  gives  in 
passing  through  a  world  where  all  is  against  us,  and 
what  sanctifying  power  it  has  !  There  is  no  motive, 
no  resource  but  -Jehovah,  which  could  satisfy  any  other 
craving,  or  by  which  the  heart  desires  to  secure  itself 
iu  seeking  aught  else.  Ilence  come  what  would, 
Christ  waited  patiently  for  Jehovah,  looked  for  no 
other  deliverance.  Nor  have  we  to  seek  any  other, 
and  this  makes  the  way  perfect.  We  turn  not  aside 
to  make  the  path  easier.  And  to  this  the  psalm 
turns.  Death  was  before  Christ.  As  Abraham  was 
called  to  slay  his  son,  in  whom  the  promises  were  to 
be  fulfilled,  Christ  as  living  on  the  earth  had  to  re- 
nounce all  the  promises  to  which  lie  was  entitled  and 
life  with  them.  The  sorrow  of  this  to  Him — for  He 
felt  all  perfectly — is  depicted  in  the  102nd  psalm  ;  but 
as  Abraham  trusted  Jehovah  and  received  Isaac  from 
the  dead  in  a  figure,  bo  the  Lord  here,  the  leader  and 
finisher  of  faith,  trusts  Jehovah  in  view  of  Ilis  own 
death — is  perfect  in  trust  in  it.  lie  had  sci  Jehovah 
always    before    Him.       He    was   at    His    right    hand, 

therefore  ilis  heart  was  glad  and  Ilis  glory  rejoiced; 
His  flesh  rested  in  hope,  for  the  Jehovah  He  trusted 


48         PEACTICAL  EEFLECTIONS  ON 

would  not  leave  His  soul  in  hades  nor  suffer  His  Holy 
One  to  see  corruption.  Holy  One  is  not  here  the 
same  as  "  saints  in  the  earth."  Saints  are  those  set 
apart  —  consecrated  to  God.  Thy  Holy  One  is  one 
walking-  in  piety,  agreeable  to  God.  It  is  Christ 
known  in  this  character.  He  is  also  given  this  name 
in  psalm  lxxxix.  19,  where  read  u  of  thy  holy  one." 
Remark  that  it  is  thy  Holy  One,  One  who  morally 
belongs  to  God  by  the  perfection  of  His  character. 
Christians  are  such  only  full  of  imperfections.  They 
are  saints,  set  apart  to  God,  but  they  are  also — and 
are  to  walk  as — the  "  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved ; " 
and  as  such  to  put  on  the  character  of  grace  in  which 
Christ  walked.  The  former  part  of  Col.  iii.  displays 
this  life  at  large  in  us.  Eph.  i.  4  shows  it  in  its  per- 
fection in  result.  This  confidence  of  the  pious  soul  in 
the  faithfulness  of  Jehovah,  the  reasoning  of  faith 
from  this  nature  that  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  and 
the  consciousness  of  relationship  with  God  as  His  de- 
light, is  very  beautiful  here.  It  is  not,  "thou  wilt  raise 
me,"  but  it  is  not  possible  in  the  thought  of  One  in 
whom  is  the  power  of  life, that  Jehovah  shouldleave  the 
soul  that  has  this  life  in  hades,  far  from  Him  in  death  ; 
and  the  object  of  His  delight  to  sink  into  corruption. 
This  moral  confidence  and  conclusion  is  exceedingly 
beautiful.  "  It  was  not,"  says  Peter,  "  possible  that 
He  could  be  holden  of  it."  This  may  include  His 
person,  but  His  power  cannot  be  separated  from  this 
grace.  The  same  confidence,  flowing  from  life,  is 
manifested  as  to  Jehovah's  showing  Him  the  path  of 
life.  It  is  the  perfection  of  faith  as  to  life,  but  in 
Jehovah.      "  Thou  wilt  show  me  the  path  of  life," 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    XVI.  19 

perhaps  through  deatli ;  for  there,  if  He  was  to  be 
perfect  with  God,  this  path  led — but  not  to  stay  there, 
or  it  were  not  a  path  of  life.  Jehovah  could  show 
Him  no  other.  Man  had  taken,  in  spite  of  warning, 
the  path  of  death  —  the  path  of  his  own  will  and 
disobedience  ;  but  Christ  conies,  the  obedient  man. 
There  was  no  path  for  man  in  paradise — no  natural 
path  of  life  in  the  desert  of  sin.  Man  had  not  life  in 
himself;  but  what  path  of  the  new  divine  life  in  man 
could  there  be  for  man  in  a  world  of  sin,  amongst  men 
already  departed  from  God?  The  law  had  indeed 
proposed  one,  but  it  only  brought  out  the  sinfulness 
of  man's  nature.  The  knowledge  of  sin  was  by  it. 
and  its  exceeding'  sinfulness.  Christ,  who  had  life,  no 
doubt,  could  have  kept  it ;  yea,  did  so,  because  in  Him 
was  no  sin,  but  there  He  was  in  this  wholly  dissociated 
from  as  who  are  sinners.  He  was  alone,  separate 
from  sinners.  But  in  a  path  of  faith,  He  could  be 
associated  with  those  quickened  by  the  word — con- 
Feasors  of  sin,  not  keepers  of  law,  judges  of  all  evil, 
separated  by  quickening  grace  from  sinners,  and 
treading  the  path  of  faith  across  the  world,  not  of  it. 
towards  the  full  issue  of  this  divine  life,  which  was 
not  here,  which  must  go  through  the  death  of  flesh. 
He  had  nothing  to  judge,  nothing  to  confess,  nothing 
to  die  to  or  for  in  Himself ;  but  he  could  walk  in  the 
holy  path  of  faith  across  the  world  in  which  they,  as 
renewed,  had  to  walk.  But  for  them  this  holy  path 
was  necessarily  death,  for  there  was  a  life  of  sin.      He 

could  have  abode  alone,  and  had  twelve  legions  of 
angels,  and  gone  on  high;  but,  speaking  reverently, 
though   this  would  have  been  righteous  as  to  Him, 


50         PEACTICAL  DEFLECTIONS  ON 

tliere  was  no  sense  in  His  becoming  a  man  for  this. 
And  not  only  does  He  die  for  them,  (for  expiation  is 
not  the  subject  of  this  psalm,  but  life,)  but  having 
set  out  to  go  with,  yea,  before,  them,  He  treads  this 
path  through  death,  that  He  may  destroy  its  power 
for  us,  and  treads  it  alone,  as  He  had  overcome  Satan's 
power  in  this  world,  and  now  destroyed  it  in  death 
too — treads  it  alone.  The  disciples  could  not  follow 
Him  there,  till  He  had  destroyed  Satan's  power  in  it. 
"  Thou  canst  not  follow  me  now,  but  thou  shalt  follow 
me  after."  No  earnestness  of  human  will,  no  affection 
could  abide  there.  But  when  dead  to  sin,  and  streng- 
thened with  the  strength  of  Christ,  he  could  let  ano- 
ther bind  him  and  carry  him  (as  Jesus  did)  whither 
nature  would  not.  Christ  then  associated  Himself 
from  John's  baptism  with  these  saints  in  the  earth — 
trod  the  path,  only  perfectly  apart  from  sin,  and  only 
Avith  God,  doing  His  will,  showed  this  path  of  life  in 
man ;  then,  having  died  to  sin,  and,  in  the  full  result 
of  this  life  in  its  own  place,  where  no  evil  is,  lives  to 
God.  He  did  so,  by  faith,  when  down  on  earth  always, 
but  as  man,  in  a  world  apart  from  God,  and  taking 
the  word  as  His  guide,  living  by  every  word  that  came 
out  of  the  mouth  of  God,  as  we  have  to  do.  The 
resurrection  demonstrated  the  perfectness  of  a  life 
which  was  always  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness; 
but  now  He  lives  in  it  in  its  own  place,  and  this  is 
what,  though  through  death,  in  an  undiscontinued  life, 
He  anticipates.  "  In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy." 
This,  always  His  delight,  was  now  His  perfect  en- 
joyment, "and  at  thy  right  hand."  (Divine  power 
had  brought  Him  to  this  place  of  power  and  accept- 


THE  TSALMS. — PSALM  XVI.  51 

ance — the  witness  of  His  being  perfectly  acceptable 
to  God)  are  "  pleasures  for  evermore." 

Such  is  life  as  life  is  with  God — life  shown  as  man 
in  this  world,  associating  itself  with  the  saints  on  the 
earth,  and  (reading  their  path;  not  Christ  uniting 
them  to  Himself.  Life  before  God,  and  looking-  ever 
at  Him:  a  life  which,  though  free  from  sin,  neither 
innocence  nor  sinful  man  could  know — which,  in  fact, 
had  not  to  be  lived  in  paradise — which  could  not  be 
lived  as  belonging  to  the  world,  but  which  was  lived 
to  God  through  it :  setting  Jehovah  always  before  it 
as  its  object.  Such  is  the  life  we  have  to  live.  "  I 
am  crucified  with  Christ;  nevertheless  I  live,  yet  not 
I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me;  and  the  life  which  I  live 
in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Sou  of  God, 
who  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me."  Christ,  as 
the  psalm  shows  us,  lived  the  life  of  faith,  and  never 
of  anything  but  faith;  and  this  was  His  perfection. 
In  this  world  there  is  no  other  for  a  man.  A  life 
which  has  no  object  but  the  Lord  Himself.  This  is  a 
wonderful  point — not  one  object  in  the  world  at  all. 
For  otherwise,  it  is  not  faith,  but  sight,  or  lust. 
Innocent  man  had  no  object:  lie  enjoyed  in  peace 
God's  goodness.  .Man  departed  from  God — had 
many  objects;  but  all  these  separate  his  heart  from 
God,  and  end  in  death.  Morally  separated  from  '.'oil. 
he  may  find  a  famine  in  the  land,  but  has  noway  God 
for  his  object.  But  the  new  life  which  comes  down 
from  the  Father  looks  up  with  desire  to  its  source, 
and  becomes  the  nature  in  man  which  tends  towards 
God,  has  the  Sou  of  God  for  its  object — as  Paul  says, 
••that  [  may  win  Christ."    This  life  has  no  portion 


52         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

iu  this  world  at  all ;  and,  as  life  in  man,  looks  to  God, 
leans  on  God,  and  seeks  no  other  assurance  or  prop, 
obeys  God,  and  can  live  only  by  faith.  But  this  is  a 
man's  life,  does  not  extend  to  God.  God  as  such  is 
holy,  is  righteous,  is  love ;  but  cannot,  it  is  evident, 
live  by  faith.  He  is  its  object.  Nor  is  it  exactly  an 
angel's  life,  though  they  are  holy,  obedient,  and  loving. 
It  is  man's  life,  living  wholly  for  and  towards  God 
in  a  world  departed  fiom  Him — hence,  towards  Him 
and  by  faith ;  for  it  is  not  merely  that  they  serve  in 
it.  That  angels  can  do;  but  though  not  morally 
of  it,  for  the  life  is  come  down  from  heaven,  "  They 
are  not  of  the  world,  as  I  am  not  of  the  world." 
Yet,  as  to  their  place  as  man,  they  are  of  it,  and 
hence  have  to  live  in  order  not  to  be  of  it  morally ; 
objectively  entirely  out  of  it ;  thus  having  to  say  to 
God,  or  it  would  be  idolatry.  But,  thus,  while  it  is  a 
man's  life,  and  no  more  as  such,  yet  it  must  be  abso- 
lutely for  God  according  to  His  nature  :  and  it  lives, 
in  that  it  lives,  to  God.  The  living  Father  had  sent 
Christ,  and  He  lived  (5ta  top  Rarepa)  for  the  sake  of  the 
Father :  so  he  that  eats  me  shall  live  for  me.  God  is 
the  measure  of  perfection  iu  motive — hence,  hereafter 
in  enjoyment,  and  a  heart  wholly  formed  on  Him. 
This  life  of  man  Christ  led  and  filled  the  whole  career 
of.  Out  of  this  Satan  wanted  Him  to  come  in  the 
wilderness,  and  have  a  will,  make  the  stones  bread, 
distrust,  try  if  the  Lord  would  fulfil  His  promise  or 
fail  him,  have  an  object — the  kingdoms  of  the  world. 
This  last  destroyed  the  very  nature  of  the  life,  and 
Satan  is  openly  detected  and  dismissed.  Christ  would 
not  come  out  of  man's  dependent,  obedient  place  of 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XVI.  53 

unquestioning'  trust  in  Jehovah.  His  path  here  was 
with  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  perfect  in  the  life 
which  was  come  down  from  heaven,  but  which  was 
lived  on  earth,  looking  up  to  heaven.  Whatever  our 
privileges  in  union  with  Christ,  it  is  all-important  for 
the  Christian  to  live  in  the  fear  and  faith  of  God, 
according  to  the  life  of  Christ.  It  is  not  man's 
responsibility  without  law  or  under  law  as  a  child  of 
Adam  :  it  is  all  over  with  us  on  that  ground.  It  is 
the  responsibility  of  the  new  life  of  faith,  which  is  a 
pilgrim  and  a  stranger  here— a  life  come  down  from 
heaven.  "  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this 
life  is  in  his  Son  :  he  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life;"  but 
a  life  which  man  lives  in  passing  through  this  world, 
but  wholly  out  of  it  in  its  object — a  life  of  faith, 
which  finds  in  God's  presence  fulness  of  joy.  A 
man's  life  does  not  extend  to  God,  though  perfect  for 
God,  and  in  its  delight  in  God.  Such  was  Christ, 
though  He  was  much  more  than  this.  Such  are  we 
as  far  as  we  are  Christians  ;  only  we  have  to  remember 
that  the  development  of  this  life  in  us  is  not,  as  in 
the  psalm,  in  connexion  with  the  name  of  Jehovah, 
but  with  the  full  revelation  of  the  Father  and  the 
Son.  The  blessed  one  who  thus  lived  as  man  on  earth 
is  as  man  at  God's  right  hand,  where  are  pleasures 
for  evermore,  with  BTim  in  whose  presence  is  fulness 
of  joy.  His  flesh  saw  no  corruption,  and  His  soul 
was  uot  left  in  hades.  lie  despised,  for  this  joy  set 
before  Him,  the  shame  and  endured  the  cross,  the 
leader  and  finisher  of  faith. 

This  psalm  gives  us  the  inward  spiritual  life  of  Christ, 
and  so  ours,  ending  in  the  highest  joy  of  God's  presence. 


54         PEACTICAL  EEFLECTIONS  OX 

Psalm  xvii.  considers  this  life  practically  here 
below,  and  in  respect  to  its  difficulties  with  man 
opposed  to  what  is  right.  The  state  of  the  soul  is 
still  marked  by  entire  dependence  on  God,  but  as  to 
integrity  towards  God,  and  as  against  man,  the  soul 
can  plead  righteousness.  Still  it  does  not  avenge  itself, 
but  casts  itself  entirely  on  God,  arid  thus  gets  the 
fruits  of  His  righteous  dealings.  This  is  a  great  secret 
of  practical  wisdom,  not  avenging  self — the  patience 
of  the  new  life  in  the  midst  of  evil,  and  looking, 
and  leaving  all  to  God.  This  supposes  the  righteous 
path  as  man  of  the  divine  life,  which  therefore 
can  appeal  to  God's  necessaiy  judgment  about  it, 
knowing  what  lie  is  and  also  trusting  in  Him  ;  but 
even  here  deliverance  is  sought,  not  vengeance,  only 
the  disappointing  the  plans  of  wickedness.  If  we 
have  not  walked  uprightly,  still  confidence  in  God  is 
our  true  place.  He  spares  and  restores  in  mercy  most 
graciously  ;  but  this,  though  other  psalms  take  it  up, 
is  not  the  subject  of  this  psalm.  Here  it  is  the 
righteous  life  which  God  looks  at  and  vindicates 
against  the  men  of  this  world,  for  it  is  Christ  and 
Christians  as  far  as  they  live  the  life  of  Christ.  Im- 
mediately, as  ever,  it  is  Christ  and  the  remnant.  Je- 
hovah hears  the  righteous  and  the  prayer  which  goes 
not  out  of  feigned  lips.  Remark  that  in  this 
psalm  the  life  of  Christ  is  supposed  and  found  to 
meet  opposition  and  oppression  in  the  world  from  the 
men  of  this  world.  We  have  seen  how  separated  it 
was,  associated  with  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  jDassing 
as  a  stranger  through  it,  though  humanly  in  it.  But 
then  faith — and  this  shews  how  entirely  Jehovah  is 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XVII.  55 

.still  looked  to — sees  that  the  men  of  this  world  are 
the  men  of  God's  hand.     They  serve  to  prove  the 
heart  and,  in  us.  who  are  ever  in  danger  to  slip  into 
the  world,  to  keep  us  strangers  in  it.     Still  Q-od  de- 
livers from  them.     Christ  for  blessed  reasons  was  not 
delivered;  yet  as  freely  giving  Himself.     The  heart 
has  the  sense  of  righteousness  here  and  hence  counts 
on  deliverance;  but  there  is  no  spirit  of  vengeance. 
It   is  the  Spirit  of  Christ  Himself,  and   hence   above 
the  spirit  of  the  remnant,  and  much  more  the  Christian 
spirit.     There  is  the  consciousness  of  righteousness 
and  of  integrity,  but  entire  dependence  on  the  Lord 
in  respect  of  it,  not  as  regards  justification — it  is  not 
the  question  here — but  confidence.     I  know  nothing 
of  myself,  says  Paul,  yet  I  am  not  hereby  justified. 
Again,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  we  have 
confidence  towards  God.    So  Jesus:  "the  Father  hath 
not  left  me  alone,  fori  do  always  those  things  that  please 
Rim."     There  is  the  consciousness  of  righteousness 
and  confidence  in  God.    And  the  heart  appeals  to  him, 
because  of  righteousness.    And  all  this  is  right,  thinks 
rightly  of  God,  and  trusts  to  God  that  lie  will  not 
be  inconsistent  with  Himself  and  cannot  be.     If  there 
be  desire  of  vengeance,  we  have  sunk  below  this.    Re- 
mark the  further  traits  of  the  conscious  life.     It  is 
not  merely  righteous  walk,  but  a  proved  heart,  where 
the  secret  movements  of  the  heart  are  alone  with  God. 
When  the  reins  instruct,  God  proves,  but  nothing  is 
found.     This,  absolutely  true  of  Christ,  is  true  of  the 
Christian  as  to  the  purpose  of  his  heart,  and  so  far  as  he 
keeps  nothing  back,  nothing  reserved  from  God.    This 
can  be,  though  then  in  utter  humiliation,  where  even 


5G         PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

there  has  been  failure.  "  Thou  knowest  all  things,  thou 
knowest  that  I  love  thee."  So  in  Job.  He  held  fast 
the  consciousness  of  his  integrity — not  that  he  had 
not  failed.  The  short-comings  of  nature  had  to  be 
checked  and  judged,  and  this  he  only  did  when 
humbled  in  the  presence  of  God.  He  had  for  a  long 
while,  as  God  witnesses,  held  fast  his  integrity  in 
every  sense.  He  did  as  with  God  all  through,  but 
did  not  know  himself  as  this  was  needed.  Christ  ever 
walked  so  and  the  provings  of  His  heart  only  found 
integrity  to  God.  There  was  purpose.  His  mouth 
also  should  not  transgress.  He  was  a  perfect  man,  as 
James  says.  Xext,  as  regards  the  works  of  men,  for 
He  walked  as  a  man  in  this  world,  this  word  was  His 
absolute  rule.  By  it  He  kept  Himself  from  the  paths 
of  the  destroyer.  But  there  is  no  pride,  but  entire 
dependence  on  Jehovah  in  the  right  path.  "  Hold  thou 
up  my  goings  in  thy  paths,  that  my  footsteps  slip  not." 
Such  was  the  practical  life  of  Christ  in  this  world. 
This  was  His  life  and  walk  in  itself. 

In  what  follows  from  verse  6,  it  is  shown  in  looking 
to  God  as  regards  the  opposition  and  oppression  of 
the  wicked.  He  looks  for  Jehovah's  loving-kindness 
as  his  sole  stay  in  presence  of  his  enemies.  This, 
again,  is  perfection.  His  path  was  with  God ;  no 
yielding  to  please  men  and  be  spared ;  no  complaint 
that  he  had  not  his  portion  in  this  world.  He  sees 
the  success  and  prosperity  of  the  men  of  this  world, 
without  envy.  Faith  fully  tried  is  faith  still.  If  we 
trust  the  Lord  and  have  Him  for  our  portion,  we  have 
courage  to  walk  in  His  path  and  not  find  nature  satis- 
fied ;  but  this  is  faith.     If  there  be  not  so,  there  will  be 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   XVII.  ">7 

some  craving  after  what  the  natural  heart  could  have, 
and  so  danger  of  yielding,  in  order  to  have  what  nature 
craves  and  the  world  gives — after  all,  husks  that  perish. 
But  the  human  heart  must  have  something.  If  it  has 
the  Lord  it  suffices,  but  this  tests  it.  Here  we  have 
perfection  in  respect  of  the  heart  aud  path  in  this 
world.  The  great  secret  is  to  have  the  heart  filled 
with  Christ,  and  so  be  in  the  path  at  God's  will.  Thus 
there  is  no  room  for  will  and  acts  which  harass  the 
soul,  and  of  which  self  is  always  the  centre,  as  Christ 
is  in  the  heart  walking  in  faith.  Hence  His  presence 
in  righteousness  is  what  is  before  the  soul  as  the 
blessed  result.  It  is  in  righteousness.  It  is  not  the 
absolute  joy  in  God  of  Psalm  xvi.,but  the  righteousness 
which  gives  joy  in  His  presence  for  those  who  have 
suffered  for  it  and  by  it  here  below  in  God's  paths,  in 
an  opposing  world,  and  absence  or  denial  of  self.  "God 
is  not  unrighteous  to  forget."  "It  is  a  righteous  thing 
with  God  to  recompense  to  you  rest  with  us."  And 
the  heart,  too,  is  satisfied,  not  here  exactly  with  what 
God  is,  but  with  what  we  are.  "I  shall  awake  up 
after  thy  likeness,"  so,  "we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we 
shall  see  Ilim  as  lie  is.''  AVe  are  predestinated  to  be 
conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  that  He  may  be 
the  firstborn  among  many  brethren.  Holy  delight  in 
God,  having  Him  always  before  the  face,  leads  to  per- 
fect delight  and  joy  in  God,  when  His  presenee  makes 
it  full.  Faithfulness,  internal  and  external,  to  God  in 
the  midst  of  an  opposing  and  perhaps  oppressing 
world,  leads  to  righteous  recompense  of  glory  and 
God's  presence  in  righteousness.  Both  are  perfect  in 
Christ,   and  through   Christ,  the  portion  of  the  saints. 


58         PKACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Verses  7  and  1 1  give  the  general  application  to  those 
associated  with  Christ ;  still,  though  applicable  to  the 
remnant,  the  psalm  gives  the  proper  perfection  of 
Christ  and  so  of  the  Christian.  Deliverance  now  is 
looked  for  in  this  psalm,  not  in  xvi.  There  it  was  the 
perfect  passage  of  life  with  God  through  death,  up  to 
fulness  of  joy  in  Him  in  His  presence.  Here 
righteous  deliverance  from  men  is  looked  for.  And 
for  this — though  we  may  be  honoured  with  martyr- 
dom, according  to  the  pattern  of  Christ's  sufferings — 
the  Christian  may  look.  "  The  Lord  shall  deliver  me," 
says  the  apostle,  "from  every  evil  work,  and  preserve 
me  to  his  heavenly  kingdom."  The  soul  may  confi- 
dently and  entirely  trust  God,  as  against  all  the 
machinations  of  the  wicked,  as  walking  in  the  path  of 
righteousness.  God  saves  such  by  His  right  hand. 
He  may  trust  for  restoration,  if  it  has  failed ;  but 
there  is  a  path  of  righteousness  which  Christ  has 
traced  here  below  in  a  world  of  sin,  and  left  the 
blessed  track  of  His  steps,  and  the  witness  of  the 
movements  of  His  heart,  for  us  to  walk  in  and  live  by. 

Psalm  xviii.  is  of  the  deepest  interest,  as  regards  the 
interpretation,  presenting,  as  it  does,  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  as  the  centre  of  all  the  deliverance  of  Israel. 
His  cry  there  called  out  upon  Israel  all  the  favour 
of  God  in  power.  But  I  have  not  a  great  deal  to  say 
upon  it,  for  that  very  reason,  in  its  application  to  us. 
The  great  principle  developed — and  it  is  a  precious 
one — is  the  cry  to  a  trusted  God  in  distress,  which 
He  surely  hears.  Of  this  Christ  is  the  example,  as 
elsewhere.     "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  Jehovah  heard 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM  XVJir.  o9 

liiin."  Only  that  here  it  is  not,  us  in  psalm  xxxiv., 
tender  commiseration  towards  the  suffering  poor ;  but 
the  interest  that  Jehovah  takes  in  a  suffering  Christ, 
who  has  walked  in  perfect  obedience  to  the  law.  The 
psalm  is  a  psalm  of  praise,  because  He  has  been  heard 
and  Jehovah  known  as  a  rock  and  a  deliverer;  but 
this,  as  often  remarked,  is  the  result  expressed  in  the 
first  verses,  and  what  leads  to  it  is  then  pursued. 

"  I  will  call  upon  Jehovah,"  for  His  name  it  is,  and 
1  lis  alone,  the  God  of  His  people,  which  inspires  con- 
fidence.  It  is  His  name  which  is  celebrated,  but  what 
has  drawn  all  his  praise  out  is  the  answer  to  the  cry 
raised  to  Him  in  distress  in  the  midst  of  enemies,  in 
the  sorrows  of  death.  In  that  distress  Jehovah  heard 
out  of  His  temple.  This  associates  it  at  once  with 
the  earth,  and  deliverance,  and  triumph  there.  But 
another  point  of  the  highest  interest  does  so  to — obe- 
dience to  the  law  laid  as  the  ground  for  his  living-,  heard 
in  the  day  of  distress,  (ver.  20 — 20.)  The  righteous 
mi  earth  and  dependence  of  Messiah  on 
Jehovah,  calling  (Mi  Him  ia  distress,  brought  JJim 
earthly  deliverance  and  earthly  triumph.  The  two 
previous  psalms  look  onward  to  heavenly  blessing. 
though  the  latter  of  them  for  the  disappointment  of 
the  enemy  also  ;  and  the  hope  held  out  is  heavenly, 
the  righteousness  not  legal;  but  in  the  former  the 
heart  Bel  on  Jehovah,  in  the  latter  a  heart  right  with 
God,  and  in  this  world,  and  looking  for  righteousness. 

Here  in   psalm   wiii.   there   is  obedience  to  His 

statutes,  a  cry  in  distress  even  to  the  pains  of  death, 

and  deliverance,   and  triumph  on  the  earth.      Such  is 

•  uii  of  the  legal  righteousness  of  Christ,  when 


60         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

in  distress,  in  the  midst  of  the  floods  of  ungodly  men 
and  LTis  strong  enemy.  Note,  it  is  the  power  of  men 
and  death,  and  His  crying  thus  to  God,  and  His  cry 
comes  before  Him — in  no  way  God's  hand  upon  Him 
as  suffering  for  sin.  Messiah's  legal  righteousness 
and  distress  bring  earthly  triumph  and  supremacy  to 
David  and  to  his  seed.  It  is  the  government  of  God, 
(see  25,  26,)  having  regard  to  righteousness  on  the 
earth  which  in  Christ  was  perfect.  But  this,  per- 
fectly accomplished  when  Christ's  enemies  are  put 
under  His  feet,  is  not*  actually  so  now,  because  God 
prepares  His  saints  for  a  heavenly  dwelling  and  joy. 
and,  during  all  the  proving  of  the  first  Adam,  shows 
by  their  trials  that  their  rest  is  not  here.  Still  there 
are  some  precious  points  for  every  soul.  In  upright- 
ness and  suffering  through  it,  he  can  surely  count 
upon  God ;  and  remark  here  that  the  interest  and 
sympathy  of  God,  awakening  in  us  the  blessedest 
affections,  are  sweetly  shown.  The  Lord  hears  when 
we  call  in  distress,  and  in  the  greatest  depth  we  can 
have  confidence,  and  what  ought  to  seem  to  shut  us 
out  from  it  is  just  the  occasion  of  it'.  The  psalm 
instructs  us  thus  to  call  upon  the  Lord  in  distress, 
come  how  or  why  it  may — to  call  on  the  Lord;  and 
thus  not  only  the  deliverance  is  known,  but  the  Lord  is 
known  in  His  sympathy,  and  kindness,  and  interest 
in  us.  I  love  the  Lord,  he  says ;  or  rather  the  heart 
turns  to  the  Lord  Himself  and  says,  "  I  will  love  thee, 
0  Lord,  my  strength,"  and  then  the  heart  thinks  of  all 
He  is  for  us.  uThe  Lord  is  my  rock,  and  my  fortress, 
and  my  deliverer,  my  God,  my  strength,  in  whom  I 
will  trust,  my  buckler,  the  horn  of  my  salvation,  and 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM   XVIII.  61 

my  high  tower."  The  heart  enlarges  in  the  sense  of 
what  He  has  been  for  us.  And  so  lie  is.  Though  our 
deliverances  may  not  be  exactly  of  the  same  kind,  yet 
difficulties  and  distress  often  beset  us,  and  there  is 
deliverance  in  crying  to  the  Lord.  Note  also,  there 
are  holy  affections  drawn  out  by  the  dealings  of  the 
Lord,  as  by  His  eternal  salvation — holy  and  confiding 
affections,  piety ;  not  merely  praise,  because  he  has 
redeemed  us  for  ever,  but  daily  exercise  of  sympathy 
and  tender  thoughts  of  compassion.  He  cannot  bear 
to  see  us  suffer,  save  when  needed,  and  there  are  trials 
which  draw  out  love  to  Him.  Surely,  lie  says, 
"Ephraim  is  my  dear  child;  for  since  I  spake  against 
him,  I  do  earnestly  remember  him  still."  There  indeed 
it  was  the  remembrance  of  him  when  under  chastise- 
ment. Here  it  is  suffering  in  integrity,  but  at  bottom 
there  is  integrity  in  the  Christian  and  in  Christ.  He 
can  cry  in  that  distress.  The  psalm  however  is  the 
cry  <if  a  holy  and  calm  spirit,  confiding  in  God  and 
finding  the  abundant  results  in  His  faithfulness.  The 
heart  is  drawn  to  Himself. 

In  xvi.,  xvii.,  xviii,  we  have  found  Christ  Himself — 
His  personal  position,  the  joy  set  before  Him  in  heaven, 
and  His  final  triumph  on  earth  as  siiffering  when 
legally  righteous.  In  xix. — xxi.  we  have  the  godly 
remnant  contemplating  the  different  testimonies  pre- 
sented to  the  responsibility  of  man.  A  few  remarks 
on  each  are  called  for.  First,  there  is  the  testimony 
of  creation,  anil  in  particular  the  heavens,  for  the  earth 
has  been  given  t<>  man  and  is  corrupt.  Here,  re- 
mark, God  is  spoken  of,  not  Jehovah — His  hope  in 

(.'(»1    as    such.      Hence    the   godly  man   sees   that,   the 


62         PBACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

witness  goes  out  into  all  lands,  and  that  the  Gen- 
tiles are  the  objects  of  God's  testimony.  This  is  a 
veiy  important  point,  which  the  Jews  ought  to  have 
understood,  and  which  Paul,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  did 
understand,  citing  this  psalm  to  show  it — not  resting 
on  what  the  testimony  was,  but  on  the  fact  that  the 
testimony  of  God  went  out  into  all  lands  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth.  The  godly  man  can  delight  in  this 
testimony  to  the  glory  of  His  God;  but  he  sees  it 
reaches  out  to  all.  He  enters  into  and  understands 
the  penetrating,  pervading  character  of  this  testimony, 
and  that  it  is  God  who  is  witnessed  to  by  it.  Such, 
I  add,  will  be  the  estimate  of  the  restored  remnant  in 
the  last  days.  (See  psalm  cxlviii.)  But  the  godly  man 
estimates  the  experimental  excellence  of  the  law  of 
God  also ;  and  though,  of  course,  for  Israel  it  was 
the  law  as  given  by  Moses,  we  must  take  it  here  as 
the  testimony  of  the  word  of  God  to  the  conscience. 
I  say  the  conscience,  because  it  is  not  the  revelation 
of  the  riches  of  grace,  or  the  unfolding  of  the  person 
of  Christ  and  the  ways  of  God  in  Him,  but  the  testi- 
mony of  God's  word  respecting  man,  to  the  conscience 
of  man,  even  when  it  is  taken  in  the  largest  sense. 
He  does  not  say  the  law  of  God  here,  but  "the  law  of 
Jehovah,"  a  God  known  in  covenant  relationship.  His 
law  is  given  to  His  people,  to  His  servants.  It  is 
perfect,  the  exact  mind  of  God  as  to  what  man 
ought  to  be  before  God,  according  to  God's  will,  now 
that  evil  is  known;  but  man's  mind  is  not  such, 
even  when  the  law  of  God  is  delighted  in.  It  sets 
the  soul  therefore  right.  One  has  the  consciousness 
of  its  doing  so:  for  the  soul,  having  life,  appreciates 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   XVIII.  G3 

it  when  revealed,  (though  it  may  not  Lave  had  it  in 
mind,)  and  is  livingly  susceptible  of  its  truth.     It  has 

living  ]  xiwer  as  the  word  of  God  for  him  who  lives. 
But  where  it  is  not  forgotten,  there  is  enlightening 
and  direction.  It  is  purr  and  enlightens  the  eyes, 
gives  to  set-  clear  where  we  were  obscure  in  heart  and 
spirituality.  But  the  psalm  connects  this  with  the 
State  of  the  heart.  There  is  a  reference,  not  merely, 
to  the  law,  but  to  the  Lord  Himself — the  effect  of 
the  sense  of  God's  presence  in  the  conscience — the 
fear  of  the  Lord — the  introduction  of  God  into  every 
tiling,  and  the  reference  of  the  heart  to  Him.  and  the 
judgment  which  he  Has  of  everything.  This  is  clean ; 
no  spot  can  remain  there,  and  it  is  an  eternal  princi- 
ple, for  it  depends  on  the  nature  of  God  Himself. 
Further,  God's  dealings  and  ways  as  pronounced  (for 
judgments  include  that,  as  well  as  judgments  executed; 
He  does  show  His  judgment  of  things  in  His  chas- 
tisements ;)  but  hi  general  every  judgment  He  forms, 
however  shown,  is  true  and  righteous  altogether. 
Bat  they  are  not  only  this,  but  as  gold  and  the  honey- 
comb  to  the  faithful;  they  are  the  expressions  of  God's 
mind,  and  that  is  infinitely  precious  and  sweet  to  the 
saint.  But,  besides  this,  the  heart  is  in  the  midst  of 
dangers  and  human  tendencies,  which  draw  us  far  from 
God.  The  judgments  of  the  Lord  on  all  human  con- 
duct warn  us:  for  the  joy  of  the  word,  and,  in  the 
case  of  the  Christian,  of  heaven,  do  not  suffice.  We 
need  the  wisdom  ami  prudence  which  can  point  out 
a  divine  path  in  the  confusion  of  evil,  to  guide  our 
steps  out  of  the  reach  of  evil  here.  God's  word  meets 
us  even  here.  And  in  keeping  His  judgments  there 
is  great  reward :  great  positive  blessing  and  peace  of 


64         PRACTICAL  EEPLECTIONS  ON 

heart  here.  The  soul  is  happy  with  God,  and  walks  in 
peace  through  the  world,  and,  as  a  Christian,  the  heart 
is  thus  wholly  free  to  serve  others.  Remark  that  it 
is  not  merely  what  the  law  is,  but  what  the  heart 
knows  it  to  be  :  the  servant  of  Jehovah  is  warned  by 
it.  There  is  delight  in  it,  according  to  the  new  nature, 
and  the  consciousness  of  relationship ;  for  we  are 
servants  of  God,  though  we  have  higher,  more  inti- 
mate and  glorious  relationships.  But  in  this  confi- 
dence the  effect  of  this  nearness  is  to  turn  the  eye  to 
another  point :  the  want  of  full  self-knowledge,  distrust 
of  self.  "  Who  can  understand  his  errors  ?  Cleanse 
thou  me  from  secret  faults."  In  many  things,  although 
delighting  in  the  word,  and  appreciating  it  when 
thinking  of  it,  I  may  not  have  judged  my  own  heart, 
or  be  able  morally  to  prove  it,  so  as  to  judge  it  ac- 
cording to  that  perfection  :  for  there  is  growth  in 
spiritual  judgment.  But  there  is  integrity  and  con- 
fidence in  the  Lord,  and  he  demands  to  be  cleansed 
from  his  secret  faults,  and  to  be  kept  from  all  pre- 
sumptuous faults — what  one  would  commit  Avith  open 
disregard  of  God.  Thus  he  would  be  undefiled,  and 
be  kept  with  God,  not  turning  aside  to  idols  or  vanity. 
For  small  and  neglected  sins  and  unjudged  confi- 
dence of  heart  lead  to  forgetfulness  of  God,  and 
denial  of  Him  in  the  truth.  I  do  not  speak  here 
of  security  by  grace,  but  of  the  path  in  which  these 
evils  leads.  Finally,  the  true  desire  of  the  heart  is 
shown :  that  the  words  of  the  mouth,  and  the  medi- 
tations of  the  heart  may  be  acceptable  in  God's  sight. 
This  is  the  true  test  of  a  godly  life,  when  good  is 
sought   inwardly,   when   only    in   God's  sight:    the 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALMS  XX.,  XXI.  G5 

research  of  good  with  God,  not  before  man  or  in  the 
knowledge  of  man.  I  speak  not  of  hypocrisy,  but  of 
walking  with  God.  But  in  all  true  righteousness 
God  is  owned  as  our  Rock  and  Redeemer •  for  we 
cannnot  be  "with"  Him,  with  the  real  apprehensions 
<>f  a  new  life,  without  feeling*  our  need  of  Him  in  both 
characters. 

Psalms  xx.,  xxi.,  as  remarked  elsewhere,  present 
to  us  the  third  witness  presented  to  the  responsibility 
of  men — Christ.  But  this  is  not  our  only  subject 
here :  psalm  xx.  shows  us  the  profound  interest 
which  the  heart  takes  in  watching-  the  Faithful  One 
in  His  sorrows — in  a  Jewish  form  no  doubt.  Still,  as 
elsewhere,  the  substance  in  the  same  for  us.  It  is 
still  confidence  in  Jehovah  which  characterizes  the 
feeling  of  Him  who  speaks ;  for  the  Goji  of  Jacob  is 
before  His  thoughts.  There  is  faith  in  Him  in  this 
relationship.  Yet  Messiah  is  seen  in  the  trials  and 
questions  of  His  life  here  below,  walking  but  in  piety 
towards  Jehovah,  and  in  dependance  on  Him.  Nothing- 
can  show  Christ  more  completely  as  a  man  than  this. 
The  Anointed  is  saved,  i.e.,  delivered,  and  heard.  The 
whole  heart  of  the  godly  is  wrapped  up  in  this.  But 
the  remnant  see  yet  further  here,  as  Israel  ought  to 
have  done;  they  see  Ilim  answered  in  His  demand 
for  life,  by  a  most  glorious  one  for  ever,  in  the  imme- 
diate light  of  God's  countenance,  with  which  lie  is 
made  glad,  and  after  that,  His  right  hand  finding  out 
all  His  enemies,  and  destroying  them.  But.  even  in 
all  this,  (as  in  John  xvii.  where  one  sees  at  the  same 
time  that  In' must  be  one  with  the   Father,)  Messiah 


G6         PRACTICAL  INFLECTIONS  ON 

receives  all  from  Jehovah,  as  a  man,  and  is  so  viewed 
by  the  godly.  And  so  was  He  presented  by  Peter. 
His  privilege  is  the  favour  of  Jehovah ;  His  piety, 
confidence  in  Jehovah.  This  link  is  what  occupies 
the  godly,  who  are  thus  profoundly  attached  to 
Messiah,  and  this  was  in  effect  what  characterized 
Christ — seeking  His  Father's  glory,  and  in  nothing 
His  own.  So  Jehovah  associates  nimself  entirely 
with  Him  as  xxi.  9,  as  the  godly  does  on  his  side 
also.  And  as  Messiah  is  exalted  by  Jehovah  in  spite 
of  His  enemies,  so  is  Jehovah  exalted  in  His  glory 
in  doing  it ;  and  so  it  is,  the  remnant,  equally  inte- 
rested, exalt  and  praise  the  power  of  Jehovah.  This 
linking  up  the  interests  of  the  godly,  bound  in  heart 
to  Messiah — Messiah  and  Jehovah,  as  characterizing 
the  piety  of  the  godly,  is  full  of  beauty  and  interest. 
Yet,  in  His  life,  Christ  never  took  this  title  with  His 
disciples.  He  would  lead  them  further.  He  was 
Son  of  man,  and  spoke  of  His  Father  as  being 
Himself  Son  of  God.  «  My  Father,"  said  He  to  the 
Jews,  of  whom  ye  say  that  He  is  your  God.  All  the 
moral  qualities  of  Messiah,  Son  of  God,  He  had,  but 
He  was  weaning  His  disciples  from  the  earthly  asso- 
ciations to  higher  and  heavenly  ones  ;  and  this  shows 
us  the  need  there  is  in  all  our  use  of  the  psalms  to 
make  this  difference.  We  see  with  the  profoundest 
interest  the  sorrows  and  sufferings  of  Christ,  but  it 
is  from  a  higher  point  of  view ;  we  look  not  at  His 
official  place  and  then  humiliation,  but  the  divine  and 
perfect  love  in  which  He  emptied  Himself  and  came 
down  and  took  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  found 
in  fashion  as  a  man,  and  passed  with  a  purpose  of  love 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   XXII.  G7 

across  the  trials  and  sorrows  of  this  world  of  sorrow. 
and  we  see  LTis  glory  in  it.  The  truth  is  much  more 
deeply  taught  in  the  New  Testament.  Still  the  way 
Christ  is  presented  as  a  true  dependant  man,  and  His 
piety  in  this  dependence  is  most  instructive  to  us  who 
can  add  the  deeper  truth  from  the  revelation  of  the 
Son  of  God.     The  word  of  life  in  it  is  seen. 

In  commenting  on  psalm  xxii.,  our  part  here  is  not 
to  unfold  the  blessed  doctrine  contained  in  it,  in  the 
introduction  of  grace  on  a  wholly  new  footing,  (viz.. 
redemption,  and  the  death  of  Christ,)  which  rose  above 
and  closed  all  mere  human  responsibilities  in  grace. 
We  have  rather  to  pursue  the  feelings  and  thoughts 
of  Christ.  For  the  piety  of  this  part  of  the  Psalms  is 
the  piety  of  Christ  Himself.  Nor  is  anything  more 
instructive  or  sanctifying.  Nothing  deepens  our  own 
piety  so  much. 

This,  then,  shall  be  our  subject  now.  The  Lord 
enable  us  to  tread  reverently  here! 

We  find  what  called  out  the  special  cry  of  the 
Saviour — a  cry  which,  till  that  bitter  cup  had  been 
fully  drank,  could  not  be  heard.  There  is  progress 
and  completeness  in  the  utterance  of  these  sorrows. 
Violence,  unrestrained  and  full  of  rage,  surrounded 
Ilim — bulls  of  Bashan — ravening  and  roaring  lions. 
It  was  no  haughty  strength  of  man  which  met  this. 
He  must  meet  and  feel  it  in  the  meekness  of  His 
nature,  and  know  the  weakness,  though  never  the  sin. 
of  human  nature,  save  in  bearing  it.  lie  was  poured 
out  like  water — all  His  bones  as  out  of  joint — His 
heart    melted  like   wax   in   the  midst  of   His  bowels. 


G8  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

His  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd  :  His  tongue 
cleaves  to  His  jaws.  But  here  there  is  no  stopping, 
nor  could  He  do  so,  at  second  causes.  He  is  down  in 
the  dust  of  death;  but  Jehovah  has  brought  Him 
there.  The  point  here  is  His  state — the  dust  of 
death  :  only  He  looks  at  the  real  source  of  all,  at  the 
thoughts  and  counsels  of  Jehovah.  This  is  perfection 
in  this  respect :  entire  sensibility  as  to,  and  moral 
perception  of,  the  character  of  the  enemies,  who  are 
the  instruments  of  our  suffering ;  but  looking,  through 
it  all,  to  the  -ways  and  wisdom  and  will  of  God,  and 
God  in  faithful  relationship  to  us,  the  true  source  of 
all.  But  besides  the  violence  which,  instrumentally, 
had  brought  the  gentle  and  unresisting  Saviour,  dumb 
as  a  sheep  before  His  shearers,  to  the  dust  of  death, 
had  violently  dragged  away  and  mocked  Him  whose 
simple  presentation  of  Himself  had  made  all  fall  to 
the  ground — there  was  the  manifestation  of  the  cha- 
racter of  men,  when,  through  His  own  giving  Himself 
up,  He  was  in  their  power.  Dogs  encompassed  him — 
creatures  without  heart  or  conscience — without  shame 
or  feeling,  whose  pleasure  was  in  the  shame  of  another, 
and  insults  offered  to  Him  who  made  no  resistance, 
in  outrages  to  the  righteous.  They  were  wicked  as 
well  as  violent.  They  stared  and  looked  upon  Him. 
How  must  the  Saviour  have  felt  their  shameless  and 
heartless  insults — His  exposure,  naked  to  the  hardened 
eye  of  those  that  rejoiced  in  iniquity  and  in  His 
shame !  They  amuse  themselves  with  appropriating 
His  garments.  The  vesture  of  the  Innocent  was  an 
affair  of  dice  or  casting  lots.  No  eye  to  pity — none 
to  help.     Trouble  was  there:    He  looks  on  Jehovah, 


THE  TSALMS. — PSALM  XXII.  69 

entreating-  Him  not  to  be  far  from  Him,  and,  if  He 
has  no  strength,  Jehovah,  as  His  strength  to  be  near. 
And  here  we  approach  the  deeper  part  of  this  solemn 
hour.  In  the  utmost  trials  from  man,  when  no  eye 
was  there  to  pity,  no  hand  to  help,  lie  looks  to  Jeho- 
vah, the  covenant  God  of  Israel's  and  Messiah's  faith. 
But  here,  0  mystery  of  mysteries  !  there  was  no  help 
either,  but  only  infinite  perfection  (for  infinite  it  now 
must  be)  in  the  Blessed  One.  lie  is  still  associated 
here  with  Israel  as  to  Ilis  place  in  the  psalm,  what- 
ever the  efficacy  of  that  work  in  which,  in  this  great 
turning-point  of  divine  history,  this  central  definition 
and  solution  of  the  question  of  good  and  evil,  that  in 
which  it  was  settled  for  eternity.  The  God  of  Israel 
was  to  leave  Him  and  destroy  the  enmity,  and  rend 
the  veil  which,  in  Israel,  concealed  God;  that,  in  the 
full  result  of  divine  love  by  righteousness,  grace 
mighl  reign  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  for  every  believer, 
Jew  or  Gentile,  and  for  the  complete  glory  of  God  in 
heaven  and  earth.  We  still,  remark,  find  the  necessary 
difference  of  Christ  in  the  psalms  and  in  the  gospels. 
There  it  is  as  Son  (save  in  His  forsaking)  lie  speaks, 
saying,  "  father,  forgive  them  ; "  and  afterwards, 
"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 
Here  it  is:  "  Be  not  far  from  me,  0  Jehovah."  He 
seeks  help  for  Himself  from  the  God  of  Israel,  His 
God.  And  such  is  the  result.  It  is  the  remnanl 
gathered,  and  then  all  Israel,  the  niilleuial  nations 
and  the  people  to  be  born — those  who  are  the  called 
and  blessed  fruit  of  this  work.  AVo  do  not  rise  up 
to  heaven.    Having  made  this  remark,  as  important 


70         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

to  the  right  use  of  the  psalms,  which  we  find  has  its 
place  even  in  what  is  said  of  the  cross  itself  in  the 
psalms,  I  turn  to  the  character  of  faith  and  piety 
found  here  in  the  Blessed  One,  in  His  trust  as  come 
in  the  midst  of  Israel,  in  Jehovah.  "  For  of  Israel, 
as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  came,  who  is  God  over 
all,  blessed  for  evermore."  There  is  the  deepest 
consciousness  of  His  own  outwardly-abject  state  and 
desertion,  and  that  in  painful  contrast  with  every 
faithful  soul— a  circumstance  wonderfully  calculated 
to  produce  in  the  human  heart  irritation  and  despon- 
dency, i.e.,  a  forgetfulness  of  what  God  was — if  this 
had  been  possible  with  Jesus.  "  I  am  a  worm,  and 
no  man  —  a  scorn  of  men,  and  despised  of  the 
people."  Nor  was  this  all.  The  blessed  Saviour,  He 
who  had  been  cast  upon  Jehovah  from  the  womb, 
whose  hope  Jehovah  had  been  from  His  mother's 
breast,  who  had  sought  His  will  and  glorified  His 
name,  had  to  declare  before  all,  and  in  presence  of  the 
taunts  and  mockery  of  His  adversaries,  that  God  had 
forsaken  Him.  How  deep  this  trial  was  morally, 
none  but  He  could  tell  who  passed  through  it.  It 
was  in  the  proportion  of  the  love  He  enjoyed  and 
lived  in,  and  His  faithfulness  to  it.  We  speak  of 
trial  and  piety,  not  of  expiation  here.  In  all  this, 
and  through  all  this,  the  blessed  Saviour  is  perfect 
towards  Jehovah.  First,  His  trust  is  perfect,  ne 
says  not  Jehovah  ;  for  the  relationship  was  not  then 
in  exercise  as  it  was  with  His  Father  in  Gethsemane; 
but  He  says,  "My  God,  my  God."  Whatever  the 
dreadful  forsaking  was,  His  perfect  faith  in  God  and 
devotedness    to    God,    as    the    only  one  He  owned, 


TIIE  TSALMS. — PSALM  XXII.  71 

remains  absolute  and  unshaken.  He  is  perfect,  abso- 
lutely perfect,  as  man,  subjectively.  But  this  is 
shown  in  another  point.  Whatever  the  sufferings  of 
Christ — notwithstanding  the  fact,  that  iu  His  path, 
there  was  no  cause  for  His  being  forsaken, — His  tes- 
timony to  God,  His  sense  of  the  perfectness  of  His 
ways  and  nature,  remains  1  lie  same,  yea, more  elevated. 
"  But  thou  continuest  holy,  thou  that  inhabitest  the 
praises  of  Israel."  Let  God  abandon  the  righteous, 
the  rig-hteous  One  is  sure  He  is  perfect  in  doing  so. 
Nothing  can  express  more  completely  the  perfection 
of  Christ  as  man,  His  position  as  such — how  He  had 
taken  the  place  of  "  my  goodness  extendeth  not  to 
thee."  He  is  not  here  contemplating  the  counsels  of 
God,  and  understanding  their  accomplishment,  which 
He  had  Himself  undertaken.  It  is  the  dependant 
man  feeling  the  trial  as  it  reached  Himself  as  man, 
but  perfect  and  faithful  when,  as  regards  His  feelings, 
there  was  no  answer  of  God  in  trials,  wherein  lie 
counted  on  it,  and  it  alone  was  to  be  counted  on. 

We  can  answer  the  question,  "  Why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me?"  We  shall  answer  it,  who  believe  in 
Jesus,  with  everlasting  adoration.  But  it  is  of  the 
last  importance  for  us,  not  only  to  know  that  Christ 
lias,  by  Himself,  purged  our  sins,  having  drank  the 
cup  of  wrath,  but  to  know  Christ  as  suffering  person- 
ally under  this  forsaking  of  God — nis  own  entrance 
as  man  info  the  sense,  as  regards  Himself,  of  this 
forsaken — His  own  personal  Borrow  in  it;  because 
though  He  were  wholly  alone  in  i(,  it  leads  lis  to  that 
joy  which  He  felt  in  entering,  again  and  more  than 
ever,   into  the  fall,  enclouded  light  of   His   Father's 


72  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

countenance — consequent  on,  and  according  to,  the 
value  of  redemption,  and  the  full  resting  of  the 
necessary  delight  of  God  in  Him,  and  His  acceptance, 
as  having  perfectly  glorified  Him,  when  sin  had  put 
all  in  confusion.  So  that  all  that  God  was,  as  brought 
out  by  sin,  (for  sin  brought  out  sovereign  love, 
righteousness,  truth,  vindicated  majesty,)  was  perfects- 
revealed  and  glorified.  His  own  sufferings,  I  say, 
lead  us  to  that  joy  into  which  Christ  entered  with 
His  God  and  Father  as  man ;  and  which,  as  all  this 
was  accomplished  in  a  work  wrought  for  our  sins,  He 
communicates  to  us,  introducing  us  into  the  full 
blessedness  into  which  He  is  entered  as  man.  In  the 
work,  He  was  alone ;  but  it  was  for  us,  while  for  the 
divine  glory ;  and  He  introduces  us  into  the  blessed- 
ness, as  that  which  He  enjoys  in  consequence  of  it. 

This  is  the  second  part  of  the  psalm,  as  to  which  I 
will  only  now  refer  to  the  sentiments  of  Christ.  He 
has  been  heard  from  the  horns  of  the  unicorn,  trans- 
pierced by  the  power  of  death;  God's  judgment 
against  sin  being  executed  and  passed.  I  have  re- 
marked, elsewhere,  the  very  instructive  fact,  that 
Christ  never  speaks  in  the  gospels,  during  His  life,  of 
God  as  His  God,  but  always  as  the  Father.  This  was 
the  impression  of  His  own  personal  relationship,  the 
name,  too,  that  He  revealed  to  His  disciples.  He 
never  directly  calls  Himself  the  Christ,  in  the  gospel 
history;  not  that  He  was  not  presented  as  such  to 
Israel,  for  He  was,  but  it  is  not  the  place  and  name 
He  takes  Himself  with  God  and  His  Father,  which 
is  the  way  we  have  to  know  Him.  When  the  Jews 
say  to  Him,  "  If  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly," 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    XXII.  73 

lie  says,  "  I  have  told  you  already;"  but  as  revealed 
to  us,  lie  is  Emmanuel,  the  Prophet  that  should  come, 
the  Son  of  man,  the  Sou  of  God.  The  word  lie  uses 
with,  and  of  God,  is  ever,  Father,  and  My  Father: 
with  His  disciples,  Son  of  man.  In  the  psalm  we  are 
studying,  we  read,  My  God,  My  God.  He  is  man 
with  whom  God  deals  in  judgment,  but  man,  even  if 
forsaken,  perfect  in  his  own  relationship  with  God  in 
faith  :  lie  says,  My  God.  Now  He  declares  the  name 
of  God  to  I  lis  brethren,  and  employ  s  both  these  titles — 
man  gone  to  the  extreme  of  trial  with  God,  standing 
as  regards  all  that  God  is  in  righteousness,  truth, 
majesty,  love.  My  God — all  that  God  is  in  His  own 
perfection  and  majesty,  and  claim,  He  is  necessarily 
and  obligedly,  though  in  the  delight  of  His  love  for 
us  as  in  Christ,  doubtless  according  to  His  own 
counsels,  but  righteously,  and  thus  necessarily,  and 
unalterably  for  us.  What  He  is  as  God,  He  is  as  our 
God,  for  through  Christ — Christ  proved  on  the  cross — 
He  is  for  us,  and  that,  sin  being  put  away  by  Christ's 
sacrifice  of  Himself.  The  cloudless  perfection  of  God 
shines  out  on  us,  in  His  own  proper  blessedness,  as  on 
Christ  in  virtue  of  His  having  glorified  Him,  in  the 
perfection  in  which  He  thus  shines  out.  This  name, 
(that  is  the  true  reality  of  this  relationship.)  is  declared 
to  us.  The  gracious  name  and  nature  of  God  was 
declared  mi  earth  by  Christ,  who  was  the  only  begotten 
Sun  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father.  But  with  that,  sinful 
man,  at  enmity  with  God,  could  have  no  part  or  asso- 
ciation. The  light  shines  in  darkness ;  the  darkness 
comprehended  it  not.  Yea,  man  saw  and  hated  Him, 
and  His  Father,  But  Christ  was  made  sin  for  us. 
F 


74         PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

stood  as  man  responsible  before  God,  with  God  in  all 
these  attributes  in  which  He  dealt  with  sin,  but  was 
perfect  there;  that  love  might  righteously  have  its 
free  course.     Hence  He .  says,  "  I  have  a  baptism  to 
be  baptized  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be 
accomplished ! "   For  He  was  that  love — God,  in  Christ, 
reconciling,  till  it  could  flow  out  according  to  the  per- 
fection of  God  in  righteousness  ;  but  it  could  not  flow 
out  freely  where  sin  was.     This,  through  the  cross, 
through  Christ's  perfection,  when  He  was  made  sin  for 
us,  it  could ;  yea,  love  was  exalted  and  the  very  cha- 
racter of  God  made  good  in  and  by  it — His  name,  the 
very  name  which  was  to  be  revealed,  made  good  by  it. 
Hence  Christ  could  say  "  therefore  doth  my  Father  love 
me."     But  then  Christ  entered  in  a  still  more  supreme 
degree,  into  the  joy  of  His  Father's  love,  and  all  this 
as  man.     He  does  so  when  heard.     It  was  publicly 
made  good  and  evident  in  resurrection.     He  was  raised 
by  the  glory  of  the  Father.     Then  He  declares  this 
name  to  His  brethren.     For  now  sin  being  man's  only 
place  with  God,  out  of  Christ,  he  who  believed  had,  in 
Christ,  Christ's  place  as  raised  from  the  dead,  in  the 
relationship  in  which  He  stands  with  the  Father  ;  and, 
death  having  come  in,  no  other.     Go  and  tell  my  breth- 
ren, said  the  Lord,  "  I  ascend  to  my  Father  and  your 
Father,  and   my  God  and   your   God."      Now '  He 
employs  both  titles  and   applies  them  both  to  us, 
both  because  all  that  God   is,  He  is   in  righteous- 
ness for  Him  as  man  in  glory,  and  He  is  re-entered 
into  the  joy  of  His  Father's  communion,  and  places 
us,  in  virtue   of  this  work,  wrought  for  us,  in  the 
position  in  which  He  is ;  as  His  brethren,  partakers 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   XXII.  75 

of  the  favour   and  heritage  which  is  His,  through 
grace. 

I  have  entered  more  into  the  doctrine  connected 
with  the  psalm,  than  I  intended,  though  it  has  been 
practically  ;  for  the  feelings  and  affections  of  Christ 
are  my  object  now.  Remark  that  the  first  thought  of 
Christ,  when  heard  from  the  horns  of  the  unicorn,  is 
to  declare  the  name  of  God  and  His  Father,  to  His 
brethren — now  glorious,  but  not  ashamed  to  call  us 
brethren.  Perfect  in  love,  attached  to  these  excellent 
of  the  earth,  He  turns  when  once  He  is  entered  into 
the  position  of  joy  and  blessing,  through  a  work  which 
gave  them  the  title  to  enter,  to  reveal  to  them  what 
placed  them  in  the  same  position  with  Himself.  Thus 
He  gathered  them  ;  and  then  having  awakened  their 
voices  to  the  same  praise  as  that  which  He  was  to 
offer,  He  raises  the  blessed  note  as  man,  and  sings 
praise  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly.  Oh  with  what 
loud  voices  and  ready  hearts,  we  ought  to  follow  Him ! 
And  note  he  who  is  not  clear  in  acceptance,  and  the 
joy  of  souship  with  God,  in  virtue  of  redemption,  can- 
not sing  with  Christ.  lie  sings  praises  in  the  midst 
of  the  assembly.  Who  sings  with  Him?  He  who 
has  learnt  the  song,  which  he  has  learnt  to  sing  as 
come  out  of  judgment  into  the  full  light  and  joy  of 
acceptance.  The  first  chapter  of  Ephesians  shows  us 
this  place,  in  verses  3  and  4.  Here  we  have  the  saints 
led  by  Jesus  in  praise,  according  to  His  own  joy. 
The  grace  of  this  position  is  perfect.  The  further 
results  of  the  work,  I  do  not  enter  on  here,  save  to 
renin rk,  that  all  is  grace,  no  judgment  (it  is  founded 
on  it,)  and  that  nothing  goes  beyond  earth  here. 


76         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Psalm  xxiii.  is  so  ordered  by  the  Spirit  as  to  apply 
to  a  dying  Christ,  or  "  saint"  who  follows  His  footsteps, 
or  the  preserved  remnant.  It  does  not  consider  the 
sufferings  of  Christ  from  God,  or  from  man,  nor  those 
of  the  faithful,  save  as  mere  facts  and  occasions  of 
Jehovah's  care.  Its  subject  is,  "  Jehovah  is  my  shep- 
herd,"—the  constant,  unfailing  care  exercised  by  Him. 
It  is  a  life  spent  under  His  care  and  eye,  come  what 
will,  the  experience  it  affords,  and  the  assurance  that 
Jehovah's  love  gives  to  the  end  and  for  ever.  It  is 
not  what  He  gives,  which  assures  the  heart,  but  Him- 
self. "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd  ;  I  shall  not  want." 
Power,  grace,  goodness,  interest  in  the  faithful  One, 
all  assure ;  and  assure  in  all  circumstances  and  for 
ever,  and  always.  He  has  undertaken  and  has  charged 
Himself  with  the  care  of  His  faithful  ones.  These 
cannot  want.  We  have  not  to  think  of  what  may 
come,  or  what  means  may  be  employed.  The  Shep- 
herd's care  is  our  assurance.  The  natural  fruit  of  this 
care  is  fresh  and  green  pastures  in  security,  the  peaceful 
enjoyment  of  the  sure  refreshings  of  goodness.  But 
in  fact  man,  specially  the  remnant,  and  Christ  Himself, 
are  in  the  midst  of  oppressing  sorrow,  and  death,  and 
in  presence  of  mighty  enemies.  Is  the  soul  troubled 
and  bowed  down  ?  He  restores  it.  Does  it  go  through 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death?  Does  death  cast 
its  dark  gloom  over  the  spirit  that  must  go  down  into 
its  shade  ?  He  is  there,  greater  than  death,  to  guide 
and  sustain.  Are  powerful  and  relentless  enemies 
there  to  alarm  and  threaten?  They  are  powerless 
before  Him.  He  dresses  a  table  for  His  beloved, 
where  they  sit  down  in  safety  and  secure.     Divine 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   XXIII.  77 

unction  is  the  seal  of  power  when  all  is  against  us. 
Human  weakness,  death  and  spiritual  powers  of  wicked- 
ness, all  are  only  the  occasions  to  show  most  evidently 
that  Jehovah,  the  Shepherd,  is  the  infallible  safeguard 
of  His  people.  Christ  was  not,  of  course,  a  sheep, 
but  lie  trod  the  path  the  sheep  have  to  tread,  and 
trusted  in  Jehovah.  lie  is  the  Jehovah- Shepherd  of 
them  that  are  His.  lie  loves  us,  as  Jehovah  loved 
and  cared  for  Him.  It  is  then,  the  sure  care  of 
Jehovah  through  all  that  besets  human  nature  in  its 
path  through  this  world.  The  natural  proper  fruit  of 
this  care  is  green  pastures  in  the  security  of  peace ; 
but  in  man's  ruined  state,  and  the  path  He  has  to 
tread  in  the  midst  of  the  powers  of  evil,  an  infallibly 
sustaining  power.  Hence  the  heart,  as  it  trusts  in  the 
unchangeable  Jehovah,  reckons  on  the  future.  It  is 
as  certain  and  secure  as  the  past.  Goodness  and  mercy 
will  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my  life,  and  the  house  of 
Jehovah  receive  me  for  ever.  Confidence  is  in  the 
Lord  Himself,  and  therefore  all  circumstances,  and  the 
whole  power  of  evil,  and  difficulties  of  mortal  man 
included  in  them,  are  but  occasions  of  Jehovah's  power, 
interested  in  infallible  faithfulness,  in  carrying  the  faith- 
ful through. 

It  is  interesting  to  see  this  care  of  divine  power, 
holding  its  place  in  infallible  certainty  over  all  the 
special  sufferings,  and  trial,  and  death  of  the  Lord. 
This  is  the  faithful  man's  blessing,  when  the  earth  is 
not  the  Lord's,  when  the  power  of  evil  and  death  and 
mighty  adversaries  arc  before  it.  Jehovah  is  the 
secure  dwelling-place  of  faith.     When  the  earth  La  the 

Lord's,  (Ps.  xxiv.)  who   shall  ascend  His  hill,  or  Stand 


78  PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

in  His  holy  place  ?  Here,  remark,  the  door  has  become 
open  to  all.  Only  Jacob  has  the  place  of  acceptance  and 
proximity  to  Jehovah  ;  but  blessing  and  acceptance  in 
favour  from  God,  who  is  their  salvation,  are  the  portion 
of  every  one  who  has  purified  himself  to  seek  God, 
who  has  placed  His  blessing  in  Jacob.  The  character 
of  such  is  given,  but  the  Gentiles  who  have  it,  have 
access  in  Jehovah's  holy  hill.  Christ  himself  enters 
there  in  triumph  as  Jehovah. 

Psalm  xxiv.  closes  the  whole  series  which  speaks 
of  the  association  of  Christ  with  the  excellent— 
the  saints  that  are  in  the  earth.  We  have  in  it, 
Christ  in  the  path  of  life  with  the  saints;  Christ 
in  the  path  of  righteousness  in  the  midst  of  an 
evil  world ;  Christ  suffering,  the  centre  of  all  Israel's 
history,  and  the  object  of  Jehovah's  interest  when 
identified  with  Israel ;  Christ  suffering  as  witness  to 
the  truth,  object  of  the  remnant's  thoughts  and  affec- 
tions ;  Christ  suffering  as  forsaken  of  God ;  Christ 
taking  personally  the  path  in  which  the  sheep  had  to 
walk,  and  so  unfolding  to  them  the  care  of  Jehovah, 
though  Himself  the  true  shepherd ;  (compare  John 
x. ;)  and  Christ,  when  all  own  Jacob  and  the  God  of 
Jacob,  entering  into  the  temple  as  the  triumphant 
Jehovah,  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  Though  the  blessed 
One  be  largely  a  pattern  for  us  in  much  of  this,  yet 
the  true  effect  on  the  piety  of  the  heart  is  wrought  in 
seeing  Himself  truly  man,  treading  the  path  before  our 
eyes,  and  engaging  every  affection  of  the  soul  in  the 
contemplation  of  it. 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XXIV.  79 

In  what  follows,  we  have  again  the  thoughts  and 
feeling's  of  the  remnant  in  their  sorrows,  in  connexion 
with  this  place  of  Christ:  but  we  shall  find  large  in- 
struction for  our  hearts  in  a  path  which  is  always  one 
of  sorrow,  and  essentially  the  same  as  long  as  evil 
reigns.  In  looking  hack  to  the  psalms  which  we  have 
studied,  there  is,  I  think,  progress  in  their  character. 
Thus  in  the  first  psalms — from  iii.  to  vii.  we  have  the 
general  principles  and  condition,  showing  that  righte- 
ousness does  not  yet  reign  by  judgment.  This  is 
founded  on  the  great  foundations  of  Psalms  i.  and  ii. 
The  righteous  man  in  the  midst  of  the  wicked  ;  judg- 
ment yet  to  come ;  and  the  counsels  of  God  as  to 
Messiah  announced  but  not  yet  fulfilled  in  viii.  In 
Psalms  ix.  and  x.  the  circumstances  of  the  land  and 
the  Jews  in  the  last  days  ;  and.  then,  xi. — xv.  the  re- 
lationships, judgment,  and  principles  of  the  remnant 
looking  towards  Jehovah  in  this  state  of  things  ;  xvi. 
— xxiv.  having  given  (he  whole  position  of  Christ  in 
respect  <if  Israel,  introducing  Him  amongst  them,  and 
showing  the  result,  we  have  now  much  more  of  the 
experimental  exercises  of  the  saints  in  that  day.  This 
we  have  now  to  (■(insider.  These  could  not  be  but 
founded  on  the  intervention  and  sacrifice  of  Christ.  It 
is  not  meant  thereby  that  they  are  clear  as  to  this,  or 
that  the  expressions  of  the  psalms  suppose  it,  or  suit 
a  soul  which  is  in  liberty.  But  such  exercises  could 
not  have  place  without  that  intervention  and  sacrifice, 
ami  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  remnant,  and  in  every  soul, 
works  in  virtue  of  them,  and  with  a  view  to  their  full 
recognition. 


80         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

In  Psalm  xxv.  we  have,  for  the  first  time,  the  definite 
confession  of  sin.  This,  with  xxvi.,  the  declaration  and 
consciousness  of  integrity  of  heart,  form  the  subjective 
basis  of  all  their  experiences :  the  two  following-  the 
objective.  Jehovah,  light  and  salvation,  and  present 
distress,  through  the  pressure  of  the  wicked,  still 
here  with  confidence  of  heart  in  Jehovah.  But  the 
more  we  study  the  Psalms,  the  more  we  shall  see  that 
they  apply  properly  to  the  Jews,  and  that  almost 
universally ;  referring  to  the  godly,  righteous  man  of 
the  remnant,  animated  according  to  his  position,  whose 
thoughts  are  furnished  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  speak- 
ing in  the  prophet.  Many  parts  of  them  can  be 
applied  to  Christ  Himself,  when  all  cannot.  But  this 
shows  what  I  have  already  remarked,  that  the  possi- 
bility of  referring  passages  to  Christ  does  not  make 
them  exclusively  prophecies  of  Him,  nor  prove  that 
all  the  Psalm  applies  to  Him;  and,  further,  the  real 
danger  of  taking  the  Psalms  as  the  expression  of 
Christian  piety.  They  are  not  so.  Often  they  furnish 
blessed  instruction  on  confidence  in  God;  but  he  who 
would  take  the  form  of  his  piety  from  the  Psalms,  as 
a  whole,  would  falsify  Christianity.  Having  said  this, 
I  turn  to  details.  The  soul  is  lifted  up  to  Jehovah  in 
its  difficulties — the  true  secret  of  overcoming  them, 
and  having  peace  in  the  midst  of  them.  The  true 
heart  has  no  other  refuge.  Another  distracts  it  from 
this.  It  says,  my  God,  in  them — it  can  now,  through 
Christ,  and  trust  in  God ;  and  looks  not  to  be  ashamed, 
nor  its  enemies  triumph  over  it.  This  in  difficulties 
is  the  first  desire  of  faith.  But  it  cannot  confine 
itself  when  real  to  self.     It  is  linked  up  by  grace  with 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   XXV.  81 

God's  goodness,  felt  in  this  very  hope;  but  then  with 
all  those  who  wait  on  Jehovah.  It  desires  that  the 
wicked — causeless  transgressors,  i.e.,  those  who  love 
iniquity,  not  who  fall  in  it,  may  be  ashamed.  This, 
as  a  general  principle,  is  no  way  unchristian.  The 
Christian  cannot  desire  that  an  individual  enemy 
come  under  judgment;  but  he  does  desire  that  evil  be 
set  aside,  and  that  the  adversaries  of  good  be  made 
ashamed:  he  loves  and  desires  righteousness,  and 
that  the  oppressor  of  righteousness,  and  of  the  lowly, 
and  meek,  and  just,  be  put  down,  and  put  to  shame. 
In  his  own  case  he  can  desire  it  as  to  result, 
without  wishing  evil  to  the  individual.  His  trust 
in  Jehovah  prevents  his  taking  the  smallest  step  for 
the  injury  of  his  enemy ;  but  he  refers  his  case  to 
the  Lord,  and  leaves  it  in  His  hands,  looking  for  His 
deliverance. 

I  Jut  there  is  another  characteristic  of  the  saint 
whose  heart  is  turned  towards  the  Lord  in  repentance. 
He  seeks  Jehovah's  ways,  His  paths — to  be  led  in 
His  truth  and  taught.  Remark  this  very  definite 
character  of  good  in  the  upright  soul.  It  is  not 
simply  a  right  way,  but  the  Lord's  way  he  seeks. 
His  spirit  is  returned  to  the  Lord,  thinks  of  Him, 
estimates  His  character,  is  conscious  of  owing  allegi- 
ance and  service  to  Him,  belonging  to  Him,  and  that 
all  does,  and  delights  in  and  seeks  only  His  way.  But 
tins  psalm  presents  a  returning  man,  (the  Jew,)  not 
one  first  converted.  Israel  (and  so  the  saint)  does 
remember  ami  recall,  but  looks  to  Jehovah's  remem- 
bering his  faults  no  more,  and  according  to  His  mercy 

to  remember  himself,  to  remember  him  in  that  way  ; 


82  PKACTICAL  KEFLECTIONS   ON 

for  He  knew  Jehovah  to  be  merciful,  and  it  was  for 
the  glory  of  His  own  name,  he  could  ask  it  for  His 
goodness'  sake.  This  shows,  not  known  pardon,  but 
the  confiding  of  grace.  This  is  not  a  purged  con- 
science, yet  it  flows  from  the  answer  of  God.  But  it 
is  an  acceptable  way  of  approaching  God.  So  the 
poor  woman  that  was  a  sinner  in  the  gospel.  She 
came  thus,  she  went  away  in  peace.  But  there  is  a 
faithfulness  of  the  Lord  to  His  own  goodness — His 
own  character,  which  is  above  evil,  which  (a  ransom 
being  found  which  maintains  righteousness)  makes 
Him  act  for  the  true  blessing  of  the  sinner  thus  looking 
to  Him.  As  it  is  said  even  of  Joseph,  "  He  was  a 
just  man,  and  not  willing  to  make  her  a  public  ex- 
ample." No  doubt  other  motives  come  in  with  man  ; 
still,  as  far  as  he  has  to  act  like  God,  this  principle 
comes  in.  Good  and  upright  is  the  Lord.  Good  to 
us,  He  loves  uprightness,  loves  to  see  it,  and  so  will 
teach  it  in  grace  to  those  wandered  from  it.  It  is 
sweet  to  one  that  has  wandered  to  count  on  this. 
Remark,  it  is  not  here  His  way.  That  was  the  ex- 
pression of  the  state  of  the  saint's  heart — this  the 
revelation  of  (or,  rather,  the  confidence  of)  the  saint  in 
what  was  in  Jehovah's.  What  the  way  was  not 
exactly  the  question — of  course  a  good  one  ;  but  He 
would  teach  them  in  it.  His  active  love  would  be 
occupied  with  them  for  good.  Yet  the  character  of 
the  way  is  not  left  out  when  the  true  character  of  the 
renewed  saint  is  brought  in.  The  meek  will  He  guide 
in  judgment,  in  the  path  which  expresses  God's  mind. 
The  meek  will  He  teach  His  way. 

But  there   is   progress   in   other  respects  in  this 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XXV.  83 

psalm.  It  divides  itself  into  three  parts,  1 — 7,  8 — 14, 
15 — 22.  In  the  first  part,  the  oppressed  and  tried 
soul  judging-  its  past  sins,  but  trusting-  God  and  look- 
ing to  Him,  pleads  with  God  in  respect  of  its  wants 
and  difficulties,  in  presence  of  the  power  of  evil.  In 
the  second  part,  this  reference  to  God  has  led  the 
soul  to  speak  about  Him,  dwelling  on  and  declaring 
what  He  is  in  His  ways.  In  the  third,  the  soul  looks 
personally  to  the  Lord,  as  assured  of  His  interest  in 
it,  and  calls  down  the  eye  of  God  on  itself  and  on  its 
enemies  and  circumstances,  looking  for  forgiveness  in 
that,  but  confiding  in  conscious  integrity;  and,  finally, 
applies  its  request  to  all  Israel.  But  there  is  also 
progress  in  detail,  as  to  the  condition  of  the  soul  in 
speaking  of  God.  First,  His  goodness  and  upright- 
ness lead  Ilim  to  teach  sinners  uprightness  hi  heart. 
They  had  wandered  in  their  own  ways  ;  how  terribly 
are  God's  forgotten.  But  the  good  and  gracious 
Lord  will  not  leave  them  unguided  ;  their  state  draws 
(inf  His  compassion.  He  loves  the  right  way,  nor  can 
He  bless  elsewhere.  He  teaches  sinners  in  the  way. 
But  the  effect  of  acknowledging  sin  and  knowing  the 
goodness  of  God,  is  meekness,  subduedness  of  spirit, 
and  lowliness  ;  the  absence  of  haughtiness,  of  self,  of 
what  the  heathens  considered  the  spring  of  virtue. 
In  this  state  God  guides  in  judgment  and  teaches  His 
way.  Not  only  (lie  way  is  taught  to  one  who  had 
wandered  far  from  it;  but  where  there  is  lowliness 
and  submission  to  Q-od,  He  guides  in  (he  intelligence 
of  His  wavs,  in  their  own  spirit  and  mind.  They  are 
formed  by  Mis  instructions  to  judge  of  what  God's 
own  way  is.     This  is  an  internal  and  moral  conformity 


84  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

which  applies  itself  to  discern  and  judge  circum- 
stances. And  this  moral  conformity  and  discernment 
is  very  precious.  But  verse  12  goes  further.  We 
have  one  fearing  God,  walking  in  the  consciousness  of 
His  presence,  and  responsibility  to  Him,  referring  hi 
heart  to  Him  as  subject  to  Him.  Here  is  not  merely 
moral  discernment,  but  knowledge  of  the  chosen  way 
of  God.  The  man  who  is  guided  in  judgment  will 
know  what  is  right  and  do  it,  and  avoid  what  is  wrong, 
but  the  man  of  Issachar  had  understanding  of  the 
times.  There  was  a  way  God  chose  in  the  midst  of 
prevalent  evil,  and  he  who  feared  Jehovah,  should 
be  taught  in  this  way.  He  would  find  the  path  which 
issued  in  full  blessing.  This  is  a  great  privilege,  and 
of  which  no  surrounding  darkness  or  confusion  can 
deprive  us.  It  is  the  way  Jehovah  chooses  in  the 
midst  of  it — a  special  covenant  way  for  those  who 
fear  Him.  So  surely  there  is  for  the  Christian  in  the 
confusion  in  which  the  Church  of  God  is.  This  is 
shown  with  additional  evidence  in  the  words  which 
follow.  The  secret  of  Jehovah,  for  He  has  a  secret 
for  the  ears  of  those  who  hear,  is  with  them  that  fear 
Him— His  friends  to  whom  He  makes  known  His 
mind.  It  is  wonderful  that  Mary  knew  more  of  it 
than  Martha.  She  could  anoint  Him  beforehand  for 
His  burial,  had  the  Lord's  mind  in  the  scene  which 
was  before.  His  word  is  always  a  guard  against  false 
pretences  to  this,  but  it  remains  ever  true,  that  the 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him.  And 
however  all  seems  to  run  against  His  sure  promise, 
they  see  the  result  and  progress  towards  it  by  faith, 
and  will  see  it  in  full  accomplishment  further  on  when 


THE   PSALMS.— PSALM   XXV.  85 

His  ways  are  accomplished.     This  is  a  great  blessing' 
aiid  gives  a  tranquility,  a  calm,  in  the  path,  which 
nothing  else  does.     One  has  the  Lord's  mind  in  it. 
This  closes  the  second  part.     In  traversing  the  evil, 
the  trust  of  the  soul  is  in  the  Lord,  and  His  faithful 
love.  "  Mine  eyes  are  ever  to  the  Lord,  he  shall  pluck 
my  feet  out  of  the  net."     This  is  the  secret  of  all — 
the  Lord.     One  looks  out  of  all  the  evil  and  trusts  in 
Ilim  who  is  above  it  all.     Knowledge  of  the  Lord's 
secret  is  not  insensibility  to  present  evil,  even  as  it 
affects  self;  nor  coldness  as  to  the  Lord's  interest  in 
ourselves,  not  only  in  righteousness,  (though  lie  be 
ever  righteous,)  but  in  ourselves.     The  secret  of  the 
Lord,  through  His  fear,  tends  to  give  this  intimacy 
and  confidence.     Turn  thou  unto  me,  and  have  mercy 
upon  me,  for  I  am  afflicted  and  desolate.     There  is  a 
truth  of  heart  with  the  Lord.     But  this  supposes  in- 
tegrity, and  such   is  found  here;  and  such   in  Christ 
is  found  in  the  true  of  heart,  though   they  confess 
themselves  in  themselves  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  in 
their  flesh  no  good  thing-.     The  heart  can  present  all 
the  hostility  of  its  enemies  to  God,  and  leave  that 
also  with    Him.     It  looks  to  be  not  ashamed,  for  it 
has  put  its  trust  in   Him.      Christ  only  had  to  go 
through  the  contrary  for  us,  the  upright  soul  never 
will.      But  the  heart,  though   having  this  intimacy 
with,   ami  confidence  in,  Cod,  does  not   forget    His 
people — Israel,  then;  for  us,  the  Church.     The  heart 
is  there  and,  if  it  is  intimate  with  God,  must  be.     I 
have  entered  somewhat  into  the  detail  of  moral  feel- 
ings exhibited   in  the  psalm,   but  it  must  be  held  in 
mind  that  all  are  founded  on  the  presence  in  the  heart 


86         PKACTICAL  BEFLECTIONS  ON 

of  a  deep  consciousness  of  what  Jehovah  was  for  it, 
that  the  thought  of  Jehovah  predominated,  and  is  the 
source  of  all  that  is  felt. 

In  Psalm  xxvi.  it  is,  as  already  remarked,  the  con- 
sciousness of  integrity  rather  than  the  confession  of 
sins,  but  here,  also,  all  refers  to  Jehovah,  and  draws 
from  what  Jehovah  is,  and  the  attachment  of  the  soul 
to  Him,  the  principle  of  separation  from  evil  doers, 
and  final  joy  in  His  congregation  when  there  shall 
be  full  deliverance  from  them.  The  spirit  of  the 
psahn  is  that  integrity  which  has  kept  the  soul  by  its 
own  affections,  and  its  attachment  to  Jehovah,  and 
trust  in  Jehovah  in  presence  of  the  power  of  evil 
(and  for  the  time,  as  between  them  and  the  saints, 
evildoers  are  always  the  most  powerful,  because  they 
can  act  according  to  their  will  without  restraint  or 
conscience,)  apart  from  evildoers;  and  the  conscience 
in  presence  of  Jehovah  looks  to  God's  not  gathering 
it  with  sinners,  when  He  comes  in  in  power,  and  on 
this  it  counts  in  faith.  It  is  the  expression  of  the 
path  and  desire  of  integrity  in  presence  of  evil. 

Psalm  xxvii.  shews  the  heart  confident  in  Jehovah, 
yet  exercised  before  Him  in  the  presence  of  the  out- 
ward manifestations  of  evil.  What  would  create  fear 
more  than  distress  of  spirit?  The  connexion  of  con- 
fidence in  thinking  of  the  enemies,  and  exercise  of 
heart  when  looking  to  God,  I  think  instructive, 
though  at  first  sight  it  seems  strange  in  this  psalm. 
Confidence  is  not  indifference  or  insensibility ;  but 
true  exercises  of  heart  with  God,  even  when  fear  ac- 


THE  TSALMS. — PSALM  XXVII.  87 

companies  those  exercises,  shew  themselves  iu  con- 
fidence and  boldness  in  presence  of  the  hostile  action 
of  evil.  Man  would  have  spoken  of  fear  when  in 
presence  of  the  enemy  and  confidence  when  with  God. 
Whereas  grace,  working1  in  true  exercises  of  heart 
with  God,  gives  boldness  with  the  enemy.  There  is 
a  real  power  of  evil.  The  rightly  taught  heart  feels 
it  in  its  inward  sources  and  reality  (more  or  less 
spiritually,)  but  feels  it  with  God,  and  then  is  at  peace 
in  the  midst  of,  and  as .  to,  the  conflict  itself.  So 
Christ  sweat,  as  it  were,  great  drops  of  blood  in  ex- 
ercise of  soul  before  God,  and  was  of  perfect  calmness 
in  the  presence  of  His  enemies,  yea,  they  fell  to  the 
ground  at  the  mention  of  His  name.  This  is  full  of 
instruction  as  to  the  difficulties  and  pains  of  Christian 
life.  Where  the  heart,  conscious  of  the  power  of 
evil,  is  exercised  with  and  before  God  as  to  it,  the  evil 
itself,  whatever  its  power,  is  powerless  when  it  comes, 
assuming  the  exercise  to  be  complete.  "  This  is  your 
hour,"  said  Christ,  "  and  the  power  of  darkness." 
But  He  had  felt  all  that  with  God,  and  took  the  cup, 
as  to  the  fact,  out  of  the  Father's,  not  the  enemy's 
hand,  who  had,  as  to  Christ,  no  such  power.  The 
psalm  shows  us  the  working  of  this  in  ordinary  men 
according  to  His  Spirit.  Jehovah  is  the  saints'  light 
by  faith,  lightens  up  all  around.  There  is  no  power 
of  darkness  for  the  spirit,  when  darkness  is  there  in 
power.  It  rules  in  the  enemies,  but  light  is  in  the 
heart  from  the  Lord,  and  it  walks  thus  in  the  light. 
This  is  a  great  consolation.  But  the  Lord  is  more 
than  this — lie  is  actual  deliverance.  This,  till  the 
cap  was  drank,  He  could  not  be  for  Christ;  but  He  is 


88         PEACTICAL  EEFLECTIONS  ON 

known  to  be  so  for  the  redeemed  soul  in  the  midst 
of  the  trial.     The  same  revelation  of  Jehovah  which 
gives  light,  gives  us  in  the  light  to  be  assured  of  the 
deliverance :    I  do   not   say  necessarily   to   see    the 
deliverance,  for  the  how  may  be  obscured,  but  to  be 
assured  of  it.     Because  Jehovah  is  there  in  light,  He 
will  deliver  ;  so  the  Father  for  us,  and  in  His  place  of 
government,  the  Lord.       But  if  it  be  God  Himself, 
clearly  there  is  nothing  to  fear.     This  is  celebrated 
in  thinking  of  the  wicked,  whom  no  conscience  re- 
strains— of  war,   where    will   is   unbridled,    however 
violent   and   mighty ;    if   the   Lord   is   there,    all    is 
provided  for.     But  an  important  principle,   or  state 
of  soul,  is  associated  with,  and  is  the  basis  of,  this 
confidence — entire  singleness  of  eye  and  desire,  the 
looking  to  Jehovah  for,  and  seeking  one  thing,  to  be 
with  Him,  in  His  presence  where  He  is,  and  can  be 
adored;  to  behold  His  beauty,  and  learn  there  His 
will  and  mind.     But  this,  on  the  other  hand,  is  con- 
nected with  confidence  in  His  goodness.     The  soul, 
defenceless  in  itself,  knows  the  Lord  will  hide  it  in 
the  time  of  trouble  in  His  pavilion.     Who  shah  hurt 
or  disturb  it  there?     And  what  love  in  the  Lord,  what 
interest  He  takes  in  those  He  loves!     The  soul  dwells 
with  Him,  and  dwells  in  safety.     It  is  not  apparent 
deliverance,  but  the  secret  of  His  tabernacle.     And 
it  is  wonderful  how  the  Lord  does  when  evil  rages, 
and  there  seems  no  resource  ;  the  soul  seeks  none,  it 
confides  sweetly   and  quietly   in  the  Lord,    sure    of 
security  in  Hun.     The  6th  verse  counts  on  full  de- 
deliverance  and  praise  in  His  tabernacle,  now  not  a 
hiding-place,  nor  a  secret,  but  the  blessed  place  of 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   XXVII.  89 

open  praise.  In  the  following  verses  we  have  the 
exercises  of  soul    with   the    Lord,  while  waiting-  on 

lliia  for  help.  The  Lord  had  called  to  seek  His  face. 
He  could  not  tin n  it  away.  The  soul  recognizes  here 
the  possibility  of  anger,  and  deprecates  it,  and  counts 
on  grace.  This  is  important  for  the  soul,  for  one 
might  think  it  could  trust  in  the  Lord  if  lie  had 
nothing  against  it.  IJut  not  so:  the  heart  may  re- 
cognize that  it  ought  to  expect  anger,  yet  trust 
grace.  It  has  known  a  helping  God,  and  looks  not  to 
In-  forsaken  of  one  who  is  a  Saviour  God.  Tins  con- 
Qdence  is  complete;  more  than  the  nearest  ties  of 
nature  can  give,  and  so  indeed  it  is  for  him  who  knows 
the  Lord.  It  takes  up  its  own  matters  between  itself 
and  God,  looks  to  he  taught  His  way,  and  led  in  a 
plain  path,  because  its  enemies  watched  for  its  getting 
Olil  of  the  way.  The  pressure  of  enemies  was  great. 
and  there  will  be  such  for  the  saint.  There  is  a  will 
of  evil — false  witness,  then  cruelty.  The  goodness  of 
the  Lord — no  human  means — is  the  resource  of  the 
heart,  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in  His  government. 
The  result  is:  wait  on  the  Lord.  He  strengthens  the 
heart.  "Wait.!  say.  on  the  Lord."  This,  indeed,  is  the 
secret  of  strength  in  the  time  of  evil.  There  is,  then, 
nothing  to  fear.  We  may  have  learnt  that  it  is  a 
Father's  love  in  our  path  of  children,  and  the  care  of 
Christ,  that  good  Shepherd.  1  n it  the  principle  of  our 
confiding  in  the  Lord  is  the  same.  It  is  remarkable 
how  entirely  absent  is  the  thought  of  any  other  re- 
source Or  help,  than  that  of  the  Lord.  And  this  it  is 
maintains  integrity.  I'm-  the  Lord  cannot  help  other- 
wise than  in  maintaining  truth  of  heart.      The  wile  of 


00        TKACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

enemies  is  there.  The  soul  knows  nothing,  (no  human 
means  or  strength,  or  wisdom,  or  plan,)  but  seeking 
Jehovah's  face ;  with  Him  all  is  settled,  and  so  in 
■  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and  integrity.  The  enemies 
are  then  Jehovah's  concern.  This  is  the  secret  of  our 
security  and  comfort  in  trial.  Hence,  grace  being 
there,  we  can  reckon  on  the  Lord  at  all  times.  If  we 
have  erred,  bring  it  to  Him.  It  is  a  true  exercise  of 
soul  in  His  presence.  He  deals  with  it  according  to 
truth,  between  itself  and  Him,  but  grace  and  His 
secret  place,  and  their  deliverance  are  its  position. 

Though  Jehovah  be  the  great  subject  of  Ps.  xxviii. 
as  of  all  these,  as  regards  the  faithful  there  is  a  special 
point — his  cry  to  Jehovah,  and  the  supplication  ad- 
dressed to  Him.  The  heart  connects  itself  with  the 
Lord  in  crying  to  Him.  The  cry  implies  the  Lord's 
interest  in  us,  and  our  having  this  for  our  starting 
point ;  also  our  avowed  dependence  on  Him.  Hence, 
crying  and  prayer  to  the  Lord  are  important,  and  an 
index  to  the  state  of  soul.  We  may  desire  from  the 
Lord,  have  faith  in  His  goodness  in  giving,  but  crying 
to  Him  identifies  us  avowedly  with  Him,  even  before 
others.  Here  the  soul  is  spoken  of  as  in  extreme 
distress — the  pit  of  scheol  open  before  it.  But  the 
principle  is  ever  true,  even  in  interceding  for  others. 
Here  faith  is  shown  in  crying,  when  all  seemed  to 
man's  eye  hopeless.  This  connection  with  the  Lord  is 
distinctly  marked  here,  in  its  being  made  the  ground 
for  not  being  drawn  away  with  the  wicked  in  judgment. 
In  psalm  xxvi.  it  was  the  integrity  of  the  believer  in 
his  ways,  which  was  laid  as  the  ground  for  not  being 


THE   PSALMS.— PSALM  XXVI 1..  91 

so  drawn  away:  here  it  is  this  connection  With  the 
Lord,  shown  in  calling  upon  Iliin.  And  though 
the  wickedness  of  evildoers  be  die  ground  on  which 
their  judgmenl  is  Looked  for,  yet  their  disregard  of 
Jehovah  is  declared  to  lie  the  ground  of  their  destruc- 
tion. The  righteous  lias  dusted  in  I lini  and  been 
helped.  Hill  there  is  more,  and  much  more,  in  the 
Lord's  deliverance  of  us  than  the  fact  of  being  de- 
livered. He  has  delivered  us.  The  heart  was  attached 
to  Him.  adored  Him,  looked  up  to  Ilini,  believed 
Sim,  and  He  has  not  failed  us.  Oh!  true  this  is! 
and  how  it  attaches  afresh  the  heart  to  Him.  So 
here,  (ver.  (5,  7,)  "  My  heart  trusted  in  him,  and  I  am 
helped;  t herefore  my  heart  greatly  rejoiceth,  and 
with  my  son--  will  1  praise  him."  This  looking  with 
confidence  to  the  Lord  is  a  real  entering  into  His 
character  and  conformity  to  it,  in  the  sense  of  esti- 
mating, delighting  in,  and  honouring  it,  in  counting  it 
impossible  to  be  otherwise.  It  appreciates  the  Lord; 
and  he  who  appreciates  anything  morally  excellent  is 
in  a  dependent  way  like  it.  I  have  a  friend,  of  a 
noble,  faithful,  self-devoting  character.  I  am  in  cir- 
cumstances where  all  is  opposed  to  the  probability  or 
possibility  of  his  coming  in  to  help.  I  am  sure  he 
will.  1  count  with  affection  on  what  he  is.  It  is 
evident  thai  I  hold  fast  in  my  appreciation  of  him. 
He  is  to  my  mind  superior  to  all  circumstances, 
governed  by  bis  own  excellence ;  and  this  is  what  1 
appreciate  and  reckon  on.  Whatever  circumstances 
may  be,  my  heart  goes  with  his  in  his  conduct,  though 

in  the  way  of  dependence,  and  his  with  mine.  When 
he  has  acted,  1  rejoice  in  him,  in  my  estimate  of  him. 


92        PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

I  say,  I  knew  my  appreciation  was  just :  I  knew  him, 
and  what  he  is.  I  rejoice  in  his  excellence  :  I  have 
reckoned  on  it  as  certain,  and  above  all  the  circum- 
stances. He  has  proved  his  interest  in  me  in  inter- 
vening. Thus,  when  God  shall  deliver  the  remnant. 
and  when  He  delivers  the  Christian,  they  can  say. 
"  This  is  our  God ;  we  have  waited  for  him."  This  is 
what  we  can  see  in  Job  through  all  his  culpable  irri- 
tation. He  reckons  on  God,  and  knows  what  he 
would  be  and  do  if  he  could  find  Him.  The  heart 
has  trusted  God's  heart,  and  found  it,  and  rejoices  in 
it — has  really  honoured  God,  though  only  in  waiting, 
in  assured  confidence  for  Him.  It  is  satisfied  hi  what 
its  mighty  Friend  is,  and  in  His  love.  It  rejoices  in 
deliverance,  for  it  suffered  and  was  oppressed  in  v>  eak- 
ness  ;  but  rejoices  in  heart — delight  in  the  deliverer. 
It  has  a  friend  that  has  formed  the  heart  after  His 
own  excellency,  and  formed  it  to  confide  in  it.  In 
the  Christian  this  will  be  calmer,  because  he  is  more 
instructed  in  heavenly  things,  knows  God  better,  and 
has  less  anxiety  as  to  what  is  here  below,  does  not 
look  on  the  things  that  are  seen.  But  the  principle 
is  the  same. 

Psalm  xxix.  does  not  call  for  much  remark  connected 
with  the  way  we  are  now  viewing  them.  It  is  a 
summons  to  the  mighty  of  the  earth  to  own  and  give 
glory  to  Jehovah — the  honour  due  to  His  name.  The 
only  point  I  would  notice  is  the  connexion  of  worship 
with  this,  and  here  owning  Him  in  His  temple,  where 
He  has  placed  His  name.  His  name  has  been  re- 
vealed.    Glory   is  due  to   Him  as  revealed,  to   His 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALMS  XXIX.,  XXX.  93 

Dame  ;  a  name  which,  while  it  is  the  revelation  of  Him- 
self, is  thai  also  of  His  relationship  with  His  people. 
There  He  has  placed  His  name,  so  as  to  form  a  centre 
of  association  and  revealed  place  of  worship.  Thus, 
while  His  voice  may  proclaim  the  majesty  of  that 
name,  they  who  know  it  are  drawn  together  by  it  as  a 
place  of  common  worship.  The  glory  of  this  name 
is  made  good  by  and  revealed  in  what  is  declared  in 
the  last  verses.  Jehovah  sitteth  upon  the  floods,  is 
above,  and  rules  to  J  Lis  own  pin-poses  all  the  tumul- 
tuous movings  of  the  mass  of  peoples.  lie  sits,  too, 
King'  for  ever.  As  He  is  above  the  swellings  of  men, 
so  He  sits  in  sure,  unmoved  government  for  ever. 
But,  then,  there  is  the  connexion  with  His  people. 
1  le  gives  them  strength.  He  blesses  them  with  peace. 
Verse  10  is  the  possession  of  power  overall  and  in 
Himself.  Verse  11,  what  lie  is  for  the  people.  It 
is  the  invitation  of  the  mighty  to  own  Jehovah,  and 
tin'  sure  blessing  of  Israel. 

The  great  truth  of  psalm  xxx.  is  the  practically 
deeply-interesting  one,  that  the  joy  flowing  from  the 
deliverance  the  Lord  (in  this  psalm  Jehovah)  affords 
is  greater  and  deeper  than  the  blessing  of  prosperity, 
even  when  acknowledged  to  come  from  God.  It  may 
be  that  the  deliverance  is  from  sorrow  occasioned  by 
faults.  With  the  remnant  of  the  Jews  it  will  surely 
be  305  'm<  '*  1S  complete  and  full;  and  when  the  sin 
or  evil  is  fully  acknowledged,  the  restoration  and 
Messing  is  absolute  in  communion  with  God.  For- 
giveness, or  the  thought  of  it,  in  an  unhealed  soul, 
may  have   regrets.      When   the   soul   is  healed,  it  will 


94  PRACTICAL   INFLECTIONS   ON 

Ieam  judgment  of  the  evil,  assuredly,  aud  a  sense  of 
humbleness,  if  it  be  recurred  to — always  more  tender- 
ness of  spirit,  more  grace ;  but  if  the  healing  be  full, 
the  soul  wholly  searched  out,  no  regrets,  because  what 
God  is  for  us,  as  such,  will  possess  the  soul.  The  st  »ul 
will  abhor  the  flesh,  and  the  principles  which  led  to 
evil ;  but  self  will  be  taken  out  of  the  abhorrence 
when  the  evil  is  really  hated,  and  peace  will  be  there. 
I  do  not  say  the  psalm  pursues  these  thoughts  to  this 
depth.  It  is  more  occupied  with  the  outward  circum- 
stances, with  the  hand  of  God  upon  it  for  evil,  thai] 
with  the  evil  for  which  His  hand  is  upon  it.  But 
these  are  looked  at  as  His  anger.  The  effect  is. 
that  circumstances  are  looked  at  as  a  matter  of  His 
anger  and  favour ;  and  on  this  the  soul  rests.  It  had 
been  in  prosperity,  had  owned  its  coming  from,  God, 
but  saw  in  circumstances  its  ground. of  confidence  for 
happiness,  though  looked  at  as  given  and  established 
by  God.  But,  in  so  doing-,  however  much  it  owned 
God  in  giving  and  assuring  the  blessing,  it  rested  on 
the  blessing,  and  that  blessing  ministered  to  self, 
instead  of  taking  out  of  it.  "  I  shall  never  be  cast 
down.  Thou,  Lord,  of  thy  goodness,  hast  made  my 
mountain  to  stand  strong."  Though  piety  might  be 
there,  it  might  degenerate  into  "the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  these."  The  psalm, 
however,  supposes  true  piety.  Only  that  God's  favour 
has  made  the  mountain — "»///  mountain" — to  stand 
strong,  instead  of  the  favour  itself  being  the  blessing. 
Jehovah  hides  His  face,  and  direct  dependence  is  felt, 
direct  blessing  looked  for.  Chastening  and  exercises 
for  faults  come,  and  divine  favour  itself  is  felt  to  be 


THE   PSPLMS. — PSALM    XXX.  95 

the  blessing  needed.  And  what  Jehovah  is  Himself 
is  the  source  of  joy.  WTien  His  anger  is  on  the 
people  that  is  felt;  nol  merely  the  circumstances  it  is 
expressed  in,  but  the  hiding  of  Jehovah's  face  for  sin. 
The  soul  is  brought  into  an  immediate  relationship, 
though  it  be  by  anguish  and  distress.  It  is  brought 
to  think  of  itself.  doI  as  a  self  to  be  caressed,  a  centre 
of  its  own  blessing,  but  as  Binful,  and  God's  favour  is 

needed.  Thus,  though  painfully,  a  most  useful  and 
importanl  work  is  done,  through  grace,  when  this 
self-judgment  is  wrought  iu  the  soul,  so  that  there  is 
spiritual  integrity.  The  favour  of  Jehovah  shines  in 
upon  if,  and  is  enjoyed,  aud  is  become  itself  the 
blessing,  while  positive  deliverance  accompanies  it  in 
God's  good  time.  The  true  nature  of  God  in  holy 
worship  is  entered  into.  He  is  not  merely  a  God  to 
Serve  man  in  Messing.  The  enemy  does  not  rejoice 
over  us,  and  the  soul  itself  is  healed.  We  see  that  if 
His  anger  be  there,  it  is  but  a  moment  of  discipline 
and  instruction  for  the  saints;  and  then  they,  being 
purified,  enjoy  Himself  more  folly.  Here,  literally, 
we  see  the  remnant  at  the  verge  of  the  grave,  and 
there  delivered  ;  but  the  true  work  is,  even  for  them, 
with  God. 

I  add  these  conditions  of  soul  in  which  we  may 
lints  now.  of  which  this  psalm  gives  an  occa- 
sion to  speak,  first,  what  we  may  call,  in  a  com- 
parative sense,  innocence,  when  a  converted  soul 
has  no  acquaintances  with  corruption,  and  no  great 
inward  conflict.  Here  the  grace  of  forgiveness  is 
enjoyed,  and  the  soul  is  cheerfully  happy  in  the  known 
kindness  and  love  of  God  its  Saviour.      Such  a  soul,  if 


96         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

walking  close  with  God,  may  attain  to  the  real  judg- 
ment of  self  and  deep  acquaintance  with  God. 
Otherwise,  the  soul  is  superficial,  and  the  man  of  self 
little  known,  separation  from  flesh's  sphere,  the  world 
on  its  amiable  side,  little  realized.  The  next  is  where 
it  has  failed,  and,  gone  through  deeper  exercises,  has 
been  brought  thus  to  the  knowledge  of  self  in  a 
humbling  way.  This  is  more  the  case  of  the  psalm. 
Then  forgiveness  may  be  known,  and  there  is  the  rest 
of  this;  but  a  certain  shame  of  sin  and  want  of  open 
confidence  with  God,  as  naturally  in  enjoyment  of 
Hun,  if  there  have  been  anything  base  or  trifling  with 
God.  This  is  more  difficult  to  attain.  But  self,  at 
any  rate,  is  not  set  aside.  Thirdly,  when  the  root 
that  has  produced  the  evil  is  really  judged,  the  point 
of  departure  from  God,  (not  merely  the  evil  itself,) 
and  self  thus  set  aside  practically,  then  divine  favour 
is  everything.  The  heart  is  so  far  whole  with  God, 
and,  while  humble,  bold  with  men.  It  has  its  conscious 
link  with  God,  His  favour — God  known  to  be  with  it 
in  moral  luiison,  and  in  positive  sustainment  and 
strength.  The  present  is  its  place  with  Him,  not  the 
past. 

Psalm  xxxi.  is  the  expression  of  entire  confidence  in 
Jehovah — God  known  in  our  relationship  with  Him, 
in  the  most  terrible  circumstances  of  trial  and  distress. 
and  that  where  sin  has  brought  it  on  ;  yet  where  faith 
is  at  work,  and  the  known  name  of  God  counted  on, 
and  therefore  His  righteousness  in  making  it  good. 
It  is  not  reckoning  upon  God  with  pride.  It  is 
Jehovah  trusted  in  for  what  He  is- — His  name — but 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XXXI.  (J7 

Avitli  the  fullest  confession  of  failure,  and  that  it  is 
through  sin  that  trouble  has  come  upon  Ilimthat  cries 
to  Him.  It  is  not  so  much  the  confession  of  iniquity, 
hut  that  the  sorrow  out  of  which  the  ciy  is  sent  up  IS 
due  to  iniquity  ;  but  the  extremity  of  pressure  casts 
the  soul  in  confidence  on  God  according*  to  His  reve- 
lation of  Himself.  The  special  character  of  the  psalm 
is  trust,  and,  from  personal  knowledge  of  Jehovah,  the 
committing  one's  case  to  Him.  This  is  a  deep  prin- 
ciple of  true  piety — such  a  knowledge  of  the  Lord, 
such  faith  in  what  He  is,  that  the  soul  can  trust  Him, 
and  cast  all  on  Him,  when  distress  and  hostility 
come  to  an  extremity.  And  it  is  a  principle  of  utter 
righteousness,  because  the  soul  cannot  look  thus 
to  God  but  in  righteousness.  The  Lord  is  known  as 
having  considered  the  distressed  one's  trouble.  He 
has  known  his  soul  in  adversities.  The  sufferings  were 
not  God's  forgetting  the  sufferer.  God  has  known, 
recognized,  followed,  His  heart  owned,  the  sufferer's 
soul,  and  thought  of  it  in  the  midst  of  adversities; 
and  the  sufferer  as  an  owned  soul,  (however  faulty), 
looks  through  the  suffering  to  the  Lord.  It  accepts 
the  punishment  of  its  iniquity,  but  in  this  righteous 
feeling  trusts  Jehovah;  and  in  this  spirit,  in  what  is 
perfect  in  principle,  commits  itself  entirely  to  the 
Lord,  and  knows,  ami  is  content  that  it  should  be  so, 
that  all  is  in  His  hand.  (Ver.  15.)  It  looks  hence  for 
His  face  to  shine  on  it  ;  but  that  through  His  appear- 
ing for  it,  it  should  not  be  finally  ashamed,  nor  will 
any  that  trust  in  Him.  He  has  laid  up  goodness  for 
them  that  fear  Him,  and  trust  in  Him  before  the  sons 
of  men.     His  presence  is  a  sure  unfailing  sanctuary, 


98         PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

which  makes  human  malice  vain  in  its  attempts.  He 
admits  that,  in  the  pressure  of  distress,  he  had  for  a 
moment  spoken  as  cast  out  of  God.  Still  faith  was 
shown  in  the  cry  to  the  Lord,  and  he  was  heard.  The 
Lord  preserves  the  faithful,  so  that  the  saints  may 
love  Him,  and  be  of  good  courage,  whatever  come. 
It  is  not  every  one  that  has  to  pass  through  such  sor- 
rows, as  those  referred  to  here;  but  when  it  is  the 
portion  of  the  saint,  it  gives  great  intimacy  and  con- 
fidence. What  a  known  God  is,  is  the  ground  of  the 
psalm,  and  the  cry  founded  on  faith  in  it.  I  should 
not  say  that  such  is  the  brightest  exercise  of  faith. 
This  will  be  found,  for  example,  more  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Philippians,  the  bright  expression  of  normal 
Christian  experience.  Nor  is  it  the  commonest :  but 
God,  in  His  rich  mercy,  has  in'  His  word  met  every 
need,  and  made  provision  in  His  word  for  every  state. 
And  the  state  of  soul  here  is  one  of  much  exercised 
depth  and  intimacy  of  confidence  in  God  only,  learnt 
through  needed  distress. 

Psalm  xxxii.  But  in  the  midst  of  all  the  exercises 
of  heart  which  belong  to  a  renewed  soul  in  the  midst 
of  its  difficulties  here  below,  there  is  one  point  which 
is  the  centre  of  all,  a  need  to  which  an  answer  is  craved 
alike  by  the  heart  and  conscience — its  relationship  to 
God  when  it  thinks  of  its  sin  before  Him.  It  has  need 
of  confidence  for  trials,  of  deliverance  and  help.  It 
is  cheered  by  promises,  and  bowed  in  heart  and  will 
as  to  the  ways  of  God.  But  it  needs  reconciliation 
with  Himself  above  all,  the  unclouded  light  of  His 
countenance :  as  regards  its  own  state  forgiveness,  and 


THE   PSALMS.— PSALM  XXXII.  99 

the  absence  of  guilt  The  entire  removal  of  all  guilt 
before  God,  and  Eis  complete  forgiveness,  is  beauti- 
fully connected  here  with  purifying  the  heart  and 
inner  man.  the  taking  oul  guile,  and  this  in  the  con- 
fession of  actual  sins.  But  it  begins,  as  it  must,  with 
God,andfinds  its  satisfaction  in  Eis  thoughts  towards 
it  And  this  is  right.  Thus  only  can  the  heart  be 
really  purified,  and  sin  have  its  true  character,  and 
God  His  right  place,  without  which  nothing  is  right. 
Vet  it  is  the  conscious  state  of  its  forgiveness  which 
lirst  affects  the  soul,  after  conviction  and  distress  For 
sin  has  been  wrought  and  the  soul  brought  to  con- 
fession. "  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  transgression  is 
forgiven."  lie  has  sinned  against  God,  transgressed. 
It  is  all  perfectly  forgiven.  But  it  was  sin  before 
God  and  evil — a  thing  itself  hateful  in  God's  sight, 
and  now  in  the  soul's.  It  is  expiated,  covered;  pro- 
pitiation has  been  made.  The  present  state  is  then 
put  absolutely :— Jehovah  imputed  no  iniquity  to  it: 
and  now  the  whole  heart  is  open  before  God.  There 
is  no  guile  in  it.  Why  should  there  be  when  all  is 
open  with  God,  all  cleared,  and  sin  gone  out  of  His 
sight?  And  oh!  what  a  blessing  it  is  to  have  the 
perfed  light  of  God  on  an  unsullied  soul,  not  an 
innocent  one  That  is  a  far  less  thing,  and.  indeed, 
the  inshining  of  perfect  light  would  be  inapplicable 
then;  but  with  a  knowledge  of  g  i  <'•  and  evil,  and 
knowing  what  lighl  is  (in  contrasl  with  darkness.) 
and  to  have  it  shining  upon  one  as  white  as  snow,  is 
infinitely  1i1cs.mi1.  I  do  not  deny  that  it  is  more  per- 
sonal relationship  here,  into  which  also  I  will  enter; 
bul   For  the  Christian    this  is  implied  m  Forgiveness, 


100        PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

and  covering,  and  non-imputation  of  sin.  As  yet,  of 
course,  it  is  by  faith,  but  not  the  less  true  for  that. 
The  ways  of  God  in  bringing  the  soul  to  it,  and  His 
ways  after  it,  are  also  gone  into  in  the  psalm  :  no 
rest  to  the  proud  will  which  would  not  confess  !  (how 
gracious  to  pursue  the  soul  thus  !) — the  most  intimate 
guidance  for  the  soul  reconciled  in  communion,  care 
in  the  midst  of  trial. 

The  psalm,  then,  is  the  expression  of  conscious 
1  ilessedness  in  the  sense  of  being  forgiven.  And  how 
sweet  it  is  to  be  in  the  sunshine  of  God's  favour  in 
the  sense  that  His  love  has  been  active  towards  us ! 
The  undeservedness  of  the  favour,  though  it  is  not 
the  brightest  joy,  gives  great  deepness  to  it,  because 
it  is  God  Himself  who  forgives ;  for  so  it  must  be  in 
forgiveness  when  the  soul  is  restored  to  Him.  Then 
there  is  the  consciousness  of  the  sin  being  out  of 
God's  sight.  This  is  a  very  great  blessing  indeed, 
and  the  consciousness  of  it  most  sweet,  the  thought 
that  not  one  sin  appears  in  the  sight  of  God.  But 
there  is  the  special  sense,  not  that  there  was  no  sin, 
but  that  God  imputes  none,  that  He  has  a  deter- 
mined fixed  judgment— He  does  not  impute  it.  The 
sin  is  not  denied ;  that  would  be  guile.  In  this  part 
the  feelings  are  not  so  much  engaged,  but  there  is  the 
judicial  certainty  of  non-imputation  necessary  for 
truth  in  the  inward  parts.  This  connects  itself  with 
confession.  But  it  is  not  only  uprightness  in  word 
and  confession,  but  in  spirit.  There  was  truth  in  the 
inward  parts.  No  desire  in  the  soul  to  hide,  to  conceal 
from  itself  the  evil,  it  presents  itself  before  forgive- 
ness, before  non-imputation :    that   is  its   connexion 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    XXXII.  101 

with  sili.  m>t  hiding  it.  Tic  sees  the  sin  truly,  but 
sees,  and  because  lie  sees,  it  is  not  imputed.  But 
the  phrase  is  absolute  and  general — "to  whom  the 
Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity."     It  is  an  absolute  con 

dition  of  the  individual;  it  is  not  his  iniquity  or 
particular  fault  forgiven,  though,  doubtless,  that  is  so 
too,  but  absolute  non-imputation  of  any.  The  man 
exists  before  God  as  having  ao  sin.  according- to  the 
judgment  of  God.  Then  my  heart  is  open  and  free 
before  God.  1  have  the  consciousness  of  this,  and 
look  up  to  God  as  having  no  sin.  with  the  conscious- 
ness that  He  sees  none.  Hence  there  is  no  cloud, 
nothing  to  hide.  This  is  not  so.  however,  when  con- 
fession is  not  made.  Absolute  non-imputation — that 
is  God's  actual  judgment  of  me  and  manner  of 
looking  at  me.  No  sin  is  there;  none  between  me 
and  Him.  But,  in  arriving  at  the  consciousness  of 
this  Missed  truth,  there  has  been  confession.  Till 
then,  the  pressure  of  God's  hand  was  upon  the  soul. 
to  force  it  to  come  to  this.  How  gracious  this  is, 
God's  watching  over  a  soul,  and  a  soul  going*  wrong. 
too  !  to  bring  it  to  Himself.  But  he  was  brought  by 
grace  to  this  point — acknowledging  sin  to  God,  no 
excuse,  giving-  it  its  true  character,  real  spiritual 
uprightness,  however  humbling  it  may  be.  This  was 
morally  important,  but  is  not  all.  "  I  will  confess 
my  transgressions" — the  acts  are  brought  up  in 
memory.        He   resolved   to  take  this  course,   and   all 

was  right.  "Jehovah  forgave  the  iniquity."  1  John  i. 
opens  this  out  Christianly.     There,  also,  we  cannot 

Bay  we  have  DO  sin.  and  we  confess  our  sins.  The 
connexion  of  the  absence  of  all  sin  on  the  conscience 


102  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

and  no  guile  in  the  heart,  because  it  is  entirely  open 
through  conscious  non-imputation,  is  very  instructive. 
It  can  be  in  no  other  way,  only  man  is  brought  to  it 
in  truth  by  confession,  and  to  confession  through 
confidence.  Thus  only  is  the  heart  opened  to  God 
through  grace,  thus  only  is  truth  in  the  inward  parts, 
though  forced  to  the  humiliation  as  regards  our  will, 
by  forgiveness  being  known  by  promise.  "There  is 
forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou  mightest  be  feared." 

This  revelation  of  God  awakens  the  thought  and 
feeling  of  all  the  upright  and  gracious  minded  to  look 
to  God  in  the  time  when  He  reveals  Himself  as  the 
forgiving  God,  when  He  can  be  found.  So  for  Christ 
Himself  in  Isaiah  xlix. ;  it  was  the  accepted  time. 
When  He  had  been  perfect,  when  perfectly  proved 
before  God,  then  He  was  heard,  for  He  had  been 
made  sin ;  and  the  apostle  cites  it  thus,  "  Now  is  the 
accepted  time,  to-day  is  the  day  of  salvation."  The 
revelation  of  forgiveness  and  the  joy  of  such  relation- 
ship with  God  awakens  the  desire  after  and  delight 
in  such  a  God  in  gracious  souls,  and  they  seek  unto 
Him.  Supposing  they  have  not  the  sense  of  sin  at 
the  moment,  they  know  they  are  sinners,  and  God  is 
so  revealed,  has  a  character  which  is  their  delight,  and 
their  soid  links  itself  with  Him.  They  seek  to  Him, 
not  simply  for  forgiveness.  It  is  in  their  character  of 
graciousness  they  are  spoken  of  here,  but  it  is  such  a 
God — a  God  of  this  character,  and  these  ways — 
which  draws  their  heart ;  and  note,  God  so  acting,  so 
revealed,  makes  the  time  the  finding  time.  This 
connection  of  the  graciousness  of  the  heart  with  the 
graciousness  of  God,  and  the  power  of  attraction  it 


THE  PSALMS.-   PSALM    XXXII.  108 

lias,  is  very  beautiful,  and  it  is  very  deep  in  the 
gracious  mind.  There  must  be  the  sense  of  need, 
of  dependence,  and  in  us  of  the  need  of  grace  as 
such  in  the  whole  character  of  our  relationship  with 
God.  But  it.  is  withal  a  deep  realization  in  proportion 
in  godliness,  when  the  conscience  is  not  bad,  of  the 
perfeel    and    divine   grace,    the  loveliness,  yet  the 

sovereign  goodness  of  God's  ways  in  this.  Happy  in 
goodness,  we  feel  that  this  grace  suits  us  and  suits 
(rod;  it  draws  us,  as  godly,  to  God.  Hence  we  are 
there  sheltered,  come  what  will.  If  we  think  of  the 
remnant,  the  principle  will  be  plain.  Israel,  the 
•  lews,  have  been  deeply  guilty  in  everyway.  God 
holds  out,  as  in  this  psalm,  and  everywhere  in  Moses 
and  the  prophets, forgiveness.  This  is  felt;  God  is  so 
revealed;  the  godly  remnant  are  touched  by  this: 
sins,  no  doubt,  are  confessed,  but  the  heart  of  the 
godly  draws  to  God.  When  the  flood  of  judgments 
break  in,  they  are  preserved.  In  every  case,  the  soul 
thus  acquainted  with  goodness  can  count  upon  God. 
God  Himself,  thus  known,  is  its  hiding  place.  In  the 
end  songs  of  deliverance  will  be  its  portion. 

Bui  then  promises  come.  We  have  to  go  through 
a  wilderness  in  which  there  is  no  way;  and  in  the 
midsl  of  snares  and  dangers  of  false  ways',  God 
guides  and  teaches.  The  eye  of  God  rests  on  us  and 
guides  us.  it  is  not  a  way  marked  out  and  left;  it  is 
God  Himself  who  watches  over  and  guides  us  in  a 
way  that  suits  Him,  and  is  the  fruit  of  His  wisdom,  a 
divine  way  for  us.      God  Himself  it  is  that  is  brought 

before  as  here:  God's  goodness,  God's  leading,  God 
interested  in  us  to  forgive  when  aeeded,  to  lead  with 


104  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

the  undistracted  eye  of  love.  But  then  it  supposes 
that  the  heart  pays  attentiou  to  the  eye  of  God.  It 
is  attention  to  Him,  and  the  following  it  with  under- 
standing that  is  the  way;  and  thus  the  soul  is  in- 
wardly taught  in  what  is  agreeable  to  Him,  and  is 
formed  after  Him  in  knowledge.  This  the  New  Testa- 
ment largely  unfolds.  (Phil.  i.  9 — 11 ;  Col.  i.  9,  10;  iii. 
10;  Eph.  iv.  24.)  Even  Moses  says,  "If  I  have  found 
grace  in  thy  sight,  teach  me  thy  way,  that  I  may 
know  thee  and  find  grace  in  thy  sight."  It  is  the 
spiritual  learning  of  God's  way  through  His  guidance, 
and  communion  with  Him  founded  on  His  favour. 
Hence  they  are  warned  not  to  be  like  an  unintelligent 
beast,  who  must  be  outwardly  held.  God  can  guide 
us  thus,  does  graciously  sometimes  by  His  providence : 
but  there  is  no  spiritual  understanding,  no  moral 
assimilation  to  His  nature,  and  growth  of  the  delight 
of  our  new  nature  in  Him ;  no  increased  capacity,  by 
this  means,  for  knowing  God.  The  result  is  declared 
in  the  judicial  ways  of  God  in  the  last  two  verses  : 
only  that  we  have  to  remark,  that  it  is  in  Jehovah 
Himself  that  the  soul  has  to  rejoice,  not  in  the  conse- 
quences, though  they  that  trust  in  Him  be  compassed 
about  with  mercy.  He  Himself  known  by  forgive- 
ness, known  by  ever  accessible  kindness  and  goodness, 
as  a  hiding  place  for  the  soul,  as  one  that  guided  wTith 
His  own  care,  with  His  eye,  was  the  one  to  whom  the 
soul  thus  taught  was  taught  to  rejoice.  So  Paul — 
"  Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway,  and  again  I  say  rejoice." 
We  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus,  by  whom  we 
have  received  the  reconciliation.  He  fills  the  soul, 
and  He  is  above  all. 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM  XXXIII.  105 

I 'sal  m  xxxiii.  I  have  only  a  few  principles  to  note 
in  speaking-  of  this  psalm.  All  the  psalms  to  the  end 
of  xxxix.  nnfold  the  moral  state  of  the  Jewish  rem- 
nant in  the  last  days.  I  say  the  moral  state,  more 
than  their  condition  under  oppression,  and  the  thought 
of  forgiveness  gives  in  general  a  brighter  tiut  to  the 
colouring  of  them,  though  the  sense  of  their  condition 
is  found  also,  as  elsewhere.  Psalm  xxxiii.  follows  on 
the  last  verse  of  xxxii.,  and  the  thought  of  forgiveness 
having  put  a  new  song'  in  his  mouth,  he  can  look  out 
with  clearer  confidence  on  the  principles  on  which 
men  should  act,  looking  to  the  word  and  works  of  God. 
The  earth  is  viewed  as  under  God's  eye  and  direction — 
TJis  government  as  applied  to  it.  This,  fully  displayed 
at  the  end,  has  its  application  to  the  lower  part  of  a 
Christian's  life,  too.  (Compare  Psalm  xxxiv.  12 — 1G; 
1  Peter  iii.  10.)  We  get  some  general  principles. 
"  The  works  of  the  Lord  are  done  in  truth.''  I  may 
perfectly  reckon  on  His  acting  on  the  known  principles 
of  His  holy  will.  Hence  His  word,  which  is  essen- 
tially right,  can  judge  me  now.  This  is  always  an 
important  principle.  The  Lord,  though  not  visibly  and 
publicly,  does  govern  all  things.  Hence  I  can  act  on 
His  word,  and  be  sure  of  the  consequences.  I  may, 
no  doubt,  suffer  for  Christ — that  is  a  still  better  bless- 
ing; but  the  result  of  acting  on  God's  word  will  be 
blessing.  From  the  Gth  verse,  the  power  of  the  word 
is  shown  in  creation.  The  earth  should  fear  Him, 
••  for  he  spake,  and  it  was  done;"  again,  He  subverts 
the  counsels  of  men.  Eis  stand  fast.  Another  prin- 
ciple then  comes  in,  the  blessing  of  being  the  chosen 
people  of  God,  His  inheritance     This  is  Israel:  still 


106  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

faith  has  to  walk  in  the  strength  of  it  now.  "  Put  on, 
therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved."  We 
are  not  God's  inheritance,  but  heirs  of  God  ;  but  the 
greater  elevation  of  the  position  does  not  destroy, 
though  it  may  give  a  deeper  application  to,  the  prin- 
ciple. We  have  to  walk  through  the  world  as  the 
elect  of  God  ;  and  this  is  a  most  blessed  position.  It 
is  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father ; 
but  we  walk  in  the  consciousness  of  being  the  elect  of 
God.  He  orders  and  fashions  all  hearts.  What  a 
thing  to  say,  if  I  have  to  say  to  men !  And  He 
makes  all  things  work  together  for  good  for  me. 
Thus,  while  all  human  strength  is  nought,  I  can  wait 
on  the  Lord  with  sure  confidence.  His  eye,  too,  is 
never  withdrawn  from  me.     (Compare  Job  xxxvi.  7.) 

But,  Psalm  xxxiv.  goes  further.  It  takes  up  the 
case  of  sorrow  and  trial  in  the  most  beautiful  way. 
Jehovah  himself,  as  ever,  is  the  blessed  burden  of  the 
psalm.  In  the  first  four  verses,  it  is  the  spirit  of 
Christ  in  an  especial  way  which  speaks,  but  as  for  the 
heart  of  every  one  so  tried,  and  belongs  to  every  one 
who  has  this  faith,  that  every  one  may  have  it.  The 
point  of  the  psalm  is,  "  at  all  times."  It  is  easy  to 
praise  the  Lord  when  He  makes  all  flow  softly  for  us. 
Yet  the  Lord  is  not  as  much  praised  really  for  what 
He  is.  In  the  midst  of  trouble  the  soul  is  seen  humble 
and  subdued  in  spirit.  He  has  sought  the  Lord,  and 
he  found  Him  a  ready  friend.  This  made  the  Lord 
intimate  and  precious  to  him.  The  saint's  heart  was 
tried,  exercised  ;  difficulty  and  wrong  pressed  upon  it, 
and  his  will  did  not  rise  up  in  pride  and  anger,  but  he 


THE  TSALMS. — PSALM   XXXIV.  107 

lays  his  matter  with  confidence  on  the  kindness  of  the 
Lord,  and  lie  interests  Himself  in  him.  It  is  not  high 
and  sovereign  providence  making-  things  flow  for  out- 
ward Messing — no  doubt,  we  should  be  thankful  for 
this — but  the  gracious  interest  of  the  Lord  in  his  tried 
heart.  This  is  much  nearer,  the  interest  greater,  the 
link  more  sweet  and  stronger.  It  was  not  pride  of 
will  in  trial  or  in  success,  but  an  oppressed  and  humble 
heart  finding  the  Lord's  ear  and  heart  open  to  it. 
.Thus  consoled  himself,  he  could  console  others  with 
the  comfort  wherewith  he  himself  was  comforted  of 
God.  He  was  delivered  from  all  his  fears.  Oh,  how 
often  this  happens,  even  as  to  the  removing  not  un- 
reasonably expected  evil  entirely.  This  knowledge  of 
the  Lord  leads  to  the  exercise  of  love  in  encouraging 
others,  while  the  heart  experiences  it,  and  is  tilled 
with  it.  It  is  applied  to  the  remnant  by  the  Spirit  in 
verse  5.  They  recall  the  case  of  Christ,  in  verse  6. 
In  verse  7,  we  have  it  as  a  general  truth;  in  8 — 10  his 
own  blessed  experience  enables  him  who  has  trusted 
the  Lord,  to  assure  others  of  the  certainty  of  finding 
this  help. 

The  experience  of  the  Lord's  kindness  is  very  pre- 
cious. It  is  not  only  that  one  is  assured  of  it  for  all 
trials,  but  Himself  is  known.  He  is  blessed  and 
praised.  The  heart  dwells  in  Him,  and  finds  its  joy 
and  rest  in  Him,  and  in  the  goodness  of  one  who  is 
alone,  and  none  like  Him  in  what  lie  is.  The  blessed- 
i.i  38  is  infinite  and  divine  in  its  nature,  as  He  who  is 
the  source  of  it,  yet  as  intimate  as  what  is  in  the 
heart  can  be — more  intimate  than  any  human  being 
who  is  without  us.    We  dwell  in  Him,  and   the  Lord 


108       PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

is  our  stay  and  the  rest  of  our  heart.  There  is  nothing- 
like it.  None  can  be  so  intimately  near  us  as  God : 
for  He  is  in  us.     Yet  what  an  intimacy  it  is  ! 

But  there  is  another  principle  brought  out  here — 
what  the  walk  is  in  which  this  blessing'  is  found  (ver. 
7—10).  We  have  fearing  the  Lord,  trusting  the  Lord, 
and  seeking  the  Lord.  Ver.  11 — 16  take  up  what  the 
character  of  this  fear  of  the  Lord  is,  in  a  passage 
most  of  which  is  quoted  by  Peter  only.  The  end  of 
16  is  left  out  as  inapplicable  now,  though  the  general 
fact  of  government  for  the  Christian  is  not.  It  is  im- 
portant that  we  should  remember  this.  Not  only  is  it 
true  that  God  is  not  mocked— that  what  a  man  sows 
he  will  reap — that  God  has  goyernmentally  attached 
certain  consequences  to  certain  conduct;  but  He  also 
watches  over  and  directly  governs  His  children — may 
cause  them  to  be  sick,  to  die  ;  may  deliver  them  from 
it,  on  confession  or  intercession.  "  The  eyes  of  the 
Lord  are  upon  the  righteous,  his  ears  open  to  their 
cry."  Not  only  that,  but  "  nigh  to  them  that  are  of  a 
broken  heart,  and  saveth  such  as  be  of  a  contrite 
spirit."  Then  there  is  a  path  marked  out  by  God  as 
the  path  of  peace  in  a  world  like  this ;  not  simply  in 
itself  the  path  of  spiritual  power,  but  of  quietness  and 
peace  in  this  world,  going  peaceably  through  it  under 
God's  eye.  And  that  is  very  precious  for  us.  Grace 
is  a  means  of  doing  it,  as  the  heart  is  elsewhere  than 
in  idleness  and  passion.  The  feet  are  shod  with  the 
preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace.  As  far  as  in  us 
lies,  we  live  peaceably  with  all  men.  This  is  true  even 
of  unconverted  men.  Those  who  walk  in  this  way,  in 
general,  see  good  days,  because  such  is  the  conse- 


THE  PSALMS. — rSALM  XXXIV.  109 

quence  of  the  public  government  of  God.  It  becomes 
the  Christian  so  to  do,  but  others  may  do  it.  This 
government  of  God  is  always  true,  as  we  see  in  Job  ; 
only  the  saint  should  understand  it.  But  there  is  yet 
a  word  which  remains.  This  government  is  not  such 
now  as  that  the  righteous  should  not  suffer  (comp. 
1  Pet.  hi.  14 — 17),  still  more  for  the  name  of  Christ. 
Hut  Jehovah  watches  over  him.  Not  a  sparrow  falls 
to  the  ground  without  our  Father.  It  seems  strange 
to  us  to  hear,  "  Some  of  you  shall  they  put  to  death  ; 
but  there  shall  not  a  hair  of  your  head  perish."  But 
the  government  of  God  now  is,  not  the  public  govern- 
ment applied  to  the  suppression  of  all  evil  but  to  the 
case  of  the  righteous  under  and  through  the  power  of 
evil.  When  Christ  appears,  there  will  be  this  sup- 
pression of  evil.  In  general,  they  who  live  peaceably 
will  live  in  peace;  but  in  a  world  where  Satan's  power 
is,  the  righteous  will  suffer — have  many  afflictions, 
but  none  without  the  watchful  care  of  the  Lord.  And 
in  some  way  deliverance  will  come.  Who  would  have 
said  that,  in  the  seemingly  unbridled  rage  of  men, 
when  all,  Jew,  priests,  or  Gentile,  were  united  against 
Christ — when,  to  appearance,  they  had  all  their  own 
way,  this  psalm  should  be  literally  fulfilled  in  Christ? 
Not  a  hair  of  our  head  but  is  counted.  I  doubt  that 
this  verse,  l'ii,  iii  the  psalm  is  exactly  a  prophecy. 
though  literally  accomplished  in  Christ.  I  should 
rather  suppose  that  the  passage  in  John's  Gospel  re- 
ferred to  Exod.  xii.  1G.  But  Christ  is  a  perfect  ex- 
ample in  any  case  of  the  declaration  made  in  the 
psalm,  as  a  great  general  principle,  if  the  passage  be 
not  cited.     God's  care  never  fails,  and  is  shown  in  the 


110  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

smallest  circumstances,  and  in  spite  of  all  man's 
thoughts,  though  God  may  allow  many  afflictions  to 
come  upon  those  that  trust  Him.  These,  too,  will 
surely  be  a  blessing.  The  soul,  thus  learning  the 
Lord's  ways  and  trusting  Him,  can  bless  Him  at  all 
times.  Christianity,  indeed,  can  teach  us  deeper  fruits 
of  spiritual  life  in  this  respect.  But  it  is  precious  to 
know  the  Lord  as  one  that  watches  thus  over  us  in 
love — a  Father's  tender  care,  in  which  we  can  confide, 
and  in  which  we  can  walk  peaceably  in  this  world, 
seeking  the  good  of  those  around  us. 

Psalm  xxxv.  is  the  direct  demand  for  judgment  of 
the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  the  remnant,  so  that  I  have  not 
much  to  remark  upon  it.  But  nimself  was  the  first 
to  suffer  what  here  will  be  judged ;.  but,  as  we  have 
seen,  never  personally  looks  for  judgment.  Still  this 
psalm  shows  us  the  spirit  in  which  judgment  is  de- 
manded. It  was  after  patience  and  unwearied  grace, 
and  when  this  grace  was  of  no  avail,  when  there  was 
no  self-revenging,  but  casting  themselves  on  the  Lord, 
that  at  the  end  the  Lord  is  looked  to  for  deliverance. 
This  is  important  to  remark,  as  regards  the  judgment 
looked  for.  (See  verses  12 — 14.)  And  it  was  only 
when  he  would  be  swallowed  up  that  he  looks  to  the 
Lord  Himself  to  interfere,  and  so  He  will.  The  poor 
will  not  always  be  forgotten,  nor  is  it  right  that  heart- 
less, unjust,  and  cruel  evil  should  always  have  the 
upper  hand  unhindered.  It  is  right  that  the  saint 
should  be  patient,  bear  all  till  the  Lord  Himself 
interferes  ;  and  this  is  the  spirit  of  this  psalm,  and 
then  it  rejoices  in  the  Lord's  salvation.     There  is  a 


THE  rSALMS.— PSALMS  XXXV.  Ill 

righteous  feeling  that  the  Lord's  recompensing  the 
cruel  wickedness  is  right,  and  so  it  is  ;  besides  this, 
what  we  have  is  the  character  and  way  of  the  wicked, 
and  the  preceding  entirely  gracious  walk  of  him  who 
found  the  wicked  too  strong  for  him.  Verses  2G  and 
27  have  a  special  application  to  Christ,  but  the  whole 
.psalm,  in  the  mouth  of  any  one  forward  in  faithful- 
ness, was  to  bring  the  tide  of  evil  on  himself.  I 
would  refer  to  one  or  two  passages  to  show  the  work- 
ing of  this  spirit,  and  how  far  the  Lord  points  to  it  as 
to  the  remnant.  As  to  Himself,  save  to  prophesy  the 
fact,  lie  did  not  ask  for  it.  He  never  does.  See 
1  Samuel  xxiv.,  xxv.,  xxvi. — the  spirit  in  which  David 
was  kept,  though  weak,  yet  still,  then,  the  instrument 
specially  fitted  by  grace  to  attune  the  mind  of  Christ 
in  these  psalms  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the 
remnant,  cast  out  like  him,  will  be,  and  rising  up, 
when  God  pleased,  to  the  prophetic  declaration  of 
what  Christ  Himself  should  pass  through,  and  pro- 
vide words,  wonderful  honour  !  in  which  Christ  could 
express  Himself,  (see  particularly  xxiv.  11-13,  and 
the  end  of  xxvi.,)  for  so  many  of  the  psalms.  So 
Abigail  keeps  him  in  this  spirit  through  mercy,  but 
there  is  no  self-avenging,  but  casting  himself  on  the 
Lord. 

The  way  in  which  the  Lord  directs  His  disciples  in 
Matt.  x.  marks  the  spirit,  too,  in  which  the  remnant 
are  to  bear  witness  for  His  commission,  and  goes  on  to 
His  return,  (ver.  13 — 15.  Comp.  Psalm  xxxv.  13.)  It 
is  important  that  the  Christian  should  understand  that 
while  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  His  own  walk  in  the  world 
was  quite  different,  and  so  ought  the  Christian's  to  be, 


112  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

from  the  desire  of  judgment  expressed  in  the  psalms, 
yet  that  that  desire  is  righteous  and  right  in  its  place, 
and  that  the  desire  of  judgment  is  not  self- vengeance, 
but  an  appeal  to  a  delivering  and  righteous  God  after 
the  perfect  patience  of  the  heart  under  unrighteous 
oppression,  as  bowing  to  the  will  of  God,  and  learning 
the  lesson  He  had  to  teach.  (Comp.  Psalm  xciv.  12, 
and  following.)  Still  the  Christian  is  on  quite  dif- 
ferent ground.  In  this  point  of  view  this  psalm  is  an 
important  one.  It  is  one  in  which  the  spirit  of  the 
remnant  is  exercised  before  God  by  trial,  and,  in- 
wardly subdued,  is  cast  upon  God  to  look  for  deliver- 
ance, according  to  the  way  in  which  it  was  promised  to 
Israel  and  to  the  remnant  under  the  divine  govern- 
ment revealed  in  the  law  and  the  prophets. 

Psalm  xxxvi.,  while  spoken  in  connexion  with  what 
is  a  very  great  trial,  is  yet,  and  indeed,  for  that  very 
reason,  full  of  very  deep  comfort.  The  trial  is  this, 
that  the  ways  of  the  wicked  prove  to  the  heart  of 
the  servant  of  God  that  there  is  no  restraint  of  con- 
science, nothing  to  reckon  on  in  them,  no  check  to 
malice  by  the  fear  of  God.  Flattering  himself  in 
his  oavu  sight,  he  is  devising  mischief,  has  no 
abhorrence  of  evil.  How  often  does  this,  alas ! 
come  before  the  saint  when  in  conflict  with  the 
power  of  the  enemy.  It  is  hard  to  believe  this 
absence  of  conscience  and  planning  mischief ;  malice 
reflected  or  advisedly;  yet  so  it  is.  The  heart  knows 
it  is  true.  The  word  points  it  out  as  characteristic. 
But  then  the  consolation  is  very  great  and  blessed, 
while  it  casts  the  soul  entirely  on  a  faithful  and  all- 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM  XXXVI.  113 

gracious  God,  who  is  above  all  schemes  of  man,  so 
that  Ave  can  be  perfectly  peaceful.     "  Thy  mercy,  0 
Jehovah,  is  in  the  heavens."  What  can  malice  do,  then? 
Its  schemes   cannot   reach    there,    nor   frustrate  the 
plans  or  government  which  are  established  there,  nor 
come  between  the  sonl  and  their  effect.     Mercy  is  out 
of  the  reach  of  the  wicked's  devices.     But  there  is 
another  quality  in  God — faithfulness.     Mercy  is  the 
spring-  of  and  disposes  His  doings.     That  is  a  comfort. 
Upon  Ilis  faithfulness  I  can  count.     It  lifts  its  head 
above  .the  machinations  of  the  wicked.     The  immu- 
table principle  of  God's  government  in  faithful  love, 
His  dealing  in  righteousness,  is  as  firm  and  towering 
in  strength  as  the  mountains;  Ilis  ways  of  judging 
and  dealing  as  profound  but  as  mighty  as  the  great 
deep.     Not  fathomable  beforehand  by  us  as  to  how 
or  why,  He  is  working  above  the  power  of  evil,  but 
beyond  the  reach  of  puny  man,  so  that  lie  can  bring- 
about  Ilis  purposes  of  blessing  by  the  malice  of  men. 
Be  preserves  man  and  beast.     The  moment  we  intro- 
duce the  Lord  so  known,  all  the  effect  of  the  malice 
of  men,  unrestrained  though  it  be  by  the  conscience 
of  God  in  the  wicked,  is  to  make  us  trust  God  and 
not  man.     This  is  a  real  trial,  but  it  is  perfect  peace ; 
a  breach  with  man,  i.e.,  of  the  saint  with  man,  as 
alienated  from  God,  but  a  knitting  of  him  to  God  in 
confiding  cleaving  of  heart.     And  this  has  the  highest 
moral  effect.     This  effect  is  unfolded  in  verses  7,8. 
••  How  excellent  is  thy  lovingkindness, 0  God."    It  is 
not   merely  now   a   defence  against    unconscientious 
malice  that  is  found,  but  the  positive  goodness  of  Him 
in  whom  it  is  found.     The  children  of  men  put  their 


114  PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

trust  under  the  shadow  of  God's  wing's,  because  His 
lovingkindness  is  excellent.  This  is  the  right  and 
fitting  condition  of  the  creature,  but  yet  supposes 
evil  and  the  need  of  this  goodness,  but  this  goodness 
as  a  resource.  But  this  carries  the  saint  yet  further. 
The  goodness  which  has  sheltered  and  protected  him 
becomes  his  portion.  Such  is  the  blessed  effect  of 
being  entirely  cast  on  God  and  driven  away  from  man. 
Brought  under  the  shadow  of  God's  wings,  they  enjoy 
the  fatness  of  His  dwelling  place.  "  They  shall  be 
abundantly  satisfied  with  the  fatness  of  thy  house  ; 
thou  shalt  make  them  drink  of  the  river  of  thy  plea- 
sures." There  are  joys  and  pleasures  that  belong  to 
God's  house,  yea,  to  God  Himself.  This  is  charac- 
teristic of  the  joy  of  the  saints,  and  can  only  be  when 
we  are  made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.  This 
must  have  its  joys  where  God  has  His ;  and  this  is 
the  special  proper  blessedness  of  the  saints.  And 
God  gives  us  this  in  the  fullest  way.  He  gives  us 
His  own  presence,  He  gives  us  Christ.  How  rich  is 
this  blessing,  to  receive  a  nature  capable  of  enjoying 
divine  joys,  and  these  having  the  fullest  divine  objects 
in  every  way,  for  it  is  in  every  way  to  enjoy !  Looking 
up,  our  calling  is  to  be  holy  and  without  blame  before 
Him  in  love,  to  enjoy  God  and  be  His  delight  according 
to  the  divine  nature  imparted  to  us,  and  in  relation- 
ship to  be  adopted  as  sons  to  Himself ;  our  place 
of  inheritance  God's  own  house,  our  home :  and  as 
heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ,  all  that  is 
subject  to  Him.  But  this  is  the  inferior  part ;  but  as 
it  is  as  redeemed  and  made  perfectly  happy  under 
Christ,  it  is  a  divine  joy.     We  have  it,  too,  in  fellow- 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM  XXXVI.  115 

ship  one  with  another.  All  this  the  Christian  enjoys 
in  the  highest  way,  because  Christ  is  become  his  life, 
and  that  in  the  highest  and  nearest  relationship  with 
the  Father.  Hence — and  that  through  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost — we  have  fellowship  with  the  Father 
and  with  His  Sou  Jesus  Christ.  Our  joy  is  full.  I 
have  referred  to  this  on  Christian  ground.  The  prin- 
ciple is  stated  in  the  psalm;  and,  in  principle,  it  is 
true  of  all  saints,  though  not  in  the  Christian  degree, 
God  having  provided  some  better  thing  for  us,  that 
they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect.  But  in 
principle  it  is  true.  The  psalm  continues,  ""With 
thee  is  the  fountain  of  life,  and  in  thy  light  shall  we 
see  light."  Up  to  this  it  has  spoken  rather  of  what 
God  is  for  us,  looked  at  as  shelter,  and  protection, 
and  comfort — in  a  word,  a  resource;  but  having 
brought  us  into  the  fatness  of  His  house  and  the  rivers 
of  His  pleasures,  it  refers  to  what  God  is  more  in- 
trinsically in  Himself  in  blessing;  still  more  as  what 
He  is  for  us  than  in  us — that  belongs  by  the  noly 
Ghost  to  Christians.  "What  is  in  us  is  here  seen  in 
Him  as  its  source.  "  With  thee  is,"  says  the  psalm; 
"  it  shall  be  in  him,"  says  the  Lord  of  the  Christian. 
God  is  that,  however,  and  so  revealed  here  and  known. 
With  Him  is  the  fountain  of  life — a  word  of  great  im- 
port, though  never  fully  revealed  till  Christ  came.  In 
Him  was  life.  There  was  a  tree  of  life  of  which  man 
never  eat,  an  instrumental  ordinance  of  man's  life.  In 
the  patriarchal  times  life  is  not  the  subject,  but  what 
the  Almighty  is  to  His  beloved  and  blessed  ones.  The 
law  connects  life  as  a  promise  with  man's  doing,  and 
the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  o-ood  and  evil.     It  was 


116       PEACTICAL  KEFLECTIONS  ON 

to  be  one.  Life  is  a  living  connexion  with  the  source 
of  blessing1,  or  at  least  a  living  enjoyment  of  His 
favour — not  necessarily  heaven.  No  law  could  give  it 
or  was  it.  God  promised  it  to  him  who  kept  the  law. 
God  is  the  fountain  of  it,  but  the  law  given  to  a  sin- 
ner on  the  principle  of  his  responsibility  could  be  no 
means  of  life,  but  a  ministry  of  death  and  condemna- 
tion. It  spoke  of  life — was  with  life  in  view,  as 
promise  on  obedience  ;  but  in  fact  was  found  to  be 
unto  death.  The  psalms  are  where,  though  heavenly 
things  are  spoken  of,  the  connexion  of  the  heart  of  the 
remnant  with  God  is  brought  out,  and  all  its  throbs 
and  beatiugs  in  its  need,  and  what  God  is  for  it  are 
felt ;  and  that  according  to  the  working  of  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  though  temporal  deliverances  are,  as  for  the 
remnant,  the  main  desire.  Life  and  resurrection  as 
the  hope  of  faith  necessarily  come  in,  though  it  be  but 
in  the  depth  of  their  most  intimate  thoughts ;  and 
they  will  meet  the  need  of  those  who  may  be  slain. 
It  is  not  life  and  incorruptibility  brought  to  light  by 
the  gospel ;  life  in  a  man,  the  Son  of  God,  a  quicken- 
ing Spirit ;  life  in  us  by  His  becoming  our  life.  Still 
as  Christ's  Spirit  speaks  in  the  psalms,  He  who  had 
life  was  sure  of  the  path  of  it  in  this  world  ;  and,  as 
it  led  through  death  in  the  purpose  for  which  He  came 
into  this  world,  sure  of  the  resurrection  too,  that  His  soul 
would  not  be  left  in  hades  nor  His  flesh  see  corrup- 
tion— but  here  in  dependence  on  God  as  being  man. 
So  here,  where  the  saint's  heart  is  separated  from  man, 
as  wholly  separated  himself  even  from  the  fear  of  God, 
not  only  protection  and  lovingkindness  are  looked 
for,  but  the  fountain  of  life  is  seen  to  be  with  God. 


THE  PSALMS.— MALM  XXXVI.  117 

We  know  death  is  overcome,  its  power  rendered  void, 
KarripyovfMvri .  "\Ve  know  that  the  eternal  life  which  was 
with  the  Father  is  come  down  from  heaven.  We  know 
it  is  communicated  to  us,  that  Christ  is  our  life,  that 
having-  the  Son  we  have  life,  that  we  are  quickened 
and  made  alive  according'  to  the  exceeding  greatness 
of  His  power,  according  to  the  working  of  His  mighty 
power,  in  which  He  raised  Christ  from  the  dead 
ami  set  Ilim  at  His  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly 
places ;  so  that  life  for  us  and  in  us,  (for  Christ  is  our 
life,)  is  final  triumph  over  death,  and  reaches  into 
heavenly  places.  This  has  been  brought  to  light  by 
the  gospel,  John  giving  us  life  descending  and  mani- 
fested here  in  Christ  and  communicated  to  us ;  and 
Paul  life  more  fully  completed  in  result  up  there, 
according  to  the  divine  counsels  in  glory.  All  this,  of 
course,  is  not  here  entered  into,  and  could  not  be  till 
Christ's  resurrection.  There  could  have  been  even  no 
righteousness  in  it.  Who  had  a  title  to  be  in  a 
heavenly  place  till  Christ  entered  into  it?  In  whom 
could  it  lie  displayed  in  glory  till  the  Head  so  entered 
into  it  ?  Still  the  principle,  source,  root  of  it  is  seen 
and  revealed  here.  The  Psalms  are  not  law,  though 
law  be  yet  owned;  but  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  and  of  life,  in  those  who  are  under  it  or  in  Christ 
Himself,  and  in  those  too  who  have  to  confess  them- 
selves sinners  under  it.  could  not  hope  for  life  there- 
l'<  lie  1  >y  it,  but  whose  eye  is  opened  on  mercy,  forgiveness, 
and  grace,  if  not  on  heaven,  though  this,  so  far  as  the 
sense  of  the  joy  of  God's  presence  expresses  it,  is  reached 
where  life  is  most  fully  expressed,  as  in  Psalm  xvi. 
Hence  the  source  of  life  is  seen-  a  blessed  thought — 


118       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

when  all  was  condemnation  and  death  under  law. 
They  could  not  say,  The  life  has  been  manifested,  and 
we  have  seen  it ;  still  less,  our  life  is  hid  with  Christ 
in  God;  but  they  could  say,  and  are  taught  to  say, 
and  know,  With  thee  is  the  fountain  of  life.  Hence, 
there  is  a  drinking*  of  the  river  of  His  pleasures.  For 
where  should  this  life  be  satisfied,  or  the  cravings  of 
the  heart  even  unconsciously  animated  by  it,  if  not  at 
that  river,  the  river  that  makes  glad  the  city  of  God  ? 
We  have  in  us  who  have  drank,  come  to  Christ  and 
drank,  have  drank  of  the  water  He  gives,  a  well  of 
water  in  us,  springing  up  into  everlasting  life ;  yea, 
through  the  Spirit,  rivers  flow  out  from  us,  and  that 
from  the  inmost  consciousness  of  blessing.  But  all 
this  is  the  power  of  life  in  the  Spirit.  But  it  is 
equally  precious  to  know  its  nature  is  divine.  I  have 
remarked  elsewhere,  that  what  is  spoken  of  as  life 
and  nature  in  Colossians,  is  referred  to  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  Ephesians.  Here  we  have  God  as  the  foun- 
tain, a  blessed  expression ;  blessed  to  know  that  the 
fountain  is  God  Himself.  The  Father  hath  life  in  Him- 
self; that  is  true  of  Christ  as  man;  then  we  that  have 
the  Son  have  life.  It  shows,  I  think,  that  it  is  looked 
at  as  something  flowing  forth.  What  our  hearts  have 
to  rest  on  is,  God  being  the  source  of  life,  that  we 
may  feel  and  know  what  life  is — how  divine  a  joy  it  is, 
that,  having  a  life  which  is  divine  in  its  nature,  this  is 
capable  of  rejoicing.  It  is  its  nature  to  rejoice  in 
what  is  divine.  It  can,  indeed,  enjoy  nought  else,  save, 
as  the  expression  of  it,  in  goodness  or  truth,  but  finds 
its  joy  in  these  rivers  which  flow  unexhausted  from 
divine  love,  and  in  which  we  drink  the  blessedness 


TUE  rSALMS.— rSALM  XXXVI.  119 

which  is  in  His  nature — in  a  nature  which,  being 
spiritually  the  same,  must  and  can  enjoy  it  according 
to  that  nature  itself  in  its  own  perfectnesB.  We  joy 
in  Cud. 

But  there  is  another  thing.  "In  thy  light  we  shall 
see  light."  God  shines  out,  as  well  as  He  is  a  source. 
He  has  life  in  Himself,  but  with  Him  is  the  fountain 
of  it.  He  is  light,  but  He  shines  forth,  gives  light. 
So  Christ ;  in  Him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light 
of  men.  And  even  we,  Christ  is  our  life,  and  we  are 
light  in  the  lord.  Here,  no  doubt,  light  is  looked  at 
more  as  comfort  in  the  darkness  of  trial,  when  man, 
under  Satan's  power,  was  in  the  fullest  sense  mani- 
fested darkness  ;  but  this,  as  we  have  seen,  has  led  to 
the  discovery  of  what  God  is  Himself.  In  the  ab- 
stract principle,  nothing  indeed  in  the  psalms  leads 
us  more  to  what  was  fulfilled  in  Christ.  Only  here  it 
is  seen  in  Jehovah  as  its  source,  and  the  one  in  whom 
it  is  displayed.  But  this  gives  it  its  divine  perfect- 
ness.  "  In  thee  is  the  fountain  of  life,  and  iu  thy 
light  shall  we  see  light."  It  is  the  confidence,  in  the 
midst  of  darkness  and  trial,  that  Jehovah  in  grace  was 
a  source  of  life,  and  that  hi  His  light  they  would  see 
light.  In  Christ  we  get  every  way  deeper  truths ; 
because,  when  the  life  was  the  light  of  men,  not  for 
mere  outward  help,  but  shining  in  the  moral  darkness 
of  this  world,  Hie  darkness  was  darkness  still,  did 
not  comprehend  if.  As  long  as  He  was  in  the  world, 
He  was  the  light  of  the  world.  Men  loved  darkness 
rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil.  The 
closing  versus  return  to  the  present  hopes  of  deliver- 
ance by  the  government  of  Cod,  and  the  assurance  of 


120       PKACTICAL  EEFLECTIONS  ON 

its  accomplishment.  "What  characterizes  the  righteous 
here,  is  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah  and  uprightness  in 
heart — the  enemies,  pride  and  wickedness.  He  sees 
them,  by  faith,  all  fallen  and  unable  to  rise. 

Psalm  xxxvii.  is  very  distinctly  in  connection  with  the 
display  of  the  direct  government  of  God  in  this  world, 
as  it  will  be  made  good  when  the  meek  shall  inherit 
the  land  and  the  wicked  be  cut  off.  We  have  already 
seen  that  the  epistles  of  Peter  especially  furnish  to  us 
the  application  of  this  to  the  christian  estate  as  far  as 
it  is  so  applicable.  The  beginning  of  Matthew  v. 
gives  us  also,  only  with  a  much  fuller  evangelical 
character,  though  not  going  farther  than  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  the  application  in  the  way  of  promise,  as 
far  as  the  temper  pleasing  to  God  goes.  But  there 
are  some  most  interesting'  and  instructive  exhortations 
in  the  psalm  as  to  the  spirit  in  which  the  believer  is 
to  walk  and  the  character  of  his  confidence  in  God  in 
the  midst  of  the  evil  which  surrounds  him.  For 
though  the  time  of  the  direct  display  of  God's  govern- 
ment be  not  come,  and  no  doubt  the  power  of  evil  will 
be  displayed  more  oppressively  just  before  it  is  put 
down,  still  it  is  even  now  the  time  of  patience,  and 
the  evil  is  there.  Till  Christ  comes,  it  is  in  principle 
the  evil  day,  and  the  patience  and  kingdom  of  Jesus 
Christ  go  together  in  the  heart— not  His  own  kingdom 
and  glory.  They  are  all  founded  on  the  certainty  that 
after  all  Jehovah  is  above  all  the  evil,  loves  judgment, 
does  not  forget  the  righteous  and  those  who  trust  in 
Him,  and  that,  in  the  end,  His  way  would  have  the 
upper  hand.      Meanwhile,  faith  is  exercised  and  all 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM  XXXVII.  121 

thai  is  in  the  heart  judged,  which  would,  by  selfwill, 
mar  the  spiritual  character  and  hinder  the  confidence 
hi  the  Lord  which  becomes  the  saint. 

The  first  exhortation  is  to  peacefulness  of  spirit,  (and 
it  is  general  and  applies  to  the  state  of  the  mind.)  "  Fret 
nut,  ihyself."  When  self  will  ami  the  desire  of  present 
satisfaction  mingles  itself  with  the  love  of  righteous- 
ness, when  one  desires  righteousness  and  partly,  some- 
times, through  fear  of  the  power  of  evil,  and  is  selfish 
though  peacedoving  interests,  one  is  apt  to  fret  one- 
self, because  evil  has  its  way.  All  this  is  the  same 
spirit  <>f  unbelief  as  that  of  the  wicked — God  hath 
forgotten — though  with  other  desires.  lint  it  is  un- 
belief and  selfwill.  The  wrath  of  man  does  not  work 
the  righteousness  of  God.  We  are  neither  to  fret, 
which  is  distrust ;  nor  be  envious,  which  is  even  worse 
and  self-interest.  Then  comes  the  positive  direction 
in  what  spirit  we  are  to  walk.  What  is  the  resource 
against  the  power  of  evil  ?  "Trust  in  Jehovah  and  do 
good."  You  will  reap  the  fruit  of  it  according  to 
promise.  Next,  delight  thyself  in  Jehovah:  lie  will 
give  the  desires  of  the  heart.  Holy  desires,  which  have 
Himself  for  their  object,  will  be  satisfied.  But  oppo- 
sition, shame,  perhaps  calumny,  is  there.  ;-  Commit  thy 
way  to  Jehovah."  How  true  is  this  !  He  has  always,  as 
nun  speak,  the  last  word  if  we  have  only  faith  to  wait 
for  it.  Ee  will  bring  the  result  the  righteous  heart 
desires  and  make  evident  its  righteousness.  Next, 
patient  waiting  for  Jehovah  in  heart  and  desire,  the 
surest  character  of  trust.  Circumstances  may  thus 
be  in  turmoil  around  one — violence  and  efforts.  The 
soul  waits  for  Jehovah's  coming  in  when  lie  will.  The 
I 


122        PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

wicked  may  prosper;  Jehovah  has  His  own  time,  a 
time  which  is  always  right  and  sets  all  light.  He  may 
chasten  for  good,  have  plans  bringing  to  maturity, 
patience  Himself  with  the  wicked,  His  own  glory  to 
bring  out,  which  is  our  everlasting  joy.  Hence,  no 
anger,  no  wrath,  no  fretting,  no  uneasiness.  It  leads 
to  doing  evil,  indulging  our  own  will  in  evil  to  meet 
evil.  This  is  not  the  patience  and  faith  of  the  saints. 
Evil  doers  shall  be  cut  off  (the  saint  must  not  be 
among  the  number).  They  that  wait  on  Jehovah  shall 
inherit  the  earth.  So  of  the  meek,  so  of  such  as  are 
blessed  of  Jehovah.  This  is  Jewish  undoubtedly,  but 
as  we  have  seen,  the  government  of  God  is  still  exer- 
cised, though  not  in  public  manifestation ;  and  when 
the  soul  has  waited  on  Him  in  patience,  it  has  its 
blessing  even  here.  The  latter  part  of  the  psalm  is  a 
careful  declaration  of  this  sure  government  of  the 
earth  to  be  publicly  manifested  in  connexion  with  the 
Jews,  more  secretly  carried  on  in  the  time  of  heavenly 
grace — still  ever  true.  There  are  one  or  two  points  of 
blessing  to  note  in  it.  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are 
ordered  by  Jehovah.  This  is  a  vast  and  precious 
blessing,  to  think  that  in  this  wilderness,  where  there 
is  no  way  in  the  midst  of  confusion  and  wickedness, 
our  Father  directs  our  steps.  A  young  Christian  may, 
in  confiding  zeal,  not  so  much  see  the  value  of  this, 
but  through  how  many  experiences  will  he  pass  ?  But 
wdien  one  has  seen  the  world,  its  snares,  what  a  path- 
less wilderness  of  evil  it  is,  it  is  beyond  all  price 
that  the  Lord  directs  our  steps.  Also  the  humble 
young  Christian  is  directed  through  grace,  if  he  waits 
on  the  Lord,  though  he  may  not  see  the  wisdom  of 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XXXVII.  123 

it,  nor  the  greatness  of  the  privilege  and  mercy,  till 
afterwards.  But  this  is  not  all.  Being  so  directed, 
the  path  is  a  good,  a  divine  path.  There  is  indeed  no 
other,  and  the  heart  is  directed  in  it.  For  the 
Christian  is  led  by  the  spirit  of  God.  His  heart  is  in 
the  ways  ;  as  Moses  says,  Show  me  tlty  way,  not  a  way, 
hut  thy,  that  I  may  know  thee.  If  I  know  a  person's 
ways,  I  know  him.  God  leads  by  His  Spirit  acting  on 
and  in  the  inner  man  and  the  word  sanctifies.  Then 
God  has  delight  in  the  saint's  way.  lie  delights  hi 
seeing  a  divine  path  trodden  by  a  man  in  this  world  of 
evil.  This  Christ  did  perfectly  and  God  delighted  in 
it.  So  far  as  we  follow  Him,  the  Lord  delights  in  our 
way,  has  positive  delight  in  it.    It  meets  His  heart. 

Remark  that  there  is  no  way  but  Christ.  Adam  did 
not  need  a  way  :  lie  had  to  abide,  enjoying  God's  good- 
ness where  he  was.  In  a  sinful  world  there  is  no  way 
— all  is  confusion  and  sin.  Bat  Christ  was  Himself, 
according  to  God,  in  the  world,  and  in  passing 
through  it  manifesting  divine  life  and  its  path  through 
the  world  when  not  of  it.  This  was  a  wholly  new 
thing,  partially  manifested  in  every  saint  in  his  walk 
i  if  faith  ;  but  existing  in  itself  and  perfectly  manifested 
in  <  Ihrist.  This  is  our  path.  We  have  to  follow  His 
steps  and  Be  is  the  way  to  the  Father,  and  it  is  to 
Him  avc  aiv  going.  It  is  an  immense  privilege  to 
think  our  steps  are  ordered  of  the  Lord,  as  a  guard- 
ing from  evil  and  guidance:  and,  then,  that  the  Lord 
delights  in  our  way.  What  a  path  in  a  world  like 
this:  How  fast  should  we  hold  it,  and  seek  none 
else,  and  seek  to  keep  it!  Here  the  [precepts,  as  in 
Col.  iii..  or  Eph.  iv.  v.,  come  so  preciously  in.    There 


124  PRACTICAL  INFLECTIONS   ON 

is  another  mercy — God  watches  over  him.  lie  may 
fall,  i.e.,  in  trials,  not  carnally,  (comp.  2  Cor.  iv.  9 
and  following-,)  but  he  is  not  utterly  cast  dcwn  ;  the 
Lord  upholds  him  by  His  hand.  It  may  be  a  part  of 
this  government  of  God  that  he  should  be  brought 
low,  set  aside,  but  the  Lord's  hand  is  in  it,  not  he  out 
of  it,  and  that  hand  upholds  him.  The  vessel  may  be 
broken  or  put  to  dishonour  by  men,  the  power  is  of 
God. 

There  is  a  moral  reason  for  God's  way s — He  loves 
judgment;  besides  that,  there  is  the  assurance  of 
sovereign  love.  He  loves  his  saints.  They  are  pre- 
served for  ever:  but,  then,  according  to  the  ways  of 
this  judgment,  we  have  besides  some  traits  of  the 
righteous.  He  speaks  wisdom,  that  is,  the  mind  of 
God ;  and  talks  of  judgment,  the  uprightness  of  the 
divine  ways  in  God's  sight,  how  God  judges  of  right 
and  wrong ;  his  heart  is  in  the  walking  in  God's 
known  will :  his  steps  will  not  slide.  We  have  then 
to  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  to  keep  His  way.  The  end 
of  the  perfect  and  uprightness  is  peace.  And  so  it  is, 
practically,  with  a  Christian  ;  he  may  be  chastened  for 
particular  faults,  for  God's  ways  are,  through  mercy, 
unbending  and  right ;  but  when  a  man  walks  with 
upright  purpose  of  heart  in  his  life,  that  life  closes — 
if  it  close  this  side  of  glory — in  peace.  The  fear  of  God 
and  walking  in  His  presence  is  a  great  means  of 
peace.  I  speak  not  of  peace  for  a  sinner's  con- 
science through  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  but  the 
peace  of  God  filling  the  heart  when  all  comes  before 
Him.  Finally,  the  Lord  is  the  strength  of  the 
righteous  in  the  time  of  trouble.     That  cannot  fail. 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM  XXX VIII.  125 

He  shall  help  and  deliver  them,  save  them  from  their 
enemies  because  they  trust  in  Him.  This  is  always 
true. 

Psalm  xxxviii.  presents  to  us  a  special  state  of  soul. 
The  relationship  of  the  heart  with  God  is  known  and 
felt,  and  that  even  in  confidence,  as  the  soul  pursues 
the  expression  of  its  feelings.  "  In  thee,  0  Jehovah, 
do  I  hope.  Thou  wilt  hear,  0  Lord  my  God."  Yet 
the  soul  is  in  the  depth  of  sorrow  and  distress,  and 
this  looked  at  as  the  chastening  of  the  Lord.  It  is 
under  it,  but  deprecates  it ;  that  is,  being  in  profound 
distress  and  sorrow,  in  loathsome  disease,  and  friends 
abandoning,  and  enemies  lively  (as  Job's  state  par- 
tially), Jehovah  is  looked  to  in  it.  The  heart  attri- 
butes it  all  to  sin,  but  first  of  all  looks  to  Jehovah 
and  His  hand.  It  is  that  shows  faith  and  a  right 
mind.  The  order  of  thought  is  thus  remarkable. 
First,  Jehovah  judging,  then  sin  as  the  cause,  then 
personal  misery,  then  abandonment  of  friends,  then 
liveliness  and  ill-will  of  enemies,  and  the  conscious- 
ness of  all  resulting  in  the  heart  confiding  in  Him 
that  smote,  tinning  to  Him  that  smiteth  it;  and  then 
comes  out  what  at  bottom  was  in  the  heart — hope  in 
.Jehovah,  the  consciousness  of  such  belonging  to 
Him  as  that  the  triumph  of  faith's  enemies  could  not 
be,  ami  that  in  the  sense  of  the  need  of  His  inter- 
vention, because  the  poor  sinning  soul  had  no  strength 
in  self.  All  this  leads  to  the  expression  of  unfeigned 
integrity  of  heart;  acknowledgment  of  sin,  not 
merely  owning  it  to  be  the  cause  of  judgment,  but 
judging  self  for  it  before  a  trusted  Jehovah,  and  thus 


12G  rciACTICAL   EEFLECTIONS   ON 

able  freely  to  look  for  help  from  Him.  The  soul,  in 
disengaging-  sin  from  itself,  through  grace,  in  judging- 
it  can  disengage,  so  to  speak,  its  enemies  from  the 
pressing  judgments  of  Jehovah,  and  seeing  them  only 
in  their  own  malice  and  hostility  to  the  servant  of 
Jehovah,  and  what  was  right,  can  now  look  for  Jeho- 
vah's help  against  them.  For  the  believer,  though  he 
had  grievously  sinned  and  been  brought  righteously 
low  for  it,  yet  really  followed  what  was  good.  And 
though  Jehovah  used  the  malice  of  the  wicked  as  a 
rod,  it  was  not  the  evil  which  the  wicked  hated  in  the 
saints,  but  their  connexion  with  and  owning  the  Lord. 
Yet  the  judgment  was  righteous.  This  will  be  the 
true  history  of  the  remnant  when,  under  the  terrible 
chastisement  of  Jehovah,  they  earnestly  turn  to  what 
is  right.  But  what  an  instruction  also  for  us  when 
under  chastisement  for  what  is  wrong !  Perhaps  com- 
plicated chastisement  for  an  extreme  case  is  supposed 
here. 

But  what  instruction  for  us  when  discipline  comes 
upon  us,  where  to  look,  where  to  begin !  There  may 
be  the  sense  of  God's  chastening  hand  for  sin  and 
deserved  wrath,  but  the  reference  of  the  heart  to 
God's  faithful  love  in  relationship  with  us  will  lead 
just  to  deprecate  wrath  and  His  hot  displeasure. 
There  is  a  government  of  God  according  to  His 
nature,  and  though  the  chastening  hand  of  God  doe* 
not  destroy  the  faith  and  knowledge  of  our  relation- 
ship, (to  us  of  Father,)  nor  the  reflective  certainty 
that  there  can  be  no  imputation  to  the  believer,  yet 
the  soul  does  not  quiet  itself  with  this  under  the 
sense  of  the  governmental  hand  of  God  in  it.     It  is. 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XXXVIII.  127 

of  immense  consequence,  no  doubt,  and  is  at  the  basis 
of  confidence,  is  a  real  sustaining  directing  power  to 
the  soul,  but  it  is  not  directly  objectively  thought  of. 
God's  holy  nature,  with  whom  we  have  communion, 
and  what  lie  is  necessarily  as  regards  sin,  is  before  the 
soul.  And  the  government  of  God  is  according  to 
that  nature ;  which  indeed  has  been  glorified  by  the 
work  of  redemption  as  to  the  imputation  of  sin. 
And  though  this  last  be  true,  the  former  point  is  what 
is  rightly  felt  at  the  time  :  not  a  doubt  of  redemption 
but  a  sense  of  the  way  God,  in  His  very  nature  and  as 
Lord  in  His  government,  looks  at  sin  with  wrath,  not 
reasoning  about  it,  but  because  one  has  a  nature  that 
knows  Him  and  an  awakened  conscience,  one  feels  it, 
and  feels  it  as  to  self,  the  goodness  of  God  making  self- 
judgment  more  terrible.  It  is  not  despair,  it  is  not 
doubting  justification :  but  it  is  not  using  this  to 
screen  the  soul  from  the  sense  of  the  aspect  sin  has 
in  the  sight  of  God.  It  deprecates,  because  it  knows 
the  Lord,  wrath  and  hot  displeasure,  which  its  sin 
had  deserved,  anil,  because  it  knows  Ilim,  looks  to 
Him  of  whom  it  has  deserved  it.  In  the  circumstan- 
ces of  the  trial  one  looks  to  the  hand  and  thoughts  of 
Ilim  who  inflicts  it,  and  interprets  the  ways  of  God 
because  all  comes  from  His  hand,  and  looks  to  His 
thoughts  in  it.  And  hence,  the  conscious  relation- 
ship being  present,  the  heart  gets  into  the  power  of 
it  as  a  purifying,  more  than  a  wrathful,  process.  It 
can  say,  Lord,  all  my  desire  is  before  thee,  my  groan- 
ing is  not  hid  from  thee.  This  introduction  of  the 
Lord  into  His  own  chastisements,  according  to  the 
full  love  and  the  relationship  in  which  He  is  to  us,  is 


128  '    PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

very  beautiful.  He  is,  according-  to  these,  the  key  for 
the  heart  of  His  own  ways.  And  the  heart  recovers 
its  equilibrium,  as  we  see  in  the  end  of  the  Psalm, 
where  there  is  the  consciousness  of  God  being  for  it, 
as  its  resource  against  what  before  pressed  on  it,  and 
as  to  which,  in  the  sense  of  the  sin  which  had  caused 
it,  it  was  deprecating  wrath  and  hot  displeasure.  This 
is  the  effect  of  looking  straight  to  Him,  and  confess- 
ing simply,  and  in  true  depth  of  soul,  the  evil  as 
against  Himself,  settling  it  between  the  soul  and  God ; 
then  it  settles  matters  between  the  heart  and  the 
enemies  with  God.  The  secret  of  all  is  looking 
directly  to  God  nimself  as  He  is  in  relationship  with 
us,  and  this  is  the  true  confession  of  sin,  but  looking 
to  and  casting  all  on  Himself.  Confidence  in  Jehovah 
is  the  spring  of  eveiy  thought  in  all  these  psalms. 
The  relationship  of  Father  in  which  God  stands  to  us, 
and  which  is  realized  by  faith,  modifies,  in  a  measure, 
the  kind  of  feeling  which  the  heart  has.  We  have 
more  sense  of  tenderness  and  graciousness  in  His 
thoughts  towards  us  when  we  look  towards  Him,  more 
of  compassion  and  love ;  but  this  does  not  hinder  its 
being  substantially  the  same,  and  God  as  a  God  of 
government,  according  to  the  holiness  of  His  nature, 
being  before  the  soul  and  conscience,  though  His  love 
be  trusted.  It  will  be  remarked  that  the  soul,  with 
its  desire  before  God,  is  entirely  submissive,  and  silent 
as  to  the  mischief  and  wrong-  of  the  enemy ;  and  that 
because  it  referred  to  God  and  hoped  in  Him,  trusted 
in  Him  as  having  carried  the  whole  matter  in  the 
spirit  of  confession  to  Him,  and  looks  at  it  as  coming 
from  His  hand.     It  would  not  otherwise  have  put 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALMS   XXXIX.,   XL.  129 

Him  between  itself  and  the  enemies.     (Ver.  13  and 
following.) 

Ps.  xxxix.  is  more  the  nothingness  of  man  in  pre- 
sence of  all  the  evil,  and  the  pretensions  of  power  in 
which  it  showed  itself,  the  heart  referring  itself  to 
Jehovah.  The  heart  kept  a  check  on  itself  in  the 
presence  of  the  wicked,  lest  it  should  speak  foolishly  or 
rise  up  against  it,  as  if  it  had  strength,  too,  whereas 
all  in  man  was  vanity.  Then  God's  hand  is  seen  in 
what  the  heart  was  undergoing-,  and  He  is  looked  to 
for  deliverance,  and  all  the  pretensions  of  the  wicked 
disappear,  so  to  speak.  Jehovah  was  correcting  for 
iniquity.  The  believer  in  this  world  is  a  stranger, 
sojourning  with  Cod — for  how  long  He  alone  can  say. 
It  does  not  depend  on,  nor  is  it  to  be  vexed  by,  the 
bustling  pretensions  and  arrogance  of  the  wicked  in 
their  success.  This  would  be  to  make  ourselves  of 
this  world  with  a  claim  to  something  in  it.  Is  that 
true  ?  Ver.  12  takes  lliis  place  of  Abraham  and  David, 
and  all  the  walkers  by  faith,  though  looking,  as  the 
believing  'lew  would,  for  present  sparing,  though  of 
God  and  as  from  God,  and  this  is  in  chastening-,  (see  9, 
10,)  the  soul  can  now  do.  As  to  the  government  and 
ways  of  QrOd,  it  is  a  New  Testament  wish. 

Psalm  xl.  In  all  these  psalms  we  have  had  the  fail- 
ing saint  (the  remnant)  looking  to  a  God  known  in  re- 
late mshipand  faithful  grace, though  in  failure.  In  psalm 
Xl.  we  have  Christ  taking  tlio  place  of  patience  without 
failure,  and  so  furnishing  a  ground  for  confidence  even 
fm-  those  who  failed,  by  taking  His  place  with  them 


130        PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

(who,  after  all,  were  the  saints  upon  the  earth,  the 
excellent)  in  their  sorrows,  and  the  path  of  integrity 
on  the  earth.  Nor  does  He  fail  in  this  to  place  Him- 
self under  the  burden  of  evil  and  sins  under  which 
Israel  had  brought  itself.  We,  though  this  be  in 
every  sense  true  for  the  redemption  of  Israel,  know  it 
in  yet  a  deeper  way — such  a  glorifying  of  God  as  gives 
a  heavenly  place.  This  is  not  looked  at  here;  but  the 
way  in  which  Christ  identifies  Himself  with  Israel, 
though  in  the  integrity  of  the  upright  remnant,  is 
profoundly  instructive,  and  leads  us  into  a  wonderful 
apprehension  of  a  special  part  of  His  sorrows.  His 
death,  and  the  sorrows  of  His  death,  are  not  viewed 
as  atoning-,  bearing  of  wrath,  but  as  sorrows  and 
suffering  and  grief.  And  so  they  were  ;  though,  be- 
sides that,  atonement  was  in  them,  viewed  as  the 
drinking  the  cup  of  wrath.  But  there  Christ  does 
not  bear  sorrow  with,  but  for  His  people ;  here  God 
is  viewed  as  helping  Christ  when  in  sorrow,  in  which 
He  is,  and  in  which  He  waits  on  the  Lord.  It  lay  on 
the  remnant,  as  in  Israel's  opposition,  because  of  their 
faults  and  departure  from  God.  Christ,  who  had 
been,  as  He  states  in  this  psalm,  faithful  to  God  in 
everything,  enters  into  this  sorrow  in  heavenly  grace. 
It  is  not  His  own  relationship  to  God,  but  His  enter- 
ing into  the  remnant's  as  connected  with  Israel.  His 
own  had  been  perfect :  theirs,  though  founded  on 
Jehovah's  faithfulness  on  one  side,  actually  the  fruit 
of  sin.  It  is  further  at  the  close  of  His  life.  It  is 
morally  closed  as  to  service.  During  that  He  had 
being  doing  God's  will  in  the  body  prepared  for  Him, 
and  faithfully  declaring  God's  righteousness   in  the 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XL.  131 

great  congregation,  i.e.,  publicly  in  Israel.  Now.  and 
as  regards  man,  (and  so  it  will  be  with  the  remnant : 
their  trials  will  come  upon  them  from  the  proud,  he- 
cause  of  their  faithfulness  and  testimony,  only  they  will 
have  deserved  it,  as  themselves  involved  in  the  sins  of 
the  jieople,)  because  of  this  faithful  testimony,  the 
evils  come  upon  him.  So  we  know  it  was  with  Christ 
historically.  His  hour  was  come  for  it — the  hour  of 
His  enemies  and  of  the  power  of  darkness.  Here  (as 
it  is  not  the  atoning-  character  of  His  suffering*  and 
sorrow,  but  His  association  with  the  remnant — with, 
as  I  have  said,  not  for),  we  have  not,  "My  God,  my 
God,  -why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  as  in  psalm  xxii.. 
where  the  foundation  of  righteous  grace  was  to  be  laid. 
It  is  Christ's  perfect  life,  and  sorrows  at  the  close  of 
it,  in  which  He  refers  to  the  faithfulness  and  goodness 
of  Jehovah,  so  as  to  lead  I  Lis  people  to  confide  in 
it,  instructing  them  in  this  in  which  His  perfection 
was  shown.  "I  waited  patiently  for  Jehovah;"  patience 
had  its  perfect  work  —  an  immense  lesson  for  us. 
Flesh  can  wait  long,  but  not  till  the  Lord  comes  in, 
not  in  perfect  submission  ;  and  confiding  in  His  only 
strength  and  faithfulness  so  as  to  be  perfect  in  obedi- 
ence  and  in  the  will  of  God.  Saul  waited  nearly  seven 
days,  but  the  confidence  of  the  flesh  was  melting 
away— his  army;  the  Philistines,  the  proud  enemies 
were  there.  lie  did  not  wait  out  till  the  Lord  came 
in  with  Samuel.  Had  he  obeyed  and  felt  he  could  do 
nothing,  and  had  only  to  obey  and  wait,  he  would 
have  said,  I  can  d< thing,  and  I  ought  to  do  nothing 

till  the  Lord  comes  by  Samuel.  Flesh  trusted  its 
own  wisdom,  and  looked  to  its  own  force,  though  with 


132  PEAOTICAL  REFLECTIONS   OX 

pious  forms.  All  was  lost.  It  was  flesh  tried  and 
which  failed.  Christ  was  tried  :  He  waited  patiently 
for  Jehovah.  He  was  perfect  and  complete  in  all  the 
will  of  God.     And  this  is  our  path,  through  grace. 

This  is  the  great  personal  instruction  of  this  psalm, 
save  that  Christ's  own  perfectness  is  always  the 
greatest  of  all.  Here  He  gives  Himself  as  the  pat- 
tern. "I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord" — for  the 
Lord — that  is,  till  Jehovah  Himself  came  in.  His 
own  will  never  moved,  though  fully  put  to  the  test. 
Hence  it  was  perfectness.  He  would  have  no  other 
deliverance  but  His.  His  heart  was  wholly  right — 
would  not  have  a  deliverance  which  was  not  the 
Lord's.  This  is  a  very  important  point  as  to  the 
state  of  the  heart.  It  would  not  have  another  than 
the  Lord's.  Besides,  it  knows  that  there  is  no  other, 
and  that  the  Lord  is  perfectly  right,  when  His  moral 
will  has  been  perfectly  made  good,  and  His  righteous- 
ness vindicated  when  needed.  There  is  the  known 
perfectness  of  His  will — His  only  title,  and  then 
perfectness  of  submission  and  the  desire  of  only  Him. 
As  this  is  a  pattern  for  the  saints,  trial  is  looked  at 
as  such,  and  death  is  not  spoken  of  save  as  it  may  be 
trial — a  horrible  pit,  miry  clay — images  of  distress, 
terror,  and,  humanly  speaking,  danger.  The  resource 
was  a  cry  to  Jehovah,  and  He  was  heard  in  that  He 
Feared.  Here  Christ  speaks  in  His  own  person,  but 
in  verse  3,  deliverance  enables  Him  to  speak  to  the 
remnant — "a  new  song  in  my  mouth"— even  for 
deliverance  from  what  had  come  upon  them  because 
of  their  sins.  "  Praise  unto  our  God,"  "many  shall  see 
it  and  fear,  and  put  their  trust  in  Jehovah."     This 


TIIE   PSALMS.— PSALM   XL.  188 

would  let  in  Gentiles.    God  had  come  in  to  deliver 

out  of  the  effect  of  evil,  and  set  Bis  feet  upon  ;i  rock 
above  it  and.  all  its  effects.  This  sure  faithfulness  of 
grace — the  deliverance  <'f  God  manifested  in  one  who 
had  -'one  to  the  depths  of  trial,  would  be  a  resting 
place  for  the  faith  of  others,  the  rather  as  lie  had 
pine  into  it  as  the  consequence  of  the  state  of  the 
people  in  the  eight  of  God.  Hence  it  is  applied  t<> 
tlic  condition  of  the  remnant,  though  thus  true  of 
every  saint  in  trial  by  others'  wickedness  and  the 
power  of  evil,  perhaps  brought  on  himself.  "Blessed 
is  the  man  that  maketh  Jehovah  his  trust,  and  re- 
specteth  not  the  proud,"  the  high  pretensions  of  man. 
and  apparently  successful  wickedness,  "nor  such  as 
turn  aside  to  lies,"  abandon  God  for  other  false  re- 
fuses, and  the  falsehoods  of  inlidelity.  Then,  as  man, 
Christ  begins  to  recite  how  this  most  excellent  proof 
Of  God's  faithfulness  to  His  people  came  in,  though 
owning  them  to  all  others.  The}-  were  numberless 
towards  His  people,  "to  us-ward."  He  puts  Himself 
with  them.  Verse  6,  the  special  and  glorious  One 
comes  in  view,  He  who  could  discourse  with  Jehovah 
in  eternity.  The  Sou  and  Word,  who  was  with  God 
and  was  God  and  in  the  beginning  with  God,  accord- 
ing to  what  was  written  in  the  roll  of  the  book,  has 
the  place  of  obedience  prepared  for  Ifim,  ears  dug. 
a  body  prepared,  and,  according  to  the  divine  counsels 
(and  love  for  us),  freely  and  willing  undertakes  the 
same  place,  the  place  of  obedience;  His  delight 
when  He  has  taken  it,  and  is  man — has  taken  the 
form  of  a  servant,  is  to  do  God's  will.  God's  law  is 
within  His  heart.     Such  is  Christ  as  man;  obedient ; 


134  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

who  in  free-will  had  come,  taking  the  body  prepared 
for  Him,  and  entered  into  the  willing  servant's  place, 
the  place  of  willing  and  glad  obedience.     Verse  6 
presents  the  thought  and  counsels  of  God,  ver.  7  His 
willing  coming  to  do  God's  will  according  to  these 
counsels.     But  we  must  remember  He  speaks  when 
man,  and  verses  6  and  7  are  the  revelation  of  what 
passed  in  the  everlasting  world  (wonderful  thought !) 
telling  us  how  He  became  a  man.     But,  as  in  verse  5, 
so  again  in  8,  Christ  speaks  again  as  actually  in  the 
place  on  earth.     "  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  God ; 
thy  law  is  in  my  heart ;"  that  is,  His  perfectness  as 
man.  In  ver.  9, 10,  we  have  the  perfectness  of  His  ser- 
vice.    He  has  preached  righteousness  before  the  whole 
people  of  Israel ;  He  has  not  shrunk  from  it,  nor  hid  it 
within  His  heart — a  lesson  to  all  of  us,  though  to  be 
used  with  divine  guidance.     It  was  God's  righteous- 
ness, His  ways,  nature,  judgments,  judgment  of  evil, 
what  He  was  in  judging  it,  His  faithfulness,  too,  and 
salvation — for  Jehovah  was  this  to  Israel — His  loving- 
kindness  and  truth.     He  had  preached  righteousness 
to  man,  and  that  perfectly  ;  aud  he  had  fully  declared 
what  Jehovah  was,  in  all  the  perfectness  of  His  nature 
and  character  towards  Israel.     All  this  was  accom- 
plished.    He  appeals  to  its  full  accomplishment.     But 
now,  He  who  had  freely  undertaken  this  service  for 
God's  glory  towards  Israel,  finds  Himself  in  another 
position.     It   has  brought  the  hatred  of  the  nation 
upon  Him,   the   wishers  of  evil  against  Him.     But 
this  great  controversy,  and  the  need  for  the  saints' 
deliverance,  raised  the  question  of  the  state  in  God's 
sight  of  those  that  were  to  be  delivered.     And  with- 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALMS  XL.,  XLI.  135 

out  entering  here  on  the  ground  of  atonement,  the 
governmental  expression  of  the  view  God  took  of 
Israel's  sin,  in  which  the  remnant  had  been  involved, 
comes  pressing  on  the  soul  of  Christ,  as  it  will  really 
on  the  remnant;  the  iniquities  of  Israel  will  take  hold 
upon  them  as  reaping  what  they  have  sowed — not 
condemnation  (the  burden  of  that  Christ  indeed 
underwent  for  them  in  atonement,)  but  trial,  distress, 
and  felt  (or,  rather,  making  them  to  feel  the)  displeasure 
of  God,  but  in  which  true  faith  looks  for  the  loving- 
kindness,  and  truth  proclaimed  and  trusted — in  the 
righteousness  proclaimed  is  felt  as  a  witness  against 
sin,  through  the  distress  flowing  from  it,  as  Joseph's 
brothers  before  Joseph. 

Psalm  xli.  The  40th  psalm  presented  to  us  the 
blessed  Lord  coming  to  take  the  place  of  obedience  in 
the  body  prepared  for  Him,  to  be  the  poor  and  needy 
one  on  the  earth,  and  waiting  patiently  for  the  Lord. 
The  41st  speaks  of  the  blessedness  of  those  who  could 
discern  this  place  of  the  poor.  The  Lord  was  in  it 
above  all,  and  understood  it  above  all ;  but  we  know 
in  the  beatitudes  how  He  pronounces  blessed  those 
who  through  grace  are  like  Him  poor  in  spirit.  For 
in  truth  these  beatitudes  are  nearly  the  whole  of  them 
just  a  description  of  what  Christ  was,  though  given 
as  a  character  to  which  blessing  belonged,  poor  in 
spirit,  meek,  pure  in  heart,  who  was  such  like  the 
Croat  Peacemaker.  In  Lake  we  have  more  directly 
to  His  disciples  :  Blessed  are  ye  pour.  But  lie  entered 
into  the  sorrows  and  place  of  Ilis  disciples,  and  when 
lie  put  forth  His  own  sheep  went  before  them. 


13G       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Although  a  psalm  taking'  up  a  general  character,  it 
is  specially  fulfilled  in  Christ,  who  used  the  9th  verse 
as  specially  fulfilled  in  Himself.  It  is  indeed  this 
identification  with  the  remnant  which  gives  such  a, 
deep  interest  to  the  psalms.  This  poor  man  cried. 
What  is  looked  for  in  the  psalm  is  the  understanding 
of  this  place.  With  this  we  have  the  sure  confidence 
that  Jehovah  would  uphold  him  in  his  integrity,  and 
set  him  before  His  face  for  ever.  Blessed  is  he  who 
enters  into,  and  who  has  spiritual  intelligence  of,  and 
interest  in,  this  place  of  the  poor  man  who  waits, 
though  in  sorrow  and  lowliness,  on  Jehovah.  If 
malice  pursue  him,  he  looks  to  Jehovah  and  His 
mercy  in  integrity  of  heart. 

In  the  early  part  of  this  second  book  of  the  Psalms 
there  is  an  element  which  gives  a  very  distinct  character 
to  its  spiritual  as  well  as  its  prophetical  import — the 
absence  of  the  covenant-name  of  God  (the  transition 
to  Jehovah,  is  in  psalm  xlvi).  Whatever  the  distresses 
and  sorrows  of  the  first  forty-one  psalms,  the  heart  of 
the  psalmist  always  looked  freely  to  Jehovah  in  them, 
was  in  fuller  relationship  with  Him  and  the  enjoyment 
of  public  services,  in  which  His  name  was  celebrated. 
Here  he  is  cast  out.  He  remembers  these  things. 
He  is  an  outcast  and  can  only,  in  the  secret  of  his 
soul  and  in  wilderness  circumstances,  look  to  the 
nature  and  essence  of  what  God  is.  We  have  still  to 
remember  the  difference  of  the  nature  of  relationship 
of  Jehovah  and  the  Father,  and  the  looking  for  out- 
ward deliverance  and. judgment  in  order  to  have  that 
deliverance.     Still  this  change  will  furnish  deep  re- 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   XLK.  137 

ligious  instruction.     Psalm  xxii.  furnishes  us  with  the 
expression  of  this  difference  in  the  strongest  way. 
There  Christ    Himself  was  out  of  the  enjoyment  of 
His  own   relationship  with  the  Father,  having-  been 
made  sin  for  us.     In  human  sorrows  He  for  once  does 
not  find  divine  comfort.     Now  as  to  present  wrath, 
no  godly  soul,  of  course,  ever  goes  through  this;  but 
as  to  sorrow,  God's  face  is  hid  from  Israel,  and  when 
they  are  awakened  they  feel  that  it  is  because  of  sin, 
and  though  faith  is  at  work,  which  is  just  what  these 
psalms  describe.     It  is  faith  looking  at  God  when  all 
circumstances  are  against  him  who  exercises  it  and 
they  are  driven  out  from  the  present  enjoyment  of  re- 
vealed communion  and  covenant   relationship;  it  is 
the  position  God  sets  His  people  in  when  covenant 
relationship   is   broken — as  it  will  be,   and  is — with 
Israel,  or  not  known :  and  faith,  acknowledging  the 
justice  of  this,  looks  through  all  to  God's  own  faith- 
fulness  as   such.     It   is,  so  to  speak,   naked   faith, 
without  anything  to  sustain  it,  of  what  God  gives  to 
His  people,  as  the  witness  of  conferred  favours.     The 
result  is,  a   full   trial   of  the  soul.     The  question  for 
the  soul  here  is  not  how  far  it  is  enjoying  His  gifts, 
but,  how  far  its  state  can  link  itself  with  what  God 
is  in  Himself,  and  count  on  that.     This  probes  it  to 
the  bottom,  because  all  llesh    is  completely  judged; 
for  it  can  have  no  connexion  with  God  at  all.     It  is 
true    thai    this    is    never   understood  but   by  a  new 
nature — that  nature  which  can  understand  what  God 
is,  ami,  through  -race  and  the  working  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  cleave  to  promises;   but  the   llesh   is  thereby 
fully  judged,  and  the  difference  of  that  and  the  new 

K 


138  PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS   ON 

man  known  and  discerned,  but  redemption  is  not 
known.  Because  of  this  new  nature  there  is  the 
consciousness  of  the  desire  to  do  good,  and  of  God's 
favour,  hut  no  peace.  It  is  a  searching  process  that 
we  may  he  cast,  in  naked  dependence  on  grace.  It  is 
practically  as  to  principle  Rom.  vii. 

In  speaking  of  Psalm  xlii.,  we  can  only  take  the 
great  principle,  unless  in  a  very  special  case  of  Chris- 
tian experience  ;  because  the  psalm  supposes  the 
person's  enjoyment  of  common  blessings,  he  remem- 
bered them.  The  special  case  is  this  :  when  a  soul 
has  believed  in  forgiveness,  owning,  no  doubt,  its  sin- 
fulness, but  not  really  searched  out,  or  the  entirely 
sinful  nature  of  the  flesh  discovered,  the  first  joy  may 
be  lost,  and  the  soul  only  know  enough  of  God  to 
feel  the  dreadfulness  of  not  having  the  light  of  His 
countenance ;  but  this  gives  the  earnest  desire  to 
enjoy  it.  It  may  also  happen  when  a  soul  has  sup- 
posed itself  christian,  but  finds  out,  through  the 
operation  of  God's  Spirit,  that  it  is  not.  In  either 
case,  the  true  blessed  effect  of  the  position  in  which 
we  are  placed  by  redemption  is  not  known.  The 
psalm  goes  no  further  than  hope,  but  it  is  a  hope 
much  deepened  and  made  more  true  by  the  trial.  It 
expresses  more  the  result  of  the  trial  than  the  pro- 
cess ;  and  hence  it  is  we  have  so  blessed  an  expression 
of  the  state  of  the  soul,  however  forlorn  it  is.  It 
thirsts  after  God  Himself — the  difference  of  the 
christian  state  is  that,  as  in  Rom.  v.,  he  joys  in  God. 
Still,  this  state  of  thirsting  is,  in  certain  respects, 
deeper  than  the  first  joy,  because  the  joy  is  partial  in 
its  realisation :  the  want  is  complete,  and  God  Him- 


THE   PSALMS. — rSALM  XLH.  139 

self,  in  Himself,  the  thing  desired.  Xo  doubt  the 
psalm  refers  to  the  circumstances,  and  it  is  the  souls' 
loss  of  God  in  happy  circumstances  which  supported 
the  soul,  more  or  less,  which  obliges  it  to  lean  on  and 
look  for  God  Himself  more  absolutely:  and,  as  we 
shall  sec.  draws  its  joy  thence.  And  it  is  this  the 
spiritual  soul  has  to  look  to  in  this  psalm.  His 
soul  is  athirst  for  God. .  He  had  lost  the  joy  of  the 
multitude,  but  he  now  panted  after  God  Himself, 
where  there  was  uone  of  this.  The  change  was  sen- 
sible ;  but  what  he  felt  the  loss  of  for  his  heart  was 
God  Himself.  That  was  what  he  panted  after. 
People  and  happy  circumstances  disappear  from  the 
mind  as  from  the  scene,  though  they  were  enjoyed 
with  God.  The  individual  heart  wants  God  for  itself. 
The  divine  nature  in  us  craves  after  its  delight  in  God, 
ilic  objective  fulness  that  satisfies  it,  because  it  is  the 
divine  nature.  Its  thirst  is  perfect  after  that — that 
one  great,  blessed  object,  which  tills  all  the  desires  and 
excludes  every  other.  Previously  the  soul  had  en- 
joyed the  blessings  from  God  and  God  Himself  in 
tin  in.  Now  God  Himself  becomes  consciously  and 
necessarily  the  whole  blessing  itself.  The  trial  has 
judged  all  flesh  as  to  the  subjective  state  of  the  soul, 
all  mediate  enjoyment  of  God  in  circumstances;  and 
the  divine  life,  in  order  to  its  full  blessing  and  con- 
sciousness of  whal  that  blessing  is,  has  its  perfect 
delight  in  God  only  and  God  Himself.  This  is  a 
wonderfully  ing  process.     It  is  not  that  the 

soul  will  not  have  joyj  but  that  the  source  of  joy, 
pure,  moral  blessing,  has  a  much  fuller  place  in  the 
heart,  and,  as  we  shall  see,  henceforth  characterizes  it. 


140        PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Hence  it  is  that  we  see  persons  who  have  been  deeply 
tried  by  the  loss  of  blessings,  which  in  their  place 
were  given  of  God,  far  more  calm,  possessed  of  a 
deeper  consciousness  of  Gocl  being  their  portion;  and 
hence  more  withdrawn  from  the  influence  of  circum- 
stances to  that  blessed  centre  of  rest. 

The  enemy,  though  in  a  painful  way — and  so  is  it 
even  in  God's  discipline — contributes  to  the  further- 
ance of  the  soul  in  this  path.  They  said,  Where  is 
thy  God  ?  They  have  driven  them  out  from  the  public 
enjoyment  of  conferred — and  in  Israel  covenant — 
blessing.  (So  Job.)  And  where  was  the  sign  of  their 
having  blessings  from  Him?  But  as  they  had  as- 
cribed it  to  God  and  proclaimed  His  faithfulness  and 
power  to  secure,  they  taunt  them  with  it  now  and 
say,  What  can  you  say  now,? — where  is  thy  God? 
This,  really,  the  unhappy  Jews  did  to  Christ.  But 
this  only  casts  the  soul  on  Him.  There  was  nothing 
for  it,  but  what  God  was  Himself.  The  enemy  had 
driven  them  away  from  all  else- — from  mercies  which 
by  abuse  tended  to  shut  God  out.  These  the  enemy 
succeeded  in  depriving  the  soul  of,  and  left  it  only 
God.  And  the  soul  hoped  in  Him;  but  what  was 
the  consequence?  Crying  out  for  the  blessing?  No. 
Often  the  soul,  by  seeking  joy,  cannot  get  it,  this 
would  not  purify  and  bless  it :  and  to  bless  God  must 
purify.  "When  emptied  of  self  and  seeking  God,  Ave 
find  joy.  So  here,  while  remembering  the  past  joy,  he 
says,  I  shall  yet  praise  Him  for  the  help  of  his  coun- 
tenance. But  some  other  traits  must  be  noticed  here. 
Pride  and  stoical  resistance  to  sorrow  will  not  do. 
That  does  not  draw  the  soul  to  God,  but  effectually 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM  XT. II.  141 

ami  specially  keeps  it  from  Him — teaches  it,  or 
pretends  to  teach  it,  to  do  without  ILim,  as  the 
stoics  held  in  fact  that  the  virtuous  man  was  God's 
equal.  Here  the  soul  had  felt  the  sorrow  and  was 
dependent,  and  now  can  he  open  with  God,  because  of 
His   goodness   and   faithfulness.     Sorrow,  when  it  is 

c plete  and  helpless,  gives  intimacy  with  him  who 

IS  willing  and  able  to  help,  and  this  is  now  with  God. 
He  tells  his  sorrow  to  God.  (Ver.  5.)  lie  reasoned 
with  himself.  Now  he  says,  "Oh  my  God,  my  soul  is 
cast  down  within  me,  therefore  will  I  remember  thee." 
But  this  leads  to  another  point.  The  troubles  them- 
selves come  from  God.  Inward  self-judgment  and 
Looking  to  God  bring  Him  and  Him  alone  into  every- 
thing-. Enemies  have  disappeared  with  blessings. 
Thy  waves  and  thy  billows  are  gone  over  me.  God 
began  the  matter  with  Job  and  told  neither  Satan  nor 
Job  what  He  was  about,  and  uses  Satan's  blind  malice 
to  break  Job's  unsubdued,  and  of  himself  unsuspected, 
nature,  and  bring  about  a  blessing.  Deep  called  to 
deep,  but  it  was  at  the  voice  of  God's  waterspouts. 
But  this  seeing  God's  hand  in  purpose  leads  to  the 
consciousness  of  covenant  relationship;  to  us  of 
Father,  here  of  Jehovah;  and  he  is  reckoned  upon 
according  to  thai  for  the  future.  Jehovah  will  com- 
mand His  lovingkimlness  in  the  day-time,  and  in  the 
night  shall  11  is  song  be  with  me  and  my  prayer  unto 
the  (hid  of  my  life.  Confidence  is  thus  acquired — 
boldness  with  a  faithful  God.  k>  1  will  say  unto  God 
my  rock.  Why  hast  thou  forgotten  me?"  He  does 
not  say.  forsaken  here.  That  Christ  alone  was.  and 
faith   knows   it    never  can   be.      But  because  of   this 


142  TEACTICAL  KEFLECTIONS   ON 

confidence  in  the  unfailing  love  of  God,  he  asks  Him 
who  is  his  rock — why  He  has  left  him  in  the  power  of 
the  enemy.  Note  how  when  once  we  see  the  hand  of 
God  in  our  sorrows  we  can  look  for  deliverance,  be- 
cause it  is  God,  and  His  hand  is  on  us  in  love.  And 
now  the  reproach  of  the  enemies  becomes  a  plea  with 
God;  for  when  they  say,  Where  is  thy  God?  the 
only  answer  is,  God's  manifesting'  Himself.  Mean- 
while the  soul  has  been  deepened  in  its  desires  after 
God  Himself.  All  carelessness  of  heart  removed,  so 
that  manifestation  has  infinitely  more  value.  Here 
the  assurances  of  blessing  are  enlarged,  before  the 
distressed  soul  has  said  that  he  was  assured  of  the 
help  of  His  countenance  as  the  theme  of  his  praises ; 
but  we  have  seen  that  his  heart,  purified  and  exercised, 
had  been  drawn  up  into  confiding  in  the  sure  faithful- 
ness of  God  in  known  relationship.  The  heart, 
though  not  yet  outwardly  freed,  is  fixed  on  God  in 
desire  and  in  confidence.  Hence  he  says  now,  "Who 
is  the  health  of  my  countenance — his  countenance 
reflects  in  joy  the  outshining  of  God's  in  love — and 
my  God.  Distress  and. the  deprivation  of  all  given, 
even  religious  blessings,  had  cast  the  heart  upon  God 
and  drawn  it  to  look  to  Him  as  the  alone  source  of 
joy,  and  with  the  confidence  which  must  spring  up 
when  the  soul  is  near  God,  known  in  His  own  rela- 
tionship by  faith.  It  cannot  be  otherwise.  There 
may  be  delay  as  to  full  peace  of  heart  and  enjoyment, 
if  the  Lord  sees  purifying  and  sifting  still  necessary  ; 
but  there  will  be  a  confiding  leaning  on  Him,  and  the 
soul  then  is  brought  to  thirst  evidently  for  Himself. 
My  soul  is  athirst  for  God.     It  addresses  itself  to  God, 


THE  PSALM. — PSALM  XLIII.  14." 

but  it  is  the  soul  panting-  after  Him.  We  do  not  get  the 
answer  here,  but  the  state  of  the  soul  looking-  purely 
for  God  Himself,  brought  to  do  it,  and  assured  of  the 
shining  of  the  lighl  of  His  countenance  and  of  the  joy 
and  health  it  would  give.  Remark  as  to  the  detail 
that  it  is  -when  the  soul  has  been  broken  down  and 
its  force  of  pride  has  given  way,  that  it  then  remem- 
bers God.  (Ver.  G.)  So  when  God's  hand  is  seen  in 
his  trials,  (ver.  7.)  he  sees  that  Jehovah,  God  as  known 
in  relationship,  will  command  His  loving-kindness,  and 
God  is  the  God  of  his  life  and  God. his  rock. 

Psalm  xliii.  In  psalm  xlii.  we  have  seen  the  soul 
internally  restored  and  animated  to  an  earnest  thirsting 
after  God  Himself,  seeking-  all  its  joy  in  Himself.  Being- 
brought  to  that,  psalm  xliii.  is  looking  out  for  a  de- 
liverance, which  shall  enable  it  to  enjoy  God  freely 
and  fully.  God  has  become,  for  the  heart,  its  exceed- 
ing joy;  and  it  will  be  recalled,  thus  restored,  to  free 
worship  of  Him,  to  express  its  joy  and  thanksgiving 
fully.  God  is  not  here  characterized  as  the  living- 
God,  but  as  the  God  of  his  strength.  Till  the  soul 
•was  fully  fixed  on  God  Himself  as  its  delight,  this 
cry  for  deliverance,  though  natural  and  not  wrong,  if 
subject  to  His  will  (yet  it  would  rather  desire  puri- 
fication than  escape  from  affliction),  was  yet  more  a 
reference  to  comfort  and  ease  ;  though  from  the  hand 
of  God  this  is  not  to  lie  slighted.  But  now  it  is 
identified  with  the  desire  to  praise  and  glorify  God. 
This  change  has  to  be  noted,  when  under  trial,  righte- 
ously and  graciously  from  God,  perhaps  unrighteously 
from  man.     The  heart  naturally  desires  freedom  ;  but, 


144  PKACTICAL  EEFLECTIONS   ON 

as  Elitm  says  to  Job,  if  it  is  not  as  subject  to  God's 
gracious  dealings,  it  is  choosing-  iniquity  rather  than 
affliction — there  is  a  want  both  of  uprightness  and 
submission.  When  once  the  heart  is  fully  restored, 
(and  with  an  upright  conscience  we  shall  pretty  well 
know  this,  and  God  will  perfectly,  that  if  there  be 
subjection  to  Him,  and  the  desire  of  perfectness  of 
heart,  the  deliverance  will  be  surely  at  the  right  time) 
the  desire  of  deliverance  has  its  fully  right  place.  It 
is  the  desire  to  be  manifestly  with  Him  in  peace,  and 
to  glorify  and  praise  Him  openly.  Outward  enemies 
had  been  reproaching  in  psalm  xlii.,  but  they  were 
God's  waves  and  billows.  But  "  where  is  thy  God?" 
was  the  terrible  thing.  His  soul  became  athirst  for 
Him.  Now  he  desires  judgment  of  his  cause  and 
deliverance.  There  was  a  nearer  trial  than  outward 
oppression,  though  he  was  still  under  it,  the  direct 
wickedness  of  injustice  with  which  he  had  to  do.  He 
looked  for  God's  light  and  truth  to  come  out  and  lead 
him  and  bring  him  to  God's  holy  hill.  It  is  not  the 
consciousness  that  God  was  his  secret  delight  to  which 
he  had  been  brought,  but  that  He  who  was  would,  by 
His  power,  lead  him  now  to  open  praise  and  worship. 
The  God  of  strength  would  bring  him  there ;  he  would 
be  present  with  Him  who  was  his  exceeding  joy.  This 
hope  encourages  his  heart  and  brings  him  back,  too, 
to  that  which  was  the  secret  and  fulness  of  his  joy, 
and  which  he  possessed  in  hope  that  Gocl  would  be 
the  health  of  his  countenance.  He  was  morally  his 
exceeding  joy — now  it  would  shine  forth  in  glad 
Avorship,  and  be  reflected  in  the  gladness  of  the  counte- 
nance of  him  who  enjoyed  it.     The  panting*  after  God 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XLIV.  145 

was  the  result  in  the  last  psalm,  though  looking  out 
for  blessing.  Here  this  is  wrought  in  the  soul,  and, 
though  not  restored  yet  to  outward  public  blessings, 
God  is  his  exceeding  joy,  and  God — his  God ;  and 
the  outward  restoration  is  presently  looked  forward  to. 

Psalm  xliv.  We  have  certainly  in  this  book  of  the 
psalms  moral  exercises  more  deeply  and  fully  de- 
veloped. The  soid  has  to  do  with  God;  but  the 
application  is  not  the  easier  to  the  christian  state,  for 
this  simple  reason,  the  exercises  flowing  from  rela- 
tionship under  trial  are  not  the  theme  of  this  book, 
but  exercises  of  soul  with  God,  when  the  enjoyment 
of  known  relationship  is  lost.  ITence,  while  in  the 
former  part,  in  order  to  apply  it  to  the  christian,  it 
was  only  needed  to  apprehend  the  change  of  relation- 
ship from  Jehovah  to  Father;  having  in  Christianity 
a  relationship  founded  on  the  destruction  of  all  in 
flesh ;  one  in  that  relationship  has  passed  beyond  the 
whole  position  in  this  book.  The  state  of  the 
christian  reveals,  and  is  known  in,  the  exercise  of  a 
heavenly  one.  Hence  the  proper  state  of  the  christian 
is  found  less  here  even  than  in  the  first  book.  But 
the  relationship  of  an  exercised  soul  with  God,  on  the 
other  hand,  comes  out  into  relief.  In  this  psalm  the 
faithful  one  recognises  that  through  divine  favour  and 
power  aloue  they  had  enjoyed  the  blessings  of  which 
they  were,  now  deprived,  the  signs  of  God's  favour. 
The  direct  government  of  God  is  owned,  "  Thou  art 
my  king,  0  God,"  in  the  language  of  Israel,  but 
always  true,  though  the  authority  now,  without  being 
less  absolute,  is  infinitely  sweeter.  lie  is  our  Lord  by 
L*2 


14G        PEAOTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

redemption.  We  do  not  deny  the  Lord  that  bought 
us.  This  was  still  the  'faithful  one's  trust.  In 
Elohim  he  made  his  boast,  and  praised  His  name  for 
ever ;  but  they  were  given  up,  and  their  enemies  had 
the  upper  baud  ;  yet  they  held  fast,  and  did  not  for- 
get God,  nor  were  unfaithful  to  the  Covenant.  Two 
great  principles,  faithfulness  to  the  will  and  authority 
of  God,  whatever  disaster  and  seeming  desertion 
there  may  be,  and  looking-  for  no  other  help  than  God 
Himself,  who  seems  to  have  deserted  the  faithful,  are 
here  in  play.  This  puts  integrity  utterly  to  the  test, 
and  personal  faith,  and  that  is  just  what  is  needed  for 
the  soul  to  be  in  the  state  in  which  it  can  be  restored 
to  the  full  joy  of  positive  blessing.  The  fact  that 
God  thus  tests  His  people,  and  He  does  so  now 
spiritually  before  peace  be  obtained,  is  one  of  deep 
import.  It  brings  out  what  we  have  seen  charac- 
terizes this  book — absolute  trust  in  God,  in  Himself ; 
and  it  shows  that  uprightness  with  Him  is  before  all 
comfort  or  ease  for  the  heart :.  for  if  nothing  is  got 
from  it  they  hold  to  Him  for  His  own  sake.  He 
Himself  is  the  object,  and  Himself  morally,  and  in 
His  claim  upon  them.  Hence  the  heart  cannot  turn 
to  anything  else  for  it  is  not  God — nor  help  which 
would  relieve  it  from  nis  ways*  This  brings  in 
another  point  which  this  psalm  leads  us  to,  that 
the  trials  which  accompany  this  apparent  desertion  are 
attributed  to  God's  own  hand.     "  Thou  makest  us  to 

turn  our  back Thou  hast  given  us  like  sheep." 

There  is  another  thought  connected  with  this  psalm 
besides  the  individual  application.  When  God  con- 
founds and  rebukes  His  people  in  their  public  con- 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  XLIV.  147 

ilicts  with  the  power  of  evil,  when,  in  the  exercise  of 
His  government,  Be  allows  the  power  of  evil  to  get 
the  upper  hand,  and  bo  orders  it,  this  is  a  deep 
trial  for  I  lis  people,  not  only  for  their  own  sorrow  in 
it,  but  because  the  name  of  God  is  dishonoured.  The 
enemy  triumphs  in  this  ;  but  surely  the  government 
of  God  is  shown  in  it.  Here  we  learn  the  meditations 
of  the  upright  soul  in  these  circumstances.  It  had 
not  forgotten  God,  nor  behaved  unfaithfully  as  re- 
garded His  covenant,  though  smitten  down  in  the 
place  of  dragons.  On  the  contrary ;  though  it  might 
be  the  needed  public  government  of  God,  as  regarded 
the  profession  of  His  name,  and  to  separate  out  the 
faithful,  who  may  be  in  the  midst  of  His  professed 
people;  yet.  as  regards  those  faithful,  it  was  for  God's 
name  they  were  suffering.  This  is  still,  I  judge. 
somewhat  different  from  Jehovah's  name.  Of  course, 
it  was  Jehovah,  as  with  the  Father,  but  here  it  is 
for  what  (Jod  is  as  such.  Not  only  faithfulness  in  not 
denying  the  revealed  name  is  there,  but  it  was  for 
what  God  is  that  they  were  suffering.  There  was  no 
turning  in  heart  to  idols.  They  preferred  suffering 
anything,  or  suffer  what  they  might,  for  owning  the 
true  God;  they  would  do  it  for  His  own  sake,  for 
the  attachment  of  their  heart  to  Him,  for  what  He 
was  when  they  got  no  blessing;  because  the  God  who 
was  in  covenant  with  His  people  was  the  true  God, 
and  they  would  be  tried,  not  only  for  the  covenant 
blessings,  but  for  their  heart-attachment  to  what 
He  was  in  His  nature  :  and  so  in  principle  with  us. 
And  this  is  joy;  because  the  love  of  integrity, 
the   partaking  of  the    divine    nature,    by    which    we 


152       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

delight  in  what  is  good,  in  what  is  of  God,  gives  the 
consciousness  of  itself,    the   conscious   delight   there 
is  in  that  nature  in  rejoicing  in  what  is  good  and 
right.     It  is  not  self-righteousness,  but  the  conscious 
delight  in  good  of  the   divine  nature,  proper  divine 
joy  in  its  nature,  only  in  our  case  it  must  have  an 
object,  God  Himself,  and  this  is  tested  in  us  by  suf- 
fering for   God.      Hence   the   true   case   is — for  the 
enemy  hated  God — "  For  thy  sake  we  are  killed  all 
the  day  long;   we  are  accounted   as   sheep  for  the 
slaughter."    To  test  it  fully,  and  make  it  real  suffering 
for  God,  the   blessings  which   belong  to  His  power 
must  not  be  there.      Hence  the  upright  are  left  for 
the  time  to  the  oppression  of  the  enemy.     This,  while 
it  searches  the  heart,  if  there  be  any  false  way,  makes 
it  here  suffering  for  what  God  is ;  and  on  the  cry  for 
mercy  in  due  time  brings  in  the  answer  from  Him;  for 
He  cannot  leave  what  answers  to  His  nature — integrity 
towards  Him  needlessly  in  the  power  of  evil.     And  so 
it  ever  is,  though  our  joy  may  be  in  another  world 
altogether.     Yet,  as  a  rule,  God  as  to  His  covenant, 
delivers  in  this.     As  regards  the  earth,  this  cry  brings 
in  Messiah.    There  is  progress,  I  think,  in  psalm  xliv., 
as  compared  with  the  two  preceding  psalms.     There 
was  deprivation,  and  the  light  of  God's  countenance 
looked  for ;  and  all  right.     Here  God  Himself  is  held 
to  in  heart-integrity,   in  spite  of  everything.      It  is 
the  same  in  principle,  but  more  absolute.    And  this  is 
what  is  needed.     This  clinging  to  God  Himself  in  spite 
of  all  is  to  be  learnt.     And  the  heart  is  herein  fully 
tested  for  God. 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   XLV.  153 

Psalm  xlv.  The  object  is  evidently  the  celebration  of 
Messiah  the  Bang.  The  heart  feels  it  is  inditing  a  good 
matter.  When  Christ  is  before  the  soul,  it  is  enlivened 
and  roused.  Here,  doubtless,  as  king,  and  in  His 
victories,  BO  that  there  is  more  of  human  triumph  than 
in  the  Christian's  estimate  of  Him.  The  power  of  evil 
will  then  be  put  down,  and  the  heart  exult  in  it.  Now 
the  joy  is  deeper  and  more  divine.  Collectively,  we 
expect  the  Bridegroom;  individually,  the  Saviour,  who 
is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.  "When  we  think 
of  Him  as  a  divine  Person,  we  feel  the  depth  of  that 
divine  work  in  which  God  met  sin,  and  in  which  it  has 
been  put  away  for  us — a  work  which  none  can  fathom; 
and  dwell  on  that  glory  into  which  He  is  entered,  and 
of  which  He  is  worthy,  both  in  His  person  and  by  His 
work.  Still,  we  can  understand  the  exultation  of  the 
delivered  Jew,  or,  at  least,  one  anticipating  deliverance 
thus  by  Messiah.  But  there  is,  besides  this  joy,  a  prin- 
ciple of  deep  importance  contained  in  this  psalm:  the 
call  to  the  daughter  to  forget  her  own  people  and  her 
father's  house — so  shall  the  king  desire  her  beauty. 
Si i,  as  to  blessing,  instead  of  father's  she  shall  have 
children's.  Association  with  Christ  breaks  off  pre- 
vious associations  which  nature  has  hail,  and  forms 
wholly  new  ones.  This  is,  of  course  and  evidently,  a 
principle  which  is  of  an  absolute  and  decisive  charac- 
ter. But  this  is  put  in  the  strongest  way  here:  "so 
shall  the  king  greatly  desire  thy  beauty."  For  the 
Christian,  then,  that  he  may  walk  so  that  the  Lord 
may  have  delight  in  him,  there  is  an  entire  breaking 
with  all  that  nature  is  linked  up  with.  The  doctrines 
on  which  this  is  founded  are  not  laid  down  here:  that 

i. 


154       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

would  not  suit  the  Psalms.  It  is  the  state  of  the  soul. 
It  was  to  forget  all  that  had  a  claim  on  it  according  to 
nature.  It  is  the  coming  in  of  Christ  which  calls  for 
this.  He  has  Himself  done  it — broken  with  the  world 
by  death,  and  entered  on  a  new  world  in  resurrection. 
His  claim  is  absolute,  and  in  contrast  with  all  others. 
According  to  nature,  there  was  no  link,  no  association 
with  the  blessings  He  brings  into.  It  was  another 
order  of  relationships.  These  claimed  the  heart  natu- 
rally in  their  place;  but  Christ  takes  to  Himself, 
founds  new  ones,  of  which  He  is  the  centre,  and  has  a 
divine  claim.  The  old  ones  are  left,  and  the  new  ones 
entered  on  by  redemption  out  of  them.  He  must  have 
the  whole  heart,  as  a  divine  claimant,  who,  by  giving 
Himself  for  and  to  us,  brings  us  into  a  new  scene  of 
relationship  with  Himself.  No  counter  claim  can  be 
allowed.  It  is  not  owning  his.  It  is  giving  up  our 
nature  and  place,  and  going  back  into  the  old  things. 
Being  His  is  all  our  being.  As  Scripture  expresses  it, 
" Christ  is  all."  This  is  denied  if  concurrent  claims  are 
allowed.  This  is  true  as  to  religious  claims.  The  Jew, 
when  Christ  reigns,  must  give  up  his  glorying  in  his 
fathers  to  glory  in  Christ.  So  we;  whatever  legal  or 
fleshly  religion  may  have  been  indulged  in,  is  all  given 
up.  All  that  was  gain  is  loss.  The  past  is  gone — we 
are  taken  out  of  it.  Christ,  and  the  future  He  gives, 
are  all.  Christ  may  place  in  present  duties  connected 
with  human  relationships,  and  He  does;  but  he  who 
looks  back  is  not  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  All  was 
failure  before:  Christ  is  joy  and  gladness,  and  that 
stably  and  in  power.  See  the  full  doctrinal  and  experi- 
mental statement  of  this  as  to  the  Christian  in  2  Cor.  v. : 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   XLVI.  155 

"Yea,  if  I  have  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet 
henceforth  know  I  him  no  more.  Therefore,  if  any 
man  be  in  Christ,  lie  is  a  new  creature:  old  things  are 
passed  away,  behold  all  things  are  become  new." 

Psalm  xlvi.  gives  ns  one  most  simple  truth,  but  a 
most  solemn  and  weighty  one — one  much  needed  by 
Christians  in  the  hearings  of  this  world,  and  in  the 
tendency  to  seek  relief  by  human  effort.  "Be  still, 
and  know  that  I  am  God."  That  is  the  exhortation. 
The  encouragement  is  this:  "God  is  our  refuge  and 
strength,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble."  But  if 
God  takes  this  character,  the  waters  may  rage  and  be 
troubled,  and  the  mountains  shake  with  their  swelling; 
we  can  be  still.  For  no  matter  what  power  or  swel- 
ling there  is,  if  God  be  there,  our  refuge.  Only  we 
must  wait,  and  wait  till  He  comes  in :  and  here  it  is 
faith  is  tried.  Hence,  "and  know  that  I  am  God." 
This  may  be  by  the  exercise  of  patience,  or  the  resist- 
ing the  tendency  to  human  effort.  But  the  truth 
contained  in  the  psalm  is  a  most  blessed  and  precious 
encouragement,  which  no  one  trouble  can  touch ;  for 
trouble  is  at  the  utmost  from  the  creature,  and  God 
is  God.  But  it  implies  that  nothing  else  is  a  refuge, 
and  this  is  perfect  reliance,  and  implies  that  all  else 
may  be  against  us. 

The  great  point  is,  that  it  is  God  as  such  who  is  our 
refuge  and  strength.  He  does  not  say,  "  The  Lord  " 
(Jehovah).  Further  on  in  the  psalm,  where  relation- 
ship is  in  question,  he  does.  Here  the  point  is,  that 
it  is  God  in  His  nature  contrasted  with  man — indeed 
with  every  power;  for  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 


156       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

.against  us?  Faith  gets  hold  of  this.  He  is  a  refuge, 
where  we  may  resort  for  safety;  and  He  is  strength, 
so  that  no  adverse  power  can  reach  or  succeed  against 
us.  It  supposes  that  trouble,  yea,  insolent  swellings 
of  power,  are  there;  tmt  He  is  a  present  help.  This 
secures  fully;  hut  the  help  is  not  always  a  present, 
apparent  one.  But  God  Himself  is  looked  to;  and 
the  fact  that  we  are  left  wholly  to  Him,  and  that  no 
other  resource  is  there,  makes  all  the  power  of  evil 
immaterial  to  us ;  for  it  is  nothing  against  God. 
"What  is  this  confidence?"  said  the  King  of  Assyria 
to  Hezekiah.  Other  help  we  might  calculate  and 
compare  the  value  of.  This  only  requires  faith.  "Ye 
believe  in  God."  Against  this  help  all  effort  is  una- 
vailing; only  Ave  must  wait  for  it.  Human  effort  shuts 
this  help  out.  It  is  another  kind  of  resource  which 
is  not  faith.  God  may  command  activity,  and  faith 
acts  confidently.  But  this  is  never  man's  way ;  and 
when  the  matter  is  in  God's  hands,  when  there  is  not 
a  duty,  then  our  part  is  to  be  still,  and  we  shall  soon 
know  that  He  is  God.  Human  effort  only  spoils  all. 
No  human  planning  is  ever  right.  God  will  come  in, 
in  His  own  time  and  way.  There  are  duties.  When 
there  are,  do  them:  but  when  the  power  of  evil 
against  us  is  there,  and  there  is  not  a  duty,  the  path 
is  to  be  still.  Human  efforts  prove  want  of  faith  and 
restlessness,  and  planning  is  mere  flesh.  Elsewhere 
we  have  seen  that  integrity  is  needed  to  trust  God, 
because  it  is  God's  holy  nature  which  is  trusted. 
This  absolute  trust  is  called  for  when  the  power  of 
evil  is  rampant,  and  endurance  till  deliverance  is  the 
path  of  the  saint.      There   is  another  thought  here. 


THK   PSALMS. —  PSALM  XLVII.  lo7 

God  (the  Most  High  over  all  the  earth)  has  a  dwell- 
ing-place, where  the  rivers  of  His  grace  refresh : 
then  the  city  of  God,  Zion  and  the  temple;  now  the 
Church.  There  the  streams  of  refreshment  run,  and 
Be  will  preserve  her  (not  now  as  Zion,  the  city  of 
God's  solemnities,  but  in  a  better  way),  and  there  He 
enters  into  the  proper  character  of  His  own  relation- 
ship. And  there  He  gives  peace,  having  destroyed 
all  the  power  of  the  enemy.  Then  will  he  who  has 
waited  know  who  is  Cod — we  in  yet  brighter  and 
holier  scenes. 

Psalm  xlvii.  I  have  but  few  words  to  say  on  this 
psalm.  It  is  the  triumph  of  Cod's  people  when 
deliverance  is  come  in,  prophetically  announced.  That 
which  will  be  useful  to  remark  is,  how  entirely  the 
government  of  the  world  is  connected  with  Israel. 
Cod  Most  High  is  a  great  King  over  all  the  earth. 
Then  the  peoples  and  nations  are  subdued  under 
[srael,  and  Cod  chooses  the  inheritance  for  the  rem- 
nant of  His  people — His  beloved  Jacob.  But  this 
issues  in  the  praises  of  Cod  Himself,  awakens  praise 
in  His  people.  And  whatever  the  blessings  and  glory 
of  God's  people,  their  great  delight  is  in  the  glory  of 
Cod  Himself.  First,  the  power  of  Cod  is  celebrated, 
and  the  peoples,  there  in  relationship  with  Israel,  are 
culled  upon  to  triumph  in  it,  for  it  is  their  deliverance 
and  blessing,  and  that,  at  least,  Israel  knows,  and  is 
the  proclaimer  of  it  to  them.  There  Israel  gets  its 
place.  But  this  makes  Cod  pre-eminent  in  Israel's 
thought.  Thus  it  ever  is  when  the  soul  truly  knows 
blessing.     It  turns  to  the  blesser.     But  this  draws 


158       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

out,  not  merely  thanksgiving,  but  the  celebration  of 
all  that  God  is  as  known  in  blessing  to  those  He 
blesses.  Bat  His  own  proper  glory  is  their  joy.  I 
say,  "known  in  blessing;"  but  not  simply  because  of 
blessing,  but  in  His  own  glory  as  so  known.  Thus 
ver.  5 — 8  celebrate  what  God  is,  as  thus  displayed 
and  known.  So  in  Rom.  v.  11,  it  is  not  only  the  state- 
ment of  salvation,  but  "  we  joy  in  God,  by  whom  we 
have  received  the  reconciliation."  Further,  praises 
with  understanding  are  called  for.  The  relationships 
of  God  are  stated  in  verse  8.  This,  too,  is  a  point 
neglected  by  the  saints — the  living  and  praising  in 
and  according  to  the  relationships  in  which  God 
stands  with  us.  We  have  to  say,  "  The  Father  "  and 
"  Christ  the  Lord."  Here,  in  the  kingdom,  it  is  He 
sits  upon  the  throne  of  His  holiness,  and  He  reigns 
over  the  heathen — only,  now,  that  which  is  power  on 
the  earth.  The  princes  of  the  peoples  are  gathered 
in  recognition  of,  and  association  with,  one  peculiar 
people — the  people  of  original  promise — the  people 
of  the  God  of  Abraham.  The  shields  of  the  earth 
belong  to  God:  He  is  greatly  exalted;  for  this  must 
be  the  last  and  possessing  thought  of  the  saint.  I 
will  only  add,  that  this  takes  up  the  reign  of  God  in 
its  great  general  principle  and  connected  with  divine 
exaltation,  though  in  connexion  with  Israel  who  cele- 
brates it.  The  following  psalm  connects  it  more  with 
local  details,  and  the  judgment  by  which  His  throne 
is  established  in  Zion.  Psalm  xlix.  is  a  full  com- 
mentary upon  all  this,  showing  man's  place  in  it. 

Psalm  xlix.  gives  a  commentary,  showing  the  empti- 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   XLIX.  159 

ness  of  the  world,  connected  with  the  judgment  of 
God  at  the  end,  but  which  is  applicable  in  all  times, 
though  publicly  proved  then.  Death  proves  the  folly 
of  all  human  wisdom  and  foresight,  of  all  human 
grandeur — a  common  observation,  little  acted  on,  but 
always  true.  As  it  is  said  of  wisdom,  death  and  de- 
struction have  heard  the  fame  thereof  with  their  ears. 
They  cannot  give  positive  wisdom,  but  they  can  nega- 
tively show  that  only  what  does  not  belong  to  mortal 
man  has  any  value.  Man  establishes  his  family,  per- 
petuates his  name,  but  he  is  gone  :  nothing  stays  tlie 
hand  of  death.  Ransom  from  that  is  out  of  man's 
power.  There  is  a  morning  coming  when  the  righteous 
will  have  the  upper  hand  of  those  who  seem  wise  as 
regards  this  world.  Death  feeds  on  these,  or,  as  neg- 
lectcrs  of  God,  they  arc  subjected  to  the  righteous, 
when  His  judgment  comes.  But  the  power  of  God, 
in  whom  the  righteous  trust,  is  above  the  power  of 
death.  He  saves  the  remnant  from  death.  So  those 
who  are  alive  when  Christ  comes  for  the  Church,  will 
not  die  at  all ;  those  who  are  will  be  raised.  Such  is 
the  confidence  of  the  believer  :  death  docs  not  alarm 
him,  because  he  trusts  in  One  who  is  above  it,  who  re- 
deems, frees  from  its  power  altogether,  or  raises.  But 
the  Christian  goes  yet  farther,  though  this  be  true  of 
him.  He  can  say,  "That  I  should  not  trust  in  myself, 
but  in  Cod  that  raises  the  dead."  But  he  says  more  : 
"  I  had  the  sentence  of  death  in  myself."  He  does 
not  at  all  take,  as  the  remnant,  his  portion  this  side 
death ;  so  that  deliverance  from  it  to  live  here  is  the 
object  of  his  soul.  Christ  having  died,  his  connexion 
with  this  world  lias  ceased,  save  as  a  pilgrim  through 


1G0       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

it.  He  lias  the  sentence  of  death  in  himself.  He  knows 
no  man  after  the  flesh,  no,  not  even  Christ.  His 
associations  with  the  world  are  closed,  save  as  Christ's 
servant  in  it.  He  reckons  himself  dead.  He  is  cruci- 
fied  with  Christ,  yet  lives ;  but  it  is  Christ  lives'  in 
him,  and  he  lives  the  life  he  lives  in  the  flesh  by  the 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  him  and  gave  Him- 
self for  him,  so  that  he  is  delivered  from  this  present 
world.  This,  while  it  puts  the  believer  on  the  ground 
of  this  psalm,  as  far  as  it  goes  as  to  its  great  principle, 
yet  sets  him  in  a  totally  different  position.  There  is 
not  a  question  about  escaping  death  (though  out- 
wardly he  may,  for  we  shall  not  all  die),  for  death  is  a 
gain,  and  he  reckons  himself  dead  and  his  life  hid 
with  Christ  in  God  and  Christ  to  be  his  life.  Yet 
this  only  shows  still  more  what  the  psalm  insists  on, 
the  folly  of  laying  up  and  making  oneself  great,  and 
counting  on  a  future  in  a  world  where  death  reigns 
and  in  the  things  to  which  its  power  applies.  Man 
being  in  honour  abides  not.  How  difficult,  even  if 
happy  and  heavenly -minded  in  Christ  as  to  one's  own 
joys,  not  to  look  upon  the  things  that  are  seen,  to 
think  that  the  wisdom,  and  talents,  and  success,  and 
approval  of  men  is  simply  nothing,  the  food  of  death ; 
and  that  all  the  moral  question  lies  behind,  save  so 
far  as  these  may  have  deceived  men  !  The  saint  has 
to  watch  still,  not  to  be  afraid  when  success  accom- 
panies those  who  do  not  accept  the  cross.  We  await 
God's  judgment  of  things  in  power — we  exercise  it  in 
conscience.  There  is  no  divine  understanding  in  the 
man  whose  heart  is  in  the  glory  of  the  world.  Men 
will  praise  him.     How  well  he  has  got  on,  settled  his 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   L.  1G1 

children,  raised  himself  in  his  position  !  The  fairest 
names  will  be  given  to  it.  He  has  no  understanding. 
His  heart  is  in  what  feeds  death,  and  that  death  works 
it.  Ail  the  motives  of  the  world  are  weighed  by  death. 
After  all,  in  them  man  is  only  as  the  Leasts  that  perish, 
with  more  care. 

Psalm  1.  But  if  death  tells  this  tale,  divine  judg- 
ment is  executed ;  and  this  brings  in  other  considera- 
tions too,  the  contrast  of  ceremonial  religion  which 
God  may  have  ordered  in  His  goodness  to  man,  and 
that  practical  righteousness  which  God  must  have  in 
order  to  own  man.  But  this  will  be  found  in  special 
relationship  to  God,  and  that  in  His  own  way.  Saints 
are  gathered  by  sacrifice.  Redeeming  grace  and  the 
sense  of  its  need  must  come  in  to  be  owned  as  such 
by  God ;  but  these  are  gathered  to  God.  Judgment 
proceeds  on  the  ground  on  which  man  stands ;  for 
abuse  of  privileges  if  he  has  them,  but  on  the  moral 
ground  on  which  his  conscience  stands.  So  here  as 
to  Israel,  God  does  not  complain  of  want  of  sacri- 
fices. No  ceremonial  religion  will  be  in  question, 
but  wickedness.  Because  God  had  kept  silence  in 
long  patience,  the  world  may  fancy  he  is  to  be  dealt 
with  as  man  is,  with  outward  forms,  sacrifices,  cere- 
monies, and  no  conscience,  and  that  God  sees  no  fur- 
ther ;  but  God  sets  before  man  what  he  has  done.  He 
wlio  so  knows  God  as  to  praise  Him,  who  owns  what 
He  is,  blesses  Him  for  what  He  is,  and  orders  his  con- 
versation alight,  he  will  have  the  governmental 
blessing  of  God.  Him  who  makes  offerings  as  though 
he  would  quiet  God  so,  and  goes  on  without  taking 


162       PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

heed  to  Him  in  his  conscience,  He  will  reprove,  and 
set  in  order  before  him  all  he  has  done.  If  here,  for 
salvation  ;  if  in  judgment,  there  is  none  to  deliver. 

y,  TJT  But  where  there  is  a  work  of  God  it  goes  much 
deeper,  and  this  we  see  in  Psalm  li.  God  had 
announced  judgment.  Here  mercy  is  looked  for  by 
the  divinely-moved  soul,  that  He  who  alone  can  do  it 
should  make  us  clean,  as  is  suiting  to  Himself;  for 
the  soul  thus  taught,  feels  it  has  to  do  with  God,  and 
looks  for  cleansing  suited  for  that.  Compare  John 
xiii. — a  "part  with  Me." — (He  came  from  God  and 
was  going  to  God,  and  the  Father  had  given  all  into 
His  hand.)  The  sin,  too,  is  confessed.  Having  to 
say  to  God  Himself  is  what  marks  this  psalm,  and  the 
feeling  of  him  thus  concerned ;  and,  as  I  have  said,  it 
goes  much  deeper  than  what  is  spoken  of  in  judgment. 
From  verse  5  the  inward  principles  are  looked  at,  for 
it  is  a  question  of  having  to  say  to  God,  not  merely  of 
judgment  of  acts. 

There  is  the  sense  of  sin  in  the  nature  and  in  the 
origin  of  our  being;  and  that  God  must  have  truth 
in  the  inward  parts ;  but  confidence  in  God  that  He 
will  give  divine  wisdom  to  be  known  in  the  heart, 
that  which  the  vulture's  eye  hath  not  seen.  This  is 
precious  to  understand.  The  soul  looks  to  humiliation 
with  pleasure  as  against,  and  the  breaking  down  of, 
an  unholy  will ;  for  as  it  hates  it,  so  it  desires  it  to 
be  broken.  The  bitterness  of  humiliation  is  in  this 
respect  sweet.  There  is  the  blessed  consciousness, 
that,  when  the  Lord  washes  us,  we  are  clean  every 
whit,   whiter  than  snow.     A  blessed   thought  to  be 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    LI.  1G3 

clean  before  His  eyes  :  how  little  believed,  because 
men  do  not  believe  in  His  washing  !  Thus  far  it  has 
been  more  the  intrinsic  preciousness  of  being  clean, 
clean  for  God — what  is  necessary  for  God  and  what 
the  heart  delights  in.  Now,  gladness  is  looked  for, 
but  from  God ;  as  all  is  seen,  the  humiliation  and 
chastisement,  as  the  rest,  from  God's  hand — joy,  glad- 
ness, God's  face  can  be  rightly  looked  for  now,  not 
before.  That  would  have  been  selfish  comfort,  though 
natural  enough ;  but  God  does  not  give  it  till  the 
heart  is  right.  The  heart  must  be  real,  truly  purified 
in  accord  with  God  to  enjoy  here  favour  and  joy. 
Nor,  while  looking  to  God  to  hide  His  face  from  its 
sins  and  blot  out  its  iniquities,  is  this  separate  from 
the  desire  after  cleanliness  of  heart ;  only  now  it  is 
looked  at,  God's  goodness  being  in  view ;  not  as  the 
requirement  of  His  holiness,  to  which  the  heart  assents, 
but  the  work  of  His  grace,  something  from  Him. 
"Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God."  Give  it  me,  and 
renew  (not  a  right,  but)  a  fixed,  settled  spirit  within 
me — one  that  calmly,  settledly  thinks  on  God,  the 
heart's  only  object,  and  peacefully  counts  and  waits  on 
Him.  The  soul  thus  taught  cannot  do  without  the 
presence  of  God.  Its  dread  is  to  be  cast  out  of  it.  It 
is  not  yet  intelligent  in  grace  and  the  surcness  of 
God's  favour,  but  cannot  do  without  His  presence. 
To  be  removed  from  it  would  be  everlasting  misery, 
as  indeed  it  would,  and  felt  the  more,  the  more  the  eye 
is  opened  upon  Him.  It  craves,  therefore,  this  above 
all,  not  to  be  cast  out  from  His  presence;  known  in  truth, 
desire,  and  the  necessity  of  the  soul ;  if  not,  no  joy. 
The  action  of  the   Holy   Spirit    is  known   as   the 


164       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

power  of  joy;  His  indwelling  is  not.  The  soul 
pleads  not  to  be  deprived  of  the  former.  Here  a 
difference  must  be  noted  with  the  case  of  a  Christian, 
whether  we  consider  his  first  conversion  or  his  restor- 
ation to  communion.  Hitherto  we  have  been  able  to 
weigh  the  great  essential  principles  of  the  communion 
of  the  soul  with  God.  In  these  verses  the  occasion 
comes  in.  An  intelligent  Christian  could  not  say 
literally,  Take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me ;  he  views 
the  effect  of  his  sin  quite  in  another  way.  He  has 
grieved  the  Spirit,  he  has  sinned  against  love.  He 
does  not  believe  that  God  will  ever  take  His  Holy 
Spirit  from  him.  If  the  extreme  of  chastisement  is 
on  him,  and  the  shield  of  faith  is  down,  he  doubts  or 
disbelieves  he  has  or  perhaps  ever  had  it,  but  does  not 
ask  that  it  should  not  be  taken  away.  He  despairs, 
all  but ;  thinks  himself  a  reprobate  ;  and  if  he  thinks 
he  had  it  outwardly,  as  Heb.  vi.,  thinks  it  impossible 
he  can  be  renewed  to  repentance  because  he  has  lost 
it.  But,  save  in  this  extreme  case  or  the  use  of  Heb. 
vi.  (common  before  real  peace  is  obtained)  to  our  own 
condemnation,  there  is  no  such  thought  in  a  Christian. 
A  man  may  doubt  whether  he  has  the  Holy  Ghost, 
but  an  intelligent  Christian  does  not  think  of  God 
taking  it  away.  It  is  quasi-despair,  or  grieving  be- 
cause he  has  grieved  the  Spirit  which  is  in  him.  Its 
present  action  in  Israel,  inasmuch  as  God  owned  the 
nation,  or  the  returning  remnant  hoped  so,  that  rem- 
nant may  plead  for.  Compare  Haggai  ii.  5.  And 
David  in  the  same  way,  having  sinned,  could  so  speak; 
but  a  Christian  could  not.  The  cry  might  come  from 
an  inexperienced  Christian  who  had  not  found  peace, 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    LI.  1G5 

nor  knew  that  God  docs  not  take  His  Spirit  from  the 
Christian,  but  not  from  one  who  knew  the  truth.  A 
Christian  knowing  the  truth,  hut  having  failed  in 
walk,  and  assaulted  by  the  enemy,  might  deprecate 
the  practical  loss  of  that  action  of  the  Spirit  which 
alone  keeps  us  in  communion,  and  the  shield  of  faith 
up,  and  this  would  he  all  right.  So  could  one  who  had 
thus  lost  it,  say,  Restore  \mto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salva- 
tion, though  in  the  extreme  of  such  a  case;  neither  is 
that  the  state  of  soul,  hut  only  where  it  is  getting  hack. 
In  the  extreme  case  it  is  the  thought  of  being  lost, 
though,  after  all,  hope  is  never  absolutely  given  up. 
But  on  the  returning  of  such  a  soul  verses  1 1  and  1 2 
are  practically  used,  though  never  "take  not  thy 
Holy  Spirit  from  me."  But  there  is  a  constant  action 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  keeps  faith  alive — may  he,  a 
source  of  great  joy  when  we  walk  with  God,  hut,  when 
we  have  not  joy,  keeps  the  enemy  from  bringing  doubt 
on  our  souls  hefore  God;  keeps,  as  I  said,  faith  alive. 
He  is  not  hetween  our  souls  and  God,  the  power  of 
darkness.  This  is,  practically,  what  is  desired  here, 
and  the  sensihle  joy  of  God's  salvation  to  he  restored, 
hut  without  the  knowledge  of  the  indwelling  Spirit 
founded  on  redemption.  What  verse  12  looks  for  we 
may  have  to  look  for,  the  joy  of  salvation  to  he 
restored,  and  the  having  the  heart  established  with 
Coil's  free  Spirit,  that  liherty  hefore  God  and  in  His 
service  which  is  enjoyed  through  the  ungricved  Spirit 
by  the  soul  that  knows  redemption  and  the  blessed 
ligb.1  of  God's  countenance.  In  David  there  was  the 
uncertainty  of  repeated  forgiveness,  abiding  accept- 
ance being  unknown,  and  of  great  sin.      In  Israel,  in 


166       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

the  latter  Jays,  the  knowledge  of  long-enjoyed  rela- 
tionships, all  now  in  question,  though  God  be  trusted 
for  them.  But  this  is  not  the  Christian's  state :  if  he 
knows  that  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  him,  he  knows 
it  abides  there.  The  soul  in  which  God's  Spirit  works 
may,  as  to  this,  be  in  the  following  states.  First, 
exercised,  but  ignorant,  having  a  general  idea  of 
mercy,  it  may  apply  all  these  consequences  of  sin  to 
itself  vaguely  but  with  terror.  When  forgiveness  is 
known  (and  specially  when  it  is  known  with  little 
depth  of  conviction  of  sin),  but  the  righteousness  of 
God  not,  the  soul  losing  the  sense  of  forgiveness 
through  failure  or  carelessness,  sees  judgment  before 
it,  without  having  righteousness,  and  all  previous  joy 
becomes  bitterness,  and  the  sense  of  loss  (Heb.  vi.) 
is  applied,  and  all  the  passages  which  speak  of  con- 
tinuing as  a  condition  or  of  falling  away.  But  the 
soul  is  not  really  set  free  here.  It  has  known  forgive- 
ness, not  righteousness.  It  has  known  the  blood  on 
the  door-post,  not  the  Bed  Sea.  It  is  in  the  path  of 
learning  divine  righteousness  and  abiding  peace  before 
God  in  Christ  risen.  There  is  yet  the  case,  where, 
with  the  truth  known,  sin  has  been  trilled  with,  and 
there  the  enemy  gets  power — a  case  I  have  already 
spoken  of,  where  there  is  no  power  to  apply  the  word 
or  promises,  and  every  bitter  sentence  is  applied  to 
oneself.  Yet,  God's  justice  seen  to  be  right,  Satan, 
so  to  speak,  is  the  interpreter  of  the  word,  not  God. 
Yet  this  God  uses  as  chastisement,  to  set  the  soul 
right;  and  the  soul,  through  grace,  clings  to  God  in 
spite  of  all. 

I  have  said  rather  more  on  these  verses  than  might 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LI.  107 

seem  natural,  because  they  are  so  often  misused  to 
put  Christians  on  the  ground  of  Old  Testament  know- 
ledge, and  deprive  the  Christian  of  the  truth  of  the 
constantly  indwelling  Spirit.  All  this  is  a  misappli- 
cation of  it.  I  close  with  some  remarks  on  the  last 
verses  of  the  psalm. 

The  soul  is  not  yet  restored  in  the  psalm,  nor  free 
before  God;  it  is  looking  for  it.  When  it  is,  it  can 
teach  others  freely.  But  while  a  clean  heart  is  looked 
for,  there  is  another  character  of  sin  which  presses  on 
the  soul  rejecting  Christ,  blood-guiltiness.  We  can- 
not, of  course,  kill  Him,  but  the  sin  is  the  same. 
Thus  there  is  not  only  uncleanness  in  sin,  but  the 
affections  arc  wrong — there  is  hatred  against  God 
shown  in  enmity  to  saints,  but  above  all  to  Christ. 
We  can  understand  how  Israel  will  have  to  look  for 
this :  they  have  called  for  His  blood  on  them  and  on 
their  children.  But  practically  our  hearts  have  re- 
jected Him,  and  would  none  of  Him.  Yet  the  soul, 
brought  near  in  grace,  can  look  for  cleansing  from  this 
also :  more  than  this,  in  forgiveness  of  this,  sees  that 
God  is  indeed  the  God  of  its  salvation,  not  of  judg- 
ment; but  in  the  extremest  of  sin  is  a  Saviour — saves 
in  love.  Then  it  sings  aloud  of  God's  righteousness. 
In  its  actual  relationship  with  God  there  was  only  sin. 
The  cross  was  God  meeting  sin,  and  sin  meeting  God 
in  man.  Man,  i.e.,  the  sinner,  had  only  sin.  There 
he  showed  what  he  was  in  respect  of  God  present  in 
love — hatred  and  violent  will.  This  was  all  he  was; 
but  there  God  became,  not  a  restorer,  but  a  Saviour — 
a  complete  Saviour,  and  showed  His  righteousness  in 
respect  of  the  work  of  Christ  by  setting  man,  Him  as 


168       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

man,  at  His  right  hand.  God's  righteousness  only 
now  is  known;  and  as  it  has  triumphed  in  salvation, 
the  sold  sings  aloud  of  it.  This  is  true  freedom — the 
Holy  Ghost,  thus  given,  the  power  of  it.  The  neces- 
sary consequence  is,  sacrifices  have  no  place.  Where 
would  they  be?  How  would  they  own  God?  A 
broken  spirit  is  what  siiits  the  cross,  suits  Christ's 
broken  body  and  forgiven  sins.  Nor  does  God  despise 
this.  It  answers  to  His  mind  in  the  cross,  to  His 
grace  towards  the  sinner.  Then  comes  peace,  blessing, 
and  service.  Here,  according  to  Jewish  milennial 
order,  of  course,  but  true  in  spirit  in  the  Christian. 

Psalm  lii.  requires  few  words.  It  looks  to  judg- 
ment in  Israel,  but  there  are  some  principles  which 
directly  concern  the  believer  at  any  time.  Where  he 
looks  in  the  prevalence  of  evil  power — not  to  circum- 
stances. Evil  boasts  itself  in  power,  but  faith  sees 
another  thing.  The  goodness  of  God,  before  whom 
men  are  as  grasshoppers,  endures,  however  evil  pre- 
vails yet  continually.  There  is  no  moment  where  it 
is  not  fully  in  Him,  no  day  when  anything  escapes 
Him  or  anything  is  out  of  His  reach.  It  is  not  only 
the  power  of  God,  but  His  goodness.  This  is  a  great 
general  truth ;  but  we  say,  Our  Father.  Not  a  spar- 
row falls  to  the  ground  without  your  Father.  Yet  on 
the  other  hand  there  is  something  specially  precious 
in  the  thought  here.  It  is  not  the  goodness  of  the 
Lord  in  His  relationship  with  Israel,  but  what  is  in 
the  nature  of  God.  The  goodness  of  God,  what  a 
resource  against  evil!  It  cannot  cease  or  be  inter- 
rupted, if  it  be  thus.     The  end  of  pride  is  ruin,  but 


THH    PSALMS. — PSALM   LIII.  1G9 

he  who  trusts  in  the  Lord  and  His  faithful  love  shall 
be  green,  when  all  else  withers,  and  planted  in  the 
courts  of  God's  house. 

Psalm  liii.,  as  we  know,  convicts  those  who  have  the 
best  advantage  of  entire  sinfulness.  But  the  secret 
of  this  course  is  old  too,  and  on  that  a  few  words. 
All  the  path  of  the  wicked  comes  from  this.  For  him 
God  is  not.  Faith  does  not  exist,  and  God  is  not 
seen.  This  is  the  secret  of  all  error  in  practice  and  in 
human  reasoning.  The  more  we  examine  the  whole 
course  of  human  action,  the  faults  of  us  Christians, 
the  various  wanderings  of  philosophy,  the  more  we 
shall  find  that  an  Elohim  is  at  the  root  of  all.  Here 
it  is  the  case  that  the  conscience  takes  no  notice  of 
God.  The  heart  has  no  desire  after  Him,  and  the 
will  works  as  if  there  were  none.  He  says  so  in  his 
heart.  Why  should  he  say  it?  Because  his  con- 
science tells  him  there  is  one.  His  will  would  not 
have  one;  and  as  He  is  not  seen  in  His  workings, 
will  sees  only  what  it  will.  God  is  set  aside,  and  the 
u'hole  conduct  is  under  the  will's  influence,  as  if  no 
God  existed.  He  takes  pains  to  prove  there  is  not,  if 
he  thinks,  because  he  cannot  get  on  if  there  is;  but  he 
lifts  himself  up,  and,  deceiving  himself,  comes  in 
practical  condition  to  will  there  should  be  none — and 
not  to  think,  but  to  act  as  if  he  thought,  and  that  in 
purpose  as  well  as  act,  as  if  there  were  none.  In  a 
certain  sense,  he  even  thinks  so;  for,  being  entirely 
occupied  with  present  things,  and  blind  through  his 
alienation  from  God,  his  moral  feeling  dead,  judging 
from   present    things,   he   can  draw  conclusions,  not 

M 


170  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

believe  that  there  is  one,  and  living  in  his  own 
thoughts  thus  formed,  live  in  the  thought  there  is 
none — says  so  in  his  heart.  If  conscience  awakes,  he 
knows  well  there  is ;  but  he  lives  in  his  will  and  the 
thoughts  of  his  will,  and  for  him  there  is  no  God. 
But  it  is  wonderful  how  habitually  human  reasoning 
goes  on  as  if  this  were  so.  Man  cannot  look  at  all 
that  is  around  him  without  feeling  the  mass  of  evil 
there  is.  If  he  does  not  accept  the  fall  and  salvation, 
what  can  he  think  when  there  are  no  immediate 
present  interventions,  as  in  Israel  1  Men  leave  God 
out,  and  account  for  all  as  if  there  were  none.  Men 
will  not  put  all  on  the  ground  of  truth.  If  not,  they 
cannot  bring  God  in  it  at  all,  and  account  for  all 
without  doing  so.  And  this  is  called  philosophy,  and 
it  leads  on  necessarily  to  the  power  of  evil,  for  evil 
there  is,  and  consequently  the  power  of  evil ;  and  if 
God  be  not  brought  in,  the  power  of  evil  must  have 
the  upper  hand,  for  who  is  to  hinder  it  having  so1? 
God  does  till  His  time  is  come,  the  time  when  no  more 
good  is  to  be  done  by  waiting.  Evil  then  comes  to  a 
head,  which  is  embodied  in  this  psalm ;  and  the  result 
is,  the  judgment  spoken  of  at  the  end.  But  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  world  are  such  at  all  times.  Whenever 
I  act  as  if  God  was  not  (that  is,  without  reference  to 
His  will),  I  so  far  say  in  my  heart,  "There  is  no  God." 
If  the  fear  spoken  of  in  verse  5  be  of  the  congrega- 
tion of  the  just,  as  I  suppose,  there  we  see  how 
needless  the  fear  of  the  godly  is  in  the  day  of  the 
power  of  evil.  The  more  it  increases,  the  more  the 
question  becomes  God's.  At  its  height  it  is  wholly 
so ;  consequently,  the  less  reason  there  is  to  fear.     It 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LIV.,   LV.  171 

is  when  at  their  height  God  despises  them.  The 
psalmist,  as  a  Jew,  longs  for  this  time — the  time  of 
the  restoration  of  Israel.  In  a  certain  sense  we  desire 
it,  for  Ave  desire  the  disappearing  of  evil  and  the  rest 
of  the  earth ;  but  it  is  not  the  highest  good. 

Psalm  liv.  gives  one,  but  a  most  weighty,  practical, 
principle — God  alone  and  His  name ;  that  is,  the 
revelation  of  Himself  is  the  resource  of  the  soul. 
Strangers  have  not  set  God  before  them,  the  believer 
has,  and  all  hangs  from  His  name.  Dependence  is 
expressed,  and  God  is  sought  according  to  His  name. 
This,  the  name  of  God,  holds  the  first  place  in  the 
psalm.  "We  must  remark  that  God  is  not  known  here 
in  subsisting  covenant  relationship.  It  is  not  Jehovah 
until  the  end  of  the  psalm,  but  God,  as  such,  in  con- 
trast with  men  and  all  else ;  and  in  Himself  known 
in  what  He  is — the  source  of  mercy  and  good,  on 
which  we  depend.  But  God  has  revealed  Himself — 
made  Himself  known  to  men;  His  name,  that  which 
expresses  what  He  is,  is  known,  and  the  heart  trusts 
in  this.  And  how  sweet  it  is  to  do  it  !  In  itself  it  is 
joy  and  rest ;  and  what  can  man  do  when  God  is  for 
us1?  I  may  not  know  what  God  will  do,  but  He  is 
trusted.  God  says  He  is  mine  helper.  When  deli- 
vered, or  in  the  thought  of  deliverance,  all  that  God 
is  in  relationship  with  His  people  comes  into  the  soul 
for  praise;  but  what  God  is  as  God  is  the  resource  of 
the  soul. 

Psalm  It.  is  the  expression  of  intense  distress  of  spirit. 
Outward  enemies  were  there.     This  was  the  difficulty 


172      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

in  which  he  stood ;  but  it  was  but  the  occasion  of  what 
pressed  upon  his  spirit.  This  was  the  hatred  of  those 
who  stood  in  the  closest  relationship  to  him.  This 
brought  him  into  the  presence  of  death,  and  divine 
judgment,  because  as  special  instruments  of  Satan  they 
would  bring  the  effect  of  guilt  upon  his  soul  between 
him  and  God.  How  completely  the  Lord  Himself 
(though  the  psalm  be  not  properly  prophetic  of  Him) 
went  through  this,  I  need  not  say.  They  sought  to 
bring  the  guilt  upon  Him  and  triumphed  in  His  being 
forsaken  of  God,  did  esteem  Him  stricken,  smitten  of 
God  and  afflicted.  Directly  it  is  the  remnant  in  the 
last  day,  but,  as  we  have  seen,  in  all  their  affliction  He 
was  afflicted.  But  this  bringing  iniquity  on  the  soul 
by  wicked  men  as  instruments  of  Satan  (which  the  Lord 
went  through  deeper  than  anyone  could,  because  He 
took  our  iniquity)  is  a  very  solemn  thing.  It  is  not 
the  wrath  directly  that  Christ  bore,  and  we  never  shall ; 
but  the  bringing  it  on  the  soul  by  the  power  of  Satan 
by  wicked  men.  The  Lord  may  see  it  needed,  but  it  is 
only  a  special  case  with  Christians.  There  is  confidence 
in  God,  an  expectation  that  His  ear  is  open  to  the  cry 
of  the  heai*t  that  trusts  Him.  But  till  the  Lord  is 
looked  to,  the  power  of  wickedness,  and  the  wickedness 
itself  distress  and  bow  down  the  soul.  The  existence 
and  power  of  evil,  of  what  is  opposed  to  God,  weighs 
on  it.  This  is  united  with  the  deepest  wounding  of 
confidence  in  man,  for  it  was  not  an  open  enemy,  but  a 
friend,  who  had  done  it.  What  in  man  was  to  be  trusted 
when  the  nearest  betrayed  1  It  gives  isolation  of  heart. 
Nothing  can  be  trusted.  Now  the  Lord  went  through 
this  power  of  evil.     We  only  feel  it  when  flesh  is  not 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    LV.  173 

bvokeil  down  and  has  to  bo  broken  down.  It  is  there, 
but  its  power  is  broken  by  Him  for  faith.  But  inas- 
much as  we  are  sinners,  this  kind  of  power  of  Satan 
brings  the  character  of  judgment  with  it.  We  may- 
get  above  this  by  grace  and  confide,  for  this  it  was 
that  Christ  prayed  for  Peter ;  and  he  was  kept,  when 
failing  under  the  power  of  Satan,  from  going  on  to 
doubt  the  Lord's  love,  and  despair.  The  most  terriblo 
thing  here  is  wickedness  coining  as  the  power  of  evil. 
But  the  spirit  itself  shrinks  from  the  heartlessness  of 
it  and  would  flee ;  for  a  gracious  spirit  would  rest  in 
peace  when  evil  is  all  around.  The  heart  meanwhile 
is  conscious  that  it  has  no  association  with  it,  and 
would  only  flee  away  and  be  alone  in  quiet,  for  the 
condition  is  that  it  has  none  to  trust  in.  But  this 
casts  the  mind  on  the  Lord,  for  after  all  it  has  not  the 
wings  of  a  dove  in  this  world.  The  effect  of  this  is  to 
bring  up  the  wickedness  before  the  Lord,  that  is,  in 
its  full  light.  This  necessarily  brings  (in  the  aspect 
in  which  all  is  looked  at  in  the  Psalms,  of  patience 
under  evil,  and  righteousness  which  must  view  evil  as 
evil ;  for  though  Christ's  sufferings  under  it  even  to 
wrath  are  brought  in,  and  so  grace,  in  judgment, 
passed,  yet,  in  general,  as  to  the  government  of  God) 
— this  necessarily  brings  in  the  thought  of  judgment ; 
for  the  judgment  of  evil  and  the  deliverance  of  the 
oppressed  are  in  the  nature  of  God  as  governing  and 
seeing  all  things.  The  heart  groaning  under  oppression 
and  suffering  before,  while  thinking  of  evil  sought  to 
be  charged  on  it,  and  so  with  horror  and  oppression  of 
spirit,  can  now,  as  looking  to  the  Lord,  judge  all  the 
evil  more  calmly  as  to  itself  in  its  own  character,  and 


174      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

the  judgment  which  must  follow.  And  full  confidence 
in  Jehovah,  a  known  covenant  God  springs  up.  And 
then,  free  in  spirit,  one  can,  from  verse  1 9,  look  calmly 
at  it  all  and  see  the  end.  The  full  and  blessed  conclu- 
sion in  the  deepest  sense  of  the  most  pressing  evil  is, 
"  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord  and  he  shall  sustain 
thee  ;  he  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be  moved." 
Here  end  all  the  exercises  giving  the  ground  of  our  con- 
stant faith.  And  although  the  psalm  looks  for  judg- 
ment, if  we  take  the  principle  of  this  declaration,  it  is 
the  blessed  sustainment  of  faith  in  all  trial.  There  are 
two  points  in  this.  "  Cast  thy  burden  on  the  Lord." 
Whatever  the  trial  or  difficulty  may  be,  cast  it  upon  the 
Lord.  It  is  not  that  the  trial  goes  always — here  it 
would  not  till  judgment  came;  but  "He  shall  sus- 
tain thee."  It  is  better  than  the  trials  going.  It  is  the 
direct  coming  in  of  God  to  ourselves,  to  our  own  souls, 
the  sense  of  His  interest  in  us,  His  favour,  His  nearness, 
that  He  comes  to  help  us  in  our  need.  It  is  a  divine 
condition  of  the  soul,  which  is  better  than  any  absence 
of  evil.  God  is  a  sure  help  to  sustain  us.  The  second 
point  is  the  infallible  faithfulness  of  God.  He  shall 
never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be  moved.  Tried  they 
may  be,  but  He  cannot  suffer  evil  in  the  world  to  prevail, 
nor  will  He.  We  may  learn  to  trust  by  the  evil,  but  in 
trusting  we  know  the  Lord  will  keep,  and  the  extreme 
character  of  the  evil  only  shows  the  rather  that  God 
must  come  in — makes  His  intervention  necessary. 

Psalm  lvi.  The  soul  has  got  out  of  the  depth  of  in- 
ward distress  in  which  it  was  in  psalm  lv.  For,  though 
the  faithful  one's  enemies  lie  in  wait  for  him,  it  is  not 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LVI.  175 

the  unfaithfulness  and  treachery  of  friends.  They  are 
enemies  who  seek  to  wrong  him.  He  is  afraid,  more 
than  distressed,  and  looks  through  the  difficulties  to 
God.  Faith  is  readily  in  activity.  In  the  previous 
psalm  his  spirit  was  inwardly  deeply  depressed.  Here 
he  is  only  tried.  Hence  he  soon  can  trust  in  God, 
and  His  word  is  the  testimony  of  certain  deliverance 
to  him.  In  psalm  lv.  it  is  only  at  the  19th  verse  and 
at  the  end  he  can  bring  God  in.  Hero  God  is  at 
once  before  his  soul.  In  truth  outward  trials  are 
little  compared  with  inward  breaches  on  the  spirit. 
The  spirit  [even]  of  a  man  will  bear  his  infirmities, 
but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ?  The  saint's  trust, 
then,  is  in  God.  But  this  trust  in  God  is  not  without 
some  revelation  of  God.  Hence,  when  the  soul  can 
look  at  Him  and  trust,  that  by  which  He  has  revealed 
His  mind,  the  testimony  which  in  His  love  He  has 
given  to  us,  becomes  at  once  the  guide  and  confidence 
of  the  soul.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  have  it.  God 
cannot  but  make  it  good.  These  two  points  are  the 
hinges  of  thought  in  this  psalm — God  Himself  and 
His  word.  "  In  God  will  I  praise  his  word."  His 
word  gives  us  the  sure  witness  of  what  He  will  be, 
what  He  is  for  us.  But  if  it  be  God,  what  can  flesh 
do]  This  is  the  conclusion  that  the  soul  comes  to. 
It  has  enemies,  perhaps  mighty  and  strong  ones,  nor 
is  it  insensible  to  them.  They  hide  themselves  and 
plot  against  the  faithful  one  ;  and  he  has  no  resource 
in  flesh.  All  this  is  good  for  him.  It  makes  him 
know  the  world  he  is  in  and  weans  him  from  flesh. 
But  what  can  he  do1?  He  can  do  nothing.  This  casts 
him  then  on  God,  and  this  is  as  positively  blessed  as 


176      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

it  is  useful.  In  truth,  if  God  be  for  us,  what  can  flesh 
do  ]  The  worldly  man  may  have  fleshly  resources 
against  flesh.  The  saint  cannot  have  recourse  to  these. 
It  would  take  him  away  from  God  just  when  God  is 
leading  him  wholly  to  Him.  He  cannot  say  "  con- 
federacy "  to  all  to  whom  the  people  weak  in  faith  say 
confederacy.  But  he  is  not  to  fear  their  fear  neither, 
not  be  afraid,  but  sanctify  the  Lord  of  Hosts  Himself; 
and  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary.  It  is  out  of  the  occasion 
of  fear  that  the  faithful  one  looks  out  to  God  here.  Then 
what  can  flesh  do1?  God  disposes  of  everything  and 
has  His  plans,  which  he  will  certainly  bring  to  pass. 
But  there  is  another  blessing  accompanies  this,  and  a 
deep  one.  The  soul  is  in  trial,  the  wicked  plotting 
against  it.  But  God  is  with  it  in  the  sorroiv  and  takes 
account  of  it  all.  He  tells  the  wanderings  of  the  saint, 
for  he  is  here  looked  at  as  deprived  of  outward  privileges, 
with  God's  people  and  in  His  house ;  but  God  counts 
all  this  up,  and  the  saint  can  look,  as  it  is  beautifully 
expressed,  to  His  putting  every  tear  into  His  bottle. 
Every  sorrow  of  the  saint  is  in  His  book.  It  is  a 
blessed  thought.  So  the  heart  confides  in  Him  and 
knows  that  when  it  cries  to  Him  all  its  enemies  will  be 
turned  back ;  then,  as  it  praised  His  word  in  faith  in 
the  midst  of  its  fears  and  sorrows,  looking  to  it,  sus- 
tained by  it,  counting  on  it.  Oh  that  saints  knew  how 
to  do  it !  So  now  the  soul  will  do  it  in  counting  on 
deliverance  by  His  sure  intervention.  Another  prin- 
ciple is  found  in  this  psalm  (in  a  Jewish  form  of  course) 
connected  with  these  exercises  of  heart,  and  which  are 
ever  found  in  them,  and  indeed  one  great  object  of  them 
as  coming  from  God,  the  sense  of  belonging  to,  and 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LVII.  177 

being  given  up  to,  consecrated  to  Cod.  "Thy  vows 
are  upon  me."  It  will  be  in  the  sense  of  praise  and 
rendered  in  praise  when  delivered,  bnt  the  heart  learns 
in  these  trials  what  we  arc  apt  to  forget,  that  we  do 
not  belong  to  ourselves.  It  is,  in  its  lowest  stage, 
connected  with  the  want  of  deliverance;  in  the  highest, 
with  the  joy  that  God  owns  US  for  His  own.  The 
foundation  being  the  redemption  which  has  made  us 
wholly  His  in  fact,  as  indeed  Israel  was  externally  as 
redeemed  from  Egypt.  Hence  praises  are  in  the  heart 
of  the  oppressed  one  already.  He  receives  what  he 
prays  for,  believing.  But  the  soul  uses  mercies  and 
deliverances  to  count  for  more.  It  has  been  delivered 
from  death;  hence  it  looks  to  be  kept  from  falling. 
It  was  under  the  power  and  oppression  of  the  enemy, 
him  that  has  the  power  of  death,  the  devil — it  is  set 
free;  but  now  it  has  to  walk  without  stumbling  and 
falling  in  the  way,  but  it  has  learnt  its  dependence  in 
the  trial  and  it  looks  to  God  for  this.  Wilt  thou  not 
deliver  my  feet  from  falling'?  But  the  sold  has  learnt 
more  in  its  distress,  the  comfort  of  walking  before 
God  in  the  light  of  His  favour  and  the  safety  of  His 
presence.  It  looks  to  this  as  the  object  of  its  being 
kept.  It  does  look  for  its  own  peace  and  comfort,  but 
it  looks  for  it  before  God.  The  light  of  the  living  was 
the  light  of  divine  preserving  favour  for  Israel.  It  is 
not  the  highest  order  of  joy  here,  but  it  is  the  soul's 
looking  out  of  distress  and  oppression  to  that  faithful 
goodness  of  God  which  shall  make  it  walk  before  Him 
in  safety  and  in  peace. 

In  psalm  lvii.  there  are  the  same  trials,  but  more 


178       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

confidence.  But  his  eye  seeing  more  brightly  God's 
power  and  help,  it  sees  more  of  the  evil  and  wickedness 
of  its  enemies  and  less  of  its  own  oppression,  and  this 
is  constantly  true.  We  have  to  watch  this,  for  our 
heart  is  treacherous.  If  it  gets  out  of  its  own  oppres- 
sion and  fear,  it  is  apt  to  dwell  too  much  on  the  wicked- 
ness of  its  enemies.  Looking  more  at  God,  it  must 
see  this  more.  That  is  not  the  evil,  but  dwelling  on 
it.  It  is  dangerous  to  merge  evil  and  go  on  comfort- 
ably, but  it  is  injurious  also  to  dwell  on  evil.  It  does 
not  nourish  the  soul — how  should  it? — and  a  spirit 
contrary  to  the  gospel  grows  up.  We  shall  see  it,  if 
we  are  near  God,  but  we  shall  soon  be  occupied  with 
God  and  not  with  the  evil.     He  is  above  it  all. 

Thus  there  is  progress  in  these  three  psalms. 
Between  psalms  lvi.  and  lvii.  the  first  verse  shows  the 
difference :  the  former,  "for  man  would  swallow  me  up;" 
the  second,  "for  my  soul  trusteth  in  thee."  There  he 
was  trusting  God's  word,  here  he  is  looking  for  the 
accomplishment  of  it  by  the  hand  of  God,  and  trusts 
under  the  shadow  of  His  wings  till  the  tyranny  be 
overpast.  Hence  he  is  able  to  look  out  to  God's 
exalting  Himself  above  the  heavens  and  His  glory  above 
all  the  earth.  It  is  not  that  the  power  of  evil  is  not 
there  as  much  as  it  was.  It  is,  and  the  soul  is  bowed 
down  through  it,  but  the  mind  rests  more  on  God. 
Remark,  too,  that  there  is  no  thought  of  resisting  the 
evil  and  getting  rid  of  it  by  one's  own  strength.  It 
waits  on  God,  and  this  it  must  do  to  have  its  own  path 
perfect.  And  this  Christ  did.  The  former  psalm  felt 
more  God's  entering  into  the  sorrow.  This  looks  more 
to  its  own  escape  out  of  it,  but  by  God's  sending  from 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   LVIII.  179 

heaven  and  accomplishing  deliverance.  He  sees,  too, 
the  evil  taken  in  their  own  plannings.  There  is  no 
thought  of  countcrplanning.  But  casting  himself 
wholly  on  God,  he  sees  their  own  plans  to  be  their  ruin, 
and  this  is  a  striking  way  of  judgment  and  confirmation 
of  faith.  He  gets  through  faith,  so  to  speak,  praise 
ready;  and  in  the  Ammim  and  Leummim — peoples 
and  tribes:  it  is  not  specially  among  the  heathen  as 
adverse  and  opposed.  His  trials  are  within  the  people, 
the  men  he  was  associated  with;  and  it  is  not  triumph 
over  adversaries,  but  deliverance  where  he  could  only 
bow  down  his  heart.  But  the  result  was  praise  among 
men  in  a  wider  sphere  than  that  he  had  been  tried  in ; 
and  so  it  ever  is,  for  He  who  delivers  is  great.  In  fact 
he  looks  out  to  millennial  glory,  when  all  will  be 
gathered  together  in  one  in  Christ.  But  I  use  it  now 
as  seen  here  in  God's  ways. 

On  psalm  lviii.  very  few  words  will  suffice.  The 
force  of  the  psalm  is  this :  the  wicked  as  such  are  hope- 
less as  to  amendment,  but  God  will  judge  them;  so 
that  men  will  sec  that  there  is  a  reward  for  the 
righteous  and  a  God  that  judgeth  the  earth.  Is  there 
upright,  just  judgment  among  men'?  is  the  question. 
There  is  wickedness  in  their  hearts :  they  plan  and  plot 
in  it.  It  is  in  their  nature  and  will,  and  characterizes 
itself  by  falsehood.  It  is  of  the  serpent,  in  its  nature 
devilish;  and  they  refuse  any  and  every  attracting 
power  and  influence,  whatever  it  may  be.  God  comes 
in  and  Jehovah  judges,  let  their  power  and  strength  be 
as  lions.  They  melt  away  to  nothing  when  His  hand 
comes  in.     Vengeance — and  this  explains  the  joy  in 


180  PRACTICAL    REFLECTIONS    OX 

it — does  come  in,  vindicates  the  just  man  and  shows 
him  right,  however  he  may  have  seemed  helpless  and 
been  oppressed,  and  God  righteous,  and  that  there  is  a 
judge  in  spite  of  oppression. 

Psalm  lix.  I  have  not  much  to  say  on  this  psalm  in 
view  of  our  present  object  in  commenting  on  them. 
It  refers  directly  to  the  desired  judgment  of  the  heathen. 
I  may  only  note  that  absence  of  all  conscience  and  all 
heart  is  to  be  expected  from  the  world  when  the  Lord 
and  His  saints  are  in  question ;  a  terrible  judgment, 
but  which  these  psalms,  as  well  as  experience,  prove  to 
be  true.  The  simple  refuge  of  the  saint  is  in  God. 
"  God  is  my  defence."  It  is  not  counter-plotting,  nor 
using  human  means  to  meet  the  power  of  the  enemy. 
We  may  partially,  perhaps,  and  for  a  time  so  succeed, 
but  in  using  carnal  weapons  we  have  lost  the  depend- 
ence which  calls  God  in,  and  the  perfection  of  walk 
and  testimony  which  waiting  on  Him  gives.  We  have 
played  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  by  acknowledging 
the  power  of  the  world  as  competent  to  settle  the  ques- 
tion of  good  and  evil,  a  power  which  after  all,  till  Christ 
comes,  is  in  his  hands,  though  under  God's  sovereign 
rule.  The  heart  of  the  saint  has  to  say,  "  the  God  of 
my  mercy."  He  knows  Him  as  such.  His  favour  is 
what  he  cares  for,  and  he  trusts  His  faithfulness.  He 
expects  the  wickedness  which  has  no  fear  of  God  at  all. 
They  will  retxirn  heartless  and  impious,  but  the  godly 
will  sing  of  God's  power.  And  not  that  only — mercy, 
tender  consideration  of  the  afflicted  saint,  of  him  who 
has  need  even  of  mercy  through  his  failure,  has  been 
experienced  at  the  hands  of  God.     He  will  sing  aloud  of 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LX.  18] 

God's  mercy,  and  that  when  brighter  times  come;  for  in 
the  trouble  that  mercy  lias  been  shown.  God  is  his 
strength  too,  and  to  Him  he  sings.  The  saint  thus 
encouraged  not  only  sings  of  God  but  to  God.  The 
wickedness  of  the  wicked  is  viewed  as  pure  wicked- 
ness here.  As  between  God  and  the  saint  there  may 
be  occasion  for  discipline ;  but  between  the  saint  and 
the  wicked,  the  former  had  given  no  occasion  to  the 
malice  of  his  enemy.  Still,  towards  God,  in  the  sense 
of  the  power  of  this  evil,  he  looks  for  mercy.  His  heart 
loves  to  turn  there  in  the  sense  of  weakness  and  nothing- 
ness.    God  for  him  is  the  God  of  his  mercy. 

Psalm  lx.  is  one  which  we  can  only  apply  in  prin- 
ciple to  our  outward  conflicts  with  the  power  of  evil. 
There  God  can  leave  us  as  to  His  government  for  the 
time  to  defeat  and  scattering.  And  it  is  the  deepest 
kind  of  chastening  in  these  conflicts.  For  as  we  serve 
in  God's  cause,  we  sec  that  it  is  defeated  on  earth 
through  our  fault  or  failure.  No  doubt,  in  us  pride 
may  be  mortified  too,  as  we  are  in  the  conflict ;  still, 
the  feeling  of  grief  and  distress  is  a  genuine  feeling, 
a  feeling  which  must  fill  the  heart  of  the  servant  of 
God.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  see  those  who  stand  in 
the  place  of  God's  people  and  witnesses,  put  to  the 
worse  before  their  enemies,  the  cause  of  God  for  the 
moment  defeated.  God  has  given  a  banner  to  them 
that  fear  Him,  to  be  diplayed  because  of  the  truth. 
He  has  set  His  ensign  among  them,  and  it  is  terrible 
if  with  this  they  are  defeated  and  driven  back ;  if 
when  saying  Jehovah-Nissi,  the  enemy  has  the  upper 
hand.     Jehovah  had  war  with  Amalek ;  but  if  Achan 


182      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

was  in  the  camp,  He  did  not  go  out.  For  if  God 
contends,  it  is  in  and  for  the  exercise  of  His  people. 
But  when  thus  cast  down,  faith  does  not  lose  its 
courage  though  drinking  the  wine  of  astonishment. 
It  looks  to  God,  judges  the  evil  if  it  be  there,  looks  to 
God,  owning  there  must  be  some  if  it  does  not  discover 
it.  But  God  has  spoken  in  His  holiness.  The  very 
unchangeableness  of  His  nature,  which  allows  no  evil, 
gives  the  certainty  that  He  will  make  good  His  word 
in  their  favour.  To  this  faith  looks — on  this  it  counts. 
And  when  it  has  to  say,  Who  will  go  out  with  our 
hosts  ]  it  says,  Wilt  not  thou,  0  God,  which  hadst  cast 
us  off?  Then  all  is  right.  The  one  who  had  thus  dis- 
ciplined His  people  would  be  their  sure  and  faithful 
deliverer  and  strength.  Through  Him,  though  erst 
scattered,  the  saints  will  do  valiantly.  For  faith  looks 
through  everything  to  God,  because  He  is  faithful,  and 
His  favour  better  than  life.  This  confidence  is  fully 
brought  out  in  the  psalm  which  follows. 

Psalm  lxi.  The  soul  is  still  removed  from  the  en- 
joyment of  present  blessing.  It  is  at  the  end  of  the 
earth,  but  looks  to  God.  The  heart  is  overwhelmed 
within  itself.  There  is  no  resource  within  in  the 
pressure  of  circumstances.  Pride  may  stand  up  against 
difficulties  and  be  haiighty  even  in  destruction,  but 
this  is  not  the  path  of  the  saint.  Besides  the  forti- 
tude which  maintains  itself  in  adverse  circumstances 
has  always  some  result  to  hope  for.  But  in  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  saint  here  before  us,  there  were 
none.  He  is  driven  out  and  no  ground  to  hope  for 
human  deliverance,  and  pride  is  far  from  him.     He 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXII.  183 

bows  to  God's  hand;  but  he  has  a  resource — God 
lends  him  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  he.  Faith 
gets  to  what  is  above  circumstances,  when  nature  is 
overwhelmed  by  them.  And  if  God  be  for  us  who 
can  be  against  us?  Cod  takes  an  interest  in  us;  we 
know  it;  He  has  shown  it.  The  heart  can  look  to 
Him  with  whom  all  circumstances  are  nothing.  The 
heart  trusts  God  and  self  disappears  overwhelmed,  as 
it  may  be.  God  is  the  securer  and  portion  of  the 
believer.  All  else  is,  then,  simply  nothing.  It  is  the 
contrast  between  God  and  circumstances,  instead  of 
between  ourselves  and  circumstances.  God  has  heard 
the  cry  of  distressed  faith,  and  as  it  trusts  now  so 
will  it  abide  for  ever  in  the  tabernacle  of  God.  It  is 
tbc  seci'et  of  all  peace  in  trial,  the  rock  higher  than 
ourselves.  The  spies  saw  themselves  grasshoppers. 
Was  God  sol  The  walls  were  up  to  heaven — what 
matter  when  they  tumbled  flat  down. 

Psalm  lxii.  Waiting  on  God  is  the  subject  of  this 
psalm.  It  implies  dependence,  confidence;  and  both 
in  such  sort  that  we  abide  God's  time:  dependence, 
because  we  cannot  do  anything  without  Him,  and 
ought  not;  because  what  He  does  is  what  the  soul 
alone  desires;  because  action  without  Him,  even  in 
self-defence,  is  only  the  action  of  our  own  will,  and  so 
our  being  without  God  so  far.  Saul  did  not  wait 
upon  God.  He  waited  nearly  seven  days;  but  if  he 
had  felt  he  was  dependent,  and  nothing  could  be  done 
without  God,  he  would  have  done  nothing  till  Samuel 
oame.  He  did  not;  he  acted  for  himself,  and  lost  the 
kingdom.     Deliverance  from  God  is  sweet;  it  is  love; 


184      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

it  is  righteous,  holy  deliverance — becomes  the  reve- 
lation of  the  favour  and  grace  of  God.  It  is  perfect  in 
time,  way,  place.  So  -where  the  soul  waits  for  it,  will 
not  being  at  work,  it  meets  and  enjoys  the  deliverance 
in  this  perfectness;  and  we  are  perfect  and  complete 
in  the  will  of  God.  But  it  implies  confidence,  too;  for 
why  should  Ave  wait  if  God  would  not  come  in1?  The 
soul  is  thus  sustained  meanwhile.  And  this  confidence 
is  such  that  we  tarry  the  Lord's  leisure.  Patience  has 
its  perfect  work,  so  that  we  should  be  perfect  and  com- 
plete in  all  the  will  of  God.  There  is,  too,  an  active 
reckoning  upon  God.  But  this  leaves  the  soul  abso- 
lutely and  exclusively  waiting  on  Him.  It  is  not  active 
for  itself;  it  waits  only  upon  God.  ("Truly"  in  verse 
1  and  "only"  in  verse  5  is  the  same  word  in  Hebrew.) 
The  two  points  connected  with  it  show  the  state  of 
soul :  "from  him  cometh  my  salvation"— "my  expecta- 
tion is  from  him."  He  only  is  the  rock  and  salvation; 
so  the  confiding  soul  waits  for  Him,  and  seeks  no  other 
refuge — looks  for  deliverance  only  from  Him.  Hence, 
in  principle  (in  fact,  in  Christ),  the  heart  is  perfect  in 
its  confidence,  and  meets  in  dependence  the  perfectness 
of  God — accepts  nothing  but  that,  because  it  is  assured 
that  God  is  perfect  and  will  act  perfectly  in  the  right 
time.  Faith  corresponds  thus  to  the  perfection  of 
God.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  working  of 
self-will  at  all,  no  acceptance  or  saving  of  self  by  an 
intervention  inferior  in  its  nature  to  God  Himself. 
This  makes  patient  waiting  on  God  a  principle  of 
immense  moment.  It  characterizes  faith  in  the  Psalms, 
and  so  Christ  Himself. 

But  there  are  a  few  points  yet  to  remark.      "Trust 


THE   PSALMS. —  PSALM    LXII.  185 

in  him  at  all  times."  There  is  constancy  in  this  con- 
fidence, and  constancy  in  all  circumstances.  If  I  look 
morally  to  Him,  He  is  always  competent,  always  the 
same,  does  not  change.  I  cannot  act  without  Him,  if 
I  believe  that  He  only  is  perfect  in  His  ways.  But, 
note,  this  docs  not  suppose  there  is  not  exercise  and 
trial  of  heart;  or,  indeed,  waiting  upon  God  would  not 
have  to  be  called  for.  But  if  God  is  faithful,  and 
awaits  the  time  suited  to  the  truth  and  His  own 
character,  so  that  His  ways  should  be  perfect,  He  is 
full  of  goodness  and  tender  love  to  those  who  wait 
upon  Him.  He  calls  upon  them  to  pour  out  their 
hearts  before  Him.  How  truly  was  this  the  case  with 
Christ,  too !  How  in  John  xii.,  and  above  all  in 
Gethsemanc,  He  poured  out  His  heart  before  God ! 
God  is  always  a  refuge:  He  acts  in  the  right  time. 
He  is  always  a  refuge  for  the  heart;  and  the  heart 
realizes  what  He  is  when  the  deliverance  is  not  come: 
and  in  some  respects  this  is  more  precious  than  the 
deliverance  itself.     But  this  supposes  integrity. 

But  yet  another  point.  The  effect  of  thus  waiting 
on  God's  deliverance  is  to  make  us  know  that  it  will 
be  perfect  and  complete  when  it  does  come.  "  I  shall 
not  be  moved."  He  had  to  wait,  indeed,  till  God  came 
in  in  perfectness;  but,  then,  His  power  secured  from 
all.  Man  may  think  there  is  a  resource  in  man,  or  in 
what  man  possesses,  or  in  man's  strength  of  will;  but 
power,  faitli  knows,  belongs  to  God.  The  last  verse 
shows  that  the  soul  is  looking  to  the  perfect,  divine 
righteousness  of  (Jod's  ways,  but  in  the  sense  of  in- 
tegrity. The  final  intervention  of  God,  the  judgment 
Ho  executes,  will  be  the  deliverance  of  the  righteous. 

N 


186  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   OX 

He  lias  identified  himself  with  God's  ways  on  earth  in 
heart,  and  waited  till  God  makes  them  good,  perfectly 
good,  in  power.  But  this  will  be  the  end  of  evil,  and 
mercy  to  those  who  have  sought  good,  and  waited  for 
God  to  avenge  them.  It  will  be  a  righteous  reward 
to  the  expecting,  righteous  man:  his  waiting  will  be 
met,  and  the  power  of  evil  set  aside.  In  this  path  we 
have  to  walk.  God  deals  so  now  in  government,  though 
not  in  its  final  accomplishment;  but  we  have  thus  to 
count  and  wait  upon  Him. 

Psalm  lxiii.  supposes  the  full  knowledge  of  the 
blessings  of  relationship  with  God,  but  not  the  full 
enjoyment  of  those  blessings;  on  the  contrary,  that 
he  who  thus  knows  them  is  in  a  place  entirely  the 
contrary  of  all  their  blessedness.  But,  then,  the 
thing  sought  and  desired  is  not  the  blessing,  but  God 
Himself,  and  the  revelation  of  His  glory  where  He 
dwells.  The  whole  being  thirsts  after  Himself.  The 
effect  of  being  in  the  world,  in  the  dry  and  thirsty 
land,  is  not  complaint,  nor  even  looking  for  deliver- 
ance ;  but  thirst  is  thirsting  after  God.  This  sense  of 
nature  which  craves  after  Him  gives  us  the  conscious- 
ness also  that  He  is  our  God.  It  is  the  perfect 
delight  the  divine  nature  in  us  has  in  Him  which  gives 
the  sense  of  this  relationship.  They  cannot  be  sepa- 
rated. To  have  any  knowledge  of  God,  and  not  know 
Him  as  ours,  is  despair,  or  near  to  it  as  may  be.  And 
God  even  so  is  not  known  as  the  spring  of  delight,  so 
that  we  desire  Him.  "My  God,"  and  this  thirst 
cannot  be  separated.  It  is  not  Jehovah  and  blessings, 
but  the  divine  nature  and  God  its  delight;  but  with 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LX1II.  187 

the  dependent  sense  of  appropriation  expressed  in 
"my  God."  The  soul  which  has  the  same  desires  in 
their  nature  as  Cud  Himself,  hence  (desires  after  Him- 
self), feels  morally  and  really  that  He  is  its  God.  This 
was  perfectly  so  in  Christ  only;  and  we  never  lose  the 
sense  of  relationship  and  retain  this.  Still,  it  is  true 
in  the  nature  of  the  delight,  when  that  delight  does 
not  take  the  form  of  relationship,  but  of  nature;  when 
I  do  not  say,  Father,  but  "my  God." 

But,  then,  this  very  thirst  and  desire  after  God  longs 
to  see  Him  possessing  His  full  power  and  glory,  and 
must.  We  cannot  love  much  one  we  look  up  to,  with- 
out desiring  Him  to  enjoy  all  the  fulness  (if  the  glory 
that  belongs  to  Him,  and  to  see  Him  in  it.  We  owe 
our  delight  in  Him,  and  feeling  of  indebtedness  to 
Him;  we  must  desire  He  should  have  all  that  is  due 
to  Him,  and  that  we  should  see  Him  have  it.  And 
this  feeling  even  Christ  meets:  "Father,  I  will  that 
they  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I  am, 
that  they  may  behold  my  glory,  for  thou  lovedst  me 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  But  the  main 
desire,  the  spring  of  all  this  is,  the  desire  after  God 
Himself,  and  known  as  our  God,  come  what  will.  Not 
only  the  heart  can  appropriate  it,  as  has  been  said,  but 
would  have  it  so,  and  none  else.  The  nature  which  is 
of  God  would  have  none  but  Him,  and  would  earnestly 
have  Him.  Where  God  is  truly  known  thus,  and  the 
soul  identified  with  Him  in  desire,  the  fact  that  it  is 
where  thei'e  is  not  one  drop  of  what  can  refresh  it,  as 
is  the  case  in  this  world,  only  renders  this  longing  after 
Him  more  intense.  But  it  is  because  He  is  known, 
known  as  He  reveals  Himself  in  the  intimacy  of  His 


188       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

own  nature,  in  the  sanctuary  where  He  displays  Him- 
self and  makes  Himself  known.  But  with  this  there 
is  another  thought — that  is,  when  God  is  thus  known 
as  He  is  in  the  sanctuary,  His  loving  kindness,  His 
grace,  and  favour,  and  goodness,  are  felt  by  the  soul. 
The  sense  of  them  rests  upon  it.  That  is  better  than 
life.  Life  is  life  here,  the  present  enjoyment  of  it  in 
this  world;  and  as  to  that,  he  had  absolutely  nothing 
of  it — as  Pa\il :  "If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in 
Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  There, 
indeed,  it  was  more  outward  pressure — here  the  inward, 
necessary  sense,  from  the  life  in  which  he  speaks  and 
feels  here,  that  there  was  not  the  smallest  thing  in 
what  was  in  the  world  which  could  meet  and  refresh 
that  nature.  So  perfectly  with  Christ.  Still,  though 
connected  with  trial,  this  was  remarkably  imfolded  in 
Paul.  He  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  alway,  when  nothing 
refreshed  his  spirit. 

Hence,  in  the  sense  of  this  loving  kindness,  in  a  dry 
and  thirsty  land  his  lips  praised  his  God.  This  is  ver}- 
swect:  and,  note,  it  is  perfect  in  its  nature,  because  it 
is  simply  God;  for  in  the  land  the  saint  is  in,  there  is 
absolutely  nothing.  God,  his  God,  is  his  desire;  His 
loving  kindness  is  the  refreshing  of  his  soul.  Now 
this  is  perfect,  divine  life  in  one  having  the  divine 
nature,  but  in  the  place  of  dependence,  known  only 
to  the  soul  born  of  God,  or  in  its  perfection.  So 
Christ.  This  gives,  then,  exchisivcly  its  colour  to  life. 
"Thus  will  I  bless  thee  while  I  live"  (down  here  in 
the  dry  and  thirsty  land).  This  is  all  his  soul  lives  in 
here:  Hence,  in  this  life  he  blesses  God,  his  God.  His 
whole  life   in  the  dry  land  is,   in  spirit,    out   of  it. 


THE    l'SA J.MS.— PSALM   LXIII.  189 

Nothing  attracts  his  soul  in  it  at  all.  It  finds  its 
refreshings,  because  the  land  is  altogether  such  to  the 
new  nature,  wholly  in  God.  Yet  he  is  not  in  the  pre- 
sent, full  enjoyment  of  God  as  present;  he  is  still  in 
the  dry  and  thirsty  land,  but  blesses  while  he  lives, 
and  owns  and  worships  the  God  he  thus  knows.  But 
there  is  perfect  happiness  and  satisfaction  of  heart 
when  separated  from  the  turmoil  of  the  world,  and 
when  nothing  is  there  to  engage  the  flesh's  attention, 
which  is  perfect  misery  to  the  flesh,  but  real  deliver- 
ance to  the  renewed  spirit,  the  soul  can  meditate  upon 
God  Himself.  The  soul  finds  in  God  Himself  the  full- 
oat  and  richest  food.  The  soul  is  satisfied,  docs  not 
want  anything  else,  when  it  can  be.  thus  alone  with 
God,  in  which  is  its  delight — it  is  filled  with  it. 

So  in  coming  to  Christ  (only  there  negatively,  which 
is  what  human  nature  in  this  world  wanted — here  posi- 
tively, because  it  is  the  new  nature's  delight  in  God), 
"  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger,  and  he  that 
believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst."  There  shall  not 
be  the  unsatisfied  cravings  of  men's  hearts  in  this 
world.  But  here  there  is  the  full  satisfaction.  The 
delights  of  the  heart  are  created  and  satisfied  with  the 
revelation  of  God  Himself.  God  is  essentially  delighted 
in  and  enjoyed.  And  as  the  soul  is  full,  so  it  overflows 
in  praise;  the  mouth  praises  with  joyful  lips.  There 
is  not  the  need  here  of  weighing  how  far  we  are 
enabled,  or  entitled,  to  praise  in  the  state  we  are  in. 
It  is  the  new  nature  finding  its  own  proper  delight  in 
God,  and  thinking  (as  the  new  nature  does  not)  of 
nothing  else;  and  because  thinking  of  Him  simply, 
has  not  itself  to  think  of,  and  praises  because  He  is  ti 


190       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

source  of  praise.  And  this  is  true  simplicity.  When 
the  eye  is  not  single,  the  thought  of  God  detects  it, 
and  comes  as  a  claim,  and  forces  us  to  think  of  our- 
selves; but  when,  as  is  here  supposed,  it  is  simply  the 
new  nature,  its  whole  delight  is  simply  in  God,  and  the 
lips  praise  joyfully.  This  simplicity  of  heart  is  very 
blessed.  Remark  here,  that  while  it  speaks  of  this, 
the  psalm  supposes  one  exposed  to  the  distractions  of 
the  world,  and  hence  looks  to  the  condition  of  the  soul 
in  loneliness,  where,  instead  of  feeling  that,  it  is  only 
delivered  from  distraction  to  delight  in  God. 

Next,  the  psalm  takes  up  not  merely  distractions, 
but  adverse  circumstances — -the  force  of  enemies.  The 
soul  sees  God,  its  God,  as  its  help,  that  is,  as  having 
been  so.  God  was  his  joy;  and  his  soul,  in  this  wholly 
desert  world,  where  no  water  is,  was  satisfied  as  with 
marrow  and  fatness.  That  was  taking  it  in  spirit  out 
of  the  world,  making  it  joy  in  God.  But  the  Blessed 
One  was  what  he  needed  for  this  world  too,  its  conflicts 
and  trials.  And  this  is  very  gracious  of  God.  We 
rejoice  in  the  Lord  always  as  looking  to  the  source  of 
our  joy.  But  if  without  are  fightings,  and  even  within 
fears,  He  comforts  them  that  are  cast  down.  "  Because 
thou  hast  been  my  help."  But  here  is  described  as 
already  experienced  what  Paul  speaks  of  himself  as 
experiencing.  Hence  it  is  the  aspect  of  the  soul 
towards  God  because  of  this.  The  soul  would  rejoice 
under  the  shadow  of  God's  wings.  It  was  the  known 
place  of  refuge  and  confidence.  There  is  the  comfort 
of  feeling  at  all  times,  the  favour  of  God,  and  the 
secxirity  in  which  we  thus  dwell.  I  know  not  what 
may  arise,  but  He  will  bo  there;  nor  this  only,  but 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    LXIV.  101 

the  sense  of  His  goodness  and  active  interest  in  the 
soul  is  a  source  of  sweet  joy  to  it.  The  soul  rejoices 
in  having  this  divine  favour  its  refuge,  and  actively 
interested  in  securing  it.  Thus  the  soul's  condition  is 
this:  in  its  activities  it  follows  hard  after  God.  It 
would  follow  Him,  come  to  Him,  enjoy  His  presence; 
and  it  had  the  sure  certainty  that  His  right  hand 
upholds  it.  The  latter  verses  are  the  judgment  on  the 
enemies  of  the  godly  men,  according  to  the  govern- 
ment of  God,  and  particularly  the  enemies  of  Christ. 
But  our  present  object  is  the  former  part.  Still,  as  we 
have  often  seen,  God  does  govern,  and  we  may  reckon 
so  far  upon  His  interference  as  is  needed  for  securing 
the  blessing  of  His  people  who  depend  upon  Him, 
though  it  may  not  be  at  the  moment  our  nature  could 
desire.  On  the  whole,  the  psalm  shews  us  simple  faith, 
the  soul  making  God  Himself  its  joy,  and  rejoicing  in 
the  sure  care  of  the  Lord,  whose  favour  protected  it  as 
a  shield.  If  we  compare  this  psalm  with  psalm  lxxxiv., 
which  in  many  respects  resembles  it,  it  will  bo  seen 
that  there  the  present  enjoyment  of  covenant  blessings 
is  in  view,  and  the  way  up  to  them;  here,  more  what 
God  Himself  is,  as  away  from  them  in  the  dry,  thirsty 
land,  and  His  protection  and  care  in  tho  difficulties 
and  dangers  we  are  in  there.  If  we  think  of  the  rem- 
nant driven  out,  which  is  the  character  of  this  book 
prophetically,  it  makes  this  view  easily  intelligible. 

Psalm  Ixiv.  shows  a  peculiar  course  of  things  in  the 
world,  yet  one  with  which  every  one  exercised  in  the 
service  of  God  in  this  world  is  familiar — that  of  the 
wicked,  who  hate  righteousness,  seeking  to  charge  evil 


192       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

on  the  upright.  This  shows  the  universality  and  power 
of  conscience,  and  another  truth  too — that  the  prin- 
ciples of  those  who  trust  God  and  confess  His  name  are 
expected  to  produce  what  is  purely  good.  This  is 
really  the  strongest  witness  to  the  principles  of  faith  on 
the  one  hand,  and  to  the  utter  wickedness  of  the  human 
heart  on  the  other.  The  wicked  recognize  that  faith 
ought  to  produce,  and,  as  its  own  proper  fruit,  does 
produce,  what  is  right  and  perfect,  and  expects  it  from 
him  who  walks  by  faith.  But  they  show  their  hatred 
of  that  principle,  and  of  those  who  cleave  to  the  Lord 
by  it,  by  searching  out  iniquity  and  inconsistency. 
This  is  a  ten'ible  proof  of  the  wickedness  of  the  world; 
and  yet  it  is  universal,  not  only  found,  yea,  not  so  much 
found  among  the  openly  ungodly  as  in  decent  unbe- 
lievers. Here  it  is  indeed  in  those  who  pursue  iniquity 
wilfully,  not  evident  immorality,  but  wickedness,  who 
are  pursuing  it  in  their  secret  counsels.  Yet  it  is  the 
spirit  of  evil  in  man.  Plotting  is  characteristic  of  evil, 
but  its  extreme  character.  But  there  is  concurrence 
of  feeling  and  acting  with  a  like  mind  when  it  has  not 
gone  so  far  as  plotting,  because  a  like  spirit  animates 
them.  Then  their  tongues  are  the  instruments  of  attack 
and  injury.  The  saint  has  no  outward  defence  or 
remedy;  but  as  to  this,  as  with  regard  to  violence,  God 
is  his  refuge.  Remark,  he  speaks  of  the  fear  of  the 
enemy.  This  malice  tends  to  produce  fear.  The  godly 
is  no  equal  match  for  it,  he  can  use  no  weapon  against 
it.  He  leaves  it  to  God  in  representing  it  to  Him. 
God  exercises  His  saints;  but  in  result  the  wicked  bring 
His  judgment  on  their  own  heads,  and  even  fear  and 
see  and  own  God's  work.    For  that  the  godly  must  wait, 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   LXV.  193 

:uid  then  joy  will  be  complete,  though  their  deliverance, 
being  a  divine  one,  must  wait  till  the  divine  time  of 
judgment  arrive.  So  Abraham  was  kept  a  stranger  and 
bis  descendants  under  oppression,  "for  the  iniquity  of 
the  Amoritcs  was  not  yet  full."  It  may  be  that  the 
trial  is  not  complete  for  us,  but  in  all  events,  when  God 
intervenes,  it  will  be  the  perfect  time  for  us.  But 
another  thing  than  our  deliverance  results.  The  deli- 
verance being  in  God's  time,  and  so  according  to  His 
perfect  judgments,  His  ways  are  displayed  in  it.  And 
God's  judgment  being  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of 
the  world  learn  righteousness.  That  is  the  full  accom- 
plishment; but  even  in  particular  cases,  men  glorify 
God  in  the  day  of  visitation,  and  own  that  they  who 
trusted  God  were  right;  that  God,  who  seemed  not  to 
interfere,  only  awaited  in  His  holy  righteousness,  and 
that  He  does  care  for  the  righteous,  and  thus  His  ways 
■are  perfect.  And  this  is  an  immense  gain.  God  is 
glorified. 

Psalm  lxv.  refers  directly  to  the  blessing  of  this 
creation,  and  the  praise  and  joy  which  will  spring  forth 
when  He  sets  aside  the  power  of  evil,  but  looks,  as 
witnesses  of  it,  to  the  present  effect  of  His  goodness. 
It  looks,  for  the  groaning  creation  waits,  not  only  for 
Israel  as  here,  but  much  more  in  order  to  its  deliverance, 
for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God,  for  the  blessing 
of  God's  people,  that  this  universal  blessing  may  take 
place;  but  the  heart  is  ready,  and  this  leads  us  to  a 
general  principle  instructive  to  us  at  all  times.  The 
readiness  of  heart  to  praise  in  the  midst  of  trial,  and 
the  almighty  power  which  is  looked  to,  whose  nature  is 


194       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

to  give  blessing.  But  this  psalm  again  applies  only  to 
the  circumstances  of  the  believer.  The  Christian  is 
never,  according  to  the  Spirit,  in  a  state  of  soul  in  which 
he  cannot  praise.  His  heart  may  have  got  away  from 
God,  so  that  the  Spirit  has  to  rebuke  him  and  humble 
him,  but  then  praise  is  not  ready  at  all.  Here  the 
thought  is,  that  though  the  heart  be  ready,  circum- 
stances do  not  furnish  occasion  to  praise.  Praise  is 
silent,  though  there  is  the  consciousness  that  praise 
belongs  to  God ;  the  vow  will  be  performed.  This  may 
be  the  Christian's  case.  He  may  say  in  trying  circum- 
stances, I  am  sure  T  shall  yet  praise  and  thank  Him  for 
deliverance.  And  this  is  a  right  spirit.  As  to  our 
highest  praise,  this  is  always  the  case.  In  the  heavenly 
courts  our  praise  is  yet  silent,  and  we  wait  and  long  for 
it.  Verse  4  plainly  shows  that  is  the  Jewish  form  of 
it:  this  is  the  thought  of  the  psalm.  The  general 
thought  there  is,  we  only  await  the  blessing  to  be  ful- 
filled for  praise  to  break  out.  God's  faithfulness  and 
power  are  celebrated  as  assuring  this.  Here  in  judg- 
ment and  for  earthly  blessings ;  but  the  Christian, 
whatever  hindrances  and  adverse  powers  there  may  be, 
counts  on  this  faithfulness  and  power  of  God  to  bring 
him  into  the  heavenly  city.  Transgressions  will  not 
bar  the  way;  through  grace  only,  we  say,  "thou  hast 
purged  them  away."  He  hears  our  prayer  and  helps  us. 
Further,  it  is  a  question  of  the  necessary  glory  of  the 
Lord,  and  even  in  the  earthly  part,  but  the  principle  is 
there.  All  flesh  must  come  to  Him.  This  the  Jew 
looked  to  as  a  part  of  the  glory.  God's  purposes  must 
be  accomplished  to  His  glory,  but  He  has  in  grace- 
identified  them  with  us.     As  Paul  expi'esses  it,  by  the 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  LXVL       195 

Spirit,  All  the  promises  of  God  are  in  Him  (Christ)  yea, 
and  in  Him  amen,  to  the  glory  of  God  hy  ns.  Hence 
faith,  assured  that  God  must  be  glorified,  looks  to  our 
own  glory  and  blessing  in  it.  This  marks  faith,  not 
believing  that  God  is  glorious,  but  connecting  His  glory 
with  the  blessing  of  His  people.  So  Moses,  "What 
wilt  thou  do  to  thy  great  name?"  "The  Egyptians 
will  hear  of  it ;"  and  so  ever  in  his  pleadings  with  God. 
What  a  source  of  security  and  ground  for  praise,  that 
God  should  have  thus  identified  His  glory  with  our 
blessing  and  His  promises  to  us  in  Christ ! 

Psalm  Ixvi.  There  is  one  point  in  this  psalm  as  to 
its  moral  force  which  is  of  great  interest  to  notice:  the 
way  in  which,  when  deliverance  comes,  all  is  ascribed 
to  God.  And  God  is  seen  all  through.  It  goes  back 
to  original  redemption,  the  unequivocal  source  of  all 
(verse  G),  while  the  final  blessing  of  God's  people  is  the 
blessing  of  the  world.  Even  when  all  seemed  to  have 
been  darkness,  it  is  now  seen  His  power  was  above  all. 
He  rules  by  His  power  for  ever.  His  eyes  behold  the 
nations.  "Woe  to  him  that  exalts  himself.  But  not 
only  this  God  is  seen  in  the  trouble  itself,  and  as  the 
author  of  it;  though  our  failures  may  have  been  the 
occasion  of  it.  This  is  the  true  test  of  the  heart  being 
right — what  is  called  (as  to  Israel,  in  Leviticus),  accept- 
ing the  punishment  of  our  iniquity.  Two  things  are 
seen  in  it:  God  brought  them  into  the  trouble;  He  held 
their  soul  in  life  through  it.  So  with  Job  in  both 
points.  Nor  did  He  suffer  their  feet  to  be  moved  out 
of  the  divine  path  of  faith  by  the  trial.  Verses  10, 
11,  recognize  this;  and  if  instruments  were  employed, 


196       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

yet  they  were  but  instruments.  The  trial  was,  and 
they  see  and  feel  it,  very  great ;  but  it  was  God's 
doing.  Nor  was  this  all.  God  has  a  positive  purpose 
in  this :  a  path,  a  place  of  love  which  He  carries 
through,  and  of  which  the  trial  was  a  part  to  fit  the 
soul  for  the  place  of  so  great  blessing.  "Thou 
broughtest  me  out  into  a  wealthy  place."  God  sends 
the  trouble,  preserves  the  soul  in  it,  piirges  the  soul 
by  it  as  silver,  brightens  its  hope  which  rests  more 
entirely  on  Him,  and  looks  with  purer  eye  for  what 
He  has  pi'omised,  and  then  brings  out  into  a  wealthy 
place.  But  some  other  points  come  out  as  to  the 
state  of  the  soul  meanwhile.  The  trouble  had  cast 
the  soul  on  God.  And  though  to  us  all  such  things 
as  vows  are  wrong,  yet  the  reference  of  the  heart  to 
Him,  the  turning  of  it  to  Him  as  the  source  of  hope  in 
a  better  way,  though  under  chastisement,  is  just  what 
hoping  in  Him  produces.  Have  confidence  in,  and 
wait  on  Him  when  tried  and  chastened;  till  the  will  is 
broken,  we  cannot;  when  it  is,  we  can,  though  conscioxis 
the  sorrow  is  the  fruit  of  our  fault.  This  supposes 
integrity;  it  issues  in  thanksgiving.  The  heart  can 
then,  too,  bear  testimony  for  God  to  others;  it  has 
known  what  He  has  been  for  itself.  It  cried  and  He 
heard.  This,  says  the  apostle,  is  the  confidence  we 
have  in  Him.  For  what  is  here  learnt  through  sorrow, 
should  be  the  constant  state  of  the  soul  without  it. 
Still  the  governing  feeling  of  the  so\il  is  its  own  thank- 
fulness, and  so  it  will  be.  It  will  turn  back  to  that, 
that  is,  to  God — to  the  secret  of  its  own  thankfulness 
to  Him,  which  is  the  joy  of  the  heart.  The  force  of  the 
psalm  is  recognizing  all  this  after  deliverance ;  but 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXVIL,   LXVIII.        197 

what  it  produces  when   received  into  the  heart,   is 
answering  faith  when  the  trouble  is  there. 

On  psalm  Ixvii.  I  have  only  a  remark  to  make.  The 
glory  of  God  is  the  spring  of  the  desire  of  the  heart 
for  blessings  even  on  His  people.  Then  blessings  flow- 
out  and  praise  goes  up  to  God.  This  psalm  explains 
Romans  xi.  1 5. 

On  psalm  lxviii.,  striking  and  interesting  as  the 
psalm  is,  I  have,  for  our  present  object,  little  to  say.  A 
remark  or  two,  by  the  by,  present  themselves  to  me. 
It  is  specially  God's  character  as  regards  the  Jews  in 
grace,  but  in  His  own  sovereign  grace,  not  in  covenant 
relationship,  but  as  establishing  them,  as  once  in  Sinai, 
only  now  in  grace  and  power.  Jab.  is  not  the  same  as 
Jehovah,  I  am  fully  persuaded.  It  is  the  absolute 
existence  of  God,  not  His  continuous  existence,  so  as 
to  reckon  on  His  faithfulness,  who  was,  and  is,  and  is 
to  come.  He  is  here,  lives  for  ever  and  ever.  He  is 
only  called  Jehovah  in  the  psalm  when  He  speaks  of 
His  dwelling  on  the  mountain  of  Zion  and  His  abiding. 
Because  there  He  takes  His  covenant  place  and  name. 
We  have  Jab,  verses  4 — 18;  but,  Lord,  elsewhere  in 
the  psalm,  is  Adonai.  It  seems  to  me  to  connect 
Christ  with  the  restoration  of  Israel,  to  give  Him  the 
place  of  Lord,  but  more  associated  with  His  being  also 
Jehovah  than  psalm  ex.  Verse  18  is  naturally  the 
centre  of  this,  only  where,  as  He  is  Jehovah  in  Zion 
according  to  promise,  here  ascended  on  His  rejection, 
He  receives  gifts  as  man.  He  is  beyond  all  Jewish 
promises.     Yet  it  applies  to  Jews,  the  rebellious.     But 


198       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

there  it  is  not  Jehovah,  hut  J  ah  Elohim.  Christ's 
exaltation  will  bring  back  God  in  soverign  grace  into 
the  midst  of  Israel. 

Psalm  lxix.  is  so  fully  prophetical  of  Christ  that  I 
make  no  remark  on  it  here.  It  is  a  full  description  of 
His  sorrows  in  life  and  death.  I  have  spoken  of  it 
fully  elsewhere. 

Psalm  lxx.  calls  for  only  one  remark.  The  willing- 
ness to  be  anything — poor,  needy,  despised — provided 
the  people  of  God  be  happy  and  in  a  condition  which 
draws  forth  their  praise.  The  Lord's  blessing  is  not 
despised,  but  for  it  the  Lord  is  waited  for.  But  the 
heart  set  on  the  happiness  and  blessing  of  God's 
people — this  is  the  true  spirit  of  faith  in  the  saint. 

Psalm  lxxi.  will  not  detain  us  either.  It  rests  on 
two  points.  God's  righteousness — the  psalmist  claims 
nothing  on  the  ground  of  his  own;  but  God  will  be 
consistent  with  Himself — not  desert  or  abandon  him. 
Hence  he  counts  on  His  faithfulness. 

Psalm  Ixxii.  is  Christ's  glory  as  Solomon,  so  as  not  to 
call  for  our  remarking  anything  here  on  its  contents. 

Although  psalm  lxxiii.,  which  begins  the  third  book 
of  Psalms,  refers  directly  to  the  temporal  judgment  of 
God  in  Israel,  as  satisfying  the  anxieties  of  heart  among 
the  faithful;  yet,  as  these  anxieties  are  of  all  times,  we 
shall  find  something  to  note  here.  We  see  the  ungodly 
having  their  way,  so  that  God  seems  to  have  forgotten, 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    LXXIII.  190 

and  the  heart  is  envious.  But  it  shows,  in  our  case, 
too  often,  that  the  heart  would  yet  have  its  portion 
here — at  least  a  portion  here  as  well  as  one  to  come. 
The  sorrow  at  the  power  of  evil  in  the  world  is  right, 
hut  it  mingles  itself  in  our  minds  with  liking  to  have 
tine's  own  way  and  judgment  in  setting  it  aside.  When 
the  will  mixes  itself  up  with  the  sense  of  the  success  «. 
<»f  evil,  it  is  either  irritated  or  disheartened  so  as  to 
give  up  perseverance  in  good.  The  ungodly  prosper 
in  the  world.  What  a  riddle !  Where  is  God's  govern- 
ment? What  is  the  use  of  good?  No  douht  it  was 
more  directly  trying  where  temporal  blessings  had  heen 
made  a  sign  of  divine  favour.  But  Christians  are  sel- 
dom separated  enough  from  this  world  not  to  feel  the 
success  of  wickedness,  and  a  desire  to  take  vengeance  " 
on  it.  Mere  indifference  to  it  is  utterly  evil.  Thus 
the  path  is  narrow,  and  grace  must  work  in  the  heart 
to  lead  us  in  it,  to  feel  the  evil  in  itself,  to  feel  God's 
glory  cast  in  the  dust  by  it;  but  to  bide  God's  time 
and  way,  as  Christ  did  when  He  suffered.  There  is  no 
place  of  learning  but  in  the  sanctuary.  There  the  will 
is  bowed — there  God  is  known — there  the  eye  is  not 
obscured  by  the  passions  of  the  world,  and  an  ignor-  <- 
ance  of  how  to  do  what  God  alone  could  do — make 
allowance  for  any  good,  have  perfect  patience  with  evil, 
.so  that  judgment  shall  be  simply  on  evil,  and  be  true 
judgment  on  evil  without  excuse.  Our  impatience 
would  be  nothing  of  tins,  even  where  the  evil  as  such 
is  justly  judged.  But  in  the  sanctuary  will  is  silent  - 
and  God  is  listened  to.  His  ways  are  right,  and  we  see 
things  with  His  eye.  The  evil  is  worse,  the  compassion 
right,  the  patience  adorable,  yet  the  judgment  sure; 


200       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

so  that  the  sense  of  righteousness  is  not  crossed  in  the 
heart,  though  the  will  of  vengeance  is;  for  the  wrath 
of  man  does  not  work  the  righteousness  of  God.  The 
judgment  is  righteous  because  patience  is  perfect — far 
more  terrible  because  there  is  no  passion  in  it.  It  refers 
to  God.  When  we  desire  that  fire  may  come  down 
from  heaven,  self  is  in  it.  We  do  not  know  what  man- 
ner of  spirit  we  are  of.  Yet,  in  one  sense,  they  really 
deserved  it.  When  God  awakes,  in  His  own  just  time, 
they  are  as  a  dream.  Their  pride,  pretensions — all  is 
as  a  departed  image.  Faith  has  to  believe  this,  and 
leave  them  there. 

But  another  blessed  truth  comes  out  here.  He  had 
been  foolish,  ignorant — "as  a  beast,"  as  he  says, 
"before  God;"  yet  there  had  been  integrity  and  con- 
science. If  he  had  let  his  thoughts  loose  when  half 
disposed  to  say  godliness  was  no  use,  he  would  have 
offended  against  the  generation  of  God's  children. 
This  checked  him.  How  beautiful  to  sec  in  the  way- 
wardness of  man's  will  these  holy  affections,  this  con- 
science of  putting  a  stumbling-block  in  the  path  of  the 
weakest  of  God's  children,  check  the  heart,  and  show 
where  the  affections  really  are,  and  that  fear  of  God 
which  shows  He  is  lovingly  known — that  the  new 
nature  is  there !  It  is  a  great  mark  of  good  that  God 
is  owned.  But  what  he  knows  of  himself  is  that  he 
was  as  a  beast  in  his  heart's  reasoning  as  it  did.  But, 
then,  mark  what  is  seen.  He  comes  to  see  that,  in 
spite  of  all  this,  while  owning  his  folly,  he  was  con- 
tinually with  God.  0  how  the  full  knowledge  of  self, 
when  we  know  as  we  are  known,  will  show  the  patient, 
unvarying  grace  of  God  waiting  on  us  all  the  way  in 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXIII.  201 

adorable  love  and  interest  in  ns !  Through  all  his  fool- 
ishness he  was  continually  with  God,  and  God  had 
holden  him  by  his  right  hand.  Blessed  grace !  God 
loves  us,  cares  for  us,  watches  over  ns,  is  interested  in 
us;  because  of  His  sovereign  love,  we  are  necessary  to 
His  satisfaction.  He  withdraweth  not  His  eyes  from 
the  righteous.  This  is  a  wondrous  thought  of  con- 
stant grace.  But  He  is  God,  and  not  man.  And  so 
the  heart  here  coimts  on  Him.  Up  to  this,  through 
all  his  shortcoming  in  faith,  he  could  say,  "  Thou  hast 
holden:"  now  he  says,  as  in  communion,  "Thou  wilt 
guide  me  by  thy  counsel."  This  is  not  merely  holding 
up  unconsciously;  it  is  the  mind  and  will  of  God  guid- 
ing us  in  communion.  Hence  it  is  seen  when  he  has 
judged  himself  and  is  in  communion,  it  is  not  that 
God  does  not  guide  ns,  make  us  go  according  to  His 
own  counsels,  when  we  are  not  in  communion — holdinu- 
our  mouths  with  bit  and  bridle;  for  He  does.  But  the 
soul  does  not  understand  it — then  cannot  speak,  as 
here,  in  the  knowledge  of  His  doing  it  by  His  counsel. 
This  He  does.  Here  we  meet,  in  the  full  force  of  the 
passage,  the  plain  distinction  of  the  Jewish  position. 
"After  the  glory,  thou  wilt  receive  me."  It  has  been 
altered  to  make  more  of  it  for  Christian  ideas,  and  the 
true  meaning  lost.  (Comp.  Zech.  ii.  8.)  After  the 
glory,  when  that  is  set  up,  Israel  will  be  received;  but 
in  that  glory  we  shall  come  with  Christ.  The  heart  is 
now  set  right  by  this  visit  to  the  sanctuary:  "Whom 
in  heaven  but  the  Lord."  We,  indeed,  may  have  our 
thought  expanded  by  the  knowledge  of  the  Father  and 
the  Son;  still,  the  truth  abides  only  better  known. 
Who  in  heaven  but  God,  the  centre  and  source  and  all 

o 


202       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

of  blessing.  On  earth,  where,  with  such  as  we  not 
thus  fixed  on  God,  there  might  be  distracting  desires, 
there  is  no  source  of  delight  with  Him;  that  is,  He  is 
the  only  one.  Singleness  of  eye  is  complete.  As  we 
are  in  the  world,  it  does  make  us  feel  alone,  but  alone 
with  God.  So  the  blessed  Saviour.  "All  ye  shall  be 
offended  in  me  this  night  and  shall  leave  me  alone ;  but 
I  am  not  alone,  for  the  Father  is  with  me."  In  one 
sense  the  heart  accepts  the  dominancy  of  evil  and  is 
blessedly  abstracted  from  all  to  God.  See  thus  the 
blessing  of  this  seeming  evil.  Were  all  peaceful  and 
good,  prosperous  in  the  present  and  imperfect  state  of 
things,  the  heart  would  sink  into  that  imperfect  state 
and  be  really  worldly;  but  the  prevalence  of  evil, 
though  pressing  on  the  spirit,  the  will  checked  by  the 
feeling  that  one  cannot  dissociate  oneself  from  God's 
people,  drives  to  the  sanctuary  of  God.  The  heart  is 
weaned  from  this  world,  and,  in  a  world  where  evil  does 
prevail,  looks  up  to  God,  has  Himself  for  its  portion 
alone  in  heaven,  and  so  nothing  along  with  Him  on  the 
earth.  He  holds  the  one  sovereign  place  in  the  heart. 
Nothing  competes  with  Him  at  all  as  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. "  Christ  is  all."  But  this  brings  in  another 
blessing.  This  endures.  Heart  and  flesh  fail.  Surely 
they  do.  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart.  He  stays 
with  divine  strength  and  goodness  and  sustains  the 
heart,  and  is  not  only  a  present  stay,  but  an  everlast- 
ing portion,  our  portion  for  ever.  This  leads  to  a  sweet 
and  earnest  conclusion.  It  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near 
to  God.  There  we  learn  truth;  there  we  find  comfort. 
He  has  put  his  trust  in  the  Lord  Jehovah,  in  One, 
sovereign  in  power,  abiding  and  faithful  in  promise. 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXIV.  203 

He  who  docs  will  surely  have  to  declare  all  His  won- 
drous works.  He  will  be  in  the  place  to  see  and  experi- 
ence them,  have  the  heart  to  notice  and  understand 
them,  the  joy  of  testifying  the  faithfulness  of  One  the 
heart  has  trusted.  In  verse  20  we  have  only  sovereign 
power  I  in  the  last  verse,  covenant  faithfulness  also. 

As  to  psalm  lxxiv.,  for  our  present  purpose  I  have 
oidy  one  remark  to  make.  We  find  in  it  confidence  in 
the  faithfulness  of  God,  when  as  to  outward  circum- 
stances, the  power  of  the  enemy  seemed  to  make  all 
hopeless  and  on  the  ground  of  confidence  in  Himself. 
But  then  what  He  is  for  His  people.  Redemption  has 
proved  His  deep  and  profound  interest  in  them.  They 
arc  His  own.  He  has,  though  taking  them  in  sovereign 
grace,  now  bound  Himself  up  (though  in  grace)  with 
them.  And  the  heart  says,  "  Arise,  0  God,  plead  thine 
own  cause."  This  is  very  blessed.  So  Moses  continu- 
ally. "  Thou  hast  brought  them  out."  Hence  if  the 
people  be  brought  utterly  low  and  the  tumult  of  ene- 
mies rise  higher  and  higher,  this  is  only  an  additional 
motive,  because  it  is  grace,  and  faithful  grace;  and 
power  over  all  things  is  with  Him.  The  heart  calls  on 
God  to  remember  the  attacks  and  reproaches  of  the 
enemy  instead  of  being  alarmed  by  them,  for  the 
reproach  is  on  His  name.  And  this  is  true.  For  the 
world's  enmity  is  really  against  the  Lord  in  being 
against  His  people.  Were  they  not  His  people,  they 
would  not  trouble  their  heads  inuch  about  them.  God's 
people  have  to  remember  the  same  thing,  and  in  their 
own  weakness  to  remember  what  is  in  question. 


204       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Psalm  lxxv.  is  the  certainty  and  righteous  govern 
ment  of  Christ's  kingdom.  Only  remark,  faith  gives 
thanks  before  it  is  set  up,  warning  the  presumptuous 
wicked,  for  God  is  the  judge.  Human  pretension  is 
no  use  against  Him.  Remark,  too,  that  when  Christ 
takes  the  kingdom,  all  is  confusion,  the  earth  and  its 
pillars  are  dissolved.  Our  hearts  should  even  say, 
God's  name  (for  us  the  Father)  is  near.  That  is  all  in 
which  He  reveals  Himself — is  close  to  us.  So  that  we 
can  ever  trust  and  not  be  afraid.  The  ways  and  deal- 
ings of  God  are  according  to  His  name.  We  believe 
in  His  name  of  Almighty  and  Most  High,  and  that  He 
will  avenge  the  persecuted  church  on  Babylon  and  its 
power,  but  it  is  not  God's  name  directly  with  us.  That, 
as  I  have  said,  is  Father.  Hence,  save  of  His  children, 
it  is  not  government.  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead 
by  the  glory  of  the  Father.  All  the  power  that  is  in 
that  name  so  displayed,  or  all  the  grace  and  faithful- 
ness of  it  for  those  who  are  risen  with  Him  and  loved 
as  He  is,  is  that  which  is  ever  near  to  us;  and  that 
wondrous  work  of  Christ's  resurrection  declares  it,  were 
death  itself  upon  us. 

Psalm  lxxvi.  The  general  subject  is  still  judgment 
executed  in  connexion  with  Israel.  But  there  is  a 
general  principle  we  may  notice.  First,  that  the  seat 
of  God's  blessing  and  throne,  or  its  manifestation  on 
earth,  low  as  it  may  fall,  is  more  excellent  than  all  the 
might  and  violence  of  man.  At  God's  rebuke  these 
fall  and  man  has  no  strength.  When  God  arises,  what 
can  man  do?  But  God's  execution  of  judgment  on  the 
earth  has  an  immediate  effect  and  purpose — the  deliv- 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXVII.  205 

erance  of  the  meek.  He  saves  all  the  meek  of  the 
earth.  His  love  and  faithful  goodness  are  even  here  in 
exercise.  Then  conies  another  principle,  applicable  at 
all  times  by  faith,  and  an  encouraging-  and  consoling 
principle.  God  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him. 
He  turns  everything  to  His  own  glory  and  purpose,  and 
then  stops  all  the  rest.  Where  faith  is  in  exercise,  it 
counts  on  God,  through  all,  sure  that  God  will  have  the 
last  and  final  word  in  the  matter. 

In  psalm  lxxvii.  we  have  some  instructive  points  to 
notice.  The  complaint  goes  further,  perhaps,  than  that 
of  any  Christian  ought  to  go.  The  seventh  verse  for 
us  would  be  simple  unbelief;  whereas  for  the  Jew,  whose 
people  arc  cast  off  as  regards  all  their  privileges,  the 
question  justly  arises,  as  in  Romans  xi.,  "  I  say  then 
hath  God  cast  away  His  people1?"  But  if  we  keep 
this  in  mind,  there  is  much  to  instruct  us  as  regards 
the  time  of  deep  trouble,  as  when  the  pressure  of 
very  adverse  circumstances,  or  even  our  own  fault, 
may  have  brought  the  soul  into  deep  distress,  as  to 
that  which  surrounds  it.  The  subject  of  this  psalm  is 
that  he  actually  and  actively  sought  the  Lord.  It 
was  a  direct  appeal  of  the  heart,  not  merely  a  wish 
nor  submission.  He  went  with  his  voice  to  God  about 
it.  This  is  more  important  than  we  are  apt  to  sup- 
pose. I  do  not  think  it  altogether  just,  "that  prayer 
is  the  soul's  sincere  desire,  littered  or  unexpressed." 
I  surely  admit  that  there  may  be  a  sigh  or  a  groan 
where  the  Holy  Ghost's  intercession  is,  and  that  the 
lifting  up  of  the  heart  to  God  will  never  find  repulse 
or  coldness  there.     All  that  I  admit ;  but  there  is  an 


206       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

actual  carrying  a  known  want  or  trouble  to  God,  the 
expression  of  the  need  we  are  in.  The  heart  expresses 
itself  in  a  distinct  application.  Thus  it  brings  itself 
before  God,  and  this  is  very  important  in  our  relation- 
ship with  God.  There  is  truth  in  the  inward  parts, 
and  true  confiding  dependence.  Up  to  this  there  was 
gnawing  trouble,  the  working  of  the  heart  on  the  trouble, 
the  soul  refusing  to  be  comforted.  The  will  was  at 
work,  and  could  not  get  what  it  wanted.  The  soul 
thinks  of  God,  but  no  comfort  was  there.  There  was 
but  its  own  thoughts  of  Him;  there  was  complaint, 
not  prayer,  and  the  spirit  overwhelmed.  So  when 
awake,  he  cannot  be  occupied  naturally  with  ordinary 
matters,  he  is  silent  through  trouble.  It  is  a  strong 
picture  of  a  thoroughly  distressed  soul,  only  fully  realized 
when  a  soul,  through  the  chastening  hand  of  God,  has 
lost  the  sense  of  divine  favour,  or  does  not  know  peace, 
but  which  in  degree  may  be  with  any  one.  But  the  soul 
turns  to  God.  It  has  enjoyed  mercy  and  songs  in  the 
night.  Would  the  Lord  cast  off  for  ever  ?  For  the 
Christian  this  question  has  no  place,  but  when  the 
shield  of  faith  is  down,  and  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked 
have  reached  the  heart — a  terrible  and  sore  chastise- 
ment. The  only  thing  like  it  is  when  a  soul  has  lightly 
received  the  Gospel  in  its  mercy  (without,  however* 
being  insincere),  and  the  work  of  conscience  goes  on 
afterwards.  When,  instead  of  communing  with  self 
and  reasoning  with  its  own  misery,  it  looks  to  God, 
the  heart  sees  all  this  is  in  itself,  not  in  God.  This 
is  the  turning  point.  But  the  Christian  does  not  go 
back  to  former  mercies  (as  the  Jew  would,  and  rightly 
would),  because  he  always  stands  in  present  favour, 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXVIII.  207 

even  if  Satan  have  got  hold  of  his  mind  for  a  time 
and  he  returns  into  the  sunshine  of  it,  when  the  cloud 
that  arose  out  of  his  own  heart  is  passed.  The  Jews 
had  early  sovereign  blessings,  and  are  right  to  remem- 
ber it  when  they  had  been  cast  off,  though  it  be  not 
for  ever.  The  Christian  is  never  cast  off.  Hence  he 
has  not  to  remember  but  enters  again  into  the  enjoy- 
ment of  divine  favour  which  has  never  ceased.  In  the 
rest  of  the  psalm  the  Christian  learns  God's  way  is  in 
the  sanctuary.  Let  His  favour  be  ever  so  unchange- 
able, His  way  is  always  according  to  His  own  holiness, 
though  for  the  very  same  reason — according  to  His 
own  faithful  love.  Whenover  Israel  turns  back,  it  is 
to  sovereign  grace  and  redemption.  God's  way  is  in 
the  sea — untraceable  and  in  power.  All  the  movements 
and  power  of  what  seems  ungovernable  and  not  to  be 
got  through  are  in  His  hand.  On  the  whole,  the 
psalm  is  the  contrast  between  the  working  of  the  soul 
in  restless  anxiety  in  thus  indulging  its  own  thoughts, 
and  turning,  when  it  has  recollected  God,  to  cry  to  Him- 
self. If  the  Christian  apply  it  to  interrupted  favour, 
he  is  all  wrong.  But  he  may  learn  in  respect  to  over- 
whelming sorrow  when  the  will  is  at  work,  that  there 
is  no  rest  till  the  soul  remembers  God  and  cries  to 
Him. 

Although  psalm  lxxviii.  be  evidently  a  recapitulation 
of  the  history  of  Israel,  convicting  them  of  their 
disobedience  and  unbelief — the  usclessness  as  to  their 
hearts  of  all  God's  dealings  with  them,  and  then,  so 
magnificently,  His  turning  to  His  own  sovereign  grace 
to  bless,  yet  there  are  some  of  the  marks  of  unbelief, 


208       PKACTICAL  KEFLECTIONS  ON 

and  warnings  as  to  it,  which  it  will  be  profitable  to  us 
to  note.  The  great  principle  of  the  psalm  which  I  have 
noticed  is  itself  of  the  highest  interest.  Sovereign 
grace  is  the  only  resource  of  God  if  He  is  to  bless 
man.  All  dealings,  however  gracious,  fail  of  their 
object.  He  loves  His  people,  but  He  has  no  resource 
for  blessing  them  but  His  own  grace.  If  He  acted 
on  the  effect  of  His  dealings,  He  gives  them  up; 
they  only  turned  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow.  So  ever. 
But  when  all  was  at  the  worst,  He  awakes  in  His  love 
to  His  people,  because  of  their  misery  and  His  love 
to  them.  Then  He  accomplishes  the  purpose  of  His 
own  grace  in  His  own  way.  "  He  chose  the  tribe  of 
Judah.  ...  He  chose  Mount  Zion,  which  He  loved.  .  .  . 
He  chose  David  his  servant."  Such  is  the  general 
instruction  of  the  psalm.  But  there  are  the  characters 
of  unbelief  which  are  instructive.  The  past  mercy  and 
faithfulness  of  God  will  not  give  courage  for  a  present 
difficulty.  God  must  be  known  by  a  present  faith. 
No  reasoning  from  former  mercies  will  give  us  con- 
fidence.    "  Can  God  furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness  1 

He  smote  the  rock Can  He  give  bread 

also1?"  Experience  of  goodness  and  power  wrill  not 
make  man  trust  it,  when  some  new  need  is  there,  or 
lust  is  at  work.  Nor  was  it  better,  though  He  com- 
manded the  clouds  from  above,  and  opened  the  doors 
of  heaven,  and  rained  down  manna  upon  them.  Nor 
did  the  correction  of  their  lusts  in  the  matter  of  the 
quails  stop  this  unbelieving  will.  When  under  His  hand, 
man  remembers  Him.  A  little  ease  brings  forgetfulness 
and  self-will.  But  He  was  full  of  compassion,  and 
stayed  His  hand  in  judgment.     "  They  tempted  God, 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXIX.  20!) 

and  limited  the  Holy  One  of  Israel " — mistrust  of  God's 
power  to  effectuate  all  His  grace,  to  do  what  is  needed 
in  any  case  for  His  people,  and  carry  out  His  purposes 
fur  them.  The  moment  I  suppose  anything  cannot  be 
for  blessing,  I  limit  God.  This  is  a  great  sin — doubly, 
when  we  think  of  all  He  has  done  for  us.  The  Holy 
Ghost  ever  reasons  from  God's  revealed,  infinite  love  to 
all  its  consequences.  He  reconciled;  surely  He  will 
save  to  the  end.  He  did  not  spare  His  Son;  how 
should  He  not  give  all  things?  This,  however,  is  good- 
ness infinite;  but  doubt  of  power  is  doubting  He  is  God. 
It  hinders  setting  our  hope  in  God.  Experience  ought 
to  strengthen  faith;  but  there  must  be  present  faith 
to  use  experience.  The  gracious  Lord  keep  us  from 
limiting  God  in  His  power,  and  so  in  His  power  to  bless, 
and  lead  us  not  to  remember  Him  only  when  His  hand 
is  upon  us,  but  for  His  own  sake,  and  in  the  midst  of 
present  blessing,  because  the  heart  is  set  on  Him ! 
Then,  in  trials,  we  shall  be  able  to  count  upon  His 
goodness  and  have  no  disposition  to  limit  His  power. 

Psalm  lxxix.  looks  for  judgment  on  the  heathen. 
That  I  leave  aside  here.  The  only  point  I  have  to 
notice  is  the  way,  when  brought  very  low,  the  heart 
turns  to  God.  It  does  not  even  here  avenge  itself, 
but — the  extreme  of  evil  being  come  upon  it — turns  to 
God,  and  thus  remembers  its  own  sins.  Nor  has  it 
any  plea  but  God's  own  name.  "Remember  not  against 
us  former  iniquities:  let  thy  tender  mercies  speedily 

prevent  us Help  us,  0  God  of  our  salvation, 

for  the  glory  of  thy  name!  Deliver  us,  purge  away 
our  sins,  for  thy  name's  sake."     Such  is  the  effect  of' 


210       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

chastisement.  It  supposes  that  we  know  God.  It 
pi-oduces  lowliness  of  heart,  true  confession,  no  pre- 
tension to  any  title  to  deliverance  but  God's  own  good- 
ness and  name — what  He  is.  Yet  the  soul  rests  on 
that :  there  is  compassion — that  God  attends  to  the 
sighing  of  His  prisoners;  and  (however  strong  the 
hand  that  holds  them  appointed  to  die)  will  act  in  the 
greatness  of  His  power  to  preserve.  The  enemy  had 
reproached  the  Lord,  in  injuring  His  people.  "Where 
is  their  God  1 " — their  confidence.  And  the  Lord  showed 
Himself;  and  this  is  looked  for,  and  His  people  praise 
Him.  This,  too,  shows  another  point  we  may  often 
notice  in  Scripture — not  that  God  simply  is  glorious, 
and  must  maintain  His  glory;  but  that  He,  having 
taken  a  people  in  the  earth,  has  identified  His  glory 
with  that  people.  Faith  feels  this,  with  deep  sense  of 
it  and  thankful,  entering  into  it,  and  reckons  on  deliver- 
ance and  grace.  God  delivers  and  secures  His  own 
glory.  But  for  the  very  same  reason  God  allows  no 
evil,  because  His  name  is  connected  with  His  people, 
as  we  see  in  Israel :  "  Thee  only  have  I  known  of  all 
the  families  of  the  earth;  therefore  will  I  punish  you  for 
your  iniquities."  Here  the  punishment  was  on  them, 
and  the  name  reproached.  So,  humbling  themselves, 
and  looking  for  mercy  and  purging,  they  look  for  de- 
liverance, because  God's  people  were  brought  low. 

Psalm  lxxx.  is  bold  in  its  appeals.  It  passes  from 
Egyptian  deliverance  to  the  knowledge,  not  of  Christ, 
but  of  the  Son  of  man.  Still  it  looks  at  Him  as  the 
branch  which  God  has  made  strong  for  Himself.  It  is 
not,  "I  am  the  true  vine,  ye  are  the  branches,"  which 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  LXXX.  211 

makes  the  introduction  of  that  15th  of  John  clear. 
Still  it  goes  now  far  in  owning  the  man  of  God's  power, 
the  Son  of  man,  whom  He  made  strong  for  Himself. 
But  if,  in  this  confidence  in  God,  and  looking  to  the 
Son  of  man,  it  speaks  boldly,  and  refers  all  to  grace. 
It  is  thoroughly  Jewish.  It  refers  to  the  order  of  the 
tribes  in  the  wilderness.  It  knows  God  as  sitting  be- 
tween the  cherubim.  Israel  was  His  own  vine;  btit  it 
takes  the  fullest  Jewish  light — the  Son  of  man.  But 
it  has  no  hope  but  God's  turning  them  again.  It  is 
this  expression,  which  characterizes  the  cry  of  the 
psalm,  which  we  must  examine  a  little.  It  is  found  in 
verses  3,  7,  19.  "We  may  find  it  again  in  the  same  use 
in  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19,  and  Lam.  v.  21 — a  similar  cry. 
This  gives  it  much  interest.  Mere  discipline  in  itself 
does  not  turn  to  God.  It  may  break  the  will,  humble 
where  God  is  working,  and  so  do  a  preparatory  work ; 
but  it  does  not  turn  to  God.  So  they  are  brought  here ; 
and  in  the  desolations  of  Ephraim  and  Judah,  when 
they  are  down  to  the  lowest,  because  nothing  less 
would  do,  to  say,  "Turn  thou  me,"  "Turn  us  again." 
It  is  not  simply  godly  sorrow  and  the  consciousness  of 
sin.  Nor  is  this  exactly  the  thought  or  feeling  here. 
There  is  the  sense  of  belonging  to  God,  being  God's 
people,  and  the  rebuke  of  God  being  upon  them — "they 
perish  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  countenance."  It  is  the 
dealing  of  God  with  His  people,  or  a  saint  in  his  testi- 
mony as  now,  when  God  deals  with  him  in  it.  There 
is  the  sense  of  being  His,  but  God's  work,  which  is 
repassed  when  it  was  carried  out  in  blessing  by  God,  is 
seen  foiled  and  a  witness  of  the  enemy's  power;  but 
this  power  is  not  what  faith  rests  on,  but  the  rebuke  of 


212  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

God.  Faith  turns  to  Him,  to  Him  as  the  original 
source  of  blessing  and  power  that  wrought  it;  as  the 
One  whose  work  it  is  that  is  always  interested  in  His 
people.  It  rests  on  the  beauty  and  delight  of  God's 
work  to  Himself,  as  He  had  planted  it,  and  now  it  was 
rooted  up;  and  hence  draws  the  conclusion  of  His 
present  intervention  in  grace.  But  it  looks  for  this 
first  as  a  turning  of  themselves.  The  state  they  are  in 
is  connected  with  the  ruin,  though  not  the  main 
thought;  they  cannot  separate  their  own  state  from 
God's  interposition.  They  needed  it,  but  His  first  act 
must  be  restoring  them,  turning  them.  Blessing  is 
their  thought,  but  God's  blessing  them  as  He  blesses ; 
hence  beginning  with  them  and  turning  them.  But 
with  this  God's  face  would  shine  on  them,  and  they 
would  be  saved.  How  well  that  we  can  look  to  God 
when  our  face  is  set  wrong,  that  He  may  turn  us,  and 
so  His  face  shine  on  us,  as  to  bring  blessing  and 
present  deliverance  on  His  people.  It  looks  to  God ; 
remark,  too,  returning  and  visiting  the  vine,  but  it  does 
not  look  for  the  restoration  of  the  original  state  of 
things  (that  is  not  God's  way),  but  to  the  setting  up 
the  branch  God  had  made  so  strong  for  Himself.  And 
so  we  now ;  we  look  to  Christ's  being  exalted  even  in 
details.  If  we  have  failed,  it  does  not  become  us  to 
look  to  God's  setting  it  right  as  before,  as  if  nothing 
had  happened — this  could  not  be  for  His  glory — but  to 
the  coming  in  of  Himself  to  show  His  goodness  in  that 
which  manifests  His  own  grace,  and  hearing  the  cry  of 
His  people.  "Let  thy  hand,"  says  the  faith  of  Israel, 
"  be  on  the  man  of  thy  right  hand."  Here  they  see 
their  strength  and  safety — their  being  kept  right.    "  So 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXX.  213 

will  'wo  not  go  back  from  thee."  So  it  will  be  fully 
with  Israel  in  the  last  clay,  and  so  with  us  practically. 
His  presence  is  what  keeps  us.  There  is  another  thing 
that  faith  seeks.  Dulness  and  death  are  in  turning 
away  from  (iod,  and  going  their  own  ways.  They  need, 
in  being  thus  turned,  to  be  quickened — the  reviving 
life-giving  power  which  calls  the  heart  back  to  God. 
It  then,  with  increased  seriousness  and  new  confidence, 
calls  upon  Him.  It  is  more  than  the  prayer  which  cries 
in  trial.  It  is  the  heart  confidingly  calling  on  God,  as 
turned  again  to  Him.  The  prophetic  scene  is  clearly 
the  restoration  of  Israel.  God  does  not  hide  His  face 
from  His  saints  now — He  has  from  Israel :  but  in  their 
work,  and  service,  and  state,  as  a  body,  they  may  find 
these  ways  in  government. 

But  I  would  turn  for  a  moment  to  the  connexion  of 
this  with  personal  turning  and  repentance  in  the  simi- 
lar passages  to  which  I  have  alluded.  In  Jeremiah,  wc 
have  first,  "Turn  thou  mc  and  I  shall  be  turned." 
First,  then,  we  have  the  action  of  God  in  grace  turning 
the  sinner  round,  converting  him.  He  was  looking 
away  from  God,  had  turned  his  back  on  God,  and  now 
in  heart  and  will  turns  round  towards  Him.  Repen- 
tance comes  after  this — "  surely  after  that  I  was  turned 
I  repented."  I  set  about,  and  as  brought  into  the 
light,  my  heart  towards  God,  I  judged  all  my  ways 
in  my  departure,  my  state  of  heart,  and  all.  Instruc- 
ted, then,  in  true  blessing,  having  the  mind  of  God 
as  to  good,  one  is  confounded,  one  could  have  thoughts 
of  such  vanity  and  evil  with  desire.  But  another 
thing  is  brought  before  us  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians.     The  turning  of  God  brines  into  sorrow. 


214       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

(2  Cor.  vii.)  The  apostle's  first  epistle  came  with 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  to  their  souls.  It  was  not 
yet  a  full  judgment  of  their  state  in  the  light,  but  the 
will  being  divinely  arrested,  there  was  grief  in  the 
sense  of  having  gone  wrong :  conscience,  not  will, 
began  to  be  at  work;  self  may  have  partially  mixed 
itself  with  it.  Still  it  was  godly  sorrow,  a  broken 
will,  brokenness  of  heart;  the  feeling — I  have  been 
following  my  own  will,  I  have  forgotten  God.  The 
illusion  of  a  perverse  will  is  gone,  and  the  effect  of 
having  to  say  to  God,  the  working  of  God's  nature 
in  us  begins.  It  is  not  with  fear  where  rightly  felt ; 
no  thought  that  God  will  impute,  condemn,  but  sor- 
row and  grief  of  heart  at  the  perverseness  and  delu- 
sion of  self-will  having  been  followed.  This  works  a 
far  more  active,  deliberate  judgment  of  evil,  called 
repentance  here.  Godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance 
which  we  shall  never  regret.  The  soul  by  being  turned, 
having  by  the  operation  of  God's  grace  been  brought  to 
grieve  at  having  listened  to  will,  now  re-enters  (or 
enters  it  at  first)  into  the  natural  effect  and  working  of 
the  new  man  at  liberty.  It  judges  with  spiritual  energy 
the  whole  evil  as  God  judges  it  in  principle.  The  sense 
of  fault  is  not  gone,  but  what  characterizes  the  state 
is  judgment  of  the  fault — of  self  as  far  as  self  is  in  it. 
The  heart  is  clear  of  the  evil  when  it  judges  it  as  God 
judges  it,  and  separates  it  from  itself  as  a  thing  external 
to  itself,  as  God  does.  And  this  is  holiness,  often  deeper 
from  better  knowledge  of  self  than  before.  We  see  an 
example  of  this  in  Peter's  address  in  Acts  ii.  Their 
sin  was  set  before  the  people.  They  were  pricked  to 
the  heart,  and  said  unto  Peter,  What  shall  we  do? 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXXI.  215 

The  boisterous  will  was  gone :  no  more,  "  Crucify 
Him,  crucify  Him."  Sin  has  done  its  act,  and  can  no 
more  undo  it.  The  folly  of  it  comes  home  with  distress 
to  the  heart.  "  What  shall  we  do  1"  They  arc  turned, 
have  come  to  distress  and  godly  sorrow.  What  are 
Peter's  words  ?  Repent  and  be  baptized  every  one  of 
you  for  the  remission  of  sins.  Turned  they  were, 
grieved  at  heart  at  their  folly  in  sinning,  they  had  yet 
to  repent.  It  is  a  larger,  deeper,  fuller  thing  of  a  soul 
brought  into  the  light,  and  the  new  man  exercising  its 
judgment  on  what  self  had  been.  Not  now  as  pressed 
on  by  God,  and  bowing  in  sorrow  of  heart  to  the  effect 
of  His  grace  and  presence  in  the  sense  of  the  evil,  but  in 
our  own  spiritual  rejection,  with  God,  of  the  evil  as 
such  from  the  standing  ground  of  the  new  man  with 
God.  This  is  accompanied  with  brokenness  and  lowli- 
ness of  heart,  but  the  soul  has  re-entered  into  its  own 
liberty  with  God.  True  repentance  is  there  when  self 
is  proved  clear  in  the  matter,  when  the  new  standing 
has  possession  of  the  judgment  and  will,  and  judges 
freely  as  a  rejected  thing  all  that  the  flesh  delighted  in 
and  had  been  misled  by. 

From  Psalm  lxxxi.  I  have  only  a  few  brief  principles 
to  state  as  to  the  government  of  God.  On  the  resto- 
ration of  blessing,  the  precious  ways  of  God  are  con- 
sidered. Had  there  been  faithfulness,  there  would 
not  only  have  been  peace  instead  of  trouble,  but  rich 
present  blessing.  Whereas  the  effect  of  not  hearkening 
to  God  was,  that  God  gave  them  up  to  their  hearts' 
lusts,  and  they  walked  in  their  own  counsels  and  soon 
oumc  under  the  power  of  their  enemies,  even  stronger 


216       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

than  the  people  of  God  on  their  own  ground.  God  has 
delivered  ns.  We  have  been  delivered  from  the  bondage 
and  burden  of  sin.  Answered  by  divine  power  when 
in  trouble  and  distress  under  it  (a  power  which,  while 
manifest  in  its  effects,  had  its  source  of  operation  in  the 
secret  of  the  divine  counsels),  we  are,  as  regards  present 
dispensed  blessings,  put  under  responsibility,  yet  in  the 
place  of  fullest  ministered  blessing.  "If  thou  wilt 
hearken  " — truth  of  heart  to  God  is  that  which  is  looked 
for ;  not  merely  avoidance  of  actual  evil,  but  no  idol  in 
the  heart.  This  tests  the  heart — truth  in  the  inward 
parts  with  God.  But  God  calls  to  this  as  being 
already  our  God — now  we  say  Father — who  has  deliv- 
ered and  saved  us  :  and  calls  us  in  the  path,  no  doubt, 
of  obedience ;  to  open  our  mouth  wide  that  He  may  fill 
it.  It  is  to  this  we  are  called,  to  enlarge  our 'hearts  to 
receive  blessing.  God  has  largely  and  richly  for  us, 
and  calls  us  to  open  our  mouths  wide.  All  His  mind 
is  to  fill  it  from  His  own  riches.  But  of  blessings  of 
grace  from  His  own  hand,  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ  are  ours,  and  dispensed  to  our  souls.  But,  alas! 
very  often  we  are  like  Israel,  "  My  people  would  not 
hearken  to  my  voice."  There  is  then  as  chastisement, 
a  giving  up  of  the  saint  to  eat  the  fruit  of  his  own 
ways :  a  terrible  judgment  sometimes  to  be  humbled 
and  feel  the  bitterness  of  the  power  of  the  enemy; 
sometimes,  what  is  Avorse,  to  think  he  is  finally  given 
up.  This  is  seldom  the  case  when  the  soul  has  really 
been  already  emptied  of  self  and  subtle  self-righteous- 
ness. Still  the  flaming  darts  of  the  wicked  are  terrible 
to  the  soul.  It  is  not  at  all  the  same  thing  as  the  legal 
doubts  of  an  exercised  soul,  but  the  dread  of  God  as 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXXII.,   LXXXIII.    217 

now  against  the  soul;  not  the  uncertainty  whether  He 

will  lie  for  it,  whether  it  can  escape.  This  last  is  legal 
doubt;  the  former,  despairing  doubt  from  Satan,  li' 
the  saint  walks  faithfully,  he  has  surely  enemies,  Satan 
and  his  machinations,  to  contend  against;  but  the  Lord 
really  subdues  them.  It  is  after  the  patience  of  faith, 
the  encouraging  proof  that  the  Lord  is  with  the  believer 
in  his  way.  Our  adversaries  are  the  Lord's:  the  con- 
sciousness of  this  is  an  immense  force.  Those  that 
oppose  us  in  the  Lord's  path  are,  at  any  rate  in  that 
respect,  the  haters  of  the  Lord.  They  arc  found  liars, 
and  empty  in  their  pretensions.  And  at  peace  through 
the  Lord's  power,  the  saint  would  walk  in  a  constant 
path.  "  He  that  docth  God's  will  abides  for  ever;"  he 
is  fed  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat,  with  the  most  pre- 
cious knowledge  of  Christ;  and  the  sweetness  of  divine 
grace  refreshing  and  satisfying  the  desire  of  the  spirit. 

On  Psalms  lxxxii.  and  lxxxiii.  I  have  no  remark  to 
make  in  connexion  with  our  present  object  in  comment- 
ing on  the  psalms.  Tn  psalm  lxxxii.  the  reader  will 
observe  that  God  judges  the  judges,  especially  those 
who  in  Israel  had  the  divine  law  to  guide  them.  They 
fall  thus  from  wielding  God's  authority  in  the  earth, 
into  the  place  of  responsible  man,  and  God  arising 
judges  the  earth.  Here  iniquity  towards  man,  the 
reparation  of  judgment  entrusted  to  man  from  righte- 
ousness, is  dealt  with  by  God.  In  psalm  lxxxiii.  it  is 
the  way  in  which  man  is  guilty  of  active  enmity  against 
God  in  his  hatred  against  God's  people,  using  craft, 
conspiracy,  and  violence  to  destroy  their  remembrance 
oft'  the  earth — the  result  being  that  Jehovah  alone 

r 


218       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

(the  God  of  Israel)  is  the  most  high  over  all  the  earth ; 
for  such  is  the  effect  of  man's  efforts.  Oppression 
downwards  in  those  who  represented  God  in  the  earth, 
rebellion  upwards  against  God  shown  in  hatred  against 
God's  earthly  people:  such  are  the  characters  of  man, 
and  the  object  of  God's  judgment  on  the  earth. 

Psalm  lxxxiv.  Though  God  be  necessarily  the  centre 
of  all  our  desires,  the  desires  of  the  new  man,  yet  it  is 
not  in  this  psalm  the  desire  after  God  as  such,  which  is 
spoken  of  as  in  psalm  lxiii.  Jehovah  is  owned  as  the 
living  God,  but  He  is  owned  as  a  manifested  God  in 
relationship  with  His  people.  It  is  not,  "  my  soul  is 
athirst/or  God;"  but,  "how  amiable  are  thy  tabernacles, 
0  Jehovah  of  hosts."  They  would  not  have  been  so,  if 
He  had  not  been  there,  if  they  had  not  been  His.  Still 
it  is  the  enjoyed  public  relationship  with  Him,  dwell- 
ing in  the  midst  of  His  people,  which  is  delighted  in, 
not  abstract  delight  in  Himself.  The  tabernacles  of 
God  are  a  resting-place  for  the  heart,  as  the  swallow 
had  a  nest  from  God  where  she  might  lay  her  young. 
And  this  is  just.  The  root  and  essence  of  personal 
piety  is  the  soul's  own  desire  after  God.  The  secret  of 
God  is  there,  and  the  soul  is  kept  in  the  holiness  of  His 
presence,  and  exercised  in  it  before  Him.  But  where 
God  displays  His  glory,  where  He  is  worshipped,  is  the 
just  resort  of  the  pious  soul.  In  His  temple  shall  every 
one  speak  of  His  honour.     There  praise  is  drawn  out. 

It  is  not  exercise,  but  the  soul  in  its  piety  as  in  the 
new  man,  alone  goes  forth  in  praise  and  worship  where 
all  do,  where  there  is  nought  else,  and  with  others  of 
the  same  spirit  also.     For  the  altar  of  God  is  the  centre 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXXIV.  219 

of  the  heart's  desire  and  outgoings.  There  God  displays 
Himself,  and  there  the  heart  is  at  home  from  exercises 
and  trials.  Hence  it  is  known  to  the  heart,  that  there 
they  will  be  still  praising  God.  They  that  dwell  there 
have  nought  else  to  do.  Such  is  the  full  accomplished 
Messing. 

But  there  is  another  thing  (vcr.  5  and  seq.)  in  which 
blessing  is  known  on  the  way  thither,  the  way  through 
this  world,  the  valley  of  tears.  The  strength  of  him 
who  passes  with  an  undisturbed  heart  towards  God's 
rest  and  dwelling-place,  is  in  the  Lord.  Hence  he  too 
is  blessed.  If  the  dwelling-place  of  God,  where  His 
glory  is  manifested  and  fills  the  place,  is  the  object  of 
the  heart,  where  its  desires  tend,  the  way  that  leads 
there  will  be  in  the  heart  too.  It  may  be  a  rough  one, 
a  valley  of  tears,  a  valley  where  the  cross  is  found,  but 
it  is  the  way  there,  and  the  heart  is  in  it.  Besides,  the 
heart  trusts  God — has  His  love  as  the  key  to  all.  Hence 
it  says,  "by  these  things  man  lives,  and  in  all  these 
tilings  it  is  the  life  of  the  Spirit."  They  turn  the  valley 
of  tears  into  a  well,  and  find  in  the  sorrow  the  refresh- 
ments of  grace.  For  we  need  the  will  broken,  the 
movement  of  will  in  the  desires  of  the  heart  judged, 
that  grace,  that  God  Himself  (that  well  of  joy  and 
blessing),  may  have  His  full  place.  And  this  the  trials 
and  exercises  of  the  wilderness  do.  It  is  not  called 
the  valley  of  trial,  but  the  valley  of  tears;  that  is,  it 
is  not  merely  the  facts  which  form  the  well,  but  the 
exercises  of  heart  which  flow  from  them.  No  doubt 
the  character  of  the  valley  was  the  som-ce  of  this;  but 
( Ihrist  perfect  in  His  way  was  a  man  of  sorrows,  therein 
manifesting  and  exercising  His  love.     We  need  humilia- 


220       PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

tion  and  breaking  down  that  we  might  get  into  this 
state,  bnt  this  is  what  makes  it  a  well  to  ns.  He  had 
meat  to  eat  in  His  sorrow  as  cast  out,  by  the  well  of 
Sychar,  which  His  disciples  knew  not  of.  But  this  is 
not  all.  There  is  direct  supply  and  ministration  of 
grace  from  above.  God  sends  a  gracious  rain  on  His 
inheritance,  refreshing  it  when  it  is  weary.  The  rain 
fills  the  pools.  The  communications  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  the  revelation  of  Christ  to  the  soul,  the  Father's 
love,  all  refresh  and  gladden  the  heart,  and  fill  it  with 
that  which  makes  the  world  a  nothing,  turning  the 
heart  elsewhere.  The  new  man  is  in  its  joys,  and  goes 
cheerfully  thinking  of  that  through  the  valley.  It 
goes  from  strength  to  strength.  It  is  not  accumulated 
strength,  though  strength  is  increased,  but  never  in 
any  sense  so  as  to  diminish  dependence  on  God,  but 
on  the  contrary  to  increase  the  sense  of  it.  Self  is 
better  known  and  more  thoroughly  distrusted ;  we  are 
more  simple,  and  have  a  more  simple  consciousness 
that  power  belongs  to  God.  As  Peter,  "when  thou  art 
converted  (brought  back),  strengthen  thy  brethren" — 
an  extreme  case,  as  to  the  means,  but  showing  how 
self-judgment  and  the  lesson  of  dependence  is  the  way 
of  having  strength,  because  strength  is  really  in  Christ. 
"My  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness."  Thus  the 
strength  we  have  and  feel  at  a  point  where  we  are 
brought  to  realize  the  grace  and  presence  of  Christ  sets 
us  forward  on  our  journey  across  the  wilderness;  we 
use  it  (I  do  not  say  lose  it)  in  travel,  but  it  is  not  the 
conscious  enjoyment  of  deriving  blessing  from  Him,  but 
employing  that  strength  in  the  way.  This  leads  us  to 
a  further  apprehension  of  our  need  of  Christ,  increased 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    LXXXIV.  221 

knowledge  of  self  by  what  we  pass  through,  but  which 
is  discovered  not  always  in  a  judgment  we  form  of 
ourselves,  but  in  such  emptying  of  self,  aud  the  decline 
of  its  deceptive  power  in  our  heart,  as  casts  us  more 
simply  on  Christ.  We  go  to  a  further  place  of  strength 
thus;  Christ  is  more  all.  If  there  be  failure,  it  will 
l)e  in  the  positive  judgment  of  self  and  restoring  the 
soul.  The  result  is  our  appearing  before  God,  where 
no  self  will  be  at  all,  and  in  the  place  where  He  has 
set  His  blessing,  and  where  all  go  up  to  worship  and 
glorify  Him.  Even  now  there  is  a  partial  realization 
of  this,  but  its  accomplishment  will  be  surely  in  glory 
— in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  and  the  Father's  house. 
But  all  this  turns  to  supplication — supplication  in  the 
sense  of  divine  majesty,  but  supplication  in  the  con- 
sciousness of*  blessed  relationship.  He  is  Jehovah  of 
hosts,  but  He  is  the  God  of  Jacob.  But  it  goes  yet 
farther.  Till  we  are  actually  in  the  courts  of  God,  we 
depend  on  this  majesty  and  covenant  faithfulness — for 
us  the  Father's  name  in  union  with  Christ — but  also 
on  God's  looking  on  Christ;  but  this  secures  us  till 
then — indeed,  in  one  sense,  for  ever.  We  are  assured, 
are  confident,  and  pray  because  God  looks  on  Christ. 
But  this  confidence  on  the  way  through  Baca  is  con- 
nected with  the  desire  to  be  in  the  courts.  "  Look  on 
Him  our  security;  rest  in  Him:  for  a  day  in  thy  courts 
is  better  than  a  thousand."  Better  be  at  the  threshold 
there,  than  enjoy  all  that  the  tents  of  the  wicked  can 
afford,  witli  the  right  to  abide  there.  God  enlightens 
with  His  glorious  majesty,  and  protects.  He  will  give 
in  perfect,  unhindered  grace  all  we  need  in  the  trial  of 
the  way,  and  in  our  weakness,  when   it  is  sweet  to 


222  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

count  on  His  help.  And  He  will  in  the  end,  when 
brought  home  capable  of  enjoying  it,  give  glory  with 
Himself.  We  can  count  on  Him  for  everything.  He 
is  good;  nothing  good  will  He  withhold  from  those  who 
walk  before  Him.  The  soul  closes  in  the  conscious 
feeling — "Blessed  is  the  man  that  trusts  in  thee." 
And  how  true  it  is !  Nothing  can  disturb,  nothing  is 
beyond,  His  power — nothing  of  which  His  love  cannot 
take  charge  for  us — nothing  which  His  wisdom  does 
not  know  how  to  deal  with  for  blessing.  And  the 
heart  knows  His  love  to  count  on  it,  and  that  "  blessed 
is  the  man  that  puts  his  trust  in  Him." 

Psalm  Ixxxv.  brings  out  a  principle  of  great  practical 
importance,  the  difference  between  the  forgiveness  of 
what  belongs  to  our  former  state,  and  the  blessedness 
into  which  the  believer  is  introduced  in  the  enjoyment 
of  relationship  with  God.  Here,  of  course,  it  is  in 
the  restoration  of  Israel  to  blessing  in  the  land  in 
accomplishment  of  the  promises  of  Jehovah.  I  shall 
now  speak  only  of  the  principle  as  regards  ourselves. 

Forgiveness  is  known  as  the  fruit  of  Jehovah's  good- 
ness, and  His  sure  goodness  to  His  people,  and  hence 
full  blessing  is  expected.  But  the  two  are  distinct.  So 
with  us,  forgiveness  applies  to  all  that  we  are,  looked 
at  as  in  the  old  man  and  his  deeds.  We  are  brought 
back  and  all  the  fruit  of  the  old  man  is  put  away  for 
ever  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  We  have  thus  full 
forgiveness.  Wrath  is  gone  as  to  it.  All  our  sin  is 
covered ;  but  the  distance  from  God  and  from  the 
enjoyment  of  communion  with  Him  is  not  removed. 
Fear  of  judgment  and  the  Judge  is  gone ;    but  the 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXXV.  223 

enjoyment  of  present  blessing  with  God,  His  favour  as 
upon  those  with  whom  is  no  question,  and  the  going 
forth  of  divine  favour  in  natural  though  righteous 
relationship,  this  is  not  entered  into.  Joy  there  has 
been,  great  joy  there  is,  in  finding  oneself  forgiven;  but 
it  applies  to  what  we  are  in  flesh,  and  is  not  commu- 
nion with  God  in  a  nature  capable  of  enjoying  Him 
and  none  else,  because  coming  from  Him.  Though 
forgiven,  this  distance,  this  want  of  enjoyment  of  God 
in  the  new  and  divine  nature,  is  felt  to  be  in  its  nature 
anger.  It  is  not  being  brought  to  God.  Nor  can  we 
rest  without  the  enjoyment  of  His  favour.  For  this 
the  appeal  in  the  psalm  is  made.  The  captivity  of 
Jacob  was  brought  back,  but  he  looked  for  more,  to 
be  turned  to  God,  and  that  all  anger  might  cease. 
This  is  a  large  word;  yet,  knowing  love  and  communion 
at  least  in  hope,  we  cannot  rest  without  it.  We  may 
have  desired  it,  i.e.,  the  sense  of  favour,  but  we  can- 
not get  it  by  progress  or  victory ;  we  must  get  it  by 
forgiveness  and  deliverance,  for  we  are  sinners.  But 
when  we  have  found  there  is  redemption  and  pardon, 
there  is  then  not  merely  the  want  of  the  conscience  by 
which  we  must  come  in,  but  the  spiritual  desires  of 
the  new  man.  "  Wilt  thou  not  revive  us  again,  that 
thy  people  may  rejoice  in  thee1?"  The  soul  is  revived 
by  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  rejoices  in 
God  Himself.  So  Romans  v.  :  we  have  peace  with 
God  :  not  only  so,  we  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  we  have  received  the  reconcilia- 
tion. "  Show  us  thy  mercy,  0  Jehovah  (for  it  is  mercy, 
but.  mercy  from  God  known  in  relationship  with  His 
own — for  us  the  Father  known  in  Christ),  and  grant 


224       PKACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

us  thy  salvation."  But  the  soul  has  learnt  grace  and 
listens  for  the  answer,  because  it  looks  for  grace.  It 
is  not  legal  agony,  but  desired  knowledge  of  God  in 
favour.  "  He  will  speak  peace.  His  salvation  is  nigh 
them  that  fear  Hirn." 

Now  this  is  all-important  for  the  soul,  not  to 
rest  in  forgiveness  (its  first  urgent  necessity,  that 
applies  to  what  it  is  as  a  sinner),  but  to  understand 
that  it  is  called  to  the  enjoyment  of  God,  in  the  cloud- 
less communion  of  a  new  nature,  which  being,  morally 
speaking,  the  divine  nature,  has  necessary  and  full 
delight  in  God,  though  a  dependent  and  growing 
delight — we  joy  in  God.  No  doubt  it  is  and  must  be 
founded  on  righteousness' — divine  righteousness,  as  we 
shall  see.  It  would  not  be  God,  were  it  not  so;  but  it  is 
not  the  settling  that  point  with  a  God  who  is  calling- 
it  in  question,  but  enjoying  God's  presence,  commu- 
nion with  Him,  according  to  the  perfectness  in  which 
we  have  been  placed  before  Him,  enjoying  Him  in 
the  divine  nature  of  which  we  are  partakers.  This  is 
thus  spoken  of  in  regard  of  Israel :  "  Mercy  and  truth 
are  met  together,  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed 
each  other."  It  is  mercy,  for  it  is  granted  to  sinners 
in  pure  and  sovereign  mercy,  but  it  is  truth,  for  it 
accomplishes  all  God's  promises  to  Israel.  To  us  far 
beyond  promise,  for  there  was  none  of  the  Church ; 
but  it  is  a  stronger  case.  It  is  being  in  Christ  and 
as  Christ,  and  so  before  God  according  to  the  favour 
in  which  He  is  before  Him  as  risen.  Righteousness 
seemed  against  the  sinner  and  was,  but  through  th 
divine  righteousness  it  associates  itself  with  peace  to 
the  sinner.     They  kiss  each  other.     Peace  answers  to 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXXV.  223 

mercy,  righteousness  to  truth.  They  have — we  have — 
peace  through  mercy;  but  righteousness  by  the  faith 
of  Jesus  Christ  brings  us  into  the  full  enjoyment  of 
the  place  He  is  in,  or  it  would  not  be  righteousness. 
Truth  springs  out  of  the  earth;  i.e.,  for  Israel  all 
promised  is  accomplished  there.  With  us,  of  course, 
it  is  sitting  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is 
not,  glory  shall  dwell  in  our  land,  but  we  are  in  title 
and  place  in  the  glory  of  God  on  high.  But  in  all 
cases  righteousness  looks  down  from  heaven.*  It  is 
not  for  Israel  or  for  us,  righteousness  looking  up  from 
earth  to  claim  blessing  from  heaven.  He  has  estab: 
lished  righteousness  in  the  very  heavens.  Christ  is 
there.  He  is  there  by  the  righteousness  of  God.  The 
righteousness  was  a  divine,  heavenly  righteousness ; 
He  having  glorified  God,  is  glorified  with  God,  and  in 
Him,  and  that  is  divine  righteousness.  Our  heavenly 
and  Israel's  earthly  blessings  both  flow  from  it.  Then 
comes  conferred  blessing,  too,  and  so  surely  it  is  all 
the  produce  of  that  heavenly  country,  its  joys  and 
privileges  are  made  ours  to  enjoy.  The  last  verse 
properly  applies  to  earth.  But  there  is  a  truth  yet 
connected  with  this  I  have  not  noticed.  The  present 
government  of  God  applies  to  this  walking  in  divine 
enjoyment,  not  to  forgiveness  and  peace.  We  enjoy 
this  blessed  communion,  dwelling  in  God  and  God  in 
us  by  the  Holy  Ghost  given  to  us.  If  we  grieve  Him, 
we  arc  made  sorry,  humbled,  perhaps  chastened.  It 
is  always  our  place,  but  its  realization  and  enjoyment 

*  Note  how  this  sets  aside  legal  righteousness ;  that  looks 
up.from  earth. 


226       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

depend  on  the  revelations  and  action  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  us,  and  these  depend  on  our  walk,  and  state, 
and  obedience.  So  in  John  xiv.  and  iv.  The  enjoy- 
ment of  divine  favour  and  blessedness  is  made  to  de- 
pend on  the  walk  of  the  saint.  It  must,  if  it  is  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  us;  for  how  should  we  be 
enjoying  communion  in  love  in  the  midst  of  evil  or  idle 
thoughts]  The  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  depends 
on  righteousness — Christ's  presence  on  high.  That 
sheds  God's  love  abroad  in  our  hearts.  We  dwell  in 
Him  and  He  in  us.  But  if  evil  is  there,  the  flesh  is 
at  work,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  grieved,  communion  is 
interrupted.  It  is  not  a  question  of  title  (that  is, 
settled :  Christ  is  in  heaven),  but  of  enjoying  the 
blessedness  I  am  brought  into,  enjoying  God.  Here 
all  our  walk  with  God  is  in  question  (though  it  is  by 
grace  I  do  so  walk  aright).  What  I  urge  here  is  the 
soul's  getting  clear  hold  of  the  difference  between  for- 
giveness— grace  applied  through  Christ's  work  to  sin 
and  all  the  fruits  of  the  old  man,  and  our  introduction 
in  Him  in  righteousness  into  the  presence  and  com- 
munion of  God  where  no  cloud  or  question  of  sin  ever 
comes.  We  may  get  out  of  this  (not  out  of  the  title 
to  it,  but  its  enjoyment  in  spirit — not  that  peace  is 
destroyed  with  God,  but  communion),  but  in  it  no 
cloud  of  sin  can  come.  We  are  loved  as  Christ  is 
loved.  All  depends  on  His  work.  But  one  is  the  for- 
giveness of  that  out  of  which  we  have  been  brought, 
the  application  of  Christ's  work  to  our  responsibility 
as  children  of  Adam  in  flesh.  In  the  other  we  are  not 
in  flesh,  but  in  Christ,  in  the  enjoyment  of  that  into 
which  He  is  entered — our  life  for  ever. 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  LXXXVI.  227 

Psalm  Ixxxvi.  This  psalm,  though  it  be  simple 
enough  in  its  expression,  yet  is  pretty  full  of  important 
practical  principles,  as  correcting  the  feebleness  of  a 
soul  drawn  to  God  with  His  full  glory  and  power.  It 
finds  its  centre,  not  in  embracing  first  the  extent  of 
the  glory  in  its  feeble  state,  but  in  being  centred  in 
God,  and  so  praising  and  looking  for  strength  and  final 
deliverance  into  glory. 

The  ground  it  rests  on,  as  looking  to  God  to  bow 
down  His  ear,  is  fourfold.  It  is  poor  and  lowly,  not 
of  the  proud  of  the  earth ;  it  is  holy,  really  set  apart 
to  God ;  Jehovah's  servant  (with  us  the  Father's  name 
must  come  in  here,  as  we  have  ever  seen,  and  Christ  as 
Lord),  it  trusts  in  Jehovah,  and  cries  daily  to  the  Lord. 
This  is  the  state  of  the  soul — poor  and  holy,  set  apart 
to  the  Lord ;  a  servant,  one  that  trusts,  and  the  trust 
is  not  idle,  it  cries  in  the  sense  of  need  and  dependence. 
This  last  is  dwelt  on  in  confidence  of  goodness,  and  a 
sense  of  the  majesty  of  the  Lord  above  all  pretenders 
to  power.  He  alone  is  God,  is  great,  and  does  what  to 
lis  is  wondrous.  It  looks,  then,  to  be  taught  God's 
way — has  no  thought  to  walk  its  own.  The  truth  and 
word  of  God  guides  it.  But  here  there  is  another 
need — the  tendency  of  the  heart  to  be  distracted  to  a 
thousand  objects,  and  wandering  thoughts,  and  it  prays 
the  Lord  to  unite  it.  How  we  need  this — to  have  the 
heart  concentrated  on  the  Lord!  Here  is  power;  here 
that  presence  of  divine  things  which  puts  the  mind  in 
what  is  heavenly,  and  in  direct  connexion  with  divine 
sources  of  strength.  "When  other  thoughts  come  in, 
one  is  outside,  in  another  world,  from  which  we  have 
to  be  delivered;  not  in  the  divine  and  heavenly  one,  so 


228       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

as  to  be  witnesses  of  it.  The  majesty  and  glory  of 
God's  name  had  been  seen  (verse  9),  but  this  does  not 
make  the  soul  pass  into  the  glory  as  if  it  was  at  home 
there.  In  a  sense  it  is  too  great  for  one,  and  this  is 
felt.  How  little  we  are  !  how  we  know  in  part!  but  it 
leads  the  soul  to  seek  further  concentration  of  all  its 
affections,  poor  and  lowly  as  it  is,  on  God.  And  this  is 
right,  satisfies  the  soul,  suits  it.  It  is  in  affection  and 
adoring  thankfulness  at  the  centre,  through  grace,  of 
all  this  glory.  Hence  it  continues — "  I  will  praise  thee, 
0  Lord  my  God,  with  my  whole  heart."  It  is  united 
here,  and  it  can  praise  as  it  is  called  to  praise,  and  as 
it  sees  in  result  will  praise.  We  are  called  on  to  com- 
prehend with  all  saints,  the  length  and  breadth,  and 
depth  and  height ;  but  we  must  first  be  thus  brought 
to  the  centre — Christ  dwelling  in  our  hearts  by  faith 
and  we  rooted  and  grounded  in  love.  Hence,  know- 
ing Him,  we  glorify  His  name  for  evermore.  Our 
littleness  has  found,  in  His  greatness,  our  place  and 
our  strength.  We  are,  as  I  said,  at  the  centre  of 
glory.  This  turns  to  the  view  the  great  deliverance 
God  has  wrought.  It  is  seen  supreme  grace  is  the 
source  of  it  all.  It  is  not  merely  owning  His  grace 
according  to  nature,  where  all  is  in  order,  but  grace, 
sovereign  grace — the  activity  of  God's  love — which 
lias  come  down  and  delivered  us  from  the  lowest 
estate.  This  gives  a  special  character  to  our  know- 
ledge of  God.  All  dependent  on  even  goodness,  yet 
intimate  in  the  character  of  our  love  to  Him,  because 
by  our  very  wretchedness  we  know  we  are  the  objects 
of  His  love,  thus  known  to  be  infinitely  great.  The 
soul  thus  confiding  in  God  and  occupied  for  itself  with 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM  LXXXVII.  229 

Him,  its  first  affair,  sees  the  enmity  of  proud  men,  who 
lour  Him  not,  rising  up  against  it.  It  looks  for  God's 
interference.  This  is  a  great  mark  of  faith,  but,  eon- 
tiding  in  J  lis  accepting  love,  it  looks  for  more.  It 
delights  in  the  manifestation  that  God  is  for  it.  This 
is  not  only  deliverance  but  satisfies  the  heart.  It  is 
all  it  asks — that  God  should  show  Himself  for  it.  It 
is  this,  the  sine  portion  of  every  one  who  trusts  God, 
walking  with  Him,  which  the  Lord  looked  for  (Psalm 
xxii.),  and  had  not,  lower  than  the  lowest  for  our  sakes 
but  therein  perfect  in  love,  and  glorifying  His  Father, 
and  so  higher  than  the  highest.  Therefore  His  Father 
loved  Him,  and  He  is  glorified  as  man  in  a  far  higher 
way.  Holpen  and  comforted  in  the  trial,  at  that 
supreme  moment,  He  was  not — but  there  He  stood 
alone.  We  trust  and  are  delivered;  He  perfect  above 
all,  alone  in  this  perfection.  The  Lord  give  us  at  least 
to  have  our  hearts  united,  undistracted  to  His  name 
and  in  the  Father's  love.  There  is  our  centre.  We 
need  not  fear  enemies  there.     (Phil.  i.  27,  28.) 

Psalm  lxxxvii.  God's  foundation  which  makes  all 
assured.  It  is  not  that  her  foundation  is  in  the  holy 
mountain  that  calls  out  the  interest,  or  assures  the 
heart  of  faith,  but  that  the  city  of  God  rests  on  God's 
foundation — so  we.  The  sure  foundation  of  God 
abideth,  and  in  the  latter  case  it  was  when  the  Church 
was  going  on  so  very  badly  that  the  saint  had  to  judge 
its  state  and  purge  himself  from  many  in  it.  But  God's 
foundation  abides  sure.  So  we  say,  His  calling  and 
His  inheritance  in  the  saints.  But  the  psalm  brings 
out  another  point,  hard  for  the  activity  of  flesh.     Faith 


230       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

attaches  more  importance  to  God's  city,  than  to  all  that 
man  has  built.  The  sentiment  of  the  psalm  is  essen- 
tially Jewish.  In  writing  up  the  people,  the  saints  and 
Messiah  Himself  are  reckoned  to  Zion.  These  are  his 
grounds  for  glorifying  in  Zion — God's  view  of  the  city. 
For  us,  no  doubt,  the  thing  comes  in  a  different  shape, 
as  to  the  Church :  Christ  is  of  it,  as  its  Head,  not  as 
born  in  it.  God's  fresh  springs  are  there.  But,  practi- 
cally, when  the  Church  of  God  is  despised,  when  it  is 
formed  of  people  who  are  of  no  account  in  this  world, 
do  we  make  our  boast  of  it  because  they  are  precious 
in  the  sight  of  God,  rich  in  faith  1  or  do  the  grandeurs 
of  the  Egypts  and  Babjdons,  which  God  judges,  eclipse 
it  in  our  sight  1  Do  we  judge  after  God's  mind,  or  after 
man's  1  Ts  the  appearance  and  vain  show  of  this  world 
of  weight  with  us ;  or  does  the  faith  of  the  Lord  of 
glory  lead  lis  to  estimate  highly  what  God  esteems, 
what  is  glorious  1  He  has  people  whom  He  counts  up. 
Is  it  the  spirit  of  the  world  or  the  Spirit  of  God  which 
forms  our  estimate  of  what  is  vile  and  what  is  valuable? 
Weigh  the  language  of  James's  epistle.  But  may  our 
souls  especially  feel  the  value  of  what  in  those  heavenly 
places  will  be  counted  excellent  by  God. 

On  Psalm  Ixxxviii.  I  have  not  much  to  say.  God  is 
known  and  looked  to  according  to  His  revealed  name 
as  the  only  Saviour,  and  it  is  just  to  this  point  that 
the  soul  is  brought  by  the  exercises  spoken  of  in  the 
psalm;  cast  by  the  pressure  of  all  around  to  find  it 
comes  from  God's  hand,  and  more  yet,  God's  judgment 
so  as  to  be  therein  a  pure  and  sovereign  salvation  from 
Him.    Jehovah,  God  of  my  salvation,  governs  the  psalm. 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   LXXXVIII.  231 

The  state  was  this:  affliction  was  present,  nature  could 
not  find  its  account  there,  acquaintance  put  far  from 
him.  But  this  was  but  the  negative  and  outward  part, 
because  nature  found  no  relief,  as  it  could  from  nature's 
sorrows  more  or  less.  The  great  point  that  pressed  on 
the  spirit  was  death,  and  death  bearing  the  witness  of 
( Jbd's  wrath  upon  it.  To  this,  the  knowledge  that  the 
revealed  God  of  promise  was  the  only  Saviour  turns 
the  heart;  his  life  drew  nigh  to  the  grave.  God's  wrath 
lay  hard  upon  him.  Still  God  was  appealed  to.  It  was 
nature  without  its  sustainments,  nature  with  death 
pressed  on  it,  that  is,  its  destruction  and  end.  And 
God  being  brought  in,  and  faith  in  Him,  so  far  there 
as  to  own  that  all  depended  on  Him,  His  wrath  was 
felt  in  it  all.  And  this  is  true.  This  is  death  when 
seen  in  its  truth.  So  Christ  saw  it  in  Gethsemane, 
though  He  would  not  have  said  all  that  is  in  this  psalm. 
So  the  convinced  soul  sees  it,  whose  eye  is  opened  upon 
God,  in  its  Adam  state.  The  psalm,  however,  does 
not  look  beyond  this  life.  In  this  it  ends  in  nature — 
.simple  Judaism.  But  the  faith  in  the  revelation  of 
God  which  has  made  it  so  feel  what  death  is,  as  wrath 
from  God,  makes  it  look  to  Him  who  has  inflicted  it  as 
a  Saviour.  And  this  is  the  value  of  such  experience. 
It  shows  us  our  true  state,  our  true  relationship  in  God 
to  nature.  Nor  is  there  way  of  escape,  for  it  is  our 
state  by  judgment  before  God.  Hence  self  is  done 
with  if  we  arc  delivered.  This  makes  deliverance 
known  as  sovereign  grace,  as  God's  deliverance,  and 
the  soul  rests  on  revelation.  And  until  the  deliver- 
ance the  soul  cries  to  God.  But  when  deliverance  is 
obtained,  the  flesh,  all  that  it  is,  remains  as  a  judged 


232       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

thing  under  wrath.  There  is  no  deception  so  far  as  to 
trust  it  really,  though  we  may  forget  its  evil  for  a 
moment,  and  even  have  to  watch  and  contend  with  it. 
But  its  status  before  God  is  ever  counted  as  a  con- 
demned and  evil  thing.  The  psalm  is  the  description 
of  the  process  which  brings  the  soul  to  this.  Some- 
times the  soul  only  reaches  this  on  its  death-bed.  This 
oi:ght  not  to  be,  but  it  explains  what  surprises  many 
in  godly  persons.  When  it  is  not  gone  through  really, 
the  soul  is  not  free.  It  stands  on  the  ground  of  God's 
salvation,  in  spirit,  not  in  flesh.  It  is  not  seeing  this, 
that  has  led  many  to  live  on  experience,  not  on  Christ. 
They  speak  of  Holy  Ghost  work,  and  knowing  the  evil 
of  the  flesh,  and  the  killing  power  of  the  law,  which 
only  means  that  they  have  not  learned  it.  They  are 
in  this  psalm.  But  they  have  not  learned  salvation 
and  the  gospel.  They  do  not  know  that  they  are  dead 
and  risen  with  Christ.  They  are  feeling  death  press 
upon  them  as  wrath  from  God,  according  to  this  psalm 
— all  well;  but  they  have  not  received  the  sentence  of 
death  in  themselves,  through  Christ's  having  died  in 
grace  for  them,  so  as  to  reckon  themselves  dead,  cruci- 
fied with  Christ,  to  be  nevertheless  alive,  yet  not  they, 
but  Christ  living  in  them,  who  had  died  and  put  away 
all  this  for  them.  They  are  under  the  pressure  of 
wrath  for  what  they  are  in  nature — all  true  in  its  place 
— but  have  not  learned  Christ,  and  through  Him,  that 
they  are  not  in  the  flesh  but  in  Christ,  in  that  He  has 
borne  and  passed  through  this  for  them,  and  that  now 
through  Him  they  are  free  in  the  new  man  as  risen  in 
Him. 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM    LXXXIX.  233 

Psalm  lxxxix.  has  one  remarkable  character  which 
it  behoves  us  to  notice  here — reliance  on  the  faithful- 
ness of  God  according  to  His  original  word  of  promise, 
when  externally  all  is  contrary  to  it,  but  the  expecta- 
tion of  fulfilment  founded  on  mercy,  in  fact  in  Christ. 
in  whom  all  promised  mercies  concentrate  themselves. 
"I  have  said,  mercy  shall  be  built  up  for  ever,  thy 
faithfulness  shalt  thou  establish  in  the  very  heavens." 
The  accomplishment  of  God's  promises  on  earth  shall 
be  a  source  of  praise  for  the  inhabitants  of  heaven. 
Yet  we  see  at  the  end  that  it  was  as  if  God  had  made 
all  men  in  vain — a  sad  thought — the  power  of  evil  rul- 
ing, men  its  willing  instruments,  and  the  good  having 
no  place  but  reproach  and  sorrow.  But  God  is  called 
on  to  remember  His  saints"  weakness  and  their  reproach. 
Still  there  is  confidence;  and,  whatever  the  state  of 
things  may  be,  He  has  wrought  redemption,  broken 
the  power  of  the  enemy;  and  has  He  not  in  a  far  better 
way  than  for  Israel?  His  arm  is  mighty,  His  right 
hand  high,  whatever  state  they  are  in.  Heaven  and 
earth  are  His.  though  till  Christ  comes  we  cannot  say. 

Pa BOr  of  heaven  and  earth.     Justice  and  judgment 

are  the  constant  attributes  of  His  throne.  Mercy  and 
truth  announce  Him  when  He  goes  forth.  This  form 
of  expression  is  beautiful.  God  has  a  throne.  There 
everything  must  be  brought  into  consistency  with  it. 
Hut  in  His  active  going  forth  tender  mercy  and  good- 
announce  Him,  ami  faithful  truth  will  tell  His 

people  He  is  there  when    He  comes  forth.      liis  activi- 
ties are  mercy  and  faithfulness,  because  His  will    is   at 

work  and  His  nature  is  love.     Yet   His  throne  still 

maintains  justice  and  judgment.      How  truly  this  has 

Q 


2o-t  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS    ON 

been  shown  in  Christ ! — will  doubtless  be  so  in  the  last 
days  in  Israel — but  signally  so  in  Christ,  and  even 
then  because  of  Him.  This  apprehension  of  God  gives 
the  sense  of  blessedness  in  the  midst  of  sorrow. 
•'  Blessed  are  the  people  who  know  the  joyful  sound. 
They  shall  walk,  0  Lord,  in  the  light  of  thy  counten- 
ance. In  thy  name  shall  they  rejoice  all  the  day,  and 
in  thy  righteousness  shall  they  be  exalted.  For  thou 
art  the  glory  of  their  strength,  and  in  thy  favour  shall 
our  horn  be  exalted."  All  this  is  realized  in  the  heart 
in  the  midst  of  sorrows,  so  that  it  can  be  as  sorrowful, 
yet  always  rejoicing.  This  gives  sweet  blessing  to  the 
heart  of  the  saint.  Trouble  does  but  increase  it, 
because  it  makes  him  feel  the  preciousness  of  the  faith- 
fulness and  favour  of  God,  and  that  nothing  separates 
him  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord.  •  The  inward  revelation  of  divine  favour  makes 
the  path  of  sorrow  full  of  sweetness.  So  Christ  Him- 
self was  a  man  of  sorrows.  Yet  He  could  say  that 
they  might  have  "my  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves."  The 
sureness  of  the  promises  in  Christ  are  then  insisted  on. 
Head  "of  thy  holy  One,"  and  remark  that  "holy"  here 
is  the  same  word  as  "mercies"  in  the  first  verse,  not 
as  "holy"  in  the  18th.  Mercy,  then,  faithfulness,  the 
character  of  the  divine  throne  and  of  the  divine  act- 
ings, past  accomplishment  of  redemption,  what  the 
title  of  God  is,  and  the  power  in  which  he  has  broken 
the  hostile  power  of  evil,  all  to  us  known  as  the  Father's 
love  through  the  Sen  by  the  Spirit,  brings  the  spirit  in 
the  midst  of  all  trial  into  the  enjoyment  by  faith,  but 
the  true  enjoyment  of  the  heart,  of  the  light  of  God's 
countenance  according  to  all  the  favour  He  bears  us  in 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   XC.  235 

Christ.  In  the  psalm,  of  course,  this  is  expressed  as 
on  Jewish  ground.  But  Christ  manifested  Himself  to 
us  as  He  does  not  to  the  world.  The  Father  and  the 
Son  come  and  make  their  abode  with  us.  Joy  is  pos- 
sessed; full,  final  deliverance  counted  on. 

Psalm  xc.  is  in  a  special  manner  Israel's  cry  for  mercy 
and  restoration  in  the  last  days,  after  their  long  afflic- 
tion. But  avc  will  apply  its  principles  as  usual.  It 
contemplates  two  things  in  the  government  of  God: 
discipline,  properly  speaking,  and  satisfying  mercy. 
But  both  are  founded  on  another  point:  that  God  is 
the  one  unchangeable  God — the  same  before  the  world, 
with  which  discipline  is  connected,  was  created,  as  now, 
and  now  as  then;  time  being  as  nothing  to  Him,  which 
to  us  may  seem  so  long;  and  that  He  is  the  dwelling- 
place  of  His  people,  where  is  their  rest  and  home,  and 
secure  abode,  whatever  wanderings  they  may  have.  As 
to  man  in  time,  He  sets  man  aside  with  a  word,  and 
restores  him.  They  are  like  grass  growing  up  and 
then  withering.  But  though  this  be  true,  if  we  com- 
pare God  and  man,  yet  faith  gets  hold  both  of  the 
ways  and  purposes  of  God  in  dealing  with  His  people. 
For  Israel  it  is  felt  as  wrath,  because  they  do  not  yet 
know  reconciliation.  We  know  it  is  love,  but  the 
truth  of  the  dealing  is  the  same,  and  we  can  apply  it. 
And  first  as  to  ways:  "as  His  fear,  so  is  His  wrath." 
It  is  not  arbitrary,  but  according  to  His  own  nature 
.Did  character.  Fear  is  knowing  Him  in  truth,  so  that 
what  He  is,  is  applied  to  the  holy  judgment  of  all  that 
is  in  the  soul,  so  that  nothing  should  displease  Him  or 
hinder  communion.      Now  wrath  as  discipline — govern- 


236  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

mental  displeasure — is  the  expression  of  this  as  regards 
the  state  of  the  soul,  where  it  has  been  unheeded,  or 
the  will  has  been  in  it.  It  makes  good  God's  character 
as  regards  that  which  is  opposed  to  it  in  us.  Faith, 
divine  teaching,  shews  us,  that  His  wrath  is,  as  His 
fear.  But  when  the  will  bows,  our  very  feebleness 
becomes  not  terror,  but  a  motive  ha  our  appeal  to  God. 
And  He  oavus  it.  He  considers  whereof  we  are  made, 
and  remembers  we  are  but  dust.  But  when  once  we 
feel  our  nothingness,  and  apply  our  hearts  to  wisdom, 
the  beginning  of  which  is  the  fear  of  Jehovah,  instead 
of  God's  having  to  enforce  it  by  subduing  our  will, 
and  correcting  our  carelessness,  the  heart  gets  courage, 
gets  bold.  It  is  not  reasoning,  but  by  grace  confidence 
is  restored,  and  the  heart  says,  "Return;  0  Lord, 
how  long?" 

Now  this,  we  have  often  seen,  is  the  expression  of 
faith.  God  purposes  to  bless,  and  in  result  will  bless 
His  people  ;  and  hence,  when  under  pressure,  faith  can 
say,  How  long  1  Self  is  not  faith,  and  the  fear  of  God 
must  be  produced,  but  where  faith  is,  it  springs  up 
again  into  the  sense  of  known  mercy  and  says,  How 
long1?  And  note,  there  is  known  mercy.  It  is  not 
come,  but  "return;"  not  as  if  God  had  left  them 
(though,  as  to  His  ways,  it  is  true  as  to  Israel,- — -He 
hides  His  face  from  the  house  of  Jacob),  but  we  look 
to  His  returning  in  the  sense  of  known  present  mercies 
and  enjoyment  of  favour.  Then  it  brightens  up  into 
full  confidence.  Faith  knows  His  pui'pose  is  to  bless, 
to  give  delight  and  joy  to  His  people,  and  that  by  His 
own  favour.  It  knows  He  delights  in  them ;  it  counts 
on  this  :  "  Satisfy  us  early."     What  a  bold  word  with 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   XC  '2'.)~ 

God!  But  it  is  confidence  now;  the  soul  is  morally 
restored  in  His  love  which  He  delights  in.  This  is 
Looked  at  as  constant  too.  "Rejoice  and  be  glad  all 
OUT  days.''  it  says.  Why  should  it  not  expect  it  from 
the  God  of  goodness?  It  maybe  more  outwardly  with 
Israel,  still  the  spirit  of  it  is  right.  It  looks  for  a 
refraining  God;  one  who  takes  account  of  the  sorrow 
of  His  people,  though  He  has  been  found  to  inflict  it. 
See  how  beautifully  and  blessed  this  is  put,  Isa.  xl. 
(just  what  is  sou-lit  here),  "Speak  ye  to  the  heart  of 
Jerusalem j  tell  her  her  time  of  trouble  is  accom- 
plished, ....  for  she  has  received  at  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  double  of  all  her  sins."  His  heart  counted  it 
twice  the  chastisement  needed,  compared  with  her 
sins ;  for  the  answer  to  faith  is  ever  more  than  the 
request.  (See  the  prayers  and  answers  in  Psalm 
exxxii.) 

But  faith,  looking  on  the  thoughts  and  purpose  of 
(iod  is  blessing,  goes  beyond  returning  and  refrain- 
ing mercies.  God  has  purpose  in  His  love  and  works 
in  its  accomplishment;  hence  they  say,  Not  only  satisfy 
us  with  thy  mercy,  but  "let  thy  work  appear  unto 
thy  servants."  God's  own  work  will  make  good  bless- 
ing, and  so  how  good  it  will  be]  and  it  will  be  mani- 
fested to  their  honour  and  delight.  So  we,  even  for 
our  souls;  we  seek  not  only  restoring  mercy,  but 
thereon  the  positive  work  of  God,  in  producing  bless- 
ing in  bringing  us  yet  nearer  to  Himself.  It  is  never 
then  merely  restoration;  it  is  a  soul  better  able  to 
appreciate  God,  ami  God-more  fully  revealed  to  it.    Yet 

-till  awaiting,  knowing  as  we  are  known,  the  result  is 
the  full  display  of  glory  (here  for  children,  because  it  is 


238      PKAGTICAL  KEFLECTIONS  ON 

literally  for  Israel  in  the  millennium) ;  but  Ave  do  look 
for  the  complete  work  of  God  in  raising  and  glorifying 
us,  and  then  entering  into  glory  to  abide.  But  another 
sweet  thought  is  added  to  this :  "  that  the  beauty  of 
Jehovah,  their  God,  should  be  upon  them."  Their 
thoughts  would  hardly  go  beyond  the  manifest  endow- 
ment of  blessing  from  His  own  hand  marking  them 
His.  With  us  how  fully  is  it  so !  Shall  not  we  be  in 
the  glory  of  Christ  Himself?  like  Him  arrayed  in  this 
blessed  likeness  before  God  our  Father,  a  place  of  per- 
fect delight !  Nor  do  I  exclude  present  blessing,  how 
Ave  may  be  as  thus  under  grace  as  the  lign-aloes  which 
the  Lord  had  planted;  and  that  was  when  Israel  was 
abiding  in  their  tents.  So  the  Church  should  be  a 
spectacle  of  grace,  to  the  angels,  of  order  and  beauty, 
and  the  life  of  Jesus  as  manifested  in  the  individual 
believer.  In  this  case,  too,  the  works  of  our  hands 
under  divine  favour  are  established  for  us. 

Psalm  xci.  On  this  beautiful  psalm,  of  the  structure 
of  which  I  haATe  spoken  elsewhere,  I  have  not  much  to 
say,  because  it  defines  the  names  of  God  which  arc 
available,  and  the  specific  effects  of  faith  going  on  even 
to  what  is  directly  applicable  to  Christ ;  so  that  the 
general  principle  is  less  justly  deducible  from  or  con- 
nected with  it.  It  would  be  reducing  what  is  purposely 
specific  to  what  is  vague.  It  takes  JchoArah,  as  such, 
as  God;  and  so  he  who  owns  that  name,  comes  under 
the  care  of  El-shaddai  for  a  specific  performance  of 
earthly  promises  in  the  ways  of  God.  This  is  not  our 
place ;  one  who  acted  on  it  would  deceive  himself. 
Yet  a  general  faith,  and  trust  of  heart  founded  on  it, 


THK   PSALMS. — PSALM   XCI.  239 

would  surely  be  blessed.  It  does  not  take  up  a 
Father's  ohastenings  with  which  the  government  of 
Cod  connects  itself. 

Here,  in  trusting  Jehovah,  no  evil  comes  nigh  the 
dwelling  of  him  who  docs  so.  This  was  what  made 
it  strange  to  David*  till  he  went  into  the  sanctuary  of 
God.  He  saw  the  wicked  prospering,  himself  plagued 
every  moment.  This  is  the  certain  result  of  owning 
Jehovah,  when  the  government  of  God  does  come  in. 

Still  we  may  learn  some  of  the  characters  of  trust. 
It  is  not  merely  the  knowledge  that  there  is  an  Almighty 
God,  who  is  above  all  things:  the  secret  place  of  His 
true  revelation  of  Himself  must  be  known.  This,  true 
faith  has,  and  confers  with  God  there  according  to  it. 
His  name  is  revealed  to  faith.  To  us,  it  is  Christ  as 
Lord  and  the  Father.  Faith  thus,  in  its  confession  of 
His  name,  makes  its  refuge  and  strong  tower,  and 
moreover  trusts  in  it :  a  great  thing,  for  no  power  of 
evil,  no  cause  of  distress  can  be  anything  to  upset  the 
mind,  if  the  Lord  lie  looked  to  and  trusted  in.  It  has 
here  the  promise  of  ever  watchful  and  protecting  care. 
This  is  true  whatever  outward  evil  may  come.  As  we 
see  in  Luke  xxi.  1G — 18,  the  Lord  says  some  of  them 
should  be  put  to  death,  but  not  a  hair  of  their  head 
should  perish — they  were  all  counted.  Providential 
power  is  all  at  (kid's  disposal.  Faith  is  identified  with 
the  interests  of  God's  people  (vcr.  9);  but  the  Lord's 
own  name  is  what  has  governed  the  heart,  and  the  true 
name  of  God  is  known  to  it;  that  is,  as  I  have  said. 
the  true  revelation  of  God  Himself  known  by  divine 

1  Query — Asaph. 


240      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

teaching.  To  us  it  is  Christ  Himself,  and  the  Father 
in  Him.  Faith  calls.  It  is  not  merely  passive  trust, 
right  as  this  is  in  its  place,  but  it  communicates  with 
God  about  its  needs,  because  it  trusts  Him.  God's 
presence  is  there  for  faith  and  the  exercise  of  its  power; 
and  this  is  as  true  now,  in  its  just  application,  as  then, 
as  hereafter.  The  way  is  different,  because  the  object 
is  different,  that  is,  to  bring  in  a  heavenly  state.  It 
brings  present  blessing  though  with  persecution,  and 
is  assured  of  eternal  and  heavenly  salvation. 

Psalm  xcii.  is  really  praise  for  the  final  deliverance 
of  Israel,  and  Jehovah's  millennial  name  is  the  key  to 
it,  as  of  the  last.  As  the  following  psalms  arc  the 
bringing  in  again  the  only  begotten,  there  is  one 
principle  to  note  in  it — the  elevation  of  the  wicked  is 
finally  for  their  destruction.  The  man  untaught  of 
God  does  not  see  this ;  but  faith  discerns  in  its  adver- 
saries and  the  power  of  evil  which  rises  up  and  presses 
on  it,  darkening  its  horizon,  the  enemies  of  the  Lord. 
Hence,  though  tried  more  than  another,  for  the  power 
of  evil  is  very  painful  to  it,  it  has  confidence.  For 
though  it  would  be  foreign  to  wish  personally  for  ven- 
geance (and  we  have  to  watch  against  this),  is  it  so  to 
the  Christian  to  rejoice  in  the  earth  being  delivered 
from  the  power  of  the  wicked1?  On  the  contrary, 
"  Rejoice  now  ye  prophets  and  ye  holy  apostles."  It  is 
said,  Faith  gives  a  keen  sense  of  the  evil,  because  it  is 
such  and  hostile  to  God  and  goodness  and  truth,  and 
rejoices  in  the  righteous  judgment.  But  it  is  as  the 
Lord's  work,  as  the  work  of  His  hands,  it  rejoices  in  it ; 
and  that  is  perfect.     It  displays,  too,  the  uprightness 


I  ill:    PSALMS.— PSALM  XCIII.  241 

of  the  Lord,  but  faith   must  wait  in  patience.     The 
following  psalms  discuss  and  celebrate  the  coming  in  of 

this  judgment. 

Psalm  xciii.  In  this  psalm  we  shall  find  some  very 
important  principles.  Though  power  be  now  exercised 
for  the  triumph  of  good,  it  is  no  new  power.  The 
Lord's  throne  is  of  old,  Himself  from  everlasting.  No 
inroad  of  evil  has  touched  or  weakened  that.  This  had 
taken  place.  The  passion  and  will  of  man  had  risen 
up  as  the  angry  and  tumultuous  waves  in  vain.  The 
Lord  on  high  is  mightier.  Rebellious  man  is  allowed 
io  do  this,  but  the  power  of  the  Ancient  of  Days  is 
concealed  from  unbelief  in  the  days  of  patience,  so 
that  man  thought  all  in  his  hand.  When  evil  rises  up 
so  as  to  reach  Him  and  call  out  His  action,  an  instant 
Suffices  to  bring  about  the  counsels  of  God  in  power  by 
their  destruction.  But  this  is  not  quite  all.  Faith 
has  that  on  which  it  rests — the  Lord's  testimonies: 
they  are  very 'sure.  God's  word  maybe  counted  on  as 
Himself,  not  only  for  final  deliverance  but  for  guidance 
along  the  path'of  difficulty.  Nor  is  this  all.  There  is 
a  character  which  is  a  safeguard  against  delusion  and  a 
means  of  judging  and  discerning  the  right  path  : 
"Holiness  becomes  God's  house."'  Oh!  how  these  two 
principles  do  cheer  and  enlighten  us  in  our  path. 
How  they  strengthen  us  in  the  consciousness  that  it  is 
of  God's  very  nature,  and  cannot  but  be  !  Thus  God's 
testimonies  and  God's  holiness  secure  and  fix  the  heart 
as  to  that  which  is  of  God.  If  the  water-floods  rise  up, 
the  Lord's  power  will  settle  all  in  His  own  judgment. 

On  psalms  xciii.— ci.,  though  they  are  very  striking 


242      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

ones,  I  have  very  little  to  say  with  my  present  object, 
because  they  treat  not  of  the  exercises  of  the  heart  in 
the  time  of  trial,  but  of  the  coming  in  of  power  to 
put  an  end  to  that  time.  They  are  characterized  by 
the  title  "Jehovah  reigns,  the  world  is  established." 
I  have,  therefore,  only  a  few  remarks  to  make :  first, 
that  the  result  of  all  this  patience  of  government  in 
God  is,  that  man  rises  up  as  the  waterfloods  against 
Him :  but  God  is  mightier.  The  termination  of  it  is 
by  power.  But  two  great  truths  accompany  this. 
God's  testimonies  are  very  sure;  ayc  can  count  upon 
His  word  through  all.  It  reveals  His  nature,  His  pur- 
pose, His  character.  It  gives  that  according  to  which 
He  will  act — no  peace  to  the  Avicked,  but  infallible  cer- 
tainty of  purpose  and  power.  Man  may  be  as  the 
grass,  evil  rise  up  like  the  waterfloods,  the  word  of 
Jehovah  abides  for  ever,  and  he  that  does  His  will. 
Hence  in  all  times  we  can  go  by  it  as  a  rule,  dark  as 
all  may  seem,  mighty  as  evil  may  be.  Israel  or  the 
Church,  apostacy  or  hollow  profession,  persecution  or 
seductive  prosperity,  His  word  is  true  and  a  sure  guide, 
according  to  Jlis  own  nature  and  character — His  to 
whom  power,  after  all,  belongs.  And  if  the  time  was 
when  He  to  whom  power  belonged  was  counted  as  a 
malefactor,  He  was  guided  by  that  word,  bowed  to  it, 
and  fulfilled  it;  and  judgment  after  all  will  return  to 
righteousness.  Thus  far  of  all  present  government 
and  future  display  of  public  power,  the  kingdom  and 
patience,  or  kingdom  and  glory  of  the  Lord.  But 
there  is  another  thing — Jehovah  has  a  house,  a  dwell- 
ing. Take  it  as  His  heavenly  dwelling,  His  temple 
where  all  speak  of  His  glory,  or  in  its  place  as  the 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   Xiill.  243 

Church,  Hi.s  habitation  by  the  Spirit.  It  is  always 
essentially  characterized  by  one  thing,  because  it  is 
His  habitation — holiness  becomes  His  house  for  ever, 
separation  to  Him  according  to  His  nature. 

These  two  points  guide  the  saint  through  all  cir- 
cumstances till  power  conies  in  to  sustain  him,  because 
he  counts  on  God,  through  all  the  risings  up  of 
the  power  of  evil :  the  word  of  God,  and  the  holiness 
of  His  nature.  God  has  graciously  communicated  His 
mind  to  men,  has  spoken.  His  word  remains  sure 
come  what  will.  That  is  inherent  to  His  nature, 
depends  on  His  power  as  God.  "  Hath  He  said  and 
shall  pre  not  do  it,  hath  He  spoken  and  shall  it  not 
come  to  pass?"  If  He  be  God,  truth  nor  power  to 
make  it  good  cannot  fail,  or  He  is  not  God.  His  speak- 
ing obliges  Himself,  so  to  speak,  by  His  nature.  1 
cannot  believe  He  is  God  at  all,  if,  when  He  has  spoken, 
it  is  not  made  good.  He  would  not  be  God.  It  would 
be  ignorance,  or  some  one  else  would  have  power  to 
hinder  Him.  His  testimonies  are  sure.  In  the  midst 
of  evil  this  is  an  immense,  a  perfect  consolation  and 
stay.  13ut  the  other  test  is  of  importance,  the  other 
claim  on  conscience,  Holiness,  if  He  be  God,  is  in  every 
sense  necessary.  No  elevation  of  truth,  no  certainty 
of  word  to  be  reckoned  on  can  alter  this.  It  puts  man 
subjectively  in  his  place.  He  might  boast  of  truth, 
may  exidt  in  sure  promises,  as  if  God  had  bound  Him- 
self. But  God  must  be  consistent  with  Himself;  what 
is  not  holy  is  in  no  case  of  Him.  He  is  supreme,  and 
all  must  refer  to  Him,  all  be  consecrated  to  Him  in  His 
presence,  and,  so  far  as  He  is  revealed,  suited  to  what 
lie   is.      Thus   a   counter-check  on  man   is   furnished. 


244      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

and  the  true  knowledge  of  God.  It  is  not  holiness 
apart  from  the  word,  nor  knowledge  or  certainty  apart 
from  holiness.  The  Spirit  of  truth  is  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Spirit  of  .truth. 

Note  further,  they  are  testimonies  coming  from 
God,  the  positive  declaration  of  His  mind  and  will  (not 
a  boasted  knowledge  of  God  by  man's  will,  and  his  pre- 
tension to  know  what  God  must  be,  though  there  be  a 
certain  apprehension  of  conscience  connected  with, 
often  perverted  by,  traditionary  knowledge ;  but)  the 
positive  testimonies  of  God,  so  that  man  is  subject  to 
them,  though  sustained  by  them.  It  is  not  man's 
reasoning,  or  man's  conscience,  but  the  testimonies  of 
God,  His  own  active  revelation  of  Himself,  the  utter- 
ance of  His  word.  They  are  simply  received  by  faith, 
the  soul  is  subject  to  them  as  such.  This  characterizes 
the  soul  that  owns  God.  Power  will  come  in  due  time. 
This  will  make  all  publicly  right.  Till  then  faith  rests 
in  the  testimonies  ;  the  soul-subjecting,  soul-sustaining 
revelation  of  God. 

God,  moreover,  has  a  house,  a  dwelling.  This,  as 
noticed  elsewhere,  is  an  immense  fruit  of  redemption. 
Neither  with  innocence,  nor  with  the  faithful  did  God 
dwell ;  Adam  before  His  fall  nor  Abraham  had  God 
dwelling  with  them  ;  innocence  marked  one,  faith  the 
blessed  path  of  the  other.  A  frustrated  or  gracious 
visit  told  of  God's  condescension  and  goodness  to  either. 
But  in  Israel's  redemption  we  find  that  Jehovah  had 
brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  that  He  might 
dwell  among  them.  (Ex.  xxix.  45,  4G.)  Innocence 
does  not  become  God's  house,  but  absolute  consecra- 
tion to  Him  according  to  His  nature  where  good  and 


THE    PSALMS. —  PSALM   XCIV.  !>4"> 

evil  arc  known;  so  it  is  in  heaven — tills  character  ami 
nature.  But,  there,  testimonies  are  not  needed. 
Knowledge  of  good  and  evil  man  lias,  hut  separated 
from  God  and  in  sin.  But  where  God  lias  redeemed 
man  to  Himself,  purified  him,  and  delivered  him,  then 
He  dwells  with  him,  in  him — in  Israel  according  to 
His  then  partial  revelation  of  Himself,  in  the  saint  now 
by  His  Spirit,  and  in  the  Church;  and  so  eternally,  for 
now  it  is  according  to  what  He  is  in  Himself,  fully 
revealed  in  Christ,  and  by  His  death.  Hence  it  is 
founded  on  testimony.  For  Cod  must  reveal  Himself. 
and  His  redemption,  and  His  ways,  and  what  He  is. 
Thus  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  consequent  on  Christ's 
exaltation  on  the  accomplishment  of  redemption,  and 
in  fact  on  the  reception  of  the  testimony  of  God  by 
faith.  When  God  is  known  (not  merely  truth),  then 
there  is  the  consciousness  of  what  suits,  there  is  the 
delight  of  His  name  according  to  His  nature;  and  thus 
it  becomes  the  test  not  only  of  truth  being  known,  but 
truth  and  so  God  Himself — for  Christ  is  the  truth,  and 
the  Spirit  is  truth.  Hence,  as  soon  as  Israel  is  redeemed. 
the  holiness  of  God  is  spoken  of,  not  before,  because 
He  was  going  to  dwell  in  them,  having  brought  them 
to  Himself.  The  world  will  be  established  by  power: 
hut  this  is  consecration  to  God  by  testimony  and  His 
own  presence  through  redemption.  It  is  not  the  pomp 
and  order  of  His  house  here  (that  we  have  in  psalm  ci.). 
but  a  dwelling-place  "I'  delight  and  nature.  (Coinp. 
Psalm  exxxii.  13,  14.) 

In  Psalm  xciv.  judgment  is  looked  for  and  vengeance 
to  set  the  world  right.     Bu1  we  find  the  discipline  and 


~2Wi  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   OX 

comforts  of  the  Lord  sustaining  the  soul  meanwhile, 
which  must  occupy  us  a  moment.  The  triumph  of  the 
wicked  is,  for  him  who  believes  in  God,  a  painful  and 
oppressive  thought,  the  power  of  evil  is  evident ;  this  is 
what  just  affects  the  mind  of  the  saint,  not  in  a  pro- 
phetic but  a  moral  way.  But  the  blindness  of  the 
haughtiness  of  man  away  from  God,  presses  on  him  who 
sees,  from  knowing  God,  the  day  of  the  wicked 
approaching.  There  is  also  the  distinct  consciousness 
of  being  God's  people  whose  weakness  and  sorrow  are 
but  an  occasion  of  oppression.  Both  are  clear  motives 
of  judgment  that  this  cannot  go  on  for  ever.  He  that 
formed  the  eye  surely  sees  it  all.  Man's  thoughts  are 
vanity.  These  two  things  then  are  the  foundation  of 
the  saint's  thought.  God's  interest  in  His  people,  and 
His  goodness  which  will  not  overlook  the  poor  when 
oppressed ;  yea,  the  very  fact  of  the  pride  of  the  wicked. 
But  another  element  is  introduced  :  God  does  judge 
evil,  but  He  begins  at  His  own  house.  God's  hand  is 
in  the  dealings  which  make  His  people  suffer,  as  well 
as  man's.  It  is  to  this  the  heart  of  the  saint  turns. 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  chastenest,  0  Jeho- 
vah." We  have  the  interpreter  here  one  among  a 
thousand.  God  with  the  chastening  teaches  out  of  the 
law.  God,  by  all  this  process  of  evil  having  the  upper 
hand,  breaks  the  will,  teaches  dependence,  separates 
not  only  the  heart  but  the  spirit  from  the  world  where 
this  evil  reigns.  How  could  there  be  union  with  a 
world  in  which  this  power  of  evil  is  seen  and  morally 
shrank  from  1  Man  thinks  he  can  go  on  amiably  in  the 
world  without  its  evil,  but  when  the  world  itself  is  evil 
and  felt  to  be  so,  what  then  1     Thus  wickedness  and 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    X('IV.  247 

its  rising  up,  discarding  God,  is  its  own  remedy  in  the 
heart  of  him  who  owns  God,  exercises  it,  purifies  it, 
removes  it  from  the  sphere  in  which  its  own  will  works, 
when  it,  if  not  in  intention,  at  any  rate  practically, 
sou-ht  an  outlet  for  nature.  Divine  life  having  given 
it  thoughts  of  God ;  it  is  met  by  a  world  which  will 
none  of  Him,  and  rises  up  against  Him  :  all  this  is 
God's  hand. 

But  there  is  more,  there  is,  with  the  discipline  of  His 
hand,  direct  inward  teaching  by  His  word,  which  reveals 
Himself.  Thus  the  haughty  evil  which  drives  back  the 
heart,  also  has  subducdncss,  and  has  tasted  that  the 
Lord  is  gracious,  drives  it  to  God,  known  in  grace  and 
the  revelation  of  Himself,  His  ways,  His  purposes;  and 
grace  effectuates  itself  in  the  heart.  The  renewed  heart 
gets  into  its  own  sphere,  and  learns  not  merely  the 
necessary  character  of  God  as  hating  evil  and  loving- 
good,  but  His  own  ways,  the  development  of  His  grace 
and  truth,  His  holiness  in  the  sphere  in  which  He 
reveals  what  He  is  for  those  who  know  Him.  This  is  a 
rest  of  heart  for  the  saint,  a  repose  of  the  spirit  which 
seeks  and  delights  in  good.  If  it  sought  to  meet  the 
evil  (though  activity  in  service  there  will  be  according 
to  God's  will),  but  to  meet  the  evil  in  the  world,  largely 
as  the  heart  desires  it  and  looks  for  God's  bringing  it  in, 
there  would  be  weariness  and  heart-breaking;  but  when 
the  power  of  evil  is  rife,  the  soul  is  driven  up  into  its 
own  place,  into  the  direct  revelation  of  God  and  His 
ways,  and  there  near  Clod's  altar,  for  it  draws  out  wor- 
ship, it  finds  rest — till.  It  still  looks  for  setting  evil 
right  and  the  deliverance  of  the  poor  and  needy,  but 
it  abides  in  patience,  learning  God's  mind,  and  finds  rest 


248       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

therein,  rest  in  what  is  eternal.  The  activity  of  good 
it  will  engage  in,  where  the  open  door  is,  but  its  rest  is 
in  that  which  is  properly  of  God.  The  establishment 
of  that  by  power  will  come,  and  that  is  certain.  God  is 
sure  in  His  ways.  He  will  not  cast  off  His  people.  He 
will  not  have  evil  in  power  for  ever.  Here  it  is,  of 
course,  the  intervention  of  judgment  on  earth,  judgment 
returning  to  righteousness — power  and  good  going 
together,  not  power  and  evil.  We  have  better  things, 
a  heavenly  revelation  for  sons,  a  heavenly  place,  our 
Father's  house  before  us,  but  the  principle  is  the  same. 
The  judgment,  once  in  the  chief  priests  and  Pilate, 
while  righteousness  and  truth  were  in  the  blessed  Jesus, 
will  come  to  His  hands  who  was  once  Himself  the 
poor  and  oppressed  ;  judgment  will  return  to  righteous- 
ness. And  if  we,  taking  up  our  cross,  are  glad  to 
suffer  and  so  shall  reign  with  Him;  yet  the  thoughts 
and  ways,  and  counsels,  and  faithfulness  of  God  will  be 
fulfilled.  Heavenly  grace  and  heavenly  glory  may  be 
added  in  our  present  rest  of  spirit,  and  the  rest  that 
remains  to  us ;  still  righteousness  will  have  dominion 
if  it  be  heavenly,  and  eternal  blessing  for  us  who  have 
a  part  with  Him  who  suffered.  The  appeal  to  the 
impossibility  of  its  going  on,  if  the  Lord  is  to  show 
Himself  at  all,  is  strikingly  put  forward  in  verse  20. 

The  power  of  evil,  note  (16,  17)  was  deeply  felt.  Be 
it  so ;  it  may  show  our  weakness  sometimes,  but  it  is 
well  it  should,  if  faith  be  there.  The  heart  ought  not 
to  get  accustomed  to  the  power  of  evil,  will  not  if  it 
be  with  God;  will  be  sensible  to  it,  astonished  at  it, 
and  dependent  on  divine  restoration  to  meet  it  in 
thought.     This  was  true  of  Christ,  only  in  perfection. 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   XiiV.  249 

and  do  fault  in  His  thoughts.  He  was  astonished  at 
their  unbelief;  He  Looked  round  upon  them  with  anger, 
being  grieved  at  the  hardness  of  their  hearts;  He  could 
say.  How  long  shall  I  be  with  you,  how  long  shall  J 

Buffer  you?  But  then,  no  less  ready  in  heart  in  the 
activity  of  good  where  there  was  a  want,  hu  could  say. 
Now  is  my  Boul  troubled,  and  what  shall  1  say  I 
Father,  save  me  from  this  hour;  but  then  perfect  in 
submission  and  obedience,  and  the  one  desire  to  glorif 
His  Father,  that  His  Father  should  glorify  Himself — 
perfect  in  all  things.  We,  alas  !  if  not  helped  some- 
times, ready  to  dwell  in  silence,  should  soon,  so  to 
speak,  give  up,  where  Christ,  the  blessed  One,  felt  all 
infinitely  more,  and  was  perfect  in  it.  But  when  we 
turn,  in  the  consciousness  of  tendency  to  fail,  or  being 
actually  in  present  danger,  to  Cod,  His  help  is  there. 
'Phis  is  great  mercy.  Teaching,  then,  is  for  the  rest  of 
the  spirit,  hut  there  is  holding  up  and  help  in  our 
ways.  David  encouraged  himself  in  God :  who  can 
fail  then?  He  who  is  mightier  than  all,  lie  whose 
force  is  accomplished  in  weakness,  is  there  to  help, 
there  in  a  tried  one,  witness  of  goodness,  that  if  we 
never  failed  we  were  in  danger. 

Another  scene  opens  too,  for  God  thinks  of  all  things 
for  us.  What  questions,  if  our  minds  work,  present 
themselves  to  us,  in  the  confusion  ami  labyrinths  of 
the  mixture  of  good  and  evil  !  The  mind  enjoying 
God's  goodness  may  abstain  from  it.  It  docs  well,  but. 
the  root  and  spring  of  all  these  questions  are  in  men's 
hearts,  and  the  power  of  evil  around  us  awakens  them. 
It  is  not  only  selhshnesss,  though  self  is  always  the 
centre,  the  centre  of  the  questionings,  but  when  evil 

R 


250      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

affects  the  spirit,  a  multitude  of  thoughts  are  there.  I 
do  not  say  it  is  right— it  is  not.  It  is  the  fruit  of  our 
departure  from  God,  and  the  consequent  letting  in  of 
evil  into  God's  world,  a  being  within  it  in  fact ;  but 
when  heart  aud  mind  go  out  beyond  it,  having  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  revelation  here,  when  the 
mind  works,  increases  the  difficulty  and  the  multitude 
of  thoughts,  for  the  mind  sees  good  clearer.  Why  and 
whence  this  evil  1  It  sees  another  world  of  God's  power. 
Why  then  this  1  It  looks  into  a  world  beyond  it,  and 
brings  back  its  thoughts  into  this  where  they  are  not 
realized.  It  sees  goodness  and  power,  and  dwells  in 
the  midst  of  sorrow  and  evil.  This  may  be  in  a  selfish 
shape — often  is.  It  is  then  a  low  principle,  but  it  has 
always  man  for  its  centre,  and  (save  as  it  was  in  perfect 
love  and  holiness  in  Christ  who  perfectly  brought 
another  world  into  this,  I  mean  in  His  own  mind  and 
person)  is  always  evil,  is  but  the  "  multitude  of  our 
thoughts."  Yet  God  has  compassion.  I  retreat  into 
God  by  faith.  This  comforts,  delights  my  soul.  Our 
thoughts  speculating,  as  knowing  good  and  evil,  either 
by  personal  sorrow,  or  by  working  of  mind,  which  is 
worse,  launch  out  into  the  endlessness,  not  really 
infinitude,  of  speculation  as  to  what  ought  to  be,  or 
into  complaint  against  God  as  to  what  God  is.  It 
may  be  sometimes  in  a  more  submissive  way  of 
wonder  and  acknowledgment  of  its  being  too  hard 
for  us ;  but  it  is  a  finite  mind,  a  mind  in  the  sphere 
of  this  wrorld,  out  of  which  it  has  no  natural  powers, 
let,  in  thought  and  speculation,  into  its  relation- 
ship with  the  infinite,  with  good  and  wTith  evil. 
It   has    a    multitude   of   thoughts,    but   no   possible 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM    XCIV.  2-31 

In  its  state  it  docs  not  belong   to  the   sphere 
it  lias  got  into. 

Hence,  let  me  add,  in  passing,  the  form  infidelity 
has  largely  taken  in  these  days — what  is  called  posi- 
tivism or  realism,  saying,  1  know  what  I  sec  and 
experience,  with  perhaps  some  small  conclusions  from  it, 
and  pretending  to  stop  there.  It  docs  not,  for  it  pre- 
tends to  <l<  ny  all  beyond  it.  This  is  false  upon  the  lace 
of  it,  for  if  it  only  knows  what  is  knowable  to  man  from 
himself,  it  can  deny  nothing  beyond  it,  any  more  than 
it  can  affirm.  It  is  a  low  thought.  But  it  is  false  on 
another  ground.  The  mind  has  no  certainty,  but  it  has 
a  multitude  of  thoughts  beyond  the  sphere  of  the 
natural  human  powers  which  can  decide  on  what  is 
within  these  powers.  There  are  a  multitude  of  thoughts 
within  us.  "We  arc  incompetent  to  come  to  a  conclu- 
sion, but  there  are  thoughts  and  something  or  other  to 
suggest  them,  but  the  heart  has  no  answer.  Where 
there  is  no  infidelity,  but  merely  the  natural  working  of 
the  human  heart,  this  is  the  case.  There  is  no  further 
answer  till  judgment  comes,  till  judgment  returns  to 
righteousness.  In  the  psalm,  this  exercise  of  soul  refers 
naturally  more  entirely  to  the  government  of  this 
world ;  Christianity,  the  revelation  of  another  world, 
has  with  the  former  brought  in  a  thousand  others, 
where  men's  minds  work.  But  there  is  a  refuge  and  a 
resource,  not  in  the  explanation  of  everything  to  the 
mind,  so  as  to  maintain  it  in  the  mad  and  wicked  pre- 
tensions to  judge  God,  but  in  the  introduction  of  the 
positive  guild  which  is  in  Cod  into  the  soul,  so  that  it 
knows  it  has  got  blessedness  and  truth,  whatever  of  its 
multitude  of  thoughts  it  may  be  unable  to  solve.    Con- 


252      PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

science  is  upright  when  it  is  acted  on  and  judges  self. 
But  when,  by  our  enfeebled  and  beclouded  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil,  we  pretend,  calling  it  conscience,  to 
judge  God,  the  pretension  is  to  make  our  ignorance  and 
moral  state,  as  it  is,  the  measure  of  what  is  perfect, 
when  all  is  imperfectly  known  and  God  not  at  all.  For 
in  that  state  men  are  forming  a  judgment — what  they 
are  to  acknowledge  as  such.  It  is,  on  the  face  of  it. 
judging  of  a  whole  system  of  things  when  only  an 
obscure  end  of  it  is  before  us.  Reasoning  from  that 
state  of  things  full  of  evil,  I  can  judge  nothing.  God 
has  not  yet  set  things  right,  nor  am  I  competent  to 
judge  even  how  to  do  it ;  but  He  has  inti-oduced  good, 
perfect  good,  Himself  into  the  midst  of  the  evil.  He 
has  made  me  discover  my  own  evil — judge  myself :  an 
immense  moral  gain.  Those  only  who  have  done  so 
are,  as  to  soul  matters,  upright.  That  is  true,  honest 
conscience,  and  gives  me  a  resource  in  grace,  a  perfect 
knowledge  of  His  love  (in  Israel  a  relative  knowledge 
by  His  ways),  and  in  the  details  of  exercises  which 
follow  for  self-knowledge  and  purifying  the  soul,  I  have 
known,  perfect  love  to  have  recourse  to,  and  what  it  has 
rcvcnled  and  imparted  to  me,  grace  and  truth;  and 
that  not  only  in  the  outward  revelation  of  it,  however 
authoritative,  but  in  my  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  "He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in 
himself."  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  the  things  which 
God  has  prepared  for  them  who  love  him,  but  God  hath 
revealed  them  to  lis  by  his  Spirit;"  and  again,  ""We 
joy  in  God."  Besides,  God  acts  directly  by  His  Spirit. 
Mis  love  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts,  His  faithfulness 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALMS   X<  V. — CII.  Z)o 

in  that  love  can  be  counted  onj  but  direct  communion 
with  Himself  raises  ua  up  to  a  kind  and  source  of  joy 
which  the  trouble  and  sorrow  do  not  touch ;  nothing- 
separates  from  His  love.    We  are  more  than  conquerors 

in  this  world  ;  we  have  the  joys  of  another,  divine  com- 
forts through  the  sorrows  we  have  to  hear,  in  presence 
of  the  evil  which  besets  US  :  the  power  of  it  drives  us 
into  our  retreat,  our  joy  in  Him  who  is  always  the 
same,  and  whom  we  learn  to  know  better.  Judgment 
will  close  the  scene  in  which  I  have  to  be  troubled. 

The  psalms  that  follow  I  do  not  dwell  upon,  because 
;  hey  are  the  actual  coming  in  of  the  Lord  to  judgment, 
not  the  exercises  of  the  heart  in  awaiting  it.  Psalm 
xcv.  calls  the  Jews  to  be  ready  to  meet  Him.  Psalm 
xevi.  the  Gentiles.  In  Psalm  xcvii.,  He  is  actually 
coming  in  clouds;  xcviii.,  He  has  wrought  the  deliver- 
ance; xcix.,  He  has  taken  His  seat  in  Jerusalem  between 
the  Cherubim.  Psalm  c.  calls  the  Gentiles  up  to  par- 
bake  in  Israel's  joy  and  worship;  ci.  gives  us  the  prin- 
ciples on  which  the  government  of  the  earth  will  be 
carried  on  by  Jehovah's  king. 

Psalm  eii.  is  one  of  the  most  profoundly  interesting 
in  the  whole  book  of  Tsalms,  but  I  have  no  remark  to 
make  on  it  here.  It  applies  especially  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Himself,  whatever  occasion  circumstances  of 
individual  sorrow  may  have  furnished  to  its  composi- 
tion. The  citation  of  it  in  Hebrews  i.  leaves  no  douht 
as  to  this,  and  gives  to  the  psalm  a  depth  of  interest 
which  scarce  another  equals  it  in.  It  shows  how  the 
divine,  eternal  nature  of  the  Lord  meets  the  difficulty 


254      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

of  His  having  been  cut  off  when  Zion  is  to  be  restored 
hereafter.  But  this  gives  to  the  poignancy  of  His 
sorrows  a  depth  and  character  of  its  own.  It  is  not 
a  glorious  result  in  blessing,  the  consequence  of  a 
work  alone  in  its  nature  and  value,  nor  the  judgment 
which  follows  the  rejection  of  Messiah,  but  the  eternal 
truth  of  the  Lord's  divine  nature  meeting  the  reality 
of  His  sorrows  even  unto  death.  Hence  it  is  especially 
His  Person  which  is  the  peculiar  object  of  this  psalm, 
and  gives  it  its  especial  interest.  But,  though  the 
security  of  the  children  of  His  servants,  it  does  not 
afford  us  instruction  so  much  on  the  government  of 
God,  though  the  foundation  of  it  all  is  in  grace.  Nor 
do  the  following  psalms  very  largely  either,  ciii. — cvi., 
which  closes  this  book.  The  Spirit  views  what  God 
always  is  for  faith,  but  in  connexion  with  the  deliver- 
ance coming  in  by  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 

Still  the  power  of  good  manifested  in  setting  all 
things  right,  which  faith  looks  at  as  coming  in,  is  real- 
ized by  that  faith  as  belonging  to  Him  whom  it  knows 
already,  so  that  it  rests  in  it,  as  God's  character,  in 
Him  as  bearing  that  character,  though  its  results  are 
not  yet  produced,  and  clothes  present  things  with  that 
knowledge  of  God,  though  evil  be  still  here.  It  looks 
at  this  world  as  the  display  of  power  and  wisdom 
under  a  government  of  goodness,  God  being  known, 
though  the  evil  is  not  finally  set  aside,  nor  the  result 
of  goodness  produced.  But  He  who  governs  is  good. 
And  this  is  known  by  those  who  have  sinned  against 
Him,  known  for  themselves  and  in  themselves;  and  it 
is  this  knowledge  of  God  which  enables  the  soul  to  see 
wisdom  and  goodness  in  all  things,  though  the  effects. 


THE    ISA  I. MS. — PSALM    CII.  2-J-> 

of  sin  arc  still  present.  This  is  a  very  important 
principle :  the  perception  of  God  and  goodness  in  the 
midst  of  the  scene  of  evil  in  which  we  live.  True,  a 
godlj  Jew,  who  had  not  seen  Jesns  rejected,  who  did 
not  know  the  cross,  could  not  know  evil  as  we  do,  still 
he  knew  it;  and  the  faith  which  looked  to  a  final 
deliverance  not  yet  come,  introduced  God  thus  known 
into  the  scene  through  which  faith  had  to  pass.  God 
who,  in  the  midst  of  evil,  has  let  nothing  out  of  His 
hand,  lias  ordered  all  things  sovereignly  in  the  midst 
of  the  evil,  though  the  evil  he  not  His,  in  judgment 
lias  remembered  mercy.  And  when  the  bondage  of 
corruption  came  in,  He  who  made  all  things  very  good, 
has  held  the  reins  and  ordered  all  things  wisely,  what- 
ever witness  of  evil  remains,  and  sorrow  and  death. 
We  are  in  bondage  to  it  till  divinely  freed,  but  God 
never  has  been,  never  will  be — would  have  us  know 
thai  all  things  groan — b\it  that  there  comes  deliver- 
ance when  He  shall  rule — but  that  the  Creator,  who 
made  all  things  good,  overrules  and  orders  all  things 
now.  His  mercy  is  over  all  His  works.  Now,  faith 
pierces  through  the  felt  evil,  docs  not  wish  to  be  insen- 
sible to  it,  but  by  faith  gets  at  Him  who  is  above  it, 
and  can  bring  in  His  goodness  even  into  this  present 
scene,  sees  His  part  in  it,  and  even  His  part  as  superior 
to  all  the  evil.  It  is  not  natural  enjoyment  of  creation. 
which,  though  as  creatures  all  arc  good  and  lovely,  may 
be  utter  self-deception  and  blindness  to  evil,  but  faith 
getting  to  goodness  above  the  evil,  and  bringing  this 
into  its  own  enjoyment  of  God  in  the  creature. 

I  repeat,  Israel  could  not  know  the  evil  as  we  do ; 
but  then,  on  the  other  hand,  he  could  not  have  known 


25G      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

the  redemption  wrought  and  reconciliation  to  be 
wrought  as  we  do,  so  that  we  can  bring  in  God  more 
fully  yet.  This  is  the  general  character  of  Psalms 
ciii.,  civ.,  cv.  They  contemplate  the  full  deliverance 
of  Israel,  but  by  faith;  and  look  at  creation  not  in  its 
abstract  perfection,  but  God  in  it;  and  Israel's  histoiy, 
too,  as  a  series  of  failures,  but  God's  mercy  and  good- 
ness rising  above  it. 

Thus  Psalm  ciii.  recognizes  forgiveness  and  healing, 
looks  on  by  faith  to  the  deliverance  and  grace  in  store 
for  Israel,  but  knows  God  according  to  that;  sees  His 
patience  and  goodness  meanwhile,  and  this  applied  to 
His  government.  He  is  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous 
in  mercy.  We  know  on  what  a  perfect  basis,  as  regards 
sin,  all  is  founded :  but  here  the  effect  is  celebrated  in 
the  government  of  Israel;  but  God  is  known  for  all 
times  according  to  this  knowledge  of  Him.  Hence  it 
is  not  vague  goodness,  deceiving  oneself,  but  evil 
owned,  but  God  known  in  goodness.  This  ought  to 
characterize  our  ways  and  thoughts.  Not  that  we 
.shall  not  have  to  deal  with  evil,  and,  if  we  go  below 
the  surface,  meet  it  everywhere;  but  I  ought  to  have 
so  gone  to  God  about  it,  as  to  bring  Him  back  with  me 
according  to  what  I  have  found  Him  to  be  above  it  all. 
My  feet  should  be  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the 
gospel  of  peace. 

Psalm  civ.  takes  up  creation  in  the  same  way.  The 
last  verse  shows  the  judgment  which  clears  the  world 
of  evil,  and  His  sovereign  power  is  owned.  But  the 
•Spirit  is  able  to  bring  in  the  goodness  into  the  midst 


THE   PSALMS.— PSALM   CV. — CVIL  257 

of  all   it   Bees.     But  it  does  nut  go  beyond  a  fallen 
creation. 

Psalm  CV.  reviews  the  special  dealings  with  Israel  in 
past  times.  The  present  deliverance  by  judgment  is 
also  found  here,  but  it  is  looked  at  as  His  faithfulness 
to  His  promise  and  grace.  Here  what  is  present  mani- 
festation of  goodness,  awakes  the  memory  of  all  God's 
past  ways.       This  is  what  He  is,  what  He  always  was. 

The  following  psalm  takes  the  other  side  of  the  pic- 
ture, and  shows  man's  ways — that,  in  all  the  interven- 
tions of  <Jod  in  goodness,  man,  after  the  first  gladness 
at  being  delivered,  turned  back  to  his  own  evil  and 
unfaithful  ways.  Still  His  car  Mas  ever  open,  He 
remembered  His  promise,  repented  according  to  the 
multitude  of  His  mercies,  so  as  to  bring,  finally,  praise 
and  thanksgiving  to  His  name.  The  former  gave  what 
God  was  in  His  own  ways,  this  His  being  finally  above 
the  evil  in  accomplishing  mercy  and  promise  when  men 
had  shown  what  they  were.  God  good  in  Himself, 
<Jod  good  in  the  midst  of  evil,  but  not  as  allowing  the 
evil,  but  as  making  Himself  known  by  His  own  ways 
of  mercy.  And  He  being  thus  known  by  the  heart, 
the  heart  passes  through  present  circumstances  accord- 
ing to  this  knowledge  of  Him.  But  to  do  this  con- 
sistently and  constantly,  supposes  the  heart  not  only 
to  know  hut  to  be  with  Him.  This  closes  the  fourth 
hook. 

Psalm  cvii.  In  the  last  Book  of  1'sahns  we  find, 
besidesmany  songs  of  praise,  all  the  moral  circumstances 


258      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

of  Israel  on  their  return  to  blessing.  The  first  psalm 
in  it  stamps  this  character  on  it.  It  looks  at  them  as: 
gathered  back,  but  traces  the  various  scenes  through 
which  they  might  have  passed,  and  that  after  their 
entry  into  the  land  too,  and  God's  ways  with  them  in 
it.  It  is  a  description  of  toils  and  trials,  in  which 
the  Lord  was  looked  to,  and  answered  and  interfered 
in  behalf  of  the  tossed  and  tried  soul,  and  men  are 
exhorted  to  own  and  praise  Him.  It  carried  this 
blessed  truth  in  the  forefront.  His  mercy  endures 
for  ever.  God's  unchanging  love  and  goodness,  cele- 
brated from  the  first,  fully  proved  failure  of  Israel 
onward.  Man  fails,  God's  mercy  to  His  people  not.  It 
is  His  redeemed  and  gathered  ones  who  arc  the 
people  that  have  to  bear  witness  to  this.  Strangers 
and  pilgrims  where  there  was  no  resting-place,  no 
home,  hungry  and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainting  in  them, 
they  cried  to  the  Lord  and  were  led  in  a  right 
way  to  where  their  foot  and  heart  found  rest.  Two 
characters  are  given  to  the  soul  in  this  condition.  It 
is  a  longing  soul  and  a  hungry  soul.  We  have  craving 
and  want,  but  these  brought  before  the  Lord.  This 
is  mercy.  It  is  not  the  case  of  holy  desires  here,  but 
God  meeting  wants.  The  wearied  and  fainting  soul 
wants,  but  this  want  turns  into  a  cry  to  the  Lord. 
Mercy  is  surely  there.  But  this  might  be  even  where 
their  affliction  and  distress  Avas  chastisement,  the  fruit 
of  rebellion.  But  here  where  the  heart  turned  to 
the  Lord,  mercy  met  it,  and  there  was  deliverance. 
The  gates  of  brass  and  iron  which  shut  them  in  are 
broken,  where  iniquity  and  the  folly  of  departure  from 
the  Lord  had  brought  it   all  on.     He  sent  His  word 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM  CVII.  259' 

that  they  mighl  be  healed,  and  so  delivered.  When 
men  were  venturesome  and  braved  dangers  and  found 
themselves  &i  their  wit's  end  through  the  storm  of 
the  sea  which  gives  no  footing  to  them,  the  Lord 
comes  in  and  gives  peace  and  leads  them  to  the  haven 
of  their  desire.  In  the  very  place  of  the  habitation  of 
His  people,  in  the  place  of  promises,  there  His  direct 
government  comes  in.  Hi  vers  are  a  -wilderness,  a 
fruitful  land  barren,  through  judgment;  turning  the 
wilderness  into  pools  of  water,  judging  wickedness 
and  showing  mercy  to  the  needy  soul,  satisfying  the 
hungry  who  lean  on  Him.  Careless  and  lifted  up 
even  there,  they  are  brought  down.  He  pours  con- 
tempt on  princes,  but  the  poor  and  needy  He  sets  on 
high.  It  is  not  the  order  of  a  world  blessed  of  God 
where  evil  is  not,  but  the  government  of  God  where 
evil  is,  where  God  overrules  the  evil  to  the  purposes 
of  His  own  government,  to  hide  pride  from  man,  and 
comfort  and  encourage  the  poor  in  spirit  who  look  to 
Him,  who  trust  not  in  pride  and  human  strength  and 
will  rest  in  the  Lord.  In  all  the  ways,  too,  where 
their  will  has  brought  them,  where  their  sins  even 
have  brought  them,  if  He  be  looked  to,  His  mercy 
and  goodness  are  found.  Thus  God  deals  with  the 
heart — turns  the  state  of  things  and  the  ways  of 
men  into  the  means  of  their  hearts  knowing  Him. 
The  righteous  rejoice,  and  oh  how  true  that  is — how 
much  truer  it  will  be  where  the  fruit  of  the  Lord's 
goodness  to  the  humble,  waiting  soul  which  has  put 
its  trust  in  Him  is  seen.  In  the  end  evil  will  be  put 
down,  but  in  the  way  the  Lord  meets,  comforts,  and 
justifies  in  result  the  path  of  the  humble  soul;  and 


260      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

the  wise  and  observant  sonl  will  see,  however  busy, 
however  pretending,  however  seemingly  successful 
man's  will  may  be,  the  loving  kindness  of  the  Lord 
will  be  made  good  before  him  to  his  joy  and  gladness 
of  heart.  The  Lord  teach  us  to  walk  softly  before 
Him,  and  leave  the  results  in  His  own  gracious  hand. 
It  is  sometimes  difficult,  but  always  wise — painful  to 
see  the  wicked  and  wickedness  prosper.  It  is  a  woi'ld 
of  evil,  but  God  works  in  it,  and  His  ways  will  work 
out  blessing,  and  the  fruit  of  His  goodness  and 
righteous  power. 

One  or  two  brief  remarks  on  Psalm  cviii.,  but  on  a 
point  of  great  beauty.  There  is  great  confidence  here, 
and,  as  ever,  mercy  to  the  soul  which  knows  itself  and 
comes  before  truth.  But,  then,  for  its  own  deliver- 
ance and  blessing,  it  looks  to  the  exalting  of  God. 
This  shows  it  must  be  a  holy,  righteous  exalting.  Be 
thou  exalted,  0  God,  above  the  heavens,  and  thy  glory 
above  all  the  earth,  that  thy  beloved  may  be  delivered: 
It  is  a  blessed  thought,  and  this  is  what  faith  has  to 
lay  hold  of  now,  even  in  the  time  of  trial,  that  our 
blessing  and  God's  glory  are  one,  only  we  must  put 
His  glory  first.  This  is  the  very  principle  of  upright- 
ness— "He  that  seeketh  His  glory  that  sent  Him, 
the  same  is  true,"  says  Christ,  "  and  there  is  no  un- 
righteousness in  him  " — and  the  highest  blessing.  So 
Jesus  Himself,  "What  shall  I  say,  Father,  save  me 

from  this  hour Father,  glorify  thy  name." 

Then  comes,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  shall  draw  all  men 
unto  me."  So  in  trial  and  even  in  evil,  faith  identifies 
the  glory  of  God  and  His  people.      "The  Egyptians 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM    CIX.  201 

will  hear  of  it  ...  .  What  wilt  thou  do  to  thy  great 

name  '."  For  the  same  reason  there  is  no  sparing  evil 
when  we  are  in  the  midst  of  the  people,  and  evil  calls 
this  principle  out,  God  being  publicly  dishonoured, 
"Slay  ye  every  man  his  brother,  and  every  man  his 
companion,  and  every  man  his  neighbour."  In  a 
word,  faith  identities  Coil's  glory  and  exaltation  and 
J I  is  people,  but  puts  God  first.  Here  it  is  in  blessing, 
and  we  have  the  remarkable  answer  of  God.  I  will 
rejoice.  His  own  joy  and  delight  is  in  the  blessing  of 
His  people j  exults  in  doing  them  good,  in  delivering 
His  beloved,  in  the  employment  of  His  might  to  set 
aside  the  evil  which  oppressed  them,  and  put  them  in 
possession  of  what,  by  His  gift,  belonged  to  them. 
And  whatever  the  strength  of  their  adversaries,  He 
will  accomplish  their  blessing :  the  strong  city  dare 
no1  stand  before  Him.  And  even  when  through  their 
fault  they  had  been  refused  His  help  (in  Israel's  case. 
as  we  know,  long  cast  off),  still,  when  the  just  time  of 
the  blessing  of  the  humble  comes,  He  will  put  forth 
the  needed  strength  thai  all  may  be  fulfilled.  He 
gives  strength  to  His  people,  His  own  power  delivers 
them.  They  have  learnt  that  His  only  is  of  any 
worth  or  avail. 

Psalm  eix.  is  the  judgment  of  Judas  and  the  anti- 
Christian  Jews  at  the  end.  It  affords  us  little  experi- 
mental teaching,  while  most  solemn  in  its  testimony. 
First,  the  motive  of  help:  "Do  it  for  thy  name's 
sake.''  The  nature  and  glory  of  God  is  at  the  root  of 
all  His  ways  ;  and  when  the  heart  caughl  at  this,  the 
answer  of  help   is    seen,   God   cannot    be    inconsistent 


262      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

with  Himself.  But  for  this  the  heart  must  be  brought 
into  the  state  co-ordinate  with  that  name,  lowliness, 
the  judgment  of  evil  in  self  and  so  uprightness, 
dependence ;  and  God  may  exercise  fully  to  manifest 
brokenness  of  will  and  produce  it,  and  the  heart's 
leaving  all  submissively  to  Him.  In  Christ's  place 
all  these  exercises  only  brought  out  His  perfectness, 
in  us  they  work  uprightness  and  dependence.  In 
Him  all  this  sorrow  was  purely  God's  hand,  that  is, 
there  was  no  reason  for  it  in  Himself.  And  this  is 
accorded  to  us  in  grace,  even  if  we  have  given  occasion 
to  it  by  our  self-will  or  evil,  still  God  has  taken  it  in 
hand  in  our  discipline,  and  when  He  has  wrought  His 
work  sets  His  saints  up  in  blessing  to  the  confusion  of 
the  adversary,  forced  to  own  His  hand  where  they  tri- 
umphed in  evil,  and  thought  only  to  triumph  over  the 
just.  But  they  have  met  God,  for  these  were  His 
ways  with  His  people,  and  this  government  can  go  on 
with  us  because  redemption  is  complete.  In  Christ's 
case  it  was  pure  hatred  against  good,  He  undergoing 
it  for  us.  For  His  love  they  were  His  adversaries. 
But  they,  the  lovers  of  evil,  are  before  the  Lord  con- 
tinually ;  the  time  of  showing  it  is  His  own  for  us 
when  His  work  of  subjugating  our  will,  teaching  us 
holy  dependence,  is  complete;  in  Christ,  when  it  has 
been  manifested  and  God  fully  glorified. 

Psalm  ex.  In  this,  glorifying  Christ  at  God's  right 
hand,  I  have  only  one  remark  to  make.  The  last 
verse  shows  the  perfection  of  Christ  in  this  spirit  of 
dependence  on  the  way,  the  path  in  which  we  have  to 
follow  Him  as  walking  in  the  new  man ;  glad  of  the 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   CXL  263 

refreshments  of  God,  but   dependent   in  them,   and 

taking  them  as  they  are  found,  that  is,  as  God  Himself 
gives  them  in  the  way — the  spirit  oi'  lowly  dependence. 

Psalm  exi.  In  a  vast  number  of  the  psalms  of  this 
last  book,  the  present  intervention  of  judgment  and 
power  is  so  contemplated,  that  instructions  for  the 
trials  of  the  way  arc  less  to  be  looked  for.  It  is  the 
case  in  this  psalm.  It  raises,  anticipativcly  no  doubt, 
its  hallelujah  for  the  works  of  God.  Only  this  is  to  be 
remarked,  and  so  always,  that  these  works  of  deliver- 
ance arc  always  conformable  to,  and  founded  on,  and 
make  good,  the  truth  of  God's  character.  They  are 
verity  and  judgment.  His  commandments  are  proved 
sure  in  them.  They  stand  fast  for  ever  and  ever,  and 
are  done  in  truth  and  uprightness.  Hence  to  enjoy 
the  fruit  of  them,  our  path  is  to  walk  after  the  Lord's 
ways  and  reckon  on  the  sureness  of  His  promise,  and 
if  He  tarry,  wait  for  Him.  But,  as  we  have  always 
seen,  mercy  and  compassion  towards  \is  is  found  and 
felt  in  them.  If  we  are  delivered,  it  is  sovereign 
goodness.  Hence  the  fear  of  Jehovah  is  the  beginning 
of  wisdom  ;  obedience  leads  us  to  intelligence,  being 
in  the  path  of  God.  Light  is  truth  in  that  path,  and 
according  to  it.  You  cannot  separate  the  true  know- 
ledge of  divine  things  from  godliness.  It  is  the 
nature  which  is  godly,  obedient — grace  dependent  on 
God  which  alone  desires  or  understands  them.  If  any 
man  will  do  my  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine 
whether  it  be  of  God.  Hence,  in  the  path  of  obedi- 
ence, the  realizing  the  light  in  a  subjection  which  owns 
God,  more  is  found  ,  for  light  and  the  path  of  the  new 


2G4  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

nature  are  one.  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  that  ye 
put  off  the  old  man  and  put  on  the  new,  which,  after 
God,  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness. 
We  are  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him 
who  created  us.  In  this  path  we  haAre  to  walk  by 
faith  till  power  comes  in.  In  Israel,  of  course,  it  was 
more  as  law ;  but  the  principle  is  always  true,  as  true 
knowledge  is  the  knowledge  of  God.  It  is  impossible 
to  separate  true  knowledge  from  a  state  which  owns 
God  for  what  He  is — obedience  and  dependence  on 
Him. 

Psalm  cxii.  I  leave  aside,  of  course,  the  promises  of 
temporal  blessing,  which  apply  directly  to  the  Jewish 
people  and  system.  These  latter  psalms  refer  espe- 
cially to  them,  because  blessing  is  just  come  in  by 
judgment,  but  some  principles  are  worthy  of  note — 
the  wisdom  of  acting  in  obedience  through  the  path  of 
trial  is  specially  insisted  on  in  these  psalms.  Much 
was  there  (there  always  is)  to  say  that  faithfulness  was 
folly  and  ruin.  God  warns  them,  and  in  that  is  the 
path  of  wisdom.  It  lasts  in  its  effects  when  the 
wicked  disappear.  The  generation  of  the  upright 
will  be  blessed.  His  righteousness  endures  for  ever. 
No  doubt  darkness  seems  to  shut  him  in,  but  light 
arises  for  him  even  there.  We  must  learn  to  trust  to 
God,  blessing  is  sure  to  the  obedient.  But  thus 
walking  with  God,  peace  of  heart  and  the  sense  of 
goodness  make  him  gracious  and  full  of  compassion 
towards  others — upright  too  with  them.  Self-seeking 
is  not  his  governing  principle.  He  shows  favour,  is 
liberal  in  heart,  nor  is  there  rashness  or  self-will.     He 


THE    PSALMS.— PSALM   (XIII.  265 

carries  out  and  carries  through  his  matters  in  the  fear 
of  Guil,  with  soundness  of  mind;  does  not  use  light- 
ness, thai  his  yea  should  be  nay.  Guided  by  God  in 
going  into  them  he  carries  through  his  path  to  the 
end,  because  it  is  God's  will,  and  with  the  strength 
and  steadiness  the  consciousness  of  doing  that  gives. 
And  this  is  of  importance  in  the  path  of  the  saints  as 
a  testimony  that  God  is  there,  and  His  mind  the 
guide  of  our  path  He  abides,  he  that  docs  God's 
will  does  so.  Further,  when  the  power  of  evil  is 
abroad,  he  is  not  shaken.  In  the  midst  of  exercises  of 
heart,  of  moral  evil,  he  lias  been  with  God.  His  will 
has  been  supreme  with  him.  He  has  looked  at  God 
as  one  whose  will  ordered  all,  and  God  Himself  as  all. 
If  He  was  pleased,  he  was  content.  Circumstances 
had  lost  their  power  as  motives,  and  (Jod  had,  so  to 
Bpeak,  taken  their  place  in  his  heart  and  mind. 
Hence,  when  adverse  ones  arise,  they  find  God  there 
known,  trusted:  his  heart  is  fixed  trusting  in  the  Lord. 

Only  one  principle  comes  before  lis  in  Psalm  cxiii., 
but  one  which  cannot  be  too  often  brought  before  our 
souls,  one  which  we  have  constant  tendency  to  forget. 
God  chooses  weak  things,  that  it  may  be  evident  that 
good  and  blessing  come  from  His  power  and  love. 
God  uses  means,  but  when  man  speaks  of  means  he 
generally  speaks  not  of  reference  of  heart  to  Cod, 
prayer,  His  word,  and  the  like,  but  of  leaning  on 
man's  influence,  and  man's  strength.  This  is  all  evil. 
Oh  that  we  may  remember  thai  Cod  chooses  the 
foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise  ;  and 
weak   things,    and    things    that    are   not,    to   bring    to 

s 


2G(j  PEACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

naught  things  that  arc,  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in 
His  presence.  Blessing  were  not  divine  blessing  indeed 
if  it  were  not  so.  But  then  in  this  strength  we 
may  look  for  grace.  He  dwells  on  high,  but  humbleth 
Himself  to  behold  the  things  that  are  in  heaven  and 
earth.  He  raiseth  the  poor  out  of  the  dust,  and 
liftcth  up  the  needy  out  of  the  dunghill  to  set  him 
with  the  princes,  even  the  princes  of  His  people,  and 
takes  the  barren  and  gives  her  children  like  a  flock, 
makes  her  a  joyful  mother  of  children.  Such  are  God's 
ways.  The  heart  delights  in  them.  Power  is  His, 
mid  goodness,  but  what  a  lesson  in  the  midst  of  this 
world,  and  for  the  heart  of  man. 

Psalm  cxiv.  The  same  thing  as  to  power  is  seen  in 
this  very  beautiful  little  psalm.  He  brought  water 
out  of  the  flint  rock.  His  presence  makes  the  earth 
that  has  forgotten  Him  to  tremble  ;  but  for  His  people 
in  the  desert,  His  power  and  grace  bring  refreshment 
and  life  out  of  what  seems  to  man  hopeless  and  most 
opposed.  Dependence  and  confidence  in  Him — siich 
is  the  peaceful  path  of  faith. 

Psalm  cxv.  .  The  first  principle  here  brought  under 
our  eye  is  setting  the  Lord's  glory  first,  a  simple 
but  mighty  one — "not  to  us  but  to  thy  name."  So 
we  find  perfectly  in  Christ.  But  this  is  followed, 
for  all  that,  by  the  connexion  of  that  glory  with 
God's  people.  The  first  principle  gives  purity  of 
motive — this  the  courage  and  hope  of  faith.  And 
note  what  is  specially  blessed — the  name  (i.e.,  the 
revelation  of  God's   character)  is  specially  suited  to 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   (XV.  267 

the  blessings  of  His  people.  He  had  spoken  in 
promise,  but  they  have  failed  on  their  side  to  take  up 
the  promise  in  the  path  of  righteousness.  Yet  God 
has  promised,  and  here  His  name  of  government  in 
grace  comes  in.  "  (Jive  the  glory  to  thy  name  for  thy 
mercy,"  that  is  part  of  His  name;  "and  for  thy  truth's 
sake,"  that  is  another.  And  here  the  glory  comes  out 
— if  He  were  not  the  former,  the  latter  could  not  be 
righteous  judgment,  would  have  not  cut  off  the  guilty ; 
but  there  would  have  been  no  fulfilment  of  promise. 
But  mere)-  rejoices  over  judgment.  "What  God  is  in 
His  nature,  love,  interprets  itself  in  His  ways  towards 
the  failing,  in  mercy,  leading  them,  no  doubt,  into  the 
place  of  repentance  that  they  may  suitably  enjoy ; 
suitably  to  any  moral  relationship  with  God,  but  then 
accomplishing  His  promise  in  truth.  But  the  divine 
glory  goes  first.  This  is  counted  on.  God  had  made 
Himself  to  display  His  ways,  the  God  of  His  people. 
"Wherefore  should  the  heathen  say,  "Where  is  now 
their  God?"  Such  was  the  ancient  plea  of  Moses  and 
Joshua.  This  is,  further,  in  contrast  with  the  idols  of 
the  heathen.  When  God's  glory  is  first  sought  by 
faith,  it  not  only  turns  to  the  blessing  of  the  people 
according  to  that  glory,  but  it  opens  out  into  the  con- 
BCiousness  and  apprehension  of  that  glory  in  itself  in 
the  hearts  of  the  people.  This  is  a  great  blessing. 
They  joy,  no  doubt,  in  the  salvation,  but  they  joy  in 
God.  For  the  full  display  of  this,  He  must  come  in 
in  judgment;  not  for  our  blessing,  for  He  has  given 
us  heavenly  things,  where  His  own  dwelling  is,  in 
what  He  is  in  Himself,  not  merely  as  what  He  is  in 
His  ways.      For  we  may  remark  how  earth  is  here  the 


268  PBA.CTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

sphere,  and  this  present  life  the  energy  in  which  Gocl 
is  known  and  owned.  "  The  dead  praise  not  the  Lord  ;" 
"the  earth  hath  He  given  to  the  children  of  men."  We 
rejoice  in  being  dead  and  having  our  place  in  resur- 
rection Avith  Christ  in  heavenly  places.  We  cannot 
keep  this  too  strongly  in  mind,  though  there  he 
instruction  as  to  God's  ways  on  earth  in  these  psalms. 
In  these  last  especially,  the  earthly  government  is  in 
view,  because  judgment  at  the  end  is  just  coming  in. 
It  is  a  blessing  to  have  heaven  instead,  and  our  God, 
such  as  He  is,  our  Father. 

In  Psalm  cxvi.  the  suppliant  has  been  heard;  the 
government  of  God  consequently  enters  but  little 
into  its  composition.  The  soul  has  been  brought 
down  under  the  pressure  of  death,  but  delivered.  It 
is  the  history  of  the  remnant  at  the  end,  into  which 
the  blessed  Lord  so  wonderfully  entered,  but  which  is 
not  a  prophecy  of  Him,  and  applicable  to  any  so  suffer- 
ing, as  is  seen  by  the  apostle's  citation  of  verse  10. 
(2  Cor.  iv.  13.)  The  deliverance  is  for  this  world.  The 
thought  of  the  psalm  is — grace  and  faithfulness  in 
Jehovah  in  delivering.  The  character  of  the  saint  is 
simplicity  :  a  spirit  difficult  to  some,  but  precious.  It 
is  formed  by  a  simple-hearted  reference  to  the  thoughts 
of  God  and  living  in  them,  and  then  trusting  Him  who 
always  makes  His  own  thoughts  good,  and  remembers 
those  who  thus  trust  in  Him.  The  opposite  to  this 
is — the  activity  of  man's  thoughts,  his  will  and  coun- 
sels mixing  themselves  with  them.  These  perish,  he 
is  disappointed.  The  humble  spirit  does  not  think  so 
much —  it  receives  God's  thoughts.    Thev  have  a  moral 


THH   PSALMS.— PSALM   CXVT.  269 

character.  Be  abides  in  them,  is  obedient,  and  waits 
"ii  God.  (Compare  Eleazar,  Gen.  xxiv.)  The  deliver- 
ance of  God  comes  as  favour  and  an  answer  to  the 
soul,  and  is  full  of  sweetness.  His  faithfulness  to 
the  state  and  expectation  is  felt.  1  fence,  on  receiving 
the  blessing,  thankfulness  (not  merely  enjoying  the 
blessing)  is  the  fruit;  and,  l'I  love  the  Lord:"  hence 
sweet  associations  of  soul  are  connected  with  it.  It 
is  felt  that  the  Lord  has  dealt  bountifully.  The  soul 
returns  to  its  rest,  faith  had  been  at  work  before.  The 
soul  believed  and  spoke  as  trusting  God,  but  was  sore 
troubled— now  finds  the  God  it  thus  trusted  its 
source  of  joy  and  blessing,  not,  mark,  the  blessing  it 
gets.  The  sold  was  turned  to  Him,  not  to  comfort, 
in  the  trouble.  It  is  turned  to  Him,  now  in  the  time 
of  joy.  The  Lord  Himself  is  before  the  soul,  its 
source  of  blessing.  Note  another  thing  in  this  psalm, 
the  feeling  of  the  failure  of  all  men.  It  is  not  exactly 
"  in  my  haste,"  but  in  my  anxious  pressure  of  alarm, 
such  as  would  make  man  flee  in  haste.  This  gave  the 
consciousness  that  man  could  not  be  relied  on.  It 
was  not  simple  faith  or  sound  judgment  this,  but  there 
are  moments  when  God  makes  us  feel  that  we  cannot 
rely  on  man,  but  only  on  Him.  Often  we  have  com- 
fort from  men.  "God  who  comforteth  them  who  are 
cast  down,  comforted  me  by  the  coming  of  Titus."  Bu1 
we  must  not  rely  on  man.  Hence  there  are  moments 
when  we  have  to  say,  "all  men  are  liars,"  and  we  are 
casl  on  the  Lord.  How  truly  the  Lord  was  so,  I  need 
not  say;  yet  in  grace  He  could  say  to  His  disciples,  Ye 
are  they  which  have  continued  with  me  in  my  temp- 
tations.     But  there  was  an  hour  when  He  must  sav, 


270       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

"one  <\f  you  shall  betray  me,"  and  feel  it ;  and,  "all  yc- 
shall  be  offended  because  of  me  this  night,  and  shall 
leave  me  alone."  That  showed  His  perfection.  It 
teaches  us  to  lean  on  the  Lord  only,  not  diminishing 
cordial  confidence  and  openness  of  heart,  but  teaching 
to  rely  on  God.  Unhindered  joy  will  come  after- 
wards.    But  in  all  trouble  the  Lord  thinks  of  us. 

Psalm  cxvii.  The  consciousness  of  grace  and  favour 
enlarges  the  heart.  Israel  never  thought  of  calling 
the  nations  to  praise  when  under  the  law.  But  now 
that  mercy  has  brought  blessing,  they  do.  It  is  the 
sentiment  of  what  God  is  to  us,  the  thankful  enjoy- 
ment of  it  as  of  God,  which  opens  the  mouth  and 
heart  by  the  knowledge  of  Him.  It  calls  others  to 
enjoy  His  goodness,  too.  It  is  an  assimilation  to  the 
divine  nature  and  privilege  in  the  knowledge  of  love ; 
only,  as  it  should  be,  we  learn  love  by  knowing  its 
exercise  towards  ourselves. 

In  Psalm  cxviii.  we  are  still  on  the  ground  of  final 
blessing,  so  that  the  government  of  God  in  the  midst 
of  trial  is  only  referred  to  in  the  past.  It  is  Israel's 
recognition  of  the  divine  ways  and  of  Christ  Himself 
when  blessing  is  come,  owning  that  Jehovah's  mercy 
has  lasted  out  all  their  ways  and  endured  for  ever. 
I  notice  only  the  aspect  of  circumstances  as  applicable 
to  us  at  all  times.  God  is  for  His  people ;  but  men, 
all  men,  may  be  against  them.  One  has  only  to  trust 
the  Lord,  and  victory  remains  with  faith.  But  in  this, 
where  evil  has  to  be  governmentally  corrected,  Satan 
seeks,   Satan  has  his  part.     How  truly  it  was  so  in 


THE    PSALMB. — PSALM   CXVIII.  271 

leading  all  men  against  Christ;  how  fully  so  in  the 
last  days  of  Antichrist's  power,  I  need  not  say;  but 
as  the  book  of  Job  shows,  it  is  so  in  the  various  chasten- 
ings  <>f  God.  Evil  on  the  conscience,  or  even 
unconsciously  in  the  heart,  gives  him  a  handle,  some- 
times a  terrible  one,  against  the  soul  even  where  it 
is  upright.  Rest  is  found  only  in  self-judgment  and 
confession  of  what  gives  him  a  handle.  Satan  would 
seek  to  make  us  fall  thus;  but  behind  all  this  the 
band  of  God  is  to  be  seen,  as  in  Job's  case.  "Thou 
hast  chastened  me  sore,  but  thou  hast  not  given  me 
over  unto  death."  It  is  for  blessing.  One  only  could 
declare,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh  and  hath 
nothing  in  me ; "  but  with  us,  all  is  love  and  blessing, 
to  make  us  know  ourselves,  and  then  enjoy  His  bles- 
sing (compare  Deut.  viii.),  and  fully  own  what  Christ 
is  according  to  His  victory  and  glory,  in  the  counsels  of 
God.  We  must  be  thus  exercised,  the  ground  ploughed 
and  'harrowed,  but  the  result  is — "  this  is  the  day 
which  the  Lord  hath  made."  No  doubt  this  is  the 
final  blessing  of  the  earth  when  Christ  comes,  but  in 
every  exercise  of  a  soul  brought  to  the  point  of  upright- 
ness with  Cod,  the  principle  is  made  good;  the  gates 
of  righteousness  into  the  joy  of  communion,  so  to 
speak,  are  opened.  And  the  mercy  to  which  "we  had 
no  title  we  own  to  be  the  Lord's  doing,  and  all  is  light. 
The  direct  application  to  the  remnant  is  evidently  the 
just  application  of  the  psalm,  but  we  connect  this  great 
display  of  God's  government  with  the  details  in  which 
it  applies  to  us. 

Psalm  cxix.  is  the  expression  of  the  effect  of  the  law 


272       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

written  in  the  heart  of  Israel,  when  they  had  long 
erred  from  God's  ways  and  were  sorrowing  under  the 
effects  of  it.  It  is  one  of  the  psalms  which  pronounces 
blessedness.  We  will  examine  some  of  the  elements 
of  this  work  in  the  heart.  This  blessedness  is  pro- 
nounced on  "the  undefiled  in  the  way."  The  world  is 
full  of  defilement.  There  is  only  one  path  in  the 
world  (for  ours  is  out  of  it,  we  are  pilgrims  and  stran- 
gers following  Christ  who  is  gone  on  high)  but  only 
one  in  the  world  which  can  be  undefiled;  that  is, 
God's  law.  It  is  not  what  is  heavenly  formed  within, 
affections  set  on  things  above,  a  walking  in  the  Spirit ; 
that  no  doubt  will  produce  fruits  which  no  law  of  God 
will  condemn.  It  is  the  way  wholly  formed  by  God's 
expressed  will  for  man's  walk  in  this  world.  They 
"walk  in  the  law  of  Jehovah."  There  is  a  delight 
in  what  is  right,  in  what  is  not  defiled  by  sin  or 
the  world ;  but  that  is  in  Avalking  in  the  law.  It  is  a 
perfect  rule,  according  to  God,  in  this  world  for  a 
living  man.  But  this  is  carried  farther  in  the  heart. 
It  looks  to  the  source.  God  has  borne  witness  to  His 
will,  and  shewed  that  He  would  have  man  walk  in  it, 
and  the  heart  turns  to  it,  not  only  as  undefiled  and 
right,  but  as  "His  testimonies."  This  connects  itself 
with  the  desire  after  Himself.  They  "  seek  Him  with 
the  whole  heart."  This  is  the  general  character  of 
the  effect  of  the  law  written  in  the  heart.  The  prac- 
tical effect  is  evident :  they  "do  no  iniquity."  Not 
only  the  heart  is  set  morally  right  in  undefiledness, 
but  evil  or  unrighteousness,  relative  wrong,  is  not  done. 
Instead  of  their  own  will,  and  puffing,  as  it  is  said,  at 
God,    "  they  walk  in    His   ways."     The   authority  of 


THE   PSALMS. —  PSALM    CXIX.  273 

God  is  recognized  in  the  heart,  and  diligence  in 
acquiescence  in  it,  and  the  desires  of  the  heart  are 
towards  it.  "0  that  my  ways  were  directed,"  Stc. 
it  is  not  only  the  perception  of  God's  ways — what  is 
intrinsically  approved  in  the  heart;  hut  the  desire  that 
the  actual  course  of  life  were  ordered  so  as  to  keep 
God's  statutes;  not  satisfying  our  will,  or  our  will 
being  towards  God's.  And  here  dependence  is  felt  as 
to  the  course  of  a  man's  life,  and  there  is  the  desire 
it  may  be  directed.  Conscience  and  spiritual  discern- 
ment go  together.  Shame  does  not  flow  from  man's 
disapprobation;  hut  from  the  conscience  not  being 
good  according  to  God's  revealed  will.  But  this  way 
is  complete  and  an  only  one.  Whatever  is  out  of  it 
is  not  undefiled,  is  the  world  which  is  abhorrent  from 
God;  we  must  he  in  it  in  will,  heart,  and  way,  or  out 
of  it,  and  bo  ashamed,  if  the  will  of  the  heart  he  right. 
If  my  mind  and  soul  have  morally  discerned  the  excel- 
lency of  God's  way,  the  conscience,  if  1  am  out  of  it 
in  every  respect,  makes  me  ashamed.  The  heart  set 
right  has  respect  to  "all  God's  commandments."  But 
where  this  is,  not  only  the  conscience  is  right  and 
peaceful,  hut  the  heart  is  set  free.  "I  will  praise 
Thee  with  uprightness  of  heart,  when  I  shall  have 
learned  thy  righteous  judgments."  There  is  know- 
ledge of  (Jod  through  His  ways,  and  the  heart  restored 
to  Him,  and  having  learned  His  thoughts  (not  only 
commandments,  hut  His  judgments),  can  praise  Him 
not  only  for  benefits  but  in  the  heart's  association  with 
Himself.  Another  clement  of  this  state  is  lull  will 
and  purpose  of  heart  to  obey  and  keep  what  God  has 
ordained    or     appointed,    what     has     God's    authority 


274       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

attached  to  it,  not  merely  moral  right  and  -wrong. 
But  it  "was  a  time  when  Israel  had  erred;  hence  here 
there  is  a  special  looking  to  God,  not  utterly  giving 
them  up.  "We  see  thus  that  the  form  of  this  psalm 
cannot  apply  to  the  Christian.  He  never  expects  to- 
be  utterly  forsaken;  in  a  particular  course  he  may 
apply  this,  when  he  is  conscious  of  having  followed 
his  own  will.  Bnt  from  the  general  principle  we  may 
learn  much,  as  that  which  is  wrought  in  the  heart  as 
regards  its  moral  disposition.     (Ver.  1 — 8.) 

But  there  are  other  points  practically.  The  ten- 
dency of  man's  energy  as  such  is  to  follow  his  own 
will.  This  is  now  natural,  not  before  the  fall.  Then 
man  enjoyed,  thanked,  and  blessed;  followed  naturally 
in  the  path  described  by  God — a  simple  one.  Now, 
through  that  first  distrust  of  God,  will  is  come  in. 
And  here  we  have  a  difference  of  the  very  last  impor- 
tance in  Christian  obedience  and  the  law.  The  law 
addresses  itself,  as  such,  to  responsible  man  down  here 
without  raising  the  question  of  and  not  supposing  a 
new  nature,  though  it  may  discover  (when  known  to 
be  spiritual)  the  need  of  one.  It  supposes  a  will  and 
lusts  which  have  to  be  checked  and  put  down.  The 
Old  Testament  does  not  speak  of  flesh  and  spirit,  but 
of  responsible  men  and  their  ways.  Christian  obedi- 
ence is  as  Christ's;  the  will  of  God  is  the  motive  of 
action,  not  merely  the  rule.  "I  come  to  do  thy  will :" 
no  doubt  it  will  herein  be  a  rule  to  guide  us.  In  us 
this  is  a  new  nature,  Christ  being  our  life.  "We  do  not 
find  in  the  Old  Testament  "he  cannot  sin  because  he 
is  born  of  God."      It  is  not  that  there  was  not  the 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   (XIX.  27-> 

desire  to  obey  in  renewed  souls  then;  surely  there 
was.  It  could  not  he  otherwise.  But  the  relation- 
ship in  which  men  stood  to  God  was  a  law  without 
tin 'in  to  govern  their  ways  when  in  flesh,  not  a  known 
new  nature  standing  in  the  results  of  redemption 
whose  only  motive  of  action  was  God's  will.  The 
prophets,  indeed,  pointed  out  Christ  as  such  (as  in 
psalm  xl.),  and  the  masters  in  Israel  should  have 
known  that,  to  have  their  future  privileges,  they  must 
he  horn  of  water  and  the  Spirit  (as  in  Ezekiel  xxxvi.). 
But  ohediencc  under  the  law  was  a  rule  applied  to  one 
who  had  a  will  whose  movements  were  to  he  judged 
by  the  law,  not  a  nature  whose  only  motive  was  God's 
will,  standing  in  the  power  of  redemption  so  as  to 
have  the  right  to  reckon  a  discovered  old  man  to  he 
dead,  yea,  which  God  had  pronounced  dead  through 
Christ.  Hence  the  heirs  differed  nothing  from  ser- 
vants, to  do  this,  and  that,  whatever  their  own  will 
might  he.  Ways,  and  not  nature,  were  in  question, 
even  though  renewal  of  heart  were  there.  Hence  the 
young  man,  where  energy  of  will  is  found,  is  to 
"cleanse  his  way."  Lusts  would  have  carried  his  will 
elsewhere :  how  should  he  find  the  means  of  having 
his  ways  clear  before  God]  "Watchfulness,  the  fear  of 
God  (not  will)  according  to  God's  word.  God's  word 
— how  precious  to  have,  it  in  such  a  world  of  darkness 
and  will,  to  guide  our  feet  in  a  path  according  to  God's 
mind!  For  the  heart  is  set  right.  It  is  not,  indeed, 
the  sweet  enjoyment  of  love  in  a  reconciled  soul,  love 
shod  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost  given. 
but  (what  is  of  all  vital  importance)  the  heart  right 
in  the  sight  of  God.      It  supposes  the  man  away  from 


276       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

God  but  undiscovered  in  his  desire.  Both  are  true 
of  the  Christian.  He  is  reconciled  and  has  peaceful 
affections  in  perfect  relationship  (this  the  law  had 
not) ;  and  he  has,  as  known  and  seen  in  glory,  earnest 
desire  after  Him  that  has  loved  him,  only  as  knowing 
(not  merely  seeking)  Him.  Here  He  is  "  sought  with 
the  whole  heart;"  no  guile  but  the  true  desire  of  the 
heart  towards  God.  Being  so  (the  commandments  of 
God  being  precious,  as  making  known  His  will),  the 
true  heart  prays  not  to  be  let  to  wander  from  them. 
God  is  looked  to  in  goodness ;  for  when  He  is  truly 
sought,  there  is  always  some  sense  of  His  goodness. 
It  is  what  distinguishes  conversion  from  mere  terror 
of  conscience,  desire  towards  Him  and  sense  of  good- 
ness in  God.  We  have,  then,  another  element.  The 
heart  which  thus  seeks  God,  and  has  a  desire  to  do 
His  will,  not  only  seeks  outward  conduct  to  be  right 
when  the  occasion  arises,  but  keeps  the  word  at  the 
centre,  so  to  speak,  and  springs  of  action.  He  hides 
it  in  his  own  heart  as  that  which  he  loves;  "out  of 
the  heart  (where  that  word  is  hid)  are  the  issues  of 
life."  Howt  large  a  place  the  word  has  here.  Note,  too, 
man's  estimate  of  conduct  disappears.  It  is  between 
God  and  the  heart,  and  that  is  integrity  of  heart. 
It  is  not  here  a  single  eye  to  an  object;  so  far  as  that 
is  here,  it  is  found  in  seeking  with  the  whole  heart. 
This  is  the  integrity  which  by  reason  of.  the  desire 
towards  God,  takes  His  mind  as  governing  the 
springs  of  life.  It  is  a  blessed  and  important  prin- 
ciple. The  word  hid  in  the  heart  prevents  sinning 
against  Him.  But  the  heart  goes  farther.  It  owns 
the  blessedness  of  Jehovah   Himself,   known  in   His 


THK    PSALMS.— PSALM  (XIX.  277 

ways,  His  goodness,  His  mercy,  that  endureth  for 
ever.  There,  in  the  midst  of  its  distress,  the  renewed 
heart  finds  its  resource  and  its  rest.  "  Blessed  art 
thou,  0  Jehovah.''  This  makes  the  heart  look  for 
what  He  lias  decreed  and  ordained  and  for  divine 
teaching  in  it.  This  looking  at  God  gives  courage 
ami  the  consciousness  of  integrity  and  faithfulness. 
When  the  heart  is  right,  this  is  the  case.  The  heart, 
however  humble,  when  it  walks  in  integrity,  has  the 
consciousness  of  it  before  God.  It  may  see  weakness 
and  infirmity  in  its  ways,  shortcomings  of  which  it 
will  judge  the  cause ;  but  with  God  it  will  have  the 
consciousness  of  entire  gnilclessncss  and  purpose  of 
heart.  "This  one  thing  I  do" — "To  me  to  live  is 
Christ."  This  does  not  affect  humility;  entire  de- 
pendence on  grace  and  divine  strength  for  willing 
and  doing  is  felt  (we  are  in  result  unprofitable  ser- 
vants, had  we  done  all),  it  is  duty  and  delight.  But 
there  is  the  joyfulness  with  and  from  God  that  the 
heart  is  right,  Service  flows  from  confidence  in  God 
and  knowledge  Of  His  blessedness  with  the  value  we 
have  of  what  God  has  given.  So  Christ  fully  in 
Psalm  xl.  The  spirit  is  the  same  here.  It  is  the 
effect  of  perception  of  divine  things,  in  power  and 
value  for  them,  to  make  us  declare  them.  It  is 
glorifying  God.  Love  to  others  may  accompany  this, 
but  it  is  another  thing.  We  owe  it  to  God  to  declare 
what  He  is.  He  ought  to  be  known,  and  what  He 
is  owned.  The  difference  of  praise  is  that  the  sense 
of  what  He  is,  is  addressed  to  Himself.  Perfection 
is  where  Be  is  full v  known,  so  that  there  is  no 
need  to  declare  it   to  others ;   all  with  one  mind  wor- 


278       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

ship  because  of  it.  Then  we  hold  nothing  back, 
"all  the  judgments  of  thy  mouth."  We  are  filled 
with  what  God  is,  its  value ;  and  it  is  uttered.  We 
may  be  wise  for  others'  sake,  but  God  is  sufficiently 
valued  to  be  fully  declared.  God's  testimonies  be- 
come the  riches  of  the  soul.  The  possession  of 
heaven  somewhat  modifies  this;  yet,  still,  for  here 
below,  the  way  of  God's  testimonies  are  joy,  moral 
joy,  as  riches  would  be  to  men.  But  there  is  an 
inward  life,  which  occupies  itself  with  these  things, 
as  well  as  the  activity  of  duty ;  much  to  be  fed  on, 
digested,  learnt  in  God's  testimonies.  We  meditate 
on  them :  A\re  have  thus  God's  mind — the  Holy  Ghost's 
intention  in  them.  Thus  the  soul  is  fed  in  delight. 
But  God's  ways  are  held  in  respect  as  authority, 
to  the  mind.  The  heart  goes  with  them  too.  It 
is  not  merely  that  they  delight  his  soul,  but  there 
is  the  activity  of  the  new  man;  he  delights  himself 
with  them,  he  makes  it  the  matter  of  his  occupation, 
seeking  his  enjoyment  there,  and  keeps  it  (oh!  how 
needed  it  is)  in  memory,  the  true  proof  of  affection. 

From  the  third  division,  another  element  comes  in. 
Its  literal  application  is  to  the  sorrows  of  Israel  in  the 
last  days;  in  principle  it  applies  to  all  times — the 
sorrows  and  trials  which  accompany  godliness.  The 
soul  looks  for  mercy  from  One  that  is  supreme,  where 
it  is  a  stranger.  It  needs  this  to  keep  the  law.  No 
doubt,  it  may  be  strengthened  even  to  martyrdom ; 
but,  in  general,  it  looks  for  mercy  to  be  able  to  walk. 
The  heart  owns  it,  is  God's  servant,  and  looks  to  be 
kept  in  mercy  in  oi'der  to  walk  truly.     This  is  a  great 


THE   PSALMS.— PSALM   (XIX.  270 

point  of  the  return  of  the  soul  to  God.  By  this  fact 
God  has  now  His  own  place  and  authority  as  such. 
Whatever  evil  may  be  permitted  (corap.  xeiv.),  God, 
our  God,  is  supreme  ;  and,  further,  goodness  is  always 
then  necessarily  known  in  Him.  But  there  is  more; 
the  soul  thus  knowing  God  desires  the  knowledge  of 
His  mind,  not  merely  a  rule  to  direct,  but  "  wondrous 
tilings  out  of  God's  law."  And  all  this  gives  the  con- 
sciousness of  being  a  stranger  in  the  earth.  A  good 
God  (whose  servants  we  are),  and  an  evil  world, 
make  a  man  "a  stranger"'  (we  much  more,  through 
Christ).  We  need  these — our  own  moral  delights — 
God's  commandments ;  we  must  add  the  fulness  of 
Christ.  "They  are  not  of  the  world  as  I  am  not  of 
the  world.  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth  :  thy 
word  is  truth."  And  here  the  heart  is  fully  engaged  and 
filled;  "my  soul  brcaketh"  forth,  for  there  is  infinite 
delight,  in  the  new  nature,  in  the  fulness  of  God's 
revelations.  It  does  break  forth  with  delight.  But 
this  delight  in  the  word  gives  a  just  estimate  of  man 
in  the  world,  the  "proud"  man  acting  from  his  own 
will  and  setting  himself  up.  He  may  seem  to  succeed 
and  puff  at  God.  He  is  under  a  curse,  he  errs  from 
the  one  true  way  of  man — God's  way.  The  exalta- 
tion <>f  will  brings  necessary  curse;  for  we  are  thus 
away  from,  in  rebellion  against,  God — all  acting  of 
human  will.  But  godliness  docs  more  than  make  a 
stranger,  a  sure  thing  for  the  heart.  Ii  brings  cruel 
mockings,  for  proud  man  will  not  have  subjection  to 
God:  it  is  contemptible  to  man;  and  the  deist,  he 
cannot  help  him,  he  boasts.  That  is  not  contemptible, 
his  will  is  in  it.      lint  with  God  man  must  lie  subject, 


280       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

and  the  wilful  despise  this,  though  often  with  mis- 
givings of  heart.  This  the  saint,  while  enduring, 
seeks  to  be  removed.  God  should  assert  His  title, 
not  suffer  the  faithful  to  be  pressed  down  by  evil. 
Still,  meanwhile,  he  can  retreat  into  his  own  delights  ; 
he  meditates  in  God's  statutes,  hid  there  from  the 
pride  of  man.  The}'  are  his  delight,  and  his  coun- 
sellors, too.     (Ver.  17—24.) 

He  who  seeks  to  follow  God's  ways  will  find  himself 
often  in  evil  days— days  when  the  power  of  evil  pre- 
vails and  presses  upon  his  spirit.  What  then  marks 
faithfulness  is,  that  the  heart  does  not  turn  aside  to 
an  easier  path  or  other  comforts,  but  looks  to  God 
and  His  raising  up  the  heart  according  to  His  word. 
There  his  heart  is.  He  prefers  sorrow  with  it  to 
leaving  it,  but  has  learnt  to  trust  God,  and  in  the 
sorrow  looks  to  relief,  according  to  this  revelation  of 
God ;  and  God  can  be  counted  on  for  it.  The  heart 
had  been  true  with  God — not  only  knew  that  He 
knew  all  its  ways,  but  the  desire  of  being  right  in 
His  sight  and  confidence  with  God  even  there.  He 
had  declared  His  ways.  This  integrity  in  the  time  of 
trouble,  when  there  is  not  the  joy  of  God's  deliver- 
ance, is  very  important — to  be  able  to  say,  "  When 
my  spirit  was  in  heaviness,  thou  knewest  my  path." 
Still  there  is  confidence  in  the  result,  so  that  the  soid 
cleaves  to  God's  ways,  and  the  heart  reckoning  on  His 
faithfulness  is  sure,  if  led  by  Him  in  faithfulness  of 
walk,  it  will  soon  declare  His  wondrous  works.  Not 
only  did  the  heart  take  the  lowly  and  abased  place,  as 
having  no  courage  as  to  external  things,  but  it  melted 


THK   PSALMS.—  PSA  I.M    CXIX.  281 

within  for  heaviness — inwardly  was  in  felt  weakness. 
Still  the  strength  it  looks  for  is  according  to  God's 
word.  It  seeks  nothing  bnt  this.  The  false  way  in 
the  midst  of  which  it  lived,  it  would  have  kept  far 
away  from  the  heart.  Through  this  it  was  downcast. 
But  better  to  be  downcast  through  evil  than  to  walk 
merrily  in  it.  More  energetic  faith  might  lift  np. 
Still  the  sense  of  evil  and  dependence  is  good.  It  was 
deliberate.  He  knew  all  this,  but  he  had  chosen  the 
way  of  truth.  "Lord,  to  whom  should  we  go1?"  How 
simple  the  path  then!  The  soul  had  been  stedfast. 
and  another  thing  was  connected  with  this.  The  heart 
sees  that  its  joys  and  sorrows  arc  in  the  hand  of  Cod. 
If  it  was  put  to  shame,  it  woidd  be  His  doing,  but  He 
could  not  for  our  keeping  His  own  testimonies.  "  l'ut 
to  shame  "  is  not  here  bearing  shame  by  man's  mock- 
but  confounded  as  coming  under  judgment.  After 
all,  the  free  running  in  God's  path  is  when  the  heart 
is  set  at  liberty  and  free,  joyfully  with  Him.  (Ver. 
25—32.) 

These  last  verses  look  for  apprehension  of  the  ways 
of  God's  precepts  ;  BO  that  the  heart  is  taught  in  the 
midst  (T  sorrow.  Here  it  is  more  keeping  and 
observing  it  in  his  path.  Otherwise  the  first  three 
portions  were  his  own  resolutions;  here  the  demand 
of  God's  teaching.  For  the  heart,  true  in  its  resolu- 
then  turns  to  God.  It  may  be  first  for  its  sor- 
rows, hut,  then  for  guidance  and  dependence  on  Him. 
We  need  His  teaching  when  the  will  is  right, 
understanding  from  Him — His  help  ton.  'Make  me 
to  go."     But   the  heart   seeks  to   lie   rightly  inclined 

T 


282       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

also,  but  that  root  of  all  evil  turns  it  aside — covetous- 
ness.  The  same  as  to  vanity,  but  this  is  all  around  us. 
It  is  not  the  inclination  of  the  heart,  b\it  distraction 
and  leading  away  the  mind  from  God  to  folly.  Hence 
the  soul  seeks  to  be  given  energy  and  life,  to  seek  in 
singleness  of  eye  heartily  the  Lord  and  His  will.  He 
seeks  too  that  the  word  may  be  confirmed  to  the  soul. 
This  may  be  inwardly  by  the  Holy  Ghost  giving  it 
power  or  even  by  God's  ways  according  to  it.  The 
heart  follows  God  and  bows  in  heart  to  him  at  any 
rate,  but  seeks  to  be  strengthened  and  confirmed. 
Reproach  is  when  God  allows  shame  on  one  for 
righteousness  without  interfering  to  screen  or  save 
from  it.  It  is  as  if  He  abandoned  His  servant  to 
the  mockery  of  the  enemy,  successful  in  his  ways,  or 
at  any  rate  the  faithful  in  a  state  to  be  triumphed 
over.  So  Christ :  "  Reproach  hath  broken  my  heart." 
The  world  could  say,  "  He  trusted  in  God,  let  him 
deliver  him."  But  after  all,  what  God  ordained  was 
good,  in  which  the  faithful  walked.  Why  should  he 
be  left  to  reproach,  which  he  feared  1  The  heart  Avas 
right.  It  longed  after  God's  precepts,  and  looked 
for  the  Lord  to  give  liveliness  of  heart  and  energy  of 
renewed  will,  undistractedness  through  the  faithful- 
ness of  God  (that  consistency  with  His  own  goodness 
and  favour  on  which  we  can  reckon  in  Him). 
"  Quicken  me  in  thy  righteousness."  This  last  sup- 
poses an  increased  knowledge  of  God,  so  that  we  can 
reckon  on  Him.  So  indeed  does  all  this  demand  on 
God  for  help  and  teaching.  Uprightness  and  integrity 
lead  to  confidence  in  Him  for  our  leading  in  the  way  of 
righteousness,  which  we  know  He  must  love.     Being 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   (XIX.  283 

thus  <if  one  mind  -with  Him,  through  grace,  gives  it; 
but  the  last  word  here  shows  deepened  intimacy  of 
faith,  which  counts  on  what  God  must  he.  (Ver. 
33—40.) 

Remark  here,  that  all  through  there  is  no  thought 
of  looking,  in  difficulty  or  trial,  to  anything  but  God. 
Help  to  keep  the  law,  deliverance  from  trial  hecause 
<>f  it,  these  are  sought,  hut  there  is  nut  the  smallest 
idea  of  turning  anywhere  else;  it  docs  not  even  occur 
to  the  faithful.  This  is  true  integrity  of  heart.  God 
in  truth,  of  His  will,  God  in  mercy,  God  Himself  as 
an  ohject,  hut  only  God — nothing  outside  or  away 
from  Him.  His  mercies  are  looked  for,  and  that  is 
right,  and  deliverance  from  Him,  and  this  according 
to  His  word,  for  He  has  perfectly  revealed  Himself, 
and  we  want  nothing  short  of  Him.  What  an  answer 
will  His  deliverance  he  to  the  enemy  that  reproaches  ! 
And  the  word  He  had  sent  to  us  was  trusted  in  as 
well  as  obeyed.  This  is  an  important  point,  it  is  nol 
only  the  authority  of  the  word,  hut  we  have  set  to 
our  seal  thai  God  is  true,  we  receive  it  as  the  word 
of  God,  and  God,  we  know,  must  he  true,  for  we 
know  Him;  and  the  soul  is  interested  in  the  truth  of 
the  word.  It  has  taken  it  as  of  and  from  God, 
delighted  in  it.  had  its  confidence  in  it,  taken  it  in  face 
of  the  wicked  as  that  which  we  had  of  God  (was 
perfeel  aa  He,  revealed  Him),  identified  it,  so  to  speak, 
with  God.  Hence,  when  there  was  deliverance  accord- 
ing to  it  (and  other  the  heart  would  not  seek),  it 
v,.is  the  very  answer  the  heart  wanted  to  him  that 
reproached;  God's  word  has  an  immense  place  in  the 


284       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

heart.  It  is  what  reveals  Him.  Not  only  it  does  so, 
but  it  is  what  does  so.  (So  John  v.  39.)  Had  God 
abandoned  the  faithful,  as  fear  would  lead  him  to 
expect,  the  word  would  have  been  taken  out  of  his 
mouth.  Yet  here  it  is  not  doubting  the  truth  of  the 
word,  or  its  being  God's  testimony ;  but  he  was 
allowed  to  accredit  it  no  more  by  faith.  This  he  fears 
because  he  values  it.  This  was  Christ's  trial  and 
the  perfectness  of  the  cross,  as  to  desire  ("how,  then, 
should  the  Scriptures  be  fulfilled1?");  as  to  trust,  "Yet 
thou  continuest  holy."  Here  the  faithful  has  hoped 
in  God's  judgments,  God's  acting  on  that  which  is 
gone  out  of  His  mouth,  His  acting  according  to  the 
revelation  of  Himself  in  His  word ;  and  this  enabled 
him  to  keep  it  for  ever.  So  will  it  be  with  Israel 
when  he  is  delivered  from  the  oppressor  at  the  end, 
the  law  having  been  written  in  his  heart.  Christ 
took  none  of  the  promises  in  life,  but  higher  glory 
awaited  Him  as  man,  an  answer  to  higher  and  infinite 
faithfulness  to  God,  faithfulness  to  make  good  His 
nature,  to  be  the  proof  of  it  when  abandoned,  when 
only  it  could  be  done  because  of  sin.  Then  will 
Israel  walk  at  large,  when  God's  judgments  have 
come  in,  for  that  was  his  desire,  to  be  free  to  keep 
them  in  delight  and  joyfully.  Through  mercy  we 
may  learn  this  by  times,  but  our  path  is  a  higher  one 
— to  follow  and  suffer  with  Christ.  But  he  has  been 
encouraged  by  these  thoughts.  The  word  gets  its 
value  and  God  His  place,  so  to  speak,  though  unseen. 
He  speaks  of  His  testimonies  before  kings,  and  is  not 
ashamed.  This  is  the  character  of  faith.  It  has  the 
sense  of  the  importance  of  God's  testimonies,  and  is 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM  (JXIX.  285 

filled  with  it.  Men  take  their  place,  may  be  respected, 
as  due  to  them;  but  God  tills  and  governs  the  mind, 
not  by  effort,  but,  so  to  speak,  naturally.  The  com- 
mandments of  God  become  thus,  instead  of  a  pressure 
on  the  conscience,  the  delights  of  the  heart.  There 
is  open  confession  and  dedication  to  them  ;  I  suppose 
tins  is  lifting  up  the  hands  to  them.  It  is  a  solemn 
avowal  and  asseveration  of  heart ;  not  only  he  has 
loved  them,  but  he  openly  declares  his  owning  their 
truth  and  authority,  saying,  That  is  what  I  own.  And 
us  he  openly  owns  his  affiance  to  them,  so  he  medi- 
in  them  for  his  own  joy.     (Ver.  41 — 48.) 

But  the  soul  has  counted  on  God's  word ;  God  has 
taught  and  led  the  soul  to  do  it,  and  now  it  looks  for 
God  to  put  His  amen  to  it  (man,  through  grace, 
having  put  his).  This  confidence  of  faith,  in  God's 
word  had  been  its  comfort  in  affliction.  There  was 
that  which  was  firm  and  stedfast  for  hope,  and  brought 
in  God's  faithfulness  and  testimony — Himself  in  hope 
to  the  soul  when  all  circumstances  around  were 
adverse,  and  nothing  to  lean  on.  And  this  is  comfort, 
true  comfort,  in  affliction ;  but  it  looks  to  God  to  fulfil 
His  word — knows  He  cannot  but  do  it.  That  very 
word  bad  quickened  the  soul  itself  to  do  it.  This 
lowly,  patient  obedience,  .accepting  meekly  reproach, 
had  been  the  scorn  and  derision  of  the  proud;  but 
faith  in  His  word  had  kept  the  soul  from  swerving. 
Jt  kept  fast  in  the  sorrow.  It  looked  back  to  God's 
ways  of  old,  when  His  hand  had  been  stretched  out. 
What  made  it  obedient  made  it  confident  :  that  is, 
God    was    looked    to,    and   this   kept    the    vision    and 


286       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

memory  of  faith  clear.  It  counted  on  faithfulness, 
and  it  remembered  judgments ;  for  all  this  is  the 
government  of  God.  And  His  ways'  of  old  are  ever 
the  thought  of  Israel  in  the  Psalms,  and,  in  their 
place,  we  can  think  of  them ;  though  our  hope  be 
elsewhere,  as  Christ's,  in  whose  favour,  when  all  was 
tested,  it  was  not  made  good ;  but  the  better  portion 
of  resurrection  was  the  answer  for  us.  But  this 
thought  of  God's  judgments  does  make  it  awful  to 
contemplate  the  result  for  the  wicked,  who  are  hurry- 
ing wilfully  against  them.  But  it  is  not  only  the  end 
of  the  wicked  that  is  spoken  of  here.  The  wicked- 
ness itself  is  to  the  soul  poignant  distress.  The  soul 
dwells  in  Mesech.  It  sees  around  what  is  grief  of 
heart,  for  its  delight  is  in  the  fresh  air  of  God's  holy 
will.  The  rank  and  fetid  breath  of  sin  is  distress 
and  pain  to  it,  and  seen  not  only  intrinsically  as  sin, 
but  in  the  pride  of  wickedness.  Still  there  is  joy  : 
God's  statutes  are  its  song  in  the  house  of  its  pil- 
grimage. How  true  that  is  !  How,  when  pressed  in 
by  evil  around,  does  the  heart  find  its  relief  and 
enlargement  in  the  word  and  testimony  of  God  Him- 
self !  His  statutes  are  our  songs  in  the  house  of  our 
pilgrimage;  and  the  loneliness  in  which  the  heart  is 
in  a  world  of  evil  (for  it  will  and  must  be  isolated,. 
however  sweet  communion  may  be  by  the  way,  if  it 
be  faithful),  will  be  met  by  the  name  of  the  Lord  (to 
them  Jehovah,  to  us  Christ  and  the  Father  in  Him). 
And  when  cast  upon  our  thoughts,  these  thoughts  arc 
filled  with  their  names  and  all  is  peace,  and  the  pur- 
pose of  the  heart  in  obedience  and  communion  is 
settled  and  strengthened.     And  this   is  the   fruit   of 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    (  XIX.  287 

obedience,  for  holiness  and  communion — the  sense  of 
God's  presence — arc  the  fruit  of  obedience.  Bo 
Romans  vi.  22,  "  Ye  had  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  and 
the  end  everlasting  life."  The  obedience  here  has  the 
sense  of  diligent  observation  of  God's  precepts,  a  thing 
not  t<>  he  forgotten.     (Ver.  -19 — 5G.) 

In  this  part  (ver.  .">" — G-l)  we  have  more  the  affec- 
tions connected  with  the  word  written  in  the  heart : 
"Thou  art  my  portion,  O  Lord."  The  heart  has  Him- 
self as  its  source  of  joy  and  blessing.  This  connects 
itself  necessarily  with  purpose  of  heart  towards  God  : 
'•  /  have  said."  It  is  impossible  to  look  to  the  Lord  as 
one's  portion  without  thus  purposing  to  do  His  will, 
for  that  would  be  not  owning  Him.  This,  too,  neces- 
sarily involves  the  desire  of  His  favour  since  He  is 
God.  Still  the  word  here  has  its  place,  which  has 
awakened  this  desire  and  confidence,  both  as  assuring 
of  the  mercy  and  the  revelation  of  the  principles  on 
which  this  favour  and  mercy  are  shown.  I  see  the 
same  desire,  not  mere  obedience  though  resulting  in 
it,  but  the  meditation  of  the  heart:  "I  thought  on 
my  ways" — the  heart's  inward  exercises,  a  needful 
and  important  matter  for  us — "and  turned  my  feet 
unto  thy  testimonies."  We  may  obey  instinctively, 
carelessly  almost,  with  right  intention,  lint  showing 
that  the  heart  is  not  with  God,  not  exercised,  not 
anxious  as  to  pleasing  Him,  and  in  which,  though  tin 
path  be  not  evil,  the  heart  may  be  in  a  very  poor  state. 
lint  the  saint  rightly  with  God  will  review  the  purpose 
of  his  ways,  the  direction  of  them,  how  far  they  are 
according  to   the   measure   of  the   purpose   which   the 


2  88       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

light  given  to  us  leads  to,  and  if  the  purpose  be  ade- 
quate, how  far  the  filling  up  in  practice  be  true  to  it 
and  earnestly  pursued,  true  to  the  character  of  that 
purpose.  For  we  may  be  externally  blameless,  in 
appearance  even  amiable,  and  unfaithful  to  the  calling 
<»f  God.  Here,  of  course,  we  have  to  turn  to  God's 
testimonies  which  are  able  to  make  the  man  of  God 
perfect,  "throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works." 
We  see  how  having  the  Lord  for  our  portion  is  the 
very  spring  of  all  this.  Thus  we  should  have  a  heart 
which  thinks  on  our  ways.  But  this  gives  diligence 
Avhen  the  heart  is  right.  It  does  not  confer,  then, 
with  flesh  and  blood,  having  only  God's  favour  in  view 
and  purpose  of  heart :  "  I  made  haste,  and  delayed 
not,  to  keep  thy  commandments."  How  characteristic 
and  all-important  this  is  I  need  not  say.  It  is  the 
essential  first-fruits  and  spring  of  a  life  true  to  God, 
as  we  see  in  the  blessed  Apostle  Paul.  Suffering  may 
be  found  in  this  path,  opposition  of  the  haters  of 
the  Lord,  the  instruments  of  Satan,  but  the  inward 
life  remains  steady  and  rightly  directed — does  not 
swerve  in  its  judgment  of  its  path:  "I  have  not  for- 
gotten thy  law."  We  may  be  occupied  with  opposi- 
tion and  evil,  so  as  to  have  the  state  of  our  mind 
formed  by  it,  though  opposed  to  the  wicked.  It  is 
but  meeting  flesh  by  flesh.  He  who  looks  to  the  Lord 
has  the  character  of  his  path  in  the  scene  of  wicked- 
ness formed  by  the  unforgotten  word,  and  this  leads 
to  see  God  as  the  dealer  with  these  things.  It  looks 
for  the  perfectness  of  God's  dealings  with  evil.  This 
is  a  comfort,  for  an  upright  mind  would  often  rise  up 
in  indignation  against  public  evil ;  but  the  wrath  of 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    (XIX.  280 

man  docs  not  work  the  righteousness  of  God.  It  is 
hard  often  for  an  active  energetic  mind  to  take  the 
lowly  place,  and  not  bring  down  fire  from  heaven,  or 
will  to  smite  with  the  sword,  when  ( 'hrist  and  His  truth 
are  insulted  and  annoyed;  but  in  looking  above  we 
have  songs  in  the  night.  The  heart,  in  singleness  of 
eye,  led  of  God  in  His  ways,  has  springs  of  joy  which 
wake  it  up  in  the  time  of  evil,  and  when  it  is  alone 
with  God.  Sorrow  may  be  around,  but  joy  with  Him. 
It  arises.  There  is  a  chord  of  heart  to  praise.  It  is 
not  only  comforted  in  the  sorrow,  but  freed  from  the 
bond  of  evil,  active  in  praising  Him  whom  it  knows 
and  who  is  its  portion.  For  judgment  and  deliverance 
will  come  according  to  the  word,  and  the  heart  gets  xip 
to  God  as  to  it  now.  But  though  we  are  and  must  be 
alone  in  faith,  not  in  fellowship,  when  the  Lord  is 
our  portion,  we  arc  a  companion  of  them  that  fear 
Him  and  walk  in  His  ways.  And  here  the  heart  is 
able  to  turn  round  and,  when  all  the  evil  had  pressed 
upon  it,  yet  see  mercy.  And  so  it  is  :  evil  may  rise 
up  like  a  flood,  but  the  Lord  is  always  above  it;  and 
when  the  heart  by  faith  realizes  that,  and  the  will  is 
bowed  as  to  it  all,  if  it  is  then  comforted  by  the 
thought  of  God's  judgments,  it  finds  the  constant 
exposition  of  His  mercy  now,  and  seeks  in  peace  to  be 
led  in  His  ways.  This  is  an  interestiug  part  of  the 
.soul's  experience  under  the  influence  of  the  word 
of  God.     (Ver.  57— G4.) 

We  have  now  the  sense  of  blessings  from  God,  and 
the  heart  turned  to  Him  as  its  portion  :  this  with 
the   consciousness,  the  will   being  broken,    of  being 


290  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   OX 

His  servant.  Still  in  unerring  goodness  the  word, 
the  great  subject  of  this  psalm,  has  its  place.  The 
Avord  guides  Jehovah  in  His  goodness,  as  it  assures 
us  of  that  goodness,  revealing  Him  and  His  ways 
to  us,  as  it  guides  us  in  our  path.  This  is  very 
precious,  because  it  teaches  how  to  reckon  on  it,  and 
that  we  can.  And  here  he  had  found  it  by  experience ; 
he  had  been  afflicted,  and  he  can  now  account  for  it ; 
but  as  His  word,  so  Jehovah's  ways  have  been.  So 
even  (and  it  is  most  precious)  we  can  reckon  on  it 
at  all  times.  We  may  have  more,  but  this  we  have. 
Now  he  looks  for  discernment  as  taught  of  God, 
divinely-given  judgment  and  knowledge ;  for  he  had 
put  the  seal  to  God's  commandments,  for  believing 
here  is  putting  the  amen  of  his  heart.  Herein  he 
can  confidently  look  to  be  guided — so  we ;  and  it 
gives  confidence  to  the  heart,  so  as  to  look  for  it.  His 
will  had  been  broken.  Affliction  had  been  there ; 
before  will  had  its  way,  forgetting  God  and  going 
its  own  way.  Affliction  is  understood  now,  and  obe- 
dience wrought.  How  graciously  God  follows  through 
righteously  as  to  government  and  necessarily  so  in 
general !  For  sometimes  He  breaks  the  heart  through 
favour  as  He  knows  how,  when  we  have  wandered 
away  from  Him.  Hence  God  is  known  in  goodness 
in  the  subdued  heart :  "  Thou  art  good  and  doest 
good."  The  desire  of  the  heart  is  after  God's  ways. 
Now  "teach  me  thy  statutes;"  that  is,  the  goodness 
the  heart  seeks.  This  subdual  of  will  and  setting  the 
heart  right  is  beautiful  to  see.  The  pride  of  ungodly 
adversaries  is  before  him,  saying  evil  of  him  in 
untruth  :  it  is  natural  if  he  has  left  their  wavs  and  his 


THE   PSALMS.—  PSALM   CXIX.  '2U1 

own  pride  of  will,  but  experience  has  given  purpose  of 
heart.  It  was  enough  to  have  gone  astray;  he  chugs 
to  that  with  purpose  which  he  has  now  got;  and  the 
moral  difference  is  great.  Filled  with  will  and  self 
on  one  side,  perhaps  BUCCess  ;  delight  in  Jehovah's 
law  on  the  other:  the  law  of  Him  whose  we  arc — 
.Jesus  Christ's  will  in  all  things.  But  not  only  was 
there  breaking  of  will  and  return;  there  is  positive 
progress,  through  infinite  grace,  in  this  experience. 
The  breaking  of  will  brings  the  elements  of  the 
heart  directly  into  contact  with  the  word.  Self  is 
judged  in  the  forms  it  takes  within  in  the  heart — what 
flesh  is  in  its  ways,  however  deceitful.  Thus  the  heart 
gets  to  learn,  freed  from  self,  and  the  light  of  the  word 
breaking  in  on  the  heart,  and  exercising  it,  thus  ren- 
ders it  cognizant  of  its  import  and  power;  for  (though, 
yea,  and  because,  of  God)  it  is  directed  to  and  adapted 
to  the  heart  of  man  :  only  till  the  will  is  broken  and 
conscience  awakes,  it  does  not  reach  it  intelligently. 
See  the  parable  of  the  sower  and  John  iv.  But  then 
the  law  of  God's  mouth  is  precious  above  all,  the 
expression  of  His  own  perfect  mind  and  will,  and  His 
will  about  us.  We  live  by  it,  but  we  live  on  it  too, 
ami  with  delight,  as  from   Him  and  perfect  and  for  us. 

The  soul  looks  now  to  God  as  dependent  for  man's 
vi  iv  being  on  God,  so  that  He  should  surely  direct  and 
guide  it,  as  Peter  wrote,  "  Committing  the  keeping  of 
our  souls  to  him  in  well  doing  as  unto  a  faithful  Crea- 
tor." The  heart  alone,  which  knows  Him  in  grace, 
can  do  this.  Otherwise  we  seek  our  own  will  in  resist- 
ance to  Him.      Hut  once  He  is  known.  He  is  known  in 


292       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

all  that  He  is  according  to  the  truth  of  His  nature  in 
grace.  This  enlarges  our  knowledge  of  God,  and  applies 
it  to  everything.  It  warrants  thus  the  desire  founded 
on  it.  Here  it  is  applied  to  the  teaching  of  the  word, 
because  the  soul  is  walking  and  to  walk  in  the  old 
creation.  Still  we  can,  as  down  here  now,  look  to  the 
truth  of  God's  nature,  when,  as  I  said,  He  is  known, 
and  look  to  Him  thus  because  thus  our  dependence  on 
Him,  in  the  fullest  and  most  absolute  sense,  is  expressed, 
as  well  as  the  desire  of  the  renewed  heart.  I  only 
exist  by  thy  work:  make  me  then  walk  as  disposed  in 
heart  and  guided  by  thee.  He  who  made  can  give 
understanding.  But  there  was  a  common  bond  in  thus 
looking  to  God — the  same  disposition  of  heart  which 
delighted  in  His  being  owned  and  honoured,  and  was 
kind  to  those  who  did,  in  the  midst  of  an  evil  world. 
They  were  companions,  as  Malachi  speaks :  "  They 
that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another;" 
and  as  we  see  so  beautifully  in  the  lovely  picture  of 
the  hidden  ones  in  the  beginning  of  Laike.  There  is 
another  trait  of  this  divine  work  in  the  soul.  God 
being  really  known  in  the  soul,  it  rises  up  to  the  justi- 
fication of  Him  in  His  ways,  however  painful.  Thus 
the  heart  knows  in  a  double  way  that  His  judgments 
are  right.  They  are  His,  and  we  know  what  He  is. 
He  cannot  but  do  rightly,  and  more,  rightly  towards 
us.  He  is  faithful  to  us  in  goodness ;  but  then, 
secondly,  we  see  the  Tightness  of  it  morally.  God 
ought  not  to  allow  evil — above  all,  not  in  His  people. 
For  their  good  He  could  not.  Right  and  wrong  are 
known  and  judged,  and  it  is  God's  care  over  His 
people  which  makes  Him  follow  them  in  their  ways. 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM    OXIX.  293 

But  the  feeling  that  the  chastening  comes  from  God, 
though  it  gives  submission,  gives  the  desire  of  His 
favour,  when  the  submission  is  complete.  Still  one 
desires  relief;  but  a  subdued  heart,  while  naturally 
desiring  relief,  yet  seeks  divine  favour  in  it,  and  corn- 
fort  from  God,  not  in  self-will.  "  Let,  I  pray  thee,  thy 
merciful  kindness  be  for  my  comfort."  "  God  who 
comforteth,"  says  the  apostle,  "them  that  arc  cast 
down;-'  and  this  depends  on  God's  faithful  word.  On 
that  goodness  he  counts  and  looks  for  it,  and  this  is 
right.  Mere  looking  for  relief  is  self-will,  and  may  be 
the  means,  if  we  had  it,  of  more  sorrow;  but  a  subdued 
and  broken  will  under  chastisement  is  all  right  in 
desiring  mercy.  It  knows  this  character  in  God  and 
desires  that  it  may  be  exercised,  if  possible;  and  it 
can  plead  its  integrity  in  this  case,  for  the  desire  is 
right  when  submission  is  complete,  so  that  goodness 
is  felt  to  be  in  God.  So  here,  "For  thy  law  is  my 
delight;"  and  judgment  is  the  portion  of  the  proud. 
There  is  the  sense  that  the  proud  will  is  the  subject  of 
judgment.  In  the  time  of  grace  the  Christian  desires 
that  will  may  be  changed.  Yet  he  knows  faith  is  nut 
of  all.  Here  the  desire  that  they  should  be  ashamed 
is  according  to  the  righteous  character  of  God.  The 
faithful  one  keeps  himself  apart  and  meditates  in 
God's  revealed  will.  But  there  is  the  desire,  not  only 
<>f  the  favour  of  God,  but  that  those  who  fear  God 
should  turn  to  the  afilicted  one.  There  is  something 
special  in  these.  It  is  not  that  he  seeks  them. 
though  this  be  right.  There  is  energy  of  affiance  in 
God,  and  i.  i  seeks  Him  only,  nor  leans  on  another, 
but  delights  in  their  association  with  him.      It  is  not 


294  PRACTICAL    REFLECTIONS   ON 

that  he  was  not  a  companion  of  those  that  feared 
God's  name,  but  here  he  seeks  his  comforts  from 
God ;  and  as  Job's  acquaintance  came  to  him  again 
when  the  testimony  of  God  was  with  him,  so  it  is 
here.  Only  Avhatever  the  comforts  of  God,  his  desire 
is  to  be  maintained  in  integrity.  There  is  no 
thought  of  blessing  out  of  the  way  of  God's  word. 
So  shall  the  servant  of  God  not  be  ashamed.  (Ver. 
73—80.) 

Ver.  81 — 88  goes  further.  The  pressure  of  the 
power  of  evil  is  greater  and  the  cry  more  earnest, 
but  the  word  is  fully  trusted.  This  blessed  revelation 
of  God  Himself,  of  His  will  and  favour,  that  in  which 
He  cannot  lie,  maintains  the  heart  through  all.  How 
precious  is  it — the  fact  of  having  a  revelation  of 
Himself  as  sure  as  Himself!  With  this  two  grounds 
of  appeal — the  extremity  of  distress.  He  is  dried  up 
like  a  bottle  in  the  smoke ;  but  he  dare  not  forget 
God's  statutes.  But  a  poor,  short-lived  creature,  it 
was  time  for  God  to  lay  to  His  hand,  if  he  was  to 
taste  of  mercy.  And  the  sorrow  he  was  suffering 
was  both  the  pride  of  man  and  was  not  according  to 
the  word  which  God  made  good  and  owned.  Yet  that 
word  was,  all  of  it,  faithful  and  the  persecution  wrong- 
ful. It  had  gone  very  far.  He  was  almost  consumed 
in  the  land,  the  very  place  of  promise  and  God's 
power;  but  he  forsook  not  God's  precepts.  Mercy,  too, 
is  looked  for  as  life-giving  to  himself.  It  is  not  only 
comfort  from  without,  but  the  restoration  of  the  soul 
itself,  and  so  is  it  kept  firmly,  and  with  good  courage, 
and  confidence,  the  testimony  of  God's  mouth.     Thus 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   CXIX.  295 

sorrow  itself  and  great  pressure,  where  there  is  integ- 
rity, become  a  plea  with  God. 

Another  aspect  of  the  word  is  now  before  the  soul 
— before  God  in  heaven  itself.  There  it  is  settled  for 
ever.  There  where  lie  is,  it  remains  in  its  own  charac- 
ter of  God's  settled  and  expressed  purpose.  But  God 
has  acted  out  of  heaven,  though  His  purpose  be 
settled  in  it.  His  faithfulness,  His  abiding  by  what 
He  is  and  has  said,  continues  through  the  changing 
generations  of  men.  Hence  when  we  have  His  word, 
we  can  reckon  upon  it  as  sure  as  what  is  in  heaven, 
and  changes  not  as  God  Himself.  He  established 
the  earth  and  it  abides.  All  continues  as  God  orders 
it ;  for — and  it  is  another  important  truth — all  that 
does  exist  is  the  servant  of  God.  If  even  He  lias 
given  them  fixed  laws,  why  do  they  abide  in  them  I 
Because  they  depend  on  Him.  They  are  His  servants. 
All  are  His  servants;  but  then  the  soul  has  its 
strength  in  this  word.  Here  is  a  moral,  willing  obedi- 
ence in  a  renewed  heart,  and  when  circumstances 
were  all  adverse,  it  were  hard  to  hold  good  \inless  the 
moral  side  of  the  law  had  its  power.  God  seemed  out 
of  the  circumstances,  but  the  inward  delight  in  the  law 
of  I  rod  kept  it  fast.  We  have,  J  think,  something  more, 
though  this  be  interesting  as  a  testimony  to  a  renewed 
bead  and  true  to  us.  We  glory  in  tribulation,  know- 
ing its  working  in  us,  having  the  love  of  God  shed 
abroad  in  our  hearts,  as  it  is  witnessed  in  the  gift  of 
the  Son,  by  the  Holy  Ghost  given  to  us.  "  All  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  Him."  How 
truly  Christ  held  to  God's  will,  ill  the  highest  sense. 


20G       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

against  all  adverse  circumstances — even  to  wrath.  This 
power  of  the  word  in  sustaining  the  heart,  in  sorrow, 
in  its  inward  quickening  and  restoring  power  in  the 
new  man,  gives  purpose  of  heart  in  the  consciousness 
of  its  divine  preciousness.  And  this  leads  up  to  God 
in  the  consciousness  that  we  are  His.  I  do  not  say  it 
creates  the  thought,  hut  it  leads  the  heart  to  the 
consciousness  of  it ;  and  hence  to  look  to  Him  who 
is  faithful  to  save  and  deliver,  and  that,  as  ever  here, 
in  the  consciousness  of  integrity.  "  I  have  sought 
thy  precepts;"  and  this  must  he  so.  Want  of  it 
enfeebles  all  confidence,  though  God  may  have  mercy. 
One  sees  how  constantly  the  soul  is  seen  in  the  pre- 
sence of  oppressing  enemies ;  for  the  remnant  will  be 
so  in  the  last  days.  In  one  sense  we  always  arc,  but 
it  applies  often  in  evil  days.  "The  wicked  have 
waited  for  me  to  destroy  me."  But  the  soul  waits  in 
peace,  occupied  with  God's  testimonies.  And  this 
does  give  peace,  and  enables  the  soul  to  leave  all  to 
God.  Another  pressure  of  the  soul  is  universal 
failure.  Not  that  there  is  no  integrity;  but  the  heart 
would  be  disposed  to  say  so  under  the  pressure  of  it. 
But  there  is  no  fulfilling,  completing — such  is  the  force 
of  the  word — the  will  of  God  even  in  those  who  under- 
take to  walk  in  it.  But  if  the  heart  turn  to  the  word. 
it  has  quite  another  effect.  This  very  failure,  though 
never  justified,  leads  to  see  how  perfect,  how  complete, 
and  wide  God's  commandment  is — how  it  reaches  to 
everything  in  which  man  can  be  engaged — everything 
in  the  relation  of  the  creature  to  God — all  moral  rela- 
tions.    (Ver.  89—96.) 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    CXIX.  297 

Ver.  97 — 10+  is  the  affection  and  value  lie  has  for 
the  law,  its  known  experienced  value.  He  loves  God's 
law  in  itself.     It  is  of  God  to  him,  the  revelation  of 

His  will.  It  is  his  meditation  all  the  day.  It  is  nol 
for  the  fruit  he  got  from  it,  nor  the  wisdom  it  gave 
him  towards  others;  he  loved  it  for  itself.  This  charac- 
terizes the  new  man.  But  its  effect  when  loved  for  its 
own  sake  was  to  make  him  wiser  than  his  enemies, 
however  subtle  and  cunning  they  may  be;  there  is  a 
path  which  the  vulture's  eye  has  not  known — "simple 
concerning  evil,  and  wise  unto  that  which  is  good," 
which  outreaches  and  baffles  the  adversaries  of  God 
and  of  the  godly  man.  They  can  form  no  estimate  of 
the  principles  of  those  who  fear  God.  But  this  sup- 
poses  constancy  and  consistency  in  them.  "They  are 
ever  with  me."'  It  is  divine  wisdom,  and  immcdiately 
so  that  it  gives  a  discernment  (because  it  acts  on  the 
soul  itself  and  forms  it,  and  is  perfect  in  every  respect) 
which  no  human  teaching  however  godly  can.  This 
may  lie  very  useful  as  drawn  from  and  leading  to  the 
word  ;  but  even  in  the  case  of  the  highest  gift  nothing 
gained  by  it  is  in  the  faith  of  the  soul  with  God,  until 
it  is  learned  there;  it  may  be  pointed  out,  interest  the 
heart  and  mind;  but  to  possess  it,  it  must  be  learned 
with  God.  "They  shall  be  all  taught  of  God." 
Nothing  teaches  like  the  word  of  God,  sought  out 
and  searched  in  hoi}'  subjection,  and  received  as  a 
new-born  babe.  We  have  thus  understanding — divine 
wisdom — as  to  our  mind  and  path  ;  so  it  gives  more 
wisdom  than  human  experience,  when  God's  precepts 
are  kept.  It  becomes  a  positive  motive;  it  is  pre- 
ferred to  every  evil  way:  we  leave  them  all  for  that 

u 


298  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

one  which  is  God's  way,  because  the  heart  has  learned 
to  delight  in  that.  We  see,  too,  how  directly  the  soul 
connects  itself  with  God  in  grace  here,  and  has  the 
consciousness  that  it  is  of  God,  gives  the  word  autho- 
rity. "  I  have  not  departed  from  thy  judgments,  for 
thou  hast  taught  me."  This  has  great  weight  in  the 
soul,  when  the  power  of  God's  word  has  been  realized. 
What  has  been  taught  of  man,  may  be  left  for  man; 
but  what  has  been  taught  of  God,  will  never  be  left 
for  God;  and  for  whom  else  shall  we  leave  itl  It 
has  the  bond  of  faith  and  authority  for  the  soul.  It 
comes  from  and  leads  to  Him.  The  soul  returns  to 
the  thought  of  the  sweetness  of  the  word  to  the  taste. 
These  divine  communications  are  the  delight  of  the 
soul.  It  is  not  merely  duty,  though  that  is  owned,  but 
they  are  sweeter  than  honey  to  the  mouth.  .  Through 
God's  precepts  the  heart  itself  is  formed;  learns  to 
discern  good  and  evil.  It  is  not  merely  obedience  to 
a  law,  but  moral  discernment  grown  up  in  the  heart 
and  will.  By  reason  of  use,  the  heart  being  attached 
to  God's  word,  the  senses  are  exercised  to  discern 
good  and  evil,  and  every  false  way  is  hated. 

It  is  remarkable  to  how  many  things  the  word 
applies.  In  the  last  section  the  heart  and  affections 
were  engaged  in  it  for  its  own  sake,  leading  to  wis- 
dom. Now  it  is  a  guide  to  our  path  through  the 
world  in  which  we  walk,  a  very  different  service.  It 
"  is  a  lamp  to  my  feet  and  a  lantern  to  my  path."  This 
it  is.  It  is  the  means  of  a  right  walk,  not  merely 
because  it  sets  the  heart  right,  but  as  casting  light  on 
this  world;  yet  not  merely  light  on  this  world,  such 


THE   PSALMS.— PSALM   (XIX.  299 

ns  it  is,  bul  on  our  path  through  it.  So  Chrisl  does 
not  merely  detect  by  practical  righteousness,  but  he 
thai  follows  Him  has  the  light  <>t'  life.  It  shows  the 
path  of  the  law,  to  us  of  divine  life,  through  the  world. 
But  withal  it  never  loses  the  character  of  obedience. 
Here, of  course,  in  Jewish  form  :  "I  have  sworn  and 
will  perform  it  :  1  will  keep  thy  righteous  judgments." 
Yet  here,  I  think,  with  a  decided  moral  estimate  of 
their  character  in  contrast  with  man  and  the  world. 
It  is  not  testimonies  here,  that  is  for  oneself;  righteous 
judgments  are  the  contrast  of  God's  ways  and  man's 
ways.  He  then  turns  to  his  trials  through  which  this 
path  must  pass.  Affliction  is  here  seen,  not  as  coming 
from  the  hand  of  God,  but  as  affliction.  The  former  ho 
had  to  learn,  and  did  learn,  his  will  being  bound  (see 
ver.  G7,  71,  75).  So  it  was  the  wasting  of  human 
strength  (ver.  81 — 83).  Here  it  is  viewed  as  affliction 
on  the  path  which  was  lighted  up  for  him  by  the  word  ; 
and  he  looks  for  strength  and  revival  through  the 
word  from  God  in  his  soul  in  that  path.  But  the 
desire  of  the  heart  is  not  here  deliverance,  sweet  as  it 
may  be,  but  that,  in  turning  to  God  in  this  path  of 
righteousness,  the  free-will  offerings  of  his  mouth  may 
lie  accepted.  He  can  bring,  as  kept  there,  and  Cod's 
thoughts  in  him,  free  praises  to  God,  that  was  not 
interrupted  though  affliction.  He  was  brought  low — 
had  been  astray,  but  walking  now  in  rectitude  of 
heart,  desired  that  these  outgoings  of  his  heart,  fruit 
of  the  word's  power,  might  lie  accepted.  This  is  all 
right.  If  is  not  (lie  joy  of  present  salvation.  There 
is  all  through  the  consciousness  of  having  been  aBtray  ; 
only  the  heart  is  srt  right.      The  word  has  power  over 


300      PKACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

his  ways;  he  feels  it  as  a  light  in  these  he  has  entered 
on ;  and,  though  in  a  certain  sense  under  the  fruit  of 
his  old  ways,  his  heart  set  right,  can  go  forth  in  praise  ; 
can  it  he  accepted  1  Such  is  his  desire,  and  surely  it 
would  be.  But  the  lowliness  of  the  desire  is  right,  as 
the  desire  itself  is  the  fruit  of  grace.  It  is  not  the 
simple-hearted  praise  of  one  in  known  relationship 
when  it  flows  forth  unhesitatingly  as  the  natural  and 
necessary  fruit  of  blessing.  As  he  praises,  so  he  looks 
to  be  taught  in  God's  ways,  in  contrast  with  evil.' 
Purpose  of  heart  then  characterizes  his  path.  His 
state  of  affliction  and  even  danger  was  great,  his  soul 
was  continually  in  his  hand,  but  this  did  not  alter  his 
purpose,  he  does  not  forget  God's  law.  He  was  not 
so  absorbedly  in  the  danger  as  to  put  this  out  of  his 
mind.  This  is  a  blessed  witness  of  the  power  of  the 
link  with  God  which  grace  gives,  and  how  what  is 
known  of  God,  where  faith  is  in  exercise,  is  paramount 
to  the  strongest  effects  of  chcumstances  and  the  power 
which  Satan  can  exercise  !  What  God  gives  to  the 
soul  is  kept  in  remembrance  in  spite  of  it.  Craft  and 
subtle  wiles  were  in  his  path  ;  and  to  an  upright  mind 
this  is  trying  and  painful,  but  his  feet  were  stedfast  in 
the  way.  They  were  set  in  that  way  to  dishearten  in 
it,  but  the  word  had  its  own  power  within ;  and  the 
full  secret  of  this  was,  he  had  taken  God's  testimonies 
as  his  portion  for  ever.  It  was  not  present  delight 
which  may  influence  the  mind  and  be  lost  as  in  a 
moment ;  it  was  a  divinely-given  estimate  of  the  good 
and  divine  truth  that  was  in  them.  Hence,  when 
really  held  by  grace,  it  abides,  and  is  not  affected  by 
circumstances.      The   terrors  of  the  enemy  and  his 


Till:    PSALMS. — PSALM    CX!X.  301 

wiles  make  the  soul  cling  more  closely  to  what  is  of 
God  and  truth  from  Him.  They  have  been  and  are 
themselves  the  rejoicing  of  the  heart;  only  we  say 
more — "nothing  shall  separate  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  Hence  obedience 
was  the  purpose  of  the  heart,  in  its  continual  prac- 
tice or  as  a  perpetual  bond.  So  indeed  with  us.  Still 
we  say  rather,  "Having  loved  His  own  which  were  in 
the  world,  He  loved  them  unto  the  end."  Yet  even 
that  leads  to  equally  perpetual  obedience  as  our  very 
element  and  state  as  men.     (Ver.  105 — 112.) 

This  section  is  simple  in  its  character.  The  soul 
states  its  own  condition,  but  then  looks  out  to  see 
( Kid's  intervention  according  to  the  word,  hoping  in 
that,  but  withal  apprehends  God's  judgment  on  the 
disobedient.  "I  hate  vain  thoughts,  but  thy  law  do 
I  love" — thoughts,  I  suppose,  of  man's  understand- 
ing and  reasoning,  but  God's  word  he  loved.  The 
soul  thus  turned  to  God  from  man's  reasonings,  God, 
and  <>'od  only,  is  his  hiding-place  and  shield;  he  hopes 
in  His  word.  So  iu  turning  to  men  he  refuses  evil- 
doers, bis  mind  is  made  up,  he  looks  to  be  upholden 
to  the  end,  and  not  disappointed  in  this  hope  founded 
on  the  word.  But  this  desire  is  more  precise;  that  is, 
he  Looks  to  the  Lord  to  hold  him  up  in  the  way,  and 
he  will  be  sale.  He  needs  not  only  to  be  guarded,  but 
kept  morally  upright — God's  strength  and  grace  to 
sustain  him  :  otherwise  the  enemy  would  have  the 
advantage  over  him  ;  but  thus  kept  he  would  constantly 
heed  God's  commandments.  But  he  sees  God's  judg- 
ments on    those   that  went   away    from    them.     That 


302  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

by  which  they  sought  to  beguile  men  turned  out  to 
be  emptiness  and  vanity.  Deceit  is,  as  regards  men, 
falsehood — what  was  vain  and  false  in  itself.  God 
rejected  them  and  treated  them  as  nought — as  dross. 
This  encouraged  the  heart  in  God's  testimonies, 
whose  way  the  heart  had  kept,  in  spite  of  the  wicked 
who  puffed  at  them.  But  there  was  fear,  and  just 
fear,  in  the  prospect  of  these  judgments.  We  indeed 
shall  be  above  them,  taken  out  of  the  hour  of  tempta- 
tion which  shall  come  on  all  the  earth,  but  encouraged 
by  the  word  and  even  by  the  judgment  in  looking  u\> 
to  Him  from  whom  it  came.  And  such  is  ever  the  case 
in  this  psalm.  Nothing  can  be  more  natural  nor  more 
true  than  this  righteous  fear.  The  expression  of  the 
apostle  (how  perfect  is  Scripture  ever !)  in  view  of 
deeper  judgments,  if  less  outwardly  terrible,  shows 
that  while  he  would  not  directly  be  in  it  at  all,  he  was 
not  unconscious  of  it.  "  Knowing  therefore  the  terror 
of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."  It  only  awoke  love 
(for  he  would  not  come  into  judgment),  but  he  knew 
its  solemnity  and  terror.  It  acted  in  sanctifj'ing 
power,  manifesting  him  as  a  present  thing  to  God, 
but  where  one  passed  through  it,  though  not  reached 
by  it,  fear  was  right.  So  "  Noah,  being  warned  of 
God,  moved  with  fear,  prepared  an  ark  for  the  saving 
of  his  house."     (Ver.  113— 120.) 

There  arc  three  points  in  this  section.  He  is 
fully  in  the  presence  of  the  power  of  evil,  his 
regard  is  to  Jehovah  Himself;  the  energy  of  evil  in 
its  moral  character  only  attaches  him  increasedly  to 
God's  word  and  testimonies.     This  is  the  effect  of  near- 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM    (XIX.  303 

i  God,  because  His  presence  keeps  the  heart  free 
and  confident,  and  maintains  the  sense  of  vain 
what  is  in  the  word.     There  is,  T  think, progress  here. 

In  ver.  82,  it  is,  "when  wilt  thou  comfort  me."    This  is 
•    here,     though    Jehovah's    mercy    is    earnestly 

Bought.  He  appeals  on  the  ground  of  righteousness 
to  ( rod's  protection,  but,  with  this,  if  waiting  in  anxious 
for  deliverance,  yet  for  the  word  of  God's  right- 
eousness, mure.  I  think,  than  faithfulness  to  promised 
deliverance,  as  ver.  124  shows.  When  delivered,  his 
heart  would  he  set  free  in  obedience.  But  he  looked  for 
more  than  deliverance,  or  measuring  this  by  the  evil 
be  was  under.  His  heart  had  got  to  God,  and  lie 
looked  to  he  dealt  with  according  to  His  mercy.  This 
is  progress  too,  and,  I  think,  shows  consciousness  of 
integrity  on  which  God  has  set  His  seal  in  the  heart. 
When  under  the  sorrows  of  God's  chastening  hand,  we 
look  for  mercy,  for  deliverance:  grace  and  caring  for 
His  favour  leads  us  to  it.  But  it  is  left  to  Him,  as 
wholly  undeserved;  the  pressure  of  the  power  of  evil 
is  felt  as  deserved,  and  deliverance  from  it  is  mercy 
enough  :  hut  when  this  has  wrought  its  effect,  when 
tlu-  heart  has  hcen  purified  to  think  more  of  God,  and 
His  holiness  and  will,  and  less  of  the  sorrow  and  evil 
from  without,  so  that  it  Bprings  up  from  under  it,  so 
to  speak— when  the  heart  is  morally  restored  (and 
God's  place  in  it  in  contrast  with  the  sorrow  is  just  the 
tesl  of  it),  it  measures  what  it  seeks  for  hy  God,  into 
whose  knowledge',  revealed  within,  it  has,  so  to  speak, 
got  back.  Hence,  in  what  follows,  we  see  the  fruit  of 
this  reconciliation  with,  or  restoration  to,  God.  The 
soul  ha<  got  into  the  place  of  uprightness,  and  it  saj  i, 


304      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

"I  am  thy  servant."  In  such  a  shape  we  have  not 
had  this  yet.  Holy  desires,  confidence,  true  confession 
we  have  had — the  general  expression,  "  Thou  hast 
dealt  well  with  thy  servant."  But  this  is  another 
thing.  He  presents  himself  to  God  directly  as  being 
in  this  relationship  and  place;  "I  am  thy  servant." 
It  is  perfect  submission  but  one  who  holds  the  place, 
God  owning  him  in  it,  and  he  knowing  that  He  does. 
This  is  saying  a  great  deal.  What  a  ground  to  ask 
from  God,  understanding  that  we  may  serve  Him !  For 
what  a  thing  it  is  to  serve  God  rightly  such  as  we  are ! 
No  doubt  it  is  a  great  encouragement  being  able  to  say 
"I  am  thy  servant:"  so  the  parable  of  the  talents, 
where  confidence  in  Him,  who  had  enabled  them  to 
serve,  was  the  spring  of  service.  But  there  all  was 
happy  and  right.  Here  the  soul  was  only  getting 
back  to  say  "  I  am  thy  servant  "  after  long  chastening 
for  wanderings.  Verse  126  shows  the  same  growing 
confidence  and  taking  the  blessed  title  of  one  free 
with  God.  God's  law  is  precious  to  Himself;  not  a 
tittle  can  pass  from  it  till  all  be  fulfilled.  And  when 
the  believer  can  look  out  of  himself,  it  is  a  plea  with 
God.  It  is  time  for  Thee  :  "  they  have  made  void 
thy  law."  What  a  principle  it  is  that  God's  authority 
must  be  maintained,  so  that  the  extreme  of  evil  gives 
the  assurance  of  deliverance.  But  it  makes  God's  law 
exceeding  precious.  The  love  to  the  law  (and  here 
this  is  the  expression  of  God's  will)  grows  with  the 
growth  of  the  power  of  evil.  We  feel  more  how  pre- 
cious it  is,  how  sure  it  is,  how  it  comes  from  God;  and 
what  makes  His  intervention  precious  as  against  the 
power  of  evil,  makes   His  word  precious  against  the 


THE   PSALM& — PSALM  CXIX.  305 

development  of  evil  itself.  There  is  a  double  feeling 
as  to  this.  The  commandments  of  God  arc  loved 
above  all  that  could  be  precious  to  man.  There  is 
decision  of  moral  judgment.  All  God's  precepts  are 
taken  as  absolutely  and  the  whole  of  what  is  right, 
and  every  way  of  vain  falsehood  is  hated.  The  deci- 
sion of  good  and  evil  is  absolutely  by  the  word.  (Ver. 
121—128.) 

The  sold  has  now  got  into  a  place  where  it  not  only 
obeys,  and  tastes  the  goodness  of  the  law,  but  estimates 
its  value  in  itself.  There  is  intelligence.  "Thy  testi- 
monies are  wonderful:  therefore  dues  my  soul  keep 
them."  God's  woids  getting  into  the  heart  give 
Light  :  even  to  the  simple  they  give  understanding. 
Thus  they  become  to  the  heart  the  subject  of  earnest 
;  the  soul  is  engaged  with  the  excellency 
of  them.  It  was  a  thirst  produced  by  them; 
noi  a  filling  of  the  heart,  though  a  desire  formed 
by  them.  There  may  be  intelligence,  obedience  as 
regards  the  path  we  walk  in  on  the  way.  and  hunger 
and  thirst  alter  righteousness,  a  moral  forming  and 
filling  the  desire,  but  the  satisfying  it  will  be  only 
when  the  promises  are  fulfilled  and  God  takes  His 
place,  of  whose  mind  His  testimonies  speak.  So  with 
us,  though  in  a  higher  way.;  for  it  is  Christ,  and  a 
heavenly  cry  Himself.  Hence  the  cry  is  for  this  mercy 
ordering  his  steps,  delivering  from  oppression;  and 
s  he  is  in  the  midst  of  evil — only  looks  for  God's 
face  to  shine  upon  him,  and  to  be  taught.  He  has 
deep  grief,  because  the  law  is  not  kept;  but  this  seems 
tu  flow  more  here  from  the  sense  of  the  excellency  of 


306      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

the  law,  than  from  love  to  the  persons  who  failed. 
(Ver.  129—136.) 

But  the  righteousness  of  God's  law,  and  the  key 
it  gives  to  God's  ways,  leads  to  the  recognition  of 
what  Jehovah  is  who  gave  it.  "  Righteous  art  thou, 
0  Lord,  and  upright  are  thy  judgments."  That  is 
the  way  Jehovah  deals  with  a  case,  or  the  moral 
decision  which  He  utters  as  to  it.  His  testimonies 
He  had  commanded  according  to  righteousness  and 
faithfulness.  This  characterized  them.  The  contempt 
of  Jehovah's  words  had  roused  his  zeal  so  as  to  consume 
him;  he  became  as  an  earnest  adversary,  in  collision 
with  evil  yet  in  power,  as  Christ  in  the  temple.  But 
whatever  the  evil  around,  there  is  in  one  rest  and 
comfort  for  the  heart  Avhen  the  word  of  God  is  known 
and  loved.  "  Thy  word  is  very  pure,"  try  it  ever  so, 
it  is  only  more  proved  to  be  purity  itself;  the  heart 
loves  it  as  its  resting  place  and  joy.  And  it  gives 
greatness  and  courage  to  the  heart.  One  may  be  small 
and  despised,  yet  one  has  the  courage  to  keep  God's 
precepts  in  spite  of  the  power  of  the  world  or  its 
scorn,  for  they  are  God's  words — what  God  is  as  judg- 
ing evil  and  good;  He  is  everlasting.  His  righteous- 
ness is  everlasting,  and  His  law  truth.  It  is  not  here, 
surely,  the  truth  that  came  along  with  grace  by  Jesus 
Christ;  but  in  the  presence  of  all  else  on  the  earth, 
which  is  a  lie,  that  is  truth,  true  religion,  God's  mind 
about  everything,  in  contrast  with  man's  thoughts  and 
all  he  sets  up  to  be ;  and  God  will  make  His  judgment 
therein  revealed,  good  for  ever.  (Comp.  Isaiah  xlii.  3.) 
It  is  not  the  absolute  revelation  of  God  as  He  is;  that 


THE    PSALMS. —  PSALM   CXIX.  :><), 

is  in  Christ,  lint  it  is  the  revelation  of  God's  judg- 
ment as  tn  man  as  to  good  and  evil,  and  that  will  be 
made  good  for  ever.  Executed  judgment  will  be  veri- 
fied. Those  that  have  Binned  against  the  law  will  be 
judged  by  the  law;  just  as  those  that  heard  Christ's 
word  will  be  judged  by  it.  The  tribulation  of  the 
power  of  evil  will  take  hold  of  the  remnant,  but  there 
will  be  the  comfort  of  the  commandments  being  their 
delight  in  the  inner  man.  So  we  in  all  sorrow,  in  the 
evil  day  in  a  vet  higher  way.  And  now  he  arrives  at 
the  point  we  have  touched  upon.  "  The  righteousness 
of  Jehovah's  testimonies  is  everlasting."  They  come 
from  God,  His  will  and  judgment  concerning  man;  and 
that  He  will  make  good  for  ever.  What  he  has  to 
look  for  is  understanding;  then  he  will  live,  guided  in 
the  path  where  life  is  found,  found  even  when  the 
wicked  are  cut  off:  yea,  never  so  found  here  below  as 
then.  This  is  true  of  government  as  to  us,  yea,  even 
of  Christ  ("as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  commandments 
and  abide  in  His  love").  As  to  life,  it  was  in  Him, 
and  in  our  ease  we  have  it  by  Him:  so  all  that  live  ; 
but  it  was  only  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel.  "What 
was  presented  to  them  as  the  governmental  way  of  life, 
and  will  be  so  literally  at  the  end,  is  the  governmental 
way  of  blessing  for  us  here  below.     (Yer.  137 — 11  1.) 

Here  the  soul  expresses,  and  expresses  to  God, 
the  Bense  of  its  depeiidenee.  This  is  an  important 
point.  We  are  dependent,  know  ourselves  to  be 
dependent,  ami  remain  quiescently  bo.  This  shows 
want  of  interest  in  that  for  which  we  are  dependent, 
and  want  of  reckoning  on  God's  faithful  love.      If  we 


308  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

did,  we  should  cry.      "  If  thou  knewest and 

who  it  is thou  wouldest  have  asked,  and  he 

would  have  given."     Here  he   cries  with  his  whole 
heart,  and  declares  his  purpose  of  obedience  to  Jeho- 
vah's enactments.     Then  he  looks  for  deliverance  that, 
having,  he  may  keep  them,  no  hindrance  and  his  heart 
so  disposed.     There  was  diligence  in  the  cry,  too,  for 
the  word,  which  led  his  heart,  was  trusted,  but  it  was 
not  only  for  the  cry  to  be  delivered  he  was  diligent, 
but  to  meditate  in  Jehovah's  word  itself.     Deliverance, 
no  doubt,  was  sought,  but  the  word  itself  is  loved. 
All  this  goes  together  necessarily  in  the  soul.     Deliver- 
ance is  to  be  with  God,  freed  from  transgressors  of  His 
law,   from  rebellious  oppressors.     The  meditation  of 
the  law  is  to  be  with  God,  and  the  word  which  makes 
us  hope  is  the  testimonies  we   delight  in.     Still  he 
looked,  as  we  shall  in  true-heartedness,  in  distress  (so 
did  Christ  Himself),  to  be  heard,  and  according  to  the 
kindness  of  Jehovah,   but  with  the   desire  that  the 
work  of  power  might  be  wrought  in  him,  to  be  quick- 
ened, receive  life  according  to  the  mind  of  God,  that 
is,'  which  had  its  nature  and  desires  according  to  God's 
judgment.      He  does  not  speak  as  dead,  but  of  moral 
quickening.     We  know  it  must  be  a  new  life.     The 
sense  of  the  present  power  of  evil  was  upon  his  soul. 
Jehovah  only  was  his  refuge  he  must  draw  near  to. 
This  is  beautiful,  the  true  only  resource  which  gives  a 
perfect  principle.     "I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord" 
— perfect  submission  to  His  will;  no  deliverance  sought 
until  it  was  so,  till  His  will  brought  it;  but  faith  knew 
Jehovah  was  near  and  the  path  plain.     All  His  com- 
mandments were  the  one  true  path  of  security  and  of 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   CXIX.  300 

God.  Jehovah's  testimonies  were  founded  for  ever. 
They  could  not  change;  they  will  lie  made  good.  Only 
God  must  come  in,  and  that  was  his  cry  and  demand 
here.  These  verses  arc  a  cry  for  deliverance,  but  it 
musi  be,  if  true  and  of  God,  according  to  His  word 
and  making  good  for  ever  its  truth,  in  its  moral  testi- 
monies, and  as  the  foundation  ofhope.    (Ver.  145 — 152.) 

The  soul  of  him  who  opens  out  his  heart  to 
God  is  much  more  in  presence  of  the  persecutors  and 
enemies,  God's  deliverance  and  of  the  need  of 
help,  than  in  the  beginning.  There  what  the  law 
was  for  the,  heart  was  more  in  view.  So  it  ever  is. 
With  < 'hrist  the  word  of  blessing  begins;  at  the  end 
he  is  in  presence  of  the  enemies  and  looks  for  deliver- 
ance. So  Paul:  he  begins  with  carrying  out  of  the 
blessing;  at  the  close  he  has  to  do  with  persecution 
and  desertion  too.  So  ever,  when  good  is  persevered 
in,  because  the  testimony  of  God  in  every  shape  and 
faithfulness  draw  out  opposition,  and  the  place  of  the 
word  in  the  world,  not  in  the  heart,  is  more  distinctly 
felt.  Still  there  is  no  uncertainty  of  heart.  Salva- 
tion is  needed,  i.r.,  present  deliverance,  but  it  is  far 
from  the  wicked.  But  where  righteousness  of  heart 
and  May  is,  the  affliction  is  a  ground  of  pleading  with 
God.  But,  with  deliverance,  quickening  also  is  sought. 
the  practical  power  of  life  according  to  the  word  and 
revealed  judgments  of  God.  Righteousness  is  sought 
in  liberty  and  power  when  righteousness  is  loved  in 
tic  heart.  External  security  in  the  word  is  sou-lit. 
but  internal  power  too.  In  the  thought  of  Jehovah's 
-   quickening    is   sought    according  to 


310      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

God's  judgments.  The  felt  goodness  of  God  leads 
always  to  the  desire  of  His  will.  When  the  purity 
and  blessedness  of  His  word  is  thought  of  with 
delight,  His  lovingkindness  is  thought  of  as  that  in 
which  He  should  quicken  us.  His  word  is  so  precious, 
we  look  to  grace  to  form  us  freely  into  it.  Truth  and 
perpetuity  characterize  the  word.  I  question  whether 
"from  the  beginning"  is  the  sense,  and  if  not  rather 
the  sense  the  whole  contents,  but  cannot  now  say. 
(Ver.  153—160.) 

The  soul  goes  something  further  in  this  por- 
tion. The  heart  stands  in  awe  of  God's  word — a 
godly  feeling.  It  comes  with  God's  authority ;  yet 
he  rejoices  in  it  as  one  that  has  found  great  spoil. 
This,  i.e.,  the  connection  of  these  two,  characterizes 
the  true,  full  apprehension  of  the  word.  It  is  God's — 
a  most  solemn  thing ;  the  soul  trembles,  as  it  is  said, 
"at  thy  word."  It  comes  with  divine  and  absolute 
authority ;  but  as  it  is  God's  word,  and  we  have  a  new 
nature,  and  are  taught  of  God,  we  delight  in  an 
unspeakable  way  in  that  which  is  of  and  reveals  Him. 
Nor  is  there  any  difference  as  to  good  and  evil,  the  law ' 
being  taken  as  the  truth  or  true  measure  of  what  is 
right.  He  hates  and  loves — hates  lying  and  loves  the 
law;  not  merely  what  is  right,  but  God's  authoritative 
expression  of  it.  And  all  this  begets  praise,  because 
the  heart  rises  up  to  the  source  of  these  things.  It  is 
not  merely  that  we  have  what  is  good ;  we  have  it 
from  God.  He  praises  Him  in  the  relationship  he 
was  in  with  Him.  These  are  Jehovah's  ways  with 
His    people.     But    the    expressed    will    of    God   has 


THE    PSALMS.— PSALM  CXIX.  oil 

another  power  when  really  received  :  the  heart  is  in 
peace.     It  is  a  known  perfect  communication  from  God 

with  Which  the  heart  is  satisfied,  and,  if  it  trusts  in 
God,  circumstances  cannot  stumble  the  heart  then, 
because  it  has  and  enjoys  the  mind  of  God  which  no 
circumstances  can  affect.     There  is  no  stumbling.     1 

have  what  is  perfect  from  God,  know  it  to  be  so,  and 
enjoy  it  in  a  new  nature.  That  is  ail'eeted  by  nothing 
without. 

Another  element  of  a  godly  walk  besides  obedience 
is  found  here.  "  All  my  ways  are  before  thee,"  but 
this  leads  naturally  to  obedience  :  but  the  heart  and 
conscience  are  all  before  God.  It  is  a  most  important 
principle.  So  Paid,  "  We  are  made  manifest  to  God  ;" 
only  this  goes  further.  He  looked  at  complete,  final 
judgment  of  men,  and  fur  that  knew  the  righteous- 
ness of  God.  And  it  was  not  merely  his  ways  before 
God  as  to  his  earthly  government.  He  himself  was 
manifested,  as  men  would  be  manifested,  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ,  who  judges  as  Son  of  man — 
perfect,  every  secret  emotion,  the  heart  itself  brought 
out.      (Ver.  1G1— 168.) 

When  men  have  gone  astray,  cries  and  suppli- 
cations  go   first,   praises  and  testimony   after.     Still 

the  cry  and  supplication  is  a  godly  one,  though  it 
arise  from  need.  He  seeks  understanding,  intelli- 
gence, not  exactly  of  the  word,  but  according  to  it. 
It  is  that  wisdom  in  discernment  which  those  taught 
in  God's  word  have.  They  see  clear  in  what  is  before 
them.  No  doubt  it  is  God's  mind  and  will  they  dis- 
cern :   but  they  discern   in  circumstances.      They  walk 


312      PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

not  as  fools,  but  as  wise.  The  word  has  formed  their 
judgment.  Then  the  soul  looks  to  be  heard  and 
delivered.  Still  its  delight  is  in  God's  revealed  will. 
It  will  praise  when  really  taught  them  of  God — for 
thankfulness  comes  first — for  it  is  our  own  portion 
first  of  all ;  and  from  God ;  then  we  have  liberty  to 
speak  of  it  to  others.  This  is  an  important  principle 
also  :  no  testimony,  no  preaching,  no  teaching,  even  if 
the  matter  of  it  be  all  right,  is  right  teaching,  when  the 
soul  is  not  filled  for  itself  first  from  God,  We  must 
drink  for  ourselves  that  rivers  may  flow.  Indeed  all. 
else  dries  up  the  soul.  "That  thy  profiting  may 
appear,"  says  the  apostle.  It  is  only  fresh,  good,  and 
powerful,  when  it  is  the  soul's  own  portion  first  with 
God.  The  help  of  God's  hand,  the  longing  for  His  sal- 
vation, is  not  merely  that  we  may  be  delivered.  That 
may  be  sought,  if  only  it  be  sought,  in  some  bye  way, 
not  God's  way.  But  when  the  heart  is  in  God's  pre- 
cepts, only  God's  salvation  is  sought.  So  Christ :  "  I 
waited  patiently  for  the  Lord."  There  was  submission 
to  God's  will.  God  could  not  come  in  till  His  will  was 
done,  so  that  His  glory  should  be  made  good  in 
coming  in — till  His  counsels  were  fulfilled  and  perfect 
judgment  wrought  by  His  coming  in.  And  this  the 
soul  had  learnt  to  desire,  though  often  out  of  sorrow. 
There  was  Christ's  perfectness  in  this  respect — there 
our  path  in  submissive  uprightness.  Then  the  soul 
praises  God,  God  Himself  in  it,  and  God's  own 
judgments  help  us.  This  is  a  principle  of  great 
perfectness  and  great  blessing.  Yet  here,  though 
brought  to  this,  yea  because  brought  to  this,  the 
people   then — some    when    occasion    arises — acknow- 


THE    PSALMS.— PSALM   cxiX.  313 

ledge  that   they  Bad  gone  astray  (for  that  is  their 
and  is  the  condition  of  the  whole*  Psalm,  the 

law  being  now  written,  in  desire  at  least,  in  their 
hearts),  and  gone  astray  like  a  sheep  wholly  lost.  The 
humbled  and  repentant  remnant  (and,  I  repeat,  we, 
when  we  have  wandered  from  God),  look  for  God's 
:  them,  for  they  were  upright  in  heart,  mindful 
<>f  His  commandments.  This  gives  the  key  to  the 
whole  Psalm — Israel  gone  astray,  the  desire  and  love 
of  God's  law  in  their  hearts,  but  their  eircumstanccs 
and  condition  not  yet  set  right  by  Jehovah's  deliver- 
ance, but  their  hearts  set  right  that  He  may  come  in 
His  word,  and  His  deliverance  being  their  desire,  and 
His  word  the  ground  of  their  hope.  In  the  restoring 
of  any  soul  we  have  an  analogous  process,  specially 
when  under  chastisement.  It  docs  not  seek  comfort 
without  restoration,  where  uprightness  of  heart  is. 
Only  if  we  know  the  Lord,  we  stand  in  Him  as  our 
righteousness.  This  they  could  not  speak  of  as  estab- 
lished or  their  hearts  in  it.  They  were  only  looking 
for  it  when  delivered.  It  had  been  prophesied  of: 
Jehovah  would  be  their  righteousness.  Gracious  and 
true  as  this  is,  our  place  is  infinitely  higher.  (Ver. 
1G9— 17G.) 

I  have  thus  closed  this  running  notice  of  Psalm 
cxix.,  of  which  1  l'eel  the  poverty.  But  I  feel  every 
day  more,  that,  true  and  applicable  as  this  may  all  be 
to  I  he  government  of  our  hearts,  we  arc  far  away 
from  Christian  ground  here.  Nothing  makes  it  more 
le  than  the  Psalms.  Neither  the  Father,  nor 
divine  righteousness,  is  known  in  them,  nor  that  whole 

x 


314       PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

class  of  feelings,  blessed  and  holy  as  those  feelings  are, 
which  flow  from  them.  May  Ave  remember  Ave  are 
Christians  ! 

Psalm  cxx.  These  psalms  of  degrees  all  treat  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  restored  but  undelivered  remnant ; 
our  part  now  is  to  enquire  into  their  moral  bearing. 
The  first  psalm  declares  their  state  and  resource.  "In 
my  distress  I  cried  unto  Jehovah,  and  he  heard  me." 
The  character  of  evil  is  spoken  of :  deceit  and  hostile 
power.  It  was  grief  of  heart  to  have  constantly  to 
say  to  this.  But  such  was  his  condition.  He  was 
dwelling  in  the  midst  of  evil.  It  was  his  sorrow,  and 
distress  to  him.  He  sought  peace :  they  were  for  war. 
It  is  the  spirit  and  chai'acter  of  the  Christian  in  the 
midst  of  the  power  of  evil,  which,  when  called  out  by 
the  presence  of  good,  shows  itself  thus.  Judgment, 
howevei',  would  come  on  the  false  tongue.  It  is  the 
simple  expression  of  the  grief  of  a  soul,  peace-loving 
and  peaceable,  having  to  do  with  the  wicked  deceit  of 
man.     The  resource  is  calling  on  the  Lord,  who  hears. 

Psalm  exxi.  Where  should  the  soul  look"?  To  the 
hills'?  (Comp.  Jer.  iii.  23.)  Help  was  to  be  found  in 
the  Lord.  I  suppose  it  is :  shall  I  look  to  the  hills  1 
My  help  is  in  Jehovah,  and  Jehovah  would  surely  keep 
me.  He  slumbers  not,  nor  sleeps.  The  point  is, 
Direct  me  away  from  all  false  and  vain  hopes,  and  set 
forth  the  one  true  object  and  resource,  surely  to  be 
reckoned  upon,  and  reckoned  upon  to  keep  all  evil 
away.  Only  we  must  now  note  that  the  literal  appli- 
cation of  this  is  not  now  just.       Christ  has  been  reck- 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM   CXXIL,   CXXIII.        315 

oned  among  transgr  id  wc  have  to  go  on  no1 

looking  for  absolute  deliverance:  yet  we  are  to  be 
assured  that  the  hairs  of  our  bead  are  numbered.  God 
withdraws  not  His  <  a  the  righteous  now;  but 

we  do  not  look  in  result  to  be  kept  for  earth,  as  the 
Jew  rightly  will  in  the  path  of  faithfulness.  Yet  our 
Father  dues  watch  over  us  with  unceasing  vigilance. 
We  may  be  at  peace  under  the  shadow  of  His  wings. 
Our  instruction  is,  in  the  midst  of  every  evil,  to  look 
■11 1  v  to  the  Lord. 

Psalm  exxii.  The  Lord's  house,  i.e.,  His  pres<  nee 
and  worship  in  the  place  of  His  rest,  is  our  desire  (for 
us,  heaven).  But  love  to  that  place  of  God's  dwelling 
is  accompanied  by  the  sense  that  all  tins  is  united  in 
blessing.  It  is  loved,  not  only  for  the  Lord's  own 
sake,  the  centre  of  all,  but  for  all  the  saints'  sake,  for 
our  brethren's  and  companions'  sake.  This  cannot  be 
the  first  thing,  but  it  is  the  first  circle  round  the  true 
centre — dove  to  all  saints.  Heaven  is  loved,  but  it  is 
loved  for  the  sake  of  the  dwelling-place  of  Him  with 
whom  we  have  to  do — our  Father's  house.  If  heaven 
r  to  me,  that  is  what  especially  makes  it  so.  We 
desire  even  the  Church's  good  now  for  the  same  n 
We  do  take  our  place  in  heavenly  places.  They  are 
bright  and  holy:  wc  rejoice  in  it.  But  the  house  of 
God  is  the  centre  there  for  our  hearts. 

I'     hnexxiii.    The  heart  waits  on  God  for  deliverance. 
So  we.     There  '  •  on  the  heart  by  the  presence 

of  the  power  of  evil.  We  wait  continually  upon  God 
for  the  coming  of  the  blessed  Lord  to  remove  it  all. 


316  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

The  contempt  of  the  proud  will  cease.     All  will  be 
wholly  changed  to  the  soul's-  rest. 

Psalm  exxiv.  God  alone  keeps  His  people.  The 
great  point  all  through  here  is  to  look  to  Him  alone. 
And  it  is  our  part  along  our  path,  and  specially  in 
these  last  days.  All  other  refuges  will  give  in  some- 
thing or  another.  A  wrong  direction  to  the  soul  will 
lead  it  into  a  false  path,  makes  its  state  less  holy  in 
purpose,  less  pure  and  wise  in  walk.  God  can  make 
use  of  everything,  because  His  motive  to  bless  us  is 
always  in  Himself,  and  He  disposes  of  everything. 
Whereas  we  arc  formed  in  heart  by  the  objects  we 
have,  and  must  adapt  ourselves  to  what  we  lean  on. 

But  then  (Psalm  exxv.)  trusting  in  the  Lord  is  per- 
fectly sure.  A  divine  and  almighty  hand  secures  us. 
"We  know  from  many  passages,  the  Lord  may  see  good 
to  let  us  suffer,  but  not  a  hair  of  our  head  shall  perish. 
"When  His  time  is  come,  the  rod  of  the  wicked  shall 
not  be  on  the  lot  of  the  righteous.  He  may  let  us 
suffer  for  our  God,  or  for  His  name's  sake ;  but  even 
so  it  is  not  according  to  the  will  and  power  of  the 
wicked,  but  according  to  His  own.  Only  this  sup- 
poses one  walking  in  His  ways. 

Psalm  exxvi.  We  find  here  a  partial  restoration, 
leading  to  look  for  full  blessing.  God  may  have  deliv- 
ered the  soul,  too,  from  the  alienation  and  sorrow  of 
its  evil  days,  when  it  has  gone  wrong,  backslidden, 
without  its  being  yet  fully  restored.  God  comes  in 
in   goodness   on   repentance,    encourages    us,    brings 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM    CXXVI.  ol7 

Qga  we  neve;-  could  have  hoped  for,  re-establishes 
the  bouI  in  the  place  of  blessing,  makes  His  favour  so 
far  manifest,  bo  that  we  feel  Be  is  for  us  with  great  joy. 
Yet  it  is  not  the  peaceful  How  of  favour  in  communion 
with  Him,  as  if  there  was  nothing  but  favour  naturally 
enjoyed  in  the  place  we  are  in.  Just  as  to  Jacob  a1 
Peniel,  God  blessed  him,  but  would  not  reveal  His 
name— blessed,  bul  did  not  reveal  Himself.     Tin 

the  blessing  from  God,  finds  so  far  His  favour; 
but  it  is  not  in  communion,  nor  does  it  receive  the 
communication  of  what  He  is,  so  as  to  he  able,  going 
forth  from  Him  into  the  world,  to  be  a  witness  for 
Him  in  it.  This  is  our  true  place.  Xo  doubt  to  be 
I  and  restored,  when  we  have  gone  astray,  is 
great  mercy  ;  hut  our  place  is  to  be  peacefully  in  com- 
munion  where  God  has  set  us  with  Himself,  and  thus 
the  vessels  of  His  revelation  of  Himself  to  others. 
And  this,  in  the  Jewish  form  of  it,  is  what  our  psalm 
expresses.  But  there  is  another  principle  also.  In  a 
world  where  the  power  of  evil  is,  sowing  time,  in  which 
we  meet  the  evil  in  possession  with  the  word,  is  a  time 
"I'  tears.  "I  have  given  them  Thy  word,  and  the 
world   hath  hated  them."      (John  xvii.)      Christianity 

own  in  tlie  tears  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  the  fruit 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul  which  He  will  see  in  that  day. 
So  in  all  service  (and  we  must  make  up  our  minds  to 
it),  where  there  is  to  be  real  blessing,  there  niiiM  he 
the  soi-row  of  the  world's  opposition,  and  even  in  the 
Church  the  greater  Borrow  of  trials,  of  failure  and 
shortcoming  where  we  desire  to  see  Christ  fully  repre- 
sented. But,  going  forth  with  the  precions  word. 
we  may  reckon  on  bringing  our  sheaves  hack  with  us. 


318       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

Psalm  cxxvii.  This  psalm  tells  us  that  God  alone 
gives  the  increase.  All  labour,  all  toil  is  vain,  except 
the  Lord  Himself  and  His  hand  be  in  it  to  work  and 
bless ;  as  the  people  said  of  Jonathan,  he  hath  wrought 
with  God  this  day.  But  thus  the  diligent  efforts  of 
evil-doers  result  in  nothing,  and  (blessed  be  His 
name  !)  He  gives  rest  and  peace  to  His  beloved  with- 
out all  the  toil  and  labour  with  which  the  reckless 
men  of  this  world  seek  it  in  vain. 

Psalm  cxxviii.  Bat  if  the  Lord's  blessing  alone  can 
keep  or  give  success,  they  who  fear  the  Lord  can 
count  upon  it.  And  this  is  true.  It  does  not  exclude 
persecution,  nor  does  it  exclude  discipline  and  the 
exercise  of  faith.  But  when  Ave  walk  in  the  fear  of 
God,  we  are  in  the  path  of  peace  even  here.  "Who 
is  he  that  shall  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that 
which  is  good?"  It  does  not  mean  a  prosperity 
which  consists  in  gratifying  our  lusts,  but  in  the 
peaceful  enjoyment  of  divine  favour  here  below.  But 
there  is  one  joy  above  all  others,  here  spoken  of  as  the 
then  fruit  of  godliness — the  seeing  the  Lord's  people, 
and  the  Lord's  habitation,  in  prosperity  and  peace, 
manifestly  blessed  of  God.  This,  as  regards  this 
world,  is  the  highest,  most  constant  wish  of  the  heart. 
Blessing  shall  come  to  us  out  of  God's  dwelling-place, 
the  place  of  faith  on  the  earth,  before  the  final  temple 
of  glory  is  built  and  Ave  see  blessing  resting  on  it. 
The  details  arc,  of  course,  Jewish,  present  outward 
blessings.  This  is  the  final  blessing  promised  in  the 
place  of  distress.  And  on  this  faith  counts  in  the 
evil  day  and  time  of  distress.     Joyful  to  receive  any 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM    (XXIX.  319 

anticipation  of  it  in  the  Church  of  Cod  now,  and  in 
this  detail  it  applies  now,  we  know  that  the  peace 
will  be  perfed  when  God  shall  have  accomplished 
His  counsels.     We  do  look  for  it  before,  but  we  are 

of  it-then,  for  He  wills  the  blessing  of  the  Church. 
Zion  is  the  place  of  faith.  It  is  not  the  temple  on 
Moriah,  but  where  David  placed  the  ark  when  he  had 

lit  it  hack.  The  Lord  is  owned  there.  So  we; 
we  have  the  blessing  in  the  scat  of  grace  in  power ;  wc 
shall  have  perfect  rest. 

Psalm  exxix.  The  soul  looks  hack  and  sees  God's 
faithful  dealings  all  along  the  mad — a  blessed  thought ! 
How  sweet  it  is  to  turn  hack  and  see,  while  we  were 
obliged  to  walk  by  faith,  and  it  was  as  though  He 
beheld  not,  the  eye  of  the  Lord  has  unceasingly  waited 
on  us  and  ordered  all  things!  It  is  the  effect  of 
rity  1"  be  able  to  do  this.  It  is  true  that  he  who 
could  say,  "  Few  and  evil  have  been  the  days  of  the 
years  of  the  life  of  my  pilgrimage,"  could  also  say, 
"The  angel  that  redeemed  me  from  all  evil."  And  it 
;-  blessed  to  see  His  faithfulness,  even  when  we  have 
failed,  when  our  unrighteousness  commends  the 
righteousness  of  God.  Still,  it  is  another  thing  when 
in  the  path  of  Cod  through  trials  and  difficulties 
(perhaps  doubts  and  fears  of  success  as  to  service  and 
making  good  what  was  committed  to  us),  wc  can  trace 
i!i     good  hand  of  Cod  all  through.      And  here  sorrow 

and  trial  are  looked  at,  the  hostility  of  God's  enemiee 
against  Cod's  people.  Bu1  it  was  in  vain.  God, 
even  if  He  had  ohastised,  had  been  faithful,  and  now 
had   manifested    His    righteousness,    faithful   to   His 


320  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

own  ways  and  promises,  the  expectation  He  had 
raised,  the  trust  He  had  called  for.  He  had  cut 
asunder  the  cords  of  the  wicked.  We  may  expect  it. 
He  will  chastise  if  needed,  though  He  does  not  afflict 
willingly;  but  He  will  make  good  the  expectation  of 
faith,  He  will  deliver  and  bless ;  and  the  expectation 
of  the  proud  shall  be  as  the  grass  upon  the  housetop. 

Psalm  exxx.  The  last  psalm  considered  the  sorrow 
and  suffering  of  those  that  are  the  Lord's,  and  the 
pleasure  of  the  wicked  in  their  oppression.  This 
refers  to  the  chastisement  and  evil  to  which  I  have 
alluded  above  in  commenting  on  it.  The  sorrows 
have  tbeir  character  to  the  soul,  not  in  the  oppression 
of  the  wicked,  but  in  the  consciousness  of  sin  with 
God.  The  oppression  is  unrighteous,  the  pleasure  of 
wickedness ;  but  while,  when  God  restores,  we  can 
see  this,  yet  restoration  is  with  God  and  in  looking 
to  His  mercy,  owning — and  yet  in  spite  of  what  we 
have  deserved — and  looking,  with  a  heart  which  has 
the  sense  of  its  sin,  to  His  deliverance.  For  here  it 
is  not  forgiveness  in  the  sense  of  justification,  though 
allied  to  it,  but  of  government.  But  it  is  the  ques- 
tion of  the  Lord's  marking  iniquity,  not  of  oppression, 
though  that  were  the  outward  rod  that  brought  ini- 
quity upon  the  soul  from  God's  hand.  But  the  Lord 
is  cried  to.  No  turning,  to  gain  release,  to  the 
oppressor ;  that  is  in  character  apostacy,  and  accepting 
the  power  of  evil  and  making  terms  with  it.  The 
soul  is  in  the  depths,  but  it  refers  it  in  integrity  to 
its  sin,  cries  to  the  Lord  in  faith  as  one  who  forgives ; 
waits  for  the  Lord  to  come  in  when  He  is  pleased,  so 


THE   PSALMS.— PSALM   CXXXL,  (XXXII.      ! 

as  that  the  deliverance  is  righteous,  and  His  favour 
too,  and  His  word  is  trusted  in.  "Lot  Israel  hope 
in  the  Lord,"  he  concludes,  and  this  glorifies  His 
character  as  above  evil  and  Himself  good;  and  till 
deliverance  has  that  character,  it  is  nut  looked  for. 
With  Him  Is  mercy  and  plenteous  redemption  j  mercy 
to  the  faulty  soul  and  plenteous  redemption.  Thus 
1  here  is  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and  God's  true 
character  and  His  active  power  in  complete  deliver- 
ance are  known.  How  far  better  than  compromise 
with  evil  i 

Psalm  exxxl*  gives  us  another  character  of  the 
returning  soul — the  soul  right  with  God.  It  is  not 
speculative  or  haughty  in  mind,  does  not  re; 
matters.  It  walks  in  meekness  as  a  weaned  child 
and  waits  for  deliverance  :  it  hopes  in  the  Lord.  But 
activity  of  mind  as  to  what  ought  to  be  and  manag- 
ing matters,  which  are  really  in  God's  hand,  does  not 
go  together  with  true  hoping  in  Him  in  lowlim 
heart.  And  this  is  often  a  great  trial  of  faith  when 
we  see  the  power  of  evil. 

Psalm  exxxii.  This  psalm  is  important  as  showing 
the  position  which  all  these  psalms  of  degrees  occupy. 
We  have,  indeed,  the  house,  as  in  Psalms  exxii;  and 
exxvii.,  the  former  of  which  seems  to  refer  to  the 
temple;  yet  I  think  hardly  there  as  yet  accepted  and 
built  of  God,  as  Psalm  exxvii.  shows.  The  remnant 
were  rejoiced  at  the  thought  of  going  to  the  house  and 
Jerusalem,  and  we  have  it  clothed  with  the  thoughts 
of  faith.      lint  the  Lord  had  not  vet  built  it.      For  all 


322       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

the  songs  of  degrees  are  the  expi-ession  of  the  godly 
ones'  thoughts  and  feelings  between  their  external 
restoration,  when  the  sonr  grape  is  ripening  in  the 
flower  (Isaiah  xviii.),  and  the  full  restoration  to  the 
Lord's  enjoyed  blessings,  their  enemies  being  cut  off 
by  judgment.  It  is  all  Isaiah  xviii.,  but  with  this  we 
have  Zion  and  David — the  interference  of  power  in 
grace,  connecting  the  hearts  of  the  remnant  with  Jeho- 
vah as  a  present  thing,  and  giving  the  present  testi- 
mony that  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  For  David 
placed  the  ark  on  Mount  Zion,  and  had  this  song  first 
sung  after  the  ark  had  been  delivered  from  the  Philis- 
tines, and  brought  up  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom. 
Israel  in  responsibility  had  failed,  and  God  had  deliv- 
ered His  strength  into  captivity,  and  His  glory  into 
the  enemies'  hand.  Now,  it  was  brought  out,  and 
sovereign  grace,  for  His  name's  sake  (first  by  a  prophet, 
and  next  properly  by  power  in  grace,  by  a  king),  acted 
in  behalf  of  Israel,  and  gave  a  new  link  and  ground  of 
relationship  in  the  ark  on  Mount  Zion.  This  was  not 
the  temple,  the  place  of  settled  peace  and  prosperity  ; 
but  it  was  a  link  with  God  renewed  to  faith,  David 
being  the  centre.  David's  son,  as  the  true  Solomon, 
would  give  in  time  the  full  blessing;  for  David  did  not, 
after  all,  build  the  house.  So  the  place  of  rest  here  is 
in  the  heart  and  in  hope;  what  we  have  is  the  person 
on  whom  the  blessing  is  founded.  (Compare  2  Sam.  vii. 
and  1  Chrou.  xvii.)  We  have  David  brought  before  us 
as  the  great  dispensational  root  and  characteristic, 
consequently  of  the  blessing,  but  the  house  is  the 
subject,  a  dwelling-place  for  the  mighty  one  of  Jacob. 
Hence,  also,  it  is  not  wilderness  blessings.     It  is  not, 


THE    PSALMS.— PSALM    C'XXXIL  323 

'•  Rise  up,  Jehovah,  and  let  thine  enemies  be  scattered;'' 
and,  "Return,  "  Lord,  to  the  man}-  thousands 
of  [srael."  (Numb.  x.  3,  5,  G.)  It  is  "Arise,  (> 
Jehovah,  into  thy  rest,  thou  and  the  ark  of  thy 
Btrength."  It  is  Zion  which  is  God's  rest  forever. 
This  it  is  He  has  chosen;  there  He  will  make  the  horn 
of  David  to  lmd.  The  person  of  David's  Son,  royal 
grace  in  Zion,  is  thus  what  characterizes  the  blessing. 
Whatever  house  is  built,  David  ami  his  trouble  is 
remembered,  m>t  Solomon  the  typical  son  of  David, 
and  his  house.  In  truth,  Solomon's  faith  was  person- 
ally every  way  inferior,  lie  went  to  Gibcon,  not  to 
Zion;  to  the  empty  tabernacle,  not  to  the  ark  until 
afterwards.  David's  heart  was  on  the  honse.  It  was 
all  right.  But  God  built  his  as  He  replied  to  him.  It 
is  the  personal  grace  of  Christ  that  is  the  centre  of 
all,  and  the  faith  that,  when  the  outward  blessing  was 
not  yet  there  in  peace,  formed  the  true  link  with  (Jed. 

What  a  blessing  for  the  remnant  then,  and  this  is  in 
principle  our  case  now,  and  especially  in  these  latter 
days!  His  tabernacle  and  His  footstool  are  more  than 
the  temple.  Hence,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Heb 
the  tabernacle,  never  the  temple,  is  taken  as  the  figure 
and  shadow  of  the  blessings  of  faith,  though  not  so 
the  very  image.  Still  Cod's  rest  is  desired,  i.e.,  that 
Mr  should  rest,  and  so  we  worship  in  His  h( 

Let  us  Bee  a  little  in  what  particulars  this  is  broughl 

out.      The  answer  of  Cod  is  in  everything  beyond  the 

There  are  three  requests.     The  first  is  thai 

Jehovah  should  arise  into  His  rest,  that  Jehovah'- 
priests  may  he  clothed  with  righteousness.  This 
became  them,  it  was  the  right  desire.      The  righteous 


32-4  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   OX 

Lord  loveth  righteousness.  His  countenance  beholds 
the  upright.  How  often  had  they  been  otherwise !  The 
second  is,  that  Jehovah's  favour  and  blessing-  might 
be  such  that  the  saints  might  shout  for  joy.  The 
third  is,  that  for  David's  sake  Jehovah  should  not  turn 
away  the  face  of  His  anointed.  As  to  David  there  is 
the  positive  promise,  and  the  conditional  one.  The 
answer  then  comes.  Zion  will  be  His  rest  for  evei\ 
He  hath  desired  and  chosen  it;  her  priests  will  be 
clothed  with  salvation,  her  saints  shout  aloud  for  joy. 
There  the  horn  of  David  will  bud,  his  crown  nourish 
on  him — the  true  David  and  David's  Son,  the  Beloved. 
And  now  note  the  principles.  The  afflictions  of  faith 
are  the  true  path  of  blessing.  A  rest  for  God  is  the 
desire  of  the  new  nature;  for  sin,  disorder  only  has 
disturbed  that  rest,  and  note  that  rest  which  has  its 
place  in  His  relationship  with  His  creatures,  for  in 
Himself  He  ever  rests;  but  He  must  rest  in  holiness 
and  love,  in  the  state  of  the  creatures,  with  whom  He 
has  to  do,  being  according  to  His  mind  and  love. 
This  the  heart  desires.  It  is  God's  rest,  nor  can  the 
heart  rest  till  then.  But  this  is  according  to  the  wTay 
of  His  presence;  in  Israel  covenant-promise  and 
governmental  glory;  for  us  our  Father's  house,  God's 
rest  according  to  His  own  nature,  holy  and  without 
blame  before  Him  in  love,  and  in  glory.  That  it  is  in 
the  Beloved,  the  true  David,  the  Anointed,  the  Christ 
— this  both  secures  and  gives  the  true  character  of  the 
blessedness  in,  with,  and  like  Him.  But  note,  that 
simplicity  of  faith,  its  proper  energy,  leaning  not  on 
the  past  which  is  ruined  or  to  be  forgotten,  but  on 
what  is  before  us  as  its  object  and  on  only  dependence, 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   CXXXII.  325 

on  divine  leading  as  to  it — simplicity  of  faith,  wrought 
as  it  is  by  God,  leads  into  the  place  of  God's  desire 
and  Cod's  election.  David  brought  the  ark  to  Zion, 
hut  Zion  God  had  chosen,  bad  desired  for  His  habita- 
tion. This  in  us  is  identified  with  a  new  creature. 
made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.  Tn  this 
faith  lives,  and  acts,  and  judges.  It  is  in  the  saint  a 
new  nature,  living  on  Christ  as  its  object  and  food. 
And  it  learns  and  knows  the  place  of  God's  rest  herein. 
For  David  and  Zion  are  really  identified  each  in  its 
own  way  with  one  another.  Thus  our  new  nature. 
God's  desire,  God's  election,  God's  rest,  and  Christ 
Himself  all  coincide.  But  the  place  of  Christ's  glory, 
which  is  Cod's  rest,  where  lie  dwells,  Cod  owns  as  His 
for  ever.  "This  is  my  rest.''  And  faith  looks  at  all 
connected  with  it,  priests  and  saints  as  Cod's — "thy 
priests"  and  "thy  saints."  But  then  He,  taking 
Christ  for  the  resting  place  of  His  glory,  and  con- 
templating the  place  of  His  dwelling  and  rest  and 
habitation  (i.e.,  for  us,  the  Church  which  is  His  habita- 
tion, His  tabernacle,  His  city  holy  Jerusalem) — He 
baying  thus  so  associated  Himself  with  her  (comp. 
Eph.  iii.  21;  and  Rev.  xxi.  3),  looks  at  the  priests  and 
saints  as  her  priests  and  her  saints,  thus  specially 
BhowingHis  delight  ill  her.  His  identification  with  her. 
ilis  priests  are  her  priests,  His  saints  her  saints,  as  thai 
to  which  they  belong.  Then  it  is  He  sets  up  the  glory 
of  David's  born;  the  glory  of  the  power,  and  rule  of  the 
Beloved;  and  this  (while  David  is  the  foundation,  His 
everlasting  glory  the  result)  is  the  subject  of  the  Psalm 
Zion  l'"i-  us,  the  Church,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem. 
This  is  His  rest,  His  dwelling  place  forever,  His  desire. 


326       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

what  He  has  chosen.  And  if  He  fully  glorifies  His 
Anointed,  as  He  will  and  must  do,  it  is  there  He  will 
do  it.  Though  His  name  flourish  in  Himself  (for  His 
person  must  be  the  ground  and  centre  of  glory),  yet 
its  place  is  in  the  city  of  grace  and  glory.  Her  priests, 
her  saints  will  have  salvation  and  abundant  joy.  One 
cannot  say  her  David  or  her  Christ;  that  would  be  oxit 
of  place.  His  dignity  is  onr  personal  glory,  but  it 
dwells  here  as  the  place  with  which  it  is  associated, 
and  all  the  rest  can  be  called  hers.  The  glory  is  His, 
the  place  of  it  the  chosen  city  of  God — for  us,  the 
( 'liurch,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem. 

There,  too  (Psalm  cxxxiii.),  blessing  and  unity  are, 
but  here  after  the  analogy  of  Aai-on;  the  lowest  skirt 
of  his  garment  partakes  of  the  anointing  of  the  head, 
and  this  one  Spirit  makes  the  unity  according  to  which 
(Eph.  iv.  3)  they  ought  to  dwell  together.  The  bless- 
ing, too,  was  there.  The  abundant  dew  of  Hermon, 
i.e.,  abundant  as  on  Hermon,  fell  upon  the  mountain  of 
Zion.  This  fellowship  was  rich  in  blessing  from  above, 
as  the  desired  refreshing  of  abundant  dew  fell  in  the 
everlasting  hills.  For  in  Zion  Jehovah  had  promised 
the  blessing.  The  anointing  of  the  Lord,  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  the  refreshing  of  goodness  from  on  high  in 
abundance,  shall  accompany  the  unity  of  Israel  in  Zion. 
How  far  more  deeply  true  was  it  on  the  Church,  when 
the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  His  full  ministra- 
tion of  grace  by  the  word  revealing  heavenly  things 
enriched  and  gladdened  the  unity  in  Christ  which  that 
Spirit  formed !  Alas,  where  is  it  now  1  Yet  it  is  our 
privilege. 


THE  PSALMS.— PSALM   <  XX  XIV.  32  t 

These  psalms  of  degrees  close  by  a  summons  to  bless 
Jehovah.  (Ps.  exxxiv.)  There  in  the  Banctuary  they 
were  to  bless;  on  the  other  hand  blessing  is  pronounced 
out  of  Zion  upon  him  who  1ms  gone  through  the  sorrows 
and   endured.     It    is    Bielchisedec  bles  nly  in 

Jehovah's  sanctuary,  and  out  of  Zion  where  grace  has 
set  power  to  bless.  It  is  the  full  crowning  expression 
of  the  result  of  these  psalms;  the  points,  able  to  Mess 
.Jehovah  in  His  own  sanctuary,  and  the  godly  man 
blessed  out  of  long  desolate  Zion— but,  where  Jehovah 
HOW  dwells.  The  city  over  which  Jesus  could  wee}), 
■  dust  Jehovah's  servants  bail  remembered,  was 
now  the  seat  of  Jehovah's  sanctuary,  and,  what  was 
more,  of  Jehovah's  presence.  This  will  not  bo  fully 
ours  till  we  are  in  our  Father's  house.  But  then, 
though  praise  will  surely  go  up  unceasingly,  we  shall 
not  have  need  to  call  on  others  to  bless.  "We  are  kings 
and  priests,  as,  indeed,  we  bless  now  as  such  in  spirit, 
and  as  more  than  that,  as  dear  children,  holy  and 
beloved.  It  is  in  the  holiest  of  all,  where  no  Jewish 
priest  could  enter  to  bless  even  in  figure,  that  we  stand 
in  reality,  and  bl<  Him  in  whose  presence  and  light 
tand  there.  Night  we  cannot  say  then,  for  "there 
shall  be  no  night  there;''  now  we  praise  in  Spirit  here, 
savin--,  "  the  night  is  far  spent."  And  as  to  our  souls, 
the  darkness  passes,  the  true  light  now  shines.  But 
it  is  in  the  holiest  we  bless,  in  God's  own  presence, 
and  hence  in  heaven.  We  may  well  say  He  has  set  us 
in  a  wealthy  place.  And  while  on  earth  it  will  then 
be  Jehovah  the  Creator  who  will  bless  out  of  the  chosen 
place  of  grace  in  power,  He  who  gives  eternal  life,  and 
in  whose  knowledge  it  is  possessed,  blesses  us  as  brought 


323       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

home  into  the  possession  of  it,  in  the  seat  of  the 
unclouded,  knowledge  of  it,  Avhere  what  He  is,  as  the 
power  and  source  of  it,  is  fully  displayed.  To  knew 
thc  Father  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  has  sent  is  eter- 
nal life.  The  Father  has  life  in  Himself,  and,  iu  the 
Son,  man  here  below  has  life.  He  was  it  with  the 
Father  before  the  world.  We  have  it  in  Him,  and 
there  in  that  which  that  life  is,  and  therefore  enjoys, 
as  a  holy  being  enjoys  holiness,  a  loving  being  love,  we 
shall  possess  the  divine  fulness  iu  God  of  that  which 
we  delight  in.  And  it  is  the  God  of  redeeming  love, 
the  Father  and  the  Son,  not  simply  the  Creator  of 
heaven  and  earth.  Such  is  our  place.  "We  enjoy  it 
now  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  it  is  now  but  in  earthen 
vessels.  Still  we  are  called  to  be  "holy  and  without 
blame  before  Him  in  love,"  and  children  with  the 
Father,  and  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and  with 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  The  accomplishment  of  promises 
in  grace  is  much,  the  enjoyment  of  communion  is  more. 
The  Psalms  of  degrees  are  the  progress  of  Israel  in  the 
land,  out  of  sorrow  and  through  sorrow,  to  the  full 
blessing  in  Zion,  which  forms  the  crowning  result. 
Jehovah  being  there. 

Psalm  exxxv.  gives  the  more  general  praise  of  Israel, 
not  so  much  priestly  praise,  but  then  it  consequently 
brings  out  the  place  of  the  people  as  such  with  God. 
They  are  in  the  courts  of  God,  there  as  His  people, 
praise  Him,  for  He  is  good,  and  it  is  pleasant.  We  do 
praise  Him  as  priests  in  the  sanctuary.  But  we  praise 
Him  also  as  on  earth  in  the  sense  of  His  goodness, 
'  and  praise  is  pleasant.     His  name  is  known ;  that  is. 


THE    ISA  I. MS. — PSALM   CXXXV.  329 

His  revelation  of  Himself,  so  as  to  be  known  to  us. 
But  there  is  more  :  we  sing,  as  we  do  all  else,  as  the 
elect  of  Cod,  holy  and  beloved — an  immense  privilege. 
It  is  not  only  that  God  is  good,  what  He  is  in  nature; 
but  we  are  the  special  objects  of  His  favour  and 
it.  This,  when  known,  is  an  immense  delight. 
As  people  of  God  we  know  it,  and  for  ourselves  as  part 
of  it,  but,  when  personally  brought  home,  it  is  of  divine 
delight  to  be  the  peculiar  treasure  of  God,  and  thai 
not  as  a  national  election  but  according  to  His  own 
nature,  the  personal  objects  of  His  delight.  It  is 
known,  it  is  evident,  as  of  pure  grace.  It  is  what  gives 
it  its  value.  Faith  recognizes  it  as  true,  rests  in  it. 
It  is  a  doctrine  of  Scripture — the  faith,  but  in  relation- 
ship it  is  great  delight.  But  we  know  withal  that  He 
is  great,  and  though  we  know  Him  as  Father,  yet  we 
do  know  Him,  realize  His  presence,  as  exceeding  great, 
and  as  supreme  above  all  ;  and  the  heart  delights  in 
this.  Our  God  is  above  all.  It  is  more  general  for 
us  than  for  all  Israel  who  could  speak  of  other  gods, 
but  the  absoluteness  and  supremacy  of  God  for  the 
heart  remains  true.  He  is  sovereign  in  His  actings 
everywhere,  a  comfort  when  we  have  to  traverse  in 
weakness  a  world  of  wickedness.  He  disposes  of 
everything.  He  has  smitten  the  power  of  evil  and 
brought  out  His  people,  and  brought  them  into  a 
heavenly  inheritance  whence  the  powers  of  darkness 
arc  expelled.  This  is  true  for  us  now,  as  in  Kphcsians 
iv.  and  Oolossians  ii.,  though  not  for  the  possession  of 
tin'  inheritance.  And  we  reckon  fully  on  the  final 
result.  And  it  is  looked  for  presently,  though  no  day  Or 
hour  be  known.     This  as  to  Israel  is  broughl  out  here 

Y 


330      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

in  a  remarkable  passage.  The  original  promise  in  which 
God  appeared  to  Moses  as  taking  lip  Israel  for  ever 
in  grace,  His  name  of  memorial  for  ever,  is  cited; 
and  the  prophetic  declaration  in  Deuteronomy  xxxii.  of 
what  He  would  do  when  Israel  had  wholly  utterly  failed 
— judge  His  people  and  repent  Himself  concerning 
His  servants.  The  idols  are  nought.  It  is  in  the  place 
of  royal  rest  that  praise  is  found,  the  Jerusalem  where 
Jehovah  dwells.  And  so  for  us,  the  Church  and  even 
the  individual  saint  knows  itself  as  the  heavenly 
dwelling-place  of  God,  the  bride ;  and  now  we  dwell  in 
Him  and  He  in  us,  as  we  know  by  the  Spirit,  and 
collectively  too  are  buildcd  together  for  an  habitation 
of  God  through  the  Spirit ;  but  it  is  as  a  new  heavenly 
thing,  as  that  which  is  heavenly,  as  that  which  remains. 

Psalm  exxxvi.  celebrates  a  blessed  principle  in  con- 
nection with  Zion,  the  place  of  sovereign  grace  in 
power.  Our  having  the  place  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving depends  on  this,  that  His  mercy  endures  for 
ever.  Ichabod  had  been  written  on  Israel;  the  ark 
where  the  blood  was  to  be  placed  on  the  day  of  atohe- 
men,  that  Israel  might  have  a  place  with  God,  was 
taken — as  far  as  Israel  Avent,  lost.  But  God's  mercy 
endures  for  ever,  and  David,  so  soon  as  he  sets  the  ark 
on  Zion,  establishes  this  song  there,  celebrating  the 
alone  Jehovah,  the  creator  and  wonder-doer  of  His 
people.  His  mercy  does  endure  for  ever  for  us.  Christ 
and  the  Father's  love  in  every  way  secure  our  blessing 
and  ourselves  for  it.  But  while  glory  awaits  us,  and  He 
will  confirm  us  to  the  end,  we  possess  that  in  which 
He  confirms  us,  even  eternal  life  as  His  children.     The 


TUE  PSALMS. —  PSALM  CXXXVII.,  (XXXVIII.    331 

life  we  have  and  know  it,  the  inheritance  we  have 
nothing  of  aa  yet,  but  arc  assured  of  and  being  kept  for 

it.  And  in  this  wilderness  we  can  abundantly  say, 
His  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  But  it  is  only  along  the 
road  we  say  it,  because  wc  have  eternal  life.  Only  if 
a  soul  wanders  from  Him  and  is  restored,  it  can  say 
with  special  application,  His  mercy  endures  for  ever. 

Psalm  exxxvii.     There  is  a   double  application   of 

this  to  our  souls.  Nothing  can  make  us  forget  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  house  where  Cod  and  the 
Lamb  are  the  temple,  and  where  they  dwell.  All  the 
glory  of  the  world  is  nothing  compared  with  that 
heavenly  home.  But  the  Church  on  earth,  which  will 
he  it  in  glory,  arrests  our  hearts ;  we  see  it  desolate 
and  her  walls  cast  down,  her  children  scattered  or  in 
captivity.  But  the  saint's  heart  is  still  there.  The 
outward  worldly  glory  of  Babylon  cannot  efface  the 
attachment  and  love  of  heart  to  the  Church  as  God 
founded  it  on  earth;  and  even  the  judgment  of  those 
who  corrupted  it  is  looked  for  with  joy  by  the  Chris- 
tian. Hut  of  the  individuals  a  Christian  could  not 
do  that — it  would  be  revenge — but  of  the  whole 
power  of  evil. 

Psalm  exxxviii.  Bu1  the  enduring  of  Cod's  mercy 
for  ever  brings  out  a  blej  ed  apprehension  in  the 
heart  of  many  other  truths,  which  make  Cod's  charac- 
ter known,  and  His  word  precious  as  revealing  it 
and  as  sure,  BO  thai  the  whole  heart  praises.  And 
this  is  a  very  important  element.     Not  will  for 

ing.  not  even  thankfulness  for  that  which  we  do 


H32      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

desire,  while  the  main  current  of  the  heart  is  else- 
where than  with  God ;  but  such  a  learning  of  God  as 
makes  the  whole  heart  praise  Him,  and  this  is  always 
in  circumstances  which  makes  the  whole  heart  want 
Him  (as  it  will  be  with  Israel  in  the  latter  day). 
This  may  be  learnt  gradually  by  emptying  of  self,  or 
in  times  of  deep  trial  when  help  fails,  and  thus  self  is 
broken  up  within.  Hence,  too,  when  God  is  thus 
known,  He  is  praised  in  presence  of  all  the  pretentious 
power  of  this  world,  which  seemed  to  make  those  that 
leaned  upon  it  happy  and  enriched.  We  praise  with 
the  whole  heart,  we  praise  before  the  gods,  all  within  ; 
all  without  has  given  place  to  God  known  and 
revealed  in  His  word.  Lovingkindness  and  truth  are 
the  great  traits  in  which  He  is  known,  just  as  grace 
(a  fuller  word)  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Ghrist,  who 
is  the  living  Word.  There  they  came,  and  we  know 
their  fulness  and  perfectness  in  Him ;  here  they  are 
learned  by  experience,  and  it  is  lovingkindness  in 
nature  and  circumstances,  not  infinite  and  perfect- 
grace  in  itself.  But  God  had  here  made  good  His 
word.  His  faithfulness  had  exalted  itself,  and  taught 
the  saint  how  right  he  was  in  trusting  God  when  all 
seemed  contrary.  But  this  involved  His  goodness 
also  in  caring  for  us  and  persevering  in  His  love  in 
spite  of  failure.  His  word  taught  us  to  trust  in 
Him,  was  in  its  nature  a  call  to  it,  revealed  His  good- 
ness to  sinners  to  this  effect,  but  called  us  to  wait  on 
Him  to  this  effect,  to  trust  Him  though  it  set  us  in  a 
lowly  place,  apparently  far  off  from  all  our  desires 
and  left  evil  in  power  to  try  our  faith.  So  it  was  with 
Christ    and  those  who  followed   Him. — But  there  is 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   (XXXVIII.  333 

another  point.  The  saint  led  by  this  word,  and  guided 
in  his  thought8  by  it,  cried  and  was  answered;  and, 
before  the  public  answer  came  forth  by  power,  God 
strengthened  with  strength  in  his  soul.  How  true 
this  is  of  Chrisl  even,  and  of  the  Christian  !  But  this 
gives  the  assurance  that  all  shall  have  to  own  the 
power  which  we  have  trusted  in  the  time  of  darkness. 
We  have  had  God's  mind,  following  Jesus,  done  God's 
will  (by  power)  before  power  came  in  to  deliver  and 
make  that  will  good.  But  every  knee  shall  how  to 
Him  to  whom  our  knees  have  gladly  bowed.  But 
(hey  shall  praise  and  Mess  His  name  (for  those  are 
looked  at  here)  who  own  that  power  truly  in  that  day. 
Thus  the  word  revealed  God  as  the  object  of  trust, 
and  there  J  lis  faithfulness  came  to  make  good  all  that 
He  had  led  the  heart  to  trust  in.  The  word  gave 
both — revealed  God  ami  gave  that  to  hope  in  which  it 
was  fulfilled.  This  brought  out  another  character  of 
goodness.  The  Lord,  high  as  He  was,  had  respect  to 
the  lowly.  He  is  too  high  to  make  a  difference  of 
man's  exaltation.  If  we  look  down  from  heaven,  all 
is  flat  upon  tin'  earth.  But  then'  are  high  and  low 
here,  and  God  thinks  of  the  lowly.  Trouble,  too 
comes  on  the  faithful,  hut  the  goodness  and  the  pro- 
mise give  (he  issue  according  to  the  word.  Nor  is 
this  quite  all.  (iod  will  perfect  what  concerns  us, 
make  good  in  blessing  in  and  to  us  all  that  was  in 
His  heart,  and  which  He  had  revealed  in  His  word, 
in  relationship  ami  communion  with  Himself.  <  hrer  all, 
through  all  difficulties,  and,  beyond  all.  His  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 


334  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

Psalm  cxxxix.  But  it  is  not  without  the  most 
thorough  searching  out  of  all  that  we  are.  But  this, 
where  there  is  confidence,  is  a  great  grace ;  for  He 
who  alone  can  do  it,  and  does  it  according  to  His  own 
pcrfectness,  does  it  to  purify  us  from  all  inconsistent 
with  Himself — His  own  mind,  and  hence  with  our 
hlessedness,  which  is  in  communion  with  Himself.  I 
do  not  think  that  the  psalm  goes  beyond  creation  and 
God's  knowing  perfectly  His  own  work,  though  there 
may  he  a  known  analogy  to  the  Church.  It  is  the 
conscience  brought  into  the  sense  of  God's  perfect 
acquaintance  with  everything  in  lis.  All  is  under 
His  eye  and  He  actually  sees  everything.  It  is 
not  only  He  sees,  but  He  searches.  He  is  there 
with  us,  however  offended,  in  all  our  ways.  This  pro- 
duces uneasiness.  Adam  innocent  could  not  have 
thought  of  it.  There  was  no  reflex  act  in  himself  to 
judge  how  he  was  going  on  ;  no  thought  consequently 
of  what  God  had  to  see.  He  enjoyed  and  blessed  or 
might  have  done  so.  But  where  there  is  a  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil,  a  reflex  act  on  what  passes  conse- 
quently in  our  hearts,  the  eye  of  God  that  reaches 
all  its  recesses,  knows  all,  makes  us  uneasy — i.e., 
makes  the  disturbed  conscience  uneasy.  God  is 
everywhere  and  in  every  corner  of  my  heart,  and 
darkness  and  light  are  all  the  same.  The  very  fact 
makes  us  uneasy  now  in  our  natural  state ;  for  fear 
and  moral  fear  has  entered  in  and  is  become  a  part  of 
our  nature.  Still,  where  He  is  known,  there  is  con- 
fidence, and  here  integrity  of  heart  gives  confidence. 
Not  here  the  peaceful  confidence  of  known  redemp- 
tion and  living  in  a  nature   the   fulness  of  which  is 


THE    PSALMS.— PSALM    CXXX1X.  335 

Christ  Himself;  but  the  state  of  heart  wliicli  gives 
confidence,  as  being  the  integrity  of  the  new  nature. 
And  this  knowledge  which  searches  the  conscience  is 
drawn  from  creative  power.  We  are  the  work  of  His 
hands.  Here  it  is  man  as  man,  so  that  the  earth  out 
of  which  he  was  fashioned  at  first  is  as  the  womb  out 
of  which  we  were  born.  God  has  formed  us,  be  it  in 
the  womb  of  dust  or  of  our  mother,  the  place  where 
wc  were  nothing,  before  we  were.  The  same  God  has 
ever  thought  of  us  along  the  road,  and  here  confidence 

>ii  acquired,  though  thus  acquired  it  reaches  to 
all  God's  creative  knowledge  and  power.  If  He  sees 
in  the  dark,  He  keeps  in  the  dark  when  wc  awake. 
and  so  it  will  be  in  resurrection  too.  We  arc  still 
with  Him — He  knows  our  thoughts,  but  thinks  of  us 
when  we  think  not.  Thus  if  God  knows  all  our 
thoughts,  and  long  before  His  are  precious  to  us,  to 
Midi  the  putting  down  of  evil  is  the  sure  expectation, 
yea  the  call  for  judgment  on  the  haters  of  the  Lord, 
whom  we  therefore  abhor.  Christians  do  not  desire 
their  ruin  as  souls,  nm-  does  God;  but  looked  at  as 
wicked,  as  haters  of  the  Lord,  one  does  desire  their 
removal  by  judgment — abhors  them  as  such  and  rejoices 
at  their  being  taken  away  from  corrupting  and 
destroying  the  earth.  But  if  this  desire  of  their  judg 
meut  be  holiness  and  righteousness,  not  will,  we  shall 

the  full  searching  out  of  evil  in  ourselves.  It 
is  tin.'  hatred  of  evil  as  under  the  eve  of  an  all-seeing 
God.  But  it  is  exceedingly  beautiful  to  sec  this 
integrity  of  heart,  broughi  into  the  lull  light  of  God's 
presence  (one"  shrunk  from  as  searching  all),  now  it 

•  thr  thorough  searching  of  God,  that  it  may  gel 


336       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

rid  of  the  evil  that  it  hates.  Note,  too,  mere 
integrity  will  not  suffice  without  God  to  find  out  evil. 
An  honest,  natural  man  may  use  his  conscience,  but 
as  the  natural  eye  must  have  light  to  search  with,  so' 
we  the  presence  of  Him  who  is  light.  He  who  had 
kept  the  commandments  for  his  own  conscience  from 
his  youth  up,  shrunk  from  that  which  searched  his 
heart  and  its  motives.  So  we,  even  if  desirous  of 
knowing  the  evil  of  our  hearts,  bring  God  into  the 
work,  and  seek  Him  to  do  it.  If  not,  there  is  not 
integrity. 

Psalm  cxl.  I  have  only  for  our  present  purpose  to 
note  that  it  teaches,  in  the  relentless  and  crafty  malice 
of  the  wicked,  to  cast  oneself  wholly  over  on  the 
Lord.  The  saint  cannot  rival  the  world  in  craft  and 
plotting,  but  there  is  One  above  all  who  knows  the 
end  from  the  beginning — to  Him  we  have  to  look. 
The  character  of  the  Lord's  people  in  presence  of  this 
wickedness  is  to  be  remarked;  they  are  the  afflicted, 
the  poor,  righteous,  and  upright.  And  they  can 
reckon  upon  the  Lord  against  the  evil  doer  and  the 
wicked  man.  Jehovah  is  owned  as  his  God.  So  we 
acknowledge  God  fully  as  ours  in  the  revelation  of 
the  Father  aud  Jesus  our  Lord.  He  is  owned,  that  is, 
in  face  of  the  world. 

Psalm  cxli.  looks  indeeed  for  deliverance,  but  more 
for  rightness  of  heart  in  trial.  The  desire  is  to  be  with, 
near  God,  that  God  should  draw  near.  The  heart  is 
with  Him — is  right  with  Him.  He  does  not  say 
deliver,  as  his  first  desire,  but  "give  ear  to  my  voice;" 


THE    PSALMS. — PSALM   CXLI.  337 

that  his  prayer  may  be  incense,  the  lifting  up  his  hands 

as  t  ho  evening  sacrifice.     Be  Beeks  too  (and  how  needed 
.  that  in  the  pressure  of  evil  God  should  set  a 

watch  before  his  mouth  and  keep  the  door  of  his  lips. 
We  may  be  true  and  right  in  principle  on  the  Lord's 

side;  but  how  does  an  impatient  or  pretentions  and 
reproachful  word  mar  the  testimony,  give  a  handle  to 
the  enemy,  and.  so  far,  set  the  soul  wrong-  with  God. 
No  point  is  more  important  than  this  for  the  upright. 
He  who  can  bridle  his  tongue,  the  same  is  a  perfect 
man.  ile  looks  to  hi'  in  no  way  drawn  away  into  the 
paths  or  society  of  the  wicked.  What  he  wants  is  to 
he  kept  in  uprightness.  If  the  smiting  of  the 
righteous  be  needed,  he  will  rejoice  in  it,  as  an  excel- 
lent oil  to  anoint  him,  and  honour  him  as  a  friend. 
(Irace  accompanies  this.  When  calamities  come  upon 
God's  outward  people,  lor  of  such  it  speaks  here, 
who  have  been  the  enemies  of  him  who  has  Bought 
to  walk  godly  and  keep  himself  from  evil,  his  heart 
yearns  over  them;  there  is  no  rejoicing  or  triumphing 
over  them;  his  prayer  ascends  to  (Jod  for  them. 
He  looks,  too,  to  the  overthrow  of  those  who  had  power 
over  them,  smitten  by  the  enemy,  as  that  which  shall 
break  down  their  pride  lor  good,  so  that  they  would 
hear  his  words  :  and  he.  whatever  trouble  he  might 
be  in,  knew  their  sweetness.  The  distress  was 
deep,  evil  in  power,  but  his  eyes  were  unto  God. 
But  again  we  find  here  that  what  his  heart  is  on 
is  the  nearness  of  his  soul  with  Godj  "leave  not  my 
soul  destitute."  This  is  a  sure  mark  of  the  renewal  of 
heart.  So  the  thief  on  the  cross  does  not  even  think  of 
his  Bufferings,  but  asks  Christ  to  remember  him  in  His 


338      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

kingdom.  It  is  a  full  picture  of  uprightness  of  heart, 
in  a  soul  which,  having  been  away  from  God,  is  morally 
restored  hut  still  under  trial. 

Psalm  cxlii.  is  the  expression  of  extreme  distress, 
refuge  failing  him — no  man  caring  for  his  soul.  He 
cried  unto  Jehovah  with  his  voice.  This,  as  we  have 
seen,  is  more  than  trusting  Him.  God  is  known  in 
the  revelation  of  Himself;  so  we  look  to  the  Lord  and 
to  a  Father's  love.  But  in  crying  with  the  voice  there 
is  confession  of  His  name,  and  open  acknowledgment 
of  dependence  and  confiding  in  the  Lord.  The 
heart  can  open  itself  out  before  the  Lord — not  be 
careful,  but  make  its  requests  known.  It  is  a  sure 
sign  of  confidence  making  our  trouble  known — a  great 
thing  to  leave  such  with  God.  But  there  is  another 
comfort  here ;  he  was  in  the  path  of  God.  And  from 
this  grew  the  sense,  of  immense  importance  in  the 
times  of  trial,  that  God  knew,  acknowledged,  and  had 
His  eye  on,  as  accepting  it,  the  faithful  man's  path. 
This  is  a  fountain  of  strength  and  comfort.  It  sup- 
poses faith — that  realizing  that  one's  way  is  pleasing 
to  God  suffices.  The  spirit  may  be  overwhelmed  by 
the  pressure  of  enmity  and  desertion,  but  the  soul  is 
in  peace,  resting  in  the  approbation  of  God. 

Psalm  clxiii.  I  pass  over  here  the  desires  of  judg- 
ment as  dispensational,  as  we  have  often  seen.  In  this 
we  have  the  soul  bowed  down  under  the  trouble,  but 
in  principle  set  right  with  God  as  one  chastened  for 
sin,  only  in  the  midst  of  those  hostile,  but  brought  to 
uprightness.     It  looks  for  mercy  that  it  may  not  be 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM  CLXHI.  339 

under  judgment   from  God,  but  thai  God  may  be  a 
deliverer,  and  looks  for  it  as  in  heart  belonging  to  God 

and  His  servant.  It  is  broken  by  the  affliction,  and 
trusts  God,  and  seeks  His  way.  It  transfers  tbe  evils. 
s:>  to  speak,  from  God  to  the  adversary,  associating 
in  heart  with  God,  and  looking  that  God  sbould 
own  it  and  take  up  its  cause  as  against  the  power  of 
evil  which  lie  bad  used  as  a  rod.  We  have  this 
experience  when  we  have  suffered  from  malicious 
enemies,  bui  through  our  own  fault.  Tbe  heart  true 
with  God  when  thoroughly  subdued  and  set  right, 
accepting  the  punishment  of  its  iniquity  instead  of 
excusing  itself,  can  then  look  to  Cod  to  take  up  its 
cause  against  tbe  malice,  but  not  till  it  has  set  God'l 
glory  above  itself.  The  soul  then  clings  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  God's  lovingkindness  in  a  subdued  and  softened 
spirit,  and  its  motives  are  purified,  which  is  the  very 
object  of  the  discipline,  not  merely  its  ways,  but  its 
motives,  and  so  power  of  communion,  which  is  directly 
in  relation  with  our  motives  and  state  of  heart. 
There  is  a  strengthening  of  the  bond  of  the  heart 
with  God,  and  His  will  is  sought  because  it  is  so. 
".Thy  Spirit,"  he  says,  "  is  good."  The  heart  lives  in 
the  sense  of  what  the  Spirit  works  in  lis;  His  influ- 
ences in  the  heart  are  good.  The  soul  has  found 
where  good  is.  There  is  accordance  between  the 
heart  and  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  and  it  is  felt,  and 
true  delight  is  in  the  soul  in  it.  So  we  say  praise  is 
good;  it  is  right  pleasant,  felt  to  be  pleasant,  ami 
pleasant  because  it  is  right.  There  is  the  sense,  too, 
of  divine  favour  with  it.  But  withal  the  soul  seeks 
to  enjoy  it,  where  all  is  in  harmony  with  it  ;   where  its 


o40      PEACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

exercises  and  fruits  will  be  natural  (for  he  was  in  the 
midst  of  unholy  enemies).  For  us  this  will  only  be 
in  heaven.  The  heart  is  separated  by  trial  to  God 
through  grace,  and  in  uprightness  owns  it  cannot 
stand  in  the  judgment,  and  looks  for  divine  favour 
and  deliverance. 

Psalm  cxliv.  I  have  only  a  remark  to  make  here. 
All  these  exercises  make  us  learn  what  man  is,  and 
the  whole  bearings  of  good  and  evil.  When  man  is 
seen,  known,  judged,  and  is  delivered,  there  is  an 
acquaintance  with  the  whole  scene  which  makes 
God's  patience,  goodness,  and  ways  known  and  per- 
fect in  our  eyes.  "  Man  is  like  to  vanity,"  but  we  sing 
a  new  song ;  happy  are  the  people  that  are  in  such  a 
case.  We,  indeed,  have  a  far  more  radical  acquain- 
tance with  this.  It  is  settled  at  once  by  one  act  in 
the  cross,  and  we  reckon  ourselves  dead  and  alive 
unto  God  through  Him  that  is  risen.  It  is  a  new 
creation,  and  we  are  children  with  the  Father.  Still 
every  one  does  not  learn  it  like  Paul,  and  in  every 
case  it  must  be  learnt  experimentally.  Only  a  simple 
mind  laid  hold  of  by  Christ,  which,  therefore,  does  not 
confer  with  flesh  and  blood,  learns  it  easier  and  walks 
in  the  power  of  it.  Only,  alas  !  how  many  like  to  be 
Jews,  and  live  only  to  die  at  the  end,  and  so  learning 
it,  instead  of  dying  and  then  living  as  alive  to  God, 
and  so  pass  into  Christ  according  to  the  power  of 
that  life,  whether  they  wake  or  sleep. 

Psalm  cxlv.  looks  back  and  shows  the  soul  (for  I  do 
not  speak  of  dispensation  here  as  such  :  it  is  the  Spirit 


THE    PSALMS.— -PSALM  CXLV.  341 

of  Christ  showing  what  passes  in  the  millennium; 
Imt  it  shows  the  bouI)  recounting  with  praise  and 
thanksgiving,  the  works  and  ways  of  God,  wh 
cmii  look  back — the  greatness  of  God.  But  then  in 
these  ways  the  character  of  God  lias  been  fully  dis- 
played, and  the  soul  has  learned  thai  blessed  lesson, 
knows  what  He  is.  See  verses  8,  9,  14 — 20.  This 
is    a    great    bl<  All    that    we    have    passed 

through  exercises  us,  breaks  our  will,  makes  us  know 
ourselves.  We  have  learnt  by  it,  and,  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  the  heart,  it  gives  what  God  is.  Israel  learned 
themselves  in  the  wilderness,  but  here  they  learn  God, 
if  they  had  hearts  to  understand  it.  First,  what  He 
is,  and  then  in  what  He  shows  Himself  such  to 
others.  Not  only  His  greatness  :  that  indeed  has  been 
shown  in  bringing  all  to  His  own  ends;  but  He  is 
gracious,  good,  thinking  of  others  in  love,  and  full  of 
compassion.  He  is  slow  to  anger — perhaps  the  heart 
mplained  of  that  sometimes  in  trial,  yet  we  need 
it — and  of  great  mercy.  Yes,  we  arc  often  Jonases, 
though  we  need  or  have  needed  as  much  mercy  as 
Nineveh.  Bui  what  should  we  have  lost,  to  say 
nothing  of  losing  ourselves,  if  our  God  had  not  been 
all  this;  But  this  is  the  God  we  have  to  say  to,  ami 
when  we  are  delivered,  we  delight  in  Him,  such  as  He 
is.  Xo  doubt  by  faith  we  delight  in  His  being  Buch, 
hut  we  have  to  gel  our  wills  broken,  our  heart  set 
righl  in  its  desires,  tempers,  and  whole  state,  to 
delighl  fully  in  God  who  so  Ion-'  suffers  evil  which  W( 
hate,  and  the  evil  doers  who  thwart  our  desire  of 
good,  bul  with  which  our  will  mixes  itself,  and  taking, 
perhaps,  it-  mosl  subtle  form.     "Ye  know  not  what 


34.2  PRACTICAL   REFLECTIONS   ON 

manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of ;  for  the  Son  of  man  came 
not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them."  He 
was  the  manifestation  of  God  in  forbearing  love ;  and 
we  have  to  walk  in  love  as  He  showed  it,  offering 
Himself  up  to  God,  in  nothing  seeking  His  own  will, 
committing  Himself  to  Him  who  judgeth  righteously. 
Finally,  in  peace  we  shall  heartily  rejoice  in  God  as 
such.  And  it  is  His  nature  and  character;  He  is 
good  to  all,  His  mercy  is  over  all  His  works.  Com- 
pare Peter,  the  apostle  of  God's  government  and 
judgments.  (2  Peter  iii.  9,  the  epistle  that  applies 
judgment  to  the  wicked.  He  is,  too,  the  faithful 
Creator,  1  Peter  iv.  9.  One  sees  in  this  passage,  as 
elsewhere,  how  the  Epistles  of  Peter  take  up  the 
government  of  God  as  the  Psalms,  only  introducing 
redemption.)  First,  then,  we  find  mercy.  The  Lord 
occupied  with  the  need  of  men,  all  that  fall  (that  is 
weakness) ;  those  that  be  bowed  down  (that  is  oppres- 
sion). Then  even,  as  he  says  in  Jonah,  "  and  very 
much  cattle,"  He  it  is  that  takes  care  of  and  pro- 
vides for  man  and  beast.  But  then,  further,  there  are 
moral  character  and  relationships  in  which  He  has  to 
do  with  men.  He  is  righteous  in  His  ways,  takes 
account  of  all  that  is  due  to  others,  and  also  to  Him- 
self. He  Himself  thinks  of  others,  for  this  also  is- 
righteousness  in  Him,  and  there  is  gracious  consider- 
ation in  His  works,  no  evil.  His  ear,  too,  is  open  to 
the  cry  of  those  who  seek  Him — fulfils  the  desire  of 
those  who  fear  Him.  He  preserves  those  that  love 
Him.  He  is  thus  interested  in  every  want,  and  takes 
notice  of  all  our  ways.  Thus  the  exercises  of  our 
hearts  will  have  caused  us  to  know  Him. 


THE   PSALMS. — PSALM    CXLVL,   CXLVII.       343 

The  following  psalms  are  the  hallelujahs  of  a  deliv- 
ered people.  Some  elements  of  God's  way.;  in  genera] 
may  he,  however,  found  here,  because  God  in  the 
deliverance  has  Bhown  whom  lie  thought  of  and  His 
care  for  them. 

Psalm  cxlvi.     It  is  ili-  of  trusting  the  all- 

enduring,  ever-living  Lord  that  is  spoken  of.     "  Put 

not  your  trust  in  man:"'  Ins  breath  goes  forth:  all  his 
thoughts  arc  gone.  Not  so  with  God.  Not  only  He 
lias  power,  but  lie  is  faithful— keeps  truth  for  ever. 
And  again,  His  tender  mercy  is  brought  out  for  the 
eomfort  of  those  that  are  in  sorrow.  The  oppn 
the  hungry,  the  prisoners  come  before  Him,  arc  the 
objects  of  His  care  and  power j  the  blind  He  gives  eyes 
to,  raises  up  those  that  arc  bowed  down.  All  this  is 
comfort  of  heart  to  those  that  are  in  sorrow  and  trial, 
thai  are  oppressed.  But  farther,  He  loves  the  righteous, 
so  that  men,  whatever  comes  upon  them,  can  trust  in 
Him.  The  stranger  whose  heart  may  feel  sick  where 
he  is,  the  fatherless  or  widow  whose  sustaining  props 
are  gone,  He  preserves  and  relieves.  The  heart  of  the 
righteous  Las  its  sure  confidence,  of  the  bowed  down 
and  these  deprived  of  earthly  stay,  the  sure  hand  of  a 
God  who  cares  for  them,  because  they  are  such.  It  is 
n  hat  God  always  is. 

Psalm  cxlvii.  The  great  principle  in  all  these  psalms 
is  that  the  one  true  (.'oil,  the  ( Ireator,  and  lie  who  min- 
isters to  every  creature,  is  specially  kuown  as  the  God 
of  His  people,  and  is  known  by  His  delivered  people 
to  be  righteous,  full  of  compassion,  and  good.     His 


344      PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  ON 

ways  and  character  have  become  known  to  the  deliv- 
ered ones;  but  He  is  the  God  of  Israel,  as  we  say  our 
Father,  or  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  All  this  is  largely  brought  out  in  this  psalm 
— the  ground  for  trusting  Him  in  every  trial,  but  for 
seeking  Him  and  walking  in  righteousness,  for  He 
takes  pleasure  in  those  that  fear  Him.  But,  besides 
this,  another  blessing  is  spoken  of,  belonging  to  His 
people,  and  so  to  us,  His  word.  This  is  the  first  of 
blessings.  He  gave  it  to  His  people.  He  had  not 
dealt  so  with  any  nation.  There  is  a  difference  between 
us  and  Israel  here.  This  in  itself  is  true  of  both;  but 
the  Jew  was  shut  up  in  his  own  system.  The  temple 
was  a  place  of  resort  for  all  nations,  but  for  Jews  even 
there  was  no  access  to  God  Himself,  no  knowledge  of 
Him  by  the  revelation  of  Himself.  The  law  told  them 
what  man  ought  to  be,  God's  dealings  taught  them 
many  a  lesson  if  they  would  learn  it  as  they  do  here: 
but  the  way  into  the  holiest  was  not  made  manifest, 
and  there  was  no  going  out  with  the  testimony  that 
God  is  love.  They  learnt  from  His  ways  on  earth, 
but  did  not  know  Him  in  heaven  and  will,  not  as  we 
do,  even  in  the  millennium,  though  mercy  and  redemp- 
tion will  be  clearer  for  them.  We  do;  Ave  know  God 
as  light  and  love.  We  shall  be  in  the  Father's  house 
then.  Hence,  while  Ave  have  the  Avord  which  rcATcals 
Him  who  has  sanctified  Himself,  a  man  in  heaven  apart 
from  the  world,  avc  haAre  known  God's  love  issuing  and 
in  the  power  of  eternal  life.  We  know  the  Father  in 
the  Son,  and  then  God  as  loA'e,  yea,  are  in  Him  and 
He  in  us.  Hence  Ave  haA'e  a  gospel  ministry,  and  every 
one  is  a  witness  of  divine  1oatc  and  heavenly  righteous- 


THE   PSALMS. —  PSALM   CXLVIII.  345 

ncss.  We  have  no  priesthood  here,  save  as  wc  all  are, 
hut  go  with  boldness  into  the  holiest,  our  great  Eigh 
Priest  being  ever  there.  The  word  is  in  this  respect 
another  thing  for  us,  though  still  God's  word.  We 
have  the  word  for  others  because  it  is  the  true  know- 
ledge of  God  1 1  imself  in  grace,  a  heavenly  word.  Some 
other  elements  of  goodness  are  spoken  of  in  this  psalm, 
though  the  general  tenor  of  it  be  the  same.  He  heals 
the  broken  in  heart,  He  binds  up  their  wounds.  There 
is  not  only  tender  compassion  in  grace,  but  remedy, 
and,  more  and  more,  He  establishes  securely,  strengthens 
the  bars  of  the  city  of  God,  and  blesses  His  children 
in  her.  Thus  we  have  a  richer  and  fuller  unfolding  of 
mercy  in  this  psalm.  The  general  principle  is  the 
same.  God's  ways  revealing  what  He  is  in  its  effects 
of  goodness  and  righteous  government,  a  knowledge 
of  God  by  His  statutes  and  judgments;  but  not  the 
revelation  of  Himself  and  introduction  into  His  pre- 
sence as  He  is,  nor  knowledge  of  Him  as  Father.  It 
is,  indeed,  in  contrast  with  it.  Sec  Ephesians  i.  3 — 5, 
where  we  have  the  Christian's  place,  as  in  veraeB 
19 — 23  our  relationship  with  Christ,  to  which"  add 
chapter  v.  2.")— 30. 

Psalm  cxlviii.  With  this  remark  I  may  merely  note 
the  character  of  this  psalm.  All  creation  is  called  to 
praise  God,  but  with  the  additional  word,  He  exalts 
the  horn  of  His  people.  It  is  more  than  deliverance 
and  mercy.  He  exalts  them  in  the  creation  as  the 
people  of  His  favour  on  earth.  He  is  the  praise  of 
His  saints,  a  people  near  Him — a  blessed  thought,  but 
how  far  more  blessed  to  us  who  will  be  near   Himself, 


346       PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS  OX 

unveiled  in  His  house  and  in  His  presence !  Israel  i» 
near  the  Creator,  as  His  people  on  the  earth.  We 
with  God  our  Father  in  heaven  like  the  Lord  Jesus 
His  only-begotten  Son.  In  this,  as  in  the  following 
psalm,  deliverance  is  not  spoken  of,  for  there  is  pro- 
gress in  them.  First,  mercy  and  deliverance,  favour 
to  the  tried  righteous  within  her;  then  the  horn  of 
His  people  exalted,  and  Israel  a  people  near  Him;  and 
now  it  is  joy  and  triumph. 

Psalm  cxlix.  He  takes  pleasure  in  them,  and  they 
are  His  weapon  against  His  enemies,  the  high  praises 
of  God  in  their  mouths  and  a  two-edged  sword  in  their 
hands,  executing  the  judgment  written.  We  see  at 
once  how  we  are  on  the  Jewish  ground  of  judgment  in 
this  world.  There  is  a  delight  in  the  setting  aside  of 
evil  by  power,  even  for  the  Christian.  "  Rejoice  over 
her,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  holy  apostles  and  prophets;" 
but  this  only  when  the  Church  gets  on  prophetic,  not 
on  her  own,  ground.  Hence  the  Father  is  not  more 
spoken  of  in  the  Apocalypse  than  in  the  psalms. 
Where  the  relationship  is  with  the  Father,  there  it  is 
carried  out  in  love.  And  this  difference,  often  noted, 
is  as  distinct  and  plain  to  the  spiritual  mind  as  pos- 
sible, and  of  all  importance  to  make  the  psalms  intel- 
ligible and  set  Christianity  on  its  own  true  ground. 
The  Christian  is  not  a  Jew;  the  revealed  name  of  God 
to  him  is  not  Jehovah,  but  Father,  as  Christ  so  mark- 
edly states. 

Psalm  cl.  gives  the  full  praise   to  Jehovah  in   a 
double  character,  the  sanctuary  and  the  firmament  of 


THE  PSALMS. — PSALM   CL.  347 

His  power,  for  His  ways  which  come  from  the  firma- 
ment of  His  power  were  always  according  to  the  sanc- 
tuary in  which  He  governed  Israel,  and  made  good  the 
revelation  of  Himself  there.  So,  indeed,  with  us,  He 
makes  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  Him;  but  it  is  according  to  the  heavenly  place  to 
which  they  belong  and  to  which  He  is  bringing  them. 
Christ  is  in  the  firmament  of  His  power  now.  He  is 
praised  for  His  acts,  praised  for  His  greatness  mani- 
fested in  them.  Jehovah  is  the  theme  of  praise — 
Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel,  but  Jehovah  the  Creator 
and  Sustainer  of  all — the  righteous  judge.  But  here 
it  is  Jehovah,  God  in  His  sanctuary,  as  we,  after  all  we 
have  received  in  a  higher  way,  glory  in  tribulations, 
and  finally  in  God  Himself — not  in  what  we  have 
received.  It  is  not  even  here,  Praise  our  God,  just  as 
that  was,  but  it  rises  higher.  "Praise  God  in  his 
sanctuary."  The  deep  sense  of  what  God  is  goes  out 
beyond  the  relationship  in  which  we  are,  though  it  is 
relationship  with  Him  in  the  highest  way  that  we  have. 
Our  Father's  love,  ours  and  Christ's,  is  sweet,  but  we 
joy  in  God.     Blessed  be  His  name ! 


348  ADVERTISEMENTS. 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR,  AND  MAY  BE  HAD   OF  THE  SAME 
PUBLISHER. 

Notes  on  the  Scripture.    Price  Is.,  Cloth,  post  free. 

Lectures  on  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.    Price  Is.  Gd.,  and  in  cloth, 

gilt,  2s. 
Notes  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.    Price  9d.,  Cloth  Limp;  and  in 

Extra  Cloth,  Is. 
Notes  on  the  Gospel  of  Luke.   Price  2s.,  Cloth. 
The  Sabbath  :  Is  the  Law  Dead,  or  am  I  ?    Price  Gd. 
Meditations  on  the  lGth  and  17th  Psalms.    Price  Gd.,  Cloth. 
A  few  Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs.    Price  Gd.,  Cloth  Limp,  and  in 

French  Morocco  Limp,  gilt  edges,  for  presents.  Is.  Gd.    Post  free. 
Notes  on  the  Epistle  to  Hebrews.    Price  Is.  6d.,  Cloth. 
Thoughts  on  Psalm  exix.    Cloth,  Gd.    Two  copies  post  free. 
The  Faithfulness  of  God,  as  seen  in  his  ways  with  Balaam.    Price  2d. 
Who  is  a  Priest?  and  What  is  a  Priest  ?    Price  Id. 
Notes  of  Addresses  on  the  Ways  of  God,  with  particular  reference  to 

the  Church.    Price  9d.,  Cloth  Limp. 
"  The  Man  of  Sorrows."    (Poetry.)     Price  Id.    Also  in  Large  Type. 

Price  Id. 
Brief  Notes  of  an  Address  on  Phil.  3,  &c.    Price  Id. 
Brief  Thoughts  on  the  Apocalypse.    Price  2d. 
Christ's  Work  and  its  Consequences.    Heb.  9  and  10.    Price  4d. 
The  Red  Sea  and  the  Wilderness.    Price  Id.    Twelve  copies  postage 
free. 


By   W.   KELLY. 

Lectures  on  the  Book  of   Revelation.     A   new  and  revised  edition. 

Price  5s.   Also  the  same,  with  a  New  Translation,  &c.   Price  6s.  Gd. 
Vols.  I.  to  IV.  of  the  Bible  Treasury.    New  and  revised  edition.    Edited 

by  William  Kelly.    Price  7s.  Gd.  each.    Postage  free. 
The  Second  Advent  of  Christ  Pre-Millennial.    Price  Is.  3d.,  Cloth. 
Types  of  Scripture.    Price  9d.,  Cloth  Limp ;  and  in  extra  Cloth,  Is. 
Christ  and  the  Seven  Churches.    Cloth,  Is.  Gd.    Post  free. 
Teetotalism  and  the  Testimony  of  the  Bible.    Price  Gd.    (New  edition.) 
Thoughts  on  the  Lord's  Prayer.    A  New  Edition.    Price  2d.    Six  copies 

post  free. 
Notes  on  Matthew  xiii.:  being  a  Short  Exposition  of  the  Seven  Parables. 

Price  Gd.,  in  Cloth,  and  in  Paper  Covers,  4d. 
Thoughts  on  Matthew  xxv.    Price  3d.    Four  copies  postage  free. 


ADVERTISEMENTS. 


Miscellaneous  Papers.    By  J.  G.  Bellett.    Edited  by  W.  Kelly.    Price  3s.,  Cloth. 

Ke-issue  of  the  Bible  Treasury  in  Is  Parts.    Just  ready,  Part  17,  being  Part  5  of  Vol.  3, 

and  will  (D.V.)  be  continued  monthly.      Those  who  may  wish  the  full  Vols,  at  once 

can  obtain  them  direct  from  London  or  Glasgow,  Price  7s  6d  each. 
Help  for  Enquirers.    By  C.  J.  Davis.    Subjects  tieated— The  Law  and  God's  Righteousness. 

The  Sabbath  and  the  Lord's  Day.    Sanctification.    The  Lord's  Prayer.    Confession  of 

Sins  and  Forgiveness.    Faith  and  Repentance.    The  Church.    Ministry.— Price  4d. 

3  Copies  Postage  Free. 
"  He  is  not  hero.''     An  Address  by  J.  Alfred  Trench.     Price  2d. 
The  Peculiarity  of  our  Calling.     By  \V.  T.  Tropin.    Price  Id. 

The  Faithfulness  of  God,  as  seen  in  his  ways  with  Balaam.    By  J.  X.  D.    Price  Twopence. 
"The  men  which  Thou  gavest  me,"  John  xvii.    By  J.  Alfred  Trench.    Price  Twopence. 
Thoughts  on  Matthew  xxv.    By  William  Kelly.    Price  Threepence.    4  copies  postage  free. 
A  Few  'Words  on  St  Paul's  General  Epistles.     By  J.  G.  Bellett.     Price  One  Penny. 
Presbyterianism  Tested  by  the  Word  of  God;  a  letter  to  the  Editor  of  "The  British  Herald," 

by  W.  Kelly.     Price  One  Penny. 
Christ  the  Last  Adam  and  Second  Man.     By  W.  Kelly.    Price  Id.     12  copies  postage  free. 
The  Red  Sea  and  the  Wilderness.    By  J.  N.  D.     Price  One  Penny.     12  copies  postage  free. 
Thoughts  on  Psalm  cxix.     By  J.  N.  D.    Cloth,  Sixpence.    2  copies  postage  free. 
"His  Own  which  were  in  the  World."  By  J.  Alfred  Trench.  A  New  Edition.  Price  Twopence. 
Precious  Portions  from  J.  N.  D.,  J.  B.  S.    A  New  and  Revised  Edition.     Price  4d.  Cloth. 
Thoughts  for  this  Day.  reprinted  from  "A  Voice  to  the  Faithful."    Price  Is,  Cloth,  and  in 

Paper  Covers,  6d. 
Vols.  1  to  4,  "Words  of  Truth,''  may  now  be  had,  price  Is.  6d.  each.    Postage  free. 
The  Ways  of  God.     A  brief  outline  of  God's  dealingR  with  Israel,  the  Nations  and  the 

Church,  aiid  His  purposes  for  the  Glory  of  Christ.    By  F.  G.  Patterson,  editor  of  "Words 

of  Truth."    Price  2s.    Post  free. 
The  New  Birth:  What  is  It?    By  F.  G.  Patterson.    Price  6d.  Cloth;  Paper  Covers,  4d. 

a 'ii: 'lit  Testimony.    By  F.  G.Patterson.     Price  2d. 
"  There  is  one  Body  and  one  Spirit."  and  "  The  Unity  of  the  Spirit."    By  F.  G.  P.     Price  3d 
"  The  Church  which  is  His  Body."    By  F.  G.  P.    Price  l$d. 
An  Introduction  to  Isaiah.    By  J.  G.  Bellett.    Price  4d.    3  copies  post  free. 
True  Worshii  purs  :  who  are  they?    By  H.  H.  Snell.     One  Penny. 
Meditations  on  the  ICth  and  17th  Psalms.     By  J.  N.  D.    Price  6d,  Cloth. 
"  \\  hum  say  ye  that  I  am."     An  Address  by  J.  E.  Batten.     Price  2d.    C  copies  post  free. 
A  few  i  Spiritual  Songs,    ByJ.  N.  D.    Price  8cL    Cloth  Limp,  6d.,  and  in  French 

Morocco  Limp,  gilt  edges,  for  presents,  Is  6d.    Post  free. 
Notes  oi.  i.ll,  brews.     By  J.  X.  I).     Price  Is.  lid.  cloth. 

"  Sophy's  Story,"  or  Simple  Scripture  Lessons.    Just  ready,   Part  18,  being  Part  for  July, 
i     BOns    from  the  26th   to  the    27tL  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Exodus, 

price  One  Penny,  and  will  (D.V.)  be  continued  in   Monthly  One  Penny 

each.     Hi.  Brst  VoL  may  now  be  had,  containing  Lessons  from  the  whole  oi  the  Book 

of  Genesis,  neatly  bound  in  cloth,  price  Is.  Cd.    Postage  free. 
Just  ready,  a  New  Series  of  Scripture   Texts  for  Sunday  Schools.     Three  kinds  ;  2d.  pel 

Sheet     Also,  Hymn  Cards,  j^ilt.   Id.  per  sheet. 
Notes  on  Matthew  xiii. :  being  a  a  .short  Exposition  of  the  Seven  Parables.     By  Wm.  Kelly. 
Price  tid  in  cloth,  and  in  paper  covers  4d. 


ADVERTISE  11 KNTS. 


Few  Gospel  Paper,  Price  OWE  HALFPENNY,  Monthly,  20  Copib3  Postage  Free, 

"TIOIIE     <3- OS  IP  EL." 

A  Paper  exclusively  devoted  to  Gospel  Articles,  and  thus  suitable  for  distribution  generally 
among  the  careless  and  unsaved. 

£5T  Each  Number  will  be  complete  in  itself,  and  the  price  has  been  fixed  at  One  Half- 
penny, to  enable  those  who  take  an  interest  in  Gospel  work  to  distribute  freely,  as  the 
little  Paper  can  be  given  away  as  a  Gospel  Tract. 


Primitive  Christianity.    By  C.  E.  Stuart.    Cloth  Is.  6d. 
Convicted  yet  Confiding.    By  J.  G.  B.    Price  One  Penny. 
Christ's  Work  and  its  Consequences.    By  J.  N.  D.    Price  Fourpence. 
The  Rest  that  Eemaineth.    By  W.  Kelly,  Id. 

The  Titles  of  the  Deity  :  being  a  Collection  of  the  Titles,  Names,  Characters,  and  Epithets, 
by  which  the  persons  of  the  Godhead  have  been  addressed  in  the  Scriptures  of  Truth 
ByE.  C   T.    Cloth  Limp,    Price  Ninepence. 
On  Eomans  viii.     By  W.  Kelly.    One  Penny. 
Thoughts  on  1st  Corinthians,  chap.  xv.    By  W.  Kelly. 
The  Object  of  Prophecy.     By  J.  N.  D.     One  Halfpenny. 

The  Christian  Ministry:    Its  Source,  Object,  &c.     By  J.  C.  Davis.     Price  4d. 
The  Sabbath  :  Is  the  Law  Dead,  or  am  I  ?    By  J.  N.  D. ;  revised  by  W.  Kelly.    6d. 
Five  Important  Questions  Answered  as  to  Salvation,  &c.    By  J.  Gilmour.    Price  Twopence. 
A  Scriptural  Inquiry  as  to  what  is  the  Church  or  the  Assembly  of  God,  addressed  espe- 
cially to  Young  Believers,  by  C.  J.  Davis,  price  2d, 
Thoughts  Introductory  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  by  W.  Kelly,  price  2d. 
Brief  Thoughts  on  the  Apocalypse.    By  J.  N.  D.     Price  2d. 


Little  Mary  of  the  Lighthouse.    Price  Id. 

The  Sailor's  Return.     Price  id. 

The  Child  Heroine.     Price  id. 

Glad  Tidings,  a  conversation  about  Salvation, 

between  Robert  and  his  Father  price,  Jd. 
Yeddie's  First  &  Last  Communion.  Price  Id. 


"God  is  now  here,"  or  the  Infidel  and  his 
Board.    Price  M. 

John  Morgan,  and  How  the  Lord  Dealt  with 
Him.     Price  Id. 

Seeking  Salvation.    Price  |d. 

How  a  Little  Girl  Found  Jesus.    Price  Id. 

"  I  will  tell  Jesus  all  about  it,"  price  Id. 

The  above  are  part  of  a  New  Series  of  Little  Books  for  the  Y'oung,  all  neatly  Illustrated 
and  containing  Simple  Statements  of  the  Gospel.    More  in  course  of  publication. 

Waiting  for  the  Son  from  Heaven.     By  J.  G.  B.    One  Penny. 

The  Personal  Return  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     For  Young  Believers.     By  C.  J.  Davis.    3d. 

On  the  Study  of  the  Psalms.     By  C.  H.  M.    Price  £d. 

A  New  Series  of  Tests  for  the  Wall.  Finely  printed  in  colour  and  mounted  on  cardboard, 
with  ribbon  attached,  for  Meeting  Rooms  and  Cottage  Homes.  12  kinds.    Price  2d  each. 

The  C.  S.  Tracts,  in  French,  same  price  as  in  English,  already  published.  The  Little 
Garden:  or  "  Fruits  of  Repentance."  A  Lesson  from  an  Old  Schoolmaster.  Conversion. 
The  Telescope:  or  "How  may  I  know  I  have  the  Right  Faith."  Being  Nos.  1,  2,  3, 
and  4  of  "  Plain  Words."  Also,  "  I  have  my  Ticket,"  "The  Son  of  God,"  "Must  I  not 
Strive,"  "Just  in  Time,"  "  The  Uighteousness  of  God."  "  Redemption  by  the  Blood  of 
Christ;  or,  Obedience  to  the  Law,"  "Which  is  it? — I  Work  to  be  Saved;  or,  I  Work 
because  I  am  Saved?"  "  I've  been  a  rare  Fool."    Price  Is.  per  100,  post  free. 

Notes  of  Addresses  by  J.  N.  D.  and  G.  V.  W.,  on  the  Ways  of  God,  with  particular  reference 
to  the  Church.    Price  9d.,  Cloth  Limp. 

Notes  on  the  Gospel  of  Luke.     By  J.  N.  D.    Price  2s.    Cloth. 

*"*~  Lectures  on  the  Book  of  Revelation.     By  Wm.  Kelly.     A  new  and  revised  edition. 

Price  5s. Also  the  same  on  superior  paper  and  binding,  with  a  New  Translation. 

Price  6s.  6d. 


ADVERTISEMENTS. 


The  Precious  Name  of  Jesus.    Poetry.     Price  Id.    Uniform  with  "The  Man  of  Sorrows." 
'f houghts  on  the  Lord's  Prayer.  A  New  Edition.    By  W.  Kelly.  Price  2d.  6  copies  post  free. 
The  Sunday  School  Teacher— what  is  his  work,  &c.    By  A.  T.  S.     Cloth  Limp.     Price  6d. 
The  Salvation  of  God,  as  Typifyed  by  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Jordan.     By  Wm.  Kelly.  Price  3d. 
Thoughts  on  the   Parables  in  Matthew  xiii.,  developing  in  a  very  interesting  manner  the 

e(  of  the  "  Kingdom  "  from  its  rise  to  its  close.    By  R.  Beacon.    Cloth  Limp, 
Essays  on  Prophetic  interpretation.  By  Wm.  Trotter,  Author  of  "  Plain  Paperson  Prophetic 

Subjects."    Price  Is  6d.,  Cloth,  Post  Free. 
Types  of  Scripture.     By  W  Kelly.     Price 'Jd.,  Cloth  Limp;  and  in  extra  Cloth.  Is. 
The  Ministry  of  the  Word.    By  G.  V.  Wigram.    Price  One  Penny.    12  copies  postage  free. 
i_^-    Vols.  1  to  4  or  the  Bible  Treasury.    New  and  revised  edition.    Edited  by  William 

Kelly.    Price  7s.  Gd.  each.    Postage  free. 
What  is  the  Church?    Do  the  Old  Testament  Saints  form  part  of  it  ?    By  the  late  W.  Trotter. 
Price  (3d.    Two  copies  postage  free.    (A  new  edition,  edited  by  William  Kelly.) 
■1  ism  and  the  Testimony  of  the  Bible.    By  Wm.  Kelly.    Price  6d.    (New  edition). 
A  Sheet  of  37  Hymns  for  Gospel  Meetings.    Price  Is  3d  per  100. 
Brief  Notes  of  Addresses  delivered  in  Lublin,  on  Phil,  iii ,  by  J.  N.  D.    Price  Id. 
Notes  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.     By  J.  N.  D.    Edited  by  W.  Kelly.    Price  9d,  Cloth. 

Limp:  and  in  Extra  Cloth    Is. 
The  Object  and  Character  of  True  Service.    By  J.  A.  Trench.    Price  Twopence. 
Christ  and  the  Seven  Churches.     By  W.  Kelly.    Cloth,  gilt,  Is.  6d.,  Post  Free. 
Scripture  Note  Paper,  8d.  per  quire ;  Envelopes  4d.  per  packet,  assorted  Texts. 
An  Address  to  the  Roman  Catholic   Brethren.     By  J.  N.  D.     Price  2d. 
Lectures  on  the  Second  Coming  of   Christ.     By  J.  N.  D.     Price   Is.  6d.,   and  in  cloth, 

•.  2s. 
The  Church  at  Thessalonica.    By  J.  G.  Bellett.    Price  3d. 

A  Short  Exposition  of  the  First  Six  Chapters  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     Price  Cd. 
\    1  i    -t:im  of   1'ivine  Dispensations,  with  Key.     By  D.  T.  Grimston.    Price  Cd. 
The  Second  Advent  of  Christ  Pre-Millcnnial.     By  W.  Kelly.    Price  Is  3d.,  Cloth. 
Papers  on  the  Pre-Millennial  Advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  By  W.  Trotter.  Is.,  Cloth,  Post  free 
Notes  on  Scripture.     By  J.  N.  D.    Price  Is.,  Cloth,  Post  Free. 
On  the  Return  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  meet  His  Saints  in  the  Air.    By  J.  G.  Bellett. 

Price  'Jd.,  Cloth  Limp;  and  in  Extra  Cloth,  Is. 
1'h-  Lord's  Supper  and  the  Lord's  Table.     For  Young  Believers.     By  C.  J.  Davis.    3d. 
Follow  thou  nie.     A  Word  for  the  Day.    By  J.  T.     Price  Id. 

"I  am  bound  to  let  you  pass."     A  Gospel  Word  for  the  Young.    By  C.  J.  Davis.     PricolJ. 
The  Revelation  Translated  from  a  Text  drawn  from  the  best  Manuscripts.     W.  Kelly.    4d. 
The  Two  Links.     By  C.  II.  M.     Price  ljd.     8  copies  postage  free. 
Who  is  a  Priest  ?  and  What  is  a  Priest?     By  J.  N.  D.     Price  Id. 

Lukewarm,  and  Neither  Cold  nor  Hot.    Rev.  iii.  16.    Price  Id.—'-  Reality."    Judges  vii. 
l-s.    Prioe  Id.— And  Devotednesa,  2  Sam.  xxiil.  i  ;-l7.    Price  lid.    The  above  are  Parts 
1,  2,  and  :;  of  "Truth  for  this  Day."     By  W.  T.  Turpin. 
How  the  Lord  took  to  Himself  a  little  Boy  off  the  Sands  at  Margate.    By  C.  S.    Price  ljd. 
"The  Man  of  Sorrows. '    (Poetry.)    By  J.  N.D.    Price  Id.    Also  in  Large  Typo.     Price  Id. 
The  Course  of  this  World,  what  is  it?     By  0.  P.     Price  One  Penny. 
The  Two  Resurrections.     By  the  Author  of  "  God  so  loved  the  world."    Price  Twopence. 
Life  and  Judgment.    I'.;.  tuthor.    Price  Twopence.    6  Copies  postage  Free. 

The  Good  Shepherd— Poetry.    Bythe  Author  of  "Howl  w  '    Price  4d.  per  doz. 

■  I    •  not  your  Hearts  he  Troubled."    John  xiv.     By  J.  A.  Trench.     Price  Id. 
Proofs  from  Scripture  of  the  Pre-MlllennlaJ  Advent.    By  Wm.  Trotter.    Price  3d. 


ADVERTISEMENTS. 


Glasgow  Series  of  Gospel  Books,  Packet  No.  2,  price  Sd.,  post  free,  contains  one  each  of 
the  following  .-—Grace  Beseeching:  Man  Despising.  Have  you  Peace  with  God? 
Moses  and  Jesus;  or  Law  and  Grace.  "That  is  your  Man,  Sir,"  or  answering  to  a 
Description.  The  Village  Peasants.  The  Dying  Monk;  or,  The  Gospel  in  the  Con- 
vent.    Grace  and  Government.     Salvation  in  its  various  aspects. 

Glasgow  Series  of  Gospel  Books,  Packet  No  1,  price  Is.,  post  free,  contains  one  each  of 
the  following: — "Doing  my  Best."  Philip  Sharky:  or,  "Oh,  man,  hoo  my  heart 
grippit  at  it."  "  We'll  get  it  if  we  be  earnest  enough."  Knowing  about  it,  and  yet  not 
knowing  it.  Notes  of  an  Address  on  John  iii.  Christ :  Faithful  and  True.  Blessed 
Jesus,  I  see  it  all.  Law  and  Grace  Exemplified.  The  Cleansing  Blood.  How  God 
treated  a  Man  who  had  a  quarrel  with  him.  The  Father  and  Prodigal  An  Address 
on  Luke  xv.     "  God  so  loved  the  world."    Peace  with  God  :  what  is  it? 


The  Father's  Welcome,  a  Gospel  Address.    By  C.  J.  Davis.    Price  Twopence. 

Waiting  for  a  Change.     By  T.  "W.  T.     Price  2s.  per  100. 

The  Two  Musts.     By  C.  H.  M.     Price  One  Halfpenny. 

Doubts  Removed.     By  D.  T.  G.     Price  4d.  per  Dozen. 

The  Value  of  the  Death  of  Christ.     By  J.  N.  D.    Price  One  Halfpenny. 

The  Four  Judgments.     By  T.  W.  T.     Price  One  Halfpenny. 

The  Rejected  Stone.    Price  One  Halfpenny. 

£3T  Any  of  these  little  Books,  the  circulation  of  which  has  been  much  owned  of  God,  may 
be  had  in  quantities  for  gratuitous  distribution,  at  a  considerable  reduction,  direct 
from  the  Publisher.  

The  Glasgow  Series  of  Gospel  Tracts,  containing  Simple  Statements  of  the  Gospel,  first 
series,  eight  kinds,  two  pages,  as  follows  : — A  Living  Testimony  to  the  Blood.  "God 
so  loved  the  World."  Is  he  Dead  or  Risen?  God  gave  His  Son.  "  Whosoever."  A 
Dying  Testimony  to  the  Blood.  "  Believing  on  Him."  Everlasting  Life.  In  Assorted 
Packets  of  100,  price  4d.,  by  post  5d.  Each  Tract  may  be  had  direct  from  the  Pub- 
lisher at  2s.  3d.  per  1000,  or  at  2s.  lid.  per  1000  post  free. 

The  Second  Series  of  2-Paged  Tracts,  chiefly  Narrative,  eight  kinds,  as  follows  : — The  Old 
Creation  and  the  New.  Peace  for  the  Anxious.  The  Value  of  the  Death  of  Christ. 
Repentance.  Works,  or  the  Blood.  "Behold,  He  Cometh."  "I  rest  upon  Him." 
"  I've  been  a  rare  Fool."  In  Assorted  Packets  of  100,  price  5d.,  by  post  6d.  Each 
Tract  may  be  had  direct  from  the  Publisher  at  2s.  3d.  per  1000,  or  at  2s.  lid.  per  1000 
post  free. 

Words  of  Life  and  Peace,  a  New  Series  of  Tracts,  chiefly  Narrative,  twelve  kinds,  four 
pages,  as  follows : — Faith  or  Feelings,  Which  ?  The  Watch  Tower.  "  Doing  my 
Best."  God's  Power  in  Nature  and  in  Judgment.  The  Grace  of  God.  Not  very  Good 
and  not  very  Bad.  "Saved  for  Nothing.''  "The  New  Well."  How  the  Lord  treated 
me.  "Quite  Happy."  Do  I  need  to  be  Reconciled?  Trusting  all  to  Jesus.  In 
Assorted  Packets  of  100,  price  Sd,  by  post  lOd.  Each  Tract  may  be  had  separately  at 
4s.  6d.  per  1000,  direct  from  Publisher,  or  carriage  free  at  5s.  lOd.  per  1000. 
***  Orders  to  amount  of  Is  and  upwards,  postage  free. 
Complete  Catalogue  of  Publications  on  Application. 

R.  L.  ALLAN,  Printer,  Bookseller,  and  Publisher,  15  Paternoster  Row,  London: 
and  75  Sauchiehall  Street,  Glasgow. 
IS*-  The  above  List  of  Books,  <fcc,  can  also  be  had  as  follows: — In  America,  from 
F.  G.  Brown,  3  Tremont  Row.  Boston,  U.S.:  M.  Grant,  300  Yonge  St.,  Toronto,  Canada  West ; 
from  John  Vance,  at  11'2  Russell  Street,  Melbourne,  Victoria  ;  and  B.  T.  Slim,  Nelsoa  Street, 
Bridgeton,  Barbadoes,  West  Indies. 


Date  Due 

J^ppBwB 

) 

sbs**"**^ 

-  -. 

fte^ft 

1 

mmmmm00m 

aMBBBI 

OOT^ 

r 

^••"Wgw 

''^^"V. 

$ 

