THIS  BOOK  IS 
WITH  TEARED 
PAGES 


Keep  Your  Card  in  This  Pocket 


Books  will  be  issued  only  on  presentation 
of  proper  library  cards. 

Unless  labeled  otherwise,  books  may  be 
retained  for  fpur  weeks.  Borrowers  finding 
books  marked,  defaced  or  mutilated  are  ex- 
pected to  report  same  at  library  desk;  other- 
wise the  last  borrower  will  be  held  responsible 
for  all  imperfections  discovered. 

The  card  holder  is  responsible  for  all  books 
drawn  on  hi§  card. 

Penalty  foi*  ove^-due  books  2c  a day  plus 
cost  of  notices. ' . , 

Lost  cards  ci^spge  of  residence  must 
be  reported  pronjfitljr^ 


/ApOBLIC  LIBMRY 

Kansas  City,  Mo. 


AND  ,'MEN-.- 

REV.  EDWARD  M.  BpDNDS ’’ 


PRAYER 

AND  PRAYInB  MEN 

BY 

REV.  EDWARD  M.  POUNDS 

AUTHOR  OF  “the  INEFFABLE  GLORY,”  “PREACHER 
AND  PRAYER,”  “PURPOSE  IN  PRAYER,”  ETC. 


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY 

REV.  HOMER  W.  HODGE 


YORK 


GEORGE  H.  DORAN  COMPANY 


COmiGHT,  1921, 

BY  GEORGE  H,  DORAN  COMPANY 


into.  Ma  4 *31 


PRINTED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


INTRODUCTION 


Rev,  Edward  McKendrie  Bounds  was  pas- 
sionately devoted  to  his  beloved  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.  His  devotion  was  extraordinary  in 
that  he  was  praying  and  writing  about  Him  all 
the  time,  except  during  the  hours  of  sleeping. 

God  gave  Bounds  an  enlargedness  of  heart  and 
an  insatiable  desire  to  do  service  for  Him.  To 
this  end  he  enjoyed  what  I am  pleased  to  term  a 
transcendent  inspiration,  else  he  could  never  have 
brought  out  of  his  treasury  things  new  and  old  far 
exceeding  anything  we  have  known  or  read  in  the 
last  half  century. 

Bounds  is  easily  the  Betelguese  of  the  devo- 
tional sky.  There  is  no  man  that  has  lived  since 
the  days  of  the  apostles  that  has  surpassed  him 
in  the  depths  of  his  marvelous  research  into  the 
Life  of  Prayer, 

He  was  busily  engaged  In  writing  on  his 
manuscripts  when  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  “Well 
done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant,  enter  thou 
into  the  joys  of  thy  Lord/*  His  letters  would 
often  come  to  me  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  19 ii, 
1912  and  1913,  saying,  “Pray  for  me  that  God 


vi  INTRODUCTION 

will  give  me  new  nerves  and  new  visions  to  finish 
the  manuscripts. 

Wesley  was  of  the  sweetest  and  most  forgiving 
disposition,  hut  when  aroused  he  was  a man  of 
the  “keenest  penetration  with  a gift  of  speech  that 
bit  like  the  stroke  of  a whip.”  Bounds  was  meek 
and  humble,  and  never  did  we  know  him  to 
retaliate  upon  any  of  his  enemies.  He  cried  over 
them  and  wept  praying  for  them  early  and  late. 

Wesley  was  easily  gulled.  “My  brother,”  said 
Charles,  on  one  occasion  in  disgusting  accents, 
“was,  I believe,  born  for  the  benefit  of  knaves.” 
No  man  could  impose  on  Bounds’  credulity.  He 
i,was  a diagnostician  of  rare  ability.  Bounds  shied 
kway  from  all  frauds  in  profession,  and  would 
waste  no  time  upon  them. 

Wesley  was  preaching  and  riding  all  day. 
Bounds  was  praying  and  writing  day  and  night. 

Wesley  would  not  allow  any  misrepresentation 
of  his  doctrinal  positions  in  his  late  years.  Bounds 
in  this  respect  was  very  much  like  him. 

Wesley  came  to  his  fame  while  yet  alive.  He 
was  always  in  the  public  eye.  Bounds,  while 
editing  a Christian  Advocate  for  twelve  years,  was 
little  known  out  of  his  church. 

Wesley  at  eighty-six  could  still  preach  on  the 
streets  for  thirty  minutes.  Bounds  was  able  at 
seventy-five  in  the  first  hour  of  the  fourth  watch 
to  pray  for  three  hours  upon  his  knees. 

Wesley,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  had  enjoyed 


INTRODUCTION 


vii 


fifty-six  years  of  preferment.  His  name  was  on 
every  tongue.  Christianity  was  born  again  in 
England  under  his  mighty  preaching  and  organiza- 
tion. Bounds  was  comparatively  unknown  for 
fifty  years  but  will  recover  the  “lost  and  forgotten 
secret  of  the  church”  in  the  next  fifty  years. 

Wesley’s  piety' and  genius  and  popularity  flowed 
from  his  early  life  like  a majestic  river.  Bounds’ 
has  been  dammed  up,  but  now  it  is  beginning  to 
sweep  with  resistless  force  and  ere  long  he  will 
be  the  mighty  Amazon  of  the  devotional  world. 

Henry  Crabbe  Robinson  said  in  his  diary  when 
he  heard  Wesley  preach  at  Colchester,  “He  stood 
in  a wide  pulpit  and  on  each  side  of  him  stood  a 
minister,  and  the  two  held  him  up.  His  voice  was 
feeble  and  he  could  hardly  be  heard,  but  his 
reverend  countenance,  especially  his  long  white 
locks,  formed  a picture  never  to  be  forgotten.” 
The  writer  of  these  lines  gave  up  his  pulpit  in 
Brooklyn  in  1912  to  Rev.  E.  M.  Bounds  just  ten 
months  before  his  death.  His  voice  was  feeble 
and  his  periods  were  not  rounded  out.  His  ser- 
mon was  only  twenty  minutes  long,  when  he  quietly 
came  to  the  end  and  seemed  exhausted. 

Wesley  had  sufficient  money  and  to  spare  dur- 
ing all  his  career.  Bounds  did  not  care  for  money. 
He  did  not  depreciate  it ; he  considered  It  the  low- 
est order  of  power. 

Wesley  died  with  “an  eye  beaming  and  lips 
breaking  Into  praise.”  “The  best  of  all  is  God 


viii  INTRODUCTION 

with  us,’’  Bounds  wrote  the  writer  of  these  lines. 
“When  He  is  ready  I am  ready;  I long  to  taste  the 
joys  of  the  heavenlies.” 

Wesley  said,  “The  World  is  my  parish.” 
Bounds  prayed  as  if  the  universe  was  his  zone. 

Wesley  was  the  incarnation  of  unworldliness, 
the  embodiment  of  magnanimity.  Bounds  was  the 
incarnation  of  unearthliness,  humility  and  self- 
denial.  Wesley  will  live  in  the  hearts  of  saints 
for  everlasting  ages.  Bounds  eternally. 

Wesley  sleeps  in  City  Road  Chapel  grounds, 
among  his  “bonny  dead,”  under  marble,  with 
fitting  tribute  chiseled  in  prose,  awaiting  the  Resur- 
rection. Bounds  sleeps  in  Washington,  Georgia, 
cemetery,  without  marble  covering,  awaiting  the 
Bridegroom’s  coming. 

These  two  men  held  ideals  high  and  clear  be- 
yond the  reach  of  other  men.  Has  this  race  of 
men  entirely  gone  out  of  the  world  now  that  they 
are  dead?  Let  us  pray. 

Homer  W.  Hodge 

Brooklyn,  N.  .Y. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER 

I  Praying  Saints  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ments   

II  Praying  Saints  of  ^he  Old  Testa- 
ments (^continued) 

III  Abraham,  the  Man  of  Prayer  . 

IV  Moses,  the  Mighty  Intercessor 
V Elijah,  the  Praying  Prophet  . 

VI  Hezekiah,  the  Praying  King  . 

VII  Ezra,  the  Praying  Reformer  . 
VIII  Nehemiah,  the  Praying  Builder  . 
IX  Samuel,  the  Child  of  Prayer  . 

X  Daniel,  the  Praying  Captive  . 

XI  Faith  of  Sinners  in  Prayer  . 

XII  Paul,  the  Teacher  of  Prayer  . 

XIII  Paul  and  His  Praying  . • . . 

XIV  Paul  and  His  Praying  {continued)  . 

XV  Paul  and  His  Requests  for  Prayer 

XVI  Paul  and  His  Requests  for  Prayer 
'{continued) 


PAGE 

13 

Z1 

Z9 

33 

42 

54 

66 

72 

80 

89 

97 

107 

I2I 

I3I 

142 

150 


IX 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING 
MEN 

CHAPTER  I 

PRAYING  SAINTS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENTS 

The  Holy  Spirit  will  give  to  the  praying  saint  the 
brightness  of  an  immortal  hope,  the  music  of  a deathless 
song,  in  His  baptism  and  communion  with  the  heart.  He 
will  give  sweeter  and  more  enlarged  visions  of  heaven 
until  the  taste  for  other  things  will  pall,  and  other  visions 
will  grow  dim  and  distant.  He  will  put  notes  of  other 
worlds  in  human  hearts  until  all  earth  s music  ts  discord 
and  songless. — E.  M.  Bounds. 

Old  Testament  history  is  filled  with  accounts 
of  praying  saints.  The  leaders  of  Israel  in  those 
early  days  were  noted  for  their  praying  habits. 
Prayer  is  the  one  thing  which  stands  out  promi- 
nently in  their  lives. 

To  begin  with,  note  the  incident  in  Joshua,  loth 
chapter,  where  the  very  heavenly  bodies  were 
made  subject  to  prayer.  A prolonged  battle  was 
on  between  the  Israelites  and  their  enemies,  and 


13 


14!  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

when  night  was  rapidly  coming  on,  and  it  was  dis-/’ 
covered  that  a few  more  hours  of  daylight  were*,* 
needful  to  ensure  victory  for  the  Lord’s  hosts,!'. 
Joshua,  that  sturdy  man  of  God,  stepped  into  the 
breach,  with  prayer.  The  sun  was  too  rapidly 
declining  in  the  west  for  God’s  people  to  reap  the 
full  fruits  of  a noted  victory,  and  Joshua,  seeing 
how  much  depended  upon  the  occasion,  cried  out 
in  the  sight  and  in  the  hearing  of  Israel,  “Sun, 
stand  thou  still  upon  Gideon,  and  thou  moon  in 
the  Valley  of  Ajalon.”  And  the  sun  actually 
stood  still  and  the  moon  stopped  on  her  course  at 
the  command  of  this  praying  man  of  God,  till  the 
Lord’s  people  had  avenged  themselves  upon  the 
Lord’s  enemies. 

Jacob  was  not  a strict  pattern  of  righteousness, 
prior  to  his  all-night  praying.  Yet  he  was  a man 
of  prayer  and  believed  in  the  God  of  prayer.  So 
we  find  him  swift  to  call  upon  God  in  prayer  when 
he  was  in  trouble.  He  was  fleeing  from  home 
fearing  Esau,  on  his  way  to  the  home  of  Laban, 
a kinsman.  As  night  came  on,  he  lighted  on  a 
certain  place  to  refresh  himself  with  sleep,  and  as 
he  slept  he  had  a wonderful  dream  in  which  he 
saw  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending 
on  a ladder  which  stretched  from  earth  to  heaven. 
It  was  no  wonder  when  he  awoke  he  was  con- 
strained to  exclaim,  “Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this 
place  and  I knew  it  not.” 

Then  it  was  he  entered  into  a very  definite  cove- 


PRAYING  SAINTS 


15 


[Liant  with  Almighty  God,  and  in  prayer  vowed  a 
fow  unto  the  Lord,  saying,  “If  God  will  be  with 
n/ie,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I go,  and 
will  give  me  bread  to  eat  and  raiment  to  put  on, 
so  that  I come  again  to  my  father’s  house  in 
peace;  and  shall  the  Lord  be  my  God,  and  this 
stone  which  I have  set  for  a pillar  shall  be  God’s 
house;  and  of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me,  I will 
surely  give  one-tenth  unto  thee.” 

With  a deep  sense  of  his  utter  dependence  upon 
God,  and  desiring  above  all  the  help  of  God, 
Jacob  conditioned  his  prayer  for  protection,  bless- 
ing and  guidance  by  a solemn  vow.  Thus  Jacob 
supported  his  prayer  to  God  by  a vow. 

Twenty  years  had  passed  while  Jacob  tarried 
at  the  house  of  Laban,  and  he  had  married  two  of 
his  daughters  and  God  had  given  him  children. 
He  had  increased  largely  in  wealth,  and  he  re- 
solved to  leave  that  place  and  return  home  to 
where  he  had  been  reared.  Nearing  home  it  oc- 
curred to  him  that  he  must  meet  his  brother  Esau, 
whose  anger  had  not  abated  notwithstanding  the 
passage  of  many  years.  God,  however,  had  said 
to  him,  “Return  to  thy  father’s  house  and  to  thy 
kindred,  and  I will  be  with  thee.”  In  this  dire 
emergency  doubtless  God’s  promise  and  his  vow 
made  long  ago  came  to  his  mind,  and  he  took  him- 
self to  an  all-night  season  of  prayer.  Here  comes 
to  our  notice  that  strange,  inexplicable  incident  of 
the  angel  struggling  with  Jacob  all  night  long,  till 


16  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

Jacob  at  last  obtained  the  victory.  “I  will  not  let 
thee  go  except  thou  bless  me.”  And  then  and), 
there,  in  answer  to  his  earnest,  pressing  and  imi- 
portunate  praying,  he  was  richly  blessed  person! 
ally  and  his  name  was  changed.  But  even  more 
than  that,  God  went  ahead  of  Jacob’s  desire,  and 
strangely  moved  upon  the  angry  nature  of  Esau, 
and  lo  and  behold,  when  Jacob  met  him  next  day, 
Esau’s  anger  had  entirely  abated,  and  he  vied  with 
Jacob  in  showing  kindness  to  his  brother  who  had 
wronged  him.  No  explanation  of  this  remarkable 
change  in  the  heart  of  Esau  is  satisfactory  which 
leaves  out  prayer, 

Samuel,  the  mighty  intercessor  in  Israel  and  a 
man  of  God,  was  the  product  of  his  mother’s 
prayer.  Hannah  is  a memorable  example  of  the 
nature  and  benefits  of  importunate  praying.  No 
son  had  been  born  to  her  and  she  yearned  for  a 
man  child.  Her  whole  soul  was  in  her  desire.  So 
she  went  to  the  house  of  worship,  where  Eli,  the 
priest  of  God,  was,  and  staggering  under  the 
weight  of  which  bore  down  on  her  heart  she  was 
beside  herself  and  seemed  to  be  really  intoxicated. 
Her  desires  were  too  intense  for  articulation. 
“She  poured  out  her  soul  in  prayer  before  the 
Lord.”  Insuperable  natural  difficulties  were  in 
the  way,  but  she  “multiplied  her  praying,”  as  the 
passage  means,  till  her  God-lightened  heart  and 
her  bright  face  recorded  the  answer  to  her 


PRAYING  SAINTS  17 

prayers,  and  Samuel  was  hers  by  a conscious  faith 
and  a nation  was  restored  by  faith. 

Samuel  was  born  in  answer  to  the  vowful  prayer 
of  Hannah,  for  the  solemn  covenant  which  she 
made  with  God  if  He  would  grant  her  request 
must  not  be  left  out  of  the  account  in  investigating 
this  incident  of  a praying  woman  and  the  answer 
she  received.  It  is  suggestive  in  James  5 :i5  that 
“The  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sicK,*”  the 
word  translated  means  a vow.  So  that  prayer 
in  its  highest  form  of  faith  is  that  prayer  which 
carries  the  whole  man  as  a sacrificial  offering. 
Thus  devoting  the  whole  man  himself,  and  his 
all,  to  God  in  a definite,  intelligent  vow,  never 
to  be  broken,  in  a quenchless  and  impassioned 
desire  for  heaven — such  an  attitude  of  self-devote- 
ment  to  God  mightily  helps  praying.  Samson 
is  somewhat  of  a paradox  when  we  examine  his 
religious  character.  But  amid  all  his  faults,  which 
were  grave  in  the  extreme,  he  knew  the  God 
who  hears  prayer  and  he  knew  how  to  talk  to 
God. 

No  farness  to  which  Israel  had  gone,  no  depth 
to  which  Israel  had  fallen,  no  chains  however 
iron  with  which  Israel  was  bound  but  that  their 
cry  to  God  easily  spanned  the  distance,  fathomed 
the  depths,  and  broke  the  chains.  It  was  the 
lesson  they  were  ever  learning  and  always  forget- 
ting, that  prayer  always  brought  God  to  their 
deliverance,  and  that  there  was  nothing  too  hard 


18 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


for  God  to  do  for  His  people.  We  find  all  of 
God’s  saints  in  straits  at  different  times  in  some 
way  or  another.  Their  straits  are,  however,  often, 
the  heralds  of  their  great  triumphs.  But  for 
whatever  cause  their  straits  come,  or  of  what 
kind  soever,  there  is  no  strait  of  any  degree  of 
direness  or  from  any  source  whatsoever  of  any 
nature  whatsover,  from  which  prayer  could  not 
extricate  them.  The  great  strength  of  Samson 
does  n,ot  relieve  him  nor  extricate  him  out  of 
his  straits.  Read  what  the  Scriptures  say : 

“And  when  he  came  unto  Lehi,  the  Philistines 
shouted  against  him;  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
came  mightily  upon  him,  and  the  cords  that  were 
upon  his  arms  became  as  flax  that  was  burnt  with 
fire,  and  his  bands  loosed  from  off  his  hands. 

“And  he  found  a new  jawbone  of  an  ass,  and 
put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  it,  and  slew  a thou- 
sand men  therewith. 

“And  Samson  said.  With  the  jawbone  of  an  ass, 
heaps  upon  heaps,  with  the  jawbone  of  an  ass 
have  I slain  a thousand  men. 

“And  it  came  to  pass  when  he  had  made  an 
end  of  speaking,  that  he  cast  away  the  jawbone 
out  of  his  hand,  and  called  that  place  Ramath- 
Lehi. 

“And  he  was  sore  athirst,  and  called  on  the 
Lord,  and  said,  Thou  hast  given  this  great  de- 
liverance into  the  hand  of  thy  servant,  and  now 
shall  I die  of  thirst,  and  fall  into  the  hand  of  the 
un  circumcised? 

“But  God  clave  a hollow  place  that  was  in  the 


PRAYING  SAINTS 


19 


jaw,  and  there  came  water  thereout;  and  when  he 
had  drunk,  his  spirit  came  again  and  he  revived.” 

We  have  another  incident  in  the  case  of  this 
strange  Old  Testament  character,  showing  how, 
when  in  great  straits,  their  minds  involuntarily 
turned  to  God  in  j^rayer.  However  irregular  in 
life  they  were,  however  far  from  God  they  de- 
parted, however  sinful  they  might  be  when  trouble 
came  upon  these  men,  they  invariably  called  upon 
God  for  deliverance,  and,  as  a rule,  when  they 
repented  God  heard  their  cries  and  granted  their 
requests.  This  incident  comes  at  the  close  of 
Samson’s  life,  and  shows  us  how  his  life  ended. 

Read  the  record  as  found  in  Judges,  i6th  chap- 
ter. Samson  had  formed  an  alliance  with  Delilah, 
a heathen  woman,  and  she,  in  connivance  with  the 
Philistines,  sought  to  discover  the  source  of  his 
immense  strength.  Three  successive  times  she 
failed,  and  at  last  by  her  persistence  and  womanly 
arts  persuaded  Samson  to  divulge  to  her  the  won- 
derful secret.  So  in  an  unsuspecting  hour  he 
disclosed  to  her  the  fact  that  the  source  of  his 
strength  was  in  his  hair  which  had  never  been 
cut;  and  she  deprived  him  of  his  great  physical 
power  by  cutting  off  his  hair.  She  called  for  the 
Philistines,  and  they  came  and  put  out  his  eyes 
and  otherwise  mistreated  him. 

On  an  occasion  when  the  Philistines  were 
gathered  together  to  offer  a great  sacrifice  to 
Dagon,  their  idol  god,  they  called  for  Samson  to 


20  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

make  sport  for  them.  And  the  following  is  the 
account  as  he  stood  there  presumably  the  laugh- 
ing-stock of  these  enemies  of  his  and  of  God. 

“And  Samson  said  unto  the  lad  that  held  him 
by  the  hand,  Suffer  me  that  I may  feel  the  pillars 
whereupon  the  house  standeth,  that  I may  lean 
upon  them. 

“Now  the  house  was  full  of  men  and  women; 
and  all  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  were  there; 
and  there  were  upon  the  roof  about  three  thou- 
sand men  and  women,  that  beheld  while  Samson 
made  sport. 

“And  Samson  called  unto  the  Lord  and  said, 
O Lord  God,  remember  me,  I pray  thee,  and 
strengthen  me,  I pray  thee,  only  this  once,  my 
God,  that  I may  be  at  once  avenged  of  the  Philis- 
tines for  my  two  eyes.  And  Samson  took  hold  of 
the  two  middle  pillars  upon  which  the  house 
stood,  and  on  which  it  was  borne  up,  of  the  one 
with  his  right  hand  and  of  the  other  with  his  left. 

“And  Samson  said.  Let  me  die  with  the  Philis- 
tines. And  he.  bowed  himself  with  all  his  might, 
and  the  house  fell  upon  the  lords,  and  upon  all 
the  people  that  were  there  within.  So  the  dead 
which  he  slew  at  his  death  were  more  than  they 
which  he  slew  in  his  life.” 


CHAPTER  II 


PRAYING  SAINTS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENTS 

{Continued) 

Bishop  Lambeth  and  Wainwrigtht  had  a ffreat  M,  E* 
Mission  in  Osaka^  Japan*  One  day  the  order  came  from 
hiffk  up  that  no  more  meetings  would  he  allowed  in  the 
city  by  Protestants,  Lambeth  and  W ainwright  did  all 
they  could  but  the  high  officials  were  obstinate  and  urn- 
relenting.  They  then  retired  to  the  room  of  prayer. 
Supper  time  came  and  the  Japanese  girl  came  to  summon 
them  to  their  meal,  but  she  fell  under  the  power  of  prayer. 
Mrs,  Lambeth  came  to  find  what  the  matter  was  and 
fell  under  the  same  power.  They  then  rose  and  went 
to  the  mission  hall  and  opened  it:  and  at  once  com^ 
menced  meeting,  God  fell  upon  the  assembly  and  two 
of  the  sons  of  the  city  officials  came  to  the  altar  and  were 
saved,  'Next  morning  one  of  the  officials  in  authority 
came  to  the  mission  and  said,  "Go  on  with  your  meetings, 
you  will  not  be  interrupted The  Osaka  daily  paper 
came  out  with  box  car  letters  saying,  "THE  CHRIS* 
TUN'S  GOD  GAME  TO  TOWN  LAST  NIGHTS 

— Rev.  H.  C.  Morrison. 

JoNAH^  the  man  who  prayed  in  the  fish’s  belly, 
brings  to  view  another  remarkable  instance  of 
these  Old  Testament  worthies  who  were  given 
to  prayer.  This  man  Jonah,  a prophet  of  the 


21 


g2  PRAYEK  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

Lord,  was  a fugitive  from  God  and  from  the  place 
of  duty.  He  had  been  sent  on  a mission  of,  warn- 
ing to  wicked  Nineveh,  and  had  been  commanded 
to  cry  out  against  them,  “for  their  wickedness  is 
come  up  before  me,”  said  God.  But  Jonah, 
through  fear  or  otherwise,  declined  to  obey  God, 
and  took  passage  on  a ship  for  Tarshish,  fleeing 
from  God.  He  seems  to  have  overlooked  the 
plain  fact  that  the  same  God  who  had  sent  him 
on  that  alarming  mission  had  His  eye  upon  him  as 
he  hid  himself  on  board  that  vessel.  A storm 
arose  as  the  vessel  was  on  its  way  to  Tarshish, 
and  it  was  decided  to  throw  Jonah  overboard  in 
order  to  appease  God  and  to  avert  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  boat  and  of  all  on  board.  But  God 
was  there  as  He  had  been  with  Jonah  from  the 
beginning.  He  had  prepared  a great  fish  to  swal- 
low Jonah,  in  order  to  arrest  him,  to  defeat  him 
in  his  flight  from  the  post  of  duty,  and  to  save 
Jonah  that  he  might  help  to  carry  out  the  pur- 
poses of  God. 

It  was  Jonah  who  was  in  the  fish’s  belly,  in  that 
great  strait,  and  passing  through  a strange  experi- 
ence, who  called  upon  God,  who  heard  him  and 
caused  the  fish  to  vomit  him  out  on  dry  land.  What 
possible  force  could  rescue  him  from  this  fearful 
place?  He  seemed  hopelessly  lost,  in  “the  belly 
of  hell,”  as  good  as  dead  and  damned.  But  he 
prays — ^what  else  can  he  do?  And  this  is  just 


PRAYING  SAINTS  23 

what  he  had  been  accustomed  to  do  when  in  trou- 
ble before. 

“I  cried  by  reason  of  my  affliction  unto  the 
Lord,  and  he  heard  me;  out  of  the  belly  of  hell 
cried  I,  and  thou  heardst  my  voice.” 

And  the  Lord  spake  unto  the  fish,  and  it  vom- 
ited out  Jonah  upon  the  dry  land. 

Like  others  he  joined  prayer  to  a vow  he  had 
made,  for  he  says  in  his  prayer,  “But  I will  sacri- 
fice unto  thee  with  the  voice  of  thanksgiving ; I will 
pay  that  that  I have  vowed.  Salvation  is  of  the 
Lord.” 

Prayer  was  the  mighty  force  which  brought 
Jonah  from  “the  belly  of  hell.”  Prayer,  mighty 
prayer,  has  secured  the  end.  Prayer  brought  God 
to  the  rescue  of  unfaithful  Jonah,  despite  his  sin 
of  fleeing  from  duty,  and  God  could  not  deny  his 
prayer.  Nothing  is  too  hard  for  prayer  because 
nothing  is  too  hard  for  God. 

That  answered  prayer  of  Jonah  in  the  fish’s 
belly  in  its  mighty  results  became  an  Old  Tes- 
tament type  of  the  miraculous  power  displayed  in 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead. 
Our  Lord  puts  His  seal  of  truth  upon  the  fact  of 
Jonah’s  prayer  and  resurrection. 

Nothing  can  fee  simpler  than  these  cases  of 
/God’s  mighty  deliverance.  Nothing  is  plainer 
than  that  prayer  has  to  do  with  God  directly 
and  simply.  Nothing  is  clearer  than  that  prayer 
has  its  only  worth  and  significance  in  the  great 


24  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

fact  that  God  hears  and  answers  prayer.  This 
the  Old  Testament  saints  strongly  believed.  It  is 
the  one  fact  that  stands  out  continuously  and 
prominently  in  their  lives.  They  were  essentially 
men  of  prayer. 

How  greatly  we  need  a school  to  teach  the  art 
of  praying!  This  simplest  of  all  arts  and 
mightiest  of  all  forces  is  ever  in  danger  of  being 
forgotten  or  depraved.  The  further  we  get 
away  from  our  mother’s  knees,  the  further  do  we 
get  away  from  the  true  art  of  praying.  All  our 
after-schooling  and  our  after-teachers  unteach  us 
the  lessons  of  prayer.  Men  prayed  well  in  Old 
Testament  times  because  they  were  simple  men 
and  lived  in  simple  times.  They  were  childlike, 
lived  in  childlike  times  and  had  childlike  faith. 

In  citing  the  Old  Testament  saints  noted  for 
their  praying  habits,  by  no  means  must  David 
be  overlooked,  a man  who  preeminently  was  a 
man  of  prayer.  With  him  prayer  was  a habit, 
for  we  hear  him  say,  “Evening  and  morning  and 
at  noon  will  I pray  and  cry  aloud.”  Prayer  with 
the  Sweet  Psalmist  of  Israel  was  no  strange  oc- 
cupation. He  knew  the  way  to  God  and  was 
often  found  in  that  way.  It  is  no  wonder  we 
hear  his  call  so  clear  and  impressive,  “O  come,  let 
us  worship  and  bow  down;  let  us  kneel  before  the 
Lord  our  Maker.”  He  knew  God  as  the  one 
being  who  could  answer  prayer:  “O  thou  that 
hearest  prayer,  to  thee  shall  all  flesh  come.”' 


PRAYING  SAINTS 


25 


When  God  smote  the  child  born  of  Bathsheba, 
because  David  had  by  his  grievous  sins  given  oc- 
casion of  the  enemies  of  God  to  blaspheme,  it  is 
no  surprise  that  we  find  him  engaged  in  a week’s 
praying,  asking  God  for  the  life  of  the  child.  The 
habit  of  his  life  asserted  itself  in  this  great  emer- 
gency in  his  home,  and  we  find  him  fasting  and 
praying  for  the  child  to  recover.  The  fact  that 
God  denied  his  request  does  not  at  all  affect  the 
question  of  David’s  habit  of  praying.  Even 
though  he  did  not  receive  what  he  asked  for,  his 
faith  in  God  was  not  in  the  least  affected.  The 
fact  is  that  while  God  did  not  give  him  the  life 
of  that  baby  boy,  He  afterward  gave  him  another 
son,  even  Solomon.  So  that  possibly  the  latter 
son  was  a far  great  blessing  to  him  than  would 
have  been  the  child  for  whom  he  prayed. 

In  close  connection  with  this  season  of  prayer, 
we  must  not  overlook  David’s  penitential  praying 
when  Nathan,  by  command  of  God,  uncovered 
David’s  two  great  sins  of  adultery  and  murder. 
At  once  David  acknowledged  his  wickedness,  say- 
ing unto  Nathan,  “I  have  sinned.”  And  as  show- 
ing his  deep  grief  over  his  sin,  his  heart-broken 
spirit,  and  his  genuine  repentance,  it  is  only  neces- 
sary to  read  Psalm  51  where  confession  of  sin, 
deep  humiliation  and  prayer  are  the  chief  in- 
gredients of  the  Psalm. 

David  knew  where  to  find  a sin-pardoning  God, 
and  was  received  back  again  and  had  the  joys  of 


36  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

salvation  restored  to  him  by  earnest,  sincere,  peni- 
tential praying.  Thus  are  all  sinners  brought 
into  the  divine  favor,  thus  do  they  find  pardon, 
and  thus  do  they  find  a new  heart. 

The  entire  Book  of  Psalms  brings  prayer  to  the 
front,  and  prayer  fairly  bristles  before  our  eyes 
as  we  read  this  devotional  book  of  the  Scriptures. 

Nor  must  even  Solomon  be  overlooked  in  the 
famous  catalogue  of  men  who  prayed  in  Old 
Testament  times.  Whatever  their  faults,  they 
did  not  forget  the  God  who  hears  prayer  nor  did 
they  cease  to  seek  the  God  of  prayer.  While 
this  wise  man  in  his  later  life  departed  from  God, 
and  his  sun  set  under  a cloud,  we  find  him  praying 
at  the  commencement  of  his  reign. 

Solomon  went  to  Gibeon  to  offer  sacrifice,  which 
always  meant  that  prayer  went  in  close  companion- 
ship with  sacrifice,  and  while  there,  the  Lord 
appeared  to  Solomon  in  a vision  by  night,  saying 
unto  him,  “Ask  what  I shall  give  thee.”  The 
sequel  shows  the  material  out  of  which  Solomon’s 
character  was  formed.  What  was  his  request? 

“O  Lord  my  God,  thou  hast  made  thy  servant 
king  instead  of  my  father;  and  I am  but  a little 
child;  I know  not  how  to  go  out  or  to  come  in. 

“And  thy  servant  is  in  the  midst  of  thy  people 
which  thou  hast  chosen,  a great  people,  that  can- 
not be  numbered  nor  counted  for  multitude. 

“Give  therefore  thy  servant  an  understanding 
heart  to  judge  thy  people,  that  I may  discern  be- 


PRAYING  SAINTS  27 

tween'  good  and  bad;  for  who  is  able  to  judge 
this  thy  so  great  a people?” 

We  do  not  wonder  that  it  is  recorded  as  a re- 
sult of  such  praying: 

“And  the  speech  pleased  the  Lord,  that  Sol- 
omon had  asked  this  thing. 

“And  God  said  unto  him,  Because  thou  hast 
asked  this  thing,  and  hast  not  asked  for  thyself 
long  life;  neither  hast  asked  riches  for  thyself, 
nor  hast  asked  the  life  of  thy  enemies,  but  has 
asked  for  thyself  understanding  to  discern  judg- 
ment ; 

“Behold  I have  done  according  to  thy  word; 
Lo,  I have  given  thee  a wise  and  understanding 
heart;  so  that  there  was  none  like  thee  before 
thee,  neither  after  thee  shall  any  arise  like  unto 
thee. 

“Also  I have  given  thee  that  which  thou  hast 
not  asked,  both  riches  and  honor;  so  that  there 
shall  not  be  any  among  the  kings  like  unto  thee  all 
thy  days.” 

What  praying  was  this!  What  self-depreca- 
tion and  simplicity!  “I  am  but  a little  child.” 
How  he  specified  the  one  thing  needful!  And 
see  how  much  more  he  received  than  that  for 
which  he  asked! 

Take  the  remarkable  prayer  at  the  dedication 
of  the  temple.  Possibly  this  is  the  longest  record- 
ed prayer  in  God’s  Word.  How  comprehensive, 
pointed.  Intensive,  it  is!  Solomon  could  not 
afford  to  lay  the  foundations  of  God’s  house  in 


28  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

anything  else  but  in  prayer.  And  God  heard  this 
prayer  as  he  heard  him  before,  “And  when 
Solomon  had  made  an  end  of  his  praying,  the  fire 
came  down  from  heaven,  and  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  filled  the  house,” ' thus  God  attested  the 
acceptance  of  this  house  of  worship  and  of 
Solomon,  the  praying  king. 

The  list  of  these  Old  Testament  saints  given 
to  prayer  grows  as  we  proceed,  and  is  too  long  to 
notice  at  length  all  of  them.  But  the  name  of 
Isaiah,  the  great  evangelical  prophet,  and  that  of 
Jeremiah,  the  weeping  prophet,  must  not  be  left 
out  of  the  account.  Still  others  might  be  men- 
tioned. These  are  sufficient,  and  with  their 
names  we  may  close  the  list.  Let  careful  readfers 
of  the  Old  Scriptures  keep  the  prayer  question  in 
mind,  and  they  will  see  how  great  a place  prayer 
occupied  in  the  minds  and  lives  of  the  men  of 
those  early  days. 


CHAPTER  III 


ABRAHAM,  THE  MAN  OF  PRAYER 


Oh  for  determined  men  and  women,  who  will  rise 
early  and  really  hurn  out  for  God,  Oh  for  a faith  that 
will  sweep  into  heaven  with  the  early  davming  of  the 
morning  and  have  ships  from  a shoreless  sea  loaded  in 
the  soul’s  harbor  ere  the  ordinary  laborer  has  knocked 
the  dew  from  his  scythe  or  the  huckster  has  turned  from 
his  pallet  of  straw  to  spread  nature's  treasures  of  fruit 
before  the  early  buyers. — ^Rev.  Homer  W.  Hodge. 

Abraham,  the  friend  of  God,  was  a striking 
illustration  of  one  of  the  Old  Testament  saints 
who  believed  strongly  in  prayer.  Abraham  was 
not  a shadowy  figure  by  any  means.  In  the 
simplicity  and  dimness  of  the  patriarchal  dis- 
pensation, IS  illustrated  by  him,  we  learn  the 
worth  of  prayer,  as  well  as  discover  its  antiquity. 
The  fact  is,  prayer  reaches  back  to  the  first  ages 
of  man  on  earth.  We  see  how  the  energy  of 
prayer  is  absolutely  required  in  the  simplest  as 
well  as  in  the  most  complex  dispensations  of  God’s 
grace.  When  we  study  Abraham’s  character,  we 
find  that  after  his  call  to  go  out  into  an  unknown 
country,  on  his  journey  with  his  family  and  his 

29 


80  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

household  servants,  wherever  he  tarried  by  the 
way  for  the  night  or  longer,  he  always  erected  an 
altar,  and  “called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.” 
And  this  man  of  faith  and  prayer  was  one  of  the 
first  to  erect  a family  altar,  around  which  to 
gather  his  household  and  offer  the  sacrifices  of 
worship,  of  praise  and  of  prayer.  These  altars 
built  by  Abraham  were,  first  of  all,  essentially 
altars  about  which  he  gathered  his  household,  as 
distinguished  from  secret  prayer. 

As  God’s  revelations  became  fuller  and  more 
perfect,  Abraham’s  prayerfulness  increased,  and 
it  was  at  one  of  these  spiritual  eras  that  “Abraham 
fell  on  his  face  and  God  talked  with  him.”  On 
still  another  occasion  we  find  this  man,  “the  father 
of  the  faithful,”  on  his  face  before  God,  aston- 
ished almost  to  incredulity  at  the  purposes  and 
revelations  of  Almighty  God  to  him  in  promising 
him  a son  in  his  old  age,  and  the  wonderful  en- 
gagements which  God  made  concerning  his  prom- 
ised son. 

Even  Ishmael’s  destiny  is  shaped  by  Abraham’s 
prayer  when  he  prayed,  “O  that  Ishmael  might 
live  before  thee!” 

What  a remarkable  story  is  that  of  Abraham’s 
standing  before  God  repeating  his  intercessions  for 
the  wicked  city  of  Sodom,  the  home  of  his  nephew 
Lot,  doomed  by  God’s  decision  to  destroy  it! 
Sodom’s  fate  was  for  a while  stayed  by  Abraham’s 
praying,  and  was  almost  entirely  relieved  by  the 


ABRAHAM,  THE  MAN  OF  PRAYER  SI 

humility  and  insistence  of  the  praying  of  this  man 
who  believed  strongly  in  prayer  and  who  knew 
how  to  pray.  No  other  recourse  was  opened  to 
Abraham  to  save  Sodom  but  prayer.  Perhaps  the 
failure  to  ultimately  rescue  Sodom  from  her  doom 
of  destruction  was  due  to  Abraham’s  optimistic 
view  of  the  spiritual  condition  of  things  in  that 
city.  It  might  have  been  possible, — ^who  knows? 
— that  if  Abraham  had  entreated  God  once  more, 
and  asked  Him  to  spare  the  city  if  even  one 
righteous  man  was  found  there,  for  Lot’s  sake, 
He  might  have  heeded  Abraham’s  request. 

Note  another  instance  in  the  life  of  Abraham 
as  showing  how  he  was  a man  of  prayer  and  had 
power  with  God.  Abraham  had  journeyed  to  and 
was  sojourning  in  Gerar.  Fearing  that  Abimelech 
might  kill  him  and  appropriate  Sarah  his  wife 
to  his  own  lustful  uses,  he  deceived  Abimelech  by 
claiming  that  Sarah  was  his  sister.  God  ap- 
peared unto  Abimelech  in  a dream  and  warned 
him  not  to  touch  Sarah,  telling  him  that  she  was 
the  wife  of  Abraham,  and  not  his  sister.  Then 
he  said  unto  Abimelech,  “Now  restore  therefore 
the  man  his  wife ; for  he  is  a prophet,  and  he  shall 
pray  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  live.”  And  the  con- 
clusion of  the  incident  is  thus  recorded:  “So 
Abraham  prayed  unto  God,  and  God  healed 
Abimelech  and  his  wife,  and  his  maid  servants, 
and  they  bare  children.  For  the  Lord  had  fast 


S2  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

closed  up  all  the  wombs  of  the  house  of  Abimelech 
because  of  Sarah,  his  wife.” 

This  was  a case  somewhat  on  the  line  of  that 
of  Job  at  the  close  of  his  fearful  experience  and 
his  terrible  trials,  when  his  friends,  not  under- 
standing Job,  neither  comprehending  God’s  deal- 
ings wiih  this  servant  of  His,  falsely  charged  Job 
with  being  in  sin  as  the  cause  of  all  his  troubles. 
God  said  to  these  friends  of  Job,  “My  servant  Job 
shall  pray  for  you,  for  him  will  I accept.  And 
the  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Job  when  he  had 
prayed  for  his  friends.” 

Almighty  God  knew  His  servant  Job  as  a man 
of  prayer,  and  He  could  afford  to  send  these 
friends  of  Job  to  him  to  pray  in  order  to  carry 
out  and  fulfill  His  plans  and  purposes. 

It  was  Abraham’s  rule  to  stand  before  the  Lord 
in  prayer.  His  life  was  surcharged  with  prayer 
and  Abraham’s  dispensation  was  sanctified  by 
prayer.  For  wherever  he  halted  in  his  pilgrim- 
age, prayer  was  his  inseparable  accompaniment. 
Side  by  side  with  the  altar  of  sacrifice  was  the 
altar  of  prayer.  He  got  up  early  in  the  morning 
to  the  place  where  he  stood  before  the  Lord  in 
prayer. 


CHAPTER  IV 


MOSES,  THE  MIGHTY  INTERCESSOR 


Intercessory  Prayer  is  a pomerful  means  of  grace  to 
the  praying  man.  Martyn  observes  that  at  times  of  in- 
mard  dryness  and  depression,  he  had  often  found  a de- 
lightful revival  in  the  act  of  praying  for  others  for  their 
conversion,  or  sanctification,  or  prosperity  in  the  work  of 
the  Lord*  His  dealings  with  God  for  them  about  these 
gifts  and  blessings  were  for  himself  the  divinely  natural 
channel  of  a renewed  insight  into  his  own  part  and  lot  in 
Christ,  into  Christ  as  his  own  rest  and  power,  into  the 
perfect  freedom**^  of  an  entire  yielding  of  himself  to  his 
Master  f on  His  work. — Bishop  Handley  C.  G.  Moule. 

Prayer  unites  with  the  purposes  of  God  and 
lays  itself  out  to  secure  those  purposes.  How 
often  would  the  wise  and  benign  will  of  God  fail  In 
its  rich  and  beneficent  ends  by  the  sins  of  the  peo- 
ple if  prayer  had  not  come  in  to  arrest  wrath  and 
make  the  promise  sure  I^^Tsrael  as  a nation  would 
have  met  their  just  destruction  and  their  just  fate 
after  their  apostasy  with  the  golden  calf  had  it 
not  been  for  the  Interposition  and  unf ainting  Im- 
portunity of  Moses’  forty  days’  and  forty  nights’ 
praying ! 

Marvelous  was  the  effect  of  the  character  of 
Moses  by  his  marvelous  praying.  His  near  and 

33 


34.  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

sublime  intercourse  with  God  in  the  giving  of  the 
law  worked  no  transfiguration  of  character  like 
the  tireless  praying  of  those  forty  days  in  prayer 
with  God.  It  was  when  he  came  down  from  that 
long  struggle  of  prayer  that  his  face  shone  with 
such  dazzling  brightness.  Our  mounts  of  trans- 
figuration and  the  heavenly  shining  in  character 
and  conduct  are  born  of  seasons  of  wrestling 
prayer.  All-night  praying  has  changed  many  a 
Jacob,  the  supplanter,  into  Israel,  a prince,  who 
has  power  with  God  and  with  men. 

No  mission  was  more  majestic  in  purpose  and 
results  than  that  of  Moses,  and  none  was  more 
responsible,  diligent  and  difficult.  In  it  we  are 
taught  the  sublime  ministry  and  rule  of  prayer. 
Not  only  Is  it  the  medium  of  supply  and  support, 
but  it  is  a compassionate  agency  through  which 
the  pitying  long-suffering  of  God  has  an  outflow. 
Prayer  is  a medium  to  restrain  God’s  wrath,  that 
mercy  might  rejoice  against  judgment. 

Moses  himself  and  his  mission  were  the  crea- 
tion of  prayer.  Thus  it  is  recorded:  “When 
Jacob  was  come  into  Egypt,  and  your  fathers  cried 
unto  the  Lord,  then  the  Lord  sent  Moses  and 
Aaron,  who  brought  your  fathers  out  of  Egypt, 
and  made  them  dwell  in  this  place.”  This  is  the 
genesis  of  the  great  movement  for  the  deliver- 
ance of  the  Hebrews  from  Egyptian  bondage. 

The  great  movements  of  God  have  had  their 
origin  and  energy  in  and  were  shaped  by  prayers 


THE  MIGHTY  INTERCESSOR 


35 


of  men.  Prayer  has  directly  to  deal  with  God. 
Other  ends,  collateral  and  incidental,  are  secured 
by  prayer,  but  mainly,  almost  solely,  prayer  has 
to  deal  with  God.  He  is  pleased  to  order  His 
policy,  and  base  His  action  on  the  prayers  of 
His  saints.  Prayer  influences  God  greatly.  Moses 
cannot  do  God’s  great  work,  though  God-com- 
missioned, without  praying  much.  Moses  can- 
not govern  God’s  people  and  carry  out  the  divine 
plans,  without  having  his  censer  filled  full  of  the 
incense  of  prayer.  The  work  of  God  cannot  be 
done  without  the  fire  and  fragrance  are  always 
burning,  ascending  and  perfuming. 

Moses’  prayers  are  often  found  relieving  the 
terrible  stroke  of  God’s  wrath.  Four  times  were 
the  prayers  of  Moses  solicited  by  Pharaoh  to  re- 
lieve him  of  the  fearful  stroke  of  God’s  wrath. 
“Entreat  the  Lord,”  most  earnestly  begged 
Pharaoh  of  Moses,  while  the  loathsome  frogs 
were  upon  him.  And  “Moses  cried  unto  the  Lord 
because  of  the  frogs  which  God  had  brought 
against  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  the  Lord  did  ac- 
cording to  the  word  of  Moses.”  When  the  griev- 
ous plague  of  flies  had  corrupted  the  whole  land. 
Pharaoh  again  piteously  cried  out  to  Moses,  “En- 
treat for  me.”  Moses  went  out  from  Pharaoh 
and  entreated  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  again  did 
according  to  the  word  of  Moses.  The  mighty 
thunderings  and  hail  in  their  alarming  and  destruc- 
tive fury  extorted  from  this  wicked  king  the  very 


36  , PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

same  earnest  appeal  to  Moses,  “Entreat  the 
Lord.”  And  Moses  went  out  from  the  city  into 
privacy,  and  alone  with  Almighty  God,  he  “spread 
abroad  his  hands  unto  the  Lord,  and  the  thunder- 
ings  and  hall  ceased,  and  the  rain  was  not  poured 
out  upon  the  earth.” 

Though  Moses  was  the  man  of  law,  yet  with 
him  prayer  asserted  Its  mighty  force.  With  him, 
as  In  the  more  spiritual  dispensation,  it  could 
have  been  said,  “My  house  is  the  house  of  prayer,” 

Moses  accepts  at  its  full  face  value  the  founda- 
tion principle  of  praying  that  prayer  has  to  do 
with  God.  With  Abraham  we  saw  this  clearly  and 
strongly  enunciated.  With  Mpses  it  is  clearer 
and  stronger  still  If  possible.  I'  It  declared  that 
prayer  affected  God,  that  God  was  influenced  in 
His  conduct  by  prayer,  and  that  God  hears  and 
answer  prayer  even  when  the  hearing  and  answer- 
ing might  change  His  conduct  and  reverse  His 
action.  Stronger  than  all  other  laws,  and  more 
inflexible  than  any  other  decree,  is  the  decree, 
“Call  upon  me  and  I will  answer  you.” 

Moses  lived  near  God,  and  had  the  freest  and 
most  unhindered  and  boldest  access  to  God,  but 
this,  instead  of  abating  the  necessity  of  prayer, 
made  It  more  necessary,  obvious  and  powerful. 
Familiarity  and  closeness  to  God  gives  relish, 
frequency,  point  and  potency  to  prayer.  Those 
who  know  God  the  best  are  the  richest  and  most 
powerful  in  prayer.  Little  acquaintance  with 


THE  MIGHTY  INTEKCESSOR  37 

God,  and  strangeness  and  coldness  to  Him,  make 
prayer  a rare  and  feeble  thing. 

There  were  conditions  of  extremity  to  which 
Moses  was  reduced  which  prayer  did  not  relieve, 
but  there  is  no  position  of  extremity  which  baffles 
God,  when  prayer  puts  God  into  the  matter. 

Moses’  mission  was  a divine  one.  It  was 
ordered,  directed  and  planned  by  God.  The  more 
there  is  of  God  In  a movement,  the  more  there  is 
of  prayer,  conspicuous  and  controlling.  Moses’ 
prayer  rule  of  the  church  illustrates  the  necessity 
' of  courage  and  persistence  In  prayer.  For  forty 
days  and  forty  nights  was  Moses  pressing  his 
prayer  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord’s  people.  So 
intense  was  his  concern  for  them  which  accom- 
panied his  long  season  of  praying,  that  bodily 
infirmities  and ' appetites  were  retired.  How 
strangely  the  prayers  of  a righteous  man  affect 
God  is  evident  from  the  exclamation  of  God  to 
Moses,  “Now,  therefore,  let  me  alone,  that  my 
wrath  may  wax  hot  against  them,  that  I may 
consume  them;  and  I will  make  of  thee  a great 
nation.”  The  presence  of  such  an  influence  over 
God  fills  us  with  astonishment,  awe  and  fear. 
How  lofty,  bold  and  devoted  must  be  such  a 
pleader  I 

Read  this  from  the  divine  record : 

“And  Moses  returned  unto  the  Lord,  and  said. 
Oh,  this  people  have  sinned  a great  sin,  and  have 
made  them  gods  of  gold  I 


38  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

“Yet  now  if  thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin — and 
if  not,  blot  me,  I pray  thee,  out  of  thy  book  which 
thou  hast  written. 

“And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Whosoever 
hath  sinned  against  me,  him  will  I blot  out  of  my 
book. 

“Therefore  now  go,  and  lead  the  people  unto 
the  place  of  which  I have  spoken  unto  thee.  Be- 
hold my  angel  shall  go  before  thee.” 

The  rebellion  of  Korah  was  the  occasion  of 
God’s  anger  flaming  out  against  the  whole  con- 
gregation of  Israel,  who  sympathized  with  these 
rebels.  Again  Moses  appears  on  the  stage  of 
action,  this  time  having  Aaron  to  join  him  in 
intercession  for  these  sinners  against  God.  But 
it  only  shows  that  in  a serious  time  like  this  Moses 
knew  to  whom  to  go  for  relief,  and  was  en- 
couraged to  pray  that  God  would  stay  His  wrath 
and  spare  Israel.  Here  is  what  is  said  about  the 
matter : 

“And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  Aaron, 
saying, 

“Separate  yourselves  from  among  this  con- 
gregation, that  I may  consume  them  in  a moment. 

“And  they  fell  on  their  faces,  and  said,  O God, 
the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  shall  one  man 
sin,  and  wilt  thou  be  wroth  with  all  the  congrega- 
tion ?” 

The  assumption,  pride  and  rebellion  of  Miriam, 
sister  of  Moses,  in  which  she  had  the  presence 
and  sympathy  of  Aaron,  put  the  praying  and  the 


THE  MIGHTY  INTERCESSOR  S9 

spirit  of  Moses  in  the  noblest  and  most  amiable 
light.  Because  of  her  sin  God  smote  her  with 
leprosy.  But  Moses  made  tender  and  eai-nest 
intercession  for  his  sister  who  had  so  grievously 
offended  God,  and  his  prayer  saved  her  from  the 
fearful  and  incurable  malady. 

The  record  is  intensely  interesting,  and  follows 
just  here : 

“And  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled 
against  them  and  the  cloud  departed  from  off  the 
tabernacle  and  behold,  Miriam  became  leprous, 
white  as  snow;  and  Aaron  looked  upon  Miriam, 
and  behold  she  was  leprous. 

“And  Aaron  said  unto  Moses,  Alas,  my  Lord, 
I beseech  thee,  lay  not  the  sin  unto  us,  wherein 
we  have  done  foolishly,  and  wherein  we  have 
sinned. 

“Let  her  not  be  as  one  dead,  of  whom  the 
flesh  is  half  consumed  when  he  cometh  out  of  his 
mother’s  womb. 

“And  Moses  cried  unto  the  Lord,  saying,  Heal 
her,  O God,  I beseech  thee. 

“And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  If  her  father 
had  but  spit  in  her  face,  should  she  not  be 
ashamed  seven  days?  Let  her  be  shut  out  from 
the  camp  seven  days,  and  after  that  let  her  be 
received  again.” 

The  murmurings  of  the  children  of  Israel  fur- 
nished conditions  which  called  into  play  the  full 
forces  of  prayer.  They  impressively  bring  out 
the  intercessory  feature  of  prayer  and  disclose 


40  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

Moses  in  his  great  office  as  an  intercessor  before 
God  in  behalf  of  others.  It  was  at  Marah,  where 
the  waters  were  bitter  and  the  people  grievously- 
murmured  against  Moses  and  God. 

Here  is  the  Scripture  account : 

“And  when  they  came  to  Marah,  they  could 
not  drink  of  the  waters  of  Marah;  for  they  were 
bitter ; therefore  the  name  of  it  was  called  Marah. 

“And  the  people  murmured  against  Moses,  say- 
ing, What  shall  we  drink? 

“And  Moses  cried  unto  the  Lord;  and  the 
Lord  showed  him  a tree,  which  when  he  had  cast 
into  the  waters,  the  waters  were  made  sweet; 
there  he  made  for  them  a statute  and  an  ordi- 
nance, and  there  he  proved  them.” 

How  many  of  the  bitter  places  of  the  earth 
have  been  sweetened  by  prayer  the  records  of 
eternity  alone  will  disclose. 

Again  at  Taber  ah  the  people  complained,  and 
God  became  angry  with  them,  and  Moses  came 
again  to  the  front  and  stepped  into  the  breach  and 
prayed  for  them.  Here  is  the  brief  account: 

“And  when  the  people  complained,  it  dis- 
pleased the  Lord;  and  the  Lord  heard  it;  and  his 
anger  was  kindled;  and  the  fire  of  the  Lord 
burnt  among  them,  and  consumed  them  that  were 
in  the  uttermost  part  of  the  camp. 

“And  the  people  cried  unto  Moses,  and  when 
Moses  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  the  fire  was 
quenched.” 

^ Moses  got  what  he  asked  for.  His  praying 
was  specific  and  God’s  answer  was  likewise  speci- 


THE  MIGHTY  INTERCESSOR  41 

£c.  Always  was  he  heard  by  Almighty  God  when 
he  prayed,  and  always  was  he  answered  by  God. 
Once  the  answer  was  not  specific.  He  had  prayed 
to  go  into  Canaan.  The  answer  came  but  not 
what  he  asked  for.  He  was  given  a vision  of  the 
Promised  Land,  but  he  was  not  allowed  to  go 
over  Jordan  into  that  land  of  promise.  It  was 
a prayer  on  the  order  of  Paul’s  when  he  prayed 
three  times  for  the  removal  of  the  thorn  in  the 
flesh.  But  the  thorn  was  not  removed.  Grace, 
however,  was  vouchsafed  which  made  the  thorn 
a blessing. 

It  must  not  be  thought  that  because  the  90th 
Psalm  is  incorporated  with  what  is  known  as  the 
^‘Psalms  of  David,”  that  David  was  the  author 
of  it.  By  general  consent  it  is  attributed  to 
Moses,  and  it  gives  us  a sample  of  the  praying 
of  this  giver  of  the  law  of  God  to  the  people.  It 
is  a prayer  worth  studying.  It  is  sacred  to  us  be- 
cause it  has  been  the  requiem  uttered  over  our 
dead  for  years  that  are  past  and  gone.  It  has 
blessed  the  grave  of  many  a sleeping  saint.  But 
its  very  familiarity  may  cause  us  to  lose  its  full 
meaning.  Wise  will  we  be  if  we  digest  it,  not 
for  the  dead,  but  for  the  living,  that  it  may  teach 
us  how  to  live,  how  to  pray  while  living,  and  how 
to  die.  “So  teach  us  to  numbe^r  our  days  that  we 
may  apply  our  hearts  to  wisdom.  Establish  thou 
the  work  of  our  hands,  yea,  the  work  of  our  hands 
establish  thou  it.” 


CPiAPTER  V 


ELIJAH,  THE  PRAYING  PROPHET 

‘‘T  hm)e  known  men^'  sa^s  Goodwin — it  must  have 
been  himself — ^*^who  came  to  God  for  nothing  else  but 
just  to  come  to  Him,  they  so  loved  Him.  They  scorned 
to  soil  Him  and  themselves  with  any  other  errand 
than  just  purely  to  be  alone  with  Him  in  His  presence. 
FHendship  is  best  kept  up,  even  amonff  men,  by  fre- 
quent visits;  and  the  more  free  and  defecate  those  fre- 
quent visits  are,  and  the  less  occasioned  by  business,  or 
necessity,  or  custom  they  are,  the  more  friendly  and  wel- 
come they  are." — Rev.  Alexander  Whyte. 

Elijah  is  preemlnendy  the  elder  of  the 
prophets.  The  crown,  the  throne  and  the  scepter 
are  his.  His  garments  are  white  with  flame.  He 
seems  exalted  in  his  fiery  and  prayerful  nature,  as  a 
being  seemingly  superhuman,  but  the  New  Tes- 
tament places  him  alongside  of  us  as  man  of  like 
nature  with  us.  Instead  of  placing  himself  out- 
side the  sphere  of  humanity,  in  the  marvelous 
results  of  his  praying,  it  points  to  him  as  an  ex- 
ample to  be  imitated  and  as  inspiration  to  stimu- 
late us.  To  pray  like  Elijah,  and  to  have  results 
like  Elijah,  is  the  crying  need  of  the  times. 

Elijah  had  learned  the  lesson  of  prayer,  and 


42 


ELIJAH,  THE  PRAYING  PROPHET  43 


had  graduated  in  that  divine  school  ere  we  know 
him.  Somewhere  in  the  secret  places,  on  moun- 
tain or  in  plain,  he  had  been  alone  with  God,  an 
intercessor  against  the  debasing  idolatry  of  Ahab. 
Mightily  had  his  prayers  prevailed  with  God. 
How  confidently  and  well  assured  were  the 
answers  to  his  praying. 

He  had  been  talking  with  God  about  venge- 
ance. He  was  the  embodiment  of  his  times. 
Those  times  were  times  of  vengeance.  The  in- 
tercessor was  not  to  be  clothed  with  an  olive 
branch  with  its  fillet  of  wood,  the  symbol  of  a 
suppliant  for  mercy,  but  with  fire,  the  symbol 
of  justice  and  the  messenger  of  wrath.  How 
abruptly  does  he  come  before  us  In  the  presence 
of  Ahab  I Well  assured  and  with  holy  boldness 
does  he  declare  before  the  astonished,  cowering 
king  his  message  of  fearful  import,  a message 
gained  by  his  earnest  praying, — “in  praying  he 
prayed  that  it  might  not  rain,”  and  God  did  not 
deny  his  prayer.  “As  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
liveth,  before  whom  I stand,  there  shall  not  be 
dew  nor  rain  these  years  but  according  to  my 
word.” 

The  secret  of  his  praying  and  the  character  of 
the  man  are  found  in  the  words,  “Before  whom 
I stand.”  We  are  here  reminded  of  Gabriel’s 
words  to  Zacharias  in  informing  this  priest  of  the 
coming  of  a son  to  him  and  his  wife  in  their  old 
age : “I  am  Gabriel  that  standeth  in  the  presence 


4j4  prayer  and  praying  MEN 

of  God.”  The  archangel  Gabriel  had  scarcely 
more  unflinching  devotion,  more  courage,  and 
more  readiness  of  obedience,  and  more  jealously 
of  God’s  honor,  than  Elijah.  What  projecting 
power  do  we  see  in  his  prayer ! “And  it  rained 
not  on  the  earth  by  the  space  of  three  years  and 
six  months.”  What  omnipotent  forces  which 
can  command  the  powers  of  nature ! “Not  dew 
nor  rain.”  What  man  is  this  who  dares  utter 
such  a claim  or  assert  such  a power?  If  his  claim 
be  false,  he  is  a fanatic  or  a madman.  If  his  claim 
be  true,  he  has  stayed  the  benevolent  arm  of 
Omnipotence,  and  put  himself,  by  God’s  leave,  in 
God’s  place.  The  accursed  and  burnt-up  land 
and  the  fiery,  rainle'ss  and  dewless  days  and  nights, 
attest  the  truth  of  his  saying,  and  prove  the  stern- 
ness, strength,  firmness  and  passion  of  the  man 
who  holds  back  the  clouds  and  stays  the  blessed 
visitation  of  the  rain.  Elijah  is  his  name,  and 
this  attests  the  truth  of  that  name,  “My  God  is 
Jehovah.” 

His  prayers  have  the  power  to  stay  the  benig- 
nant course  of  nature.  He  stands  in  God’s  stead 
in  this  matter.  The  sober,  passionless,  unimagi- 
native James,  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  in  his 
Epistle,  says  to  us : “See  what  prayer  can  do,  by 
Elijah!  Pray  as  Elijah  prayed.  Let  the  righteous 
man  put  forth  to  its  fullest  extent  the  energy 
of  prayer.  Let  saints  and  sinners,  angels  and 
devils,  see  and  feel  the  mighty  potencies  of  prayer. 


ELIJAH,  THE  PRAYING  PROPHET  45 

See  how  the  prayer  of  a good  man  has  power 
and  influence,  and  avails  with  God !” 

No  sham  praying  was  that  of  Elijah,  no  mere 
performance,  no  spiritless,  soulless,  olBcial  pray- 
ing was  it.  Elijah  was  in  Elijah’s  praying.  The 
whole  man,  with  ail  his  fiery  forces,  was  in  it. 
Almighty  God  to  him  was  real.  Prayer  to  him 
was  the  means  of  projecting  God  in  full  force  on 
the  world,  in  order  to  vindicate  His  name,  estab- 
lish His  own  being,  to  avenge  His  blasphemed 
name  and  violated  law,  and  to  vindicate  His 
servants. 

Instead  of  “prayed  earnestly,”  in  James  5 :i7, 
the  Revised  Version  has  it,  “In  his  prayer  he 
prayed,”  or  “with  prayer  he  prayed.”  That  is, 
with  all  the  combined  energies  of  prayer  he 
prayed. 

Elijah’s  praying  was  strong,  insistent,  and  re- 
sistless in  its  elements  of  power.  Feeble  praying 
secures  no  results  and  brings  neither  glory  to  God 
nor  good  to  man. 

Elijah  learned  new  and  higher  lessons  of  prayer 
while  hidden  away  by  God  and  with  God  when 
he  was  by  the  brook  Cherith.  He  was  doubtless 
communing  with  God  while  Ahab  was  searching 
all  lands  for  him.  After  a while  he  was  ordered 
to  Sarepta,  where  God  had  commanded  a widow 
to  sustain  him.  He  went  there  for  the  widow’s 
good  as  well  as  for  his  own.  A benefit  to  Elijah 
and  a signal  good  to  the  widow  were  the  results 


46 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


of  Elijah’s  going.  While  this  woman  provided 
for  him,  he  provided  for  the  woman.  Elijah’s 
prayers  did  more  for  the  woman  than  the  woman’s 
hospitality  did  for  Elijah.  Great  trials  awaited 
the  widow  and  great  sorrows  too.  Her  widow- 
hood and  her  poverty  tell  of  her  struggles  and  her 
sorrows.  Elijah  was  there  to  relieve  her  poverty 
and  to  assuage  her  griefs. 

Here  is  the  interesting  account: 

“And  it  came  to  pass  that  after  these  things, 
the  son  of  the  woman,  the  mistress  of  the  house, 
fell  sick;  and  his  sickness  was  sore,  that  there 
was  no  breath  left  in  him. 

“And  she  said  unto  Elijah,  What  have  I do  to 
with  thee,  O thou  man  of  God?  Art  thou  come 
unto  me  to  call  my  sin  to  remembrance  and  to 
slay  my  son? 

“And  he  said  unto  her.  Give  me  thy  son.  And 
he  took  him  out  of  her  bosom,  and  carried  him 
up  into  a loft,  where  he  abode,  and  laid  him  upon 
his  own  bed. 

“And  he  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  O Lord 
my  God,  hast  thou  also  brought  evil  upon  the 
widow  with  whom  I sojourn  by  slaying  her  son  ? 

“And  he  stretched  himself  upon  the  child  three 
times,  and  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  O Lord 
my  God,  I pray  thee  let  this  child’s  soul  come 
into  him  again. 

“And  the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  Elijah,  and 
the  soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  again,  and 
he  revived. 

“And  Elijah  took  the  child  and  brought  him 
down  out  of  the  chamber  into  the  house,  and  de- 


ELIJAH,  THE  PRAYING  PROPHET  ¥1 

livered  him  unto  his  mother.  And  Elijah  said, 
^e,  thy  son  liveth. 

“And  the  woman  said  to  Elijah,  Now  by  this 
I know  that  thou  art  a man  of  God,  and  that  the 
word  of  the  Lord  in  thy  mouth  is  truth.” 

Elijah’s  prayer  enters  regions  where  prayer 
had  never  gone  before.  The  awful,  mysterious 
and  powerful  regions  of  the  dead  are  now  invaded 
by  the  presence  and  demands  of  prayer.  Jesus 
Christ  refers  to  Elijah’s  going  to  this  widow  as 
mainly,  if  not  solely,  for  her  good.  Elijah’s 
presence  and  praying  keep  the  woman  from  starv- 
ing and  brings  her  son  back  from  death.  Surely 
no  sorrow  is  like  the  bitterness  of  the  loss  of  an 
only  son.  With  what  assured  confidence  Elijah 
faces  the  conditions!  There  is  no  hesitancy  in 
his  actions,  and  there  is  no  pause  in  his  faith.  He 
takes  the  dead  son  to  his  own  room,  and  alone 
with  God  he  makes  the  issue.  In  that  room  God 
meets  him  and  the  struggle  is  with  God  alone.  The 
struggle  is  too  intense  and  too  sacred  for  compan- 
ionship or  for  spectator.  The  prayer  is  made' to 
God  and  the  issue  is  with  God.  The  child  has 
been  taken  by  God,  and  God  rules  In  the  realms 
of  death.  In  His  hands  are  the  issues  of  life  and 
death.  Elijah  believed  that  God  had  taken  the 
child’s  spirit,  and  that  God  could  as  well  restore 
that  spirit.  God  answered  Elijah’s  prayer.  The 
answer  was  the  proof  of  Elijah’s  mission  from 
God,  and  of  the  truth  of  God’s  Word.  The  dead 


48 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


child  brought  to  life  was  a sure  conviction  of  this 
truth : “Now  by  this  I know  that  thou  art  a man 
of  God,  and  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy 
mouth  is  truth.  Answers  to  prayer  are  the  evi- 
dences  of  the  being  of  God  and  of  the  truth  of 
His  Word. 

The  immortal  test  of  Elijah  made  in  the 
presence  of  an  apostate  king,  and  in  the  face  of 
a back-slidden  nation  and  an  idolatrous  priesthood 
on  Mount  Carmel,  is  a snblirne  exhibition  of  faith 
and  prayer.  In  the  contest  the  prophets  of  Baal 
had  failed.  No  fire  from  heaven  falls  from 
heaven  in  answer  to  their  frantic  cries.  Elijah, 
in  great  quietness  of  spirit  and  with  confident 
assurance,  calls  Israel  to  him.  He  repairs  the 
wasted  altar  of  God,  the  altar  of  sacrifice  and 
of  prayer,  and  puts  the  pieces  of  the  bullock  in 
order  on  the  altar.  He  then  uses  every  preven- 
tive against  any  charge  of  deception.  Every- 
thing is  flooded  with  water.  Then  Elijah  prays  a 
model  prayer,  remarkable  for  its  clearness,  its 
simplicity  and  its  utmost  candor.  It  is  noted  for 
its  brevity  and  its  faith. 

Read  the  account  given  in  the  Scriptures : 

“And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  time  of  the  offering 
of  the  evening  sacrifice,  that  Elijah  the  prophet 
came  near  and  said.  Lord  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac 
and  of  Ipael,  let  it  be  known  this  day  that  .thou 
art  God  in  Israel,  and  that  I am  thy  servant,  and 
that  I have  done  all  these  things  at  thy  word. 


ELIJAH,  THE  PRAYING  PROPHET  49 

“Hear  me,  O Lord,  hear  me,  that  this  people 
may  know  that  thou  art  the  Lord  God,  and  that 
thou  hast  turned  their  heart  back  again. 

“Then  the  fire  of  the  Lord  fell,  and  consumed 
the  burnt  sacrifice,  and  the  wood,  and  the  stones, 
and  the  dust,  and  licked  up  the  water  that  was  in 
the  trench. 

‘‘And  when  all  the  people  saw  it,  they  fell  on 
their  faces;  and  they  said.  The  Lord,  he  is  God; 
The  Lord,  he  is  God.” 

Elijah  had  been  dealing  directly  with  God  as 
before.  True  prayer  always  deals  with  God. 
This  prayer  of  Elijah  was  to  determine  the  exis- 
tence of  the  true  God,  and  the  answer  direct  from 
God  settles  the  question.  The  answer  is  also  the 
credentials  of  Elijah’s  divine  mission  and  the 
evidence  that  God  deals  with  men.  If  we  had 
more  of  Elijah’s  praying,  marvels  would  not  be 
the  marvels  that  they  are  now  to  us.  God  would 
not  be  so  strange,  so  far  away  in  being  and  so 
feeble  in  action.  Everything  is  tame  and  feeble 
because  our  praying  is  so  tame  and  feeble. 

God  said  to  Elijah,  “Go  show  thyself  to  Ahab, 
and  I will  send  rain  on  the  earth.”  Elijah  acted 
promptly  on  the  divine  order,  and  showed  him- 
self to  Ahab.  He  had  made  his  issue  with  Ahab, 
Israel  and  Baal.  The  whole  current  of  national 
feeling  had  turned  back  to  God.  The  day  was 
fading  into  the  evening  shades.  No  rain  had  come. 
But  Elijah  did  not  fold  his  arms  and  say  the 


50  PKAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

promise  had  failed,  but  gave  point  and  fulfilment 
to  the  promise. 

Here  is  the  Scripture  record  with  the  result 
given ; 

“And  Elijah  said  unto  Ahab,  Get  thee  up,  eat 
and  drink,  for  there  is  a sound  of  abundance  of 
rain. 

“So  Ahab  went  up  to  eat  and  to  drink.  And 
Elijah  went  up  to  the  top  of  Carmel.  And  he 
cast  himself  down  upon  the  earth,  and  put  his 
face  between  his  knees. 

“And  said  to  his  servant.  Go  up  now,'  look 
toward  the  sea.  And  he  went  up  and  looked,  and 
said,  There  is  nothing.  And  he  said.  Go  again 
seven  times. 

“And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  seventh  time  that 
he  said,  Behold  there  riseth  a little  cloud  out  of 
the  sea,  like  a man’s  hand.  And  he  said.  Go  up, 
say  unto  Ahab,  Prepare  thy  chariot,  and  get  thee 
down,  that  the  rain  stop  thee  not. 

“And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  meanwhile,  that 
the  heaven  was  black  with  clouds  and  wind,  and 
there  was  a great  rain.  And  Ahab  rode  and  went 
to  Jezreel. 

“And  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  on  Elijah.” 

Then  it  was,  as  James  records,  “And  he  prayed 
again,  and  the  heaven  gave  rain,  and  the  earth 
brought  forth  her  fruit.” 

Elijah’s  importunate,  fiery  praying  and  God’s 
promise  brought  the  rain.  Prayer  carries  the 
promise  to  its  gracious  fulfillment.  It  takes  per- 
sistent and  persevering  prayer  to  give  to  the 


ELIJAH,  THE  PRAYING  PROPHET  51 

promise  its  largest  and  most  gracious  results.  In 
this  instance  it  was  expectant  prayer,  watchful  of 
results,  looking  for  the  answer.  Elijah  had  the 
answer  in  the  small  cloud  like  a man’s  hand.  He 
had  the  inward  assurance  of  the  answer  even  be- 
fore he  had  the  rain.  How  Elijah’s  praying 
shames  our  feeble  praying ! His  praying  brought 
things  to  pass.  It  vindicated  the  existence  and 
being  of  God,  brought  conviction  to  dull  and 
sluggish  consciences,  and  proved  that  God  was 
still  God  in  the  nation.  Elijah’s  praying  turned 
a whole  nation  back  to  God,  ordered  the  moving 
of  the  clouds,  and  directed  the  falling  of  the  rain. 
It  called  down  lire  from  heaven  to  prove  the  exis- 
tence of  God  or  to  destroy  God’s  enemies. 

The  praying  of  the  Elder  Prophet  of  Israel  was 
clothed  in  his  robes  of  fire.  The  golden  crown 
was  on  his  head,  and  his  censer  was  full  and  fra- 
grant with  the  flame,  the  melody  and  the  perfume 
of  prayer.  What  wonderful  power  clothed  him 
on  this  occasion!  It  was  no  wonder  that  Elisha 
cried  out  as  he  saw  this  fiery  prophet  of  the  Lord 
enter  the  chariot  for  his  heavenly  ride,  “My 
father ! my  father  I The  chariot  of  Israel  and  the 
horsemen  thereof!”  But  chariots  and  armies 
could  not  begin  to  do  as  much  for  Israel  as  did 
this  praying  Elijah.  Prayers  are  omnipotent 
'orces,  world-wide  and  heaven-reaching. 

Where  are  the  praying  ones  of  modern  times 
of  fiery  faith  who  can  incense  Elijah’s  prayers? 


52  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

We  need  at  this  time  rulers  in  the  Church  who  can 
add  to  the  force,  flame  and  fragrance  of  Elijah’s 
praying  by  their  own  prayers. 

Elijah  could  touch  nothing  but  by  prayer. 
God  was  with  him  mightily  because  he  was  mighty 
in  prayer. 

In  the  contest  with  the  prophets  of  Baal,  he 
makes  the  issue  clearly  and  positively  to  deter- 
mine the  true  God,  as  one  to  be  made  by  prayer. 
Does  God  live?  Is  the  Bible  a revelation  from 
Him?  How  often  in  these  days  are  those  ques- 
tions rising?  How  often  do  they  need  to  be  set- 
tled ? An  appeal  by  prayer  is  the  only  settlement 
to  them.  Where  is  the  trouble?  Not  in  God, 
but  in  our  praying.  The  proof  of  God  and  of  His 
being  is  that  He  answers  prayer.  It  takes  the 
faith  and  prayer  of  Elijah  to  settle  the  question. 
Where  are  the  Elijahs  In  the  Church  of  the  present 
day?  Where  are  the  men  of  like  passions  as  he, 
who  can  pray  as  he  prayed?  We  have  thousands 
of  men  of  like  passions,  but  where  are  the  men 
of  like  praying  as  he  was?  Notice  with  what 
calm,  assured  confidence  he  stakes  the  issue  and 
builds  the  altar.  How  calm  and  pointed  is  his 
prayer  on  that  occasion  1 

Instead  of  such  praying  being  out  of  the  range 
of  New  Testament  principles  and  moderation, 
this  very  praying  of  Elijah  is  pressed  as  an  ex- 
ample to  be  imitated  and  as  an  illustration  of 
what  prayer  is  and  what  prayer  can  do  when  per- 


ELIJAH,  THE  PRAYINff'll^Bi^f SB 

formed  by  the  right  men  in  the  right 

results  could  be  secured  if  we  had  more  Wii^^ 

men  to  do  the  praying. 

Elijah  prayed  really,  truly  and  earnestly.  Hdw- 
much  of  praying  there  is  at  the  present  time  which 
is  not  real  praying,  but  is  a mere  shell,  shucks, 
and  mere  words!  Much  of  it  might  well  be 
termed  non-praying.  The  world  is  full  of  such 
praying.  It  goes  nowhere,  it  avails  nothing,  it 
brings  no  returns.  In  fact,  no  returns  nor  results 
are  expected. 

The  requisites  of  true  prayer  are  the  requisites 
of  scriptural,  vital,  personal  religion.  They  are 
the  requisites  of  real  religious  service  in  this  life. 
Primary  among  these  requisites  is  that  in  serving, 
we  serve.  So  in  praying,  we  must  pray.  Truth 
and  heart  reality,  these  are  the  core,  the  sub- 
stance, the  sum,  the  heart  of  prayer.  There  are 
no  possibilities  in  prayer  without  we  really  pray 
in  all  simplicity,  reality  and  trueness.  Prayerless 
praying — how  common,  how  popular,  how  de- 
lusive and  vain  I 


CHAPTER  VI 


HEZEKIAH,  THE  PRAYING  KING 

One  can  form  a habit  of  study  until  the  will  seems  to  he 
at  rest  and  only  the  intellect  is  engaged,  the  will  having 
retired  altogether  from  exercise.  This  is  not  true  of 
real  praying.  If  the  affections  are  laggard,  cold,  indif-- 
ferentj  if  the  intellect  is  furnishing  no  material  to  clothe 
the  petition  with  imagery  and  fervor,  the  prayer  is  a 
mere  vaporing  of  intellectual  exercise,  nothing  being  ac~ 
eomplished  worth  while. — Rev.  Homer  W.  Hodge. 

The  great  religious  reformation  under  King 
Hezekiah  and  the  prophet  Isaiah  was  thoroughly 
impregnated  with  prayer  in  its  various  stages. 
King  Hezekiah,  of  Judah,  wiU  serve  as  an  illus- 
tration of  a praying  elder  of  God’s  Church,  white- 
robed  and  gold-crowned.  He  had  genius  and 
strength,  wisdom  and  piety.  He  was  a states- 
man, a general,  a poet  and  a religious  reformer. 
He  is  a distinct  surprise  to  us,  not  so  much  because 
of  his  strength  and  genius — ^they  were  to  be  ex- 
pected— but  in  his  piety,  under  all  the  circum- 
stances connected  with  him.  The  rare  statement, 
“He  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,”  is  a glad  and  thrilling  surprise  when  we 

54 


HEZEKIAH,  THE  PRAYING  KING  55 

consider  all  his  antecedents  and  his  environments. 
Where  did  he  come  from?  Under  what  circum- 
stances was  his  childhood  life  spent?  Who  were 
his  parents  and  what  were  their  religious  charac- 
ter? Worldliness,  half-heartedness  and  utter 
apostasy  marked  the  reign  of  his  father,  grand- 
father and  his  great-grandfather.  His  home  sur- 
roundings as  he  grew  up  were  far  from  being 
favorable  to  godliness  and  faith  in  God.  One 
thing,  however,  favored  him.  He  was  fortunate 
in  having  Isaiah  for  his  friend  and  counselor  when 
he  assumed  the  crown  of  Judah.  How  much  there 
is  in  a ruler’s  having  a God-fearing  man  for  a 
counselor  and  an  associate  I 

With  what  familiar  and  successful  praying  did 
he  intercede  with  God  is  seen  in  the  Passover 
feast,  in  which  a number  of  the  people  were  im- 
fitted  to  participate.  They  had  not  prepared 
themselves  by  the  required  ceremonial  cleansing, 
and  it  was  important  that  they  be  allowed  to  eat 
the  Passover  feast  with  all  the  others. 

Here  is  the  brief  account  with  special  refer- 
ence to  the  praying  of  Hezekiah  and  the  result: 

“For  there  were  many  in  the  congregation  that 
were  not  sanctified;  therefore  the  Levites  had  the 
charge  of  the  killing  of  the  passover  for  every 
one  that  was  not  clean,  to  sanctify  them  unto  the 
Lord. 

“For  a multitude  of  the  people  had  not 
cleansed  themselves  yet  did  they  eat  the  pass- 
over  otherwise  than  it  was  written.  But  Heze- 


56  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

klah  prayed  for  them  saying,  The  Good  Lord 
pardon  every  one, 

“That  prepareth  his  heart  to  seek  God,  the 
Lord  God  of  his  fathers,  though  he  be  not 
cleansed  according  to  the  purification  of  the 
sanctuary. 

“And  the  Lord  hearkened  to  Hezekiah,  and 
healed  the  people.” 

So  the  Lord  heard  him  as  he  prayed,  and  even 
the  violation  of  the  most  sacred  law  of  the  Pas- 
sover was  forgiven  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  this 
praying,  God-fearing  king.  Law  must  yield  its 
scepter  to  prayer. 

The  strength,  directness  and  foundation  of  his 
faith  and  prayer  are  found  in  his  words  to  his 
army.  Memorable  words  are  they,  stronger  and 
mightier  than  ail  the  hosts  of  Sennacherib : 

“Be  strong  and  courageous;  be  not  afraid  nor 
dismayed  for  the  king  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all  the 
multitude  that  is  with  him;  for  there  be  more 
with  us  than  with  him. 

“With  him  is  an  arm  of  flesh;  but  with  us  is 
the  Lord  our  God  to  help  us,  and  to  fight  our 
battles.  And  the  people  rested  themselves  upon 
the  words  of  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah.” 

His  defense  against  the  mighty  enemies  of  God 
was  prayer.  His  enemies  quailed  and  were  de- 
stroyed by  his  prayers  when  his  own  armies  were 
powerless.  God’s  people  were  always  safe  when 
their  princes  were  princes  in  prayer. 

An  occasion  of  serious  import  came  to  the  peo- 


HEZEKIAH,  THE  PRAYING  KING  57 

pie  of  God  during  his  reign  which  was  to  test  his 
faith  In  God  and  furnish  opportunity  to  try  the 
prayer  agency  to  obtain  deliverance.  Judah  was 
sorely  pressed  by  the  Assyrians,  and,  humanly 
speaking,  defeat  and  captivity  seemed  imminent. 
The  King  of  Assyria  sent  a commission  to  defy 
and  blaspheme  the  name  of  God  and  to  insult 
King  Hezekiah,  and  they  uttered  their  insults  and 
blasphemy  publicly.  Note  what  Hezekiah  im- 
mediately did  without  hesitation: 

“And  it  came  to  pass  when  King  Hezekiah 
heard  it,  that  he  rent  his  clothes  and  covered 
himself  with  sackcloth,  and  went  into  the  house 
of  the  Lord.” 

His  very  first  impression  was  to  turn  to  God 
by  going  to  the  “house  of  prayer.”  God  was  in 
his  thoughts,  and  prayer  was  the  first  thing  to 
be  done.  And  so  he  sent  messengers  to  Isaiah 
to  join  him  in  prayer.  In  such  an  emergency  God 
must  not  be  left  out  of  the  account.  God  must 
be  appealed  to  for  deliverance  from  these 
blasphemous  enemies  of  God  and  His  people. 

Just  at  this  particular  juncture  the  forces  of 
the  King  of  Assyria,  which  were  besieging  Heze- 
kiah, were  diverted  from  an  immediate  attack 
on  Jerusalem.  The  King  of  Assyria,  however, 
sent  to  Hezekiah  a defaming  and  blasphemous 
letter. 

For  the  second  time,  as  he  is  insulted  and  beset 
by  the  forces  of  this  heathen  king,  he  enters  the 


68  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

house  of  the  Lord,  the  “house  of  prayer.”  Where 
else  should  he  go?  And  to  whom  should  he  ap- 
peal but  unto  the  God  of  Israel? 

“And  Hezekiah  received  the  letter  from  the 
hand  of  the  messengers,  and  read  it;  and  Heze- 
kiah went  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
spread  it  before  the  Lord. 

“And  Hezekiah  prayed  unto  the  Lord:  O 
Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel  that  dwellest 
between  the  cherubim.  Thou  art  the  God,  even 
thou  alone,  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth. 
Thou  hast  made  heaven  and  earth. 

“Now,  therefore,  O Lord  our  God,  save  us 
from  his  hand,  that  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
may  know  that  thou  art  the  Lord,  even  thou 
only.” 

And  note  the  speedy  answer  and  the  marvelous 
results  of  such  praying  by  this  God-fearing  king. 
First,  Isaiah  gave  the  King  full  assurance  that  he 
need  fear  nothing.  God  had  heard  the  prayer, 
and  would  give  a great  deliverance. 

Then  secondly,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came 
with  swift  wings  and  smote  185,000  Assyrians. 
The  king  was  vindicated,  God  was  honored,  and 
the  people  of  God  were  saved. 

The  united  prayers  of  the  praying  king  and  of 
the  praying  prophet  were  almighty  forces  in  bring- 
ing deliverance  and  destroying  God’s  enemies. 
Armies  lay  at  their  mercy,  defenceless;  and 
angels,  swift-winged  and  armed  with  almighty 
power  and  vengeance,  were  their  allies. 


HEZEKIAH,  THE  PRAYING  KING  59 

Hezekiah  had  ministered  in  prayer  in  destroy- 
ing idolatry  and  in  reforming  his  kingdom.  In 
meeting  his  enemies,  prayer  had  been  his  chief 
weapon.  He  now  comes  to  try  its  efhciency 
against  the  set  and  declared  purposes  of  Almighty 
God.  Will  it  avail  in  this  new  field  of  action? 
Let  us  see.  Hezekiah  was  very  sick,  and  God 
sends  his  own  familiar  friend  and  wise  counselor 
and  prophet,  Isaiah,  to  warn  him  of  his  approach- 
ing end,  and  to  tell  him  to  arrange  all  his  affairs 
for  his  final  departure.  This  is  the  Scriptural 
statement : 

“In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto  death. 
And_  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  the  son  of  Amoz,  came 
to  him,  and  said  unto  him.  Thus  saith  the  Lord: 
Set  thy  house  in  order,  for  thou  shalt  die  and 
not  live.” 

The  decree  came  direct  from  God  that  he 
should  die.  What  can  set  aside  or  reverse  that 
Divine  decree  of  heaven?  Hezekiah  had  never 
been  in  a condition  so  insuperable  with  a decree 
so  direct  and  definite  from  God.  Can  prayer 
change  the  purposes  of  God  ? Can  prayer  snatch 
from  the  jaws  of  death  one  who  has  been  decreed 
to  die  ? Can  prayer  save  a man  from  an  incurable 
sickness?  These  were  the  questions  with  which 
his  faith  had  now  to  deal.  But  his  faith  does 
not  seem  to  pause  one  moment.  His  faith  is  not 
staggered  one  minute  at  the  sudden  and  definite 
news  conveyed  to  him  by  the  Lord’s  prophet.  No 


60  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

such  questions  which  modern  unbelief  or  disbelief 
would  raise  are  started  in  his  mind.  At  once  he 
gives  himself  to  prayer.  Immediately  without 
delay  he  applies  to  God  who  issued  the  edict.  To 
whom  else  could  he  go  ? Cannot  God  change  His 
own  purposes  if  He  chooses? 

Note  what  Hezekiah  did  in  this  emergency, 
sorely  pressed,  and  see  the  gracious  result; 

“Then  he  turned  his  face  to  the  wall  and 
prayed  unto  the  Lord,  saying, 

“I  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  remember  now  how 
I have  walked  before  thee  in  truth  and  with  a per- 
fect heart,  and  have  done  that  which  is  good  in 
thy  sight.  And  Hezekiah  wept  sore.” 

It  was  no  self-righteous  plea  which  he  offered 
to  God  for  recovery.  He  was  only  pleading  his 
fidelity,  just  as  Christ  did  in  after  years : 

“Father,  I have  glorified  thee  on  earth.”  He 
is  the  Lord’s  reminder,  and  is  putting  Him  in 
mind  as  to  his  sincerity,  fidelity  and  service,  which 
was  in  every  way  legitimate.  This  prayer  was 
directly  in  line  with  that  of  David  in  Psalm  26  :i, 
“Judge  me,  O Lord,  for  I have  walked  in  my 
integrity.”  This  is  not  a prayer  test  with  Heze- 
kiah, nor  is  it  a faith  cure,  but  it  is  a testing  of 
God.  It  must  be  God’s  cure  if  a cure  comes  at  all. 

Hezekiah  had  hardly  finished  his  prayer,  and 
Isaiah  was  just  about  to  go  home  when  God  gave 
him  another  message  for  Hezekiah,  this  time  one 
more  pleasant  and  encouraging.  The  mighty 


HEZEKIAH,  THE  PRAYING  KING  61 

force  of  prayer  had  affected  God,  and  had  changed 
His  edict  and  reversed  Him  in  His  purpose  con- 
cerning Hezekiah.  What  is  that  which  prayer 
cannot  do?  What  is  it  which  a praying  man 
cannot  accomplish  through  prayer? 

“And  it  came  to  pass  before  Isaiah  had  gone 
out  into  the  middle  court,  that  the  word  of  the 
Lord  came  to  him,  saying, 

“Turn  again,  and  tell  Hezekiah,  the  captain 
of  my  people,  Thus,  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of 
David  thy  father,  I have  heard  thy  prayer;  I 
have  seen  thy  tears;  Behold,  I will  heal  thee;  on 
the  third  day  thou  shalt  go  up  to  the  house  of  the 
Lord. 

“And  I will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years, 
and  I will  deliver  thee  and  this  city  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  King  of  Assyria;  and  I will  defend 
this  city  for  my  own  sake,  and  for  David,  my 
servant’s  sake.” 

The  prayer  was  to  God.  It  was  that  God  should 
reconsider  and  change  His  mind.  Doubtless 
Isaiah  returned  to  his  house  with  a lighter  heart 
than  he  did  when  he  delivered  his  original  mes- 
sage. God  had  been  prayed  to  by  this  sick  king, 
and  had  been  asked  to  revoke  His  decree,  and 
God  had  condescended  to  grant  the  request.  God 
sometimes  changes  His  mind.  He  has  a right  to 
do  so.  The  reasons  for  Him  to  change  His  mind 
are  strong  reasons.  His  servant  Hezekiah  wants 
it  done.  Hezekiah  had  been  a dutiful  servant  and 
had  done  much  for  God.  Truth,  perfection  and 


62  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

goodness  have  been  the  elements  of  Hezekiah’s 
service  and  the  rule  of  his  life.  Hezekiah’s  tears 
and  prayer  are  in  the  way  of  God’s  executing 
His  decree  to  take  away  the  life  of  His  servant. 
Prayer  and  tears  are  mighty  things  with  God. 
They  are  to  Him  much  more  than  consistency  and 
much  more  to  Him  than  decrees.  “I  have  heard 
thy  prayer;  I have  seen  thy  tears;  behold  I will 
heal  thee.” 

Sickness  dies  before  prayer.  Health  comes  in 
answer  to  prayer.  God  answered  more  than 
Hezekiah  asked  for,  Hezekiah  prayed  only  for 
his  life,  and  God  gave  him  life,  and  in  addition 
promised  him  protection  and  security  from  his 
enemies. 

But  Isaiah  had  something  to  do  with  the  re- 
covery of  this  praying  king.  There  was  something 
more  than  prayer  in  it.  Isaiah’s  praying  was 
changed  into  the  skill  of  the  physician.  “And 
Isaiah  said,  Take  a lump  of  figs.  And  they  took 
and  laid  it  on  the  boil,  and  he  recovered.” 

God  often  uses  remedies  in  answering  prayer. 
It  frequently  takes  a stronger  faith  to  rise  above 
means  and  not  to  trust  in  them,  than  it  does  to 
wholly  reject  all  means.  Here  was  a simple 
remedy  that  all  might  know  that  it  did  not  cure 
the  deadly  disease,  and  yet  a means  to  aid  or  to 
test  faith.  But  still  more  praying  was  to  be  done. 
Isaiah  and  Hezekiah  could  not  do  things  without 
much  praying: 


HEZEKIAH,  THE  PRAYING  KING  63 


“And  Hezekiah  said  unto  Isaiah,  What  shall 
be  the  sign  that  the  Lord  will  heal  me,  and  that 
I shall  go  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  the  third 
day? 

“And  Isaiah  said.  This  sign  shalt  thou  have  of 
the  Lord,  that  the  Lord  will  do  the  thing  that  he 
hath  spoken:  Shall  the  shadow  go  forward  ten 
degrees,  or  go  back  ten  degrees  ? 

“And  Hezekiah  answered.  It  is  a light  thing 
for  the  shadow  to  go  down  ten  degrees ; nay,  but 
let  the  shadow  return  backward  ten  degrees. 

“And  Isaiah  the  prophet  cried  unto  the  Lord, 
and  he  brought  the  shadow  ten  degrees  backward, 
by  which  it  had  gone  down  in  the  dial  of  Ahaz.” 

Hezekiah  meets  the  occasion  and  covers  the 
answer  to  his  prayer  with  thanksgiving.  The 
fragrance  of  the  sweet  spices  are  there,  and  the 
melody  of  the  harp  also. 

Four  things  let  us  ever  keep  in  mind:  God 
hears  prayer,  God  heeds  prayer,  God  answers 
prayer,  and  God  delivers  by  prayer.  These  things 
cannot  be  too  often  repeated.  Prayer  breaks  all 
bars,  dissolves  all  chains,  opens  all  prisons  and 
widens  all  straits  by  which  God’s  saints  have  been 
holden. 

Life  was  sweet  to  Hezekiah  and  he  desired  to 
live,  but  what  can  brook  God’s  decree?  Nothing 
but  the  energy  of  faith.  Hezekiah’s  heart  was 
broken  under  the  strain,  and  its  waters  flowed 
and  added  force  and  volume  to  his  praying.  He 
pleaded  with  great  strivings  and  with  strong  ar- 
guments; and  God  heard  Hezekiah  praying,  saw 


64 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


his  tears,  and  changed  his  mind,  and  Hezekiah 
lived  to  praise  God  and  to  be  an  example  of  the 
power  of  mighty  praying. 

Like  Hezekiah,  the  decent,  soulless  way  of 
praying  did  not  suit  Paul.  He  puts  himself  in  the 
attitude  of  a wrestler,  and  charges  his  brethren  to 
join  him  in  the  agony  of  a great  conflict.  “Breth- 
ren, I beseech  you,”  he  says,  “for  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ’s  sake,  and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that 
ye  strive  together  with  me  in  your  prayers  to  God 
for  me.”  He  was  too  much  in  earnest  to  touch 
the  praying  business  genteelly  or  with  gloved 
hands.  He  was  in  it  as  an  agony,  and  he  desired 
his  brethren  to  be  his  partners  in  this  conflict  and 
wrestling  of  his  soul.  Epaphras  was  doing  this 
same  kind  of  praying  for  the  Colossians : “Always 
laboring  fervently  for  you  in  prayers,  that  ye 
may  stand  perfect  and  complete  in  all  the  will 
of  God.”  An  end  worth  agonizing  for  always. 
This  kind  of  praying  by  these  early  pastors  of  the 
Apostolic  Church  was  one  secret  of  the  purity, 
one  source  of  the  power  of  the  Church.  And 
this  was  the  kind  of  praying  which  was  done  by 
Hezekiah. 

Here  was  prayer  born  in  the  fire  of  a great 
desire,  and  pursued  through  the  deepest  agony 
of  conflict  and  opposition  to  success.  Our  spiri- 
tual cravings  are  not  strong  enough  to  give 
life  to  the  mighty  conflicts  of  prayer?  They  are 
not  absorbing  enough  to  stop  business,  arrest 


HEZEKIAH,  THE  PEAYING  KING  65 

worldly  pursuits,  awaken  us  before  day,  and  send 
us  to  the  closet,  to  solitude,  and  to  God;  to  con- 
quer every  opposing  force  and  win  our  victories 
from  the  very  jaws  of  hell.  We  want  preachers 
and  men  and  women  who  can  illustrate  the  uses, 
the  forces,  the  blessing,  and  the  utmost  limits  of 
prayer. 

Isaiah  laments  that  there  was  no  one  who 
stirred  himself  up  to  take  hold  of  God.  Much 
praying  was  done,  but  it  was  too  easy,  indifferent, 
complacent.  There  were  no  mighty  move- 
ments of  the  soul  toward  God,  no  array  of  all 
the  sanctified  energies  to  reach  out  and  grapple 
God  and  draw  out  his  treasures  for  spiritual  uses. 
Forceless  prayers  have  no  power  to  overcome 
difficulties,  no  power  to  win  marked  results,  or 
gain  a complete  and  wonderful  victory. 


CHAPTER  VII 


EZRA,  THE  PRAYING  REFORMER 

Before  the  Great  War  there  were  many  signs  of  a neu 
interest  in  Prayer  and  new  hope  from  its  exercise.  Hou 
these  signs  have  multiplied  is  known  to  every  one.  Thh 
one  thing  at  least  that  is  good  the  War  has  done  for  us 
already.  Let  us  not  miss  our  opportunity.  Prayer  is  not 
an  easy  exercise.  It  requires  encouragement,  exposition, 
and  training.  There  never  was  a time  when  men  and 
women  were  more  sincerely  anxious  to  be  told  how  to 
pray.  Prayer  is  the  mightiest  instrument  in  our  armory, 
and  if  we  are  to  use  it  as  God  has  given  the  encourage- 
ment, we  must  do  everything  in  our  power  to  bring  it 
into  exercise. — Rev.  James  Hastings. 

Ezra,  the  priest,  and  one  of  God’s  great  re- 
formers, comes  before  us  in  the  Old  Testament 
as  a praying  man,  one  who  uses  prayer  to  over- 
come difficulties  and  bring  good  things  to  pass. 
He  had  returned  from  Babylon  under  the  patron- 
age of  the  King  of  Babylon,  who  had  been  strange- 
ly moved  toward  Ezra  and  who  favored  him  in 
many  ways.  Ezra  had  been  in  Jerusalem  but  a 
few  days  when  the  princes  came  to  him  with  the 
distressing  information  that  the  people  had  not 
separated  themselves  from  the  people  of  that 
country,  and  were  doing  according  to  the  abomi- 

66 


EZRA,  THE  PRAYING  REFORMER  67 

nations  of  the  heathen  nations  about  them.  And 
that  which  was  worse  than  all  was  that  the  prlnce-tg 
and  rulers  in  Israel  had  been  chief  in  the  trespass. 

It  was  a sad  state  of  affairs  facing  Ezra,  ^as 
he  found  the  Church  almost  hopelessly  involif/ed 
with  the  world.  God  demands  of  His  Chfarch 
in  all  ages  that  it  should  be  separated  from!  the 
world,  a separation  so  sharp  that  it  amoutyats  to 
an  antagonism.  To  effect  this  very  end,  Me  put 
Israel  in  the  Promised  Land,  and  cut  them  off 
from  other  nations  by  mountains,  deserts  aind  seas, 
and  straightway  charged  them  that  thefy  should 
not  form  any  relation  with  alien  nation/s,  neither 
marital,  social  nor  business.  f 

But  Ezra  finds  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  as  he 
returns  from  Babylon,  paralyzed  an^  hopelessly 
and  thoroughly  prostrated  by  the  violation  of 
this  principle.  They  had  intermarried,  and  had 
formed  the  closest  and  most  sacred  ties  in  family, 
social  and  business  life,  with  the  Gentile  nations. 
All  were  involved  in  it,  priests,  Levites,  princes 
and  people.  The  family,  the  business,  and  the 
religious  life  of  the  people  was  founded  in  this 
violation  of  God’s  law.  What  was  to  be  done  ? 
What  could  be  done  ? Here  were  the  important 
questions  which  faced  this  leader  in  Israel,  this 
man  of  God. 

Everythi’^S  appearetf.  <o  be  against  the  recovery 
of  the  Cfu^^h.  Ezra  could  not  preach  to  them, 
because  whole  city  would  be  inflamed,  and 


68  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

\ would  hound  him  out  of  the  place.  What  force 
vt  ’■zs  there  which  could  recover  them  to  God  so 
th  lat  they  would  dissolve  business  partnerships, 
di-v  ^orce  wives  and  husbands,  cut  acquaintances  and 
diss  olve  friendships? 

1 /^he  first  thing  about  Ezra  which  is  worthy  of 
rema  .rk  was  that  he  saw  the  situation  and  realized 
how  'ffierious  it  was.  He  was  not  a blind-eyed 
optim^'st  who  never  sees  anything  wrong  in  the 
Church'^.  By  the  mouth  of  Isaiah  God  had  pro- 
poundec^  the  very  pertinent  question,  “Who  is 
blind  but-i  my  servant?”  But  it  could  not  possibly 
be  made  fto  apply  to  Ezra.  Nor  did  he  minimize 
the  conditiion  of  things  or  seek  to  palliate  the  sins 
of  the  pebble  or  to  minimize  the  enormity  of 
their  crimes^.  Their  offense  appeared  in  his  eyes 
to  be  seriou4^  In  the  extreme.  It  is  worth  not  a 
little  to  havd  leaders  in  Zion  who  have  eyes  to 
see  the  sins  oh  the  Church  as  well  as  the  evils  of 
the  times.  Onfe  great  need  of  the  modern  Church 
is  for  leaders  after  the  style  of  Ezra,  who  are 
not  blind  in  their  seeing  department,  and  who 
are  willing  to  see  the  state  of  things  in  the  Church 
and  who  are  not  reluctant  to  open  their  eyes  to 
the  real  situation. 

Very  naturally,  se^ng  these  dreadful  evils  in 
the  Church  and  in  th«^  society,  ..gf  Jerusalem,  he 
was  distressed.  The  S9^4"^ondift»5,j  of  things 
grieved  him,  so  much  so  that  he  rent  hi, 
plucked  his  hair,  and  sat  down  astonig^e^j 


EZRA,  THE  PRAYING  REFORMER  69 

these  things  are  evidences  of  his  great  distress 
of  soul  at  the  terrible  state  of  affairs.  Then  It. 
was  in  that  frame  of  mind,  concerned,  solicitou.s 
and  troubled  in  soul,  that  he  gave  himself  'to 
prayer,  to  confession  of  the  sins  of  the  peopde, 
and  to  pleading  for  pardoning  mercy  at  the  ha.nds 
of  God.  To  whom  should  he  go  in  a time  like 
this  but  unto  the  God  who  hears  prayer,  who 
is  ready  to  pardon  and  who  can  bring  the,  unex- 
pected thing  to  pass?  ‘ 

He  was  amazed  beyond  expression  at  the 
wicked  conduct  of  the  people,  was  deeply  moved 
and  began  to  fast  and  pray.  Prayer  and  fasting 
always  accomplish  something.  He  prays  with 
a broken  heart,  for  there  is  naught  else  that  ,he 
can  do.  He  prays  unto  God,  deeply  burdericd, 
prostrate  on  the  ground  and  weeping,  while  the 
whole  city  unites  with  him  in  prayer. 

Prayer  was  the  only  way  to  placate  God,  and 
Ezra  became  a great  mover  in  a great  work  for 
God,  with  marvelous  results.  The  whole  work, 
its  principles  and  its  results,  are  summarized  by 
just  one  verse  in  Ezra  io:i: 

“Now  when  Ezra  had  prayed,  and  had  con- 
fessed, weeping  and  casting  himself  down  before 
the  house  of  God,  there  assembled  unto  him  out 
of  Israel  a very  great  congregation  of  men  and 
women  and  rlnldren,  .for  the  people  wept  sore.” 

There  had  been  mighty,  simple  and  persever- 
ing pray<^r.  Intense  and  prevailing  prayer  had 


70  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

accomplished  its  end.  Ezra’s  praying  had  brought 
ii  Mto  being  and  brought  forth  results  in  a great 
-V7  ork  for  God.  It  was  mighty  praying  because 
it  1 brought  Almighty  God  to  do  His  own  work, 
•vvhi  ch  was  absolutely  hopeless  from  any  other 
sour  ce  save  by  prayer  and  by  God.  But  nothing 
Is  hojpeless  to  prayer  because  nothing  is  hope- 
lessly \ to  God. 

Ag^iin  we  must  say  that  prayer  has  only  to  do 
with  C^'od,  and  is  only  resultful  as  it  has  to  do 
with  Geld.  Whatever  influence  the  praying  of 
Ezra  had  upon  himself,  its  chief,  if  not  its  only, 
results  followed  because  it  affected  God,  and 
moved  Him  to  do  the  work. 

\A  great*'  and  general  repentance  followed  this 
praving  of  Ezra,  and  there  occurred  a wonderful 
refoiimation  in  Israel.  And  Ezra’s  mourning  and 
his  praying  were  the  great  factors  which  had  to 
do  with  , bringing  these  great  things  to  pass. 

So  thewough  was  the  revival  which  occurred 
that  as  evidences  of  Its  genuineness  it  is  noted 
that  the  leaders  in  Israel  came  to  Ezra  with  these 
words : 

“We  have  trespassed  against  our  God,  and 
have  taken  strange  wives  of  the  people  of  the 
land.  Yet  now  there  is  hope  in  Israel  concerning 
this  thing. 

“Now  therefore  lef'ps  make.,-aL.  covenant  with 
our  God  to  put  away  a^  tJde^ives^  and  such  as 
are  born  to  them,  according  to  the  of  my 

lord,  and  of  those  that  tremble  at  the  command- 


EZRA,  THE  PRAYING  REFORMER  71 

ment  of  our  God;  and  let  it  be  done  according 
to  the  law. 

“Arise,  for  this  matter  belongeth  unto  thee. 
We  also  will  be  with  thee;  be  of  good  courage, 
and  do  it.” 


CHAPTER  VIII 


NEHEMIAH,  THE  PRAYING  BUXEDER 

JVe  care  not  for  your  splendid  abilities  as  a minister, 
or  your  natural  endowment  as  an  orator  before  men.  W e 
are  sure  that  the  truth  of  the  matter  is  this:  No  one  will 
or  can  command  success  and  become  a real  praying  soul 
unless  intense  application  is  the  price.  I am  even  now 
convinced  that  the  difference  between  the  saints  like 
Wesley,  Fletcher,  Edwards,  Brainerd,  Bramwell,  Bounds, 
and  ourselves  is  energy,  perseverance,  invincible  deter- 
mination to  succeed  or  die  in  the  attempt.  God  help 
us. — ^Rev.  Homer  W.  Hodge. 

In  enumerating  the  praying  saints  of  the  Old 
Testament,  we  must  not  leave  out  of  that  sacred 
catalogue  Nehemiah,  the  builder.  He  stands  out 
on  an  equal  footing  with  the  others  who  have 
been  considered.  In  the  story  of  the  reconstruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem  after  the  captivity,  he  plays  a 
prominent  part,  and  prayer  is  prominent  in  his 
life  during  those  years.  He  was  a captive  in 
Babylon,  and  had  an  important  position  in  the 
palace  of  the  king  to  whom  he  was  cup  bearer. 
There  must  have  been  considerable  merit  in  him 
to  cause  the  king  to  take  a Hebrew  captive  and 
place  him  in  such  an  office,  where  he  really  had 

7a 


NEHEMIAH,  THE  PRAYING  BUILDER  73 

the  life  of  the  king  in  his  charge,  because  he  was 
responsible  for  the  wine  which  he  drank. 

It  was  while  Nehemiah  was  in  Babylon,  in  the 
king’s  palace,  that  one  day  his  brethren  came 
from  Jerusalem,  and  very  naturally  Nehemiah 
desired  news  from  the  people  there  and  informa- 
tion concerning  the  city  itself.  The  distressing 
information  was  given  him  that  the  walls  were 
broken  down,  the  gates  were  burned  with  fire, 
and  the  remnant  who  were  left  there  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  captivity  were  in  great  affliction 
and  reproach. 

Just  one  verse  gives  the  effect  of  this  sad  news 
upon  this  man  of  God; 

“And  it  came  to  pass  when  I heard  these  words, 
that  I sat  down  and  wept,  and  mourned  certain 
days  and  fasted,  and  prayed  before  the  God  of 
heaven.” 

Here  was  a man  whose  heart  was  in  his  own 
native  land  far  away  from  where  he  now  lived. 
He  loved  Israel,  was  concerned  for  the  welfare 
of  Zion,  and  was  true  to  God.  Deeply  distressed 
by  the  information  concerning  his  brethren  at 
Jerusalem,  he  mourned  and  wept.  How  few  the 
strong  men  in  these  days  who  can  weep  at  the 
evils  and  abominations  of  the  times!  How  rare 
those  who,  seeing  the  desolations  of  Zion,  are 
sufficiently  interested  and  concerned  for  the  wel- 
fare of  the  Church  to  mourn!  Mourning  and 
weeping  over  the  decay  of  religion,  the  decline 


74(  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

of  revival  power,  and  the  fearful  inroads  of 
worldliness  in  the  Church  are  almost  an  unknown 
quantity.  There  is  so  much  of  so-called  optimism 
that  leaders  have  no  eyes  to  see  the  breaking 
down  of  the  walls  of  Zion  and  the  low  spiritual 
state  of  the  Christians  of  the  present  day,  and 
have  less  heart  to  mourn  and  cry  about  it. 
Nehemiah  was  a mourner  in  Zion.  And  possess- 
ing this  state  of  heart,  distressed  beyond  measure, 
he  does  that  which  other  praying  saints  had  done 
— ^he  goes  to  God  and  makes  it  a subject  of  prayer. 
The  prayer  is  recorded  in  Nehemiah,  ist  chapter, 
and  is  a model  after  which  to  pattern  our  prayers. 
He  begins  with  adoration,  makes  confession  of 
the  sins  of  his  nation,  pleads  the  promises  of 
God,  mentions  former  mercies,  and  begs  for  par- 
doning mercy.  Then  with  an  eye  to  the  future — 
for  unquestionably  he  had  planned,  the  next  time 
he  was  summoned  into  the  King’s  presence,  to  ask 
permission  to  visit  Jerusalem  and  to  do  there  what 
was  possible  to  remedy  the  distressing  state  of 
affairs — ^we  hear  him  pray  for  something  very 
special:  “And  prosper  thy  servant  this  day,  I 
pray  thee,  and  grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of 
this  man.  For,”  he  adds  by  way  of  explana- 
tion, “I  was  the  king’s  cup  bearer.” 

It  seemed  all  right  to  pray  for  his  people,  but 
how  was  a heathen  king,  with  possibly  no  sym- 
pathy whatever  for  the  sad  condition  of  his  city 
and  his  people  in  a captive  land,  and  who  had  no 


NEHEMIAH,  THE  PRAYING  BUILDER  75 

interest  in  the  matter,  to  be  so  favorably  affected 
that  he  would  consent  to  give  up  his  faithful  cup 
bearer  and  allow  him  to  be  gone  for  months? 
But  Nehemiah  believed  in  a God  who  could  touch 
even  the  mind  of  a heathen  ruler  and  move  him 
favorably  toward  the  request  of  his  praying 
servant. 

Nehemiah  was  summoned  into  the  king’s  pres- 
ence, and  God  used  even  the  appearance  of 
Nehemiah’s  countenance  as  an  entering  wedge  to 
gain  the  consent  of  Artaxerxes.  This  started  the 
inquiry  of  the  king  as  to  its  cause,  and  the  final 
result  was  that  the  king  not  only  permitted  Nehe- 
miah to  go  back  to  Jerusalem  but  furnished  him 
with  everything  needful  for  the  journey  and  for 
the  success  of  the  enterprise. 

Nor  did  Nehemiah  rest  his  case  when  he  first 
prayed  about  this  matter,  but  he  stated  this  signifi- 
cant fact  as  he  was  talking  to  the  king:  “So  I 
prayed  unto  the  God  of  heaven?”  leading  out  the 
impression  that  while  the  king  was  inquiring  about 
his  request  and  the  length  of  time  he  would  be 
gone,  he  was  then  and  there  talking  to  God  about 
the  matter. 

The  intense,  persistent  praying  of  Nehemiah 
prevailed.  God  can  even  affect  the  mind  of  a 
heathen  ruler,  and  this  he  can  do  in  answer  to 
prayer  without  in  the  least  overturning  his  free 
agency  or  forcing  his  will.  It  was  a parallel  case 
with  that  of  Esther  when  she  called  upon  her 


76  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

people  to  fast  and  pray  for  her  as  she  went  un- 
invited into  the  king’s  presence.  As  a result,  his 
mind  at  a very  critical  moment  was  touched  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  he  was  favorably  moved 
toward  Esther  and  held  out  to  her  the  golden 
scepter. 

Nor  did  the  praying  of  Nehemiah  cease  when 
he  had  succeeded  thus  far.  In  building  the  wall 
of  Jerusalem,  he  met  with  great  opposition  from 
Sanballat  and  Tobiah,  who  ridiculed  the  efforts 
of  the  people  to  rebuild  the  city’s  walls.  Unmoved 
by  these  revilings  and  the  intense  opposition  of 
these  wicked  opponents  of  that  which  was  for 
God’s  cause,  he  pursued  the  task  which  he  had 
undertaken.  But  he  mixes  prayer  with  all  he  does : 
“Hear,  O our  God,  for  we  are  despised;  and  turn 
their  reproach  upon  their  own  head,  and  give 
them  for  a prey  in  the  land  of  our  captivity.” 
And  in  continuing  the  account  he  says,  “Never- 
theless we  made  our  prayer  unto  our  God.” 

All  along  in  the  accounts  of  the  high  and  noble 
work  he  was  doing,  we  find  prayer  comes  out 
prominently  to  the  front.  Even  after  the  walls 
were  completed,  these  same  enemies  of  his  and 
of  the  people  of  God  again  opposed  him  in  his 
task.  But  he  renews  his  praying,  and  he  himself 
records  this  significant  prayer:  “Now  there,  O 
God,  strengthen  my  hands.” 

Still  further  on,  when  Sanballat  and  Tobiah  had 
hired  an  emissary  to  frighten  and  hinder  Nehe- 


NEHEMIAH,  THE  PRAYING  BUILDER  7T 

miah,  we  find  him  setting  himself  directly  against 
this  new  attack,  and  then  again  he  turns  to  God 
in  prayer:  “My  God,  think  thou  upon  Tobiah 
and  Sanballat  according  to  these  their  works  and 
on  the  prophetess  Noadiah,  and  the  rest  of  the 
prophets,  that  would  have  put  me  in  fear.”  And 
God  answered  his  faithful  laborer,  and  defeated 
the  counsels  and  the  plans  of  these  wicked  op- 
ponents of  Israel. 

Nehemiah  discovered  to  his  dismay  that  the 
portions  of  the  Levites  had  not  been  given  them, 
and  as  a result  the  house  of  God  was  forsaken. 
He  took  steps  to  see  that  the  lawful  tithes  were 
forthcoming  so  that  God’s  house  should  be  opened 
to  all  religious  services,  and  appointed  treasurers 
to  give  attention  to  this  business.  But  prayer 
must  not  be  overlooked,  so  we  find  his  prayer 
recorded  at  this  time:  “Remember  me,  O ray 
God,  concerning  this,  and  wipe  not  out  my  good 
deeds  that  I have  done  for  the  house  of  my  God, 
and  for  the  offices  thereof.” 

Let  it  not  be  thought  that  this  was  the  plea 
of  self-righteousness  as  was  that  of  the  Pharisee 
in  our  Lord’s  time  who  professedly  went  up  to 
the  temple  to  pray,  who  paraded  his  self-righteous 
claims  in  God’s  sight.  It  was  a prayer  after  the 
fashion  of  Hezekiah,  who  reminded  God  of  his 
fidelity  to  Him  and  of  his  heart’s  being  right  in 
his  sight. 

Once  more  Nehemiah  finds  evil  among  the  peo- 


78  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

pie  of  God.  Just  as  he  corrected  the  evil  which 
caused  the  closing  of  the  house  of  God,  he  dis- 
covers practices  of  Sabbath  breaking,  and  here  he 
has  not  only  to  counsel  the  people  and  seek  to 
correct  them  by  mild  means,  but  he  proposes  to 
exercise  his  authority  if  they  did  not  cease  their 
buying  and  selling  on  the  Sabbath  Day.  But  he 
must  close  this  part  of  his  work  also  with  prayer, 
and  so  he  records  his  prayer  on  that  occasion: 

“Remember  me,  O my^  God,  concerning  this 
also,  and  spare  me  according  to  the  greatness  of 
thy  mercy.” 

Lastly,  as  a reformer,  he  discovers  another 
great  evil  among  the  people.  They  had  inter- 
married with  the  men  and  women  of  Ashdod, 
Ammon  and  Moab.  Contending  with  them,  he 
caused  them  to  reform  in  this  matter,  and  the 
close  of  his  record  has  a prayer  in  it : 

“Remember  me,  O my  God,  because  they  have 
defiled  the  priesthood,  and  the  covenant  of  the 
priesthood,  and  of  the  Levites.” 

Cleansing  them  from  all  strangers,  he  appointed 
the  wards  of  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  and  his 
recorded  career  closes  with  this  brief  prayer : “Re- 
member me,  O my  God,  for  good.” 

Fortunate  is  that  Church  whose  leaders  are 
men  of  prayer.  Happy  is  that  congregation  who 
are  contemplating  the  erection  of  a church  to 
have  leaders  who  will  lay  its  foundations  in  prayer. 


NEHEMIAH,  THE  PRAYING  BUILDER  79 

and  whose  walls  go  up  side  by  side  with  prayer. 
Prayer  helps  to  build  churches  and  to  erect  the 
walls  of  houses  of  worship.  Prayer  defeats  the 
opponents  of  those  who  are  prosecuting  God’s 
enterprises.  Prayer  touches  favorably  the  minds 
even  of  those  not  connected  with  the  Church,  and 
moves  them  toward  Church  matters.  Prayer  helps 
mightily  in  all  matters  concerning  God’s  cause  and 
wonderfully  aids  and  encourages  the  hearts  of 
those  who  have  His  work  in  hand  in  this  w^orld. 


CHAPTER  IX 


SAMUEL,  THE  CHILD  OF  PRAYER 


That  was  a grand  action  by  Jerome,  one  of  the  Roman 
fathers.  He  laid  aside  all  pressing  engagements  and 
went  to  fulfill  the  call  God  gave  him,  viz.,  to  translate 
the  Holy  Scriptures.  His  congregations  were  larger  than 
many  preachers  of  to-day  but  he  said  to  his  people, 
"Now  it  is  necessary  that  the  Scriptures  be  translated; 
you  must  find  you  another  minister:  I am  bound  for 
the  wilderness  and  shall  not  return  until  my  task  is 
finished."  Away  he  went  and  labored  and  prayed  until 
he  produced  the  Latin  Vulgate  which  will  last  as  long 
as  the  world  stands.  So  we  must  say  to  our  friends,  "I 
must  away  and  have  time  for  prayer  and  solitude."  And 
though  we  did  not  write  Latin  Vulgates  yet  our  work  will 
be  immortal:  Glory  to  Rev.  C.  H.  SpuRGEON. 

Samuel  came  into  this  world  and  was  given 
existence  in  direct  answer  to  prayer.  He  was  born 
of  a praying  mother,  whose  heart  was  full  of 
earnest  desire  for  a son.  He  came  into  life  under 
prayer  surroundings,  and  his  first  months  in  this 
world  were  spent  in  direct  contact  with  a woman 
who  knew  how  to  pray.  It  was  a prayer  accom- 
panied by  a solemn  vow  that  if  he  should  be  given, 
he  should  be  “lent  unto  the  Lord,”  and  true  to 

So 


SAMUEL,  THE  CHILD  OF  PRAYER  81 

that  vow,  this  praying  mother  put  him  directly 
in  touch  with  the  minister  of  the  sanctuary  and 
under  the  influence  of  “the  house  of  prayer.”  It 
was  no  wonder  he  developed  into  a man  of  prayer. 
We  could  not  have  expected  otherwise  with  such 
a beginning  in  life  and  with  such  early  environ- 
ments. Such  surroundings  always  make  impres- 
sions upon  children  and  tend  to  make  character 
and  determine  destiny. 

He  was  in  a favorable  place  to  hear  God  when 
He  spoke  to  him,  and  was  in  an  atmosphere  where 
it  tended  to  his  heeding  the  divine  call  which 
came  to  him.  It  was  the  most  natural  thing  in 
the  world  when  at  the  third  call  from  heaven, 
when  he  recognized  God’s  voice,  that  his  childish 
heart  responded  so  promptly,  “Speak,  Lord,  thy 
servant  heareth.”  Quickly  was  there  a response 
from  his  boyish  spirit,  of  submission,  willingness 
and  prayer. 

Had  he  been  born  of  a different  sort  of 
mother,  had  he  been  placed  under  different  sur- 
roundings, had  he  spent  his  early  days  in  contact 
with  different  influences,  does  any  one  for  one  mo- 
ment suppose  he  could  have  easily  heard  the  voice 
of  God  calling  him  to  His  service,  and  that  he 
would  have  so  readily  yielded  his  young  life  to 
the  God  who  brought  him  into  being?  Would  a 
worldly  home,  with  worldly  surroundings,  sepa- 
rated from  the  Church  of  God,  with  a worldly- 
minded  mother,  have  produced  such  a character 


82 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


as  Samuel?  It  takes  such  influences  and  agencies 
in  early  life  to  produce  such  praying  men  as  Sam- 
uel. Would  you  have  your  child  called  early  into 
divine  service  and  separated  from  the  world  unto 
God?  Would  you  have  him  so  situated  that  he 
will  be  called  in  childhood  by  the  Spirit  of  God? 
Put  him  under  prayer  influences.  Place  him  near 
to  and  directly  under  the  influence  of  the  Man 
of  God  and  in  close  touch  with  that  house  which 
is  called  “the  house  of  prayer.” 

Samuel  knew  God  in  boyhood.  As  a conse- 
quence he  knew  God  in  manhood.  He  recognized 
God  in  childhood,  obeyed  him  and  prayed  unto 
him.  The  result  was  that  he  recognized  God  in 
manhood,  obeyed  him,  and  prayed  unto  him.  If 
more  children  were  born  of  praying  mothers, 
brought  up  in  direct  contact  with  “the  house  of 
prayer,”  and  reared  under  prayer  environments, 
more  children  would  hear  the  voice  of  God’s  spirit 
speaking  to  them,  and  would  more  quickly  respond 
to  those  divine  calls  to  a religious  life.  Would 
we  have  praying  men  in  our  churches?  We  must 
have  praying  mothers  to  give  them  birth,  praying 
homes  to  color  their  lives,  and  praying  surround- 
ings to  impress  their  minds  and  to  lay  the  founda- 
tions for  praying  lives.  Praying  Samuels  come 
from  praying  Hannahs.  Praying  priests  come 
from  “the  house  of  prayer.”  Praying  leaders 
come  from  praying  homes. 


SAMUEL,  THE  CHILD  OF  PRAYER  83 

Israel  for  years  had  been  under  bondage  to  the 
Philistines  and  the  ark  was  housed  in  the  home 
of  Abinadab,  whose  son  Eleazer  was  appointed 
to  keep  this  sacred  testimony  of  God.  The  people 
had  gone  into  idolatry  and  Samuel  was  disturbed 
about  the  religious  condition  of  the  nation.  The 
ark  of  God  was  absent,  the  people  were  given  to 
the  worship  of  idols,  and  there  had  been  a griev- 
ous departure  from  God.  Calling  upon  them  to 
put  away  their  strange  gods,  he  urged  them  to 
prepare  their  hearts  unto  the  Lord  and  to  begin 
again  to  sejve  Him — ^promising  them  that  the 
Lord  would  deliver  them  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
Philistines.  His  preaching  thus  plainly  to  them, 
for  with  all  else  belonging  to  him,  Samuel  was  a 
preacher  of  the  times,  made  a deep  impression 
and  bore  rich  fruits  as  such  preaching  always  does, 
“Then  the  children  of  Israel  did  put  away  Baalim 
and  Ashtoreth,  and  served  the  Lord  only.” 

But  this  was  not  enough.  Prayer  must  be  mixed 
with  and  must  accompany  their  reformation.  So 
Samuel,  true  to  his  convictions  about  prayer,  says 
to  the  people,  “Gather  all  Israel  to  Mizpeh,  and 
I will  pray  for  you  unto  the  Lord.”  While  Sam- 
uel was  offering  up  prayer  for  these  wicked 
Israelites,  the  Philistines  drew  near  to  battle 
against  the  nation,  but  the  Lord  intervened  at  the 
critical  moment  and  thundered  with  a great  thun- 
der, and  discomfited  these  enemies  of  Israel,  “and 
they  were  smitten  before  Israel.” 


84! 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


The  nation  fortunately  had  a man  who  could 
pray,  who  knew  the  place  and  the  worth  of  prayer, 
and  a leader  who  had  the  ear  of  God  and  who 
could  influence  God. 

But  Samuel’s  praying  did  not  stop  there.  He 
judged  Israel  all  the  days  of  his  life,  and  had 
occasion  from  year  to  year  to  go  in  circuit  to 
Bethel,  Gilgal  and  Mizpeh.  Then  he  returned 
home  to  Ramah,  where  he  resided.  “And  there 
he  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord.”  Here  was  an 
altar  of  sacrifice  but  as  well  was  it  an  altar  of 
prayer.  And  while  it  may  have  been  for  the  benefit 
of  the  community  where  he  lived,  after  the  fashion 
of  a town  church,  yet  it  must  not  be  overlooked 
that  it  must  have  been  a family  altar,  a place 
where  the  sacrifice  for  sin  was  offered  but  at  the 
same  time  where  his  household  gathered  for  wor- 
ship, praise  and  prayer.  Here  Almighty  God 
was  acknowledged  in  the  home,  here  was  the  ad- 
vertisement of  a religious  home,  and  here  father 
and  mother  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
differentiating  this  home  from  all  the  worldly  and 
idolatrous  homes  about  them. 

Here  is  an  example  of  a religious  home,  the 
kind  so  greatly  needed  in  this  irreligious,  godless 
age.  Blessed  is  that  home  which  has  in  it  an 
altar  of  sacrifice  and  of  prayer,  where  daily  thanks- 
givings ascend  to  heaven  and  where  morning  and 
night  praying  is  done. 

Samuel  was  not  only  a praying  priest,  a praying 


SAMUEL,  THE  CHILD  OE  PRAYER  85 

leader  and  a praying  teacher  and  leader,  but  he 
was  a praying  father.  And  any  one  who  knows 
the  situation  so  far  as  family  religion  is  concerned 
knows  full  wel'  that  the  grea  lemand  of  these 
modern  times  is  religious  homes  and  praying 
fathers  and  mothers.  Here  is  where  the  break- 
down in  religion  occurs,  where  the  religious  life 
of  a community  first  begins  to  decay,  and  where 
we  must  go  first  to  beget  praying  men  and  women 
in  the  Church  of  God.  It  is  in  the  home  that  the 
revival  must  commence. 

A crisis  came  in  the  history  of  this  nation.  The 
people  were  infatuated  by  the  glory  of  a kingdom 
with  a human  king,  and  was  prepared  to  reject 
God  as  their  king,  as  He  had  always  been.  So 
they  came  to  Samuel  with  the  bold  request,  “Make 
us  a king  to  judge  us  like  all  the  nations.”  The 
thing  displeased  this  man  of  God,  w^  was  jealous 
for  the  name,  the  honor  and  the  pleasure  of  the 
Lord  God.  How  could  it  be  otherwise?  Who 
would  not  have  been  likewise  displeased  if  he’ 
were  built  after  the  pattern  of  Samuel  ? It  grieved 
him  in  soul.  The  Lord,  however,  came  to  him 
just  at  that  time  with  the  comforting  assurance 
so  far  as  he  was  personally  concerned  in  the  trans- 
action, that  “they  have  not  rejected  thee,  but  they 
have  rejected  me,  that  I should  not  reign  over 
them.  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the  people,  in 
all  that  they  say  unto  thee.” 

Then  it  was  that  Samuel  followed  the  bent  of 


86  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

his  mind,  “And  Samuel  prayed  unto  the  Lord.” 
It  seemed  that  in  every  matter  concerning  this 
people,  with  which  Samuel  was  connected,  he  must 
pray  over  it.  How  much  more  now  when  there 
was  to  be  an  entire  revolution  in  the  form  of 
government,  and  God  was  to  be  displaced  as  the 
ruler  of  the  people,  and  a human  king  was  to  be 
set  up?  National  affairs  need  to  be  prayed  over. 
Praying  men  are  demanded  to  carry  to  God  in 
prayer  the  affairs  of  government.  Lawmakers, 
law  judges,  and  law  executives  need  leaders  in 
Israel  to  pray  for  them.  How  much  fewer  the 
mistakes  if  there  was  more  praying  done  in  civil 
matters? 

But  this  was  not  to  be  the  end  of  this  matter. 
God  must  show  so  definitely  and  plainly  His  dis- 
pleasure at  such  a request  as  had  been  made  for  a 
human  king,  that  the  people  might  know  what  a 
wicked  thing  they  had  done,  even  though  God 
acceded  to  their  request.  They  must  know  God 
still  existed  and  had  to  do  with  this  people,  and 
with  their  king  and  the  affairs  of  the  govern- 
ment. So  the  prayers  of  Samuel  must  again  be 
brought  into  play  to  carry  out  the  divine  purposes. 
So  Samuel  called  upon  the  people  to  stand  still, 
and  he  would  show  them  what  the  Lord  would 
do  before  their  eyes.  So  he  called  upon  God,  and 
in  answer  God  sent  a tremendous  storm  of  thun- 
der and  rain,  which  exceedingly  terrified  the  peo- 
ple, and  caused  them  to  acknowledge  their  great 


SA^IUEL,  THE  CHHLD  OF  PRAYER  87 

sin  in  asking  for  a king.  So  afraid  were  the  people 
that  they  hastily  called  upon  Samuel  to  pray  for 
them  and  to  spare  them  from  what  seemed  to  be 
destruction.  Samuel  again  prayed,  and  God  heard 
and  answered,  and  the  thunder  and  rain  ceased. 

One  more  incident  in  the  prayer  life  of  Samuel 
is  worth  noticing.  King  Saul  had  been  ordered 
to  destroy  all  the  Amalekites,  root  and  branch, 
and  all  their  stuff,  but  Saul,  contrary  to  divine 
instructions,  had  spared  King  Agag  and  the  best 
of  the  sheep  and  the  cattle,  and  had  justified  it 
because  he  claimed  that  the  people  wanted  it  done. 

God  brought  this  message  to  Samuel  at  this 
time : 

“It  repenteth  me  that  I have  set  up  Saul  to  be 
king;  for  he  is  turned  back  from  following  me, 
and  hath  not  performed  my  commandments.” 

“And  it  grieved  Samuel,  and  he  cried  all  night 
unto  the  Lord.”  Such  a sudden  declaration  was 
enough  to  produce  grief  of  soul  in  a man  like 
Samuel,  who  loved  his  nation,  who  was  true  to 
God,  and  who  above  everything  else  desired  the 
prosperity  of  Zion.  Such  grief  of  soul  over  the 
evils  of  the  Church  and  at  the  sight  of  the  abomi- 
nations of  the  times  always  drives  a man  to 
his  knees  in  prayer.  Of  course  Samuel  carried 
the  case  to  God.  It  was  a time  for  prayer.  The 
case  was  too  serious  for  him  not  to  be  deeply 
moved  to  pray.  So  greatly  was  the  inner  soul  of 
Samuel  disturbed  that  he  prayed  all  night  about 


88  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

it.  Too  much  was  at  stake  for  him  to  shut  his 
eyes  to  the  affair,  to  treat  it  indifferently,  and 
to  let  it  pass  without  taking  God  into  the  matter, 
for  the  future  welfare  of  Israel  was  in  the  balance. 


CHAPTER  X 

DANIEL^  THE  PRAYING  CAPTIVE 


It  is  a monderful  historical  fact  that  the  men  of 
prayer  have  always  been  the  men  of  power  in  the  world. 
I want  to  convince  you  about  this.  Some  of  you  men — 
and  I am  glad  to  see  such  a large  number  of  men  here 
to-night — if  you  are  arguing  with  some  friend  in  the 
zuorkshopji  be  sure  and  ask  him  why  it  is  that  the  men  of 
power  in  the  world  have  been  the  men  of  prayer.  'Take 
only  one  instance:  Where  did  they  go  always  to  find 
men  for  the  forlorn  hope  in  Havelock's  daysf  They 
went  to  Havelock's  prayer  meeting;  that  is  where  they 
found  men  who  had  courage  to  come  out  for  the  forlorn 
hope. — Bishop  Winnington  Ingram. 

That  was  a notable  experience  in  the  life  of 
Daniel  when  he  was  ordered  by  the  king  while 
in  Babylon  not  to  ask  any  petition  of  any  God  or 
king  for  thirty  days,  under  penalty  of  being  cast 
into  the  lions’  den.  He  paid  no  attention  to  the 
edict,  for  it  is  recorded,  “Now  when  Daniel  knew 
that  the  writing  was  signed,  he  went  into  his 
house,  and  his  windows  being  opened  in  his  cham- 
ber toward  Jerusalem,  he  kneeled  upon  his  knees 
three  times  a day,  and  prayed  and  gave  thanks 
before  his  God,  as  he  did  aforetime.”  Do  not 

89 


90  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

forget  that  this  was  the  regular  habit  of  this  man 
of  God.  “He  kneeled  upon  his  knees  and  prayed 
as  he  did  aforetime.”  What  was  the  result?  Just 
as  expected.  God  sent  an  angel  into  the  den  of 
lions  with  Daniel  and  locked  their  mouths  so 
that  not  a hair  on  his  head  was  touched,  and 
he  was  wonderfully  delivered.  Even  so  to-day 
deliverance  always  come  to  God’s  saints  who  tread 
the  path  of  prayer  as  the  saints  of  old  did. 

Daniel  did  not  forget  his  God  while  in  a foreign 
land,  away  from  the  house  of  God  and  its  religious 
services,  and  deprived  as  he  was  of  many  religious 
privileges.  He  was  a striking  illustration  of  a 
young  man  who  was  decidedly  religious  under  the 
most  unfavorable  surroundings.  He  proved  con- 
clusively that  one  could  be  definitely  a servant  of 
God  though  his  environments  were  anything  else 
than  religious.  He  was  among  heathens  so  far  as 
a God-fearing  nation  was  concerned.  There  was 
no  temple  worship,  no  Sabbath  Day,  no  Word  of 
God  to  be  read.  But  he  had  one  help  there  which 
remained  with  him,  and  of  which  he  could  not 
be  deprived,  and  that  was  his  secret  prayers. 

Purposing  in  his  heart  without  debating  the 
question  one  moment  or  compromising  at  any  one 
point,  that  he  would  not  eat  of  the  king’s  meat 
nor  drink  the  king’s  wine,  he  stood  out  in  that 
ungodly  country  a striking  illustration  of  a young 
man,  fearing  God  first  of  all,  and  resolving  to  be 
religious,  cost  what  it  may.  But  he  was  not  to 


DANIEL,  THE  PRAYING  CAPTIVE  91 

have  a flowery  bed  on  which  to  rest  nor  a smooth 
road  on  which  to  travel.  The  whimsical,  tyran- 
nical and  unreasonable  king,  Nebuchadnezzar, 
was  to  put  him  to  the  test,  and  His  praying  quali- 
ties were  to  be  proved.  This  king  had  a strange 
dream,  the  particular  items  of  which  passed  from 
his  memory,  but  the  fact  of  the  dream  remained. 
So  troubled  was  he  about  the  dream,  he  called 
for  all  the  soothsayers,  astrologers  and  sorcerers 
to  call  the  dream  to  mind,  an  impossible  task, 
humanly  speaking,  and  then  to  interpret  it.  He 
classed  Daniel  and  his  three  companions,  Shad- 
rach,  Meshach  and  Abednego,  with  these  men, 
though  there  really  was  nothing  in  them  in  com- 
mon with  the  two  classes  of  men.  Being  Informed 
that  it  was  impossible  to  discover  a dream  like 
that,  and  at  their  saying  if  the  king  would  tell  the 
dream  to  them,  they  would  interpret  it,  the  king 
became  very  angry,  and  ordered  them  to  be  put 
to  death?  This  sentence  of  death  was  against 
Daniel  and  his  three  companions. 

But  Daniel  appeared  upon  the  stage  of  action. 
At  his  suggestion  the  execution  of  the  rash  edict 
was  held  up,  and  he  immediately  called  his  three 
companions  into  counsel,  and  he  urged  them  to 
unite  with  him  in  a concert  of  prayer  that  God 
would  discover  to  Daniel  the  dream  with  the  in- 
terpretation thereof.  In  answer  to  this  united 
praying,  it  is  recorded:  “Then  was  the  secret  re- 
vealed unto  Daniel  in  a night  vision.  Then  Daniel 


92  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

blessed  the  God  of  heaven.”  As  a sequel  to  this 
incident  of  the  praying  of  these  four  men,  Daniel 
revealed  to  the  king  his  dream  and  its  interpreta- 
tion, and  as  a final  result  the  king  acknowledged 
the  God  of  Daniel  and  elevated  to  high  positions 
Daniel  and  his  three  associates.  And  it  all  came 
about  because  there  was  a praying  man  there  just 
at  a critical  time.  Blessed  is  that  nation  which 
has  praying  men  who  can  come  to  the  help  of 
civil  rulers  who  are  greatly  perplexed  and  in  great 
difficulties,  and  who  can  be  depended  upon  to 
pray  for  rulers  of  state  and  Church. 

Years  afterward,  while  still  in  a foreign  land, 
he  still  had  not  forgotten  the  God  of  his  fathers, 
and  to  him  was  given  the  noted  vision  of  the  “Ram 
and  the  He  Goat.”  But  Daniel  did  not  compre- 
hend this  strange  vision,  and  yet  he  knew  it  was 
from  God  and  had  a deep  and  future  meaning  for 
nations  and  people.  So,  of  course,  he  followed 
the  bent  of  his  religious  mind  and  prayed  about  it. 

“And  it  came  to  pass  when  I even  I Daniel,  had 
seen  the  vision,  and  sought  for  the  meaning,  then 
behold  there  stood  before  me  as  the  appearance 
of  a man. 

“And  I heard  a man’s  voice  which  called,  and 
said,  Gabriel,  make  this  man  to  understand  the 
vision.” 

And  so  Gabriel  made  him  understand  the  full 
meaning  of  this  remarkable  vision.  But  it  came 
in  answer  to  Daniel’s  praying.  So  puzzling  ques- 


DANIEL,  THE  PRAYING  CAPTIVE  93 

tions  may  often  find  an  answer  in  the  closet.  And 
as  elsewhere,  God  employs  angelic  intelligences 
to  convey  information  as  to  prayer  answers. 
Angels  have  much  to  do  with  prayer.  Praying 
men  and  the  angels  of  heaven  are  in  close  touch 
with  each  other. 

Some  years  thereafter,  Daniel  was  studying  the 
records  of  the  nation,  and  he  discovered  that  it 
was  about  time  for  the  seventy  years  of  captivity 
of  his  people  to  end.  So  he  gave  himself  to  prayer : 

“And  I set  my  face  to  seek  by  prayer  and  sup- 
plications, with  fasting  and  sackcloth  and  ashes. 
And  I prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  made  confes- 
sion.” 

Then  follows  the  record  in  those  Old  Testa- 
ment Scriptures  of  Daniel’s  prayer,  so  full  of 
meaning,  so  simple  in  its  utterances,  so  earnest 
in  its  spirit,  so  direct  in  its  confession  and  requests, 
worthy  of  being  patterned  after. 

And  it  was  while  he  was  speaking  in  prayer 
that  the  same  archangel  Gabriel,  who  seemed  to 
have  a direct  interest  in  the  praying  of  this  man 
of  God,  “being  caused  to  fly  swiftly,  touched  me 
about  the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice,  and  he 
informed  me  and  talked  with  me,”  and  then  gave 
him  much  desired  information  valuable  to  Daniel. 

The  angels  of  God  are  much  nearer  us  in  our 
seasons  of  prayer  than  we  imagine.  God  employs 
these  glorious  heavenly  intelligences  in  the  blessed 
work  of  hearing  and  answering  prayer,  when  the 


94>  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

prayer,  as  in  the  case  of  Daniel  on  this  occasion, 
has  to  do  with  the  present  and  future  welfare 
of  His  people. 

One  other  incident  on  the  prayer  line  in  the 
life  of  this  captive  man  in  Babylon.  Another 
revelation  was  made  to  Daniel,  but  the  time  of  its 
fulfillment  appeared  to  be  far  in  the  future.  “In 
those  days,  I Daniel  was  mourning  three  full 
weeks.  I ate  no  pleasant  bread,  neither  came 
flesh  nor  wine  into  my  mouth  till  the  three  whole 
weeks  were  fulfilled.” 

It  was  then  that  he  had  a very  strange  experi- 
ence and  a still  stranger  revelation  was  made  to 
him  by  some  angelic  being.  It  is  worth  while 
to  read  the  scripture  account : 

“And  behold  a hand  touched  me,  which  set  me 
on  my  knees,  and  upon  the  palms  of  my  hands. 

“And  he  said  unto  me,  O Daniel,  a man  greatly 
beloved,  understand  the  words  that  I speak  unto 
thee,  and  stand  upright,  for  unto  thee  am  I now 
sent.  And  when  he  had  spoken  this  word  unto 
me,  I stood  trembling. 

“Then  he  said  unto  me,  Fear  not,  Daniel;  for 
from  the  first  day  that  thou  didst  set  thy  heart 
to  understand  and  to  chasten  thyself  before  thy 
God,  thy  words  were  heard,  and  I am  come  for 
thy  words. 

“But  the  Prince  of  the  Kingdom  of  Persia 
withstood  me  one  and  twenty  days ; but  lo, 
Michael,  one  of  the  chief  princes,  came  to  help 
me,  and  I remained  there  with  the  kings  of  Per- 


DANIEL,  THE  PRAYING  CAPTIVE  95 

What  all  this  means  is  difficult  to  comprehend, 
but  enough  appears  on  its  face  to  lead  us  to  believe 
that  the  angels  in  heaven  are  deeply  interested  in 
our  praying,  and  are  sent  to  tell  us  the  answers 
to  our  prayers.  Further,  it  is  very  clear  that  some 
unseen  forces  or  invisible  spirits  are  operating 
to  hinder  the  answers  to  our  prayers.  Who  the 
Prince  of  Persia  was  who  withstood  this  great 
angelic  being  is  not  divulged,  but  enough  is  re- 
vealed to  know  that  there  must  be  a contest  in 
the  unseen  world  about  us  between  those  spirits 
sent  to  minister  to  us  in  answer  to  our  prayers 
and  the  devil  and  his  evil  spirits  who  seek  to  de- 
feat these  good  spirits. 

The  passage  furthermore  gives  us  some  intima- 
tion as  to  the  cause  of  delayed  answers  to  prayer. 
For  “three  full  weeks”  Daniel  mourned  and 
prayed,  and  for  “one  and  twenty  days”  the  divinely 
appointed  angel  was  opposed  by  the  “Prince  of 
the  Kingdom  of  Persia.” 

Well  was  it  for  praying  Daniel  that  he  had 
the  courage,  fortitude  and  determination  to  per- 
sist in  his  praying  for  three  weeks  while  the  fearful 
conflict  between  good  and  bad  spirits  was  going 
on  about  him  unseen  by  mortal  eyes.  Well  will 
it  be  for  us  if  we  do  not  give  up  In  our  praying 
when  God  seems  not  to  hear  and  the  answer  is 
not  immediate.  It  takes  time  to  pray,  and  it 
takes  time  to  get  the  answer  to  prayer.  Delays 
in  answering  prayer  are  not  denials.  Failure  to 


96 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


receive  an  immediate  answer  is  no  evidence  that 
God  does  not  hear  prayer.  It  takes  not  only 
courage  and  persistence  to  pray  successfully,  but 
it  requires  much  patience.  “Wait  on  the  Lord  and 
be  of  good  courage;  and  he  shall  strengthen  thy 
heart;  wait,  I say,  on  the  Lord.” 


CHAPTER  XI 


FAITH  OF  SINNERS  IN  PRAYER 

A certain  preacher  whose  sermons  converted  many  souls 
received  a revelation  from  God  that  it  was  not  Ms  ser^ 
mons  or  works  by  all  means  but  the  prayers  of  an  illiter- 
ate lay  brother  who  sat  on  the  pulpit  steps  pleading  for 
the  success  of  the  sermon.  It  may  be  in  the  all-revealing 
day  so  with  us*  We  may  believe  after  laboring  long  and 
wearily  that  all  honor  belongs  to  another  builder  whose 
prayers  were  gold,  silver^  and  precious  stones,  while 
our  sermonizings  being  apart  from  prayer  are  hut  hay  and 
stubble, — Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

One  of  the  peculiar  features  of  prayer  as  we 
study  the  Old  Testament  on  this  subject  is  the 
faith  of  unrighteous  and  backslidden  men  in  pray- 
er, and  the  great  confidence  they  had  in  the  prayers 
of  praying  men  of  that  day.  They  knew  certain 
men  as  men  of  prayer,  who  believed  in  God,  who 
were  favored  of  God  and  who  prayed  unto  God. 
They  recognized  these  men  as  having  influence 
with  God  in  averting  wrath  and  in  giving  deliv- 
erance from  evil. 

Frequently  when  in  trouble,  when  God^s  wrath 
was  threatened  and  even  when  there  were  visita- 
tions of  evil  upon  them  for  their  iniquities,  they 

97 


98 


PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


showed  their  faith  in  prayer  by  appealing  to  the 
men  who  prayed,  to  beg  God  to  avert  His  dis- 
pleasure and  turn  aside  His  wrath  against  them. 
Recognizing  the  value  of  prayer  as  a divine 
agency  to  save  men,  they  made  application  to 
the  men  who  prayed,  to  Intercede  with  God  for 
them. 

It  is  one  of  the  strange  paradoxes  of  those 
early  days  that  while  people  departed  from  God, 
and  went  into  grievous  sin,  they  did  not  become 
either  atheists  nor  unbelievers  when  it  came  to 
the  question  of  the  existence  of  a prayer-answering 
God.  Wicked  men  held  fast  to  a belief  in  God’s 
existence,  and  to  faith  In  the  power  of  prayer  to 
secure  pardon  for  sin  and  to  deliver  them  from 
God’.s  wrath.  It  is  worth  something  as  showing 
the  influence  of  the  Church  on  sinners,  when  the 
latter  believe  in  prayer  and  beg  Christian  people 
to  pray  for  them.  It  is  an  item  of  interest  and 
an  event  of  importance  when  a sinner  on  a dying 
bed  calls  for  a praying  man  to  come  to  his  bedside 
to  pray  for  him.  It  means  something  when  peni- 
tent sinners,  under  a sense  of  their  guilt,  feeling 
the  displeasure  of  God,  approach  a church  altar 
and  say,  “Pray  for  me,  ye  praying  men  and 
women.”  Little  does  the  Church  understand  its 
full  import,  and  still  less  does  the  Church  appre- 
ciate and  take  In  the  full  Import  of  praying,  espe- 
cially for  the  unsaved  men  and  women  who  ask 
them  to  pray  for  their  immortal  souls.  If  the 


FAITH  OF  SINNERS  IN  PRAYER  99 

Church  was  fully  alive  to  God  and  awake  to  the 
real  peril  of  the  unconverted  all  about  it,  and 
was  in  a thriving  state,  more  sinners  would  be 
found  seeking  the  altars  of  the  Church  and  crying 
out  to  praying  people,  “Pray  for  my  soul.” 

Much  so-called  praying  for  sinners  there  may 
be,  but  it  is  cold,  formal,  official  praying,  which 
goes  nowhere,  never  reaches  God,  and  accom- 
plishes nothing.  Revivals  begin  when  sinners  seek 
the  prayers  of  praying  people. 

Several  things  stand  out  in  bold  relief  as  we 
look  at  those  Old  Testament  days: 

First,  the  disposition  of  sinners  against  God 
to  almost  involuntarily  turn  to  praying  men  for 
help  and  refuge  when  trouble  draws  near,  and 
to  invoke  their  prayers  for  relief  and  deliverance. 
“Pray  for  us”  was  their  cry. 

Second,  the  readiness  with  which  those  praying 
men  responded  to  these  appeals  and  prayed  to 
God  for  those  who  desired  this  thing.  Moreover, 
we  are  impressed  with  the  fact  that  these  praying 
men  were  always  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  and  ready 
at  any  time  to  inquire  of  God.  They  were  always 
keyed  up  on  prayer. 

Third,  we  note  the  wonderful  influence  these 
men  of  prayer  had  with  God  whenever  they  made 
their  appeal  to  Him.  God  nearly  always  quickly 
responded  and  heard  their  praying  for  others. 
So  intercessory  prayer  predominated  in  those  early 
days  of  the  Church. 


100  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


It  is  a question  worthy  of  earnest  considera- 
tion, how  far  the  present-day  Church  is  responsible 
for  the  unbelief  of  sinners  of  these  modern  times 
in  the  value  of  prayer  as  an  agency  in  averting 
God’s  wrath,  in  sparing  barren  lives  and  in  giving 
deliverance.  How  far  is  the  Church  responsible 
for  the  precious  few  mourners  in  Zion  in  these 
times,  who  ignore  your  altar  calls  and  treat  with 
indifference  your  appeals  to  come  and  be  prayed 
for? 

The  first  illustration  we  notice  as  showing  the 
faith  of  wicked  men  in  prayer  and  their  appeal 
for  a man  of  God  to  intercede  for  them  is  the 
case  of  the  fiery  serpents  sent  upon  the  Israelites. 
They  were  journeying  from  Mount  Hor  by  way 
of  the  Red  Sea,  seeking  to  compass  the  land  of 
Edom,  when  they  spoke  against  God  and  Moses, 
after  this  fashion: 

“Wherefore  have  ye  brought  us  up  out  of 
Egypt  to  die  in  the  wilderness?  for  there  is  no 
■bread,  neither  is  there  any  water;  and  our  soul 
loatheth  this  light  bread.” 

The  thing  so  sorely  displeased  God  that  He 
sent  fiery  serpents  among  the  people,  and  many 
of  the  people  of  Israel  died. 

“Therefore  the  people  came  to  Moses,  and 
said,  We  have  sinned  because  we  have  spoken 
against  the  Lord,  and  against  thee ; pray  unto  the 
Lord,  that  He  take  away  the  serpents  from  us.” 

And  Moses  prayed  for  the  people. 


FAITH  OF  SINNERS  IN  PRAYER  101 


As  far  as  these  people  had  departed  from  God, 
and  as  great  as  was  their  sin  in  complaining 
against  God’s  dealings  with  them,  they  had  not 
lost  faith  in  prayer,  neither  did  they  forget  that 
there  was  a leader  in  Israel  who  had  influence 
with  God  in  prayer,  and  who  could  by  that  means 
avert  disaster  and  bring  deliverance  to  them. 

Jeroboam,  first  King  of  the  ten  tribes  when 
the  kingdom  was  divided,  was  another  case  in 
point.  This  was  a most  noted  case  because  of 
the  notoriety  of  his  departure  from  God,  which 
was  often  referred  to  in  the  after  history  of 
Israel,  as  “the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,” 
and  shows  that  despite  his  great  wickedness  in 
the  sight  of  God,  he  did  not  lose  his  faith  in  the 
efficacy  of  prayer.  This  king  on  one  occasion 
presumed  to  take  the  place  of  the  high  priest,  and 
stood  by  the  altar  to  burn  incense.  A man  of  God 
came  out  of  Judah  and  cried  against  the  altar  and 
proclaimed,  “Behold  the  altar  shall  be  rent,  and 
the  ashes  that  are  upon  it  shall  be  poured  out.” 
This  angered  Jeroboam,  who  saw  that  it  was  in- 
tended as  a public  rebuke  for  him,  who  had  under- 
taken contrary  to  the  Levitical  law  to  assume  the 
office  of  God’s  priest,  and  the  king  put  forth  his 
hand  with  the  apparent  purpose  of  arresting  or 
doing  violence  to  the  man  of  God,  saying,  at  the 
same  time  to  those  about  him,  “Lay  hold  upon 
him.” 

Immediately  God  smote  the  king  with  leprosy. 


102  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

so  that  he  could  not  pull  his  hand  back  again,  and 
at  the  same  time  the  altar  was  rent.  Astonished 
beyond  measure  at  this  sudden  retribution  for 
his  sin,  coming  like  lightning  from  heaven,  and 
very  much  afraid,  he  cried  out  to  the  man  of  God, 
“Entreat  now  the  face  of  the  Lord  thy  God  for 
me,  that  my  hand  may  be  restored  again.”  And 
it  is  recorded  that  “the  man  of  God  besought  the 
Lord,  and  the  king’s  hand  was  restored  him  again, 
and  became  as  it  was  before.” 

Let  us  keep  in  mind  that  we  are  not  now  con- 
sidering the  praying  habits  of  the  man  of  God 
nor  the  possibilities  of  prayer,  though  both  face 
us  here.  But  rather  we  are  finding  just  here 
that  a ruler  in  Israel,  guilty  of  a grievous  sin, 
and  departing  from  God,  when  God’s  wrath  falls 
upon  him,  he  immediately  calls  upon  a praying 
man  to  intercede  with  God  in  his  behalf.  It  is 
but  another  case  where  a sinner  against  God 
showed  his  faith  in  the  virtue  of  the  prayers  of 
a man  of  God.  Sad  is  the  day  in  a Christian 
land,  not  only  where  there  is  the  decay  of  prayer 
In  the  Church,  but  where  sinners  are  so  unaffected 
by  the  religion  of  the  Church  that  they  have  no 
faith  in  prayer  and  care  little  about  the  prayers 
of  praying  men. 

Another  illustration  follows  this  case  very 
quickly.  The  son  of  King  Jeroboam  fell  sick,  and 
was  about  to  die.  And  this  wicked,  indifferent 
king,  posted  his  wife  off  to  Ahijah,  the  prophet 


FAITH  OF  SINNERS  IN  PRAYER  103 

of  God,  to  ask  him  to  say  what  would  be  the  result 
of  the  illness  of  the  child.  She  attempted  to  prac- 
tice a deception  upon  the  old  prophet  who  was 
nearly  blind,  intending  not  to  make  herself  known 
to  him.  But  he  had  the  vision  of  a prophet  even 
though  dim  in  sight,  and  immediately  revealed  to 
her  that  she  was  known  to  him.  After  telling 
her  many  things  of  vast  importance  concerning 
the  kingdom  and  charging  her  husband  that  he 
had  not  kept  God’s  commandments,  but  had  gone 
into  idolatry,  he  said  to  her:  “Arise,  therefore, 
and  get  thee  down  to  thy  house;  and  when  thy 
feet  enter  into  the  city,  the  child  shall  die.” 

How  natural  for  a father  in  trouble  to  appeal 
to  a praying  prophet  for  relief?  And  as  in  the 
first  mentioned  case,  his  sin  did  not  blind  his  eyes 
to  the  value  of  having  a man  of  God  intercede 
for  him.  It  availed  nothing  as  was  proved,  but 
it  did  prove  our  contention  that  in  Old  Testa- 
ment times  sinners,  while  they  were  not  themselves 
praying  men,  believed  strongly  in  the  prayers  of 
praying  men. 

Take  the  instance  of  Johanan,  just  as  the  Chil- 
dren of  Israel  began  their  life  of  captivity  in 
Babylon.  Johanan  and  Jeremiah,  with  a small 
company,  had  been  left  in  their  native  land,  and 
Ishmael  had  conspired  against  Gedaliah,  the  ap- 
pointed governor  of  the  country,  and  had  slain 
him.  Johanan  came  to  the  rescue  and  delivered 
the  people  from  Ishmael  who  was  taking  them 


104<  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

away  from  their  land.  But  Johanan  wanted  to 
flee  down  into  Egypt,  which  was  contrary  to  the 
Divine  plan.  At  this  particular  juncture  of  affairs, 
he  assembled  all  the  people,  and  they  went  to 
Jeremiah  with  the  earnest  appeal: 

“We  beseech  thee,  let  our  supplication  be  ac- 
cepted before  thee,  and  pray  for  us  unto  the  Lord 
thy  God,  that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  show  us 
the  way  wherein  we  may  walk,  and  the  thing  that 
we  may  do.” 

Like  all  other  appeals  to  good  men  for  prayer, 
Jeremiah  interceded  for  these  inquirers  after  the 
right  way,  and  after  ten  days  the  answer  came, 
and  they  were  informed  by  Jeremiah  what  God 
would  have  them  do.  This  was  to  the  effect  that 
they  should  not  go  down  to  Egypt,  but  remain 
in  and  about  Jerusalem,  but  the  people  and 
Johanan  played  Jeremiah  false,  and  refused  to  do 
as  God  had  told  them  in  answer  to  prayer.  But 
it  did  not  disprove  the  fact  that  they  had  faith 
in  prayer  and  in  praying  men. 

Another  case  may  be  noticed  as  showing  the 
truth  of  our  proposition  that  sinners  had  faith  in 
prayer  in  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  thus 
indirectly  proving  the  preeminence  of  prayer  in 
those  days,  for  certainly  prayer  must  have  had  a 
prominent  place  and  its  necessity  must  have  re- 
ceived general  recognition,  when  even  sinners  by 
their  actions  pve  endorsement  to  its  virtue  and 
necessity.  Surely  if  sinners  bore  testimony  to  its 


FAITH  OF  SINNERS  IN  PRAYER  105 

worth,  and  at  that  time  displayed  their  need  of 
prayer,  even  by  the  prayers  of  some  one  else, 
Church  people  of  this  day  ought  to  have  a deep 
sense  of  its  need,  and  should  have  strong  faith  in 
prayer  and  its  virtue.  And  certainly  if  the  men 
of  Old  Testament  times  were  such  men  of  prayer, 
and  had  such  a reputation  as  praying  men,  then  in 
this  favored  day,  Christian  men  should  be  so  given 
to  prayer  that  they  also  would  have  a wide  reputa- 
tion as  praying  men. 

Zedekiah  was  king  of  Judah  just  as  the  captivity 
of  God’s  people  began.  He  was  in  charge  of  the 
kingdom  when  Jerusalem  was  besieged  by  the 
King  of  Babylon.  And  it  was  just  about  this  time 
that  Zedekiah  sent  two  chosen  men  unto  Jeremiah 
saying:  “Inquire,  I pray  thee,  of  the  Lord  for 
us;  for  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of  Babylon,  maketh 
war  against  us;  if  so  be  that  the  Lord  will  deal 
with  us  according  to  all  his  wondrous  works,  that 
he  may  go  up  from  us.” 

And  God  told  Jeremiah  in  answer  to  this  in- 
quiry what  to  do,  and  what  would  occur,  but  as 
in  another  case,  that  of  Johanan,  Zedekiah  proved 
false,  and  would  not  do  as  God  instructed  Jere- 
miah to  tell  him.  At  the  same  time  it  proved 
conclusively  that  Zedekiah  had  not  lost  his  faith 
in  prayer  as  a means  of  finding  out  the  mind  of 
God,  nor  did  it  affect  him  in  his  belief  in  the 
virtue  of  the  prayers  of  a praying  man. 

Verily,  prayer  must  have  had  a preeminent  place 


106  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

in  all  Old  Testament  history  when  not  only  the 
men  of  God  were  noted  for  their  praying  habits, 
but  even  men  who  departed  from  God  and  proved 
false  bore  testimony  to  its  virtue  by  appealing  to 
the  men  of  prayer  to  make  intercessions  for  them. 
This  is  so  notorious  in  Old  Testament  history  that 
no  careful  reader  of  these  old  scriptures  can  fail 
to  discover  and  notice  it^ 


CHAPTER  XII 


PAUL,  THE  TEACHER  OF  PRAYER 

Fletcher  of  Madeley,  a great  teacher  of  a century  and 
a half  agoj  used  to  lecture  to  the  young  theological  stu- 
dents, He  was  one  of  the  fellow'ouorkers  with  Wesley 
and  a man  of  most  saintly  character.  When  he  had 
lectured  on  one  of  the  great  topics  of  the  Word  of  God, 
such  as  the  Fullness  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  or  on  the  power 
and  blessing  that  He  meant  His  people  to  have,  he  would 
close  the  lecture  and  say,  *^TKat  is  the  theory;  now  will 
those  who  want  the  practice  come  along  up  to  my  roomf 
And  again  and  again  they  closed  their  books  and  zvent 
away  to  his  room,  where  the  hour's  theory  would  be 
followed  by  one  or  two  hours  of  prayer, 

— ^Rev.  Hubert  Brooke. 

. How  instant,  strenuous,  persistent,  and  pathetic 
was  Paul’s  urgency  of  prayer  upon  those  to  whom 
he  wrote  and  spoke  I exhort,”  says  he,  writing 
to  Timothy,  ^‘first  of  all,  that  supplications, 
prayers,  intercessions  and  giving  of  thanks  be 
made  for  all  men.”  This  he  meant  was  to  be  the 
prime  deposit  and  truth  for  the  Church.  First  of 
ail,  before  all  things,  to  the  front  of  all  things,  the 
Church  of  Christ  was  to  be  a praying  Church, 

107 


108  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

was  to  pray  for  men,  was  to  pray  for  all  men. 
He  charged  the  Philippians  to  this  effect:  “Be 
careful  for  nothing,  but  in  everything,  by  prayer 
and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving,  let  your  re- 
quests be  made  known  unto  God.”  The  Church 
must  be  anxious  about  nothing.  In  everything 
prayer  must  be  made.  Nothing  was  too  small 
about  which  to  pray.  Nothing  was  too  great  for 
God  to  overcome. 

Paul  lays  it  down  as  a vital,  all-essential  injunc- 
tion in  writing  to  the  Church  at  Thessalonica, 
“Rejoice  evermore.  Pray  without  ceasing.  In 
everything  give  thanks.  For  this  is  the  will  of 
God  concerning  you.”  The  Church  must  give 
itself  to  unceasing  prayer.  Never  was  prayer  to 
cease  in  the  Church.  This  was  tjjje  will  of  God 
concerning  His  Church  on  earth.  ; 

Paul  was  not  only  given  to  prayer  himself,  but 
he  continually  and  earnesdy  urged  it  in  a way 
that  showed  its  vital  importance,  f He  was  not 
only  insistent  in  urging  prayer  upon  the  Church 
in  his  day,  but  he  urged  persistent  praying.  “Con- 
tinue in  prayer  and  watch  In  the  same,”  was  the 
keynote  of  all  his  exhortations  on  prayer.  “Pray- 
ing always  with  all  prayer  and  supplication,”  was 
the  way  he  pressed  this  important  matter  upon 
the  people.  “I  will,  therefore,”  I exhort,  this  is 
my  desire,  my  mind  upon  this  question,  “that  men 
pray  everywhere,  without  wrath  and  doubting.” 
As  he  prayed  after  this  fashion  himself,  he  could 


PAUL,  THE  TEACHER  OF  PRAYER  109 

afford  to  press  it  upon  those  to  whom  he  minis- 
tered. ' 

Paul  was  a leader  by  appointment  and  by  uni- 
versal recognition  and  acceptance.  He  had  many 
mighty  forces  in  this  ministry.  His  conversion, 
so  conspicuous  and  radical,  was  a great  force,  a 
perfect  magazine  of  aggressive  and  defensive  war- 
fare. His  call  to  the  apostleship  was  clear,  lumi- 
nous and  convincing.  But  these  forces  were  not 
the  divinest  energies  which  brought  forth  the 
largest  results  to  his  ministry.  Paul’s  course  was 
more  distinctly  shaped  and  his  career  rendered 
more  powerfully  successful  by  prayer  than  by 
any  other  force. 

It  is  no  surprise  then  that  he  should  give  such 
prominence  to  prayer  in  his  preaching  and  writing. 
We  could  not  expect  it  to  be  otherwise.  As  prayer 
was  the  highest  exercise  in  his  personal  life,  so 
also  prayer  assumed  the  same  high  place  in  his 
teaching.  His  example  of  prayer  added  force 
to  his  teaching  on  prayer.  His  practice  and  his 
teaching  ran  in  parallel  lines.  There  was  no  in- 
consistency in  the  two  things. 

Paul  was  the  chiefest  of  the  apostles  as  he  was 
chief  in  prayer.  If  he  was  the  first  of  the  apostles, 
prayer  conspired  to  that  end.  Hence  he  was  all 
the  better  qualified  to  be  a teacher  on  prayer. 
His  praying  fitted  him  to  teach  others  what  prayer 
was  and  what  prayer  could  do.  And  for  this  rea- 
son he  was  competent  to  urge  upon  the  people  that 


110  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

they  must  not  neglect  prayer.  Too  much  de- 
pended upon  it. 

He  was  first  in  prayer  for  this  cause.  For  the 
reason  that  on  him  centered  more  saintly  praying 
than  on  any  one  else,  he  became  the  first  in  apostle- 
ship.  The  crown  of  martyrdom  was  the  highest 
crown  in  the  royalty  of  heaven,  but  prayer  put 
this  crown  of  martyrdom  on  his  head. 

He  who  would  teach  the  people  to  pray  must 
first  himself  be  given  to  prayer.  He  who  urges 
prayer  on  others  must  first  tread  the  path  of 
prayer  himself.  And  just  in  proportion  as  preach- 
ers pray,  will  they  be  disposed  to  urge  prayer  upon 
those  to  whom  they  preach.  Moreover,  just  in 
proportion  as  preachers  pray,  will  they  be  fitted 
to  preach  on  prayer.  If  that  course  of  reasoning 
be  true,  would  it  be  legitimate  to  draw  the  con- 
clusion that  the  reason  why  there  is  so  little 
preaching  on  prayer  In  these  modern  times  is  be- 
cause preachers  are  not  praying  men  ? 

We  might  stake  the  whole  question  of  the  abso- 
lute necessity  and  the  possibilities  of  prayer  in 
this  dispensation  on  Paul’s  attitude  toward  prayer. 
If  personal  force,  if  the  energy  of  a strong  will, 
if  profound  convictions,  if  personal  culture  and 
talents,  and  if  the  Divin6  call  and  the  Divine 
empowerment, — If  any  one  of  these,  or  all  of 
them  united,  could  direct  the  Church  of  God  with- 
out prayer,  then  logically  prayer  would  be  unneces- 
sary. If  profound  piety  and  unswerving  consecra- 


PAUL,  THE  TEACHER  OF  PRAYER  111 

tion  to  a high  purpose,  if  impassioned  loyalty  to 
Jesus  Christ,  if  any  or  all  of  these  could  exist 
without  devoted  prayer,  or  lift  a Church  leader 
above  the  necessity  of  prayer,  then  Paul  was  above 
its  use.  But  if  the  great  and  gifted,  the  favored 
and  devoted  Paul  felt  the  necessity  of  unceasing 
prayer,  and  realized  that  it  was  urgent  and  press- 
ing in  regard  to  its  claims  and  necessity,  and  if 
he  felt  that  it  was  clamorous  and  insistent  that 
the  Church  should  pray  without  ceasing,  then  he 
and  his  brethren  in  the  apostolate  should  be  aided 
by  universal  and  mighty  praying. 

Paul’s  praying  and  his  commands  and  the 
urgency  with  which  he  pressed  upon  the  Church 
to  pray,  is  the  most  convincing  proof  of  the  abso- 
lute necessity  of  prayer  as  a great  moral  force  in 
the  world,  an  indispensable  and  inalienable  factor 
in  the  progress  and  spread  of  the  Gospel,  and  in 
the  development  of  personal  piety.  In  Paul’s 
view,  there  was  no  Church  success  without  prayer, 
and  no  piety  without  prayer,  in  fact  without  much 
prayer.  A Church  out  of  whose  life  streams 
prayer  as  the  incense  flames  went  out  of  the  censer, 
and  a leadership  out  of  whose  character,  life  and 
habits  flames  prayer  as  imposing,  conspicuous  and 
spontaneous  as  the  fragrant  incense  flamed,  this 
was  the  leadership  for  God. 

To  pray  everywhere,  to  pray  in  everything,  to 
continue  instant  in  prayer,  and  to  pray  without 


112  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

ceasing,  thus  Paul  spoke  as  a commentator  on 
the  Divine  uses  and  the  nature  of  prayer. 

Timothy  was  very  dear  to  Paul,  and  the  at- 
tachment was  mutual  and  intensified  by  all  their 
affinities.  Paul  found  in  Timothy  those  elements 
which  fitted  him  to  be  his  spiritual  successor,  at 
least  the  depository  and  the  leader  of  the  great 
spiritual  principles  and  forces  which  were  essen- 
tial to  the  establishment  and  prosperity  of  the 
Church.  These  primary  and  vital  truths  he  would 
enforce  on  and  radicate  in  Timothy.  Paul  re- 
garded Timothy  as  one  to  whom  fundamental  and 
vital  truths  might  be  committed,  who  would  pre- 
serve them  truly,  and  who  would  commit  them 
inviolate  to  the  future.  So  he  gives  to  Timothy 
this  deposit  of  prayer  for  all  ages  as  found  in 
1st  Timothy  2 :i. 

Let  it  be  noted  before  we  go  any  further  that 
Paul  wrote  directly  under  the  superintendency  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  guarded  Paul  against  error, 
and  who  suggested  the  truths  which  Paul  taught. 
We  hold  definitely  without  compromise  in  the  least 
to  the  plenary  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  and 
as  Paul’s  writings  are  part  and  parcel  of  those 
Sacred  Writings,  then  Paul’s  Epistles  are  portions 
of  the  Scriptures  or  the  Word  of  God.  This 
being  true,  the  doctrine  of  prayer  which  Paul 
affirmed  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  His' 
Epistles  are  of  the  Word  of  God,  inspired,  au- 
thentic and  of  Divine  authority.  So  that  prayer 


PAUL,  THE  TEACHER  OF  PRAYER  113 

as  taught  by  Paul  is  the  doctrine  which  Almighty 
God  would  have  His  Church  accept,  believe,  and 
practice. 

These  words  to  Timothy,  therefore,  were  di- 
vinely inspired  words.  This  section  of  Holy  Writ 
is  much  more  than  merely  suggestive,  and  is  far 
more  than  a broad,  bare  outline  on  prayer.  It 
is  so  instructive  about  prayer,  about  how  men 
ought  to  pray,  how  business  men  should  pray,  and 
so  forceful  about  the  reasons  why  men  ought  to 
pray,  that  it  needs  to  be  strongly  and  insistently 
pressed. 

Here  are  Paul’s  words  to  Timothy  on  prayer: 

“I  exhort,  therefore,  that,  first  of  all,  supplica- 
tions, prayers,  intercessions  and  giving  of  thanks, 
be  made  for  all  men; 

“For  kings  and  all  that  are  in  authority  that 
we  may  lead  a quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all 
godliness  and  honesty. 

“For  this  is  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight 
of  God,  our  Saviour; 

“Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved  and  to 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth. 

“For  there  is  one  God,  and  one  Mediator  be- 
tween God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus ; 

“Who  gave  himself  a ransom  for  all,  to  be 
testified  in  due  time.  I will  therefore  that  men 
pray  everywhere,  lifting  up  holy  hands,  without 
wrath  and  doubting.” 

In  this  prayer  section  we  have  set  forth  by 
Paul  the  inheritance  and  practice  of  every  Chris- 


114  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

tian  in  all  ages.  It  is  a vade  mecum  in  the  great 
business  of  praying.  It  gives  us  a view  of  the 
energy  and  many-sidedness  of  prayer.  First  in 
point  of  time  in  all  excellence  of  all  duties  is 
prayer.  It  must  be  first  in  all  occupations.  So  ex- 
acting and  imperative  in  its  import  and  power  is 
prayer  that  it  stands  first  among  spiritual  values. 
He  that  prays  not,  is  not  at  all.  He  is  naught,  less 
than  naught.  He  is  below  zero,  so  far  as  Christ 
and  God  and  heaven  are  concerned.  Not  simply 
among  the  first  things  does  prayer  stand  on  a 
level  with  other  things,  but  first  of  the  first,  to 
the  very  forefront,  does  Paul  put  prayer  with  all 
his  heart.  “I  exhort  that  first  of  all.” 

His  teaching  is  that  praying  is  the  most  im- 
portant of  all  things  on  earth.  All  else  must  be 
restrained,  retired,  to  give  it  primacy.  Put  it 
first,  and  keep  its  primacy.  The  conflict  is  about 
the  primacy  of  prayer.  Defeat  and  victory  lie  in 
this  one  thing.  To  make  prayer  secondary  is  to 
discrown  it.  It  is  to  fetter  and  destroy  prayer. 
If  prayer  is  put  first,  then  God  is  put  first,  and 
victory  is  assured.  Prayer  must  either  reign  in 
the  life  or  must  abdicate.  Which  shall  it  be  ? 

According  to  Paul,  “supplications,  prayers,  in- 
tercessions and  giving  of  thanks”  all  these  ele- 
ments of  prayer  and  forms  of  prayer  are  to  be 
offered  for  men.  Prayer  is  offered  for  things, 
for  all  things,  for  all  temporal  good,  and  for  all 
spiritual  good  and  grace,  but  in  these  directions 


PAUL,  THE  TEACHER  OF  PRAYER  115 

Paul  rises  to  the  highest  results  and  purposes  of 
prayer.  Men  are  to  be  affected  by  prayer.  Their 
good,  their  character,  conduct  and  destiny  are 
all  involved  in  prayer.  In  this  regard  prayer 
moves  along  the  highest  way,  and  pursues  its 
loftiest  end.  We  are  cognizant  and  consonant 
with  things,  with  blessings,  and  bestowments,  with 
matters  and  things  which  touch  men,  but  men 
themselves  are  here  set  forth  as  the  objects  of 
prayer.  This  broadens  and  ennobles  prayer. 
Men,  through  the  whole  sweep  and  range  of  their 
conditions,  are  to  be  held  in  the  mighty  grasp  of 
prayer. 

Paul’s  teaching  is  to  the  effect  that  prayer  is 
essentially  a thing  of  the  inner  nature.  The  spirit 
within  us  prays.  So  note  Paul’s  directions:  “I 
will  therefore  that  men  pray  everywhere,  without 
wrath.”  “Wrath”  is  a term  which  denotes  the 
natural,  internal  motion  of  plants  and  fruits,  swell- 
ing with  juice.  The  natural  juices  are  warmed 
into  life,  and  rise  by  the  warmth  of  Spring.  Man 
has  in  him  natural  juices  which  rise  as  does  the 
sap.  Warmth,  heat,  all  stages  of  passions  and 
desires,  every  degree  of  feeling,  these  spontane- 
ously rise  under  provocation.  Guard  against  and 
suppress  them.  Man  cannot  pray  with  these  nat- 
ural feelings  rising  in  him,  cultivated,  cherished 
and  continued  there.  Prayer  is  to  be  without 
these.  “Without  wrath.”  Higher,  better,  nobler 


116  PBAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


inspiration  are  to  lift  prayer  upward.  “Wrath” 
depresses  prayer,  hinders  it,  suppresses  it. 

The  word  “without”  means  making  no  use  of, 
having  no  association  with,  apart  from,  aloof 
from.  The  natural,  unrenewed  heart  has  no  part 
in  praying.  Its  heat  and  all  its  nature  juices 
poison  and  destroy  praying.  The  nature  of  prayer 
is  deeper  than  nature.  We  cannot  pray  by  na- 
ture, even  by  the  kindliest  and  the  best  nature. 

Prayer  is  the  true  test  of  character.  Fidelity 
to  our  conditions  and  trueness  to  our  relations 
are  often  evinced  by  our  prayerfulness.  Some 
conditions  give  birth  to  prayer.  They  are  the 
soil  which  germinates  and  perfects  prayer.  To 
pray  under  some  circumstances  seems  very  fitting. 
Not  to  pray  in  some  conditions  seems  heartless 
and  discordant.  The  great  storms  of  life,  when 
we  are  helpless  and  without  relief,  or  are  devoid 
of  assuagement,  are  the  natural  and  providential 
conditions  of  prayer. 

Widowhood  is  a great  sorrow.  It  comes  to 
saintly  women  as  well  as  to  others.  True  widows 
there  are  who  are  saintly.  They  are  to  be  hon- 
ored and  their  sorrow  is  divine.  Their  piety  is 
aromatic  and  lightened  by  their  bruised  hearts. 
Here  is  Paul’s  description  of  such  widows: 

“Now  she  that  is  a widow  indeed  and  desolate, 
trusteth  in  God,  and  continueth  in  supplications 
and  prayers  night  and  day.  But  she  that  liveth  in 
pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth.” 


PAUL,  TPIE  TEACHER  OF  PRAYER  117 

Here  is  the  striking  contrast  between  two  classes 
of  women.  One  gives  herself  to  supplications 
night  and  day.  The  other  lives  in  pleasure  and 
is  spiritually  dead.  So  Paul  describes  a trae 
widow  as  being  great  in  prayer.  Her  prayers, 
born  of  her  faith  and  desolation,  are  a mighty 
force.  Day  and  night  her  prayers  go  up  to  God 
unceasingly.  The  widowhood  heart  is  a mighty 
appeal  to  God  when  that  heart  is  found  in  the 
way  of  prayer,  intense,  unwearied  prayer. 

One  of  Paul’s  striking  injunctions  worthy  of 
study  is  this  one,  “continuing  instant  in  prayer,”  or 
as  the  Revised  Version  reads,  “Continuing  stead- 
fast in  prayer,”  which  is  his  description  of  prayer. 
The  term  means  to  tarry,  to  remain,  to  be  stead- 
fast and  faithful  in  prayer,  to  stick  to  it  strong, 
to  stay  at  it  with  strength  to  the  end,  to  give 
attention  to  it  with  vigor,  devotion  and  constancy, 
to  give  unremitting  care  to  it. 

Praying  is  a business,  a life-long  business, 
one  to  be  followed  with  diligence,  fervor  and  toil. 
The  Christian’s  business  by  way  of  preeminence 
is  prayer.  It  is  his  most  engaging,  most  heavenly, 
most  lucrative  business.  Prayer  is  a business  of 
such  high  and  deserved  dignity  and  import  that 
it  is  to  be  followed  “without  ceasing.”  That  is, 
with  no  let  up  nor  break  down,  followed  assidu- 
ously and  without  intermission.  To  prayer  we 
are  to  give  all  strength.  It  must  cover  all  things, 


118  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

be  in  every  place,  find  itself  in  all  seasons,  and 
embrace  everything,  always,  and  everywhere. 

In  the  remarkable  prayer  in  Ephesians,  3d  chap- 
ter, he  is  praying  for  wide  reaches  of  religious  ex- 
perience. He  is  there  bowing  his  loiees  unto  God, 
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  asking  that  God 
would  grant  that  these  Ephesian  believers  would 
in  their  experiences  go  far  beyond  the  utmost 
stretches  of  past  sainthood.  “Filled  with  all  the 
fullness  of  God,”  an  experience  so  great  and  so 
glorious  that  it  makes  the  head  of  the  modern 
saint  so  dizzy  that  he  is  afraid  to  look  up  to  those 
supernal  heights  or  peer  down  into  the  fathomless 
depths.  Paul  just  passes  us  on  to  Him,  “who  is 
able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that 
we  can  ask  or  think.”  This  is  a specimen  of  his 
teaching  on  prayer. 

In  writing  to  the  Philippian  Church,  Paul  re- 
counts the  situation,  and  shows  the  transmuting 
power  of  prayer  as  follows : 

“Some  indeed  preach  Christ  of  envy  and  strife  ; 
and  some  also  of  good  will,* 

“The  one  preach  Christ  of  contention,  not  sin- 
cerely, supposing  to  add  afiliction  to  my  bonds; 

“But  the  other  of  love,  knowing  that  I am  set 
for  the  defense  of  the  Gospel. 

“What  then?  Notwithstanding  every  way, 
whether  in  pretense  or  in  truth,  Christ  is 
preached;  and  I therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will 
rejoice. 

“For  I know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  salva- 


PAUL,  THE  TEACHER  OF  PRAYER  119 

tion  through  our  prayer  and  the  supply  of  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ. 

“According  to  my  earnest  expectation  and  my 
hope ; that  in  nothing  shall  I be  ashamed,  but  that 
with  all  boldness,  as  always,  so  now  also  Christ 
shall  be  magnified  in  my  body,  whether  it  be  by 
life  or  death.” 

Boldness  was  to  be  secured  by  him  and  dis- 
comfiture and  shame  prevented  by  their  prayers, 
and  Christ  was  to  be  gloriously  magnified  by  and 
through  Paul,  whether  he  lived  or  died. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  all  these  quotations 
in  Corinthians,  Ephesians  or  Philippians,  the  Re- 
vised Version  gives  us  the  most  intense  form  of 
prayer,  “supplications.”  It  is  the  intense,  per- 
sonal, strenuous,  persistent  praying  of  the  saints, 
that  Paul  requests,  and  they  must  give  special 
strength,  interest,  time  and  heart  to  their  praying 
to  make  it  bear  its  largest  golden  fruit. 

The  general  direction  about  prayer  to  the  Col- 
lossian  Christians  is  made  specific  and  is  sharpen- 
ed to  the  point  of  a personal  appeal:  “Continue 
in  prayer  and  watch  in  the  same,  with  thanks- 
giving; withal  praying  also  for  us,  that  God  would 
open  unto  us  a door  of  utterance,  to  speak  the 
mystery  of  Christ,  for  which  I am  also  in  bonds; 
that  I make  it  manifest  as  I ought  to  speak.” 

Paul  is  accredited  with  the  authorship  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  We  have  it  in  a refer- 
ence to  the  character  of  Christ’s  praying,  which 


im  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


Is  illustrative,  directory  and  authentative  as  to  the 
elements  of  true  praying*  How  deep  tones  are 
his  words!  How  heart-affecting  and  how  sub- 
lime was  His  praying  who  prayed  as  never  man 
prayed  before,  and  yet  prayed  in  order  to  teach 
man  how  to  pray,  ^‘who  in  the  days  of  His  flesh, 
when  He  had  offered  prayers  and  supplications, 
with  strong  crying  and  tears,  to  Him  that  was 
able  to  save  Him  from  death,  and  was  heard 
in  that  He  feared.”  The  praying  of  Jesus  Christ 
drew  on  the  mightiest  forces  of  His  being.  His 
prayers  were  His  sacrifices,  which  He  offered 
before  He  offered  Himself  on  the  cross  for  the 
sins  of  mankind.  Prayer-sacrifice  is  the  fore- 
runner and  pledge  of  self-sacrifice.  We  must  die 
in  our  closets  before  we  can  die  on  the  cross* 


CHAPTER  XIII 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING 

la  the  life  of  Frank  Crossley  it  is  told  hozi/  one  day 
in  iZSZ  he  had  said  good-hye  at  the  station  to  his  fnendsjt 
G eneral  and  Mrs,  Booth;  but  before  they  steamed  out  he 
handed  a letter  to  them  giving  details  of  a sacrifice  he 
had  resolved  to  make  for  the  Army,  He  came  home 
and  zuas  praying  alone,  ''As  I was  prayingF  he  said, 
"there  came  over  me  the  most  extraordinary  sense  of  joy. 
It  was  not  exactly  in  my  head,  nor  in  my  heart,  it  was 
almost  a grasping  of  my  chest  by  some  strange  hand  that 
filled  me  with  an  ecstasy  I never  had  before.  It  was 
borne  in  on  me  that  this  was  the  joy  of  the  Lordf^  So 
this  servant  of  God  made  in  his  pilgrimage  to  God  an 
advance  from  which  he  never  fell  back.  He  thought  it 
likely  at  the  time  that  the  Booths  had  read  this  letter 
in  the  train  and  this  was  an  answer  to  prayer  of  theirs; 
afterwards  he  heard  they  had  prayed  for  him  in  the  train 
just  after  getting  well  out  of  Manchester, 

— ^Rev.  Edward  Shillito. 

He  who  studies  Paul’s  praying,  both  his  prayers 
and  his  commands  about  prayer,  will  find  what 
a wide,  general,  minute,  and  diversified  area  it 
covers.  It  will  appear  that  these  men  like  Wes- 
ley, Brainerd,  Luther,  and  all  their  holy  successors 
in  the  spiritual  realms,  were  not  guilty  of  fanat- 
icism nor  superstition  when  they  ordered  all  things 


121 


12S  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


by  prayer  great  and  small,  and  committed  all 
thing,  secular  and  religious,  natural  and  spiritual, 
to  God  in  prayer.  In  this  they  were  but  follow- 
ing the  great  exemplar  and  authority  of  the  Apos- 
tle Paul. 

To  seek  God  as  Paul  did  by  prayer,  to  com- 
mune with  God  as  Paul  did,  to  supplicate  Jesus 
Christ  as  Paul  did,  to  seek  the  Holy  Spirit  by 
prayer  as  Paul  did,  to  do  this  without  ceasing, 
to  be  always  a racer,  and  to  win  Christ  as  Paul 
did  by  prayer — all  this  makes  a saint,  an  apostle, 
and  a leader  for  God.  This  kind  of  a life  en- 
gages, absorbs,  enriches,  and  empowers  with  God 
and  for  God.  Prayer,  if  successful,  must  always 
engage  and  absorb  us.  This  kind  of  praying 
brings  Pauline  days  and  secures  Pauline  gifts. 
Pauline  days  are  good,  Pauline  gifts  are  better, 
but  Pauline  praying  is  best  of  all,  for  it  brings 
Pauline  days,  and  secures  Pauline  gifts.  Pauline 
praying  costs  much,  is  death  to  self,  the  flesh  and 
the  world.  Pauline  praying  is  worth  all  it  costs. 
Prayer  which  costs  nothing  gets  nothing.  It  is 
beggarly  business  at  best. 

Paul’s  estimate  of  prayer  is  seen  and  enforced 
by  the  fact  that  Paul  was  a man  of  prayer.  His 
high  position  in  the  Church  was  not  one  of  dignity 
and  position  to  enjoy  and  luxuriate  in.  It  was 
not  one  of  ofEcialism,  nor  was  it  one  of  arduous 
and  exhaustless  toil,  for  Paul  was  preeminently 
a praying  man. 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING  123 

He  began  his  great  career  for  Christ  in  the 
great  struggle  and  school  of  prayer.  God’s  con- 
vincing and  wonderful  argument  to  assure  An- 
anias was,  “Behold  he  prayeth.”  Three  days 
was  he  without  sight,  neither  eating  nor  drinking, 
but  the  lesson  was  learned  well. 

He  went  out  on  his  first  great  missionary  trip 
under  the  power  of  fasting  and  prayer,  and  they, 
Paul  and  Barnabas,  established  every  Church  by 
the  very  same  means,  by  fasting  and  prayer.  He 
began  his  work  in  Philippi  “where  prayer  was 
wont  to  be  made.”  As  “they  went  to  prayer,” 
the  spirit  of  divination  was  cast  out  of  the  young 
woman.  And  when  Paul  and  Silas  were  put  in 
prison,  at  midnight  they  prayed  and  sang  praises 
to  God. 

Paul  made  praying  a habit,  a business  and  a 
life.  He  literally  gave  himself  to  prayer.  So 
with  him  praying  was  not  an  outer  garb,  a mere 
coloring,  a paint,  a polish.  Praying  made  up  the 
substance,  the  bone,  the  marrow,  and  the  very 
being  of  his  religious  life.  His  conversion  was 
a .marvel  of  grace  and  power.  His  apostolic 
commission  was  full  and  royal.  But  he  did  not 
vainly  expect  to  make  full  proof  of  his  ministry, 
by  the  marvels  of  conditions  and  by  wonderful 
results  in  the  conversion,  nor  by  the  apostolic  com- 
mission signed  and  sealed  by  Divine  authority,  and 
carrying  with  it  all  highest  gifts  and  apostolic  en- 
richments, but  by  prayer,  by  ceaseless,  wrestling. 


U4>  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

agonizing  and  Holy  Spirit  praying.  Thus  did 
Paul  work  his  work,  and  crown  his  work,  his  life 
and  the  death  with  martyr  principles  and  with 
martyr  glory. 

Paul  had  a spiritual  trait  which  was  very 
marked  and  especially  promised,  and  it  was  that  of 
prayer.  He  had  a profound  conviction  that  prayer 
was  a great  as  well  as  a solemn  duty;  that  prayer 
was  a royal  privilege;  that  prayer  was  a mighty 
force;  that  prayer  gauges  piety,  makes  faith 
mighty  and  mightier;  that  much  prayer  was 
necessary  to  Christian  success;  that  prayer  was 
a great  factor  in  the  ongoing  of  God’s  kingdom 
on  earth;  and  that  God  and  heaven  expected  to 
pray. 

Somehow  we  are  dependent  on  prayer  for 
great  triumphs  of  holiness  over  sin,  of  heaven 
over  hell,  and  of  Christ  over  Satan.  Paul  took 
it  for  granted  that  men  who  knew  God  would 
pray;  that  men  who  lived  for  God  would  pray 
much,  and  that  men  could  not  live  for  God  who 
did  not  pray.  So  Paul  prayed  much.  He  was 
in  the  habit  of  praying.  He  was  used  to  pray- 
ing, and  that  formed  the  habit  of  prayer.  He 
estimated  prayer  so  greatly  that  he  fully  knew 
its  value,  and  that  fastened  the  habit  on  him. 
Paul  was  in  the  habit  of  praying  because  he  loved 
God,  and  such  love  in  the  heart  always  finds  its 
expression  in  regular  habits  of  prayer.  He  felt 
the  need  of  much  grace,  and  of  more  and  more 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING 


125 


grace,  and  grace  only  comes  through  the  channels 
of  prayer,  and  only  abounds  more  and  more  as 
prayer  abounds  more  and  more. 

Paul  was  in  the  habit  of  praying,  but  he  prayed 
not  by  mere  force  of  habit.  Man  is  such  a crea- 
ture of  habit  that  he  is  always  in  danger  of  doing 
things  simply  by  heart,  in  a routine,  perfunctory 
manner.  Paul’s  habit  was  regular  and  hearty. 
To  the  Romans  he  writes,  “For  God  is  my  wit- 
ness, that  without  ceasing,  I make  mention  of  you 
always  in  my  prayers.”  Prison  doors  are  opened 
and  earthquakes  take  place  by  such  praying  as 
Paul  did,  even  by  such  melodious  Pauline  pray- 
ing. All  things  are  opened  to  the  kind  of  pray- 
ing which  was  done  by  Paul  and  Silas.  All  things 
are  opened  by  prayer.  They  could  shut  up  Paul 
from  preaching,  but  this  could  not  shut  him  up 
from  praying.  And  the  Gospel  could  win  its  way 
by  Paul’s  praying  as  well  as  by  Paul’s  preaching. 
The  apostle  might  be  in  prison,  but  the  Word 
of  God  was  free,  and  went  like  the  mountain  air, 
while  the  apostle  is  bound  in  prison  and  abounds 
in  prayer. 

How  profound  their  joy  in  Jesus  which  ex- 
pressed itself  so  happily  and  so  sweetly  in  praise 
and  prayer,  under  conditions  so  painful  and  so 
depressing ! Prayer  brought  them  into  full  com- 
munion with  God  which  made  all  things  radiant 
with  the  Divine  presence  which  enabled  them  to 
“rejoice  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer 


126  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

shame  for  His  name,  and  to  count  it  all  joy  when 
they  fell  into  divers  trials.”  Prayer  sweetens  all 
things  and  sanctifies  all  things.  The  prayerful 
saint  will  be  a suffering  saint.  Suffering  prayer- 
fully he  will  be  a sweet  saint.  A praying  saint 
will  be  a praising  saint-  Praise  is  but  prayer  set 
to  music  and  song. 

After  that  notable  charge  to  the  elders  at 
Ephesus,  as  he  tarried  there  while  on  his  way 
to  Jerusalem,  this  characteristic  record  is  made 
in  Acts: 

“And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  kneeled 
down  and  prayed  with  them.  And  they  all  wept 
sore,  and  fell  on  Paul’s  neck  and  kissed  him.” 

“He  kneeled  down  and  prayed,”  Note  those 
words.  Kneeling  in  prayer  was  Paul’s  favor- 
ite attitude,  the  fitting  posture  of  an  earnest, 
humble  suppliant.  Humility  and  intensity  are 
in  such  a position  in  prayer  before  Almighty  God. 
It  is  the  proper  attitude  of  man  before  God,  of 
a sinner  before  a Saviour,  and  of  a beggar  before 
his  benefactor.  To  seal  his  sacred  and  living 
charge  to  those  Ephesian  elders  by  prayer  was 
that  which  made  the  charge  efficient,  benignant 
and  abiding. 

Paul’s  religion  was  born  in  the  throes  of  that 
three  days’  struggle  of  prayer,  while  he  was  in 
the  house  of  Ananias,  and  there  he  received  a 
divine  impetus  which  never  slackened  till  it 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING  127 

brought  him  to  the  gates  of  the  eternal  city.  That 
spiritual  history  and  religious  experience  projected 
along  the  line  of  unceasing  prayer,  brought  him  to 
the  highest  spiritual  altitudes  and  yields  the 
largest  spiritual  results.  Paul  lived  in  the  very 
atmosphere  of  prayer.  His  first  missionary  trip 
was  projected  by  prayer.  It  was  by  prayer  and 
fasting  that  he  was  called  into  the  foreign  mission- 
ary field,  and  by  the  same  means  the  Church  at 
Antioch  was  moved  to  send  forth  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas on  their  first  missionary  journey.  Here  is 
the  Scripture  record  of  it: 

“Now  there  were  in  the  Church  which  was  at 
Antioch  certain  prophets  and  teachers,  as  Barna- 
bas and  Simeon,  that  was  called  Niger;  and  Lu- 
cius of  Cyrene,  and  Manean,  which  had  been 
brought  up  with  Herod  the  tetrarch,  and  Saul. 

“And  as  they  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and 
fasted,  the  Holy  Ghost  said,  Separate  me  Barna- 
bas and  Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  I have  called 
them. 

“And  when  they  had  fasted  and  prayed,  and 
had  laid  their  hands  on  them,  they  sent  them 
away.” 

Here  is  a model  for  all  missionary  outgoings, 
a presage  of  success.  Here  was  the  Holy  Spirit 
directing  a prayerful  Church  obedient  to  the 
Divine  leadership,  and  this  condition  of  things 
brought  forth  the  very  largest  possible  results 
in  the  mission  of  these  two  men  of  God.  We  may 
confidently  assert  that  no  Church  in  which  Paul 


128  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

was  prominent  would  be  a prayerless  Church. 
Paul  lived,  toiled  and  suffered  in  an  atmosphere  of 
prayer.  To  him,  prayer  was  the  very  heart  and 
life  of  religion,  its  bone  and  marrow,  the  motor 
of  the  Gospel,  and  the  sign  by  which  it  conquered. 
We  are  not  left  in  ignorance,  for  that  spirit  estab- 
lished churches,  putting  in  them  the  everlasting 
requisite  of  self-denial,  in  the  shape  of  fasting, 
and  in  the  practice  of  prayer.  Here  is  the  Divine 
record  of  Paul’s  work  on  this  line : 

“Confirming  the  souls  of  the  disciples,  and  ex- 
horting them  to  continue  in  the  faith,  and  that 
we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

“And  when  they  had  ordained  them  elders  in 
every  Church,  and  had  prayed  with  fasting,  they 
commended  them  to  the  Lord,  on  whom  they  be- 
lieved.” 

In  obedience  to  a heavenly  vision,  Paul  lands 
in  Europe,  and  finds  himself  at  Philippi.  There 
is  no  synagogue,  and  few  if  any  Jews  are  there. 
A few  pious  women,  however,  have  a meeting 
place  for  prayer,  and  Paul  is  drawn  by  spiritual 
attraction  and  spiritual  affinities  to  the  place 
“where  prayer  is  wont  to  be  made.”  And  Paul’s 
first  planting  of  the  Gospel  in  Europe  is  at  that 
little  prayer  meeting.  He  is  there  the  chief 
pray-er  and  the  leading  talker.  Lydia  was  the 
first  convert  at  that  prayer  meeting.  They  pro- 
tracted the  meeting.  They  called  it  a meeting  for 
prayer. 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING  129 

It  was  while  they  were  going  to  that  protracted 
prayer  meeting  that  Paul  performed  the  miracle 
of  casting  the  devil  of  divination  out  of  a poor 
demon-possessed  girl,  who  had  been  made  a source 
of  gain  by  some  covetous  men,  the  results  of 
which,  by  the  magistrate’s  orders,  were  his  scourg- 
ing and  imprisonment.  The  result  by  God’s  or- 
ders was  the  conversion  of  the  jailer  and  his 
whole  household.  To  the  praying  apostle  no 
discouragements  are  allowed.  A few  praying 
women  are  enough  for  an  apostolical  field  of  labor. 

In  this  last  incident  we  have  a picture  of  Paul 
at  midnight.  He  is  in  the  inner  prison,  dark 
and  deadly.  He  has  been  severely  and  painfully 
scourged,  his  clothing  is  covered  with  blood, 
while  there  are  blood  clots  on  his  gnashed  and 
torn  body.  His  feet  are  in  the  stocks,  every 
lierve  is  feverish  and  swollen,  sensitive  and  pain- 
ful. But  we  find  him  under  these  very  unfavor- 
able and  suffering  conditions  at  his  favorite  pur- 
suit. Paul  is  praying  with  Silas,  his  companion, 
in  a joyous,  triumphant  strain.  “And  at  mid- 
night, Paul  and  Silas  prayed  and  sang  praises 
unto  God,  and  the  prisoners  heard  them.  And 
suddenly  there  was  an  earthquake,  so  that  the 
foundation  of  the  prison  was  shaken,  and  im- 
mediately aU  the  doors  were  shaken;  and  every 
one’s  ban  was  loosed.  And  the  keeper  of  the 
prison  awaking  out  of  his  sleep,  and  seeing  the 
prison  doors  opened,  he  drew  out  his  sword,  and. 


ISO  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

7ouId  have  killed  himself,  supposing  that  the 
)risoners  had  been  fled. 

“But  Paul  cried  out  with  a loud  voice  saying, 
Do  thyself  no  harm;  for  we  are  all  here.” 

Never  was  prayer  so  beautiful,  never  more  re- 
iultful.  Paul  was  an  adept  at  prayer,  a lover 
of  prayer,  a wondrous  devotee  of  prayer,  who 
could  pursue  it  with  such  joyous  strains,  under 
such  conditions  of  despondency  and  despair.  What 
a mighty  weapon  of  defense  was  prayer  to  Paul  I 
How  songful ! The  angels  doubtless  stilled  their 
highest  and  sweetest  notes  to  listen  to  the  music 
which  bore  those  prayers  to  heaven.  The  earth- 
quake trod  along  the  path  made  by  the  mighty 
forces  of  Paul’s  praying.  He  did  not  go  out 
when  his  chains  were  loosed,  and  the  stocks  fell 
off.  His  praying  taught  him  that  God  had  nobler 
purposes  that  night  than  his  own  individual  free- 
dom. His  praying  and  the  earthquake  alarm 
were  to  bring  salvation  to  that  prison,  freedom 
from  the  thraldom  and  prison  house  of  sin  which 
was  prefigured  to  him  by  his  body  emancipation. 
God’s  mighty  providence  had  opened  his  prison 
door  and  had  broken  his  prison  bonds,  not  to 
give  freedom,  but  to  give  freedom  to  the  jailer. 
God’s  providential  openings  are  often  to  test 
our  ability  to  stay  rather  than  to  go.  It  tested 
Paul’s  ability  to  stay. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING 

{Continued) 

William  'Law  has  this  ver^  pertinent  word  in  his 
'' Devout  Life*\'  ^^When  you  begin  your  petitions  use  such 
various  expressions  of  the  attributes  of  God  as  may  make 
you  most  sensible  of  the  greatness  and  power  of  the 
Divine  nature/^  And  then  William  Law  gives  various 
examples,  which  I am  hound  to  say  would  not  he  helpful 
to  me,  as  they  would  imprison  my  spirit  in  a coat  of 
math  But  I want  to  emphasize  and  commend  the  prin^ 
ciple  of  it,  which  is,  that  our  fellowship  should  begin 
with  the  primary  elements  of  adoration  and  praise. 

— Rev.  J.  H.  Jowett. 


There  are  two  occasions ‘with  wonderful  re- 
sults where  the  statement  is  not  explicit  that  Paul 
was  in  prayer,  hut  the  circumstances  and  the  re- 
sults, and  Paul’s  universal  and  intense  praying 
habit,  make  it  most  evident  that  the  key  to  the 
results  of  both  occasions  is  prayer.  The  first 
occasion  is  when  Paul  sailed  away  from  Philippi 
and  came  to  Troas,  where  he  abode  seven  days. 
On  the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the  disciples 
came  together  to  break  bread,  Paul  preached  unto 

131 


102  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

them,  expecting  to  depart  on  the  morrow,  and  con- 
tinued his  preaching  till  late  in  the  night. 

There  was  sitting  in  the  window  a young  man 
named  Eutychus,  who  naturally  fell  asleep,  and 
as  Paul  was  rather  long  in  speaking,  the  young 
man  fell  out  of  the  high  window,  and  was  taken 
up  for  dead.  Paul  went  down  to  the  place  where 
the  young  man  had  fallen,  and  embracing  him, 
told  the  people  about  him  that  they  need  not  be 
troubled,  for  life  was  still  in  the  body.  Paul  re- 
turned to  the  upper  room,  where  he  had  been 
preaching,  and  talked  with  the  disciples  till  break 
of  day.  And  the  young  man  was  brought  alive, 
and  as  a consequence  all  were  greatly  comforted. 

The  very  natural  conclusion  without  the  fact 
being  specially  stated  is  that  Paul  must  have 
prayed  for  the  young  man  when  he  embraced  him, 
and  his  prayer  was  answered  in  the  quick  recovery 
of  the  young  man. 

The  second  occasion  was  in  the  perilous  and 
protracted  storm  which  overtook  the  vessel  in 
which  Paul  was  being  carried  as  a prisoner  to 
Rome.  They  were  being  exceedingly  tossed  about 
with  the  great  tempest,  and  neither  sun  nor  stars 
appeared  as  they  were  beset  and  struggled  against 
wind  and  storm.  All  hope  that  they  would  be 
saved  seemed  gone.  But  after  long  abstinence, 
Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  those  on  board,  and 
speaking  more  particularly  to  the  officers  of  the 
vessel,  said,  “Sirs,  ye  should  have  hearkened  unto 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING  183 

me,  and  not  have  loosed  from  Crete,  and  to  have 
gained  this  harm  and  loss.  And  now  I exhort 
you,  to  be  of  good  cheer,  for  there  shall  be  no 
loss  of  any  man’s  life  among  you,  but  of  the  ship. 
For  there  stood  by  this  night  the  angel  of  God, 
whose  I am  and  whom  I serve,  saying.  Fear  not, 
Paul;  thou  must  be  brought  before  Caesar,  and 
lo,  God  hath  given  thee  all  them  that  sail  with 
thee.  Wherefore,  sirs,  be  of  good  cheer;  for 
I believe  God,  that  it  shall  be  even  as  God  hath 
told  me.” 

It  requires  no  strained  interpretation  to  read 
into  this  simple  record  the  fact  that  Paul  must 
have  been  praying  when  the  angel  appeared  unto 
him  with  that  message  of  encouragement  and  as- 
surance of  safety.  Paul’s  habit  of  prayer  and  his 
strong  belief  in  prayer  must  have  driven  him  to 
his  knees.  Such  an  emergency  with  him  would 
necessarily  move  him  to  pray  under  such  crucial 
circumstances. 

After  the  shipwreck,  while  on  the  island  of 
Melita,  we  have  another  representation  of  Paul 
at  prayer.  He  is  at  his  work  of  praying  for  a 
very  ill  man.  While  a fire  was  being  made,  a 
deadly  poisonous  viper  fastened  itself  on  his  hand, 
and  the  barbarians  immediately  concluded  it  was 
a case  of  retribution  for  some  crime  Paul  had 
committed,  but  they  soon  discovered  that  Paul  did 
not  die,  and  changed  their  minds  and  concluded 
that  he  was  a sort  of  god. 


1S4  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


In  the  same  quarter  at  the  time,  was  the  father 
of  Publius,  who  was  very  ill  of  a fever,  and  bloody 
flux,  approaching  seemingly  his  end.  Paul  went 
to  him,  and  laid  his  hands  upon  him,  and  with 
simple  confidence  in  God  he  prayed,  and  immedi- 
ately the  disease  was  rebuked,  and  the  man  was 
healed.  When  the  natives  of  the  island  beheld 
this  remarkable  incident,  they  brought  others  to 
Paul,  and  they  were  healed,  after  the  same  fash- 
ion, by  Paul’s  praying. 

Turning  back  in  Paul’s  life  to  the  time  he  was 
at  Ephesus  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem,  we  find  him 
stopping  at  Tyre  after  he  departed  from  Ephesus. 
Before  leaving  Ephesus  he  had  prayed  with  them 
all.  But  he  did  not  trust  in  his  words  howsoever 
strong,  fitting  and  solemn  they  might  have  been. 
God  must  be  recognized,  invoked  and  sought, 
Paul  did  not  take  it  for  granted,  after  he  had 
done  his  best,  that  God  as  a master  of  course 
would  bless  his  efforts  to  do  good,  but  he  sought 
God.  God  does  not  do  things  in  a matter-of- 
course  sort  of  way.  God  must  be  invoked,  sought 
unto,  and  put  into  things  by  prayer. 

Following  his  visit  to  Ephesus,  he  arrived 
at  Tyre,  where  he  stopped  a few  days.  Here 
he  found  some  disciples,  who  begged  Paul  not 
to  go  to  Jerusalem,  saying  through  the  Spirit  that 
he  should  not  go  up  to  that  city.  But  Paul  adhered 
to  his  original  purpose  to  go  to  Jerusalem.  The 
account  says: 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING  135 

“And  when  we  had  accomplished  those  days^ 
we  departed,  and  went  our  way;  and  they  all 
brought  us  on  our  way  with  their  wives  and  chil- 
dren, till  we  were  out  of  the  city ; and  we  kneeled 
down  on  the  shore  and  prayed.” 

What  a sight  to  behold  on  that  seashore! 
Here  is  a family  picture  of  love  and  devotion, 
where  husbands,  wives  and  even  children  are 
present,  and  prayer  is  made  out  in  the  open  air. 
What  an  impression  it  must  have  made  upon  those 
children!  The  vessel  was  ready  to  depart,  but 
prayer  must  cement  their  affections  and  sanctify 
wives  and  children,  and  bless  their  parting — a 
parting  which  was  to  be  final  so  far  as  this  world 
was  concerned.  The  scene  is  beautiful  and  does 
honor  to  the  head  and  heart  of  Paul,  to  his  person 
and  his  piety,  and  shows  the  tender  affection  in 
which  he  was  held.  His  devoted  habit  of  sanctify- 
ing all  things  by  prayer  comes  directly  to  the 
light.  “We  kneeled  down  on  the  shore  and 
prayed.”  Never  did  sea  strand  see  a grander  pic- 
ture or  witness  a lovelier  sight — Paul  on  his  knees 
on  the  sands  of  that  shore,  invoking  God’s  bless- 
ing upon  these  men,  women  and  children. 

When  Paul  was  arraigned  at  Jerusalem,  in  mak- 
ing his  public  defense,  he  refers  to  two  instances 
of  his  praying.  One  was  when  he  was  in  the 
house  of  Judas,  in  Damascus,  after  he  had  been 
stricken  to  the  earth  and  brought  under  convic- 
tion. He  was  there  three  days,  and  to  him  was 


136  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

Ananias  sent,  to  lay  his  hand  upon  him,  at  the 
time  of  his  blindness  and  darkness.  It  was  dur- 
ing those  three  days  of  prayer.  This  is  the  Scrip- 
tural record,  and  the  words  are  those  of  Ananias 
addressed  to  him : 

“And  now  why  tarriest  thou?  Arise  and  be 
baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the 
name  of  the  Lord.” 

The  Lord  had  emboldened  the  timid  Ananias 
to  go  and  minister  to  Paul,  by  telling  him,  “Be- 
hold he  prayeth.”  And  so  we  have  in  this  refer- 
ence Paul’s  prayerfulness  intensified  by  the  ex- 
hortation of  Ananias.  Prayer  precedes  pardon  of 
sins.  Prayer  becomes  those  who  seek  God. 
Prayer  belongs  to  the  earnest,  sincere  inquirer 
after  God.  Pardon  of  sin  and  acceptance  with 
God  always  come  at  the  end  of  earnest  praying. 
The  evidence  of  sincerity  in  a true  seeker  of  re- 
ligion is  that  it  can  be  said  of  him,  “Behold  he 
prayeth.” 

The  other  reference  in  his  defense  lets  us 
into  the  prayerful  intenseness  into  which  his  whole 
religious  life  had  been  fashioned  and  shows  us 
how  in  the  absorbing  ecstasy  of  prayer,  the  vision 
came  and  directions  were  received  by  which  his 
toilsome  life  was  to  be  guided.  Also  we  see  the 
familiar  terras  on  which  he  stood  and  talked  with 
his  Lord : 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING  137 

“And  it  came  to  pass  when  I was  come  again 
to  Jerasalem,  even  while  I prayed  in  the  temple, 
I was  in  a trance; 

“And  saw  him  saying  unto  me,  Make  haste  and 
get  thee  quickly  out  of  Jerusalem,  for  they  will 
not  receive  thy  testimony  concerning  me. 

“And  I said.  Lord,  they  know  that  I imprisoned 
and  beat  in  every  synagogue  them  that  believed 
on  thee. 

“And  when  the  blood  of  thy  martyr  Stephen 
was  shed,  I also  was  standing  by,  and  consenting 
to  his  death,  and  kept  the  raiment  of  them  that 
slew  him. 

“And  he  said  unto  me,  Depart,  for  I will  send 
thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles.” 

Prayer  always  brings  directions  from  heaven 
as  to  what  God  would  have  us  to  do.  If  we 
prayed  more  and  more  directly,  we  should  make 
fewer  mistakes  in  life  as  to  duty.  God’s  will  con- 
cerning us  is  revealed  in  answer  to  prayer.  If  we 
prayed  more  and  prayed  better  and  sweeter,  then 
clearer  and  more  entrancing  visions  would  be  given 
us,  and  our  Intercourse  with  God,  would  be  of  the 
most  intimate,  free,  and  bold  order. 

It  is  difficult  to  itemize  or  classify  Paul’s  pray- 
ing. It  is  so  comprehensive,  so  discursive,  and 
so  minute,  that  It  is  no  easy  task  to  do  so.  Paul 
teaches  much  about  prayer  in  his  didactics.  He 
specifically  enforces  the  duty  and  necessity  of 
prayer  upon  the  Church,  but  that  which  was  better 
for  Paul  and  better  for  us  is  that  he  himself 
prayed  much  and  illustrated  his  own  teaching. 


1S8  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

He  practiced  what  he  preached.  He  put  to  the 
test  the  exercise  of  prayer  which  he  urged  upon 
the  people  of  his  day.. 

To  the  Church  at  Rome  he  plainly  and  specif- 
ically asseverated  with  solemnity  his  habit  of 
praying.  This  he  wrote  to  those  Roman  believ- 
ers : 

“For  God  is  my  witness,  whom  I serve  with  my 
spirit  in  the  Gospel  of  His  Son,  that  without  ceas- 
ing I make  mention  of  you  always  in  my  prayers.” 

Paul  not  only  prayed  for  himself.  He  made  a 
practice  of  praying  for  others.  He  was  preemi- 
nently an  intercessor.  As  he  urged  intercessory 
prayer  on  others,  so  he  interceded  himself  for 
others  beside  himself. 

He  begins  that  remarkable  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  in  the  spirit  of  prayer:  He  closes  it  with 
this  solemn  charge : “Now  I beseech  you, 
brethren,  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ’s  sake,  and 
for  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that  ye  strive  with  me 
in  your  prayers  to  God  for  me.” 

But  this  is  not  all.  In  the  very  heart  of  that 
Epistle,  he  commands  “Continuing  instant  in 
prayer.”  That  is,  give  constant  attention  to 
prayer.  Make  it  the  business  of  life.  Be  devoted 
to  it.  Just  what  he  did  himself,  for  Paul  was 
a standing  example  of  the  doctrine  of  prayer 
which  he  advocated  and  pressed  upon  the  people. 

In  his  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,  how  all- 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING  139 

inclusive  and  wonderful  the  praying ! Says  he  in 
writing  his  First  Epistle  to  this  Church : 

“We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you,  mak- 
ing mention  of  you  in  my  prayers;  remembering 
without  ceasing  your  work  of  faith,  and  labor  of 
love,  and  patience  of  hope.” 

Not  to  quote  all  he  says,  it  is  worth  while  to 
read  his  words  to  this  same  Church  of  true  be- 
lievers further  on : 

“Night  and  day  praying  exceedingly  that  we 
might  see  your  face,  and  might  perfect  that  which 
is  lacking  in  your  faith.  Now  God  himself  di- 
rect our  way  unto  you.  And  the  Lord  make  you 
to  increase  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  an- 
other, even  as  we  do  toward  you,  to  the  end  he 
may  establish  your  hearts  unblameable  in  holiness 
before  God,  even  our  Father.” 

And  this  sort  of  praying  for  these  Thessalonian 
Christians  is  in  direct  line  with  that  closing  prayer 
for  these  same  believers  in  this  Epistle,  where 
he  records  that  striking  prayer  for  their  entire 
sanctification : 

“And  the  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you 
wholly;  and  I pray  God  your  whole  spirit,  and 
soul  and  body  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,” 

How  Paul  did  pray  for  those  early,  Christians ! 
They  were  in  his  mind  and  on  his  heart,  and 
he  was  continually  at  it,  “night  and  day  praying 
exceedingly.”  Oh,  if  we  had  a legion  of  preachers 


140  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

in  these  days  of  superficial  piety  and  these  times 
of  prayerlessness,  who  were  given  to  praying  for 
their  churches  as  Paul  did  for  those  to  whom  he 
ministered  in  his  day  I Praying  men  are  needed. 
Likewise  praying  preachers  are  demanded  in  this 
age. 

At  the  conclusion  of  that  remarkable  prayer 
in  the  third  chapter  of  Ephesians,  he  declared 
that  “God  was  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly 
above  all  that  we  could  ask  or  think,”  now  he 
declares  he  is  praying  exceeding  abundantly,  striv- 
ing after  the  most  earnest  order,  to  have  his 
prayers  run  parallel  with  God’s  power,  and  that 
they  may  not  limit  that  power  nor  exhaust  that 
power,  but  get  all  there  is  in  it  to  bless  and  greatly 
enrich  His  Church. 

Paul  and  his  compeers  prayed  for  the  saints 
everjrwhere.  It  may  be  referred  to  again-  With 
what  solemnity  does  Paul  call  the  attention  of 
the  Roman  Christians  to  the  important  fact  of 
praying  for  them,  believers  whom  he  had  never 
seen!  “God  is  my  witness  that  without  ceasing, 
I make  mention  of  you  in  my  prayers,”  To  the 
churches  he  says,  “Praying  always  for  you.” 

Again  on  the  same  line,  we  hear  him  articulat- 
ing clearly,  “Always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for 
you  all,  making  request  with  joy.”  Again  he 
writes  thus:  “I  do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you.” 
Once  more  we  read  the  record,  “Wherefore  we 
pray  always  for  you.”  And  again  it  is  written, 


PAUL  AND  HIS  PRAYING  141 

“Cease  not  to  give  thanks  for  you,  making  men- 
tion of  you  in  my  prayers.”  And  then  he  says, 
“Remembrance  of  thee  in  my  prayers  night  and 
day,” 

His  declaration,  “night  and  day  praying  ex- 
ceedingly,” is  a condensed  record  of  the  engross- 
ing nature  of  the  praying  done  by  this  praying 
apostle.  It  shows  conclusively  how  important 
prayer  was  in  his  estimate  and  in  his  ministry, 
and  further  shows  how  to  him  prayer  was  an 
agony  of  earnest  striving  in  seeking  from  God 
blessings  which  could  be  secured  in  no  other  way. 

The  unselfishness  of  his  praying  is  seen  in  his 
writing  to  the  Romans  where  he  tells  them, 
“Making  request  if  by  any  means  I might  have 
a prosperous  journey  to  come  to  you.  For  I long 
to  see  you  that  I may  impart  to  you  some  spiritual 
gift  to  the  end  ye  may  be  established.”  The  ob- 
ject of  his  desire  to  visit  Rome  was  not  for  selfish 
gratification,  the  pleasure  of  a trip,  or  for  other 
reasons,  but  that  he  might  be  the  means  under 
God  of  “imparting  to  them  some  spiritual  gift,” 
in  order  that  they  “might  be  established”  in  their 
hearts,  unblameably  in  love.  It  was  that  his  visit 
might  give  to  them  some  spiritual  gift  which  they 
had  not  received  and  that  they  might  be  estab- 
lished at  those  points  where  they  needed  to  be 
rooted,  and  grounded  in  faith,  in  love,  and  in  all 
that  made  up  Christian  life  and  character. 


CHAPTER  XV 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER 

I desire  above  all  things  to  learn  to  pray.  We  want  to 
sound  the  reveille  for  the  Christian  warriors.  We  de- 
sire to  find  truth  of  the  lack  of  real  praying.  What  is 
it?  Why  is  it?  Why  so  little  time  spent  in  prayer  when 
Christ j who  had  command  of  His  time,  chose  to  spend 
great  part  of  it  in  IlSf  TIERCES  SI  OlSf  f *^He  ever  Hveih 
to  make  intercession  for  us  I*  We  believe  the  answer  to 
he  the  desire  is  in  the  heart,  hut  the  will  is  undisciplined, 
the  motive  is  present,  hut  the  affections  have  not  melted 
under  hours  of  heavenly  meditation ; the  intellect  is  keen, 
yet  not  for  hours  of  tireless  research.  The  intellect  and 
the  affections  have  never  been  linked  together  by  the 
sealing  of  the  blessed  Holy  Ghost  to  do  or  die  for  God's 
glory  in  the  secret  places,  with  doors  shut,  lusts  crucified. 

— Rev.  Homer  W.  Hodge. 

The  many  requests  of  Paul  for  prayer  for 
himself,  made  to  those  to  whom  he  ministered, 
put  prayer  to  the  front  in  Paul’s  estimate  of  its 
possibilities.  Paul  prayed  much  himself,  and 
tried  hard  to  arouse  Christians  to  the  impera- 
tive importance  of  the  work  of  prayer.  He  so 
deeply  felt  the  need  of  prayer  that  he  was  given 
to  the  habit  of  personal  praying.  Realizing  this 
for  himself,  he  pressed  this  invaluable  duty  upon 

142 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  US 

others.  Intercessory  prayer,  or  prayer  for  others, 
occupied  a high  place  in  his  estimate  of  prayer. 
It  is  no  surprise,  therefore,  when  we  find  him 
throwing  himself  upon  the  prayers  of  the  churches 
to  whom  he  wrote. 

By  all  their  devotion  to  Jesus  Christ,  by  all 
their  interest  in  the  advance  of  God’s  kingdom 
on  earth,  by  all  the  ardor  of  their  personal  at- 
tachment to  Jesus,  he  charges  them  to  pray  much, 
to  pray  unceasingly,  to  pray  at  all  times,  to  pray 
in  all  things,  and  to  make  praying  a business  of 
praying.  And  then  realizing  his  own  dependence 
upon  prayer  for  his  arduous  duties,  his  sore  trials 
and  his  heavy  responsibilities,  he  urges  those  to 
whom  he  wrote  to  pray  especially  for  him. 

The  chief  of  the  Apostles  needed  prayer.  He 
needed  the  prayers  of  others,  for  this  he  prac- 
tically admitted  in  asking  for  their  prayers.  His 
call  to  the  apostleship  did  not  lift  him  above  this 
need.  He  realized  and  acknowledged  his  depend- 
ence on  prayer.  He  craved  and  prized  the  pray- 
ers of  all  good  people.  He  was  not  ashamed  to 
solicit  prayers  for  himself  nor  to  urge  the  brethren 
everywhere  to  pray  for  him. 

In  writing  to  the  Hebrews,  he  bases  his  request 
for  prayer  on  two  reasons,  his  honesty  and  his 
anxiety  to  visit  them.  If  he  were  insincere,  he 
could  lay  no  claim  to  their  prayers.  Praying  for 
him,  it  would  be  a powerful  agent  in  facilitating 
his  visit  to  them.  They  would  touch  the  secret 


144  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

place  of  the  wind  and  the  waves,  and  arrange  al! 
secondary  agencies  and  make  them  minister  to 
this  end.  Praying  puts  God  in  haste  to  do  for 
us  the  things  which  we  wish  at  His  hands. 

Paul’s  frequent  request  of  his  brethren  was 
that  they  would  “pray  for  him.”  We  are  to 
judge  of  the  value  of  a thing  by  the  frequency 
of  asking  for  it,  and  by  the  special  and  urgent  plea 
made  for  it.  If  that  be  true,  then  with  Paul  the 
prayers  of  the  saints  were  among  his  greatest 
assets.  By  the  urgency,  iteration  and  reiteration 
of  the  request,  “Pray  for  me,”  Paul  showed  con- 
clusively the  great  value  he  put  upon  prayer  as  a 
means  of  grace.  Paul  had  no  need  so  pressing 
as  the  need  of  prayer.  There  were  no  values 
so  appreciated  and  appreciable  as  the  prayers  of 
the  faithful. 

Paul  put  the  great  factor  of  prayer  as  the 
great  factor  in  his  work.  The  most  powerful  and 
far-reaching  energy  in  Paul’s  estimate  is  prayer. 
He  covets  it  and  hoards  it  as  he  seeks  the  prayers 
of  God’s  people.  The  earnestness  of  his  soul 
goes  out  in  these  requests.  Hear  him  in  this 
entreaty  for  prayer  he  is  writing  to  the  Romans : " 

“I  beseech  you,  brethren,  for  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ’s  sake,  and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that 
ye  strive  together  with  me  in  your  prayers  for 
me.” 

Prayers  by  others  for  Paul  were  valuable  be- 
cause they  helped  him.  Great  helpers  are  prayers. 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  145 

Nothing  gives  so  much  aid  to  us  in  our  needs  as 
real  prayers.  They  supply  needs  and  deliver  from 
straits.  Paul’s  faith,  so  he  writes  to  the  Corin- 
thians, had  been  much  tried,  and  he  had  been 
much  helped  and  much  strengthened  by  God’s 
deliverance.  “Ye  also  helping  by  prayer.”  What 
marvelous  things  has  God  done  for  His  favored 
saints  through  the  prayers  of  others ! The  saints 
can  help  the  saints  more  by  fervent  praying  than 
in  any  other  way. 

In  the  midst  of  envy  and  detraction,  and  in 
perils  by  false  brethren,  he  writes  thus  to  the 
Philippians : 

“For  I know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  salva- 
do_n_  though  your  prayer,  and  the  supply  of  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ. 

“According  to  my  expectation,  and  my  hope, 
that  in  nothing  I shall  be  ashamed,  but  with  all 
boldness  as  always,  so  now  also  Christ  shall  be 
magnified  in  my  body,  whether  it  be  by  life  or 
death.” 

Shame  was  taken  away,  holy  boldness  secured, 
and  life  and  death  made  glorious  by  the  prayers 
of  the  saints  at  Philippi  for  Paul. 

Paul  had  many  mighty  forces'  in  his  ministry. 
His  remarkable  conversion  was  a great  force,  a 
point  of  mighty  projecting  and  propelling  power, 
and  yet  he  did  not  in  his  ministry  secure  its  results 
by  the  force  of  his  epochal  conversion.  His  call 
to  the  apostleship  was  clear,  luminous,  and  all- 


146  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

convincing,  but  he  did  not  depend  on  that  for 
the  largest  results  in  his  ministry. 

Paul’s  course  was  more  clearly  marked  out  and 
his  career  rendered  more  powerfully  successful 
by  prayer  than  by  any  other  force. 

Paul  urges  the  Roman  Christians  to  pray  for 
him  that  he  may  be  delivered  from  unbelieving 
men.  Prayer  is  a defense  and  protection  against 
the  malignity  and  machinations  of  evil  men.  It 
can  affect  men  because  God  can  affect  them.  Paul 
had  not  only  unbelieving  enemies  with  whom  to 
contend,  but  many  Christians  were  prejudiced 
against  him  to  an  extent  which  rendered  it  ques- 
tionable whether  they  would  accept  any  Christian 
service  at  his  hands.  Especially  was  this  the  case 
at  Jerusalem,  and  so  prayer,  powerful  prayer, 
must  be  used  to  remove  the  mighty  and  pernicious 
force  of  prejudice,  inflamed  and  deep-seated. 

Prryer  on  their  part  for  him  must  be  used  for 
his  safety,  and  also  that  a prosperous  journey 
and  God’s  will  might  bring  him  speedily  and  surely 
to  them,  in  order  to  bless  and  refresh  mutually 
the  Roman  Christians. 

These  prayer  requests  of  Paul  are  many-sided 
and  all-comprehensive.  How  many  things  does 
his  request  to  the  Roman  Church  include!  The 
request  for  their  prayers,  like  the  Church  to  whom 
it  is  directed,  is  cosmopolitan.  He  beseeches  them, 
entreats  them,  a term  indicating  intensity  and 
earnestness,  “for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  to 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  147 

strive  with  him  in  their  prayers  for  him.”  This 
he  desires  that  he  may  be  delivered  from  evil 
and  designing  men,  who  might  hinder  and  em- 
barrass him  in  his  mission,  then  further  that  his 
service  for  the  poor  saints  might  be  accepted  by 
the  saints,  and  that  he  might  ultimately  come 
unto  them  with  joy  that  they  might  be  refreshed. 

How  full  of  heart  earnestness  is  his  request! 
How  tChtder  and  loving  is  his  appeal  1 How  touch- 
ing and  high  is  the  motive  to  the  highest  and 
truest  form  of  prayer,  “for  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ’s  sake  1”  Also  for  the  love  we  bear  to 
the  Spirit,  or  for  the  love  which  the  Spirit  bears 
to  us;  by  the  ties  of  the  holy  brotherhood.  By 
these  lofty  and  constraining  motives  does  he  urge 
them  to  pray  for  him  and  to  “strive  with  him” 
in  their  mutual  praying.  Paul  is  in  the  great 
prayer  struggle,  a struggle  in  which  the  mightiest 
issues  are  involved  and  imperiled;  and  he  is  in 
the  midst  of  this  struggle.  He  is  committed  to 
it  because  Christ  is  in  it.  He  needs  help,  help 
which  comes  alone  through  prayer.  So  he  pleads 
with  his  brethren  to  pray  for  him  and  with  him. 

By  prayer  enemies  are  to  be  swept  out  of  the 
way.  By  prayer  prejudices  are  to  be  driven  out 
of  the  hearts  of  good  men.  His  way  to  Jerusalem 
would  be  cleared  of  difficulties,  the  success  of  his 
mission  would  be  secured,  and  the  will  of  God 
and  the  good  of  the  saints  would  be  accomplished. 
All  these  marvelous  ends  would  be  secured  by  mar- 


14.8  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

velous  praying.  Wonderful  and  world-wide  are 
the  results  to  be  gained  by  mighty  praying.  If 
all  apostolic  successors  had  prayed  as  Paul  did, 
if  all  Christians  in  all  these  ages  had  been  one 
with  apostolical  men  in  the  mighty  wrestlings  of 
prayer,  how  marvelous  and  divine  would  have 
been  the  history  of  God’s  Church  I How  un- 
paralleled would  have  been  its  success ! The  glory 
of  its  millennium  would  have  brightened  and 
blessed  the  world  ages  ago. 

We  see  in  Paul’s  requests  his  estimate  of  the 
far-reaching  power  of  prayer.  Not  that  prayer 
has  in  it  any  tallsmanic  force,  nor  that  it  is  a 
fetish,  but  that  it  moves  God  to  do  things  that  it 
nominates.  Prayer  has  no  magic,  potent  charm 
in  itself,  but  is  only  all  potent  because  it  gets  the 
Omnipotent  God  to  grant  its  request.  A precedent 
basis  in  all  prayer  as  expressed  or  understood  by 
Paul  is  that  “Ye  strive  together  with  me  in  your 
prayers  for  me.”  It  is  of  the  nature  of  a severe 
conflict  in  which  Paul’s  soul  is  engaged,  a wrestle, 
a hand-to-hand  fight.  The  strain  is  severe  and 
exhaustive  to  all  the  energies  of  the  soul,  and 
the  issue  is  tossed  in  uncertainty.  Paul  in  this 
prayer  struggle  needs  reenforcements  and  divine 
help  in  his  striving.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
struggle,  and  will  bear  the  brunt,  but  he  solicits 
and  pleads  for  the  help  of  others.  Their  prayers 
are  just  now  needed.  He  needs  help  to  offer  in- 
tense prayers. 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  14.9 

Prayer  is  not  inaptly  called  “wrestling,”  be- 
cause it  is  a most  intense  struggle.  To  prayer 
there  are  the  greatest  hindrances  and  the  most 
inveterate  foes.  Mighty  evil  forces  surge  around 
the  closets  of  prayer.  Enemies  strong  and  strongly 
entrenched  are  about  the  closets  where  praying  is 
done.  No  feeble,  listless  act  is  this  praying  done 
by  Paul.  In  this  .thing  he  has  “put  away  childish 
things.”  The  commonplace  and  the  tame  have 
been  retired.  Paul  must  do  this  praying  mightily 
or  not  do  it  at  all.  Hell  must  feel  and  stagger  and 
under  the  mightiness  of  his  prayer  stroke,  or 
he  strikes  not  at  all.  The  strongest  graces  and 
the  manliest  efforts  are  requisite  here.  Strength 
is  demanded  in  the  praying  done  by  Paul.  Cour- 
age is  at  a premium  in  it.  Timid  touches  and 
faint-hearted  desires  avail  nothing  in  the  mind 
of  Paul  which  we  are  considering.  Enemies  are 
to  be  faced  and  routed  and  fields  are  to  be  won. 
The  most  unflagging  and  invincible  bravery  and 
the  highest  qualities  of  Christian  soldierhood  are 
demanded  for  prayerj  It  is  a trumpet  call  to 
prayer,  a chieftain’s  clarion  note,  sounded  out 
for  earnest,  persistent  prayer  as  the  great  spiritual 
conflict  rages. 


CHAPTER  XVI 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER 
{Continued) 

\We  announce  the  law  of  prayer  as  follows:  A Chris- 
tianas prayer  is  a joint  agreement  of  the  will  and  his 
cabinet,  the  emotions,  the  conscience,  the  intellect,  work- 
ing in  harmony  at  white  heat,  while  the  body  co-operates 
under  certain  hygienic  conditions  to  make  the  prayer  long 
enough  sustained  at  high  voltage  to  insure  tremendous 
results,  supernatural  and  unearthly , 

— Rev.  Homer  W.  Hodge. 

We  come  to  the  request  of  Paul  made  to  the 
Church  at  Ephesus,  found  in  the  latter  part  of 
chapter  6 of  the  Epistle  to  those  Christians: 

“Praying  always,  with  all  prayer  and  supplica- 
tion in  the  Spirit,  and  watching  thereunto  with 
all  perseverance  and  supplication  for  all  saints; 

“And  for  me  that  utterance  may  be  given  unto 
me,  that  I may  open  my  mouth  boldly,  to  make 
known  the  mystery  of  the  Gospel, 

“For  which  I am  an  ambassador  in  bonds,  that 
therein  I may  speak  boldly  as  I ought  to  speak.” 

For  this  Church  he  had  labored  and  prayed 
night  and  day,  with  many  watchings  and  tears  and 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  151 

much  humility.  As  he  drew  a vivid  picture  of 
the  Christian  soldier,  with  his  foes  besetting  him, 
he  gave  them  this  charge  of  praying  specially 
for  him. 

To  these  Ephesian  Christians  he  gave  a com- 
prehensive statement  of  the  necessity,  nature  and 
special  benefits  of  prayer.  It  was  to  be  urgent, 
covering  all  times  and  embracing  all  manner  of 
places.  Supplication  must  give  intensity,  the  Holy 
Spirit  must  be  invoked,  vigilance  and  perseverance 
must  be  added,  and  the  whole  family  of  saints 
were  involved. 

The  force  of  his  request  for  prayer  centered 
on  him,  that  he  might  be  able  to  talk  with  force, 
fluency,  directness  and  courage.  Paul  did  not  de- 
pend upon  his  natural  gifts,  but  on  those  which 
came  to  him  in  answer  to  prayer.  He  was  afraid 
he  would  be  a coward,  a dull,  dry  speaker,  or  a 
hesitating  stammerer,  and  he  urged  these  believers 
to  pray  that  he  might  have  courage,  not  only  to 
speak  clearly,  but  freely  and  fully. 

He  desired  them  to  pray  that  he  might  have 
boldness.  No  quality  seems  more  important  to 
the  preacher  than  that  of  boldness.  It  is  that 
positive  quality  which  does  not  reckon  conse- 
quences, but  with  freedom  and  fullness  meets  the 
crisis,  faces  a present  danger,  and  discharges  un- 
awed a present  duty.  It  was  one  of  the  marked 
characteristics  of  apostolic  preachers  and  apostolic 
preaching.  They  were  bold  men,  they  were  bold 


152  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


preachers.  The  reference  to  the  manifestation  of 
the  principle  by  them  is  almost  the  record  of  their 
trials.  It  is  the  applause  of  their  faith. 

There  are  many  chains  which  enslave  the 
preacher.  His  very  tenderness  makes  him  weak. 
His  attachments  to  the  people  tend  to  bring  him 
into  bondage.  His  personal  intercourse,  his  ob- 
ligations to  his  people,  his  love  for  them,  all  tend 
to  hamper  his  freedom  and  restrain  his  pulpit  de- 
liverances. What  great  need  to  be  continually 
praying  for  boldness  to  speak  boldly  as  he  ought 
to  speak! 

The  prophets  of  old  were  charged  not  to  be 
afraid  of  the  faces  of  men.  Unawed  by  the  frowns' 
of  men,  they  were  to  declare  the  truth  of  God 
without  apology,  timidity,  hesitancy  or  compro- 
mise. The  warmth  and  freedom  of  conviction 
and  of  sincerity,  the  fearlessness  of  a vigorous 
faith,  and  above  all  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
are  all  wonderful  helpers  and  elements  of  bold- 
ness. How  all  this  should  be  coveted  and  sought 
with  all  earnestness  by  ministers  of  the  Gospel 
in  this  day  I 

Meekness  and  humility  are  high  virtues  of  the 
first  importance  in  the  preacher,  but  these  quali- 
ties do  not  at  all  militate  against  boldness.  This 
boldness  is  not  the  freedom  of  passionate  utter- 
ances. It  is  not  scolding  nor  rashness.  It  speaks 
the  truth  in  love.  Boldness  is  not  rudeness. 
Toughness  dishonors  boldness.  It  is  as  gentle  as 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  153 

a mother  with  a habe,  but  as  fearless  as  a lion 
standing  before  a foe.  Fear,  in  the  mild  and  in- 
nocent form  of  timidity,  or  in  the  criminal  form 
of  cowardice,  has  no  place  in  the  true  ministry. 
Humble  but  holy  boldness  is  of  the  very  first 
importance. 

What  hidden,  mysterious  mighty  force  can  add 
courage  to  apostolical  preaching,  and  give  bolder 
■utterances  to  apostolic  lips?  There  is  one  an- 
swer, and  it  is  that  prayer  can  do  the  deed. 

What  force  can  so  affect  and  dominate  evil  that 
the  very  results  of  evil  will  be  changed  into  good? 
We  have  the  answer  in  Paul’s  words  again,  in  con- 
nection with  prayers  made  for  him ; 

“Who  delivered  us  from  so  great  a death,  and 
doth  deliver;  in  whom  we  trust  that  he  will  yet 
deliver  us;  Ye  also  helping  together  in  prayer  for 
us.  What  then?  Notwithstanding  every  way, 
whether  in  pretense  or  in  truth,  Christ  is  preached, 
and  therein  I do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice.” 

We  can  see  how  the  promises  of  God  are  made 
real  and  personal  by  prayer.  “All  things  work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God.”  Here 
is  a jeweled  promise.  Paul  loved  God,  but  he 
did  not  leave  the  promise  alone,  as  a matter  of 
course,  to  work  out  its  blessed  results.  So  he 
wrote  to  the  Corinthians  as  we  have  before  seen, 
“I  am  in  trouble.  I trust  in  God  to  deliver.  Ye 
also  helping  together  by  prayer.”  Helping  me  by 


154  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

prayer,  you  help  God  to  make  the  promise  strong 
and  rich  in  realization. 

Paul’s  prayer  requests  embraced  “supplication 
for  all  saints,”  but  especially  for  apostolic  cour- 
age for  himself.  How  much  he  needed  this  cour- 
age just  as  all  true  preachers,  called  of  God,  need 
it ! Prayer  was  to  open  doors  for  apostolical  labors, 
but  at  the  same  time  it  was  to  open  apostolic  lips 
to  utter  bravely  and  truly  the  apostolic  message. 

Hear  him  as  he  speaks  to  the  Church  at 
Colosses : 

“Withal  praying  also  for  us,  that  God  would 
open  to  us  a door  of  utterance  to  speak  the  mys- 
tery of  Christ,  for  which  I am  also  in  bonds ; 

“That  I may  make  it  manifest  as  I ought  to 
speak.” 

How  appropriate  such  a request  to  be  made 
by  a present-day  preacher  to  his  congregation! 
How  great  the  need  of  those  things  by  the  present- 
day  preacher  which  Paul  desired  for  himself  1 

As  in  the  request  to  the  Ephesians,  Paul  wants 
a “door  of  utterance”  given  him,  that  he  may 
preach  with  the  liberty  of  the  Spirit,  be  delivered 
from  being  straitened  in  thought  or  hampered  in 
delivery.  Furthermore,  he  desires  the  ability  to 
make  manifest  in  the  clearest  terms,  without  con- 
fusion of  thought,  and  with  force  of  utterance, 
the  Gospel  “as  he  ought  to  speak,”  and  just  as 
every  preacher  should  speak.  Happy  that  preacher 
who  ministers  to  a people  who  pray  thus  for  him ! 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  155 

And  happier  still  if  he  inwardly  feels,  as  he  faces 
his  responsible  task  and  realizes  how  much  he 
needs  these  things  to  preach  clearly,  forcibly  and 
effectively,  that  he  has  urged  his  people  to  pray 
for  him! 

Prayer  transmutes  crosses,  trials  and  opposi- 
tions into  blessings,  and  causes  them  to  work 
together  for  good.  “These  shall  turn  to  my  sal- 
vation through  your  prayers,”  says  Paul.  Just 
as  the  same  things  to-day  in  the  life  of  the  preach- 
er are  transmuted  into  gracious  blessings  in  the 
end,  “ye  also  helping  together  by  prayer.”  Saintly 
praying  mightily  helped  Apostolic  preaching  and 
rescued  apostolic  men  fimm  many  sore  straits.  So 
just  such  praying  in  these  days  will  effect  like 
results  in  faithful  preaching  done  by  brave,  fear- 
less ministers.  Prayer  for  the  preacher  avails  just 
as  prayer  by  the  preacher  avails.  Two  things  are 
always  factors  in  the  life  and  work  of  a true 
preacher;  First  when  he  prays  constantly,  fer-  - 
vently  and  persistently  for  those  to  whom  he 
preaches;  and  secondly,  when  those  to  whom  he 
ministers  pray  for  their  preacher.  Happy  is  the 
preacher  so  situated.  Blessed  Is  that  congrega- 
tion thus  favored. 

To  the  Church  at  Thessalonica  Paul  sends  this 
pressing  request,  pointed,  clear,  and  forcible: 

“Finally,  brethren,  pray  for  us,  that  the  word 
of  the  Lord  may  have  free  course,  and  be  glori- 
fied, even  as  it  is  with  you ; 


156  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 

“And  that  we  may  he  delivered  from  wicked 
and  unreasonable  men.” 

He  has  in  mind  a race-course,  on  which  the  racer 
is  exerting  himself  to  reach  the  goal.  Hindrances 
are  in  the  way  of  his  success  and  must  be  removed, 
so  that  the  racer  may  finally  succeed  and  obtain 
the  reward.  The  “Word  of  the  Lord”  is  this 
racer,  as  preached  by  Paul.  This  Word  is  per- 
sonified and  there  are  serious  impediments  which 
embarrass  the  running  of  the  Word.  It  must 
have  “free  course.”  Everything  in  the  way  and 
opposing  its  running  must  be  taken  out  of  its  road- 
way. These  impediments  in  the  way  of  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  “running  and  being  glorified”  are 
found  in  the  preacher  himself,  in  the  Church  to 
whom  he  ministers,  and  in  the  sinners  around  him. 
The  Word  runs  and  is  glorified  when  it  has  unob- 
structed access  to  the  minds  and  hearts  of  those 
to  whom  it  is  preached,  when  sinners  are  convicted 
for  sin,  when  they  seriously  consider  the  claims 
of  God’s  Word  on  them,  and  when  they  are  in- 
duced to  pray  for  themselves,  asking  for  par- 
doning mercy.  It  is  glorified  when  saints  are 
instructed  in  religious  experience,  corrected  of 
errors  of  doctrine  and  mistakes  in  practice,  and 
when  they  are  led  to  seek  for  higher  things  and 
to  pray  for  deeper  experiences  in  the  Divine  life. 

Mark  you.  It  is  not  when  the  preacher  is 
glorified  because  of  the  wonderful  success  wrought 
by  the  Word.  It  is  not  when  people  praise  him 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  157 

unduly,  and  make  much  of  him  because  of  his 
wonderful  sermons,  his  great  eloquence  and  his 
remarkable  gifts.  The  preacher  is  kept  in  the 
background  in  all  this  work  of  glorification,  even 
though  he  is  foremost  as  being  the  object  of  all 
this  praying. 

Prayer  is  to  do  all  these  things.  So  Paul  urges, 
entreats,  insists,  “Pray  for  us.”  And  it  is  not 
so  much  prayer  for  Paul  personally  in  his  Chris- 
tian life  and  religious  experience.  All  this  needed 
much  prayer.  It  was  really  for  him  officially, 
prayer  for  him  in  the  office  and  work  of  a Gospel 
minister.  His  tongue  must  be  unloosed  in  preach- 
ing, his  mouth  unstopped,  and  his  mind  set  free. 
Prayer  must  help  in  his  religious  life  not  so  much 
because  it  would  help  to  “work  out  his  own  salva- 
tion,” but  rather  because  right  living  would  give 
strength  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  would 
save  him  from  being  a hindrance  to  the  Word 
which  he  preached.  And  as  he  desires  that  no 
hindrance  should  be  in  himself  which  would  de- 
feat his  own  preaching,  so  he  wants  all  hindrances 
taken  away  from  the  churches  to  whom  he  minis- 
:ers  that  Church  people  may  not  stand  in  the  way 
3r  weigh  down  the  Word  as  it  runs  on  the  race- 
:ourse  attempting  to  reach  the  goal,  even  the 
minds  and  hearts  of  the  people.  Furthermore,  he 
wishes  hindrances  in  the  unsaved  to  be  set  aside 
that  God’s  Word  as  preached  by  him  may  reach 
their  hearts  and  be  glorified  in  their  salvation. 


158  prayer  and  praying  MEN 

With  all  this  before  him,  Paul  sends  this  press- 
ing request  to  these  believers  at  Xhessalonica, 
“Pray  for  us,”  because  praying  by  true  Christians 
would  greatly  help  in  the  running  of  the  Word 
of  the  Lord. 

Wise  that  preacher  who  has  the  eyes  to  see 
these  things,  and  who  realizes  that  his  success 
largely  depends  upon  praying  of  this  kind  on  the 
part  of  his  people  for  him.  How  much  do  we 
need  churches  now  who,  having  the  preacher  in 
mind  and  the  preached  Word  on  their  hearts, 
pray  for  him  that  “the  Word  of  the  Lord  may 
have  free  course,  and  be  glorified.” 

One  other  item  in  this  request  is  worth  noting: 
“That  we  may  be  delivered  from  wicked  and  un- 
reasonable men.”  Such  men  are  hindrances  in 
the  way  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  Few  preachers 
but  are  harassed  by  them  and  need  to  be  delivered 
from  them.  Prayer  helps  to  bring  such  a de- 
liverance to  preachers  from  “unreasonable  and 
wicked  men.”  Paul  was  annoyed  by  such  char- 
acters, and  for  this  very  reason  he  urged  prayer 
for  him  that  he  might  find  deliverance  from  them. 

Summing  it  all  up,  we  find  that  Paul  feels  that 
the  success  of  the  Word,  its  liberty  and  largeness, 
are  bound  up  in  their  prayers,  and  that  their 
failure  to  pray  would  restrict  its  influence  and  its 
glory.  His  deliverance  from  unreasonable  and 
wicked  men  as  well  as  his  safety,  he  asserts,  are 
in  some  way  dependent  upon  their  prayers.  These 


PAUL  AND  HIS  REQUESTS  FOR  PRAYER  169 

prayers,  while  they  greatly  helped  him  to  preach, 
would  at  the  same  time  protect  his  person  from 
the  cruel  purposes  of  wicked  and  unreasonable 
men. 

In  Hebrews  13:9,  Paul  thus  opens  his  heart 
to  those  Hebrew  Christians  in  asking  them  to 
pray  for  him : 

“Pray  for  us,  for  we  trust  we  have  a good 
conscience,  in  all  things  willing  to  live  honestly.” 

In  this  prayer  request,  Paul’s  inward  conscious- 
ness of  his  integrity  of  heart  and  his  internal  wit- 
ness to  his  personal  honesty  come  out  and  are  a 
basic  truth  of  his  Christian  character.  No  room 
for  blame  does  he  find  in  himself.  “Pray  for  us.” 
Your  prayers  for  us  will  find  in  me  honest  in- 
tegrity and  honest  execution  and  honest  adminis- 
tration of  all  prayer  results. 

The  request  is  intended  to  stir  up  the  saints  to 
more  earnest  praying,  more  devotion  to  prayer, 
and  more  urgency  in  prayer.  Prayer  must  affect 
his  visit  to  them,  would  hasten  it  and  enlarge  its 
beneficial  results. 

Paul  is  on  the  most  cordial  and  freest  terms 
with  Philemon.  He  is  anxious  and  expects  to 
visit  him  at  some  future  day  and  makes  the  ap- 
pointment. He  takes  it  for  granted  that  Phile- 
mon is  praying,  for  as  this  man  had  been  con- 
verted under  his  ministry,  it  is  assumed  that  he 
has  been  taught  the  Pauline  lesson  of  prayer.  He 


160  PRAYER  AND  PRAYING  MEN 


assumes  also  that  prayer  will  open  up  the  way 
for  his  visit,  remove  the  hindrances  and  bring 
them  graciously  together..  So  he  requests  Phile- 
mon to  prepare  a lodging  place  for  him,  adding, 
“I  trust  through  your  prayers  I shall  be  given 
to  you.”  Paul  had  the  idea  that  his  movements 
were  hindered  or  helped  by  the  prayers  of  his 
brethren. 


THE  END 


UNrVERSA 

LIBRARY 


UNIV 

LIBI 


