PROVO,  UTAH 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet08newy 


THE   PREACHER'S  COMMENTARI 


ON    THE 


BOOKS  OE  KINGS. 


THE 


|reack£r'0   Complete  ^omilettcal 

COMMENTARY 


ON   THE 


OLD    TESTAMENT 

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN). 

®ith  Critical  anb  ©xpknatarg  JlotCB,  inbias,  H-y  H 


B1? 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1893 


HOMILETICAL    COMMENTARY 


ON    THE  BOOKS    OP 


KINGS 


BT 


REV.    GEORGE    BAKLOW. 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY" 

London  and  Toronto 

1892 


PREFACE. 


No  pains  have  been  spared  to  make  this  volume  a  thoroughly  usable  and 
suggestive  Homiletic  Commentary  on  the  two  Books  of  Kings.  Every  avail- 
able work  bearing  on  the  subject  has  been  consulted  and  made  to  contribute 
its  choicest  passages,  either  in  expo>itionor  illustration.  AVhat  every  explorer 
in  this  field  must  have  discovered  before,  the  homiletical  material  on  the  Books 
of  Kings  is  exceedingly  scanty,  and  there  are  many  paths  the  writer  has  been 
compelled  to  traverse  alone,  and  for  the  first  time,  so  far  as  any  known  literary 
record  bears  evidence.  The  remark  of  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  in  his  valu- 
able little  work  on  Commenting  and  Commentaries^  has  been  often  painfully 
realized:   "We  have  next  to  nothing  on  the  Books  of  Kings." 

The  student  will  readily  detect  the  plan  on  which  the  work  has  been  carried 
out.  Each  chapter  is  prefaced  by  "  Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes,"  which 
elucidate  any  word  or  sentence  in  the  original  text  thought  to  be  of  use  and 
value  to  the  exegete.  These  *'  Notes  "  are  from  the  practised  pen  of  the 
Rev.  V/.  H.  Jellie,  the  author  of  the  scholarly  and  elaborate  Commentary  on 
Jeremiah  in  this  series.  The  paragraph  on  which  the  main  homily  is  con- 
structed consists  of  as  many  verses  as  contain  a  complete  subject.  For  the 
*'  Germ  Notes,"  this  paragraph  is  again  minutely  scrutinized,  and  every  verse, 
or  part  of  a  verse,  that  suggests  matter  for  homiletic  treatment,  is  utilized, 
together  with  any  outline,  or  pithy  and  illustrative  comment,  from  other 
sources. 

I  he  practical  aim  has  been  to  bring  together,  within  the  smallest  compass, 
as  much  homiletical  material  on  the  subject  of  the  paragraph  as  will  be 
suggestive  to  the  thoughtful  sermonizer  in  working  out  his  own  original  com- 
position. 

Of  the  seven  hundred  and  forty-three  outlines,  brief  or  more  extended,  con- 
tained in  this  Commentary,  one  hundred  and  eighty-seven  are  from  the  pens 
of  other  writers.  In  every  case  where  the  author's  name  is  not  appended,  the 
outline  is  original. 

Among  the  principal  works  consulted  in  the  progress  of  this  Commentary 
are : — Lange's  Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Kings  (written  by  Dr.  E.  Har- 
wood  and  W.  G.  Sumner,  B.A.) ;  KeiVs  Commentary  on  Kings ;  Whedon's 
Commentary  (by  Milton  S.  Terry,  A.M.);  Br.  R.  Jamieson's  Critical  and 
Experimental  Commentary  ;  The  Speaker's  Commentary  ;  Trapp's 
Commentary;  PooVs  Annotations;  Br.  Kitto's  "Daily  Bible  Blus- 
trations"  ;  Maurice's  "Prophets  and  Kings";  Bishop  BalVs  '*  Contempla- 
tions "  ;  Stanley's  ''  Jewish  Church"  ;  and  Geikie's  ''  Hours  with  the  Bible." 

In  the  prosecution  of  this  work,  the  constant  effort  has  been  to  seize  and 
develop  the  moral  teaching  interwoven  with  the  details  of  the  history,  to  show 
how  the  fluctuations  of  national  prosperity  and  disaster  were  conditioned  on 
the  fidelity  or  treachery  of  God's  covenant  people,  and  to  apply  the  lessons 
derived  from  the  Divine  treatment  of  the  Israelites  to  the  national  life  of 
to-day.  Thus  viewed,  the  history  becomes  not  a  mere  desiccant  record  of  facta, 
but  pulses  with  life  and  meaning. 

GEO.  BARLOW. 
Eexham,  Aprils  188i^. 


ffOMILETIC  COMMENTARY 

ON   THE 

FIRST    BOOK    OF    KINGS. 


<|ntr0iriti:tr0tt. 

The  two  books  of  Kings  originally  constituted  one  continuous  work,  the 
division  into  two  portions  being  made  in  the  printed  edition  of  the  Hebrew 
work  by  Bomberg,  in  1518.  They  are  essentially  historical  in  their  character, 
though  the  history  throughout  has  an  evident  moral  drift.  The  work  was 
composed,  probably  by  Jeremiah,  during  the  second  half  of  the  Captivity. 
The  object  of  the  writer  appears  to  be  to  place  before  the  exiled  and  sorrowing 
Jews  a  faithful  picture  of  their  history  from  the  period  when  the  kingdom 
reached  the  highest  pitch  of  national  glory  under  Solomon,  to  its  declension  and 
fall.  The  history  is  written  not  so  much  from  a  civil,  as  from  a  religious  point 
of  view.  The  Jews  are  regarded  not  as  an  ordinary  nation,  but  as  the  people  of 
God  with  whom  He  has  entered  into  covenant.  The  historian  refers  to  civil 
events  only  so  far  as  they  illustrate  the  moral  condition  of  the  nation,  and  the 
Divine  dealings  with  it.  He  traces  the  various  steps  in  the  moral  probation  of 
the  captive  race,  and  exhibits  their  conduct  under  such  probation  in  its  true 
light.  In  the  full  career  of  Solomon's  prosperity  and  magnificence,  the  author 
sees  and  notes  the  fatal  taint  of  evil,  the  inclination  towards  idolatry,  which  is 
to  gather  strength,  and  increase,  and  finally  to  bring  about  the  complete  rejec- 
tion of  both  Israel  and  Judah.  The  sun  of  Solomon  sets  amid  clouds,  and 
henceforth  the  narrative  is  marked  by  a  pervading  spirit  of  deep  melancholy, 
which  is  not  wholly  cast  off  even  when  the  most  pious  monarchs  are  it?  subject, 
and  the  most  glorious  deliverances  have  to  be  spoken  about.*  In  the  darker 
characteristics  of  the  later  history  God  has  presented  to  mankind  another 
illustration  of  the  deep  depravity  of  human  nature,  and  its  invariable  tendencies, 
not  heavenward  and  upward,  but  earthward  and  downward;  not  to  a  tran- 
scendental perfection,  but  further  and  further  still  from  God  and  hope  and  peace. 
For  we  see  that  till  Christianity  came,  human  corruption  made  even  per- 
manent Ufitional  prospeiity  impossible.  A  perfect  kingdom  cannot  come  till 
there  is  a  perfect  nature  ;  and  a  perfect  nature  can  only  be  a  thing  of  the  future 
when  the  crowned  and  conquering  Messiah  shall  establish  over  this  scene  of 
strife  and  confusion  His  universal  kingdom  of  righteousness  and  peace.  The 
Jews  at  the  period  of  the  Captivity  were  probably  exercised  by  anxious  doubts 
relative  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  promises. f  The  history  of  human 
nature  is  the  same  in  all  ages  and  among  all  nations ;  and  there  are  instructive 
lessons  to  be  learnt  by  a  comparison  of  modem  with  ancient  times.  The  design 
of  this  Commentary  is  not  to  furnish  historical  information,  which  m:iy  be  readily 
gained  from  so  many  sources ;  but  to  aid  in  tracing  the  dealings  of  God  with  man 
in  varied  conditions,  in  searching  out  the  moral  truths  that  lie  underneath  alike 
the  great  and  trivial  events  of  national  and  individual  lite,  in  interpreting  the 
suggestive  teachings  of  the  Old  Dispensation  in  the  light  of  the  New,  and  in 
applying  the  lessons  derived  from  the  manifold  aspects  of  the  Divine  movements 
in  history  in  their  practical  bearing  on  moral  conduct. 


•  Rawlinson**  Introduction. 
t  Oarbett'i  Divine  J^lan. 


CHAP.  1.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

SCENES  IN  THE  CLOSING  CAREER  OP  A  GREAT  KING. 

Critical  and  Explanaturt  Notes.— The  opening  word,  "niw,"  is  and,  the  cop.  ) 
indicating  the  unbroken  connexion  of  this  book  with  a  prior  record.  Originally  the  books  of 
"Kings  "were  a  continuation  of  those  of  "Samuel,"  and  constituted  one  whole  narrative, 
styled  respectively  the  First,  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Books  of  Kings;  and  the  four  books 
bear  a  common  headiog  in  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate.— Verse  1.  David  was  old— In  his  seventieth 
year  (compare  chapter  ii.  U  with  2  Samuel  v.  4,  5).  Verse  2.  Get  heat— An  established 
medical  fact  that  the  aged  and  sickly  may  thus  derive  vital  warmth  from  the  young  and 
healthy.  Josephus  calls  ihese  "servants"  who  advised  this  course  pht/sicians' {Ant.  vii. 
14,  §  :)).  Verse  8.  Shunemite— Shunem,  five  miles  south  of  Tabor,  on  the  table-land  of 
Esdraelon.  Verse  o.  Adonijah,  son  of  Haggith  — No  record  of  origin  or  rank  of  Haggith, 
therefore  probably  without  any  t'atnily  distinction.  Adonijah  was  David's  fourth  son,  and 
the  eldest  now  alive.     Exalted  himsalf— ^30/111  {cf-    Proverbs  xxx.   32);  took  advantage 

of  hb  father's  feebleness  to  claim  the  throne.  But  God  was  king  in  Israel,  and  he  retained 
the  unchallengeable  right  of  selecting  the  occupant  of  the  throne  (Deuteronomy  xvii.  i4). 
Verse  6.  He  also  was  a  very  goodly  man — Thif^  would  give  him  acceptance  with  the  nation 
(1  Samuel  ix.  2\  Verse  7.  Conferred  with  Joab,  commander-in-chief  of  the  army,  through 
whom  Adonijah  hoped  to  win  military  support,  and  Abiathar,  the  High-priest,  through 
whom  he  sought  sacerdotal  sanction  and  help  ;  and  he  gained  it,  "inj^")!^     ''  to  help   one 

so  that  men  immediately  follow  him"  (Keil).  Verse  9.  Slew  sheep  and  oxen,  &c.— This 
usurpation  of  the  throne  inaugurated  by  a  sacrificial  feast.  En-rogel,  the  well  or  source  of 
the  Rogel ;  south-east  of  Jerusalem  in  $aai\iK(5  TrapaSctVy  (Josephus).  Verse  12.  Save  thine 
own  life,  &c.  ;  for  had  the  scheme  of  Adonijah  succeeded,  all  rivals  to  the  throne  would  have 
been  slain.     Verse  13.  Assuredly  Solomon,  &c.  —  The  particle  >3  scarcely  allows  of  sc  forcible 

a  rendering ;  saying.    That   Solomon  shall  reign.     Verse  14.  Confirm  thy  words:    '511'^JJ"^ 

•  TT 

J^l^  ^Jli»^?D— I  will  make  full  thy  words— a  phrase  used  for  the  fulfilment  of  divine  utter 

ances  (chapters  ii.  27,  viii.  15,24).  Verse  16.  Bowed  and  did  obeisance— The  latter  word 
denoting  the  prostrate  attitude  customary  in  the  Ea^t  before  kings.  Verse  21.  Shall  be 
counted  offenders  -  Counted  is  not  in  the  Hebrew,  though  implied  in  the  connexion  ;  they 
will    be    D''^^I3^— t-^M   guilty   of    a  capital   crime,   treated    as  traitors    deserving    death. 

•    T    — 

Verse  25.  God  save  King  Adonijah:  i.e.,  Let  the  king  live;  hi er&Wy,  Live  the  kin ff  !  the 
usual  Israelitish  acclamation  (chapter  v.  34-39  ;  1  Samuel  x.  24,  &c.).  Verse  31.  Let  my 
lord,  King  David,  live  for  ever— A  foim  of  blessing,  used  by  the  Hebrews  only  on  specially 
solemn  occasions,  but  was  a  common  form  amongst  the  Persians  (Daniel  iii.  9,  v.  1".  vi.  22; 
Nehemiah  ii.  8).  Verse  23.  Take  the  servants  of  your  lord:  viz.,  the  royal  body-guard 
(verse  38).  Eide  upon  mine  own  mule— The  command  that  he  "ride"  was  especially 
significant,  for  no  <  ne,  under  pain  of  death,  might  mount  the  king's  mule  ;  to  ride  thereoi* 
was  an  actual  declaration  that  he  was  king.     A  she-mule,  HTIJO,  because  more  docile  ana 

enduring  than  the  male.  Gihon— A  pool  or  fountain  on  the  west  side  of  Jerusalem ;  favourable 
as  a  scene  for  a  vast  assemblage,  and  removed  sufficiently  from  En-rogel  to  avoid  a  collision 
with  Adonijah's  adherents.  Verse  34.  Anoint  him— Done  only  in  the  case  of  a  new  dynasty  or 
dispute  I  succession.  Verse  35.  Sit  on  my  throne  — David  would  resign  it  to  Solomon. 
Over  Israel  and  over  Judah — The  kingdoms  were  not  yet  separate,  but  the  union  of  the 
names  was  designed  to  arrest  the  growing  disposition  to  separation  which  the  envy  of  Ephraim 
was  fostering.  Verse  39.  An  horn  of  oil  out  of  the  tabernacle :  the  priestly  consecrated 
oil,  prepared  according  to  divine  directions  (Exodus  xxx.  22-25) ;  the  king  was  thus 
emphatically  *'the  anointed  of  the  Lord."  Verse  40.  People  came  up  after  him — i.e.,  to 
Zion,  the  citadel.  Verse  47.  King  bowed  himself  upon  his  bed  — His  infirmiiies  allowed 
him  to  do  no  more  (compare  Genesis  xlvii.  31).  Verse  50.  Caught  hold  on  the  horns  of 
the  altar:  an  act  by  which  he  appealed  to  God  and  man  that  his  life,  forfeited  by  his 
attempted  usurpation  of  the  throne,  might  be  spared.  Originally  the  place  was  appointed  as 
an  asylum  for  accidental  homicides  (Exodus  xxi.  12  aq.),  but  later  on  other  transgrcsso  s 
sought  and  found  refuge  there,  befriended  from  the  penalty  of  their  crimes.  Verse  53.  Go  to 
thine  house :  be  content  with  privacy,  remain  in  seclusion,  as,ii  e  not  again  ;  in  so  doing  he 
was  to  show  himself  a  worthy  man,  vir  probus.  Such  an  act  of  clemency  by  Solomon  towards 
his  rival  was  a  noble  inauguration  of  his  kingly  rule,  and  must  have  both  favourably  affected 
the  nation  and  conciliated  the  followers  of  Adonijah. 
2 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  t. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-4. 
The  Winter  of  Life. 

I.  Overtakes  men  in  the  liighest  rank.     **Now  King  David  was    old 

and  strick('n  in  years."  Even  the  monarch  is  not  exempt  from  the  paralysing 
influence  of  life's  winter.  David  had  just  escaped  from  the  terrible  plague 
which  had  smitten  fatally  70,000  of  his  subjects,  only  to  waste  away  more 
gradually  under  the  remorseless  ravages  of  time,  from  which  there  is  no  escape 
but  in  death.  If  men  escape  one  peril  it  is  only  to  meet  another.  The  holiest 
soul  dwells  not  in  an  impregnable  fort.  The  aged  king  had  projected  a  great 
work  -  the  building  of  the  temple — and  made  vast  preparations  for  it.  He  was 
not  permitted  to  finish  it.  As  the  fiosts  of  winter  arrest  the  growth  and  deve- 
lopment of  the  most  magnificent  tree,  so  the  progress  of  life's  bleak  winter 
interrupts  the  work  of  the  most  gifted. 

II.  Chills  the  vital  sources  of  the  naturally  robust.  "  And  they  covered 
him  with  clothes,  and  he  gat  no  heat."  As  a  youth,  David  was  noted  for  beauty 
and  physical  strength — **was  ruddy  and  of  a  fair  countenance."  He  scarcely 
knew  the  limit  of  his  power.  He  hesitated  not  to  attack  and  slay  a  lion  and  a 
bear — was  the  victor  of  Goliath— the  terror  of  the  Philistines — the  hero  of  a 
hundred  fights.  But,  as  the  shadows  of  the  grave  creep  into  the  midst  of  the 
gayest  scenes  of  our  mortal  life,  so,  in  the  mid-career  of  those  exploits  which 
raised  him  into  fame,  there  were  admonitory  blasts  of  the  coming  of  that  winter 
which  must  ere  long  freeze  the  vital  energies  at  their  source.  Exposure, 
hardship,  suffering  and  sorrow,  wore  down  a  constitution  naturally  robust ;  and 
now,  in  his  0th  year — a  period  when  many  are  still  vigorous — David  was 
greatly  enfeebled.  He  was  also  suffering  from  a  wasting  disease  to  which 
frequent  allusion  is  made  in  the  Psalms.  Coverings  and  garments  can  only 
preserve  and  accumulate  the  heat  actually  existing  in  the  body,  but  cannot 
supply  that  which  is  gone.  An  affecting  picture  of  the  pitiable  weakness  of  a 
once  powerful  and  victorioTis  monarch  !  Let  not  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his 
might. 

III.  Is  but  temporarily  alleviated  by  the  best  considered  humai* 
devices.  The  cherishing  of  Abishag  was — 1.  Advised  hy  the  court  physicians. 
An  expedient  not  unusual  in  similar  cases,  when  internal  cordials  failed,  and 
with  the  limited  skill  of  the  faculty  in  the  use  of  warmth- creating  potions. 
2.  Was  innocent.  Suggested  for  no  other  than  purely  medical  reasons.  In  those 
days,  when  polygamy  was  not  forbidden  by  the  Jewish  law,  and  when  perverted 
views  as  to  the  relation  of  the  sexes  were  so  prevalent,  Abishag  was  recognized 
as  David's  wife.  She  ministered  to  him  also  as  a  nurse.  Sophocles  lauded  old 
age  as  a  deliverance  from  the  tyranny  of  the  passions,  as  an  escape  from  some 
furious  and  savage  master.  3.  Suspended  only  for  a  brief  season  the  inevitable 
progress  of  decay.  Medical  skill  is  no  more  efficacious  for  the  monarch  than  for 
the  humblest  subject.  David  died  within  the  year.  A  moment  comes  hi  the 
winter  of  life  when  the  warm  pulse  is  stilled,  and  the  once  stalwart  frame  is 
locked  in  the  icy  embrace  of  death. 

EOMILETICS   OF   VERSES  6-10. 
The  Revolt  of  Adonijah. 

I.  Was  the   outcome    of  a  spirit  of  arrogance   and  vanity  (verse  5). 

Solomon  had  been  designated  by  both  Jehovah  and  David  as  successor  to 
the  throne,  and  this  had  been  publicly  declared.  But  Adonijah,  presuming 
upon  his  seniority,  and  puffed  up  with  pride,  insolently  strove  to  prevent 
by  force  the  accomplishment  of  what  he  knew  to  be  the  Divine  arrangement. 

3 


CHAP.  L  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINQ8. 


**  Yain  men,  whilst,  like  proud  and  yet  brittle  clay,  they  will  be  knocking  theii 
sides  against  the  solid  and  eternal  decree  of  God,  break  themselves  in  pieces." 
— Trapp.  Like  his  brother  Absalom,  his  prototype  in  rebellion,  Adonijah 
assumed  all  the  external  show  of  royalty — had  a  great  retinue  of  chariots  and 
horsemen,  both  for  state  and  protection,  to  wait  upon  and  fight  for  him.  The 
glitter  of  outward  display  always  attracts  the  multitude.  There  is  no  limit  to 
the  pride  and  extravagance  of  a  rebel.  Absalom-like,  ambition  rideth  without 
reins. 

II.  Aggravated  as  committed  against  an  indulgent  and  aged  parent 
(verse  6).  Adonijah  took  advantage  of  his  father's  growing  infirmities 
to  gratify  his  sinful  ambition.  Had  never  known  the  wholesome  discipline 
of  parental  restraint.  **The  indulgence  of  parents  at  last  pays  them  home  in 
crosses."  Eeminds  us  of  Prince  Henry,  in  Shakespeare's  Henry  lY.,  part  ii., 
scene  5.  It  added  not  a  little  to  the  grief  of  the  dying  king  that  the  trumpet 
of  rebellion  should  be  sounded  in  his  ears  by  the  son  whom  he  had  loved  **  not 
wisely,  but  too  well." 

III.  Succeeded  in  corrupting  men  of  the  highest  reputation  (verse  7). 
Joab,  as  commander-in-chief,  had  formerly  done  David  noble  service  in 
most  difficult  and  troublous  times.  He  had  incurred  the  displeasure  of  the 
king  by  his  unwarrantable  murder  of  Abner  and  Amasa ;  and,  probably, 
he  disliked  the  character  of  Solomon  as  a  man  of  peace.  For  the  history 
of  Joab  see  2  Samuel  ii.  13-32 ;  iii.  22-31  ;  x.  7-14,  &c.  The 
defection  of  Abiathar,  the  high  priest,  was  more  surprising.  He  was  son 
of  that  Ahimelech  who  suffered  death  in  David's  cause,  and  the  only  one  of  his 
sons  who  escaped  the  massacre  by  Doeg.  David  seems  to  have  felt  towards  him 
a  special  tenderness.  Hitherto  they  had  been  the  firmest  friends.  Abiathar 
was  with  David  through  all  his  wanderings  when  he  fled  from  Saul — served  him 
as  priest  in  Hebron — accompanied  him  out  of  Jerusalem  when  Absalom 
rebelled — was  one  of  his  chief  counsellors.  The  addition  of  these  two 
representatives  of  the  church  and  camp  mightily  strengthened  the  cause  of 
Adonijah,  and  was  significant  of  the  charm  of  his  personal  presence,  and  bland, 
insinuating  address.  "Outward  happiness  and  friendship  are  not  known  till 
our  last  act.  In  the  impotency  of  either  our  revenge  or  recompense  it  will 
easily  appear  who  loved  us  for  ourselves,  who  for  their  own  ends." 

IV.  Stimulated  and  bribed  by  excessive  festivity  (verse  9).  Esau 
sold  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage,  and  he  is  not  the  only  one 
whose  appetite  has  proved  stronger  than  his  conscience.  Sensual  feasting 
is  often  the  precursor  of  thoughtless,  perilous  conduct.  The  judgment  is 
unhinged,  the  heart  inflamed  with  a  fictitious  bravery.  Many  commit 
themselves  to  measures  which  in  calmer  moments  they  regret.  Such  as  serve 
their  own  belly,  and  will  be  in  the  interest  of  those  that  will  feast  them,  what 
side  soever  they  are  of,  are  an  easy  prey  to  seducers  (Rom.  xvi.  11). — Matt, 
Senry.  If  the  oxen  were  offered  in  sacrifice,  as  some  think,  it  only  added  to 
the  audacity  and  impiety  of  the  proceeding.  Such  a  mockery  of  worship  is 
hateful  to  God,  and  can  end  only  in  disaster  to  the  promoters.  The  triumph  of 
the  wicked  is  short  (Job  xx.  5) 

V.  Powerless  to  vitiate  the  integrity  of  the  faithful  (verses  8,  10). 
Zadok  performed  the  offices  of  chief  priest  at  the  tabernacle  of  witness  at  Gibeon, 
while  Abiathar  was  the  real  high  priest,  and  officiated  at  the  sanctuary  con- 
taining the  ark  of  the  covenant  in  Zion.  Benaiah  was  chief  of  David's  body- 
guard (2  Sam.  viii.  18  ;  xx.  23).  Nathan,  the  prophet,  might  be  counted 
among  Solomon's  staunch  friends.     Had  given  the  infant  prince  the  name  of 

4 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  cha?.  L 


Jedidlab,  "darling  of  Jehovah,"  and  was  probably  entrusted  with  his  education. 
As  representative  of  the  Divine  aspect  of  the  arrangement,  and  privy  to  all 
David's  plans,  he  fully  approved  the  order  of  succession  which  the  king 
was  known  to  intend.  Shimei  and  Rei  are  supposed  to  be  David's  two  brothers 
Shim  ma  and  Raddai.  The  mighty  men  were  the  company  of  600  originally 
formed  during  David's  early  wanderings  (1  Sam.  xxv.  13  ;  xxvii.  2),  and  after- 
wards maintained  as  the  most  essential  element  of  his  standing  army  (2  Sam. 
xxiii.  8-39;  1  Chron.  xi.  9-47). — Speaker'^s  Comm.  Neither  these  worthies 
nor  Solomon  were  invited  to  the  feast.  It  would  only  have  added  insult  to  the 
wrong.  Higli  integrity  of  character  lifts  man  above  many  solicitations  to  evil. 
Tacitus  observed  that  the  statues  of  Brutas  and  Cassius  were  the  more  glorious 
and  illustrious  because  they  were  not  brought  out  with  other  images  in  a  solemn 
procession  at  the  funeral  of  Germanious.  Cato  said  he  would  rather  men 
should  question  why  he  had  no  statue  or  monument  erected  to  him,  than  why 
he  had.  By  not  inviting  Solomon,  Adonijah  betrayed  his  plans,  and  himself 
gave  the  occasion  for  their  frustration.  The  policy  of  the  wicked  is  short-sighted, 
and  often  helps  the  cause  it  seeks  to  hinder  (Psalm  Ixix.  23;  Romans  xi.  9). 

Lessons: — 1.  Pride  is  a  fruitful  source  of  rebellion,  2.  Rehels  do  not  suffi- 
ciently estimate  the  power  of  the  principles  they  oppose.  3.  Rebellion  is  reckless 
in  its  movements.  4.  Rebellion  conceived  in  arrogance  is  doomed  to  a  humiliating 
defeat, 

REMONSTRANCE  WITH  EVIL  DOERS— Verse  6. 

"We  are  taught  here  that  much  of  the  evil  that  Adonijah  did  had  its 
root  in  his  early  bad  training.  David,  though  a  good  man  and  a  great  king, 
sadly  erred  in  his  treatment  of  his  children.  What  a  sad  glimpse  do  we  get 
here  of  his  domestic  life !     What  is  written  is  for  our  admonition.     Learn — 

I.  That    remonstrance    with    evil    doers    is    an    imperative    duty. 
** Why  hast  thou  done  so?"     Thus  should  he  have  spoken.     "His  father." 
None  able  to  speak  with  such  authority  and  tenderness.     So  others,  according  ' 
to  their  place  and  relationships.     Hear  God's  call  to  arms :  "  Who  will  rise  up 
for  me  against  the  evil  doers  ?" 

II.  That  remonstrance  with  evil  doers  is  a  very  difficult  duty. 
'*  Displeased."  Pride  hurt ;  carnal  security  disturbed  ;  conscience  roused  to 
give  pain ;  danger  of  speaking  harshly ;  of  speaking  the  truth  in  wrath  more 
than  in  love.  Still  must  do  what  is  right.  Better  offend  men  than  God ;  better 
speak,  than  by  silence  imperil  souls.  Besides,  i£  you  act  in  time  you  may  gain 
your  brother. 

III.  That  remonstrance  with  evil  doers  is  a  much  neglected   duty. 

Here  a  father,  and  that  father  David,  is  charged  with  failure.  Who,  then,  is 
safe?  The  very  fact  that  the  duty  is  so  difficult  and  delicate  makes  many 
shrink  from  it.  They  will  not  give  pain.  They  fear  the  consequences  of 
rebuke  and  discipline.  But  though  the  neglect  of  this  duty  is  so  common,  this 
does  not  make  the  guilt  the  less.  It  is  a  sin  against  God,  and  a  crime  against 
your  brother.  Take  heed ;  be  warned  by  many  feai-ful  examples.  Innocence 
is  better  than  repentance.  Better  far  to  ''displease"  your  children  now  by 
kind  and  righteous  correction,  than  to  let  them  go  on  in  sin  without  check,  and, 
in  view  of  their  sad  fate  and  terrible  upbraidings,  to  cry,  **  Deliver  me  from 
blood  guiltiness,  0  Lord!"  Besides,  how  much  higher  a  place  will  the  father 
hold  who  rules  as  a  king,  like  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  19),  than  the  man  who 
weakly  abuses  his  trust  like  Eli  (1  Sam.  iii.  13). — Momilist 

6 


OHAF.  I 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAUT:  KINGS, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


Verses  1-4.  Weakness  and  in- 
firmity in  old  age  are — 1.  The  uni- 
versal lot  to  which  we  must  all  con- 
sider ourselves  appointed  (Psalm  xc. 
10).  2.  Should  looseij  the  bands 
which  hold  us  to  the  temporal  and 
perishable,  and  ripen  us  for  eternity 
(2  Cor.  iv.  16-18).  Old  and  sick 
people  should,  and  it  is  expected  of 
them  as  a  work  well  pleasing  to  God, 
that  they  bear  this  with  a  willing 
heart,  with  patience,  self-denial,  and 
sacrificing  love.  — Lange. 

Verse  5.  Adonijah's  attempt  to 
gain  the  crown.  1.  The  ground 
upon  which  it  rests.  1.  Upon  self- 
assertion,  pride,  lust  of  power;  but 
God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  a  haughty 
spirit  goeth  before  a  fall.  2.  Upon 
outward  qualities,  age,  and  beautilul 
person ;  but  1  Sam.  xvi.  7 ;  Psalm 
cxlvii.  10,  11.  2.  The  means  which 
he  employed,  1.  He  seeks  to  impose 
upon  the  people  by  chariots  and  horse- 
men ;  but  Psalm  xx.  8.  2.  He  con- 
spires with  false  and  faithless  men,  but 
they  forsake  him  in  the  hour  of  danger 
(verse  49  ;  Psalm  ci.  6,  7).  3.  He  pre- 
pares, for  appearance  sake,  a  religious 
festival ;  but  Prov.  xv.  8. 

The  effort  after  high  things 
(Rom.  xii.  16).  Now  many  a  person 
thinks :  [  will  become  a  great  person- 
age, a  man  of  authority  and  influence, 
and  then  scruples  at  nothing  to  attain 
his  goal.  But  that  which  is  written 
in  1  Cor.  vii.  20-24  applies  to  the  indi- 
vidual as  well  as  to  entire  classes. — 
Lange, 

Verse  6.  The  inevitable  retribu- 
tion of  parental  indulgence.  In 
its  effect — 1.  Upon  character y  engender- 
ing—  1 .  Vanity,  conscious  of  personal 
beauty,  fond  of  display.  2.  Pride 
**  exalted  himself."  3.  Eeckless- 
ness.  {a).  Disrespect  of  a  parent's 
love.  ijb).  Indifference  to  a  parent's 
sufferings.  2  Upon  conduct.  Seen — 
1.  In  deliberate  opposition  to  the 
Divine  intentions.  2,  Defiance  of 
parental  authority.  3.  Usurpation  of 
6 


parental  rights.     4.  Dissension  in  the 
household.     5.  Abuse  of  property. 

I.  His  father  made  a  fondling  of 
Adonijah.  II.  He,  in  return,  made  a 
fool  of  his  father. — M.  Henry, 

The  father  who  allows  his  son  to  go 
on  in  his  pride  and  in  worldly  or  sin- 
ful conduct,  and  shuts  his  eyes,  not  to 
trouble  him,  must  expect  that  his  son 
will  trouble  him  and  embitter  the 
evening  of  his  life.  The  fond  parent 
is  generally  punished  in  the  ingrati- 
tude and  opposition  of  those  very  child- 
ren whom  he  has  most  indulged,  for 
they  cannot  be  influenced  by  any  sense 
of  obligation  or  duty  who  have  been 
accustomed  to  be  gratified  in  every 
wish  of  their  hearts  (Prov.  xxix.  17). 

Verse.  7.  The  instability  of  human 
friendship.  1.  Begins  in  misunder- 
standings, and  is  fostered  by  imaginary 
wrongs.  2.  Characterized  by  ingrati- 
tude to  our  greatest  benefactors.  3. 
Culminates  in  bitter  hostility  and 
revenge.  4.  Disastrous  in  proportion 
to  the  intimacy  formerly  enjoyed. 

—  Wickedness  sometimes  unites 
strange  elements.  1.  Knows  where 
to  select  its  accomplices — among  the 
ambitious,  the  disaffected,  the  waver- 
ing. 2.  Combines  its  votaries  in  sym- 
pathy, aim,  mode  of  operation,  and 
vengeance,  against  a  common  foe. 
b.  Formidable  and  dangerous  when 
espoused  by  men  of  high  repute. 

—  High  personages  always  find 
people  for  the  execution  of  their  sinful 
plans,  who,  from  subserviency  or 
desire  of  reward,  from  ambition  or 
revenge,  will  act  as  counsellors  and 
agents;  but  they  have  their  reward, 
and  for  the  most  part  end  with  terror 
(Prov.  xix.  21). 

Verse  8.  The  true  value  of  human 
friendship  tested  in  trouble.  An  in- 
corruptible fidelity — 1.  Sinks  selfish 
considerations  in  promoting  the  com- 
mon weal.  2.  Soothes  the  alarm  and 
anxieties  of  the  principal  sufferer. 
3.  Is  vigilant  and  active  in  counter- 
acting the  plots  of  evU  workers.    4.  Is 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTAUY :  KINQ8,  OHiJP.  i. 


a  powerful  incentive  and  support  in  —  He  who  gives  the  crowd  wherewith 

doing  the  right.  to  eat  and  to  drink,  who  prepares  for 

With    those    who    are   meditating  them  festivities  and  pleasures,  makes 

treason  and    destruction    we    should  himself  popular  and  beloved  for  the 

never    make   common   cause     (Prov.  moment ;  but  all  who  allow  themselves 

xxiv.  21,  22).  to  be  gained  in  such  way,  to-day  shout 

Hosanna!  and  to-morrow,  Crucify! — 

Verse  9.  Sensual    indulgence.     1.  La7ige. 
Unfits  the  mind  to  estimate  the  rela- 
tive value  of  tbings,     2.  A  fruitful  Terse  1(\    A   good   character.     1. 
source  of  social  and  moral  corruption.  Places  a  man  beyond  the  suspicion  of 
3.  Encourages  promiscuous  association  treachery.     2.  Is  honoured,  whik  it 
with  questionable  characters.     4.  Af-  is   feared   and   envied,    by   the  base, 
fords  a  coveted  opportunity  to  artful  3.  Saves  man  from  many  temptations 
conspirators.      5.    Instigates    to     all  to  evil, 
kinds  of  violence. 

E0MILETIG8  OF  VERSES  11-14. 

The    Counsel    op    the    Wise    and    Good. 

I.  Is  prompted  by  an  unselfish  concern  to  carry  out  the  Divine 
will.  1.  The  Divine  will  is  the  first  and  highest  consideration  with  a  true 
prophet.  Nathan  well  knew  it  was  the  Divine  purpose  that  Solomon  should 
reign.  Doubtless  it  was  he  who  revealed  to  David  the  promise  of  Jehovah  to 
this  effect  (1  Chron.  xxii.  8,  9).  Without  blindly  and  inactively  resting  on 
the  issue  of  the  Divine  decree,  he  saw  the  wisdom  and  importance  of  using  all 
lawful  means  to  disconcert  the  wicked  attempt  to  frustrate  it.  He  was  not 
influenced  by  a  priestly  officiousness  and  love  of  political  intrigue,  but  by  the 
supreme  and  jealous  anxiety  to  fultil  the  will  of  God.  *'  When  crowns  were 
disposed  of  by  immediate  direction  from  Heaven,  no  marvel  that  prophets  were 
so  much  interested  and  employed  in  that  matter;  but  now  that  common 
Providence  rules  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  men  (Dan.  iv.  32)  the  sub- 
ordinate agency  must  be  left  to  common  persons.  Let  not  prophets  intermeddle 
in  them,  but  keep  to  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  God  among  men.'^  Nathan 
was  indifferent  to  the  personal  risk  he  run  had  his  counsel  been  rejected  and 
Adonijah  allowed  to  become  king.  In  all  things,  spiritual  and  temporal,  the 
will  of  God  is  the  highest  reason.  It  is  the  safest  motive  to  action.  2.  The 
conduct  of  Nathan  was  in  harmony  with  a  genuine  friendship.  The  faithfulness 
of  the  prophet  in  reproving  David's  sin  not  only  produced  repentance,  but 
established  a  bond  of  friendship  which  lasted  for  the  remainder  of  the  monarch's 
life.  The  training  of  Solomon  was  entrusted  to  Nathan,  and  the  amiable 
qualities  and  superior  abilities  of  the  youthful  prince  won  the  prophet's  love. 
The  services  of  a  true  friend  may  be  more  freely  and  cheerfully  rendered  when 
they  accord  with  the  Divine  intentions.  It  is  no  act  of  friendliness  to  tender 
advice  which  involves  in  its  observance  the  displeasure  of  God.  Advice  should 
be  given  with  gentleness  and  wisdom :  it  should  fall  as  the  dew,  not  overwhelm 
as  the  torrent. 

II.  Highly  valuable  in  great  emergencies.  A  grave  crisis  had  come 
in  the  history  of  the  kingdom.  It  needed  the  utmost  caution  and  promptitude 
in  dealing  with  it.  Important  interests  were  threatened.  1.  A  crown  was  at 
stake  (ver.  11).  Adonijah  had  usurped  the  position  to  which  his  brother  was 
formally  designated.  There  was  danger  the  sceptre  should  not  pass  into  the 
hands  of  Solomon.  The  crown  of  life,  more  lustrous  far  than  the  costliest 
earthly  diadem,  is  reserved  for  the  faithful.      That  no  man  take  our  crown| 

7 


CHAP.  I.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


we  must  give  heed  to  Divine  counsel.  2.  Life  was  at  stake  (ver.  12).  It 
was  the  sanguinaiy  custom  among  the  ancient  monarchies  of  the  East,  in  the 
event  of  a  forcible  seizure  of  the  throne,  to  murder  the  dethroned  ruler,  or  the 
opposing  pretenders  to  the  crown,  and  all  their  nearest  relatives  (Judg.  ix.  5 ; 
1  Kings  XV.  29  ;  2  Kings  x.  6,  13  ;  ib.  xi.  1).  If  Adonijah  succeeded,  Bathsheba, 
Solomon,  and,  probably,  I^athan,  must  perish.  We  are  in  danger  of  eternal 
death.  It  is  the  privileged  function  of  God's  messengers,  while  warning 
against  threatened  death,  to  offer  life.  Happy  are  they  who  are  wise  to  receive 
instruction !  To  keep  sound  wisdom  and  discretion  is  life  to  the  soul  and  grace 
to  the  neck  (Prov.  iii.  21,  22).  3.  The  wish  of  the  dying  king  was  dis- 
regarded. That  Adonijah  knew  the  intention  of  David  was  evident  by  his 
refusing  to  summon  Solomon,  and  by  conducting  the  conspiracy  so  secretly  that 
the  aged  king  was  ignorant  of  it.  Filial  duty  dictates  a  reverential  regard  to 
the  last  wishes  of  a  dying  parent.  Rebellion  outrages  all  family  relationships, 
and  ignores  the  dearest  parental  wishes.  4.  The  future  prestige  of  the  empire  was 
imperilled.  Adonijah  was  unfit  to  govern.  Had  he  reached  the  throne,  his 
career  must  have  been  one  of  disaster.  There  would  have  been  no  Solomon-era ; 
and  the  peace,  the  commercial  affluence,  the  luxurious  display,  the  intellectual 
glory,  and  theocratic  splendour  that  characterised  the  brilliant  reign  of  the  wise 
and  gifted  king,  would  have  been,  if  not  unknown,  indefinitely  postponed.  A 
prophet  and  a  woman — both  contemptuously  overlooked  by  the  proud  con- 
spirators— were  the  instruments  of  defeating  an  ill-starred  enterprise.  The 
timely  and  vigorous  action  of  a  single  mind  has  often  decided  the  destiny  of  a 
nation. 

III.   Suggests  the  most  forcible  reasons  for  right  action  (verse  13). 

1.  The  king  is  informed  that  his  own  arrangement  concerning  the  regal  succession  is 
violently  disturbed .  **  Why,  then,  doth  Adonijah  reign?"  It  was  a  terrible 
blow  to  David  to  be  told  that  his  son — a  son  so  fondly  loved  and  excessively 
indulged — was  engaged  in  a  rebellious  attempt  to  defeat  his  father's  declared 
intention.  It  would  affect  David  the  more  that  his  informant  was  Bathsheba,  a 
woman  he  tenderly  loved,  and  mother  of  the  son  who  would  be  most  injured  if 
the  usurper  triumphed.  Nothing  will  sooner  rouse  a  man  into  action  than  the 
forcible  and  wilful  interference  with  his  own  long-cherished  and  thoughtfully- 
formed  plans.  2.  The  king  is  reminded  of  his  oath.  **  Didst  not  thou  swear?" 
It  is  not  known  when  David  made  the  promise  on  oath  to  Bathsheba  that  her 
son  should  be  king.  It  was  evidently  after  the  revelation  made  to  him  by 
Jehovah,  recorded  in  2  Sam.  vii.  The  reference  to  his  oath,  uttered  with  the 
utmost  solemnity  and  awe,  would  be  irresistible.  The  God-fearing  king  would 
be  incited  to  adopt  prompt  and  active  measures  for  ensuring  the  accomplishment 
of  his  purpose.  The  man  who  fears  God  must  ever  be  most  solicitous  to  fulfil 
the  promise  made  by  his  solemn  invocation  of  the  Divine  Name. 

rV.   Is  supplemented  and  confirmed  by   active,    personal  endeavours 

(verse  14).  Many  are  ready  to  tender  advice  when  it  does  not  involve 
personal  effort  and  inconvenience.  Advice  thus  cheaply  given  is  generally 
estimated  at  the  same  value.  The  true  friend,  not  content  with  simply  giving 
the  wisest  counsel,  is  prepared  to  substantiate  his  words  with  earnest,  diligent, 
and  self-sacrificing  personal  endeavours.  The  advice  of  such  a  friend  is  beyond 
all  price.     It  should  be  gratefully  obeyed. 

Lessons: — 1.  The   minister    of  God  should  he  able  to  give  sound  counsel. 

2.  The  best   counsel  is  that  which  is  most  in   harmony  with  the  will  of  God, 

3.  The  counsel  of  the  wise  and  good  should  be  carefully  pondered.  4.  Good 
counsel,  when  promptly  acted  upon,  is  followed  with  beneficial  results, 

8 


EOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  i. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verse  1 1 .  Tlie  watchfulness  of  the  Gospel  message.    The  mission  of  the 

faithful    minister — 1.   Enables    him  Gospel  is— 1.    To   counsel  the  igno- 

to  discern  the  dangers  which  threaten  rant.      2.  To   warn    the    indifferent, 

the  interests  of  God's  kingdom.    2.  To  3.  To  offer  life  to  the  spiritually  dead, 

discoverthesecretplotsof  evil  workers.  4.  To  reveal  the  endless  duration  and 

3.  To  afford  seasonable  and  important  consummate  felicity  of  the  life  enjoyed 

counsel  in  grave  emergencies.     4.  To  by  the  believer.     5.  To  set  forth  the 

lend  all  the  force  of  his  personal  efforts  character  and  redeeming  work  of  the 

in  defeating  the  designs  of  the  wicked,  great  Life-Giver. 

6.  To  brave  all  the  perils  of  fidelity.  —  What  Nathan  here  says  to  Bath- 

sheba,  Christ  and  His  Apostles,  in  an 

Nathan,  the  type  of  a  true   pro-  infinitely  higher  sense,  say  to  us  all, 

phet.     Seen — I.  In  his  watchfulness  especially    every    father    and    every 

and  fidelity  (Ezekiel  xxxiii.  7).     He  mother.     How  many  take  kindly  the 

is  not  silent  when  it  was  his  duty  to  good  advice  of  a  wise  man,  for  them- 

open  his  mouth  (Isaiah  Ivi.  10).    2.  In  selves  and  for  their  children,  in  their 

hiswisdom  and  gentleness  (Matt.  X.  16).  earthly  and  outward  affairs,  but  who 

3.    In   his    earnestness    and    courage  wish  to  hear  nothing  of  the  best  advice 

(Matt.  X.    28).      How   grand  is  this  which  shall  bring  blessedness  to  their 

Nathan!     How  reproving  to  all  who  souls! 
sleep  when  they  should  be  wakeful, 

who  are  dumb  when  they  should  Verse  14.  The  purity  of  the  counsel 
counsel,  who  flatter  when  they  should  is  confirmed  by  the  accompanying  re- 
warn  !  It  is  a  solemn  duty  not  to  con-  suit.  There  are  some  seeming  contra- 
ceal  what  can  prove  an  injury  and  dictions  in  Scripture ;  and  though  they 
evil  to  an  individual  or  to  a  community,  seem  to  be  as  the  accusers  of  Christ, 
but  to  expose  it  at  the  right  time  and  never  a  one  speaking  like  the  other, 
in  the  right  place,  so  that  the  injury  yet,  if  we  understand,  we  shall  find 
may  be  averted. — Lange,  them  speaking  like  Nathan  and  Bath- 

sheba,  both  speaking  the  same  things. 

Verse  12.  The  great  burden  of  the  — Trajap, 

HOMILETIOS  OF  VERSES  15-21. 

The  Peesuasive  Pleading  op  an  Anxious  Motheb, 

I.  Is  profoundly  deferential.  Bathsheba  hesitates  not  to  venture  at 
once  into  the  inner  chamber  of  the  aged  and  dying  king.  Her  maternal 
instincts  and  concern  for  her  son's  future  render  her  courageous.  Her  presence 
pleaded  eloquently,  but  her  speech,  tremulous  with  the  conflicting  emotions  of 
the  wife  and  mother,  was  overwhelming.  **  Bathsheba  bowed  and  did  obeisance 
unto  the  king  "  (verse  16).  She  paid  every  respect  due  to  1  ^avid  as  her  prince 
and  husband.  If  we  would  find  favour  with  superiors,  we  must  show  them 
becoming  respect.  We  should  cherish  a  dutiful  regard  towards  those  from  whom 
we  expect  kindness.  Nothing  is  ever  lost  by  sincere  politeness.  It  evidences 
a  refined  and  gentle  spirit.  It  propitiates  the  most  morose,  and  often  wins  a 
favourable  reception  in  the  most  difficult  suit.  It  succeeds  where  an 
unmannerly  brusqueness  fails.  It  is  irresistible  in  a  true  woman.  Life  is  not 
so  short  but  there  is  always  time  enough  for  courtesy. 

n.  Urges  the  religious  obligation  of  an  oath.  Verse  17,  "Thon 
swarest  by  the  Lord  thy  God."  A  conscientious  man  is  morally  bound  by  his 
promised  word  ;  but  an  oath  is  in^violable.  We  are  engaged  if  we  have  promised ; 
if  we  have  sworn,  we  are  bound.     Neither  heaven  nor  earth  has  any  gyves  for 

9 


OHAP.  1.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS, 


that  man  who  can  recklessly  shake  off  the  fetters  of  an  oath.  Such  a  man  has 
no  regard  for  that  God  whose  awful  name  he  dare  invoke  to  a  falsehood.  He 
who  cares  not  for  God  will  not  care  for  man.  It  is  a  powerful  leverage  to  move 
a  man  to  right  action  when  we  can  remind  him  of  his  solemnly  pledged  word. 
An  oath  should  be  religiously  remembered  and  conscientiously  fulfilled.  It  is 
a  duty  we  owe  to  both  (iod  and  man.  Even  the  highest  in  authority  should  be 
faithfully  reminded  of  this  duty,  and  warned  as  to  the  consequences  of  a  careless 
repudiation  of  trust.     A  faithful  friend  in  a  palace  is  rare. 

III.  Graphically   depicts  the    distraction   of  rebellion  (verses  18,  19). 

1.  The  throne  is  seized  hy  an  ungrateful  son,  "Adonijah  reigneth."  "Without 
waiting  for  the  death  of  his  father,  or  seeking  his  sanction,  and  even  without 
his  knowledge,  the  presumptuous  son  assumes  all  the  authority  and  external 
display  of  royalty.  Had  his  right  to  the  succession  been  ever  so  good,  such 
conduct  was  undutiful  and  treasonable.  An  unprincipled  ambition  corrupts 
natural  affection :  it  acknowledges  obedience  to  none  but  its  own  imperious  will. 

2.  Excessive  festivity  prevails.  Indulgence  is  often  provocative  of  vain  blasting, 
extravagant  designs,  and  riotous  conduct.     It  leads  to   cruelty  and  disaster. 

3.  2  he  members  of  the  royal  family  and  the  true  friends  of  the  aged  king  are  seduced 
from  their  allegiance.  There  was  disorder  in  the  household.  The  children  of 
David  repaid  his  paternal  kindness  with  unfaithfulness  and  wild  rebellion.  The 
ingratitude  of  children,  for  whom  so  much  has  been  sacrificed  and  endured,  is 
one  of  the  sharpest  pangs  of  a  disappointed  parent's  heart.  Polygamy,  in  how- 
ever limited  a  degree,  is  a  prolific  source  of  domestic  trouble.  Any  violation  of 
the  moral  order  carries  with  it  its  own  Nemesis.  The  infidelity  of  Abiathar 
and  Joab  —men  with  whom  he  had  repeatedly  trusted  his  life — was  a  severe  blow 
to  David.  Little  does  the  renegade  friend  think  of  the  anguish  caused  by  his 
treachery.  Confidence  in  human  nature  is  shattered.  4.  The  king-designate  is 
ignored.  *'  But  Solomon  thy  servant " — not  thy  sovereign,  as  Adonijah  affects 
to  be — *'hath  he  not  called.'*  He  is  evidently  regarded  as  a  rival,  and  every 
attempt  is  made  to  prevent  his  gaining  the  throne.  It  is  not  an  oversight,  but 
a  contempt  of  the  act  of  settlement,  which  had  been  made  sufficiently  public, 
that  Solomon  is  neglected.  All  the  fondly  cherished  plans  of  David  are 
threatened  with  a  rude  and  ignominious  overthrow.  The  scene  of  confusion 
created  by  the  rebels,  thus  graphically  presented,  was  calculated  to  deeply 
affect  the  dying  monarch — as  the  husband,  the  father,  and  the  king. 

IV.  Earnestly  advocates  the  pressing  claims  of  the  nation  (verse  20). 
The  rebellion  had  not  gone  so  far  as  that  of  Absalom's  in  stealing  away  the 
hearts  of  the  people.  There  was  a  grave  pause  in  the  kingdom.  The  people 
hesitated  what  to  do,  until  the  royal  intention  was  publicly  proclaimed.  David 
was  too  firmly  seated  in  the  affections  of  his  subjects  to  allow  them  to  act 
without  the  knowledge  of  his  declared  will.  This  ominous  silence  of  the  national 
voice  was  Nathan's  opportunity  and  Adonijah's  doom.  In  troublous  times  the 
nation  looks  to  the  king.  In  him  is  vested  supreme  authority.  He  is  the  guide 
and  defender  of  the  empire.  The  interests  of  all  are  ia  his  keeping ;  and  his 
power  should  ever  be  exercised  on  the  side  of  justice,  equity,  and  peace.  A 
divine  sentence  is  in  the  lips  of  the  king.  "  That  thou  shouldest  tell  them  who 
shall  sit  on  the  throne."  This  some  princes  love  not  to  do — Queen  Elizabeth, 
for  instance.  A  false  Jesuit  wrote  that  she  wished  she  might,  after  her  death, 
hang  awhile  in  the  air,  to  see  what  scuffling  there  would  be  for  her  kingdom. 
Men  should  use  whatever  power  or  influence  they  possess,  not  in  compassing 
their  own  selfish  ends,  but  in  advancing  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah. 

V.  Is  foil  of  genuine  pathos.  1.  A  mournful  contingency  is  referred  to 
(verse  21).     **  When  my  Lord  shall  sleep  with  his  fathers."    Here  the  heart  of 

10 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  i. 


the  wife  speaks  out.  It  was  evident  David's  end  was  near;  and  Bathsheba 
could  not  contemplate  that  event  without  deep  emotion.  Death  is  compared  to 
a  sleep.  Beautiful  simile  !  Such  a  view  robs  death  of  its  terror,  and  soothes 
the  sorrow  of  the  bereaved.  Death  is  but  the  gentle  sinking  of  the  tired  and 
spent  body  into  the  lap  of  rest.  Silently  it  reposes  among  the  hallowed  dust 
of  bye-gone  generations,  until  the  last  great  trumpet  shall  wake  it  into  newness 
of  life.  2.  A  tender  allusion  is  made  to  threatened  personal  peril.  "I  and  my 
son  Solomon  shall  be  counted  offenders."  Here  the  heart  of  the  mother  speaks 
out.  It  is  suggested  by  some  commentators  that,  probably,  Adonijah  had 
spoken  slightingly  of  Bathsheba  as  an  adultress.  and  of  Solomon  as  illegitimate, 
and,  therefore,  not  fit  to  be  king.  The  reputation  of  mother  and  son  was  in 
danger,  and  must  be  protected.  Not  only  so :  if  Adonijah  succeeded,  they 
would  both  be  reckoned  traitors  and  public  enemies,  and  their  lives  sacrificed. 
Adonijah  would  not  have  dealt  so  mercifully  with  Solomon  as  Solomon  did  with 
him.  He  who  usurps  a  throne  will  stop  at  no  cruelty  to  seoure  himself  in  it. 
If  anything  will  rouse  the  soul  into  earnest  concern,  it  is  the  peril  to  which 
those  dear  to  it  are  exposed. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  The  mother  exerts  a  powerful  influence  on  the  destiny  of  the 
family.  2.  It  is  an  unspeakable  advantage  for  a  youthful  prince  to  have  a  wise 
and  capable  mother.     3.  The  eloquence  of  a  mother^ s  heart  is  irresistible. 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  15-21.  Bathsheba  before  the         Verse  18.    "  Thou  kno west  it  not. 

king.    She  reminds  him  of  his  duty —  The  isolation  of  the  aged  and  infirm 

1.  Towards  God,  before  whom  he  had  — 1.  Presents  a  melancholy  contrast  to 
Bwom.  "What  one  has  vowed  before  the  joyous  excitement  of  an  active 
God,  according  to  God's  will,  one  must  life.  2,  Renders  them  oblivious  of  the 
hold  to  under  all  circumstances ;  of  most  important  events  of  the  outside 
this  one  m'.ist  remind  kings  and  princes.  world.     3.  Ignorant  of  the  calamities 

2.  Towards  the  people,  whose  well-  that  threaten  their  dearest  interests, 
being  and  whose  woe  were  in  his  keep-  4.  Familiarizes  their  minds  with  suffer- 
ing. The  great  responsibility  of  him  ing  and  approaching  death.  5.  Calls 
towards  whom  all  eyes  are  directed,  for  the  kindly  attention  and  sympathy 

3.  Towards  the  wife  and  son,  whose  of  loving  hearts, 
happiness  and  life  were  at  stake.     Woe 

to  the  father  through  whose  guilt  wife  Verse  20.  The  grave  responsibili- 
and  children,  after  his  death,  fall  into  ties  of  the  monarch.  1 .  All  eyes  are 
contempt  and  wretchedness. — Lange.  turned  to  him  in  times  of  national  dis- 
tress. 2.  He  is  expected  to  promptly 
Verse  16.  **  What  wouldest  thou  ?"  and  effectually  crush  rebellion.  3.  The 
A  question  the  King  of  Heaven  is  ever  best  interests  of  his  subjects  should 
asking — 1.  The  perplexed  enquirer,  be  his  chief  concern.  4.  He  should 
2.  The  penitent  suppliant.  3.  The  make  the  wisest  arrangements  for  the 
complaining  sufferer.  4.  The  solitary  future  peace  and  stability  of  the  king- 
mourner.  5.  The  ambitious  self-  dom.  5.  He  is  accountable  to  God, 
Beeker.  from  whom  he  derives  his  authority. 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  22-81. 

Thb  Expostulation  of  a  Faithful  Ministeb. 

Bathsheba  retires,  and  Kathan  is  announced.  !No  time  shonld  be  lost  in 
dealing  with  evil.  Delay  is  all  in  favour  of  the  enemy.  Wickedness  hardena 
in  its  effrontery  the  longer  it  is  unchecked.     Observe :— 

11 


CHAP.  L  EOMILETia  COMMENTAnY:  KINGS. 


I.  That  the  faithful  minister  is  painfully  conscious  of  wrong  done  t 
others.  His  character  supposes  familiarity  with  the  highest  and  purest  mora 
truths.  His  communion  with  God  gives  tone  and  halance  to  his  persona 
experience  of  those  truths.  His  training  renders  him  highly  susceptihle  t 
every  variation  from  the  right.  His  office,  as  a  divinely-appointed  watchman 
implies  his  constant  alertness  in  detecting  the  presence  and  operation  of  evil 
As  the  magnet  trembles  under  the  influence  of  some  atmospheric  disturbance,  s 
the  heart  of  the  faithful  minister  is  sensitively  alive  to  the  violence  of  th 
wicked.  The  havoc  wrought  by  sin  is  the  source  of  bitterest  sorrow  to  th 
good.     He  feels  the  injury  done  to  others  more  than  the  injury  done  to  himsell 

II.  That  the  faithful  minister  is  sincerely  solicitous  to  rectify  the  wrong 
Without  d3lay,  Nathan  set  all  the  forces  within  his  reach  in  motion  to  counter 
act  the  wicked  designs  of  the  rebels.  When  we  are  conscious  of  a  flagran 
wrong,  fidelity  requires  that  we  protest  against  it,  and  use  all  lawful  and  wis 
endeavours  to  put  it  away.  Man  never  feels  so  weak  as  when  he  comes  inti 
active  opposition  with  the  colossal  powers  of  evil.  Eut  for  Divine  encouragement 
he  would  give  up  the  contest  in  despair.  When  his  best  efforts  are  powerless  t 
conquer  the  obstinacy  of  the  wicked,  like  the  tender-hearted  prophet,  h 
exclaims,  **  My  soul  shall  weep  in  secret  places  for  you"  (Jer.  xiii.  17) 
What  an  unfathomable  depth  of  disappointment  and  regret  is  sounded  in  th 
heartrending  wail  of  the  ever-pitying  Jehovah — "  0  !  that  thou  hads 
hearkened  to  my  commandments !  "  Even  the  Deity,  after  exhausting,  in  vain 
all  legitimate  attempts  to  win  man  back  to  the  right,  has  nothing  left  but  tears 
Christ  weeping  over  Jerusalem. 

III.  That  the  faithful  minister  knows  how  to  influence  the  highes 
authority  in  favour  of  the  right.  While  the  impression  made  by  the  passionat 
pleading  of  Eathsheba  was  fresh  in  the  mind  of  the  king,  Jsathan  appeared 
and,  with  the  utmost  respect,  but  in  a  form  that  implied  a  slight  reproof 
expostulated  with  him.  The  wood  that  a  single  wedge  will  not  rive  is  readily 
split  asunder  by  a  double  one.  The  prophet  rehearsed,  for  the  most  part,  th< 
arguments  used  by  the  mother;  but,  as  befitting  his  character,  he  used  then 
in  such  a  way  as  was  calculated  to  powerfully  move  the  heart  of  the  king 
1.  He  expostulated  with  David  as  a  man  of  consistency.  "  Hast  thou  sai( 
Adonijah  shall  reign  ?  "  (ver.  24).  This  was  contrary  to  what  the  king  had  saic 
before.  He  had  solemnly  declared  that  Solomon  should  be  king;  and  this  wa 
publicly  known.  This  appeal  to  his  consistency  would  rouse  the  persona 
interest  of  the  king.  The  slightest  suspicion  of  inconsistency  alarms  th( 
conscientious  soul.  It  is  sometimes  needful  to  stir  up  and  encourage  to  dut] 
those  who  mean  well,  but  are  enfeebled  by  infirmity.  2.  Me  expostulated  wit 
David  as  a  considerate  and  popular  prince,  Eebellion  had  broken  out,  and  ha( 
reached  its  highest  point  of  aggravation.  The  revellers  were  shouting,  **  Go( 
save  king  Adonijah!"  Beloved  as  David  was  by  the  nation,  the  rebels  ha( 
despised  his  authority,  challenged  his  power,  abused  his  kindness,  insulted  hi 
friends,  and  ignored  his  son  (verses  25,  26).  All  this  would  tend  to  fire  th 
indignation  of  the  king.  3.  He  expostulated  with  David  as  a  man  of  candou. 
(verse  27).  Could  it  be  that  the  king  had  changed  his  mind  as  to  the  succession 
and  kept  his  truest  friend  and  wisest  adviser  in  ignorance  ?  The  man  wh( 
represented  the  Divine  aspect  of  the  arrangement  was  surely  the  first  who  ha( 
a  right  to  know.  Had  the  king  been  practising  secresy  and  deception  ?  Thi 
was  unlike  David.  Few  men  can  bear  their  candour  called  in  question.  ^  Th 
fuse  ignited  the  train.  The  king  was  thoroughly  roused.  Feeble  and  dying  a 
he  was,  something  of  the  vigour  of  his  best  days  re-animated  his  soul.  As  th 
saint,  the  husband,  the  father,  the  prince,  he  was  prepared  to  enforce  hi 
promised  word.  The  mightiest  appeal  at  the  Mercy  Seat  is  that  which  is  base^ 
upon  the  Divine  Word. 

12 


EOMIZETIO  COMMENTAjRT:  KINOS,  chap,  l 


IV.  That  the  expostulation  of  a  faithful  minister  was  in  this  instance 

crowned  with  success.     1 .  2he  hing  resolved  to  take  immediate  action  to  maintain 

the  right.      "  Even  so  will  I  certainly  do  this  day  "  (verse  30).      Good  men 

will  do  their  duty,   if  it  is  faithfully  and  judiciously  pressed  upon  them. 

David's  love  towards  his  usurping  son  gave  place  to  indignation.      He  now 

understands  the  serious  state  of  affairs,  and  the  necessity  for  prompt  measures 

heing  taken.      The  clearness  and  vigour  with  which  the  dying  king  gave 

instructions  indicate  that,  notwithstanding   the  feeble  state  of  his  body,   his 

intellectual  powers  were  unimpaired.      Age  ripens  knowledge  into  wisdom. 

Plato  wrote  at  eighty  years  of  age,  Isocratcs  at  ninety-five,  and  some  of  the 

ablest  men  who  have  reached  a  good  old  age  have  giieved  that  they  must  die 

when  they  began  to  be  wise.     Without  immediately  revealing  his  purpose  to 

the  prophet,  David  summons  Bathsheba  into  his  presence  (verse  28).     He  still 

retained  the  power  of  the  king,  and  of  acting  independently.     The  woman  who 

would  be  so  grievously  wronged  must  be  assured  that  justice  should  be  done. 

2.    The  king  renews  his  oath  with  increased  solemnity  (verses  29,  30).     He  not 

only  repeats  his  former  oath,  but,  with  deepest  emotion,  ratifies  it  with  another. 

An  oath  is  so  sacred  that  its  obligation  cannot  be  broken ;  and  so  solemn  that 

the  impression  ought  never  to  be  forgotten.     David  acknowledges  the  goodness 

of  God  in  bringing  him  safely  through  the  difficulties  and  hardships  of  life.     As 

God  had  been  true  to  him,  so  would  he  remain  true  to  the  end.     Dying  saints 

should  bear  witness  of  the  faithfulness  of  God  towards  them.     What  a  lesson  was 

this  to  his  son  and  successor  to  trust  in  God  in  every  time  of  distress  that  might 

come  upon  him !     Bathsheba  gratefully  acknowledges  the  decision  of  the  king 

— **Let  my  lord,  king  David,  live  for  ever"  (verse  31).     Would  that  it  had 

pleased  God  that  this  change  had  never  been  necessary,  and  that  thou  miglitest 

have  lived  and  reigned  perpetually !     We  should  ever  desire  the  prolonging  of 

useful  lives,  however  much  it  may  appear  against  our  own  advantage.     David 

acted  in  this  instance,  not  merely  in  compliance  with  the  supplication  of  a  wife, 

or  from  a  dislike  to  Adonijah,  but  from  a  religious  motive.     He  was  firmly 

persuaded  that  Solomon  was  appointed  by  Jehovah  to  be  his  successor ;  and  t  hat 

through  him,  as  well  his  own  house  as  the  house  of  Jehovah  should  be  built 

up.     This  had  been  promised,  and  David  witnessed  its  fulfilment  (2  Sam.  vii. 

11-13;  comp.  Heb.  xi.  32,  33). 

Lessons  : — 1.  That  the  faithful  minister  should  not  tolerate  the  wrong.  2.  That 
the  faithful  minister  will  adopt  the  wisest  and  most  influential  method  in  persuading 
men  to  the  right.  3.  That  when  the  expostulations  of  the  faithful  minister  are 
regarded,  blessed  results  follow.  4,  That  the  minister  must  he  faithful  in 
expostulation^  irrespective  of  results, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  22,  23.  To  have  a  Nathan  by  xiii.  2).     With  questions  which  lead 

one's  side,  who  refers  at  the  right  time  to  a  knowledge  of  self,   he  who  has 

and  in  the  right  way  to  the  will  of  the   care  of  souls   often  accomplishes 

God,  is  the   choicest  blessing   for   a  more,  than  by  direct  reproaches  and 

prince.      **  He   who   fears   God    lays  disciplinary  speeches, 
hold  of  such  a  friend  "  (Eccles.  vi.  16). 

The  ministers  of  God  and  the  preachers  Verses     28-30.     David's     decision, 

of  His  word  should  not,  indeed,  mingle  1.  His  oath  is  an  evidence  of  his  firm 

in  worldly  business  and  political  affairs;  faith  in  the  divine  promise.     2.  His 

but  their  calling  always  requires  them  command  is  a  living  proof  of  the  truth 

to  testify  against  uproar  and  sedition,  of  the   Word    (Isaiah    xl.     31,    and 

for  he   who  resisteth  the  powers  re-  Psalm  xcii.  15).     Happy  for  the  king 

sisteth  the  ordinance  of  God   (Rom,  who,  under  all  circumstances,  observes 

13 


OHAP.L  EOMILETIG  COMMENTART:  KINGS, 


what  lie  has  promised.     Fidelity  in  and  finally  to  conquer.     3.  That  the 

high  places  meets  with  fidelity  from  constancy  of  Jehovah  in  delivering  His 

those  below. — Lange.  people  should  ever  he  gratefully  acknow- 
ledged.   1.  Faith  is  confirmed.    2.  Cha- 

Yerse  29.  Jehovah  the  Deliverer  racter   moulded  by  the  discipline  of 

of  His  people.     1.  That  the  people  of  trouble.      3,    Sympathy   and   fidelity 

God  a/re  not  exempt  from  the  calamities  towards  others  encouraged.     4.  Praise 

of  life.     They  may  be  prostrated  by  should  be  continually  offered, 
disease,    perplexed  with    commercial 

reverses,  disappointed  by  false  friends,  Verse  30.  **  Even  so  will  I  certainly 
distressedwith  domestic  aflliction,  over-  do  this  day."  Promptitude  in  Chris- 
whelmed  with  bereavement,  puzzled  tian  sorvice — 1.  Is  impelled  by  a 
with  the  inexplicable  mysteries  of  the  profound  conviction  of  the  superlati^  e 
Divine  procedure.  2.  That  out  of  righteousness  of  the  work  to  be  done. 
every  calamity  Jehovah  gracioitsly  de-  2.  Necessary  to  counteract  the  strata- 
livers  His  people.  This  He  does  either —  gems  of  the  wicked.  3.  Demanded 
1.  By  removing  the  cause  of  the  by  the  pressing  needs  of  humanity, 
calamity ;  or,  2,  by  abating  its  force ;  4.  Accomplishes  the  most  satisfactory 
or,  3,  by  imparting  strength  to  endure,  results. 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  32-40. 
The  Cokonation  op  Solomow. 

1.  Was  undertaken  with  the  full  approbation  and  by  the  express  direc- 
tions of  the  reigning  monarch.  1.  The  king  voluntarily  abdicated  in  famur 
of  his  son  Solomon.  "  He  shall  be  king  in  my  stead ;  and  I  have  appointed  him 
to  be  ruler  over  Israel  and  Judah"  (verse  35).  No  sooner  is  David  roused 
to  comprehend  the  gravity  of  the  occasion  than  he  proceeds  to  make  the  most 
complete  arrangements  for  carrying  out  his  own  intentions  and  the  Divine  will. 
He  suiTenders  into  the  hand  of  the  youthful  Solomon  the  kingdom  which,  for 
the  most  part,  had  been  conquered  and  coDsolidatcd  by  his  own  military  and 
administrative  genius.  He  had  subdued  Ephraim,  which  took  the  name  of 
Israel,  and  united  it  with  Judah.  Considerable  jealousy  existed  between  these 
two  portions  of  the  empire,  which  ultimately  forced  on  a  separation.  The  old  dis- 
union reappeared  in  the  revolt  of  Absalom,  and  was  again  revived  by  the 
attempt  of  Adonijah.  It  was  therefore  with  a  view  of  strengthening  Solomon's 
authority  over  the  whole  kingdom  that  David  expressly  declared  that  his  son 
should  be  ruler  over  Israel  and  Judah.  The  abdication  of  a  monarch  in  favour  of 
a  son  is  not  always  a  wise  proceeding.  King  Henry  II.  of  England  lived 
to  regret  that  he  had  so  acted.  Prince  Henry,  infiated  with  his  new  dignity, 
and  instigated  to  filial  disobediecce  by  his  mother,  rebelled  against  the  king ; 
and  in  1183,  in  the  midst  of  his  wicked  designs,  was  seized  with  a  fatal  illness, 
and  died.  But  Solomon  had  learned  better  things  from  his  father  (Prov.  iv.  4), 
from  his  mother  (Prov.  xxxi.),  and  from  his  tutor,  Nathan.  2.  The  king  was 
explicit  in  his  directions  (verses  32-35).  He  summoned  into  his  presence  Zadok, 
Nathan,  and  Benaiah,  the  chief  representatives  of  the  church  and  the  army, 
and  commanded  them  to  take  with  them  the  royal  body-guard,  to  set  Solomon 
on  his  own  mule,  an  honour  never  conferred  but  m  a  mark  of  the  highest 
distinction ;  to  conduct  him  in  state  down  to  Gihon,  there  to  anoint  him  with 
the  sacred  oil,  to  sound  the  trumpet  and  proclaim  him  king  in  the  public  street ; 
to  bring  him  back  to  the  court  in  magnificence  and  triumph,  with  all  the 
necessary  and  imposing  ceremonies  of  coronation.  The  minuteness  with  which 
these  orders  were  given  indicates  the  clearness  and  vigour  of  David's  mind,  and 
the  fervour  of  his  soul  in  doing  what  he  believed  to  be  the  right.  Zeal  for  God 
should  ever  be  controlled  by  particularity,  method,  and  purpose.  8.  Tht  action 
14 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTABT:  KINGS,  chap,  i 


of  the  king  met  with  signal  approval  (verses  36,  37).  Benaiah,  on  behalf  of  the 
rest,  applauds  the  act,  and  adds  his  devout  Amen.  He  also  utters  a  prayer 
that  Jehovah  may  be  with  Solomon,  and  exalt  his  throne  above  that  of 
his  father.  The  best  of  men  desire  their  children  to  be  wiser  and  better  than 
themselves;  as  they  themselves  desire  to  be  wiser  and  better.  To  be  wise  and 
good  is  to  be  truly  great.  Benaiah  neither  flattered  not  reflected  upon  David  ; 
but,  convinced  that  the  king's  arrangements  were  in  conformity  with 
the  Divine  will,  he  wished  that  the  blessing  of  heaven  might  rest  upon 
the  newly-formed  government.  God  heard  the  prayer,  and  confirmed  Solomon's 
reign,  characterized  by  a  lengthened  period  of  civil  and  religious  felicity, 
representing  the  triumphant  church  in  heaven,  as  David's  reign  had  been 
a  figure  of  the  church  militant  on  earth. 

II.  Was  celebrated  with  becoming  solemnities.  1.  There  was  all  the 
outward  display  of  regal  magnificence.  Among  the  Persians  it  was  a  capital 
offence  to  ride  on  a  king's  horse,  to  sit  on  his  throne,  or  to  handle  his  sceptre 
without  the  royal  permission  :  on  the  other  hand,  to  be  authorised  to  mount 
the  royal  palfrey  was  accounted  by  them  the  highest  dignity.  Solomon  was 
placed  on  the  king's  own  mule,  as  a  token  that  he  was  invested  with  the  regal 
office  ;  and,  attended  by  the  principal  officers  of  the  church,  the  state,  and  the 
army,  with  all  the  external  pomp  of  a  royal  procession,  was  conducted  down  to 
Gihon,  a  small  brook  on  the  west  side  of  Jerusalem  which  emptied  itself  into 
the  Kedron.  'The  Eabbius  assert  that  all  the  Hebrew  kings  were  anointed 
beside  a  fountain  or  river  as  a  symbol  of  the  perpetuity  of  their  kingdom.  It 
was  a  spot  where  a  large  assemblage  could  be  gathered,  and  from  which  an 
imposing  entrance  into  the  city,  which  had  no  open  public  square,  could  be 
made.  External  display  is  an  important  means  of  impressing  the  people  with 
the  majesty  of  the  throne.  That  was  a  striking  spectacle  in  the  city  of  Brussels 
in  1555,  when  Charles  V.  abdicated  in  favour  of  his  son  Philip  II.  {vide  Motley's 
Bise  of  the  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  i.,  chap.  1).  What  a  sight  for  the  universe 
was  that  when  the  triumphant  Messiah  ascended  on  high,  and  was  invested 
with  the  kingly  authority  !  2.  Ihere  was  the  solemn  anointing.  An  oil  flask 
of  horn,  containing  the  anointing  oil,  which  was  used  only  for  the  anointing  of 
priests  and  kings,  was  taken  out  of  the  tabernacle,  where  it  was  always  care- 
fully laid  up  ;  and  Zadok  and  Nathan  anointed  the  youthful  king,  one  of 
them  pouring  out  the  oil,  and  the  other  anointing  his  head,  drawing  a  circle 
round  about  it  with  oil,  according  to  the  maxim  that  the  Hebrew  kings  were 
anointed  in  the  form  of  a  crown,  to  denote  their  delegation  to  the  royal  dignity. 
The  pouring  of  the  oil  upon  the  head  symbolized  the  communication  of  the 
Spirit  of  Jehovah  (1  Sam.  xvi.  13),  and  that  the  king  should  be  endued 
with  all  regal  virtues,  and  reign  in  submission  to  and  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
will  of  God.  The  horn  of  oil  was  emblematic  of  power  and  plenty.  The 
Messiah  was  anointed  to  his  mediatorial  office,  not  with  oil,  but  with  the 
immeasurable  fulness  of  the  Spirit  (Psalm  xlv.  7).  3.  There  was  the  public 
proclamation.  Zadok  blew  his  sacred  ram's-horn,  that  gave  a  far-sounding  note, 
and  was  specially  employed  for  giving  signals,  and  on  other  solemn  occasions  ; 
and,  as  was  the  custom  on  the  inauguration  of  kings,  the  trumpeters  of  the 
guard  followed  with  a  loud  blast,  which  announced  to  the  assembled  crowd  the 
completion  of  the  impressive  ceremony.  A  shout  then  went  up  amid  the 
acclamations  of  the  multitude,  **  God  save  king  Solomon !  "  Thus,  with  all 
the  honours  befitting  the  occasion,  and  in  the  most  public  manner,  the  youthful 
prince,  at  the  age  of  fifteen  according  to  some,  of  twenty  according  to  others, 
was  raised  to  the  throne  of  his  iather  David.  The  kingly  character  of  the 
Messiah  was  openly  proclaimed  to  the  univer&e  (Psalm  xxiv.  7-10). 

III.  Was  the  occasion  of  great  national  rejoicing  (verse  40).    The  people 

16 


CHAP.  1.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


escorted  their  newly-crowned  king  to  the  city,  and  expressed  their  exuherant 
joy,  after  the  manner  of  the  Orientals,  with  the  wild  music  of  flutes,  with 
vehement  dancing,  and  with  loud  enthusiastic  plaudits,  so  that  the  earth  rang 
again.  The  excessive  jubilation  of  the  whole  people  showed  that  they  did  not 
side  with  Aden ij  ah,  but  accepted  the  decision  of  David  as  authoritative  and 
binding.  They  saw  in  the  elevation  of  Solomon  a  victory  over  the  daring 
usurper.  The  coronation  of  a  monarch  is  a  fitting  time  for  national  joy  ;  the 
more  so  when  the  character  of  the  king  wins  the  confidence  of  the  people. 
There  is  everything  in  the  kingly  character  of  the  Messiah  to  call  forth  the 
joyous  acclaim  of  all  angelic  powers,  of  all  peoples,  of  all  ages. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  A  wise  king  will  make  the  best  arrangements  for  the  future  stability 
and  peace  of  his  kingdom.  2.  The  accession  of  a  good  prince  should  he  celebrated 
with  all  due  honours,  3.  All  thrones  are  at  the  divine  disposal.  He  disconcerts 
the  most  cleverly-conceived  cabal,  and  works  through  the  confusion  his  own 
peaceful  ends. 

The  Accession  op  Soiomon  Typical  of  the  Kinglt  Cfakactee  of  Cheist. 

I.  Like  Solomon,  Christ  was  appointed  to  the  regal  ofiice  by  His  Father. 

Years  before  the  actual  event  the  voice  of  prophecy  declared :  "I  have  set  my 
king  upon  my  hill  of  Zion  "  (Psa.  ii.  6).  Gabriel  announced  to  the  Virgin  :  "  The 
Lord  God  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his  father  David,  and  he  shall  reign 
over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever;  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end  " 
(Luke  i.  32,  33).  The  highest  expectations  were  cherished  as  to  the  perma- 
nent results  of  Solomon's  brilliant  reign  ;  but  it  was  reserved  for  the  true,  the 
later  Son  of  David  to  fulfil  the  prophetic  yearnings  which  had  gathered  round 
the  birth  of  the  earlier.  All  the  weight  and  magnificence  of  the  Father's 
authority  belonged  to  the  Messiah  absolutely  (Matt,  xxviii.  18). 

II.  Like  Solomon,  Christ  was  established  in  His  throne,  notwithstanding 
the  violent  opposition  of  His  enemies.  The  greatest  dignitaries  of  both  the 
Jewish  and  heathen  worlds  plotted  against  the  Messiah,  and  strove  to  prevent 
the  establishment  of  his  kingdom.  ''The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the 
rulers  took  counsel  together  against  the  Lord  and  against  his  anointed,"  &c. 
(Psa.  ii.  2,  3).  There  had  been  a  similar  confederacy  among  the  Ammonites, 
Syrians,  &c.,  against  David,  but  it  was  completely  crushed.  And  terrible  was 
the  vengeance  that  fell  on  the  enemies  of  God's  anointed  One.  The  Romans 
were  the  instruments  of  the  Divine  wrath  against  the  Jews,  and,  in  course  of 
time,  punishment  fell  upon  the  Eomans ;  the  imperial  city  was  captured  by  the 
Goths,  and  the  conquered  people  subjected  to  the  most  barbarous  cruelties.  All 
opposition  to  Christ,  the  Father  looks  upon  as  opposition  to  Himself,  and  it  can 
end  only  in  unutterable  disaster  and  defeat. 

in.  Like  Solomon,  Christ  was  solemnly  anointed.  His  name,  Christos^ 
implies  it.  Eut  the  Messiah  was  not  anointed  to  the  regal  office  with  oil. 
Indeed,  the  consecrated  oil,  specially  compounded  and  specially  appropriated  to 
the  anointing  of  kings  and  priests,  was  lost  hundred  of  years  before  the  birth  of 
Christ,  and  the  custom  of  anointing  in  that  manner  had  long  ceased.  The  only 
anointing  of  the  Messiah  of  which  we  read  is,  the  anointing  of  the  Spirit,  Peter 
testifies  **  how  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with 
power"  (Acts  x  .  38).  And  this  anointing  took  place,  partly  at  His  conception 
(Luke  i.  35),  by  which  He  was  prepared  for  His  mission,  and  more  fully  at  His 
baptism  (Matt.  iii.  16),  when  He  formally  entered  upon  the  performance  of  all 
the  functions  belonging  to  His  Messiahship.  His  baptism  in  the  river  Jordan 
16 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  i. 


still  retained  the  analogy  suggested  by  the  old  Jewish  custom  of  anointing  kings 
near  a  stream,  to  signify  the  perpetuity  of  the  kingdom.  The  unction  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  was  poured  on  Him  with  an  immeasureable  fulness  (John  iii.  34). 

IV.  Like  Solomon,  Christ  made  His  triumphal  entry  into  the  Holy  City 
amid  the  joyous  plaudits  of  the  people.  Gi  eat  was  the  joy  and  lou  1  were  the 
hosannas  of  the  people  when  Jesus  rode  in  glorious  but  homely  pomp  into  his 
own  loved  Jerusalem — ''  Blessed  is  the  King  of  Israel  that  cometh  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord"  (John  xii.  13).  But  grander  and  louder  was  the  shout  of  victory 
that  shook  the  heavens  when  the  triumphant  Messiah  ascended  to  His  court  on 
high,  and  took  possession  of  His  mediatorial  throne  (Psa.  xlvii.  5-«  ; 
xxiv.  7-10). 

Lessons: — 1.  Jesus  reigns — His  people  may  therefore  rejoice.  2.  Jesus  reigns — 
Sis  people  will  therefore  triumph  over  every  foe.  3.  Jesus  reigns^-the  present  and 
future  interests  of  Mis  people  are  therefore  secure. 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  41-49. 
The  Defeat  of  Kebellion. 

I.  That  rebels  are  more  intent  on  selfish  indulgence  than  the  public 
good.  **  As  they  had  made  an  end  of  eating  "  (verse  41).  Adonijih  and  his 
supporters  had  given  theaiselves  up  to  festivity ;  and  the  entertainment  must 
have  been  greatly  prolonged,  as  all  the  arrangements  for  crowning  and 
proclaiming  Solomon  had  been  initiated  and  completed  while  his  opponents 
were  gluttonising.  Eebellion  originates  in  a  feeling  of  intense  selfishness,  and 
when  it  grasps  power  it  uses  its  advantage  in  a  free,  unchecked  indulgence  of 
those  appetites  which  the  force  of  constitutional  order  had  restrained.  How 
often  has  the  conqueror  of  a  tyrant  become  in  turn  a  greater  tyrant  himself ! 
He  consults  not  the  weal  of  the  community,  but  the  greed  of  his  own  passions. 
They  who  oppose  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  such  as  serve  their  own  bellies 
(Eom.  xvi.  18;  Phil.  iii.  19).  Excessive  indulgence  lulls  the  soul  into  a  fatal 
security.  The  antediluvians,  intent  only  on  selfish  indulgence,  were  deaf  to  all 
warnings,  till  the  roaring  waters  roused  them  into  concern ;  and  then  their 
frantic  efforts  were  powerless  to  rescue  from  the  suffocating  waves.  The 
dwellers  in  Sodom  gave  rein  to  the  lowest  tendencies  of  their  nature,  until  the 
reeking  stench  of  their  abominations  became  intolerable,  and  was  purged  away 
with  the  fire  from  heaven.  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  world  (Luke 
xvii.  26-30). 

II.  That  rebels  are  often  surprised  in  the  midst  of  fancied  security. 

"Wherefore  is  this  noise?"  (verse  41).  The  blare  of  the  same  trumpet  that 
proclaimed  the  coronation  of  Solomon  startled  the  revellers,  and  revealed  to  the 
leaders  of  the  revolt  the  critical  position  of  their  enterprise.  What  was  an 
inspiriting  note  of  triumph  to  one  party  was  the  dread  signal  of  confusion  and 
defeat  to  the  other.  **  When  sin  spreads  the  table  of  riotous  feasting,  the  end  of 
that  mirth  will  be  heaviness.  Ever  after  the  meal  is  ended  comes  the  reckoning. 
No  doubt,  at  this  feast,  there  was  many  a  health  drunk  to  Adonijah,  many  a 
confident  boast  of  their  prospering  design,  many  a  scorn  of  the  despised  faction 
of  Solomon  ;  and  now  for  their  last  dish  is  served  up  astonishment  and  feai-ful 
expectation  of  a  just  revenge." — Hall.  The  wicked  are  often  overtaken  when 
they  are  least  on  their  guard.  It  requires  a  sleepless  vigilance  to  detect  the 
Bwift  and  silent  approach  of  justice,  and  superhuman  forethought  to  ward  off  its 
inevitable  vengeance ;  and  these  are  qualities  the  wicked  do  not  possess.  The 
rebel  is  like  a  man  who  struggles  to  secure  possession  of  an  ocean  rock  becausf 

0  17 


CHAP.  I.  EOMILBTIC  COMMEJNTART:  KINGS, 


of  the  fabulous  treasure  it  is  reputed  to  contain ;  and  while  he  is  gloating  over 
his  newly-found  wealth,  heedless  of  danger,  he  becomes  suddenly  aware  that 
he  is  surrounded  by  the  steadily  rising  sea,  which,  despite  his  shrieks  of  horror, 
enfolds  him  in  its  pitiless  embrace,  and  sings  a  low,  wild,  mournful  dirge  as  it 
entombs  him  in  its  liquid  depths. 

III.  That  rebols  are  compelled  to  listen  to  unwelcome  tidings  (verses 
42-48).     Jonathan,  the  son  of  Abiathar  the  priest,  had  probably  been  left  behind 
to  act  as  a  spy  upon  the  movements  of  the  leading  men  in  the  city.     He  had 
seen  much  and  heard  more  from  reliable  sources.     His  industry  and  acuteness  in 
gathering  information  were  amazing;  and  when,  with  breathless  haste,  he  broke 
in  upon  the  thoughtless  banquetters,  very  different  was  his  interpretation  of  the 
tumult  which  interrupted  their  revelry,  from  what  Adonij ah  anticipated.     Joab, 
an  old  campaigner,  understood  its  significance,  and  trembled;  but  Adonij  ah, 
blinded  by  vanity  and  presumption,  flattered  himself  that  all  events  would  be 
in  his  favour.     That  man  is  often  least  timorous  who  is  in  the  most  dangerous 
condition.      The  order  in  which  Jonathan  related  his  tidings  was  calculated  to 
make  a  deep  impression  on  his  listeners,  and  to  increase  the  consternation  which 
they  caused.     Bawid  had  formally  nominated  Solomon  as  Ms  successor :  therefore, 
the  hopes  of  Adonij  ah  were  wrecked,  and  his  attempt  branded  with  rebellion 
and  ingratitude.     Zadok,  Nathan^  and  Benaiah  had  heen  authorised  to  set  Solomon 
on  the  royal  mule :  therefore,  these  men  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  the  aged  king, 
and  would  occupy  a  foremost  place  in  the  court  of  the  youthful  monarch ;  and 
the  leading  men  who  supported  the  revolt  of  Adonij  ah  had  every  reason  to  fear 
for  the  consequences  of  their  perfidy.     Solomon  had  heen  solemnly  anointed: 
therefore,  the  king  was  in  earnest,  and  everything  had  been  done  to  secure  the 
Divine  approval.     The  youthful  king  had  heen  hrought  to  Jerusalem,  and  placed 
on  the  throne  of  his  father  :  therefore,  hi*  triumph  was  complete.     The  utmost 
publicity  had  been  given  to  the  whole  transaction :  it  was  accomplished  with 
becoming  pomp  and  dignity :  it  was  welcomed  by  the  principal  officers  of  state : 
it  was  applauded  by  the  people  with  an  extravagance  of  joy  :  it  was  approved 
and  confirmed  by  the  highest  authority,  the  dying  king  bowing  reverently 
upon  his  bed,  and  pouring  out  his  soul  in  gratitude  to  God.     This  intelligence 
filled  the  rebels  with  dismay,  and  convinced  them  of  the  true  character  and 
utter  hopelessness  of  their  enterprise.      Awful  are  the  tidings  that  will  soon 
break  upon  the  ear  of  the  sinner :  in  the  midst  of  his  boasting  and  merriment 
the  message  will  come  that  will  fill  his  soul  with  a  nameless  terror:  "  Thou 
fool,  this  night  shaU  thy  soul  be  required  of  thee." 

rv.  That  rebels  are  doomed  ere  long  to  an  inglorious  defeat  (verse  49). 

The  followers  of  Adonij  ah  were  stricken  with  fear,  their  faces  paled,  their  hearts 
grew  chill,  their  courage  failed  them,  their  sport  was  spoiled,  and,  their  eyes 
being  opened,  they  saw  the  wicked  daring  of  their  conduct.  They  were  now 
liable  to  be  punished  as  rebels.  They  took  to  flight,  and  thus  sought  to  escape 
the  consequence  of  their  rash  attempt.  "  They  were  afraid,  and  rose  up  and 
went  every  man  his  way."  Such  is  the  fate  of  all  unrighteous  rebellion  against 
God  or  man.  Rebellion  has  in  it  no  element  of  permanency.  It  clutches  at  a 
temporary  advantage,  while  it  outrages  and  tramples  on  eternal  principles.  It 
must  sooner  or  later  suffer  defeat — defeat  tlie  most  humiliating  and  disastrous. 
It  is  a  bubble,  inflated  with  pride  and  glittering  with  the  many-colouied  tints 
of  vanity,  but  melting  away  before  the  gossamer  thread  stretched  across  its 
pathway.  It  is  a  cloud- wreath — light,  gay,  pretentious,  aspiring ;  but  vanishing 
into  space  before  it  reaches  the  sumniit  of  the  mountain  from  the  spongy  flank 
of  which  it  sprang. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Rebels  are  intensely  selfish,     2.  Rehels  are  ever  in  the  greatest  peril. 
3.  It  is  a  mercy  when  rebels  a/re  convinced  of  their  folly  before  recovery  is  hopelese. 
Id 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAUT :  KINGS, 


CHAP.  I. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 


Verses  41-49.  The  frustration  of 
the  schemes  of  Adonijah.  1.  The 
intelligence  he  obtains.  2.  The  effect 
produced  by  this  intelligence.  To  an 
evil  conscience  (Joab)  the  trumpets 
which  announce  victory  and  joy  are 
j  udgment  trumpets  which  sound  forth— 
Thou  art  weighed,  and  found  wanting. 
The  same  message  in  which  David  ex- 
presses himself,  Blessed  be,  &c.  (v.  48), 
works  terror  and  alarm  in  Adonijah 
and  his  party.  So  still  ever  sounds 
the  **  good  message,"  that  the  true 
Prince  of  Peace  (Christ)  has  won  the 
victory,  and  is  seated  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  which  to  some  is  for  thanks- 
giving and  praise,  so  that  they  support 
themselves  upon  it;  but  to  others  it 
is  a  stone  of  stumbling,  so  that  they 
fall  and  are  confounded  (Isa.  viii.  14  ; 
Luke  ii.  34). — Lange. 

Verse  42.  A  truthful  messenger — 
1.  Is  at  great  pains  to  ascertain  the 
truth.  2.  Has  a  good  reputation  to 
maintain.  "  Thou  art  a  valiant  man." 
5.  Is  unmoved  by  flattery.  **  Come 
in ;  thou  bringest  good  tidings." 
4.  Swerves  not  from  the  truth  because 
it  is  unpleasant.  5.  Is  earnest  and 
faithful  in  giving  prominence  to  the 
main  features  of  his  message.  6.  Is 
often  the  means  of  arresting  mischief 
before  it  has  gone  too  far. 

Verse  48.  The  joy  of  aged  and 
dying  saints  in  leaving  their  de- 
scendants prosperous,  peaceful,  and 
pious.  David  blessed  God  that  He 
had  given  him  a  worthy  successor. 
He  had  great  satisfaction  in  Solomon's 
character  as  one  eminently  wise  and 
good,  in  whom  the  Israelites  would 
heartily  acquiesce  and  rejoice,  and 
under  whose  government  the  kingdom 
wo'ild  be  peaceful,  prosperous,  and 
happy.  Amidst  all  the  languor  of 
nature,  David's  heart  rejoiced  in  this 
happy  settlement,  and  he  ascribes  the 
praise  to  that  God  from  whom  pro- 
motion Cometh,     Observe — 

I.  That  the  prospect  of  leaving 
their  families  in  prosperous  and 
peaceful  circumstances  and  in  the 


service  of  God  is  a  matter  of  great 
joy  to  aged  and  dying  saints.  1.  It 
is  a  pleasure  to  an  aged  and  dying  saint 
to  leave  his  family  in  prosperous  circum- 
stances. It  is  the  character  of  a  good 
man  that  he  is  not  a  lover  of  this 
world,  nor  anxiously  solicitous  about 
future  events.  Nevertheless,  he  con- 
siders himself  as  obliged  by  the  laws 
of  nature,  reason,  and  the  gospel,  to 
provide  for  those  of  his  own  house ; 
not  only  to  furnish  them  with  the 
necessaries  of  life  while  he  liveth,  but 
lay  up  for  them  such  a  share  of  its 
good  things  as  he  can,  consistent  with 
their  present  support  and  comfort, 
and  the  other  demands  which  his 
great  Lord  hath  upon  him.  He  is 
particularly  pleased  and  thankful 
that  what  he  leaves  is  the  fruit 
of  his  honest  industry;  that  he 
has  no  ill-gotten  money  among  his 
substance,  to  bring  a  curse  upon  it; 
and  that  his  family  will  be  likely  to 
have  the  blessing  of  God  with  what 
he  leaves  them.  2.  It  is  a  greater 
pleasure  to  leave  his  descendants  in  unify 
and  love.  David  had  seen  and  felt 
much  of  the  fatal  mischiefs  of  discord 
in  his  own  family ;  but  he  hoped  that 
the  settlement  of  so  wise  and  benevo- 
lent a  prince  as  Solomon  on  the  throne 
would  establish  and  secure  its  peace. 
Contentions  and  quarrels,  between 
whomsoever  they  happen,  are  griev- 
ous to  all  the  sons  of  peace,  dishonour- 
able to  religion,  and  injurious  to  its 
power;  but  between  those  of  the 
same  stock  and  family  they  are  most 
shameful  and  pernicious.  The  cele- 
brated I'hillip  de  Mornay  (Lord 
Plessis)  said,  with  an  air  of  cheerful- 
ness, just  before  his  death:  "1  am 
arrived  at  the  height  of  comfort,  since 
I  die  with  the  assurance  of  leaving 
peace  among  my  children."  3.  It  is  his 
greatest  joy  to  leave  his  descendants  in 
the  way  of  holiness^  and  zealous  for  the 
support  of  religion.  Next  to  the  good 
hope  of  his  own  salvation,  there  is 
nothing  can  give  the  heart  of  a  pious 
parent  higher  delight  than  such  a 
prospect  as  this.  He  can  adopt  the 
dying  words  of  Joseph  to  his  brothien 

19 


CHAP.  L 


EOMILETIO  COMMEKTARY:  KINGS, 


and  posterity :  "I  die;  but  God  will 
surely  visit  you,  and  bring  you  to  the 
land  which  He  hath  promised" 
(Gen.  1.  24). 

II.  The  reasons  why  such  a  pros- 
pect gives  so  much  joy  to  aged  and 
dying  saints.  1.  This  joy  arises  in 
part  from  their  natural  love  to  their 
descendants.  God  hath  implanted  in 
all  creatures  a  strong  affection  to 
their  offspring,  in  order  that  they 
may  preserve  and  sustain  them  till 
they  are  capable  of  providing  for 
themselves.  This  natural  instinct  or 
affection  is,  in  good  men,  sanctified 
by  religion.  Thus  their  children 
become  dear  to  them  by  a  stronger 
and  more  engaging  tie  than  that  of 
nature,  even  their  common  relation 
to  God  as  their  Father  and  Friend, 
and  to  Jesus  as  their  Eedeemer 
and  Saviour.  2.  The  concern  aged 
saints  feel  for  the  honour  of  God  and 
for  the  continuance  and  spread  of 
religion  increases  this  joy*  It  is  the 
joy  of  the  good  man  to  think  that 
though  he  is  dying,  religion  is  not 
dying  with  him :  that  that  will  sur- 
vive, and  continue  in  the  town  and 
neighbourhoood  to  which  he  is  related, 
and,  especially,  in  his  own  family. 
The  more  the  dying  eaint  loves  God 
and  His  ways,  the  more  he  rejoices 
there  are  those  rising  up  in  his  stead 
who  will  have  the  same  love  and 
care,  and  be  the  support  of  religion 
when  he  is  laid  in  the  dust.  3.  But 
the  principal  ground  of  joy  of  the  aged 
and  dying  saint  is  the  prospect  of 
meeting  his  pious  descendants  again  in 
the  heavenly  world.  The  separation 
from  loved  ones  is  but  short ;  and  it 
is  with  unspeakable  joy  the  dying 
saint  looks  around  on  his  pious,  duti- 
ful children  when  he  thinks  that  he 
shall  soon  meet  them  again  in  the 
presence  of  Christ,  with  their  graces 
infinitely  improved  and  all  their  im- 
perfections done  away. 

Inferences.     1.  It  should   be  the 
earnest  desire  and  diligent  care  of  all 


parents  that  they  may  have  this  joy. 
The  pious  Dr.  Annesty,  when  one  of 
his  friends  hinted  to  him  that  his 
charity  was  too  great  considering  the 
number  of  his  children,  answered : 
"  Ton  quite  mistake  the  matter :  I 
am  laying  up  portions  for  my  child- 
ren." 2.  Aged  saints  who  have  this 
joy  ought  to  be  very  thankful.  A 
strong  obligation  is  laid  upon  them 
to  employ  their  remaining  time  and 
strength  in  endeavouring  to  promote 
higher  degrees  of  piety,  zeal,  and 
usefulness  in  those  who  shall  come 
after  them.  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  young 
persons  to  fulfil  their  parents''  joy.  It 
is  mentioned,  as  an  amiable  part  of  the 
character  of  the  judicious  Hooker,  that 
housed  to  say:  **If  I  had  no  other 
reason  and  motive  for  bein^  religious, 
I  would  strive  earnestly  to  be  so  for 
the  sake  of  my  aged  mother,  that  I 
may  requite  her  care  of  me,  and  cause 
the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy." — 
Orton, 

Verse  49.  The  inconstancy  of 
wicked  accomplices,  l.  That  the 
wicked  vow  undying  friendship  to  each 
other  when  the  lower  instincts  of  their 
nature  are  gratified.  When  Adonijah 
prepared  a  feast  he  had  troops  of 
friends.  2.  That  the  first  tidings  of 
calamity  fill  the  wicked  with  fear. 
The  sinner  is  essentially  a  coward. 
Having  no  righteous  principle  to 
sustain  him,  he  is  powerless  in 
the  day  of  adversity.  3.  That  the 
wicked^  on  the  slightest  alarm^  seek 
safety  in  ignoble  flight.  When  the 
message  of  misfortune  was  brought 
to  Adonijah,  all  his  professed  adher- 
ents, even  the  astute  Joab,  forsook 
him  (Eccles.  vi.  10-12). 
— *'  And  went  every  man  his  way." 
Individual  responsibility— 1.  Can- 
not be  merged  m  the  actions  of  the 
crowd.  2.  Is  vividly  impressed  upon 
the  conscience  in  the  hour  of  misfor- 
tune. 3.  Eecognises  the  desert  of 
punishment  for  wrong-doing.  4. 
Anxiously  strives  to  escape  impending 
vengeance* 


10 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap,  l 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  50-68. 
EoTAL  Clemency, 

I.  Here  we  have  royal  clemency  earnestly  and  humbly  sought  (verses 
60,  51).  The  reckless  adventurer  io  liable  to  great  and  sudden  changes  •  he  may 
be  a  monarch  in  the  morning,  and  a  beggar  before  night.  He  who  issues 
commands  and  pardons  to  others  may  himself  have  to  sue  for  mercy. 
Adonijah  confesses  his  crime,  acknowledges  the  kingship  of  Solomon,  declares 
his  subjection,  and  seeks  forgiveness.  The  fear  of  death,  the  sense  of  sin,  and 
the  alarming  consequences  it  involves,  the  yearning  of  the  soul  to  be  reconciled 
to  the  Being  whom  we  have  offended,  lend  unutterable  pathos  and  fervency  to 
our  prayers.  The  deepest  want  of  the  soul,  and  that  which  is  expressed  in  it? 
most  thrilling  cry,  is  mercy.  The  sincere  penitent  seeks  not  in  vain  (Isaiah  Iv 
6,  7).     Forgiveness  is  a  blessing  worthy  of  the  most  diligent  search, 

II.  Here  we  have  royal  clemency  moved  by  the  distress  of  the  van- 
quished. Adonijah,  who  a  few  hours  ago  was  the  proudest  and  gayest 
in  Judah,  elevated  to  the  pinnacle  of  confident  success  (verses  5,  42),  was  now 
a  crushed  and  disappointed  man.  He  fears  the  vengeance  of  his  successful 
brother,  flies  to  the  altar  for  safety,  and  becomes  a  trembling  suppliant  for 
mercy.  It  may  be,  Adonijah  had  before  slighted  the  religious  services  of  the 
altar ;  but,  as  with  many  others,  in  the  time  of  distress  it  is  the  first  place  to 
which  he  runs.  Whatever  drives  the  sinner  to  the  mercy-seat  is  an  unspeakable 
blessing.  Solomon  hears  of  Adonijah's  penitence  and  terror;  he  remembers  he 
is  his  brother ;  that  this  was  perhaps  his  first  offence ;  that  he  will  be  more 
serviceable  as  a  peaceful  subject  than  as  a  restless  agitator  of  rebellion  ;  and 
the  heart  of  the  young  prince  is  moved  to  clemency.  The  victor  can  afford  to 
be  generous,  and  the  most  fitting  exercise  of  newly-acquired  power  is  to  show 
mercy.  So  God  hears  the  cry  of  distress — the  sad  monotone  of  woe,  ever 
surging  up  from  the  throbbing  sea  of  human  experience.  He  beholds,  too,  the 
voiceless  anguish  under  which  thousands  writhe ;  and  His  great  heart  melts 
with  pity,  and  His  arm  is  outstretched  to  save. 

III.  Here  we  have  the  conditions  on  which  royal  clemency  is  exercised 
(verse  52).  Indiscriminate  lenity  is  fatal  to  good  government.  The  continuance 
of  mercy  is  conditioned  on  the  moral  conduct  of  the  pardoned.  Adonijah 
is  put  on  his  good  behaviour.  If  he  show  himself  a  worthy  man  [Hebrew,  a 
son  of  valour]^  controlling  himself  and  quietly  submitting  to  the  reigning 
power,  he  shall  remain  secure  and  unmolested ;  but  if  he  hatches  a  new  treason, 
or  otherwise  misconducts  himself,  his  life  is  imperilled.  Let  not  the  veteran  in 
wickedness  delude  himself  with  the  belief  that  he  will  go  unpunished,  or  that  in 
the  boundlessness  of  the  Divine  goodness  his  sins  will  be  overlooked.  The 
llighteousness  that  provides  an  outflow  of  the  richest  mercy  is  also  inflexibly 
rigorous  in  inflicting  deserved  vengeance  (Ecclesiastes  xii.  14;  Romans  i.  18; 
2  Corinthians  v.  10).  The  moral  character  we  form  on  earth  will  be  the  basi? 
of  our  condition  and  destiny  in  the  future  world :  and  that  character  will  be 
inevitably  developed,  or  blasted,  according  to  the  degree  in  which  we  gain  or 
forfeit  the  clemency  and  approbation  of  God. 

IV.  Here  we  have  royal  clemency  generously  declared.  "So  king 
Solomon  sent,  and  they  brought  him  down  from  the  altar ;  and  Solomon  said 
unto  him,  Go  to  thine  house  "  (verse  53).  His  crime  is  pardoned,  his  life 
is  spared,  and  he  is  reinstated  in  his  position  and  inheritance.  Considering  the 
custom  of  Eastern  monarchies,  the  marvel  is  that  Adonijah  was  so  generously 

21 


CHAP.  n.  EOMILMTIG  COMMENTABT :  KINGS , 


dealt  with.  In  some  Oriental  countnes,  not  only  are  pretenders  almost  always 
punished  with  death,  but  it  has  often  been  the  custom  for  each  king,  upon  his 
accession,  to  put  to  death  all  his  brothers  as  mere  possible  pretenders.  In 
Turkey  this  custom  continued  into  the  present  century.  Pardon  brings  no 
comfort  to  the  stricken  penitent  unless  it  is  distinctly  declared  and  consciously 
realized.  God  delighteth  in  mercy  and  in  assuring  the  trembling  but  believing 
soul  of  the  joy-creating  fact  of  forgiveness.  To  forgive  is  the  most  difficult  and 
the  most  God-like ;  it  is  here  that  the  flood-tide  of  generosity  registers 
its  highest  summit. 

V.  Here  we  have  royal  clemency  gratefally  acknowledged.  "  And  he 
came  and  bowed  himself  to  king  Solomon  "  (verse  63).  Subdued  more  by  the 
generous  spiiit  of  his  victorious  brother  than  by  the  failure  of  his  own  boasted 
enterprize,  Adonijah  renders  thankful  homage  at  once  to  the  clemency  and  the 
dignity  of  the  king.  Man  forgets  the  gracious  power  that  delivers  him  from 
misery  far  more  quickly  than  the  pungency  of  the  misery  itself  when  endured. 
Of  the  ten  lepers  cleansed,  only  one  returned  to  give  thanks  to  the  Great 
Healer.  To  be  grateful  is  the  least  that  man  can  do,  and  it  is  a  grace  of  which 
he  shows  the  least.  Life  should  be  one  glad  expression  of  thankfulness  and 
humble  obedience. 

Lessons: — 1.  Power  loses  none  of  its  dignity  or  efficiency  hy  showing  mercy.  2. 
To  he  forgiven  increases  the  ohligation  to  live  uprightly,  a.  The  pardon  earnestly 
Bcught  should  he  humhly  and  gratefully  acknowledged. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

YerseSO.  The  altar,  therefagefor  4.  TIk^  position  of  man  in  the  future 

the  guilty.     1.  It  is  the  place  of  sacri-  is  decided  by  the  character  and  results 

fice   and   atonement.      2.    It   is    the  of  his  present  life.     5.  To  abuse  reli- 

symbol  of  reconciliation.     3.  It  is  the  gious    privileges    entails   unutterable 

scene  of  divine  manifestations.     4.  It  disaster, 
is  suggestive  of  worship.     5.  It  is  the 

sanctuary  of  the  distressed  in  all  ages,  Yerse   53.    "  Go   to  thine  house." 

The  uncertainty  of  earthly  great- 

Yerse52.  Destiny  decided  by  moral  ness.     1.  It  is  possible  to  be  one  day 

character.     1.  Man  is  a   free  moral  in  affluence,  the  next  a  pauper.     2. 

agent.     2.  He  is  therefore  responsible  True  greatness  is  permanent  only  when 

for   his   beliefs,   words,    and   actions,  it  rests  on  a  moral  basis.     3.  It  is  a 

3.  Every  provision  has  been  made  to  bitter  experience  to  descend  from  a 

aid  man  in  the  right  conduct  of  life,  proud  popularity  to  obscurity. 


CHAPTER  II. 
THE    BEGINNING    OF    A    BRILLIANT    BEIGN. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  3.  Keep  tlie  charge  of  Jehovali — ».*.,  pre- 
Berve  tbe  Theocracy,  maintain  the  piety  and  dignity  becoming  the  Hebi  e\v  monarch,  who  rules 
by  Divine  right,  and  is  entrusted  with  the  representation  and  vindication  of  the  Divine  laws. 

Keep  his  statutes,  hpH— the  prescriptions  of  the  law.      Commandments,   /I'liJp,  the 

expressions  of  the  Divine  will.    Judgments — D'^IOD^O  objective  sentences  and  ordinances,  the 

▼iolation  of  which  involves  punishment.    Testimonies— /lil^  solemn  declarations  of  God't 

will  against  sin  (Keil).     That  thou  mayst  prosper— Not  so  much  "  have  good  fortaae  * 
22 


EOMJLETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  cUkV,  n. 


(Gf'senius,  Do  Wetto),  but  be  sl^'l^nl,  carry  yourself  wisely,  as  he  surely  will  do  who  acta 
hamioniously  ■with  the  Divine  *'  h^tatutes,  commandments,"  kc,  veise  4.  Tbo  Vaiican  Sept. 
omits  '•concerning  m*?,"  and  ^'■with  all  their  soul."  Not  fail  thee  a  man:  assuics  "  not  a 
Completely  unhroken  succession,  but  only  the  opposite  of  a  bieuk  for  ever  "  (Ilengstenberg) ; 
lit.  "  there  sliall  not  be  cut  off  from  thee  a  man  on  the  throne  ;"  i.e.,  thy  posterity  shall  hold 
the  throue  in  p' rpetuity :  the  royal  houso  of  David  became  imperishable  in  "great  David's 
greater  Son."  Verse  5.  Shed  the  blood  of  war  in  peace ;  i.e.,  murderously  slew  the  inof- 
fensive ;  shed,  in  peace,  blood  which  should  only  flow  in  war.  Put  the  blood  of  war  on  hig 
girdle  and  in  his  shoes— The  "  girdle  "  was  the  military  band,  and  to  which  his  sword  was 
attached,  worn  by  a  warrior,  suggestive,  therefore,  of  his  rank;  while  his  "shoes"  suggest  his 
marching  equipment;  and  these  insignia  of  his  ( flRce  and  dignity  he  soiled  with  murder  I 
(comp.  Lange).  Verse  6.  Do  according  to  thy  wisdom— At  fitting  time,  and  in  fitting  manner, 
mark  his  crimes  with  abhorrence,  and  requite  his  guilty  deeds.  Verse  7.  Eat  at  thy  table, 
for  so  they  came  to  me,"  i.e.,  they  did  me  kindness  in  entertaining  me.  Verse  8.  Bahurim — 
A  village  beyond  Olivet,  five  and  a  quarter  miles  distant  from  Jerusalem.  A  grievous  curse- 
Not  merely  cursed  me,  but  J12i"D^  Tw7'\)  a  grievous,  violent  curse  (as  in  Micah  ii.  10,  ", 


sore 


destruction  *') ;  heinous,  dreadful.  Such  punishment  of  ohimei  was  not  viudictivcness  on  David's 
part,  but  a  vindication  of  the  Divine  justice  against  a  ribald  impiety.  Verse  10.  Buried  in 
the  city  of  David— A  tomb  probably  prepared  by  the  king  before'  he  died,  and  afterwards 
marked  with  great  veneration,  even  in  the  time  of  Christ.  Verse  13.  Comest  thou  peace- 
ably?—Aftei  recent  events,  there  was  reason  to  suspect  his  design.  Verse  15.  The 
kingdom  is  turned  about— lie  pi udently  thus  evades  the  charge  on  Bathsheba  of  having 
herself  been  accessory  to  this  issue.  Verse  16.  Deny  me  not ;  lit.^  turn  not  away  my 
face.  Verse  18.  Well,  I  will  speak  for  thee— She  saw  not  the  cunning  of  Adonijah,  and 
might  have  thought  this  gratification  would  appease  his  disappointment.  Ve^se  22.  Ask  for 
him  the  kingdom  also— Solomon  saw  his  crafty  aim.  The  wives  and  concubines  of  a 
deceased  king  b  3carae  the  property  of  his  successor  to  the  throne  (2  Sam.  xii.  8)  ;  hence  the 
possession  of  Abishag  would  have  given  to  Adonijah  an  additional  apparent  right  to  the 
kingdom  ;  it  was  treason,  therefore,  for  him,  a  subject,  to  claim  a  member  of  the  royal  harem 
as  his  wife;  and  Solomon  recognised  it  as  one  step  towards  Ihe  seizure  of  the  crov»n,  or  as 
a  scheme  by  which  Adonijah  sought  to  found  a  rival  dynasty.  Hence  the  summary  justice 
(verse  25),  and  hence,  too,  the  religious  oath  (verse  23),  for  the  royal  line  of  David  might  not 
be  imperilled  by  intrigue.  Verse  2G.  Not  at  this  time  put  thee  to  death  -  It  did  not  contain  a 
threat  that  what  was  now  deferred  would  be  executed  at  a  later  date ;  the  sentence  would  depend 
on  Abiathar's  future  conduct.  Verse  30.  Nay,  but  I  will  ttie  here — A  defiance  of  the  king's 
message,  thinking  that  Solomon  dared  not  order  his  execution  there.  But  Joab  had  placed 
himself  outside  the  protection  of  the  altar  (Exod.  xxi.  14;  Deut.  xix.  11-18).  Verse  37. 
Thy  blood  shall  be  upon  thine  own  head— The  legal  form  of  the  sentence  of  death  (Lev.  x. 
9,  II,  1 2,  etc.).   Verse  38.  Dwelt  in  Jerusalem  many  days  ;  D'*3-1  D'^wT  Verse  42.  The  word 

that  I  have  heard  is  good.  Pointed  sometimes  thus, — "  The  word  is  good  ;  I  have  heard." 
Verse  46.  So  the  king  commanded — that  he  died — This  was  not  merciless  rigour.  Shimei  had 
committed  perjury,  had  acted  deceitfully  and  independently — not  petitioning  Solomon  for 
leave  ;  and  having  added  to  high  treason  (verse  44)  this  crime  of  violating  his  oath,  though  on 

keeping  it  his  life  hung,  retribution  was  imperative.    Kingdom  was  established  T'il,  in 

▼: 
or  by  the  hand,  i.e.,  in  the  possession  of  Solomon,  or  by  his  administration. 


EOMILETICa  OF  VERSES  M. 

Obedience  the  Pathway  op  Blessino. 

I.  That  the  supreme  standard  of  obedience  is  the  Divine  will  (verse  8) 
"Will  expresses  itself  in  significant  actions,  or  in  positive  communis.  lh€ 
statutes  are  the  prescriptions  of  the  law,  so  far  as  itsobedionce  is  connected  with 
definite  rules  and  usages  :  the  commandments^  as  the  expression  of  the  Divine 
will,  which  is  to  be  fulfilled :  the  judgments^  as  the  objective  sentences  and 
ordinances,  the  violation  of  which  draws  punishment  after  it :  the  testimonieSf 
as  solemn  declarations  of  the  will  of  God  against  sin.  All  these  statutes, 
commandments,  judgments,  and  testimonies  are  found  in  the  law  of  Moses,  to 
obey  which  David  binds  his  son.— iT^i/.    According  to  Patrick,  the  **  statutes'* 

23 


CHAP.  n.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


are  explained  as  the  positive  ordinances  of  the  law,  e.(/.,  the  command  not  to 
BOW  two  seeds  of  different  kinds  together:  the  **  commandments  "  as  the  moral 
precepts,  not  to  steal,  &c.  :  the  **  judgments"  as  the  laws  helonging  to  civil 
government :  and  the  ''testimonies  "  as  the  laws  directing  the  commemoration 
of  certain  events  (compare  Psalm  xix.  7-8) :  the  Written  Word  is  the  latest 
declaration  of  the  Divine  will,  and  the  supreme  rule  by  which  obedience  must  be 
regulate  d. 

n.  That  obedience  consists  in  the  strict  conformity  of  the  whole  life  to 
tlie  Divine  will.  This  implies — 1.  Knowledge.  Tliere  is  to  be  a  personal 
acquaintance  with  the  will  of  God  "  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses"  (verse  3), 
and  in  the  books  of  Eevelation  and  of  nature.  The  Divine  Word  has  been  the 
subject  of  pious  instruction  from  sire  to  son,  through  succeeding  generations.  As 
in  the  case  of  David,  it  has  often  constituted  the  last  solemn  charge  of  a  dying 
father.  It  has  been  illustrated  in  the  lives  of  the  good,  and  enforced  by  the 
impressive  teachings  of  many  a  wondrous  providence.  There  has  been  line  upon 
line  and  precept  upon  precept.  Every  opportunity  has  been  afforded  for 
becoming  acquainted  with  the  Divine  will,  so  that  ignorance  thereof  is 
inexcusable  and  blameworthy  2.  Circumspection,  **  And  keep  the  charge  of 
the  Lord  thy  God  "-(verse  3).  In  general,  this  means  to  take  care  of  God,  His 
person.  His  will,  His  rights.  A  trust  of  tremendous  significance  is  committed  to 
us :  the  honour  of  Jehovah  is  in  our  hands.  It  is  only  by  an  exact  obedience 
that  we  can  discharge  the  duties  of  our  sacred  trust :  and  to  do  this  involves 
incessant  thought,  anxious  care,  and  sleepless  vigilance.  There  is  reference  to 
the  charge  given  to  all  kings  in  Deuteronomy  xvii.  18-20.  The  monarch  is 
amenable  to  the  same  moral  law  as  his  meanest  subject.  If  obedience  is 
careless  and  defective  in  the  higher  social  circles,  a  similar  spirit  will  soon 
infect  the  lower,  and  the  moral  integrity  of  the  nation  be  seriously  damaged. 
"  The  least  deviation  in  the  greatest  and  highest  orb  is  both  most  sensible  and 
most  dangerous."  Keep  the  charge — as  the  sentinel  the  post  of  danger,  as  the 
physician  in  the  critical  stage  of  disease,  as  the  stern  and  faithful  guardian  of 
untold  treasure. 

III.  That  obedience  should  be  resolute  and  manly.  "  Be  thou  strong, 
therefore,  and  shew  thyself  a  man "  (verse  2).  Solomon's  youth  clearly 
constituted  one  of  the  chief  difficulties  of  his  position.  His  exact  age  at  his 
accession  is  uncertain.  Eupolemus  made  him  twelve.  According  to  Josephus 
he  was  fourteen,  but  this  may  be  no  more  than  a  deduction  from  David's 
words,  "Solomon,  my  son,  is  young  and  tender"  (1  Chron.  xxii.  5),  and  from 
Solomon's  own  declaration  (1  Kings  iii.  7),  "  I  am  but  a  little  child."  Moderns 
generally  have  supposed  that  he  was  about  twenty,  which  is  probably  an  over 
rather  than  an  under  estimate.  For  a  youth  of  nineteen  or  twenty,  known  to 
be  of  a  pacific  disposition  (1  Chron.  xxii.  9),  to  have  rule  over  the  warlike  and 
turbulent  Hebrew  nation,  with  a  strong  party  opposed  to  him,  and  brothers  of  full 
age  ready  to  lead  it,  was  evidently  a  most  difficult  task.  Hence  he  is  exhorted, 
though  in  years  a  boy,  to  show  himself  in  spirit  a  man. — Speaker'' s  Comm.  It  is 
not  always  easy  to  obey.  It  demands  a  firm,  bold,  intrepid  spirit  to  dare  to  do 
the  right,  when  by  doing  so  it  bears  painfully  upon  those  we  love.  Obedience 
to  the  highest  law  sacrifices  all  lower  considerations,  at  whatever  cost  of  personal 
feeling.  The  obedient  man  is  the  true  man — the  bravest  and  the  best.  They 
who  would  be  faithful  to  God  have  need  of  courage. 

IV.  That  obedience  is  the  pathway  of  blessing.  1.  It  insures  the  fulfilment 
of  Divine  promises.  "  That  the  Lord  may  continue  his  word  which  he  spake" 
(verse  4).  The  promises  of  God  are  conditional,  "  which  is  as  an  oar  in  a  boat, 
or  stern  of  a  ship,  and  tumeth  the  promise  another  way."     The  original  promise 

24 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  ir. 


to  David  that  Messiah  should  come  out  of  his  loins  was  apparently  ahsoluto 
and  unconditional  (2  Sam.  vii.  11-17);  but  the  promifc  as  to  his  children 
occupying  the  throne  of  Israel  was  conditioned  on  their  obedience  (Psalm 
cxxxii.  12).  David  reminds  Solomon  of  this  in  order  to  impress  upon  him  a 
powerful  motive  to  continued  fidelity.  We  never  lose  the  blessedness  of  the 
promise  till  we  first  neglect  the  precept.  2.  It  confers  blessing  on  every  under- 
taking.  "That  thou  mayest  prosper  in  all  that  thou  doest,  and  whithersoever 
thou  turnest  thyself "  (verse  3).  To  infringe  law  in  any  department  brings 
crr'iision  and  suffering;  obedience  is  not  only  the  way  of  safety,  but  of  success. 
The  man  whose  ways  please  God  v'^hall  not  lack  any  manner  of  thing  that  is 
good.  Abraham,  when  at  the  call  of  Jehovah  he  stepped  into  the  region  of  the 
untried  and  unknown,  little  dreamt  of  the  wealth  of  blessing  that  was  destined 
to  rest  upon  him  and  his  posterity  as  the  reward  of  his  faith  and  obedience. 
There  is  no  peace  so  calm  and  abiding  as  that  which  flows  from  conscious 
rectitude.  "  That  happiness  is  built  on  sand  or  ice  which  is  raised  upon  any 
other  foundation  besides  virtue."  Ill-gotten  prosperity  is  transient  and  full  of 
bitterness.  3.  It  leads  to  (he  highest  honour.  "  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  on 
the  throne  of  Israel  "  (verse  4).  This  promise,  confirmed  by  the  Lord  himself  to 
Solomon  on  his  prayer  at  the  consecration  of  the  temple  (viii.  25),  which  was 
repeated  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  (xxxiii.  17)  at  the  time  of  the  greatest 
humiliation  of  the  royal  house  of  David,  for  the  strengthening  and  consolation 
of  the  faithful,  found  its  full  realization  in  Christ,  the  greatest  descendant  of 
David,  whose  dominion  will  endure  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  stand 
(Psalm  Ixxii.)  Fidelity  in  a  lower  sphere  is  an  excellent  preparation  foi  the 
honours  and  duties  of  a  higher.  The  career  of  the  obedient  is  like  a  river,  small 
and  unnoticed  in  its  beginning,  but  gathering  volume,  momentum,  and  majesty 
in  its  expanding  flow.  Obedience  is,  to  quote  the  language  of  Carlyle,  **  an 
everlasting  lode-star,  that  beams  the  brighter  in  the  heavens,  the  darker  here 
on  earth  grows  the  night  around." 

Lkssons  : — 1.  Oledience  is  the  earliest  and  most  difficult  lesson  to  learn.  2.  It 
is  often  richest  in  Messing  when  it  is  most  difficult  to  practise.  3.  We  are  called  to 
its  exercise  hy  the  most  solemn  considerations. 


I)atii)*s  Dting  Chajrge  to  SoLOMOir, 

The  scene  before  us  is  solemnly  impressive.  The  youth  that  had  slain  a 
giant  is  now,  after  a  most  eventful  life,  about  to  fall  before  a  mightier  arm 
than  that  of  Goliath  ;  the  friend  that  had  wept  over  his  beloved  Jonathan, 
is  now  going  the  way  of  all  the  earth  ;  the  monarch  who  had  exclaimed  over  the 
remiains  of  a  child,  still  lovely  in  death,  **  I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  cannot  return 
to  me,"  is  now  at  the  end  of  his  last  stage ,  aiKl  about  to  mingle  his  ashes  with 
the  departed.  We  will  draw  near,  and  hear  his  hist  words  of  parental  tender- 
ness and  dying  counsel  to  his  royal  son  and  successor.  **Be  thon  strong,  and 
show  thyself  a  man."  If  the  king  of  Israel  needed  strength,  and  was  required 
to  show  himself  a  man  in  the  government  of  his  kingdom,  no  less  necessary, 
nay — onerous  as  the  duties  and  cares  of  a  sovereign  might  be — far  greater,  is  the 
courage  which  the  vigorous  maintenance  ot  our  moral  and  religious  principles 
demands. 

I.  It  behoves  ns  to  be  strong",  and  quit  ourselves  as  men,  as  it  respects 
the  truth  and  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  If  on  any  question  manliness  of  character 
is  demanded,  it  is  on  this.  If  the  Scriptures  are  a  revelation  of  God's  will  to 
man,  receive  them  as  such,  and  obey  them  accordingly.  How  many  are  there 
who,  manly,  perhaps,  in  many  things  besides,  are  here  most  irresolute,  timid, 

2b 


OHAP.n.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


hesitating,  or  double-minded.  It  is  not  acting  as  a  man  to  own  the  Bible  to  be 
true,  and  at  the  same  time  treat  it  as  if  it  were  a  fiction,  a  fable,  a  falsehood. 
Sustained  by  the  clearest  evidence,  and  published  to  the  world  by  the  highest 
authority,  the  Word  of  God  is  worthy  of  all  confidence.  It  is  no  doubtful 
question  whether  the  Lord  Jesus  was  sent  by  the  Father  to  be  the  Saviour  of 
the  world,  nor  what  is  the  substance  of  His  doctrine  and  teaching.  Whatever 
He  has  expounded,  it  is  for  us,  with  a  single,  simple  heart,  to  follow  ;  to  take 
the  truth  as  He  left  it ;  to  grasp  it  firmly  as  our  life,  and  hold  it  with  the  same 
tenacity  as  a  sinking  man  would  hold  the  hand  that  was  stretched  forth  to  save 
him  from  the  gurgling  vortex.  If  we  truly  believe  that  we  possess  the 
treasure  of  a  true  revelation  from  God,  then  it  is  manly  to  espouse,  to  defend, 
to  diffuse  it  for  its  own  inestimable  value,  for  the  honour  of  Him  from  whom 
it  comes,  for  the  purity,  peace,  and  safety  of  our  own  souls,  and  for  its  power 
to  regenerate  and  bless  the  world. 

II.  To  carry  out  the  admonition  is  to  shrink  from  no  duty  and  no  sacrifice 
which  it  may  require.  It  is  not  the  way  of  the  worldy  even  where  the 
Christian  religion  is  professed,  to  render  obedience  to  the  Divine  commands.  A 
kind  of  respectful  treatment  of  the  Word  of  God — nothing  bold,  nothing 
decided — is  all  that  it  will  render ;  and  the  love  and  fear  of  the  world  will 
prompt  us  to  do  no  more.  A  still  stronger  persuasion  of  the  flesh  speaks  from 
within.  It  is  sloth,  it  is  selfishness,  it  is  the  predominance  of  some  master 
passion,  that  governs  the  irreligious  mind,  and  places  men  in  rebellion  against 
the  will  of  God  and  the  dearest  interests  of  the  soul.  And  then  the  J^vil  Spirit, 
the  great  tempter,  the  subtle  adversary  of  man,  will  suggest  all  discontented 
and  rebellious  thoughts.  Thus  beset,  multitudes,  instead  of  quitting  them- 
selves like  men  and  resisting  the  devil,  readily  jield.  Does  he  show  himself 
a  man  who  yields  to  every  temptation  to  neglect  the  house  of  God  on  the 
Sabbath,  and  to  follow  the  allurements  of  pleasure  ?  Does  that  youth  show  a 
manliness  of  mind  who  consents  to  the  enticements  of  sinners,  and  surrenders 
himself  to  companionship  with  those  whose  house  is  the  way  to  hell?  Does 
that  misguided  and  miserable  creature  show  himself  a  man  who,  for  the  sake 
of  indulging  the  lowest  and  worse  than  brutal  propensities  of  his  nature,  will 
beggar  his  wife,  starve  his  children,  cover  himself  with  rags,  and  make  hia 
home  the  scene  of  poverty,  strife,  and  every  hateful  and  disgusting  passion? 
Ought  we  not  to  carry  with  us  as  Christians  the  same  resolute  and  dc  cided 
temper,  the  same  open  and  obvious  manliness  in  all  matters  that  refer  to 
eternity,  as  we  do  to  those  which  are  limited  to  time  ?  In  a  word,  to  serve 
God  is  to  show  the  same  spirit  towards  Him  which  every  one  of  us,  who  has 
the  heart  of  a  man,  would  show  in  defence  of  the  health,  the  welfare,  the 
happiness,  and  the  life  of  the  members  of  his  own  family. 

III.  To  carry  out  the  admonition,  we  must  be  bold  and  persevering  in 
the  work  of  God,  till  He  shall  relieve  us  from  all  further  service.    It  is 

manly  to  begin  well,  but  it  is  most  unmanly  to  forsake  or  negligently  execute 
a  task  once  begun.  There  is  a  mighty  class  of  inducements  to  instability  in 
religion,  such  as  are  not  brought  to  operate  upon  the  mind  in  any  other  sphere 
of  action.  Here,  as  everywhere,  success  and  satisfaction  are  the  recompense, 
not  of  half  deeds,  but  of  manly,  hearty  energy,  industry,  and  perseverance. 
Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?  ]^o  one  of  himself;  but  He  who  gives  us 
the  command  will  not  fail  us  if  we  rely  upon  Him  for  its  fulfilment.  When  He 
bids  us  be  strong,  He  is  ready  to  give  us  power  to  obey.  Heaven  is  the  prize, 
every  effort  shall  have  its  reward.  We  are  surrounded  by  a  cloud  of  witnesses 
who  have  finished  their  manly  course,  and  reached  the  crown.  They  invite  ua 
onw  ard.  Let  us  not  fear  the  troubles  that  beset  the  way,  but  be  strong  in  the 
Loid  and  in  the  power  of  His  might.  Arise,  for  the  work  is  great,  the  time  ia 
short,  but  the  prize  is  eternal. — 2\  W,  Ilamilton^  D,D, 
26 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTART :  KINGS, 


CHAP.  n. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 


Verse  2.  "  I  go  the  way  of  all  tlie 
earth."  Death  a  journey.  1.  Silent 
and  mysterious  in  its  commencement. 

2.  Interminable  in  its  pathway.  3.  A 
journey  on  which  all  must  enter. 
4.  Demands  diligent  and  serious  pre- 
paration. 5.  Is  a  period  of  sad  fare- 
wells and  solemn  counsels. 

David  lives  to  see  a  wise  son  warm 
in  his  seat ;  and  now  he  that  yielded 
to  succession  yields  to  nature.  Many 
good  counsels  had  David  given  his  heir ; 
now  he  suras  them  np  in  his  end. 
Dying  words  are  wont  to  be  weightiest; 
the  soul  when  it  is  entering  into  glory 
breathes  nothing  but  divine  :  *'  I  go 
the  way  of  all  the  earth.'*  How  well 
is  that  princely  heait  content  to  sub- 
scribe to  the  conditions  of  human 
mortality,  as  one  that  knew  sovereignty 
doth  not  reach  to  the  affairs  of  nature ! 
Though  a  king,  he  neither  expects  nor 
desires  an  immunity  from  dissolution, 
making  no  account  to  go  in  any  other 
than  the  common  tract  to  the  universal 
home  of  mankind,  the  house  of  age. 
"Whither  should  earth,  but  to  earth  ? 
And  why  should  we  grudge  to  do  that 
which  all  do  ? — Bishop  Ball. 

*'  Ee  thou  strung,  therefore,  and 
shew  tliyself  a  man."  Be  firm,  and 
be  a  man !  1.  What  is  requisite  to  be 
one  ?     2.  How  shall  one  become  one  ? 

3.  Of  what  use?  (Heb.  xiii.  9; 
1  Cor.  XV.  5-8  ;  xvi.  13.) — Lange, 

Even  when  David's  spirit  was  going 
out,  he  puts  spirit  into  his  son;  age 


puts  life  into  youth,  and  the  dying 
animates  the  vigorous.  He  had  well 
found  that  strength  was  necessary  to 
government,  that  he  had  need  to  be  no 
less  than  a  man  that  should  rule  over 
men.  A  weak  man  mny  obey,  none 
but  the  strong  can  govern. — Bishop 
Hall, 

Verse  3.  The  last  and  best  will  of 
a  father  to  his  son.  1 .  Trust  in  God's 
protection  of  yourself  and  all  whom 
God  has  confided  to  your  care.  2.  Walk 
in  His  ways  ;  let  Him  lead  and  guide 
you  ;  He  will  do  it  well  (Prov.  xxiii. 
26 ;  Psalm  xxxv.  5).  3.  Keep  His 
ways  and  ordinances  (Eccles.  xii.  V6\ 
Psalm  i.  1-6 ;  Tob.  iv.  6).  God-fearing 
parents  are  more  anxious  about  their 
children  keeping  close  to  God  and  His 
word  than  about  leaving  them  tempo- 
ral goods. — Lange. 

Graceless  courage  were  but  the 
whetstone  of  tyranny.  The  best 
legacy  that  David  bequeaths  to  his 
heir  is  the  care  of  piety.  Himself  had 
felt  the  sweetness  of  a  good  conscience, 
and  now  he  commands  it  to  his  suc- 
cessor. If  there  be  anything  that,  in 
our  desires  of  the  prosperous  condition 
of  our  children,  takes  place  of  good- 
ness, our  hearts  are  not  upright.  Here 
was  the  father  of  a  king,  charging  the 
king's  son  to  keep  the  statutes  of  the 
King  of  kings;  as  one  that  knew 
greatness  could  neither  exempt  from 
obedience,  nor  privilege  sin. — Hall, 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  6-9. 

The  Teekeble  Pektinaciiy  of  Revenge. 

It  is  unfair  to  judge  Old  Testament  characters  according  to  the  standard  of 
New  Testament  morality.  Viewed  in  the  light  of  the  religious  ideas  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  the  temper  and  conduct  of  David  on  his  death-bed  are 
irreconcileable  with  the  spirit  and  genius  of  Christianity.  Eut  the  religious 
era  of  David  was  initial  and  imperfect  in  its  development;  and  it  is  no  marvel 
if  we  detect  serious  blemishes  alongside  what  is  best  in  its  experimental  life. 
Besides,  it  should  not  be  overlooked  that  in  the  instance  before  us  David  spoke 
not  as  a  private  individual,  but  as  a  theocratic  king,  uttering  the  decrees  of  the 
righteous  vengeance  of  Heaven  against  gross  wrong-doing.  We  may  regard  the 
whole  passage  as  illustrative  of  the  terrible  pertinacity  of  revenge. 

I.  That  a  spirit   of  revenge  is  difficult  to  suppress,     1.  It  may  ohtrudi 


ffHAP.  n.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


itself  amid  the  solemnities  of  the  dying  hour.  When  the  soul  is  about  to  quit  its 
frail,  worn  tenement,  and  is  pluming  its  wings  to  soar  into  the  invisible  and 
eternal,  it  is  desirable  that  its  latest  thoughts  on  earth  should  savour  of  amity, 
peace,  and  concord,  and  that  its  words  should  be  free  from  bitterness  and 
enmity.  But  such  is  the  subtle,  pertinacious  character  of  revenge,  that  it  clings 
to  the  soul  for  years,  and  disturbs  the  repose  of  the  dying  pillow.  It  is  the  dark, 
grim  shadow  of  man's  better  self,  ever  present,  consciously  or  unconsciously, 
and  which  sometimes  never  vanishes  but  into  the  deeper  shadow  of  the  grave. 
2.  It  mars  a  character  otherwise  noble  and  generous.  There  Avas  much  in  the 
character  of  David  of  moral  beauty,  of  noble  impulse,  and  lofty  aspiration.  In 
the  complexity  of  its  elements,  passion,  tenderness,  generosity,  fierceness — the 
soldier,  the  shepherd,  the  poet,  the  statesman,  the  priest,  the  prophet,  the  king, 
the  romantic  friend,  the  chivalrous  leader,  the  devoted  father — there  is  no 
character  of  the  Old  Testament  at  all  to  be  CDmparcd  to  it.  Jacob  conies 
nearest  in  the  variety  of  elements  included  within  it.  But  "  David's  character 
stands  at  a  higher  point  of  the  sacred  history,  and  represents  the  Jewish  people 
just  at  the  moment  of  their  transition  from  the  lofty  virtues  of  the  older  system 
to  the  fuller  civilization  and  cultivation  of  the  later.  In  this  manner  he 
becomes  naturally,  if  one  may  so  say,  the  likeness  or  portrait  of  the  last  and 
grandest  development  of  the  nation  and  of  the  monarchy  in  the  person  and 
period  of  the  Messiah."  Pity  it  is  that  a  character  of  qualities  so  fine  and 
varied  should  be  blurred  by  the  dark,  unsightly  blot  of  revenge !  making  every 
allowance  for  David  as  representing  in  his  last  utterances  the  intentions  of 
avenging  Heaven.     Eevenge  threatens  the  destruction  of  every  virtue. 

II.  That  a  spirit  of  revenge  retains  a  vivid  recollection  of  past  injuries. 
1.  The  particular  occasions  of  past  injuries  are  retentively  remembered  (verses 
5,  8.)  Joab's  chief  offence  against  David,  besides  his  murder  of  Abncr  and 
Amasa,  was,  no  doubt,  his  killing  Absalom  (2  Sam.  xviii.  14),  despite  the 
king's  orders  to  the  contrary.  Another  serious  crime  was  his  support  of  the 
treasonable  attempt  of  Adonijah.  But,  besides  these,  he  seems  to  have  ofi'ended 
David  by  a  numbcT  of  little  acts.  He  was  a  constant  thorn  in  his  side.  He 
treated  him  with  scant  respect,  taking  important  steps  without  his  orders 
(2  Sam.  iii.  26),  remonstrating  with  him  roughly  and  rudely  {ih.  verses  24,  25), 
almost  betraying  his  secrets  {ib.  xi.  verses  19-21),  and  where  he  disliked  the 
orders  given  him,  disobeying  them  (1  Chi  on.  xxi.  6).  David  allowed  his 
ascendancy,  but  he  chafed  against  it,  finding  **  this  son  of  Zeruiah "  in 
particular,  **too  hard"  for  him  (2  Sam.  iii.  39).  Shimei's  cursing  was  all 
the  more  grievous  because  David  -was  in  distress  at  the  time  (2  Sam.  xvi.)  ;  and 
the  Jews  say  the  insult  was  all  the  greater  because  Shimei  upbraided  him  with 
his  descent  from  Ruth,  the  Moabitess.  The  hatred  and  virulence  of  the  curse 
indicated  that  the  Benjamites  resented  the  loss  of  royalty  in  their  tribe,  even 
in  the  palmiest  days  of  David's  monarchy.  Kevenge  notes  every  minute  detail 
of  the  injury  inflicted,  broods  over  it  in  secret,  and  watches  for  the  moment  of 
retaliation ;  its  memory  is  infallible,  its  hatred  intense,  its  patience  stern  and 
unwearying,  and  its  sting  venomous  and  cruel.  2.  The  character  of  past 
injuries  modifies  the  character  of  the  revenge  they  provohe.  The  injuries  in 
this  case  were  of  the  gravest  kind — cmsirg  and  muider.  Sometimes  the 
revenge  is  more  terrible  than  the  offence.  In  other  instances  the  acts  are  so 
flagrant  and  sinful  that  to  cherit-h  and  execute  revenge  simply  amounts  to  the 
infliction  of  the  righteous  punishment  of  outraged  justice.  Magistrates  are 
the  avengers  of  the  blood  of  those  of  whom  they  have  charge.  There  are 
some  sins  which  it  would  be  a  greater  sin  to  allow  to  go  unnoticed  and 
unrequited.  The  murderer  and  bla«*phemer  were  punishable  with  death 
(Lev.  xxiv.  14;  Exod.  xxii.  27;  2  Sam.  xvi.  9;  ib.  xix.  22).  3.  Great 
forbearance  may  he  shown  before  revenge  is  gratified  (verse  8).  Shimei  had 
28 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  n. 


Been  and  confessed  his  sin,  and  obtained  a  reprieve,  at  least  during  David's 
lifetime  (2  Sam.  xix.  16-23).  But  his  ofTonce  was  of  such  a  character,  and 
his  turbulent,  malicious  temper  so  well  known,  that  Solomon  was  warned  not 
to  let  slip  the  opportunity  which  any  new  offence  ofl'eied  of  inflicting  the 
punishment  he  deserved.  The  spirit  of  revenge  may  be  for  a  while  restrained 
by  the  prevalence  of  a  more  generous  feeling,  from  motives  of  policy,  or  in 
order  to  choose  the  best  time  for  its  gratification  ;  but,  sooner  or  later,  the 
stroke  will  fall.  For  a  justification  of  David's  conduct  in  committing  to 
ludgmeut  a  man  whom  he  had  forgiven,  see  Keil  on  verses  8  and  9,  with  foot 
note. 

III.  That  a  spirit  of  revenge  is  terribly  pertinacious  in  its  demands 
(verses  6-9).  1.  It  surrenders  its  victims  to  the  extreme  penalties  oj 
justice.  **  Hold  him  not  guiltless," — do  not  treat  him  as  an  innocent  man ;  but 
punish  him  as  in  thy  wisdom  may  seem  best.  Not  at  once ;  but  when  the  next 
delinquency  is  committed,  hesitate  not  to  punish  with  the  utmost  severity. 
"So  that  deferring  payment  is  no  breach  of  bond:  there  will  come  a  time 
wherein  the  Lord  will  have  a  full  blow  at  the  impenitent  person,  be  the 
pretences  of  impunity  what  they  will." — Trapp.  The  hoary  head  of  both  must 
be  brought  to  the  grave  with  blood,  else  David's  head  could  not  be  brought  to 
his  grave  in  peace.  Due  punishment  of  malefactors  is  the  debt  of  authority  : 
if  that  holy  king  has  run  into  arrearages,  yet,  as  one  that  hates  and  fears  to 
break  the  bank,  he  gives  orders  to  his  paymaster,  it  shall  be  defrayed,  if  not  by 
him,  yet  for  him. — Bishop  Hall.  E-evenge  may  slumber  for  years  ;  but  whenit 
is  once  roused,  terrible  is  the  havoc  which  it  works.  It  btiras  with  irresistible 
fierceness.  It  exacts  the  uttermost  farthing  of  the  penalty.  2.  Th  aged  are 
allowed  no  exemption  from  its  severest  punishments.  Grey  hairs,  if  found  in  the 
way  of  righteousness,  are  a  crown  of  glory  (Prov.  xvi.  31),  adorned  with  which 
man  may  go  the  way  of  all  flesh  in  peace  and  comfort;  but  an  old  sinner, 
whom  even  grey  hairs  have  not  brought  to  repentance,  goes  down  to  the  grave 
without  solace  or  peace.  Age  in  itself  is  no  protection  from  justice.  The 
longer  man  continues  in  sin,  the  more  fearful  will  be  his  punishment  (Isa.  Ixv.  20). 
A  life  of  wasted  opportunities,  abused  privileges,  and  unrepented  sins  will 
bring  an  old  age  of  suffering  and  dishonour. 

IV.  That  a  spirit  of  revenge  is  often  relieved  by  the  exhibition  of  an 
opposite  spirit  of  kindness  and  liberality.  *'  But  shew  kindness  unto  the  sons 
of  Earzillai "  (verse  7).  A  good  deed  will  not  go  unrewarded.  Even  successions 
of  generations  fare  better  for  one  good  parent  (Prov.  xxvii.  10).  The  children 
of  Barzillai  inherit  the  fruits  of  their  father's  timely  hospitality  (2  Sam.  xvii. 
27-29).  Generous  natures  are  never  ungrateful.  Agesilaus,  king  of  Sparta, 
was  always  very  grateful  for  any  courtesies  he  received,  and  used  to  say  that  it 
was  not  only  an  unjust  thing  not  to  be  thankful,  but  if  a  man  did  not  return 
greater  kindness  than  he  received.  The  honour  of  eating  at  the  royal  table  is  a 
custom  thoroughly  oriental,  and  has  prevailed  in  all  ages.  How  much  more 
bountiful  is  the  Father  of  Mercies  in  the  remuneration  of  our  poor,  unworthy 
services!  The  heait  that  is  susceptible  of  the  bitterest  revenge  is  often  most 
lavish  in  affection  and  generosity. 

Lessons: — 1.  Revenge  is  strangely  out  of  place  on  a  death-led.  2.  The 
predominance  of  the  Christian  spirit  destroys  revenge.  3.  To  forgive  an  injury 
is  more  nolle  than  to  retaliate. 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  8,  9. 
The  Sins  op  Godly  Men. 

A  man  of  God  retains  to  the  last  the  bias  of  nature  with  which  his  Maker 
endowed  him  at  the  first.     Christianity  does  not  reduce  men  to  one  dead  level ; 

V^9 


CHAP.  n.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAET :  KINGS. 


it  rather  brings  out  in  greater  relief  those  parts  of  our  character  which  are  in 
harmony  with  its  principles,  while  tending  to  tone  down  others  with  which  it 
has  no  affinity.  If  the  good  man  in  the  present  age  is  so  misunderstood,  and 
his  actions  so  unmercifully  criticised,  what  little  chance  is  there  of  the  cha- 
racters of  men  in  past  times  being  rightly  appreciated  and  justly  dealt  with  ? 
The  Almighty  is  ever  the  same;  but  the  peoples  of  every  age,  in  every  land, 
differ  from  their  sires.  Where  once  the  stalwart  Koman  stood,  there  now  the 
effeminate  Italian  basks  in  languid  ease.  The  bandit  lurks  where  erst  the 
philosophic  Greek  discoursed.  All  this  God  recollects,  if  we  forget,  and 
assuredly  will  judge  men  as  well  from  that  outside  them,  as  from  that  within 
their  hearts.  There  are  three  ways  in  which  David  may  have  been  influenced 
in  giving  this  dying  injunction  to  his  son : — 

I.  As  the  agent,  unconscious  or  otherwise,  of  Divine  justice.  We  cannot 
conceive  this  measure  as  being  the  consummation  of  a  Divine  purpose,  it  had 
apparently  so  much  about  it  of  human  plan.  The  Almighty's  power,  when 
exerted  in  support  of  justice,  has  always  been  certain  and  direct  in  its  'action, 
without  any  reference  to  contingencies.  With  God  it  is  all  justice  or  ali 
mercy :  no  half  measures.  How  different  from  man's  punishment  is  this !  The 
very  manner  of  Shiraei's  death  is  the  greatest  argument  against  it  having  been 
ordained  by  God  (verse  36-46).  Even  David  and  his  son  were  ashamed  of  it- 
and  shall  God  be  credited  with  what  they  despised  ?  For  the  honour  of  his 
father's  name,  as  well  as  his  own,  Solomon  disguised  his  real  object  by  layino*  a 
trap  for  Shimei,  puerile  in  its  meanness,  and  yet  sufficient  to  attain  the  end 
desired.  David's  conduct  in  giving  this  dying  injunction  to  his  son  may  have 
been  influenced — 

II.  By  a  conscientious  desire  to  administer  human  justice  according  to 
the  will  of  God.  David,  we  are  told,  was  a  man  of  God,  one  after  His  own 
heart.  Intimately  acquainted  with  the  Divine  nature  -keenly  alive  to  heaven's 
requirements,  and  inspired  most  devoutly  with  the  desire  to  imitate  his  Maker's 
character— he  is  prominently  put  forth  as,  in  many  respects,  the  model  of  a 
godly  man  How,  then,  with  such  clear  perceptions  of  the  Divine  attributes, 
can  we  conceive  of  him  as  acting  in  this  matter  conscientiously  and  with  cool 
judgment,  in  the  full  belief  of  the  harmony  of  his  decree  with  Almighty 
rectitude?  To  do  so  is  to  dishonour  the  unswerving  uprightness  of  God's  justice, 
or  to  depreciate  David's  experiences  and  knowledge  of  the  Divine  character. 
We  would  rather  be  left  to  our  final  alternative  in — 

III.  Regarding  his  injunction  as  prompted  by  revenge.    As  a  man  he 

forgave  Shimei  at  the  time  of  his  crime,  which  then  should  have  been  effaced 
from  his  memory.  Heavenly  justice,  if  not  satisfied,  would  have  taken  its  own 
way  of  vindicating  itseK,  without  further  action  on  David's  part.  With  David, 
as  a  man  of  God  and  Israel's  lawgiver,  we  must  utterly  disconnect  this  act,  and 
attribute  ^  it  entirely  to  a  flaw  in  his  character,  which,  at  the  last,  re- 
asserted its  natural  power  in  antagonism  to  Divine  grace.  Peud  and  retalia- 
tion have  ever  been  the  preceders  of  law,  order,  and  Christianity  ;  and 
even  now,  among  some  nations,  one  of  the  most  sacred  principles  a  man  acknow- 
ledges is  to  avenge  a  loved  one's  death,  or  his  own  personal  wrong,  till  the 
third  and  fourth  generations.  Undoubtedly,  in  David's  time,  this  custom  of 
revenge  and  retaliation  was  rife  among  the  Eastern  nations,  along  with  many 
other  practices  at  variance  with  progress  and  religion.  Men  were  brought 
up  to  them,  accepted  them  as  their  moral  clothing,  and  acted  up  conscientiously 
to  their  injunctions.  So  it  was  with  David.  Though  a  man  of  (^d,  in  whom 
He  delighted,  yet  the  customs  of  his  time,  the  habits  of  thoueht  of  those  about 
80 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap,  il 


him,  with  the  silent  effect  of  their  example,  had — unknown,  mayhe,  to  him — so 
impregnated  his  heing  as  to  germinate  into  ungodly  actions  at  any  sudden 
temptation  or  crisis,  with  sufficient  power  to  sweep  away  for  a  time  the  tuition 
and  principles  of  his  heavenly  life.  In  David's  case,  what  mighty  lessons  this 
should  teach  !  Here  was  a  patriarch  indeed,  at  the  last  moments  of  his  existence 
succumbing  to  the  seducing  wiles  and  powerful  instincts  of  his  grosser  nature 
Men  may  well  dread  death,  for  then  is  the  last  great  struggle  between  earth  and 
heaven — nay,  hell  and  heaven.  It  is  Satan's  last  chance,  and  he  puts  forth  his 
mighty  energies  in  one  last  grand  endeavour,  in  which  the  deadliest  hate  and 
foar,  and  every  terrible  passion,  is  at  work,  striving  to  counteract  the  power 
of  his  Almighty  antagonist.  But  the  Almighty  knows  him,  and  He  knows  us. 
Like  David,  we  may  be  vengeful  on  our  death-bed — our  spirits  may  become 
dim,  and  weak,  and  faint ;  yet  He  knows  our  hearts  that  we  are  in  Him,  and 
He  in  us,  and  pardons  the  wanderings  of  our  falterir.g  footsteps  as  we  totter 
to  His  threshold,  until,  as  we  gain  the  door  and  faintly  knock,  it  opens 
wide,  disclosing  a  ftcene  of  light,  and  joy,  and  bliss,  with  the  inspiriting  words 
sounding  gladly  in  our  ears — **  Ee  of  good  courage,  I  will  never  leave  thee  OT 
forsake  thee !" — HomilisU 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE   VERSES, 

Verses    5-9.     Perhaps    the     dying  factory  to  see  that,  if  David  did  allow 

monarch   is    solely    anxious    for  the  himself  to  accept  the  unchristian  half 

security  of  his  young  successor's  king-  of  the  maxim  above  quoted,  and  to 

dom.  Perhaps  he  allows  old  animosities  indulge  malevolent  feelings  against  his 

to  revive,    and   is  willing  to  avenge  enemies,  at  least  he  accepted  equally 

himself    indirectly   and    by    deputy,  the  other  half,  and  entertained  warm 

though  he  had  been  withheld  by  cer-  feelings  of  affection  towards  his  friends, 

tain  scruples  from  taking  vengeance  in  His  hatred  pursues  only  the  individuals 

his  own  person.     We  must  not  expect  who  have  done  him  wrong.     His  grati- 

gos])el  morality  from  the  saints  of  the  tude  and  love  pass  on  from  the  doer 

Old  Testament.     They  were  only  the  of  a  kindness  to  the  doer's  children 

best  men  of  their   several   ages   and  after  their  father's  death. — Speaker's 

nations.     The  maxim  of  them  of  old  Comm. 
time,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  was 

"Love   your  friends   and   hate   your  Verse  7.  A  noble  heart  does  not  for- 

enemies"   (Matt.  v.  43),  and  David,  get  what  was  done  for  him  in  times  of 

perhaps,  was  not,  in  this  respect,  in  trouble   especially,    and   thinks  of  it 

advance  of  his  age.     It  would  have  even  in  the  hour  of  death.     The  world 

been  more  magnanimous  had  he,  either  is  ungrateful.      A   blessing   rests   on 

now   or    previously,    freely    forgiven  deeds   of  faithfulness,  and   self-sacri- 

these  great  offenders  (Joab  and  Shimei)  ficing,  disinterested  love ;  and  it  de- 

their  offences  against  himself;  but  it  scends    to     children    and     children's 

would  have  been  a  magnanimity  un-  children. — Lange. 
examplcd  in   the  previous  history  of 

the  world,  and  which  we  have  no  right  A   spirit  of    kindness — 1.  Has  a 

to  look  for  in  one  who  was  the  warrior  lively  appreciation  of  help  rendered  in 

king  of  a  nation  just  emerging  from  time  of  need.     2.  Is  prompt  to  acknow- 

barbarism.  If  David  was  actuated  by  a  ledge  its  obligations.     3.  Delights  in 

sense  of  his  own  wrongs  in  the  injunc-  showing     greater    kindness    than    it 

tions  which  lie  gave  with  respect  to  received.     4.  Is  an  important,  prac- 

Joab  and  Shimei,  we  cannot  justify  tical  feature  of  the  Christian  spirit, 
the  morality  of  his  conduct ;    Init  it 

ought  not  to  oc( asion  us  any  surprise  Veises  8,  9.    A  curse  rests  on  those 

or  difficulty.     At  any  rate,  it  is  satis-  who  curse  the  **  powers  "   which  are 

31 


OHAF.  n.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAUT:  KINGS, 


God's  ministers,  instead  of  praying  for  a  wicked  man  often  goes  a  long  time 

them,  and  they   are  made,  sooner  or  unpunished  for  his  deeds  ;  bat  Divine 

later,  to  feel  the  curse  (I  Peter  ii.  17,  6).  justice  does  not  fail  to  overtake  him 

The  Lord  prayed  for  those  who  cursed  finally,  ere  he  is  aware.     It  required 

Him ;  but  when  they  did  not  repent  wisdom  to  punish  :  a  premature,  ill- 

and  become  converted,    Divine  judg-  judged  chastisement  does  more  harm 

ment  came  down  on  them.     IN"©  doubt  than  good. — Lange, 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  10-12. 

The  Night  op  ak  Old  Dynasty,  and  the  Morning  of  the  New. 

The  reign  of  David  began  in  the  midst  of  storm  and  conflict.  His  was  along 
and  eventful  life,  teeming  with  romance,  ever  menaced  with  danger,  and  ever 
escaping  it,  and  yet  continually  advancing  to  a  higher  pitch  of  greatness  and 
power.  The  trumpet  of  rebellion  had  roused  him  from  his  dying  couch.  As 
one  accustomed  to  such  scenes,  and  well  knowing  how  to  act,  he  crushed  the 
incipient  attempt  before  it  had  gathered  strength  enough  to  injure  his  throne. 
It  was  his  last  struggle.  From  that  period  an  era  of  peace  was  inaugurated 
that  lasted  for  years.  At  the  beginning  of  this  season  of  tranquillity  the  dynasty 
of  the  Warrior-King  closes,  and  is  followed  by  the  rule  of  the  Man  of  Peace. 
This  change  of  government  suggests  a  few  reflections. 

I.  That  death  is  no  respecter  of  person  or  rank.  "  So  David  slept  with 
his  fathers"  (verse  10).  The  unpitying  desiroyer  ravages  alike  the  cottage 
and  the  palace.  Even  David,  who  had  borne  a  charmed  life  in  the  fiercest 
battles,  is  at  length  overtaken  by  the  enemy  whose  power  he  had  seemed  to 
defy.  All  the  resources  of  a  kingdom  are  utterly  incompetent  to  arrest  the 
inevitable  and  desolating  stroke  of  Death.  No  amount  of  wealth  can  bribe  him 
to  betray  his  ghastly  mission  ;  no  skill,  however  subtle,  can  baffle  his  designs; 
no  pleadings,  however  pathetic,  can  move  him  to  pity  ;  no  rank,  however 
exalted,  can  escape  his  fatal  visit.  Silently,  steadily,  irresistibly,  unweariedly 
he  prosecutes  his  work.  Like  the;  gigantic  vampire  bat  of  Java,  whose  perfumed 
wings  fan  its  victims  into  a  profound  sleep  while  it  sucks  the  lile-blood,  so 
Death  often  throws  a  stupor  over  the  worn-out  body  while  knawing  away  its 
vitality :  the  senses  are  numbed,  the  breath  rifled,  the  pulse  stilled,  and  all  is 
over — the  prince  and  the  beggar  are  reduced  to  the  same  level.  One  event 
happeneth  to  all. 

II.  That  the  greatness  of  the  son  is  often  built  on  the  wise  provisions  of 
the  sire.  ''  Then  sat  Solomon  on  the  throne  ot  David  his  father  "  (verse  12). 
The  exertions  of  David  had  made  the  kingdom  of  Israel  what  it  was.  By  his 
conquests  he  greatly  enlarged  its  territory  and  increased  its  wealth.  As  the 
crowning  work  of  his  life  he  set  his  heart  upon  building  a  temple  for  Jehovah  ; 
but  this  he  was  not  permitted  to  do,  though  he  had  made  extensive  preparations 
for  the  undertaking.  When,  therefore,  Solomon  came  to  the  throne,  he  found 
a  kingdom  thickly  populated,  and  growing  in  wealth,  prestige,  and  influence. 
A  substantial  basis  was  thus  laid  down  on  which  the  empire  was  raised  to  the 
height  of  affluence,  splendour,  and  renown  it  afterwards  attained.  Whatever 
reputation  Solomon  might  have  won  by  his  wisdom,  he  would  never  have  been 
known  to  posterity  as  a  mighty  prince  had  he  not  inherited  the  substantial 
fortunes  of  his  victorious  father.  The  son  of  a  great  man  and  heir  to  vast 
pos!  es  dons  occupies  no  enviable  position.  He  accepts  a  solemn  responsibility  -^ 
he  has  the  prospect  of  a  brilliant  career.  If  he  fails,  his  humiliation  is  most 
abject.  He  needs  Divine  help.  The  best  guarantee  of  success  is  to  possess 
heavenly  wisdom. 

32 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


CHAP.  II. 


III.  That  the  progress  of  a  nation  advances  notwithstanding  the  loss  of 
its  greatest  men.  •' And  his  kiDgdom  was  ('s'ublishcd  greatly"  ^verso  12). 
There  is  an  immense  power  in  an  individual  life ;  it  impresses  itself  upon  the 
nation  ;  it  moulds  its  policy  and  guides  its  destiny,  and  becomes  interwoven 
with  the  texture  of  its  character ;  it  seems  indispensable  to  its  existence.  Yet 
it  is  humbling  to  discover  how  little  one  is  missed  and  how  soon  forgotten. 
Great  men  die  ;  but  the  nations  they  helped  to  create  survive  and  flourish.  How 
often  are  we  made  to  feel : — 

The  individual  is  less  and  less, 
The  world  is  more  and  more. 


Individuals  perish — principles  never:  men  depart,  but  humanity  remains.  Thi 
work  of  one  generation  is  a  preparation  for  the  work  of  another ;  and  thus, 
under  the  controlling  hand  of  God,  nations  accomplish  their  respective  destinies  ; 

"  There  is  a  Power 
Unseen,  that  rules  the  illimitable  world — 
That  guides  its  motions,  from  the  brightest  star 
To  the  least  dust  of  this  sin-tainted  world  ; 
While  man,  who  madly  deems  himself  the  lord 
Of  all,  is  nought  but  weakness  and  dependence." — Thomson, 

Lessons  : — 1.  All  earthly  governments  are  suhject  to  change.  2.  It  is  matter  for 
gratitude  to  the  nation  ivhen  the  end  of  one  good  reign  is  the  heginning  of  another. 
3.  Amid  the  rise  and  fall  of  dynasties  the  Divine  purpose  concerning  the  race  steadily 
advances. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Verses  10,  11.  The  death  and 
burial  of  David.  1.  His  death  was  a 
rest  from  a  long  and  toilsome  life — as 
a  storm  having  spent  its  force  sinks 
gently  into  a  peaceful  and  prolonged 
slumber.  Rest  is  sweet  after  bearing 
the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day  for 
forty  years.  2.  He  was  buried  among 
the  monuments  of  his  eneigy  and 
greatness.  His  own  city  was  his  tomb. 
Kings  who  build  palaces  should  not 
forget  their  tombs ;  a  small  space  must 
shortly  contain  all  their  greatness. 
David's  grave  is  a  pledge  that  the 
memory  ot  the  just  is  blessed  (Prov.  x. 
7  ;  Acts  ii.  29). 

And  now,  when  David  hath  set  all 
things  in  a  de?ired  order  and  forward- 
ness, he  shuts  up  with  a  zealous  bless- 
ing of  his  son  Solomon  and  his  people, 
and  sleeps  with  his  fathers.  0,  blessed 
soul,  how  quiet  a  possession  hast  thou 


now  taken,  after  so  many  tumults,  of 
a  better  crown !  Thou  that  hast  pre- 
pared all  things  for  the  house  of  thy 
God,  how  happily  art  thou  now  wel- 
comed to  that  house  of  His,  not  made 
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens ! — 
Hail. 

David,  a  type  of  Christ.  1.  Ap- 
pointed by  God  to  his  high  office,  and 
consecrated  to  it  with  the  holy  oil. 
2.  Was  long  opposed  by  violent  ene- 
mies. 3.  Was  sustained  in  his  heaviest 
trials  by  a  large  measure  of  Divine  con- 
solation. 4.  Was  supreme  governor 
of  his  people.  5.  Ruled  in  righteous- 
ness. 6.  Pardoned  enemies  and 
punished  the  obstinately  rebellious. 
7.  Was  confirmed  in  the  kingdom  by 
covenant  (Pealm  Ixxxix.  3,  4,  28,  29). 
— Mobinson, 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  13-25. 
The    Doom    of    a    Teeasoxable    Spirit. 

1.  That  a  treasonable  spirit  is  slow  to  learn  a  lesson  from  past  mis- 
fortunes. One  would  have  thou->ht  that  after  the  lamentable  and  disgraceful 
failure  of  his  recent  enterprise  Adonijah  would  not  have  had  the  hardihood 

»  33 


CHAP.  n.  EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


to  risk  another  defeat.  His  conduct  at  this  time  reveals  his  character  as  a 
restless,  intriguing,  ambitious  man.  There  are  some  men  who  will  not  be 
taught.  The  advice  of  the  wise  is  contemptuously  thrown  away  :  the  most 
calamitous  events  and  their  obvious  lessons  are  speedily  forgotten.  The  love  of 
plotting  and  scheming  amounts  in  some  men  to  a  passion ;  they  are  often  blinded 
by  their  own  cunning,  and  caught  in  the  snares  they  had  laid  for  the  feet  of 
others.  Envy  and  ambition  are  turbulent  elements,  difficult  to  allay,  and  often 
hurrying  their  victims  to  certain  ruin. 

II.  That  a  treasonable  spirit  has  no  scruple  as  to  the  method  adopted  in 
gaining  its  end.  1.  It  will  flatter  a  mother^  s  vanity.  Treason  is  a  tortuous 
policy,  and  seeks  to  use  others  as  tools  to  accomplish  its  designs.  Instead  of 
going  direct  to  the  king,  Adonijah  strove  to  influence  the  mother  in  his  favour. 
He  spoke  of  her  son  in  a  way  to  gratify  the  mother's  heart,  and  to  disguise  the 
insincerity  that  lay  beneath  his  words.  Plattery  is  one  of  the  most  polished 
and  effective  weapons  of  the  schemer.  2.  It  is  regardless  of  veracity,  **  Thou 
knowest  that  all  Israel  set  their  faces  on  me."  This  was  a  great  exaggeration. 
He  had  really  no  very  large  following  (see  chapter  i.  39,  40,  45,  49).  It 
was  well  known  the  Lord  had  chosen  Solomon.  Accuracy  as  to  matters  of  fact 
never  troubles  the  conscience  of  some  people.  The  liar  is  never  at  a  loss  for 
arguments,  nor  very  particular  as  to  their  character.  ISays  the  proverb — **  It  is 
an  easy  thing  to  find  a  staff  to  beat  a  dog  with."  3.  It  can  affect  a  mock  saintliness. 
''  For  it  was  his  from  the  Lord."  Erom  such  lips,  this  sounds  very  much  like 
cant !  The  aim  was  evidently  to  deceive  Bathsheba  as  to  the  real  intention  of 
securing  her  advocacy.  Of  all  methods  to  attain  sinister  ends,  the  role  of 
the  religious  hypocrite  is  the  most  detestable.  There  are  some  natures  over 
whom  it  exerts  a  potent  charm. 

III.  That  a  treasonable  spirit  is  prompted  by  base  motives  (verse  17). 
The  beauty  of  Abishag  had  made  its  impression  on  Adonijah.  Blinded  by 
sensual  passion  and  the  lust  of  power,  he  disregarded  the  incestuous  proposal  to 
marry  his  father's  widow.  Such  an  union  was  directly  contrary  to  positive 
law  (Lev.  xviii.  8).  The  darkest  designs  are  the  offspring  of  the  lowest 
motives,  and  an  ambitious  zeal  for  place  and  the  public  weal  often  covers  the 
desire  for  a  wider  scope  in  the  personal  indulgence  of  sensual  instincts 
(Psalm  xxxvii.  12). 

IV.  A  treasonable  spirit  knows  no  bounds  to  its  ambition.  Nothing  short 
of  kingship  could  satisfy  Adonijah.  His  possession  of  Abishag  was  intended 
as  a  means  to  that  end.  Her  eminent  beauty  and  near  relation  to  David  would 
give  her  a  powerful  interest  at  court.  In  the  oriental  mind  a  monarch  was  so 
sacred,  such  a  divinity  hedged  him  in,  that  whatever  was  brought  near  to  him 
was  thenceforth  separate  from  common  use.  This  sacred  and  separate  character 
attached  especially  to  the  royal  harem.  The  inmates  either  remained  widows 
for  the  rest  of  their  lives,  or  became  the  wives  of  the  deceased  king's  successor. 
When  a  monarch  was  murdered  or  dethroned,  or  succeeded  by  one  whose  title 
was  doubtful,  the  latter  alternative  was  almost  always  adopted.  The  Pseudo- 
Smerdis  married  all  the  wives  of  Cambyses  (Herod,  iii.  68) ;  and  Darius  married 
all  the  wives  of  the  Pseudo-Smerdis  {ih.  ch.  88).  So  David,  when  he  succeeded 
Saul,  had  all  the  wives  of  Saul  (2  Sam.  xii.  8)  ;  and  Absalom,  when  he  seized 
the  crown,  by  the  advice  of  Ahitophel,  went  in  unto  his  father's  concubines 
{lb.  xvi.  22).  These  are  examples  of  what  seems  to  have  been  a  universal 
practice ;  and  the  result  was  such  a  close  connection  in  public  opinion  between 
the  title  of  the  crown  and  the  possession  of  the  deceased  monarch's  wives,  that 
to  have  granted  Adonijah's  request  would  have  been  the  strongest  encourage- 
ment to  his  pretensions. — Speaker's  Comm.  Woman  is  often  courted  for  the  sake 

34 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  ii. 


of  the  place  and  power  to  which  she  can  introduce  her  suitor :  the  serpent 
addressed  the  woman  first  in  order  to  gain  the  man.  The  ambition  of  a  treason- 
able spirit  is  as  avaricious  and  insatiable  as  it  is  reckless  in  the  agencies  it 
employs. 

V.  That  a  treasonable  spirit  is  unexpectedly  detected  and  exposed  (verses 
22,  23).  Solomon  at  once  saw  through  the  design  of  Adonijah.  He  appears, 
too,  to  have  discovered  some  indications  of  another  attempt  at  rebellion,  in 
which  Abiathar  and  Joab  were  implicated  (verse  22).  He  showed  Eathsheba 
how  she  had  been  deceived  by  the  flattery  of  Adonijah;  and  we  can  conceive 
with  what  alarm  she  would  start  back  from  the  dark  pitfall  into  which  she  was 
about  unwittingly  to  plunge  herself  and  son !  A  course  of  villany  may  go  on 
for  a  long  time  in  uninterrupted  prosperity  ;  but  detection  is  sure  to  come,  and 
the  exposure  will  be  humiliating  and  complete.  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you 
out.  In  these  days  of  literary  enterprise,  the  columns  of  a  thousand  journals 
will  exhibit  your  disgrace  to  the  world  in  unmistakeable  characters.  If  the 
mask  could  be  torn  from  the  face  of  society,  what  a  horrid  index  would  be  pre- 
sented to  the  festering  mass  of  deceit,  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all  uncharitable- 
ness  which  is  ever  heaving  and  spreading  there  !  A  day  is  coming  when  the 
secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  revealed,  and  all  wrongs  redressed.  Eut  who  can 
fathom  the  depth  of  that  Divine  patience  that  bears  with  the  enormities  of  the 
wicked,  and  calmly  waits  for  the  hour  of  retribution  ?  Better  to  find  out  and 
deplore  our  own  sins  before  they  are  exposed  and  punished  by  omniscient  and 
omnipotent  justice. 

VI.  That  a  treasonable  spirit  meets  with  summary  and  unfaltering 
vengeance  (verses  24,  25).  Adonijah  had  before  been  pardoned,  and  his  life 
spared,  on  condition  that  he  acted  worthily  (i.  52).  That  condition  was  violated ; 
and  now,  without  admitting  any  intercession  for  his  life,  he  is  solemnly  doomed 
to  death,  and  the  sentence  forthwith  executed.  The  perils  of  the  state  sometimes 
demand  the  prompt  and  rigorous  punishment  of  offenders.  Sin  entails  a  life  of 
disappointment  and  misery,  and  a  death  of  shame  and  infamy.  The  cunning  of 
the  wicked  often  overreaches  itself,  and  the  plot  which  is  intended  to  gain  a 
fortune  terminates  in  a  dishonoured  grave.  Many  a  head  has  been  lost  in  the 
attempt  to  seize  a  crown.  The  ruin  of  the  enemies  of  Christ's  kingdom  is  as 
sure  as  the  unshakeable  stability  of  that  kingdom. 

Lessons: — 1.  A  treasonable  spirit  demoralizes  man's  whole  nature.  2.  The 
cleverest  plotter  is  no  match  for  the  simple  wisdom  of  uprightness.  3.  Persistency 
in  sin  intensi^es  the  severity  of  the  punishment. 

QERM  NOTES  ON  TEE   VERSES. 

Verses  13-25.  Adonijah's  attempt  them,  but  generally  harden  and  era- 
to  gain  the  throne.  1.  Wherein  this  bolden  them.  If  they  do  not  succeed 
attempt  consisted  (verses  13-18).  by  open  force,  they  choose  deceitful 
2.  How  it  ended  (verses  19-25).  ways,  notwithstanding  all  the  promises 
Adonijah  and  his  faction  show  the  they  may  have  given  ;  and  they  feign 
truth  of  what  is  often  found — namely,  submission  until  they  think  their 
that  revolutionary  men  are  not  dis-  opportunity  has  arrived.  Every  one 
couraged  by  the  failure  of  their  plans,  to  wliom  God  has  confided  the  govern- 
and  even  disgraceful  defeat,  but  ment  should  hear  the  words  of  David 
always  brood  over  the  means  of  to  Solomon:  **Be  strong,  therefore, 
attaining  their  ambitious  views  and  and  show  thyself  a  man; '*  for  weak- 
gratifying  their  thirst  for  power.  ness  is,  in  this  respect,  sin  against 
Pardon  and  forbearance  do  not  change  God  and  man.     As  to  Adonijah,   the 

35 


«="•  "•  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


whole  East  knew  but  one  punishment  Thus  doth  our  God  many  times  answer 

for  such  plans  as  he  cherished— viz.,  our  prayers   with    merciful    denials, 

death.     Had  his  enterprise  succeeded,  and  most   blesseth  us  in  crossing  our 

he  would    doubtless   have   destroyed  Aesixea.— Bishop  Sail. 
Solomon  and  his  principal  adherents, 

in  accordance  with  the  usual  practice  Vovoo  oo    <<  t  i    <•     i.-      ti     i  • 

hitherto.     Solomon,  on  the  contrary,  .  J'To^^  V      I    ^-^'^  t^ ''"°" 

did  not  follow  this  custom,  but  showed  fr,    ^n^     S.      f    'I  '*  ?,!  ^T' 

forgiveness  and  genorosi  v;    in  fact,  f^^'i  /Ai    I      *°   strengthen    his 

he 'avoided  all  persecution  of  Adouil  t  !l    .n^^'v '^  ""'7'°^  ^K}^^ 

jah's  partisans.     Only  when  Adonijah,  ^Zn  T             •'         \n    ^'^^\ 

contrary   to  his   word,  and  notwithl  fZ  ZP  ^"T""^  T      *^  ^'"^"* 

standing  his  humble  homage,    again  Z.J  ^f  t  P°'«f,.^*  T""*  ^V 

appeared  as  pretender  to  the  throne,  ^l^rTT/"'   ^^''l.^'^'^^  King 

and  sought  to  reach  his  end  by  deceit  S^l  "V     ^"'^      '^  ^^^    ^"^ 

and  hypocrisy,  did  he  order  the  affixed  ^^'''^^^^^r  she  pleased.-Trapp. 

punishment. — Lange. 

Verse  24.  "Adonijah  shall  be  put 
Terse  18.  "I  will  speak  for  thee  to  death  this  day."  This  day,  before 
unto  the  king."  The  Christian  to-morrow,  lest  delay  should  breed 
minister  an  ambassador.  1.  He  danger.  Who  knoweth  what  a  great- 
is  divinely  called  and  qualified.  2.  l>ellied  day  may  bring  forth?  We 
He  has  influence  with  the  court  of  ^^®  ^^^^  to  say — A  day  breaketh  no 
heaven.  3.  He  pleads  the  cause  of  square ;  but  that  is  not  always  true, 
the  needy.  4.  He  seeks  to  reconcile  ^^» .  t^^t  we  would  be  as  quick  in 
the  rebellious  to  God.  5.  He  is  sl^jiiig  our  arch  rebels— those  pre- 
appealed  to  for  counsel  by  the  dis-  dominant  sins  that  threaten  our 
tressed  and  penitent.  precious  souls  l-^Tra^p. 

Verse  20.  Bathsheba  makes  a  peti-  Verse  25.  "And  he  fell  upon  him 

tion   against    herself,    and    knows  it  that  he    died."      This   was   another 

not ;  her  safety  and  life  depend  upon  piece  of  the  punishment   of  David's 

Solomon's  reign,  yet  she  unwittingly  two  great  sins,   the  small  and  short 

moves  for  the  advancement  of  Adoni-  pleasure  whereof  behold  what  a  train 

jah.      In  unfit  supplications  we  are  and  tail  of  calamities  it  draweth  after 

most   heard    when  we  are  repelled,  it! — Trapp. 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  26,  27. 

The  "Reteibution  op  a  Faithless  Feiendship. 

Formerly,  Abiathar  had  been  a  firm  and  attached  friend  of  David,  had 
ai. elided  him  in  all  his  wanderings  when  he  fled  from  Saul,  and  was  esteemed 
by  the  king  with  a  special  tenderness.  It  may  be  Abiathar  had  grown  jealous 
of  Zadok,  and  feared  being  supplanted  by  him ;  or,  it  may  be,  he  was  drawn 
into  rebellion  by  the  masterly  strategy  and  astute  opposition  of  the  wilful  and 
discontented  Joab.  He  thus  became,  equally  with  Joab,  involved  in  the  guilt 
of  treason,  though  a  difl'erence  is  made  in  the  final  judgment  passed  upon  the 
two.  The  subject  suggested  by  the  whole  passage  is  the  retribution  of  a  faith- 
less friendship. 

I.  That  a  faithless  friendship  may  merit  the  severest  punishment.  "For 
thou  art  worthy  of  death  "  (verse  26).  Treachery  on  the  part  of  one  we  have 
trusted  is  an  act  of  basest  cruelty;  aril  in  proportion  to  the  intimacy  enjoyed 
will  be  the  mischief  wrought.  It  is  an  exquisitely  painful  experience  when,  for 
the  first  time,  our  confidence  in  human  nature  is  broken.  Such  an  experience 
36 


ROMILETLC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS.  chap.  ii. 


has  driven  many  into  general  infidelity  and  a  reckless  course  of  iniquity.  AVe 
begin  to  discover  the  truth  of  the  proverb—*'  Confidence  in  an  unfaithful  man 
in^'time  of  trouble  is  like  a  broken  tooth  and  a  foot  out  of  joint"  (Prov. 
XXV.  19).  Few  men  can  be  trusted  to  do  ail  we  expect,  still  less  to  do  all  \w. 
require.  '  Faithless  couduct  is  ungrateful.  All  the  kindnesses  of  a  long,  fond 
friendship  are  forgotten  and  despised.  **  He  who  calls  a  man  ungrateful,"  says 
Swift,  ''  suras  up  all  the  evil  a  man  can  be  guilty  of."  Such  conduct  entails 
unspeakable  suffering.  To  the  pang  of  disappointment  is  added  a  series  of 
disasters.  No  one  sin  is  alone ;  it  is  the  cause  of  many  others :  it  is  like  the 
letting  out  of  waters.  Siuh  conduct  will  meet  with  severe  pumshmenf.  Tlie 
unfaithful  friend  often  suffers  more  than  his  victim.  Conscience  will  speak, 
and  its  every  tone  is  full  of  torture.  The  most  callous  will  be  goaded  into  agony 
by  the  stings  of  a,  retributive  remorse. 

II.  That  the  severity  of  retribution  is  often  moderated  by  the  recollection 
of  acts  of  fidelity  in  the  past.  1.  Respect  is  had  to  the  religious  office  and  conduct 
of  God's  ministers.  "  Because  thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  "  (verse  26). 
Whatever  we  do  for  God  in  sincerity  and  truth  will  not  be  forgotten  when 
trouble  overtakes  us.  The  virtuous  part  of  a  life  that  may  afterwards  sink  in 
the  moral  scale  is  looked  back  upon  with  admiration  and  regret.  Justice  draws 
near  with  reluctance,  and  sorrows  while  it  smites.  2.  Bespect  is  had  to  the 
exhibition  of  a  gemiine  fellow -sympathy  in  times  of  suffering.  ''  And  because  thou 
hast  been  afflicted  in  all  wherein  my  father  was  afflicted  "  (verse  26).  Abiathar 
had  been  with  David  in  his  exile  and  distress,  caused  both  by  the  persecution 
of  Saul  and  the  rebellion  of  Absalom,  and  shared  all  the  hardsliips  of  those 
trying  times.  Friendship  is  cemented  and  strengthened  by  suffering.  Our 
love  to  any  one  may  be  measured  by  the  extent  we  are  prepared  to  suffer 
for  him.  The  father  and  brethren  of  Abiathar  were  slain  for  David's  sake. 
Those  who  show  kindness  to  God's  people  will  have  it  recompensed  to  them 
sooner  or  later.  It  is  a  sad  reflection  that  a  friendship  that  has  borne  the  test 
of  suffering  may,  nevertheless,  prove  untrue. 

III.  That  the  retribution  of  a  faithless  friendship  consigns  its  victim  to 
a  condition  of  shame  and  obscurity.  1.  It  involves  a  dismissal  from  the  royal 
presence,  ''Get  thee  to  Anathoth,  &c."  (verse  26).  This  would  be  a  heavy 
blow  to  Abiathar,  whose  life  had  hitherto  been  spent  at  court,  and  occupied 
with  the  highest  affairs  of  state.  He  must  now  exchange  the  excitement 
and  display  of  the  city  for  the  obscurity  of  Anathoth.  And  yet  he  must  have 
dreaded  a  heavier  punishment  when  he  remembered  the  fate  of  Adonijah,  and 
the  fate  that  thrt  atened  Joab.  His  life  was  mercifully  spared,  though  ho  was 
excluded  from  that  which  had  before  been  the  sunshine  and  joy  of  his  life— the 
favour  of  the  king.  Cain  felt  his  curse  all  the  more  bitterly  because  he  was 
driven  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord ;  and  the  lot  of  the  finally  impenitent 
will  be  all  the  more  unendurable  because  they  are  for  ever  shut  out  from  the 
presence  of  the  Great  King.  2.  It  involves  a  degradation  from  the  most  honour- 
able  office.  ''  So  Solomon  thrust  out  Abiathar  from  being  priest  unto  tlie  Lord" 
(vers(3  27).  He  had  disqualified  himself  for  the  holy  duties  of  his  offlce  by  his 
opposition  to  that  which  he  knew  was  the  will  of  God.  ^  "The  priesthood  of 
Abiathar,  as  it  aggravated  his  crime,  so  it  sliall  preserve  his  life.  Such  honour 
have  good  princes  given  to  the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary  that  their  very  coat 
has  been  defence  enough  against  the  sword  of  justice  :  how  much  more  should 
it  be  of  proof  against  the  contempt  of  base  persons  !"  Saul  cruelly  slew  the 
father  of  Abiathar,  and  eighty-five  priests  with  their  families,  for  a  supposed 
crime  :  Solomon  spans  Abiathar  himself,  though  guilty  of  a  real  crime.  Mark 
the  judgment  of  history  in  those  two  cases:  the  government  of  Saul  was 
disgraced  and  ruined ;  the  throne  of  Solomon  was  established.     As  men  are  to 

37 


ofiAF.u.  JEOMILETIC  COMMENTAUY:  KINGS. 


God's  ministers,  they  will  find  Him  to  them.  "When  circumstances  permit, 
mildness  and  forgiveness  should  go  hand-in-hand  with  justice.  The  highest 
ecclesiastical  ofiice  does  not  lift  a  man  above  the  power  of  the  law  to  punish 
for  wrong-doing. 

IV.  That  the  retribution  of  a  faithless  friendship  may  be  the  nncon- 
scious  fulfilment  of  a  long-threatened  judgment  against  a  sinful  generation. 

''That  he  might  fulfil  the  word  of  the  Lord,  which  He  spake  concerning  the 
house  of  Eli  in  Shiloh  "  (verse  27).  Eighty  years  had  rolled  away  since  the 
words  of  doom  were  spoken  against  the  house  of  Eli,  and  it  setmed  very 
unlikely  that  they  would  ever  be  fulfilled  (1  Sam.  ii.  31-36).  But  time  has 
no  power  to  wipe  out  the  Divine  record,  or  to  enfeeble  the  justice  of  the  Divine 
hand.  The  deposition  of  Abiathar  involved  the  rejection  of  the  house  of 
Ithamar  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  3),  to  which  Eli  belonged,  and  the  re- establishment  of 
the  high-priesthood  in  the  line  of  Eleazar,  to  which  Zadok  belonged  (Num. 
XXV.  13 ;  1  Chron.  xxiv.  5,  6).  Tht  wickedness  of  a  generation  cannot  be  purged 
away,  though  its  punishment  may  be  arrested  by  the  virtues  of  individuals. 
' '  If  God  pays  slowly,  He  pays  sure.  Delay  of  most  certain  punishment  is 
neither  any  hindrance  to  His  justice,  nor  any  comfort  to  our  miseries." 
Solomon  had  no  immediate  intention  of  punishing  the  descendants  of  Eli,  and, 
perhaps,  never  thought  of  the  prophecy.  Man  is  often  the  unconscious 
instrument  of  carrying  out  the  Divine  purposes.  Faithlessness  will  not  go 
unpunished  for  want  of  agencies  to  punish.  All  the  forces  of  the  universe  are 
at  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Judge.  Rebellion  in  a  priest,  who  should  teach 
loyalty,  is  doubly  criminal. 

Lessons  : — 1.  A  treacherous  friend  may  work  serious  mischief      2.  Is  punished 
with  reluctance,      3.   Yet  cannot  escape  the  inevitable  retribution  of  his  treachery. 

GERM  NOTES    ON   THE    VERSES, 

Yerses  26,    27.     Solomon   allowed  3.  Law  offers  no  gleam  of  hope  as  to 

Abiathar  to  go  unpunished  at   first,  any  escape  from  death.    4.  Christ  alone 

which    scarcely    any    other    Eastern  redeems  from  the  curse  of  the  law. 

prince  would  have  done.     But  when  "  Because  thou  hast  been  afllicted." 

the  repeated  attempt  of  Adonijah  to  But    for    this    he     had    now  been   a 

seize  the   kingdom    was    discovered,  dead  man.     So  God  by  the  rod  pre- 

Abiathar  could  no   longer  be  passed  venteth  the  sword ;  and  therefore  will 

over.     Tet,  instead  of  infiicting  death  not  condemn  his  saints  for  their  sins, 

upon   him,   he   deprived  him  of  his  because   they   have   suffered  (1   Oor. 

influential  office,  and  let  him  live  at  xi.    31),    and    in   His   account  have 

liberty   on  his  estate,   on  account  of  suffered  double  (Isa.  xl.  1). — Trapp, 

his  former  good  behaviour.     Here  was  ^^        ^»,    n  i               •  i-   i      n  ^^ 

no  severity,  but  gratitude,  kindness,  ,  ^^'^  ^^\l^T°''  ,T!u*  ^^'^^""y 

and  generosity.      Ecclesiastical  office  tjl^e  from  Abiathar  all  the  revenues 

can  be  no  protection  from  just  punish-  o^^^^  Pl^ce.  as  well  as  the  liberty  of 

ment    of    crime   (see  Luke  xii.   47;  officiating  in   it;    but  the  sacerdotal 

1  Cor.  ix.  27).     Former  fidelity  can-  °^^\  '^''f^,,^t  """""'^"^  ^^T/°v' 

not  efface  later  treachery.     It  is  most  a^-^, /<>  '^^'''^  ^«  was   anointed,   he 

lamentable  that  a  man  who  was  faith-  «0"1'^,  f  °*    <i\v^n^b,       He    was   stiU 

fill  in  tiines  of  trouble  should  end  his  i^^^^^  ^'j'^P™^*  («^/^-  *);     ^h^^« 

career  as  a  liimer  (1  Cor.  x.  12).-  is  a  great  difference  between  depriving 

T^^^Q  a  man  of  the  dignity  and  ot  the  exer- 

^  '  cise  of  his  function  in  such  a  deter- 

Verse    26.    "  Thou  art   worthy  of  minate  place,  and   taking  from   him 

death."     The   voice  of  law  to   the  an  authority  which  was  given  him  by 

sinner.     1.  He  has  forfeited  life  by  God,  and  the  profits  and  emoluments 

transgression.      2.  It  is  the  function  which  were  the  gifts  of  the  crown  or 

of  law  to  convince  him  of  that  fact,  the  nation. 

3ii 


HOMILETIC  UOMMENTAItT :  KINGS.  chap.  n. 


E0M1LETIC8  OF  VERSES  28-34. 
The  Eetribution  of  Blood. 
Life  is  a  Divine  gift,  bequeathed  as  a  sacred  trust  to  humanity,  to  be  jealously 
guarded  and  carefully  cultured.  It  is  susceptible  of  the  loftiest  rapture, 
or  the  most  abject  misery.  To  violate  the  body,  which  is  the  curiously- 
wrought  casket  of  the  life-principle,  and  to  rob  it  of  its  priceless  jewel,  is  a 
sacrilege  and  a  crime.  Only  He  who  gave  life  has  an  absolute  right  to 
resume  it.  Murder  is  an  unpardonable  outrage  on  humanity  ;  it  is  tlie  ghastly 
policy  of  the  cruel  tyrant,  the  final  resource  of  the  baffled  coward.^  It  is  a  gross 
insult  to  the  great  Giver  of  all  life,  and  an  offence  against  the  Divine  law  which 
cannot  go  unpunished.  The  murderer  forfeits  his  own  life,  and  exposes  himself 
to  a  righteous  retribution  which  sooner  or  later  will  fall  upon  him  with  over- 
whelming power.  The  blood  of  the  innocent  victim  clamours  with  unceasing 
voice  for  vengeance,  and  clamours  not  in  vain.  Terrible  will  be  the  wrath-vials 
poured  upon  the  head  of  the  blood-shedder,  and  which  he  is  utterly  powerless  to 
avert. 

I.  The  retribution  of  blood,  thong^h  delayed,  is  inevitable.  Years  had 
passed  away  since  Joab  had  recklessly  shed  the  blood  of  Abner  and  Amasa  ;  but 
the  crime  was  not  forgotten,  nor  could  it  go  for  ever  unrequited.  Mere  lapse 
of  time  has  no  power  to  change  the  nature  of  things;  it  weakens  nothing; 
it  strengthens  nothing.  Before  Him  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,^  and 
for  ever,  the  sin  a  generation  old  is  as  new  as  at  the  time  of  its  committal, 
even  as  the  holy  aspiration  that  may  be  rising  from  the  soul  at  this  moment 
will  be  had  in  remembrance  a  thousand  yearshence  as  it  is  at  this  instant  of  time. 
Nor  can  the  good  deeds  of  one  part  of  our  life  atone  for  the  heinous  crimes 
committed  at  another  period.  Joab  deserved  well  of  his  king  and  country.  He 
was  brave  and  victorious  in  war  ;  he  did  much  towards  the  building  and  beauti- 
fying of  Jerusalem  ;  he  clung  faithfully  to  David  in  his  distresses  ;  and  devoted 
himself  to  promote  the  best  weal  of  Israel.  But  his  noblest  virtues  were  unable 
to  ward  off  the  punishment  due  to  his  old  sins.  *'  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  all  our 
deserts  to  buy  off  one  sin,  either  with  God  or  man ;  where  life  is  so  deeply  for- 
feited, it  admits  of  no  redemption."  Often  when  least  expected  the  stroke  of 
vengeance  falls.  The  long,  deep,  silent  pause  in  the  tempest  is  most  to  be 
dreaded :  the  storm-king  is  but  gathering  strength  for  a  more  terrific  onset. 

II.  The  retribution  of  blood  is  perpetually  dreaded.  "  Then  tidings  came. 
.  .  And  Joab  fled  unto  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  and  caught  hold  on  the 
horns  of  the  altar"  (verse  28).  The  conscience  spoke,  and  the  soul  was 
filled  with  fear.  **  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth."  No  man  pursued 
Adam  amid  the  bowers  of  Paradise,  yet  he  fled.  **  I  heard  thy  voice  in 
the  garden,  and  was  afraid."  No  man  pursued  Cain  when  the  world  was  in  the 
morning  of  youth,  yet  he  fled.  No  man  pursued  Joab  as  yet,  though  the  sword 
of  vengeance  was  busy  with  those  around  him,  and  yet  he  fled.  There  was  that 
within  him  which  told  him  he  could  not  always  escape.  Oh,  what  a  hell  of 
misery  is  often  carried  in  the  breast  of  the  sinner  !  His  conscience  creates  the 
image  of  his  righteous  avenger  who  is  ever  threatening  and  ever  pursuing  him. 
It  is  a  mere  phantom,  but  none  the  less  real,  none  the  less  near,  none  the  less 
alarming  on  that  account.  He  cannot  escape  it ;  he  cannot  destroy  it.  Neither 
oceans  nor  continents  can  separate  him  from  it ;  it  is  not  at  his  heels,  it  is  in  his 
heart ;  it  has  become  a  part  of  himself.  He  hears  the  visionary  pursuer  in 
every  sound.  The  whispering  wind,  the  rustling  leaf,  the  creak  of  a  swinging 
branch,  the  chirp  of  an  insect,  seem  to  betray  to  his  disturbed  imagination  the 
immediate  presence  of  the  avenger. 

"Suspicion  always  haunts  the  guilty  raind  ; 
The  thief  doth  fear  each  bush  an  officer.'' — Shnhespear$. 

d9 


CHAP.  n.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


III.  The  retribution  of  blood  respects  not  the  protection  of  the  most 
sacred  asylums.  '*Echolcl,  he  is  by  the  altar.  .  .  Go  fall  upon  him"  (verse 
29).  It  had  become  the  custom  for  malefactors  to  flee  to  the  altar  for  safety, 
though  there  was  no  law  on  the  subject,  except  for  accidental  homicides.  But 
for  the  murderer  the  altar  offered  no  protection  (Exod.  xxi.  14).  There  is  no 
citadel,  however  massive  ;  no  cavern,  however  gloomy ;  no  seclusion,  however 
remote ;  no  Fpot  on  earth,  however  sacred,  that  can  screen  the  trembling 
victim  from  the  remorseless  avenger  of  blood.  There  are  some  sins  too  great 
for  any  human  sanctuary  to  shelter.  But  there  is  a  refuge  to  which  the  worst 
transgressor  may  run,  and  be  assured  of  safety,  pardon,  and  hope.  Christ  is  that 
refuge.  The  victims  offered  and  the  blood  shed  on  the  altar  of  the  tabernacle, 
and  which  sanctified  it  as  a  place  of  refuge,  typified  the  atonement  made  for  the 
sins  of  the  whole  world  by  the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  the  Paschal 
Lamb.  None,  however  guilty,  but  may,  by  believing  in  Christ,  obtain 
salvation.     Unspeakably  happy  are  they  who  have  taken  sanctuary  iu  Him. 

"  Betake  thee  to  thy  Christ,  then,  and  repose 
Thyself  in  all  extremities,  on  those 

His  everlasting  arms, 
Wherewith  he  girds  the  heavens,  and  upholds 
The  pillars  of  the  earth." — Quarles. 

IV.  The  retribution  of  blood  is  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  law.    "  And 

the  Lord  shall  return  his  blood  upon  his  own  head"  (verse  32).  We  are  set 
in  the  midst  of  a  system  of  laws  which,  in  their  ever  active  operation,  press 
upon  us  at  all  points.  While  we  act  in  harmony  with  them  they  minister  to 
our  well-being  ;  but  when  we  violate  them  they  are  inexorable  in  their  revenge. 
1 .  Retribution  is  in  harmomj  ivith  the  law  of  causation.  We  are  to-day  the  re- 
sult of  our  conduct  yesterday,  and  the  cause  of  our  conduct  to-morrow ;  and 
thus  our  present  actions  must  ever  be  the  seeds  of  future  recompense.  2.  It 
is  in  harmomj  ivith  the  law  of  conscience.  It  is  the  province  of  conscience  to 
approve  or  condemn.  No  action  of  our  life  is  ever  lost.  Memory  reproduces 
every  detail  of  the  past ;  and  conscience  smiles  or  frowns  according  to  its  actual 
character.  3.  It  is  in  harmony  ivith  the  law  of  righleonsness.  Divine  justice 
binds  itself  to  punish  the  wicked  and  reward  the  good.  *'  Be  not  deceived  ;  God 
is  not  mocked ;  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." 

**  Heaven  is  most  just,  and  of  our  pleasant  vices 
Makes  instruments  to  scourge  us." 

V.  The  retribution  of  blood  sometimes  reaches,  in  its  effects,  beyond  its 
immediate  victim.  ''Their  blood  shall  therefore  return  upon  the  head  of  Joab 
and  upon  the  head  of  his  seed  for  ever  "  (verse  33).  1 1  is  a  sentiment  frequently 
set  forth  in  the  Old  Testament  that  innocent  blood  cries  to  God  for  vengeance, 
and  that  if  suffered  to  go  unpunished  it  brings  down  a  curse  and  judgment 
upon  the  land.  This  idea  seemed  present  to  the  mind  of  David,  and  influenced 
his  conduct ;  hence,  at  the  time  of  Abner*s  murder,  he  publicly  implored  that 
the  judgment  of  this  innocent  blood  might  be  averted  from  his  house  and  king- 
dom, and  that  it  might  rest  upon  Joab  and  upon  his  house  (2  Sam.  iii.  28,  29). 
The  murderer  hands  down  the  stigma  of  his  guilt  to  his  posterity.  The  history 
makes  no  further  mention  of  the  descendants  of  Joab  ;  they  sink  into  inglorious 
oblivion.  What  becomes  of  the  children  of  our  great  criminals?  If  it  were 
possible  to  trace  the  career  of  sin  in  its  darkest  exploits,  what  a  terrible  record 
would  be  made  ! 

VI.  The  retribution  of  blood  is  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  good 
government.     "  But  upon  David,  and  upon  his  seed,  and  upon  his  house,  and 

40 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  ii. 


upon  his  throne,  shall  there  he  pea3e  for  ever  from  the  Lord  "  (verse  33). 
Either  from  motives  of  fiiendship,  or  fearing  the  consequences  because  of 
Joab's  popularity  with  the  army,  David  had  hesitated  to  punish  tlie  murderer 
as  he  deserved ;  but  knowing  the  power  of  this  man  to  disturb  the  peace  ot  the 
kingdom— an  instance  of  which  had  just  been  exhibited  in  his  siding  with  the 
treasonable  attempt  of  Adonijah— the  dying  monarch  charged  his  son  to  execute 
upon  him  the  judgment  of  heaven  on  the  first  occasion  that  justified  him^  in  so 
acting.  All  government  is  at  an  end  where  crime  is  allowed  to  go  unpunished ; 
authority  is  insulted  and  defied,  and  anarchy  and  terror  prevail.  *'  It  is  a  foolish 
niceness,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  **to  put  more  shame  in  the  doing  of  justice  than 
in  the  violating  of  it.  In  one  act  Solomon  approved  himself  both  a  good 
magistrate  and  a  good  son,  fulfilling  at  once  the  will  of  a  father  and  the  charge 
of  God."  A  negligent  magistrate  will  bear  the  woe  of  the  sin  that  he  is  not 
careful  to  avenge.  Favour  to  the  oifender  is  cruelty  to  the  favourer.  The 
throne  is  only  secure  when  it  sends  forth  justice  irrespective  of  persons 
(Prov.  xxY.  5). 

VII.  The  retribution  of  blood  is  inexorable  and  complete.— "  So  Benaiah 
the  son  of  Jehoiada  went  up,  and  fell  upon  him  and  slew  him  "  (verse  34). 
The  voice  of  blood  can  be  silenced  only  by  adequate  retribution  (Gen.  ix.  6). 
Retribution  overtook  Joab  on  the  very  scene  of  the  most  treacherous  of  his 
murders  ;  for  the  tabernacle,  at  whose  altar  he  perished,  was  then  at  Gibeon, 
and  it  was  at  the  '' great  stone  which  is  in  Gibeon"  that  Joab  slew  Amasa 
(2  Sam.  XX.  8-10).  The  sword  of  justice  may  be  for  a  while  mercifully 
suspended;  but  w^hen  it  falls,  terrible  indeed  is  the  havoc  it  occasions.^  The 
sins  of  an  impenitent  life  return  in  vengeance  upon  the  sinner.  "  Society  is  like 
the  echoing  hills.  It  gives  back  to  the  speaker  his  words  ;  groan  for  groan, 
song  for  song.  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be^  measured  to  you 
again."  Though  human  laws  cannot  be  satisfied  with  anything  less  than  blood 
for  blood,  yet  if  the  greatest  sinner,  even  a  murderer,  fly  to  the  horns  of  the 
Divine  altar,  he  shall  never  be  dragged  thence, 

VIII.  The  retribution  of  blood  does  not  extend  further  than  to  answer  the 
purpose  of  God.  "  And  he  was  buried  in  his  own  house  in  the  wilderness  " 
(verse  4).  Vengeance  did  not  extend  to  the  dead  body  of  Joab.  It  is  not  for 
man  to  lay  the  iniquity  upon  the  bones,  whatever  God  may  do.  It  is  a  fiendish 
cruelty  that  ofiers  the  least  indignity  to  a  lifeless  corpse.  Joab  was  buried  in 
his  own  family  sepulchre  attached  to  his  country  seat,  and  in  a  manner  befitting 
a  great  warrior,  a  peer  of  Israel,  and  a  near  relative  of  the  king.  ''  Death  puts 
an  end  to  all  quarrels :  Solomon  stays  the  penalty  when  Heaven  is  satisfied  : 
the  revenge  that  survives  death,  and  will  not  be  shut  up  in  the  cofiin,  is  bar- 
barous and  unbeseeming  true  Israelites.' '  The  funeral  of  Joab  would  suggest  to  the 
spectators  many  solemn  reflections  on  fallen  greatness,  and  the  inability  of  high 
social  status  and  deeds  of  valour  to  screen  the  wrongdoer  from  severe  retribution. 

Leakn — 1.  The  preciousness  of  human  life.  2.  That  no  misery  is  so  great  as 
that  of  the  murderer.     3.  That  Christ  can  pardon  the  greatest  sinner. 

OEEM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  28-34.  The  terrible  end  of  Of  all  expositors,  Pe/Zica/i  only  justi- 

Joab.      1.  He   dies  conscious  of   his  fies  Joab  to  have  been  a  most  faithful 

guilt,    without    peace     and    pardon.  servant  to  David,  and  seemeth  to  tax 

2.  Even  in  the  very  jaws  of  death  he  it  as  a  point  of  ingratitude  in  David 

is  defiant,   rough,  and  proud.     3.  He  towards   him   to    appoint   him  to   be 

does  not  leave  the  world  like  a  hero,  slain ;    by   his    example    warning   all 

but  like  a  criminal.     How  diflterently  courtiers  of  their  uncertain  condition. 

David  dies !  (verse  2). — Lange.  But    Joab     certainly     now    received 

41 


OHAP.  XL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


according  to  his  deserts  for  his  hlood- 
shed  and  faction,  wliich  must  not  go 
unpunished. — Mayer. 

Verse  28.  *'  For  Joab  turned  after 
Adonijah."  And  that  was  his  bane. 
If  men  do  not  cast  away  all  their  trans- 
gressions— that  *'  all "  is  a  little  word, 
but  of  large  extent — they  perish  un- 
doubtedly. Many  here,  like  Benhadad, 
recover  of  one  disease  and  die  of 
another. — Trapp . 

"Joab  fled,  and  caught  hold  on  the 
horns  of  the  altar."  A.n  evil  con- 
science can  put  to  flight  a  hero  who 
never  yielded  to  the  enemy  in  a  single 
bloody  field.  Fond  Joab,  hadst  thou 
formerly  sought  for  counsel  from  the 
tabernacle,  thou  hadst  not  now  needed 
to  seek  it  for  refuge ;  if  thy  devotions 
had  not  been  wanting  to  that  altar, 
thou  hadst  not  needed  it  as  a  shelter. 
It  is  the  fashion  of  our  foolish  pre- 
sumption to  look  for  protection  where 
we  have  not  cared  to  yield  obedience. 
Even  a  Joab  clings  fast  to  God's  altar 
in  his  extremity,  which,  in  his  pros- 
perity, he  regarded  not.  The  worst 
men  would  be  glad  to  make  use  of 
God's  ordinances  for  their  advantage. 
Miserable  Joab !  what  help  canst  thou 
expect  from  that  sacred  pile  ?  Those 
horns,  that  were  sprinkled  with  the 
blood  of  beasts,  abhor  to  be  touched 
by  the  blood  of  men.  That  altar  was 
for  the  expiation  of  sin  by  blood,  not 
for  the  protection  of  the  sin  of  blood. 
If  Adouijah  fled  thither  and  escaped, 
it  is  murder  that  pursues  thee  more 
than  conspiracy.  God  hath  no  sanc- 
tuary for  a  wilful  homicide. — Buhop 
Eall. 

Terse  30.  *']^ay;  but  I  will  die 
here."  The  sullen  stubbornness  of 
crime.  1.  It  gloomily  accepts  the 
inevitable.  2.  It  expects  no  mercy. 
3.  Is  indifferent  about  desecrating  the 
most  sacred  place.  4.  Seeks,  in  dying, 
to  throw  the  utmost  odium  on  those 
who  inflict  the  punishment. 

Verse  31.  *'  That  thou  may  est  take 

away  the  innocent  blood."    David  had 

never  formally  pardoned  Joab ;  and, 

indeed,  it  may  be  questioned  whether 

42 


by  the  law  there  was  any  power  of 
pardoning  a  murderer  (see  Numbers 
XXXV.  16-34;  Deut.  xix.  33).  The 
utmost  that  the  king  could  do  was  to 
neglect  to  enforce  the  law.  Even  in 
doing  this  he  incurred  a  danger.  Un- 
punished murder  was  a  pollution  to 
the  land  (Numbers  xxxv.  33),  and 
might  bring  a  judgment  upon  it  like 
the  famine  which  had  been  sent  a  few 
years  before  this  on  account  of  Saul 
and  of  his  bloody  house,  "  because  he 
slew  the  Giboonites"  (2  Sam.  xxi.  1). 
Or  the  judgment  might  fall  upon  the 
negligent  monarch,  or  his  house,  as 
punishment  fell  upon  Eli  and  his  house, 
for  not  chastising  the  wickedness  of 
his  sons  (1  Sam.  iii.  13). — Speaker^ s 
Comm. 

Verse  32.  "  Who  fell  upon  two  men 
more  righteous  and  better  than  he  '* — 
who  had  done  Joab  no  wrong,  nor 
meant  him  any,  and,  had  they  lived, 
might  probably  have  done  David  better 
service.  If  the  blood  shed  be  not 
only  innocent  but  excellent,  the  life 
more  valuable  than  common  lives,  the 
crime  is  the  more  heinous.  Joab  is 
put  to  death  for  the  murder  of  Abner 
and  Amasa,  rather  than  for  his  treason- 
able adherence  to  Adonijah. 

Verse  34.  <*  So  Benaiah  went  up  and 
slew  him."  Joab  must  have  been  old 
and  infirm  at  this  time  ;  and  now  he 
bleeds  for  Abner,  he  bleeds  for  Amasa, 
and  he  bleeds  for  Uriah.  The  two 
former  he  murdered ;  of  the  blood  of 
the  latter  he  was  not  innocent.  Yet 
he  had  done  the  state  much  service, 
and  they  knew  it;  but  he  was  a 
murderer,  and  vengeance  would  not 
suffer  him  to  live. — Dr.  A.  Clarke. 

Verse  35.  The  reward  of  a  tried 
fidelity.  1 .  lliat  there  are  crises  when 
fidelity  is  severely  tried.  1.  In  times 
of  national  distress  and  rebellion. 
2.  In  times  of  personal  affliction  and 
helplessness.  3.  In  times  of  secret 
temptation  and  outrageous  threatening. 
2.  That  the  maintenance  of  fidelity  in 
times  of  trial  has  a  good  infiuence  on  the 
unstable.  1.  Rebellion  is  more  easily 
suppressed.     2.  The  authority  of  go- 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EIN08,  chap.  ii. 


vernment  is  more  firmly  established,  and  generosity  of  the  highest  autho- 

3.  It  is  an  education  to  fit  for  nobler  rities.     3.  It  conducts  to  positions  of 

and  more  important  service.    3.   That  high  honour  and   responsibility.      A 

fidelity  severely    tried  is  sure   to  meet  faithful   man    makes    himself    indis- 

with  reward.     1.  It  secures  the  satis-  pensable.     4.  It  exalts  the  character 

faction  of  an  approving  conscience  for  of  the  office  disgraced  by  the  unfaith- 

duty  done.    2.  It  wins  the  confidence  fulness  of  others. 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VEESESSQ-iS, 
The  Reteibution  of  a  Curse, 

It  18  a  striking  testimony  to  the  power  of  Christianity,  that  those  who  have 
been  trained  under  its  influence  find  much  that  is  painful  to  their  feelings  in 
transactions  which  would,  even  in  modern  times,  appear  perfectly  reasonable, 
just,  and  even  laudable,  among  Eastern  nations.  The  greatest  oriental  magnates 
were  animated  by  the  spirit  of  the  age  in  which  they  lived;  and  we  might  as 
well  complain  that  they  travelled  from  Dan  to  Beersheba  on  the  slow-footed 
ass,  rather  than  by  the  rapid  rail,  as  that  they  were  not  in  all  things 
actuated  by  the  spirit  of  a  later  revelation  and  a  later  time.  The  series  of 
stem  retributions  recorded  in  this  chapter  must  be  viewed  and  interpreted  in  the 
light  of  the  times  in  which  they  took  place.  Many  have  complained  that  in  the 
case  of  Shimei  an  unwonted  measure  of  severity  is  shown.  There  is  much 
force  in  the  remarks  made  by  Dr.  Kitto  : — **  Upon  the  whole,  it  seems  to  us  that 
in  this  incident,  as  in  many  other  austere  circumstances  of  Scripture  history, 
the  apparent  difficulty  disappears,  or  becomes  greatly  attenuated,  when  all  the 
circumstances  are  closely  weighed,  and  when  we  contemplate  the  subject  not 
exclusively  from  our  own  point  of  view,  but  from  that  of  contemporaries,  and 
in  connection  with  influences — religious,  political,  and  social — very  different 
from  our  own,  but  which  some  degree  of  careful  study  may  enable  us  to  realize. 
The  more  this  is  done,  the  more  *  digestible  '  many  of  the  hardest  things  of 
Scripture  history  will  appear.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  there  is  not  a  word  or 
hint  in  the  Sacred  Book  to  show  that  the  conduct  of  David  and  Solomon  to  Joab, 
Shimei,  Adonijah,  or  Abiathar,  was  regarded  as  other  than  perfectly  right  and 
just,  if  not  laudable,  by  the  people  of  the  age  and  country  in  which  David  and 
Solomon  lived.  Indeed,  we  may  be  sure  that  Solomon  was  too  sagacious  to  dis- 
figure the  commencement  of  his  reign  by  acts  abhorrent  to  the  public  opinion 
of  his  time.  And  if  he  had  that  sanction — as  we  are  sure  he  had — we  feel  that, 
in  matters  not  affecting  any  principle  of  God's  ancient  law,  we  have  no  right  to 
stigmatise  his  conduct  as  unjust  or  barbarous,  although,  with  our  keener  sense 
— with  our  Christian  and  occidental  perceptions — of  human  obligations,  we  turn 
with  relief  from  the  grim  severities  of  this  blood-stained  page."  In  reviewing 
the  conduct  and  fate  of  Shimei  observe  : — 

I.  That  a  curse  is  the  offspring  of  a  spirit  of  bitter  rancour  and  hostility. 

Shimei  was  of  the  house  of  Saul,  and  strongly  resented  the  loss  of  royalty  to 
the  Benjamites,  and  all  prospect  of  preferment  to  himself.  He  unjustly  charged 
David  with  being  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  the  Sauline  dynasty,  and  conceived  a 
violent  hatred  towards  him.  While  David  was  in  prosperity  and  power, 
Shimei  dared  not  assail  him ;  but  when,  in  a  day  of  adversity,  David  and  his 
followers  had  in  their  flight  come  to  Bahurim,  Shimei  came  out  from  his  house, 
situated  on  an  elevated  ridge  near  the  roadside,  and  poured  on  the  humbled  nnd 
distressed  monarch  a  torrent  of  outrageous  curses  (2  Sam.  xvi.  5-13).  The 
greatest  swearer  is  the  greatest  coward.  There  are  men  with  hearts  so  full  of 
hatred,  malice,  and  all  uncharitablenesSj  that  their  lips  cone^tantly  burn  witli 
freshly  uttered  blasphemies  ;  their  stomachs  are  so  foul  that  they  must  needs 

43 


CHAP  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


spit  up  the  loathsome  venom  with  which  they  are  overcharged,  and  they  care 
not  on  whom  it  shall  fall.  If  there  is  no  special  ohject  of  their  spite  before 
them,  they  will  curse  nil  round,  and  end  by  cursing  themselves.  To  curse  is  the 
most  contemptible  method  of  revenge;  it  is  an  evidence  of  utter  impotency, 
and  a  horrid  revelation  of  a  most  fiendish  nature.  Just  as  S],iiiiei  cast  dust 
{jh.  V.  13)  which  would  be  harmless  to  those  he  abused,  and  would  doubtless  be 
blown  again  into  his  own  eyes,  so  the  curses  of  the  vile  blasphemer  often  return 
m  fearful  retribution  upon  himself.  Shimei  was  a  dangerous,  bad  mnn.  equal  to 
any  intrigue,  and  finding  his  recreation  in  plotting  wickedness.  With  some 
monarchs  such  a  man  would  not  be  suffered  to  be  at  large.  There  are  some 
men  who  are  not  fit  to  be  trusted  out  of  sight,  and  the  swearer  is  often  of  that 
class. 

II.  That  the  retribution  of  a  curse  is  sometimes  mercifully  delayed. 

1.   The  delay  affords  space  for  repentance  and  reformation.     The  evildoer  mis- 
apprehends the  slowness  of  the  Divine  punishment,  as  though  it  were  an  evidence 
of  weakness.     God  hesitates,  that  man  may  relent  and  find  forgiveness.     But, 
oh  !  the  blindness  of  the  human  heart—**  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work 
is  not  execut(  (]  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in 
them  to  do  evil  "  (Eccles.  viii.  11).     The  lull  in  the  tempest  enables  the  skilful 
mariner  to  repair  damages,  and  prepare  for  the  worst ;  so  the  stillness  of  God 
should  suggest  to  the  sinner  the  importance  of  a  prompt  and  penitent  search 
after  salvation.     2.  The  delay  is  conditional  (verses  36,  37).     Shimei  was  to  be 
a  prisoner  at  large  in  Jerusalem,  and  not  to  pass  a  certain  boundarv  outside  the 
city,  foimed  by  a  circle  drawn  from  the  brook  Kidron.     To  infringe  that  condi- 
tion, on  any  pretence  whatever,  would  render  him  worthy  of  death.     ''Besides 
the  old  grudge   no  doubt  So'omon  saw  cause  to  suspect  the  fidelity  of  Shimei, 
as  a  man   wlio  was  ever  known  to  be  hollow  to  the  house  of  David.     The 
obscurity  of  a  country  life  would  easily  afford  him  more  safe  opportunities  of  secret 
mischief;  many  eyes  shall  watch  him  in  the  city;  he  cannot  lookout  unseen,  he 
cannot  whisper  unheard.     Upon  no  other  terms  shall  he  enjoy  his  life,  which 
the  least  straying  shall  forfeit."— i?^.  TIall     All  our  blessings  are  conditional. 
As  a  limit  was  fixed  for  the  restless  Shimei,  so  is  it  necessary  that  we  should 
set  a  limit  to  our  affections,  desires,  and  ambitions.     3.   The  mercy  of  delayed 
retribution  should  he  gratefidly  acknoivledged  (verse  38).     Shimei  recognized  the 
justice  and  clemency  of  the  conditions  imposed  on  him,  and  solemnly  pledged 
himself  to  observe  them.     He  looked  for  death,  and  lo  !  life  was  continued. 
The  sinner  has  reason  to  praise  God  for  every  moment  his  punishment  isdelaved. 
He  best  shows  his  gratitude  for  the  gracious  respite  by  striving  to  be  obedient. 
St.  Bernard,  one  of  the  holiest  of  the  church's  saints,  was  in  the  habit  of  con- 
stantly warning  himself  by  the  grave  enquiry — ''  Bernard,  for  what  purpose  art 
thou  here?"     The  thoughtful  penitent  may  profit  by  frequently  putting  to 
himself  the  question — ''  For  what  purpose  art  thou  spared  ?  " 

III.  That  the  retribution  of  a  curse  is  hastened  by  some  fresh  act  of  dis- 
obedience. 1.  Man  is  tempted  to  disobedience  by  the  love  of  temporal  gain 
(verses  39,  40).  Avarice  is  the  root  of  all  evil.  The  loss  of  two  servants  led 
Shimei  to  disobedience,  even  to  forget  his  oath  and  risk  his  life.  "  Covetousness 
and  presumption  of  impunity,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  ''  are  the  destruction  of  many  a 
soul.  Shimei  seeks  his  servants,  and  loses  himself!  How  many  are  there  who 
cry  out  of  this  folly,  and  yet  imitate  it !  These  earthly  things  either  are  our 
servants,  or  should  be.  How  commonly  do  we  see  men  run  out  of  the  bounds 
set  them  by  God's  law,  to  hunt  after  them  till  their  souls  incur  a  fearful  judg- 
ment!" 2.  Disobedience  is  ungrateful  Shimei  had  acknowledged  the  kind 
forbearance  shown  him,  and  engaged  himself  by  an  oath  to  observe  the  condi- 
:  iou.  He  ignored  his  obligation,  and  forgot  the  kindness  he  had  receiyed,  Fo^- 
44 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  Ii, 


getfulness  is  a  reckless  destroyer  of  gratitude,  and  a  prolific  cau?e  of  disobedi- 
ence. Men  sin  because  they  **  forget"  tbe  commandments  of  the  Lord.  It  is 
the  depth  of  ingratitude  to  rebel  against  our  best  benefactor,  to  slight  his  com- 
mands, to  depreciate  his  goodness,  and  frustrate  his  purpose.  3.  Disobedience  is 
dangerous.  This  Shimei  discovered  to  his  cost.  Let  the  skater  disregard  the 
warning,  *'  Beware  !  "  and  it  is  no  marvel  if  he  is  suddenly  immersed  under  the 
treacherous  ice.  A  certain  rebel  chieftain — a  principal  leader  in  one  of  the 
most  sanguinary  risings  of  the  Irish  against  the  government — died  from  a 
grievous  malady  contracted  by  his  weating  poisoned  boots,  which,  it  is  said, 
were  sent  him  in  a  present.  The  disobedient  walk  in  poisoned  boots,  and  to 
continue  the  practice  is  sure  to  prove  fatal  (Ezek.  xviii.  20)  I 

IV.  That  the  retribution  of  a  curse  falls  at  last  with  awful  severity. 
1.  The  grounds  of  retribution  are  rehearsed  (verses  42-45).  Stress  is  laid  upon 
Shimei's  violption  of  his  own  oath,  and  of  the  king's  commands.  He  is  also 
reminded  of  his  former  crimes :  there  was  no  need  to  call  witnesses  in  proof — 
his  own  heart  was  privy  to  it  all  (verse  44).  The  heart  is  privy  to  much  more 
wickedness  than  ever  appeared  without.  The  punishment  for  any  one  sin 
brings  up  unpleasant  recollections  of  all  the  sinful  past.  The  retribution  of  the 
wicked  will  be  justified  in  the  light  of  Divine  justice,  and  in  the  reflected  light 
of  his  own  sinful  history.  2.  The  retribution  is  complete.  **  So  Benaiah  fell 
upon  him  that  he  died  "  (verse  46).  Vengeance  against  rebels  may  sleep ;  it 
cannot  die.  Shimei's  fate  plainly  proves  the  truth  of  the  word  (Jobxxxiv.  11  ; 
Psa.  cxli.  10  ;  Prov.  v.  22).  Divine  justice  at  length  overtakes  those  whose 
crimes  have  long  been  unpunished,  and  when  they  least  expect  it.  Those 
also  who  have  cursed  the  anointed  of  the  Lord,  the  eternal  King  of  God's 
realm,  and  who  have  shot  their  poisoned  shafts  at  Him,  shall  hereafter  say  to 
the  mountains,  Fall  on  us !  and  to  the  hills,  Cover  us  !  (Luke  xxiii.  30).  How 
weak  and  forgetful  of  his  word  would  the  king  have  seemed  to  all  the  people  if 
he  had  let  Shimei  now  go  free,  particularly  with  the  notions  then  entertained 
about  a  king!  (Prov.  xvi.  12-15;  xx.  2,  26). — Lange, 

V.  The  retribution  of  a  curse  tends  to  strengthen  the  authority  of  govern- 
ment. "And  the  kingdom  was  established  in  the  hand  of  Solomon  "  (verse  46). 
All  malcontents  and  rebels  were  now  removed  or  subdued :  his  own  subjects 
were  affectionately  bound  to  him,  and  the  surrounding  nations  either  dreaded 
him,  or  did  not  think  proper  to  make  him  their  enemy.  The  union  of  mildness 
and  firmness,  generosity  and  official  justice,  in  the  conduct  of  the  young 
sovereign  in  the  treatment  of  his  foes,  must  have  deeply  impressed  the  people, 
have  increased  his  authority,  and  established  his  rule.  It  is  a  comforting 
thought  to  the  believer,  that  the  kingdom  of  Messiah  is  firmly  established, 
notwithstanding  the  rage  and  tumult  of  His  adversaries.  In  Him  the  throne  of 
David  is  established  for  ever  (verse  45;  see  also  2  Sam.  vii.  13,  16;  Psalm 
Ixxxix.  4,  36,  &c.)  The  time  is  approaching  when  all  the  enemies  of  Christ 
shall  perish,  and  His  righteous  government  be  universally  acknowledged  and 
obeyed. 

Lessons: — 1.  A  swearer  is  always  something  worse.  2.  A  foul  mouth  is  its 
own  condemnation.     3,  The  impenitent  blasphemer  will  be  rigorously  punished, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verse  36.  "  Build  thee  an  house  in  and  is  therefore  confined  and  kept 
Jerusalem."  Shimei  was  no  further  within  compass.  So  should  our 
to  be  trusted  than  he  might  be  seen,      dtvcilful  hearts  be   dealt  with.     Set 

45 


CHAP.  II. 


EOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


a  jealous  eye  upon  them,  or  else  they 
will  give  you  the  slip,  as  David's  did 
(Psalm  xxxix.  1,  2).  He  said  he 
would  look  to  his  ways  and  bridle  his 
tongue  ;  but  presently  after  he  shows 
how  he  broke  his  word  (verse  3). 

Verses  36,  37.  The  power  of  evil 
circumscribed.  1.  Though  evil  is  a 
power,  it  is  not  the  greatest  power. 

2.  Evil  is  checked  and  limited  by  the 
superior  power  of  law.  3.  Law 
enforces  its  authority  by  adequate 
penalties.  4.  When  the  limits  of 
law  are  transgressed,  its  penalties  are 
inflicted.  5.  The  extreme  penalty  of 
violated  law  is  death. 

Yerse  39.  The  temptations  of 
avarice.  1.  Are  irresistible  to  the 
depraved.  2.  Lead  to  the  transgres- 
sion of  hitherto  observed  restrictions. 

3.  Allure  the  victim  to  inevitable 
destruction. 

"And  they  told  Shimei  " — either 
for  good  or  for  evil  will ;  so  shall 
a  man  sooner  or  later  hear  of  his 
faults,  either  by  his  friends  or  his 
foes ;  and  malice,  though  an  ill  judge, 
may  be  a  good  informer. — Tra/pp. 

Verse  40.  ''And  Shimei  went  to 
Gath.  Sin,  the  way  of  death.  The 
walker  therein  is — 1 .  Passion-blinded. 
2.  Devil-driven.  3.  Judgment- 
stricken. 

—  **  And  it  was  told  Solomon." 
Kings  have  long  ears,  and  more  eyes 
than  their  own. 

Verse  42,  43.  The  precept  here 
was  a  mutual  adjuration.  Shimei 
swore  not  to  go ;  Solomon  swore  his 
death  if  he  went.  The  one  oath  must 
be  revenged ;  the  other  must  be  kept. 
If  Shimei  were  false  in  offending, 
Solomon  will  be  just  in  punishing. — 
Bishop  Hall. 

Oaths  should  bind  to  good  abearance 
(behaviour) ;  but  some  can  play  with 
them  as  apes  do  with  nuts,  or  mon- 
keys with  their  collars,  which  they 


slip  on  and  off  again  at  pleasure.— 
Trapp,  Perjury  is  a  crime  for  which 
the  avenging  God  will  visit. 

Verses  41-46.  This  proceeding 
appears  very  harsh  to  the  subjective 
modem  view  of  history.  Shimei  has 
surely,  it  is  thought,  committed  no 
great  offence,  if  he  has  brought  back 
his  slaves,  which  he  probably  bought 
and  paid  for  with  hard  cash,  and  thus 
helped  himself  to  his  own  lawful 
property.  Perhaps  he  thought  also 
that  his  journey  to  Gath  was  no 
transgression  of  the  royal  command, 
because  he  did  not  require  to  cross  the 
Kidron.  On  such  grounds  expositors 
have  endeavoured  to  excuse  Shimei, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  prove  Solo- 
mon's rigour.  But  Shimei  cannot  be 
exculpated.  The  subtle  evasion  is 
refused  by  the  plain  words  of  the  text, 
which  forbid  him  to  go  any  whither 
out  of  Jerusalem  (verses  36,  42) ;  and 
the  reference  to  the  cash  which  his 
slaves  may  have  cost  him  is  no  less 
an  empty  argument.  If  Shimei 
wished  to  remain  true  to  his  oath, 
he  should  have  informed  the  king  of 
the  flight  of  his  slaves,  petitioned 
him  for  leave  to  bring  them  back,  and 
awaited  his  directions ;  but  he  ought 
not  to  have  lightly  broken  his  oath. 
In  his  perjury  lay  his  guilt,  and  he 
had  no  excuse,  as  Solomon  showed 
him;  to  which  was  added  his  high 
treason  against  David.  In  the  punish- 
ment of  his  crime  Solomon  thus  only 
vindicated  the  Divine  right,  and 
might  therefore  have  regarded  it  as  a 
retribution  suspended  over  Shimei  for 
his  transgression,  for  which  God  will 
bless  him  by  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise  made  to  David  of  the  per- 
petual duration  of  his  throne. — Reil. 

A  sure,  though  late  judgment 
attends  those  that  dare  lift  up  either 
their  hand  or  tongue  against  the  sacred 
persons  of  God's  vicegerents.  How 
much  less  will  the  God  of  heaven 
suffer  unavenged  the  insolencies  and 
blasphemies  against  His  own  Divine 
Majesty  !  It  is  a  fearful  word,  He 
should  not  be  just  if  he  should  hold 
these  guiltless. — Bishop  Ball, 


46 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINOS.  ciiaf.  hi. 


CHAPTER  III. 
THE    RULE    OF    WISDOM. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt— Probably  Vaphres, 
but  Winer  suggests  Fsusonnes.  An  alliance  with  so  mighty  a  royal  house  shows  thut  the 
Hebrew  kingdom  enjoyed  high  renown,  and  commanded  influ'jnce  among  the  nations.  From 
the  bigyptian  monuments  a  supposed  portrait  of  this  piiricess  has  been  obtained.  The 
'•  Song  of  Solomon "  is  supposed  to  have  her  as  the  immediate  theme.  Brought  her  into 
the  city  of  David — Not  admitted  into  the  stronghold  of  Zion,  where  the  ark  was  ;  probably 
he  found  fur  her  a  temporary  home  in  his  mother's  residence  (Song  iii.  4,  viii.  2)  while  his 
own  palace  was  building.  This  marriage  is  never  censured  in  Scripture,  so  that  it  is  natural 
to  couclude  she  became  a  proselyte  to  the  Hebrew  religion.  To  this,  Psalm  xlv.  10-1  i  may 
refer,  a  Psahn  which  is  thought,  in  addition  to  the  Canticles,  to  have  been  composed  by  Solomuu 
in  her  honour.  Verse  2.  Only  the  people  sacrificed  in  high  places  -  This  is  not  recorded  as 
a  wrong  act,  but  as  rendered  necessary  until  the  Temple  could  accommodate  then.  Verse  4. 
The  king  went  to  Gibeon  to  worship  there  :  for  the  tabernacle  was  now  there  (2  Ghron.  i.  3), 
Called   the  great  high  place^   because  of  that  fact.     High  places^   PiSO'^i  »-^m  hills,    and 

T 

mountain  heights :  were  chosen  by  all  ancient  nations  for  worship  and  sacrifice.  Dangt  r  rose  out 
of  this  temporarily  permitted  practice  (Deut.  xii.  13-14) ;  but  in  Solomon's  conduct  now  there 
was  nothing  wrong.  After  the  Temple  was  completed,  the  "  high  places  "  should  have  been 
abandoned ;  but  the  habit  had  become  formed,  and  hence  the  snare.  A  thousand  burnt 
offerings — As  an  act  of  national  consecration  and  homage  to  Jehovah  ;  its  motive  being, 
"  Solomon  loved  the  Lord"  (verse  3).  Verse  5.  In  Gibeon  the  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon — 
Probably  during  this  sacrificial  festival.     Verse  7.  A  little  child :  ]t;3p  Tj^J)  a  weak  boy  \ 

but  it  is  an  error  to  suppose  him  only  twelve  years  of  age  (as  say  the  Rabbins,  and  after  them 
Keil) ;  for  David  called  him  a  *'  man  "  (chapter  ii.  9)  before  this  incident,  and  after  forty  3  ears' 
reign  he  is  called  ]pt  "  old  "  (chapter  xi.  4)  ;  hence  he  must  have  been  at  least  twenty- 
years  of  age.  But  he  felt  himself  a  mere  "child"  in  matters  of  royal  responsibility  and 
national  government.    Verse  9.  An  understanding  heart  J^D^  ^7  "a  heart  hearkening 

to  the  voice  of  God"  (Keil)  ;  "  obedient  heart"  (Luther) ;  cor  docile  (Vulgate)  ;  literally,  a 
hearing  hearty  not  self-confident,  but  eager  to  learn.  Verse  11.  To  discern  judgment — 
Lit.,  to  hear  judgment;  and  Lange  observes ''aright  sentence  depends  upon  xYvq  hearing^ 
i.e.,  the  trial  of  the  parties  ;  and  for  this,  understanding  and  judgment  are  most  requisite  for 
the  judge  "  (comp.  2  Sam.  xiv.  17).     Verse  13.  Not  asked  ;  both  riches  and  honour :  '7133 

honour  is  here  promised  as  answering  to  "  the  life  of  thine  enemies"  (verse  11),  and  may 
therefore  be  regarded  as  a  promise  of  military  honour,  victory  over  enemies,  or  the  glory  to  be 
won  by  the  bloodless  triumphs  of  his  far-famed  wisdom.  Verse  15.  Behold,  it  was  a  dream — 
yet  not  a  mere  creation  of  the  fancy,  but  a  real  incident,  "a  divine  vision  in  a  dream 
(Theodoreti).  The  sequel  proved  it  to  have  been  more  than  a  dream.  Verse  16.  Harlots — 
The  Rabbins  derive  ili^T  from  ]1t,  to  feed,  nourish ;  and  the  Targumist  translates  the 
word  here,  and  in  Josh.  ii.  1,  by  ]p^^l3,  pundekon,  hostesxes,  tavern-keepers.  Verse  20. 
Laid  her  dead  child  in  my  bosom  — In  order  to  escape  the  suspicion  and  charge  of  having 
killed  her  own  child.    Verse  26.  Her  bowels  yearned  upon  her  son :  D''0n"1»  a  Hebrew 

phrase  for  the  seat  of  feeling,  hence  here  '•  the  tender  mother  love  "  (Keil)  ;  "for  her  motherly 
heart  burned  for  her  son"  (Luther).     Verse  27.  Saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  was  in  him 
Not  that  there  was  anything  supernatural  in  Solomon's  method  of  settling  this  dispute,  but 
that  it  proved  this  youthful  king  had  penetrating  discernment  and  acquaintance  with  the 
workitigs  of  the  human  heart. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-4. 

The  Paradoxes  of  a  Defective  Piett. 

"We  obtain  a  glimpse  in  these  verses  of  the  state  of  religion  in  the  nation  at  this 
period.  The  enemies  of  Solomon  had  been  despatched,  the  throne  was  estab- 
lished in  the  popular  affection,  and  the  goveiiiment  of  tho  youtliful  king  had 

47 


CHAP.  HI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


already  won  the  respect  of  surrounding  nations.  The  only  thing  that  indicated 
the  kingdom  was  not  so  thoroughly  estabKshed  in  all  respects  as  it  might  be, 
was  the  unsettled  condition  of  public  worship.  **  Only  the  people  sacrificed  in 
high  places."  The  practices  of  the  heathen  still  clung  to  the  worshippers  of  the 
one  living  and  true  God.  The  growth  of  the  religious  life  of  a  people  is  slow  : 
it  is  a  long  time  before  all  traces  of  a  previous  period  of  imperfection  and  debase- 
ment disappear.  The  hest  guarantee  of  permanency  in  all  earthly  governments 
is  a  strong,  healthy,  propagative  piety;  and  in  the  process  of  development 
towards  a  more  perfect  knowledge  and  experience  many  contradictions  will 
appear. 

I.  That  piety  may  include  a  devout  love  of  God,  and  yet  be  defective. 

**  And  Solomon  loved  the  Lord."  So  far  good.  It  does  not  say  he  loved  the 
Lord  with  all  his  heart.  The  command  in  this  respect  was  most  explicit,  and 
frequently  repeated  (Dent.  xiii.  3,  xxx.  6  ;  Matt.  xxii.  37  ;  Mark  xii.  30,  33 , 
Luke  X.  27).  The  religion  of  some  is  "puTely  intellectual ;  they  conceive  nohle 
ideas  of  God;  they  construct  an  ideal  paradise,  and  adorn  and  fill  it  with  bright 
poetic  fancies ;  they  scorn  to  hetray  the  least  feeling — this  would  be  altogether 
too  gross  and  sensual  :  they  live  in  an  ever-revolving  circle  of  refined  mental 
intoxication.  The  religion  of  others  is  all  emotional ;  they  have  tears  for  every- 
body and  everything ;  they  are  a  power  in  society,  and  they  know  it,  for  we 
are  all  most  easily  moved  through  our  sympathies.  But  excess  of  feeling  is 
penicious— it  over-rides  the  judgment,  and  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  weakness 
and  folly.  The  victim  of  emotion  goads  himself  in  vam  efi'orts  to  produce 
certain  sensational  effects  which  will  not  admit  of  repetition  according  to  order, 
and  at  last  sinks  into  a  condition  of  helplessness,  and  is  constantly  employed  in 
a  morbid  dissection  of  his  own  miserable  and  over- wrought  feelings.  The 
religion  of  others  cons^ists  in  a  blind  and  dogged  devotion  to  some  one  moral 
precept ;  it  is  obtruded  into  everything ;  it  is  the  oracle  to  interpret  every 
problem,  the  key  to  fit  the  complicated  wards  of  human  opinion  and  unlock 
every  mystery ;  it  is  with  them  the  infallible  touchstone  by  which  to  test  the 
religion  of  everybody  else.  Such  people  have  no  conception  of  the  harmony  and 
continuity  of  universal  truth.  It  is  possible  to  love  God  with  a  devout  and 
reverential  afiection,  and  yet  be  defective  in  the  realization  and  practical 
presentment  of  the  religious  life. 

II.  That  piety  may  influence  the  practical  outgoings  of  the  individual  life, 

and  yet  be  defective.  "  Walking  in  the  statutes  of  David  his  father."  These 
** statutes"  referred,  not  only  to  the  directions  which  had  been  specially 
enjoiaed  on  Solomon  by  his  father  David  (1  Kings  ii.  2-4  ;  1  Chr.  xxviii.  8,  9), 
but  also  to  the  Divine  commandments  which  David  loved,  and  (notwithstanding 
some  grievous  falls)  ordinarily  practised.  They  who  love  God  will  strive  to 
regulate  their  every-day  life  according  to  the  Divine  precepts,  and  in  imitation 
of  the  holiest  examples.  The  best  of  human  examples  is  imperfect;  and  the 
most  devoted  and  conscientious  Christian  worker  is  painfully  conscious  of 
constantly  coming  far  short  of  his  own  ideal  of  duty.  There  are  contradictions 
in  the  individual  Christian  life  difficult  to  reconcile — the  most  saintly  have  to 
mourn  over  innumerable  defects. 

III.  That  piety  may  be  demonstrative  in  acts  of  worship,  and  yet  be 
defective.  "He  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in  high  places"  (verse  3).  The 
heathen  were  accustomed  to  perform  their  religious  rites  on  the  summit  of  lofty 
mountains,  under  the  idea  that  they  were  thus  nearer  Deity  and  heaven. 
Abraham  built  his  altars  on  mountains  (Gen.  xii.  8 ;  xxii.  2),  and  worshipped  in  a 
grove  (Gen.  xxi.  33) — whence  the  custom  among  the  Jews  was  derived,  and  for 
which  they  were  not  reprehensible  till  the  law  obliged  them  to  worship  in  one 

4tt 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTATtY:   KINGS.  ohaf.  III. 


place  (Dent.  xii.  5,  6).  The  law  did  not  forbid  **  high  places  "  directly,  but  only 
by  implication.  It  required  tlic  utter  destruction  of  all  the  high  places  which  had 
been  polluted  by  idolatrous  rites  (Deut.  xii.  2).  The  injunction  to  offer  sacri- 
fices nowhere  but  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  (Lev.  xvii.  3-5)  was  an  indirect 
prohibition  of  liigh-places,  or,  at  least,  of  the  use  which  the  Israelites  made  of 
them ;  but  there  was  some  real  reason  to  question  whether  this  was  a  command 
intended  to  come  into  force  until  the  place  was  chosen  where  the  Lord  would 
cause  His  name  to  dwell  (Deut.  xii.  11,  14).  The  result  was  that  high  places 
were  used  for  the  worship  of  Jehovah  from  the  time  of  the  Judges  downwards 
(Judg.  \i.  25;  xiii.  16;  1  Sam.  vii.  10,  xiii.  9,  xiv.  35,  xvi.  5;  1  Chron. 
xxi.  26),  with  an  entire  unconsciousness  of  guilt  on  the  part  of  those  who  used 
them.  And  God  so  far  "winked"  at  this  ignorance  that  He  accepted  the 
worship  thus  offered  Him,  as  appears  from  the  vision  vouchsafed  to  Solomon  on 
this  occasion.  There  were  two  reasons  ior  the  prohibition  of  high  places : — 1st, 
the  danger  of  the  old  idolatiy  creeping  back  if  the  old  localities  were  retained 
for  worship  ;  and,  2nd,  the  danger  to  the  unity  of  the  nation  if  there  should  be 
more  than  one  legitimate  religious  centre.  The  existence  of  worsliip  at  high 
places  did,  in  fact,  facilitate  the  division  of  the  kingdom. — Speaker'' s  Commentary. 
The  worship  of  God  is  not  confined  to  any  one  particular  spot — the  devotion  of 
the  worshipper,  and  the  manifestations  of  Divine  blessing,  consecrate  the  locality. 
We  may  worship  God  with  all  the  proprieties  of  external  ceremonial,  and  with 
all  the  ardour  of  a  devout  spirit ;  and  yet  the  religion  of  the  life  be  defective. 
Few  men  carry  into  all  the  departments  of  practical  duty  the  holy  and  exalted 
feeling  realized  in  their  best  moments  at  the  Mercy  Seat. 

IV.  That  piety  may  be  liberal  in  sacrifices,  and  yet  be  defective.    "A 

thousand  burnt  offerings  did  Solomon  offer  upon  that  altar."  A  sacrifice  of  a 
thousand  victims  was  an  act  of  royal  magnificence  suited  to  the  greatness  of 
Solomon.  So  Xerxes  offered  a  thousand  oxen  at  Troy  (Herod,  vii.  43).  We 
are  not  to  suppose  that  Solomon  offered  sacrifice  with  his  own  hand ;  such  a 
task  was  beyond  the  power  of  a  single  person  to  do.  He  simply  presented  the 
victims.  Scores  of  priests  officiated  on  such  occasions,  and  the  sacred  festival 
lasted  many  days.  Where  God  sows  plentifully,  he  expects  to  reap  accordingly  ; 
and  those  who  truly  love  Him  and  His  worship  will  not  grudge  the  expenses 
of  their  religion.  The  liberality  of  the  wealthy  is  the  easiest  part  of  Christian 
duty,  and  few  give  to  God's  cause  in  proportion  to  their  means.  Giving  is,  to 
some  natures,  the  severest  test  of  a  genuine  piety,  and  one  of  its  best  evidences. 
There  may  be  a  princely  generosity  in  giving,  while  there  is  a  niggardliness  in 
doing.  The  most  opulent  sacrifices  cannot  atone  for  active,  loving,  faithful 
service. 

V.  That  piety  may  be  associated  with  great  worldly  affluence,  and  yet  be 
defective.  **And  Solomon  made  affinity  with  Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt."  It 
was  an  evidence  of  the  importance  into  which  the  kingdom  of  Israel  had  risen 
that  Solomon  should  succeed  in  forming  an  alliance  with  Egypt,  the  most 
ancient  and  splendid  of  the  Eastern  monarchies.  It  was  the  first  intercourse 
between  these  nations  since  the  time  of  the  Exodus.  Its  immediate  effect  was 
probably  favourable  to  Solomon,  by  increasing  his  fame  and  comparative 
importance  among  the  nations,  and  adding  to  his  dominions  (chap.  ix.  16). 
Riches  fiowed  in  upon  him,  kings  courted  his  favour  and  were  proud  to  form 
alliances  with  his  house.  There  is  no  reason  why  piety  should  not  flourish  in 
the  king's  palace  as  well  as  in  the  humble  cottage :  there  are  many  among  the 
great  and  wealthy  who  fear  God  and  work  righteousness.  It  is  not  an  easy 
matter  to  settle  which  are  the  most  difficult  to  bear — the  dangers  of  the  rich, 
or  the  temptations  and  miseries  of  the  starving  poor.  It  is  possible  to  be 
surrounded  with  temporal  abundance,  while  the  heart  is  restless  and  unsatisfied, 

*  49 


CHAP.  III.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KIN08. 


Solomon  nad  all  that  his  soul  could  desire,  and  the  result  was  detrimental  rather 
than  helpful  to  his  piety.  His  marriage  with  the  Egyptian  princess,  though 
not  formally  condemned,  opened  the  way  to  other  alliances  that  were  disastrous. 
According  to  the  letter  of  the  law,  only  marriage  with  the  Canaanitish  tribes  was 
forbidden  to  the  Jews  (Ex.  xxxiv.  16) ;  and  inter-marriage  with  nations  outside 
of  Canaan  was  not  only  not  prohibited,  but  tolerated  in  the  examples,  never 
rebuked,  of  Joseph's  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  an  Egyptian  priest  (Gen. 
xli.  45);  of  Moses'  marriage  with  a  daughter  of  Midian  (Ex.  ii.  21);  and  that 
of  Eoaz  and  Ruth.  But  though  the  law  did  not  forbid  these  marriages,  they 
were  not  in  harmony  with  its  spirit;  and  it  was  by  foreign  marriages  that 
Solomon  was  at  length  seduced  from  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  Piety  is  safest 
when  it  is  humblest ;  and  only  as  the  believer  retains  his  humble,  child-like 
trust  in  God,  amid  increasing  temporal  prosperity,  will  he  escape  the  perils  that 
threaten. 

Lessons: — 1.  There  is  danger  in  resting  satisfied  with  the  mere  externalism  of 
religion.  2.  There  may  he  much  that  is  morally  good  in  individual  character y  and 
yet  a  serious  deficiency  in  piety.  3.  True  piety  demands  the  full  surrender  to  God 
of  willy  affection,  and  life. 

This  passage  may  be  also  homiletically  treated  as  follows  :— 

Piety  Limited  by  Opportunity. 

I.  That  piety  is  limited  by  individual  experience.    1.   It  is  limited  by  the 

individual  experience  of  the  love  of  God.  *'  Solomon  loved  the  Lord  "  (verse  3). 
He  was  first  loved  by  Him,  and  was  thus  called  t7ec?ic?/aA,  the  darling  of  Jehovah. 
Our  love  to  God  is  but  the  reflex  of  His  love  to  us  (1  John  iv.  19).  Our  piety 
receives  its  character  and  attains  its  limits  by  the  nature  and  degree  of  our  love 
to  God  :  as  our  love  is,  so  is  our  piety.  Love  is  the  source  and  power  of  the  reli- 
gious life,  and  the  stream  can  never  rise  higher  than  the  fountain.  2.  It  is 
limited  by  the  examples  of  those  we  are  taught  to  imitate.  Solomon  walked  in  the 
statutes  of  David  his  father,  and  strove  to  copy  his  example.  A  good  man  is  a 
pattern  for  all  to  imitate  ;  and  all  men  are  more  potently  influenced  by  a  living 
example  of  piety,  than  by  the  most  elaborate  code  of  precepts,  however 
eloquently  explained  or  cogently  enforced.  It  was  a  high  commendation  to 
the  Thessalonian  converts  that  they  became  imitators  of  the  highest  patterns  of 
Christian  excellence  (1  Thess.  i.  6).  All  human  models  are  imperfect,  and 
the  characters  shaped  and  influenced  by  them  must  partake  of  their  imperfections. 
The  example  of  Christ  is  the  absolute,  all-perfect  standard,  the  great  infallible 
pattern  after  which  the  noblest  life  must  ever  be  moulded.  3.  It  is  limited  by 
individual  capacity.  The  dew  falls  in  quantity  sufficient  to  water  the  whole 
earth,  but  there  is  an  endless  variety  in  the  capacities  of  the  flower-cups  held  out 
to  receive  the  refreshing  draught ;  some  are  so  small  that  one  crystal  drop  each 
would  fill  their  tiny  fragile  goblets.  So  the  blessing  of  heaven  descends  upon 
mankind  in  superabundant  measure,  but  there  is  a  vast  diversity  in  the  capacity 
of  the  individual  recipient.  The  grandest  created  nature  is  bounded  by  its 
finiteness.     If  man  were  not  nnite  he  could  not  grow. 

II.  That  piety  is  limited  by  the  opportunities  for  its  cultivation.    "  Only 

the  people  sacrificed  in  high  places,  because  there  was  no  house  built  unto  the 
name  of  the  Lord"  (verse  2).  The  frequent  public  worship  of  God  is  founded  in 
a  necessity  and  tendency  of  human  nature.  Man  will  worship,  and  if  he  is  not 
constantly  directed  to  the  great  Object  of  all  true  and  acceptable  worship, 
and  spiritually  assisted  in  the  exercise,  he  is  apt  to  regard  the  vast  fabric  of 
created  things  as  God  ;  and  nature,  with  her  grand,  silent  motions,  becomes  the 
object  of  his  pantheistic  idolatry.  The  multiplicity  and  accessibleness  of  Christian 
50 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   KINGS,  OHAP.  ili. 


ordinances  in  the  present  day  lead  many  to  undervalue  their  importance.  But  a 
compulsory  and  prolonged  absence  from  the  house  of  God,  aud  the  conscious 
depreciation  in  spirituality,  rectify  the  delusion,  and  compel  the  sufferer  to 
estimate  more  highly  than  ever  the  public  means  of  grace. 

II.  That  piety  is  limited  by  the  associations  and  conditions  of  national 
life.  **  And  Solomon  made  affinity  with  Pharaoh'*  (verse  1).  The  alliance  with 
Efjypt,  and  growing  importance  and  wealth  of  the  nation,  would  have  a  powerful 
influence  in  developing  and  forming  the  character  of  the  nation  at  that  time. 
National  life  is  the  outcome  and  representation  of  many  conflicting  and  contra- 
dictory causes,  some  apparent,  some  hidden ;  but  all  active.  Climate,  natural 
scenery,  employments,  modes  of  living,  intercourse  with  each  other  and  with  other 
peoples,  all  act  and  react  in  giving  form,  colour,  tone,  and  spirit  to  the  national 
character.  The  ruggedness  and  strength  of  the  free  mountaineers  are  strangely 
contrasted  with  the  refinement,  softness,  and  supineness  of  the  inhabitants 
of  the  sultry  plains ;  and  the  causes  of  the  difference  are  evident.  And  so  the 
associations  and  conditions  of  national  life  affect  and  limit  the  piety  of  a  people. 
There  will  be  more  vigour  and  enterprise  in  the  religion  of  a  nation  struggling 
for  independence  and  extended  commerce,  than  in  a  nation  reposing  in  content- 
ment, and  revelling  in  luxuries  and  riches.  Success  in  either  individuals  or 
communities  is  often  a  fatal  advantage,  and  the  period  of  greatest  prosperity 
registers  the  beginning  of  decline. 

Lessoxs  : — 1 .  That  the  opportunities  for  cultivating  personal  piety  a/re  abundant. 
2.  That  it  is  an  imperative  duty  to  strive  after  a  higher  standa/rd  of  piety.  3.  That 
the  actual  use  made  of  opportunities  will  be  the  measu/re  of  personal  piety  enjoyed, 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Yerses  1-4.  National  reformation,  but  it  has  also  a  significance  in  the 

1.  Meets   with   rebellious  opposition,  history  of  redemption.     The  great  and 

2.  Is  gradual  in  accomplishment.  3.  mighty  king  of  the  land  which  for 
Must  be  wisely  conducted.  4.  Is  Israel  had  been  "the  house  of  bond- 
facilitated  by  promoting  amicable  rela-  age,"  in  which  it  had  eaten  "the 
tions  with  other  nations.  5.  Aims  at  bread  of  affliction "  (Ex.  xx.  2  ; 
strengthening  the  internal  government.  Deut.  xvi.  3),  gives  now  to  the  king 
6.  Is  permanent  in  its  results  only  of  this  once  despised  and  oppressed 
when  it  grows  out  of  a  genuine  reli-  people  his  daughter  in  marriage,  and 
gious  life.  must,  in  the  providence  of  God,  con- 
tribute  to   the   strengthening  of  the 

Verse  1.  Marriage.  1.  An  import-  Israelitish  throne,  and  to  the  increase 
ant  crisis  in  individual  life.  2.  Not  to  of  the  power  and  glory  of  the  Israel- 
be  entered  into  without  serious  thought,  itish  kingdom.     God  has  the  hearts  of 

3.  May  make  or  mar  the  happiness  of  all  men  in  his  hands,  and  can  bring  it 
two  lives.  4.  Is  honourable  in  all.  to  pass  that  they  who  have  been  in- 
6.  Broadens  our  sympathies  for  the  imical  to  us,  and  have  despised  us,  shall 
race.  b.  Has  the  divine  sanction.  hold  us  in  great  honour  (Piov.  xvi.  7  ; 
—  Although  marriage  with  persons  of  Gjh.  xxxi.  24). — Lange. 

unlike  faith  be  allowed,  and  is  in  itself  —  This  seems  to  have  been  Solomon's 

no  sin  (1  Cor.  vii.  14),  it  is,  neverthe-  first  act  of  foreign  policy,  and  was, 

less,  better  that  one  avoid  it,  because  perhaps,  designed   to    counteract   the 

the    unbeliever  perverts  the  believer  influence  of  Hadad,  the  Edomite,  who 

more  frequently  than  the  believer  con-  had  fled  to  Egypt  during  David's  reign, 

verts  the  unbeliever.     Solomon's  mar-  and  was  now  securely  housed  in  the 

riage  with  a  daughter  of  Pharaoh  was,  royal   family    (see    chap.  xi.   14-22). 

strictly  speaking,  a  political  alliance,  Everything  in  the  history  of  Hadad 

51 


OBAP.  III. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


naturally  conspired  to  make  him  a 
settled  enemy  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel ; 
and,  perhaps,  at  a  later  period,  he  had 
a  hand  with  Jeroboam  in  planning  the 
revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel. 
Solomon  doubtless  expected  to 
strengthen  his  kingdom  by  this 
affinity  with  Egypt,  and  to  prevent 
invasion  from  that  quarter. —  Whedon. 

—  '*  Until  he  had  made  an  end  of 
building  the  house  of  the  Lord."  This 
Solomon  would  finish  before  he  would 
set  up  the  queen's  palace — such  was 
his  zeal  while  young ;  but  he  suffered 
sad  decays  afterwards.  I  read  of  a 
holy  man  who  oft  prayed  that  he  might 
keep  up  his  young  zeal  with  his  old 
discretion. — Trapp, 

Verse  2.  **  Only  the  people  sacri- 
ficed in  high  places."  The  particle 
*'  only "  has  reference  to  the  last 
sentence  of  chap.  ii.  46.  This  is  not 
mentioned  as  a  circumstance  of  blame 
either  in  the  people  or  in  the  king ; 
for  had  they  not  sacrificed  and 
burnt  incense  on  high  places,  they 
could  not  have  sacrificed  or  burnt 
incense  at  all.  And  it  appears  by 
the  sequel  that  the  sacrifice  at  Gibeon 
was  acceptable.  —  Bishop  Horsley. 
Possibly  Solomon  thought  it  better 
to  allow  an  error  in  a  circumstance 
than  to  occasion  a  neglect  of  the  sub- 
stance of  God's  worship,  which  he 
apprehended  would  follow  upon  a 
severe  prohibition  of  that  practice, 
because  the  people's  hearts  were  gene- 
rally and  constantly  set  upon  these 
high  places,  as  appears  from  all  the 
following  history ;  and  they  were  not 
willing  to  submit  to  so  much  trouble- 
and  charge  as  the  bringing  of  all  their 
sacrifices  to  one  place  would  cause  ;  nor 
would  they  yield  to  it  until  the  temple 
was  built,  which  he  knew  would 
easily  incline  and  oblige  them  to  it. 
And  that  being  speedily  to  be  done, 
he  might  think  it  more  advisable  rather 
to  delay  the  execution  of  that  law  of 
God  for  an  approaching  season,  wherein 
he  doubted  not  they  would  be  sweetly 
and  freely  drawn  to  it,  than  at  present 
to  drive  them  to  it  by  force,  although 
these  and  all  other  prudential  con- 
52 


siderations  should  have  given  place  to 
the  will  and  wisdom  of  God. — Fool. 

Verse  3.  "  Walking  in  the  statutes 
of  David  his  father" — the  customs, 
usages,  and  laws  of  religious  conduct 
practised  by  David.  But  it  does  not 
appear  that  David  ever  sacrificed  or 
burnt  incense  in  high  places.  The 
contrary  is  implied  in  this  verse ;  and 
it  is  more  than  intimated  that  though 
this  worship  was  tolerated  because  not 
offered  to  false  gods,  and  because  there 
was  no  house  yet  built  to  Jehovah, 
still  both  Solomon  and  his  people  were 
censurable  for  allowing  it  such  great  ex- 
tent and  prominence,  and  thereby  paving 
the  way  for  future  idolatry  in  Israel. 
It  would  have  been  safer  and  better  to 
have  sacrificed  only  before  the  ark  of 
the  covenant,  as  Solomon  did  after  his 
return  from  Gibeon  (verse  15),  or  else 
only  at  Gibeon,  where  the  tabernacle 
was  (1  Chron.  xvi.  39). —  Whedon. 

Verses  2-4.  Solomon's  sacrificial 
festivity.  1.  When  he  celebrated  it — 
at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  to  return 
thanks  for  the  past  assistance  of  God, 
and  to  implore  its  continuance.  2. 
Where  he  kept  it — upon  the  high  place 
at  Gibeon,  because  no  temple  was  built 
as  yet,  the  place  of  prayer  in  the  Old 
and  in  the  JN"ew  Testament.  Though 
God  dwell  not  in  temples  built  by 
human  hands,  yet  it  is  needful  for 
each  congregation  to  have  a  house 
where,  with  one  mouth,  it  praises  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  Where  this  need 
is  not  felt,  there  is  a  defect  in  faith 
and  love  for  the  Lord. — Lange, 

Verse  3.  He  loved  the  Lord.  This 
is  the  best  and  greatest  thing  that  can 
be  said  of  a  man.  So  every  one  that 
loves  the  world  has  not  in  him  the  love 
of  the  Father;  this  is  only  where 
God  is  loved  above  all  things.  His  word 
observed,  and  His  commandments  ful- 
filled with  joy  and  delight  (1  John  ii. 
5,  15;  V.  3).  Happy  is  he  who,  to 
the  question  of  the  Lord,  '*  Lovest  thou 
me  ?"  can  return  the  answer  of  Peter 
(John  xxi.  17).  Because  Solomon 
loved  the  Lord,  he  honoured  also 
his  father,  and  walked  in  his  ways. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap  hi. 


The  want  of  filial  piety  in  our  day  and  as  desiring  to  begin  his  reign 
comes  from  want  of  love  to  the  Lord.  with  God,  there  he  offers  no  less  than 
— Lange.  a   thousand   sacrifices. — Bishop  Hall. 

Verse  4.  Gibeon  was  well  worthy  If  we  should  begin  our  daily  work 

to  be  the  chief,  yea,   the  only   high  with  the  sacrifice  of  our  prayer,  how 

place.     There  was  the  hallowed  altar  much  more  our  life's  calling,  and  every 

of  God ;   there    was    the    tabernacle,  weighty  undertaking  upon  which  our 

though,  as  then,  severed  from  the  ark ;  own  and  the  well-being  of  other  men 

thither  did  young  Solomon    go   up,  depend! — Lange, 

E0MILETIC8  OF   VERSES  6-16. 

A  Deeam  op  Wisdom  ai^d  its  Reality. 

A  PEEiOD  of  special  devotion  is  often  succeeded  by  the  brightest  visions  of  God, 
and  by  rich  endowments  of  supernatural  grace.  In  ancient  times  a  common 
mode  of  Divine  revelation  to  man  was  by  a  dream  (see  Num.  xii.  6;  Matt.  i.  20 ; 
Matt.  ii.  13,  19,  &c.)  In  such  cases  the  soul  was  raised  to  a  state  of  Divine 
ecstacy  and  illumination,  and  held  conscious  intercourse  with  God  and  heavenly 
intelligences  ;  but  when  the  soul  woke  to  its  natural  condition  of  consciousness, 
the  person  knew  it  was  a  dream,  though  the  reality  of  the  Divine  communi- 
cation remained.  So  God  appeared  to  Solomon  in  a  dream  ;  and  the  youthful 
king  saw  more  with  his  eyes  shut  than  ever  they  could  see  open — even  Him 
who  is  Invisible !  **  Solomon  worships  God  by  day :  God  appears  to  him  by  night. 
Well  may  we  look  to  enjoy  God  when  we  have  served  Him ;  the  night  cannot 
but  be  happy,  whose  day  hath  been  holy.'*  The  experience  of  Solomon  during 
the  night  spent  within  the  sacred  city  of  Gibeon  had  a  mighty  influence  upon 
his  future  conduct  and  destiny, 

I.  That  wisdom  is  a  Divine  gift  (verses  5, 12).  1.  Theordinwry  endoxomenU 
of  wisdom  are  from  God  (Jas.  i.  1 7).  The  gifts  of  genius  may  exist  apart  from  the 
personal  enjoyment  otDivine  grace.  Tremendous  is  the  responsibility  of  men  who 
are  endowed  with  superior  talents,  and  great  will  be  the  punishment  for  their 
abuse.  Bezaleel  was  "  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God  in  wisdom,  understanding, 
and  knowledge,  and  in  all  manner  of  workmanship" ;  but  this  does  not  imply 
that  he  possessed  the  highest  gifts  of  grace.  It  is  said  of  Othniel  that  **the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,  and  he  judged  Israel"  (Judg.  iii.  10) ;  the 
power  conferred  being  not  necessarily  connected  with  his  piety,  but  referred  to 
his  superior  tact  in  governing  the  people.  Many  of  the  sons  of  genius  have 
not  been  children  of  the  Spirit.  Scotland's  most  honoured  bard  was  the  slave 
of  one  of  the  lowest  appetites,  and  fell  a  victim  to  its  sinful  indulgence.  The 
highest  poetic  genius  in  England  in  modem  times  was  obliged  to  banish  himself, 
because  of  his  vices,  from  the  society  of  the  honourable  and  virtuous.  Gifts  are 
often  found  where  the  graces  are  not.  We  must  not  undervalue  gifts,  for  they 
come  from  God;  but  we  must  beware  of  being  satisfied  with  them.  2.  The 
unique  wisdom  of  Solomon  was  from  God.  "  Lo,  I  have  given  thee " 
(verse  12).  It  is  the  good  pleasure  of  God  to  give  wisdom  to  them  that 
seek  for  it.  **If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God  that 
giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given  him  " 
(Jas.  i.  5).  Solomon's  wisdom  was,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  supernatural  gift,  a 
signal  dispensation  of  Divine  favour,  which  must  not  be  classed  with  natural 
acquirements,  which  are  ordinarily  obtained  by  dint  of  mental  application  alone. 
But  while  this  much  appears  upon  the  face  of  the  history,  we  must  not  suppose 
that  all  his  knowledge  was  so  special  and  supernatural  an  endowment  as  that  he 
received  it  without  any  effort  on  his  part.     He  doubtless  studied  and  toiled  like 

63 


OHAP.  in.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


other  men  for  his  acquirements;  but  he  was  divinely  and  supematurally 
assisted  in  a  manner  and  to  an  extent  which  no  other  man  ever  enjoyed.  We 
shall  see  further  in  chap.  iv.  29-34  that  Solomon's  wisdom  comprehended 
natural  science,  political  sagacity,  and  a  deep  insight  into  spiritual  truth. — 
Wliedon.  As  an  acute  philosopher,  and  a  wise,  judicious  king,  Solomon  stood 
alone — '*  There  was  not  like  unto  thee  before  thee,  neither  after  thee  shall  any 
arise  like  unto  thee."  Trapp  observes,  "He  was  not  only  wiser  than 
Trismegist,  Orpheus,  Homer,  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle,  Lycurgus,  Ptolemy ; 
but  also  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  yea,  even  Adam  himself  after  the  fall.  He 
was  the  wisest  mere  man,  take  him  for  everything,  as  ever  was ;  insomuch  as  he 
had  all  manner  of  knowledge,  natural  and  supernatural,  infused  into  him." 
Solomon  saw  around  him  the  materials  out  of  which  a  great  and  prosperous 
kingdom  could  be  made,  if  he  only  had  discretion  to  use  them  ;  and  his  prayer 
indicated  that  this  and  all  other  special  endowments  were  in  the  gift  of  God. 

II.  That  wisdom  is  to  be  diligently  sought  in  prayer.  1.  Prayer  for  wis- 
dom gratefully  recognizes  the  Divine  mercy  in  the  Messing s  already  enjoyed.  "  Thou 
hast  showed  unto  thy  servant  David  great  mercy"  (verses  6,  7).  A  good  child 
will  remember  his  father's  excellencies,  to  imitate  them,  and  draw  a  veil  over  his 
sins.  Solomon  refers  to  the  goodness  of  God,  not  only  to  his  father  David,  but 
also  to  himself  as  successor  to  the  throne.  Gratitude  for  past  mercies  is  an 
excellent  preparation  for  the  reception  of  new  benefactions.  The  search  after 
the  highest  good  should  ever  be  pursued  with  a  grateful  remembrance  of  the 
good  already  possessed.  God's  favours  are  doubly  sweet  when  transmitted  to 
us  through  the  hands  of  those  who  have  gone  before  us.  The  way  to  get  the 
entail  perpetuated  is  to  bless  God  that  it  has  hitherto  been  preserved.  2.  Prayer 
for  wisdom  humbly  recognizes  personal  incompetency.  **I  am  but  a  little 
child"  (verse  7).  Solomon,  with  graceful  modesty  and  humility,  feels  and 
acknowledges  his  youth  and  inexperience.  His  exact  age  at  this  time  is  not 
known ;  he  was  probably  not  more  than  twenty  years  of  age.  Youth,  which, 
as  a  rule,  places  freedom  in  lawlessness,  needs  before  all  things  to  ask  God 
daily  for  an  obedient  heart.  Those  who  are  employed  in  public  stations  ought 
to  be  very  sensible  of  the  weight  and  importance  of  their  work  and  their  own 
insufficiency  for  it ;  and  then  tliey  are  qualified  for  divine  conduct  and  instruc- 
tion. Absalom,  who  was  a  fool,  wished  himself  a  judge  ;  Solomon,  who  was 
a  wise  man,  trembles  at  the  undertaking,  and  suspects  his  own  fitness  for  it. 
**  I  know  not  how  to  go  out  or  come  in  " — to  sway  this  massy  sceptre,  to  rule 
this  great  people.  An  allusion  to  captains  or  shepherds,  or,  as  some  think,  to 
a  little  child,  who  learneth  of  his  mother  to  go  out  and  come  into  the  house. — 
Trapp.  It  is  an  idiomatic  expression  denoting  the  whole  official  conduct  of  a 
ruler  before  his  people  (compare  IN'umb.  xxvii.  17).  The  wisest  men  are  most 
sensible  of  their  own  ignorance.  3.  Prayer  for  wisdom  has  special  reference  to 
the  object  for  which  it  is  to  be  practically  exercised.  **  Give  thy  servant  an 
understanding  heart  to  judge  thy  people,  that  I  may  discern  between  good 
and  bad"  (verse  9).  A  monarch's  sagacity  in  the  administration  of  justice  was 
calculated  to  make  the  most  marked  impression  upon  the  popular  mind,  and 
likely  to  be  most  generally  talked  about  thi'oughout  the  land.  This  quality 
also  came  more  home  to  the  personal  concerns  of  his  subjects  than  any  other, 
and  was  for  that  reason  alone  the  more  carefully  regarded.  The  administration 
of  justice  was,  in  all  ancient  monarchies,  a?  it  is  now  in  the  East,  a  most 
important  part  of  the  royal  duties  and  functions ;  and  there  is  no  quality  more 
highly  prized  than  that  keen  discernment  in  the  royal  judge  which  detects  the 
clue  of  real  evidence  amidst  conflicting  testimony,  or  that  ready  tact  which 
devises  a  test  of  truth  where  the  evidence  aff'ords  no  clue  to  any  grounds  of 
decision. — Kitto.  The  true  wisdom  for  which  we  have  to  ask  God  does  not 
consist  in  manifold  and  great  knowledge,  but  in  that  which  enables  us  to 
54 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :   KINO 8.  chap.  ill. 


discern  hetwccn  good  and  bad,  rii^lit  and  wrong,  sin  and  duty,  trnth  and 
falsehood,  so  as  not  to  be  misled  in  judging  either  of  otluT's  actions  or  of  our 
own  (Job  xxviii.  28;  James  iii.  17;  Eph.  v.  17).  This  discernment  is  a  fruit 
of  our  spiritual  renewal  (Rom.  xii.  2). 

III.  That  wisdom  often  includes  inferior  blessings  (verse  13).  The 
way  to  temporal  blessings  is  to  be  indifferent  to  them.  Solomon  has  wisdom 
because  he  asks  for  it,  and  wealth  because  he  does  not.  God  superadds  riches 
and  honour,  and  proaiises  long  life  to  enjoy  them.  A  similar  principle  in  the 
Divine  government  is  enunciated  by  Christ — '*  Sc?k  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God 
and  his  righteousness  ;  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you"  (Matt, 
vi.  33).  The  greater  blessing  includes  all  lesser  ones.  **  So  doth  God  love 
a  good  choice,  that  He  recompenses  it  with  over  giving.  Had  Solomon  made 
wealth  his  boon,  he  had  failed  both  of  riches  and  wisdom ;  now  he  asks  the 
best,  and  speeds  of  all.  They  are  in  a  fair  way  of  hayjpiness  who  can  pray 
well." — BisJiop  Hall,  Riches  and  honour  are  then  truly  blessings  when  God 
bestows  the  wisdom  and  grace  to  improve  them  aright  (Eccles.  vii.  11). 

IV.  That  the  gift  of  wisdom  is  conditioned  on  personal  obedience  (verse 
14).  All  the  Divine  promises  are  largely  conditional.  This  wise  king,  whose  reign 
began  so  auspiciously,  failed  to  meet  the  conditions  of  long- continued  prosperity. 
'*  No  character  in  the  sacred  wiitings  disappoints  us  more  than  the  character  of 
Solomon."  As  the  condition  was  not  observed  (1  Kings  xi.  1-8),  the  right  to 
the  promise  of  lengthened  days  was  forfeited,  and  it  was  not  fulfilled.  Solomon 
can  scarcely  have  been  more  than  fifty-nine  or  sixty  at  his  death.  Length  of 
days  is  the  blessing  in  the  right  hand  of  Wisdom — typical  of  eternal  life;  but 
in  her  left  hand  are  riches  and  honour  (Prov.  iii.  16). 

V.  That  the  gift  of  wisdom  should  be  devoutly  and  joyously  acknow- 
ledged (verse  15).  1.  In  diligent  attention  to  religious  duties.  ''He  came 
to  Jerusalem,  and  stood  before  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  of  the  Lord,  and 
offered  up  burnt  offerings,  and  offered  peace  offeiings."  Solomon  deter- 
mined to  inaugurate  his  reign  by  a  grand  religious  ceremonial  at  each  of  the 
two  holy  places  which  at  this  time  divided  between  them  the  reverence  of  the 
Jews.  Having  completed  the  religious  services  at  Gibeon,  where  was  the 
Tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  and  where  he  had  received  the  Divine  blessing, 
he  proceeds  now  to  Jerusalem,  and  sacrifices  before  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant, 
which  was  in  Mount  Zion  (2  Sam.  vi.  12).  This  proceeding  symbolized  that 
coming  hour  when,  under  the  greater  than  Solomon,  all  separation  of  tabernacle 
and  ark  would  be  for  ever  past,  and  the  true  worshippers  would  advance  from  a 
culius  that  made  locality  a  test,  to  find  their  great  altar  in  the  inner  temple  of  the 
Spirit,  and  to  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth  (John  iv.  21-24).  "We 
should  give  God  praise  for  all  his  gifts,  and  for  the  promise  of  gifts  not  yet 
realized.  2.  In  promoting  the  happiness  of  others.  **  And  made  a  feast  to  all 
his  servants."  A  great  feast  naturally  followed  on  a  large  sacrifice  of  peace- 
offerings.  In  these  the  sacrificer  always  partook  of  the  flesh  of  the  victim,  and 
he  was  commanded  to  call  in  to  the  feast  theLevite,  the  stranger,  the  fatherless, 
and  the  widow  (Deut.  xiv.  29).  "We  best  employ  the  gifts  of  God  by  using 
them  to  increase  the  joy  of  those  around  us. 

Lessons: — 1.  2 he  highest  blessings  are  secured  only  hy  importunate  prayer, 
2.  To  possess  true  wisdom  is  to  possess  all  the  essentials  of  happiness. 

The  Dbeam  op  Solomon. 

Solomon  was  a  great  man — great  in  everything  he  did.  "When  he  sinned, 
great  in  sin;  when  he  worshipped,  great  in  worship.     Good  and  evil  strangely 

55 


OHAP.  III.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


met  and  battled  in  this  man's  life.  He  had  a  majestic  intellect,  an  intellect 
whose  every  thought  contained  the  wealth  of  a  proverb;  but  he  had  great 
animal  propensities  too.  The  sea  of  passion  within  him  was  deep  and  warm, 
heaved  in  resistless  waves,  and  its  surges  often  swamped  his  reason  and  his 
conscience. 

The  passage  before  us  is  the  record  of  a  dream  which  this  great  man  had  one 
night  at  Gibeon,  a  place  celebrated  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  not  mentioned  in 
the  New,  and  whose  geographical  position  cannot  be  determined  with  any 
certainty  now.     There  are  two  things  very  noteworthy  in  this  dream. 

1.  The  Mending  of  the  human  and  divine.  There  is  much  that  you  can  trace 
to  Solomon's  own  mind  in  the  nocturnal  vision  recorded  here.  It  seemed  to  he 
according  to  the  measure  of  his  capacity.  He  was  a  large-minded  man,  and  the 
dream  is  on  a  large  scale.  There  is  nothing  mean  or  small  about  it.  Pharaoh's 
dream  was  very  inferior  to  this.  He  was  a  narrow,  material-minded  man,  and 
he  dreamed  of  oxen  and  of  corn.  The  dream  of  the  Midianitish  soldier  was  a 
still  more  contemptible  thing.  A  poor,  uncultivated,  small-minded  soldier 
dreamed  that  which  was  in  accordance  with  his  capacity,  about  a  barley  cake. 
Solomon's  great  soul  took  within  the  ample  range  of  its  imagination  the  whole 
Jewish  nation,  the  Eternal  Ruler  of  the  universe,  the  righteous  providence  of 
Heaven,  and  the  everlasting  principles  of  moral  obligation.  A  small  mind  can 
never  have  large  conceptions,  either  awake  or  asleep.  The  dimensions  of  a 
man's  ideas  will  always  be  measured  by  his  capacity.  Elower-pots  cannot  grow 
the  cedars  of  Labanon — they  require  depth  of  soil  and  sweep  of  area.  It 
seemed  to  be  also  according  to  the  moral  state  of  his  mind.  The  previous  day  he 
had  been  engaged  in  religious  services.  His  whole  nature  seemed  on  fire  with 
devotion.  In  the  fourth  verse  we  are  told  that  at  Gibeon  he  sacrificed  no  less 
than  a  thousand  burnt  offerings.  A  thousand  cattle  he  ofi'ered  in  sacrifice  to  God 
in  one  act  of  devotion.  If  the  amount  of  his  sacrifice  measured  the  extent  of 
his  religious  ardour,  his  religious  feelings  on  this  occasion  must  have  reached 
the  highest  point  of  elevation.  It  was  natural,  therefore,  on  the  night  of  that 
day  the  religious  element  should  be  predominant.  The  dream  is  thoroughly 
religious.  As  the  religious  sentiment  had  flooded  his  nature  in  the  day,  it 
worked  his  imagination  in  the  night.  It  is  generally  thus.  Our  dreams  grow 
out  of  the  waking  thoughts  that  have  most  impressed  us.  Imagination  in  the 
stillness  of  the  night,  when  deep  sleep  falleth  upon  us,  brings  these  thoughts 
together,  constructs  them  into  a  fabric  often  grotesque,  strange,  and  thrilling. 
It  seemed  to  be,  moreover,  according  to  the  strongest  desire  of  his  heart.  He  had 
just  been  appointed  king  of  Israel ;  he  was  inexperienced — not  more,  perhaps, 
than  twenty  years  of  age.  The  responsibility  of  governing  a  great  country 
pressed  heavily  on  his  young  heart,  and  filled  him  with  solicitude.  He  felt 
that  to  take  the  place  of  his  father  David,  and  direct  the  destinies  of  Israel,  he 
required  that  wisdom  which  God  alone  could  bestow.  This  he  earnestly 
desires.  Our  mental  faculties  are  the  servants  of  our  desires ;  desires  are  the 
spirit  in  the  wheels  of  the  mental  machine. 

So  far,  we  see  the  human  in  this  dream ;  but  the  divine  is  manifestly  here, 
too.  The  coherency,  truthfulness,  and  sublimity  of  the  religious  thoughts,  and 
the  propriety  of  the  spirit  and  language  of  the  prayer  that  was  offered,  and  the 
fulfilment  of  the  Divine  answer  given  in  the  actual  history  of  Solomon,  all  show 
that  there  was  a  presiding  Divinity  in  the  dream.  The  other  thing  noteworthy 
in  this  dream  is — 

2.  The  suggested  conditions  of  successful  prayer.  The  prayer  of  his  dream  was, 
as  we  have  said,  answered  in  his  actual  history.  He  did  receive  a  wisdom  for 
ruling,  and  abundance  of  riches,  and  a  splendour  of  dominion  that  have  never 
been  rivalled  by  any  monarch  on  the  earth.  Now,  what  are  the  conditions  of 
Buccessful  praver  which  the  dream  suggests  ? 

56 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  chip.  ill. 


I.  That  effective  prayer  must  be  divinely  authorized.    At  the  hcgmning 
of  the   dream    Solomon  received  an  authority  to  pray:    ''And  God  said,  Ash 
what   I   shall  give   thee.''     Such  an  authority  is   evidently  a  necessary   con- 
dition.    Unless  the  Eternal  gave  us  a  warrant  to    address  Him,    our  appeals 
would  be  impious  and  fruitless.     Hell  prays,  prays  earnestly  and  continuously, 
but  it  prays  without  Divine  authority,   and  the  supplications  rebound  with  the 
force  of  a  crushing  despair.     An   all-important  question  arises  here:  Have  we, 
the  men  of  this  nge,  a  Divine  authority  for  praying?     If   not,  our  appeals  to 
Heaven    are   worse   than   idle  breath.      What   saith    the    oracle  ?    Hear   its 
declarations  on  the  point  (Deut.  iv.  29-40;  2  Chron.  vii.  13-14  ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  3 ; 
Isa.  Ixv.  24  ;  Matt.  vii.  7-11).     Here,  then,  is  sufficient  authority.     God  says 
as  truly  to  us  now  as  he  said  to  Solomon  in  his  dream,     ''Ask  what  I  shall 
give  you.''     I.  This  authority  to  call  upon  God  in  prayer  agrees  with  our  religious 
instincts.    Prayer  in  some  form  or  other  is  the  natural  cry  of  the  soul.     The  child 
in  distress  does  not  more  naturally  look  to  his  fond  parent  for  help,  than  the 
human      soul    in  sore   trouble    and  danger   looks   to    the    hi  avens  ^  for    aid. 
The  heathen  mariners  in  that  little  vessel  that  was  bearing  Jonah  to  Tarshish, 
when  the  tempest  lashed  the  sea  into  fury,   and  threatened  their  destruction, 
*'  cried  every  man  unto  his  God."     Even  men  who  in  theory  deny  the  existence 
of  a  God,  urged  by  tliis  instinct,  will  cry  to  Him  in  danger.     There  are  many 
striking  instances  of  this  on  record.     Take  one  or  two.      Volney,  the  celebrated 
infidel,  was  once  in  a  storm  at  sea.     Wliilst  the  vessel  was  reeling  and  plunging 
with  the  fury  of  the  elements,  there  was  no  man  on  board  more  frantic  with 
terror,  and  more  earnest  in  prayer  to  that  God  whose  existence  he  impiously 
denied,  than  this  Yolney.     ''Oh,  my  God,  my  God!  "  said  he,   *' what  shall  I 
do?"     One  of  his  companions  on  board,  struck  with  the  inconsistency  of  this 
man's  appeal  to  heaven,  said,  »*  What!  have  you  a  God  now?"     To  which  he 
replied,    *' Oh,  yes!  oh,   yes!"     Voltaire,  the  brilliant   Erenchman  and   the 
celebrated  infidel,  cried  out,  when  the  king  of  terrors  confronted  him,    "  Oh, 
Christ !  oh,  Jesus  Christ ! "     Tom  Paine,  that  bold,  clever  sceptic,  who  wrote 
the  *<Age  of  lleason,"  cried  out   in  his  last  hours,   **  0  Lord,  help  me  !  God, 
help  me  !  Jesus  Christ,  help  me  !  0  Lord,  help  me  !  "  &c.     Yes,  the  instinct  in 
the  soul  to  call  upon  God  when  excited  by  imminent  danger  triumphs  over  the 
strongest  logic   and    grandest  theories  of  infidelity.     It   is   to  me   no   feeble 
collateral  argument  for  the  divinity  of  the  Bible,  that  God  does  that  which  the 
soul    in  her   most    solemn  mood     craves    for— authorizes    prayer.      2.   This 
authority  to    call  upon   God  in  prayer  is  encouraging  to  our  hope  as  sinners. 
Oh  !  what  should  we,  who  are  here  involved  in  guilt,  depravity,  affliction, 
death,     do    were    those     heavens  sealed   above  us,  and  there    was    no  God 
to  hear  our  prayer  ?     Our  condition   would  indeed  be  hopeless.     But  when 
we  hear  Him  say  to  us,  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  1  will  deliver 
thee  ;  *'  and  again,  '*  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee,"  we  feel  that  we  may  obtain  His 
help  to  raise  us  to  virtue,  dignity,  and  immortal  bliss.     It   is  this  truth    that 
makes  the  thought  of  Him  even  tolerable  to  us.     The  thought  that  He  created 
the  universe,  that  He  sustains  all  existence,  that  He  is  the  righteous  Governor 
of  all  worlds,  would   overwhelm  us  with  terror  unless  we  believed   that  He 
answered  prayers.     That  He  hears  prayer  is  a  truth  that  gives  to  every  aspect 
of  His  character  an  attraction  to  us  as  sinners. 

II.  That    effective    prayer    must   he  earnestly  spiritual.    By  this  we 

mean  that  spiritual  interest  must  reign  supreme,  that  spiritual  motives  must 
be  predominant.  It  was  so  now  with  Solomon  in  his  prayer.  What  a  sense  he 
had  of  the  Invisihle  God!  The  grandeur  of  kingdoms  and  the  splendour  of 
material  worlds  seem  to  have  had  no  place  in  his  spirit  now.  The  Great  God  is  the 
one  grand  object,  in  all  the  reality  of  His  being,  before  him.  He  recognized 
Him  as   the  Author  of  all  the  distinguishing  virtues  which  his  father  David 

67 


OHAP.  IIL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTART :   KINGS. 


possessed.  *'  Thou  hast  showed,"  &c.  He  speaks  to  God  as  a  present,  personal, 
conscious  existence,  seeing  him,  knowing  and  feeling  what  he  said  in  prayer. 
What  a  sense  he  had  of  the  importance  of  spiritval  goodness  in  reference  to  his 
royal  father  in  prayer  !  The  idea  of  his  temporal  glory  was  lost  in  the  thought 
of  his  spiritual  excellence.  **  He  walked  before  thee  in  truth,  and  in  righteous- 
ness, and  in  uprightness  of  heart  with  thee."  What  a  sense  he  had  of  the 
Divine  goodness  !  He  ascribed  all  that  his  father  had  to  God.  ''Thou  hast  kept 
for  him  this  great  kindness,  that  thou  hast  given  him  a  £on  to  sit  on  his  throne." 
Much  as  he  loved  his  father,  he  traced  all  his  father's  greatness  to  the  goodness 
of  God.  What  a  sense  he  had  of  his  own  insignificance  !  *'I  am  but  a  little 
child ;  I  know  not  how  to  go  out  or  come  in."  Humility  is  essential  to  true 
prayer.  ]N'o  one  can  feel  himself  in  the  presence  of  the  Infinite  without  being 
overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  his  own  insignificance.  Egotistic  thoughts  can  no 
more  live  in  the  breath  of  prayer,  than  flakes  of  snow  in  a  summer  sun.  What 
a  sense  he  had  of  his  own  responsibility  !  '*  Thy  servant  is  in  the  midst  of  thy 
people,  which  thou  hast  chosen ;  a  great  people,  that  cannot  be  numbered 
nor  counted  for  multitude."  All  this  shows  how  earnestly  spiritual  his  prayer 
was;  and  this  earnest  spirituality  is  an  essential  condition  of  effective  prayer. 
When  we  pray,  materialism  must  vanish  from  our  minds  as  a  cloud,  and  spiritual 
realities  must  rise  in  all  their  commanding  importance.  He  that  prays  must 
feel  that  he  has  to  do  with  one  who  is  the  original  fountain  of  all  kinds  of  good. 
He  that  prays  must  have  the  deepest  humility,  must  feel  as  Abraham  felt  when 
wrestling  for  Sodom,  that  he  is  but  dust  and  ashes.  He  that  prays  must  deeply 
realize  his  responsibility,  both  to  man  and  his  Maker.  All  this  spiritual 
earnestness  is  an  essential  condition  of  effective  prayer. 


III.  That  effective  prayer  must  be  thoroughly  unselfish.    "What    he 


the  Lord  that  Solomon  had  asked  this  thing,"  &c.  Mark,  God  answered  his 
prayer ;  in  fact,  gave  to  him  more  than  he  sought,  because  he  sought  not  the  good 
for  his  own  ends,  but  in  ordor  to  enable  him  to  serve  others.  What !  it  may  be 
said,  are  we  to  forget  self  in  prayer  ?  Are  we  not  to  pray  for  spiritual  and 
temporal  good  for  ourselves  ?  By  all  means.  But  seek  the  good  for  yourself, 
not  mainly  for  the  sake  of  yourself,  but  in  order  that  thereby  you  may  be  qualified 
to  serve  your  generation  and  your  God.  With  this  spirit  Moses  prayed,  '*  Oh  ! 
this  people  have  sinned  a  great  sin,  and  have  made  them  gods  of  gold.  Yet  now, 
if  thou  wilt,  forgive  their  sin  ;  and  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of  thy  book." 
In  this  spirit  Paul  prayed,  **  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is, 
that  they  might  be  saved."  In  this  spirit  Jesus  prayed,  **Now  is  my  soul 
troubled ;  and  what  shall  I  say,  Father  save  me  from  this  hour  ?  but  for  this 
cause  came  I  unto  this  hour."  Such  are  the  conditions  of  effective  prayer 
suggested  in  this  dream.  There  are,  of  course,  other  conditions  that  are  not 
heje  suggested,  such  as  faith  in  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  all  true 
prayer  must  be  offered  up  in  his  name. 

In  conclusion,  do  you  ask  why  prayer  is  not  answered  now  as  in  olden  times  ? 
We  read  of  wondrous  things  it  did  in  ancient  times,  in  the  generations  of  old. 
Abraham  prays,  and  the  storm  of  fire  and  brimstone  is  borne  up  for  a  time 
on  the  breath  of  his  intercession.  Moses  prays,  and  now  we  see  the  earth 
opening  her  mouth,  and  swallowing  up  religious  impostors,  and  now  the  sea 
dividing  and  making  a  highway  for  the  chosen  race.  The  disciples  pray  in  the 
upper  room  at  Jerusalem,  and  the  day  of  Pentecost  comes  showering  blessings  on 
the  ages.  In  fact,  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  full  of  the  triumphs  of 
prayer — prayer  creating  the  rain  and  the  drought;  prayer  clearing  the 
mountains,  and  dividing  the  seas ;  prayer  scattering  armies,  and  awakening  the 
58 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  chap.  hi. 


dead  to  life ;  prayer  destroying  the  power  of  the  burniDg  fiery  furnace,  and 

sealing  up  the  mouths  of  lions  ;  prayer  opening  prison  doors,  and  healing  all 
manner  of  diseases.  Nor  have  we  been  left  in  later  times  without  striking 
examples  of  its  power. — Somilist, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verse  6.  Sleep  is  like  a  state  of  death  when  the  day  just  past  has  been  spent 

to   the   soul,  wherein  the  senses   are  in  revel  and  riot,  in  gross  or  in  refined 

locked  up,  and  the  understanding  and  sin. — Lange. 
will  deprived  of  the  free  exercise  of 

their  functions.     And  yet  this  is  no  Verse  9.  Solomon's  choice  of  wis- 

impediment  to  God  in  communicating  dom.     And  now  occurred  one  of  those 

His  will  to  mankind ;  for  He  has  power  prophetic  dreams  which   had  already 

not  only  to  awaken  our  intellectual  been  the  means  of  Divine  communica- 

faculties,  but  to  advance  them  above  tion  in  the  time  of  Samuel      Thrice  in 

their  ordinary  measure  of  perception,  Solomon's  life  (at  the  three  epochs  of 

even   while  the   body  is  asleep  (Job  his  rise,  of  his  climax,  of  his  fall)  is 

xxxiii.   14).      God  can  approach   the  such  a  warning  recorded.     This  was 

soul  in  many  difl"ercnt  ways  when  the  the  first.     It  was  the  choice  offered  to 

body  is  in  a  state  of  rest  and  inactivity,  the  youthful  king  on  the  threshold  of 

can  move  and  actuate  it  as  He  pleases  ;  life — the  choice  so  often  imagined  in 

and  when  He  is  inclined  to  make  a  fiction,  and  actually  presented  in  real 

discovery  of  anything,  can  set  such  a  life.     "  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee." 

lively  representation  of  it  before  the  The  answer  is  the  ideal  answer  of  such 

understanding  as  shall  prevent  a  man's  a  prince,  burdened  with  the  respon- 

doubting  the  reality  of  the  vision  (see  sibility  of  his  position.     He  remem- 

Calmet),      In  the  particular  pliase  of  bered  the  high  antecedents  of  his  pre- 

sleep  known  in  Scripture  as  **  dream"  decessor;     he   remembered    his    own 

or  ''vision,"  it  may  be  that  the  mind  youth  and  weakness;  he  reniembered 

was  sometimes  in  possession  of  all  its  the  vastness  of  his  charge ;  he  made 

powers,  and  that  only  the  body  slum-  the  demand  for  the  gift  which  he,  of 

bered.     That  which  engages  us  most  all  the  heroes  of  the  ancient  church, 

when  we  are  awake  will  even  in  sleep  was  the  first  to  claim  ;  he  showed  his 

still  be  our  employment.  wisdom   by  asking    for   wisdom  ;    he 

God  well  knew  what  Solomon  needed,  became  wise  because  he  had  set  his 

but  He  bade  him  ask.    1.  To  show  how  heart  upon  it.     This  was  to  him  the 

negligent  men  are  in  praying  for  what  specialaspect  through  which  the  Divine 

is  spiritual.     2.  That  He  would  only  spiritwas  to  be  approached  and  grasped, 

bestow  His  gifts  in  the  ordinance  of  and  made  to  bear  on  the  wants  of  men  ; 

prayer.       3.    That   great    personages  not  the  highest,    not   the   choice    of 

might  have  an  example  of  what  they  David,  not  the  choice  of  Isaiah,  but 

should  ask  of  God  above  all  others.  still  the  choice  of  Solomon. — Stanley, 

**  Ask   what    I   shall    give    thee."  As  it  appears  eventually  that  Solo- 

1.  A  test- word,  for  as  man  wishes  and  mon  did  seme  foolish  and  some  mis- 
prays,  so  does  he  show  of  whose  spirit  taken  things,  it  becomes  a  matter  of 
he  is  the  child   (Psalm  cxxxix.  '23).  interest    to    know   wherein   lay   that 

2.  A  word  of  warning,  for  we  not  only  wisdom  with  which  he  was  super- 
may,  but  we  should  also  ask  for  all  naturally  endowed.  God  giveth  to 
which  we  have  most  at  heart  (Psalm  him  that  hath.  It  was  the  previous 
xxxvii.  4). — Lange,  possession  of  wisdom  which  qualified 

him  for  more.     His  wisdom  is  evinced 

Verses  5-15.    The  prayer  of  Solo-  by  nothing  more  than  his  choice  of 

mon.      1.    Its   contents  (verses   6-9).  wisdom  beyond   all    other    blessings, 

2.    Its    answer    (verses    10-14).      A  when  the  fruition  of  his  wishes  was 

dream  like  Solomon^e  does  not  happen  offered  to  him  in  the  vision  at  Gibeon. 

69 


CHAP.  IIL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


The  terms  of  his  request  indicate  the  The 'tenns  translated  <'wise      and 

nature   of  the   wisdom    he   required.  "understanding,"  both denotei^rfljc^tca/ 

That  Divine  wisdom  in  spiritual  things,  wisdom  (see  Gen.  xli.   33-39;  Deut. 

that   heart  religion  which   the   Jews  iv.  6 ;  Prov.  i.  2,  &c.). 
sometimes  denoted  by  this  name,  is  not 

intended.  With  that  he  was  not  pre-  Yerses  11-14.  The  grantmg  of  Solo- 
eminently  gifted  ;  not  more  gifted,  men's  prayer  teaches  and  assures  us — 
certainly,  thanhis  father  David,  hardly  1.  That  God  grants  more  than  they 
so  much  gifted.  The  wisdom  which  request,  over  and  above  praymg  and 
he  craved  was  that  of  which  he  had  understanding,  to  those  who  call  upon 
already  enough  to  be  able  to  appre-  Him  with  earnestness  and  for  spiritual 
ciate  the  value  of  its  increase— prac-  gifts  (Eph.  iii.  20 ;  Matth.  vi.  33). 
tical  wisdom,  sagacity,  clearness  of  2.  That  God  gives  to  him  upon  whom 
judgment  and  intellect  in  the  adminis-  He  confers  an  office— that  is,  to  one 
tration  of  justice  and  in  the  conduct  who  does  not  rush  into  an  office  or 
of  public  affairs,  with  an  aptitude  for  calling,  but  is  called  thereto  by  God— 
the  acquisition  and  use  of  the  higher  the  necessary  understanding  if  he 
branches  of  philosophical  knowledge,  humbly  seek  it.  Where  there  is  wis- 
natural  and  moral,  which  constituted  dom  there  comes,  indeed,  also  gold  and 
the  learning  of  his  age.  In  the  latter  silver  (Prov.  iii.  16),  but  not  the  re- 
he  excelled  the  most  famous  men  of  verse. — Lan^e, 
his  time. — £iUo. 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  16-28. 
The  Judgment  op  Solomon. 

The  gifts  of  God  are  not  permitted  to  remain  long  unused.  He  who  bestows 
them  finds  ample  opportunity  tor  their  employment.  A  case  is  speedily  brought 
before  Solomon  which  brings  into  exercise  the  faculty  of  wisdom  with  which 
he  was  supernaturally  endowed ;  and  his  startling  decision  made  a  profound 
impression  on  the  people,  and  added  greatly  to  his  reputation.  The  pattern- 
instance,  as  recorded  in  these  verses,  is,  in  all  its  features,  thoroughly  Oriental. 
Examples  are  recorded  in  ancient  history  of  similar  judicial  penetration.---(bee 
Kitto  Dr.  A.  Clarice,  Lange).  But  the  sagacity  displayed  by  Solomon  in  the 
instance  before  us  was  most  wonderful,  and  evinced  to  all  that,  though  young 
in  years,  he  was  fully  competent  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  the  lofty  position  to 
which  he  was  raised. 

I.  The  judgment  of  Solomon  was  exercised  on  a  case  of  peculiar  difficulty. 

1  It  was  too  difficult  for  ordinary  tribunals  to  settle.  The  case  had,  doubtless, 
been  brought  before  a  court  where  it  was  customary  to  hear  and  decide  upon 
ordinary  disputes  and  offences;  but  this  was  altogether  beyond  the  capacity 
of  the  judge  to  settle.  The  final  appeal  must,  therefore,  be  made  to  the  king, 
and  his  judgment  be  irrevocable.  There  are  questions  sometimes  brought 
before  our  law  courts  so  involved  and  contradictory  that  the  penetration  of  the 
ablest  judge  fails  to  detect  the  real  transgressor,  and  the  power  of  justice  is  tor 
the  time  paralyzed.  But  the  great  Omniscient  cannot  be  deceived  ;  and  the  day 
is  coming  when  He  will  reveal  the  secrets  of  all  hearts,  and  redress  the  wrongs 
of  the  universe.  2.  The  disputants  were  of  questionable  character,  "There  came 
two  women  that  were  harlots  "—persons  of  abandoned  character.  The  word  is 
also  rendered  victuallers  or  hostesses.  Perhaps  they  were  both,  though  they 
could  not  be  common  harlots,  for  such  would  hardly  have  ventured  into  the 
presence  of  the  king.  One  sin  injures  the  whole  character,  and  there  are  some 
8  ns  which  cast  suspicion  on  the  veracity  of  the  transgressor,  however  solemn 
his  asseverations.     The  value  of  testimony  hinges  on  rectitude  of  personal 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  CHak  ill. 


character.  The  greatest  difficulties  of  our  law  judges  arise  from  the  unreliable 
nature  of  tlie  evidence  they  have  to  sift.  3.  2Jie  testimonies  were  evenly  balanced 
(verse  22,  23).  The  stout  affirmation  of  the  one  mother  was  met  by  the  flat 
denial  of  the  other.  Their  testimonies  were  of  equal  credit — i.e.y  of  none  at  all. 
As  there  was  no  evidence,  it  seemed  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  decision,  and 
the  whole  court  seemed  held  in  suspense,  and  unable  to  tell  which  to  believe. 
But  Solomon  was  equal  to  the  occasion,  and  had  made  up  his  mind  how  to  solve 
the  difficulty. 

II.  The  judgineiit  of  Solomon  was  successful  by  an  appeal  to  maternal 
affection,     1.  This  appeal  was  sudden.     Every  opportunity  had  been  given  to 
each  woman  to  state  her  case.     The  king  had  patiently  listened,   and  shown 
every  disposition  to  administer  equal  justice.     There  was  nothing  more  to  say 
but  what  would  be  a  repetition  of  what  had  been  already  said.   A  painful  pause 
had  come  in  the  progress  of  the  trial,  when,  as  if  moved  by  a  sudden  inspiration, 
the  king  speaks.    The  actions  which  have  had  the  most  important  bearing  on  the 
destinies  of  individuals  have  often  been  the  result  of  a  spontaneous  impulse. 
When  truth   is  quickly  apprehended  it  is  wisest  to  act  promptly.     2.  This 
appeal  was  apparently  severe,  **  And  the  king  said,  bring  me  a  sword**  (verse  24) 
!Doubtless  some  of  the  wiser  hearers  smiled  upon  each  other,  and  thought  in  them- 
eelves,  What !  will  the  young  king  cut  these  knotty  causes  in  pieces  ?     Will  he 
divide  justice  with  edged  tools?      Will  he  smite  at  hazard  before  conviction  ? 
There  was  a  law  concerning  the  dividing  of  a  living  ox  and  a  dead  one  (Exod. 
xxi.  35)  ;  but  that  did  not  reach  his  case.     The  heart  of  kings  is  unsearchable 
(Prov.  XXV.  3).     That  sword  which  had  served  for  execution,  shall  now  serve 
for  trial.     ''  Divide  the  living  child  in  two,  and  give  half  to  the  one,  and  half  to 
the  other.**     Oh !  divine  oracle  of  justice,  commanding  that  which  it  would  not 
have  done,  that  it  might  find  out  that  which  could  not  be  discovered  ?     Neither 
God  nor  his  deputies  may  be  so  taken  at  their  words,  as  if  they  always  intended 
their  commands  for  action,  and  not  sometimes  for  probation. — Bp.  Rail.    3.  This 
appeal  revealed  a  deep  practical  insight  into  human  nature.     The  mother's  heart 
was  touched,  and,  without  the  aid  of  argument  and  cross-examination,  the  great 
discovery  was  made.     The  yearning  affection  of  the  true  mother  for  the  child 
whose  life  was  thus  threatened  stood  out  in  prominent  contrast  to  the  cold, 

callous  attitude  of  her  adversary.     The  case  is  strikingly  put  by  Bishop  Hall : 

This  sword  hath  already  pierced  the  breast  of  the  true  mother,  and  divided  her 
heart  with  fear  and  grief  at  so  killing  a  sentence  :  there  needs  no  other  rack  to 
discover  nature,  and  now  she  thinks— woe  is  me,  that  came  for  justice,  and  am 
answered  with  cruelty!  **  Divide  ye  the  living  child!**  Alas!  what  hath 
that  poor  infant  offended,  that  it  survives,  and  is  sued  for?  How  much 
less  miserable  had  I  been  that  my  child  had  been  smothered  in  my  sleep, 
than  mangled  before  mine  eyes !  If  a  dead  carcase  could  have  satisfied  me' 
I  need  not  to  have  complained!  What  a  woeful  condition  am  I  fallen 
into,  who  am  accused  to  be  the  death  of  my  supposed  child  already,  and 
now  shall  be  the  death  of  my  own !  If  there  were  no  loss  of  my  child, 
yet   how  can  I  endure  this   torment  of  my  own  bowels?     And  while   she 

thinks  thus,    she    sues  to    that    suspected    mercy    of    her    just    judge 

**  Oh,  my  Lord,  give  her  the  living  child,  and  slay  him  not !  **  as  thinking,  if  he 
live,  he  shall  but  change  a  mother;  if  he  die,  his  mother  loseth  a  son:  while 
he  lives,  it  shall  be  my  comfort  that  I  have  a  son,  though  I  may  not  call  him 
Bo;  dying,  heperisheth  to  both.  Contrarily,  her  envious  competitor,  as  holding 
herself  well  satisfied  that  her  neighbour  should  be  as  childless  as  herself,  can 
Bay,  "  Let  it  be  neither  mine  nor  thine,  but  divide  it.*'  Well  might  ISolomon 
and  every  hearer  conclude,  that  either  she  was  no  mother,  or  a  monster,  that 
could  be  content  with  the  murder  of  her  child  ;  and  that,  if  she  could  have  been 
the  true  mother,  and  yet  have  desired  the  blood  of  her  infant,  she  had  been  as 

61 


OHAP.m.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTART :  KIN08. 


worthy  to  have  been  stripped  of  her  child  for  so  foul  unnaturalness,  as  the  other 
had  been  worthy  to  enjoy  him  for  her  honest  compassion.  I^ot  more  justly 
than  wisely,  therefore,  doth  Solomon  trace  the  true  mother  by  the  footsteps  of 
love  and  pity  ;  and  adjudgeth  the  child  to  those  bowels  that  had  yearned  at  his 
danger. 

III.  The  judgment  of  Solomon  won  the  respect  and  confidence  of  the 
people  (verse  28).  The  justice  of  the  sentence  made  a  deep  impression  upon 
the  whole  people.  They  saw  that  he  judged  impartially  ;  that  they  could  not 
impose  on  him ;  and  they  were  afraid  to  do  those  things  which  might  bring 
them  before  his  judgment  seat.  They  acknowledged  the  Divine  source  of  his 
marvellous  endowment.  **  They  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  was  in  him  to  do 
judgment.'*  What  was  done  to  the  other  woman  we  are  not  told;  justice  cer 
tainly  required  that  she  should  be  punished  for  her  lies  and  fraud.  Wisdom 
strengtheneth  the  wise :  it  is  better  than  weapons  of  war  (Eccles.  vii.  19 ;  ix.  18). 
Good  men  reverence,  and  bad  men  stand  in  awe  of,  the  wise. 

Lessons  : — 1.  To  do  justice  is  one  of  the  most  important  duties  of  the  sovereign. 
2.  Divine  help  is  needed  and  should  he  sought  in  order  wisely  to  discriminate  hetween 
right  and  wrong.     3,  The  Divine  justice  is  unerring ^  and  all  its  decisions  irrevocable, 

QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yerses  16-28.    Sin   infallibly  ex-  Solomon's  wise  judgment.     1.  The 

posed.    1.  Notwithstanding  the  secrecy  question  in   dispute    (verses    16-22). 

of  its  indulgence.     2.  Notwithstand-  2.     The    decision    (verses    23-28). — 

ing   the   sabtlety   and   ability   of  its  Lisco, 
defenders.      3.   Notwithstanding  the 

deceptive  contradictions  of  its  evidence.  Verses  17-22.  Such  sin  brings  to- 

Every  part  ^f  the  incident  is  cha-  gether,  but  it  unites  only  for  a  short 

racteristic.   The  two  mothers,  degraded  time,  for  it  produces  discord,  wrangling, 

as  was  their  condition,   came,  as  the  and  controversy.   Abiding  peace  dwells 

Eastern   stories   so  constantly  tell   of  only  in  the  house  where  the  God  of 

the  humblest  classes,  to  demand  justice  peace  binds  hearts  together.     He  who 

from  the  king.     He  patiently  listens ;  takes  from  the  heart  of  a  mother  her 

the  people  stand  by,  wondering  what  child,   or   estranges   or  deprives  her, 

the  child-like  sovereign  will  determine,  will  not  escape  the  righteous  tribunal 

The  mother  of  the  living  child  tells  of  the  judge  to  whom  the  mother  calls 

her  tale  with  all  the  plaintiveness  and  and  appeals.     Litigation  is  generally 

particularity  of  truth,    and  describes  associated  with  envy,  falsehood,  and 

how,  as  she  '*  looked  at  him  again  and  unrighteousness ;  hence  the  Lord  says, 

again,  behold  it  was  not  my  son  which  **  Be  ready,"  &c.  (Matth.  v.  25 ;  Luke 

I  did  bear."     The  king  determines,  by  xii.  58). — Lange. 
throwing  himself  upon  the  instincts  of 

nature,  to  cut  asunder  the  sophistry  of  Terse  19.  The  perils  of  infant  life, 
argument.  The  living  child  was  to  be  1.  Arising  from  the  ignorance  and  in- 
divided,  and  the  one  half  given  to  one,  experience  of  those  on  whom  it  is 
the  other  half  to  the  other.  The  true  dependent.  2.  From  its  own  fragile 
mother  betrays  her  affection :  0,  my  and  defenceless  condition.  3.  Erom 
Lord,  give  her  the  living  hdhe  (the  word  the  consequences  of  others'  sins.  4. 
is  peculiar),  and  in  no  wise  slay  it."  Are  avoided  only  by  the  mercy  and 
The  king  repeats,  word  for  word,  the  protecting  care  of  heaven, 
cry  of  the  mother,  as  if  questioning  its 

meaning.     "  Give  her  the  living  habcy  Yerses  25-27.  Even  in  morality  it  is 

and  in  no  wise  slay  it  ?  then  bursts  thus  also ;  truth  as  it  is  one,  so  it  loves 

forth  into  his  own  conviction :  She  is  entireness;  falsehood,  division.    Satan, 

the  mother." — Stanley.  that  hath  no  right  to  the  heart,  would 
62 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTAUT:  KINGS,  Ohap.  it. 


becontent  witliapieceof  it;  God,  that  Verses  27,  28.  When  a  child,  appa- 
madeitall,  will  have  either  the  whole  rently  given  over  to  death,  is  restored 
ornone.  The  erroneous  church  strives  to  its  parents  by  Divine  providence,  so 
with  the  true  for  the  living  child  of  much  the  more  must  their  chief  solici- 
saving  doctrine ;  each  claims  it  for  her  tude  be  to  educate  and  bring  it  up  in 
own;  heresy,  conscious  of  her  own  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord, 
injustice,  would  be  content  to  go  Not  power  and  force ;  not  great  pomp, 
away  with  a  leg  or  an  arm  of  sound  and  pride,  and  tyranny ;  but  wisdom 
principles,  as  hoping  to  make  up  the  rest  and  righteousness  give  to  the  govern- 
with  her  own  mixtures ;  tiuth  cannot  ment  authority,  and  call  forth  genuine 
abide  to  part  witb  a  joint,  and  will  fear  and  the  voluntary  obedience  of  the 
rather  endure  to  lose  all  by  violence  people.  If  it  were  given  to  a  Solomon 
than  a  piece  through  willing  con-  to  bring  to  disgrace  lying  and  misrepre- 
nivancy. — Bishop  Hall,  sentation  by  judicial  wisdom  and  know- 
Verse  26.  If  an  immoral  woman  be  ledgeof  the  human  heart,  and  to  deliver 
merciful  for  the  son  of  her  body,  and  a  righteous  judgment,  how  much  less 
cannot  forget  her  little  child,  how  shall  liars  and  hypocrites  stand  up 
much  more  should  every  Christian  under  the  tribunal  of  Him  who  could 
mother  be  ready  to  offer,  when  neces-  say,  **  A  greater  than  Solomon  is  here!" 
sary,  the  heaviest  sacrifice  to  deliver  who,  without  needing  witnesses  and 
her  child  from  moral  ruin.  If  in  the  judicial  examination,  will  bring  to 
hearts  of  sinners  the  love  of  father  and  light  what  is  hidden  in  darkness  ( I  Cor. 
mother  be  so  strong,  how  strong  must  iv.  5),  and  before  whose  judgment  seat 
the  fatherly  love  of  God  be  (Isaiah  we  must  all  appear  (2  Coi*.  v.  10)  ? — 
xlix.l5)!  Envyhardens  all  human  feel-  Lange, 
ing,  and  makes  cue  hard  and  heartless. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

THE  GOLDEN  AGE  OF  THE  HEBREW  EMPIRE. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — The  list  of  officers  in  Solomoa's  kingdom  (verses 
2-19)  seems  to  have  been  inserted  without  belonging  to  the  narrative ;  for  verse  1  connects 
itself  naturally  with  verse  20,  and  the  record  inove;J  on  consecutively.  The  list  supplies 
internal  evidence  that  it  belongs  to  the  later  period  of  Solomon's  reign,  and  not  to  this  early 
portion  of  his  career ;  for  it  includes  two  officers  who  had  daughters  of  Solomon  for  their 
wives  (verses  11  and  15).  Probably  it  is  a  record  of  the  most  distinguished  officers  of  the 
kingdom  during  the  whole  reign.  Appropriately  inserted  here,  as  showing  how  well  ordered 
and  flourishing  the  kingdom  was:  managed  by  civil  officers  of  different  degrees  of  dignity  in 
the  realm.  Verse  1.  King  over  all  Israel,  inclusive  of  Judah.  Verse  2.  Azariah,  the  priest, 
tnin*     Not  a  sacerdotal  office,  but  secular ;  |rt3  describes  a  secular  office  in  2  Sam.  viii. 

18  ;  XX.  26  ;  and  tiiS  is  used  of  "  Zabud  "  (verse  5,  called  •*  principal  officer  ") ;  and  of  these 

highest  state  dignitaries  Azariah  was  chief.  The  word  thus  denotes  an  officer  answering  to 
prime  minister,  or  chief  of  the  privy  counsellors,  the  first  in  the  state  next  the  king.  Verse  3. 
Scribes— Secretaries  of  state.  Recorder — Historiographer  or  chronicler  (the  same  officer 
was  under  David,  2  Sam.  viii.  16)  :  in  all  oriental  kingdoms,  ancient  and  modern,  this  officer 
is  of  first  rank.  Verse  4.  Benaiah,  over  the  host,  formerly  captain  of  the  guard,  now 
succeeded  Joab  as  commander  of  the  forces.  Zadok  and  Ahiathar  were  the  priests  :  the 
former  alone  discharged  the  functions  of  the  sacerdotal  office,  the  latter  was  banished  (ii.  26), 
and  retained  office  only  in  nomine.  Verse  5.  Over  the  officers :  i.e.,  the  prefects,  or  provincial 
governors  (verse  7).      Principal   officers— triS-   probably  means   a  privy  counsellor.    And 

friend  of  the  king  :  ».^.,  his  confidential  friend  or  favourite.  This  attachment  of  Solomon  to 
the  sons  of  Nathan  is  natural  and  honourable,  considering  what  service  Nathan  had  rendered 
him  (chap,  i.,  ii.  22  sq).  Verse  6.  Over  the  household— Steward  or  chamberlain  of  the  palace, 

63 


CHAP.  IV.  EOMILETIC  COMMEKTART:  KINGS. 


master  of  the  household.    The  trihute:  DDH,  the  levy,  or  lahourers  (comp.  t.  13-14) 

overseer  of  the  hirelings  who  were  employed  to  maintain  the  splendour  of  Solomon's  court. 
Verses  17-19.  Twelve  ofi&cers— Governors  of  territories  allotted  to  their  oversight,  entrusted 
with  securing  the  royal  revenues.  The  division  of  the  land  into  twelve  sections  was  not 
according  to  the  boundaries  of  the  tribes,  but  the  fertility  of  the  land.  The  returns  from 
these  districts  were  made,  not  in  cash,  but  in  the  produce  of  the  soil.  Each  district  sent 
supplies  for  a  month,  and  the  twelve  in  succession  completed  the  year.  Verse  20.  As  the 
sand  which  is  hy  the  sea— This  shows  the  promise  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  17;  xxxii.  13) 
fulfilled.  Eating,  drinking,  and  making  merry  suggests  the  contentment  and  social 
prosperity  of  the  people.  Verse  21.  From  the  river  unto  the  land— The  word  "  unto  "  is 
supplied;  but  instead  of  "l^^  unto,  ^  might  be  understood,  over,  thus;    "From  the  river 

(Euphrates),  over  the  land  of  the  Philistines,"  &c.  *^'Qxong\ii presents**  means  tribute.  All 
the  petty  kingdoms  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Mediterranean  acknowledged  the  Hebrew 
monarchy.  Verse  22.  Solomon's  provision  for  one  day  j  i.e.,  for  the  king's  table,  the  court, 
principal  officers,  foreign  visitors,  &c.  '•  The  quantity  of  fine  flour  u-ed  is  estimated  at 
240  bushels ;  that  of  meal  or  common  flour  at  480.  The  number  of  cattle  required  for 
consumption,  besides  poultry  and  several  kinds  of  game,  which  were  got  in  abundance  on  the 
mountains,  did  not  exceed  in  proportion  what  is  needed  in  other  courts  of  the  East "  (Dr. 
Jamieson).  "Ten  fattened  oxen,  twenty  from  the  pastures,  and  one  hundred  sheep,"  &c. 
(verse  23).  Verse  24.  From  Tiphsah  :  i.e.,  Thapsaeus,  a  large  town  on  the  west  bank  of  the 
Euphrates.  Even  to  Azzah :  i.e.,  Gaza,  on  the  extreme  south-west,  about  ten  miles  from  the 
Mediterranean.  Verse  25.  Under  vine  and  fig  tree — A  beautiful  metaphor  for  security  and 
comfort.    Verse  26.    And    13,000  horsemen— Not  horsemen,  riders ;   but  D^lt^lD    saddle- 

•    T  T 

horses,  as  in  contrast  with  harness -horses.  These  chariot  and  saddle  horses  Solomon  kept 
partly  in  Jerusalem,  and  partly  in  other  towns  (x.  26  ;  2  Chronicles  i.  14  ;  ix.  25).  Verse  28. 
"Dromedaries— The  fleet  one-humped  camel.  Verse  29.  Wisdom  and  understanding 
exceeding  much — High  powers  of  mmd,  and  sharpness  of  perception.    Largeness  of  heart — 

'2^  ^n*l>  amplitude  of  soul,  capacity  for  receiving  and  communicating   knowledge ;  for 

the  "heart"  with  the  Hebrews  stood  for  capacities  of  the  soul.  Verse  30.  Children  of  the 
East  Country  —Arabians,  Chaldeans,  and  Persians  (Genesis  xxv.  6).  Opposite  these  in  the 
West  was  Egypt,  whose  fame  for  wisdom  was  throughout  the  ancient  world  (Isaiah  xix.  11 ; 
Acts  vii.  22).  Verse  31.  Ethan,  the  Ezrahite— Of  tae  Levitical  family  of  Merari  (1  Chron. 
vi.  14)  ;  president  of  the  music  in  David's  tabernacle  (1  Chronicles  xv.  17  19),  and  composer 
of  Psalm  Ixxxix.  Heman— A  chief  of  the  tabernacle  musicians,  and  the  king's  seer 
(1  Chronicles  xxv.  5),  a  son.of  Joel.  Chalcol  and  Darda,  sons  of  Machol — Unknown.  The 
Babbinical  book  Seder  Olam  says,  **  These  were  prophets  that  prophesied  in  Egypt,*'  but  all 

is   uncertain.      Verse  32.    Proverbs — 7l!^0  denotes    epigrammatic  sentences,  pithy    and 

T    T 

witty  sayings  holding^  moral  sentiments  and  wise  observations  on  human  life  and  character. 
Songs— Of  these  we  possess  only  Psalms  Ixxii.,  cxxxii.,  probably  cxxvii.,  and  the  Canticles. 
How  few  of  these  lavish  creations  of  his  capacious  mind  survive  the  destructive  work  of  Time! 
The  Koran  praises  him  as  conversant  with  ihe  languages  of  men  and  demons,  birds  and  ants, 
with  all  of  whom  he  had  intercourse.  The  whole  of  the  occult  learning  in  the  East  is  still 
associated  with  his  name. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-28. 

PROMINENT   FeAIUEES    OP   ^ATIONAL   PkOSPEKITT, 

The  author  of  the  Books  of  Kings,  true  to  the  religious  intention  of  the  history, 
gives  but  a  scanty  description  of  the  external  magnificence  of  the  Israelitish 
kingdom  in  its  palmiest  days.  But  the  list  of  names,  and  brief  allusions 
contained  in  this  chapter,  present  glimpses  of  the  glory  and  affluence  of  that 
period.  "  The  general  tone  of  the  records  of  Solomon's  reign  is  that  of  jubilant 
delight,  as  though  it  were,  indeed,  a  golden  day  following  on  the  iron  and 
brazen  age  of  the  warlike  David  and  his  half-civilized  predecessors.  The  heart 
of  the  poets  of  the  age  overflows  with  the  beautiful  words  of  loyal  delight 
(Psa.  xlv.).  The  royal  justice  and  benevolence  are  like  the  welcome  showers  in 
the  thirsty  East.  The  poor,  for  once,  are  cared  for.  The  very  tops  of  the 
6^ 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTAMT:  KINGS.  chap.  it. 


ikare  mountains  seem  to  wave  with  corn,  as  on  the  fertile  slopes  of  Lehanon  " 
(Psa.  Ixxii.  2,  5,  6,  7,  13,  16).  We  have  in  the  brief  descriptions  of  this 
paragraph  a  portrayal  of  the  prominent  features  of  national  prosperity y  as 
illustrated  more  or  less  in  the  history  of  all  nations. 

I.  The  unity  and  submission  of  the  whole  nation  to  the  reig^ing^  monarch. 

"  So  king  Solomon  was  king  over  all  Israel.  And  reigned  over  all  kingdoms 
from  the  river  unto  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  and  unto  the  border  of  Egypt ; 
they  brought  presents,  and  served  Solomon  all  the  days  of  his  life  "  (verses  1, 
21).^  Solomon  was  the  only  Hebrew  monarch  who  ever  governed  for  his  whole 
lifetime  so  vast  a  territory.  David  for  seven  years  ruled  but  a  single  tribe ;  and 
at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Solomon's  successor  the  kingdom  was  rent 
asunder  by  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes,  as  the  result  of  one  churlish  breath. 
The  subject  kingdoms,  doubtless,  preserved  their  separate  organization  and 
nationality,  as  when  independent,  but  were  ever  ready  both  to  contribute  to  the 
annual  revenues  of  Solomon,  and  also  to  furnish,  when  occasion  offered,  their 
quota  of  men  for  any  public  service.  The  organization  of  a  great  empire  into 
provinces,  ruled  by  governors  holding  office  at  the  pleasure  of  the  crown,  was  a 
iiscovery  of  Darius  Hystaspis.  The  time  is  hastening  when  all  nations  will  be 
united  in  one  grand  confederation  under  the  sceptre  of  Messiah  (Psa.  Ixxii. ; 
Isaiah  Ix.  5-11). 

n.  The  splendour  and  order  of  the  court  (verses  1-19,   26-28).    The 
period  of  the  Judges  was  the  time  of  public  crudeness  in  which  there  was  an 
absence  of  order  and  of  organic  unity  of  the  kingdom.     The  age  of  David  was  that 
of  continuous  wars  and  battles,  in  which,  indeed,  victory  over  all  enemies  at  last 
came,  and  with  it,  at  the  same  time,  the  beginning  of  a  well-ordered  condition, 
but  not  complete  peace  for  the  kingdom.     This  first  came  with  Solomon's  reign 
(1  Chron.  xxii.  8,  9).     The  reign  of  Solomon  is  the  result  of  all  preceding  con- 
flicts and  Divine  teachings.     It  is  the  kingdom  of  Israel  in  its  highest  maturity. 
—Lange.      The  catalogue  of  names  probably  contains  those  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished officers  which  during  the  whole  reign  of  Solomon,  or  at  least  during 
Its  most  flourishing  period,  helped  to  add  lustre  and  dignity  to  his  administration. 
The  officers  of  the  court  were  generally  the  same  as  those  of  David's  time.      The 
great  officers  are  now,  for  the  first  time,  called  by  one  general  name— princes — 
a  title  which  before  had  been  almost  confined  to  Joab ;  these  officers  of  the  first 
rank  deriving  their  station  from   Solomon,   and  probably  holding  it  during 
pleasure.     The  union  of  priestly  and  secular  functions  still  continued.     The 
prophets  cease  to  figure  among  the  dignitaries,  as  though  the  prophetical  office 
had  been  overborne  by  the  royal  dignity.      The  chief-priesthood  was  concen. 
trated    in   Zadok    alone,    though   Abiathar,    notwithstanding    his   deposition 
(ch.  11.  27),  continued  to  hold  his  priestly  dignity  and  character,  so  that  when 
he  no  longer  executed^  the  duties  of  his  office  his  name  remained  on  the  official 
list.      The  three  military  bodies  seem  to  have  remained  unchanged.      The 
commander  of  the  host  is  the  priestly  warrior  Benaiah.     The  guard  appear  only 
as  household  troops,  employed  on  state  pageants.     A  number  of  inferior  officers 
was  appointed,   under  a  principal  officer,  the  greater  part  of  whom  had  to 
control  the  taskwork  exacted  from  the  Canaanite  population,  and  the  remainder, 
consisting  of  twelve  chiefs,   had  to  be  responsible  for  provisioiiing  the  royal 
household.     The  court  was  a  scene  of  magnificence  and  gaiety,  thronged  with 
nchly-apparelled  attendants,  and  sparkling  with  evidences  of  boundless  wealth. 
In  the  midst  of  this  gorgeous  array  stood  the  stately  figure  of  the  king— fair  ia 
countenance,  cad  resplendent  in  beauty— his  robes  scented  with  the  perfumes 
ot  India,  the  crown  on  his  head  and  the  sceptre  in  his  hand,  and  the  guards 
and  councillors  surrounding  his  brilliant  throne:  or,  as  was  often  the  case,  the 
king,   at  early  dawn,    is   driving  out  of  Jerusalem  in  one  of  his  numerous 
oliariots,  drawn  by  horses  of  unpaiallelod  swiftness  and  beauty,  himsc  ]f  clothed 

f  65 


CHAP.  IV.  EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


in  white,  followed  by  a  train  of  mounted  archers,  all  splendid  youths  of  magni- 
ficent stature,  dressed  in  purple,  their  long  black  hair  flowing  behind  them, 
powdered  with  gold-dust,  which  glittered  in  the  sun  as  they  galloped  along 
after  their  royal  master. — {Josephus,  Stanley  passim.)  A  wealthier  grandeur 
than  that  of  the  greatest  earthly  empire  rests  upon  the  throne  of  the  Great 
Bedeemer:  His  officers  are  the  most  gifted,  and  most  numerous;  His 
government  is  orderly  and  beneficent. 

III.  The  vast  increase  of  population  (verse  20).  "  As  the  sand  which  is 
by  the  sea  in  multitude,"  a  proverbial  and  hyperbolical  expression,  commonly 
used  in  all  languages.  Thus  was  fulfilled  the  promise  made  to  Abraham 
(Gen.  xiii.  lf>;  xxii.  17;  see  also  ch.  iii.  8;  and  compare  Psalm  cxxvii., 
which  is  traditionally  ascribed  to  Solomon,  and  which  celebrates  the  populous- 
ness  and  security  of  Israel  in  his  day).  A  healthy  and  increasing  population 
is  an  important  evidence  of  national  prosperity,  an  honour  to  the  prince,  and  a 
terror  to  his  enemies  (Prov.  xiv.  28).  The  people  of  God — His  spiritual  Israel — 
are  innumerable  (Rev.  vii.  9). 

What  a  countless  company 
■%  Stand  before  yon  dazzling  throne  I 

IV.  The  ample  supply  of  provisions  (verses  22,  23,  27,  28).  The  daily 
provision  for  Solomon's  table  was  sufficient  to  serve,  at  two  pounds  of  bread 
each,  besides  meat,  no  less  than  29,160  men.  Thenius  computes  the  number 
daily  fed  at  the  palace  of  the  Israelitish  king  to  be  14,000.  It  is  said  that 
one  hundred  oxen  were  daily  slaughtered  for  the  kings  of  Persia,  and  that 
15,000  persons  have  been  daily  fed  at  the  court.  And  Tavernier  relates  that 
as  many  as  five  hundred  sheep  and  lambs  were  daily  consumed  at  the  court  of 
the  Sultan,  besides  a  number  of  fowls,  and  an  immense  quantity  of  butter  and 
rice.  'Eo  nation  can  boast  of  prosperity  when  its  people  are  starved  and  famine 
prevails.  When  we  consider  how  closely  population  follows  on  the  heels  of 
production,  how  great  is  the  goodness  of  God  in  ensuring  a  constant  supply  of 
food  lor  man  and  beast !  He  who  is  greater  than  Solomon  feeds  a  more  numerous 
household,  not  only  with  the  bread  that  perisheth,  but  with  that  which  endure th 
to  everlasting  life. 

V.  The  universal  prevalence  of  peace.  "He  had  peace  on  all  sides  round 
about  him"  (verse  24).  Wherein  also  he  became  a  lively  type  of  Christ,  the 
Prince  of  Peace  (Isa.  ix.  6),  who  as  he  was  brought  from  heaven  with  that 
song  of  peace  (Luke  ii.  14),  so  he  returned  up  again  with  that  farewell  of  peace 
(Jno.  xiv.  27),  leaving  to  the  world  the  doctrine  of  peace,  the  gospel  of  peace 
(Eph.  ii.  17);  which  worketh  that  peace  which  passeth  understanding 
(Phil.  iv.  1).^Trapp, 

VI.  The  conscicus  security  and  happiness  of  the  people  (verses 20,  25). 
They  were  cheerful  in  their  enjoyment  of  abounding  plenty — eating,  drinking, 
and  making  merry — evidences  these  of  a  happy,  peaceful,  and  prosperous 
administration.  Everyman  dwelt  safely  "under  his  vine,"  that  clustered 
round  his  court;  "  and  under  his  fig  tree,"  which  grew  in  his  garden.  They 
were  no  longer  obliged  to  dwell  in  fortified  cites  for  fear  of  their  enemies;  they 
spread  themselves  over  all  the  country,  which  they  everywhere  cultivated ; 
and  had  always  the  privilege  of  eating  the  fruits  of  their  own  labours.  In 
this  was  typified  the  spiritual  peace  and  joy  and  holy  security  of  all  the  faith- 
ful subjects  of  Messiah's  kingdom.  "  It  must  be  regarded  as  an  unspeakable 
blessing  of  God,  when,  under  the  protection  of  a  wise  and  righteous  government, 
everyone  in  the  nation,  even  the  least,  can  remain  in  the  undisturbed  possession 

6§ 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


OHAP.    IT. 


of  his  property,  and  can  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  industry  in  the  bosom  of  his 
family." 

Lessons  : — 1.  National  prosperity  is  the  gift  of  God,  2.  Is  fraught  with  many 
dangers,  3.  Is  permanent  only  when  used  for  the  highest  religiotts  welfare  of  the 
people, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Chap.  IV.  The  kingdom  of  Solomon 
a  type  of  the  Messiah's.  1.  In  its 
greatness  and  extent.  2.  In  its  pros- 
perity and  peace.  3.  In  his  wisdom 
and  knowledge.  Fortunate  is  the 
government  where  all  goes  orderly. 
Their  eyes  shall  look  around  after  the 
faithful  in  the  land,  and  pious  subjects 
are  loved  and  esteemed ;  but  false 
people  and  liars,  and  those  of  a  per- 
verse heart,  who  have  proud  ways  and 
haughtiness,  and  who  calumniate 
others  secretly  and  maliciously,  it  will 
not  endure  nor  have  about  it ;  but 
will  clear  away  and  destroy  after  the 
example  of  David  (Psalm  ex.).  A 
well-ordered  state  constitution  is  the 
condition  of  the  growth  and  pros- 
peiity  of  every  kingdom ;  but  all 
ordinances  and  institutions  avail 
nothing  when  requisite  and  proper 
persons  are  wanting  for  their  adminis- 
tration and  execution.  To  select  such, 
and  to  entrust  them  with  different 
administrative  offices,  is  the  first  and 
most  difficult  task  of  a  ruler.  Happy 
the  prince  to  whom  God  grants  the 
grace  to  find  the  right  persons,  who 
can  counsel  him  and  deserve  his  con- 
fidence (Eccles.  Xc  2-5).  As  a  court, 
where  it  is  beset  with  flatterers,  back- 
biters, carousers,  &c.^  generally  goes 
down,  so  also  it  prospers,  on  the 
other  hand,  when  pious  servants  are 
there. 

Verses  4,  5.  Compare  1  Chron.  xxii. 
7-10.  David,  the  man  of  action; 
Solomon,  the  man  of  rest.  The  man 
of  active  life  usually  has  more  con- 
spicuous virtues  and  more  conspicuous 
faults  than  the  man  of  rest.  David 
proposed  to  build  the  house — the  man 
of  action  was  the  founder;  Solomon 
carried  the  plans  of  his  father  into 
execution.  David  wag  the  founder; 
Solomon  the  builder. 

Verse  20.  Not  the  multitude  of  a 


people  causes  a  scarcity  in  the  land, 
but  the  wickedness  and  avarice  of 
men.  Pood  and  drink  and  amusement 
are  a  gift  of  God  (Eccles.  iii.  13), 
when  used  in  the  fear  of  God  (Eccles. 
xi.  9)  and  with  thanksgiving  (1  Cor. 
X.  31  ;  Col.  iii.  17);  but  they  become 
sin  when,  in  the  gift,  the  Giver  is 
forgotten,  the  belly  made  a  god  of, 
and  serves  the  lust  of  the  flesh. 

Verse  21.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is 
still  far  greater.  He  rules  from  one 
end  of  the  sea  to  the  other,  from  the 
rising  of  the  sun  unto  the  going  down 
thereof  (Zach.  ix.  10).  All  kings 
shall  call  upon  Him :  all  the  heathen 
shall  serve  Him  (Psalm  Ixxii.  8-10). 

Verse  22.  As  by  Divine  providence 
and  ordering  there  are  always  diffe- 
rent conditions,  high  and  low,  rich 
and  poor,  so  their  manner  of  life  can- 
not be  the  same,  but  must  be  conform- 
able to  the  rank  and  position  which 
have  been  assigned  to  every  one  by  God. 
The  household  of  a  prince  who  stands 
at  the  head  of  a  great  and  distinguished 
people  ought  not,  indeed,  to  give  to 
the  people  the  bad  example  of  extrava- 
gant show,  luxury,  and  riot ;  but  it 
must,  in  abundance  and  splendour, 
surpass  every  private  establishment, 
and  ought  not  to  appear  needy  and 
impoverished. 

Verse  24,  25.  The  blessings  of 
peace.  1.  Wherein  they  consist. 
2.  To  what  they  oblige.  Peace 
nourishes,  disturbance  consumes. 
Only  in  peace,  not  in  war,  does  a 
nation  attain  to  well-being ;  therefore 
should  we  offer  prayer  and  supplication 
for  kings  and  all  in  authority,  &c 
(1  Tim.  ii.  2).  Happy  the  land  where 
goodness  and  truth  are  met  together, 
righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed 
each  other  (Psalm  Ixxxv.  10),— 
Lange, 

67 


CHAP.  IT.  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


MOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  29-34. 
The  Uniqub  Wisdom  of  Solomow. 

I.  It  was  vast  in  its  range  and  profound  in  its  insight  (verse  29).     The 

terms  of  this  verse  indicate  that  Solomon  was  gifted  as  a  man  of  profound 
thought,  of  deep  understanding,  with  vast  powers  of  judgment,  and  a  broad  and 
diversified  experience.  Largeness  of  heart  is  intended  to  convey  the  idea  of 
great  intellectual  capacity.  In  Scripture  the  heart  is  often  used  for  the 
intellect.  The  expression,  as  the  sand  that  is  on  the  sea  shore^  was  proverbial  in 
reference  to  numerical  multitude  (Gen.  xxii.  17  ;  xxxii.  12  ;  xli.  49 ;  Josh.  xi. 
4;  Judg.  vii.  12;  1  Sam.  xiii.  5;  2  Sam.  xvii.  11 ;  1  Kings  iv.  20;  Psalm 
Ixxviii.  27).  It  is  used  here  to  denote  the  amplitude  and  multiplicity  of  the 
knowledge  and  wisdom  of  Israel's  greatest  king.  It  was  said  of  a  certain  great 
man  that  he  was  a  very  gulph  of  learning ;  of  another,  that  he  was  a  closet 
or  market  of  all  sciences  and  learning ;  of  another,  that  he  was  skilful  in  every- 
thing; and  of  a  fourth,  that  he  might  be  said  to  know  all  that  was  know- 
able.  All  these  eulogies  might  be  fitly  applied  to  Solomon.  His  wisdom 
was  not  only  vast  in  extent,  but,  like  the  sea-sand,  minute  and  accurate  in 
detail.  As  the  sand  upon  the  sea-shore,  observes  Lord  Bacon,  incloses  a  great 
body  of  water,  so  Solomon's  mind  contained  an  ocean  of  knowledge.  Intellectual 
endowments  are  better  than  wealth  (Prov.  iii.  13,  14),  better  than  long  life 
{ib.  iii.  2),  better  than  the  uncertain  prizes  of  worldly  honour  {ib.  iii.  16). 
But  there  is  a  wisdom  deeper,  vaster,  and  more  satisfying  than  that  of  Solomon's, 
and  which  can  be  learned  only  at  the  feet  of  Him  who  is  greater  than  Solo- 
mon, and  *'  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  The 
mere  child  of  faith  is  wiser  than  the  most  profoundly  intellectual  unbeliever. 
The  wisdom  of  Solomon  gave  no  peace  to  his  restless  mind,  did  not  prolong  his 
days,  and  did  not  prevent  his  falling  into  grievous  sins.  But  the  wisdom 
that  is  from  above  is  first  pure,  then  peaceable,  &c.  (Jas.  iii.  17).  The  life 
of  man  is  short ;  but  the  glory  that  blooms  upon  it — the  outburst  and  glitter 
of  intellectual  genius — ^is  shorter  still.  But  they  that  be  wise — wise  in  the  truest 
and  highest  sense — are  invested  with  an  undying  and  celestial  radiance — "they 
shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament  and  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever." 

II.  It  surpassed  the  wisdom  of  the  best  known  philosophers  (verses  30,  31). 
The  East  is  tlie  cradle  of  the  sciences,  and  in  Solomon's  day  was  the  only  part  of 
the  world  famous  for  wisdom.  The  children  of  the  East  country  would  embrace 
the  Chaldeans  and  Arabians,  both  of  whom  were  distinguished  for  scientific 
research,  and  as  the  authors  of  sage  and  sententious  utterances,  which  became 
proverbial.  The  wisdom  of  Egypt  held  a  high  position  in  the  ancient  world,  and 
was  varied  and  extensive  in  its  character.  It  included  magic,  geometry, 
medicine,  astronomy,  architecture,  and  a  dreamy  mystic  philosophy,  of  which 
metempsychosis  was  the  main  principle.  The  Egyptians  despised  the  Greeks  as 
only  children  in  knowledge  :  and,  indeed,  the  Greak  learning  only  commenced 
four  hundred  years  after  the  era  of  Solomon.  It  is  not  certain  whether  the 
philosphers  mentioned  in  verse  31  were  contemporaries  of  Solomon,  or  men  of  a 
more  ancient  time,  whose  fame  for  wisdom  was  still  celebrated.  When  compared 
with  the  best  known  philosophers  of  his  own  and  all  former  time,  Solomon  is 
declared  to  be  supreme  in  wisdom.  The  knowledge  which  is  divinely  bestowed 
is  superior  to  that  which  is  acquired  as  the  result  of  human  labour :  grace  is 
more  potent  than  art.  To  possess  a  wealth  of  wisdom  involves  a  solemn 
responsibility.  Woe  be  to  that  man  who  prostitutes  God-given  talent  to  base 
and  ignoble  purposes !  The  abuse  of  wisdom  will  only  make  the  transgressor 
more  exquisitely  alive  to  the  misery  he  draws  upon  himself.  True  wisdom  exalts 
the  possessor,  and  blesses  the  race. 

69 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  iv. 


III.  It  enriched  the  practical  and  poetic  literature  of  the  ages  (verse  32). 
Of  these  three  thousand  proverbs  a  very  valuable  though  a  comparatively  small 
portion  reniaius  in  the  book  of  Proverbs,  and,  perhaps,  also  in  Ecclesiastes. 
The  remark  that  he  spake  these  proverbs  may  imply  that  they  were  not  all 
written,  or  actually  recorded,  and  so  far  from  being  preserved  only  by  oral 
tradition,  they  either  became  gradually  lost,  or  their  authorship  became 
uncertain.  Being  the  son  of  the  greatest  of  human  lyrists,  the  sweet  psalmist 
of  Israel,  Solomon  naturally  inherited  the  gift  of  poetry  and  song.  Of 
the  thousand  and  five  songs,  there  now  remain,  probably,  the  Ixxii.  and  cxxvii. 
Psalms,  and  the  Canticles,  though  the  authorship  of  the  latter  is  a  controverted 
question.  But  though  most  of  the  proverbs  and  songs  of  Solomon  are  lost  to  us, 
their  silent  influences,  flowing  through  unseen  channels,  may  have  greatly 
affected  both  the  ancient  and  modern  literature  of  the  East,  and  may  still  be 
studied  in  the  apocryphal  books  of  Ecclesiasticus  and  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon. — 
Whedon.  The  man  who  adds  one  really  good  book  to  the  already  wealthy 
literature  of  the  world  is  a  benefactor  to  mankind.  When  preferment  was 
off'ered  to  Thomas  Aquinas,  he  was  wont  to  sigh  and  say,  "I  would  rather 
have  Chrysostom's  Comment  on  Matthew."  A  pure  and  healthy  literature  is  a 
mighty  force  in  shaping  individual  and  public  opinion,  in  consolidating  moral 
character,  in  defining  and  directing  the  career  of  a  nation,  in  exposing  time- 
honoured  fallacies,  and  in  promoting  the  highest  ends  of  truth  and  righteousness. 
On  the  other  hand,  who  can  estimate  the  pernicious  influence  of  a  single  bad 
book  ?  It  is  lamentable  to  observe  how  the  loftiest  genius  is  employed  in 
teaching  downright  immorality,  and  shattering  the  faith  of  man  in  the  supreme 
good.  Truth  is  sacrificed  for  effect,  and  purity  for  a  temporary  bubble  reputa- 
tion. The  monetary  gain  of  a  vile  book  soon  vanishes,  but  the  mischief  remains 
long  after  the  cunning  hand  of  the  writer  has  turned  to  dust.  Many  would 
have  sacrificed  all  they  possessed  to  be  able  to  undo  the  evil  their  own 
pens  produced. 

IV.  It  embraced  a  minute  acquaintance  with  the  principal  subjects  of 
natural  history  (verse  33),  This  is  the  first  idea  of  a  complete  system  of 
natural  history  as  far  as  it  includes  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms ;  and 
Solomon  was  probably  the  first  natural  philosopher  in  the  world.  His  know- 
ledge ranged  from  the  most  gigantic  trees  to  the  humblest  plant;  from 
mammoths  to  insects.  The  writings  of  Solomon  bear  evidence  of  his  keen 
appreciation  of  the  beauties  of  nature,  and  of  the  habit  of  minute  observation 
and  sage  refiection.  His  extended  commerce  with  other  nations  afforded  him 
ample  opportunity  for  becoming  acquainted  with  rare  and  varied  specimens  of 
plants  and  animals.  His  discourse  would  consist  not  simply  in  scientific 
description  and  analysis,  but  in  tracing  evidences  of  Divine  skill  and  power. 
Unlike  some  inflated  scientists  of  the  present  day,  his  profound  knowledge  of 
the  my  teries  of  nature  did  not  obscure,  but  brighten  and  expand,  his 
conceptions  of  the  Divine.  Irenaeus  observes  that  Solomon  expounded  psycho- 
logically the  wisdom  of  God  which  is  manifest  in  creation.  And  Josephus 
states,  **  J?<?  spake  a  paralle  upon  every  sort  of  tree,  from  the  hyssop  to  the 
cedar ;  and  in  like  manner,  also,  about  beasts  and  all  sorts  of  living  creatures, 
whether  upon  the  earth,  in  the  seas,  or  in  the  air ;  for  he  was  not  unacquainted 
with  any  of  their  natures,  nor  omitted  inquiiies  about  them,  but  described  them 
all  like  a  philosopher y  and  demonstrated  his  exquisite  knowledge  of  their  several 
properties."  It  is  the  function  of  science  to  interpret  nature  ;  and  the  record 
of  its  triumphs  in  recent  years  reads  like  the  pages  of  a  thrilling  romance. 
But  alongside  the  growth  and  expansion  of  science  there  has  grown  up  an 
unhealthy  and  dangerous  scepticism.  This  has  been  more  especially  evident 
when  one  branch  of  the  great  family  of  the  sciences  has  been  the  exclusive 
object  of  study,  for  then  the  flow  of  thought  becomes  narrowed  in  its  channel, 

69 


OHAF.  IV.  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


the  range  of  vision  limited,  and  the  harmony  of  truth,  which  lies  not  so  much 
in  one  thing  as  it  pervades  all,  is  seriously  disturbed.  The  sublime  object  of 
all  true  science  is  to  interpret  and  illustrate  the  highest  truth,  and  aid  the 
anxious  inquirer  in  its  attainment.  There  is  something  overpoweringly 
affecting  in  contemplating  a  gifted  human  soul,  baffled  in  its  unaided  search 
after  truth,  and  drifting,  ever  drifting,  like  a  lonely  raft  on  a  shoreless  sea. 
The  invariable  result  of  the  kind  of  scepticism  which  certain  doctrines  of 
modern  science  has  helped  to  create  is  to  plunge  the  mind  into  greater  doubts 
than  those  from  which  it  professes  to  liberate ;  but  it  is  the  office  of  a  genuine 
philosophy— a  Christianized  science — to  bring  the  light  that  dispels  the  gloom 
and  guides  the  distraught  inquirer  into  hallowed  rest  and  peace. 

V.  It  acquired  a  universal  reputation.  ''His  fame  was  in  all  nations 
round  about "  (verses  31,  34).  Solomon  was  the  Aristotle  of  the  Jewish  nation ; 
but  his  fame  excelled  that  of  the  Grecian  sage,  and  is  to-day  familiar  with 
thousands  to  whom  the  name  of  Aristotle  is  unknown.  Solomon  not  only  con- 
tinued to  be  the  type  and  model  of  all  wisdom  to  his  own  people,  but  in  the 
East  is  so  regarded  to  the  present  day.  The  Koran  praises  him  as  knowing  the 
languages  of  men  and  demons,  of  birds  and  ants,  with  all  of  which,  it  is  said,  he 
held  intercourse.  The  Turks  still  possess  a  work  of  seventy  folio  volumes  which 
is  called  the  Book  of  Solomon.  The  occult  wisdom  of  the  East  is  still  connected 
with  his  name.  His  court  was  a  centre  round  which  gathered  the  groat  and 
learned  of  all  nations,  who  were  attracted  either  by  curiosity,  or  with  a  desire 
to  add  to  their  stores  of  wisdom  (verse  34).  It  is  not  always  the  good  fortune 
of  the  wise  to  attain  a  wide-spread  popularity.  The  highly  talented  often  pine 
in  obscurity  (Eccles.  ix.  13-16).  Messiah  is  the  embodiment  of  a  wisdom 
infinitely  surpassing  that  of  Solomon  (Prov.  viii.  22,  23  ;  Col.  ii.  3).  His  repu- 
tation is  the  most  exalted,  and  is  imperishable  (Phil.  ii.  9 ;  Ps.  Ixxii.  17)  ;  they 
who  would  be  wise  unto  salvation  must  come  to  Him  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  The  perpe- 
tuity and  blessedness  of  true  wisdom  are  best  ensured  by  imparting  it  to  others. 

Lessons. — 1.  fVe  are  again  reminded  that  superior  wisdom  is  the  gift  of  God 
(verse  29).  2.  Uncommon  abilities  increase  the  responsihilitg  to  me  them  with 
uncommon  diligence  for  the  glory  of  the  Donor.  3.  The  wisdom  of  the  few  should 
he  diffused  for  the  instruction  of  the  many.  4.  He  who  is  wise  unto  salvation,  and 
wise  to  win  souls,  acquires  an  undying  reputation. 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verses  29-34.  The  wisdom  of  Solo-  7.  As  attracting  all  ranks  to  resort  to 

mon.     1.  Its  Divine  origin  (verse  29).  him     (Psalm    xlv.    12;     Ix.     6). — 

2.    Its   vastness   (verse  29).      3.    Its  Eohinson, 
superlative  excellency  (verses  30,  31). 

4.     Its     marvellous      productiveness         Yerse  29.  l^ot   every   one   receives 

(verse   32).      5.  Its  practical   utility  from  God  an  equal  measure  of  spiritual 

(verse  33).     6.  Its  irresistible  attrac-  endowment,  but  every  one  is  obliged 

tiveness  (verse  34).  with  the  gift  he  has  received  to  dis- 
pose of  it  faithfully,  and  not  allow  it 

—  Solomon  a  type  of  Christ.     1.  to  be  fallow  (Luke   xii.   48;    Matt. 

As  the  child  of  promise.     2.  As  con-  xxv.  14-29).    In  the  possession  of  high 

secrated  to  the  regal  office.    3.  Though  spiritual   endowment,    and    of    much 

ready  to  spare,  as  finally  destroying  knowledge,  man  is  in  danger  of  over- 

every  obstinate  rebel  against  his  go-  estimating      himself,      of      becoming 

vemment.     4.  In  the  tranquillity  and  proud  and  haughty  ;  hence  the  highly 

equity  of  his  reign.     5.  As  the  builder  gifted  Solomon  himself  says,  *' Trust 

of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord.      6.  As  in  the  Lord,"   &c.  (Prov.  iii.  6,   6). 

possessed    of   extraordinary    wisdom.  --Lange, 
70 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


CHAP.  IT. 


Verses  30,  31.  The  responsibility 
of  intellectual  greatness.  1.  Intel- 
lectual greatness  should  be  distin- 
guished by  eminent  goodness.  2.  Is 
exposed  to  many  subtle  temptations. 

3.  Is  powerful  in  exerting  a  beneficent 
or  malevolent  influence  upon  the  age. 

4.  Is  all  the  more  lamentable  in  its 
fall. 

Yerse  30.  Heathen  wisdom,  great 
as  it  may  be  in  earthly  things,  under- 
stands nothing  of  divine,  heavenly 
things,  and  is  therefore  far  below  the 
wisdom  whose  beginning  is  the  fear  of 
the  personal,  living  God,  who  has  re- 
vealed Himself  in  His  Word.  This 
wisdom  alone  yields  true,  good,  and 
abiding  finiit  (James  iii.  15-17). — 
Lange, 

Verse  31.   "With  the  accession   of 

Solomon  a  new  world  of  thought  was 
opened  to  the  Israelites.     The  curtain 
which  divided  them  from  the  surround- 
ing nations  was  suddenly  rent  asunder. 
The  wonders  of  Egypt,  the  commerce 
of  Tyre,  the  romance  of  Arabia — nay, 
it  is  even  possible,  the  Homeric  age  of 
Greece — became  visible.     Of  this,  the 
first  and  most  obvious  result  was  the 
growth  of  architecture.     But  the  gene- 
ral effects  on  the  whole  mind  of  the 
people  must  have  been  greater  still. 
A  new  direction  seems  to  have  been 
given  to  Israelite  thought.     Prophets 
and   psalmists  retire   into   the   back- 
ground, and  their  place  is  taken  by  the 
new  power   called  by  the   name   of 
**  Wisdom."    Its  two  conspicuous  ex- 
amples are  the  wisdom  of  Egypt  and 
the   wisdom  of  the   Children  of  the 
East — that  is,  of  the  Idumaean  Arabs. 
Four   renowned   sages   appear  as  its 
exponents:    Ethan  the  Ezrahite,  and 
Heman,  and  Chalcol,  and  Darda,  the 
sons  of  Mahol.     It  would  almost  seem 
as  if  a  kind  of  college  had  been  founded 
for  this  special  purpose — a  house  of 
wisdom  on  seven  pillars.     A  class  of 
men   sprang  up,   distinct  both    from 
priest  and  prophet,  under  the  name  of 
"  the  wise."      Their  teaching,    their 
manner   of  life,  was   unlike   that   of 
either  of  those  two  powerful  orders. 
The  thing  and  the  name  had  been 


almost  unknown  before.  In  a  restricted 
sense,  the  word  had  been  used  of  the 
Dnnite  architects  of  the  Tabernacle, 
and  in  a  somewhat  larger  sense  of  two 
or  three  remarkable  persons  in  David^s 
reign.  But  from  this  time  forward 
the  word  occurs  in  the  sacred  writings 
at  least  three  hundred  times.  What 
it  was  will  best  be  perceived  by  seeing 
it  in  its  greatest  representative.  A 
change  must  have  come  over  the 
nation,  any  way,  through  the  new 
world  which  he  opened.  But  it  was 
fixed  and  magnified  by  finding  such  a 
mind  to  receive  it.  His  wisdom  ex- 
celled the  wisdom  of  any  one  of  his 
time.  From  his  early  years  its  germs 
had  been  recognized. — Stanley. 

Verses  32,  33.  A  pure  literature. 
1,  Embalms  the  best  thoughts  of  the 
wise  and  good  of  all  times  and  all 
lands.  2.  Is  of  unspeakable  value  in 
the  formation  of  moral  character.  3. 
Deals  with  every  phase  of  scientific 
truth.  4.  Should  be  widely  dissemi- 
nated.— The  glory  which  is  obtained 
in  the  world  through  bad  books  is 
shame  and  disgrace  before  Him  who 
demands  account  of  every  idle  word. 

Verse  32.  It  is,  we  might  say,  an 
accident  that  the   Proverbs   of   Solo- 
mon are  not  called  the   **  Parables," 
and  that  the   teachings  of  the  New 
Testament  are  called  the  "  Parables," 
and  not  the  **  Proverbs,"  of  the  Gospels. 
The  illustrations  from  natural  objects, 
the  selection  of  the  homelier  instead  of 
the  grander  of  these,  are  not  derived 
from  the  prophets  or  from  the  psalm- 
ists,   but  from  the   wise    naturalist, 
**who  spake  of  trees,  and  beasts,  and 
fowls,  and  creeping  things,  and  fishes, 
of  the  singing  birds,  of  the  budding 
fig  tree,  of  the  fragrant  vine."     The 
teaching  of  Solomon  is  the  sanctifica- 
tion  of  common  sense  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment,  and  to  that   sanctification   the 
final  seal  is  set  by  the  adoption  of  the 
same  style  and  thought  in  the  I^ew 
Testament   by    Him    who,    with   Hia 
apostles,  taught  in  "  Solomon's  porch," 
and  expressly  compared  His  wisdom 
to   the   wisdom   which   gathered    the 
nations  round  Solomon  of  old. — Stanley, 

71 


OHAP.  ▼. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


Verse  33.  Far  better  would  it  befit 
lords  and  princes  to  find  their  enjoy- 
ment in  study  rather  than  to  seek 
satisfaction  in  dramas,  plays,  and  in 
immoderate  drinking.  A  man  may  be 
able  to  speak  of  all  possible  things, 
and  at  the  same  time  be  without  wis- 
dom, for  this  does  not  consist  in  varied 
knowledge  and  wide-spread  acquire- 
ments, but  in  recognition  of  the  truth 
which  purifies  the  heart  and  sanctifies 
the  will.  Observation  and  investiga- 
tion of  nature  is  only  of  the  right  kind 
and  fraught  with  blessing  when  it  leads 
to  the  confessions  of  Psalms  civ.  24  ; 
xcii.  6,  7. — Starke. 

—  Solomon  was,  at  least  in  one  great 
branch,  the  founder,  the  only  repre- 
sentative, not  merely  of  Hebrew  wis- 
dom, but  of  Hebrew  science.  As 
Alexander's  conquests  had  supplied 
the  materials  for  the  first  natural  his- 
tory of  Greece,  so  Solomon's  commerce 
did  the  like  for  the  first  natural  history 
of  Israel.  He  spake  of  trees  from  the 
highest  to  the  lowest,  "  from  the 
spreading  cedar  of  Lebanon  to  the 
slender  caper-plant  that  springs  out 
of  the  crevice  of  the  wall."  He  spake 
also  of  beasts,  and  of  fowls,  and  of 
creeping  things,  and  of  fishes.  We 
must  look  at  him  as  the  first  great 
naturalist  of  the  world,  in  the  midst 
of  th*^  strange  animals — the  apes,  the 
peacocks — which  he  had  coUe'jted  from 
India;    in    the    garden,    among    the 


copious  springs  of  Etham,  or  in  the 
bed  of  the  deep  ravine  beneath  the 
wall  of  his  newly  erected  temple, 
where,  doubtless,  was  to  be  seen  the 
transplanted  cedar,  superseding  the 
humble  sycamore  of  Palestine;  the 
paradise  of  rare  plants,  gathered  from 
far  and  near;  *' pomegranates  with 
pleasant  fruits,  camphire  with  spike- 
nard, spikenard  and  saffron,  calermus 
and  cinnamon,  with  all  trees  of  frank- 
incense, myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the 
chief  spices." — Stanley. 

Verse  34.  The  fascination  of  learn- 
ing'. 1.  Appeals  to  the  inquisitive 
instinct  of  man.  2.  Stimulates  its 
votary  to  still  higher  achievements. 
3.  Creates  and  strengthens  a  com- 
munity of  sympathy  among  minds  of 
varying  capacity.  4.  Elevates  the 
successful  competitor  to  a  pinnacle  of 
enduring  fame. 

—  To  Solomon  came  from  all  nations 
people  to  hearken  to  his  wisdom  ;  but 
to  Him  who  is  greater  than  Solomon 
the  wise  men  of  to-day  will  not  listen 
(1  Cor.  i.  19-21).  How  many  travel 
over  land  and  sea  to  seek  gold  and 
silver,  but  stir  neither  hand  nor  foot 
to  find  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of 
the  truth  which  lie  close  at  hand,  and 
are  better  than  gold  and  silver  (Prov. 
viii.  11 ;  xxiv.  14  ;  Job  xxviii.  18)  ! — 
Lange. 


CHAPTER  V. 
NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  THE  TYRIAN  KING. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.— Vers*  1.  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  called  Eirom 
(verses  7  and  19),  Huram  (2  Chrou.  ii.  3),  and  by  Josephus  Erpwjuof.  the  same  who  had  sent 
David  timbers  for  his  palace  (2  Sam.  v.  11  ;  1  Chron.  xiv.  1).  This  embassy  to  Solomon  was 
a  declaration  that  he  desired  to  maintain  equally  friendly  relations  with  David's  successoi^ 
Solomon  took  the  incident  as  an  opportunity  to  negociate  for  "  cedar  trees  out  of  Lebanon  ** 
(verse  6)  with  which  to  build  the  temple.  Verse  3.  Wars  which  were  about  him  on  every 
side— David  was  not  prevented  from  erecting  God's  temple  because  wars  allowed  him  no  leisure 
(see  2  Sam.  vii.  1,  •'  Lord  had  given  him  rest,"  &c.)  ;  he  was  free  from  military  claims  to  do 
this  work,  but  not  free  from  military  stains  ;  his  had  been  a  career  of  war,  and  Jehovah[s 
temple  must  be  reared  bv  one  who  should  prefigure  the  ''  Prince  of  Peace  "  {cf  1  Chron.  xxviii 
3).  Note  :  Solomon  assumes  that  Eiram  knew  David's  intention  to  build  the  temple  [cj. 
1  Chron.  xxii.  1-4).  Verse  4.  Neither  adversary  nor  evil  occurrent— ^T)  J^^D  means  an  un- 
happy event,  e.g.,  plague,  rebellion,  fajiine.  David  hi;d  such  ♦*  evil  occurrent"  in  Absalom's 
rebellion,  and  in  the  plague  following  his  numbering  tlie  people.  Verse  6.  Cedar  trees  out  of 
Lebanon— Only  from  the  forests  of  Lebanon  could  Solomon  have  procured  such  timber  for  the 
t-emple.  These  forests  belonged  to  the  Phoeaicians,  who  ciurried  on  extensive  trade  in  both  cedart 
72 


BOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  kY  :  KINGS.  oftAP.  t. 


and  cypresses.  The  best  cedars  grew  on  the  north-west  of  the  mountain  range.  The  Sidoniam 
were  at  this  time  expert  shipbuilders  and  good  navigators  ;  it  would,  therefore,  be  an  easy  part 
of  their  contract  to  "  convey  by  sea  "  their  merchandize  (verse  9).  Robinson  says  the  famous 
cedar  forests  lie  two  days'  journey  north  of  Beirut,  near  the  highest  mountain  peak,  distant 
from  Jebul  Sunnin  six  or  eight  hours  north.  Verse  7.  Hiram  said,  Blessed  be  the  LOBD — 
The  Septuagint  here  reads  Qt6s,  not  Kvpios  ;  yet  this  recognition  of  Jehovah  might  indicate  in 
Hiram  nothing  more  than  a  polytheistic  acceptance  of  the  God  of  Israel  as  one  of  many  deities. 
In  the  parallel  passage  (2  Chron.  ii.  12)  Hiram  calls  him  7^*^^^  ^■i7^^    7y\7V  Jehovah,  God 

of  Israel^  and  adds,  *'  that  made  heaven  and  earths  Yet  thi'^  may  only  imply  his  assent  to  the 
religious  views  of  the  Israelites.    Verse  8.  Cedar  and  fir  -  ^'ll^l  more   probably  denotes  the 

cypress^  not  "  fir,*'  although  the  pine,  larch,  and  cypress  are  all  found  at  this  day  in  the  Lebanon  ; 
and  by  berosh  may  be  intended  either  tree.  Verse  9.  Convey  them  by  sea  in  floats— /i^t 
I  will  make  them  into  floats  on  the  sea.  Thus  they  could  be  brou  ht  down  the  river,  pro- 
bably the  Dog  River,  to  the  sea  coast,  and  by  sea  to  Joppa  (2  Chron  ii.  16).  Verso  11. 
Wheat  for  food,  and  pure  oil — Phoenicia  was  poor  in  agricultural  produce,  but  rich  in  umbra- 
geous growth.     The  land  of  Israel  was  poor  in  trees,  rich  in  corn  and  oil.     This  exchange 

was,   therefore,  mutually  advantageous.     The  "pure  oil,"  /1^713  ]Q'Z^  beaten^  ».«.,  finest  oil, 

was  obtained  from  olives  not  fully  ripe,  and  pounded  in  mortars  ;  had  a  white  colour,  as  well  aF 
a  better  flavour ;  and  yielded  a  purer  and  clearer  light  than  the  ordinary  olive  oil  obtained 
through  the  press.— X<?t/  Verse  12.  The  Lord  gave  Solomon  wisdom,  &c.,  means  that,  guidef* 
by  «*  wisdom  profitable  to  direct,"  Solomon  entered  into  a  friendly  alliance  and  commercial 
treaty  with  Hiram.  Verse  13.  Raised  a  levy— /i<.,  caused  to  go  up  (see  note  on  iv.  6), 
7^1  to  take  out  "  30,000  men"  These  were  Israelites,  in  distinction  from  Canaanitish  bond- 
servants (ch.  ix.  20 ;  2  Chron.  viii.  7-9),  and  prisoners  taken  by  David  in  war,  numbering 
153.600 ;  and  these  levied  Israelites  are  employed  on  lighter  terms  than  the  bondslaves,  serving 
in  detachments  of  10,000  for  one  month,  and  then  resting  for  two  months  at  home,  while  the 
other  two  detachments  take  their  turn.  Verse  14.  Adoniramwas  over  the  levy  {cf.  note  on 
iv.  6).  Verse  15.  Threescore  and  ten  thonsand  that  bare  burdens,  &c— 70,000  carriers  ajd 
80,000  cutters  of  wood;  or, more  probably,  of  stone— ^^Jpf  being  more  strictly  used  of  a  cutter 

of  stone  (2  Kings  xii.  12),  although  used  of  both  in  this  instance  (Gesenius).  This  total  of 
150,000  were  **  strangers  in  the  land  of  Israel"  (2  Chron.  ii.  17),  not  Israelites.  Verse  16. 
Officers  over  the  work,  3,300  — Tb^se  were  over  the  bondmen;  other  ^^^0  captains  were  over 
the  30,000  Israelites  (ch.  ix.  23).     Verse  18.  The  stone  squarers  DvDHm-The  Giblim 

(Joshua  xiiL  6),  •*.  «.,  inhabitants  of  7^3 — These  Giblites  (see  Ezek.  xxvii.  9)  were  specially 

skilful  in  shipbuilding.      Thenius  suggests  that  the  slightly  changed  word  D  l'!?^))^')   be 

accepted,  and  then  reads,  "they  wreathed  the  stones,  put  a  border  round  them,*' i.^.  "And 
Solomon's  builders  and  Hiram's  builders  did  hew  them  and  bevel  them."  Such  grooved  or  bevelled 
stones,  twenty  or  thirty  feet  long  by  six  feet,  are  now  visible  to  Palestine  explorers  as  the 
basement  stones  of  the  ancient  temple,  and  are  probably  the  original  stones  used  "  to  lay  tho 
foundation  of  the  house"  (verse  17). — W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-18. 

Pkepaeations  foe  a  Gbeat  Woki. 

I.  That  tlie  preparations  for  a  great  work  are  facilitated  where  a 
genuine  friendship  exists.  1.  The  friendship  of  a  worthy  father  is  often 
continued  to  his  posterity.  *'  For  Hiram  was  ever  a  lover  of  David  "  (verse  1). 
The  friendships  formed  by  a  good  man  are  a  precious  legacy  to  his  children. 
He  may  have  many  and  bitter  enemies  ;  but  the  faithful  few  will  love  him  to 
the  end  of  his  days,  and  after  his  death  will  honour  his  memory  even  in  his 
offspring.  A  son  will  sometimes  receive  signal  advantages  in  life,  for  his 
father's  sake.  Havid  rejoiced  to  show  kindness  to  Mephibosheth,  the  crippled 
son  of  his  friend  Jonathan  (2  Sam.  ix.  3,  13).  **  A  fast  friend  is  a  rare  bird. 
Must  fiiends  now-a-days  are  like  Joab's  dagger,  as  soon  in  and  as  soon  out. 
The  love  of  foster-brothers  in  Ireland  far  surpasseth — saith  one,  but  I  believe 
him  not — all  the  loves  of  all  men.     They  only  love  truly  that  love  one  another  out 

7J 


CHA^.T.  SOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


of  a  pure  heart  fervently  (1  Pet.  i.  22).  This  love  lasteth." — Trapp.  2.  A  genuine 
friendship  is  strengthened  and  perpetuated  hy  mutual  acts  of  courtesy  and  service 
(verse  3-11).  Solomon  responds  with  great  cordiality  to  the  congratulatory 
embassage  of  Hiram,  and,  at  the  same  time,  suggests  the  way  in  which  the 
Tyrian  king  can  help  in  his  great  work  of  building  a  house  for  the  Lord. 
Hiram  cheerfully  falls  in  with  the  arrangement,  and  the  terms  of  contract  are 
speedily  and  satisfactorily  settled.  A  friendship  where  the  giving  is  all  on  one 
side,  and  the  receiving  all  on  the  other,  will  soon  come  to  an  irreparable  breach. 
The  quid  pro  quo  may  not  always  be  the  same  in  kind ;  but  a  true  courtesy  will 
ever  be  ready  to  acknowledge  the  preponderance  of  obligation. 

II.  That  in  the  preparation  for  a  great  work  the  choicest  materials 
should  be  obtained  (verses  6,  10,  17,  compared  with  2  Chron.  ii.  7,  8). 
Cedar,  gold,  and  costly  stones — the  choicest  timber,  the  choicest  metal,  and  the 
choicest  stone — were  to  be  used  in  the  building  of  the  temple.  ^Many  wonderful 
properties  are  ascribed  to  the  cedar,  such  as  resisting  putrefaction,  destroying 
noxious  insects,  remaining  sound  for  a  thousand  years,  yielding  an  oil  famous  for 
preserving  books  and  writings,  &c.  The  wood  is  extremely  hard,  which  caused 
the  ancients  to  believe  it  incapable  of  decay.  In  whatever  work  we  do  for 
God,  the  best  material  should  be  used.  Nothing  is  too  good  for  Him.  Some 
men  will  spend  enormous  sums  on  jewelry,  on  house  furnishing,  or  on 
architectural  decoration,  and  yet  be  content  to  see  the  ugliest  and  shabbiest 
material  used  in  the  service  ot  God.  David  spared  neither  time,  nor  pains,  nor 
expense  in  gathering  together  the  costliest  materials  for  the  projected  building, 
though  he  well  knew  he  would  not  be  permitted  to  take  part  in  its  erection. 
Let  us  not  grudge  to  do  the  preparatory  work  by  which  posterity  will  princi- 
pally benefit.  He  who  does  something  to  enrich  the  future  of  humanity  has 
not  lived  in  vain. 

III.  That  in  the  preparation  for  a  great  work  the  best  talent  should  be 
sought.  "  There  is  not  among  us  any  that  can  skill  to  hew  timber  like  unto 
the  Sidonians  '*  (verse  6  compared  with  verse  18).  Sidon  was  a  part  of  the 
territories  of  Hiram,  and  its  inhabitants  appear  to  have  been  the  most  expert 
workmen.  Much  skill  is  needed  in  the  felling  and  treatment  of  timber. 
According  to  Vitruvius,  a  contemporary  of  Julius  Caesar,  and  author  of  a 
celebrated  treatise  on  architecture,  timber  must  be  cut  in  the  autumn  or  in 
the  winter,  when  it  is  free  from  a  moisture  which  is  apt  to  make  it  rot,  and  it 
should  be  cut  in  such  a  manner  as  to  allow  the  sap  to  distil  away.  It  «hould 
never  be  exposed  to  a  hot  sun,  high  winds,  or  rain,  nor  drawn  through  the 
dew ;  and  it  should  be  in  like  manner  guarded  for  three  years  before  being  used 
in  building.  Probably  these  and  other  similar  precautions  gave  the  Sidonians 
their  fame  for  skill  in  felling  timber.  They  were  also  celebrated  as  builders, 
and  as  dextrous  in  the  working  of  all  kinds  of  metals.  Strabo  ascribes  to  them 
great  knowledge  in  philosophy,  astronomy,  geometry,  arithmetic,  navigation, 
and  in  all  the  fine  arts.  Sidon  had  glass  works,  linen,  and  other  manufactures, 
that  furnished  very  ingenious  and  far-sought  commodities.  Homer  represents 
the  most  precious  and  valuable  of  the  great  metal  wine  bowls,  in  which  the 
Greeks  of  the  heroic  age  delighted,  as  imported  from  Sidon  (Odyss.  iv.  614-618  ; 
XV.  425),  and  made  by  Sidonian  workmen  (Iliad,  xxiii.  743,  744).  He  also 
ascribes  to  Sidonian  women  the  production  of  the  beautifully  embroidered  robes 
which  were  worn  by  Asiatic  ladies  of  the  first  rank  {ih.  vi.  289-295).  Both 
Herodotus  and  Homer  attest  the  general  nautical  skill  of  the  Phoenicians ;  and 
the  fonner  assigns  the  palm  to  Sidon.  Talent  is  the  gift  of  Heaven,  and  its 
best  efforts  and  most  masterly  productions  should  be  consecrated  to  the  noblest 
ends.  The  work  of  God  affords  scope  for  the  exercise  of  the  most  accomplished 
and  fertile  genius. 

74 


BOM^LETtC  COMMENTARY:  KIN08.  ohaf.  t. 


IV.  That  in  the  preparations  for  a  great  work  respect  should  be  had  to 
the  condition  and  wants  of  the  workers.  (Compare  verses  6,  9,  11,  13-16.) 
The  labourers  were  well  officered,  and  the  toil  and  drudgery  mitigated  by  a 
methodised  system  of  relays  (verse  14).  Without  some  such  system  so  vast  a 
number  of  workers  would  relapse  into  a  confused,  tyrannical  mob,  and  inflict 
on  each  other  much  oppression  and  suffering.  Organisation  lightens  labour, 
wliile  it  consolidates  it.  The  wants  of  the  workers  were  supplied.  In 
addition  to  the  provisions  sent  to  the  royal  court  of  Tyre  (verses  9,  11), 
Solomon  furnished  to  the  servants  of  Hiram  20,000  cors  (about  222,'  00 
bushels)  of  beaten  wheat,  20,000  cors  of  barley,  20,000  baths  of  wine,  and 
20,000  baths  of  oil  (2  Chron.  ii.  10).  The  land  of  Israel  was  rich  in  grain  and 
oil,  while  in  this  respect  Phoenicia  was  poor,  the  steep  mountain  ranges  of 
Lebanon  affording  very  little  space  for  arable  laud.  Honest  labour  should  be 
honestly  recompensed.  In  all  work  for  God  the  utmost  diligence  and  fidelity 
are  demanded;  but  He  will  take  care  the  humblest  labourer  shall  not  go 
unrewarded.  "Ko  house,  even  though  it  be  the  church  and  temple  of  God, 
should  be  built  to  the  hurt  and  oppression  of  one's  fellow-creatures.'*  Every 
country  has  its  staple  commodity,  by  exchange  of  which  intercourse  is  main- 
tained with  its  neighbours.  It  is  the  happiness  of  a  nation  when,  with  the  corn 
of  Canaan,  it  possesses  also  the  shipping  of  Tyre. 

V.  That  in  the  preparations  for  a  great  work  help  may  be  obtained 
from  all  available  sources  (verses  6,  8-10,  12,  18).  The  world  may  be 
used  as  the  servant  of  the  church.  The  unbeliever  is  often  called  upon 
to  contribute  to  a  work  the  spiritual  significance  and  end  of  which  he  does 
not  apprehend.  The  Tyrians,  though  Gentiles,  were  employed  about  the 
work  of  the  Temple,  and  thus  prefigured  the  vocation  of  the  Gentiles  and  their 
future  helping  to  build  up  the  spiritual  temple.  Fellicariy  in  allegorising  this 
fact,  observes  that  the  Sidonians  and  the  proselytes  among  the  Jews  were  the 
workmen,  but  the  rulers  of  the  work  were  Israelites ;  thus  showing  forth  that 
the  spiritual  temple  should  be  built  by  disciples  among  the  Gentiles,  but  the 
Apostles,  who  were  Israelitirs,  should  be  the  chief  workmen  and  governors 
therein.  Solomon  **knew  that  the  Tyrians*  skill  was  not  given  them  for 
nothing.  [N'ot  Jews  only,  but  Gentiles,  must  have  their  hand  in  building  the 
temple  of  God :  only  Jews  meddled  with  the  Tabernacle,  but  the  temple  is  not 
built  without  the  aid  of  Gentiles  ;  they,  together  with  us,  make  up  the  church 
of  God  (Eph.  ii.  13,  14).  Even  pagans  have  their  arts  from  heaven:  how 
justly  may  we  improve  their  graces  to  the  service  of  the  God  of  heaven  !  If 
there  be  a  Tyrian  who  can  work  more  curiously  in  gold,  in  silver,  in  brass,  in 
iron,  in  purple  and  blue  silk,  than  an  Israelite,  why  should  he  not  be  employed 
about  the  temple?  Their  heathenism  is  their  own,  their  skill  is  their  Maker's. 
Many  a  one  works  for  the  church  of  God  that  yet  hath  no  part  in  it. — Bp.  Hall. 
The  varied  talent  and  material  riches  of  all  nations  should  be  made  serviceable 
to  the  interests  of  Christ's  kingdom,  not  for  ostentation,  for  that  would  be  "to 
make  a  calf  of  the  treasure  gotten  out  of  Egypt." 

Lessons: — 1.  A  great  work  necessitates  corresponding  forethought,  2.  A  great 
work  is  made  up  of  numberless  little  efforts.  3.  Labour  is  dignified  by  the  greatness 
of  the  end  it  seeks  to  accomplish.  4.  The  work  of  one  generation  is  completed  by 
another, 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verse  1.  "For  Hiram  was  ever  a  3.  Makes  known  the  character  and 
lover  of  David.'*  The  influence  of  a  worship  of  the  true  God.  4.  Secures 
good  man.  1 .  Operates  irrespective  valuable  friendships  for  his  posterity, 
of  distance.  2.  Attaches  to  himself  Terse  1-5.  Solomon's  purpose  to 
men     of    widely    different     creeds,      build  a  house  to  the  Lord.     1.  Th$ 

76 


OhAF.  V. 


BOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


motive,  Yerses  3-5.  Kot  ambition,  the 
love  of  glory,  the  love  of  pomp ;  but 
the  divine  will  and  the  charge  of  his 
father.  In  every  weighty  undertaking 
one  must  examine  and  be  assured  that 
it  do  not  proceed  from  selfish  motives, 
but  is  the  good,  acceptable,  and  perfect 
will  of  God  (Eom.  xii.  2).  2.  The 
time — rest  and  peace  (verse  4).  A 
time  of  peace  is  the  time  for  building 
in  general,  but  especially  for  building 
houses  of  God,  which  are  a  memorial 
of  thanksgiving  for  the  blessings  of 
peace  and  prosperity.  3.  The  request 
for  assistance  (verse  6).  In  important 
undertakings  which  are  agreeable  to 
the  will  of  God  and  propose  his  honour, 
we  may  and  should  not  hesitate  to 
trust  in  Him  who  directs  men's  hearts, 
to  ask  others  for  aid  and  assistance. — 
Lange, 

Yerse  4.  National  peace.      1.  A 

blessing  from  God  to  be  gratcjfully 
acknowledged.  2.  The  most  favour- 
able period  for  carrying  out  great 
undertakings.  3.  Gives  greater  weight 
and  influence  in  negotiating  with  other 
nations.  4.  Is  conducive  to  the  free 
and  healthy  development  of  the  best 
qualities  of  the  people.  5.  Is  an 
emblematic  representation  of  the  uni- 
versal peace  to  be. 

—  "So  that  there  is  neither  adver- 
sary." The  Yulgate  hath  it.  Non  est 
Satan,  We  use  to  say,  seldom  lieth 
the  Devil  dead  in  a  ditch.  He  is  the 
troublous  one,  and  delighteth  tc 
hinder  anything  that  is  good ;  but  at 
this  time  God  had  chained  him  up, 
and  Solomon  had  nothing  to  hinder 
him.  "The  Lord  is  with  you  whilst 
ye  are  with  Him,"  saith  one  prophet 
(2  Chron.  xv.  2).  "And  the  Lord 
will  be  with  the  good,"  saith  another 
^^2  Chron.  xix.  11). — Trapp.  Satan 
doth  all  he  can  to  hinder  temple-work 
(1  Thess.  ii.  18;  Zech.  iii.  1);  but 
when  he  is  bound  (Eev.  3lx.  2)  we 
should  be  busy. 

Yerse  5.  A  dutiful  son.  1.  Che- 
rishes the  memory  ;  2.  Maintains  the 
reputation ;  and  3.  Executes  the 
wishes  of  his  deceased  parent. 

—  **  I  purpose  to  build  a  house  unto 

76 


the  name  of  the  Lord  my  God."    There 
is  no  building  of  the  ancient  world 
which  has  excited  so  much  attention 
since  the  time  of  its  destruction,  as 
the  temple  which   Solomon    built  at 
Jerusalem,  and  its  successor  as  rebuilt 
by  Herod.     Its  spoils  were  considered 
worthy  of  forming  the  principal  illus- 
tration of  one  of  the  most  beautiful  of 
Roman  triumphal  arches;  and  Justi- 
nian's highest  architectural  ambition 
was,    that     he     might     surpass     it. 
Throughout  the   middle   ages   it  in- 
fluenced to  a  considerable  degree  the 
forms  of  Christian  churches,  and  its 
peculiaiities  were  the  watchwords  and 
rallying  points  of  all  associations  of 
builders.     Since  the  revival  of  learn- 
ing in  the  sixteenth  century,  its  ar- 
rangements have  employed  the  pens  of 
many  learned  antiquarians,  and  archi- 
tects of  several  countries  have  taxed 
their  science  in  trying  to  reproduce  its 
forms.     Eut  it  is  not  only  to  Christians 
that  the  temple  of  Solomon  is  so  inte- 
resting;    the     whole    Mohammedan 
world  look  to  it  as  the  foundation  of 
all  architectural  knowledge,  and  the 
Jews  still  recall  its  glories,  and  sigli 
over  their  loss  with  a  constant  tenacity 
unmatched  by  that  of  any  other  people 
to  any  other  building  of  the  ancient 
world. — Smithes  dictionary, 

—  If  it  cannot  come  into  the  mind 
of  eveiy  one  to  build  a  house  of  wood 
and  stone  unto  the  Lord,  nevertheless, 
every  one  to  whom  God  has  given  wife 
and  children  is  in  a  condition  to  vow 
and  to  build  a  house  unto  the  Lord  out 
of  living  stones.  I  and  my  house  will 
serve  the  Lord  (Josh.  xxiv.  15). 
Israel  knew  not  how  to  plan  great 
buildings,  especially  works  of  art,  but 
they  did  know  how  to  serve  the  living 
God.  Better  to  live  without  art  than 
without  God  in  the  world. — Lange, 

Yerse  6.  The  cedars  of  Lebanon 
are  the  most  celebrated  of  all  the  trees 
of  Scripture,  the  monarchs  of  the 
vegetable  kingdom.  The  prophets 
refer  to  them  as  emblems  of  greatness, 
majesty,  and  splendour.  Ezekiel 
(chap,  xxxi.)  presents  us  with  a  most 
graphic  description  of  their  grandeur 
and  beauty    when    he  makes  them 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  T. 


representatives  of  the  Assyrian  power 
and  glory.     The  wood  was  used  for 
beams,  pillars,  boards,  masts  of  ships, 
and   carved   iaiages.      Not   only   did 
David  and  Solomon  impoiu  it  for  their 
building   purposes,    but   the   king  of 
Assyria  and  Persia,  and,  perhaps,  of 
other   nations,    did  the    same.      The 
modern  cedar  of  Lebanon  is  usually 
from  fifty  to  eighty  feet  high,  and  often 
covers  with  its  branches,  when  stand- 
ing alone,   a   space   the   diameter   of 
which  is  greater  than  the  height  of 
the  tree.     It  is  an  evergreen,  and  its 
leaves   are   produced   in    tufts.      Its 
branches,  disposed    in  layers,   spread 
out  horizontally,  and  form,   as  they 
approach  the  top,   a  thick  pyramidal 
head.     The  profane  writers  represent 
the  cedar  wood  as  specially  noted  for 
its  durability,   and  the  cedar  roof  of 
the  great  temple  of  Diana  at  Ephesus 
is  said  to  have  lasted   four  hundred 
years. 

^    Ver.     7-12    (See     also    2     Chron. 
ii.    11-16).      Hiram    and    Solomon. 
1.     Gratification.      Hiram     ''rejoiced 
greatly"  when  he  heard  the  words  of 
King    Solomon.     This    arose     partly 
fiona  the  love  he  bore  to  his  father 
David;  we   are   always   attracted    to 
them  who  are  loved  by  those  whom  we 
love.     **  For  David's  sake"—  the  prin- 
ciple of  substitution  is  everywhere  to  be 
seen  in  human  life.     An  illustration 
in  support  of  the  doatrine  of  justifica- 
tion by   faith.     The   gratification   of 
Hiram  sprang  also  from  a  recognition 
of  Solomon's  wisdom  :  gratification  in 
another's  good.    2.  Consideration  {\eise 
8).      The  demand  of  Solomon  was  no 
small  ono,  and  deserved  consideration. 
It  involved,  in  all  probability,  a  great 
sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  Tyrians. 
It  is  true  that  in  the  eleventh  verse 
we  are  told  that  "  Solomon  gave,"  &c., 
yet  that  was  for  his   household,    or 
servants  who  were  engaged  in  work 
for    Solomon's    own     benefit.     How 
would    this     great     sacrifice    affect 
Hiram's   subjects?     Would   they   be 
willing  to  give  to  the  people  of  another 
nation  so  much  of  their  property,  and 
especially  for  the  erection  of  a  temple 
foi  the  worship  of  (to  them)  a  strange 


deity  ?     All  these  things  Hiram  must 
have  taken  into  consideration.     Most 
of  the  mischief  of  life  is  the  result  of 
a  want  of  thought  and  consideration. 
"Evil  is  wrought  by  want  of  thought, 
as  well  as  want  of  heart."     2.  Satisfac- 
tion.    *'A11    his  desire**   (verse    10). 
There  was  not  one  thing  which  Solo- 
mon   asked,    which    Hiiam    did    not 
grant.     It  is  not  right  to  ask  or  expect 
unreasonable  things.     It  is  right  to 
grant  reasonable  requests,  even  3  they 
should  occasion  sacrifice  ;  unreasonable 
requests  should  not  be  granted,   even 
if  it  should  be  more  easy  to  do  so  than 
to  refuse.     4.  Eecognition.     ''Endued 
with  understanding"   (2  Chron.  ii.  13). 
Knowledge,     genius,     skill,      are    of 
heavenly  birth,  and  to  despise  them  is 
to  be  guilty  of  a  sin.     5.    Combination, 
Solomon  and  Hiram   were  not  inde- 
pendent of  each  other.  I^o  one  can  serve 
God  properly  in  isolation  :   **  Two  are 
better  far  than  one,"    &c.       Query, 
Have    Christians   a   right   to  remain 
detached  from  the  church  of  Christ  ? 
6.  Distrihution.     (See  2  Chron.  ii.  16.) 
Each  did  the  part  allotted  to  him  ;  the 
result  was  success. — F.  Wagstaff. 

Yer.  7.  It  proves  a  noble  heart 
when  a  man,  free  from  envy  and 
jealousy,  sincerely  praises  and  thanks 
God  for  the  gifts  and  blessings  which 
He  grants  to  others.  When  God 
wishes  well  to  a  nation  He  bestows 
upon  it  godly  rulers;  but  when  He 
wills  to  chastise  it  He  removes  them. 
Hiram  praises  God  that  He  bestows 
upon  another  people  a  wise  monarch  : 
how  much  more  should  that  people 
itself  thank  God,  since  He  bestowed 
upon  it  a  wise  and  pious  king  ? 

Yerse  7-10.  The  heathen  king 
Hiram.  1.  His  rejoicing  over  Solo- 
mon and  his  undertaking.  2.  His 
praise  of  the  God  of  Israel.  3.  His 
willingness  to  help.  How  far  stands 
this  heathen  above  so  many  who  call 
themselves  Christians ! — Lange. 

Yerse  12.  Kingly  wisdom.  1.  la 
a  divine  gift.  2.  Is  honourably  em- 
ployed in  cultivating  peaceful  rela- 
tions   with    neighbouring    kingdoms. 

3.  Encourages  a  prosperous  commerce. 

4.  Promotes  the  best  social  interests 

77 


CHAP.  ▼!. 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


of  the  people.  5.  Conserves  and 
extends  the  religious  life  of  the 
church. 

—  The  league  between  S  olomon 
and  Hiram.  1.  Its  object — a  good 
God-pleasing  work  begun  in  the  ser- 
vice of  God.  Like  kings  and  nations, 
even  so  individual  men  should  unite 
only  for  such  purposes.  2.  Its  condi- 
tions— each  gave  to  the  other  accord- 
ing to  his  desire;  neither  sought  to 
overreach  the  other ;  the  compact  was 
based  upon  honesty  and  fairness,  not 
upon  cunning  and  selfishness.  Only 
upon  such  compacts  does  the  blessing 
of  God  rest,  for  unjust  possessions  do 
not  prosper. — Lange. 

Yerse  13-18.  The  workmen  at 
the  temple  building.  1.  Israelites. 
Solomon  acted  not  like  Pharaoh  (Exod. 
ii.  23).  He  laid  no  insupportable 
burdens  upon  his  people,  but  permits 
variety  in  the  work,  and  Israel  itself 
undertakes  it  without  murmurs  or 
complaints.  How  high  do  those 
Israelites  stand  above  so  many  Chris- 
tian communities,  who  constantly 
object  or  murmur  when  they  are 
about  to  undertake  any  labour  for 
their  temple,  or  must  needs  bring  a 
sacrifice  of  mercy  or  time!  2.  Hea- 
then (Psa.  xxii.  29).  Jew  and  hea- 
then together  must  build  the  temple 
of  God,  according  to  divine  decree — a 
prophetic   anticipation  of  fact  as  set 


forth   Eph.   11.   14,    19-22;   lii.   4-6. 

The  great  preparations  of  Solomon 
must  naturally  remind  us  of  the  fai 
greater  preparations  and  arrangements 
which  God  has  made  for  the  building 
of  the  spiritual  temple  of  the  New 
Testament.  How  many  thousand 
faithful  labourers,  how  many  wise 
and  good  men,  has  he  placed  in  every 
known  part  of  the  world:  how  has  he 
furnished  them  with  wisdom  and 
many  other  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  so  that 
the  great  work  of  the  glorious  build- 
ing may  be  completed  ! — Lange, 

Verse  17.  "  And  they  brought 
costly  stones  to  lay  the  foundation." 
Now  is  the  foundation  laid,  and  the 
walls  rising  of  that  glorious  fabric 
which  all  nations  admired,  and  all 
times  have  celebrated.  Even  those 
stones  which  were  laid  in  the  bast  of 
the  building  were  not  ragged  and 
rude,  but  hewn  and  costly  :  the  part 
that  lies  covered  with  earth  trom  the 
eyes  of  all  beholders  is  no  less  pre- 
cious than  those  that  are  rtore  con- 
spicuous. God  is  not  all  for  the  eye  : 
He  pleaseth  Himself  with  the  hidden 
value  of  the  living  stones  of  His 
spiritual  temple.  How  many  noble 
graces  of  His  servants  have  been 
buried  by  obscurity !  not  discerned  so 
much  as  by  their  own  eyes!  which 
yet  as  He  gave,  so  He  crowneth. 
Hypocrites  regard  nothing  but  show ; 
God  nothing  but  truth. — Bp.  Mall. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


THE  BUILDING  OP  SOLOMON'S  TEMPLR 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Began  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord — 
The  chronological  year  is  carefully  noted,  and  no  criticism  supplies  reason  for  changing  the 
figures  here  given.  The  Sept,  reads  440  instead  of  480,  but  is  supported  by  no  ancient  MS. 
The  site  was  Mount  Moriah  (2  Ohron.  iii.  1).  "The  uneven  rock  of  Moriah  had  to  be 
levelled,  and  the  inequalities  filled  by  immense  substructions  of  great  stones,  costly  stones,  and 
hewed  stones"  (ch.  v.  17). — Stanley.  Verse  2.  Cubits— The  ancient  standard  length  of  a  cubit 
was  one  foot  six  inches  English  measure.  The  structure  is  separated  into  three  main  architec- 
tural divisions  :  **  the  house  "  (verse  2),  "  the  porch  "  (verse  3),  and  *•  the  chambers  round 
about "  (verse  6).    The  house  JT'^n  was  constructed  of  massive  stone  walls  (verses  6,  7), 

and  included  two  compartments ;   the  front  is  called  (verse  6)  "  the  temple  of  the  house  ** 

l3^2in  /DTI  and  the   "oracle"  (verse   5)  in  the  rear,   T'^'^n    Verse  4.    Windows— Of 
•     —     —  ..  .  • 

their  number,  ftituation,  and  shape  or  size  no  information  is  given,  none  therefore  possessed 

7b 


BOMILETIC  COMMT.NTARY :  KINGS. 


CTTAP.    Tl. 


t^e  -  hoY.P^fl^  ^^'"^^V^  ^'**''fv-  ^"'^^  ^-  Clia«^l^er«  round  abont-On  three  sides  of 
to  Solnr.l  ^:^''\^^'^  chanibers  m  three  stories.  Verse  11.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
his  wnrrL':^*'  '-.^T^.^  tl'e  erection  of  the  sacred  structure,  in  order  to  encourage  the  kingm 
The  wn^'/u'^f/J!'  ^!"\f^/h^  solemn  conditions  under  which  he  reared  a  temple  for  Jehovah. 
God  n  /  Tr}  -i'"'^  ^'^^  "^2"^^  ^^''°  *^'  ^^"^  ^°^  P««P'«  «g^i°^^t  assuming  that 
w^t.o^  h«f  '.f'  '^  ""'^'^i/  "^^g°>fice«t  ^^"ilding.  He  required  sptitual  consecration  : 
ove  thl  ni  '"  *^T  H4^^^"ld°^y.?5  "dwell  among"  them  (verse  1.3)  in  His  manifested  glory 
cTnress  /" T^mT*-  .7"f  ^^'  J^'  '"'^^^  ^^^  "«^^  ^^^  the  inner  walls  and  ceiling^he 
Z^H   1  J         ?   ^^'^  ¥  ^^''''-     ^^"^'^    ^^-  Tiie  whole  internal  space  of  the  -house"  was 

tlltJLTY"  r''  ^?.'"  '\  ^''\''  ^^^  ^^'^"^-  *'"^  P^'-t'ti^^  ^'"-«ng  of  folding  doors 
drawn  to  and  f  o  hy  golden  chams  (verse  21);  these  two  apartments  were  respectively  the 
front,  measuring  forty  cubits  square,  "  the  holy  place,-  >^9^,  and  the  rear,  measuring  twenty 

cubits  square,  -the  most  holy  place,"  T^l^  Verse  18.  Knops  and  open  flowers-Bitter 
gourds  and  opened  buds.    Verse  21.  He  made'a  partition  by  the  chains  of  gold-  i  e    he  made 

ThVwi,  ^'?  ^'  ^\"^""  ^t^^''  "^'^^"^ '  "^  worked  the  partition  by  golden  chains.  Verse  29 
The  whole  house  he  overlaid  with  gold- ^...,  the  entire  interior  of  the  holy  place;  and  the 
altar,  and  the  holy  of  holies.  Verse  23.  Two  cherubim  of  oUve  tree-These  D>2nD 
were  of  a  form  which  can  only  be  conjectured  by  us.  In  Ezek.  xli.  and  Rev  iv  fmfhpr 
descriptive  indications  are  given  ;  but  the  cherub  is  represented  various  y,  with  one  two  and 
then  four  various  faces  ;  and  with  two,  four,  or  six  wings ;  probably  colossal  fic^uratlvelmates 
oi  manifold ^^^  majesHc  life.  -  Standing  on  the  highest  step  of  created  life,"and  unitS 
DtTnellfT'^'r/^^'  perfect  created  life,  they  are  the  most  perfect  revelation'of  Sod  and  t^^ 
aZZI  \^  ?  ^^r'  ^''^  "^^^  employed  in  their  construction,  as  being  most  solid  and 
durable.  Their  outspread  wings  spanned  the  entire  breadth  of  the  temple  from  side  to  .^dp 
meeting  and  touching  in  the  centre  of  the  holy  ''  oracle  "  (verse  27).  Ve^s'  29  Carved  aU 
the    walls  .  .  .    within   and    without  -/.7.,   from    within  to    without,  \^Trh^  D'^^^^D 

v;;.!T  ^l'T'\  «^«^^^'    *i«  ^^^J  ^f  holies,  to  the  outer  compartment,  the'holy  viace 
Veise  34.  The  two  leaves  of  the  one  door  were  folding- It  seems  from  thi^^f^rf  tv,?^ 
consi-ted  ot  two  w,n,s,  or  halves,  and  these  were  mad!  like  Telvesof'hl^iM  olive  tree' 
either  longitudinally  like  leaves  bound  together,  or  the  two  leaves  were  the  uTper  a  Jlo  ver 
halves   of   each   door   wing.      Verse   37.     In  the   fourth   vear     &e      "T^^PPer  ana  lou  ei 
in  erecting  the  temple  was  ffom  the  second  month  of  the  fourth  ylV  tt  th~e^^hth  mont'h'X^ 
eleventh  year  of  Solomon's  reign;  t...,  about  seven  years  and  a Ll^  a  sW 
magnificent  an  edifi...e  ;  but  the  large  nimber  of  workmTer^^loved  a,,d  thP  iL?       i-  ^°'  '° 
preparation  of  stones  and  timber  which  were  used,  TxpTaln  th?cJmpa?:tt^^^ 
this  temple  of  Jehovah's  glory  was  reared  and  finished.— W.  H.  J.  ^ 


SOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-38. 
The  Temple  op  Solomon  an  Emblem  of  the  Church  op  God. 

folf;d^fnTf^^''^f  '^  God   like  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  rests  on  a  soHd 
foundation.     In  forming  the  sub-basement  of  the  gorgeous  temple  on  Monnt 

feTin   tfe  tTh   ">.'  "T'^'f^  '^'^'^''^  chiselled%nd  s7Jred;and^ 
deep    m   the   earth    with   the   utmost  precision    rohar^fpr   v     17N       r«      i. 

sa,  .  :   .<  The  king  laid  the  foundation  o?  thetelp^le  Te"  d^.p^in^ihe  g2nd' 

and  the  materials  were  strong  stones,  and  such  as  would  resist  the  foree  ffW 

These  were  to  unite  themselves  with  the  earth,  and  become  a  basis  and  ™re 

foundation  to  sustain  with  ease  those  vast  superstructures  and  precious  oma! 

monts  whose  own  weight  was  to  be  not  less  than  the  weight  of  thosrother  hTrfi 

^n?^.  tw  1  ^  church  of  God  is  securely  settled   on  a  foundation  of 

truths  that  know  no  decay,  and  which  shall  survive  the  wreck  and  ruin  of  the 

r:  e^^'s  S^Xslound';.-    '°  ^^  """^r'^  '^^«'  "'  earthquakerrulble 
the  same!  ^'"^~^^'^  foundation  is  immovable :  the  truth  of  God  is  unalterably 

va5?etfof  SerK  %1"^;  &«  Temple  of  Solomon,  is  composed  of  a  great 
variety  oi  materials.     The  stone,  the  wood,  the  gold,  the  brass,  the  iron,  and 

79 


CHAP.  VI.  noklLETIO  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


the  textile  fabrics  used  in  the  construction  and  beautifying  of  the  material 
temple  point  out  the  great  diversity  of  moral  character  which  now  constitutes 
the  temple  of  God  (Luke  xiii.  29).  The  stars  that  glitter  in  the  firmament  vary 
in  magnitude,  in  motion,  and  in  embellishments ;  but  their  light  is  one,  and 
they  together  form  the  same  grand  temple  of  the  skies.  Diversity  in  unity  is 
the  leading  characteristic  in  all  the  works  of  God. 

III.  The  Church  of  God,  like  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  is  gradual  and  silent 
in  its  erection  (verse  7.)  When  Bishop  Heber  read  to  a  friend  his  poem  on 
Palestine,  he  was  reminded  that  in  describing  the  Temple  of  Solomon  he  had 
made  no  reference  to  the  silence  in  which  the  building  proceeded.  The  poet 
turned  aside,  and  in  a  few  minutes  struck  off  the  beautifully  expressive  line  : — 

**  Like  some  tall  palm  the  noiseless  fabric  sprang.** 

"  In  order  to  reconcile  the  spirit  of  the  new  architecture  as  nearly  as  possible 
with  the  letter  of  the  old  law  (Deut.  xxvii.  5,  6),  the  stones  were  hewn  in  the 
quarries  and  placed  with  reverent  silence  one  upon  another  without  sound  of 
axe  or  hammer,  and  the  temple  rose  as  if  by  the  gradual  growth  of  nature." 
The  work  was  not  done  in  haste.  Years  had  been  spent  in  thoughtful  and 
substantial  preparations ;  and  more  than  seven  years  were  occupied  in  the  actual 
building  (verses  1,  37-38).  Some  of  the  greatest  movements  are  for  a  time  veiled 
in  obscurity  until  the  right  moment  comes,  when  the  obscurity  vanishes,  and  the 
vastness  and  splendour  of  the  work  elicit  the  wonder  and  admiration  of  the  age. 
We  are  familiar  with  this  process  in  the  natural  world  and  in  the  progress  of 
individual  history.  The  fruits  of  the  earth  do  not  reach  maturity  at  a  bound. 
Slowly  and  in  secret  the  bud  is  rounded,  then  comes  the  delicately-tinted 
blossom,  and  afterwards  the  glossy,  mellow  fruit.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the 
growth  of  human  character.  It  reaches  the  higher  grade  of  mental  and  moral 
excellence  by  slow  and  silent  stages,  and  advances  in  the  same  ratio  with  the 
fidelity  and  energy  with  which  the  man  carries  out  the  great  plan  of  his  life- 
career.  The  plan  and  scope  of  our  individual  life  is  often  obscure  to  us ;  but 
as  we  endeavour  to  work  out  that  part  that  is  clear,  the  whole  gradually  becomes 
more  distinctly  defined.  And  so  in  rearing  the  temple  of  God,  the  work 
proceeds  deliberately  and  noiselessly.  Such  a  method  is  an  education  and 
discipline  to  the  church.  The  grandest  truths  of  God  are  not  comprehended 
suddenly  by  the  weakness  of  man  :  inquiiy  is  provoked  and  faith  in  the  divine 
wisdom  and  power  encouraged. 

IV.  The  Church  of  God,  like  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  is  the  scene  of  hal- 
lowed worship.  1 .  There  the  truth  of  God  is  deposittd.  ' '  The  oracle  he  prepared 
in  the  house  within,  to  set  there  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  "  (verse  19). 
The  ark  contained  the  two  tables  of  stone,  inscribed  with  the  ten  commandments 
which  testified  to  the  nature  of  the  covenant  existing  between  Jehovah  and  his 
people.  Over  the  ark  stretched  the  wings  of  the  cherubim  (verses  23-27).  This 
was  the  very  throne  of  Jehovah,  who  was  said  to  "  dwell  between  the  cherubim." 
It  was  also  called  the  Mercy  Seat  or  Propitiatory,  because  Jehovah  there 
revealed  himself,  especially  on  the  great  day  of  atonement,  as  **  God  pardoning 
iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin."  Nor  was  it  without  the  profoundest  allusion 
to  the  coming  dispensation  of  the  gospel  that  God's  throne  of  Mercy  covered  and 
hid  the  tables  of  the  law.  The  attitude  of  the  cherubim  was  significant  of  the 
desire  of  angelic  intelligences  to  learn  the  gospel  mysteries  that  were  hidden  in 
the  law.  The  more  complete  revelation  of  the  divine  will  is  committed  to  the 
custody  of  the  Christian  church,  and  it  is  her  function  to  disseminate  the  know- 
ledge of  that  will.  Acquaintance  with  divine  truth  is  essential  to  intelligent 
and  acceptable  worship.  2.  I'here  praise  is  offered.  The  devout  Israelite  re- 
joiced to  praise  God  in  His  sanctuary.     Praise  is  the  essence  of  all  true  wmship. 

80 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap,  vl 


Should  be  offered  continually  (Psalm  xxxiv.  1).  Should  be  intelligent  and 
fervid  (1  Cor.  xiv.  15).  Is  oi'tcn  the  precursor  of  special  bh^ssing  (compare  2  Chron. 
V.  13,  14;  Neh.  viii.  6,  9,  12,  17,  25,  26;  Acts  xvi.  25,  26).  Should  always  follow 
the  reception  of  blessing  (Acts  ii.  46,  47).  The  prophetic  description  of  the 
heavenly  temple  designates  its  walls  '^salvation,"  and  its  gates  ''praise."  3.  There 
the  divine  glory  is  manifested.  The  Temple  of  Solomon  was  the  scene  of  revela- 
tions of  overpowering  splendour  (2  Chron.  v.  14).  The  glory  of  Jehovah  shone 
forth  from  between  the  cherubim  (Ps.  Ixxx.  1).  The  sanctuary  has  ever  been 
the  place  where  the  soul  has  beheld  its  brightest  visions  (Ps.  Ixiii.  2).  The 
church  is  the  r(^pository  of  heavenly  mysteries  and  the  academy  where  they  are 
explained.  Here  many  a  dark  mind  has  been  illumined,  many  a  burdened  soul 
relieved,  many  a  strange  providence  interpreted,  many  a  tangled  question 
settled.  The  manifestation  of  Jehovah  to  the  soul  fills  it  with  solid  satisfaction 
and  radiant  joy. 

V.  The  Church  of  God,  like  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  is  the  dwelling^  place 
of  Jehovah  (verse  11-13).  The  presence  of  Jehovyh  is  the  charm,  the  life,  and 
the  glory  of  the  church.  "  Methinks,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  '*  I  see  four  temples 
in  this  one.  It  is  but  one  in  matter,  as  the  Grod  that  dwells  in  it  is  but  one  ; 
three,  yet  more  in  resemblance,  according  to  the  division  of  them  in  whom  it 
pleases  God  to  inhabit ;  for  wherever  God  dwells,  there  is  His  temple.  0  God  ! 
Thou  vouchsafest  to  dwell  in  the  believing  heart.  The  heaven  of  heavens  is 
not  able  to  contain  thee,  and  yet  thou  disdainest  not  to  dwell  in  the  strait 
lodgings  of  our  renewed  souls.  So,  then,  because  God's  children  are  many, 
and  those  many  divided  in  respect  of  themselves,  though  united  in  their  head, 
therefore  this  temple,  which  is  but  one  in  collection,  as  God  is  one,  is  manifold 
in  the  distribution,  as  the  saints  are  many  ;  each  man  bearing  about  with  him  a 
little  shrine  of  this  Infinite  Majesty.  This  temple  of  stone,  though  most  rich 
and  costly,  yet  what  is  it  to  the  living  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  oui 
body  ?  What  is  the  temple  of  this  body  of  ours  to  the  temple  of  Christ's  body, 
which  is  His  church  ?  And  what  is  the  temple  of  God's  church  on  earth  to 
that  which  triumpheth  gloriously  in  heaven  ?  '* 

VI.  The  Church  of  God,  like  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  is  permanent  in  its 
reputation.  JS'otwithstanding  the  chequered  history  of  the  Temple — the  glory 
of  its  prime,  the  humiliation  of  its  decay  ;  its  disasters,  its  transformations,  its 
demolition — it  retains  to  this  day  a  conspicuous  place  in  the  veneration  of  the 
wandering  and  scattered  Israelites,  and  in  the  esteem  and  marvel  of  the  re- 
ligious world.  Its  memory  will  never  perish  :  the  material  type  has  vanished ; 
the  spiritual  antitype  endures.  So  the  church  of  God,  alternating  with  the 
ebb  and  flow  of  reverses  and  triumphs,  is  ever  advancing  more  distinctly  into 
view,  is  gaining  on  the  admiration  and  affection  of  the  race,  and  is  winning  for 
herself  immortal  renown. 

The  Building  op  the  Heavenly  Temple  (Verse  7). 

The  house  built  in  this  mysterious  silence  was  the  first  temple  at  Jerusalem, 
Of  all  earthly  objects  this,  to  the  ancient  Jew,  was  the  most  sacred  and  dear. 
If  he  loved  his  God,  it  was  the  scene  of  his  sweetest  joys.  If  he  loved  Him 
not,  he  loved  His  temple.  The  men  who  wrote  the  Scriptures  partook  of  this 
feeling.  Would  they  raise  the  believer  in  Jesus  to  his  highest  honour  ? 
"  Know  ye  not,"  says  one,  "  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God?'*  Would  they 
describe  the  church  in  her  brightest  glory  ?  The  beauty  of  Zion  is  made  an 
emblem  of  her  ;  the  church  is  represented  as  **  an  holy  temple,"  designed  and 
builded  for  its  Creator's  praise.  The  subject  before  up  is  a  view  of  tbo 
redeemed  church  as  a  temple  now  building  by  God  in  an  eternal  world. 

«  81 


OHAF.   VI. 


KOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


T   The  materials  of  which  it  is  composed.    And  what  are  they  ?    They 

i.-fi,«,.>'  l^n  nxpa  or  hammer  were  found  there  to  prepare  ttiem.  in  or  are 
S  ^eans  S  gra  to  be  found  beyo.d  the  skies.  There  no  preacher  warns, 
^afflictions  soften,  no  patient  Saviour  entreats,  no  spint  strives. 

11.  The  foundation  of  this  heavenly  building.      And  how  wontofuUy 

rL^::nTh;py^ofld=Vt  t^  '-i:ii^i-^':^^^:i!r::i^:l 

^;:;ronh\^)K^ 

who  redeemed  their  souls  from   desti  notion,    ana   lo^^^^J^        ^  .. 

Ls  covenanted,  pledged  Hiniselt,  to  U^^^^^^^^^^ 

speak  of  them  as  a  buxldmg   Che  Hgy  Spx  t  t^^^^^^^^^ 

"'f^/rS'    n^reda^nVS  ontlil'it'is  not  only  built,  but  to 
neath  it  a  ''""S'/"',^;?' 'f^  ^^w„„  e  a  part  of  it;  so  that  it  can  no  more 

are  huilded  together." 

l^^r^:^^  If  d  h- ns^U'  in  gll. ;  ^^^^  pojd    -her 

-^rau^Sr^gSr;^:^^ 

Blowly;  at  other  times  it  has  advanced  with  wonderiui  rapiaiiy,  uu 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTABT:  KINf^S,  chip.  ti. 


times  '*  the  God  of  all  gmcc  "  has  been  employed  on  it,  so  that  the  building  has 
increased  in  height  and  glory  through  all  generations.  In  the  present  day  the 
Lord  is  hastening  Tlis  work.  He  is  "  adding  to  His  church  daily  such  as  shall 
be  saved ;"  and  after  He  has  made  them  ready,  He  takes  them  from  this  His 
earthly  habitation,  and  fixes  them,  one  after  another,  in  their  places,  in  His 
fairer  temple  above. 

2.  This  temple  is  bailding  also  constantly y  steadily,  surely — without 
interruption  or  hindrance.  Earthly  structures  do  not  proceed  thus.  Unfore- 
seen difficulties  embarrass,  and  unavoidable  delays  retard.  Sometimes  the 
design  of  the  bulkier  is  changed ;  at  other  times  he  is  baffled  in  carrying  it  into 
effect.  It  is  not  so,  however,  when  God  builds.  His  purposes  never  change; 
they  can  never  be  frustrated.  *'  Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,"  He 
formed  the  stupendous  plan  of  His  heavenly  house.  It  was  the  work,  the 
masterpiece,  of  His  infinite  skill ;  and  it  contains  "  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge,"  which  angels  cannot  explore,  nor  eternity  unfold.  The  directions 
given  for  the  Jewish  temple  were  minute;  but  in  this  most  glorious  edifice 
nothing  was  overlooked.  It  was  '*  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure."  We  know 
but  little  of  the  magnificence  of  this  plan,  but  were  it  possible  that  it  could  be 
jet  more  vast,  we  know  that  there  is  ability  in  Christ  to  perform  it  all.  His 
people,  though  more  numerous  than  the  stars  of  heaven,  shall  all  **  be  willing  in 
the  day  of  His  power;"  and  as  for  His  enemies,  they  can  no  more  impede  His 
designs,  than  a  host  of  worms  could  delay  the  rolling  of  the  glorious  sun. 

3.  Thus  goes  the  building  on,  gradually,  constantly ;    but  yet,  all  this  time, 
silently.     Turn  again  to  the  Jewish  temple.     **  There  was  neither  hammer,  nor 
axe,  nor  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house  while  it  was  building"  (verse  7). 
This  silence  has  something  in  it  deeply  mysterious.     It  could  not  have  happened 
from  mere  chance.      It  was  undoubtedly  enjoined   by  God,  and  intended  to 
convey  some  important  truth.     The  question  is,  What  is  that  truth?     And 
this  is  not  easily  answered.     (1.)  It  intimates,  the  unnotieed  and  secret  manner 
in  which  God  carries  on  His  purposes  of  grace  in  a  tumultuous  world.     What  is  the 
history  of  the  world  ?     A  history  of  commotions.     Its  great  men  have  seldom 
moved,  but  confused  noise  and  garments  rolled  in  blood  have  marked   their 
footsteps.     They   have  struggled   till  whole   kingdoms  have  resounded   with 
their  deeds,  and  this  poor  distracted  earth  has  resembled  ''the  troubled  sea 
when  it  cannot  rest."     Eut    God,  in   the   midst  of   them,    unperceived   and 
almost  unthought  of,  is  bringing  His  own  purposes  to  pass;  is  making  '^the 
wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,"  and    the  wickedness  of  man  to  do  His  will. 
He  presides  in  the  storm.     The  waves  thereof  toss  themselves,  but  He  turns 
every   billow  that  swells    to  the  furtherance  of  His  own    glory.     (2.)    The 
silence  in  this  temple  may  remind  us  of  the  secret  operations  of  God  in  the  souls 
of  men.     Sometimes  He  turns  their  thought  to  Himself  by  the  wind,  the  earth- 
quake, or  the  fire,  by  means  which  are  visible  and  striking ;  but  it  is  generally 
in  "  the  still  small  voice  "  that  He  manifests  Himself  as  the  God  of  their  salva- 
tion.    The  seed  is  sown  in  their  hearts,  they  know  not  when ;  **it  groweth  up 
they  know  not  how ;"  it  brings  forth  fruit  of  which  they  themselves  are  often 
unconscious.     They  are  ripened  for  heaven  in  a  way  which  they  underst  md  not, 
and  then  they  die,  and  go  there  by  a  road  which  none  can  discover.     They  lie 
down  in  the  grave,  and  all  is  silence.     And  what  a  peaceful  world  do  they  enter ! 
(3.)  The  stillness  among  the  Jewish  builders  might  be  designed  to  remind  us  of 
the  peace  of  heaven.     All  there  is  unbroken  calmness.      Changes  and  afflictions 
have  ceased.     The  souls  they  so  often  assailed  and  wrought  on,  need  them  no 
more.     No  ionger  earthly,  they  are  now  heavenly  and  faultless.     All  is  purity, 
and  perfection,  and  brightness.     The  work  is  done ;   the  instruments  thereof  are 
cast  aside  ;    and  not  a  sound  is  heard  but  the  voice  of  overflowing  blessedness, 
and  the  songs  of  adoration,  and  the  shout  of  praise.     Now  what  may  we  learn 
from  this  part  of  our  subject  ?     We  are  taught  not  to  despair  of  the  cause  of  Qod 

83 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  vi. 


even  in  the  darkest  scenes.  Look  where  we  will,  the  state  of  the  world  is  indeed 
deplorable.  But  amid  all  its  clamour  and  strifes,  the  work  of  God  is  going 
gradually,  surely,  silently  on.  Wo  hear  the  voice  that  is  lifted  up  in  the 
streets,  the  conqueror's  shout,  the  wrangler's  curse,  and  the  worldling's  song, 
but  we  hear  not  the  prayer  of  the  broken  heart,  we  see  not  the  bended  knee, 
we  mark  not  the  spirit  that  in  this  cottager's  hut,  or  in  that  poor  man's  dwel- 
ling, bursts  joyfully  from  its  prison  of  clay,  and  is  carried  home  by  the  angels 
of  God.  We  may  learn  here,  too,  the  character  of  true  religion.  Nothing  is  more 
common  in  some  parts  of  our  land  than  an  ostentatious,  noisy  display  of  affected 
piety.  Beware  of  a  love  of  display.  Beware  of  a  bold,  forward,  unmeaning 
tongue.  It  will  please,  it  will  deceive,  none  but  the  simple ;  it  will  disgust  all 
the  wise.  Let  your  tempers,  let  your  lives,  speak  with  a  louder  voice  than 
your  words.  True  religion  is  a  silent,  humble,  retiring  thing.  It  is  as  modest 
as  it  is  bold.  It  will  come  into  public  notice,  rather  than  leave  misery 
unrelieved,  ignorance  unaided,  or  any  duty  undone  ;  it  will  brave  the  opposition 
and  cruelty  of  a  whole  world,  rather  than  sin  ;  and  then  it  will  retire  into  its 
closet,  and  be  seen  only  by  its  God. 

IV.  The  great  end  for  which  this  heavenly  temple  is  raised.  And  this, 
perhaps,  is  too  often  overlooked.  The  temple  of  Solomon  was  not  built  for 
this  single  purpose,  that  it  might  be  "a  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations."  It 
was  designed  to  be  the  habitation  of  God,  the  seat  of  His  presence,  and  a 
monument  of  His  name.  And  this  heavenly  temple  is  erected  for  the  same 
purpose;  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  the  living  and  shining  stones  that 
compose  it,  as  for  the  honour  of  its  great  builder;  not  so  much  for  the  salvation 
of  the  poor  outcasts  of  the  earth,  as  for  the  glory  of  the  power,  wisdom,  and 
grace  of  the  great  God  of  heaven.  Brethren,  will  this  blessedness  be  ours  ? 
The  edifice  of  which  you  have  been  hearing  is  not  a  creation  of  fancy,  the 
baseless  fabric  of  a  dream.  It  is  as  true  that  there  are  pardoned  sinners  joyful 
in  heaven,  as  that  there  are  dying,  suffering  sinners  within  these  walls.  It 
becomes  a  question,  then,  and  a  very  solemn  one,  Shall  we  ever  see  this  glorious 
temple  ?  Shall  we  ever  form  a  part  of  it  ?  To  answer  this  question  we  must 
ask  another :  Are  our  souls  emblems  of  this  great  building  ?  Are  we  now 
*' the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghosi?" — '*  habitations  of  God  through  the  Spirit?" 
With  such  a  weight  of  glory  before  us,  shall  we  repine  at  the  strokes  which  are 
making  us  ready  for  its  honours  and  happiness?  What  if  the  blows  fall  heavy 
and  fast?  The  sound  of  the  axes  and  hammers  will  the  sooner  cease;  if  not, 
the  more  honourable  will  be  our  place  in  the  building,  the  more  shall  we  show 
forth  in  heaven  the  glory  of  the  Lord. — C.  BKiU)LEY. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  23-28. 
The  Cherubim  Emblematic  of  the  Highest  Forms  op  Life. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Cherubim  has  elicited  a  great  variety  of  views  among 
the  ablest  expositors.  By  some  the  symbol  has  been  made  to  signify  either 
the  four  covenants ;  or  all  the  creatures  ;  or  the  four  cardinal  virtues — justice, 
wisdom,  fortitude,  and  temperance ;  or  the  four  faculties  in  the  soul — rational, 
irascible,  concupisciblc,  and  conscience ;  or  the  four  chief  passions — joy,  giiof, 
hope,  and  fear  ;  or  the  four  great  monarchies  ;  or  the  four  elements ;  or  the 
four  evo  igelists.  Others  have  contended  that  the  cherubic  figures  were 
intended  to  symbolize  the  Divine  Persons  in  the  Sacred  Trinity — the  figure  of 
the  lion  being  associated  with  the  human  form  to  indicate  the  promised  incar- 
nation ;  or  that  they  were  glowing  emblems  of  the  character  and  modes  of 
84 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap,  tl 


operation  of  the  Third  Person  of  the  Trinity  ;  or  that  the  cherubim  were  no 
other  than  holy  angels,  and  the  figures  of  thera  in  the  Temple  were  symbolical 
representations  of  their  nature  and  ministry.  Dr.  Kitto  argues  in  favour  of  the 
opinion  that  the  cherubim  represent  the  whole  multitude  of  the  redeemed  from 
among  men,  not  of  any  section  of  the  church,  nor  of  any  class  of  its  members, 
but  of  the  great  body  of  believers  in  the  Atonement  throughout  all  ages,  coun- 
tries, and  nations.  **In  the  immediate  application  of  this  symbol,"  he  writes, 
"it  may  bo  said  that,  when  the  High  Priest  entered  the  Most  Holy  Place  of 
the  Tabernacle,  which  he  never  did  without  tho  blood  of  atonement  in  his  hands, 
and  looked  upon  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  with  its  cherubic  appendages,  with 
the  Shekinah  enthroned  between,  he  beheld,  in  fact,  but  a  miniature  model  of 
what  he  saw  on  a  large  scale  without,  when  standing  amidst  the  many 
thousands  of  Israel  abiding  in  their  tents.  Here  were  the  cherubic  symbole 
resolved  into  their  constituent  multitudes ;  and  over  the  host  rested  in  calm 
majesty  the  pillar  of  cloud,  the  visible  external  token  of  the  Divine  presence 
permanently  residing  among  the  tribes.  And  even  this  was,  as  our  further 
light  indicates,  but  a  type  of  that  which  the  Israelites  could  not  see,  and  would 
not  like  to  have  seen,  of  multitudes  redeemed  to  God,  out  of  all  nations,  by 
the  blood  of  atonement,  forming  the  Church  of  G-od  among  whom  He  should 
dwell."  For  homiletical  purposes,  the  more  practical  views  entertained  on  this 
subject  may  be  combined  by  regarding  the  Cherubim  as  emblematic  of  the  Highest 
Forms  of  Life, 

I.  The  cherubim  were  emblematic  of  life  in  general.  A  conspicuous  and 
extraordinary  feature  of  the  cherubim  was  their  wings  (v.  24,  27,  compared 
with  Isa.  vi.  2  ;  Ezek.  i.  23-25).  Wings  are  suggestive  of  motion,  and  motion 
of  life.  As  the  eye  of  the  devout  worshipper  rested  on  the  figures  of  the 
cherubim  carved  on  the  cedar  walls  of  the  temple  and  on  the  folding  doors  of 
the  oracle  (v.  29-35),  he  would  be  reminded  that  life  in  its  lowest  forms  had 
its  origin  from  that  Being  before  whose  awful  presence  he  bowed.  The  world 
teems  with  evidences  of  life.  The  swarming  insects,  the  merry,  fluttering 
birds,  the  gleaming,  trembling  waters  with  their  countless  inhabitants,  display 
to  the  observer  that  earth,  air,  and  sea,  are  pregnant  with  vitality.  Life  at  all 
times  and  in  any  aspect  is  full  of  mystery ;  it  eludes  the  keenest  search  and 
puzzles  the  ablest  analyst.  The  ancients  recognized  the  Divine  origin  of  life  in 
their  story  of  Prometheus,  who  climbed  the  heavens  by  the  assistance  of  Minerva, 
and  stole  fire  from  the  chariot  of  the  sun,  which  he  brought  down  in  a  hollow 
stick  or  ferule  to  animate  his  man  of  clay.  The  genius  of  man  may  construct 
mechanical  marvels,  but  it  cannot  inspire  life.  All  life  depends  for  its  origin 
and  perpetuity  on  the  will  of  God.  This  seems  the  first  and  most  elementary 
truth  suggested  by  the  cherubic  symbol,  and  its  surrounding  decorations  of  palm 
tree  and  open  flowers  (v.  29). 

II.  The  cherubim  were  emblematic  of  manifold  forms  of  life.  The 
cherubim  were  composite  images  significant  of  all  forms  of  creature  life,  and 
symbols  of  the  living  presence  of  Jehovah  in  all  departments  of  the  animal 
world.  Their  form  is  described  in  the  opening  vision  of  Ezekiel  i.  5-11. 
Each  cherub  had  four  faces  and  four  wings,  and  every  part  of  their  appearance 
seems  to  have  been  symholical  of  some  aspect  or  manifestation  of  Divine  energy 
and  power  in  creature  life.  A  Jewish  proverb  says,  concerning  the  cherubim  : 
**  Pour  are  the  highest  things  in  the  world  :  the  lion  amongst  the  wild  beasts, 
the  bull  amongst  cattle,  the  eagle  amongst  birds,  the  man  is  over  all,  but  God 
is  supreme."  God,  on  the  other  hand,  is  common  to  these  four,  and  the  Hfe 
uniting  them,  which  they  have  not  of  themselves,  but  from  Him  who  is  the 
source  of  all  life — the  Creator,  and  hence  stands  and  is  enthroned  above  them 
all.      The  distribution  and  limitation  of  life  are   among   the  mysteries  and 

85 


OHAF.  VI.  EOMJLETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


wonders  of  creation.  The  character  of  each  individual  plant  or  animal  is 
decided  and  shaped  by  the  measure  of  life-force  it  contains.  This  accounts  for 
the  endless  variety  to  be  found  in  nature.  But  life,  in  whatever  form  or  degree 
manifested — whether  in  the  crawling  worm  or  the  majestic  lion,  in  the  slimy 
frog  or  the  stately  bull,  in  the  humble  sparrow  or  the  soaring  eagle,  in  the 
sluggish  octopus  or  in  divinely-imaged  man — has  but  one  source  in  God.  This 
idea  of  the  cherubic  figures,  as  representative  of  multiform  life,  was  evidently 
embodied  in  the  mythologies  of  the  ancients,  though  travestied  by  many  an 
extravagance.  We  observe  it  in  the  Egyptian  Sphinx,  or  Serapis,  compounded 
of  the  human  and  the  quadruped ;  in  the  Persian  Mithra,  sun  and  bull ;  and 
in  the  Eoman  Diana,  horse,  dog,  and  man. 

III.  The  cherubim  were  emblematic  of  the  higher  forms  of  spiritual  life. 

**  These  cherubim,"  observes  BaJiry  "as  beings  standing  on  the  highest  step  of 
created  life,  and  uniting  in  themselves  the  most  perfect  created  life,  are  the 
most  pel  feet  relation  of  God  and  the  Divine  life."  This  life  is  enjoyed  in  a 
very  lofty  degree  by  the  angels,  who  are  frequently  represented  in  Scripture  by 
cherubic  symbols ;  but  the  higher  possibilities  of  the  spiritual  life  are  reserved 
for  those  who  accept,  by  faith,  the  blessings  of  the  atonement,  shadowed  forth 
by  the  teachings  of  that  mercy-seat  on  which  the  cherubim  bent  their  medi- 
tative gaze.  The  first  mention  of  the  cherubim  in  Gen.  iii.  24  is  suggestive. 
Man  had  fallen ;  transgression  had  brought  its  penalty  :  he  was  already  subject 
to  the  fear  of  death.  Still,  between  him  and  this  issue  stood  the  tree  of  life ; 
he  might  still  eat  and  live  for  ever.  God  saw  his  wretchedness,  and  in  mercy 
interposed ;  for  what  would  life  be  but  one  protracted  curse  beneath  the  frown 
of  the  angry  and  unpropitiated  Deity  ?  A  voice  is  heard,  but  it  is  from  the 
Shekinah;  communion  may  be  held,  but  it  must  be  from  between  the 
cherubim ;  a  more  spiritual  economy  is  already  inaugurated ;  man's  attention 
is  to  be  turned  from  the  paradise  of  earth  to  the  paradise  of  heaven  ;  sacrifices 
already  foreshadow  the  mediatorial  atonement,  and  the  first  development  of  the 
Spirit's  operations  is  seen  in  restraining  man  from  impending  evil,  and  con- 
ducting him  to  a  holier  and  more  spiritual  life.  The  cherubic  symbols  were 
but  figures  borrowed  from  nature  to  represent  gieat  spiritual  qualities,  and 
they  were  eminently  adapted  to  do  so.  What  better  type  could  be  found  of 
intelligence,  wisdom,  sympathy,  and  every  generous  and  tender  emotion,  than 
the  face  of  man ;  of  strength,  courage,  and  magnanimity  of  spirit  than  the  body 
of  the  lion  ;  of  patient  endurance,  unwearied  service,  and  meek  submission  to 
the  yoke,  than  the  face  of  the  ox ;  and  of  an  active,  fervent,  soaring  spirit,  than 
the  wings  of  an  eagle  ? 

IV.  The  cherubim  were  emblematic  of  the  operations  of  the  Third 
Person  in  the  Trinity  as  the  source  of  the  highest  kind  of  life.  Some  writers 
have  contended  that  the  vision  of  cherubic  splendour  recorded  in  Ezekiel  i. 
symbolizes  the  offices  and  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  that  not  more  fully  are  the 
glowing  pages  of  Isaiah  occupied  with  a  delineation  of  Christ's  birth,  life, 
sufferings,  death,  and  the  glories  which  should  follow,  than  is  the  sublime  and 
majestic  scroll  of  Ezekiel,  full  from  end  to  end  of  the  illustration  of  that  mighty 
agency,  the  Holy  Ghost,  whether  viewed  under  the  emblems  of  fire,  air,  or  water. 
This  argument  is  ingeniously  set  forth  in  a  lecture  on  the  cherubic  symbol, 
delivered  before  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  in  London,  by 
Dr.  J.  B.  Melson,  in  summarizing  which  he  observes,  **  We  have  seen  this 
symbol  restraining  our  first  parents  in  paradise ;  witnessing  to  the  acceptance  of 
the  sacrifice  of  Abel ;  assuring  Abraham  of  his  inheritance  in  Mamre ;  connected 
with  the  commissioning  of  Moses,  in  which  we  have  a  type  of  that  commission 
which  every  faithful  minister  of  God  must  receive;  guiding,  defending,  and 
comforting  the  children  of  Israel  in  their  wanderings;  and  showing  forth  the 

•a 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  ohaf.  ti. 


very  method  in  wMch  the  Spirit  still  guides,  defends,  and  comforts  God's 
Israel  in  our  day.  We  have  entered  Solomon's  temple,  and  seen  it  beautifying 
the  place  of  the  Divire  residence  with  its  infoldings  and  its  unfoldings  until  the 
priests  could  no  longer  minister  by  reason  of  the  glory.  We  have  seen  the 
same  symbol  mysteriously  connected  with  the  revelation  of  God's  will  to  Ezekiel, 
Daniel,  and  Isaiah,  and  with  the  glowing  representations  of  regenerating, 
quickening,  and  sanctifying  energy  with  which  the  p;iges  of  the  prophet  of 
Chebar  abound.  Daniel  saw  the  glory  in  its  cherubic  chariot  ascending  into 
heaven,  the  shepherds  beheld  it  returning  again  to  earth.  This  glory  conducts 
the  wise  men  to  Bethlehem,  and  clothes  the  top  of  Tabor  with  its  fleecy  light; 
it  receives  the  conqueror  as  he  rises  triumphant,  enriched  with  the  spoils  of 
death  and  of  hell.  The  glory  carries  him  up  into  heaven  from  the  heights  of 
Olivet,  and  descends  in  flame  upon  the  heads  of  the  disciples  at  Jerusalem, 
filling  the  room  where  they  were  sitting."  In  this  view,  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  brought  more  vividly  and  constantly  before  the  mind  than  a  cursory 
student  of  Scripture  would  observe  ;  it  localises  and  embodies  the  spiritual  and 
unseen  ;  it  helps  to  differentiate  the  subtlest  influences ;  it  strengthens  faith,  and 
stimulates  the  soul  to  seek  after  a  more  intensely  spiritual  life. 

Lessons. — 1.  It   is   the  tendency  of   all  life   to  assume   some  visible  form. 

2.  Great  spiritual  truths  are  strikingly  represented  hy  well-known  material  symbols. 

3.  The  spiritual  life  of  the  believer  is  a  grander  reality  than  its  most  imposing 
emblems. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  1  and  38.    Why  was  the  time  tfiere  greater  temples,  but  they  were 

tor   building   the   Temple  so  exactly  the  abodes  of  darkness:  this  temple  is 

specified?     1.    Because  it  was  a  most  the  abode  of  light  and  life;   froni  it 

important  event  to  Israel.     It  points  to  light  breaks   forth    over   all   nations 

the   final   aim  of  the   leading  out  of  (Is.   ii.  3;    Jer.  iii.    7;    Mic.  iv.  2). 

Egypt,    the   land   of   bondage.      The  What  avails  the  greatest,  most  glorious 

time   of    the    wandering,    of    unrest,  temple,    if  darkness  instead  of  light 

and  of  battle,    is   over;    Israel   is   in  proceeds  from  it,    and,    amid  all  the 

possession  of   the    whole  of  the   pro-  prayers  and  praises,  the  knowledge  of 

mised   land  ;   the   time   of   the   king-  the  living  God  is  wanting  ? 
dom  of  peace  is  come.     The  temple  is 

a  memorial  of  the  truth  and  mercy  of         Terse  2.     The  exceeding  glory  and 

God,    who  ever  fulfils  his  promises,  pomp  of  the  temple.     1.  The  idea  to 

albeit  alter  many  long  years  (Ex.  iii.  which  it  bore  witness.     No  house,  no 

IV),  supplies  all   wants,  and  governs  palace  in  Israel  compared,  for  splen- 

things  excellently.     The  word  of  the  dour  and  glory,  with  the  house  of  God. 

Lord  is  sure.     After  long  wandering.  Everything  in   the    shape   of   costly 

after  many  a  cross,  many  a  tribulation  material  and  treasure  which  the  age 

and  trouble,  comes  the  promised  time  permitted,  all  toil  and  art  were  lavished 

of  peace  ;  the  Lord  helps  His  people,  upon   it.      To   the   Most  High   were 

even  as  He  preserves  every  single  being  given  the  noblest  and  dearest  of  men's 

unto  His  heavenly  kingdom  (2  Tim.  iv.  possessions.     How  many  princes,  how 

18).     2.  Because  it  is  a  world-historical  many  nations,  how  many  cities  build 

event.  The  temple  of  Solomon  is  the  first  gorgeous  palaces,  and  adorn  with  gold 

andoulyonein  the  whole  ancient  world  and   all  treasures   the   buildings   de- 

which  was  erected   to  the  one,  true,  signed  to  minister  to  the  pride  of  the 

and  living  God.     Darkness  covered  the  eyes,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  to  a 

^arth,  and  g:  oss  darkness  the  people  haughty  manner  of  life ;  but  yet  have 

(Is.  Ix.  2).     Heathendom  had  here  and  no  money,  no  sacrifice,  for  the  temples 


OHAP.  TI. 


EOMILETIG  C03IMENTARY :  KINGS, 


which  either  are  entirely  wanting,  or 
are  poor  and  miserable  in  appearance  I 
2.  The  purpose  which  it  served.  Its 
magnificence  has  no  empty,  dead  show, 
to  dazzle  and  intoxicate  the  senses; 
everything  was  full  of  meaning,  and 
referred  to  higher,  Divine  things ;  it 
was  not  nu.'ant  to  render  sensual  man 
still  more  sensual,  but  to  draw  him 
nearer  to  the  supersensuous,  and  thus 
to  elevate  him.  Empty  parade  is  un- 
seemly for  any  house  of  God  ;  rather 
must  everything  which  wealth  and  art 
can  accomplish  serve  to  raise  the  heart 
and  mind  to  God,  so  that  each  one 
shall  say,  This  is  none  other  but  the 
house  of  God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of 
heaven  (Gen.  xxviii.  17). — Lange. 

—  The  same  rule  that  skilful  carvers 
observe  in  cutting  out  the  perfect 
statue  of  a  man,  that  the  height  be 
thrice  the  breadth,  and  the  breadth 
one-third  of  the  height,  was  likewise 
duly  observed  in  the  fabric  of  the  teni- 
pie,  whose  length  was  double  to  the 
height  and  treble  to  the  breadth,  as 
being  sixty  cubits  long,  thirty  high, 
and  twenty  broad.  How  exquisite  a 
symmetry  hast  thou  ordained,  0  God, 
betwixt  the  faithful  heart  and  thy 
church  on  earth,  with  that  in  heaven ! 
How  accurate  in  each  of  these,  in  all 
their  powers  and  parts,  compared  with 
others!  So  hath  God  ordered  the  be- 
lieving soul  that  it  hath  neither  too 
much  shortness  of  grace,  nor  too  much 
height  of  conceit,  nor  too  much  breadth 
of  passion ;  so  hath  He  ordered  His 
visible  church,  that  there  is  a  neces- 
sary inequality  without  any  dispropor- 
tion, a  height  of  government,  a  length 
of  extent,  a  breadth  of  jurisdiction, 
duly  answerable  to  each  other:  so 
hath  He  ordered  His  triumphant 
church  above,  that  it  hath  a  length 
of  eternity,  answered  with  a  height  of 
perfection  and  a  breadth  of  incompre- 
hensible glory. — Bp.  II all. 

Verses  3,  16,  17.  As  the  temple 
hath  three  distinctions  of  rooms — the 
porch,  the  holy  place,  and  the  holy  of 
holies,  so  is  each  of  them  answered 
spiritually.  In  the  porch  we  find  the 
regenerate  soul  entering  into  the 
blessed  society  of  the  church ;  in 
88 


the  holy  place  the  communion  of  the 
true  visible  church  on  earth  selected 
from  the  world ;  in  the  holy  of  holies, 
wheremto  the  high  priest  entered 
once  a  year,  the  glorious  heaven  into 
which  our  true  High  Priest,  Christ 
Jesus,  entered  once  for  all  to  make  an 
atonement  betwixt  God  and  man. — 
Bp.  Hall 

Verse  5.  All  round  there  was  an 
additional  construction  of  three  stories, 
the  foundation  of  which  leant  upon 
the  outer  wall  of  the  house,  which,  on 
this  account,  grew  narrower  every 
storey,  so  that  the  rafters  of  the  circuit 
leant  upon  it  without  being  let  into 
the  wall.  Thus  was  the  temple,  like  the 
heart,  concealed,  its  walls  with  their 
graceful  proportions,  as  they  rose  to- 
wards heaven,  becoming  lighter  and 
finer ;  upon  them,  however,  rested  the 
enter  building  which  belonged  to 
them,  as  the  whole  being  rests  upon 
the  heart  filled  with  faith. 

Verse  7.  The  greatest  works 
often  proceed  in  deepest  silence. 
1.  Examples  in  the  motion  of  the 
celestial  bodies,  the  force  of  gravition, 
the  flow  of  the  tides,  the  growth  of 
vegetation.  2.  Noise  and  demonstra- 
tiveness  are  no  evidence  of  real  pro- 
gress. 3.  The  most  impressive  feature 
in  all  Divine  operations  is  their  silence. 
4.  The  voiceless  testimony  of  the 
church  before  the  world  is  often  irre- 
sistibly effective. 

—  The  temple  is  framed  in  Lebanon, 
and  set  upon  Zion.  Neither  hammer 
nor  axe  was  heard  in  that  holy  struc- 
ture. There  was  nothing  but  noise  in 
Lebanon;  notliiiig  in  Zion  but  silence 
and  peace.  Whatever  tumults  are 
abroad,  it  is  fit  there  should  be  all 
J[uietness  and  sweet  concord  in  the 
church.  0  God,  that  the  axes  of 
schism,  or  the  hammers  of  furious  cdu- 
tentions,  should  be  heard  within  thy 
sanctuary!  Thine  house  is  not  built 
with  blows,  with  blows  it  is  beaten 
down.  0  knit  the  hearts  of  thy  ser- 
vants together  in  the  unity  of  the 
spirit  and  the  bond  of  peace,  that  we 
mind  arid  speak  the  same  things,  that 
thou  who  art  the  God  of  peace  mayest 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CHAP.    TI. 


take  pleasure    to    dwell    under  the 
quiet  roof  of  our  hearts! — Bp.  Hall. 

—  The  building  of  the  Temple  em- 
blematic of  the  building  up  of  Chris- 
tian character.  J  he  erection  of  the 
Temple  was  a  type  of  the  building  up 
of  Christian  character — an  emblem  of 
the  manner  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
builds  up  the  minds  of  men  in  holi- 
ness. If  we  attempt  to  dismiss  en- 
tirely from  our  thoughts  all  things 
that  are  material,  we  shall  not  find  it 
easy,  nor,  perhaps,  possible,  to  realise 
the  ideas  for  which  they  stand.  For 
instance,  take  the  case  of  sacrifice: 
turn  away  your  mind  entirely  from 
any  material,  visible  sacrifice,  and  can 
you  tell  what  a  sacrifice  is — a  sacrifice 
of  God?  Then,  again,  dismiss  from 
your  mind  the  material  image  of  a 
temple,  and  could  a  Jew,  can  yow, 
fully  grasp  the  thought  of  God  dwell- 
ing in  man — a  mind  in  a  mind,  intel- 
lect in  intellect,  reason  in  reason,  will 
in  will? 

I.  The  erection  of  the  Temple  was 
God's  work.  It  was  built  by  His 
express  direction,  and  He  connected 
Himself  with  it  in  a  manner  not  com- 
mon to  any  place  on  earth.  Men  were 
sometimes  inspired  to  speak  and  some- 
times to  act ;  and  under  the  guidance 
of  this  inspiration  the  Temple  was 
erected,  and  God  Himself  condescended 
to  preside  over  it  in  a  special  manner. 
Thus  it  was  the  erection  of  God  Him- 
self, and  was  intended  as  a  book  in 
which  the  Jews  might  read  high  and 
Divine  principles. 

Now  leave  the  Temple,  and  look  at 
the  Christian,  and  there  learn  that 
God  is  at  the  foundation  of  Christian 
character — that  the  erection,  the  pro- 
gress, the  completion  of  the  Christian 
character,  and  its  consummation  in 
heaven,  is  an  idea  and  work  of  God. 
The  Temple  answered  political  and 
civil  ends ;  but  it  also  shadowed  forth 
some  great  spiritual  truth ;  and  what 
was  that  truth  ?  That  the  great  God 
means  to  make  living  souls  His  dwell- 
ing place,  intends  to  live  with  men,  and 
that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  union 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  with  the  Spirit  of 
man      And  hence  the  soul  of  man  is 


called  in  the  New  Testament  "  a  living 
temple." 

II.  The  Temple,  as  an  emblem  of 
the  Christian,  was  the  place  of 
mercy,  the  place  of  law,  the  place  of 
worship.  1.  The  Temple  was  a  place 
of  mercy.  There  was  erected  a  throne 
of  mercy  ;  there  mercy  was,  as  it  were, 
localized.  God's  design  was,  to  give 
man  a  clear  conception  of  mercy. 
Mercy  was  in  the  heavens,  mercy  was 
in  the  seasons,  mercy  breathed  in  all 
things  around  the  Jewish  people  ;  but 
they  did  not  recognise  it,  they  did  not 
realize  it.  In  the  Temple  there  was 
a  bright  emblem  of  mercy — mercy  in 
a  state  of  incarnation.  But  it  is  only 
a  Christian  that  has  a  clear  idea  of 
mercy  as  a  living  principle.  Men 
in  general  do  not  feel  their  need  of 
mercy  at  all.  The  Chiistian  knows 
his  need  of  it,  and  knows  the  reality 
of  mercy  as  an  attribute  of  God.  As 
soon  as  the  need  of  mercy  becomes  a 
living  idea  in  the  heart,  it  exerts  a 
softening  influence,  it  produces  humi- 
lity. It  is  possible  to  talk  of  mercy, 
and  be  proud,  hatefully  proud;  but  as 
soon  as  the  need  of  mercy  becomes  a 
genuine  operative  principle,  it  makes 
the  soul  deeply,  sweetly  humble.  It 
produces  peace — peace  between  man's 
intellect  and  truth,  between  man's 
will  and  holiness,  peace  between  man's 
desires  and  God's  government.  It  is 
with  the  Christian  as  with  the  Temple. 
The  glory  of  the  Temple  was  within. 
It  was  externally  glorious,  but  its  true 
glory  was  the  Shekinah,  the  indwell- 
ing of  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  The 
Temple  was  a  place  of  law.  The  law 
was  deposited  in  the  ark,  and  it  re- 
mained there  until  the  wars  with 
Titus.  But  leaving  the  history  of  the 
written  law,  turn  to  the  indwelling  of 
law  in  the  heart  of  the  Christian. 
Look  at  the  significant  words  of  in- 
spiration— "  This  is  the  covenant  I 
will  make  with  thee,  sai  h  the  Lord, 
I  will  put  my  laws  in  their  minds,  and 
write  them  in  their  hearts."  3.  The 
Temple  was  a  place  for  worship. 
"Worship  is  internal.  In  the  Temple 
there  was  communion  with  the  Divine 
presence ;  there  was  the  light  of  the 

89 


CHAP.  Tl. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS. 


Shekinah,  there  was  the  sacrifice 
oifered,  there  the  incense  ascended. 
Have  you  seen  or  realized  the  Being 
you  worship?  God  has  made  all 
things,  as  it  were,  douhle.  There  are 
dualities  everywhere.  "We  know  that 
if  the  eye  sees,  it  has  external  objects 
suited  to  its  operation;  if  the  ear 
hears,  it  has  sounds  to  meet  its  capa- 
city. Now,  if  we  were  simply  mat- 
ter, this  would  be  all;  but  we  are 
spirit,  and  there  is  something  to 
answer  to  spirit.  It  is  God!  And 
by  the  Temple  was  taught  the  glorious 
truth  that  the  Divine  Spirit  and  human 
souls  come  together.  The  great  work 
of  Christ  is  to  carry,  in  a  living  man- 
ner, the  presence  of  God  down  into  the 
human  heart ;  to  transfuse  God's  mind 
into  the  mind  of  man.  It  is  repelling, 
it  is  resisting  this,  that  will  ruin  men. 
This,  then,  is  the  main  idea  sug- 
gested, that  the  consecration  of  man  as 
a  temple  is  the  work  of  God. 

III.  The  erection  of  the  Temple 
was  a  noiseless  work.  *•  There  was 
neither  hammer,  nor  axe,  nor  any  tool 
of  iron  heard  in  the  house  while  it  was 
in  building."  Oh!  the  severity,  the 
stillness,  the  quietness,  of  the  growing 
up  of  this  extraordinary  edifice  !  The 
kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  ob- 
servation. "  A  bruised  reed  will 
He  not  break ;  He  shall  not  lift  up 
nor  cry,  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be 
heard  in  the  street."  The  building 
up  of  the  human  soul  as  a  temple  is  a 
quiet,  noiseless  work.  There  is  very 
little  religion  where  there  is  much 
bustle,  very  little  religion  where  there 
is  much  ostentation.  We  shall  not 
sufi'er  by  giving  a  little  more  time  to 
deep,  quiet,  severe  thinking,  to  secret 
communion  with  the  unseen ;  to  the 
inner  unostentatious  work  of  heart 
worship.  This  fellowship  with  our- 
selves and  the  indwelling  Spirit  of 
God  is  the  essence  of  true  religion, 
and  the  true  idea  of  a  spiritual  temple. 
—  Caleb  Morris. 

Verses  11-13.  The  soul  as  the 
home  of  God.  1.  Is  garnished  with 
moral  and  spiritual  virtues.  2.  Is  de- 
signed as  a  permanent  dwelling  (verse 
13).  3.  Is  clustered  with  the  memo- 
90 


ries  of  happy  fellowships."  4.  Is  re- 
tained by  continued  obedience :  dis- 
obedience involves  desertion. 

Verses  18,  22.  **  There  was  no 
stone  seen ;  the  whole  house  he  over- 
laid with  gold."  The  strength  and 
beauty  of  moral  character.  1.  Moral 
character  must  be  firmly  based  on  a 
foundation  of  imperishable  truth.  2.  A 
strong,  vigorous  character  is  often  hid 
under  the  veil  of  the  brightest  and 
tenderest  graces.  3.  Religion  in  its 
higher  development  is  essentially 
aesthetical.  4.  The  church  of  God 
combines  and  exhibits  every  moral 
excellence.  "Strength  and  beauty 
are  in  His  sanctuary." 

Verse  20.  The  construction  of  the 
Most  Holy  Place  in  the  form  of  a  perfect 
cube  had,  doubtless,  its  typical  signifi- 
cance. It  was  an  appropriate  symbol  of 
perfection.  The  solid  cube,  in  what- 
ever way  it  is  set,  is  always  upright,  a 
perfect  square  on  every  side,  and  all 
sides  and  angles  corresponding  per- 
fectly to  each  other.  So  this  form  of 
the  inner  sanctuary  indicated  that  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel  dwelleth  in  per- 
fection. 

Verse  38.  "  Solomon  began,"  says 
Wordsworth,  *'  to  build  the  temple  in 
the  flower-month,  and  finished  the 
building  in  the  fruit  month.  Such  is 
the  life  of  the  church,  and  of  every 
believer  who  is  a  temple  of  the  Spirit. 
It  begins  in  flowers,  but  must  end  in 
fruit.  The  harvest  is  the  end  of  the 
world." 

—  The  temple  of  Solomon  was  not 
distinguished,  like  the  temples  of 
Thebes,  for  gigantic  vastness,  for  it 
was  not  a  very  large  structure,  but 
rather  for  its  harmonious  proportions, 
its  beauty  and  completeness  of  work- 
manship, and  the  excessive  costliness 
of  its  materials.  And  the  church, 
the  spiritual  house  of  the  living  God, 
is  to  be  specially  distinguished  for  the 
excellency  and  completeness  of  thu 
elect  and  precious  stones  which  are 
required  to  build  it ;  for  these  are 
not  the  many  that  go  in  the  broad  way 
to  destruction,  but  the  comparatively 
few  that  find  the  way  of  life  (Matt, 
vii.  13,  l^).—  W7iedon, 


nOMILETIC  COBfMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.tii. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

THE    SPLENDOUR    OF    SOLOMON'S    BUILDINGS. 

Critical   and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.   Solomon  was  building  his  own  hoase 

thirteen  years — Because  no  previous  building  preparations  had  been  made  for  the  palace 
as  for  the  temple,  and  there  was  less  urgency  about  the  king's  house  than  that  God's  Holy 
Place  should  be  prepared  wherein  He  and  His  people  might  meet ;  and  Solomon  was  more 
zealous  in  his  work  for  Jehovah  than  for  himself.  Verse  2.  He  built  also,  &c.  Lange, 
Michaelis,  and  oihers  regard  this  *'  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  "  as  the  first  of  the  various 
edifices  composing  the  palace,  not  a  separate  summer  residence  on  Lebanon.  Probably  his  own 
house,  this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  and  the  house  for  Pharoah's  daughter,  were 
sectional  structures,  unitedly  forming  one  grand  royal  abode.  Called  the  "  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon  "  on  account  of  rows  of  cedar  trees  built  together  in  its  construction.  It  seems  to 
have  been  an  armoury  (1  Kings  x.  16,  17  ;  Isaiah  xxii.  8).  Its  form  was  apparently  an  open 
court,  surrounded  by  colonnade  and  galleries;  "the  inner  surface  was  used,  no  doubt,  for 
assemblies  of  warriors,  the  body  guard,"  &c.  {Lange).  Verse  6.  A  porch  of  pillars— This 
was  the  second  division  of  the  palatial  edifice,  and  formed  the  Court  of  Judgment ;  in  the 
rear  of  the  porch  of  pillars,  which  was  an  extended  colonnade,  was  located  this  "  porch  of 
judgment"  (verse  7).  where  the  "throne"  stood.  Verse  8.  Solomon  made  also  a 
house  for  Pharaoh's  daughter  " — This,  according  to  Eastern  custom,  would  be  not  a  building 
distinct  from  the  king's  house,  but  a  rear  part  of  it,  although  a  structure  complete  in  itself. 
Jamieson  arranges  this  complex  edifice  thus  :  the  building  itself  was  oblong,  consisting  of 
two  square  courts,  flanking  a  large  oblong  hall  which  formed  the  centre,  and  was  properly  the 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  bemg  the  part  where  were  the  cedar  pillars  of  this  hall.  In 
front  was  the  porch  of  judgment.  On  the  one  side  this  large  hall  was  the  king's  house  ;  on 
the  other,  the  royal  apartments  for  Pharaoh's  daughter.  Verse  13.  Fetched  Hiram  out  oi 
Tyre — He  seems  to  have  been  eminent  among  the  artists  in  metals  for  which  Tyre  and 
Phoenicia  were  then  renowned.  This  man  (of  like  name  with  the  king)  is  designated  in 
2  Chronicles  ii.  13,  by  the  title  of  honour  ^J^  — i.e.,  master,  teacher,  father  (Keil).  His 
genius  was  a  natural  gift  of  God  (verse  14).  Note  the  difference  between  this  phrase 
concerning  Hiram,  ^'filled  with  wisdom,'"  &c.,  and  the  statement  as  to  the  supernatural  endow- 
ments of  Bezaleel  (Exod.  xxxi.  3),  *'  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  in  wisdom,"  &c.  Verse  15. 
Pillars  of  brass  eighteen  cubits  high — These  columns  were  32^  feet  long,  without 
the  capitals,  and  7  feet  in  diameter  ;  the  metal  was  about  3^  inches  thick  (Jer.  lii.  21),  and  the 
total  weight  of  each  pillar  must  have  been  about  18  tons.    The  capitals  were  over  8  feet 

high  (verse  16),  making  a  total  height  of  41  feet      Verse  21.  Jachin  and  Boaz— ]'>5"' 

•T 

means  established  (2  Chron.   xvii,  5)  ;  while  \^2i  is  a  compound  of  t^  power,  strength, 

and  *)Ili  in  him— ».«.,  in  God  ;  ergo,  strong  in  Him  (Isa.  xlv.  24).  Verse  23.  Molten 
gea"— ^^3^ ;  colossal  brazen  basin   17^  feet  in  diameter,  over  8  feet  in  depth,  capable  of 

holding  Nearly  20,000  gallons  of  water.  Verse  25.  Stood  upon  twelve  oxen — of 
enormonS  size  necessarily — similar  to  the  Assyrian  bulls;  for  the  total  combined  weight 
of  the  vessel  and  water  would  be  some  100  tons.  Verse  40.  Layers,  for  carrying  away 
water ;     shovels,    for    removing    ashes ;    basins   for  receiving    the    blood    of    sacrifices. 

Verse     45.     Bright     brass  —  lO^DDj    polished    after  the    casting ;    brilliant,   therefore. 

Verse  46.  In  the  plain  of  Jordan  .  .  .  between  Succoth  and  Zarthan— Here  the 
soil  is  stated  to  be  entirely  marl.  "  Succoth,"  close  by  the  mouth  of  the  Jabbok  ;  "  Zarthan  " 
(or  Zaretan),  whose  site  is  uncertain,  except  that  it  was  proximate  to  the  Jordan,  was  near  by 
Succoth.  The  distance  from  Jerusalem  was  considerable ;  but  all  the  noxious  smoke  and 
vapours  of  the  foundry  would  thereby  be  avoided ;  although  the  clay  and  sand  found  there 
doubtless  determined  the  choice  of  the  spot.  Verse  47.  Solomon  left  all  the  vessels— The 
word  unweighed  is  wisely  mverted  in  the  translation,  for  Tl!l^^  means  he  let  them  be;  the 

number  was  so  great  that  their  weight  was  not  computed.  Verse  48.  And  Solomon  made, 
&c. — As  Hiram  was  equally  "skilful  to  work  in  gold  "  (2  Chron.  ii.  14),  it  is  most  probable 
that  the  king  entrusted  this  work  also  to  him.  Verse  61.  The  things  which  David  his  father 
had  dedicated— From  1  Chron.  xxii.  14-16,  xxix  2  sg.,  w*  find  that  David's  store  of  gold, 
silver,  &c.,  was  vast,  including  the  valuable  trophies  of  his  victories  {of  2  Sam.  viii.  7,  11,  12 ; 
1  Chron.  xviii.  7,  10,  11),  and  his  own  private  treasures  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  13-18).  So  abundant 
was  the  supply  of  precious  metal  that,  although  the  quantity  used  for  the  temple  waa 
immense,  there  was  a  large  store  in  reserve. — W.  H.  J. 

91 


OHAP.TU.  BOMtLETlG  COMMEJSfAUY:   KINGS. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-12. 

The  Ethical  Significance  op  the  Palace  op  Soiomox 

The  group  of  buildings  described  in  these  verses  constituted  one  and  the  same 
royal  palace.  It  included  several  edifices  within  itself.  The  principal  one 
was  the  great  hall  of  state,  encased  in  cedar,  and  so  called  "  the  House  of  the 
Forest  of  Lebanon  "  (verse  2).  In  front  of  it  was  reared  a  pillared  portico 
(verse  6).  Between  this  portico  and  that  part  of  the  palace  which  was  set  apart 
for  the  royal  residence  was  a  cedar  porch  of  exquisite  proportions  and  surpassing 
beauty,  called  the  Porch  of  Judgment  (verse  7).  Adjoining  these  erections, 
separated  by  an  inner  court,  was  the  residence  of  the  king ;  and  beyond  this, 
and  connected  with  it,  was  the  house  of  his  Egyptian  consort,  built  after  the 
gorgeous  pattern  of  the  porch  of  cedar  (verse  8).  This  magnificent  pile  of 
buildings  was  surrounded  with  a  spacious  court,  decorated  with  a  colonnade 
of  stones  and  cedar  (verse  12).  The  palace  of  Solomon  was  thirteen  years  in 
building:  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  was  erected  in  seven.  We  should  ever 
manifest  more  zeal  and  eagerness  in  prosecuting  the  work  of  God^  than  in 
making  provision  for  our  material  comfort.  The  results  of  Christian  work 
remain  when  the  most  imposing  fabrics  of  human  pride  and  luxury  have 
crumbled  into  ruin.     The  palace  of  Solomon  suggests  the  following  reflections. 

I.  That  religion  is  not  inimical  to,  but  promotive  of,  the  highest  art. 
The  iconoclasm  that  would  destroy  every  vestige  of  a  work  of  art,  because  of 
its  possible  abuse  in  matters  religious,  is  the  fruit  of  the  reckless  barbarism  of  a 
barbarous  age.  In  all  great  reforms,  whether  in  the  Church  or  in  the  State,  it  is 
difficult  to  prevent  excesses :  there  are  always  some  wild  extremists  who  com- 
mit enormities  that  bring  discredit  upon  the  best  of  causes.  Religion  has  often 
suffered  in  reputation  by  the  rude  vandalism  of  a  few  ;  and  the  Church  of  God 
has  been  held  up  to  scorn  as  the  enemy  of  the  arts  and  sciences.  And  yet  it  is 
evident  to  the  thoughtful  that  religion  has  ever  been  the  foster-mother  of  true 
genius  :  she  inspires  the  noblest  and  purest  conceptions,  and  supplies  the  most 
exalted  themes  for  the  pen,  the  pencil,  or  the  chisel.  In  all  ages,  whatever 
has  been  grandest  in  architecture,  most  exquisite  in  painting,  most  chaste 
in  statuary,  and  most  celebrated  in  song,  may  be  traced  to  the  influence  of  the 
religious  spirit.  It  is  only  religion  that  saves  the  arts  and  sciences  from 
becoming  the  ministrants  of  the  most  revolting  vices. 

XL  That  it  is  the  duty  of  the  king  to  defend  and  maintain  the  best 
interests  of  his  people.  In  the  royal  palace  were  deposited  the  weapons  of 
war,  the  targets  and  shields  of  beaten  gold  (ch.  x.  16,  17).  Thus  was  set 
forth  the  mission  of  the  king  against  his  enemies — his  protecting  war-strength* 
In  the  Porch  of  Pillars,  sometimes  called  the  Tower  of  David — apparently 
hung  over  the  walls  outside,  as  was  the  custom  in  many  warlike  cities,  were  a 
thousand  golden  shields,  which  gave  the  whole  palace  the  name  of  the  Armoury. 
**  With  a  splendour  that  outshone  any  like  fortress,  the  tower  with  these 
golden  targets  glittered  far  off  in  the  sunshine  like  the  tall  neck,  as  it  was 
thought,  of  a  beautiful  bride,  decked  out  after  the  manner  of  the  East,  with 
strings  of  golden  coins.  Five  hundred  of  them  were  made  by  Solomon's  orders 
for  the  royal  guard ;  but  the  most  interesting  were  the  older  five  hundred  which 
David  had  carried  off  in  his  Syrian  wars  from  the  guard  of  Hadadezer,  as 
trophies  of  arms  and  ornaments,  in  which  the  Syrians  specially  excelled.  It 
was  these  which,  being  regarded  as  spoils  won  in  u  sacred  cause,  gave,  in  all 
probability,  occasion  to  the  expression  '  the  shields  of  the  earth  belong  unto 
92 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS.  chaf.  tii. 


God.* "  When  the  Israelites  first  desired  a  king,  one  important  purpose  was 
that  he  might  go  out  before  them  and  fight  their  battles  (1  Sam.  viii.  20) :  and 
they  would  be  reminded  of  this  every  time  they  gazed  upon  the  glittering 
shields  of  the  royal  armoury.  A  good  monarch  makes  the  best  welfare  of  his 
people  his  constant  study ;  and  he  is  ever  ready  to  protect  them  from  the 
assaults  and  ravages  of  the  foe.  William  the  Silent,  of  Holland,  devoted  all 
his  treasures  and  talents  with  such  self-denying  bravery  in  defending  and 
delivering  his  oppressed  countrymen,  that  "  as  long  as  he  lived,  he  was  the 
guiding  star  of  a  brave  nation ;  and  when  he  died,  the  little  children  cried  in  the 
streets." 

III.  That  the  administration  of  justice  is  an  essential  part  of  good 
government.  The  most  attractive  portion  of  the  palace  of  Solomon  was  the 
Porch  of  Judgment,  in  the  interior  of  which  the  throne  was  erected.  It  repre- 
sented the  royal  elevation  and  majesty,  and  signified  the  vocation  of  the  king 
in  judging  and  ruling  his  subjects.  "  This  porch,"  wiites  Stanley ^  **  was  the 
gem  and  centre  of  the  whole  empire,  and  was  so  much  thought  of  that  a  similar 
likeness  to  it  was  erected  in  another  part  of  the  royal  precinct  for  the  queen. 
Within  the  porch  itself  was  to  be  seen  the  king  in  state.  On  a  throne  of  ivory 
brought  from  Africa  or  India,  the  throne  of  many  an  Arabian  legend,  the  kings 
of  Judah  were  solemnly  seated  on  the  day  of  their  accession.  From  its  lofty 
seat,  and  under  that  high  gateway,  Solomon  and  his  successors  after  him  de- 
livered their  solemn  judgments.  That  porch,  or  gate  of  justice,  still  kept 
alive  the  likeness  of  the  old  patriarchal  custom  of  sitting  in  judgment  at  the 
gate;  exactly  as  the  gate  of  justice  still  recalls  it  to  us  at  Granada,  and  the  Sub- 
lime Porte — the  Lofty  Gate  at  Constantinople.  He  sat  on  the  back  of  a  golden 
bull,  its  head  turned  over  its  shoulder,  probably  the  ox  or  bull  of  Ephraim ; 
under  his  feet,  on  each  side  of  the  steps,  were  six  golden  lions,  probably  the 
lions  of  Judah.  This  was  the  seat  of  judgment.  This  was  the  throne  of  the 
house  of  David."  Where  justice  is  peiTcrted,  the  nation  suffers ;  government  is 
impossible,  and  the  people  become  the  victims  of  a  sateless  avarice,  or  a  cruel 
tyranny.  **  The  king  by  judgment  establisheth  the  land  ;"  but  when  "  the  law 
is  slacked  and  judgment  doth  never  go  forth,"  disorder  and  anarchy  ensue. 

IV.  That  magnificence  in  architecture  is  a  substantial  evidence  of 
national  prosperity  and  culture.  Temporal  aggrandisement  was  an  important 
element  in  the  blessing  that  Jehovah  had  promised  the  Jews  on  condition  of  their 
obedience.  In  consequence  of  their  own  sins,  they  had  tasted  the  bitterness  of 
the  warning,  but  not  till  now  did  they  attain  the  full  glory  of  the  promise.  To 
preclude  the  possibility  of  the  objection  being  raised  that  the  motive  of 
reward  had  not  been  tried  in  God's  dealings  with  His  people,  they  are  favoured 
for  a  brief  period  with  the  material  splendour  and  religious  progress  of  the 
era  of  Solomon.  Their  public  buildings,  in  temple,  palace,  and  fortresses  ;  their 
enriching  and  extended  commerce;  their  splendid  apparel  and  sumptuous 
banquets,  were  unmistakable  indications  of  the  wealth,  luxury,  and  refine- 
ment of  the  times,  **  Kings  and  princes  cannot,  on  account  of  their  high  position, 
choose  to  live  in  ordinary  houses,  or  yet  in  poor  hovels ;  it  is  simply  folly  to 
reproach  them  when  they  build  castles  for  themselves.  The  building  of  palaces 
becomes  sinful  and  blameable  only  when  they  are  built  for  the  gratification  of 
ostentation  and  insolence,  or  at  the  expense  of  a  poor  and  oppressed  people." 

V.  That  regal  and  national  aggrandisement  is  fraught  with  many 
dangers.  1.  There  it  the  danger  of  unguarded  pride.  Few  could  bear  the 
popularity  which  Solomon  reached,  or  resist  the  temptations  to  which  he  was 
exposed.  All  that  the  world  most  highly  prizes  were  at  his  disposal-  -wealth, 
power,  beauty,  knowledge.    He  is  not  the  first  whose  brain  has  been  turned  by 

93 


CHAP.  VII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


a  plethora  of  wordly  abundance.  "  Great  riches,"  says  L  )  d  Bacon,  "  have  sold 
more  men  than  ever  they  have  bought  out."  2.  There  is  the  danger  of  an 
enfeeUing  indulgence.  At  the  bottom  of  every  spaikHng  cup  of  pleasure  is  the 
bitter  dreg— satiety.  To  revel  in  the  voluptuousness  and  sm  which  unlimited 
wealth  may  furnish,  destroys  the  very  capacity  for  enjoyment.  The  pleasure  is 
still  pursued  long  after  it  has  ceased  to  be  a  pleasure ;  and  the  unsatisfied  votary 
has  to  moan 

01  pleasures  past,  what  are  ye  now, 

But  thorns  about  my  bleeding  brow : 

Spectres  that  hover  o'er  my  brain. 

And  aggravate  and  mock  my  pain  I 

8.  There  is  the  danger  of  a  disastrous  and  irreparable  decay.  It  is  sad  to  observe 
amid  the  gayest  bloom  of  national  or  individual  life  the  withering  leaves  of 
approaching  and  inevitable  decline.  At  the  brightest  noonday  of  Solomon's 
glory  the  coming  shadow  of  his  fall  was  already  discernible.  Worldly 
prosperity  is  *'like  a  river  that  beareth  up  things  light,  and  drowneth  things 
weighty  and  solid."     Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  most  imposing  scene  of  ea/rthly  greatness  is  but  tempora/ry  in 
its  duration.  2.  The  greater  the  treasures  of  a  nation^  the  greater  is  the  responsi- 
bility of  the  ruler.  3.  The  religious  life  of  a  nation  is  the  most  precious  possession, 
and  in  its  results  the  most  enduring, 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  18—61. 
Eelioion  akb  Ast. 

Solomon  determined  to  offer  the  best  to  God — the  best  in  material,  the  best 
in  form.  He  desired  to  have  real  works  of  art,  and  he  so  little  despised  art  as 
the  handmaid  of  religion,  that  he  even  sent  for  a  heathen  and  foreign  artist. 
In  his  wisdom,  he  regarded  the  command,  **  Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself  any 
graven  image,"  not  as  the  prohibition  of  every  species  of  religious  sculpture.  As 
Hiram's  mother  was  an  Israelite,  we  may  well  surmise  that  he  was  not  unac- 
quainted with  the  God  whom  his  mother  worshipped,  and,  therefore,  would  be 
better  able  than  all  other  Tyrian  artists  to  enter  into  the  right  spirit  and  meaning 
of  the  works  which  Solomon  entrusted  to  him.  The  elaborate  decoration  of  the 
Temple,  and  the  exquisite  finish  of  its  furniture  as  detailed  in  these  verses, 
suggest  several  reflections  as  to  the  relation  of  Religion  and  Art. 

I.  Art  imbibes  its  best  inspirations  from  religion.  Hiram  "was  filled 
with  wisdom  and  understanding,  and  cunning  to  work  aU  works  in  brass " 
(verse  14).  The  genius  of  art  is  a  divine  endowment.  The  skill  of  Hiram  is 
referred  to  nearly  in  the  same  terms  as  that  of  Bezaleel  (Exod.  xxxi.  3) ;  but 
in  the  case  of  the  latter  it  was  a  supernatural  inspiration  for  a  special  purpose, 
while  in  the  case  of  Hiram  it  was  a  natural  gift  of  God.  Like  all  true  genius, 
it  possessed  the  soul  of  the  artificer  with  an  irrepressible  passion  for  his  particular 
work.  He  wa^  filled  with  wisdom  and  ingenuity  to  work.  It  is  a  dangerous, 
and  often  fatal  infatuation,  when  a  man  dreams  he  is  a  genius,  and  does  nothing 
more  but  dream.  The  greatest  genius  is  he  who  has  the  greatest  capacity  for 
hard  work,  and  who  finds  his  greatest  pleasure  in  it.  The  artist  is  ever  an 
enthusiast.  When  Macready  acted  Romeo  for  the  first  time — being  then  only 
Bixteen  years  of  age— his  success  was  so  great  that  a  host  of  friends  crowded 
round  him  at  the  close,  and  shook  his  hand  with  fervent  congratulations.  A 
lady  asked  him,  "  Well,  sir,  how  do  you  feel  now?"  and  be,  with  a  boyish 
94 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  ohAp.  vn. 


ingenuousness,  answered — **  I  feel  as  if  I  should  like  to  act  it  all  over  again!" 
How  much  more  pure  and  lofty  should  be  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Christian 
artist  ! 

II.  Art  fulfils  its  loftiest  mission  when  it  is  consecrated  to  religious  uses. 
All  this  wealth  of  metal  and  of  talent  was  employed  in  building  and  embel- 
lishing the  Temple  of  Jeho^-ah.  It  is  a  sad  and  pitiful  sight  to  see  the  leaders 
of  art  and  science  lending  their  great  powers  in  antagonism  to  religion.  And 
yet  it  is  reassuring  to  know  that  the  greatest  minds,  and  those  who  have  had 
the  greatest  influence  in  moulding  the  best  thoughts  of  the  world,  have  ever 
been  among  the  most  devout.  Copernicus,  whose  system  of  the  universe  over- 
threw the  delusion  of  many  thousand  years,  was  no  enemy  of  religion.  His 
tomb  bears  the  following  characteristic  inscription : — 

**  I  crave  not  the  grace  which  Paul  received, 
Nor  the  favours  with  which  Thou  didst  indulge  Peter ; 
That  alone  which  Thou  bestowedst  upon  the  thief  on  the  crosS) 
That  alone  do  I  entreat." 

Kepler,  Newton,  and  many  others  who  were  giants  in  the  realm  of  science, 
were  humble  and  zealous  Christians.  Genius  gains  its  most  entrancing  visions, 
glitters  with  its  brightest  radiance,  wins  its  most  resplendent  victories,  and 
scatters  its  choicest  blessings,  when  it  devotes  its  best  powers  to  expound  and 
adorn  religion. 

III.  Religion  combines  what  is  beautiful  in  art  with  all  that  is  vigorous 
and  substantial  in  principle.  The  Temple  was  firmly  founded,  massive  and 
durable  in  structure,  graceful  and  brilliant  in  ornamentation.  The  great 
Creator  has  so  exquisitely  proportioned  His  external  dwelling-place  that  there 
is  everything  about  it  to  delight  the  eye  and  gratify  and  elevate  the  taste.  He 
has  stamped  upon  it  all  the  glory  of  form,  irradiated  it  with  all  the  brilliance 
and  softness  of  colour,  and  finely  attuned  it  to  all  the  rapture  and  harmony 
of  sound.  The  mastei-piece  of  the  most  gifted  artist  is  but  a  dim,  imperfect 
reflection  of  the  native,  peerless  beauty  of  the  universe.  Jehovah  is  said  to 
** clothe  Himself  with  light  as  with  a  garment;"  and  what  are  all  His  created 
works  but  a  garment,  jewelled  with  stars,  embroidered  with  constellations,  and 
heavy  with  the  riches  of  all  worlds  ?  The  Being  whose  self-created  Temple  is 
so  full  of  grandeur  and  beauty  is  worthy  of  the  most  gorgeous  sanctuary  that 
the  hand  of  man  can  fashion.  The  ocean  loses  none  of  its  power  because  it  is 
silvered  with  fretted  foam,  or  sparkling  with  the  golden  sheen  of  reflected  sun- 
beams. The  mountain  is  not  less  majestic  because  it  is  belted  with  the  feathery- 
branched  pines,  garlanded  with  slender  wild  flowers,  and  clothed  with  a  purple 
robe  of  blooming  heather.  Nor  does  the  religious  hero  lose  anything  in  strength 
and  stature  because  he  wears  **the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which 
is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price." 

rV.  Art  becomes  dangerous  and  misleading  when  it  usurps  the  place  of 
religion.  The  principle  laid  down  and  developed  by  Neander  is  the  true  one — 
that  the  design  of  the  Christian  religion,  which  is  to  promote  holiness  of  life, 
should  be  kept  constantly  in  view  ;  and  whatever  is  beautiful  in  art  should  ever 
be  subordinated  to  this  design.  When  the  beautiful  becomes,  or  tends  to  become, 
supreme  in  worship  and  in  Christian  art,  then  it  becomes  unlawful.  Whenever 
this  principle  is  infringed,  an  intense  desire  to  reform  is  apt  to  develop  itself 
into  a  reckless,  iconoclastic  spirit.  The  men  who  denuded  and  dismantled  the 
churches  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  regarded  ornaments  as 
snares  to  the  conscience,  and  as  the  foster-nurses  of  superstition.  Religion 
admits  of  no  rival :  she  must  be  supreme,  and  all  the  meretricious  graces  of  art 

95 


CHAP.  vn.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


must  be  subservient  to  her  sway,  and  minister  to  her  high  and  beneficent 
purpose.  Art  is  one  of  tlie  noblest  and  best  gifts  which  God  has  bestowed  on 
man  •  therefore,  above  all,  it  should  be  applied  to  the  glorification  ot  (jod,  and 
not  merely  to  the  sanctification  and  pleasure  of  the  world.  To  scorn  and  reject 
art  in  the  service  of  religion  is  to  reject  Him  who  has  given  it.  The  aesthetics 
of  the  Christian  life  must  not  be  permitted  to  mar  or  displace  its  spiritual 
power. 

Lessons:—!.  The  best  talent  should  he  em/ployed  for  God.  2.  A  gmuine 
Christian  life  is  adorned  with  the  beauty  of  many  virtues.  3.  Art  without  religion 
is  idolatry  and  sin. 

EOMILETICS  OF  VEBSE  22. 

Lilt  Wobk. 

"While,  for  convenience  sake,  this  is  called  Solomon's  Temple,  it  is  much  more 
David's ;  but  in  the  highest  sense  it  is  God's— God's  thought,  which  He  put 
into  the  soul  of  David,  and  fed  by  His  holy  aspirations  and  musings.  And 
about  this  divinely-suggcbted  Temple,  with  all  its  several  items  of  grandeur 
and  device,  there  is  nothing  more  distinctly  characteristic  than  the  idea  which 
gleams  forth  from  this  description  of  the  pillars  built  by  Hiram— **  Upon  the 
top  of  the  pillars  was  lily  work ; "  an  illustration,  moreover,  of  that  work,  also 
David's,  into  which  he  threw  his  thought,  not  only  about  the  material  Temple, 
but  about  all  Divine  realities—"  Stiength  and  beauty  are  in  His  sanctuary." 
The  pillars,  how  massively  grand,  towering,  and  sublime,  yet  fretted  over  and 
crowned  with  gracefulness !     Even  **  lily  work  "  of  choicest  artifice. 

I.  As  we  look  at  these  pillars,  we  cannot  fail  to  remember  that  the  man  who 
built  them  threw  his  soul  into  them.  And  his  soul  was  inspired  to  do  the  best  his 
hands  could.  How  immensely  it  would  relieve  the  drudgery  of  manual  occu- 
pation if  our  workers  were  to  feel  that  their  true  work  was  an  inspiration — 
that  the  thought  of  it,  and  the  power  to  do  it,  were  alike  from  God,  and  that 
they  were  doing  it  for  God  ?  Would  not  this  make  them,  also,  do  their  daily 
duty  as  indeed  for  God  ?  In  that  Temple  all  was  to  be  good  and  sound.  Men 
felt  it  was  all  for  God,  and  so  they  put  their  souls  into  it.  The  one  thouglit 
seemed  to  be,  How  shall  we  most  fitly  express  our  sense  of  the  Divine  worth  ? 
And  to  an  age  largely  impressed  by  material  signs  and  symbols  this  was  a 
testimony  of  some  value.  It  was  looked  upon  as  a  Divine  gift  to  have  a  faculty 
for  skilful  workmanship.  In  these  days  it  is  to  be  feared  that  our  loose 
thought  about  what  constitutes  the  soul  of  religion  has  led  to  some  disparage- 
ment of  these  so-called  natural  gifts.  It  needs  to  be  told  with  much  plainness 
to  the  so-called  Christian  people  of  this  day,  that  they  are  not  honouring  God 
if,  however  dovout  and  prayerful,  they  neglect  their  proper  every-day  work. 
To  serve  God  is  not  simply  to  be  rapt  by  religious  emotions.  He  who  makes  a 
boot,  or  drives  a  nail,  or  executes  a  design  skilfully,  may  do  it  religiously. 
And  we  might  say  to  the  workers,  It  is  to  be  feared  that  we  of  the  pulpit  some- 
times needlessly  disparage  your  toil,  and  make  it  harder  than  needs  be,  because 
we  do  not  sufficiently  allow  that  a  true  glory  rests  about  all  honest,  well- 
wrought  toil.  The  true  sanctification  of  labour  will  never  be  attained  until  we 
allow  that  a  good  work  may  be  as  truly  wrought  by  painstaking  and  skill  in 
the  commonest  engagements.  We  must  do  our  best,  because  we  are  doing  it 
for  our  Lord.  Christ  takes  note  of  all  conscientious,  painstaking  endeavour, 
and  whatever  is  well  done,  conscientiously  done,  is  done  for  Hiiu.  Believing 
that  in  the  simple  work-a-day  matters  of  conscientiousness  and  painstaking 
about  our  daily  calling  it  is  within  our  power  to  please  or  grieve  Him,  let  us 
give  Him  our  best. 
96 


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTJJtT:  KIN08.  chap.  vn. 


II.  Following  closely  upon  this  is  a  thought  ahout  the  soundness  and  honesty 
of  service  in  God^s  Spiritual  Temple.  All  work  that  is  worth  doing  at  all  is 
worth  doing  well.  If  a  man  has  to  give,  let  him  give  cheerfully,  for  God 
loveth  a  cheerful  giver.  If  he  has  to  teach,  let  him  give  himself  in  the  teaching ; 
if  he  has  to  rule  a  household,  let  him  do  so  with  diligence.  Let  his  service  be 
not  by  constraint,  but  willingly.  A  cup  of  cold  water  is  not  unacceptable,  but 
meat  may  sometimes  be  more  serviceable,  therefore  more  acceptable.  A  prayer 
for  the  troubled  is  good,  but  a  suffering  patience  is  better.  This  high,  grand 
principle  would  effectually  rectify  at  least  some  of  the  wrongness  of  the  Christian 
church.  AYell  doing  is  in  doing  one's  best.  A  really  spiritual  endeavour  is  an 
endeavour  in  which  the  spirit  of  a  man  shows  itself,  as  in  a  good  painting  a 
man's  soul  peers  through  the  canvas.  Whetlicr,  therefore,  in  one's  own  soul- 
culture,  or  in  the  culture  of  spiritual  life  in  others,  we  should  not  present  a 
maimed  sacrifice,  when  we  ought  to  and  can  offer  an  unblemished  one.  Let 
all  our  works  be  done  in  truth.  Let  them  bear  the  inspection  of  the  eye  of 
H(aven.  However  laborious,  let  them  be  finished;  if  pillars,  let  the  top  be 
chased  with  "  lily- work.'* 

III.  But  passing  away  from  these  general  thoughts  suggested  by  the  scene  of 
these  varied  works  in  the  Temple,  let  us  come  to  another.  If  upon  the  top  of 
Hiram's  pillars  was  **  lily-work,"  so  majesty j  crowned  with  gracefulness,  will  he 
found  in  all  the  Divinest  thoughts.  Religion  is  one  of  these  Divine  thoughts. 
Revelation  is  to  provoke  religious  life;  and  in  religious  life  there  is  strength 
as  well  as  beauty,  beauty  as  well  as  strength.  "Upon  the  top  of  its  pilla:^  is 
lily-work."  In  ''Theophilus  Trinal"  the  words  are  applied  to  the  frame  of 
Nature,  thus : — *'  How  mighty  and  massive  is  Nature's  frame !  Strong  are  the 
world's  pillars  !  Yet  what  profusion  of  things  graceful,  even  sportively  graceful, 
does  the  earth  contain !  Beautiful  is  the  *  Hly-work.'  "  This  great  Temple — 
the  world  is  like  that  old  Temple— the  wonder  of  Solomon's  heart  and  time. 
**  Upon  the  top  of  the  pillars  is  lily-work."  In  all  God's  works  will  be  found 
a  perfect  harmoniousness ;  so  there  is  as  truly  in  the  sphere  of  the  spiritual 
within  man  the  same  blending  of  the  strong  with  the  beautiful.  The  massive- 
ness  of  the  religious  principle  which  it  takes  time  to  establish  and  to  build  up 
is  adorned  with  many  a  grace,  and  crowned  with  many  a  flower-picture. 

IV.  The  pillars  must  be  before  the  florid  ornamentation.  That  which  is 
essentially  Divine  must  l.ave  elements  of  strength  and  stability.  The  force 
which  is  to  control  a  man's  inner  and  outer  being  must — being  a  Divine  force 
— be  an  overcoming  one.  There  is  muscle  and  sinew  and  bone  in  all  healthily 
embodied  life.  It  must  be  able  to  resist  and  assert  itself.  Moral  cowardice, 
e.g.,  cannot  co-exist  with  a  healthy  spiritual  life ;  hence  the  repeated  exhorta- 
tions in  Scripture  to  **  be  strong,"  to  "  be  very  courageous."  The  muscular 
school  of  Christianity,  as  it  is  called,  has  done  some  good  if  it  has  only  helped 
to  explode  the  notion  that  religion  is  an  effeminate  thing;  but  it  has  not  always 
chosen  the  best  modes  of  exemplifying  its  principles. 

Strong  are  the  pillars  of  God's  spiritual  temple,  deeply  laid  the  foundations, 
in  force  of  principle,  in  power  of  life.  Pity  the  man  who  is  wanting  in  these, 
whose  religion  is  sentiment  and  nothing  more.  Presently  some  blast  will  tear 
up  the  I'oots  of  such  a  life,  and  lay  the  lifeless  trunk  bare  to  the  scorn  of  all 
beholders.  But  beauty  is  also  in  God's  sanctuary,  and  "  upon  the  top  of  the 
pillars  was  lily  work  " — one  of  its  simplest  illustrations.  Nature  in  this  respect 
furnishes  us  a  series  of  types.  Her  vegetation  which  clothes  those  rugged  peaks, 
climbing  ever  where  it  can  to  adorn  and  beautify,  tells  of  some  thought  of  God, 
to  be  applied  to  spiritual  ideas.  To  the  devout,  all  such  contemplation  of  the 
works  of  God  will  result  in  an  ever-deepening  conviction  that  while  God  loves 
the  strong,  He  also  loves  the  grac(iful.  Similarly,  out  of  the  settled,  rock-like 
principles  of  religious  faith  spring  many  a  beautiful  plant  of  grace. 

B  97 


OHAF.Tli.  EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  KINQ8, 


Attention  to  the  minor  moralities,  the  tender,  graceful  offices  of  Christian 
gentleness,  is  no  unimportant  phase  of  the  sweetness  of  goodness.  ^  It  is  our  joy 
when  we  can  trace  all  things  of  worth  to  the  Saviour ;  and,  having  taken  the 
text  from  which  to  teach  of  the  strength  and  beauty  which  God  loves,  we  would 
turn  with  profound  respect  and  gratitude  to  the  Saviour  of  men  as  the  source 
of  all  that  is  enduringly  grand  and  vitally  beautiful.  Consider  Christ — how 
settled  and  stable  are  the  grand  principles  upon  which  His  religion  is  founded! 
What  strength  you  have  in  the  elementary  principles  of  the  Christian  religion ! 
Yet  what  beauty!  As  in  His  life,  so  also  in  the  life  that  is  nurtured  by  faith  in 
Him,  you  will  find  force  and  fragrance — whatever  can  give  sustenance  to  the 
more  heroic  virtues;  whatever  can  give  nurture  to  the  gentler  graces.  The 
pictures  representing  the  Saviour  mostly  err  in  the  direction  of  effeminacy.  So 
also  Ecnan's  word-picture  of  Him  is  an  exaggeration  in  this  direction.  And 
we  are  all  apt,  knowing  how  much  of  sweetness  was  in  his  nature,  to  forget  the 
ruggeder  virtues  which  dwelt  within  His  manly  breast.  But  we  have  only  to 
come  to  the  cross  to  get  these  effeminate  notions  corrected.  He  could  *'  even 
dare  to  die," — of  such  stalwart  sort  was  His  inner  soul,  and  yet  even  from  that 
cross  could  turn  a  look  of  pitying  love  toward  the  weeping  woman  by  it,  and  say 
to  John,  "Behold  thy  mother." 

And  as  in  the  human  life  and  story  of  Christ,  so  also  in  the  manifestations  of 
Christ  ever  since ;  what  brave  endurance,  what  meek  patience,  have  been  seen  1 
Strength,  manly  and  courageous ;  beauty,  touching,  pathetic,  graceful.  Think 
of  those  pillars  in  Solomon's  Temple — ^beautiful  in  their  grandeur  :  they  repre- 
sent a  true  religious  life — massive,  towering,  sublime;  ^et  crowned  with  the 
graceful,  wrought  upon  the  top  in  *' lily  work."  You  are  firm  and  true  to 
principle  :  do  not  think  you  need  be  rude  and  ungainly.  Let  the  **  beauty  of 
holiness  "  beam  forth  from  you.  Let  not  the  sacredness  of  your  life  ever  be 
forbidding — shine  forth !  Though  possessed  of  the  enduring  vitalities  of  the 
hidden  life,  be  also  clothed  in  the  comely  garment  of  the  Christian  graces. 

Istly.  You,  especially,  who  are  seeking  for  something  abiding — who  yearn  to 
be  in  your  true  place,  a  place  not  to  be  changed — you  must  overcome.  "  Him 
that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  Temple  of  my  God."  Have  you 
overcome  self-will,  passion,  worldly  expediency  ?  There  is  earnest  work 
before  you  before  this  hope  of  heaven  can  be  your  enjoyment.  In  the  strength 
of  God  and  of  his  dear  Son  you  will  find  the  victory. 

2ndly.  Tou  who  love  the  heautiful — where  are  you  looking  for  it  f  You  find 
much  baseness,  lowness  in  yourself — in  society.  Look  for  it  in  Christ,  and  in 
that  which  springs  from  the  acceptance  of  His  service  and  yoke.  **  Come  unto 
Me,"  all  ye  sons  and  daughters  of  pleasure,  wearied  with  much  seeking  and 
never  finding.  **  Come  unto  Me,"  all  searchers  after  true  consolation  and  joy : 
*'  I  will  give  you  rest."--C.  W.  P. 


The  Symbolio  Teaching  op  the  Temple. 

When  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  states  that  "  the  Law  had  a 
shadow  of  good  things  to  come,"  he  does  not  undertake  to  show  that  the  several 
institutions  and  ceremonies  of  that  legal  period  have  their  exact  counterparts, 
in  every  particular,  in  the  institutions  of  Christian  times.  Shadows  are  very 
indefinite  and  insubstantial  things,  erratic  and  uncertain  in  their  movements,  so 
that  it  is^  only  with  great  difficulty  and  much  patient  observation  that  we  can 
succeed  in  defining  the  substance  they  so  dimly  forecast.  The  symbolic 
character  of  the  Levitical  ritual  has  been  often  exaggerated.  Old  Testament 
persons  and  places,  sacred  seasons  and  sacred  things,  down  even  to  the  very 
snuffers  and  tongs  of  the  sanctuary,  have  been  strained  into  meanings  the  most 
fantastic,  and  have  afforded  scope  for  tk©  play  of  the  most  fanciful  imagination. 
98 


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chip.  Ttf. 


But  while  the  typical  and  figurative  teaching  of  the  Bible  is  liable  to  be  abused, 
it  has  ever  been,  and  still  is,  a  valuable  and  impressive  medium  of  conveying 
the  knowledge  of  the  most  important  truths,  especially  if  one  of  the  fundamental 
rules  of  allegorical  interpretation  be  observed — that  which  necessitates  the 
rejection  of  everything  inconsistent  with  the  particular  truth  it  is  intended  to 
unfold  and  illustrate.  The  Temple  of  Solomon,  so  far  as  it  was  a  reproduction 
(on  an  enlarged  scale)  of  the  Tabernacle,  was,  like  that  more  ancient  structure, 
the  pattern,  example,  and  shadow  of  heavenly  things.  But  Solomon  introduced 
a  number  of  additions  to  the  ancient  pattern  shown  to  Moses  in  the  Mount. 
The  side-chambers,  the  colossal  cherubim,  the  molten  sea  on  twelve  oxen  in 
place  of  the  more  simple  laver  of  the  tabernacle  court,  the  ten  smaller  lavers 
and  their  bases,  the  ten  tables  and  the  ten  golden  candlesticks — all  seem  to  have 
been  the  product  and  expression  of  theocratic  ideas  that  had  been  maturing  in 
the  Israclitish  mind  for  more  than  four  hundred  years,  though  many  of  them 
were  probably  demanded  by  the  more  extensive  and  elaborate  service  of 
Solomon's  time.  The  symbolic  meaning  of  vaiious  parts  of  the  Temple  are 
worthy  of  consideration. 

I.  The  Temple,  as  the  dwelling  place  of  Jehovah,  localised  the  mani- 
festation of  His  presence  and  power.  Though  Solomon  was  well  aware 
**  the  heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens  "  could  not  contain  the  God  of  Israel,  yet 
he  built  the  Temple  with  the  declared  purpose  of  providing  a  house  for  Jehovah 
to  dwell  in — a  settled  place  for  His  abode  (viii.  3).  He  could,  therefore,  have 
entertained  no  such  thought  as  that  by  dwelling  in  the  Temple  God  ceased  to 
bo  omnipresent;  but  the  Temple  was  specifically  the  place  where  Jehovah 
recorded  His  name,  and  therefore  the  visible  sign  and  pledge  of  His  covenant 
with  Israel.  It  was  the  abode  of  His  holiness,  the  place  where  He  was  to  be 
consulted  and  understood  by  His  people — ^the  place  of  vision  and  of  glorious 
manifestation  and  blessing. 

II.  The  Temple  was  symbolic  of  Heaven.  While  the  Temple  was 
specifically  the  dwelling  place  of  Jehovah,  it  also  typified  heaven  itself,  which 
the  Apostle  designates  *'  the  true  Tabernacle  "  (Heb.  viii.  2;  ix.  24).  Accord- 
ingly, in  Solomon's  prayer  at  the  dedication,  we  find  a  continued  contrast 
between  **  this  house,"  or  **  this  place,"  and  "heaven.  Thy  dwelling  place,"  or 
simply  "heaven"  (chap.  viii.  30-49).  And  so  the  pious  Israelite  might  ever 
see  in  the  holy  and  beautiful  house  where  Jehovah  recorded  His  name  a  type 
and  symbol  of  heaven  itself.  It  was  the  Temple  of  His  holiness  (Psalm  v.  7 ; 
Ixxix.  1 ;  oxxxviii.  2). 

III.  The  Temple  indicated  the  close  relationship  existing  between  God 
and  man.  This  divine  human  relationship  was  symbolised  in  the  two  main 
apartments  of  the  Temple.  Why,  in  the  Temple  as  in  the  Tabernacle,  havo 
two  holy  rooms,  rather  than  three  or  more  ?  Why,  except  to  express  the  two- 
fold relation  that  essentially  exists  between  the  worshipper  and  God  ?  The 
holy  of  holies,  with  its  profound  symbols  of  "  Mercy  covering  wrath,"  showed 
God's  relation  to  His  people ;  how,  and  on  what  terms,  the  Almighty  and  Holy 
One  would  dwell  with  man.  The  holy  place,  where  the  consecrated  priests 
ministered,  with  its  incense,  altar,  and  tables  and  candlesticks,  expressed  the 
relation  of  the  true  worshipper  to  God.  The  devout  worshippers,  who  offer 
before  God  the  incense  of  continual  prayer,  are  at  once  the  salt  of  the  earth 
and  the  light  of  the  world.  And  this  is  the  one  great  truth  embodied  in  the 
several  symbols  of  the  holy  place.  Thus,  in  the  two  main  apartments,  were 
exhibited  "  the  two  great  branches  into  which  the  tree  of  Divine  knowledge 
always  of  necessity  runs — namely,  the  things  to  be  believed  concerning  God, 
and  the  things  to  be  done  by  His  believing  people." 

99 


OHiP  vii.  EOMILETIO  COMMSNTART:  KINOS. 


rV.  The  Temple  symbolised  the  gradual  revelation  of  the  Divine 
Holiness.  When  we  come  to  observe  the  details  of  the  structure  we  notice, 
first  of  ail,  the  graduated  sanctity  of  the  three  holy  places.  First,  the  court, 
where  nothing  unclean  might  enter;  then  the  holy  place,  where  only  the 
consecrated  priests  might  go  to  perform  holy  services ;  and,  beyond  this,  vailed 
in  thick  darknes?,  the  holy  of  holies,  where  only  the  high  priest  entered  (and 
he  but  once  a  year)  on  the*  great  day  of  atonement.  Here  was  symbolised,  not 
only  the  absolute  holiness  of  Him  who  "  dwelt  in  the  thick  darkness,"  but  also 
the  gradual  and  progressive  revelations  of  His  name  and  Nature,  which  have 
been  made  known  to  men.  Whilst  the  Temple  and  the  priesthood  remained, 
the  Holy  Ghost  signified  that  the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was  not  yet  made 
manifest  (Heb.  ix.  8) ;  but  since  Christ  has  rent  the  vail  and  entered  heaven 
itself  for  us,  we  all  may,  with  boldness  and  full  assurance  of  faith,  enter  into 
the  holiest,'  and  have  everlasting  fellowship  and  communion  with  God 
(Heb.  ix.  24  ;  x.  19-22). 

V.  The  square  form  of  all  the  apartments  and  courts  of  the  Temple  is 
not  without  significance.  The  oracle  was  a  perfect  square,  the  nave  a  double 
square,  the  porch  half  a  square,  &c.  Nowhere^  do  we  find  the  form  of  the 
triangle,  the  pentagon,  or  the  circle  ;  but  everything  about  the  sanctuary  seems, 
like  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  to  be  quadrangular,  as  if  to  correspond  with  the 
four  corners  of  heaven,  the  upper  dwelling  place  of  God  (Jer.  xlix.  36; 
Matt.  xxiv.  31). 

VI.  The  Temple  also  had  a  symbolism  of  members.  Especially  noticeable 
is  the  predominance  of  the  numbers  ten  and  three.  The  length  and  breadth  of 
all  the  apartments  and  the  courts  is  a  common  multiple  of  ten — the  number  of 
the  commandments  written  on  the  Tables  of  Testimony  within  the  Ark.  Ten  is 
the  number  of  the  candlesticks  and  tables,  the  bases  and  the  lavers ;  ten  cubits 
was  the  height  of  the  cherubim  and  the  extent  of  their  outstretched  wings ;  ten 
cubits  was  the  breadth  of  the  molten  sea.  Then  we  note  the  three  holy 
apartments,  each  with  its  type  of  expiation — the  altar  of  burnt  offerings,  the 
altar  of  incense,  and  the  mtrcy  seat ;  the  last  within  the  most  holy  place,  which 
bore  the  form  of  a  perfect  cube,  the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the  height  of 
it  being  equal.  Each  apartment  also  had  three  principal  kinds  of  articles  of 
furniture.  In  the  oracle  were  the  cherubim,  the  ark,  and  the  tables  of  the 
Law ;  in  the  nave  were  the  candlesticks,  the  tables,  and  the  altar  of  incense ; 
and  in  the  court  were  the  brazen  sea,  the  lavers,  and  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings. 
There  were  also  the  three  stories  of  side-chambers.  In  this  symbolism  of 
numbers  we  may  discern  a  mystic  representation  both  of  the  variety  and  unity 
of  all  Divine  revelation.  '*  What  happens  thrice  is  the  genuine  once ;  what  is 
divided  into  three  is  a  true  unity.  The  one  dwelling,  by  its  division  into  three 
parts,  is  designated  as  one  complete  whole ;  and  the  three  kinds  of  articles  of 
use  which  are  in  the  three  parts,  or  in  one  of  them,  again  form  a  complete 
whole,  and  belong  under  it  to  the  one  or  the  other  relation.  While  the  number 
(ten)  gives  the  impress  of  finishing  and  completing  to  multiplicity,  the  number 
(three)  is  the  signature  of  perfect  unity,  and  thus  also  of  the  Divine  Being." 

VII.  The  decorations  of  the  Temple  symbolised  the  Divine  source  of 
all  forms  of  life.  The  cherubim,  lions,  oxen,  palms,  flowers,  and  lily  work 
were  representative  of  all  created  life,  and  signified  that,  while  Jehovah 
condescended  to  make  the  Temple  His  special  dwelling  place,  His  presence  fills 
the  universe  with  life.  He  upholds  all  things  by  the  Word  of  His  power. 
Angels  and  men,  cattle  and  creeping  things  and  fowl,  and  all  inanimate  creation, 
have  their  being  from  Him  whom  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain.  And 
thus  was  added  to  the  various  lessons  of  Jehovah's  absolute  holiness  and  infinite 
perfections,  which  the  Temple  symbolisfid,  this  ornamental  expression  of  His 
universal  providence  (see  Bahr  on  "  The  Symbolism  of  the  Mosaic  Worship  "  : 
Whedon's  Comm.,  and  Lange), 

100 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  chap.  vii. 


GEIiM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Verse  1-51.  In  matter ;  all  was  here  —  The  building  of  the  hoase  for  the 
of  the  best.  The  wood  was  precious,  king  followed  immediately  upon  the 
sweet,  lasting;  the  stones  beautiful,  building  of  the  temple:  they  belong 
costly,  insensible  of  age;  the  gold  pure  together.  Altar  and  throne  stand  and 
and  glittering.  So  are  the  graces  of  fall  together,  even  as  we  have  the  two 
God's  children  excellent  in  their  na-  commandments :  Fear  God :  Honour 
ture,  dear  in  their  acceptation,  eternal  the  king  (1  Pet.  ii.  17  ;  Prov.  xxiv.  2). 
in  their  use  :  so  are  the  ordinances  of  In  the  kingdom  where  religion  is 
God  in  His  church  holy,  comfortable,  cherished  and  highly  honoured,  there 
irrefragable :  so  is  the  perfection  of  royalty  is  most  secure  :  a  God-fearing 
His  glorified  saints  incomparable,  un-  people  is  the  best,  nay,  the  only  sup- 
conceivable.  In  situation  :  the  outer  port  of  the  throne. — Lange, 
parts  were  here  more  common ;  the 

inner  more   holy  and   peculiarly  re-  Terse   13.  As  the   tabernacle    was 

served.     One  court  of  the  temple  is  built  with  the  wealth  of  Egypt,  so  the 

open  to  the  unclean,  to  the  uncircum-  temple  with  the  wit   of  Tyre :  God 

cised :  within  that  another,  open  only  will  serve  himself  by  the  common  gifts 

to  the  Israelites,  and,  of  them,  to  the  of  men. 
clean ;  within  that  yet  another,  proper 

only  to  the  priests  and  Levites,  where  Yerse  13,  14.  A  wise  prince,  in  the 

was  the  brazen  altar  for  sacrifice,  and  furtherance   of  his  enterprise,  which 

the  brazen  sea  for  washing.     The  eyes  aims  at  the  honour  of  God  and  the 

of  the  laity  might  follow  their  obla-  good  of  the  nation,  looks  around  for 

tions  in  hither ;  their  feet  might  not.  the  best  instruments,  and  in  order  to 

Yet  more,  in  the  covered  rooms  of  the  obtain  them  seeks  them  wherever  he 

Temple  there  is,  whither  the  priests  can  find  them  (Prov.  xxvi.  10).     He 

only  may  enter,  not  the  Levites ;  there  who  has  learned  anything  thoroughly, 

is,  whither  the  high  priest  only  may  and   brought   it  to   perfection  in   its 

enter,  not  his  brethren.     It  is  thus  in  especial  province,  must  be  sought  out 

every   renewed   man,   the   individual  and  held  in  esteem,  whatsoever  be  his 

temple   of  God:  the   outer  parts  are  position  or  country, 
allowed   common    to     God   and    the 

world;  the  inwaidest  and  secretest.  Verse  15-22.    The  pillars  of  Hiram 

which  is  the  heart,  is  reserved  only  emblematic  of  the  church  of  God. 

for  the  God  that  made  it.     It  is  thus  1.  As  to  its  stahility .  The  names  given 

in  the  church  visible:  the  false  and  to  the  pillars  are  suggestive.     Jachin: 

foul-hearted  hypocrite  hath  access  to  Se  will  establish,  referring  to  the  lact 

the  holy  ordinances  of  God,  and  treads  that  Jehovah's  dwelling  place,  hitherto 

in  His  courts:  only  the  true  Christian  movable  and  moving,  was  now  firmly 

hath  entire  and  private  conversation  fixed    in   the   midst   of   His    people, 

with  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  he  only  Boaz :  In  him  is  strength,    indicating 

is  admitted  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  the  strength  and  power  that  would  be 

and  enters  within  the  glorious  vail  of  put  forth  by  God  in  the  defence  and 

heaven. ^i>/?.  Hall,  establishment   of    His    people.      The 

church  is     stable — 1.    Because   it   is 

Verse  1-12.   They   who   are   great  founded   in  truth  ;    2.   Built   up    in 

may  appear  so;  it  is  as  fit  that  a  king  truth;  and  3.  Sustained  and  encom- 

should  dwell  in  a  palace,  as  a  peasant  passed  by  the  God  of  truth.     II.  As 

in  a  cottage.     They  who  are  occupied  to  its  beauty.     The  pillars  were  sur- 

in  building  should  take  care  not  to  mounted    with     ornamental    capitals, 

lose,    in  the  stone   and  mortar,  their  shaped  like  a  full-blown  lily-cup,  with 

solicitude  to  secure  a  better   *'  house,  fine  checkered  network  thrown  over 

not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  the   whole,  and  delicate  chain   work 

heavens."  hanging  in  festoons  outside,  and  deco- 

10} 


OHAP.  VtL 


EOMILMTIO  COUMENTABY :  KINOS. 


i.  A      UT.    n.-vplinfr  rows   of   Dome-  could  be  choscn  for  the  Capitals  befow 

?ale       Th"  i^^^^^  alred-l  the  holy  temple  than  the  lily  .-Z..,. 

f  with  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  --  ;;  And  upon  the  pmars  was  hly- 

2   w  th  the  beauty  of  holiness  ;  3,  with  work^»      To   show    the  beauty   and 

the  reflected  glory   of   its  risen  and  sweetness  of  Christ  and   His  people, 

llorified  head  (2  Cor  iii.  18).    III.  As  those  especially  that  are  more  eminent, 

t  Us  eventjul  history.     These  famous  the   glory   of  the   churches ;  such  as 

pillars  weri  broken  in  pieces  by  the  were   James  Cephas,  a^d  John,  who 

Babylonians    when    they     destroyed  "  seemed  to  be  pillars     (Gal.  ii.  9). 

Jerusalem  (2  Kings  XXV.  13;  Jer.  lii.  ^         «„     .         ,          ^          t     ^x. 

\l)      But  the  material  remained  and  Yerse  23.  As  a  large  laver  for  the 

retained  its  value.     So  the  church  has  priests  to  wash  in  (2  Chron.  iv    6). 

often  been  persecuted,   pierced,    and  The  Hebrews  used  to  call  the  gather- 

broken  by  the  violence  of  its  foes,  and  ing  together  of  much  water  a  sea.     It 

often  brought  disaster  on  itself  by  its  signifieth  both  the  exceeding  filthiness 

unfaithfulness  to  God ;  but  it  has  not  of  sin,  reqmnag  a  sea  for  the  cleansing 

been  utterly  destroyed.     It  retains  its  of  it,  and  the  infinite  virtue  of  Chnst  s 

vigour,  and  is  ever  increasing  in  value  blood. — Trapp. 

and  preciousness.  ^^^^^  ^^    ^^  ^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^ 

Yerse  18.  The  pomegranate  was  one  casting."     To  teach  the  uniformity 

of     the     commonest     ornaments    in  about  things  of  God.     It  is  a  sweet 

Assyria.     It  was  used  on  quivers,  on  thing  when  with  one  mind  and  one 

spear-shafts  and  mace-heads,  in  pat-  mouth  God  is  glorified  as     the  Father 

terns  on  doorways  and  pavements.     It  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Chnst     (Eom.  xv. 

is  doubtful  whether  a  symbolical  mean-  6),  and  men's  prayers   come  before 

ing  attached  to  it,  or  whether  it  was  Him  ''  as  the  sound  of  n.any  waters, 

merely  selected  as  a  beautiful  natural  . 

ioxm.LRawUnson,  Yerse    40-51.     What    signification 

have  the  holy  vessels  of  the  temple  jor 

Yerse  22.  The  Hebrew  named  the  the  church  of  the  Lord,  which  is  the 
lily  simply  ''the  white";  it  is,  there-  true  temple  of  God?  1.  The  pHlars, 
fore,  a  natural  symbol  of  purity.  Jachin  and  Boaz,  m  the  porch,  are,  as 
The  priests,  as  '*  the  holy  ones"  (Ex.  it  were,  the  superscription  oyer  the 
iii.  27),  were  dressed  in  white  (Num.  temple,  and  declare  its  strong  founda- 
xvi.  7);  and  the  high  priest,  the  holiest  tion  and  its  permanence.  The  Lord 
of  the  holy,  wore  on  the  great  day  of  declares  both  to  His  people  church : 
atonement  white  garments  instead  of  upon  this  rock  will  I  build  my  church, 
his  usual  many  coloured  ones;  and  these  and  the  gates  of  Hell  shall  not  prevail 
white  robes  were  called  *' holy  gar-  against  it  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  Great, 
ments  (Lev.  xvi.  4,  32).  Inasmuch  noble  promise !  II.  The  brazen  sea 
as  holiness  was  the  characteristic  and  and  the  vases  in  the  porch  are  there, 
fundamental  idea  of  the  Israelitish  that  the  priests  may  puriiy  themselves 
religion,  ''the  white"  (i.e.,  the  lily)  and  the  sacrifices  which  they  bring 
seems  to  have  been  their  religious  there.  The  church  of  the  Lord  is  that 
fiower,.  as  the  lotus  was  the  well-  holy  priesthood  which  offers  spiritual 
known  sacred  flower  of  the  Indian  and  sacrifices  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  Those  who 
Egyptian  religions.  Besides  this,  the  wish  to  perform  such  service  the  pro- 
lily  is  nowhere  more  indigenous  than  in  phet  summons  :  Wash  ye  (Isa.  i.  16) ; 
Palestine  (Matt.  vi.  28) ;  and  it  may  and  the  apostle  :  I  beseech  you,  &c. 
therefore  be  named  the  flower  of  the  (Rom.  xii.  1).  III.  The  altar,  the 
Promised  Land,  as  the  palm  was  its  candlesticks,  and  the  table  stand  in 
tree.  If  the  capitals  of  the  pillars  the  building  itself,  which  is  a  type  of 
were  thus  always  and  everywhere  de-  heaven,  and  show  that  for  them  who 
corated  with  carvings  of  flowers,  no  offer  themselves  pure  and  holy  sacn- 
more  characteristic  and  suitable  one  fices,  a  divine  light  and  life  are  pre- 
102 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARt:  KINGS,  chap.  viri. 


pared  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  no  memory,  wlilch  keepeth  the  bread  ol 

other  sacrifice  is  rendered  except  the  life   continually  ?     Yea,    if  we   shall 

incense  of  prayer,  of  praise,  and  wor-  presume  so  far  as  to  enter    into  the 

ship   of  God  (Ps.    xvi.  11;  Eev.   v.  very    closest   of    God's   oracle,    even 

S'U).—Za7if/e.  there,    0   God  !  do   we  find  our  un- 

—  If,  from  the  walls,  we  look  into  worthy  hearts  so  honoured  by  thee, 

the   furniture:    what    is    the    altar,  that   they   are   made   thy   very   ark, 

whereon  our  sacrifices  of  prayer  and  wherein  thy  royal  law  and  thy  pot  of 

praises  are   offered  to   the  Almighty,  thy  heavenly  manna  are  kept  for  ever; 

but  a  contrite  heart?     AVhat   is   the  and  from  whose  propitiatory,  slmded 

golden  candlestick,  but  the  illumined  with  the  wings  of  thy  glorious  angels, 

understanding,  wherein   the   light   of  thou  givest  the  gracious  testimonials 

the  knowledge  of  God  and  His  divine  of  thy   good  Spirit,  witnessing   with 

will   shineth   for   ever  ?      What   the  ours  that  we  are  the  children  of  the 

tables  of  ehew-bread,  but  the  sanctified  living  God.-— ^^.  Hall. 


CHAPTER  VIIL 
THE  DEDICATION  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.— In  the  Vatican  Sept.  this  chapter  commences :  And 
it  came  to  pass  when  Solomon  had  made  an  end  of  building  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  his 
own  house,  after  twenty  years,  then  Solomon,  &c. ;  but  no  other  authority  sustains  the 
addition.  Eleven  months  elapsed  between  the  completion  of  the  Temple  and  its  dedication  • 
It  being  finished  in  the  eighth  month  (chap.  vi.  38),  and  opened  in  the  seventh  month  of  the 
followmg  year  (viii.  2).  This  delay  was  solely  for  the  arrival  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  in 
the  Jubilee  Year,  which  happened  the  year  ensuing.  The  commemoration  of  the  nation 
having  dwelt  in  booths  in  the  wilderness  (Feast  of  'i'abernacles)  was  a  fitting  occasion  for 
the  consecration  of  the  first  permanent  House  of  Jehovah ;  and  their  being  assembled  in  large 
numbers  gave  a  public  dignity  to  the  august  event.  Verse  1.  Then  Solomon  assembled-- 
The  representatives  of  the  nation  were,  by  royal  edict,  summoned  to  their  place  in  the  pro- 
cession  which  should  attend  the  removal  of  the  Ark  into  the  Temple.  The  order  would  be  -the 
king,  elders  of  the  people,  priests  bearing  the  Ark,  Levites  carrying  the  vessels.  Progress  must 
have  been  very  deliberate,  for  along  the  line  priests  were  stationed  with  sacrifices,  and  the  pro 
cession  paused  while  they  were  at  intervals  offered.  Verse  4.  The  Tabernacle  of  the  congre- 
gation —  This    l^iD  ^riii  was  the  tent  in  which  the  Ark  rested  at  Gibeon  {cf.  1  Chron" 

xvi.  8,  9  ;  xxi.  29  ;  2  Chron.  i.  3),  the  original  Mosaic  tabernacle,  in  distinction  from  David's 
tabernacle  for  the  Ark  {cf.  2  Sam.  vi.  17;  1  Chron.  xv.  1).  Verse  6.  Before  the  Ark 
sacrificing— The  procesbion  having  reached  the  temple,  tlie  ark  was  laid  down  in  the  outer 
court,  and  a  great  sacrilice  offered  ;  then  it  was  borne  by  the  priests  into  the  Oracle,  and  placed 
nder  the  wings  of  the  cherubim.  Note :  There  were  cherubim  fixed  upon  the  ark  originally 
(Exod.   xxxvii.  7-9) ;   these,  therefore,   remained,   and   the    colossal  D^HHD   of    Solomon 

extended  their  wings  over  all.  Verse  9.  Nothing  in  the  ark,  etc.— In  Heb  ix  4  "  the 
golden  pot  with  manna  and  Aaron's  rod  "  are  mentioned  in  addition  ;  but  these  were  never  in 
the  ark,  only  "laid  before  the  Lord "  (Exod.  xvi.  33;  Numb  xvii.  10)  Verse  10  11 
Cloud  filled  the  house,  .  .  .  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house  -This  "  cloud  "  was  not 
wholly  dense  darkness  (as  some  suggest),  but  possibly  dark  clouds  surrounding  a  resplendent 
glory  ;  for  when  Aaron  entered  the  holiest  of  the  tabernacle  the  smoke  of  incense  rolled  itself 
around  him,  enveloping  him  as  in  a  cloud,  thus  softening  the  overmastering  splendour  of  the 
B'pl  n:i3  (Lev.  xvi.  13).  The  nU3  of  the  O.T.  answers  to  the  SS^a  of  the  N.  T. 
Verse  12.  Dwell  in  the  thick  darkness-A  deeply  solemn  gloom  which  impressed  beholders 
with  a  mysterious  awe.     As  on  Sinai  (Exod.  xx.  21  bS^V^)   so  here  '?3-1:L?H  correspond- 

lf£Vo*\®  ^T.^^^rt.  ^^''^  ^^-  ^'^^  turned  his  *face\bout-wilhhiJ'back  upon  the 
people;  he  and  they  had  been  watchinsr  the  movements  of  the  ulory  cloud  ;   now  he  faced  the 

?n"^^lvTfh«T      ^'T^  \t^'  '°5'^'?  ^^^°"^°°'^  '^^'-'''  '^  t^«  P-Pl«'  -ho  listen  standing! 
in  ^^hlch  the  king  gratefully  records  that  he  undertook  and  completed  the  temple  in  obedience 

aldr^'anlVZ       ^T'  ^^'^^  I^'^'P^  ^'^^''  of  Dedication- ^^  Solomon  stoo^nefore  the 
altar    on  a  brazen  platform  erected  for  the  occasion  (2  Chron.  vi.  13)  in  front  of  the  altar  of 

103 


CHAP.  vm.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


burnt 
sublime 


offering ;  there,  too,  be  knelt  (verse  64),  and  with  uplifted  hands  (verse  22)  presented  this 
le  prayer  before  Jehovah.     Verse  28.    Prayer,    supplication,    and    cry  -  n?3p, 

n3nD»  n31   are  respectively  prayer  in  general    (whether  praise,   petition,    or    thanks), 

entreaty  or  supplication  (petition  for  grace  and  help),  and  prahe  (prayer  as  the  joyful  expression 
of  praise  and  thanks).— Jf^i/.  Verse  31.  If  any  man  trespass-  Sol.  men  here  passes  from 
general  prayer,  and  begins  to  specify  distinct  cases.  Seven  particular  cases  are  given  in  which 
God's  merciful  interposition  would  be  needed  :  concerning  the  observation  of  the  oath  (31.  82), 
captives  (83,  34).  drought  (35,  36),  land  plagues  (37-40),  strangers  (41-43),  Israelites  when 
absent  from  Ziou  (44,  45),  captives  (46-50).  Verses  51-53.  A  concluding  argument  by  which 
Solomon  urges  his  prayer.  Verses  54-61.  Solomon  counsels  and  blesses  the  congregation— 
Ee  arose  from  the  altar,  .  .  ■  and  he  stood  and  blessed,  S;c.  Verse  H 1 .  Let  your  heart  be  perfect 
with  the  LOED,     TV\TV    W    D*?^  ?     uprightly     with     Jehovah     (Luther)  ;    submissive 

T     :  •  ••  T 

(Dr.  Wette) ;  in  friendship  ivith  God  (Gesenius);  undividedhj given  to  the  Lord  (KeW  and  Lange). 
Verses  62-64.  The  sacrificial  act  of  consecration— These  were  the  first  offerings  laid  upon  the 
sacred  altar.  The  priests'  court  was  not  sufficiently  extensive  for  such  numerous  sacrifices ; 
therefore  the  king  did  "  hallow  the  middle  of  the  court "  temporarily  for  sacrificial  purposes.  The 
immense  number  of  sacrifices  offered  supplied  for  the  prolonged  '*  feast "  which  succeeded,lasting 
fourteen  days,  and  to  which  assembled  great  multitudes,  from  the  entering  in  of  Ramath  unto 
the  river  of  JEgypt.  Verse  65.  Hamath  is  the  Grecian  Epiphaneia,  the  principal  city  of  Upper 
Syria,  on  the  Orontes,  the  Northern  frontier  of  Palestine  (Numb.  xiii.  21  ;  xxxiv.  8).  The 
river  of  Egypt  is  here,  not  the  Nile,  but  the  el  Arish — the  Southern  boundary  of  the  land  of 
Israel  (Numb,  xxxiv.  6 ;  Josh.  xv.  4,  47).— W.  H.  J. 


I 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-9. 
The  Chxtkch  the  Saceed  Depositoet  op  the  Ditine  "Wobd. 

As  the  Tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  was  solemnly  consecrated  to  the  worship 
of  Jehovah  (Ex.  xl. ;  Num.  viii.),  so  now  must  the  grander  house  which  is  to 
supersede  and  supplant  the  tattered  relics  of  the  old  system  be  dedicated  with 
becoming  solemnities  to  the  same  lofty  purpose.  And  as  Moses,  the  inspired 
servant  of  Jehovah,  faithful  in  all  his  house  (Num.  xii.  7),  was  the  chosen  one 
to  consecrate  the  tabernacle,  so  Solomon,  the  Divinely  chosen  King  in  Zion 
(1  Chron.  xxviii.  6),  in  whose  person  the  Hebrew  monarchy  at  this  time  reached 
the  highest  summit  of  its  glory,  was  the  only  proper  person  to  consecrate  the 
Temple.  No  priest  could  perform  this  holy  service  as  properly  as  he.  No 
other  person  in  the  realm  had  concentrated  in  himself  at  that  time  such  sanctity, 
exaltation,  and  power.  He  was  the  type  of  that  greater  Solomon  who  is  now 
silently  building  His  spiritual  Temple,  and  will  Himself  presently,  at  the  time 
appointed,  fill  and  hallow  it  with  a  cloud  of  glory  that  shall  never  pass  away. 
The  first  step  in  the  august  ceremony  was  the  removal  of  the  ark  from  the 
tabernacle  of  Da\id  on  Mount  Zion  to  the  Most  Holy  Place  in  the  new  Temple 
on  Mount  Moriah.  And  here  the  thought  is  suggested — that  as  the  ark  con- 
tained the  tables  of  the  Law,  so  the  church  is  the  sacred  depository  of  the 
Divine  "Word. 

I.  The  Divine  Word  is  the  irresistible  rallying  cry  of  a  whole  nation 
(verses  1,  2).  Ihe  fiery  cross  of  the  Scottish  Highlanders,  or  the  gory  morsels 
of  the  slaughtered  oxen  distributed  throughout  the  coasts  of  Israel  by  the  warlike 
Saul,  were  not  more  potent  in  mustering  the  militant  hosts  of  the  nation,  than 
was  the  mention  of  the  ark  of  God  in  gathering  the  Hebrew  people  to  one  common 
centre.  The  leading  men  of  the  nation  at  once  obeyed  the  summons  (verse  1). 
The  elders  included,  more  particulaily,  the  chosen  representatives  of  the  nation ; 
the  heads  of  the  tribes  were  the  leading  and  most  influential  individuals ;  and  the 
chiefs,  or  princes,  of  the  fathers,  were  the  most  distinguished  and  saintly  old  men 
104 


HOMILSTIO  COMMENTABT     EIN08.  ohaf.  rm. 


of  the  nation,  whose  presence  and  approbation  were  indispensable  at  so  important 
an  event  as  the  dedication  of  the  Temple.  '*  Nothing  can  be  nobler  than  to  see 
a  whole  nation,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  gathered  in  unity  round  its 
holiest  possession.'*  It  is  the  Word  of  God  that  makes  the  most  profound 
impression  on  the  national  heart,  and  that  shapes  and  determines  the  national 
destiny. 

II.  The  Divine  Word  is  the  infallible  directory  in  all  true  worship. 
1.  It  recognises  the  office  of  sacred  persons  (verses  3,  4).     The  priests  and  the 
Levites  are  mentioned  indiscriminately.     The  parallel  passage  in  the  Chronicles 
says  that  "the  Levites  took  up  the  ark ;"  but  there  is  no  contradiction  in  this, 
for  all  priests  were  Levites,  though  all  Levites  were  not  priests.     Priests  bore 
the  ark  across  the  Jordan  and  around  Jericho  (Joshua  iii.  6 ;  vi.  6).     These 
persons  were  specially  set  apart  to  this  sacred  work,  according  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  law  (Num.  iv,  15  ;  Deut.  xxxi.  9).     Inattention  to  the  divinely- 
prescribed   order   was   followed   by   fatal  results   (compare  2  Sam.    vi.  1-7; 
I  Chron.  xv.  12,  13).     To  be  bearers  of  the  Word  of  God,  to  set  up  the  mercy 
seat  in  the  sanctuary,  and  to  point  perishing  sinners  to  the  sprinkled  blood,  is 
the  office  and  the  glory  of  God's  ministers.     Office  has  nothing  sacred  in  itself, 
apart  from  the  iaithful  performance  of  the  duties  it  involves,  and  the  irreproach- 
able moral  character  of  the  person  appointed  to  it.     Priestly  assumption  is  the 
most  unwarrantable,  and,  in  the  sight  of  God,  the  most  abhorrent.     2.  It  limits 
the  significance  of  sacred  things  (verse  4).     It  would  appear  that  on  this  great 
inauguration  day  two  imposing  processions  were  formed  :  the  one  coming  from 
the  height  of  Gibeon,  bearing  aloft  the  sacred  tent  and  the  holy  vessels  of  the 
old  pastoral  worship,  now  to  be  disused  for  ever— the  ancient  brazen  altar,  the 
candlestick,  the  table  of  shew-bread,  and  also  the  brazen  serpent.     This  proces- 
sion was  joined  on  Mount  Zion  by  a  still  more  imposing  and  stately  one,  bearing 
the  ark  of  acacia-wood,   covered  with  its  two  small  winged  figures; — the  one 
relic  that  was  to  unite  the  old  and  new  together.     Much  has  been  made  of 
these^  sacred  vessels,  until  they  have  been   raised   into   objects  of  idolatry. 
Starting  with  a  certain  modicum  of  truth,  the  enthusiastic  lover  of  types  and 
figures  has  wandered  into  regions  unheard  of  and  untrod  before,  and  discovered 
hidden  meanings  and  mysterious  premonitions  which  the  obvious  use  and  common- 
sense  teaching  of  the  symbols  utterly  failed  to  convey.     By  a  careful  comparison 
of  the  Word  of  God  we  are  taught  the  true  significance  and  appropriate  use  of 
these  sacred  things,  and  of  all  external  aids  in  the  acceptable  worship  of  God. 
3.  It  authorizes  the  exercise  of  sacred  acts  (verse  5).     The  removal  of  the  ark 
was  celebrated  by  sacrifices  of  ''  sheep  and  oxen  that  could  not  be  numbered  for 
multitude."     The  road,  according  to  Josephus,  was  flooded  with  streams  of 
blood.     The  air  was  darkened  and  scented  with  the  clouds  of  incense ;  the 
songs  and  dances  were  unintermitted.     No  worship  can  be  acceptable  to  God 
apart  from  sacrifice.     The  Divine  Word  is  most  explicit  on  this  point  (compare 
Lev.  i.  2;  iii.  2,   7;  Gen.  viii.  20;    xxii.  7;  Ex.  xviii.   12;  xl.  29;  Num. 
xxviii.  10,  14;    1  Kings  iii.  4  ;  Ps.  li.  16,  19;   Isa.  xl.  16  ;  Heb.  x.  6-8,  &c.). 
The  vilest  sinner  can  now  approach  God  through  the  ever- efficacious  sacrifice  of 
His  Son.     P:very  act  of  genuine  worship  involves  sacrifice.     Our  whole  self, 
and  the  best  of  everything  we  have,  should  be  freely  sacrificed  to  Him  who 
gave  Himself  for  us. 

III.  The  Divine  Word  finds  its  permanent  home  in  the  holiest  place  of  the 
Church.  1.  There  it  is  securely  guarded  (verses  6,  7).  The  ancient  lid  of  the 
ark  formed  by  the  two  small  cherubim  of  beaten  gold  was  removed,  and  a  new 
one,  without  them,  was  substituted  to  fit  its  new  abode.  On  a  rough  unhewn 
projection  of  the  rock  the  ark  was  thrusc  in  and  placed  longtliways,  under  the 
shadow  of  the  outspread  wings  of   the  two  gigantic  cherubim  which  were 

105 


OBAP.  Tin* 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


waiting  like  two  watchful  and  stalwart  guardians,  to  receive  and  evermore 
ZteK  prelus  treasure.     -  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  under  Dmne  protec 
K    the  L  Jels  are  its  guardians  and  watchers  ;  it  can  neither  be  destroyed  by 
hZan  ^owe'r    nor'  s  it  aided  or  protected  by  men  "     The  holiest  church  is 
the  most'^Mthful  custodian  of  the  Word  and  the  holiest  heart  is  its  safest  and 
most  beauteous  shrine.     2.  There  it  is  intended  to  remain  (verse  8).     When  the 
^rk  mo™^^^      the  veil  to  be  seen  no  more,  the  retiring  priests,  as  a  sign 
SatTthad  at  length  reached  ^'  the  place  of  its  rest,"  and  was  not  to  be  earned 
about  any  more,  drew  forth  from  it  the  staves  or  handles  on  which  they  had 
borne  it  to  and  fro;  and,  although  the  staves  th^em selves  remained  within  tne 
veil,  the  ends  could  just  be  seen  protruding  through  the  door,  m  token  that  its  long 
wanderincrs  were  over;  or,  as  Keil  puts  it,  their  ends  could  be  observed  from 
the  sanctuary  by  the  elevations  on  the  vail,  which  might  be  seen  from  the 
sanctuary  itself,  but  not  without.     They  remained  long  afterwards,  even  to  the 
later  days  of  the  monarchy,  and  formed  a  lane  to  guide  the  steps  of  the  Chief 
Priest  as  he  entered  in  the  darkness.     The  Word  of  God  has  found  its  permanent 
home  in  His  church,  and  the  history  of  the  two  are  inseparably  bound  together. 
Kot  long  ago  there  was  discovered  among  the  hardened  lava  of  Pompeii  the  torm 
of  a  human  body,  with  all  the  features  singularly  perfect  and  strikingly  beautiful, 
and  the  expression  as  of  one  who  was  sleeping  a  pleasant  and  placid  sleep 
The  burning  flood,  which  carried  death  in  its  impetuous  flow,  and  the  cold 
entombment  of  eighteen  hundred  years,  had  not  availed  to  destroy  the  imperish- 
able lineaments.     So  the  church  may  be  exposed  to  the  fiery  persecution  ot  her 
cruellest  enemies,  or  buried  under  the  cold  neglect  of  her  professed  friends ;  but 
cast  in  the  mould  of  the  undying  and  unchanging  Word  of  God,  she  retains 
her  indestructible  image,  with  every  line  and  feature  of  perfection  distmctiy 
marked,  and,  when  ages  have  rolled  away,  will  stand  forth  to  an  astonished 
world  in  all  her  peerless  beauty  and  greatness.     3.  There  it  ts  the  most  highly 
prized  treasure.     *'  There  was  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables  of  stone 
(verse  9).     When  the  old  lid  of  the  ark  was  taken  off  before  it  disappeared 
within  the  vail,  and  before  the  new  covering  was  fixed  on,  the  interior  of  the 
ark  was  seen  by  Israelitish  eyes  for  the  first  time  for  more  than  four  centuries, 
perhaps  ior  the  last  time  for  ever.     The  pot  of  manna,  the  rod  of  Aaron,  and 
the  golden  censer,  which  were  said  to  be  laid  up  within  it,  or  beside  it,  were 
gone— lost,  it  may  be,  in  the  Philistine  captivity.     ISTothing  remained  but  the 
two  granite  blocks  from  Mount  Sinai,  graven  with  the  ten  commandments. 
But  these  were  of  unspeakable  value  and  unmistakable  significance.      **  ine 
ark  of  the  covenant  was  the  root  and  kernel  of  the  whole  sanctuary  :  it  con- 
tained  the  moral  law,  at  once  *ie  original  document  and  pledge  of  the  covenant, 
through  which,  and  in  consequence  of  which,  Jehovah  was  to  dwell  m  the 
midst  of  His  people.     We  have,  in  the  New  Covenant,  not  only  the  Law,  but 
the  Gospel,  which  is  everlasting.     Where  His  Word  is,  there  the  Lord  dwelia 
and  is  enthroned ;  it  is  the  soul  of  every  House  of  God,  and,  indeed,  gives  it 
its  consecration." 

Lessons  :— 1 .  The  Word  of  God  should  he  fervently  loved.    2.  Diligently  studied. 
8.  Jealously  guarded.     4.  Faithfully  oheyed. 

QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Yerse  1.  Solomon  decked  and  gar-  Solomon.     And  as  that  woman  who 

nished  his  temple  before  he  prayed  in  sought    her   groat    swept   the   whole 

it;  so,  saith   one,  before  thou  prayest  house,  so  when  thou  seekest  anything 

prepare  thy  heart,  which  is   the  true  of  God,  sweep  the  whole  house  of  thy 

temple  of  Him  who  is  greater  than  heart ;  sweep  it  by  repentance,  wash 
106 


HOMILETIO  OOMMBNTABT:  KINGS.  chap.  Tin. 


the  pavement  of  it  with  tears,  beautify  that  had  dwelt  in  a  tabernacle  and 
it  with  holiness,  perfume  it  with  been  carried  to  and  fro  for  five  hun- 
prayers,  deck  it  with  humility,  hang  died  years  was  now  to  enter  into  its 
it  with  sincerity.— Trajo/?.  place  of  rest  (compare  1  Chron.  xxviii. 

—  There  seems  to  be  a  contrast  here  2  ;  2  Chron.  vi.  41).  And  so  the  holy 
between  the  more  popular  proceedings  house,  begun  in  the  month  of  flowers 
of  David,  who,  when  he  brought  up  and  finished  in  the  month  of  garnered 
the  ark  to  Mount  Zion,  **  gathered  to-  fruits,  was  appropriately  consecrated 
gether  all  the  chosen  men  of  Israel,  in  the  month  of  thanksgiving.  4.  It 
thirty  thousand,"  and  the  statelier,  venerates  the  most  sacred  ohjeets(YeTse  4), 
more  aristocratic  system  of  his  son,  The  ark,  the  tabernacle,  and  the  holy 
who,  born  in  the  purple,  conducts  him-  vessels  had  been  associated  with  the 
self  in  a  loftier  way,  merely  summon-  most  eventful  eras  in  the  history  of 
ing  the  chief  men  as  representatives  of  the  Israelites,  in  defeat  and  victory,  in 
the  nation.  The  rest  of  the  people  distress  and  joy.  Sacred  relics,  while 
"  assembled  themselves "  (verse  2),  unworthy  of  idolatry  in  themselves, 
and  were  mere  spectators  of  the  are  often  reminders  of  privileges  and 
ceremony.  blessing  in  the  past  which  the  grateful 

soul  would  not  willingly  forget. 
Verse  1-4.  Religion  the  mightiest 
force  in  the  nation.      1.  It  is  the         Verse  4.  The  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
source  and  safeguard  of  regal  authority,     gregation,  made   by   Moses,    hitherto 
The   ruler  who  ignores  the  religious     transportative   and    for    many    years 
principle  has  no  guarantee  for  a  sound     severed  from  the  ark,  was  now  to  be 
and  permanent  government.     Stronger     re-united  and  settled  in  the  temple ; 
than  the  sword,  or  the  schemes  of     as  the  saints,  here  tossed  up  and  down, 
statecraft,  or  the  popular  cry  of   the     shall  one  day  be  in  heaven,  that  habi- 
hour,  is  the  deep-rooted  religious  life     tation   of    God's    holiness.      Though 
of  the  people.    ^1.  It   commands   the     neither  the  tabernacle,  nor  its   holy 
homage  and  allegiance  of  all  ranks  and     vessels,  were  applied  to  any  use  in  the 
conditions.     All  that  is  venerable  in      temple,  their  sacred  character  made  it 
age,  ripe  in  wisdom  and  counsel,  bril-     fitting  that  they  should  be  deposited 
liant  in  genius,  vigorous  and  daring  in     within  its   precincts.     Most  probably 
manhood,  or  blooming  and  hopeful  in     they  were  placed  in  the  treasury, 
youth,  respond  at  once  to  its  irresistible 

call  (verse  1,  2).  3.  It  commemorates  Verse  5.  Sacrifice  the  essence  of 
and  consecrates  great  national  llessings  acceptable  worship.  1 ,  Was  insti- 
(verse2).  ''The  feast  in  the  month  tuted  in  the  earliest  times.  2.  Has 
Ethanim'^^  was  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  been  practised  in  some  form  by  all  na- 
Ethanim  is  defined  as  **the  month  of  tions  in  all  ages.  3.  Was  most  per- 
flowing  streams,"  and  corresponded  fectly  exemplified  in  the  sufferings 
with  our  October;  it  also  signifies  and  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  4.  Is 
ripeness  or  strength.  Solomon  finished  illustrated  in  generous  gifts  for  reli- 
the  Temple  in  the  eighth  month,  but  gious  purposes.  5.  Demands  the  whole 
waited  till  the  seventh  month  of  the  life  and  service  of  the  individual 
next  year  for  the  dedication,  that  it  believer, 
might  be  coincident  with  the  Feast  of 

Tabernacles.  This  feast  was  designed  Verses  6-8.  The  ark  an  emblem  of 
for  a  thanksgiving  and  rejoicing  over  the  human  heart.  1.  As  vivifying 
the  fruits  of  the  harvest  (Ex.  xxiii.  16  ;  and  adorning  the  most  splendid  crea- 
Deut.  xyi.  13);  and  also  for  a  com-  tion  of  human  genius.  2.  As  the 
memoration  of  the  time  when  Israel  hiding  place  for  the  Divine  Word 
dwelt  in  booths  in  the  desert  (Lev.  (Psa.  cxix.  11).  3.  As  having  affinity 
xxiii.  43).  It  was  therefore  fitting  to  with  angelical  life.  4.  As  it  exercises 
associate  the  dedication  of  the  temple  itself  in  showing  mercy.  5.  As  it  ia 
with  this  important  feast,  for  the  ark     the  shrine  of  Divinest  manifestations, 

107 


CHAP.  vin.  EOMILBTIO  COMMENTAItT:  KIN08. 


Yerse  9.  "There  was  nothing  in  are  lost.      3.  It  survives  the  wreck 

the  ark  save  the  two  tahles  of  stone."  and  ruin   of  the   mightiest  empires. 

The^  imperishable     nature    of   the  4.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  men  or 

Divine  Word.     1.  It  is  superior  to  its  devils  to  destroy  it.     5.  It  will  endure 

most  magnificent  surroundings.     2.  It  when  earth   and  sea   and  stars  have 

remains  when  other  precious  things  vanished. 

H0MILETIG8  OF  VERSES  10-lS. 
The  Cloud  of  the  Loed. 

I.  Was  the  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  Presence  in  the  midst  of  His 
people.  The  word  shechinahy  though  not  used  in  the  Bible,  is  frequently- 
employed  by  writers  on  sacred  subjects  to  designate  this  remarkable  appearance, 
the  creation  of  His  power  **  whose  strength  is  in  the  clouds,"  and  of  whom  it 
is  said  that  "  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him,  while  righteousness 
and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne."  Erom  various  references  to 
it  in  the  Scriptures  we  gather  that  the  Shechinah  was  an  iDtensely  brilliant 
light,  enclosed  in  a  pillar-shaped  cloud ;  that,  during  the  day,  this  cloud  would 
be  so  dense  as  almost  entirely  to  conceal  the  light,  but  that  at  night  it  would 
become  so  attenuated  and  transparent  as  to  leave  the  light  alone  visible.  It 
might  be,  also,  that  the  approbation  or  anger  of  Jehovah  would  be  indicated  at 
certain  times  by  the  changing  aspects  of  unusual  brightness  or  darkness.  The 
recorded  appearances  of  the  God  of  Israel  in  the  form  of  a  cloud  may  have 
suggested  to  many  heathen  writers  the  manifestations  of  their  own  deities  in  a 
similar  form.  Thus,  we  read  of  Jupiter  enthroned  on  Mount  Gargaius  "  veiled 
in  a  fragrant  cloud  "  :  of  Minerva  entering  the  Grecian  army  "  clad  in  a  purple 
cloud "  ;  and  that,  when  Apollo  attended  a  celebrated  warrior,  **  a  veil  of 
clouds  involved  his  radiant  head."  The  first  mention  made  of  this  remarkable 
spectacle — as  if  thrust  out  of  space  by  some  unseen  hand — was  on  the  memorable 
night  of  the  exodus  of  the  Israelites  from  their  long  vexatious  bondage  in 
Ejivpt.  And  it  must  surely  have  created  a  profound  feeling  of  wonder  and  awe 
amonp*  that  vast  host  of  two  millions  and  a  half,  as  the  mysterious  glory-cloud 
floated  down  into  their  midst,  and,  proceeding  to  the  front,  majestically  and 
silently  assumed  the  leadership  in  their  perilous  journey.  When  the  Tabernacle 
was  reared  and  furnished  to  foster  the  spirit  of  worship,  and  to  assist  the  growth 
and  enlargement  of  the  religious  life,  tlie  cloud  of  the  Lord  covered  and  filled 
it  with  inexpressible  glory.  As  Jehovah,  in  the  old  covenant,  chose  a  visible 
dwelling  among  His  people  in  token  of  their  election,  so  also  He  verified  His 
presence  in  this  Temple  of  Solomon  in  a  way  cognizant  to  the  senses — that  is, 
through  the  cloud,  which  is  the  medium  and  sign  of  His  manifestation,  not 
only  here,  but  all  through  the  Old  Testament.  (Compare  Ex.  xvi.  10;  xx.  21  ; 
xxiv.  15,  16  ;  xxxiv.  5 ;  xl.  34  ;  Lev.  xvi.  2 ;  Num.  xi.  25  ;  xii.  5 ;  Isa.  vi. 
3,  4;  Ezek.  i.  4,  28;  x.  3,  4 ;  Ps.  xviii.  10-12.) 

II.  Indicated  that  the  glory  of  the  Divine  character  is  beyond  the 
comprehension  of  the  human  mind.  The  cloud  concealed  and  veiled  the 
majesty  of  Jehovah  as  well  as  revealed  it.  *'  The  Lord  said  that  He  would 
dwell  in  the  thick  darkness"  (verse  12).  Cloud  and  darkness  are  synonymous 
words.  The  throne  within  the  Temple,  on  which  the  Divine  presence  was 
concentrated,  stood  in  the  back  part  of  the  most  Holy  Place,  which  was  perfectly 
dark.  *'  The  cloud  is,  then,  on  the  one  hand,  the  heaven-descended  sign  of  the 
presence  of  the  self-manifesting  God;  on  the  other  hand,  it  declares  that  God, 
in  His  being,  spiritually  and  ethically,  is  so  far  above  and  different  from  all 
other  beings,  that  man,  in  his  sinful  and  mortal  nature,  cannot  comprehend  nor 
endure  the  sight  of  Him."  The  glory  of  Jehovah  that  is  unseen  infinitely 
surpasses  that  which  is  visible  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12  ;  Job.  xxxviii.  ;  Ex.  ii.  20,  32), 

108 


EOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chip.  vm. 


III.  Is  the  true  consecration  of  every  Christian  sanctuary.  Every  Chris- 
tian sanctuary  is  erected  in  the  name  and  for  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  and  is 
intended  for  His  dwelling  place,  His  permanent  home  (verse  13).  But  the  true 
consecration  of  the  building  is  the  manifested  presence  of  God  to  the  hearts  of 
the  worshippers.  The  Shechinah  of  the  old  dispensation  was  ever  closely 
associated  with  the  Tabernacle.  It  was  not  a  spectacle  simply  to  excite  and 
gratify  the  amazement  of  the  people,  but  was  intended  to  assist  them  in  the 
worship  of  the  one  living  and  true  God  (Ex.  xl.  ^38).  A  sanctuary  is  to  be 
consecrated,  not  with  holy  water  and  the  mummery  of  Pagan  rites  and  cere- 
monies, but  with  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  with  the  Word  and  blessing  of  God. 
\V  herever  Jehovah  manifests  His  glory,  there  is  the  consecrated  Temple  for  His 
worship. 

IV.  Is  sometimes  manifested  in  overwhelming^  majesty  and  glory  (verses 
10,  11,  compared  with  2  Chron.  v.  13,  14).  The  darkness  was  so  insup- 
portable, and  the  heavenly  glory  so  overpowering,  that  the  priests  staggered 
under  the  awful  manifestation,  and  were  not  able  to  minister.  It  is  worthy  of 
note,  too,  that  the  power  of  God  came  down  while  the  worshippers  were  in  the 
act  of  praising  (ib.  verse  13).  When  we  rise  to  the  highest  pitch  of  sincerity 
and  fervour  in  the  worship  of  the  Most  High,  it  is  then  we  receive  the  most 
memorable  benedictions.  The  existence  of  the  church  to-day  is  a  triumphant 
evidence  of  the  continuance  of  the  Divine  presence  and  the  special  manifestations 
of  the  Divine  glory.  And,  though  we  have  not  the  pillar  of  fire  glittering  over 
the  church  as  in  days  of  yore,  the  power  of  God  is  realized  in  the  person  and 
government  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  glory  has  been  displayed  in  diifereut 
periods  of  the  church's  history  in  a  way  every  whit  as  wonderful  and  imposing, 
and  with  more  extensive  results  than  in  the  days  when  the  mysterious  outward 
sign  attended  the  Israelites  *'  throughout  all  their  journeys."  The  miraculous 
effusion  of  the  Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  and  the  remarkable  revivals 
which  have  occurred  since  that  day,  are  signal  examples  and  distinctive  pledgi'P 
of  the  plenitude  and  omnipotency  of  spiritual  grace  with  which  the  church  may 
expect  to  be  visited  in  the  present  day.  God  is  still  in  the  midst  of  His  people. 
"When  the  world  is  convinced  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment ;  when 
believers  are  earnest  in  prayer  and  diligent  in  seeking  the  salvation  of  souls ; 
when  the  careless  and  giddy  are  arrested  in  their  whirl  of  gaiety,  and  become 
serious  with  thoughts  of  eternity ;  when  the  callous  are  melted,  the  obstinate 
persuaded,  the  doubting  re-assured,  and  the  despairing  cheered ;  when  the  soul 
is  humbled  under  a  sense  of  personal  un worthiness,  and  overwhelmed  with  views 
of  the  glory,  the  condescension,  and  the  love  of  God  ;  when  the  false  confidences 
of  the  heart  are  shivered,  and  we  are  enabled  to  rely  only  on  Jesus  ;  when  love 
glows  with  intense  heat,  and,  under  its  fervid,  constraining  influence,  we  aro 
led  to  consecrate  ourselves  afresh  to  God  and  to  His  great  service — then  have 
we  unmistakable  evidences  of  the  presence  and  mighty  operations  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  that  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  is  filling  His  Temple  and  descending  iato  the 
midst  of  His  worshipping  people,  in  all  the  glory  of  His  transcendent  charms, 
in  all  the  generous  encompassing  fulness  of  His  outpoured  blessing.  Nothing 
short  of  the*  felt,  spiritual  presence  of  God — God  realized  in  the  heart  by  the 
energy  of  the  Spirit — can  be  an  effectual  safe-guard  against  sin.  The  Jews  saw 
the  glory-cloud,  the  symbol  of  God's  presence  and  guidance  and  power ;  it  was 
"in  sight  of  all  the  House  of  Israel  throughout  all  their  journeys;  "  it  filled  the 
Temple  specially  and  solemnly  dedicated  to  His  worship ;  ^et  they  sinned — sinned 
grievously  and  repeatedly.  An  awful  commentary  on  the  insufficiency  of  the 
most  imposing  outward  symbolism  to  regenerate  and  sanctify  corrupted  human 
nature  1  It  is  the  revelation  of  Christ  to  the  heart  by  the  Spirit  that  can  alone 
accomplish  the  sin-destioying  work. 

Lkssons: — 1.  The  Temple  is  the  place  of  glorious  revelations.  2.  Tt  is  in  the 
highest  moods  of  worship  that  the  greatest  blessings  are  road 

109 


OHAP.  mx. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Verse  10.  By  a  cloud  did  God  often 
both  represent  His  glory,  and  cover  it : 
signifying  thereby  that  it  was  both 
invisible  and  unapproachable. 

—  The  cloud — the  visible  symbol 
of  the  Divine  presence,  the  Shechinah 
of  the  Targums — which  had  been  pro- 
mised before  the  ark  was  begun  (Ex. 
xxix.  42),  and  had  filled  the  Taber- 
nacle as  soon  as  it  was  completed  (Ex. 
xl.  34),  and  which  had  probably  been 
seen  from  time  to  time  during  the 
long  interval  when  we  have  no  ex- 
press mention  of  it  from  a  little  before 
the  death  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxxi.  15), 
to  the  present  occasion,  now  once  more 
appeared  in  full  magnificence,  and 
took,  as  it  were,  possession  of  the 
building  which  Solomon  was  dedica- 
ting. The  presence  of  God  in  the 
Temple  henceforth  was  thus  assured 
to  the  Jews,  and  His  approval  of  all 
Solomon  had  done  was  signified. — 
Speaher*8  Comm, 

Yerses  10-13.  It  is  impossible  that 
mortal,  sinful  man  should  see  or  com- 
prehend the  Holy  and  Infinite  One. 
I  can  experience  His  merciful  pre- 
sence ;  but  presumption  and  folly  it  is 
to  wish  to  sound  the  depths  of  His 
Being.  The  eye  of  faith  beholds  in 
darkness  the  glory  of  the  Lord;  in 
the  night  of  the  cross,  the  light  of  the 
world;  through  the  dim  veil  of  the 
flesh,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God, 
full  of  mercy  and  grace. — Lange, 

— '  The  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared 
in  a  cloud,  a  dark  cloud,  to  signify — 
1.  The  darkness  of  that  dispensation 
in  comparison  with  the  light  of  the 
Gospel,  by  which,  with  open  face,  we 
behold,  as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of  the 
Lord.  2.  The  darkness  of  our  present 
state  in  comparison  with  the  vision 


of  God  which  will  be  the  happiness 
of  heaven,  where  the  divine  glory  is 
unveiled.  Now  we  can  only  say  what 
He  is  not,  but  then  we  shall  see  Him 
as  He  is. 

Verse  11.  The  holy  angels  clap 
their  wings  upon  their  faces,  as  it 
were  a  double  scarf — or  as  a  man  doth 
his  hands  before  his  eyes,  when  he 
beholdeth  an  exceeding  great  light — 
before  the  brightness  of  God's  pre- 
sence, that  would  else  put  out  their 
eyes.  Pellican  saith,  by  the  priests 
being  driven  out  by  this  cloud  appear- 
ing was  showed  that  the  time  should 
come  when  this  priesthood  should 
minister  no  more  by  carnal  rites  in  this 
place. — Tra^p. 

—  Not  veneration  for  the  Divine 
majesty  alone  forbids  delay  in  the 
presence  of  the  Divine  glory ;  not 
merely  a  holy  dread  thrills  through 
the  priests,  so  that  they  draw  back ; 
but  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  like  a  con- 
suming fire,  is  that  before  which  un- 
holy man  cannot  exist,  to  which  he 
cannot  approach  without  being  des- 
troyed. Hence  the  High  Priest  was 
obliged  to  prepare  his  entrance  into 
the  holiest  by  first  enveloping  with 
the  smoke  of  burning  incense  the  sym- 
bol of  the  sin-covering  power  of  prayer 
— the  cloud  which  embodied  the  glory 
of  the  Lord. — Keil, 

Verse  12.  Perceiving  both  priests 
and  people  struck  with  horror  and 
wonder  at  this  darkness,  Solomon 
reminds  them  that  this  was  no  sign  of 
God's  dislike  or  disfavour,  as  some  of 
them  might  possibly  imagine ;  but  a 
token  of  His  approbation  and  grace 
and  special  presence  among  tL^m. — 
Pool. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  14—21. 

The  Joy  op  an  Accomplished  Pxtrposb. 

The  human  mind  abhors  incompleteness.     "When  Charles  Leslie  died,  he  left 
upon  his  easel  an  unfinished  painting  of  Titania,  from  the  Midsummer  NigMt 
110 


EOMILETIG  OOMMENTART:  KINGS,  chap.  vin. 


Dream,  that  was  to  be  another  pictorial  realization  of  Shakespearian  creations 
with  which  the  fame  of  Leslie  is  inseparably  connected.  But  the  busy  brain 
ceased  to  work,  the  pencil  dropped  from  the  facile  fingers,  and  the  deserted 
fragment  retains  but  a  dim  promise  of  the  artistic  genius  which  the  completed 
picture  would  have  revealed.  It  is  impossible  to  gaze  upon  an  incomplete 
work  like  thafc  without  feeling  disappointment  and  regret.  The  crumbling 
ruins  of  a  structure  that  was  once  complete  is  more  satisfying  to  the  mind  than 
an  unfinished  building  abandoned  to  decay  without  having  served  any  useful 
purpose.  How  great,  then,  is  the  joy  of  seeing  accomplished  a  purpose  which 
has  cost  80  much  anxiety  and  thought,  and  which  has  been  in  progress  for 
years !  Such  a  joy  was  realized  by  Solomon  at  this  time,  when  he  witnessed 
the  greatest  work  of  his  life  completed,  and  that  it  was  accepted  of  God. 
Observe — 

I.  The  joy  of  an  accomplished  purpose  is  expressed  in  devout  thanks- 
giving (verses  14,  15).  The  heart  of  the  king  was  full  of  joyous  gratitude,  and 
under  its  influence  he  blessed  the  people,  and  blessed  the  Lord  Grod  of  Israel. 
Sharing  in  the  gladness  and  solemnity  of  the  occasion,  the  whole  congregation 
stood  up,  as  if  eager  to  receive  the  benediction.  The  first  moments  of  a 
realized  good,  long  hoped  and  worked  for,  are  full  of  unutterable  emotion. 
The  ecstacy  is  sometimes  fraught  with  peril.  In  his  last  days  the  Venerable 
Bede  was  engaged  in  a  translation  of  the  l^ew  Testament  on  which  he  had  set 
his  heart.  He  dictated  to  one  of  his  disciples  the  last  verse  in  the  Gospel  of 
John.  "  It  is  finished,  master,**  said  the  scribe.  **  It  is  finished,"  replied  the 
dying  saint.  "  Lift  up  my  head,  let  me  sit  in  my  cell,  in  the  place  where  I 
have  so  often  prayed.  And  now,  glory  be  to  the  Father,  to  the  Son,  and  to  the 
Holy  Ghost."  And,  with  these  words,  as  if  the  rapture  of  having  accomplished 
a  patiently  prosecuted  purpose  was  too  much  for  him,  his  spirit  fled.  It 
is  said,  on  one  occasion  when  Sir  Isaac  Newton  was  engaged  in  some  calcula- 
tions to  prove  the  extent  of  his  elaborated  theory  of  terrestrial  gravitation,  that, 
as  he  drew  to  the  close  and  foresaw  the  absolute  certainty  of  the  theory  they 
would  inevitably  prove,  he  became  so  agitated  that  he  was  obliged  to  desire  a 
friend  to  finish  them.     A  genuine  joy  overflows  in  thanksgiving. 

II.  The  joy  of  an  accomplished  purpose  is  intensified  by  a  review  of  the 
varied  steps  by  which  it  is  consummated  (verses  15-21).  These  verses  contain 
an  appropriate  narration  of  the  most  interesting  facts  connected  with  the 
planning  and  building  of  the  temple,  and  without  such  narration  the  services  of 
the  dedication  would  have  been  incomplete.  1.  This  purpose  was  divinely 
suggested.  *'  The  Lord  God  of  Israel  spake  with  His  mouth  unto  David  my 
father  "  (verse  15).  Our  best  thoughts  and  holiest  inspirations  come  from  God  : 
and  the  most  successful  work  in  connection  with  His  Church  is  that  which  is 
done  on  the  lines  projected  by  His  Word.  Moses  was  directed  to  build 
the  Tabernacle  according  to  the  pattern  showed  him  in  the  Mount  (Heb.  viii.  5). 
2.  Its  accomplishment  was  greatly  needed.  For  years  the  ark  was  migratory,  and 
Jehovah  had  no  settled  place  for  His  worship.  Under  a  theocratic  government 
it  was  important  there  should  be  some  spot  specially  set  apart  in  which  the 
Lord  could  record  His  name.  Jehovah  first  chose  the  person  who  should  rule 
His  people,  and  then  put  it  into  his  heart  to  build  a  house  for  His  worship 
(verse  17).  If  any  other  city  than  Jerusalem  had  been  divinely  chosen  for 
the  Temple,  then  this  would  be  regarded  as  a  usurpation.  But  it  is  expressly 
stated  that  God  "chose  no  city  to  build  an  house**  (verse  16);  ther.  fore,  there 
was  the  more  urgent  need  for  the  building  of  this.  3.  It  was  cherished  hy  one 
who  was  not  permitted  to  carry  it  out  (verses  17-19).  It  was  the  life-purpose 
of  David  to  build  a  temple  for  Jehovah,  and  he  made  extensive  preparations 
accordingly.     It  would  have  been  an  unspeakable  joy  to  him  had  he  been 

ill 


CHIP.  ▼UL  EOMILBTIO  OOMMENTART :  KJNQ8, 


permitted    to    build  and  consecrate  the   temple;    and  the  occasion   would 
have  called  into    exercise    the   highest   genius   of  his   poetic   nature.     But 
this    honour     was    denied     him;     partly,     because    the    ancient    nomadic 
form   of  worship   was  not  yet  to  be  abandoned;    and  because  the   wars   of 
David  unfitted  him  to  be  the  founder  of  a  seat  of  peaceful  worship  (2  Sam.  vi. 
6,  11;    1  Chron.  xxii.  8).      But   a    solemn   assurance    was    given   that   his 
dynasty  should  last  for  ever  to  continue  the  work  :  and  the  glory  of  building 
and   consecrating  the  most  celebrated  temple   of  antiquity  fell  to  the  lot  of 
Solomon  (2  Sam.  vii.  13 ;  1  Chron.  xxii.  9).     Jehovah  approved  and  accepted 
the  good  intentions  of  David,  though  he  did  not  permit  him  to  put  them  into 
execution.     This  Divine  approval  was  implied  by  God's  acceptance  of  the 
design,  with  only  the  difference  that  it  should  be  executed  by  the  son  instead 
of  the  father,  and  also  by  the  various  promises  by  which  He  rewarded  the 
pious  wish  of  His  servant  (2  Sam.  vii.  10-16).     4.  It  was  Iroiight  to  its  final 
accomplishment  ly  Divine  assistance,     *'  The  Lord  hath  performed  His  word  that 
He  spake  "  (verse  20),  ''  Hath  with  His  hand  fulfilled  it "  (verse  15).     Solomon 
was  the  instrument ;  but  Jehovah,  as  in  all  truly  great  enterprises,  was  the 
moving  power.     The  son  was  but  completing  the  plan  which  had  been  pre- 
conceived and  arranged  by  his  father.     It  is  instructive  to  observe  how  the 
unfinished  works  of  a  previous  age  are  continued  and  completed  by  succeeding 
generations.     M.  Lesseps,  in  constructing  the  Suez  Canal,  has  only  completed 
the  work  commenced  by  Pharoah-Necho ;  while  the  Mount  Cenis  engineers,  in 
tunnelling  a  way  though  the  Alps,  have  finished  the  work  of  Hannibal.     The 
Pacific  Railroad,  and  the  new  line  of  steamers  from  Hong  Kong  to  San  Francisco, 
have  accomplished  the  grand  vision  of  Columbus  of  a  direct  trade  between 
Europe  and  Asia  by  the  Western,  instead  of  the  Eastern  route.     Russia,  by  hei 
present  efforts  to  make  Sarmacand  a  great  centre  of  traffic,  is  filling  in  the 
grand  outline  bequeathed  to  her  by  Tamerlane ;  while,  by  choosing  the  Oxus 
as  the  great  commercial  highway  of  Central  Asia,  she  is  merely  treading  in  the 
footsteps  of  Alexander  the  Great.     Every  age  has  its  own  special  mission ;  and 
it  should  strive  to  maintain  and  extend  the  civil  and  religious  blessings  handed 
down  to  it  by  our  suffering  and  heroic  forefathers.     The  Divine  side  of  the  work 
remains  unchangeably  the  same.     God  never  yet  *'  suffered  His  faithfulness  to 
fail,  nor  altered  the  thing  that  went  out  of  His  mouth "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  33). 
Witness  the  constant  and  concurrent  experience  of  saints  in  all  ages — not  one 
instance  to  the  contrary. 

III.  The  joy  of  an  accomplished  purpose  is  based  on  the  assurance  of  its 
harmony  with  the  Divine  covenant  (verse  21).  The  tables  of  stone  laid  up 
in  the  ark  were  enduring  witnesses  of  the  covenant  into  which  Jehovah  had 
entered  with  His  people.  The  erection  and  consecration  of  the  Temple  was 
another  evidence  of  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  His  part  of  the  covenant ;  and 
this  thought  would  augment  the  joy  of  Solomon  on  the  occasion.  There  can 
be  no  solid  satisfaction  in  doing  anything  that  we  know  is  not  in  harmony  with 
the  Divine  will:  "Whatever  good  we  do,  we  must  look  upon  it  as  the  per- 
formance of  God's  promise  to  us,  rather  than  the  performance  of  our  promise  to 
Him.  The  more  we  do  for  God,  the  more  we  are  indebted  to  Him  ;  for  our 
sufficiency  is  of  Him,  and  not  of  ourselves."  We  have  more  need  to  be 
concerned  about  our  own  fidelity  than  that  of  God. 

Lessons: — 1.  iVb  purpose  can  prosper  that  is  not  conceived  in  a  humlle  and 
grateful  spirit,  2.  It  is  an  unspeakable  privilege,  and  a  great  responsihtlitg,  to  he 
allowed  to  take  any  part  in  the  work  of  God,  3.  The  joy  of  an  accomplished  good 
outweighs  the  suffering  and  toil  encountered  in  its  achievement, 

113 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHlf .  Tin. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Verse  IC. — The  choice  of  God  is  no 
blind  preference  of  one  and  prejudice 
against  another,  but  aims  at  the  salva- 
tion of  both.  As  from  amongst  all 
nations  He  chose  Israel  for  its  salva- 
tion, so  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 
He  chose  the  city  of  David  for  the 
blessing  of  the  whole  kingdom.— 
Lanffe. 

Verso  17.  How  many  individuals, 
as  well  as  whole  congregations,  have 
the  means  and  the  power  wherewith  to 
build  a  church,  to  repair  a  ruinous 
one,  or  to  enlarge  one  which  has  be- 
come too  small ;  but  nothing  can  be 
further  from  their  mind. 

Verse  18.  Unrealized  ideals  not 
useless.  1.  The  character  of  an  in- 
dividual life  is  influenced  and  shaped 
by  the  ideal  after  which  it  continually 
aspires.  2.  The  ideal  of  a  holy  and 
useful  life  should  be  constructed  in 
harmony  with  the  requirements  of  the 
Divine  will.  3.  If  the  ideal  of  life  is 
not  realized,  the  effort  after  its  attain- 
ment will  confer  a  reflex  benefit  on  the 
sincere  aspirant.  4.  Ideals  of  goodness, 
though  unrealized,  call  forth  the 
Divine  commendation.  5.  Unrealized 
ideals  in  the  present  life  become  the 
bases  of  still  loftier  ideals  in  the 
future. 

—  He  who  pui^oses  to  do  a  good 
work,  but  is  hindered  therein  not  by 
his  own  fault,  but  by  Divine  decree,  has 
yet  **  well  done."  God  regards  his 
intentions  as  the  deed  itself. 

—  On  maintaining  a  high  ideal. 
1.  By  a  high  ideal  is  meant,  not  some- 
thing vast  and  vague  and  unattainable, 
but  what  each,  by  God's  help,  in  the 
full  development  of  his  own  nature, 
may  attain.  To  aim  at  less  would  be 
to  be  sluggish,  uiidutiful,  uufaitliful. 
To  aim  at  more  would  be  to  enter  the 
mist,  and  become  unreal.  Speaking 
generally,  it  will  be  found  that  what- 
ever can  be  intelligently  and  conscien- 
tiously aimed  at,  can  be  attained.  In 
the  very  ideas  we  entertain,  and  in  the 
endeavouis  we  make,  God  gives  us  the 
assurance  that  what  we  thus  think  of 


and  strive  after  may  be  attained.     It 
was  the  notion  of  Plato  that  each  in- 
dividual human  creature  is  an  offspring 
or  product  of  aneternal  form  or  idea  in 
the  Divine  mind.     Something  of  this 
kind   must    be   supposed   in   reason : 
something  of  this  kind  is  indeed  taught 
by  the  Christian  revelation.  God  thus, 
as  we  may  say,  keeps  the  secret  of 
ever^-  life,  its  true  image  and  propor- 
tions, and  opens  that  secret  to  each  as 
he  comes  to  Him.     He  has  a  picture 
in  his  own  mind  of  which  each  may 
be,  through  His  grace,  a  living  reflex. 
0  beautiful,  inspiring  thought !  touch- 
ing us  with  fear,  and  yet  raising  us  to 
rapture — that   each    of    us   can   find 
himself  truly,  only  in  his  God,  and  that 
the  discovery  is  certain  to  be  eternal 
advancement   and   salvation.      2.  To 
maintain  the  ideal  high,  we  must  be 
continually  striving  to  enlarge  it.  Our 
moral  conception  of  our  own  proper 
nature  must  either  grow  larger  and 
more   luminous,     or  fade  down   into 
narrowness  and  darkness.     Nothing  on 
earth,  mental  or  material,  can  continue 
in  one  stay.     There  is  a  sense  in  which 
our  best  thoughts  and  noblest  purposes 
are  passing  away  and  dying  ;  and  our 
only  safety  lies  in  raising  still  better 
thoughts  and  still  nobler  purposes  from 
the  ashes   of  those   that   have   died. 
Swift  and  subtle  and  sure  is  the  pass- 
ing away  of  our  most  etherial  thought, 
our  most  glowing  emotion.     Swiit  and 
sure  also  is  the  reproduction  and  ex- 
pansion of  them,  so  that  while  there  is 
dying  and  coming  into  life  perpetually, 
there  shall  yet  be  to  our  consciousness 
only  an   unbroken  continuity,  and  a 
going  on   of  our  life   from   strength 
to  strength."     3.  In  seeking  to  main- 
tain and  still  enhance  this  spiiitual  and 
great  idea  of  our  own  life,  we  shall  be 
much  assisted  by  an  assured  belief  that 
it  is  the  very  thing  which  God  wishes 
and  will  help  us  to  realize  and  be.    If 
God  will  not  help  us  in  this  by  the 
breath  of  His  own  infinite  sympathy, 
by  the  uplifting  of  the  light  of  His 
countenance    upon  us,  our  life  is  in- 
deed a  dark  and  hopeless  thing.     It 
never  can  expand  into  summer  breadth 

213 


OHAP.  Till. 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


and  beauty.  How  it  pleases  a  father, 
or  a  strong  elder  brother,  to  take  the 
hand  of  some  youthful  climber  and 
help  him  up  the  rocks  and  along  the 
giddy  and  perilous  ridge  towards  some 
sunny  and  safe  elevations  of  the  moun- 
tains! Will  it  please  the  Heavenly 
Father  less  to  help  those  who,  already 
called  and  quickened  by  His  grace, 
are  aiming,  as  they  can,  after  entire 
conformity  to  the  very  image  of  their 
Father?  4.  If  we  would  maintain  a 
high  sentiment  and  a  pure  idea  about 
our  own  life,  we  must  learn  to  believe 
in  the  actual  goodness  of  others  as  well 
as  in  the  possible  growth  of  our  own. 
To  use  technical  but  perfectly  appro- 
priate language,  we  must  learn  to 
believe  that  God  has  a  people  in  the 
world.  Look  for  goodness,  and  it  will 
shine  out  upon  you,  unless  you  your- 
self are  evil.  Look  for  the  love  and 
tenderness  of  Christ,  which  yet  are 
found  in  so  many  human  hearts,  and 
you  will  soon  be  refreshed  by  the 
breathing  of  that  love  and  tenderness 
as  though  He  Himself  were  near.  5. 
The  contemplation  of  goodness  in 
others  will  be  found,  in  the  case  of 
most  young  persons,  to  operate  power- 
fully in  the  same  direction — towards 
raising  and  keeping  the  standard  and 
tone  of  life  pure  and  high.  Nothing 
touches  life  so  deeply  and  sensibly  as 


life.  Nothing  moves  it  to  finer  issues. 
Is  it  not  certain  that,  looking,  we  shall 
become  like?  being  changed  by  the 
subtle,  benignant  laws  of  grace  into 
the  same  image  we  thus  see  and  admire 
— "from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord."  6.  Above  all,  we  must 
maintain  a  constant,  vital  connection 
— a  connection  by  faith,  love,  admira- 
tion— with  Jesus  Christ.  None  among 
us,  old  or  young,  can  maintain  a  high 
ideal  of  our  life  without  Him.  We 
need  Him — for  our  reverence  and  for 
our  admiration,  and  for  our  enthusiasm 
and  for  our  love !  and  for  our  frailties, 
oh  !  how  much  !  and  for  our  great  un- 
worthiness.  A  human  life  is  simple, 
pure,  and  high,  when  it  is  a  "  growing 
up  into  Him  in  all  things  who  is  the 
head." — A.  Raleigh  (condensed  from 
the  Sunday  Magazine  for  1873). 

Verse  20.  The  fairest  prerogative 
of  him  whom  God  has  placed  upon  a 
throne  is,  that  he  has  power  to  work 
for  the  glory  of  God's  name,  and  to 
watch  over  the  extension  of  the  Divine 
Kingdom  amongst  His  people.  Every 
son  who  succeeds  to  the  inheritance  of 
his  father  should  feel  obliged,  first  of 
all,  to  take  up  the  good  work  whose 
completion  was  denied  to  his  father, 
and  perfect  it  with  love  and  zeal. — 
Lange, 


nOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  22— 6a 
A  Model  Dedicatokt  Peayeb. 


This  is  a  prayer  of  unusual  length,  of  great  compass  and  pithos  in  its 
petitions;  and  is  ** remarkable  as  combining  the  conception  of  the  Infinity  of 
the  Divine  Presence  with  the  hope  that  the  Divine  Mercies  will  be  drawn  down 
on  the  nation  by  the  concentration  of  the  national  devotions,  and  even  of  the 
devotions  of  foreign  nations  towards  this  fixed  locality."  It  consists  of  three 
parts — 1.  Adoration  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  to  David  (verses  23,  24). 
2.  Prayer  for  its  continued  fulfilment,  and  for  blessings  upon  the  concentration 
of  worship  at  the  Temple  (verses  25-30).  3.  Supplication  for  specific  blessings 
(31-53);  e.g.y  incases  of  trespass,  when  smitten  before  enemies,  in  times  of 
drought,  famine,  or  plague,  for  the  devout  stranger,  for  success  in  battle,  and  for 
deliverance  from  captivity.  These  prayers  for  specific  blessings  are  seven,  thus 
corresponding  in  number  with  the  seven  petitions  of  the  Lord's  prayer.  We 
may  regard  the  whole  prayer  as  illustrative  of  and  embodying  the  three  principal 
id^as  which  governed  the  religious  life  of  the  Jewish  people — the  ideas  of  God, 
of  sin,  and  of  a  coming  deliverance.  Just  as  the  Grecians  represented  the 
114 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTABY:  KINGS.  OHAp.  thl 


philosophic  and  artistic  culture,  and  the  Romans  the  legisla  tive  capacity,  of  the 
human  race,  so  the  Israelites  represented  the  religious  principle — the  greatest 
force  of  all,  and  that  which  was  destined  to  interpenetrate  all  other  forces,  and 
use  them  for  the  advancement  and  salvation  of  the  race.  An  examination  of 
the  scope  and  matter  of  this  prayer  will  show  how  the  three  leading  ideas 
referred  to  were  ingrained  in  the  national  consciousness  of  Israel.  The  whole 
prayer  is  an  excellent  model  that  may  be  appropriately  followed  in  the  dedicatory 
services  of  every  sanctuary  solemnly  set  apart  for  Divine  worship. 

I.  This  prayer  is  illustrative  of  the  Israelitish  idea  of  Jehovah.    The 

whole  world  was  overrun  with  polytheism,  and  the  idea  of  one  God  was 
in  danger  of  being  utterly  extinguished.  Abraham,  the  founder  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  was  rescued,  by  the  special  call  of  heaven,  from  the  darkness  and 
bewilderment  of  heathenism,  and  became  the  great  apostle  of  monotheism.  With 
his  descendants  was  deposited  the  precious  truth,  which,  though  at  first  a 
strictly  national  possession,  was  ultimately  to  enrich  and  exalt  mankind.  The 
Israelites  cherished  the  loftiest  ideas  of  Jehovah — 1.  As  a  Being  of  Incom- 
parable  Majesty  i  "There  is  no  God  like  Thee"  (verse  23).  Jehovah  is  not 
compared  here  with  other  gods ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  is  described  a  s  the  only 
true  God  (compare  Deut.  iv.  39 ;  Josh.  ii.  II;  2  Sam.  vii.  22 ;  xxii.  32). 
God  is  recognized  as  the  living  and  personal  God,  who  is  the  source  and  power 
of  all  things,  and  in  comparison  with  whom  all  is  emptiness  and  vanity. 
2.  As  a  Being  of  Infinite  condescension:  **  But  will  God  indeed  dwell  on  the 
earth  ?"  (verse  27).  The  omnipresence  and  infinitude  of  Jehovah  are  acknow- 
ledged. This  is  at  once  a  refutation  of  the  anthropomorphic  notions  of  God 
such  as  heathenism  made  in  its  temples,  and  which  it  might  seek  to  associate 
with  His  dwelling,  no  longer  a  movable  tent,  but  in  a  permanent  building  ;  and 
also  a  refutation  of  the  pantheistic  notion  of  Deity,  which  the  higliest  philosophy 
of  heathendom,  by  identifying  God  and  the  world,  imagined.  *'  The  Israelitish 
idea  of  God  knows  nothing  of  a  contradiction  between  the  supernal,  infinite,  and 
absolute  being  of  God,  and  His  entering  into  creatureiy,  finite,  and  limited  being. 
Just  because  He  is  infinite  and  unsearchable,  He  can  communicate  with  the 
finite ;  and  because  He  is  everywhere.  He  can  be  peculiarly  present  in  one 
place,  centring  His  presence  and  displaying  His  absolute  sublimity."  3.  As  a 
Being  of  unutterable  purity.  From  Him  proceeds  the  law  which  discovers  sin 
in  us  and  holiness  in  Him,  and  which  law  is  the  rule  to  regulate  our  earthly 
life.  The  whole  Levitical  economy,  in  its  elaborate  particularity,  was  so  con- 
structed as  specially  to  detect  and  unveil  sin  in  man,  and  to  foster  the  most 
exalted  conceptions  of  Divine  purity.  4.  As  a  Being  of  boundless  mercy  :  "  Who 
keepest  covenant  and  mercy  ;"  "  And  when  thou  hearest,  forgive  "  (verses  23, 
30).  He  is  the  gracious  and  merciful  God  to  whom  the  poor  and  aMicted  may 
look  for  help,  and  all  the  world  for  blessing.  In  the  new  covenant  we  no 
longer  call  upon  God  as  the  God  of  Israel,  but  as  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  He  has  revealed  Himself  to  us  through  Christ,  and  through  Christ 
alone  do  we  find  in  Him  the  true  God,  the  God  of  grace  and  mercy  (Eph.  i.  3  ; 
John  xvii.  3).  We  have  glimpses  now  of  the  depth  and  vastness  of  God^s 
mercy  which  the  most  pious  Israelite  never  saw.  5.  As  a  Being  of  unchange- 
able faithfulness  (verses  24,  25).  Through  the  ages  of  the  past,  notwithstanding 
the  failures  and  sins  of  His  chosen  people,  Jehovah  continued  steadfast  to  His 
part  of  the  covenant.  The  course  of  Jewish  history  is  studded  with  wondrous 
and  convincing  evidences  of  the  unswerving  fidelity  of  God ;  and  the  sacred 
writers  are  never  wearied  in  rehearsing  the  mighty  acts  which  were  done  in 
defence  and  preservation  of  His  people,  and  in  the  accomplishment  of  His 
promised  Word.  The  believer  of  to-day  has  the  same  invulnerable  fidelity  to 
fall  back  upon  :  "  Faithful  is  He  who  hath  promised,  who  also  will  do  it." 

115 


OBiP.  mi.  EOMILETJO  COMMENTABT:  KINGS, 


II.  This  prayer  is  illustrative  of  the  Israelitish  idea  of  sin.  Israel  is  the 
nation  conscious  of  sin,  conscious  as  no  other  nation  ever  was  or  could  be.  The 
best  of  men  in  the  pre-Christian  age  were  conscious  there  was  something  radically 
wrong,  but  they  had  no  just  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  wrong,  and  were 
utterly  powerless  to  devise  a  remedy.  Convinced  that  things  could  not  go  on  as 
tliey  were,  they  looked  for  the  destruction  of  the  world,  and  despaired  of  mankind. 
The  piety  and  religions  of  the  ancient  world  resolved  themselves  into  stoical 
scepticism  on  the  one  hand,  and  superstitious  despair  on  the  other.  There  was 
no  nation  in  whom  the  consciousness  of  sin  was  deeper,  more  genuine,  or  more 
powerful  than  in  Israel.  The  law  was  a  constant  remembrancer  and  a  constant 
convicter  of  sin.  Sacrifice  was  the  central  point  of  all  the  rites  and  ceremonies 
of  the  law.  The  sacred  fire  was  to  be  burning  incessantly  upon  the  altar ; 
sacrifices  were  to  be  offered  day  by  day ;  and  the  climax  of  all  sacrifice  was  that 
offered  on  the  great  day  of  atonement,  on  which  the  high  priest,  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  nation,  laid  upon  the  sacrificial  animal  the  sins  of  the  whole 
people,  bore  the  blood  of  atonement  into  the  place  of  God's  typical  presence,  and 
sprinkled  with  it  the  mercy  seat,  that  the  people  might  be  absolved  from  sin,  and 
reconciled  to  God.  Not  only  is  universal  sinfulness  expressly  asserted — '*  There  is 
no  man  that  sinneth  not ; "  or,  rather.  That  may  not  sin  (verse  46) — but  the  living 
consciousness  of  sin  is  interwoven  with  every  thought.  This  is  the  more  charac- 
teristic, as  it  was  not  a  penitential  ceremony  at  which  the  prayer  was  offered,  but 
a  joyful  thanksgiving  festival,  and  it  was  offtTed  by  a  king  who  was  the  wise-t 
of  his  time,  and  had  reached  the  summit  of  power  and  prosperity.  It  is  evident, 
then,  how  deeply  rooted  was  this  consciousness  of  sin  in  Israel,  and  how  insepar- 
ably it  was  blent  with  their  religious  ideas.  (Consult  Luthardt^s  Fundamental 
Truths,  Lecture  viii.,  and  Lange^s  Com,)  The  deeper  our  sense  of  sin,  the  more 
awful  does  the  holiness  of  God  appear,  and  the  more  eagerly  do  we  welcome  and 
prize  His  mercy. 

III.  This  prayer  is  illustrative  of  the  Israelitish  idea  of  future  deliverance 
and  glory.  Israel  was  the  nation  of  hope.  Ancient  prophecies  of  a  Eedeemer 
and  of  a  glorious  redemption,  in  which  the  whole  world  was  to  share  (verse  60), 
existed  among  this  people,  and  ever  kept  their  view  directed  to  the  future. 
These  prophecies  assumed  a  form  ever  increasingly  definite,  while  their  fulfil- 
ment was  confided  to  an  ever  narrowing  circle — to  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  the  house  of  David.  And  now  Israel,  in  the  reigns  of  David  and 
Solomon,  has  reached  the  climax  of  its  history  and  the  maturity  of  its  national 
development  and  glory ;  and  this  era  is  a  type  of  the  victorious  conflicts  and 
universal  peace  of  the  future,  when  a  greater  than  Solomon  shall  reign  over  a 
vanquished  and  ransomed  world.  It  is  remarkable  that  while  Solomon  is 
offering  this  prayer,  at  the  very  flood-tide  of  national  prosperity  and  triumph, 
as  if  gifted  by  prophetic  insight,  he  foresees  the  defeat  and  captivities  of  Israel 
in  the  future,  and  earnestly  supplicates  for  their  restoration,  that  the  Divine  pur- 
pose in  advancing  the  good  of  mankind  and  His  own  glory  might  not  be  frus- 
tated  (verse  46-53 — compare  with  verse  43-59,  60).  **  The  common  talk  of 
vulgar  rationalism,  about  Jehovah  being  only  a  God  of  the  Jews  and  of  their 
land,  appears  in  all  its  emptiness  and  folly  when  contrasted  with  the  official 
acknowledgment  of  Israel's  world-wide  mission,  and  which  acknowledgment  was 
made  on  a  most  solemn  occasion."  The  continual  approach  of  a  great  deliverance 
and  of  an  era  of  happy,  peaceful,  and  glorious  government,  is  the  great  theme  of 
all  the  Hebrew  prophets.  Divei  sely  as  the  records  may  read,  penned  as  they 
were  under  such  different  circumstances,  all  the  varying  features  of  the  prophetic 
utterances  combine  to  form  one  great,  bright  picture  of  future  blessings.  The 
history  of  Israel  to  the  present  is  a  witness  to  the  veracity  of  the  prophecies 
and  to  the  wondrous  facts  of  Christianity.  The  prince  who,  on  one  occasion, 
asked  his  chaplain  to  furnish  him  with  the  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Christianity, 

116 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


OHJUP  .TIU. 


but  to  do  80  briefly,  for  he  had  no  time  to  spare,  received  as  an  answer  th^ 
words — "  The  Jews,  your  majesty !  " 

Lessons  : — 1 .  Prayer  is  a  humble  admission  of  personal  dependence  and  helpless- 
ness. 2.  Must  be  offered  to  the  only  living  and  true  God.  3.  Should  be  compre- 
hensive in  its  topics,     4.  Should  be  urgent  and  persevering  in  supplication. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 


Verse  22.  Solomon  stands  before 
the  altar,  bows  the  knee,  stretches  out 
his  hands ;  the  people  stand  around, 
the  worshippers  turn  their  faces  to- 
wards the  sanctuary  (verses  38,  44, 
48,  54).  In  prayer  the  ancients  used 
to  spread  out  the  palms  of  their  hands, 
as  it  were  to  receive  a  blessing  from 
God  (Exodus  ix.  29 ;  Psalms  xliv.  20 ; 
cxliii.  6).  Outward  forms  for  the 
worship  and  service  of  God  are  not  to 
be  rejected  when  they  are  the  natural 
unbidden  outflow  of  inward  feeling. 
They  are  worthless  when  they  are 
regarded  as  meritorious,  and  man  puts 
his  trust  in  them  (Luke  xviii.  11). 
They  are  sinful  and  blameworthy  if 
they  are  performed  merely  for  appear- 
ance's sake,  or  to  deceive  men  (Matt. 
vi.  6,  1(5).  The  Lord  knows  the 
hearts  of  all  men ;  one  cannot  serve 
the  living  God  with  dead  works.  The 
L^rd  Himself  and  His  Apostles  prayed 
upon  their  knees  (Luke  xxii.  41  ; 
Eph.  iii.  14).  No  one  is  so  exalted 
that  he  ought  not  to  bow  his  knee  and 
clasp  his  hand. 

Verses  23-53.  The  prayer  of 
Solomon.  1.  A  witness  to  his  faith. 
He  confesses  the  living,  holy,  and  one 
God  before  all  the  people.  2.  To  his 
love.  He  bears  his  people  upon  his 
heart,  and  makes  intercession  for  them. 
3.  To  his  hope.  He  hopes  that  all 
nations  will  come  to  a  knowledge  of 
the  true  God.  From  Solomon  we  may 
leam  how  we  ought  to  pray — in  true 
reverence  and  humiliation  before  God, 
with  earnestness  and  zeal,  with  un- 
doubting  confidence  that  we  shall  be 
heard.  What  an  elevating  spectacle — 
a  king  upon  his  knees  praying  aloud 
in  the  presence  of  his  whole  people, 
and  in  their  behalf!  Although  the 
highest  of  them  all,  he  is  not  ashamed 


to  declare  himself  a  servant  of  God, 
and  to  fall  down  upon  his  knees ;  al- 
though the  wisest  of  them  all,  he 
prays,  as  a  testimony  that  a  wisdom 
which  can  no  longer  pray  is  folly; 
although  the  mightiest  of  all,  he  con- 
fesses that  nothing  is  done  by  his 
power  alone,  but  that  the  Lord  is  the 
King  Eternal ;  therefore  it  is  that  he 
does  not  merely  rule  over  his  subjects, 
but  as  an  upright  king  supplicates 
and  prays  for  them  likewise. — Lange, 

Verse  27.  Reflecting  upon  God's 
performance  of  His  promise  concerning 
the  building  of  the  Temple,  Solomon 
breaks  forth  into  admiration.  Is  it 
possible  that  the  great  and  high  and 
lofty  God  should  stoop  so  low  as  to 
take  up  His  dwelling  here  amongst 
men !  0,  astonishing  condescension  I 
The  heaven — all  this  vast  space  of 
the  visible  world : — And  heaven  of 
heavens — the  third  and  highest  and 
therefore  the  largest  heaven,  called 
the  heaven  of  heavens  here  (as  also 
Deut.  X.  14 ;  Psalm  cxlviii.  4),  for 
its  eminency  and  comprehensiveness— 
cannot  contain  Thee,  for  Thy  essence 
reacheth  far  beyond  them,  being 
omnipresent.  How  much  less  this 
house  that  I  have  builded !  This  house, 
therefore,  was  not  built  as  if  it  were 
proportionable  to  Thy  greatness,  or 
could  contain  Thee,  but  only  that 
therein  we  might  serve  and  glorify 
Thee.— Pfo/. 

By  the  sentence  that  the  heaven 
of  heavens — i.e.^  the  heaven  in  its  most 
extended  compass ;  the  illimitable 
space  above  the  visible  heaven  or 
fii'mament  which  lies  immediately 
over  the  earth — cannot  contain  God, 
Solomon  strikes  down  all  rationalistic 
assertions,  that  the  Israelites  imagined 
Jehovah  to  be  only  a  finite  national 

117 


OHAP.  Tin. 


EOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY :  K1NG8. 


god.  The  infinite  and  supra-mundane 
exaltation  of  God  cannot  be  more 
clearly  and  strongly  expressed  than  it 
is  in  these  words.  That,  however, 
Solomon  was  addicted  to  no  abstract 
idealism  is  sufficiently  apparent  from 
this,  that  he  unites  this  consciousness 
of  the  infinite  exaltation  of  God  with 
the  firm  belief  of  His  real  presence  in 
the  temple.  The  true  God  is  not 
merely  infinitely  exalted  above  the 
world,  has  not  only  His  throne  in 
heaven  (verses  34,  36,  39 ;  Psalm  ii. 
4;  xi.  4;  ciii.  19;  Isaiah  Ixvi.  I; 
Amos  ix.  6),  He  is  also  present  on  the 
eaith  (Deut.  iv.  39),  has  chosen  the 
temple  for  the  dwelling  place  of  His 
name  in  Israel,  from  which  He  hears 
the  prayers  of  His  people. — KeiL 

—  Although  the  heaven  of  heavens 
cannot  contain  the  Unmeasurable  and 
Infinite  One,  and  no  building,  how 
great  and  noble  soever,  can  suffice  for 
Him,  yet,  in  His  mercy,  He  will  make 
His  dwelling  place  (J no.  xiv.  23)  in 
the  heart  of  that  man  who  loves  Him 
and  keeps  His  word,  and  it  will  truly 
become  a  temple  of  God  (1  Cor.  iii  16). 
He  will  dwell  with  those  who  are  of  a 
humble  spirit  (Isaiah  Ivii.  15;  Psalm 
cxiii.  6,  6). 

Verses  27-30.  The  greatness  and 
condescension  of  God.  I.  God  is  too 
great  to  he  confined  hy  anything  that  has 
limits.  1.  He  is  greater  than  all 
created  things:  **  Behold,  the  heaven 
and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  con- 
tain thee"  (verse  27).  Solomon  won- 
ders that  God  should  appoint  a  temple 
to  be  erected  to  Him  upon  the  earth, 
when  He  is  not  contained  in  the  vast 
circuit  of  the  heavens  ;  His  essence  is 
not  straitened  in  the  limits  of  any 
created  work.  He  who  was  before 
the  world,  and  place,  and  all  things, 
was  to  Himself  a  world,  a  place,  and 
everything:  He  is  really  out  of  the 
world  in  Himself,  as  He  was  in  Him- 
self before  the  creation  of  the  world. 
As  because  God  was  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world  we  conclude  His 
eternity,  so  because  He  is  without  the 
bounds  of  the  world  we  conclude  His 
immensity.  He  is  above  and  outside 
of  all  His  creatures,  and  governs  all 
118 


the  possibilities  of  their  existence 
2.  He  is  present  every  where.  Every- 
thing is  filled  by  God ;  but  that  which 
is  filled  is  different  from  that  by 
which  it  is  filled.  The  Omnipresent 
God  is  the  inmost  fundamental  Being 
of  everything  that  exists :  He  is  the 
life  of  all  that  lives,  the  Spirit  of  all 
spirits.  And  as  He  is  all  in  all,  so  is 
all  in  Him.  As  the  bird  in  the  air,  as 
the  fish  in  the  sea,  so  do  all  creatures 
live  and  move  and  have  their  being  in 
God.  The  world  of  time  and  space, 
of  nature  and  history,  is  contained  in 
Him.  But  although  creation  is  con- 
tained in  God,  God  is  not  contained  in 
His  creation.  Although  the  Omni- 
present One  is  essentially  present  in 
every  leaf  and  every  grain  of  wheat, 
He  dwells  and  moves  freely  in  Him- 
self, in  virtue  of  His  eternity.  The 
fundamental  error  of  Pantheism  is  the 
notion  that  God  is  Omnipresent  of 
necessity.  God  is  present  in  one  way 
in  nature,  in  another  way  in  history  ; 
in  one  way  in  the  church,  in  another 
way  in  the  world :  He  is  not,  in  the 
same  sense,  present  alike  in  the  hearts 
of  His  saints,  and  in  those  of  the  un- 
godly; in  heaven  and  in  hell  {Mar- 
tensen).  II.  God  condescends  to  make 
His  church  His  dwelling  place.  1 .  Here 
His  presence  is  especially  realized: 
**  The  place  of  which  thou  hast  said, 
My  name  shall  be  there  "  (verse  29). 
The  choice  of  Jerusalem  as  the  place 
seems  to  have  been  made  by  special 
revelation  to  David  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  68 ; 
cxxxii.  13,  comp.  with  1  Chron. 
xxii.  1).  The  jN^ame  Jehovah  is 
synonymous  with  the  nature  and  per- 
fections of  Jehovah ;  and  it  is  here  in- 
timated that  He  would  be  present  in 
His  temple  to  show  forth  His  power 
and  glory  by  enlightening,  quickening, 
pardoning,  sanctifying,  and  saving  the 
devout  and  sincere  worshipper.  As 
the  prayerful  Jew  directed  his  gaze 
towards  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  so 
the  believer  must  address  his  prayers 
to  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  who  is 
the  Mead  of  the  spiritual  church 
(Dan.  vii.  10,  with  Heb.  x.  19,  20; 
Col.  i.  18).  2.  Here  His  word  is  de- 
posited. The  church  is  commissioned 
to  hold  inviolate  the  sacred  trust,  and 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTAET  ;•  KINGS,  OHAf.  nn. 


fco  disseminate  the  Word  in  all  its  purity     sion.    2.  He  is  worthy  of  ceaseless  adora- 
and   power.      The  hoarded  riches  of     tion.     3.    The  most  abject  sinner  who 
ancient  cities    were  paltry  compared     turns  to  Him  will  not  be  rejected, 
with  the  inexhaustible  wealth  of  re-         ^         r>«     mi  n  ^   -.    ,    , 

velations  which  are  treasured  up  in         ^^^^^  ^9     The  eye  of  God   looks 

the  church  of  God— treasured  up  not  ?P^^  ^^f  ^  ^/^^^^  where  His  name  is 

to  lie  unused  and  unproductive,  but  to  ^o^oujed    where  all  with   one  mind 

enrich  the  world.     3.  Here  His  mercy  ^^''^  ^^^}^  ^^^  ^^,^^  *°  S^?>  ^\^  ^^jl 

is  dispensed.     The  ark  of  the  covenant,  "P^^  ^^«   P^.^  ^^^^'  ?^^^\^\,  ^^ 

with  its  mercy  seat,  was  in  the  Temple  Vr^'r^'''''}:  ^^I'T""^ ''  ^P?|''^^¥-: 

-a  symbol  of  hope  and  a  pledge  of  My  Name  shall  be  there       The  object 

deliverance  to  the  transgressor.     III.  ^^  every  church  is  to  be  a  dwelling- 

God  is  graciously  pleased  to  hear  and  V^^^\^\  ^i/me  revelation,  ^^.    of  the 

a^iswer  the  prayer  of  the  humble  sup-  If^  .^    ^.f '^rl?''5w  '^^''^'  ^P.^"" 

pliant  ( -  erses  28,  30).    1 .  Prayer  may  ^^^.  ^t^'ength  of  that  Word,  worship, 

be  offered  anywhere.    The  exclusive-  PJ'^^^^>  and  prayer  shall  be  offered  to 

ness  of  the  Jewish  religion  was  a  pre-  ^^^  ^^°^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^• 
paration   for,    and   made   possible,    a         Verse   30.      The    houses    of    God, 

religion   that   was   to   be  adapted  to  above   all    else,    must   be   houses   of 

universal  man.     In  the  old  dispensa-  player  (Isa.  Ivi.   7) :  they  are  dese- 

tion  prayer  was  offered  m  or  towards  crated  if  devoted  to  merely  worldly 

Jerusalem  (verse  30)  :  m  the  present  pui-poses  of  any  kind  whatsoever,  in- 

dispensation    the    command    is    that  stead   of   being   used  for  prayer  and 

^'Men    pray   everywhere,    lifting    up  supplication.     The  hearing  of  prayer 

holy  hands  without  wrath  and  doubt-  does  not,    indeed,    depend   upon   the 

mg"  (1  Tim.  li.  8).     Both  tabernacle  place  where  it  is  offered  (Jno.  iv.  20), 

and  temple  were  types  of  Christ— God  ^^t  prayer  should  have  an  appointed 

manifest  m  the  flesh ;  and  He  was  and  place,  where  we  can  present  ourselves, 

IS  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  g^en  as  God  wills  tliat,  together  with 

The   human  nature   of  Christ  is  the  one  voice,  we  humbly  exalt  His  name 

temple  m  which  dwell  all  the  fulness  ^^^^^  ^v.  6 ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  4).     Where 

of  the  Godhead  bodily;  therefore  all  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in 

prayer,  to  be  acceptable  and  entitled  jjis  name,  He  is  in  their  midst ;  how 

to  a  hearing,  must  be  offered  to  God  n^^^ch  more  will  He  be  where  a  whole 

through  Him.     There  is  no  restriction  congregation  is  assembled  to  call  upon 

as   to   locality.      From   the   crowded  Him.  -Lanae 
sanctuary  or  the  quiet   home-circle, 

from  the  dingy  prison  or  the  pathless         Verses  31-50.    The  seven  petitions 

seas,  the  worshipper  may  direct  his  of    the   prayer  teach   us — 1.    In  all 

prayers  to  the  Great  Helper  of  the  help-  necessity  of  body  and  soul  to  turn  to 

less.     2.  Prayer,  to  be  successful,  must  the  Lord,  who  alone  can  help,  and  call 

be  fervent.      Solomon  speaks  of  the  upon  Him  with  earnestness  and  zeal 

*'cry"      and     the      ** supplication"  (Psalm  1.  15;    xci.   14,  15).      2.    In 

(verses   28,    30).      The  more  vividly  all  our  straits  to  recognize  the  whole- 

the  soul  realizes  its  need  and  its  peril,  some  discipline  of  an  holy  and  just 

the  more  pathetic  and  passionate  will  God,  who  will  show  us  the  good  way 

be   its  cry    for   help.      Spite   of  the  in  which  we  must  walk  (Psalm  xciv. 

hollow    sneer   of    modern    scientists,  12  ;  Heb.  xii.  5).     3.  To  confess  our 

prayer  has  an  indefinable  something  sins,    and   to   implore   forgiveness   in 

about  it  that  moves  the  heart  of  God,  order  that  we  may  be  heard  (Psalm 

and  brings  Him  consciously  nearer  to  xxxii.  1,  5,  7).     4.   Not  only  for  our- 

the  praying  soul.     The  most  coveted  selves,   but  also  for  others,  in  their 

prizes   in   religious    experience   have  time  of  need,    should  we   pray    and 

been  won  by  wrestling  prayer.  supplicate,  even  as  the  king  docs  here 

Lessons: — 1.   The  greatness  of  God  for  all  individual    men,   and  for  his 

u  manifested  in  His  merciful  condcscen'  entire  people. — Lange. 

119 


CHAT.  yni. 


EOMILETJG  COMMENTARY:  KINQ8, 


Verses  31,  32.  The  solemn  appeal 
of  the  accused.  1.  That  cases  will 
arise  where  it  is  difficult  to  convict 
the  wrong -doer  of  his  crime.  Sin  is 
subtle  in  its  movements  and  deceptive 
in  its  appearance.  It  often  wears  the 
garb  of  the  saint,  while  it  is  enacting 
the  enormities  of  the  most  vicious. 
How  often  is  the  truth  concealed  by 
the  most  miserable  equivocation.  A 
sudden  lie  may  be  sometimes  only 
manslaughter  upon  truth ;  but,  by  a 
carefully  constructed  equivocation, 
truth  always  is,  with  malice  afore- 
thought, deliberately  murdered.  It 
is  difficult  to  detect  the  real  culprit, 
amid  the  mystifications  he  has  himself 
originated,  as  it  is  to  seize  the  cuttle- 
fish by  groping  in  the  inky  waters  it 
has  itself  discoloured.  2.  2  hat  the 
final  refuge  of  lafjUcd  justice  is  to  allow 
the  accused  an  appeal  to  the  judgment 
of  God.  1.  This  appeal  has  been 
often  abused.  In  the  ruder  stages  of 
human  development,  very  painful 
methods  were  resorted  to  as  tests  of 
innocence.  Fire  and  sword  were 
freely  used  for  this  purpose.  In  the 
dark  ages  a  fire  was  kindled  within 
the  church,  not  far  from  the  great 
altar ;  a  bar  of  iron  was  heated,  and, 
after  an  elaborate  ritual  of  prayers 
and  abjurations,  the  accused  was  re- 
quired to  carry  the  red-hot  iron  nine 
yards  from  the  flame.  The  moment  he 
laid  it  down,  he  was  borne  by  the 
priests  into  the  vestiy :  there  his 
hands  were  wrapped  in  linen  cloths, 
sealed  down  with  the  signet  of  the 
church ;  and,  according  to  the  condi- 
tion iD  which  the  hands  were  found 
on  the  third  day,  was  he  declared 
innocent  or  guilty.  A  belief  was 
common  among  the  northern  nations 
that  the  corpse  of  a  murdered  person 
would  bleed  on  the  touch  or  at  the 
approach  of  the  real  murderer;  and 
this  test  was  often  applied  with  great 
and  imposing  ceremonies.  In  Borneo, 
we  are  told,  when  two  dyaks  have  to 
decide  which  is  in  the  right,  they 
have  two  equal  lumps  of  salt  given 
them  to  drop  into  water,  and  he  whose 
lump  rMssolves  first  is  deemed  to  be 
in  the  wrong.  Or,  they  put  two 
live  shell-fish  on  a  plate — one  for  each 
120 


litigant — and  squeezing  lime-juice 
over  them,  the  verdict  is  given  ac- 
cording to  which  man^s  mollusc  stirs 
first.  The  Siamese,  again,  have  a 
curious  way  of  deciding  the  truth 
between  two  parties  in  the  absence  of 
witnesses  :  their  method  is  to  ascer- 
tain which  of  the  two  can  stay  longest 
under  water.  Such  are  specimens  of 
the  varied  plans  which  reveal  the 
craft,  the  audacity,  and  the  folly  of 
mankind.  2.  This  appeal  must  be 
solemn  and  sincere  (verse  3 1 ).  Though 
the  method  may  be  abused,  we  may 
and  must  call  upon  God  to  help  the 
innocent  man  to  his  rights,  and,  even 
in  this  world,  to  reward  the  evil  man 
according  to  his  deserts.  It  is  allow- 
able for  a  pious  man  to  entreat  God  to 
administer  his  just  cause;  yet,  must 
he  not  wish  evil  to  his  neighbour  in 
mere  human  vindictiveness  (Psa.  cix. 
1).  The  oath  is  a  prayer,  a  solemn 
invocation  of  God  in  testimony  of  the 
truth :  the  false  oath  is  not  merely  a 
lie,  but  an  insolent  mockery  of  God, 
and  God  will  not  be  mooked  (Gal.  vi. 
7  ;  Ex.  XX.  7).  Bear  in  mind,  when 
thou  swearest,  that  thou  art  standing 
before  the  altar,  i.e.^  before  the  judg- 
ment-seat of  the  Holy  and  Just  God, 
who  can  condemn  body  and  soul  to 
hell.  Where  the  oath  is  no  longer 
held  sacred,  there  the  nation  and  the 
state  go  to  ruin. — f  Starke  J.  3.  That 
the  Judgment  of  God  is  infallihle  in  the 
punishment  of  the  guilty  and  the  vindi- 
cation  of  the  innocent  (verse  32).  The 
sinner  cannot  triumph  for  ever ;  and 
the  cries  of  the  injured  for  justice  are 
not  in  vain.  The  retribution  of  the 
wicked  is  often  swift,  and  is  always 
terrible:  God  "  brings  his  way  upon 
his  head."  This  He  hath  done  on 
those  who  have  taken  false  oaths  of 
execration,  as  may  be  instanced  in  the 
three  false  accusers  of  Narcissus,  the 
bishop  of  Jerusalem  ;  in  the  case  of 
Earl  Godwin ;  and  in  the  case  of  one 
Anne  ^veries,  \vho,  forswearing  her- 
self in  a  shop  in  Wood  Street,  London, 
in  1575,  praying  God  she  might  sink 
where  she  stood,  if  she  had  not  paid 
for  the  wares  she  took,  fell  down 
speechless  and  instantly  expired.  Ve- 
rily, there  is  a  God  that  ruleth  in  the 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTAMT:  KINO 8. 


CHAP.  vin. 


earth,  and  every  act  of  man  shall 
receive  its  due  recompense  according 
to  its  character. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  innocent  need  not 
fear  the  strictest  scrutiny.  2.  Sin  is 
certain  to  he  discovered  and  punished, 
3.  The  appeal  to  Divine  Justice  is  not 
in  vain, 

—  Personal  injuries.  I.  Should 
7iot  he  lightly  inferred.  Here  an  oath 
was  taken  of  the  man  who  had  in- 
flicted the  injury.  This  oath  was 
to  be  taken  before  God's  altar. 

II.  Should  he  committed  into  the 
hand  of  God.  The  Jud^je  of  all  the 
earth  will  do  liglit.  Prayer  to  God 
when  we  smart  under  injury  will — 

I.  Prevent  a  vindictive  spirit.  2. 
Lead  us  to  desire  the  triumph  of 
righteousness. 

Yerse  33,  34.  The  terrible  scourge 
of  war.  1.  That  the  defence  of  a 
nation  depends  upon  the  bravery  of  its 
people.  2.  That  sin  saps  the  founda- 
tion of  natural  courage.  3.  That  war 
is  sometimes  an  instrument  of  punish- 
ment for  national  offences.  4.  That 
war  is  ever  attended  with  terrible 
suff'ering.  5.  That  defeat  often  drives 
a  nation  to  seek  help  and  deliverance 
in  prayer.  6.  That  God  hears  the 
cry  of  the  humble  and  penitent 
captives,  and  brings  them  out  of  their 
distresses. 

—  I.  The  commission  of  sin  producing 
national  calamities.  Israel  smitten 
before  the  enemy,  **  because  they 
sinned."  This  result  may  be  brought 
about  by  the  operation  of  natural 
laws — not  necessary  to  suppose  any 
miraculous  intervention.  Sin  weakens 
— sin  destroys. 

II.  The  means  that  should  he  em- 
ployed in  times  of  calamity. 

1.  Eeformation — **Tum  again  to 
thee."  2.  Confession  of  sin — "  Con- 
fess thy  name."  3.  Prayer  to  God — 
**  And  pray." 

—  A  victorious  enemy  is  the  whip 
and  scourge  with  which  the  Lord 
chastises    a  nation,    so  that  it   may 


awake  out  of  sleep,  conftss  its  sins, 
turn  unto  Him,  and  learn  anew  its 
forgotten  prayers  and  supplications. 
To  those  who  are  taken  captive  in  war, 
and,  far  from  fatherland,  must  dwell 
beneath  a  foreign  yoke,  applies  the 
"Word  of  the  Lord  (Luke  xiii.  2). 
Therefore,  they  who  are  prospering 
in  their  native  country  must  pray  for 
them,  believing  in  the  words  of  Psalm 
cxlvi.  7. 

Verses  35,  36.  The  abuse  of  pros- 
perity and  its  Nemesis.  I.  Prospe- 
rity is  a  blessing  from  God.  He 
controls  the  food-producing  elements 
— opens  or  stops  "the  bottles  of  the 
sky,"  fills  the  earth  with  fraitfulness, 
or  binds  it  up  with  the  iron  bands  of 
sterility.  II.  Prosperity  is  encom- 
passed with  many  perils.  Of  a  reck- 
less and  thankless  indulgence — of  a 
proud  self-suthciency — of  an  impious 
forget  fulness  of  God.  III.  The  abuse 
of  prosperity  is  followed  with  inevit- 
able punishment.  Hard,  harassing, 
and  unremunerative  labour — general 
scarcity — life-long  disease,  personal 
and  social  sufferings.  IV.  The  teach- 
ings of  adversity  tend  Jto  correct  the 
errors  of  prosperity.  The  proud  and 
thoughtless  are  humbled — man  is 
taught  his  absolute  dependence  on 
God — a  spirit  of  genuine  devotion  is 
encouraged — a  wise  and  generous  use 
of  prosperity  is  inculcated. 

— Introduces  a  question  about  which 
there  has  been  much  angry  discussion 
Can  human  prayer  modify  or  influence 
the  operation  of  natural  law  ?  If  so,  to 
what  extent,  and  under  what  con- 
ditions? Probably  a  thorough  and 
satisfactory  solution  of  the  problem 
will  never  be  obtained.  JN^o  necessary 
conflict  between  prayer  and  natural 
law. 

I.  The  possrhilify  of  a  great  calamity 
arising  from  natural  causes.  **  Heaven 
shut  up."     ''jS^orain." 

II.  The  co?inectio7i  of  this  calamity 
with  human  sinfulness.  **  Because  they 
have  sinned  against  Thee." 

III.  The  Scriptural  method  of  tev' 
minating  this  calandty. 

1.  Confession  of  sin.  2.  Abandon- 
ment of  sin.     3.  Prayer  of  God. 

1:^1 


CHAP.  vm. 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY  :  KINO 8, 


—  Inasmuch  as  fruitful  seasons, 
instead  ot  leading  to  repentance,  as 
being  proofs  of  God's  goodness,  so 
often  tend  to  create  pride,  haughtiness, 
and  lightmindedness,  therefore  the 
Lord  sometimes  shuts  up  His  heavens. 
But  then  we  should  murmur  not 
against  Hira,  but  against  our  own 
sins  (Sam.  iii.  39),  aid  confess  that 
all  human  care  and  toil  for  obtaining 
food  out  of  the  earth  is  in  vain  if  He 
give  not  rain  out  of  heaven  and  fruitful 
seasons.  JFine  weather  is  not  brought 
about  by  the  means  of  processions,  but 
by  true  repentance  and  heartfelt 
prayer  (Lev.  xxvi.  3,  4^.  When 
God  humbles  us.  He  thus  directs  to 
the  good  way  (Psalm  cxix.  67  ;  Deut. 
ii.  3;  V.  8). — Starhe. 

Verse  36.  The  good  way.  1.  Is 
Divinely  revealed.  2.  Is  maintained 
by  Divine  instruction.  3.  Is  lost  by 
disobedience.  4.  Is  found  in  the 
pathway  of  suffering  and  trial.  5. 
Leads  to  everlasting  blessedness. 

Terse  37-40.   National  calamities 
and  their  lessons.     I.  That  national 
calamities  are^varied  in  their  character 
(verse  37).      1.    Famine,  a  scarcity, 
or  total   want   of   bread,   necessarily 
springing  from   the  preceding  cause, 
want    of  rain.      2.   Pestilence,    any 
general      and       contagious      disease. 
3.  Blasting,  anything  by    which  the 
crops  are  injured,  so  that  the  ear  is 
never  matured,  but,  instead  of  whole- 
some grain,  tliere  is  a  black  offensive 
dust.     4.  Mildew,  anything  that  vi- 
tiates or  corrodes  the  texture  of  the 
stalk,  destroys  the  flowers  and  blos- 
soms,   or   causes   the    young   shaped 
fruits    to   fall   off   their   stems.      5. 
Locust,  a   well-known   curse    in  the 
East,   a  species  of    grasshopper   that 
multiplies  by  millions,  and  covers  the 
face  of  the    earth    for    many    miles 
square,  destroying  every  green  thing, 
leaving  neither  herb  nor  grass  upon  the 
earth,  nor  leaf  nor  bark  upon  the  trees. 
6.  Caterpillars,  the  locust  in  its  young 
or  nympha  state.     The  former  refers 
to     ocusts   brought    by   winds  from 
other  countricv^  and  settling  on   the 
land ;  the  latter,  to  the  young  locusts 
122 


bred    in  the  land.      7.    An  enemy, 
having  attacked  their  defenced  cities, 
the   keys   and   barriers   of  the  land. 
8.    Any   other  kind  of  plague,    that 
which  affects  the  surface  of  the  body 
— blotch,  blain,  leprosy,   ophthalmia, 
&c.     9.  Sickness,  whatever  impaired 
the  strength,  or  affected  the  intestines, 
disturbing  or  destroying  their  natural 
functions.     II.  That  national  calami- 
ties    are     aggravated     by     individual 
offences.     1.  Sin  is  the  fruitful  source 
of  all  calamities,   and   is   itself   the 
greatest  of  all.     2.  That  a  personal 
consciousness  of  sin  is  the  discovery  of 
man's  greatest  moral  plague  (verse  38). 
III.    That  national  calamities   should 
lead  to  national  humiliation  and  prayer. 
lY.    That    the    removal    of    national 
calamities  should  intensify  and  augment 
national  piety  (verse  40). 

—  Divine  j  udgments  and  means  of 
discipline   are   very  various  in  their 
kind,  their  degree,  and  their  duration. 
God  in  His  wisdom  and  justice  metes 
out  to  a  whole  people,  as  to  each  in- 
dividual man,  such  measure  of  suffer- 
ing as  is  needed  for  its  salvation,  for 
He  knows  the  hearts  of  all  the  chil- 
dren  of  men,  and  He  tries  no  man 
beyond  His  power  of  endurance.    He 
hearkens  to  him  who  calls  upon  Him 
in   distress  (2  Sam.  xxii.  7 ;    Psalm 
xxxiv.    18;    Isaiah  xxvi.   16).     Dis- 
tress teaches  us  how  to  pray,  but  often 
only  so  long  as  it  is  present  with  us. 
God  looks  upon  our  hearts,  and  knows 
whether  our  prayer  is  a  mere  passing 
emotion,    or  whether  we  have  truly 
turned  to  Him.     How  entirely  diffe- 
rent would  our  prayers  often  sound  if 
we  reflected  that  we  were  addressing 
Him  who  knows  our  heart,   with  its 
most  sscret  and  mysterious  thoughts, 
expectations,  and  wishes.     The  effect 
of  an  answer  to  our  prayers  must  be 
that  we  fear  the  Lord,  and  walk  in  His 
ways,  not  only  in  the  time  of  need  and 
trouble,  but  at  all  times  as  long  as  we 
live.     It  is  a  priceless  thing  that  the 
heart  remains  constant. — Lange. 

Yerse  38.  The  moral  plague  of 
humanity.  **  Shall  know  every  man 
the  plague  of  his  own  heart."  I.  The 
moral  plague  of  humanity  is  sin.     II. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EINOS. 


CHAP.  VIII. 


Is  inward  and  individual.  III.  Is 
terrible  when  it  intensifies  itself  into 
the  form  of  a  conscious  and  deserved 
judgment  of  God.  IV.  Is  an  un- 
speakable bles  in  g  when  it  induces  man 
to  escape  from  its  ruinous  consequences 
by  a  timely  repentance.  Y.  Can  be 
removed  only  by  a  believing  applica- 
tion of  the  Divine  Eemcdy. 

*<The  plague  of  his  own  heart." 

His  own  iniquity  (Psalm  xviii.  23) : 
the  cause  of  his  calamity,  as  he  well 
understandeth  when  sin  and  wrath 
meet  in  his  soul  and  make  a  wound  in 
it :  the  cure  whereof  he  seeketh  of 
God  by  prayer,  which  hath  a  pacify- 
ing property,  and  fetcheth  out  the 
stain  and  sting  of  ^in.^Trapp. 

Verse  39.  The  divine  knowledge 
of  man.  1.  Is  infallible.  2.  Uni- 
versal. 3.  Minute.  4.  Is  specially 
concerned  with  his  moral  condition. 
6.  Enables  God  to  reveal  man's  true 
state  to  himself.  6.  Should  foster  in 
man  a  spirit  of  vigilance,  circumspec- 
tion, and  awe. 

Verse  40.  The  fear  of  God  is  again 
connected  with  forgiveness  in  Psalm 
cxxx.  4,  as  if  he  should  not  fear,  unless 
we  could  hope.  So  Milton  makes 
Satan  say,  "  Then  farewell  Hope  ;  and 
with  Hope,  farewell  Fear."  And 
Aristotle  speaks  of  fear  as  inseparably 
connected  with  hope  (Rhet.  ii.  5). — 
Speaker's  Comm. 

Verses  41-43.  The  unifying  power 
of  prayer.  I.  All  men  are  alike  in 
their  moral  needs.  II.  The  exercise 
of  prayer  is  an  invisible  but  all-active 
power  that  unites  the  entire  race — irre- 
spective of  rank,  of  nationality,  of 
creed,  or  outward  circumstances.  III. 
Prayer  is  a  divinely-appointed  means 
of  bringing  all  men  to  a  true  know- 
ledge of  God.  IV.  Prayer  recognises 
the  fact  of  a  universal  brotherhood. 

Verse  41.  Nothing  is  more  remark- 
able in  the  Mosaic  law  than  its  libe- 
rality with  regard  to  strangers.  Not 
only  were  the  Israelites  forbidden  to 
vex  or  oppress  a  stranger  (Ex.  xxii. 
21),  not  only  were  they  required  to 


relieve  the  stranger  who  was  poor  or 
in  distress  (Lev.  xxv.  35),  not  only 
had  they  a  general  command  to  "love 
the  stranger"  (Deut.  x.  19) ;  but,  even 
in  religious  matters,  where  anciently 
almost  all  nations  were  exclusive,  they 
were  exclusive,  I  hey  were  bound  to 
admit  strangers  to  nearly  equal  pri- 
vileges. Such  persons  might  make 
offerings  at  the  tabernacle  under  ex- 
actly the  same  conditions  as  the  native 
Israelites  (Num.  xv.  14-16) ;  and  they 
might  be  present  at  the  solemn  reading 
of  the  law,  which  took  place  once  in 
seven  years  (Deut.  xxxi.  12).  It  is 
quite  in  the  spirit  of  these  enactments 
that  Solomon,  having  first  prayed  God 
on  behalf  of  his  fellow-countrymen, 
should  next  go  on  to  intercede  fox  the 
strangers,  and  to  ask  for  their  prayers 
the  same  acceptance  which  he  had 
previously  begged  for  the  prayers  of 
faithful  Israelites. — Speaker's  Com, 

Verses  41-43.  Even  Solomon  bore 
witness  that  the  house  he  had  built 
could  not  encompass  Him  whom  the 
heavens  cannot  contain,  so  likewise  he 
testified  that  the  covenant  made  by 
God  with  Israel  did  not  exclude  all 
other  nations  from  salvation,  but  rather 
aimed  at  leading  all  men  to  a  know- 
ledge of  the  truth.  If  a  Solomon 
prayed  for  the  attainment  of  this 
object,  how  much  more  does  it  become 
us  to  pray  for  the  conversion  of  the 
heathen,  and  do  our  utmost  that  the 
people  who  sit  in  darkness,  and  in  the 
shadow  of  death,  may  come  to  Him,  a 
light  set  by  God  before  all  nations  to 
lighten  the  heathen  (Luke  ii.  31). 
He  who  desires  to  know  nothing  of 
missions  to  the  heathen,  fails  to  know 
the  God  who  wills  that  help  should  be 
given  to  all  men,  and  that  all  should 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  Himself 
(1  I  im.  ii.  4).  Solomon  hoped  that 
the  heathen,  when  they  heard  the 
great  deeds  which  the  Lord  did  in 
Israel,  would  turn  to  that  God ;  how 
much  stronger  becomes  this  hope 
when  the  infinitely  greater  scheme  of 
salvation  in  Christ  J  esus  is  declared  to 
theml — The  acknowledgment  of  the 
name  of  God  necessarily  causes  the 
fear  of  God.     If  an  individual,  or  an 

123 


OHAP.  Tin. 


EOMJLETIO  COMMENTAHT:  KINGS. 


entire  nation,  be  wanting  in  the  latter, 
they  will,  alas !  lack  a  true  knowledge 
of  God,  let  them  boast  as  they  will  of 
enlightenment  and  enlightened  reli- 
gious ideas. — Lange, 

Verse  43.  Here  is  one  of  the  Old 
Testament  intimations  of  the  univer- 
sality of  the  true  religion  and  true 
worship  of  God.  Though  the  national 
consciousness  of  Israel  was  that  of 
scparateness  from  all  other  nations, 
yet  at  times  the  Spirit  lifted  it  above 
that  exclusiveness,  and  thrilled  it  with 
a  momentary  gxasping  after  universal 
brotherhood. — Terry, 

Verse  44.  This  refers  to  wars 
undertaken  by  Divine  appointment — 
**  Whithersoever  thou  shalt  send 
them  "  :  for  in  no  other  wars  could 
they  expect  the  blessing  and  concur- 
rence of  the  Lord  ;  in  none  other 
could  the  God  of  truth  and  justice 
maintain  their  cause.  There  were 
such  wars  under  the  Mosaic  dispensa- 
tion; there  are  none  such  under  the 
Christian  dispensation :  nor  can  there 
be  any,  for  the  Son  of  Man  is  corae, 
not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save 
them.  Except  mere  defensive  war,  all 
others  are  diabolic ;  and  if  there  were 
no  provocations,  would  there  be  any 
attacks,  and,  consequently,  any  need  of 
defensive  wars  ? — A,  Clarke, 

Verses  44,  45.  Prayer  a  prepara- 
tion for  conflict.  1.  Every  man  is 
called  to  wage  unceasing  warfare 
against  evil.  2.  Man  can  conquer  evil 
only  by  JUivino  aid.  3.  He  who  prays 
the  most  will  fight  the  best.  4.  Prayer 
will  win  the  conflict  when  all  external 
tactics  fail.  5.  God  will  prosper  and 
maintain  the  cause  He  has  made  His 
own. 

—  A  people  who  undertake  war 
should,  fbove  all,  be  sure  that  it  is 
under  the  guidance  of  God.  That 
alone  is  a  just  war  which  is  undei  taken 
with  God's  help  and  in  the  cause  of 
God,  of  truth,  and  of  justice.  A  host 
going  forth  to  battle  should  remember 
this: — Nothing  can  be  done  in  our 
own  strength;  we  are  soon  quite  ruined 
(Psa.  xxxiii.  16),  and  thereupon  w© 
124 


should  pray  and  entreat  the  Lord,  from 
whom  alone  proceeds  victory  (Prov. 
xxi.  31 ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  10).— That  soldier 
can  never  answer  it  to  God  that  strikes 
not  more  as  a  justicerthan  as  an  enemy. 
Soldiers  must  fight  and  pray,  and  pray 
and  fight. 

Verses  46-50.  Captivity  and  free- 
dom. I.  Capti\  ity  is  a  bitter  experi- 
ence to  the  ardent  lover  of  liberty. 
It  is  the  badge  of  defeat — the  loss  of 
home  and  country — exposes  to  ex- 
asperating taunts  and  pitiless  cruelties. 
II.  Captivity  to  sin,  and  on  account  of 
sin,  is  most  degrading,  and  fraught 
with  unutterable  distress.  III.  The 
first  step  towards  freedom  begins  in 
repentance  and  prayer  (verse  47).  IV. 
Freedom  from  sin  involves  restoration 
to  the  Divine  favour  and  inheritance. 

—  Eighteousness  exalteth  a  nation, 
but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people 
(Prov.  xiv.  34).  Thus  the  people 
Israel  is  a  living  example  for  all  times 
as  a  warning  and  as  an  admonition 
(1  Cor.  X.  2.)  The  Lord  has  patience 
with  each  person,  as  also  with  whole 
peoples  and  governments,  for  He  knows 
*'  there  is  no  man  that  is  not  sinful." 
But  when  the  riches  of  His  goodness, 
patience,  and  long- suffering  are  de- 
spised, and  a  nation  given  over  to 
hardness  of  heart  and  impenitence 
(Rom.  ii.  4),  He  casts  it  away  from 
before  His  face,  and  wipes  it  out  as  a 
man  wipeth  a  dish  (2  Kings  xxi.  13), 
so  that  it  ceases  to  be  a  people  and  a 
kingdom.  The  world's  history  is  the 
world's  final  doom.  The  wrath  of  God 
towards  all  ungodly  conduct  of  men  is 
not  a  mere  biblical  form  of  speech,  but 
a  fearful  truth,  which  he  who  hearkens 
not  will  learn  by  experience. — The 
saying :  "  There  is  no  man  that  sin- 
neth  not" — that  may  not  sin — must  not 
be  misused  to  apologize  for  sin  as  a 
natural  weakness ;  it  should  rather 
warn  and  exhort  us  that  we  must  not 
give  the  reins  to  that  will  which  lieth 
even  at  the  door,  but  rule  over  it 
(Geo.  i.  4,  7) ;  for  he  who  committeth 
sin  is  the  slave  of  sin  (Jno.  viii.  34). 
The  statement  is  not  made  with  re- 
ference to  the  possibilities  of  gracious 
attainment  in  the  Christian  life,  but 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  ohaf.  ▼iti. 


to  the  ordinary  facts  of  human  history.  Verse  61.     **  The  midst  of  the  fur- 

The  meaning'  is,  there  is  no  man  and  nace    of     iron."      The    disciplinary 

no  nation  tluit  can  claim  to  be  beyond  aspect  of  affliction.     I.  Is  very  pain- 

the  possibility  of  sinning.     Israel  must  ful  to  endure.     II.  Tests  the  faith  and 

not  assume  that  because  they  are  the  patience  of  the  sufferer.     III.  Purifies 

chosen  people  that  may  not,  hy  run-  and  ennohles  the  whole  man.  lY.  Mag- 

ning  into  sin,  draw  down  the  Divine  nifies  the  grace  and  power  of  God  in 

anger  in  bitter  judgments  upon  them,  sustaining  and  delivering.  V.  Prepares 

But  here  is  surely  no  such  universal  for  a  loftier  mission  and  more  extended 

proposition  as  to  involve,  as  some  as-  usefulness, 
sume,  that  even  the  New  Testament 

saint,  whose  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  Verses  51-53.  Arguments  in  plead- 

God,  sees  never  in  this  life  the  hour  in  ing  with  God.   Based  on — I.  Intimacy 

which  he  does  not  sin.     The  confes-  of  relationship  :  **  They  be  thy  people." 

sion,   **  We  have  sinned"   (verse  47)  1.  Specially  chosen  :  *' For  thou  didst 

must  come    from  the  depths  of    the  separate   them   from   among  all    the 

heart,  and  must  be  in  connection  with  people   of   the   earth."      2.  Specially 

the  conversion  of  the  whole  soul  to  prized:     "Thine   inheritance."      II. 

the  Lord ;  for  he  alone  can  obtain  for-  The  fact  of   great  suffering  :    "  The 

giveness  of  all  his  sins  in  whose  spirit  midst  of  the  furnace  of  iron."     III. 

there  is  no  guile  (Ps.  xxxii.  2).     But  The   memory    of   past   deliverances  : 

how   often   in    days   of    fasting    and  "  Which  thou  hroughtest  forth  out  of 

humiliation   is   this    confession   made  Egypt."      IV.   The  record  of  Divine 

only  with  the  lips !     IIow,  then,  can  pledges    and   promises  :     "As    thou 

a  man  hope  for  mercy  and  forgiveness  spakest  by  the  hand  of  Moses." 
through  the  hearing  of  prayer  ?     The 

Lord,  who  guides  the  hearts  of  men  as  —  In  the  midst  of  our  cries  and 

water-courses,  can   bestow  upon    our  prayers    we    should    rememher    how 

enemies  a  forgiving  and  merciful  heart,  dearly  the  Lord  has  purchased  us  for 

even  as  Israel  experienced.     For  this.  His   own   by  the   blood  of  His   Son 

and  not  for  the  destruction  of  our  ene-  (Eom.  viii.  32  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20  ;  Rev.  v. 

mies,  we  ought  to  pray. — Lange  and  9).     The  grace  of  God  in  Christ  is  the 

Whedon.  foundation  of  our  assurance  that  the 

Lord  will  deliver  us  from  all  tiihula- 

Verse  50.    Solomon  probahly  means,  tion  and  sorrow,  and  will  lead  us  to 

not  merely  such  compassion  as  Evil-  His  heavenly  kingdom.     For  this  do 

Merodach  showed  towards  Jehoiachin  we  close  our  prayer  with  the  words — 

in  alleviating  his  sufferings  and  ame-  For  the  sake  of   thine  eternal  love, 

liorating  his  condition  (2  Kings  xxv.  God  does  not  leave  His  people  in  the 

27-30  ;  Jer.  lii.  31-34),  but  such  as  furnace  of  misery,  but  always  guides 

Cyrus  and  Artaxerxes  showed  in  allow-  them  forth  from  it  (Job.  iii.  22).    Our 

ing  the  captive  Jews  to  return  to  their  prayers  from  beginning  to  end  must 

own  land  (Ezra  i.  3  ;  viii.  13 ;  Neh.  be  grounded  on  the  Divine  promises 

ii.  6,  compared  with  Ps.  cxlvi.  46).  (2  Sam.  vii.  25). — Storks, 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  64-61. 

The  Eleyatino  and  Satis?  jino  Poweb  of  Tkue  Detotiov* 

I.  It  fills  the  soul  with  gratefal  emotion  (verses  54,  55).  As  Solomon 
rose  from  his  knees,  after  his  earnest  and  prolonged  pleading  with  God,  his 
heart  was  so  full  of  Divine  and  heavenly  influence  that  it  overflowed  in  earnest 
and  emphatic  expressions  of  gratitude  and  joy — *'  He  stood  and  blessed  all  the 
congregation  with  a  loud  voice."     And  so  it  is.     They  that  wait  upon  the 

125 


CHAP.  vm.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTAItT:  KINGS. 


Lord  shall  renew  their  strength — shall  gain  an  increase  of  moral  vigour  and 
sympathy.  The  suppliant  may  enter  the  presence-chamber  of  the  Invisible  and 
Eternal  God  with  trembling  and  fear ;  but  he  retires  braced  up  in  coni'age,  and 
clothed  with  supernatural  power,  prepared  for  conflict  and  hopeful  of  victory : 
he  comes,  stricken  down  with  a  gloomy  sense  of  personal  unworthiness  and 
defilement,  and  retires  modestly  elated  with'  a  sense  of  pardon,  transfigured 
with  the  rndiance  of  a  moral  transfer aiation,  the  very  countenance  glistening 
with  the  chrism  of  a  heavenly  benediction.  There  is  no  emotion  so  tender,  so 
profound,  so  full  of  nameless  pathos  and  tranquillising  joy  like  that  which  flows 
into  the  heart  in  its  quiet  moments  of  communion  with  God ;  or  which,  like 
sunshine  after  storm,  visits  the  soul  after  it  has  passed  through  a  season  of 
earnest  and  successful  wrestling  with  God.  The  man  whose  life  is  spent  in 
devotion,  though  bound  to  earth  by  the  dearest  human  ties,  holds  high  fellow- 
ship with  the  world  above.  In  him  earth  and  heaven  are  united — both  are 
understood  by  him  in  their  true  significance,  and  held  in  proper  balance  and 
esteem.  He  is  like  a  tall,  gigantic  mountain  whoso  broad  base  is  fixed  in  the 
rocks  far  down  beneath  our  feet,  but  whose  top,  springing  into  the  lofty 
expanse  above,  reposes  under  the  pure  covering  of  radiant  snow  and  sunlight. 
He  is  lifted  above  the  pleasures  of  this  world,  and  finds  consolation  and  strength 
in  the  darkest  day  of  adversity.  The  apostle  was  "  in  prison  more  frequent, '* 
but  in  his  dungeon  he  found  the  presence  of  Jesus,  and  could  pray  and  sing 
praises  unto  God.  *'  I  thought  of  Jesus,"  said  the  holy  John  Rutherford,  when 
imprisoned  for  the  Gospel's  sake,  "until  every  stone  in  the  walls  of  my  cell 
shone  like  a  ruby." 

II.  It  presents  the  most  exalted  and  satisfying  views  of  the  faithfulness 
of  God  (verse  56).  1.  As  to  a  specijic  Divine  promise.  **  The  Lord  hath  given 
rest  unto  His  people  Israel,  according  to  all  that  He  promised."  Solomon 
blessed  God,  not  for  wealth,  grandeur,  power,  or  victory,  all  of  which  had  been 
so  conspicuously  bestowed  on  Israel,  but  for  rest.  Without  this  blessing  all 
the  others  would  be  unavailing.  Many  weary  years  wheeled  round,  and  many 
sharp  trials  were  endured  before  the  promised  rest  was  given  ;  but  it  came  at 
last.  And  it  will  come  to  us.  Oh !  how  often  does  the  veteran  wilderness- 
traveller,  wearied  with  toil,  and  battered  with  conflict,  turn  his  dim,  weather- 
worn eyes  towards  the  shadowy  outlines  of  the  Canaan  he  approaches,  and 
sigh  for  the  rest  that  remains  for  the  people  of  God !  2.  As  to  every  Divine 
promise.  **  There  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  all  His  good  promise"  (Dent. 
xii.  10;  Josh.  xxi.  45  ;  xxiii.  14).  How  marked  is  the  contrast  between  man, 
the  promise-breaker,  and  God,  the  promise-keeper !  Every  Divine  promise  is 
based  on  His  unchangeable  faithfulness,  and  backed  by  His  Omnipotence. 
Not  only  the  nature  of  God,  but  every  act  of  His  providential  and  redemptive 
government,  is  a  guarantee  of  His  incorruptible  and  unfailing  fidelity.  What- 
ever is  opposed  to  the  Divine  will  must  inevitably  fall :  whatever  God  has 
promised  will  be  inevitably  fulfilled.  The  united  and  fiercest  opposition  of 
earth  and  hell  cannot  hinder  the  final  and  complete  accomplishment  of  the 
Divine  Word. 

III.  It  realizes  the  nearness  of  God  in  the  ordinary  walk  of  life 

(verses  57,  58).  1.  The  Clearness  of  God  with  His  people  is  a  fact  of  past  expe- 
rience. "  As  He  was  with  our  fathers."  He  was  with  Abraham  when  he  was 
called  by  His  mysterious  voice  to  leave  the  idolatrous  associations  of  his  early 
life,  and  migrate  to  an  unknown  country  and  become  the  father  of  a  countless 
heritage.  He  was  with  Jacob  when  he  fled  from  the  fury  of  an  incensed 
brother.  He  appeared  to  him  at  Bethel,  assured  the  distracted  traveller  of 
future  guidance  and  prosperity,  and  renewed  to  him  the  promise  which  had 
been  made  to  Abraham >  He  was  with  Israel  in  Egypt,  preserved  them  amid 
126 


EOMtLETtC  COMMENTARY:  KIK03.  OUap.  viti. 


the  threatenings  and  cruelties  of  their  relentless  taskmasters,  delivered  them 
from  their  oppressors,  defended  them  amid  the  perils  and  trials  of  the  wilder- 
ness, and  guided  them  in  safety  to  the  promised  rest.  God  is  with  Ilis  church 
to-day  ;  and  in  this  fact  is  the  assurance  of  her  final  victory  and  everlasting 
blessedness.  2.  The  nearness  of  God  is  matter  of  personal  consciousness.  '*  That 
He  may  incline  our  hearts  unto  Him."  The  heart  is  the  sphere  in  which  God 
manifests  His  presence — mind  revealing  itself  to  mind,  will  to  will,  heart  to 
heart.  When  the  soul  is  full  of  love  to  God,  it  the  more  readily  recognizes  His 
presence  in  every  event  of  life.  ''  If  we  have  loving,  waiting,  Christ-desiring 
spirits,  everything  in  this  world — the  common  meal,  the  events  of  every  day, 
the  most  veritable  trifles  of  our  eartlily  relationships — will  all  have  hooks  and 
barbs,  as  it  were,  which  will  draw  alter  them  thoughts  of  Him.  There  is 
nothing  so  small  but  that  to  it  there  may  be  attached  some  filament  which  will 
bring  after  it  the  whole  majesty  and  grace  of  Christ  and  His  love."  Man  is 
never  so  sweetly  conscious  of  the  nearness  of  God  as  when  he  is  bowed  at  His 
footstool  in  humble  and  sincere  devotion.  He  only  forsakes  those  who  have 
forsaken  Him  (Ps.  ix,  11).  3.  The  nearness  of  God  is  the  great  inspiration  to  a 
life  of  obedience.  **  To  walk  in  all  His  ways,  and  to  keep  His  commandments 
and  His  statutes  and  His  judgments."  The  temptations  to  turn  aside  from 
rectitude  are  many  and  powerful,  but  for  Divine  aid  we  should  be  powerless  to 
resist.  When,  says  one,  the  believer  is  as  nigh  to  God  as  a  creature  can  be, 
the  sound  of  the  devil's  feet  is  heard  behind  him  ;  but,  blessed  be  God !  He  is 
near  to  His  people  as  the  devil  can  be,  and  if  the  devil  touch  Job's  flesh  and 
Job's  bone  too,  God  is  in  Job's  heart,  and  that  is  nigher.  The  end  of  Divine 
blessing  is  to  bring  the  heart  near  to  Him,  and  to  give  grace  to  walk  in  His 
way  with  uprightness  and  perseverance. 

IV.  It  teaches  how  temporal  blessings  are  to  be  subordinated  and  made 
contributory  to  the  more  glorious  end  of  spreading  ths  knowledge  of  the 
only  true  God  (verses  59,  60).  Jehovah  blessed  Israel  with  a  marvellous  history, 
with  deliverances,  successes,  and  affluence  which  reached  their  climax  of 
grandeur  and  power  in  the  age  of  Solouiou,  but  He  did  it  all  for  His  name's  sake ; 
and  to  fit  the  nation  for  its  great  mission  in  making  known  His  salvation  to  all 
people  (verse  60).  Every  temporal  blessing  has  its  moral  significance,  and 
increases  the  responsibility  of  the  recipient.  Wealth,  intellectual  genius,  spiritual 
influence,  that  is  not  used  for  God  will  only  intensify  the  sorrows  and  sufl'erings 
of  the  unfaithful  possessor.  Like  most  garments,  like  most  carpets,  everything 
has  a  right  side  and  a  wrong  side.  You  can  take  any  joy,  and  by  turning  it 
round  find  troubles  on  the  other  side ;  or  you  may  take  the  greatest  tiouble, 
and  by  turning  it  round  find  joys  on  the  other  side.  The  gloonuest  mountain 
never  casts  a  shadow  on  both  sides  at  once,  nor  does  the  greatest  of  life's  calamities. 
By  aiming  at  the  glory  of  God  in  all  things,  sorrows  will  be  turned  into  joy, 
reverses  into  success. 

V.  It  stimulates  the  soul  after  a  higher  standard  of  moral  perfection 
(verse  61).  The  best  and  greatest  wish  which  a  king  can  form  for  his  people, 
a  father  for  his  children,  a  pastor  for  his  flock,  is — May  your  heart  be  rigliteous— 
i.e.y  whole  and  undivided  before  the  Lord  our  God.  He  who  elects  to  side  with 
Him  must  do  so  wholly  end  entirely  :  all  *' halting  between  two  opinions"  is  an 
abomination  to  him  :  the  lukewarm- he  will  spue  out  of  his  mouth.  Be  thou  on 
the  Lord's  side,  and  he  will  be  with  thee  {Lcuige).  The  great  end  of  prayer  is 
to  encourage  a  holier  life;  and  it  is  a  miglity  agency  in  promoting  that  end. 
We  must  find  happiness  in  our  every-day  life  and  in  the  performance  of  our 
ordinary  duties,  or  we  shall  miss  it  altogether.  The  greatest  happiness  is  the 
outgrowth  of  the  highest  moral  perfection,  and  the  spring  of  both  is  found  in  a 
spirit  of  profound  devotion. 

127 


OHAP.  VIU. 


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


Lessons: — 1.  The  soul  touches  the  lowest  depth  of  humiliation  and  reaches  its 
most  exalted  blessedness  in  communion  with  God.  2.  The  brightest  visions  of  God's 
character  and  the  most  practical  lessons  for  the  conduct  of  life  are  obtained  in  the 
lest  moods  of  devotion.  3.  Frayer  is  one  of  the  most  potent  agencies  in  promoting 
a  holier  life. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Verses  54-61.  Solomon's  final 
address  to  the  people  contains — 1.  A 
psalm  of  praise  (verse  56).  2.  A  wish 
for  a  blessing  (verses  57-60).  3.  A 
warning  (verse  61). 

Verse  56.  "  The  Lord  hath  given 
rest  unto  His  people."  Compared 
with  1  Chronicles  xxiii.  25.  The  rest 
of  the  people  of  God.     T.  In  the 

mysterious    polity   of   the    people   of 
Israel,  spiritual  and  temporal  blessings 
were  so  closely  allied  that  the  same 
language  might  naturally  he  employed 
to   signify   either.      "When   with   the 
conviction    of  special    divine    super- 
intendence was  combined  the  pure  and 
lofty    moral  nature    of    the    Divine 
Governor,  as  revealed  in  the  law  issued 
by  Moses,  it  is  inconceivable  but  that 
the  higher  class  of  Israelitish  minds, 
the  holy  and  meditative  class,   must 
often   have  felt    that  the     mass    of 
ordinances    which    surrounded    them 
were  truly  meant  as  types   of   some 
more  profound  spiritual  realities ;  and 
that  their  whole  national  history  was 
intended  to  image  forth  a  moral  his- 
tory, wider  in  its  purpose  and  extent, 
and  more  adequate  to  the  power  and 
dignity   of  a   God   whom  they   well 
knew  to  be  the  God  of  the  whole  earth 
as  well  as  of  the  territory  of  Israel, 
yea,  even  a  God  whom  ''the  heaven 
of  heavens   could   not   contain."     In 
the  fourth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  it  is  shown    that  the   rest 
which  the  Israelites  enjoyed  in  the 
land  of  promise,  no  less  than  the  rest 
of  the  Sabbath-day,  was  symbolical  of 
the  repose  of  the  persevering  Christian. 
II,  It  is  not  unwarrantable  to  con- 
jecture that  when  the  patriot  cried — 
**The  Lord  hath  given  rest  unto  His 
people  Israel,"  he  was  not  more  the 
patriot  of  Israel  than  of  mankind  ;  or 
at  least,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  spoke 
123 


through  his  lips  with  a  higher  purpose, 
to  be  explained  and  developed  by  the 
events  of  subsequent  ages.     The  God 
of  Israel,  in  permitting  His   ark  to 
be  deposited  in  a  permanent  abode, 
seemed  to  guarantee  the  eternal  glory 
of  the  city  of  David.     And  it  seemed 
at  length  that  the  Lord  was  about  to 
give   His   people  the   proof    of    His 
peculiar   favour,    which   they    might 
naturally  have  expected,  by  actually 
exalting  them  to  the  highest  temporal 
position   among   the    nations   of    the 
earth,  and  making  the  divine  glory  on 
the  mercy  seat  the  centre  from  which 
the  deputed  authority  of  God  was  to 
radiate  to  the  circumferencdVof  the 
world.     It  was  the  destiny  of  Israel, 
after  a  brief  period  of  prosperity,  to 
separate  into  rival  dynasties,  to  run 
through  a  course  of  much  iniquity,  to 
despise  constant,  reiterated  warnings, 
and  at  length  to  merge  into  utter  ruin, 
undestroyed,    indeed,    but    preserved 
only  as  a  monument  of  God's  abiding 
vengeance.     But  mark  the  unsearch- 
able depths  of  the  purposes  of  Provi- 
dence !      These   national   misfortunos 
brought     in     universal     blessedness. 
Israel  fell  to  prepare  the  salvation  of 
mankind ;  and  the  rest  which  the  Lord 
denied  His   people   was  denied  only 
that   an   everlasting    rest    might    be 
secured  to   His   spiritual   people   for 
ever  !     III.  This  rest  which  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel  bestows  on  His  spiritual 
Israel  is  no  unattainable  blessing  even 
on  this  side  of  tho  grave.     It  is  the 
mark  of  a  poor  spirit  to  be  satisfied 
with  small  things.    With  the  temporal 
dispensations  of  God,   whatever  they 
be,  a  Christian  is  bound  to  be  content ; 
but  for  the  man  who  is  not  a  Christian, 
that  discontent  should  be  his  portion 
is  the  prayer  of  mercy  itself!     Such 
discontent  is  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  for  whom  his  nature  was  origin- 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHAp.  ym. 


ally   formed,  calling    upon    him    to 
perceive  and  acknowledge  that  he  has 
no   abiding   city   here,    and   that    in 
seeking  after  the  thinj2:s  that  belong 
to  his  peace,   he   must  turn   to   the 
Prince  of  Peace.     What  some  dreamer 
imagined  as  to  the  structure  of  the 
earth  we  live  on,  is  a  truth  as  regards 
our  own  internal   nature.     We   are, 
indeed,   a  fragment  struck  from   the 
great  source  of  light  and  heat,  from 
the  sun  of  eternal  righteousness ;  and 
if  the  force  that  wilfully  separates  us 
from  our  origin  would  but  cease  to 
operate,    we   should    return    to    our 
native  birth-place,  even  the  bosom  of 
our    Father ;   we   should   fly   to   the 
centre  of  all  good,  and  there  abide  in 
blessedness  for  ever.     To  efi'ect  this 
union    is    the    great    object    of  our 
religion :     Christ  the  Mediator  is  the 
link   that  binds  us  to  the  centre  of 
everlasting  happiness.      lY.  1.  Rest 
and  peace  must  fall  upon  a  Christian 
spirit,  first  from  its  devotion  to  Christ 
Himself,  and  its  devoted  imitation  of 
His  pure  and  perfect  example.     The 
life  of  a  Christian  is  the  imitation  of 
Christ.     And,  among  all  the  imitable 
attributes   of   Christ,    none    is    more 
beautiful    than     His    perfect   peace. 
Blessed  Lord !   Thou  dost  indeed  give 
us  this  peace  when  Thou  givcst  Thyself 
as  our  example  !     To  be  thy  disciples 
and  copyists  is  to  be  at  peace  with 
everything  but  sin.     2.  This  influence 
of  the  character  of  Christ  becoming  the 
great  examplar  of  their  actions  is  not 
the  only  cause  which  works  peace  and 
rest   in  the   hearts  of  his  followers. 
The  very  singleness  of  the  object  of 
His  hope  has  a  power  to  elevate  the 
Christian  above  the  petty  concerns  of 
daily  life.     The  true  peace  of  mind  is 
that  which  resolves  all  into  a  single 
principle.     God  is  one  :  let  our  affec- 
tions but  partake  of  the  unity  of  that 
object,  and  we  shall  have  reached  the 
pathway  of  real  and  imperishable  rest. 
3.  The  same  question  might  be  argued 
from  the  very  nature  of  the  Christian 
affections,  affections  whose  very  exer- 
cise is  peace  and  happiness.     In  the 
very  exercise    of  faith  and  hope  and 
love,  there  are  the  materials  of  peace, 
even  apart  from  the  subject  of  these 

K 


feelings.      The   mere    position   of   a 
mind  believing,  trusting,  and  loving  is 
one  of  real  happiness  and  rest.     4.  In 
such    a    state    as    ours,    unless    the 
eternal  world  in  some  manner  becomes 
the   guarantee   of  this,    we    are    the 
slaves  of  every  accident,  without  any 
hope  for  the  future,  any  consolation 
for    misfortune,    any    substantial    or 
permanent   motive  for   conduct,    any 
reward  for  endurance,  any  guide  for 
life.     The  earthly  and  the  heavenly 
elements   must   combine,    or   we   are 
powerless.     To  have  the  great  object 
of   our  thoughts  placed   beyond   the 
chances  of  human  life  is  to  place  our- 
selves    beyond     them !       Our    hope 
**  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil." 
The  Christian  lays   hold  of  a   chain 
which  is  bound  to  the  throne  of  God ; 
he  links  himself  to  the  eternal  cer- 
tainties   of   nature;    the    immutable 
attributes  of  the  God  of  the  universe 
are  pledged  for  his  security.     As  the 
certainty  of  the  end  is  greater  than 
that  of  the  means,  and  as  the  dead 
world  that  surrounds  us  exists,  doubt- 
less, with  a  main  view  to  the  Christian 
people  of  God — the  less  perfect  being 
ever  subordinate  to  the  more  perfect — 
so  we  may  say  that  the  finest  laws  of 
nature  and  man,  the  very  foundations 
of  the  world  that  now  is,  are  less  finn 
and  durable  than  the  purpose  of  God 
to  make  His  faithful   people  happy! 
(Condensed  from  Archer  Butler.) 

"  There  hath  not  failed  one  word  of 
all  His  good  promise.'^  The  Divine 
purpose  fulfilled.  1.  God  hath 
formed  a  purpose  of  mercy  toward 
mankind.  2.  The  fulfilment  of  this 
purpose  of  mercy  is  committed  to  the 
Lord  Jesus — accomplished  by  His  own 
atonement  for  sin,  and  by  the  com- 
munication of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3. 
The  Divine  purpose  of  mercy,  under 
the  administration  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
shall  be  perfectly  and  triumphantly 
accomplished. 

Yerse  57.  The  presence  of  God. 
1.  Necessary.  2.  Promised.  3.  Actu- 
ally experienced.  4.  Continued  on 
obedience.  5.  The  source  of  all  help 
and  happiness. 

Yerse  58.     All  keeping  of  the  com- 

129 


OHlP.  YIII. 


SOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS, 


mandments,  all  mere  morality,  without 
submission  of  the  heart  to  God,  is  worth- 
less; a  mere  shell  without  the  kernel. 

Verses  59,  60.  The  words  which 
rise  out  of  the  depths  of  the  heart  to 
God  reach  Him  and  ahide  with  Him. 
He  forgets  them  not  (Eev.  viii.  3,4). 
That  the  Lord  is  God,  and  none  other, 
seems  nowhere  more  conspicuous  than 
in  the  choosing  and  leading  of  the 
people  Israel,  in  which  He  has  revealed 
Himself  in  His  might  and  glory,  in  His 
holiness  and  justice.  His  faithfulness 
and  mercy  (Psalm  cxlv.  3-12).  'Eo 
better  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  one 
living  God  than  the  history  of  Israel. — 
Lange. 

Verse  61  (compared  with  Exod. 
XV.  11).  Holiness  the  supreme  end 
of  life.  1.  We  need  the  revelation  of 
God's  holiness  in  order  to  sustain  us  in 
the  presence  of  the  tremendous  forces 
of  the  external  universe,  and  in  the 
presence  of  what  sometimes  seems  to 
be  the  chaotic  confusion  of  this  world^s 
affairs.  To  me  it  is  not  the  benevolence 
of  God  which  seems  to  be  supremely 
necessary  for  the  solace  and  the  peace 
of  the  heart,  but  His  justice.  I  want 
to  know  that  the  law  of  righteousness, 
to  which  my  conscience  does  homage, 
will  sooner  or  later  be  openly  and  com- 
pletely vindicated ;  that  even  now  we 
are  not  under  the  government  of  mere 
chance  or  of  brute  force,  but  of  a  living 
holiness;  that  there  is  not  only  a  judg- 
ment seat  before  which,  in  some  re- 
mote and  uncei-tain  day,  all  men  will 
have  to  give  an  account  of  the  deeds 
done  in  the  body,  but  that  now  a 
righteous  God  rules  the  world,  and 
suffers  no  irreparable  injustice  to  be 
inflicted  on  any  man ;  that  however 
intolerable  th-^  actual  condition  of  hu- 
man attairs  may  seem  to  me.  He  who 
has  power  to  prevent  every  accident, 
every  mistake,  every  folly,  every 
crime ;  He  who  could  strike  the  liar 
dumb  before  he  utters  the  slander 
which  will  break  the  heart  of  the 
innocent;  He  who  could  unmask  before 
it  is  consummated  the  villainy  which 
will  ruin  the  peace  and  honour  of  a  fnir 
and  virtuoushome ;  He  who  could  strike 
130 


down  with  mortal  disease  the  reckless 
statesman  who  hurries  a  nation  into  an 
unnecessary  and  iniquitous  war;  I 
want  to  know  that  He  the  Almighty 
and  Omniscient  Euler  of  all  men  is  not 
careless  of  what  happens  on  earth,  that 
He  has  no  selfish  purpose  to  accomplish, 
that  He  is  not  wilful,  that  He  is  not 
capricious,  but  absolutely  and  perfectly 
just ;  that  He  has  a  hatred  and  scorn 
as  much  more  intense  than  mine  for 
every  sin  as  His  nature  is  greater  than 
my  own.  Knowing  this — and  I  know 
it  —  I  can  look  back  upon  the 
sorrowful  ages  of  human  history,  I 
can  look  round  upon  the  wild  con- 
fusions of  my  own  time,  I  can  look 
forward  to  the  dark  and  stormy  future 
which,  apart  from  Him,  promises  no 
sure  relief  from  the  vast  and  terrible 
evils  which  seem  to  be  the  inheritance 
of  our  race,  and  my  heart  is  at  rest. 
Prom  the  vision  of  God's  holiness  I 
receive  a  peace  which  the  world  cannot 
give,  and  which  the  world  cannot  take 
away.  2.  Nor  is  it  only  peace  of 
heart  which  God's  holiness  inspires. 
The  Divine  holiness  is  a  strong  support 
to  all  our  endeavours  to  attain  moral 
and  spiritual  perfection.  Whatever 
mystery  may  rest  upon  the  Divine 
government,  and  however  unable  we 
may  be  to  interpret  the  issues  that 
are  to  come  out  of  the  movements  of 
that  providence  over  which  God  pre- 
sides, we  can  be  in  no  doubt  concerning 
God's  ultimate  purpose  in  relation  to 
ourselves.  Apart  from  any  spiritual 
relation,  we  have  an  absolute  certainty 
that  wherever  there  is  the  capacity 
for  holiness,  holiness  must  be  the  great 
end  of  existence.  We  are  capable  of 
a  perfection  which  transcends,  though 
it  includes  moral  virtue,  and  this  per- 
fection is  holiness.  Since  we  are 
capable  of  it,  it  is,  and  it  must  be,  the 
supreme  end  for  which  we  ought  to 
live.  We  miss  the  glory  which  is 
within  our  reach  if  we  do  not  attain 
to  it.  God's  holiness  makes  it  certain 
that  He  regards  our  holiness  as  the 
very  crown  of  our  nature,  apart  from 
which  the  idea  which  He  desires  to 
have  illustrated  in  every  man  is  un- 
fulfilled. 3.  God  has  no  ultimate  use 
for  a  man  who  is  not  holy,  and  such  a 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTABT:  KINGS.  chap.  viii. 


man  does  not  become  what  he  was  which  God  made  us.  The  grace  that 
meant  to  be.  Being  holy  Himself,  it  Christ  reveals  does  not  for  a  moment 
must  be,  and  it  is,  His  great  concern  suggest  that  God  regards  our  sin  with 
that  we  should  attain  to  moral  and  that  pity  and  compassion  with  which 
spiritual  perfection.  God's  supreme  it  is  the  tendency  of  our  modem 
concern  in  relation  to  you  and  me  is,  religious  lives  to  regard  all  sin ;  but 
not  that  we  should  be  happy  to-day  or  that  He  abhors  sin  so  much,  that  He 
to-morrow,  and  all  our  life  through  :  Himself  stooped  to  the  most  terrible 
His  supreme  concern  is  that  we  should      sufferings,  to  shame  and  to  death,   in 

regard  sin  with  intense  and  unutterable  order  to  deliver  us  from   sin.      The 

abhorrence,  and  that  we  should  regard  holiness  of  God  lies  at  the  very  root  of 

goodness  with  a  deep  and  passionate  the   redemptive   work    of   the    Lord 

affection.     And  God  will  not  shrink  Jesus  Christ.     It  is  just  because  God 

from    inflicting    any    pain,    however  is  so  holy  that  He  set  His  heart  upon 

sharp,  or  any  suffering,  however  pro-  redeeming  us  from  the  power  of  sin. 

tracted,  upon  any  of  us,  that  may  be  Until  we  know  that  God  is  glorious  in 

necessary  in   order  to  fulfil  His  great  holiness,  as  well  as  infinite  in  mercy, 

design.     lY.  This  was  His   supreme  and  find  in  His  very  holiness  that  on 

purpose   in   sending   the   Lord   Jesus  which  we  shall  build  our  trust,  and 

C!hrist  into  the  world.     Christ  came  that  out  of  which  our  joy  shall  spring, 

to  save  us  from  our  sins,  not  merely  we  know  very  little  of  the  fulness  of 

to  release  us  from  the  penalty  of  our  life,  and  the  depth  of  peace,  and  the 

sins,  much  less  to  assure  us  that  we  perfection  of  blessedness  possible  to  us 

may  remain  sinful  and  yet  not  miss  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. — (Con- 

the   gloiy   and    the    blessedness    for  densedfiomH.  TF,  Dale  in  0,W,^), 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  62—66. 
Sackifice  the  Test  of  Gratitijde. 

The  Temple,  the  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah,  the  pride  of  the  Jews,  the 
marvel  of  the  ages,  was  now  completed ;  and  its  solemn  dedication  was  attended 
with  overwhelming  manifestations  of  the  divine  presence  and  glory.  Its  actual 
consecration  is  now  crowned  with  an  act  of  sacrifice  on  a  scale  of  unexampled 
magnitude  and  grandeur.  Monarch  and  people  cheerfully  unite  in  offering  the 
vast  holocaust.  As  the  whole  empire  shared  in  the  religious  benefits  of  the 
occasion,  so  it  was  fitting  it  should  share  in  its  religious  duties.     Observe — 

I.  That  a  grateful  heart  prompts  to  acts  of  sacrifice.  Bowed  under  a 
sense  of  the  Divine  condescension  and  beneficence,  the  people  burst  forth  in 
praising  Jehovah,  'Tor  He  is  good;  for  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever" 
(2  Chron.  vii.  3).  It  is  when  the  heart  is  touched  and  melted  with  gratitude 
that  it  is  most  prolific  in  generous  sacrifices,  in  holy  resolves,  and  in  initiating 
noble  enterprises.  The  origin  of  many  a  stately  building,  of  many  a  princely 
charitable  endowment,  and  of  many  a  saciitice  which,  though  small  as  the 
widow's  two  mites,  has,  like  hers,  been  the  most  acceptable  to  heaven,  may  be 
traced  to  the  tender  impulse  of  a  holy  and  grateful  heart.  While  Jacob  was 
impressed  with  the  goodness  of  a  manifested  God,  he  vowed  a  vow  and  set  up  a 
pillar  (Gen.  xxviii.  16-22).  When  Isaiah  felt  the  cleansing  touch  of  the 
Seraphim,  and  saw  the  ineffable  glory  of  Jehovah,  the  difficulties  of  his  mission 
vanished,  and  his  grateful  and  enraptured  spirit  eagerly  cried,  **  Here  am  I; 
send  me  !"  (Isa.  vi.  1-8.)  In  a  similar  way,  many  a  brave  and  successful 
missionary  pioneer  has  offered  his  all  upon  the  altar.  The  heart  that  is  in- 
capable of  gratitude  is  incapable  of  anything  truly  great. 

II.  That  sacrifice  should  be  proportioned  to  the  magnitude  and  character 
of  the  benefits  conferred  (verse  62-64).     1.  It  should  be  e^ual  to  the  oeeasion. 

131 


CHAP.  VIII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


The  opening  of  the  temple  was  the  greatest  event  in  the  history  of  the 
Israelitish  nation.  It  was  the  fulfilment  of  a  promise  of  many  years'  standing; 
the  crowning  act  of  a  graduated  series  of  laborious  preparations.  The  liberality 
with  which  the  people  offered  their  gifts,  the  enthusiasm  with  which  they 
laboured  in  its  erection,  and  the  readiness  with  which  they  gathered  to  cele- 
brate its  dedication,  indicate  the  supreme  importance  in  which  it  stood  in  the 
national  estimation.  And  now  the  sacrifices  they  are  called  to  offer  must  bear 
some  adequate  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  the  occasion.  Alas !  how  few 
gifts  to  the  church  of  God,  now-a-days,  are  worthy  of  the  name  of  sacrifice? 
Men — Christian  men  so-called — wil]  spend  hundreds  of  pounds  in  a  pleasure 
trip,  a  fancy  ball,  a  luxurious  banquet,  or  a  bit  of  jewellery,  and  yet  insult  the 
church  of  Christ  by  grudgingly  offering  a  paltry  piece  of  silver  !  There  is 
neither  poetical  nor  any  other  kind  of  justice  in  conduct  like  this.  It  is 
shockingly  below  the  occasion.  All  sense  of  honour,  of  obligation,  of  gratitude, 
is  utterly  quenched.  2.  It  should  he  proportioned  to  ahility.  God  had  bestowed 
on  Solomon  great  commercial  prosperity,  great  wealth,  great  intellectual 
powers,  great  religious  privileges,  and  he  strives  on  this  occaf^ion  to  offer  a  be- 
coming return  to  the  Great  Giver  of  all  good.  The  Lord  estimates  the  sacri- 
fices of  the  rich,  not  by  what  is  given,  but  by  what  is  left.  It  was  a  frequent 
saying  of  Gon^alvo  de  Cordova,  the  great  Spanish  captain,  "]N"ever  stint  your 
hand:  there  is  no  mode  of  enjoying  one's  property  like  giving  it  away."  It 
is  expected  by  every  law  of  right  and  justice  that  the  wealthy  should  offer  to 

God's  cause  in  accordance  with  their  means  ;  that  the  intellectually  gifted  should 
devote  their  best  powers  to  promote  His  glory ;  and  that  those  who  are  specially 
endowed  with  spiritual  influence  should  use  it  diligently  for  the  good  of  humanity, 
God  does  not  expect  impossibilities.  "  If  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  it  is  ac- 
cepted a' cording  to  that  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  that  he  hath  not " 

(2  Cor.  viii.  12). 

III.  That  sacrifice  is  a  privilege  to  be  enjoyed  (verse  65).  It  was  here 
accompanied  with  great  festivities.  The  feast  of  the  dedication  of  the  altar 
lasted  for  a  week,  over  which  period,  probably,  the  offering  of  the  enormoua 
mass  of  sacrificial  victims  was  extended.  This,  again,  was  succeeded  by  the 
Feast  of  the  Tabernacles  (2  Chron.  vii.  8,  9),  now  celebrated  with  more  than  the 
usual  festivities.  The  mere  feasting  occasioned  by  the  vast  number  of  victims 
wassufficient  to  mark  the  grandeur  of  the  festival,  Whatever  we  do  for  God  should 
be  done  cheerfully  and  willingly,  with  all  the  relish  of  an  enjoyable  feast :  not  as 
if  performing  some  iiksome  and  unpleasant  task,  but  as  if  enjoying  a  distinguished 
privilege.  It  is  a  triumph  of  Divine  grace  in  man,  and  an  evidence  of  a  high 
state  of  personal  sanctity,  when  it  becomes  a  joy  to  make  sacrifices.  It  is  then 
that  man  most  closely  imitates  the  example  of  the  great  Sacrificial  Victim  who 
said,  "  Lo  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  God !  "  and  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set 
before  Him  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame. 

IV.  That  sacrifice  is  often  followed  by  the  most  joyous  results  (verse  66). 

The  vast  host  of  Israelites  who  had  joined  in  the  celebration  was  filled  with 
joy  and  thankfulness.  When  the  people  were  dismissed  they  blessed  the  king, 
and  went  away  to  their  tents,  glad  and  merry  of  heart,  lightening  the  journey 
home  with  songs  of  joy,  "for  all  the  goodness  that  the  Lord  had  done  for  David 
His  servant,  and  for  Isiael  His  people."  Great  sacrifices  are  often  succeeded 
by  great  blessings.  What  we  sow  in  tears,  we  reap  in  joy.  The  sacrifices  of  a 
few  may  contribute  to  the  happiness  of  the  many.  The  one  sacrifice  of  the  Son 
of  God  has  filled  earth  and  heaven  with  gladness. 

Lessons: — t.   We  owe  to  God  more  than  we  can  ever  repay.    2.  The  most  ac* 
ceptahle  sacrifice  to  God  is  a  grateful  and  obedient  life,     3.   We  find  our  ^reatesi 
happiness  in  our  greatest  sacrifices- 
132 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


CHAP.  VIII. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Verses  62-66.  The  Temple  Dedica- 
tion. 1.  A  thanksgiving  feast  (vtrses 
62,  63).  2.  A  covenant  feast  (verse 
65).     3.  A  feast  of  great  gladness. 

—  For  great  benefits  men  should 
offer  great  thanksgivings,  and  iiiTieed 
should  prove  their  gratitude  by  pro- 
moting the  true  service  of  God,  and 
by  benevolence  to  the  poor  and  needy. 
— Lange, 

Verse   62.    A  sublime  spectacle. 

1.  A  nation  before  the  Lord  conse- 
crating a   temple    to    His    worship. 

2.  King  and  people  mutually  ac  know- 
ledging  sin.  3.  King  and  people 
uniting  in  highest  acts  of  devotion. 
4.  King  and  people  rejoicing  together. 

Verse  63.  Sacrifices.  1.  Were 
Differed  ever  since  the  fall.  2.  Were 
a  perpetual  memorial  of  Jehovah's 
covenant  with  His  people.  3.  An 
acknowledjiment  of  Divine  mercies. 
4.  Necessary  as  an  expiation  for 
human  sin. 

Verse  64.  The  Burnt  Offering  was 
so  called  because  the  victim  was 
wholly  consumed  by  fire  upon  the 
altar,  and  so,  as  it  were,  sent  up  to 
God  on  the  wings  of  fire.  This  idea 
which  is  expressed  in  the  account 
of  Noah's  sacrifice,  and  which  con- 
stantly recurs  both  in  the  Scriptures 
and  in  profane  authors,  is  implied  in 
the  Hebrew  word,  which  signifies 
to  ascend.  The  sacrifice  was  a  memo- 
rial of  God's  covenant,  and  signified 
that  the  offerer  belonged  wholly  to 
God,  and  that  he  dedicated  himself 
soul  and  body  to  Him,  and  placed  his 
life  at  His  disposal.  And  every  such 
sacrifice  was  a  type  of  the  perfect 
off'ering  made  by  Christ,  on  behalf  of 
the  human  race,  of  His  human  nature 
and  will  to  the  will  of  the  Father. 
The  Meat  Offering  always  accom- 
panied the  burnt  ofi'ering,  for  which 
it  might  be  substituted  by  the  poor. 
As  the  burnt  offering  signified  the 
^onsecration  of  life  to  God,  both  that 
of  the  off'erer  himself  and  of  his  living 
property,  so  in  the  meat  off'ering  the 
produce  of  the  land   was   presented 


before  Jehovah,  as  being  His  gift. 
The  Peace  Offering  was  not  an  atoning 
sacrifice  to  make  peace  with  God,  but 
a  joyful  celebration  of  peace  made 
through  the  covenant.  In  this  part 
of  the  Mosaic  ritual,  more  than  in 
any  other,  wo  see  Jehovah  present  in 
His  house,  inviting  the  worshipper  to 
feast  with  Him.  Peace  offerings 
were  presented  either  as  a  thanks- 
giving, or  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow,  or 
as  \x  free-will  offering  of  love  and  joy. 

Verse  66.  When  a  man  has  ren- 
dered unto  God  what  is  of  God,  he 
can  go  forth  to  his  daily  labour  with 
joy  and  gladness.  To  praise  and  thank 
God  makes  the  heart  glad  and  willing 
to  work.  A  good  king  is  the  joy  of 
his  subjects.  When  we  return  to 
our  eternal  home,  our  joy  shall  never 
end ;  and  our  King  Jesus  will  be  the 
theme  of  everlasting  praise. 

—  As  the  King  concluded,  the 
cloud  which  had  rested  over  the  Holy 
of  Holies  grew  brighter  and  more 
dazzling ;  fire  broke  out  and  consumed 
all  the  sacrifices  (2  Chron.  vii.  1); 
the  priests  stood  without,  awestruck 
by  the  insupportable  splendour;  the 
whole  people  fell  on  their  faces,  and 
worshipped  and  praised  the  Lord, 
"  for  He  is  good,  for  His  mercy  is 
for  ever.'*  Which  was  the  greater, 
the  external  magnificence  or  the 
moral  sublimity  of  this  scene  ?  Was 
it  the  Temple,  situated  on  its  com- 
manding eminence,  with  all  its  courts, 
the  dazzling  splendour  of  its  mate- 
rials, the  innumerable  multitudes, 
the  priests  in  their  gorgeous  attire, 
the  king,  with  all  the  insignia  of 
royalty  on  his  throne  of  burnished 
brass,  the  music,  the  radiant  cloud 
filling  the  Temple,  the  sudden  fire 
flashing  upon  the  altar,  the  whole 
nation  upon  their  knees  ?  Was  it  not 
rather  the  religious  grandeur  of  the 
hymns  and  of  the  prayer ;  the  exalted 
and  rational  views  of  the  Divine 
Nature ;  the  union  of  a  wliole  people 
in  the  adoration  of  one  Great,  Incom- 
prehensible, Almighty,  Everlasting 
Creator  ? — Dean  Milman. 

—  "For  all  the  goodness  that  the 

i33 


OTlF.  IX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS. 


Lord  had  done  for  David  "his  servant."  3.    Demands  continued  obedience  on 

The   heritage  of  the   good.     1.   Is  the  part  of  its  possessor.     4.  Is   an 

transmitted  to  succeeding  generations.  unspeakable  boon  to  any  nation.     6. 

2.  Bears   constant   testimony    to  the  Should    be     earnestly     coveted    and 

Divine  faithfulness  (comp.  verse  15).  faithfully  preserved^ 


CHAPTER  IX. 

SEVERAL  IMPEBIAii  TRANSACTIONS. 

Critical  and  Explanatoet  Notks. — Chapter  divides  itself  into  two  sections:  rersos  1-9, 
Gods  answer,  of  promise  and  warning,  to  Solomon's  prayer;  verses  10-27,  transactions 
between  Solomon  and  Hiram,  with  a  record  of  Solomon's  levy  of  labourers,  his  officers  and 
servants,  his  navy  and  foreign  trade.  Verse  1.  It  came  to  pass,  Ac. — ♦.  «.,  '*  at  the  end  of 
twenty  years"  (verse  10),  for  verse  1  begins  a  narrative  which  verse  2  interrupts;  verses  2-9 
being  a  parenthesis.     Solomon's  desire,  plitH— (1  Chron.  vii.  11),  "  All  that  came  into  Solo- 

V  •• 

mon's  heart."  Thenius  suggests  "  pleasure  buildings  "  as  in  distinction  from  public  works. 
But  verse  19  explains  his  "desire"  as  having  reference  to  "  Jerusalem,  Lebanon,  and  all  the 
land  of  his  dominion" — probably  aqueducts,  &c.  Verse  2.  That  the  Lord  appeared,  &c.— 
Rather,  "/or  the  Lord  appeared,"  as  interposing  this  section,  which  continues  till  verse  10 
resumes  the  narrative.  The  second  time  as,  &c. — In  Gibeon,  during  the  night  after  his  sacri- 
fices (chap  iii.  5) ;  in  this  instance,  during  the  night  following  the  dedication  prayer  and  sacri- 
ficial offerings  ;  and  again  "  in  a  dream."  Verse  3.  Sept.  inserts,  after  '*  Supplication  that  thou 
hast  made  before  me,"  "7  have  done  to  thee  according  to  all  thy  prayer.'"  Verse  6.  If  ye 
shall  at  all  turn. — A.  V.  implies  only  the  slightest  dereliction,  **at  all  turn;"  whereas 
"{i^^il  'yVD  is  an  intensive  Hebraism,  implying  entirety,  absolute  apostasy.     Which  I 

have  set  before  you :  or,  Moses  set  before  yon ;  so  Sept.  Notice  also  that  the  threatening 
(verse  7)  is  a  quotation  from  Moses  (Deut.  xxviii.  37).     Verse  8.  This  house  is  high — Omit 

italicised  words  a^  and  which ;  ta  highrzfuture  tense,  shall  be  high  ]V/J^.  not  exalted  in  renown 

(as  Von  Meyer,  De  Wette,  Bahr),  but  shall  stand  high,  a  conspicuous  example,  a  pre-eminent 
illustration  of  destruction.  Others  (the  Peshito  and  Dr.  Bottcher),  ''this  house  shall  be  a 
heap."  Sept.  =6  oIkos  uvtos  earat  6  v^\6s.  Vulg.,  et  domus  hcec  erit  in  exemplum.  Verse  10. 
At  the  end  of  twenty  years— Seven  and  a-half  years  spent  in  erecting  temple,  twelve  and  a- 
half  upon  his  own  house.  This  verse  takes  up  again  the  suspended  narrative  (verse  1,  supra). 
Aftei  Solomon,  with  the  aid  of  Hiram,  had  completed  his  work,  the  king  gave  Siram  tiventy 
cities,  &c.  Verse  11.  Cities  in  the  land  of  Galilee— Adjacent  to  Tyre  (Josephus),  until  then 
unconquered,  and  occupied  by  the  Canaanites.  Veises  12  and  13.  They  pleased  him  not.  .  . 
he  called  them  Cabul— Gesenius  regards  Cabul  as  a  name  of  contempt ;  Keil  considers  the 
word  to   be  a  contraction  from   7^3n3  as  a  vacuity,  a  desolate  region.     Vers  s  15-19. 

Solomon  fortified  the  border  cities  especially  open  to  attacks  from  foes,  and  carried  out  build- 
ing projects  for  the  public  health  and  advantage.  The  levy  which  King  Solomon  raised— 
Comp.  notes  on  chap.  v.  13.  Verse  23  shows  whom  the  levy  included.  Verse  22.  Men  of 
war  QH^^  -  officials  of  the  war  department.   Rulers  of  his  chariots  Q^ti/vli^— Rather,  royal 

adjutants— ihe  royal  body  guard.  Verses  24  and  25  are  inserted  here  without  apparent  con- 
nection with  the  narrative,  but  by  referring  back  to  the  events  which  embarrassed  Solomon  at 
the  beginning  of  his  reign  (chap.  iii.  1-4),  they  mark  the  completion  of  his  building  projects, 
and  hence  the  fulfilment  of  '-all  his  desire."  Veiss  26.  Navy  of  ships— The  Sept.,  Chald., 
and  Arab,  have  the  singular  sAij?,  both  here  and  verse  27 ;  yet  ^^J^  mt  ans  a  fleet.     Ezion-geber^ 

a  port  at  the  eastern  head  of  the  Red  Sea.  Elioth,  Elim,  where  a  grove  of  terebinth  trees  still 
stands  at  the  head  of  the  eulf.  Verse  28.  Gold,  four  hundred  and  twenty  talents— 2  Chron. 
viii.  18  states  450,  a  mere  change  of  the  cipher  ^  (60)  into  ^  (20) ;  calculated  to  value 
£2,604,000.— W.  H.  J. 


184 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  ix. 

EOMILETICS  OF    VERSES  1, 1. 

The  Privileob  and  Responsibility  op  Divine  Manifestation  to  Man. 

At  two  important  eras  in  the  career  of  Solomon,  Jehovah  appeared  to  him. 
The  first  appearance  was  at  Gibeon,  at  the  outset  of  his  kingly  career,  when  the 
Lord  gave  him  not  only  what  he  asked  for,  but  also  riches,  dignity,  and  fame  : 
the  second  occurred  some  years  after,  when  Solomon  had  completed  all  his  great 
works,  and  stood  at  the  highest  pinnacle  of  his  external  and  imperial  grandeur. 
Each  appearance  had  its  own  peculiar  significance  and  worth.  The  one  afforded 
the  opportunity  and  power  to  advance  on  a  pathway  of  unexampled  greatness 
and  authority  ;  the  other  was  fraught  with  warning  as  to  the  danger  of  apostasy 
and  decline,  and  that  at  a  time  when  he  had  reached  the  very  summit  of  success. 
Favoured,  indeed,  is  the  man  whose  life  is  divinely  guided  in  its  beginning, 
prospered  in  its  progress,  and  cautioned  and  guarded  in  its  mid-career.  To  fall, 
after  being  thus  divinely  fenced,  is  a  saddening  proof  of  the  fickleness  of  human 
promises,  of  base  ingratitude,  of  gross  criminality.  Every  revelation  of  God  to 
man  is  a  distinguished  privilege  and  a  grave  responsibility. 

I.  That  Divine  maiiifestation  to  man  is  an  act  of  gracious  condescen- 
sion. In  all  ages  man  has  eagerly  longed  for  revelations  of  the  Divine. 
Heathen  authors  speak  of  the  appearance  of  gods  on  the  earth,  and  of  the 
exaltation  of  heroic  men  to  the  dignity  of  deity  ;  the  former  in  the  incarnations 
of  the  Eastern  world,  the  latter  in  the  apotheoses  of  the  Western.  Though 
these  are  but  poetic  fancies,  they  indicate  the  strong  aspirations  of  the  human 
heart  after  God.  Sin  has  broken  the  union  that  once  existed  between  God  and 
man,  and  created  a  moral  gulf  which  man  is  wholly  unable  to  cross.  But  the 
infinite  mercy  of  God  has  followed  man  in  all  his  wanderings,  met  him  more 
than  half  way,  and  bridged  the  otherwise  impassable  chasm.  The  yearnings  of 
humanity  have  been  satisfied  by  Divina  manifestations.  The  revelations  of 
Jehovah  in  Israel  were  preliminary  and  prophetic  of  the  great  revelation  in 
which  He  was  Himself  to  appear  in  the  person  of  His  Son,  and  thus  restoie 
the  harmony  between  God  and  man  that  had  been  disturbed  by  sin.  Sin  was 
the  reason  for  the  incarnation :  the  needs  of  humanity  were  met  by  the  gracious 
condescension  of  God. 

II.  That  Divine  manifestation  to  man  often  occurs  at  a  critical  junc- 
ture in  his  individual  history.  Solomon  was  now  at  the  height  of  his  fame 
— in  the  full  tide  of  prosperity.  Temptations  unlike  any  he  had  had  before 
assailed  him,  and  he  was,  perhaps,  less  prepared  to  resist  them.  There  was  no 
one  around  him  who  had  the  courage  or  the  ability  to  warn  him  of  his  dangers. 
At  this  crisis,  Jehovah  appeared  to  him  a  second  time,  and,  while  encouraging 
him  in  the  pathway  of  integrity,  cautioned  him  as  to  the  consequences  of  dis- 
obedience. How  deep  and  untiring  is  the  interest  God  takes  in  His  children. 
His  manifestations  are  the  most  timely,  and  His  words  fraught  with  nrofound 
significance.  The  extremity  of  the  individual  life  has  been  the  opportunity  for 
Divine  interference ;  the  crisis  has  been  successfully  passed,  and  the  destiny 
changed.  The  Divine  manifestations  are  unmistakable.  A  poor  Arabian  of 
the  Desert  was  one  day  asked  how  he  came  to  be  assured  that  there  was  a  God. 
*'  In  the  same  way,"  said  he,  ''that  I  am  able  to  tell  by  the  print  impressed 
on  the  sand  whether  it  was  a  man  or  a  beast  that  had  passed  tliis  way."  The 
manifestation  of  the  God-Man  was  at  a  critical  period  in  the  world's  history ; 
and  who  shall  estimate  the  influence  of  that  manifestation  on  the  destinies  of 
the  human  race  I 

135 


OHAP.  DC  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   KINOS. 


III.  That  Divine  manifestation  to  man  involves  a  solemn  responsibility. 

1.  Because  it  is  made  to  one  who  can  apprehend  and  appreciate  its  significance.  It 
is  not  a  display  to  insensate  and  unthinking  matter.  However  gorgeous  might 
be  the  revelation  in  its  external  aspect,  there  is  nothing  in  star,  or  flower,  or 
tree  to  catch  and  respond  to  its  meaning ;  they  robe  themselves  in  the  glory, 
while  all  unconscious  of  the  truth  it  unfolds.  But  the  revelation  to  man  is  to 
one  gifted  with  intelligence  and  formed  in  the  Divine  image.  **  If  we  think  of 
God,  we  think  of  Him  after  our  image ;  and  we  do  not  think  incorrectly.  And 
as  God  has  ever  thought  of  and  willed  Himself,  so  has  He  ever  lovingly  willed 
man,  in  order  to  impart  Himself  to  him."  Thus  having  affinity  with  the 
Divine  nature,  man  is  competent  to  understand  the  meaning  and  appreciate  the 
value  of  Divine  manifestations.  2.  Because  it  is  made  to  one  who  is  capable  of 
carrying  out  the  Divine  behests.  Man  has  capacity  for  accomplishing  great  things. 
Yast,  indeed,  is  his  power  for  good  or  for  evil.  Marvellous  are  the  productions 
of  human  genius.  Solomon  had  just  exemplified  what  one  man  could  do,  when 
divinely  aided,  in  building  up  an  empire  which  was  the  wonder  of  succeeding 
ages.  Man  is  exalted  to  the  highest  dignity  when  he  becomes  a  medium  for 
carrying  out  Divine  ideas  and  purposes.  3 .  Because  it  is  made  to  one  who  may  abuse 
the  blessings  it  confers.  The  will  of  man  is  free,  and  that  which  may  be  the 
instrument  of  the  greatest  good  may  become  a  power  for  propagating  terrible 
mischief.  The  noble  may  become  ignoble,  the  refined  base,  the  honoured  con- 
temptible. Few  great  men  exercise  the  questionable  caution  of  a  certain 
celebrated  musical  composer  who  spent  the  last  forty  years  of  his  life  in  almost 
complete  idleness,  saying,  *' An  additional  success  would  add  nothing  to  my 
fame ;  a  failure  would  injure  it.  I  have  no  need  of  the  one,  and  I  do  not  choose 
to  expose  myself  to  the  other."  Mayhap,  it  would  have  been  well  for  some  lives 
if  they  had  terminated  when,  to  all  appearance,  they  had  reached  the  highest 
point  of  moral  goodness,  rather  than  be  prolonged  to  present  such  pitiful 
examples  of  degeneracy  and  sin. 

Lessons: — 1.  Ood  honours  man  by  His  manifestations.  2.  The  most  blessed 
manifestation  is  that  which  is  made  to  the  heart.  3  Every  manifestation  of  God 
is  a  prelude  and  motive  to  loftier  enterprise  and  toil,  4.  To  disregard  Divine 
manifestation  is  to  incur  unutterable  calamity. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yerse  1-2.     The   second    appear-  before    reached    such    a    great    and 

ance    of   Jehovah  to  Solomon. — 1.  prosperous  state,  being  blessed  with 

The  point  of  time  at  which  it  occurred:  peace  and   quiet   without,    and  with 

after    the    completion    of   the    great  pi osperity  and  comfort  within.     Then 

works  of  the  kingdom.     2.  The  ob-  came   the   second   appearance,  which 

ject  of  the  appearance  :  promise  and  contained,   with  the  remembrance  of 

warning.  the  prayer  answered  at  the  dedication 

—    The    appearance    with    which  of  the   Temple   and  the  promise   of 

Solomon  was  favoured  after  the  com-  blessing  in  the  future,  a  threatening 

pletion  of  his  many  grand  edifices,  as  and   warning    very   wholesome,    and 

the  text  clearly  and   positively  says,  even    necessary    now,     for    Solomon 

is  expressly  placed  m  relation  to  and  himself,   who,   though  hitherto  loyal 

contrasted  with  that  which  he  had  in  and  faithful  to  the  Lord,  was  open  to 

the  beginning  of  his  reign  at  Gibeon  the  temptation  to  fall  away,  as  the 

(ch.  iii.  5).      He  had  succeeded  in  all  after-history    shows.       It    was    also 

that  he  had  undertaken.       l>fot  only  needed   by   that   ever-restless,   fickle 

did  he  himself  stand  at  the  sumii   t  of  people  which,  in   the   enjoyment   of 

fortune,  but  his  people  had  never  the  greatest  happiness,  were  in  dan- 
136 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  ix. 


ger  of  forgetting  their  Lord  and  God,  —  The  danger  of  transitions   in 

and  of  relapsing  into   the  idolatrous  life. — 1.  Every  period  in  life  has  its 

worship  which  was  more  agreeable  to  special    dangers.       2.    The    greatest 

the  flesh. — Lange,  danger  is  present  when  in  a  state  of 

—  This   was  a   great  engagement  transition  from  one   period   into   an- 

upon  Solomon  to  cleave  close  to  that  other.      3.  In  every  such  transition 

God   who    had    appeared    unto   him  special   help    and  wisdom    should  be 

twice  (ch.  xi.  9).       See  an  analogical  sought.       4.    It   is    an   unspeakable 

appearance  to  all  that  love  Him  (Jno.  boon  to  be  conscious  at  such  times  of 

xiv.    21)  ;    and    be   instructed,    lest  the    Divine    presence    and  guidance. 

God's  soul  depart  from  us  (Jer.  vi.  8),  5.    To   ignore   the    lessons    of    such 

for    our    evil    heart    of  unbelief   in  periods    is    to    invite    disaster    and 

departing  from  the  living  God  (Heb.  ruin, 
iii.  12). — Trapp, 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  3-9. 

Religion  the  Globt  op  a  Nation. 

I.  That  the  religion  of  a  nation  does  not  consist  in  anything  externaL 
1.  Not  in  the  grandeur  of  its  temples.  Architecture  and  artistic  decoration  are 
not  essential  to  true  piety.  The  most  exquisite  creations  of  the  trowel  and 
mallet  can  never  rival  the  glorious  edifice  which  has  been  already  reared  by  the 
master  hand  of  Deity.  Nature  is  one  vast  cathedra],  with  its  roof  fretted  with 
clouds  and  gemmed  with  stars ;  its  aisles  are  the  long-extended  valleys ;  its 
pillars  the  lofty,  massive  hills;  its  altar  the  spot  where  the  worshipper 
reverently  bends  his  knee ;  and  its  music  the  manifold  voices  tliat  rise  from 
bird,  or  forest,  or  sea.  Some  of  the  costliest  temples  built  by  the  art  and 
adorned  by  the  genius  of  man  are  consecrated  to  the  worship  of  other  than  the 
only  true  God.  2.  Not  in  the  elaborateness  of  its  ritual.  The  rites  and  cere- 
monies of  the  Israelitish  religion  in  the  days  of  Solomon  were  minute  and 
exacting.  Their  worship  was  a  rich,  imposing  pageant,  calculated  to  impress 
both  the  worshipper  and  the  spectator ;  and  their  history  shows  with  what 
scrupulosity  they  observed  the  forms  of  their  ritual  when  the  spirit  which 
gave  those  forms  life  and  meaning  was  altogether  quenched.  It  is  the 
tendency  of  man  to  rest  in  the  outward ;  and  the  devoutest  worshipper  has 
often  to  comf)lain — 

But  I  of  means  have  made  my  boast, 

Of  means  an  idol  made ; 
The  spirit  in  the  letter  lost, 

The  substance  in  the  shade. 

3.  Religion  consists  in  the  sincere  worship  of  an  ever-present  God.  The  true  glory 
of  Moriah's  Temple  was  the  hallowing  presence  of  Jehovah.  *'  I  have  hallowed 
this  house  \^'hich  thou  hast  built,  to  put  my  name  there  for  ever  ;  and  mine  eyes 
and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually"  (verse  3\  When  we  fail  to  recog- 
nize the  true  God,  when  we  forget  ffis  eye  is  upon  us,  when  we  are  no  longer 
conscious  of  His  personal  and  all-compassionate  love,  religion  ceases  to  be  a  power, 
ceases  to  be  a  reality.  We  may  take  our  place  in  the  temple,  we  may  engage 
mechanically  in  its  services,  but  there  is  no  longer  any  true,  acceptable  worship 
(Matt.  XV.  8,  9). 

II.  That  the  religion  of  a  nation  depends  for  its  permanence  on  obedience 

to  God  (verses  4,  5).  1.  Obedience  is  regulated  by  clearly  defined  injunctions. 
**  To  do  according  to  all  that  1  have  commanded  thee,  and  wilt  keep  my  statutes 
and  my  judgments."     Obedience  must  be  intelligent,  be  governed  by  a  studious 

137 


OHAF.  nc  EOMILETJC  COMMENTAItT:  KIKQS. 


appreciation  of  the  Divine  commands.  We  are  surrounded  by  law.  We  can- 
not properly  fulfil  the  great  purpose  of  life  without  some  acquaintance  with  the 
laws  and  forces  in  operation  around  us.  The  mariner  needs  it  in  order  to  pilot 
his  vessel  aright,  the  scientist  to  guide  him  in  research,  the  physician  to 
ameliorate  human  suffering.  There  should  not  be  less  study  given  to  the  laws 
of  God  for  the  government  of  our  moral  actions  than  is  given  to  the  laws  of 
nature.  2.  Obedience  must  be  genuine  and  complete.  **  In  integrity  of  heart  and 
in  uprightness."  We  must  be  sincere.  When  we  remember  with  what 
energy  and  publicity  we  have  sometimes  served  sin,  we  should  be  animated 
with  the  more  courage  and  earnestness  in  serving  God.  "  He  doeth  not  God's 
will  but  his  own,  wlio  doeth  no  more  than  himself  will.  Everything  must  be 
done  as  well  as  anything,  else  we  do  nothing."  3.  Obedience  is  illustrated  by 
nolle  examples.  "■  If  thou  wilt  walk  before  me  as  David  thy  father  walked." 
God  expects  no  impossibility.  What  one  man  has  done,  another  may  do.  David 
had  great  imperfections ;  but  he  had  also  great  virtues.  The  seed  of  the  godly 
cannot  expect  to  enjoy  the  entail  of  the  blessing  unless  they  tread  in  the  steps 
of  those  who  have  gone  before,  and  keep  up  the  piety  of  their  ancestors.  Solo- 
mon's subsequent  fall  lends  to  these  repeated  warnings  a  special  interest. 
4.  Obedience  ensures  perpetuity  of  blessing.  "  Then  I  will  establish  the  throne  of 
thy  kingdom  upon  Israel  for  ever"  (verse  5).  Obedience  and  blessing  run 
together.  If  we  are  faithful  to  our  part  of  the  covenant,  God  will  never  fail 
on  His  part.  All  the  promises  of  God  are  conditional ;  and  failure  in  fulfilment 
of  the  promise  is  no  proof  of  changeableness  in  God,  but  of  infidelity  in  man. 
While  the  condition  is  observed,  the  promise  is  inviolably  kept. 

III.  That  the  decay  of  the  religion  of  a  nation  is  inevitably  followed  by 
national  ruin  (verses  6-9).  1.  The  ruin  of  its  national  greatness.  "  Then  will 
I  cut  off  Israel  out  of  the  land  I  have  given  them."  In  the  very  land  where 
the  Jews  were  most  highly  exalted  did  they  witness  the  most  abject  degradation. 
When  the  people  forsook  God,  and  turned  to  idols,  the  Temple  of  Solomon — 
the  world-wide  evidence  of  national  prosperity  and  blessing — was  destroyed, 
Israel  ceased  to  be  an  independent  kingdom,  and  the  people  were  banished  ;  and 
when,  after  the  second  temple  was  built,  they  rejected  David's  greater  Son — their 
promised,  true,  and  eternal  king  in  whom  all  nations  of  the  earth  were  to  be 
blessed — this  temple  was  destroyed  never  to  be  rebuilt,  and  the  people  were 
scattered  through  the  whole  world,  ceasing  for  ever  to  be  an  independent  king- 
dom and  nation.  Irreligion  will  ruin  a  nation  more  completely  than  an  invad- 
ing army  could  do.  The  external  evidences  of  national  greatness  are  the  last  to 
go  :  the  first  fatal  weakness  begins  within,  and  may  progress  for  a  time  silently 
and  unnoticed.  2.  The  ruin  oj  its  religious  prestige.  '*  And  this  house  which  I 
have  hallowed  for  my  name  will  I  cast  out  of  my  sight."  The  temple  was  the 
symbol  and  external  evidence  of  the  intense  religiousness  of  the  people.  Never 
was  there  before  a  nation  so  favoured  with  religious  privileges :  it  was  its 
solemn  mission  to  preserve  and  promulgate  the  idea  of  the  Only  True  God, 
which  idea  had  become  lost  amid  the  mists  of  heathenism.  When  Israel  lost 
its  religion  it  lost  everything — temple,  character,  influence.  The  same  is  true 
of  every  nation  that  abandons  God.  3.  The  ruin  is  held  up  as  a  terrible  warning 
to  all  ages.  ^'  And  Israel  shall  be  a  proverb  and  a  bye- word  among  all  people  ; 
and  this  house  which  is  high  (Heb.  shall  be  high),  every  one  that  passeth  by  it 
shall  be  astonished,  and  shall  hiss  "  (verses  7,  8).  Not  a  scornful  hiss,  but  a 
hissing  of  terror  (Jer.  xix.  8  ;  xlix.  17).  The  temple  and  the  nation  shall  be 
as  conspicuous  in  their  desolation  as  in  their  glory.  No  people  in  the  world 
ever  became  such  a  proverb — everywhere  despised,  reviled,  and  persecuted. 
By  its  story  it  illustrates  to  all  nations  the  unchanging  truth  uttered  by  the 

f^rophet  Azariah  to  King  Asa,  **If  ye  forsake  Him,  He  will  forsake  you*' 
2  Chron.  xv.  2). 
188 


SOMIlBTtC  COMHrENTABY :  KINGS. 


CBkT.  IX. 


Lessons: — 1.  Religion  is  at  once  the  strength  and  the  adornment  oj  a  people, 
2.  The  chief  concern  of  the  monarch  should  he  for  the  religioiM  wtlfare  of  his  people, 
8.  The  nation  that  abandons  God  will  he  abandoned  by  Ilim, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Yerse  3.  "  To  put  my  name  there 
for  ever."  God's  gifts  are  without 
repentance.  When  He  puts  His 
name  in  the  temple,  Ho  does  it,  in 
intention,  for  ever.  He  will  not  arbi- 
trarily withdraw  it  after  so  many 
years  or  so  many  centuries.  Once 
placed  there,  it  will  remain  there  for 
ever,  so  far  as  God  is  concerned.  But 
the  people  may,  by  unfaithfulness, 
drive  it  away. 

—  "  Mine  eyes  and  mine  heart  sliall 
be  there  perpetually."  Solomon's 
prayer  had  been  that  God's  eyes  might 
be  directed  towards  the  temple  con- 
tinually. The  answer  given  is — jS'ot 
mine  eyes  only,  but  mine  eyes  and 
mine  heart.  To  every  house  where 
the  name  of  God  is  truly  honoured 
applies  the  Divine  saying,  **  Mine  eyes 
and  my  heart  shall  dwell  there  for 
ever." 

—  The  Divine  solicitude  for  the 
Church.  1 .  He  investigates  its  moral 
condition.  2.  He  sympathises  with 
its  struggles.  3.  He  rejoices  in  its 
triumphs.    4.  His  care  is  unremitting. 

Terse  4.  '^If  Thou  wilt  walk 
before  me  "  (compared  with  verse  6). 
The  power  of  individualism.  1. 
The  national  is  vastly  influenced  by 
the  personal.  2.  A  monarch  may 
foster  or  blast  the  religious  interests 
of  his  people.  3.  The  greater  the 
authority  placed  in  the  hands  of  one 
man,  the  greater  is  his  responsibility 
for  its  use  or  abuse.  4.  How  me- 
mento as  are  the  opportunities  pre- 
sented within  the  compass  of  a  single 
lifel 

Yerses  6-9,  Because  men  endure 
uninterrupted  prosperity  with  much 


greater  difficulty  than  they  do  crosses 
and  afflictions,  therefore,  when  they 
are  at  the  summit  of  their  wishes  and 
their  hearts'  desire,  it  is  most  neces- 
sary that  the  grave  importance  of  God 
and  of  eternity  should  be  held  up 
before  them,  so  that  they  may  not  fall 
into  security,  and  forget  to  work  out 
their  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling  (Matt.  xvi.  26;  1  Cor. 
X.  12).  The  more  abundantly  God 
displays  His  mercy  and  love  towards 
an  individual  or  towards  a  nation,  so 
much  the  more  fearful  will  be  the 
righteous  sentence,  if  the  riches  of 
His  mercy  are  despised.  In  happy 
and  prosperous  days  forget  not  that 
the  Lord  tells  us,  "  AVatch  and  pray, 
lest  ye  enter  into  temptation."  How 
many  men,  how  many  families,  how 
many  nations,  blessed  in  every  respect, 
have  come  to  a  fearful  and  shameful 
end!  Askcst  thou — Wherefore  is 
this?  The  only  reply  is— Because 
they  have  forsaken  the  Lord  their 
God ;  for  what  a  man  sows  that  shall 
he  also  reap.  Let  him  who  will  not 
recognize  a  Divine  justice,  turn  to  the 
twice-destroyed  temple  of  Jerusalem, 
and  to  the  world- scattered  people  who 
have  become  a  byeword  amongst  all 
nations. — Lange. 

Yerse  7.  If  our  growth  in  grace 
does  not  correspond  with  our  privi- 
leges, our  boast  of  the  temple  and  the 
best  form  of  worship  wiU  but  delude 
and  destroy  us. 

Yerse  9.  Apostasy  is  hateful  even 
among  the  heathen.  Solyman,  the 
Grand  Signior,  rejected  the  revolt  of 
his  Christian  subjects  to  Turkism,  and 
doubled  their  taxations. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  10—14. 

QlTESTIOlTABLE    GeNEEOSITT. 

I.  It  is  questionable  generosity  when  a  gift  is  tardily  rendered.    "  And 
it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  twenty  years — that  then  King  Solomon  guve 

ia9 


OHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


Hiram  twenty  cities '' — one  city  for  every  year  of  building.  The  charm  of 
generosity  is  its  proinptness.  That  is  well  done  that  is  done  quickly.  To  give 
slowly  is  to  give  grudgingly.  I  he  Arabians  are  said  to  be  remarkably  lavish  in 
their  generosity.  Gibbon  relates  that  a  dispute  had  arisen  who,  among  the 
citizens  of  Mecca,  was  entitled  to  the  prize  of  generosity,  and  a  successive 
application  was  made  to  the  three  who  were  deemed  most  worthy  of  the  trial. 
Abdallah,  the  son  of  Abbas,  had  undertaken  a  distant  journey,  and  his  foot  was 
in  the  stirrup  when  he  heard  the  voice  of  a  suppliant,  "  0  son  of  the  uncle  of 
the  Apostle  of  God,  I  am  a  traveller,  and  in  distress ! "  He  instantly  dis- 
mounted to  present  the  pilgrim  with  his  camel,  her  rich  caparison,  and  a  purse 
of  four  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  excepting  only  the  sword,  either  for  its  intrinsic 
value,  or  as  the  gift  of  an  honoured  kinsman.  The  servant  of  Kais  informed 
the  second  suppliant  that  his  master  was  asleep;  but  he  immediately  added, 
*'  Here  is  a  purse  of  seven  thousand  pieces  of  gold — it  is  all  we  have  in  the 
house — and  here  is  an  order  that  will  entitle  ycu  to  a  camel  and  a  slave."  The 
master,  as  soon  as  he  awoke,  praised  and  enfranchised  his  faithful  steward,  with 
a  gentle  reproof  that  by  respecting  his  slumbers  he  had  stinted  his  bounty. 
The  third  of  these  heroes,  the  blind  Arabah,  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  was  sup- 
porting his  stepson  the  shoulders  of  two  slaves — *<Alas!"  he  replied,  **  My 
coffers  are  empty ;  but  these  you  may  sell :  if  you  refuse,  I  renounce  them." 
At  these  words,  pushing  away  the  youthful  slaves,  he  groped  along  the  wall 
with  his  staff.  There  is  a  generosity  that  is  questionable  in  its  excess ;  when 
it  surpasses  the  limits  of  discretion.     A  true  generosity  is  regulated  by  justice. 

II.  It  is  questionable  generosity  where  the  right  of  disposal  is  doubtful. 

A.ccording  to  the  law,  Solomon  had  no  right  to  give  away  these  cities,  or  any 
part  of  the  inheritance  of  Israel  (Lev.  xxv.  23).  But  this  was  not  the  first  nor 
last  instance  in  which  this  great  king  stepped  aside  from  the  law  of  Moses. 
Already,  contrary  to  the  express  commands  of  the  law,  he  had  multiplied  horses 
and  chariots.  In  the  case  before  us  the  appearance  of  transgression  is  some- 
what modified  when  we  remember  that  these  cities,  when  given  to  Hiram,  were 
not  peopled  by  Israelites,  but  by  heathens.  Solomon  may  have  regarded  it  as 
a  prudent  policy  to  hand  over  the  government  of  these  heathen  cities,  which 
were  evidently  of  no  great  worth,  to  his  friendly  neighbour  who  had  rendered 
him  so  much  service  in  building  the  Lord's  house.  It  is  worse  than  a  ques- 
tionable generosity,  it  is  a  positive  injustice,  for  a  man  to  give  away  in  charity 
what  ought  to  be  paid  in  discharge  of  his  just  debts.  It  is  easy  for  a  man  to  be 
lavish  with  money  that  is  not  his  own,  but  which  in  all  fairness  belongs  to  his 
creditors.     It  is  the  impulse  of  benevolence  blinding  the  sense  of  justice. 

III.  It  is  questionable  generosity  where  the  gift  creates  disappointment 
rather  than  pleasure.  '*  And  Hiram  came  out  of  Tyre  to  see  the  cities  which 
Solomon  had  given  him  ;  and  they  pleased  him  not"  (verse  12).  It  is  not 
always  that  a  generous  spirit  meets  with  the  appreciation  and  gratitude  it 
merits ;  but  it  strives  so  to  administer  its  gifts  as  to  meet  the  wants  and  pro- 
mote the  happiness  of  the  recipient.  There  is  a  way  of  bestowing  benefits 
in  which  the  giver  makes  himself  appear  as  the  obliged  party.  On  the  other 
hand,  a  gift  may  be  so  inadequate  in  comparison  with  the  resources  of  the 
donor  and  the  merits  of  the  recipient  as  to  produce  chagrin  and  displeasure. 
Hiram  might  naturally  have  coveted  some  of  Solomon's  coast  towns — ^perhaps 
had  cast  his  eyes  on  the  noble  bay  of  Acco  or  Ptolemais — and  was  therefore  dis- 
satisfied with  the  gift  of  a  comparatively  useless  inland  region.  It  would  be 
well  for  us  to  have  as  light  an  esteem  of  all  things  temporal  as  Hiram  had  of 
these  twentv  cities ! 

IV.  An  act  of  questionable  generosity  need  not  interfere  with  a  long- 
tried  friendship.     '^  And  Hiram  sent  to  the  king  six  score  talents  of  gold" 

140 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  rx. 


(verse  14).  Apparently  to  show  that,  although  disappointed,  he  was  rot 
offended.  The  sura  sent  was  very  large — above  a  million  and  a  quarter  of  oUc- 
money,  according  to  Mr.  Poole's  ( stimate  of  the  weight  of  the  Hebrew  gold 
talent,  or  about  £720,000  according  to  the  estimate  preferred  by  Mr.  S.  Clarke. 
At  any  rate,  it  was  more  than  equal  to  a  sixth  part  of  Solomon's  regular 
revenue  (chap.  x.  14).  The  cities  despised  by  Hiram  were  restored  to 
Solomon,  who  rebuilt  and  colonized  them  with  Israelities  (2  Chron.  viii.  2). 
No  doubt  Solomon  compensated  Hiram  in  some  other  way.  Their  friendship 
was  not  pacriticed  by  what  might  have  been  thought  an  act  of  parsimoniousness 
on  the  one  hand,  or  an  act  of  ungrateful  coutemptuousness  on  the  other.  In 
the  dearest  friendships,  anomalies  will  occur  which  are  difficult  to  reconcile. 
The  conduct  of  a  friend  may  seem  questionable  and  blameworthy.  Then  is  the 
time  to  exercise  patience  and  forbearance,  to  put  the  best  construction  on  the 
most  unfavourable  appearances,  and  wait  calmly  the  issue  of  events.  Many  a 
valuable  friendship  has  been  wrecked  by  a  single  injudicious  act ;  and  a  wound 
inflicted  which  has  rankled  in  the  heart  for  years.  It  is  a  bitter  experience 
when  the  soul  realizes  for  the  first  time  the  heartless  infidelity  of  a  long 
trusted  friend ! 

Is  all  the  counsel  that  we  two  have  shared, 
The  sisters'  vows,  the  hours  that  we  have  spent 
When  we  have  chid  the  hasty-footed  time 
For  parting  us—  O  I  is  all  forgot  ? 
All  school-days'  friendship,  childhood  innocence? 

And  will  you  rend  our  ancient  love  asunder 

To  join  with  men  in  scorning  your  poor  friend  ? 

Midsummer  NighVa  Dream. 

Lessons: — 1.  It  requires  great  wisdom  to  he  truly  generous.  2.  Generosity  is 
often  abused^  loth  in  the  donor  and  in  the  recipient,  3.  A  genuine  friendship  is  too 
valuable  to  he  forfeited  hy  trifles. 

OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Yerse  10.  The  demeanor  of  Solo-  And  so  the  remonstrance  of  Hiram 

mon  and  Hiram  towards  each,  other.  with  Solomon  is  very  natural :  *'  What 

1.  Fiicnds  and  neighbours  should  be  cities  are  these  which  thou  hast  given 

of  one  mind,  and  mutually  ready  to  me,     my     brother  ?"    and    then    he 

help  each   other.     II.    Let  not  him  fastens  upon  the  gift  a  name  of  con- 

who  has  kindly  aided  thee  with  his  tempt — Cabul,  vile  or  displeasing — a 

substance  be  long  awaiting  the  proofs  mode  of  expressing  and  of  perpetu- 

of  thy  gratitude,  and  render  to  him  ating  dissatisfaction  eminently  Oiien- 

more  rather  than  less,  even  if  he  need  tal. — The  Land  and  the  Book. 

it  not.     III.  Regard  not  so  much  the  —  From  the  heathen  Hiram,  many 

gift  which  thou  receivest,  as  the  dis-  Christians   may    learn,    even   where 

position  of  the  giver,    remembering  real  cause  for  dissatisfaction  and  just 

always,  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  claims  exist,  to  state  the  dispropor- 

to  receive.  tion   between  gifts  and  recompenses 

^         ,  A     A  •  -^      1        ^^^^  friendly  words  and  in  a  kindly 

Yerse  10.   A  generous  spirit.     1.      manner 

Is  careful  in  estimating.     2.  Liberal 

in  providing.     3.  Prompt  in  giving.  ^  ,  ^     t.  •     -i        i.      ^i         i. 

4.    Is  one  of   the   noblest  fruits  of      ,    ^^^^®   14     Friends    who   through 

Chiistianity.  ^"""^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^'^^^  ^^^^,  ^'^^^ 

•^  must  not  be  estranged,  even  when  one 

Yerse  13.  These  twenty  cities  were       thinks  himself  injured  by  the  other, 

mere^  villages,  of  course,  and  it  is  a       but  must  strive  to  come  to  a  thorough 

genuine  Eastern    trick  to  dignify  a      understanding      and      agreement.— 

email  present  with  a  pompous  name.       Lange. 

141 


omAv.  IX.  EOMTLETIC  COMMBNTART:  KINGS. 


EOMILETJCS  OF  VERSES  16—38. 
The  Impkbatitb  Exigencies  of  Eegal  Magniticexce. 

Solomon  had  the  wisdom  to  conceive  how  his  little  inland  kingdom  could  he 
raised  into  greatness  and  importance ;  and  it  excites  our  admiration  to  observe 
the  skilful  combinations  by  which  he  accomplished  his  aims.  His  relations  with 
Egypt,  Arabia,  and  Tyre,  by  which  he  seemed  to  open  up  the  resources  of  the 
East  and  the  West,  tended  to  the  rapid  aggrandisement  of  his  empire.  One 
luxury  demanded  another ;  and  the  increase  of  riches  seemed  to  beget  the 
desire  for  more.  In  these  verses  we  have  some  indications  of  the  manifold 
exigencies  of  regal  magnificence. 

I.  There  is  che  demand  for  arcMtectural  display  (verses  15, 17-19).     The 

character  of  a  nation  is  known  by  its  public  buildings.  The  great  nations  of 
antiquity  have  been  famous  for  the  grandeur  of  their  erections.  No  other 
Israelitish  king  ever  built  so  much  as  Solomon.  The  sacred  narrative  would 
not  have  given  such  prominence  to  his  buildings  but  for  their  relation  to  the 
Theocratic  kingdom.  They  were  designed  to  further  the  greatness,  power,  and 
splendour  of  the  Theocracy  of  which  the  Temple — the  House  of  Jehovah — was 
the  ostensible  centre.  After  first  building  the  Temple,  his  cJief-d'ceuvre^ 
Solomon  erected  his  own  royal  palace,  fortified  Jerusalem,  and  built  cities  and 
fortresses  in  different  parts  of  his  dominions.  And  yet  where  are  these  vast 
structures  to-day  ?  They  have  succumbed  to  the  violence  of  dynastic  changes, 
and  the  relentless  ravages  of  time.  From  the  ^orgpous  temple  of  Moriah  to  the 
massive  and  elaborate  edifices  of  Tadmor  in  the  Wilderness,  whose  ruins  now 
lie  **  lonely  and  forsaken,  line  bleached  bones  on  a  long-neglected  battle-field," 
the  same  fate  has  overtaken  them.  It  is  not  possible  to  conceive  higher  ideas 
of  Solomon's  magnificence  than  these  ruins  present,  nor  more  humiliating  ideas 
of  the  vanity  and  weakness  of  all  human  splendour. 

II.  There  is  the  emplojrment  of  forced  labour  (verses  15,  20,  21).    The 

greater  portion  of  the  levies  of  men  employed  by  Solomon  in  his  public  works 
were  drawn  from  the  subjugated  nations ;  but  still  the  Israelites  were  not 
exempt.  This  was,  perhaps,  the  first  time  the  Israelites  were  called  upon  to 
perform  forced  labour.  It  had  been  prophesied,  when  they  desired  a  king, 
that,  if  they  insisted  on  having  one,  he  would  **  take  their  men-servants  and 
their  maid-servants,  and  their  goodliest  young  men,  and  put  them  to  work  " 
(1  Sam.  viii.  16);  and  David  had  bound  to  forced  service  **  the  strangers  that 
were  in  the  land  of  Israel"  (1  Chron.  xxii.  2) ;  but  hitherto  the  Israelites  had 
escaped.  Solomon  now,  in  connection  with  his  proposed  work  of  building  the 
Temple,  with  the  honour  of  God  as  an  excuse,  laid  this  burden  upon  them. 
As  to  the  system  adopted,  see  chap.  v.  13,  14.  This,  though  a  light  form  of  task 
work,  was  felt  by  the  Israelites  to  be  a  great  oppression.  But  the  great  works 
of  an  imperious  prince  must  proceed,  and  he  who  will  not  voluntarily  help  must  be 
compelled.  Every  form  of  human  slavery  is  degrading.  Most  of  the  great 
buildings  of  antiquity  are  the  work  of  slaves.  Will  the  works  of  freemen  b© 
more  enduring? 

III.  There  is  the  maintenance  of  a  costly  court  (verses  22,  23).  The  court 
of  Solomon  was  on  a  scale  of  magnificence  never  attempted  in  Israel  before  or 
since  his  day.  The  great  officers  are  now  for  the  first  time  called  by  one 
general  name — Princes.  The  union  of  priestly  and  secular  functions  still 
continued.  The  Palace  was  next  in  point  of  splendour  to  the  Temple,  and 
the  Porch  of  the  Palace  was  the  gem  and  centre  of  the  whole  empire.     The 

142 


EOMILETIC  CO.V]irENTART .    KINGS.  chap.  ii. 


royal  banquets  were  of  the  most  superb  kind.  All  the  plate  and  drinking  vessels 
were  of  gold.  There  was  a  constant  succession  of  guests.  Xlie  train  of 
servants  was  such  as  had  never  been  seen  before.  There  were  some  who 
sat  in  the  king's  presence,  others  who  always  stood,  others  who  were 
his  cup-bearers,  others  musicians.  His  stables  were  on  the  most  splendid 
scale.  In  the  midst  oF  this  gorgeous  array  was  the  sovereign  liimself. 
The  king  is  fair,  with  superhuman  beauty ;  his  sword  is  on  his  thigh ;  he 
ri'los  in  his  chariot,  or  on  his  war-horse  ;  his  archers  are  behind  him,  his 
gu  irds  are  round  him  ;  his  robes  are  so  scented  with  the  perfumes  of  India  or 
Anbia  that  they  seem  to  be  nothing  but  a  mass  of  myrrh,  aloes,  and  cassia.  The 
queen,  probably  from  Egypt,  the  chief  of  all  his  vast  establishment  of  wives  and 
concubines,  themselves  the  daughters  of  kings,  was  by  his  side,  glittering  in 
the  gold  of  Ophir — one  blaze  of  glory,  as  she  sat  by  him  in  the  interior  of  the 
palace  ;  her  attendants,  gorgeously  arrayed,  are  behind  her ;  she  has  left  her 
father  and  her  father's  house;  her  reward  is  to  be  in  the  greatness  of  her 
descendants.  Such  is  the  splendour  of  Solomon's  court,  which,  even  down  to 
the  outward  texture  of  their  royal  robes,  lived  in  the  traditions  of  Israel 
(^Stanley  in  loco).  The  dignity  of  royalty  should  be  maintained  in  accordance 
with  the  wealth  and  resources  of  the  nation. 

IV.  There  is  the  call  for  elaborate  defence.  1.  A  standing armymust  he 
maintained  (verses  22,  23).  The  three  military  bodies  remain  as  in  the  days  of 
David,  'i  he  commander  of  the  host  is  the  priestly  warrior,  Benaiuh,  who 
succeeded  the  murdered  Joab.  The  six  hundred  heroes  of  David's  early  life 
only  once  pass  across  the  scene.  Sixty  of  them  attended  Solomon's  litter,  to 
guard  him  from  banditti  on  his  way  to  Lebanon.  The  guard  appear  only  as 
household  troops,  employed  on  state  occasions.  2.  Strong  fortifications  must  he 
erected  {veTses  15,  19).  Jerusalem,  the  capital,  is  surrounded  by  massive  walls 
and  strengthened  with  a  huge  tower.  Garrison  cities  are  built  in  various  parts 
of  the  country  to  keep  the  insurrectionary  inhabitants  in  check,  and  to  protect 
the  nation  against  invaders.  As  a  people  grows  in  riches  and  in  power,  every 
necessary  preparation  is  made  at  least  to  defend  il.s  possessions.  The  wealth 
of  a  nation  tempts  the  cupidity  of  greedy  and  ambitious  marauders. 

V.  There  is  the  burden  of  an  oppressive  taxation  (verse  15,  comp.  with 
chap.  xii.  1-4).  The  vast  levies  of  men  raised  by  Solomon  to  build  the  Temple, 
the  palace,  and  the  foitifications  of  Jerusalem  and  other  cities,  must  have 
severely  taxed  the  people,  and  this  grievous  yoke  perhaps  grew  heavier  with 
Solomon's  advance  of  years.  The  people  who  once  clamoured  for  a  king,  that 
they  might  be  like  the  nations  around  them,  now  began  to  realize  the  truth  of 
Samuel's  prediction  as  to  the  cost  of  maintaining  a  king  and  court  (1  Sam.  viii. 
11-18).  This  taxation  was  so  heavy  that  it  appears  to  have  been  the  principal 
cau>e  of  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  on  the  death  of  Solomon.  ''  The  govern- 
ment of  the  wise  king  was  rapidly  becoming  as  odious  to  the  Israelites  as  that 
of  the  race  of  Tarquin,  in  spite  of  all  their  splendid  works,  to  the  patricians  of 
Kome.  Mutteriugs  of  the  coming  storm  were  already  heard,  both  abroad  and 
at  hoii  e."  No  government  can  long  flourish  that  rests  on  the  tyranny  and 
oppress  on  of  the  people.  An  excessive  taxation  drains  the  fountain  of  a 
nation's  productive  power. 

VI.  There  is  the  necessity  for  extended  commerce  (verses  26-28).  The 
exhaustion  of  the  ample  means  left  by  his  father,  and  the  inadequacy  of  the 
ordinary  sources  of  revenue  to  cover  his  vast  expenses  in  sacred  and  regal 
building,  as  well  as  to  sustain  the  great  expense  of  his  magnificent  court 
and  numerous  household,  led  Solomon  to  turn  his  attention  to  commerce.  His 
sagacity  taught   him  that  the    Phcsnicians,    with    whom    he    had    becomo 

143 


OHAF.  tZ. 


BOMIZETIC  COMMENT  ART:  KINGS, 


acquainted,  had  risen  to  extraordinary  prosperity  and  great  wealth  solely  as  the 
result  of  commerce.  Ho  therefore  joined  Hiram  in  building  and  equipping  a 
fleet  of  ships  which  sailed  ironi  the  Eod  Sea,  and  brought  in  the  rich  produc- 
tions from  the  far  East.  Necessity  is  the  mother  of  invention  for  nations  as 
for  individuals.  The  grandest  commercial  ventures  have  sprung  out  of  the 
pressing  necessity  of  the  hour.  The  increase  of  commerce  is  the  increase  of 
fresh  necessities:  commerce  begets  commerce.  It  is  the  life  of  national 
prosperity. 

Lessons: — 1.  Roy alty  has  its  undoubted  rights  and  privileges.  2.  The  glory 
of  royally  is  to  promote  the  best  welfare  of  the  people.  3.  The  government  that 
suppresses  commerce  beggars  itself 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


Yerses  15-19.  National  architec- 
ture. 1.  Is  an  evidence  of  the  wealth 
and  genius  of  a  nation.  2.  Has  a 
powerful  influence  in  the  culture  of 
the  national  taste  and  character.  3. 
May  remain  when  the  true  greatness 
of  a  nation  has  passed  away. 

Verses  15-23.  The  plans  and  ar- 
rangements of  Solomon  for  the  benefit 
and  protection  of  the  land.  1.  He 
built  the  house  of  the  Lord,  forth  from 
which  would  come  all  salvation  for 
Israel ;  then  he  built  the  store-houses 
for  times  of  need  and  famine,  and  as 
protection  against  the  enemies  of  the 
kingdom.  A  wise  prince  cares  alike  for 
the  religious  and  spiritual,  and  for  the 
material  and  temporal  well-being  of 
his  people,  and  in  times  of  peace  does 
his  utmost  to  provide  against  every 
danger  which  may  assail  the  land, 
either  from  without  or  within.  For 
this  a  nation  can  never  be  grateful 
enough,  and  should  uphold  him  with 
readiness  and  might,  instead  of  mur- 
muring and  complaining,  as  is  often 
the  case.  2.  Solomon's  plan  was,  in 
his  undertaking,  to  spare  his  nation 
all  servile  labour  as  far  as  possible. 
Therefore  for  all  compulsory  service  he 
employed  the  conquered  enemy,  who, 
as  such,  were  slaves.  A  wise  prince 
will  never  impose  burdensome  taxes  or 
heavy  labour  upon  his  people,  and 
reigns  much  more  willingly  over  free- 
men than  over  slaves ;  but  a  good  and 
loyal  people  does  not  make  freedom  a 
pretext  for  villainy,  and  ever  follows 
the  king's  call  for  arms  when  the  de- 
144 


fence  of  **  Fatherland  "  is  concerned. 
For  Israel  can  no  more  say  with  truth, 
*'The  Lord  is  my  rock,  my  fortress, 
and  my  deliverer"  (Psa.  xviii.  3),  if 
all  the  nation  does  not  aid  in  its  de- 
fences and  fortifications.  In  the 
kingdom  of  the  true  and  eternal  Prince 
of  Peace  bondage  will  cease,  and  all 
men  shall  obtain  the  freedom  of  the 
children  of  God. — Zange. 

Verse  16.  Though  in  the  East 
husbands  generally  pay  for  their  wives, 
yet  dower  is  given  in  some  casea. 
Sargon  gave  Cilicia  as  a  dowry  with 
his  daughter  when  he  married  her  to 
Ambris,  king  of  Tubal.  Antiochus 
Soter  gave  his  claims  on  Macedonia  as 
a  dowry  to  his  stepdaughter  Phila, 
when  she  married  Antigonus  Gonatas. 
Ccele-Syria  and  Palestine  were  pro- 
mised as  dowry  to  Ptolemy  Epiphanes 
when  he  married  Cleopatra,  sister  of 
Antiochus  the  Great.  The  Persian 
kings  seem  generally  to  have  given 
satrapial  or  other  high  offices  as 
dowries  to  the  husbands  of  their 
daughters. — Rawlinson. 

Verses  20, 2 1 .  The  curse  of  slavery. 
1.  It  IS  personally  degrading.  It  robs 
man  of  his  self-respect,  poisons  his 
sense  of  rectitude  and  honour,  demora- 
lizes his  sensibilities,  imbrutes  his 
entire  nature,  and  brands  him  with 
unutterable  infamy.  2.  It  is  degrading 
to  the  oppressor.  It  is  an  insult  to  his 
own  manhood,  it  lowers  his  estimate 
of  humanity,  it  blunts  his  sympathies 
for  the  race,  and  leads    him  to  the 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


CHAF.  DC. 


shameless  commission  of  other  wrongs. 
The  hideous  character  of  ojjpressors  is 
depicted  in  a  few  words  by  Words- 
worth— 

The  good  old  rule 
Sufficeth  them,  the  simple  plan, 
That  they  should  take  who  have  the  power, 
And  they  should  keep  who  can. 

3.  It  is  an  element  of  weakness  and  decay 
in  the  nation.  The  nations  of  antiquity 
in  which  slavery  was  maintained  have 
come  to  ruin.  It  blights  the  fairest 
country,  spoils  its  chivalry,  and  saps 
its  strongest  foundations. 

Yerse  25.  The  public  worship  of 
God.  1.  Is  the  duty  of  all — king  and 
subjects.  2.  Cannot  be  neglected 
without  mischievous  results  (chap.  iii. 
2-4).  3.  Should  be  observed  with 
regularity  and  solemnity.  4.  Is  the 
secret  of  national  prosperity  and  great- 
ness. 5.  Is  fraught  with  blessing  to 
the  individual  worshipper. 

—  A  king  mustmake  religion  the  rule 
of  government,  and  not  to  balance  the 
scale ;  for  he  that  casteth  i«n  religion 
only  to  make  the  scales  even,  his  own 
weight  is  contained  in  those  characters 
— Mene,  mene,  tekel,  upharsin ;  he  is 
found  too  light ;  his  kingdom  shall  be 
taken  from  him. — Bacon. 

Yerse  26.  A  wise  government  seeks 
not  only  to  preserve  existing  prospe- 
rity, but  also  to  discover  new  sources 
thereof.  Many  there  are  who  travel 
over  land  and  sea  to  seek  gold  and  to 
become  rich,  and  forget  that  the  Lord 
hath  said,  **  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of 
me  gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou 
mayest  be  rich  "  (Rev.  iii.  18).  Ex- 
peditions into  far  countries  must 
serve  not  only  to  obtain  gold  and 
treasure,  but  also  to  carry  thither  the 
treasure  whicli  neither  moth  nor  rust 
doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieves  do  not 
break  through  nor  steal  (Matt.  vi.  19). 
Commerce  may  become  a  rich  blessing 
for  a  nation,  but  a  greedy  thirst  for 
gold  often  leads  to  extreme  luxury 
and  neglect  of  God,  as  is  many  times 
exemplified  in  the  history  of  Israel. — 
Lange. 

Yerses  26-28.  Commerce.  1.  Taxes 
the  ingenuity  of  a  people.     2.  Stima- 

L 


lates  travel  and  discovery.  3.  Is  the 
source  of  a  nation's  wealth.  4.  Pro- 
motes international  amity  and  brother- 
hood. 

Yerse   28.    The    controversy    con- 
cerning the    locality    of   Ophir   will 
probably    never   be    settled.     It   has 
been  placed  in  Arabia,  in  India,  in  the 
Eurmese  Peninsula,  at  Ceylon,  on  the 
East  coast  of  Africa,  in  Armenia,  in 
Phrygia,  in  Iberia,  and  in  South  Ame- 
rica, where  it  has  been  identified  with 
Peru  !     Among  these  various  opinions 
three     predominate,      all      modems, 
except  a  very  few,  being  in  favour 
either    of   Arabia,   India,  or   Eastern 
Africa.     Africa  has  comparatively  few 
advocates,  but  M.    Quartremere   and 
Dean  Milman  are  among  them.    India 
is    preferred    by     Lassen,     Thenius, 
Ewald,  and  Eerthau.    Arabia's  claims 
are  supported  by  the  greatest  number, 
among  whom  are  Winer,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
and  Mr.  Twistleton.     The  grand  argu- 
ment in  favour  of  Arabia  is  derived 
from  the  occurrence  of  Ophir  in  the 
manifestly  Arabian  list  of  names  in 
Genesis  x.  25-29.     To  the  objection 
that  Arabia  could  not  produce  either 
gold  or  almug  trees,  it  is  replied — 1. 
It  has  not  yet  been  proved  that  she 
could   not  produce  them  ;  and  2.  At 
any  rate    she   might  have   furnished 
them  to  the  Jews  from  an  emporium. 
— Speaker's  Comm,     We  do  not  con- 
tend that  Ophir  was  a  place  on  the 
Indian  coast.     iN'ay,  more,  we  do  not 
insist  that  it  was  any  particular  place. 
It  seems  to  us  that  Heeren  is  quite 
right  in  his  remark  that  Ophir,    like 
the  name  of  all  other  distant  places  or 
regions  of  antiquity — as  Thule,  Tar- 
tessus,  and  others — denotes  no  parti- 
cular spot,  but  only  a  certain  region  or 
part  ot  the  world,  such  as  the  East  or 
West   Indies   in  modern    geography. 
Hence  Ophir  was  a  general  name  for 
all  the  countries  lying  on  the  African, 
Arabian,  or  Indian  seas,   so  far  as  at 
that  time  known.— iTeY^o. 

—  Even  the  gold  of  Ophir  perishes 
in  the  using;  but  the  treasures  of 
grace  never  wax  old  nor  decay.  He 
that  is  possessed  of  these  hath  that  fine 
gold  which  constitutes  the  true  richeg 
(Kev.  iii.  18). 

146 


CHAP.  X.  UOMILHTIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  aUEEN  OF  SHEBA  AND  SOLOMON. 

Critioal  and  Explanatory  Notes.— Verse  1.  Queen  of  She'ba— The  Arabs  and  Abyg. 
Binians  both  claim  this  queen,  and  surround  this  historic  visit  with  rival  legends  (comp. 
Stanley's  Jewish  Church,  pp.  259-262).  The  former  name  her  Balkis;  the  latter,  Maqueda. 
But  the  country  here  denoted  is  i^y^  in  Arabia  Felix,  Sabay    the  capital  of  the  Sabean 

kingdom  of  Yemen,  and  not  ^^1D  (with  which  Josephus  confounds  \t)—i.e.y  Meroe  in  African 

Ethiopia,  viz.,  Abyssinia.  Fame  of  Solomon  concerning  the  name  of  the  Lord— Wot  ds 
Tt\7V  D^7  diflScult  of  interpretation :  I)e  Wette,  to  Jehovah's  honour ;  Ewald,  through  the 

• 

glory  of  Jehovah  ;  Weil,  by  Jehovah  so  glorifying  Himself  in  him  ;  Gesenius,  by  Jehovah's 
favour;  Keil,  in  regard  to  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Hard  questions -Riddles  or  enigmas. 
Verse  2.  Spices,  very  much  gold,  and  precious  stones— Saba,  or  MapLaBa,  in  Arabia  Felix, 
was  abundant  in  these  valuables,  and  its  inhabitants  were  celebrated  among  Hebrews  and 
Greeks  for  extensive  trade  in  these  products.  Verse  4.  House— i.  e.,  his  own  palace,  for 
things  mentioned  in  verse  5  belonged  to  the  palace.  Verse  5.  His  ascent  by  which  he  went 
up,  &c.- All  the  versions  (Sept.,  Chald.,  Syr.,  and  Vulg.)  read  burnt  offerings  which  he 
offered  up  in,  &c.  ;  but  Keil,  Winer,  Ewald,  and  others,  retain  the  readinu:  in  A.  V.  Pro- 
bably it  was  an  arched  viaduct  leading  from  the  palace  to  the  temple  (2  Kings  xvi.  18),  the 
remains  of  which  have  recently  been  discovered.  Verse  10.  An  hundred  and  twenty  talents 
of  gold =£720,000:  and  spices— □\"0i£;2,  from  U^l  probably  balsam.     Verse  11.  Almug 

trees— 2  Chron.  ix.  10,  11,  has  "  algum  wood."  most  probably  red  sandal  wood.  Verse  12. 
Pillars — nj?DD-     This  word  occurs  here  only,  and  its  meaning  is  doubtful,  though  its  root, 

"T^D,  means  to  support,  make  sure.      Keil  and   Ewald    think    balustrades;    Jarchi    and 

-    T 

Lange,  tessellated  pavements.  Verses  14,  15,  Solomon's  revenue— 666  talents=:£3,996,000. 
Verse  15.  Beside  ...  of  the  merchantmen,  and  ....  merchants  —  the  words 
rendered  <' merchantmen,"  D^'lpin  ^l^JJ^  have  been  conjectured  to  mean  "fines  of  the  sub- 

ject "  (provinces) ;  but,  literally,  they  signify  "  men  of  the  travellers  "  i.e.,  travelling  traders 
dealing  in  the  larger  merchandise ;  then  the  word  '*  merchants  "     D^  7 3*1  —  wiU  mean  **  pediers" 

dealing  in  inferior  wares.    Yet  D''^Dri  is  used  in  Numb,  xiv,  6  of  the  men  Moses  sent  to 

view  and  report  upon  the  land ;  hence  some  critics  would  here  render  the  word  by  "  ambas- 
sadors" instead  of  ''merchantmen."   All  the  kings  of  Arabia-  2"^Vn  ^yy'D,  not "  of  Arabia," 

V  V   r    "  :   ~ 

the  points  will  not  allow  of  that  rendering  ;  ^"l^i  is  a  mixed  multitude;  and  these  "kings'* 

were  Icings  over  mixed  races — the  bordering  tribes,  Bedouins.  These  "  tributary  kings  and 
governois  of  the  country  "  would  bring  from  their  respective  provinces,  periodically,  presents 
of  the  produce  of  their  territories  (see  note  on  chap.  iv.  7-19).  Verse  16.  Targets — 
*' ni)ii  is  a  large  square  shield,  rounded  down  upon  its  length,  covering  the  whole  body" 

T     • 

{La>ige).  Verse  18.  The  best  gold-  Gold  of  Uphaz.  The  "  throne  of  ivory  "  is  not  to  be 
understood  as  of  solid  massive  ivory,  but  inlaid.  Verpe  22.  A  navy  of  Tharshish— Tartessus 
in  Spain,  the  ancient  Phoenician  emporium,  where  silvei  was  so  freely  obtained  ;  but  the  better 
interpretation  of  the  word  is  Tharshish  navy,  a  common  phrase,  equivalent  to  a  strongly  built 
fleet.  "Silver"  could  have  been  gained  from  Spain,  but  not  the  gold,  apes,  peacocks,  or 
ivory ;  these  were  obtainable  in  Africa  Ver^e  28.  Horses  brought  out  of  Egypt,  and  linen 
yarn— A  decided  error  here  in  the  translation:  rnpD  cannot  be '*  linen  yarn,"  it  means  a 

"troop  ;  "  hence  the  verse  reads,  "  As  for  the  export  of  the  horses  which  Solomon  got  from 
Egypt,  a  troop  of  royal  merchants  used  to  fetch  a  troop  (of  horses)  at  a  price."  The  chapter 
thus  indicates  the  vast  wealth,  splendour,  and  luxury  of  Solomon's  court.— W.  H.  J. 


14$ 


EOMILETIC  COMMEI^TARY :  XUGS.  chap.  X. 


HOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-13 
The  Love  of  "Wisdom. 

I.  Exceeds  the  love  of  wealth  and  station.  Here  was  a  woman  occupying 
the  most  illustrious  position,  the  queen  of  a  country  so  highly  favoured  that  it 
was  called  **  The  Happy  Land,"  and  possessing  unlimited  resources,  as  the 
splendour  of  her  retinue  and  the  richness  of  her  presents  indicated,  smitten 
with  a  love  of  that  which  was  to  her  more  precious  than  crown  or  sceptre. 
There  are  wants  in  man  which  neither  riches  nor  honours  can  satisfy.  The 
deep  questionings  and  eager  longings  of  the  heart  can  be  met  only  by  the 
solutions  of  a  higher  wisdom.  "It  is  a  good  thing  to  doubt,  better  to  be  re- 
solved. The  mind  that  never  doubts,  shall  learn  nothing:  the  mind  Ihat  ever 
doubts,  shall  never  profit  by  learning.  Our  doubts  only  serve  to  stir  us  up  to 
seek  truth  :  our  resolutions  settle  us  in  the  truth  we  have  found.  There  were 
no  pleasure  in  resolutions  if  we  had  not  been  formerly  troubled  with  doubts. 
There  were  nothing  but  discomfort  and  disquiotness  in  doubts,  if  it  were  not 
for  the  hope  of  resolution.  It  is  not  safe  to  suifer  doubts  to  dwell  too  long 
upon  the  heart;  there  may  be  good  use  of  them  as  passengers,  dangerous  as 
inmates.  Happy  are  we  if  we  can  find  a  Solomon  to  remove  them." — Bp.  Hall, 
Many  sacrifice  wealth,  comfort,  position,  and  even  health  itself,  in  a  life-long 
pursuit  after  truth. 

II.  Inspires  the  soul  with  courage  and  enterprize  in  its  search.  Undis- 
mayed by  distance  or  the  difficulties  of  travel,  this  rich  and  powerful  queen 
journeyed  from  the  remotest  South  to  Jerusalem,  not  for  the  purpose  of  mer- 
chandise or  political  alliance,  but  purely  in  search  of  wisdom.  "  AYe  know 
merchants  who  venture  to  either  Indies  for  wealth  ;  others  we  know  daily  to 
cross  the  seas  for  wanton  curiosity.  Some  few  philosophers  we  have  known  to 
have  gone  far  for  learning;  and  amongst  princes  it  is  no  unusual  thing  to  send 
their  ambassadors  to  far  distant  kingdoms  for  transaction  of  business,  either  of 
state  or  commerce.  But  that  a  royal  lady  should  in  person  undertake  and 
overcome  so  tedious  a  journey,  only  to  observe  and  inquire  into  the  mysteries 
of  nature,  art,  and  religion,  is  a  thing  unparalleled.  Why  do  we  think  any 
labour  great,  or  any  way  long,  to  hear  a  greater  than  Solomon  ?  How  justly 
shall  the  Queen  of  the  South  rise  up  in  judgment  and  condemn  us  who  may 
hear  wisdom  crying  in  our  streets,  and  neglect  her ! "  Man  will  venture 
everything  for  that  which  he  loves.  Love  is  the  soul  and  strength  of  bravery. 
The  love  of  wisdom  is  ennobling. 

III.  Gives  an  aptitude  in  acquiring  its  rarest  treasures  (verses  1-3).  The 
queen  came  as  an  enquirer,  to  prove  Solomon  with  hard  questions.  Great  art 
is  required  in  asking  questions ;  and  it  is  only  a  passionate  love  for  the  science 
in  which  we  are  specially  interested  that  guideo  the  mind  to  the  most  important 
points  on  which  light  is  needed.  In  most  things  "  love  sees  not  with  the  eye, 
but  with  the  mind ;  "  and  its  divinings  are  subtle  and  wonderfully  verified. 
**  The  spirit  of  this  asking  of  questions  and  solving  of  dark  riddles  is  of  the  very 
nature  of  the  Socratic  wisdom  itself.  *  To  ask  questions  rightly,*  said  Lord 
Bacon,  *  is  the  half  of  knowledge.'  *  Life  without  cross-examination  is  no  life 
at  all,*  said  Socrates.  And  of  this  stimulating  process,  of  this  eager  enquiry, 
of  this  cross-examining  of  our  thoughts,  bringing  new  meanings  out  of  old 
words,  Solomon  is  the  first  example.  When  we  enquire,  when  we  question, 
when  we  are  restless  in  our  search  after  truth,  when  we  seek  it  from  unexpected 
quarters,  we  are  but  following  in  the  steps  of  the  Wise  King  of  Judah  and 
the  Wise  Queen  of  Sheba."— /S^aw^^y.     The  enquiries  of  the  royal  student  were 

147 


CHIP,  x^  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 

fdlly  and  satisfactorily  answered  (verse  3).     Happy  are  they  whose  doubts  are 
resolved,  and  wliose  hearts  are  set  at  rest. 

IV.  Reverently  acknowledges  its  Divine  origin  (verses  4-9).  And  if  this 
great  personage  admire  the  wisdom,  the  buildings,  the  domestic  order  of 
Solomon,  and  chiefly  his  stately  ascent  into  the  House  of  the  Lord,  how  should 
our  souls  be  taken  up  with  wonder  at  thee,  0  thou  true  Son  of  David,  and  Prince  of 
Everlasting  Peace,  who  receivedst  the  Spirit  not  by  measure,  who  has  built  this 
glorious  house  not  made  with  hands,  even  the  heaven  of  heavens,  whose  infinite 
Providence  hath  sweetly  disposed  of  all  the  family  of  thy  creatures,  both  in 
heaven  and  earth  ;  and  who  didst  ascend  on  high  and  leddest  captivity  captive, 
and  gavest  gifts  to  men. — Bishop  Hall.  True  wisdom  is  from  above,  and  bears 
the  indelible  impress  of  its  heavenly  origin  (James  iii.  17).  A  generous  spirit 
will  acknowledge  and  admire  the  genius  which  he  finds  in  another :  a  devout 
spirit  will  trace  all  gifts  to  their  Divine  source,  and  adore  the  affluence  and 
wisdom  of  the  Giver. 

Lessons: — 1.  Wisdom  is  worthy  of  diligent  self-denying  search,  2.  A  saving 
knowledge  of  Christy  who  is  the  wisdom  of  Gody  is  the  highest  and  only  satisfying 
wisdom. 

This  passage  may  be  also  homiletically  treated  as  follows  ;— 

The  Queen  op  Sheba,  a  Type  op  the  Heathen  Seeking  afteb  Tbuth. 

It  was  no  uncommon  thing  in  ancient  times  for  men  to  travel  far  in  search  of 
wisdom.  They  would  traverse  seas,  and  deserts,  and  mountains  to  visit  the 
spots  famous  for  learning,  and  to  converse  with  men  celebrated  in  philosophy. 
The  increased  facilities  with  which  the  most  distant  countries  are  now  reached, 
and  the  vast  number  of  people  who  now  travel  with  such  variety  of  objects,  do 
not  admit  of  the  career  of  a  seeker  of  knowledge  being  so  noticeable  as  of  yore* 
And  yet  the  search  for  increased  light  is  not  less  earnest,  and  it  is  certainly  mor^ 
general.  The  cry  of  the  dying  Goethe  is  the  cry  of  millions  to-day,  ''Light, 
more  light !  "  The  Queen  of  Sheba  is  a  type  of  the  intense  desire  with  whicb* 
thousands  outside  the  circle  of  Christian  teaching  are  seeking  after  truth. 

I.  There  is  the  admission  of  conscious  need.  The  Queen  of  SIr  b  i  possessed 
everything  that  could  minister  to  her  temporal  enjoyment.  She  had  wealth, 
prosperity,  rank,  power ;  but  these  did  not  satisfy  the  cravings  of  her  soul. 
There  was  a  sense  of  something  still  needed  in  order  to  attain  happiness.  That 
something  was  the  wisdom  described  and  extolled  in  Prov.  iii.  13-18.  The  sense 
of  need  is  the  spur  which  goad?  the  soul  onward  in  its  weary,  painful  search 
for  rest.  The  sinner  never  seeks  forgiveness  till  he  is  first  conscious  of  his  sin ; 
he  never  flees  for  safety  till  he  is  roused  to  a  sense  of  danger.  Our  fitness  to 
receive  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  is  the  humble  confession  of  our  need.  God 
delights  to  fill  the  empty,  to  feed  the  hungry,  to  cheer  the  disconsolate. 

II.  There  is  the  eagerness  with  which  the  intelligence  of  clearer  light 

is  welcomed.  The  Sheban  Queen  **  heard  of  the  fame  of  Solomon  concerning 
the  name  of  the  Lord"  (verse  1).  God  hath  no  use  of  the  dark  lanterns  of 
secret  and  reserved  perfections :  we  ourselves  do  not  light  up  candles  to  put 
them  under  bushels.  The  great  lights,  whether  of  heaven  or  earth,  are  not 
intended  to  obscurity  ;  but  as  to  give  light  unto  others,  so  to  be  seen  themselves. 
Dan  and  Beersheba  were  too  strait  bounds  for  the  fame  of  Solomon,  which  now 
had  flown  over  lands  and  seas,  and  raised  the  world  to  an  admiration  of  his 
more  than  human  wisdom.  Even  so,  0  thou  Everlasting  King  of  Peace  !  Thj^ 
148 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  x. 


name  is  ^eat  amonp"  the  Gentiles.  There  is  no  speech  nor  language  where  the 
report  of  Thee  is  not  heard.  Fame,  as  it  is  always  a  blab,  so  ofttimes  a  liar. 
The  wise  princess  found  cause  to  distrust  so  uncertain  an  informer,  whose 
reports  are  either  doubtful  or  fabulous,  and,  like  winds  or  streams,  increase  in 
passing.  This  great  queen  would  not  suffer  herself  to  be  led  by  ears,  but  comes 
in  person  to  examine  the  truth.  How  much  more  unsafe  is  it,  in  the  most  im- 
portant businesses  of  our  souls,  to  trust  the  opinions  and  reports  of  others ! 
Those  eyes  and  ears  are  ill  bestowed  that  do  not  serve  to  choose  and  judge 
for  their  owners. — Bp.  Hall.  The  anxioas  enquirer  hails  with  joy  the  faintest 
glimmer  of  light  which  will  corduct  him  out  of  the  dark  labyrinth  in  which  he 
has  been  so  long  wandering ;  as  the  inhabitant  of  the  Polar  Regions,  shut  up  in 
darkness  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  rejoices  to  descry  the  first  rosy  rays 
of  dawn  kindling  on  the  snow-clad  mountain  tops,  which  announce  to  him  the 
approach  of  the  summer,  during  which  the  sun  never  sets. 

III.  There  is  the  willingness  to  seek  truth  wherever  it  may  be  found. 

**  And  she  came  to  Jerusalem,"  &c.  (verse  2).  She  spared  neither  expense  nor 
trouble  ;  the  toils  and  dangers  of  travel  did  not  intimidate,  the  scorn  and  con- 
tempt of  the  world  did  not  trouble.  The  soul-hunger  for  the  word  of  life,  the 
desire  to  know  something  about  the  name  of  Jehovah,  enabled  her  to  overcome 
all  difficulties,  and  brave  all  perils.  **How  superior  is  this  heathen  woman  to 
many  Christians  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  all  possible  things,  but  never  after 
a  knowledge  of  truth  and  wisdom."  The  sincere  seeker  after  truth  will  press 
through  fire  and  water,  will  sunder  the  dearest  ties  of  relationship,  will  sacri- 
fice the  most  brilliant  prospects  in  life,  to  attain  the  goal  where  light  and  rest 
and  peace  are  to  be  found  (e.g.^  the  history  of  Sakya-Muni,  founder  of 
Buddhism). 

IV.  There  is  the  joyous    acknowledgment    of   the  truth   (verses  4-9). 

1.  This  acknowledgment  was  the  result  of  overwhelming  conviction.  "  When  the 
queen  had  seen  all  Solomon's  wisdom,  &c.,  there  was  no  more  spirit  in  her  " 
(verses  4,  5).  She  saw,  examined,  and  judged  for  herself;  the  evidence  was 
ample,  and  the  conviction  irresistible.  The  reality  of  Solomon's  ability  and 
greatness  exceeded  all  she  had  heard.  The  profession  of  truth  that  is  not  based 
on  clear  and  profound  conviction  will  not  be  permanent.  The  true  order  is 
laid  down  by  the  apostle  :    **  We  believe,  and  therefore  speak"  (2  Cor.  iv.  13). 

2.  This  aclcnowledgment  was  freely  and  generously  rendered  (verses  6-8).  An  un- 
prejudiced mind  will  readily  and  cheerfully  admit  the  force  of  truth.  It  is 
weak,  it  is  dishonest,  not  to  act  up  to  the  deepest  convictions  of  the  soul.  The 
martyrs  and  confessors  bore  nobly  their  testimony  in  the  presence  of  cruelty 
and  death.  3.  This  anhnowledgment  recognized  the  Divine  source  of  truth  (verse 
9).  Perhaps  the  heathen  queen  was  turned  from  her  dumb  idols,  henceforth  to 
worship  the  living  and  true  God.  This  was  a  general  belief  among  Jewish 
writers.  God  is  the  fountain  of  all  truth  ;  and  He  should  be  praised  continu- 
ally for  the  abundant  revelations  with  which  lie  has  favoured  the  race. 

V.  There  is  the  practical  manifestation  of  a  gratefal  heart  (verse  10). 
The  queen  brought  presents  of  gold,  of  precious  stones,  and  fragrant  spices.  The 
test  of  our  gratitude  to  God  is  seen  in  what  we  give  to  him.  Few  give  according 
to  their  ability,  none  in  proportion  to  the  blessings  received.  '*  IIow  should  we 
bring  unto  Thee,  0  Thou  King  of  Heaven,  the  purest  gold  of  Thine  own 
graces,  the  sweet  odour  of  our  obedience.  Was  not  this  Avithal  a  type  of  that 
homage  which  should  be  done  unto  Thee,  0  Saviour,  by  the  heads  of  the  nations  ? 
The  kings  of  Tarshish  and  the  isles  bring  presents;  the  kings  of  Sheba  and 
Seba  bring  gifts ,  yea,  all  kings  shall  worship  Thee,  all  nations  shall  serve 
Thee  (Isa.  Ix.).     They  cannot  enrich  themselves,  but  by  giving  unto  Thee." 

149 


«HAP.  X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


True  wisdom  cannot  be  bought  with  gold,  but  too  much  gold  cannot  be  spent 
in  its  attainment  and  propagation.  It  cannot  be  too  dearly  bought,  not  too  far 
fetched. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  Great  is  the  responsibility  of  that  nation  which  possesses  the  light 
of  Divine  Truth.  2.  A  sincere  seeker  after  Truth  shall  not  seek  in  vain,  3.  The 
eagerness  with  which  the  heathen  embraces  the  Truth  is  a  rebuke  to  the  cold 
indifference  of  more  highly  favoured  nations. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Verses  1-13.  The  Queen  of  Sheba 
comes  to  Solomon.  1.  She  comes  in 
order  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon. 

2.  She  finds  more  than  she  expected. 

3.  She  worships  and  praises  the  Lord 
for  what    she   has   seen    and   heard. 

4.  She  returns  home  in  peace,  with 
rich  gifts.  Solomon  receiving  the 
Queen  of  Sheba  a  type  of  Christ 
(Matt.  xxii.  42).  1.  He  did  not 
reject  her  who  sought  Him,  but 
raised  her  up  (Jno.  vi.  37).  2.  He 
solved  her  questions,  and  showed 
her  His  glory  (Jno  i.  9,  14  ;  xxii.  46  ; 
vi.  68).  3.  He  accepted  her  gifts,  and 
gave  her  much  more  in  return,  even 
all  that  she  desired  and  requested 
(Jno.  X.  11,  28;  xvi.  24;  iv.   13). 

Verses  1-3.  The  dissolving  of  doubts 
(compared  with  Dan.  v.  16).  Doubts 
and  ques  ions  are  the  common  lot  and 
heritage  of  humanity.  They  vary  in 
their  subjects  and  times,  but  we  have 
them  always  on  hand.  We  live  just 
now  in  a  specially  doubting  age,  where 
almost  every  matter  of  feeling  is 
openly  doubted,  or,  it  may  be,  openly 
denied.  Science  puts  everything  in 
question,  and  literature  distils  the 
questions,  making  an  atmosphere  of 
them.  We  doubt  both  creation  and 
Creator.  We  doubt  free  agency  and 
responsibility,  immortality  and  salva- 
tion, the  utility  of  prayer  and  worship, 
and  even  of  repentance  for  sin.  And 
these  sweeping,  desolating  doubts  run 
through  all  grades  of  minds,  all  modes 
and  spheres  of  life,  as  it  were  tele- 
graphically, present  as  powers  of  the 
air  to  unchristen  the  newborn  thoughts 
of  religion  as  fast  as  they  arrive.  The 
cultivated  and  mature  have  the  doubts 
ingrown  they  know  not  how,  and 
150 


the  younger  minds  encounter  their 
subtle  visitations  when  they  do  not 
seek  them.  And  the  more  active- 
minded  they  are,  and  the  more  thoughts 
they  have  on  the  subject  of  religion, 
the  more  likely  they  are  (unless 
anchored  by  true  faith  in  God)  to  he 
drifted  away  from  all  the  most  solid 
and  serious  convictions  even  before 
they  are  aware  of  it. 

Note  the  three  principal  sources 
and  causes  whence  our  doubts  arise, 
and  from  which  they  get  force  to  make 
their  assault.  They  never  come  of 
truth  or  high  discovery,  but  always  of 
the  want  of  it. 

1.  All  the  truths  of  religion  are  in^ 
herently  dubitable.  They  are  only  what 
are  called  probable,  never  necessary 
truths  like  the  truths  of  geometry  or 
of  numbers.  In  these  we  have  the 
premises  in  our  very  minds  themselves. 
In  all  other  matters  we  have  the  pre- 
mises to  find.  JSTow  this  field  of  pro- 
bable truth  is  the  whole  field  of  re- 
ligion, and  of  course  it  is  competent 
for  doubt  to  cover  it  in  every  part  and 
item. 

2.  We  begin  life  as  unknowing  crea- 
tures that  have  everything  to  learn.  We 
grope,  and  groping  is  doubt ;  we  handle, 
we  question,  we  guess,  we  experiment, 
beginning  in  darkness  and  stumbling 
on  towards  intelligence.  We  are  in 
a  doom  of  activity,  and  cannot  stop 
thinking — thinking  of  everything — 
knocking  against  the  walls  on  every 
side  ;  trying  thus  to  master  the  pro- 
blems, and  about  as  often  getting  mas- 
tered by  them.  Yeast  works  in  bread 
scarcely  more  blindly. 

3.  It  is  a  fact  that  our  faculty  is  it- 
self in  disorder.  A  broken  or  bent 
telescope  will  not  see  anything  lightly. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


cnAP.  X. 


A  filthy  window  will  not  bring  in  even 
the  day  as  it  is.  So  a  mind  wrenched 
from  its  true  lines  of  action,  or  straight 
perception,  discoloured  and  smirched 
by  evil,  will  not  see  truly,  but  will 
put  a  blurred,  misshapen  look  on 
everything.  To  show  not  how  doubts 
may  be  stopped,  for  that  is  impossible, 
but  only  how  they  may  be  dissolved, 
or  cleared  away,  observe  : — 

I-  Doubters  never  can  dissolve  or 
extirpate  their  doubts  by  inquiry, 
search^  investigation^  or  any  hind  of 
speculative  endeavour.  They  must  never 
go  after  the  truth  to  merely  find  it, 
but  to  practise  it,  and  live  by  it.  It 
is  not  enough  to  rally  their  inventive- 
ness, doing  nothing  to  polarize  their 
aim.  They  imagine,  it  may  be,  that 
they  are  going  first  to  settle  their  ques- 
tions, and  then,  at  their  leisure,  to 
act.  As  if  they  were  going  to  get  the 
perfect  system,  and  complete  know- 
ledge of  truth,  before  they  move  an 
inch  in  doing  what  they  know  !  !N'o, 
.  there  is  no  fit  search  after  truth  which 
does  not,  first  of  all,  begin  to  live  the 
truth  it  knows. 

II.  There  is  a  way  for  dissolving  any 
and  all  doubts — a  way  that  opens  at  a 
very  small  gate,  but  widens  wonderfully 
after  you  pass.  Every  human  soul,  at 
a  certain  first  point  of  its  religious  out- 
fit, has  a  key  given  it,  which  is  to  be 
the  open  sesame  of  all  right  discovery. 
Using  this  key  as  it  may  be  used,  any 
look  is  opened,  any  doubt  dissolved. 
Thus  every  man  acknowledges  the  dis- 
tinction of  right  and  wrong,  feels  the 
reality  of  that  distinction,  knows  it 
by  immediate  consciousness  even  as  he 
knows  himself.  Here  is  the  key  that 
opens  everything.  The  true  way  of 
dissolving  doubts  is  to  begin  at  the 
beginning,  and  do  the  first  thing  first. 
Say  nothing  of  investigation,  till  you 
have  made  sure  of  being  grounded 
everlastingly,  and  with  a  completely 
whole  intent,  in  the  principle  of  right 
doing  as  a  principle.  And  here  it  is 
that  all  un religion 8  men  are  at  fault, 
and  often  without  knowing,  or  even 
suspecting  it.  They  do  right  things 
enough  in  the  out-door,  market  sense 
of  the  term,  and  count  that  being  right. 


But  let  them  ask  the  question,  "  Have 
I  ever  consented  to  be,  and  am  I  really 
now,  in  the  right,  as  in  principle  and 
supreme  law  ;  to  live  for  it,  to  make 
any  sacrifice  it  will  cost  me,  to  believe 
everything  it  will  bring  me  to  see,  to 
be  a  conf(  s.^or  of  Christ  as  soon  as  it 
appears  to  be  enjoined  upon  me,  to  go 
on  a  mission  to  the  world's  end  if  due 
conviction  sends  me,  to  change  my  oc- 
cupation for  good  conscience'  sake,  to 
repair  whatever  wrong  I  have  done  to 
another,  to  be  humbled,  if  I  should, 
before  my  worst  enemy,  to  do  complete 
justice  to  God,  and,  if  I  could,  to  all 
worlds— in  a  word,  to  be  in  wholly 
right  intent,  and  have  no  mind  but  this 
for  ever?"  Ah!  how  soon  do  they 
discover  possibly,  in  this  manner,  that 
they  are  right  only  so  far  as  they  can 
be,  and  not  be  at  all  right  as  in  princi- 
ple— right  as  doing  some  right  things, 
nothing  more.  As  certainly  as  the 
new  right  mind  begins,  it  will  be  as 
if  the  whole  heaven  were  bursting  out 
in  day.  This  is  what  Christ  calls  the 
single  eye,  and  the  whole  body  is  in- 
evitably full  of  light.  This  is  the 
menstruum  by  which  all  doubts  may  be 
dissolved.  How  surely  and  how  fast 
they  fly  away,  even  as  fogs  are  burned 
away  by  the  sun ! 

Lessons: — 1.  Be  never  afraid  of 
doubt.  2.  Be  afraid  of  all  sophistries 
and  trichs  and  strifes  of  disingenuous 
argument.  3.  Have  it  as  a  fixed  prin^ 
ciple  that  getting  into  any  scornful  way  is 
fatal.  4.  Never  settle  upon  anything 
as  true  because  it  is  safer  to  hold  it  than 
not.  5.  Have  it  as  a  law  never  to  put 
force  on  the  mind,  or  try  to  mahe  it  be* 
lieve,  because  it  spoils  the  mind^s  inte- 
grity  ;  and  when  that  is  gone,  what  power 
of  advance  in  the  truth  is  left?  6, 
Never  be  in  a  hurry  to  believe,  never  try 
to  conquer  doubts  against  time. — Con- 
densed from  Bushnell. 

Terse  4.  Words  must  be  followed 
by  works :  the  beholding  with  her 
own  eyes,  and  her  very  own  experi- 
ence, must  be  added  to  the  rumours 
she  has  heard.  Nathaniel,  when  ho 
heard  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  spoke 
doubtidgly   at   first — Can    anv   good 

151 


OHAP.  X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


come  out  of  ITazareth  ?  But  when  he 
came  and  saw,  he  joyfully  exclaimed, 
''  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  Thou  art 
the  King  of  Israel "  (Jno.  i.  45-49). 
As  in  order  to  form  a  just  conception 
of  visible  things  we  must  see  them 
with  our  own  eyes,  so  also  with 
invisible  and  Divine  things  :  rightly  to 
recognize  thera  as  such,  we  must  feel 
and  taste  their  strength  in  our  own 
heart,  and  not  merely  hear  of  them 
from  others  (1  Peter  ii.  3;  Psalms 
xxxiv.  9). 

Yerse  5.  Great  palaces,  brilliant 
arrangements,  &c.,  are  objects  worthy 
of  real  admiration  if  they  are  not  evi- 
dently mere  works  to  gratify  the  lust  of 
the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life,  but  rather 
proofs  of  wisdom,  of  spiritual  elevation, 
and  of  love  of  art.  The  scene  here  des- 
cribed receives  very  apt  illustrationfrom 
the  Assyrian  banquet  scenes,  where  we 
have  numerous  guests  sitting,  dressed 
handsomely  in  fringed  robes,  with 
armlets  upon  their  arms,  and  bracelets 
round  their  wrists,  attendants  stand- 
ing behind  them,  and  magnificent 
drinking  cups,  evidently  of  a  costly 
metal,  in  the  hands  of  the  guests, 
which  are  filled  from  a  great  wine- 
bowl at  one  end  of  the  chamber. — 
Ancient  Monarchies. 

Verse  8.  !N"ot  because  of  their  fine 
clothes,  of  their  high  position,  of  their 
splendid  possessions,  did  the  queen 
regard  the  people  and  the  servants  of 
Solomon  as  blessed  and  happy  ;  but 
because  they  could  always  listen  to 
his  wisdom.  How  much  the  more  are 
those  to  be  esteemed  blessed  who,  sit- 
ting at  His  feet  who  Himself  contains 
all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  of 
knowledge,  can  hear  tlie  word  of  ever- 
lasting life  from  His  mouth  (Luke 
X.  23). — Lange. 

Yerse  9.  Christ  the  Head  and 
King  of  the  church.  When  the 
Queen  of  Sheba  came  from  the  South 
to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  and 
saw  his  buildings,  provisions,  ministers, 
and  servants,  she  acknowledged  and 
praised  Jehovah,  as  the  Author  of 
Solomon's  advancement.  Slie  observes 
152 


that  it  was  an  evidence  of  God's  spe- 
cial regard  to  him  that  he  was  set  on 
the  throne  of  Israel,  God's  peculiar 
people ;  and  she  further  observes  that 
it  was  a  token  of  God's  great  and 
everlasting  love  to  Israel  that  so  wise 
and  pious  a  prince  was  set  over  them. 
With  much  more  justice  may  these 
w^rds  be  applied  to  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  God  hath  **  set  as  King 
on  His  holy  hill  Zion ;"  and  we  may 
say,  with  humble  and  devout  praise, 
"  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  ^hich  delight- 
eth  in  Him  to  make  Him  Head  and 
King  of  the  church.  Because  the 
Lord  loved  mankind,  and  was  desirous 
to  save  them  for  ever,  therefore  He 
made  His  Son  King,  to  do  judgment 
and  justice."  Let  us  see  how  the 
words  are  applicable  to  Christ,  and 
what  reason  we  have  to  bless  God 
for  so  wise  aud  gracious  an  appoint- 
ment. 

I.  The  designation  or  appointment 
of  Christ  to  be  Head  and  King  of  the 
church  was  an  evident  instance  of 
God's  delight  in  Him.  Thus  a  great 
honour  was  conferred  upon  the  Son  of 
God.  It  is  an  honour  to  be  any  way 
employed  for  God.  In  this  view  the 
work  of  Christian  ministers  is  honour- 
able, and  it  becomes  them  to  *' magnify 
their  office."  It  is  an  honour  to  the 
angels  to  be  the  *' ministers  of  God, 
aud  do  his  pleasure."  But  signal 
honour  was  conferred  upon  Christ,  in 
being  invested  with  so  great  authority, 
exalted  to  so  extensive  a  dominion, 
and  having  all  things  put  under  His 
feet.  This  was  an  evidence  that  Ho 
loved  righteousness  and  hated  iniquity 
that  God  thus  exalted  Him.  For  no- 
thing but  such  a  disposition  can  give 
one  rational  being  a  real  excellency 
and  superiority  above  another.  A  very 
great  trust  was  reposed  in  the  Son  of 
God ;  and  that  shows  God's  approba- 
tion of  Him  and  delight  in  Him,  no 
less  than  recovering  God's  fallen,  sin- 
ful creatures  to  theif  duty  and  allegi- 
ance, promoting  the  glory  of  the  great 
Lord  of  all,  and  making  so  considerable 
a  part  of  the  intelligent  creation  holy 
end  happy.  The  Father  loved  His 
Son,  and  hath  given  all  things  into 


nOMllETIC  COJIfUEXTAnT:   KINGS. 


OITAP.  X. 


His  hands.  Again,  by  this  appoint- 
ment the  glory  and  joy  of  the  Redeemer 
were  advanced.  Every  soul  brought 
into  suLJc^ction  to  Him  adds  to  His 
revenue  of  praise  and  honour.  He 
sees  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  is 
satisfied.  This  was  the  *'the  joy  set 
before  Him."  What  superior  honour 
can  God  confer  on  any  being,  than  to 
render  him  an  instrument  of  com- 
municating great,  extensive,  and  last- 
ing happiness  to  many  others  ?  This  is 
making  such  a  being,  in  an  eminent 
degree,  like  Himself.  Christ  hath  a 
large  spheie  of  sernce  for  the  glory  of 
God  and  the  salvation  of  souls.  There 
is  joy  in  heaven  whenever  it  prospers ; 
and  whenever  the  whole  redeemed  are 
presented  faultless  before  the  presence 
of  the  Divine  glory,  it  will  be  to  the 
exceeding  joy  of  Christ  Himself,  and 
the  highest  evidence  of  God's  delight 
in  Him. 

II.  The  appointment  of  Christ  to 
be  King  of  the  church  is  a  remark- 
able instance  of  God's  love  to  man. 
Because  He  loved  the  world,  He  made 
Jesus  Christ  King  to  do  justice  and 
judgment.  It  was  an  evidence  of 
God's  love  to  man  that  He  appointed 
prophets  and  teachers  to  instruct  and 
reclaim  an  ignorant,  idolatrous,  sinful 
world.  But  in  proportion  to  the  ex- 
cellency of  the  persons  commissioned 
to  this  work,  will  the  Divine  love  and 
grace  be  apparent.  It  Is  a  merciful 
scheme  to  rescue  the  world  from  ignor- 
ance, superstition,  and  vice,  to  erect 
a  spiritual  kingdom  in  it,  to  desti'oy 
the  works  of  the  devil,  and  to  deliver 
men  from  the  worst  slavery.  But  to 
manifest  His  Son  for  this  purpose  was 
an  aetonishing  instance  of  mercy.  The 
perfections  of  His  nature,  and  especi- 
ally His  moral  excellencies,  qualify 
Him  for  this  work.  His  example  illus- 
trates and  recommends  His  precepts, 
and  He  is  able  to  bestow  every  bless- 
ing which  we  can  want;  to  deliver  us 
from  everything  that  would  hinder  or 
lessen  our  happiness,  and  confer  and 
continue  everything  that  will  promote 
and  secure  it.  How  pertinent  and 
useful  are  such  reflections  as  these  in 
this  connection !  Did  the  Queen  of 
Sheba  bless  the  God  of  Israel  for  ap- 


pointing Solomon  to  be  king  over  it? 
And  shall  not  I  ardently  praise  Him 
for  exalting  a  Son  to  be  a  Prince  and 
a  Saviour  ?  I  would  consider  from 
what  a  slavery  He  redeems  us ;  from 
ignorance,  error,  and  a  thousand  irregu- 
lar lusts  and  passions.  He  redeems  us  to 
God,  brings  us  into  a  state  of  likeness 
to  Him  and  friendship  with  Him,  He 
has  made  effectual  provision  that  we 
shall  not  again  be  ensLived  if  we  will 
stand  fast  in  our  liberty.  I  would 
further  consider  how  wisely  and  gra- 
ciously He  governs  us.  His  laws  are 
all  plain,  reasonable,  wholesome,  ex- 
cellent, enforced  by  the  most  po\\  erful 
sanctions ;  and  gracious  allowances 
are  made  for  our  weakness  and  imper- 
fection. I  would  consider  also  to 
what  a  state  of  glory  and  happiness 
he  will  raise  all  his  faithful  subjects. 
He  will  bring  them  to  His  heavenly 
courts,  fix  them  beyond  the  reach  of 
enemies,  sorrows,  and  dangers,  in  a 
state  of  perfect  holiness  and  never- 
ending  joy.  How  affectionately  and 
gratefully  should  my  soul  magnify  the 
Lord  for  this  unspeakable  gift ! 

Reflections. — When  the  queen  of 
Sheba  had  complimented  Solomon  on 
his  wisdom,  prosperity,  and  the 
happiness  of  his  servants,  and  praised 
God  for  making  him  king,  she  **  gave 
him  much  gold,  spices,  and  precious 
stones."  This  was  a  token  of  hei 
high  veneration  for  him,  and  grati- 
tude for  the  favours  she  had  received 
from  him.  Thus,  when  we  have  been 
commemorating  the  goodness  of  God 
in  exalting  His  Son  to  be  the  Ruler 
and  Saviour  of  His  people,  it  becomes 
us  to  offer  our  presents  to  Him.  He 
require th  not,  he  needeth  not  gold, 
and  silver,  and  precious  stones.  He 
requireth  that  we  yield  ourselves  to 
Him  ;  that  we  give  Him  our  hearts, 
and  testify  our  allegiance  and  subjec- 
tion, not  by  this  service  only,  but 
the  obedience  of  onr  whole  lives; 
that  we  submit  to  His  government, 
and  study  to  promote  the  interests 
of  His  kingdom.  This  is  what  we 
can  give,  what  we  ought  to  give, 
what  alone  he  will  accept. — J,  Orion, 

Versos  10-13.  The  interchange  of 

153 


CHAP.  X.  EOMILETIG  C0MM:BN-TAMT :  KIKGS. 


gfifts  between  tlie  queen  and  Solo-  Yerse  13.  With  a  treasure  incora- 
mon.  1.  The  queen  is  not  content  parable  in  value  to  gold  and  jewels, 
with  words  of  praise  and  thanks;  the  queen  joyfully  went  her  way, 
she  testifies  her  gratitude  by  means  of  like  the  eunuch  of  Ethiopia.  How- 
great  and  royal  gifts.  Of  what  avail  many  are  there  who  return  from  far 
are  mere  verbal  thanks  and  praise,  if  journeys  into  distant  lands,  rich  in 
the  life  be  devoid  of  lovely  deeds  and  gold  and  substance,  but  poor  in  faith 
of  cheerful  gifts,  for  the  acknowledg-  and  knowledge  of  the  truth  !  They 
ment  of  God's  kingdom?  2.  Solomon  have  lost  more  than  they  have  won  : 
needed  not  the  gifts ;  ^  he  had  mgre  the  queen  gained  more  than  she 
than  she  could  give  him  (verses  11,  lost. 

12) ;  he  gave  her  all  that  heart  could  —  The  generation  of  the  present 

desire.      What  are  all  our  gifts  in  day  in  comparison  with  the  queen 

comparison    with    those     which    we  of  Sheba.     I.  Its  satiety  and  indiffer- 

receive  from  the  Lord — those  which  ence.     II.  Its  unbelief  and  its  guilt 

are   immeasurably   beyond    what    we  (Matt.  xii.  42). — J wige. 

ask  and  seek  (Eph.  iii.  20),  and  where  —  The  exalted  mission  of  a  true 

it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  philosophy.       1.    Is    to    become    ao- 

(Acts  XX.  35)  ! — Lange.  quainted  with  the  highest  truth.     2. 

To  freely  communicate  truth  to  others. 

Yerses    1-13.      The    anxious     en-  3.  To  promote  the  happiness  of  nations 

qnirer.     I.  Perplexed.     II.  Aroused,  by  the  active  dissemination  of  truth. 

III.     Seeking.     lY.    Convinced.     Y.  4.    To    insist    upon    the   imperative 

Satisfied.  claims  of  truth. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  14—29. 
The  Plood-Tide  op  National  PROSPEBrrr. 

I.  Seen  in  the  super-abundance  of  wealth  (verses  14-17;  21-23).  Gold 
was  so  plentiful  that  silver  was  '*  nothing  accounted  of  in  the  days  of  Solomon ;  he 
exceeded  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  for  riches."  He  was  the  ideal  of  an  Eastern 
monarch,  all  the  attributes  of  greatness  were  united  in  him — riches,  dignity, 
ability,  fame,  splendour.  The  Old  Testament  kingdom  reached  its  culminating 
point  in  David's  Son;  all  the  promises  of  temporal  prosperity  were  fulfilled  in 
it.  Such  is  the  nature  of  worldly  wealth,  the  more  abundant  it  is,  the  less  valu- 
able it  is.  Great  fears  are  expressed  that  recent  discoveries  in  the  diamond  fields 
of  South  Africa  will  depreciate  the  value  of  the  precious  stone.  Oh !  how  ought 
the  possession  of  mental  and  spiritual  riches  to  lessen  our  love  for  the  perishable 
things  of  earth !  If  we  are  citizens  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  the  very  streets 
will  be  pure  gold,  and  the  walls  the  richest  jewels;  so  much  will  our  eternal 
blessedness  exceed  all  earthly  joy  and  felicity. 

II.  Seen  in  the  external  grandeur  of  the  throne  (verses  18-20).  In  the 
ruder  stages  of  national  life  the  king  would  dispense  justice  and  promulgate 
law  by  the  side  of  some  favourite  stream,  under  the  shadow  of  a  well-known 
tree,  on  an  elevated  mound  of  earth,  at  the  entrance  of  the  city,  or  by  the  side 
of  a  spear  thrust  into  the  ground ;  but  as  the  monarch  and  people  increased  in 
wealth,  these  simple,  primitive  methods  gave  place  to  more  ceremoLious  and 
ornate  displays  of  regal  greatness.  Solomon's  throne  was  made  of  ivory  inlaid 
with  the  best  gold.  It  was  erected  in  the  Porch  of  Jadgment,  leading  out  of 
the  Porch  of  Pillars  (chap.  vii.  7).  Here  Solomon  sat  to  receive  his  officers  of 
state,  and  foreign  ambassadors  and  princes  on  important  occasions,  and  especially 

154 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS.  chap.  x. 


to  hear  and  decide  the  eases  that  were  submitted  to  his  judgment.  The  dazzling 
splendour  of  the  throne  was  well  calculated  to  inspire  awe,  and  was  a  striking 
evidence  of  the  wealth  and  luxury  of  the  time. 

III.  Seen  in  the  consummate  wisdom  of  the  ruler  (verse  23-25).    The 

wisdom  of  Solomon  was  emineutly  practical.  It  suppressed  the  malcontents, 
and  ensured  the  peace  of  the  kingdom.  It  organised  a  complicated  and  flourish- 
ing system  of  commerce.  It  raised  the  nation  to  affluence  and  lame,  so  that 
**  king  Solomon  exceeded  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  for  riches  and  for  ^\isdom.'* 
This  was  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  promise  (eh.  iii.  13).  In  the  depressed 
condition  at  that  time  both  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  it  would  seem  to  have  been 
literally  true  that  Solomon's  kingdom  was,  for  wealth  and  splendour,  the  first 
in  all  the  world.  Grandees  from  afar  flocked  to  the  court  of  the  Israelitish 
king  to  listen  to  the  profound  wisdom  that  fell  from  his  lips,  and  to  learn  the 
secret  of  his  brilliant  rule.  lu  an  age  when  so  much  depended  on  the  character 
and  policy  of  the  sovereign,  to  be  gifted  with  almost  superhuman  wisdom  was  a 
sure  way  of  securing  increased  prosperity  and  power.  Happy  is  the  nation 
that,  with  an  expanding  and  profitable  commerce,  possesses  a  wise  and  con- 
siderate king. 

IV.  Seen  in  the  prevalence  of  expensive  luxnries  (verses  21, 22  ;  26-29). 
The  drinking  cups  were  of  gold  :  there  was  no  silver  in  them.  And  yet  a 
draught  of  water  is  as  sweet  and  refreshing  from  the  moss-covered  cistern  among 
the  hills  as  from  the  most  richly-chased  goblet  of  gold.  The  fleets  of  Solomon 
supplied  Jerusalem  with  the  rarities  and  dainties  of  foreign  lands —  gold,  silver, 
ivory,  apes,  and  peacocks.  Wordsworth  sees  a  sort  of  irony  and  sarcasm  in  the 
mention  of  apes  and  peacocks  as  *'  the  climax  of  the  produce  of  the  commerce  of 
Solomon.  Apes  and  peacocks  to  Solomon,  the  wise  king  at  Jerusalem !  To 
gratify  curiosity,  to  amuse  the  people,  and,  perhaps,  to  while  away  the  time 
of  the  strange  women  to  whom  Solomon  clave  in  love,  instead  of  cleaving  to  the 
Lord."  He  indulged  in  the  costly  extravagance  of  chariots  and  horses,  with 
which  he  established  a  new  species  of  military  force,  strongly  discouraged  by 
the  law  of  Moses,  and  from  which  all  previous  rulers  of  this  people  had  abstained. 
The  country  was  mountainous,  and  wholly  unsuited  for  cavalry.  It  was  also 
a  time  of  peace  ;  and  all  the  great  victories  of  his  father  and  other  conquerors 
had  been  won  in  reliance  upon  the  strength  of  the  Lord's  arm,  without  using 
any  such  force,  and  in  opposition  to  the  enemy  who  employed  it  (Psa.  xx,  7). 
Besides,  such  a  number  of  chariots  and  horses  was  out  of  all  proportion  to  so 
small  a  country ;  and  perhaps  no  act  of  royal  indulgence  was  more  unpopular 
among  the  people.  This  was  doubtless  a  strong  element  in  the  spirit  of  discon- 
tent which  afterwards  shattered  the  empire.  Prosperity  has  its  accompanying 
perils,  and  not  the  least  of  these  is  the  tendency  to  indulge  in  costly  and 
emasculating  luxuries. 

V.  Marks  the  beginning  of  national  decline.  As  the  flood- tide  of  the 
ocean  begins  to  ebb  soon  after  it  has  registered  its  highest  water-mark,  and  as 
the  earth  sinks  towards  the  darkness  and  cold  of  winter  the  moment  after  it  has 
risen  to  its  highest  point  in  the  summer  solstice,  so  the  period  in  which  a 
nation  bursts  forth  into  its  grandest  display  of  material  splendour  presents 
indications  of  inevitable  decay.  Wealth,  fame,  and  the  most  massive  works  of 
man  are  perishable,  while  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  moral  goodness  bloom 
with  immortal  beauty. 

Lessons  : — 1  There  is  the  wisdom  of  gold ^  and  the  gold  of  wisdom.  2.  National 
prosperity  is  ever  attended  with  serious  perils,  3.  2he  religious  character  of  a 
nation  survive*  the  decay  of  its  external  glory, 

166 


o«AP.  lu  ffOMILSTIC  COMMF.NTAnY:  KINGS. 


The  IvoiiT  Theonb  a  Symbol  of  Eeqal  Goyebnuent. 

One  of  the  most  attractive  objects  in  the  Palace  of  Solomon  was  the  great 
ivory  throne.  It  was  a  massive  and  imposing  structure,  and  exceeded  in  splen- 
dour anything  of  the  kind  in  any  other  kingdom.  It  was  in  the  form  of  an 
ancient  round-topped,  two-armed  chair,  with  the  figure  of  a  lion  on  either  side, 
probably  of  cast  metal  gilt ;  and  fixed  on  an  elevated  platform,  the  ascent  to 
which  consisted  of  six  steps,  each  step  leing  adorned  with  the  life-sized  figure 
of  a  lion,  facing  another  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  step.  The  chair  of  state,  and 
the  steps  up  to  it,  were  covered  with  ivory  and  gold.  Eepresen(ations  of  thrones 
are  frequent  in  the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  sculptures.  They  have  no  steps  up 
to  them,  but  frequently  stand  upon  square  bases.  The  back  appears  to  be  flat 
at  the  top,  not  rounded.  Assyrian  thrones  have  "stays"  or  arms  on  either 
side,  and  they  stand  generally  on  lions'  feet.  Ivory  was  a  material  used  in 
them  ;  but  they  were  chiefly  of  wood  and  metal.  We  read  in  after  years  of  the 
Parthian  kings,  whose  throne  was  of  gold,  encompassed  with  four  golden  pillars 
adorned  with  precious  stones ;  and  of  the  Persian  kings  who  sat  in  judgment 
under  a  golden  vine  and  other  trees  of  gold,  the  bunches  of  grapes  and  other 
fruits  being  formed  of  difi'erent  kinds  of  precious  stones.  We  may  regard  the 
throne  of  Solomon  as  a  symbol  of  regal  government, 

I.  That  regal  government  should  be  righteous  in  its  principles.  1.  In 
order  to  maintain  the  dignity  of  the  throne.  Ivory  and  gold  were  emblems  of 
purity,  and  point  out  the  incorruption  that  should  belong  to  kings,  whose  duty 
it  is  to  administer  justice  with  the  utmost  strictness  and  purity.  The  dignity 
of  the  judge  consists,  not  in  the  richness  of  his  robe  or  in  the  splendour  of  hia 
surroundings,  but  in  the  justness  and  integrity  of  his  decisions.  Where  partiality 
and  injustice  predominate,  the  dignity  is  transferred  to  the  innocent  prisoner, 
who  is  unrighteously  accused  and  condemned.  2.  In  order  to  enforce  the  autho' 
rity  of  the  law.  A  selfish,  corrupt,  time-serving  government  has  endless  difficulty, 
and  has  to  resort  to  the  most  brutal  methods  in  enforcing  its  authority.  Its 
laws  are  an  insult,  and  their  maintainance  an  intolerable  cruelty.  The  throne 
is  secure  in  itself,  and  in  the  willing  obedience  of  the  people,  only  as  it  is  based 
in  righteousness.  That  king  is  truly  glorious  who  makes  his  subjects  affluent 
and  happy  under  his  wise  and  righteous  administration.  Solomon  on  his  ivory 
throne  is  typical  of  Him  who  is  greater  than  Solomon,  seated  on  the  great  white 
throne  of  Judgment,  pronouncing  sentence  on  the  eternal  state  of  men  and  angels 
(Rev.  XX.  2).  Justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  the  Divine  throne 
(Ps.  Ixxxix.  14). 

II.  That  regal  government  should  be  imposing  in  its  administration. 
1.  In  outward  ceremony.  The  glittering  throne,  the  stately  figure  of  the  king, 
the  numerous  attendants,  and  the  solemnity  of  the  order  of  proceeding  could  not 
fail  to  impress  the  spectators  with  the  awful  majesty  and  power  of  law.  The 
magistrate  is  to  be  a  terror  to  evil-doers  (Rom.  xiii.  3).  All  legitimate  external 
means  should  be  adopted  that  will  tend  to  beget  a  wholesome  reverence  of  law, 
not  simply  to  create  a  slavish  dread.  It  is  said  that  Attila,  king  of  the  Huns, 
had  a  custom  of  fiercely  rolling  his  small,  deep-set  eyes,  as  if  he  wished  to  enjoy 
the  terror  he  inspired.  Law  has  nothing  terrifying  in  it  to  the  innocent.  2.  In 
moral  significance.  The  lions  which  supported  and  adorned  the  throne  not  only 
signified  its  stability,  but  also  the  vigilance  with  which  the  prince  watched  over 
the  interests  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  courage  and  power  with  which  he  defended 
his  people.  The  arms  of  Assyrian  thrones  are  occasionally  supported  by  figures 
of  animals.  The  throne  of  Rameses  II.,  at  Medinet  Abou,  has  a  sphinx  at  the 
side,  and  a  lion  below  the  sphinx.     As  the  lion  is  the  natural  king  of  beasts,  so 

156 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  x. 


the  figure  of  the  lion  is  naturally  adopted  hy  any  imaginative  race  as  an  emhlem 
of  sovereignty.  The  object  of  all  true  government  should  he,  not  simply  to  in- 
dulge in  outward  display,  but  to  teach,  in  every  possible  way,  the  lessons  of 
truth,  righteousness,  and  virtue.  The  throne  should  be  more  conspicuous  for 
moral  excellencies  than  for  ivory  and  gold. 

III.  That  regal  government  should  be  beneficent  in  its  aims.  The  twelve 
lions  represented  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  united  under  one  sovereign.  The 
ruler  should  aim  at  uniting  the  p'ople  under  his  care  into  a  law-abiding,  in- 
dustrious, and  virtuous  nation.  Government  is  instituted,  not  to  gratify  the 
ambition  and  lust  of  the  few,  but  to  promote  the  best  welfare  of  the  many.  No 
government  can  be  permanent  that  does  not  aim  at  this.  Thrones  may  fall, 
dynasties  pass  away,  but  righteousness  abides  for  ever. 

Lessons: — 1.  Justice  is  the  weapon  and  defence  of  all  true  government.  2.  Great 
is  the  responsihilily  and  glorious  the  reward  of  the  righteous  ruler.  3.  The  throne 
of  Jesus  is  impregnahle^  and  will  survive  all  the  thrones  of  earth, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yerses  14-29.  The  glory  of  Solo-  II.  The  perils  connected  with  it. 
mon.  I.  Wherein  it  lag.  J'ower,  Pride  and  haughtiness,  forgetfulness 
dominion,  pomp,  splendour,  glory,  and  of  God,  and  unbelief  (Ps.  Ixii.  11  ;  lii. 
honour,  everything  that  men  wish  or  9;  1  Tim.  vi.  9;  Matt.  xvi.  26). 
desire  in  this  world,  all  these  we  see  Thereforeenvy  not  the  rich  and  power- 
before  us  in  the  life  of  this  one  man.  ful,  for  they  are  exposed  to  many 
But  the  glory  of  man  is  as  the  grass  of  temptations  (1  Tim.  vi.  6).  Devout 
the  field,  which  fades  and  withers;  Christians  may  have  and  hold  gold 
truly,  the  lilies  of  the  field  exceed  it  in  and  silvei,  lands  and  possessions,  cattle, 
glory,  and  Solomon  himself  confessed,  in  short  eveiytliing,  and  with  a  good 
"All  is  vanity  "  (Eccles  i.  2  ;  ii.  11 ;  conscience,  it  only  they  do  not  misuse 
Ps.  xlix.  17,  18).  them  by  idle  pomp  or  for  the  oppression 

II.  Its  significance  for  us.    That  we  of  their  fellow-creatures,  for  they  are 

should  seek  after  that  other  and  im-  gifts  and  favours  of  God,  which  He 

perishable  glory,  prepared  for  us  by  lends  them  (Hagga.  iii.  8;  Ps.  1.  10). 

Him  who  is  greater  than  Solomon  (Jno.  The  throne  of  Solomon,   stately  and 

xvii.  24).    Scarcely  one  of  many  thou-  magnificent  as  it  was,   is  long  since 

sands  can  attain  to  the  glory  of  Solo-  crumbled    to    dust ;  but    His   throne 

mon,  but  to  the  glory  of  0')d  we  are  before  whose  judgment  seat  we  must 

all  called  (1  Thess.  ii.  12).     If  our  life  all  appear,    endures   to   all   eternity, 

be  hidden  with  (Jhrist  in  God,  then,  &c.  The  man  to  whom  God  has  given  great 

(Col.  iii.  3,  4).   Therefore  shall  we  re-  wealth  and  high  position  in  the  world 

joice  in  the  hope  of  future  glory,  and  may  indeed  dwell  in   splendour;  but 

not  only  so,  but  in  tribulations  also  every  man  sins  whose  expenses  exceed 

(Rom.  V.  2,  3  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18).  his  income,    or   are   greater  than  his 

Power  and  dominion.     I.  The  re-  position  requires.     Golden  vessels  are 

aponsibility  involved  therein.     To  whom  not  necessaries  of  life,    nor   do  they 

much  is  given,  of  him  shall  much  be  conduce  to  greater  happiness  or  content 

required    (Luke    xii.   48).     Singular  than   do   earthen    and   wooden    ones, 

endowments  bring  with  them  singular  It  is  the  duty  and  right  of  a  prince  to 

requirements.      Authority    is    power  bring  an  armed  force  to  the  defence  of 

given  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  inferiors;  the  country  against  her  enemies;  but 

wealth  is  bestowed  upon  the  rich  that  prince  and  people  must  ever  remember 

they  may  relieve  necessity  according  what    the   mighty   Solomon    himself 

to  their  means.  says:   *' The  horse  is  prepared  against 

i57 


OHAF.  X« 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


the  day  of  battle  :  but  safety  is  of  the 
Lord"  (Prov.  xxi.  31;  Psa.  xxxiii. 
16-19;  Isaiah  xxxi.  \).^^Lange. 

Verse  20.  One  lion  at  each  end  of 
each  of  the  six  steps  by  which  the 
king  ascended  the  throne.  They  were 
symbolic  figures,  and  in  that  position 
might  teach  that  resolute  and  deter- 
mined courage  and  firmness  should 
characterize  all  the  actions  of  the  king. 

Yerse  22.  It  is  said  by  some 
authorities  that  these  Hebrew  words 
for  ivory,  apes,  and  peacocks,  are 
identical  with  the  Tamil  names  by 
which  they  are  known  in  Ceylon  at 
the  present  day.  It  has  long  since 
been  decided,  says  Cuvier,  that  India 
was  the  cradle  of  the  peacock.  It  is 
in  the  countries  of  Southern  Asia,  and 
the  vast  archipelago  of  the  Eastern 
Ocean,  that  this  bird  appears  to  have 
fixed  its  dwelling,  and  to  live  in  a  state 
of  freedom.  All  travellers  who  have 
visited  these  countries  make  mention 
of  these  birds. 

—  Like  unto  these  ships  thus  laden 
are  the  books  of  some  sectaries,  where- 
in, as  in  the  Jewish  Talmud,  sunt  mala 
mista  honisy  sunt  bona  mista  malts.  In 
some  parts  of  their  writings  are  whole- 
some and  good  passages  ;  as  in  a  wood 
or  forest  full  of  briers  and  brambles 
there  may  be  some  violets  and  prim- 
roses; and  as  here,  with  apes  and 
peacocks,  were  gold,  silver,  and  ivory. 
— Trapp. 

Verse  23.  Wealth  and  wisdom  com- 
pared and  contrasted.  I.  Compared, 
i.  Both  are  the  gifts  of  God.  2. 
Both  involve  much  care  and  toil.  3. 
Both  are  scources  of  great  power.  4. 
Both  are  liable  to  great  abuse.  II. 
Contrasted.  1.  Wealth  and  wisdom 
not  necessarily  possessed  by  the  same 
person.  2.  Wealth  may  adorn  the 
body  ;  wisdom  adorns  the  mind. 
3.  Wealth  may  buy  influence,  wisdom 
commands  it.  4.  Wealth  is  material 
and  perishable,  wisdom  is  immortal. 

—  When  King  Demetrius  had  sacked 

and  razed  the  city  of  Megaera  to  the 

very    foundation,    he    demanded    of 

Stilpo,  the  philosopher,  what  losses  he 

158 


had  sustained.  "None  at  all,"  said 
Stilpo,  "for  war  can  make  no  spoil  of 
^drtue."  And  it  is  said  of  Bias,  that 
his  motto  was.  omnia  mea  mecumporto — 
I  carry  all  my  goods  with  me ;  viz  , 
his  goodness. 

—  Perfect  freedom  hath  four  parts  : 
wisdom,  the  priuoiple  of  doing  things 
aright ;  justice,  the  principle  of  doing 
things  equiUy  in  public  and  private  ; 
fortitude,  the  principle  of  not  flying 
danger,  but  meeting  it ;  and  tempor- 
ance,  the  principle  of  subduing  desius 
and  living  modeiately.— P/«^o. 

Verses  23,  24.  Every  other  quality 
besides  is  subordinate  and  inferior  to 
wisdom^  in  the  same  sense  as  the  mason 
who  lays  the  bricks  and  stones  in  a 
building  is  inferior  to  the  architect 
who  drew  the  plan  and  superintends 
the  work.  The  farmer  executes  only 
what  the  latter  contrives  and  directs. 
JN^ow,  it  is  the  prerogative  of  wisdom 
to  preside  over  every  inferior  principle, 
to  regulate  the  exercise  of  every 
power,  and  limit  the  indulgence  of 
every  appetite,  as  shall  best  conduce 
to  one  great  end.  It  being  the  pro- 
vince of  wisdom  to  preside,  it  sits  as 
umpire  on  every  difficulty,  and  so 
gives  the  final  direction  and  control  to 
all  the  powers  of  our  nature.  Hence 
it  is  entitled  to  be  considered  as  the 
top  and  summit  of  perfection.  It 
belongs  to  wisdom  to  determine  when 
to  act,  and  when  to  cease ;  when  to 
reveal,  and  when  to  conceal  a  matter ; 
when  to  speak,  and  when  to  keep 
silence  ;  when  to  give,  and  when  to 
receive ;  in  short,  to  regulate  the 
measure  of  all  things,  as  well  as  to 
determine  the  end,  and  provide  the 
means  of  obtaining  the  end  pursued  in 
every  delibc^rate  course  of  action. 
Every  particular  faculty,  or  skill, 
besides,  needs  to  derive  direction  from 
this :  they  are  all  quite  incapable  of 
directing  themselves. 

The  art  of  navigation,  for  instance, 
will  teach  us  to  steer  a  ship  across  the 
ocean,  but  it  will  never  teach  us  on 
what  occasions  it  is  proper  to  take  a 
voyage.  The  art  of  war  will  instruct 
us  how  to  marshal  an  army,  or  to 
fight  a  battle  to  the  greatest  advantage, 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTAnT:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  Z. 


but  you  must  learn  from  a  higher 
school  when  it  is  fitting,  just,  and 
proper  to  wage  war,  or  to  make  peace. 
The  art  of  the  husbandman  is  to  sow 
and  bring  to  maturity  the  precious 
fruits  of  the  earth ;  it  belongs  to 
another  skill  to  regulate  their  con- 
sumption by  a  regard  to  our  health, 
fortune,  and  other  circumstances.  In 
short,  there  is  no  faculty  we  can 
exert,  no  species  of  skill  we  can  apply, 
but  requires  a  superintending  hand, 
but  looks  up,  as  it  were,  to  some 
higher  principle,  as  a  maid  to  her 
mistress  for  directions  ;  and  this  uni- 
versal superintendent  is  wisdom. — 
Robert  Sail, 

Verse  24.  A  notable  type  of  Christ, 
so  generally  frequented  and  yet  still 
so  cheerfully  resorted  to  in  His  ordi- 
nances by  His  people,  flying  thereto 
as  so  many  "  clouds,  and  as  doves  to 
their  windows"  (Isaiah  Ix.  8). — 
Trapp. 

—  There  is  no  true  wisdom  that  does 
not  rest  calmly  on  a  basis  of  truthful- 
ness of  heart,  and  is  not  guarded  and 
nurtured  by  righteousness  and  purity 
of  life.     Man  is  one — one  and  indis- 
soluble.    The  intellect  and  the  con- 
science are  but  two  names  for  diverse 
parts  of  the   one   human   being — or, 
rather,  they  are  but  two  names  for 
diverse  workings  of  the  one  immortal 
soul.     And  though  it  be  possible  that 
a  man  may  be  enriched  with  all  earthly 
knowledge,    whilst   his  heart   is   the 
dwelling-place  of  all  corruption,    and 
that,  on  the  other  hand,  a  man  maybe 
pure  and  upright  in  heart,  whilst  his 
head  is  very  poorly  furnished,  and  his 
understanding  very  weak,   yet  these 
exceptional  cases   do   not   touch    the 
great  central  truth  :   **  The  fear  of  the 
Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  and 
the  knowledge  of  the  Holy  is  under- 
standing."    Here,  then,  is  the  outline 
of  the  tair  form  that  rises  before  you— 
a  wisdom  satisfying  and  entire  for  all 
the  understanding,  and  nota  dry,  hard, 
abstract  wisdom  either,  but  one  which 
18  all^  glowing  with  light  and  purity, 
and  18   guidance    for   the    will,    and 
cleansing    for    the    conscience,     and 
strength  for  the  practical  life :  wisdom 


which  is  morality  and  righteousness ; 
morality  and  righteousness   which  is 
the  highest  wisdom.     Go  out  into  the 
world,  I  pray  you,  and  strip  everything 
that  appeals  to  you  of  its  disguises,  and 
you  will  find  it  true  that,  where  Christ 
is  not,  there — let  it  woo  ever  so  sweetly, 
and  sing  ever  so  melodiously — there  is 
only   a  siren  that  tempts  you  down 
beneath  the  sunny  surface  of  pleasure 
to  the  black  depths  below,  where  she 
lives  on  dead  mens'  bones  !     There  is 
your  choice.     On  the  one  side  there 
calls  you  the  god-descended,  beautiful, 
and  serene  Wisdom,   with  diadem  on 
her  brow,  and  blessing  in  her  hands, 
and  peace  upon  her  lips — a  Wisdom 
behind  which  Christ  stands  with  face 
fairer,  yet  lips  fuller  still  of  grace,  a 
heart  gentler  than  the  woman-wisdom 
that  Solomon  knew  of,  and  hands  full 
of  better  blessin g  than  any  that  da  w n ed 
upon  him  ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  a 
loud-voiced,  clamorous,  painted,  deceiv- 
ing harlot,  who  calls  you  to  herself  to 
stifle  you  with  her  poisonous  breath. 
— A.  Maclaren. 


Verses    24,   25.    The    charms    of 
philosophy.     I.  Are  found  m  the  very 
nature  of  the  science.     1.   [t  promises 
so  much.     2.  It  gratifies  the  pride  of 
intellect.     3.  It  aff*ords  ample  scope 
for  speculation.     II.  Allure  inquirers 
from  the  most  distant  placea,     "  All  the 
earth  sought  to  Solomon  to  hear  his 
wisdom."     1.  The  love  of  knowledge 
braves  all  difficulties.     2.  Influences 
all  classes.     3.  Is  shown  by  dissemi- 
nating knowledge,  as  by  seeking  it. 
III.    Invoke  the   most  costly   offerings. 
"And   they  brought  every  man  his 
present."     1.  Wisdom  is  better  than 
gold.      2.  Talent    deserves    suitable 
acknowledgment.        3.    The    learner 
should  be  grateful.     4.  More  money 
is  wasted  in  useless  luxuries  than  is 
spent  in  seeking  knowledge.     IV.  In- 
spire unremitting  devotion  in  its  votaries. 
''Year    by    year."      1.  It    demands 
constant   attention.     2.  Its    unsolved 
problems  sustain  the  interest  of  the 
student.     3.  It  has  charms  to  many 
as  a  purely  intellectual  exercise. 

—  We  are  raised  by  science  to  an 
understanding  of  the  infinite  wisdom 

159 


CHAP.  X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


and  goodness  whicli  the  Creator  has 
displayed  in  all  His  works.  Not  a 
step  can  we  take  in  any  direction  with- 
out perceiving  the  most  extraordinary 
traces  of  design  ;  and  the  skill  every- 
where conspicuous  is  calculated  in  so 
vast  a  proportion  of  instances  to  pro- 
mote the  happiness  of  living  creatures, 
and  especially  of  ourselves,  that  we 
feel  no  hesitation  in  concluding  that, 
if  we  knew  the  whole  scheme  of 
Providence,  every  part  would  appear 
in  harmony  with  a  plan  of  absolute 
benevolence.  Independently,  how- 
ever, of  this  most  consoling  inference, 
the  delight  is  inexpressible  of  being 
able  to  follow  the  works  of  the  great 
Author  of  nature,  and  to  trace  the  un- 
bounded power  and  exquisite  skill 
which  are  exhibited  by  the  most 
minute  as  well  as  the  mightiest  parts 
of  His  system. — Brougham, 

Yerse  25.  We  have  here  expressed 
in  words  what  the  Egyptian  and 
Assyiian  monarchs  recorded  by  means 
of  elaborate  sculptures  on  slabs  and 
obelisks — the  frequent  coming  to  the 
court  of  tribute-bearers  from  the  sub- 
ject kings,  who  brought  not  only  the 
fixed  rate  of  bullion  whereto  each  of 
them  was  liable,  but  a  tribute  in  kind 
besides,  consisting  of  the  most  pre- 
cious products  of  their  respective 
countries.  Among  these  vessels,  pro- 
bably of  silver  and  gold,  garments 
and  horses  are  very  conspicuous  on 
the  monuments. — Speaker^ s  Comm. 

Yerse  26.  The  true  defence  of  a 
nation.  1.  Not  in  chariots  and 
horses — weapons  of  war.  2.  But  in 
the  devotion  and  valour  of  the  people. 

3.  In  the  overshadowing  presence  of 
God.  4.  In  the  prevalence  of 
righteousness. 

Yerses  26-29.  Trading.  1.  An 
honourable  calling,  2.  Is  a  source  of 
wealth  to  individuals  and  nations.  3. 
Encourages  industry  and  enterprize. 

4.  Expands  the  knowledge  of  human 
nature.  5.  Offers  many  temptations 
to  roguery.  <5.  Is  legitimate  only 
when  it  is  honest. 

—   How  to  be  a  Christian  in 
160 


trade  (compared  with  Matt.  xxv.  16) 
I.  The  fair  possibility  of  being  a 
Christian  in  trade.  1.  There  is  the 
very  certain  fact  that  there  have 
been  good  Christians  in  trade ;  and  if 
that  be  so,  then  it  follows,  by  a  very 
short  argument,  that  what  has  been 
can  be — that  is,  can  be  again  and 
often.  2.  All  apprehensions  of  a 
specially  harmful  exposure  in  trade 
are  mistaken.  Wh.it  it  calls  profits 
are  just  as  truly  earnings  as  any  of  the 
fruits  of  hand-labour.  3.  Little 
room  is  there,  under  anything  pro- 
perly called  trade,  for  what  many 
seem  to  regard  as  the  necessary  skill, 
in  raising  colour  by  glosses  of  false 
recommendation,  or  by  small  lies 
sprinkled  in  for  the  due  stimulation  of 
the  customer.  That  is  not  an  accom- 
plishment belonging  to  the  genuine 
operation  of  trade,  but  only  to  the  low- 
lived, inbred  halDit  of  the  man.  II. 
How  to  be  a  Christian  in  trade.  1. 
No  man  of  course  expects  to  be  a 
Christian  in  trade  without  being  a 
religious  man  in  it.  And  just  here, 
alas !  is  the  difficulty  most  commonly 
encountered — the  difficulty  of  continu- 
ing to  be  a  Christian  without  begin- 
ning to  be  one ;  the  difficulty  of  being 
kept  safe  in  religion,  or  religious 
character,  by  a  business  carried  on 
without  such  character,  and  wholly 
outside  of  religion.  2.  It  is  another 
important  consideration  that  you  are 
permitted,  if  at  all,  to  go  into  this 
occupation  by  a  really  Divine  call. 
God  has  a  place  for  every  man,  in 
what  is  to  be  his  particular  employ- 
ment, as  He  has  a  place  for  every  rock, 
and  tree,  and  river,  and  star.  3.  Be- 
ing thus  installed  in  trade,  as  by  the 
call  of  God,  how  surely  may  you  have 
God's  help  in  the  prosecution  of  it. 
How  surely,  that  is,  if  you  ask  it,  and 
train  your  ways  of  practice  so  that 
you  can  fitly  receive  it.  All  right 
employments  are  callings  in  which 
God  puts  His  servants  for  their  good, 
and  what  will  He  more  surely  do  than 
help  them  to  find  their  good  !  4.  The 
merchant  in  his  calling  of  trade  is  put 
in  a  relation  to  God  so  inherently 
religious,  if  he  will  undertake  it  in 
that  manner,  that  he  is  justified  in 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


CHAP.  X. 


passing  his  vow  not  to  be  in  trade,  or 
even   tor   a   day  to  stay  in  it,  if  he 
cannot  have  the  enjoyment  of  God  in 
it.     5.  There  are  even  special  advan- 
tages in  trade  as  regards  the  develop- 
ment of  a  Christian  life,  which  do  not 
occur  as  largely  in  any  other  employ- 
ment.     The   transactions   are    many, 
crowding  thick  upon   the  shelves  and 
counters  all  the  day.    The  temptations, 
of  course,  are  just  as  much  more  nume- 
rous as  the  transactions  ;  and  it  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  the  more  tempted 
a  man  is,  the  more  opportunities  are 
given  him  to  grow.     Scarcely  could 
he  grow  at  all  if  none  at  all  were  put 
in  his  way.     6.  There  is  also  a  con- 
siderable Christian  advantage  in  the 
relation    that   subsists    between   the 
merchant  and  his  customer.     To  be  a 
customer    signifies   more    or   less    of 
favour    and    confidence.      The    cus- 
tomer, in  being  such,  commits  himself 
in  a  large  degree  to  the  honour  of  the 
merchant,  and  then  the  merchant  in 
turn  accepts  him  naturally   as  a  man 
who  comes  in  expression  of  trust,  and 
is   fairly   entitled   to   generosity.     7. 
Trade  also  f uinishes  occasions  of  bene- 
ficence to  the  poor,  which  are  all  the 
better  to  both  parties,  that  they  make 
no  parade  of  charity,  but  may  pass 
for   a   buying   and    selling    between 
them      It  is  trade  on  the  one  side, 
and  trade  on  the  other ;  only  that  on 
one  side  it  is  so  near  to  the  confines 
of    beneficence    that    it    consciously 
passes  over.     A  more   gentle,   genial, 
and   genuine    influence  on    the  man 
could  hardly  be  devised.     8.  It  is  yet 
another  and  very  great  moral  advan- 
tage   of  trade,    that   it   is    just   the 
calling  in  which  a  Christian  man  will 
best  learn  the  uses  of  money.     Hence 
it  is  going  to  be  discovered,  that  the 
great  problem  we  have  now  on  hand, 
viz.,  the  Christianizing  of  the  money 
power  of  the  world,   depends  for  its 
principal  hope  on  the  trading  class  in 
society.    Talent  has  been  Christianized 
already  on  a  large  scale.   The  political 
power  of  states  and  kingdoms  has  been 
long  assumed  to  be,  and  now  at  last 


really  is,  as  far  as  it  becomes  their 
accepted  office  to  mainttiin  personal 
security  and  liberty.  Architecture, 
arts,  constitutions,  schools,  and  learn- 
ing have  been  largely  Christianized. 
But  the  money  power,  which  is  one  of 
the  most  operative  and  grandest 
of  all,  is  only  beginning  to  be  ; 
though  with  promising  tokens  of  a 
finally  complete  reduction  to  Christ 
and  the  uses  of  His  kingdom.  Trade 
expanding  into  commerce,  and  com- 
merce rising  into  communion,  are  to 
be  the  outline  of  the  story.  When 
the  merchant  seeking  goodly  pearls — 
all  the  merchant  race — find  the  pre- 
cious one  they  seek,  and  sell  their  all 
to  buy  it,  they  will  make  it  theirs. — 
Bushnell. 

—  luxury  and  extravagance. 
1.  Always  go  together.  2.  Dt^pre- 
ciate  the  true  value  of  things.  3, 
Flourish  on  the  oppression  and  di^tres8 
of  others.  4.  Excite  popular  discon- 
tent.    6.  End  in  disgrace  and  ruin. 

Yerse  27.  This  strong  hyperbole 
marks  in  the  most  striking  way  the 
great  wealth  and  prosperity  of  the 
capital  during  Solomon's  reign.  The 
lavish  expenditure  which  impoverished 
the  provinces,  and  produced,  or  helped 
to  produce,  the  general  discontent 
that  led  to  the  outbreak  under  Jero- 
boam, enriched  the  metropolis,  which 
must  have  profited  greatly  by  the  resi- 
dence of  the  court,  the  constant 
influx  of  opulent  strangers,  and  the 
periodical  visits  of  all  Israelites,  not 
hindered  by  some  urgent  reason,  at 
the  great  festivals. — Speaker's  Comm. 

Yerse  28.  It  is  thought  that  the 
first  people  who  used  horses  in  war 
were  the  Egyptians;  and  it  is  well 
known  that  the  nations  who  knew 
the  use  of  this  creature  in  battle 
had  greatly  the  advantage  of  those 
who  did  not.  God  had  absolutely 
prohibited  horses  to  be  imported  or 
used ;  but,  in  many  things,  Solomon 
paid  little  attention  to  the  Divine 
command. 


161 


OHAP.xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

THE    DECLINE    OF    THE    HEBREW    EMPIRE. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  I.  But  King  Solomon  loved  many  strange 
women — If  importations  of  foreign  luxuries  and  indulgences  into  his  court  (see  previous 
chapter)  were  occasions  of  peril  to  Solomon,  tending  to  corrupt  his  heart  from  simple  fidelity 
to  Jehovah,  far  more  so  this  creation  of  a  foreign  harem.  Among  the  ancient  Hebrews  poly- 
gamy was  permitted ;  and  the  number  of  a  man's  wives  was  a  standard  of  his  wealth  and 
dignity.  Solomon  emulated  this  dangerous  and  degrading  custom  ;  and,  being  unrivalled  in  the 
lavi>hinent  of  wealth,  he  seems  to  have  resolved  upon  excelling  in  this  department  of  Oriental 
indulgenci^,  thereby  to  assert  his  state  magnificence.  Together  with  the  daughter  of 
Pharaoh  -  It  is  not  implied  that  his  marriage  with  Pharaoh's  daughter  was  wrong, 
but  his  adding  others.  Contrary  to  the  law  of  the  Lord  (Deut.  xvii.  17)  he  took, 
*'  together  with  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  many  strange  wives."  Verse  3.  Seven  hundred 
wives,  princesses— So  great  a  number  from  noblest  princely  houses  of  foreign  nations  suggests 
the  splendour  of  his  court.  It  was  a  vanity,  and  fraught  with  greatest  snares.  Verse  4. 
Solomon's  old  age — He  was  probably  not  over  fifty.  Verss  5.  Went  after  Ash toreth — Lange 
thinks  he  did  nut  himself  become  an  idolater,  but  allowed  every  form  of  idolatry  his  wives 
desired;  yet,  though  he  off-^red  no  sacrifice  on  the  altars  he  reared,  to  reir  them  was  equiva- 
lent to  sacrificing,  equally  off  nsive  to  Jehovah.  Ashtoreth^  Astarte,  the  highest  feminine  deity 
of  the  Sidonians  ;  Milcom,  Molech  ;  CJiemosh  (verse  7),  the  war  and  fire-god  of  the  Moabites. 
Verse  11.  Forasmuch  as  this  is  done  of  thee;  or,  is  purposed  of  thee.  Verse  15.  When 
David  was  inEdom;  or,  was  (at  war)  with.  The  Sept.  and  Peshito  read,  had  smitten. 
Hadad  was  a  royal  child,  rescued  from  Joab's  extirminating  slaughter  (2  Samuel  viii.  l:<)  in 
Edom,  carried  into  Egypt,  and  fosiered  by  the  Egyptian  king.  On  learning  of  the  death  of 
David  and  Joab,  he  quitted  Egypt,  returned  to  his  own  land,  and  sought  to  restore  the  ruined 
king'lom  of  his  fathers.  Foiled  in  his  efforts,  he  joined  himself  toRezon,  another  of  Solomon's 
adversaries  (verses  23-25).  Verse  22.  Let  me  go  in  any  wise— The  Sept.  and  Codex  Vat. 
insert  here,  "  And  Hadad  returned  to  his  own  land  ;  this  is  the  mischief  v\  l)ich  Hadad  did  ;  and 
he  abhorred  Israel,  and  reigned  over  Edom."  Verse  23.  Another  adversary,  Eezon— Comp. 
2  Sam,  viii.  3,  so.     Verse  25.  Beside  the  mischief  that  Hadad  did  IIH  "l^N  n^")n-rii»?^ 

T.:  V-:  T     T   T  V    : 

— A  peculiar  phrase,  not  easy  to  render ;  yet  A,  V.  gives  the  sense  fairly  ;  or  ihus,  But  as  for 
this  mischief  that  Hadad  did  \  or,  A7%d,  indeed,  along  with  the  evil  that  Hadad  did  (so  Ber- 
theau).  Verse  26.  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  an  Ephrathite,  i.e.,  an  Ephraimite.  Hadad 
and  liezon  were  "  adversaries"  to  Solomon  ;  but  Jeroboam  was  an  internal  enemy,  a  su'  j  ct 
and  servant  who  developed  into  a  rebel,  and  a  more  dangerous  enemy.  Being  a  young  man 
of  industry  and  talent,  Solomon  entrusted  him  with  the  honourable  position  of  8uperintendent 
of  the  engineering  works  in  progress  around  Jerusalem.  He  evidently  used  this  eminence  to 
sow  sedition,  for  "  this  was  the  cause,''  &c.,  verse  27.  Lange  suggests  that  the  Ephraimites 
had  an  old  and  irrepressible  jealousy  of  Judah,  and  very  reluctktntly  submitted  to  labour  in  the 
king's  citadel.  Compulsory  labour  increased  this  dislike  to  hatred,  so  that  Jeroboam  fou-d  it 
easy  to  fan  the  flame  of  insurreciion  among  them.  Verse  29.  Ahijah  the  Shilonite— fehiioh 
was  in  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  ;  hence  Ahijah  and  Jeroboam  were  of  the  same  tribe — probably, 
of  the  same  spirit  also.  Verse  40.  Solomon  sought,  therefore,  &c,— Jeroboam's  inflated  pride 
and  restless  ambition  led  him  to  conspiracies  even  before  Solomon's  death,  as  verse  26  affirms. 
Unto  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt,  who  harboured  this  seditious  rebel,  thus  showing  his  own 
hostility  to  or  jealousy  of  Solomon.  Shishak  was  of  a  difterent  dynasty  from  Solomon's  father- 
in-law.— W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1—8. 

The  Fall  op  Solomon,  and  its  Lessons. 

Everything  about  Solomon  was  on  a  scale  of  unparalleled  greatness.  He  was 
great  in  his  descent — the  offspring  of  the  renowned  David.  He  was  great  as  a 
sovereign,  raising  the  kingdom  of  the  Hebrews,  which  was  inaugurated  by  Saul, 
and  enlarged  and  consolidated  by  David,  to  the  highest  pitch  of  imperial  great- 
ness and  external  magnificence  it  ever  attained.  He  was  great  in  intellectual 
162 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAItY:  KINGS.  chap.  xi. 


endowment — ^'Hewas  wiser  than  all  men,  and  his  fame  was  in  all  nations 
round  about."  He  was  great  in  Divine  benedictions — **  For  the  Lord  magnified 
Solomon  exceedingly  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel,  and  bestowed  on  him  such  royal 
majesty  as  had  not  been  on  any  king  before  him  "  (1  Chron.  xxix.  25).  And 
his  greatness  was  not  less  conspicuous  in  his  sad  and  terrible  fall.  The  whole 
career  of  Solomon  is  a  succession  of  surprises  and  mysteries.  As  soon  as  he  took 
up  the  reins  of  government  he  gave  evidence  of  the  greatness  of  his  powers. 
The  nation  felt  itself  in  the  grasp  of  a  master,  and  became  pliant  and  obedient  in 
his  hand.  And  yet,  with  all  the  outward  show  of  his  consummate  abilities  and 
gigantic  enterprizes,  we  have  but  few  details  of  his  personal  life.  His  works 
impress  and  duliglit  us :  his  personality  is  vague,  and  only  mystifies  us.  As 
you  have  seen  on  occasions  of  public  rejoicing,  among  other  illuminations,  some 
gigantic  figure  lit  up  and  sparkling  in  brilliant  outline,  while  the  interspaces  of 
the  figure  are  dark,  vacant,  and  unintelligible  :  so  was  it  with  Solomon.  His 
imposing  and  majestic  figure  occupied  a  large  space  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish 
Kingdom  and  in  the  history  of  the  world,  and  shed  the  lustre  of  its  imperial  glory 
over  all  nations  and  through  all  succeeding  ages ;  but  the  minute  personal 
features  of  that  stately  form  fade  away  into  the  darkness — are,  in  fact,  for  the 
most  part  invisible.  The  splendour  of  Solomon's  reign  was  like  a  glare  of  sun- 
shine resting  on  the  fertile  plains,  teeming  with  life  and  efflorescent  with  beauty. 
While  the  light  remains,  the  scene  is  gay,  brilliant,  captivating ;  but,  all  unseen 
and  unsuspected,  the  poisonous  miasma  is  loading  the  air,  and  by-and-by  will 
spread  sorrow  and  disaster  in  its  course.     Consider — 

I.  The  causes  which  contributed  to  the  downfall  of  the  great  Hebrew 
monarch.  1.  The  intoxication  of  intellectual  pride.  We  have  seen  how  he  was 
gifted  with  a  keen  and  comprehensive  intellect,  and  was  addicted  from  his 
earliest  youth  to  the  most  profound  studies.  His  proverbs  were  the  condensa- 
tion of  the  choicest  maxims  of  moral  and  political  science,  and  have  enriched 
the  literature  of  the  world ;  his  songs  bear  evidence  of  a  lofty,  poetic  genius ; 
and  his  discourses  and  treatises  on  natural  history  embraced  the  most  important 
and  most  minute  facts  of  the  science.  It  is  appalling  to  think  of  the  powerful 
ascendency  these  high  qualities  must  have  given  him  over  the  minds  of  others. 
No  wonder  the  nations  crowded  around  such  a  prodigy  of  wisdom  (chap.  iv. 
30-34);  and  who  could  inhale  the  incense  of  adulation  that  daily  filled  his 
court  without  being  intoxicated  with  vain  thoughts  ?  It  cannot,  therefore, 
surprise  us  that,  puff*ed  up  with  the  flattery  of  courtiers  and  the  applauses  of 
the  multitude,  Solomon  began  to  think  too  highly  of  himself,  and  to  say  :  '*  By 
the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done  it,  and  by  my  wisdom,  for  lam  prudent  '* 
(Isa.  X.  13).  His  wisdom  having  thus  become  his  idol,  he  persuades  himself 
that  it  will  enable  him  to  solve  all  mysteries,  and  to  rectify  all  disordeis,  and 
thus  to  render  him  the  master  both  of  his  own  destiny  and  of  the  destinies  of 
the  people — nay,  of  the  whole  world.  We  can  imagine  how  such  a  notion 
would  captivate  a  generous,  great,  and  aspiring  mind.  He  sees  in  the  state  of 
society,  and  in  the  condition  of  individual  men,  evils  which  he  would  fain 
remove,  and  wrongs  which  he  would  fain  redress.  Many  are  suff'ering  from 
disease,  many  are  pining  in  poverty,  many  groaning  beneath  the  iron  yoke  of 
injustice  and  oppression.  Good  men  are  often  treated  with  neglect,  or  covered 
witli  obloquy,  while  wicked  men  are  as  often  high  in  place  and  power.  Why 
is  all  this  ?  What  is  the  source  and  explanation  of  these  painful  anomalies  ? 
Cannot  I,  who  have  searched  out  so  many  deep  things,  fathom  this  secret  too? 
Shall  it  not  be  the  privilege  and  the  prerogative  of  Solomon  the  Wise  to 
inaugurate  a  new  and  better  condition  of  things?" — R.  Buchanan.  He  thus 
sought  to  arrogate  to  himself  a  power  which  no  created  intelligence  is  privileged 
to  possess.  His  condition  of  mind  is  the  explanation  of  many  sad  and  painful 
backslidings  that  followed,     2.  The  system  of  polygamy ^  which  he  encouraged 

163 


CHAP.  XL  SOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


to  an  unprecedented  extent,  left  its  debasing  curse  on  Solomon  and  on  his 
family  for  generations  (verses  1-3).  The  harem  of  an  Eastern  monarch  is  even 
at  the  present  day  looked  upon  as  a  sort  of  state  necessity,  and  the  king's  rank 
and  greatness  are  estimated  according  to  its  extent.  He  multiplies  his  wives 
according  to  his  wealth  and  power,  though  many  of  them  he  never  sees  at  all. 
Darius  Codomannus  is  said  to  have  taken  three  hundred  and  sixty  concubines 
in  his  camp  when  he  marched  against  Alexander.  So  Solomon,  wishing  to 
surpass  all  other  kings  in  the  fame  of  greatness,  filled  his  harem  with  a  thousand 
women.  This  was  an  enormity.  In  the  simplest  view,  the  sexes  being  nearly 
equal,  it  deprived  a  thousand  men  of  wives  that  one  man  might  have  999  more 
than  he  required.  Such  a  system  brought  with  it  the  inevitable  evils  of  the 
oriental  seraglio.  Licentiousness  taints  the  intellect,  loosens  the  bonds  of 
morality,  and  debases  the  whole  man.  3.  The  estrangement  of  heai't  from 
Jehovah  (verses  4-6).  Solomon  did  not  openly  or  wholly  apostatise.  He  con- 
tinued his  attendance  on  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  punctually  made  his 
offerings  three  times  a  year  in  the  temple.  But  his  heart  was  not  perfect  with 
God.  Many  causes  had  concurred  to  weaken  the  religious  earnestness  of  his 
younger  days — as  the  corrupting  influence  of  wealth  and  luxury,  the  canker  of 
sensualism,  an  increasing  worldliness,  leading  him  to  adopt  more  and  more  a 
worldly  policy,  and,  perhaps,  a  growing  latitudinarianism  arising  from  contact 
with  all  the  manifold  forms  of  human  opinion  (see  Speaker^ s  Comm.).  A  most 
significant  sign  of  religious  decay  was  the  almost  total  absence  of  prophets 
during  Solomon's  brilliant  career.  The  history  of  the  prophets  is  the  most 
remarkable  and  fascinating  of  any  history  in  the  Scriptures.  They  enter  on 
their  career  as  if  thrust  forth  by  some  unseen  hand:  they  utter  their  message 
as  if  impelled  by  some  mysterious  and  irresistible  force.  Receiving  their  com- 
mission from  neither  king  nor  people,  they  are  perfectly  independent  of  both. 
JS^o  amount  of  violence  or  suffering  could  silence  their  faithful  utterances,  or 
retard  the  accomplishment  of  their  mission.  And  when  their  work  was  done, 
and  their  testimony  fearlessly  borne,  like  flaming  comets,  they  vanished  into  the 
space  from  which  they  seemed  at  first  to  emerge.  The  **  conspicuous  absence" 
of  these  faithful  messengers  indicated  the  mournful  state  of  piety  amid  the 
external  splendours  of  the  empire.  4.  The  public  sanction  and  practice  of 
idolatry  (verses  7,  8).  Heathen  temples  were  built  on  the  southern  heights  of 
Olivet  in  the  very  sight  of  the  Holy  Temple ;  and  from  the  abominable  lites 
that  were  practised  there,  a  name  of  infamy  was  given  to  the  whole  mountain. 
It  was  called — and  still  bears  the  name  of — the  Mount  of  Offence.  This  flagrant 
idolatry  roused  the  displeasure  of  Jehovah ;  and  the  consequent  disruption  of 
the  kingdom  was  plainly  foretold  (verses  9-13).  *'  He  thus  became  the  author 
of  a  syncretism  which  sought  to  blend  together  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  the 
worship  of  idols — a  syncretism  which  possessed  fatal  attractions  for  the  Jewish 
nation.  Finally,  he  appears  himself  to  have  frequented  the  idol-temples,  and 
to  have  taken  part  in  those  fearful  impurities  which  constituted  the  worst  horror 
of  the  idolatrous  systems,  thus  practically  apostatising,  though  theoretically 
he  never  ceased  to  hold  that  Jehovah  was  the  true  God."  5.  The  despotic 
character  of  his  government.  Commerce,  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  a  nation, 
must  be  national  and  not  regal.  But  the  commerce  of  Israel,  in  Solomon's  days, 
was  in  all  respects  a  monopoly  of  the  crown.  The  excessive  demands  upon  the 
people  for  sustaining  the  ever-growing  magnificence  of  the  empire  became  un- 
bearable, and  a  spirit  of  discontent  spread  throughout  the  nation  which 
ultimately  broke  out  into  open  and  successful  rebellion.  The  structure  of  the 
empire  was  shattered  by  the  weight  of  its  own  opulence  and  greatness. 

II.  The  ultimate  fate  of  Solomon.     It  was  a  much  contested  point  among 
th  e  Fathers  of  the  early  Church  as  to  whether  Solomon  was  among  the  saved 
or  the  lost ;  and  both  opinions  were  pretty  equally  sustained  by  eminent  names 
16i 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  chap.  xi. 


in  theology.  The  question  was  so  frequently  debated,  and  seemed  so  evenly 
balanced,  that  in  a  series  of  frescoes  on  the  walls  of  a  celebrated  chnrch  on  the 
Continent,  Solomon  is  represented  at  the  General  Resurrection  as  looking  doubt- 
fully to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  as  if  uncertain  in  which  side  he  would  find 
his  destined  lot.  We  incline  to  the  merciful  view,  and  feel  supported  by  two 
considerations: — (1).  Six  hundred  years  after  Solomon  had  been  resting  in  the 
grave,  and  when  posterity  could  pronounce  a  calm  and  dispassionate  verdict, 
Kehemiah  gave  a  sunimary  of  the  character  of  the  great  Hebrew  king,  in 
which  he  recognized  him  as  **tlie  beloved  of  his  God"  (Neh.  xiii.  26,  com- 
pared with  2  Sam.  vii.  14).  (2),  Add  to  this  the  generally-admitted  fact  that 
the  book  of  Eoclesiastes  contains  the  utterances  of  Solomon  at  the  close  of  his 
earthly  career ;  and,  in  the  concluding  words  of  that  book,  do  we  not  detect  a 
wandering,  sinning  spirit  coming  to  a  halt,  and  an  assured  resting-place,  as  he 
exclaims  : — **  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter:  Fear  God  and 
keep  His  commandments  !*' 

III.  The  lessons  suggested  by  Solomon's  life.  1.  That  worldly  greatness 
has  its  peculiar  perils.  Solomon  began  well.  He  loved  God,  and  strove  to  walk 
in  all  the  ways  of  David  his  father;  but  as  he  advanced  in  wealth,  and  his 
mind  expanded  into  the  vast  fields  of  intellectual  research,  the  simplicity  of 
his  trust  in  God  was  destroyed,  his  spiritual  fervour  was  chilled,  and  religious 
decline  began.  His  exalted  regal  position  and  high  mental  endowments  raised 
him  into  a  lofty  region,  in  which  few  but  himself  could  enter;  and  there  were 
none  round  about  him  who  had  the  fidelity  or  the  courage  to  warn  him  of  his 
danger,  even  if  they  themselves  perceived  that  danger.  He  became  the  victim 
of  his  own  imperious  self-sufiiciency — the  weight  of  his  own  aggrandisement 
crushed  him  to  the  dnst !  Wealth,  prosperity,  promotion,  will  ever  lift  men 
into  the  midst  of  a  thousand  threatening  dangers ;  and  the  higher  the  pinnacle 
to  which  they  are  elevatrd,  the  more  imminent  their  peril,  and  the  more 
awfully  calamitous  their  fall.  2.  That  in  the  greatest  characters  there  is  a  rtiingling 
of  good  and  evil.  As  Bacon  is,  in  English  history,  "  the  wisest,  greatest,  meanest 
of  mankind."  so  is  Solomon  in  Jewish  and  in  sacred  history.  Every  part  of  his 
splendour  had  its  dark  side.  **  The  web  of  our  life,"  says  Shakespeare,  **  is 
of  mingled  yarn — bad  and  good  together."  It  is  important  to  reeounize  this 
fact  in  forming  a  just  estimate  of  human  character.  Solomon  is  '*  the  chief 
example  in  Sacred  History  of  what  meets  us  often  in  common  history — the 
union  of  genius  and  crime.  The  record  of  his  career  sanctions  our  use  of  the 
intellectual  power  even  of  the  weakest  or  the  wickedest  of  mankind.  As 
Solomon's  fall  is  not  overlooked  in  consideration  of  his  power  and  glory,  so 
neither  because  he  fell  does  he  cease  to  be  called  the  wisest  of  men,  nor  is  his 
wisdom  shut  out  from  the  Sacred  Volume." — Stanley.  3.  That  worldly  pros- 
ferity  is  powerless  to  satisfy  the  deepest  needs  of  the  soul.  All  the  great  gifts  of 
the  world  were  possessed  by  Solomon  in  an  unexampled  degree.  His  riches 
were  fabulous,  and  came  from  afar — the  inexhaustible  mines  of  the  Eaeitern 
and  Western  worlds  replenished  his  treasury  with  an  unfailing  supply.  He 
wielded  the  most  absolute  authority.  Whatever  pleasure  could  delight  the  eye 
or  gratify  the  taste  was  at  his  command.  He  was  a  philosopher,  a  poet,  an 
accomplislK^d  scientist,  and  penetrated  to  the  depths  of  all  human  wisdom — 
even  to  exhaustion  and  satiety.  And  }  et  there  was  nothing  in  all  these  to 
make  him  happy.  Turning  from  all  his  former  delights  with  unutterable  sur- 
feiting and  loathing,  he  raises  the  sad,  melancholy  lamentation — '*  Vanity  of 
vanities !  All  is  vanity  !  "  All  that  worldly  good  can  do  for  us  is — to  show 
us  its  own  emptiness :  it  raises  our  hopes  with  delusive  promii^es,  and  dashes 
them  to  atoms  with  bitter  disappointments.  The  flowers  which  it  sprinkles 
around  our  path  barely  hide  the  charnel  house  in  which  our  bones  will  soon 
have  to  rot  I     4,  That  the  success  of  the  work  of  God  does  not  depend  upon  external 

165 


CHAP.  XI.  EOMILETIC  COMMEKTART :  KINGS. 


display.     Solomon  appears  upon  the  scene  like  a  mighty  magician  who,  with 

one  stroke,  of  his  wand,  calls  into  existence  an  enchanting  spectacle  of  royal 

splendour— the  towering  palace,  the  shining  throne,  the  courtly  attendants*  in 

gorgeous  apparel,  the  military  with  glittering  weapons  and  prancing  chargers, 

the  exuberant  riches  of  a  prosperous  commerce,  and  all  the  external  evidences 

of  a  great  and  powerful  nation— Am^^//" the  most  conspicuous  figure  in  the  gay 

and  animated  throng ;  and,  before  the  eye   has  got  well  accustomed  to  the 

dazzling  pageant,  both  magician  and  his  marvellous  creation  gradually  melt 

^7^  l^^^  ^^^'  surrounding  mysteries.     But,  all  the  time,  the  ulteiior  puipcse 

of  God  m  raising  up  the  Jewish  nation,  and  through  it  endowing  the  world  with 

unspeakable  blessing,  marched  grandly  and  silently  on  its  way.     Through  the 

changing   fortunes    of    succeeding    dynasties—tlirough  the   decline   and    final 

extinction  of  the  kingdom— through  the  disasters,  suiferin-s,  and  desolations  of 

the  long  captivities,  unto  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  gracious  purpose 

slowly  ripened,  and  gave  promise  of  a  glorious  fruitage.     The  moral  impress  on 

the  world  of  the  Saviour's  advent  was  made  utterly  independent  and  in  defiance 

of  external  pomp.     And  still  the  work  of  God  goes  on,  often  silently,  often  in 

obscurity  and  sulfering,  but  always  triumphantly  I 

High  Intellectual  Endowments  Perilous. 

I.  Because  they  are  liable  to  be  corrupted  by  the  seductions  of  sensuality 
(verses  \-'6).  Mental  power  is  no  safeguard  against  the  grossest  sins.  Superior 
knowledge  did  not  protect  Adam  from  the  blandishments  of  Eve.  "  If  one  woman 
undid  all  mankind,  what  marvel  is  it  if  many  women  undid  one.  To  them  did 
Solomon  join  in  love,  who  can  marvel  if  they  disjoined  his  heart  from  God  ?  Satan 
hath  found  this  bait  to  take  so  well,  that  he  never  changed  it  since  he  crept  into 
Paradise.  How  many  have  we  known  whose  heads  have  been  broken  with  their 
own  rib  ?  " 

II.  Because  they  may  breed  an  undue  consciousness  of  personal  superiority. 

It  is  a  lovely  sight  to  see  wisdom  combined  with  humility,  a  giant  intellect  in 
union  with  a  childlike  simplicity  of  character.  It  is  a  thrilling  but  dangerous 
moment  when  the  mind  becomes  conscious  of  its  true  power;  the  danger  is  in- 
creased when  it  discovers  its  superiority  to  others.  The  dim-sighted  wanderer, 
stumbling  with  uncertain  foothold  on  the  sides  of  precipitous  crags,  is  not  in 
greater  peril.  A  moment  like  that  came  to  Mahomet,  and  thenceforth  the  noble 
method  of  moral  suas  on  gave  place  to  the  shorter  and  more  imperious  argument 
of  the  sword.  A  moment  like  that  came  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  his  career 
thenceforword  was  a  lurid,  bloody  tragedy. 

III.  Because  they  are  intolerant  of  advice  and  admonition.  IS'o  one  single 
mind  possesses  all  the  truth  on  any  subject.  Di:fferent  shades  of  the  same 
truth  alter  the  complexion  of  the  whole,  and  may  influence  personal  action  in 
an  opposite  direction.  It  is  therefore  an  unspeakable  advantage  to  be  surrounded 
by  those  from  whom  we  can  take  council.  The  wise  man  will  learn  something 
even  from  an  enemy.  To  be  impatient  of  advice  and  indifferent  to  warning  is 
to  be  exposed  to  danger  and  disaster.  It  is  like  rushing  into  conflict  without 
sword  and  shield ;  or  fording  the  turbulent  torrent,  whilst  despising  the  use  of 
boat  or  raft.  It  is  one  of  the  misfortunes  of  the  intellectual  genius  that  so 
many  regard  him  as  above  the  necessity  of  help  from  others.  Eew  have  the 
courage  to  offer  him  advice  ;  fewer  still  the  fidelity  to  warn. 

rv.  Because  they  are  apt  to  encourage  a  proud  self-sufficiency.  Intellectual 
greatness  propounds  to  itself  the  sublimest  tasks.     It  ''  soars  into  the  heavens, 
penetrates  the  earth,  penetrates  itself,  questions  the  past,  anticipates  the  future, 
X66 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  OflAP.  XL 


and  seeks  to  find  in  every  region  of  the  universe  types  and  interpreters  of  its  own 
deep  mysteries  and  glorious  inspirations  "  (Eccles.  i.  13).  No  wonder,  with 
such  themes  revolving  in  the  mind,  it  should  be  in  danger  of  losing  its  balance; 
and  that  it  should  proudly  arrogate  to  itself  the  credit  of  all  succc^^s  and  discovery. 
Pride  of  intelh^ctis  the  most  dangerous  form  of  all  pride.  **  It  is  a  vice,"  says  the 
judicious  Hooker,  *'  which  cleaveth  so  fast  unto  the  hearts  of  men,  that  if  we 
were  to  strip  ourselves  of  all  faults,  one  by  one,  we  sliould  nn  loubledly  find  it 
the  very  last  and  hardest  to  put  off.  In  the  world  many  things  are  the  cause 
of  much  evil;  but  pride  of  all." 

Deep  is  the  sea  and  d<  ep  is  hell ;  btit  pride  mincth  deeper: 
It  is  coiled  as  a  poisonous  worm  about  the  foundations  of  the  soul. 
If  thou  expose  it  in  thy  motives  and  track  it  in  thy  springs  of  thought, 
Conij)hicent  in  its  own  detection,  it  will  seem  indignant  virtue. 
Smoothly  it  will  gratulate  thy  skill,  0  subtle  anatomist  of  self  I 
And  spurns  its  very  being,  while  it  nestleth  the  deeper  in  thy  bosom. 

Tupper. 

V.  Because  they  may  disparage  the  deepest  relig^ious  sentiments  (verses 
4-6).  The  colossal  intellectualism  of  Solomon  did  not  protect  the  purity  and 
genuineness  of  the  religion  of  his  youth.  His  "heart  was  turned  away,  it  was 
not  perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God."  Not  that  he  ceased  to  believe  in  Jehovah 
as  the  only  true  God  :  he  could  not  so  far  insult  and  stultify  his  intellectual 
consciousness.  Eut  his  religious  fervour  was  abated,  and  his  dearest  religious 
convictions  dishonoured.  The  sensual  over-shadowed  the  intellectual ;  and  the 
intellectual,  thus  eclipsed,  depreciated  the  religious.  And  there  is  a  school  of 
thinkers  to-day  who,  in  their  haste  to  reconcile  difficulties,  advance  the  theory 
of  one  theology  for  the  intt  llect,  and  another  for  the  feelings.  Their  theory  is, 
there  are  two  modes  of  apprehending  and  presenting  truth ;  the  one  by  the 
logical  consciousness  that  it  may  be  understood ;  the  other  by  the  intuitional 
consciousness  that  it  may  be  felt.  These  two  modes  may  often  conflict,  so  that 
what  is  true  in  the  one  may  be  false  in  the  other,  reminding  one  of  the  old 
dictum,  "  What  is  true  in  religion  is  false  in  philosophy."  The  danger  of  this 
theory  is  evident  in  its  enabling  a  man  to  profess  his  faith  in  doctrines  which 
he  does  not  believe.  If  asked,  Do  you  believe  that  Christ  satisfied  the  justice 
of  God  ?—  he  can  say  Yes,  for  it  is  true  to  his  feelings  :  and  he  can  say,  No,  be- 
cause it  is  false  to  his  intellect.  In  all  true  religious  experience  the  head  and 
the  heart  are  in  harmony. 

VI.  Because  they  render  failure  the  more  ig^nominious  and  unbearable.  The 

degradation  of  Nebuchadnezzar  was  all  the  more  conspicuous  because  of  the  lofti- 
ness of  his  vauntings.  The  humiliation  and  suffering  of  the  stately  dames  of 
Jersualem  were  all  the  more  noticeable  in  contrast  with  their  mincing  gait, 
their  stretched-out  necks,  and  tinkling  ornaments.  So  the  fall  of  Solomon  was 
the  more  calamitous  because  of  his  rare  and  vast  endowments  and  high  exalta- 
tion. The  locomotive  which  slips  from  the  metals  when  at  full  speed  works 
all  the  greater  devastation  and  ruin  because  of  the  ponderous  power  which 
pulses  in  its  capacious  breast.  The  nature  which  is  capable  of  the  highest 
ecstasy  is  susceptible  of  the  deeper  woe  and  misery. 

Lessons: — 1.  Intellectual  gifts  involve  correfipondiiig  responsibility.  2.  It  it 
better  to  be  wise  than  to  be  clever.     3.  To  be  truly  good  is  to  be  truly  great. 

Solomon *8  Restoration. 
(Compared  with  Neh.  xiii.  26). 

The  deep  interest  of  biography  consists  in  this — that  it  is  in  some  measure  the 
description  to  us  of  our  own  inner  history.     You  cannot  unveil  the  secrets  of 

167 


OHAF.ZL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


another  heart  without  at  the  same  time  finding;  sometliing  to  correspond  with, 
and  perchance  explain,  the  mysteries  of  your  own.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
Solomon's  life  is  full  of  painful  interest.  Ear  removed  as  he  if,  in  some 
respects,  ahove  our  sympathies,  in  others  he  peculiarly  commands  them.  He 
was  a  monarch,  and  none  of  us  know  the  sensations  which  belong  to  Kule.  He 
was  proclaimed  by  God  to  be  among  the  wisest  of  mankind,  and  few  of  us  can 
even  conceive  the  atmosphere  in  which  such  a  gifted  spirit  moves,  original, 
enquiring,  comprehending,  one  to  whom  Nature  has  made  her  secret  opon.  He 
lived  in  the  infancy  of  the  world's  society,  and  we  live  in  its  refined  and  civi- 
lized manhood.  And  yet,  when  we  have  turned  away,  wearied,  from  all  those 
subjects  in  which  the  mind  of  Solomon  expatiated,  and  try  to  look  inwards  at 
the  man,  straightway  we  find  ourselves  at  home.  Just  as  in  our  own  trifling, 
petty  history,  so  we  find  in  him,  life  with  the  same  unabated,  mysterious 
interest;  the  dust  and  confusion  of  a  battle,  sublime  longings  and  low  weak- 
nesses, perplexity,  struggle  ;  and  then  the  grave  closing  over  all  this,  and 
leaving  us  to  marvel  in  obscurity  and  silence  over  the  strange  destinies  of  man. 
The  career  of  Solomon  is  a  problem  which  has  perplexed  many,  and  is  by 
no  means  an  easy  one  to  solve.  He  belongs  to  the  peculiar  class  of  those  who 
begin  well,  and  then  have  the  brightness  of  their  lives  obscured  at  last.  His 
morning  sun  rose  beautifully,  it  sank  in  the  evening,  clouded,  and  dark  with 
earthly  exhalations,  too  dark  to  prophesy  with  certainty  how  it  sliould  rise  on 
the  morrow.  Solomon's  life  was  not  what  religious  existence  ought  to  be. 
The  Life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man  ought  to  be  a  thing  of  perpetual  develop- 
ment; it  ought  to  be  more  bright,  and  its  pulsations  more  vigorous  every  year. 
Such  certainly,  at  least  to  all  appearance,  Solomon's  was  not.  It  was  excel- 
lence, at  all  events,  marred  with  inconsistency. 

I.  The  wanderins^s  of  an  erring  spirit.  "  Did  not  Solomon,  king  of  Israel, 
sin  by  these  things?"  1.  This  is  the  first  point  to  dwell  on — the  wanderings 
of  a  frail  and  erring  human  spirit  from  the  right  way.  1.  That  which  lay  at 
the  bottom  of  all  Solomon's  transgressions  was  his  intimate  partnership  with 
foreigners.  "  Did  not  Solomon  sin  by  these  things  ?"  That  is,  if  we  look  to 
the  context,  marriage  with  foreign  wives.  Exclusiveness  was  the  principle  on 
which  Judaism  was  built.  The  Israelites  were  not  to  mix  with  the  nations, 
they  were  not  to  marry  with  them :  they  were  not  to  join  with  them  in 
religious  fellowship  or  commercial  partnership.  And  it  was  this  principle 
which  Solomon  transgressed.  He  married  a  princess  of  Egypt.  He  connected 
himself  with  wives  from  idolatrous  countries — Moabites,  Ammonites,  Edomites, 
Sidonians,  Hittites.  And  then  Nehemiah's  argument,  built  on  the  eternal  truth 
that  friendship  with  the  world  is  enmity  with  God,  is  this — "Did  not  Solomon 
sin  by  these  things  ?"  That  Jewish  law  shadowed  out  an  everlasting  truth. 
God's  people  are  an  exclusive  nation ;  God's  Church  is  for  ever  separated  from 
the  world.  When  a  religious  person  begins  to  feel  an  inclination  for  intimate 
communion  with  the  world,  and  begins  to  break  down  that  barrier  which  is  the 
line  of  safety,  the  first  step  is  made  of  a  series  of  long,  dark  wanderings  from 
God.  The  world  changes  its  complexion  in  every  age.  Solomon's  world  was  the 
nations  of  idolatry  lying  round  Israel.  Our  world  is  not  that.  The  sons  of  our 
world  are  not  idolaters,  they  are  not  profligate,  they  are,  it  may  be,  among  the 
most  fascinating  of  mankind.  Their  society  is  more  pleasing,  more  lively,  more 
diversified  in  information  than  religious  society.  No  marvel  if  a  young  and 
ardent  heart  feels  the  spell  of  the  fascination.  No  wonder  if  it  feels  a  relief  in 
turning  away  from  the  dulness  and  the  monotony  of  home  life  to  the  sparkling 
brilliancy  of  the  world's  society.  No  marvel  if  Solomon  felt  the  superior 
charms  of  the  accomplished  Egyptian  and  the  wealthy  Syrian.  His  Jewish 
countrymen  and  countrywomen  were  but  homely  in  comparison.  It  is  almost 
natural,  almost  intelligible — a  temptation  which  wc  feel  ourselves  every  day. 
I6b 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS.  chap.  xi. 


The  brilliant,  dazzling,  accomplished  world — what  Christian  with  a  mind 
polished  like  Solomon's  does  not  own  its  charms?  And  yet  now,  pause.  Is  it 
in  wise  Egypt  that  our  highest  blessedness  lies?  lo  it  in  busy,  restless  Sidon? 
Is  it  in  luxurious  Moab  ?  No.  The  Christian  must  leave  the  world  alone. 
His  blessedness  lies  in  quiet  work  with  the  Israel  of  God.  His  home  is  in 
that  deep,  unruffled  tranquillity  which  belongs  to  those  who  are  trying  to  know 
Christ.  And  when  a  Christian  will  not  learn  this ;  when  he  will  not 
understand  that  in  calmness,  and  home,  and  work,  and  love,  his  soul  must  find 
its  peace  ;  when  he  will  try  keener  and  more  exciting  pleasures ;  when  he  says, 
I  must  taste  what  life  is  while  I  am  young,  its  feverishness,  its  strange, 
delirious,  maddening  intoxication,  he  has  just  taken  Solomon's  first  step, 
and  he  must  take  the  whole  of  Solomon's  after  and  most  bitter  experience 
along  with  it. 

2.  The  second  step  of  Solomon's  wandering  was  the  unrestrained  pursuit 
of  pleasure.  And  a  man  like  Solomon  cannot  do  anything  by  halves.  What 
he  did,  he  did  thoroughly.  No  man  ever  more  heartily  and  systemati- 
cally gave  himself  up  to  the  pursuit.  If  he  once  made  up  his  mind  that 
pleasure  was  his  aim,  then  for  pleasure  he  lived.  There  are  some  men  who  are 
prudent  in  their  epicureanism.  They  put  gaiety  aside  when  they  begin  to  get 
palled  with  it,  and  then  return  to  it  moderately  again.  Men  like  Solomon 
cannot  do  that.  No  earnest  man  can.  No!  if  blessedness  lies  in  pleasure,  he 
will  drink  the  cup  to  the  dregs.  We  have  none  of  the  cool,  cautious  sipping 
of  enjoyment  here.  We  have  none  of  the  feeble,  languid  attempts  to 
enjoy  the  world  which  make  men  venture  ankle-deep  into  dissipation, 
and  only  long  for  courage  to  go  a  little  further.  It  is  the  earnestness  of  an  im- 
passioned man,  a  man  who  has  quitted  God,  and  thrown  himself,  heart  and  soul, 
upon  everything  that  he  tries,  and  says  he  will  try  it  fairly,  and  to  the  full. 
There  is  a  moral  to  be  learnt  from  the  wildest  worldliness.  When  we  look  on 
the  madness  of  life,  and  are  marv^elling  at  the  terrible  career  of  dissipation,  let 
there  be  no  contempt  lelt.  It  is  an  immortal  spirit  marring  itself.  It  is  an  in- 
finite soul,  which  nothing  short  of  the  Infinite  can  satisfy,  plunging  down  to 
ruin  and  disappointment.  Men  of  pleasure  !  whose  hearts  are  as  capable  of  an 
eternal  blessedness  as  a  Christian's,  that  is  the  terrible  meaning  and  moral  of  your 
dissipation.  God  in  Christ  is  your  only  Eden,  and  out  of  Christ  you  can  have  nothing 
but  the  restlessness  of  Cain;  you  are  blindly  pursuing  your  destiny.  That 
unquenched  impetuosity  within  you  might  have  led  you  up  to  God.  You  have 
chosen  instead  that  your  heart  shall  try  to  satisfy  itself  upon  husks.  3.  There 
was  another  form  of  Solomon's  worldliness.  It  was  not  worldliness  in  pleasure, 
but  worldiness  in  occupation.  He  had  entered  deeply  in  commercial  speculations. 
He  had  alternate  fears  and  hopes  about  the  return  of  his  merchant  ships  on 
their  perilous  three-years'  voyage  to  India  and  to  Spain.  He  had  his  mind 
occupied  with  plans  for  building.  The  architecture  of  the  temple,  his  own  palace, 
the  forts  and  towns  of  his  now  magnificent  empire — all  this  filled  for  a  time  his 
soul.  He  had  begun  a  system  of  national  debt  and  ruinous  taxation.  He  had 
become  a  slaveholder  and  a  despot,  who  was  compelled  to  keep  his  people  down 
by  armed  force.  Much  of  this  was  not  wrong;  but  all  of  it  was  dangerous. 
It  is  a  strange  thing  how  business  dulls  the  sharpness  of  the  spiritual  affections. 
It  is  strange  how  the  harass  of  perpetual  occupation  shuts  God  out.  It  is 
strange  how  much  mingling  with  the  world,  politics,  and  those  things  which 
bolong  to  advancing  civilization,  things  which  are  very  often  in  the  way  of  our 
duty,  deaden  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong.  Let  Christians  be  on  their  guard 
by  double  prayerfulness  when  duty  makes  them  men  of  business,  or  calls  them 
to  posts  of  worldly  activity.  4.  It  was  the  climax  of  Solomon's  transgression 
i\i'<it  he  suffered  the  estahlishnent  of  idolatry  in  his  dominions.  There  are  writers 
who  have  said  that  in  this  matter  Solomon  was  in  advance  of  his  age — enlightened 
beyond  the  narrowness  of  Judaism,  and  that  this  permission  of  idolatry  was  the 

169 


•HIP.  XL  EOMIIETIG  COMMENTAUY:   KINGS, 


earliest  exhibition  of  that  spirit  which  in  modern  times  we  call  rello^ious  tolera- 
tion. But  Solomon  went  far  beyond  toleration.  The  truth  seems  to  be 
Solomon  was  getting  indifferent  about  religion.  He  had  got  into  light  and 
worldly  society,  and  the  libertinism  of  his  associations  was  beginning  to  make 
its  impressions  upon  him.  He  was  beginning  to  ask,  **  Is  not  one  religion  as 
good  as  another,  so  long  as  each  man  believes  his  own  in  (arnest?'*  He  beo-an 
to  feel  there  is  a  great  deal  to  be  said  for  these  ditferent  religions.  After  all,  there  is 
nothing  certain  ;  and  why  forbid  men  the  quiet  enjoyment  of  their  own  opinion  ? 
And  so  he  became  what  men  call  liberal,  and  he  took  idolatry  under  his  patronage. 
There  are  few  signs  in  a  soul's  state  more  alarming  than  that  of  religious  in- 
difference— that  is,  the  spirit  of  thinking  all  religions  equally  true;  the  real 
meaning  of  which  is,  that  all  religions  are  equally  false. 

II.  Consider  God's  loving  guidance  of  Solomon  in  all  his  apostacy.  "  There 
was  no  king  like  unto  him  who  was  beloved  of  his  God."      1.   In  the  darkest, 
wildest  wanderings,  a  man  to  whom  God  has  shown  his  love  in  Christ  is  conscious 
still  of  the  better  way.     In  the  very  gloom  of  his  remorse,  there  is  an  instinctive 
turning  back  to  God.     According  to  Scripture  phraseology,  Solomon  had  a  great 
heart ;  and   therefore  it  was  that,  for  such  an  one,  the  discipline  which  was  to 
lead  him  back  to  God  must  needs  be  terrible.     "If  he  commit  iniquity,  I  will 
chasten  him  with  the  rod  of  men."     That  was  God's  covenant,  and  with  tre- 
mendous fidelity  was  it  kept.     You  look  to  the  life  of  Solomon,  and  there  aie 
no  outward  reverses  there  to  speak  of.     His  reign  was  the  type  of  the  reign  of  the 
power  of  peace.  No  war,  no  national  disaster,  interrupted  the  even  flow  of  the  cur- 
rent of  his  days.     No  loss  of  a  childlike  David's,  pouring  cold  desolation  into  his 
soul ;  no  pestilences  or  fumines.     Prosperity  and  riches,  and  the  internal  deve- 
lopment of  the  nation's  life — that  was  the  reign  of  Solomon.     And  yet,  with  all 
this,  was  Solomon  happy  ?     Has  God  no  arrows  winged  in  heaven  for  the  heart, 
except  those  which  come  in  the  shape  of  outward  calamity?     Is  there  no  way 
that  God  has  of  making  the  heart  grey  and  old  before  its  time,  without  sending 
bereavement,  or  loss,  or  sickness  ?     Has  the  Eternal  Justice  no  mode  of  withering 
and  drying  up  the  inner  springs  of  happiness,  while  all  is  green,  and  wild, 
and   fresh   outwardly  ?     Look   to   the    history   of  Solomon   for   the   answer. 
2.  One  way  in  which  his  aberration  from  God  treasured  up  for  him  chastise- 
ment was  by   that  weariness  of  existence  which  breatlies  through  the  whole 
book  of  Ecclesiastes.      That   book  bears    internal   evidence  of   having   been 
written  after  repentance  and  victory.      It  is  the  experience  of  a  career  of 
pleasure,  and  the  tone  which  vibrates  through  the  whole  is  disgust  with  the 
world,  and  mankind,  and  life  and  self.     I  hold  that  book  to  be  inspired.     It  is 
not  written  as  a  wise  and  calm  Christian  would  write,  but  as  a  heart  would 
write  which  was  fevered  with  disappointment,  jaded  with  passionate  attempts 
in  the  pursuit  of  blessedness,   and  forced  to  God   as  the  last  resource.     That 
saddest  book  in  all  the  Bible  stands  before  you  as  the  beacon  and  the  warning 
from   a  God  who  loves  you,  and  would  spare  you  bitterness   if   He    could. 
Follow  inclination  now,  put  no  restraint  on  feeling,   say  that  there  is  time 
enough  to  be  religious  by-and-by,  forget  that  now  is  the  time  to  take  Christ's 
yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  gradually  and  peacefully  that  serene  control  of  heart 
which  must  be  learnt  at  last   by  a  painful  wrench — forget  all  that,  and  say 
that  you  trust  in  God's  love  and  mercy  to  bring  all  right,  and  then  that  book 
of  Ecclesiastes  is  your  history.     The  penalty  that  you  pay  for  a  youth  of 
pleasure  is — if  you  have  anything  good  in  you — an  old  age  of  weariness  and 
remorseful  dissatiefacticm.      3.   Another  part  of  Solomon's  chastisement  was 
doubt.     Once  more  turn  to  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes :   **  All  things  come  alike  to 
all ;  there  is  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and  to  tire  wicked  ;  to  the  good  and  to 
the  clean,  and  to  the  unclean ;  to  him  that  sacrificeth,  and  to  him  that  sacri- 
ficeth  not."     In  this  observe  the  querulous  complaint  of  a  man  who  has  ceased 
170 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  chap.  xi. 


to  feel  that  God  is  the  Ruler  of  this  world.  A  blind  chance,  or  a  dark  destiny, 
seems  to  rule  all  earthly  things.  And  that  is  the  penalty  of  leaving  God's 
narrow  path  for  sin's  wider  and  more  flowery  one.  You  lose  your  way,  you 
get  perplexed,  doubt  takes  possession  of  your  soul.  And  there  is  no  suffering 
more  severe  than  doubt.  There  is  a  loss  of  aim,  and  you  know  not  whi.t  you 
have  to  live  for;  life  has  lost  its  meaning  and  its  infinite  significanpo.  There 
is  a  hoUowness  at  the  heart  of  your  existence ;  there  is  a  feeling  of  weakness 
and  a  discontented  loss  of  self-respect.  God  lias  liidden  his  face  from  you 
because  you  have  been  trying  to  do  without  Him,  or  to  serve  Him  with  a 
divided  heart.  4.  Lastly,  we  have  to  remark  that  the  love  of  God  brought 
Solomon  through  all  this  to  spiritual  manhood.  **  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of 
the  whole  matter :  Fear  God  and  keep  His  commandments;  for  this  is  the 
whole  duty  of  man."  In  this  we  have  tlie  evidence  of  his  victory.  Doubt,  and 
imprisonment,  and  worldliness  have  passed  away,  and  clear  activity,  belief, 
freedom,  have  taken  their  place.  It  was  a  terrible  discipline,  but  God  had 
made  that  discipline  successful.  Solomon  struggled  manfully  to  the  end. 
The  details  of  his  life  were  dark,  but  the  life  itself  was  earnest  ;  and  after 
many  a  fall,  repentance,  with  unconquerable  purpose,  began  afresh.  And  so 
he  struggled  on,  often  baffled,  often  down,  but  never  finally  subdued;  and 
still  with  tears  and  indomitable  trust  returning  to  the  conflict  again.  And  so, 
when  we  come  to  the  end  of  his  last  earthly  work,  we  find  the  sour  smoke, 
which  had  so  long  been  smouldering  in  his  heart,  and  choking  his  existence, 
changed  into  bright,  clear  flame.  He  has  found  the  secret  out  at  last,  and  it 
has  filled  his  whole  soul  with  blessedness.  God  is  man's  happiness.  "  Eear 
God,  and  keep  His  commandments ;  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man." 

Lessons. — 1.  There  is  a  way — let  us  not  shrink  from  saying  it — in  which  sin 
may  he  made  to  minister  to  holiness.  **  To  whomsoever  much  is  forgiven,  the 
same  loveth  much."  There  was  an  everlasting  truth  in  what  our  Messiah  said 
to  the  moral  Pharisees :  **  The  publicans  and  the  harlots  go  into  the  kingdom 
of  God  before  you."  JSow,  these  are  Christ's  words,  and  we  will  not  fear  to 
boldly  state  the  same  truth.  Past  sin  may  be  made  the  stepping-stone  to 
heaven.  Let  a  man  abuse  that  if  he  will  by  saying:  **  Then  it  is  best  to  sin." 
A  man  may  make  the  doctrine  absuid,  even  shocking,  by  that  inference,  but 
it  is  true  for  all  that.  God  can  take  even  your  sin,  and  make  it  work  to  your 
soul's  sanctification.  He  can  let  you  down  into  such  an  abyss  of  self-loathing 
and  disgust,  such  life  weariness,  and  doubt,  ani  misery,  and  disappointment, 
that  if  He  ever  raises  you  again  by  the  invigorating  experience  of  the  love  of 
Christ,  you  will  rise  stronger  from  your  very  fall.  But  forget  not  this  :  if  ev(r 
a  great  sinner  becomes  a  great  saint,  it  will  be  through  agonies  which  none 
but  those  who  have  sinned  know.  2.  I  speak  to  those  among  you  who  know 
something  about  what  the  world  is  worth,  who  have  tasted  its  fruits,  and  found 
them  like  the  Dead  Sea  apples — hollowness  and  ashes.  By  those  foretastes  of 
coming  misery  which  God  has  already  given  you,  those  lonely  feelings  of  utter 
wretchedness  and  disappointment  when  you  have  returned  home  palled  and 
satiated  from  the  gaudy  entertainment,  and  the  truth  has  pressed  itself  icy  cold 
upon  your  heart,  *' Vanity  of  vanities" — is  this  worth  living  for?  By  all 
that  be  warned.  Be  true  to  your  convictions ;  be  honest  with  yourselves  ;  be 
manly  in  working  out  your  doubts,  as  Solomon  was.  Greatness,  goodness, 
blessedness  lie  not  in  the  life  that  you  are  leading  now,  they  lie  in  quite  a  diffe- 
rent path  ;  they  lie  in  a  lif(i  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  3.  Learn  from  this  subject 
the  covenant  love  of  God.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  love  which  rebellion  cannot 
weary,  which  ingratitude  cannot  cool.  It  is  the  love  of  God  to  those  whom  He 
has  redeemed  in  Christ.  **  Did  not  Solomon,  king  of  Israel,  sin  ?  and  yet  there 
was  no  king  like  him  who  was  beloved  of  his  God."  Let  that  be  to  us  a  truth 
not  to  teach  carelessness,  but  thankfulness, — Condensed  |rom  F,  TT,  Robertson^ 

171 


CHAP.  H.  EOMILETIC  C03IMENTARY :   KJSGS. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Terses  1-8.     "We  come  now  to  that  danger,  who  by  inarriap:e  and  by  a 

strange,    dark    period    in     Solomon's  wilful  intrusion  upon  certain  positions 

career,  so  strangely  dark,  and,  in  con-  exposes   himself  to   it,  or   who  ever 

trast  with  his  earlier  piety  and  glory,  ventures  in  his  daily  course  too  much 

so  deeply  sad,  that  even  the  author  of  into  the  world,  under  the  pretext  of 

Chronicles  passes  it  over  in  silence,  and  libeity;  he  who  indulges  in  the  lust 

some  modern  critics  pronounce  it  in-  of  the  eyes,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and 

credible  and  psychologically  impossible,  the  pride  of  life,  instead  of  enjoying 

We  find  Jewish  pride  on  the  one  hand,  with    gratitude   and   moderation    the 

and  German  rationalism  on  the  other,  gifts  of  God,  such  an  one  becomes  the 

uniting  to  deny  or  else  explain  away  slave  of  sin,  and  falls  under  the  wrath 

the  literal  truth  of  the  history.     But  of  God.     The  heart  is  first  inclined, 

there   the    record   stands,    and    will  then  wanders  upon  evil  paths,  and  at 

stand,  in  unpleasant  but  simple  naked  last  does  openly  what  is  displeasing  to 

truth,  whose   obvious  meaning   none  the  Lord.    At  first  we  permit  in  others, 

can  doubt,  holding  up  to  the  world  a  through  complaisance,  sin,  which  we 

most    impressive    lesson    of     human  could  and   should  have  checked,  and 

frailty,  and  showing  the  terrible  danger  thus  we  actually  assist  ourselves  to 

to  spiritual  life  of  the  vain  pomp  and  sin.     Still  we  preserve  our  appearance 

glory  of  the  world  (1  Cor.  x.  12).     In  of  wisdom  and  godliness,  and  will  not 

the  earlier  part  of  his  reign  Solomon  have  it  supposed  that  we  have  entirely 

was  rich  towards  God  ;  but  later  he  deserted   the   Lord.      But  he   whose 

multiplied  to  himself  gold  and  silver,  heart  is  not  wholly  with  the  Lord  his 

horses  and  chariots,  wives  and  concu-  God  follows  Him  not  at  all;  he  who 

bines.      In    seeking    to    surpass   the  follows  Him  not  wholly,  follows  Him 

magnificence  and  glory  of  the  kings  of  not  at  all. 

the  nations,  he  fell  even  lower  than  —  The   example    g-iven   by    the 

they   all;    for  better  are  they   who  Bible  in  the  case  of  Solomon.     I. 

never  knew  the  way  of  truth,  than  he  What  it  teaches.     1.  That  for  the  sin- 

who,     having     been     blessed     with  ful  human  heart,  a  constant  outward 

superior  light   from  God,  turns  away  prosperity  is  allied  to  spiritual  dangers 

and  runs  headlong  into  a  foul  idolatry.  (Matt.  xvi.  26).     Thus  it  is  that  trial 

Solomon's  fall  was  no  sudden  apostasy,  and  sorrow  are  often  blessings  for  time 

and  doubtless  many  a  deep  and  wear-  and  eternity  (Heb.  xii.  6-12).    2.  That 

Id g  heart-struggle  did  he  pass  through  the    most   abundant  knowlcdfre,    the 

ere  the  lust  of  the  fiesh,  the  lust  of  highest  education  and  wisdom,  aie  no 

the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  finally  protection  against  moral  and  religious 

gained  over  him  the    mastery.      We  shortcomings.        Wine     and    women 

infer  from  the  warnings  against  trans-  make  foolish  the  wise  man.     Says  the 

gression  contained  in  the  Divine  com-  proverb,  no  wise  man  commits  a  little 

munication  of  chap  ix.  6,  that  already  folly.     II.  ITow  it  warns  us.     1.  To 

the  Lord  saw  in  him  tendencies  that  watch.      If    a   Solomon    can    fall,    a 

threatened  danger;    and  we  suppose  Solomon  brought  up  in  the  nurture 

that   these  tendencies  grew    stronger  and  admonition  of  the  Lord,  and  walk- 

and  stronger  until  they  resulted  in  the  ing  in  the  ways  of  God,  in  old  age,  a 

dark  and  fatal   apostasy   which   this  Solomon  the  wisest  man  of  his  time, 

chaptei*  unfolds  to  us.    (Compare  Neh.  how  necessary  is  it  for  us  all  to  watth ! 

xiii,  26). —  Whedon.  Without  watchin g,  the  greatest  wisdom 

Here  we  see  plainly  how  a  godly  may     become    foolishness,    and    the 

man  may  gradually  fall  into  sin.     He  highest  spiritual  condition  may  end  in 

first  allows  himself  too  much  liberty,  the  wrath  and  judgments  of  God.     2. 

He   ventures   into  danger,    and  then  To  pray.     In  the  great  prosperity  and 

perishes    therein.      He    who    gcoras  delight  of  this  life,  Solomon  forgot 
172 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


prayer,  which  he  had  so  well  practised 
in  earlier  years  (chap.  iii.  and  viii). 
His  wives  did  not  elevate  his  heart, 
they  debased  it.  Prayer  alone  holds 
watch,  and  is  therefore  most  necessary 
in  prosperity  and  success. — J.ange. 

—  The  vanity  and  insecurity  of 
human  greatness.  1.  Exemplified 
in  all  ages.  2.  Should  moderate  hu- 
man ambition.  3.  Should  beget  a 
constant  self-vigilance.  4.  Should 
lead  man  to  aim  at  accomplishing  the 
highest  moral  good.  6.  Should  foster 
complete  reliance  on  God. 

—  It  is  sad  to  turn  from  the  con- 
templation of  the  greatness  of  Solo- 
mon's wisrlom  to  the  mournful  reality 
of  his  end.  But  the  thought  of  God 
flooding  the  soul  of  man  mu-t  always 
be  transcendently  more  grand  than  the 
life  lived  by  man.  So  it  was  with 
Solomon,  and  so  it  must  ever  be.  As 
perhaps  chief  among  the  causes  which 
led  to  his  downfall  may  be  mentioned 
polygamy.  Like  David,  he  had  his 
**  burst  of  great  heart,"  but,  like 
David  also,  he  had  his  **  slips  in 
sensual  mire."  A  loose  morality  led 
to  looseness  in  religion.  The  com- 
mandments of  Jehovah,  broken  in  re- 
gard to  moral  conduct,  were  also 
broken  in  regard  to  religious  faith. 
Under  the  name  of  liberty,  licence  be- 
came the  rule.  The  sweet  grace  of 
toleration,  so  invaluable  a  possession 
in  itself,  was  profaned ;  and  tolerant 
men,  as  they  have  often  been  before 
and  since,  were  made  half  ashamed  of 
a  creed  that  could  lead  to  such  practices 
as  Solomon  encouraged.  There  arose 
two  parties  among  his  subjects — the 
one  favouring  his  easy,  tolerant  sym- 
pathy of  all  religious  beliefs,  and  only, 
probably,  too  willing  to  taste  some  of 
their  sensuous  fruits;  the  other  keeping 
strong  by  the  laws  of  their  early 
religion,  and  resolutely  opposed  to  in- 
novations which  they  saw,  under  their 
very  eyes,  leading  to  such  disastrous 
and  ruinous  consequences.  The  mur- 
murs of  discontent  grew  loud  and 
frequent.  The  old  tribal  jealousies, 
which  had  been  stilled  for  a  time, 
showed  that  their  fires  were  only 
smouldering.  There  were  other  agen- 
cies at  work  which  helped  to  fan  the 


flames  of  discontent.  The  burdens 
laid  upon  the  Israelites  and  the  taxes 
exacted  from  them  were  by  no  means 
light.  We  have  seen  how  many  of 
them  were  taken  from  their  homes  and 
pressed  into  service  at  the  building  of 
the  temple.  The  obligations  of  the 
king  were  so  great  that  he  had  to  ap- 
point officers  over  special  districts  to 
levy  money  for  his  use.  It  was  often 
exacted  in  the  spirit  of  the  insolence 
of  office.  Manliness  and  independence 
could  not  long  brook  such  treatment. 
— The  absence  of  the  prophetical  order 
at  the  court  of  Solomon  is  very  striking, 
and  is,  no  doubt,  a  marked  cause  of 
his  downfall.  It  might  appear  that 
in  the  person  of  Solomon  the  offices  of 
king  and  prophet  were  fitly  joined 
together;  and  so,  for  a  time,  they 
might  have  been,  had  Solomon  only 
kept  a  perfect  ideal  before  him.  This 
he  could  not  do ;  and  neither  the 
monarchy  nor  thft  prophetic  office 
were  at  this  time  ripe  for  such  a  union. 
Only  a  perfect  religion  could  produce 
a  perfect  prophet;  and  the  monarchy 
was  far  from  being  in  the  position  of 
producing  a  perfect  king.  A.s  it  was, 
the  time  soon  arrived  for  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  old  order  to  raise  their 
voice  on  high.  Thus  arose  Ahijah, 
Shemaiah,  and  Iddo,  stung  into  speech 
by  the  conviction  that  the  monarchy 
in  Israel,  by  its  narrow  aims,  was  de- 
generating into  an  ascendency  and 
violence  which  endangered  the  theo- 
cracy itself,  and  with  it  the  sacred  and 
inviolable  basis  of  Israel's  whole  exis- 
tence.— (The  Quiver  for  1875). 

Verses  1,  2. 
danger-signal  to  warn  us  against — 
1.  Disobedience  of  the  Divine  com- 
mands. 2.  Evil  companionships.  We 
are  reminded  of  St.  Paul's  solemn 
admonition:  **  Be  not  deceived;  evil 
communications  corrupt  good  manners" 
(1  Cor.  XV.  33).  Solomon's  intercourse 
with  these  idolatrous  nations  led  to  his 
adopting  their  corrupt  worship  and 
customs.  Every  true  Christian  must 
be  a  nonconformist:  "Be  not  con- 
formed to  this  world  "  (Rom.  xii.  2). 
The  service  of  God  admits  of  no  com- 
promise. We  cannot  serve  God  and 
Mammon. 

17<l 


This   "but"   IS   a 


oaiP.  XL 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


The  friendship  of  the  world  is 
enmity  against  God.  A  distinct  line 
of  division  must  be  drawn  and  main- 
tained between  the  Church  and  the 
world.  They  are  at  deadly  feud 
against  each  other :  there  can  be  no 
truce  between  them.  "There  are 
your  foes,"  said  a  general,  as  he  led 
on  his  men  to  the  attack ;  **  kill  them, 
or  they'll  kill  you."  We  must  not 
allow  our  hearts  to  be  turned  away 
from  Christ  to  worldliness,  like  Demas. 
The  world  is  not  to  be  converted  by 
unholy  alliances  with  the  enemies  of 
God,  but  is  to  be  conquered  by  His 
Word  and  Spirit. 

Verse  1-3.  The  wise  fool.  We 
have  seen  many  strange  sights  in  our 
time  —many  horrible  sights,  but  none 
so  strange,  none  so  horrible,  as  that  of 
a  wise  man  making  himself  a  fool. 
Solomon  did  that,  and  he  was  a  wise 
man,  even  the  wisest  of  men.  If  the 
deep  sagacity  of  Solomon,  if  his  keen 
discernment,  if  his  strong  reason,  if 
his  profound  knowledge  of  human 
life  and  character,  if  even  his  inti- 
mate acquaintance  with  the  law  and 
counsels  of  the  Lord,  did  not  preserve 
his  name  from  that  stamp  of  foolish- 
ness which  we  find  impressed  upon 
so  many  of  the  great  names  and  great 
acts  of  men,  who  is  there  that  can 
hope  to  stand  ?  Not  one,  as  of  him- 
self, but  there  is  without  us  and 
above  us  a  power  that  can  exalt  even 
the  lowly  to  high  things,  and  can 
sustain  them  in  all  true  wisdom  so 
long  as  they  rest  upon  it ;  instead  of 
that,  the  light  which  shines  upon  their 
path  and  glorifies  their  way,  shines 
out  of  themselves  and  not  into  them. 
Solomon  was  wise;  Solomon  was 
foolish.  Strange  contrast  and  contra- 
diction of  terms!  Yet  it  does  not 
astonish.  It  may  astonish  angels, 
but  not  us.  We  are  used  to  this  kind 
of  experience.  We  see  men  who  are 
foolish  without  being  wise;  but  we 
see  not  one  who  is  wise  without  being 
also  foolish.  Foolishness,  which  every 
man  certainly  has  in  his  nature; 
wisdom,  if  he  has  it,  is  a  gift  bestowed 
on  him — bestowed  as  freely  upon  him 
as  it  was  upon  Solomon.  The  wisdom 
174 


does  not  suppress  or  drive  out  the 
foolishness,  but  is  a  weapon,  it  may 
be  a  staff,  or  it  may  be  a  glittering 
sword  given  into  his  hands  to  fight 
against  it,  to  keep  it  under ;  a  weapon 
to  be  used  with  daily  and  ever- 
watchful  vigilance,  and  not  to  rest 
idly  in  the  scabbard.  This  was  king 
Solomon's  fault.  Having  been  victor 
in  many  a  deadly  fray,  until  victory 
became  easy  and  habitual,  he  forgot 
that  the  enemy  of  his  greatness  and 
peace  still  lived — was  not  mortally 
wounded — did  not  even  sleep.  He 
suff'ered  his  weapon  to  rest  until  its 
keen  edge  was  corroded,  until  it  clung 
in  rust  to  the  scabbard,  and  could  not 
be  drawn  forth. — Kitto. 

—  It  was  the  charge  of  God  to  the 
kings  of  Israel  that  they  should  not 
multiply  wives.  Solomon  had  gone 
beyond  the  stakes  of  the  law,  and 
now  is  ready  to  lose  himself  amongst 
a  thousand  bedfellows.  Whoso  lays 
the  reins  on  the  neck  of  his  carnal 
appetite,  can  promise  where  he  will 
rest.  0  Solomon !  where  was  thy 
wisdom,  while  thine  affections  run 
away  with  thee  into  so  wild  a  volup- 
tuousness ?  What  boots  it  thee  to 
discourse  of  all  things,  while  thou 
misknowest  thyself  ?  The  perfections 
of  speculation  do  not  argue  the  inward 
power  of  self-government;  the  eye 
may  be  clear,  while  the  hand  is 
palsied.  It  is  not  so  much  to  be 
heeded  how  the  soul  is  informed,  as 
,  how  it  is  disciplined :  the  light  of 
knowledge  doth  well,  but  the  due  order 
of  the  affections  doth  better.  Never 
any  mere  man,  since  the  first,  knew 
so  much  as  Solomon ;  many  that  have 
known  less  have  had  more  command  of 
themselves.  A  competent  estate  well 
husbanded  is  better  than  a  vast  patri- 
mony neglected.  There  can  be  no 
safety  to  that  soul  where  is  not  a 
strait  curb  upon  our  desires.  If  our 
lusts  be  not  held  under  as  slaves,  they 
will  rule  as  tyrants.  Had  Solomon 
done  this,  delicacy  and  lawless  great- 
ness had  not  led  him  into  these  bogs 
of  intemperance. — Bp,  Hall. 

Verses  3,  4.     These  wives  and  con- 
cubines were  introduced  to  add  to  the 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  XI. 


Splendour  and  gaiety  of  the  court. 
The  love  of  display  is  destructive  of 
Christian  simplicity .  It  has  ruined 
many  by  a  silly  desire  to  vie  with  their 
wealthy  neighbours.  1.  It  has  weaned 
mens'  hearts  fiora  Christ  and  His 
people.  2.  Euined  many  families. 
3.  Swollen  the  list  of  commercial 
failures.  4.  Drawn  away  its  victims 
into  wicked  associations  and  pursuits. 
Fashion  is  the  modern  Moloch,  whose 
worshippers  are  legion.  How  true  is 
it  that : 

"  Gold  glitters  most  where  virtue  shines  no 

more, 
As    stars  from  absent  suns  have   leave  to 

shine." 

David,  with  all  his  faults,  never  tole- 
rated idolatry  during  his  reign  ;  hence 
he  is  called  "  The  man  after  God's  own 
heart." 

Yerses  1-4.  Denial  of  the  existence 
of  marriage  ;is  a  divine  ordinance  is 
I  lie  source  of  the  greatest  and  weigh- 
tiest evils.  Solomon  sinned  in  this 
wise — that,  contrary  to  the  law,  he  not 
only  took  to  himself  many  wives,  but 
foreign — i.e.,  heathen — wives.  Not 
without  danger  is  it  that  a  man  takes 
a  wife  who  is  not  of  his  own  reli- 
gion (1  Cor.  vii.  19).  Lust  of  the 
eyes  and  the  pride  of  life  drowse  the 
soul,  and  cripple  the  will,  gradually 
and  imperceptibly  influence  the  heart, 
60  that  it  loses  all  seuse  of  holy  and 
earnest  things,  and  all  pleasure  therein, 
and  becomes  stupid  and  indifferent  to 
everything  divine  and  noble.  A 
prince  who  allows  himself  to  be  ad- 
vised and  led  by  women  in  the  affairs 
of  his  government,  instead  of  guiding 
himself  by  the  unchangeable  law  of 
God,  destroys  the  prosperity  of  him- 
self and  his  kingdom.  Confidential 
intercourse  and  intimacy  with  those 
who  know  nothing  of  the  living  God 
and  of  His  word,  but  rather  resist 
Him — ^those  who  well  know  how  to 
flatter — this  is  a  most  perilous  posi- 
tion for  a  God-fearing  heart  (Eccles. 
vii.  27). — Lange. 

Verse  1 .  Wasted  love. — 1 .  Love  is 
wasted  when  it  is  placed  on  an  un- 


worthy object.     2.  When  it   is  not 

properly  concentrated — a  multiplicity 
of  interests  weaken  its  power,  as  the 
many-pointed  rock  breaks  up  the  force 
of  the  wave.  3.  When  it  is  sinful  in 
its  tendency.  4.  When  it  weans  the 
heart  from  God.  5.  Is  supremely 
ridiculous  and  offensive  in  old  age. 

Verse  3.  Woman  was  first  given 
to  man  for  a  comforter,  and  not  for  a 
counsellor,  much  less  for  a  controller 
and  director ;  and,  therefore,  in  the 
first  sentence  against  men  this  cause 
is  expressed — **  Because  thou  obeyedst 
the  voice  of  thy  wife." 

Verse  4.  What  sight  on  earth  more 
sad  than  the  disgraceful  fall  of  an  old 
man  whose  youth  had  been  devout 
and  promising  and  his  manhood  noble  ? 
WeU  did  Solon,  the  Athenian,  insist 
that  no  man  should  be  counted  blessed 
until  he  had  nobly  ended  a  happy, 
noble  life. 

—  Solomon  was  the  less  to  be  ex- 
cused because  his  soul  had  had  so  long 
communion  with  God  and  experience 
of  His  goodness ;  as  also  because  his 
body  was  declining,  so  that  his  lust 
was  the  more  monstrous,  like  as  it  is 
to  behold  green  apples  on  a  tree  in 
winter.  Augustine  inveighed  ag^nst 
those,  and  worthily,  who  consecrate 
the  flower  of  their  youth  to  the  devil, 
and  reserve  for  God  the  dregs  of  their 
old  age.  Solomon  offended  on  the 
contrary  part.  Let  every  man  look  to 
what  Lord  he  dedicateth  both  his 
youth  and  his  age ;  for  it  sometimes 
falleth  out  that  Satan  preyeth  upon 
those  when  old,  whom  he  could  not 
prevail  with  when  young ;  and  it  is 
not  for  nothing  that  the  heathen  sages 
say  that  old  age  is  to  be  feared  as  that 
which  Cometh  not  alone,  but  is  itself 
a  disease,  and  bringeth  with  it  not  a 
few  diseases  both  of  body  and  mind. — 
Trapp. 

—  Even  as  in  youth  exuberance  of 
life  and  strength  opens  the  door  to 
temptation,  so  likewise  does  the  weak- 
ness of  old  age;  but  an  old  grey- 
haired  sinner  is  much  more  abominable 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  than  a  youth. 
The  sole  condition  under  which,  amid 

176 


OflAP.  XI. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


his  natural  weakness,  an  old  man  can 
retain  his  spiritual  strength  and  guard 
his  honour,  is  this — that  his  heart  is 
purely  fixed  on  God.  This  condition 
failing,  let  a  man's  whole  life  he  in- 
fluenced hy  the  opinions  of  others — 
influenced  by  such  opinions  without 
sharing  them,  yet  still  without  com- 
bating them,  then  complete  wanton- 
ness will  take  possession  of  his  old  age. 
— Lange. 

—  The  ways  of  youth  are  steep  and 
slippery,  wherein  as  it  is  easy  to  fall, 
so  it  is  commonly  relieved  with  pity ; 
but  the  wanton  inordinations  of  age 
are  not  more  unseasonable  than  odious. 
Yet,  behold,  Solomon's  younger  years 
were  studious  and  innocent :  his  over- 
hasted   age  was  licentious  and    mis- 
governed.    If  any  age  can  secure  us 
from  the  danger  of  a  spiritual  fall,  it 
is  our  last;  and  if  any  man's  old  age 
might  secure  him,  it  was  Solomon's, 
the  beloved  of  God,  the  oracle,  the 
miracle  of  wisdom.     The  blossoms  of 
80    hopeful   a    Spring    should    have 
yielded  a  goodly  and  pleasant  fruit  in 
the   Autumn   of    age.      Yet,    behold 
even  Solomon's  old  age  vicious.  There 
is  no  time   wherein  we  can  be    safe 
while  we  carry  this  body  of  sin  about 
us.     Youth  is  impetuous,  mid-age  is 
stubborn,  old  age  weak,  all  dangerous. 
Say    not    now — **  The    fury    of    my 
youthful  flash  is  over,  I  shall  hence- 
forth find  my  heart  calm  and  impreg- 
nable," while  thou  seest  old  Solomon 
doating    upon    his   concubines,    yea, 
upon  their  idolatry. — Bp.  Hall. 

—  The  fall  of  an  old  tree,  or  of 
some  noble  old  ruin,  is  beheld  with 
some  regret,  but  it  occasions  no  rend- 
ing of  heart.  It  was  their  doom. 
Age  ripened  them  but  for  their  fall ; 
and  we  wondered  more  that  they  stood 
so  long,  than  that  they  fell  so  soon. 
But  man  is  expected  to  ripen  in  moral 
and  religious  strength — to  harden  into 
rock-like  fixedness  as  his  age  increases. 
He  whom  we  have  looked  up  to  so 
long,  he  whose  words  were  wise  as 
oracles,  and  from  whose  lips  we  had  so 
long  gathered  wisdom,  he  who  had 
borne  noble  testimonies  for  the  truth, 
he  who  had  laboured  for  the  glory  of 
God,  who  had  withstood  many  storms 
176 


of  human  passion  and  many  tempta- 
tions of  human  glory,  and  in  whose 
capacious  mind  are  garnered  up  the 
fruits  of  a  life's  knowledge  and  ex- 
perience— for  such  a  man  to  fall  from 
his  high  place,  fills  the  most  firm  of 
heart  with  dread,  and  makes  the 
moral  universe  tremble.  It  is  alto- 
gether terrible.  It  is  a  calamity  to 
mankind ;  it  is  more  than  that ;  it  is 
a  shame,  a  wrong,  and  a  dishonour. 
The  righteous  hide  their  heads;  and 
the  perverse  exult ; — hell  laughs. — 
Kitto. 

^ —  Old  age.  1.  Is  encumbered 
with  many  frailties.  2.  Has  its 
peculiar  temptations.  3.  Is  not 
exempt  from  the  possibility  of  great 
crimes.  4.  Is  often  a  pitiable  contrast 
to  the  promise  and  opportunity  of 
youth.  5.  Should  be  rich  in  valuable 
experiences.  6.  Is  less  excusable  ixi 
yielding  to  the  force  of  evil  passions. 

—  *' His  heart  was  not  perfect  with 
theLord."  The  heart  the  central 
force  of  the  religious  life.  1.  The 
reason  may  be  convinced  when  the  heart 
is  untouched.  2.  The  truth  that  moves 
us  most  is  that  which  we  feel.  3. 
The  highest  feeling  is  the  highest 
reason.  4.  If  the  heart  is  wrong  to- 
wards God,  all  is  wrong.  5.  He  who 
is  unfaithful  towards  God,  i  s  not  to  be 
trusted  by  his  fellow-men.  6.  The 
outer  evidence  of  a  perfect  heart  is  a 
loving,  obedient  life. 

"Verses  5-8.  Although  Solomon  did 
not  himself  practise  idolatry,  he  per- 
mitted and  encouraged  it  in  others; 
but  the  receiver  is  as  bad  as  the  thief. 
That  is  the  curse  resting  upon  sin,  that 
the  very  means  by  which  men  seek  to 
raise  themselves  in  the  world's  estima- 
tion become  the  very  means  for  their 
destruction.  Ey  perverted  compliance 
and  long  toleration  Solomon  brought 
ruin  and  destruction  upon  himself  and 
his  people  for  centuries  to  come.  All 
indulgence  which  is  grounded  upon 
indiff^erence  to  truth,  or  founded  upon 
lukewarmness,  is  not  virtue,  but  a 
heavy  sin  before  God,  how  much  so- 
ever it  may  resemble  freedom  and 
enlightenment.  In  a  well-ordered 
church  and  state  establishment,  neither 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


CHAP.  xr. 


bigotry  nor  superstition  should  have 
equal  rights  with  faith  and  truth. 
Where  the  gate  is  open  to  them,  or 
where  they  are  patrouized  instead  of 
being  resisted,  then  both  people  and 
kingdom  are  going  to  meet  their  ruin. 
— Lancje. 

—  The  evil  results  of  an  un- 
holy alliance.  I.  Idolatry  was 
allowed.  2.  It  became  the  fashion. 
3.  It  divided  the  king's  heart.  4.  He 
patronized  it.  5.  State  provision  was 
made  for  it.  We  learn  from  this  his- 
tory— 1.  Jehovah  is  a  jealous  God,  and 
will  tolerate  no  rivals.  2.  The  Divine 
commands  are  imperial,  and  must  take 
precedence  of  all  human  laws.  3.  The 
impossibility  of  harmonizing  Christi- 
anity and  heathenism.  In  ancient 
times  this  led  to  the  worship  of  Eaalim 
and  other  idols-deities,  with  their  cruel 
orgies  and  barbarous  rites.  A  later 
result  has  been  the  birth  of  Popery, 
which  inculcates  image  cultus  in  de- 
fiance of  the  Divine  commands,  turns 
the  simple  spiritual  worship  of  God 
into  an  elaborate  heathenish  ritual, 
proclaims  the  Pope  infallible,  and 
exalts  the  Yirgin  Mary  to  a  higher 
dignity  than  the  Saviour  Himself. 
Religion  demands  decision,  and  admits 
of  no  compromise. 

Verses  7,  8.  He  that  built  a  Temple 
to  the  living  God,  for  himself  and 
Israel,  in  Zion,  built  a  Temple  to 
Chemosh  in  the  Mount  of  Scandal,  for 
his  mistresses  of  Moab,  in  the  very  face 
of  God's  house.  No  hill  about  Jeru- 
salem was  free  from  a  chapel  of  devils. 
Each  of  his  dames  had  their  puppets, 
their  altars,  their  incense  B'jcause 
Solomon  feeds  them  in  their  super- 
stition, he  draws  the  sin  home  to  him- 
self, and  is  branded  for  what  he  should 


have  forbidden.  Even  our  very  per- 
mission appropriates  crimes  to  us. 
We  need  no  more  guiltiness  of  any  sin 
than  our  willing  toleration.  Who  can 
but  yearn  and  fear  to  see  the  woful 
wreck  of  so  rich  and  goodly  a  vessel  ? 
0  Solomon!  wert  thou  not  he  whose 
younger  years  God  honoured  with  a 
message  and  style  of  love;  to  whom 
God  twice  appeared,  and  in  a  gracious 
vision  renewed  the  covenant  of  his 
favour ;  whom  he  singled  out  from  all 
the  generation  of  men  to  be  the  founder 
of  that  glorious  temple  which  was  no 
less  clearly  the  type  of  heaven,  than 
thou  wert  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  ever 
living  God  ?  Wert  not  thou  that  d(>op 
sea  of  wisdom,  which  God  oi  d:tined  to 
send  forth  rivers  and  fountains  of  all 
divine  and  human  knowledge  to  all 
nations  ?  Wert  not  thou  one  of  those 
select  secretaries,  whose  hand  it  pleased 
the  Almighty  to  employ  in  three  pieces 
of  the  Divine  monuments  of  Sacred 
Scriptures  ?  Which  of  us  dares  ever 
hope  to  aspire  unto  thy  graces?  Which 
of  us  can  promise  to  secure  ourselves 
from  thy  ruins  ?  We  fall,  0  God,  we 
fall  to  the  lowest  hell,  if  thou  prevent  us 
not,  if  thou  sustain  us  not ! — Bp.  Hall, 

—  So  fallen  I  so  lost  I  the  light  withdrawn 

Which  once  he  wore  I 
The  glory  from  his  gray  hairs  gone 

For  evermore  1 
Of  all  we  loved  and  honoured,  nought 

Save  power  remains ; 
A  fallen  angel's  pride  of  thought, 

Still  strong  in  chains. 
All  else  is  gone  ;  from  these  great  eyes 

The  soul  has  fled  : 
When  faith  is  lost,  and  honour  dies, 

The  man  is  dead. 
Then  pay  the  reverence  of  old  days 

To  his  dead  fame ; 
Walk  backward  with  averted  gaze, 

And  hide  the  shame. —  Whittier, 


E0UILETIC8  OF  VERSES  ^-IZ. 
Tkb  Divinf  Anger  and  Human  Disobedience. 

I.  That  the  Divine  angler  is  a  fact.  *'  And  the  Lord  was  angry  with  Solo- 
mon.'' It  is  the  fashion  with  many  to  expatiate  on  the  Divine  benevolence  while 
they  ignore  the  Divine  anger.  But  the  fact  of  that  anger  is  one  of  the  plainest 
and  most  awful  revelations  of  the  Bible  (Isa.  xiii.  13  ;  Jno.  iii.  36  ;  llom.  i.  18). 
Divine  anger  is  no  sudden  burst  of  passion,  no  low  and  hateful  motion  of 

V  177 


CHIP.  XI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


revenge,  as  human  anger  often  is,  and  with  which  too  many  are  prone  to 
associate  their  idea  of  the  Divine  anger.  It  is  rather  the  deep,  eternal 
antagonism  of  holiness  to  sin,  of  truth  to  error,  of  right  to  wrong.  However 
much  Grod  may  love  the  human  soul  as  such,  if  that  soul  cleaves  unto  sin,  it 
must  of  necessity  place  itself  along  with  the  sin  in  enmity  towards  God,  and  so 
be  exposed  to  the  Divine  anger.  It  requires  a  sound  judgment  and  a  heart  of 
tenderest  love  to  speak  with  profit  on  the  subject  of  the  Divine  anger. 

II.  That  the  Divine  anger  is  excited  by  human  disobedience.  "  Because 
his  heart  was  turned  from  the  Lord  "  (verse  9).  1.  Uisohedience  is  aggravated 
when  committed  against  definite  commands,  "And  had  commanded  him  concerning 
this  thing"  (verse  10;  comp.  vi.  12;  ix.  6).  AVhen  law  is  violated  ignorantly  it 
is  still  a  sin,  but  is  not  so  aggravated  as  when  committed  with  the  full  knowledge 
of  the  prohibition.  Princes  who  have  dominion  over  others  are  apt  to  forget 
the  Divine  dominion  over  them,  and  while  they  exact  obedience  from  their  own 
subjects,  to  neglect  on  their  part  to  render  obedience  to  the  Great  E-uler  of  all. 
The  mariner  who  disregards  the  lights  and  landmarks  which  define  the  path  of 
safety  is  the  more  reprehensible  when  he  wrecks  his  vessel  among  the 
treacherous  shoals.  2.  Disobedience  is  aggravated  when  committed  notwithstandi7ig 
repeated  Divine  manifestations.  The  Lord  "  appeared  unto  him  twice"  (verse  9; 
comp.  iii.  5  ;  ix.  1,  2).  Good  turns  aggravate  unkindnesses.  It  is  a  great 
privilege  to  receive  the  law  through  the  lips  of  God's  ministers,  but  a  greater 
still  to  hear  it  from  the  lips  of  God  Himself.  Solomon  was  singularly  favoured 
with  Divine  blessings.  His  recalcitrance  excited  the  greater  displeasure,  and 
merited  the  greater  punishment.  The  Lord  does  not  trifle  with  men  in  the 
declarations  of  His  word,  and  He  will  not  eventually  allow  men  to  trifle  with 
Him. 

III.  That  the  Divine  anger  will  manifest  itself  in  some  form  of  punish- 
ment (verse  11).  The  threat  to  divide  the  kingdom  was  carried  out :  the  subse- 
quent repentance  and  restoration  of  Solomon  did  not  prevent  it.  There  are  some 
things  in  which  repentance  comes  too  late,  llepentance  does  not  arrest  the 
course  of  physical  law.  It  must  have  been  a  bitter  experience  to  Solomon  to 
know  that  the  magnificent  empire  it  had  been  his  life-work  to  build  up  must 
ere  long  be  rent  asunder  and  crumble  into  ruins.  "  Solomon  had  let  go  the 
sincere  service  of  God  by  sharing  himself  betwixt  Him  and  his  idols ;  his 
servant  therefore  shall  share  the  kingdon  with  his  son,  and  bear  away  the  better 
half  from  him."  The  Divine  anger  is  not  a  theological  scare- crow  set  up  to 
frighten  timid  souls,  but  a  terrible  reality,  as  the  evil-doer  will  by-and-by 
discover  to  his  dismay.     Homer  has  given  expression  to  a  similar  idea : — 

Fast  by  the  threshold  of  Jove's  court  are  placed 
Two  casks,  one  stored  with  evil,  one  with  good. 

To  whom  He  gives  unmixed 
The  bitter  cup,  He  makes  that  man  a  curse, 
His  name  becomes  a  byword  of  reproach, 
His  strength  is  hunger-bitten,  and  he  walks 
The  blessed  earth  unblest,  go  where  he  may. 

lY.  That  the  Divine  anger  is  ever  tempered  with  mercy.  1 .  Mercy  in 
delaying  punishment,  "Notwithstanding  in  thy  day  I  will  not  do  it"  (verse 
12).  Compare  a  similar  mitigation  of  punishment  promised  to  Josiah  (2  Kings 
xxii.  20).  Delay  affords  space  for  repentance.  If  the  opportunity  it  presents  is 
despised,  the  punishment  will  be  the  heavier,  and  the  sufferer  be  without  excuse. 
2.  Mercy  in  moderating  the  severity  of  punishment.  *'  Howbeit  I  will  not  rend 
away  all  the  kingdom,  but  will  give  one  tribe  to  thy  son"  (verse  13).  Two 
tribes  were  really  retained.  The  tribe  of  Benjamin  seems  to  have  been 
178 


ILUMlLtTlC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


CHAP.    XI. 


absorbed  into  the  tribe  of  Judah,  to  which  David  belonged  (xii.  21).  This 
Becond  mitigation  of  the  sentence  reveals  the  tender  compassion  of  God,  and  His 
unwillingness  to  punish.  Solomon  did  not  at  once  turn  from  God  :  his  defec- 
tion was  gradual ;  and  Jehovah  did  not  at  once  wrest  the  kingdom  from  him. 
This  additional  proof  of  the  Divine  mercy  must  have  greatly  affected  Solomon ; 
and  there  is  room  to  hope  that  it  led  him  to  repent  and  retrace  his  wanderings. 
Kindness  succeeds  where  a  stern  severity  fails.  3.  Mercy  shown  on  account  of 
ulterior  Divine  purposes.  '*  For  David  my  servant's  sake,  and  for  Jerusalem's 
sake  which  I  have  chosen"  (verse  13).  The  line  of  the  Messiah  must  be 
preserved.  The  prevailing  lion  must  come  out  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  :  not  only 
the  tribe  must  be  preserved,  but  the  regal  line  and  the  regal  right.  All  this 
must  be  done  for  the  true  David's  sake ;  and  this  was  undoubtedly,  observes 
Dr.  A.  Clarke,  what  God  had  in  view  by  thus  miraculously  preserving  the 
tribe  of  Judah  and  the  royal  line  in  the  midst  of  so  general  a  defection.  As 
David  was  a  type  of  the  Messiah,  so  was  Jerusalem  a  type  of  the  true  church : 
therefore  the  old  Jerusalem  must  be  preserved  in  the  hands  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  till  the  true  David  should  establish  the  new  Jerusalem  in  the  same  land 
and  in  the  same  city.  And  what  a  series  of  providences  did  it  require  to  do  all 
these  things !  The  prosperous  career  of  Solomon  was  only  part  of  a  great 
scheme  for  the  benefit  of  the  entire  race;  and  the  failure  of  even  so  great  a  man 
as  Solomon  must  not  be  allowed  to  frustrate  the  Divine  intention. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  Man  cannot  sin  with  impunity.  2.  The  Divine  anger  is  righteous, 
S.  The  manifestation  of  the  Divine  anger  is  terrible,  4.  God  has  more  delight  in 
showing  mercy  than  in  punishing.  5.  Ms  who  most  delights  in  mercy  most 
resembles  God, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Yerse  9.  Had  not  this  man's  delin- 
quency been  strongly  marked  by  the 
Di\ine  disapprobation,  it  would  have 
had  a  fatal  effect  upon  the  morals  of 
mankind.  Vice  is  vice,  no  matter  who 
commits  it.  And  God  is  as  much  dis- 
pleased with  sin  in  Solomon  as  He 
can  be  with  it  in  the  most  profligate, 
uneducated  wretch.  And,  although 
God  sees  the  same  sin  in  precisely 
the  same  degree  of  moral  turpi- 
tude as  to  the  act  itself,  yet  there 
may  be  circumstances  which  greatly 
aggravate  the  offence,  and  subject  the 
offender  to  greater  punishment.  Solo- 
mon was  wise ;  he  knew  better :  his 
understanding  showed  him  the  vanity 
as  well  as  the  wickedness  of  idolatry. 
God  had  appeared  unto  him  twice. 
The  promises  of  God  had  been  fulfilled 
to  him  in  a  most  remarkable  manner. 
All  these  were  aggravations  of  Solo- 
mon's crimes,  as  to  their  demerit;  for  the 
Fame  crime  has,  in  every  case,  the  same 
degree  of  moral  turpitude  in  the  sight 
of  God  ;  but  circumstances  may  so  ag- 
gravate as  to  require  the  offender  to 


be  more  grievously  punished :  so  the 
punishment  may  be  legally  increased 
where  the  crime  is  the  same.  Solo- 
mon deserved  more  punishment  for  his 
worship  of  Ashtoreth  than  any  of  the 
Sidonians  did,  though  they  performed 
precisely  the  same  acts.  The  Sidonians 
had  never  known  the  true  God :  Solo- 
mon had  been  fully  acquainted  with 
Him. — A,  Clarke, 

Verses  9-11.  The  sin  of  idolatry. 

1.  Is  a  tendency  of  fallen  humanity. 

2.  Is  an  insult  to  God.  3.  Is  a  viola- 
tion of  the  most  specific  prohibitions. 
4.  Is  the  cause  of  national  disgrace 
and  ruin. 

Verses  9-13.  The  punishments  that 
fell  upon  Solomon  show  us — I.  The 
holiness  and  righteousness  of  God 
(Ps.  cxlv.  17  ;  Jer.  xvii.  10  ;  Luke  xii. 
47).  II.  His  faithfulness  and  mercy 
(verses  12,  13).  He  knows  how  to 
punish  so  that  His  gracious  promises 
remain  firm  (2  Tim.  ii.  13  ;  E,om.  iii. 
3).     God  makes   known  to   us  His 

179 


cirAt».xl.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTABT :  KINGS. 


judgments  fhrough  His  "Word,  so  that  Solomon   shall  snffer  his  faithfulness 

we  may  have  time  to  repent  and  to  to  fail  towards  his  God,  God  will  not 

turn  unto  Him  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  2).     If  requite  him   with  the  failinpj  of  his 

judgment  fell  specially  on  Solomon,  faithfulness  to  Solomon:  if  Solomon 

notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  Lord  break   his   covenant  with  God,    God 

appeared  unto  him  twice  in  a  dream,  will  not  break  His  covenant  with  the 

and   he   was  honoured    with   distin-  father   of  Solomon,   with  the  son  of 

guished  grace,  what  judgment  must  David.     He  shall  smart ;  he  shall  not 

we   expect,    to    whom  He    has    ap-  perish.     0  gracious  word  of  the  God 

peared  tenderly  in  Christ  Jesus  (1  Cor.  of  all  mercies,  able  to  give  strength  to 

iv  30;  Heb.  ii.  3;  x.  29).     God  knows  the  languishing,  comfort  to  the  des- 

how,  in  the  proper  time,  to  belittle  pairing,  to  the  dying,  life !     Whatso- 

him  who  abandons  and   forsakes  the  ever  we  are,  thou  wilt  be   still  thy- 

Lord  and  His  cause  in  order  to  become  self,  0  Holy  one  of  Israel,  true  to  thy 

great  and  distinguished  in  the  eyes  of  covenant.     The  sins  of  thy  chosen  can 

the  world  (Dan.  iv.  34). — Lange,  neither    frustrate    thy    counsel,    nor 

outstrip  thy  mercies. — Bp.  Hall, 
Yerses  12,  13.  In  the  midst  of  the 
horrorof  this  spectacle,  able  to  affright  Yerse    13.    One  tribe   remains    to 

all  the   sons    of    men,    behold  some  him — ^that  is,  of  the  Divine  grace  only 

glimpse  of  comfort.     Was  it  of  Solo-  a  single  part  of  the  sovereignty  over 

mon    that    David     his    father    pro-  all  Israel  is  left  to  him.     This  view 

phesied  —  "Though  he  fall  he  shall  is  confirmed  by  the  observation  that 

not  be  utterly  cast  down,  for  the  Lord  even  the  standing  distribution  in  the 

upholdeth  him  with   His  hand"?     If  Old  Testament  of  Israel  into  twelve 

sensible  grace,  yet  final  mercy,  was  tribes  has  its  most  proper  ground,  not 

not  taken  from  that  beloved  of  God.  in  the  fact   that   Jacob   had   exactly 

In  the  hardest  of  this  winter,  the  sap  twelve  sons,  as  after  the  recognition 

was  gone  down  to  the  root,  though  it  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  as  separate 

showed  not  in  the  branches.     Even  tribes,   the    people    properly  formed 

while   Solomon   removed,   that  word  thirteen  tribes ;  but  is  to  be  sought 

stood  fast:  "He  shall  be  my  son,  and  in  the  import  which  this  number  had 

I  will  be  his  father."     He  that  fore-  acquired  in  the  remotest  antiquity  by 

saw  his  sin,    threatened   and  limited  the  observation  of  the  twelve  months 

his  correction  (Psa.    Ixxxix.  31-33).  of  the  year,  and  the  twelve  signs  of 

Behold,  the  favour  of  God  doth  not  de-  the  zodiac. — Keih 
pend  upon  Solomon's  obedience.     If 


B0MILETIC8  OF  VEBSES  14-40. 
The  Agents  op  Divine  Retbibutioit. 

I.  Are  secretly  preparing^  when  least  suspected.  Hadad  and  Rezon  on 
the  frontier,  and  Jeroboam  under  the  shadow  of  the  throne,  were  plotting 
mischief  for  the  empire.  In  a  time  of  unexampled  peace  and  security,  the 
seeds  of  rebellion  were  being  sown.  Things  are  not  always  what  they 
seem.  The  loveliest  flower  may  hide  within  its  cup  the  deadliest  poison. 
The  mountain  draped  with  richest  verdure,  and  musical  with  forest  songs, 
may  simmer  with  internal  fires  which  shall  burst  their  prison,  and  spread 
devastation  and  woe  in  their  burning  pathway.  The  most  promismg  pro- 
ductions of  earth  may  be  blasted  in  a  single  night.  Eut  the  agents  of 
destruction  are  not  always  in  haste :  they  can  afford  to  wait.  Not  at  once 
does  Divine  retribution  overtake  the  offender;  but  after  much  long-suffering 
and  many  opportunities  for  repentance. 
180 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  cnAP.  xi. 


II.  Often  accomplish  their  mission  by  gratifying  personal  revenge 
and  ambition  (verses  14-17,  25,  26).  The  Edomite  prince,  who  escaped 
when  a  child,  the  desolating  slaughter  of  David  (2  Sara,  viii.),  dreamed  of 
recovering  the  lost  throne  of  his  father.  He  dreamed  of  vengeance  for  the 
blood  of  his  countrymen  ;  aad  ''  dreams  grow  realities  to  earnest  men."  Rezon 
was  influenced  in  all  his  plottings  against  Israel  by  a  spirit  of  bitter  and 
ungovernable  hatred  (verse  25),  and  lost  no  opportunity  of  inflicting  injury  on 
Solomon.  Jeroboam,  endowed  with  unquestioned  ability,  and  evidently 
conscious  of  it,  was  eagerly  ambitious  of  place  and  power.  While  these  men 
pursued  their  several  selfish  ends,  Jehovah  used  them  as  agents  for  the 
punishing  of  wrong-doing.  History  is  full  of  examples  of  this  Divine  pro- 
cedure. The  Lord  can  make  the  wrath  of  men  His  servant,  and  to  minister 
to  His  praise  (Psalm  Ixxvi.  10).  His  hand  is  on  all  the  springs  of  being. 
All  the  forces  of  the  universe  are  His  obedient  instruments  in  scattering  blessings, 
or  in  accomplishing  the  sterner  missions  of  justice. 

III.  Embitter  the  close  of  a  career  which  had  a  brilliant  and  promising 
beginning.  How  few  can  foresee  the  contrast  which  the  end  of  life  will  present 
wiih  its  opening!  How  sad,  how  heart-rending  would  be  the  picture  if  we 
could  see,  as  God  sees,  the  horrid  process  by  which  the  innocence  of  youth 
gives  place  to  the  hardened  effrontery  and  guilt  of  old  age!  "Nothing 
but  love  and  peace  sounded  in  the  name  of  Solomon  ;  nothing  else  was  found 
in  his  reign  while  he  held  in  good  terms  with  his  God ;  but  when  once  he 
fell  foul  with  his  Maker,  all  things  began  to  be  troubled.  There  are  whips  laid 
up  against  the  time  of  Solomon's  foreseen  offence  which  are  now  brought  forth 
for  his  correction.  God  would  have  us  make  account  that  our  peace  ends  with 
our  innocence.  The  same  sin  that  sets  debate  betwixt  God  and  us,  arms  the 
creatures  against  us.  It  were  a  pity  we  should  be  at  any  quiet,  while  we  are 
fallen  out  with  the  God  of  peace."  Solomon's  reign  of  peace  closes  amid  the 
threatenings  of  war,  the  firmness  of  his  government  is  supplanted  by  the 
tremors  of  rebellion,  his  enormous  supplies  are  failing  him,  his  greatness 
is  dwarfed  to  littleness,  his  wisdom  is  transformed  into  folly.  Many  a  bitter 
pang  smote  the  monarch's  heart  as  he  beheld  the  wreck  and  failure  of  his  life. 
The  grave  holds  many  a  human  heart  that  has  been  wounded  and  broken  by 
disappointed  hopes,  baffled  endeavours,  or  dethroned  pride. 

rV.  Are  limited  and  restrained  by  the  Divine  will  (verses  34,  39).  The 
Power  which  has  directed  the  migrations  and  limited  the  wars  of  nations,  fixed 
the  boundaries~of  the  ocean,  and  adjusted  the  force  of  gravitation,  also  interferes 
in  moderating  and  defining  the  degree  of  punishment  for  sin.  **  I  will  for  this 
afflict  the  seed  of  David  ;  hut  not  for  ever^^  (verse  39).  Here  breaks  in  another 
ray  of  promise  to  the  House  of  David,  whose  sons,  though  chastened  and  smitten 
with  the  rod  of  men  (2  Sam.  vii.  14),  were  to  be  the  human  line  of  fathers  to 
that  Great  Son  who  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  whose 
kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end.  The  very  anger  of  God  is  more  construc- 
tive than  destructive.  The  worst  enemies  can  do  the  church  no  damage 
beyond  what  the  will  of  God  permits. 

V.  Cannot  be  defeated  in  their  purpose  by  hnman  malice  (verse  40). 
**  Solomon  thought  therefore  to  kill  Jeroboam."  Murder  has  ever  been  the 
ghastly  policy  of  the  tyrant,  the  idolized  weapon  of  the  coward,  the  sport  of 
the  brutal,  the  sanguinary  carnival  of  monsters.  Solomon's  relations  to 
Jeroboam  were  strikingly  similar  to  those  of  Saul  to  David.  Solomon, 
like  Saul,  drew  down  upon  himself  by  disobedience  the  anger  of  heaven; 
and  to  him,  as  to  Saul,  the  words  of  the  Lord  announced  judgments  that 
darkened  all  his  future.    Like  Saul,  he  knew  and  sought  to  kiU  his  rivaL 

181 


OHAP.  XI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


The  beginning  of  his  reign,  Kke  that  of  SauPs,  was  popular  and  auspicious,  but 
its  end  was  sad  and  dark.  The  rage  of  man  is  impotent  to  frustrate  the  ultimate 
designs  of  God. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  prosperous  have  always  many  enemies.  2.  The  fall  of  a 
great  man  involves  many  in  his  ruin.  3.  The  instruments  hy  which  a  man  climbs 
to  greatness  willj  when  abused,  be  his  most  inveterate  adversaries.  4.  Gilded  sins 
entail  dismal  retributions. 


OEEM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Verse  14.  The  certainty  of  punish- 
ment for  sin.  1.  Is  here  directly  at- 
tributed to  Jehovah.  2.  May  be 
eff(  cted  by  human  agencies.  3.  Is  a 
w  urning  to  evil  doers.  4.  Vindicates 
the  righteousness  of  the  Divine  law. 

—  God  is  said  to  have  stirred  up 
Solomon's  adversaries,  not  by  infusing 
this  malice  into  them,  but  as  using  it 
to  punish  his  wickedness  by  lliem, 
even  as  a  workman  worketh  by  tools 
that  another  made,  and  by  crooked 
tools  oft  maketh  straight  and  smooth 
work . — Trapp . 

Verses  14-40.  Solomon's  enemies. 
1.  They  are  roused  against  him  by 
God,  so  that  he  may  know  and  con- 
fess what  heart-suffering  it  brings  to 
forsake  the  fear  of  the  Lord  his  God 
(Jer.  ii.  19).  So  marvellously  does 
God  bring  it  about,  that  he  who  will 
not  fear  Him  must  needs  fear  his  fel- 
low-men. Once  the  man  of  rest  and 
the  prince  of  peace,  now  he  is  pressed 
sore  by  enemies  from  the  north,  from 
the  south,  and  from  his  midst.  They 
are  the  scourges  with  which  the  Lord 
chastises  him.  When  foes  and  oppo- 
nents rise  against  thee  and  cause  thee 
care  and  anguish,  then  think,  the 
Lord  has  summoned  them  on  account 
cf  thy  sins  and  unfaithfulness.  The 
hostility  of  man  is  a  sermon  of  repent- 
ance from  thy  God  to  thee.  2.  They 
were  in  God's  hands,  and  could  do  not 
more  than  He  permits.  They  re- 
belled, but  they  were  poweiless  to 
take  from  Solomon  the  throne  and 
kingdom  during  his  lifetime.  The 
Lord  commands  our  foes,  So  far  shalt 
thou  go,  and  no  further. —  Cramer. 

Verses  14-26.  The  power  of  the 
182 


little  to  annoy  the  great.    Solomon's 

last  years  were  not  suffered  to  pass 
without  heavy  troubles,  which  must 
have  brought  down  his  kingly  pride 
very  low.  Enemies,  one  after  another, 
appeared,  who  had  in  his  early  years 
been  kept  down  by  the  memory  of 
David's  victories,  and  by  the  show  of 
substantial  strength  which  his  own 
government  presented.  At  length, 
however,  they  ventured  to  try  its 
texture,  and  finding  it  more  vulnerable 
than  even  they  had  suspected,  that 
there  was  nothing  very  terrible  to 
resolute  men  in  its  showy  greatness ; 
and  having  found  that  the  king  had 
really  no  power  to  make  any  effectual 
opposition  to  their  assaults,  far  less  to 
put  them  down,  they  were  emboldened 
to  take  further  measures,  until  some 
established  their  independence,  while 
others  offered  the  passive  resistance  of 
withholding  their  tributes — so  that 
his  power  became  shorn  at  the  borders, 
and  eventually  shaken  at  home,  where 
the  discontinuance  of  many  outer  sup- 
plies of  revenue,  and  probably  the 
interruption  of  his  various  lines  of 
trade,  no  longer  in  his  undisputed 
possession,  urged  him,  not  to  economy 
and  retrenchment,  but  to  make  good 
the  deficiency  by  the  taxation  of  his 
native  subjects. — Kitto. 

—  Formerly,  all  kings  did  homage 
to  Solomon,  and  brought  him  gifts, 
and  journeyed  from  all  countries  to 
see  and  hear  him ;  his  power  was  as 
great  as  his  kingdom.  But  now  his 
power  and  might  are  abased  before 
those  who  hitherto  ranked  far  below 
him,  whom  he  had  regarded  as  the 
least  of  his  slaves  and  vassals.  Humili- 
ation coming  through  weak  and  infe- 
rior means  is  much  more  bitter  than 


nOMILETIC  COM^TENTARY :  KIKG8. 


OHAP.  XI. 


tbe  Bame  humiliation  tlirongh  etrorg 
and  powerful  means.  The  latter  we 
can  ascribe  to  man,  but  in  the  fonner 
we  must  recognize  the  will  and  power 
of  God. — Gerhardt. 

Verses  14-22.  The  fate  of  Hadad  is 
recounted  to  us  not  so  much  on  his  own 
account  as  on  our  own,  in  order  that 
we  may  learn  to  regard  the  ways  of 
God  with  man,  and  order  our  ways  by 
Him  who  is  ever  mercy  and  wisdom 
(Ps.  XXV.  10).  If  God  brought  back 
the  heathen  Hadad  by  mysterious  v  ays 
to  his  native  land,  how  much  more 
will  he  lead  those  who  keep  his  cove- 
nant and  testimony  to  the  true  native 
land,  and  to  the  eternal  rest,  how  dark 
and  inscrutable  soever  may  be  the  ways 
by  which  He  leads  them. — Lange, 

Verses  21,  22.  The  love  of  father- 
land. I.  Is  deeply  implanted  in 
humanity.  2.  Creates  irrepressible 
yearnings  in  the  heart  of  the  exile. 
3.  Becomes  intensified  under  a  sense 
of  oppression  and  wrong.  4.  Fires 
the  soul  with  bravery  in  its  defence. 
5.  Is  a  faint  image  of  the  love  we 
should  feel  for  the  heavenly  father- 
land— to  go  to  heaven  is  to  go  home 
again. 

Verse  22.  The  secresy  of  revenge. 
1 .  The  fierceness  of  revenge  is  fanned 
by  the  rehearsal  of  past  injuries.  2. 
Is  cherished  in  the  midst  of  peace  and 
plenty.  3.  Is  hidden  from  the  dearest 
friend  and  benefactor.  4.  Is  intensi- 
fied by  its  secresy. 

O  that  the  slave  had  forty  thonsand  lives ; 
One  is  too  poo-,  too  weak  for  my  revenge! 
Arise,  black  vcn  .eance,  from  thy  hollow  cell! 
Yield   up,   0  love,  thy  crown   and   hearted 

throne, 
To  tyrannous  hate !     Swell,  bosom,  with  thy 

fre  ghf, 
For  'tis  of  aspics*  tongues  I — Othello. 

Verses  23-25.  Though  vanquished 
and  cast  down,  tyranny  and  ambition 
do  not  forget.  They  think  perpetually 
of  vengeance,  and  seek  to  satisfy  it, 
now  by  rough  means,  now  by  subtle 
ones,  whenever  an  opportunity  ofi'ers. 
Therefore  warns  the  apostle  so  earn- 


estly against  those  secret  and  mighty 
motives  in  the  natural  heart  of  man 
(Eom.  xii.  19). 

Verse  26.  Solomon's  servant,  but 
unthankful  and  disloyal,  such  as  was 
Ahithophel  to  David,  Brutus  to  Caesar, 
Phocas  to  Mauritius,  Frederick  III.'s 
courtiers  and  creatures  to  him,  Biron 
to  Henry  IV.  of  France.  That  king 
had  made  him  of  a  common  soldier  a 
captain,  of  a  captain  a  knight,  of  a 
knight  Duke  of  Biron,  Marshal  of 
France,  (Jovernor  of  Burgundy,  &c. 
Yet  all  this  and  more  could  not  keep 
him  from  conspiring  the  death  of  his 
king,  queen,  and  prince,  that  the  king- 
dom might  be  transferred  to  others, 
and  the  Huguenots  rooted  out. 

Verses  26-40.  The  dang^erous  gut- 
ter of  a  crown.  1.  Infatuates  the 
ambitious.  2.  Has  allured  many  to 
their  ruin.  3.  Hides  the  misery  and 
care  of  the  unhappy  wearer.  4. 
Should  be  guarded  and  fenced  by  a 
strict  moral  obedience  to  the  law  of 
God  (verse  38). 

—  The  disruption  of  the  kingdom 
was  not  the  work  of  a  day,  but  the 
growth  of  centuries.  To  the  house  of 
Joseph — that  is,  to  Ephraira,  with  its 
adjacent  tribes  of  Benjamin  and 
Manasseh — had  belonged,  down  to  the 
time  of  David,  all  the  chief  rulers 
of  Israel :  Joshua,  the  conqueror ; 
Deborah,  the  one  prophetic,  Gideon, 
the  one  regal,  spirit  of  the  judges; 
Abimelech  and  Saul,  the  first  kings; 
Samuel,  the  restorer  of  the  state  after 
the  fall  of  Shiloh.  It  was  natural 
that,  with  such  an  inheritance  of  glory, 
Ephraim  always  chafed  under  any  rival 
supremacy.  Even  against  the  im- 
partial sway  of  its  own  Joshua,  or  of 
its  kindred  heroes,  Gideon  or  Jephthah, 
its  proud  spirit  was  always  in  revolt, 
how  much  more  when  the  blessing  of 
Joseph  seemed  to  be  altogether 
merged  in  the  blessing  of  the  rival 
and  obscure  Judah;  when  the  Lord 
*'  refused  the  tabernacle  of  Joseph,  and 
chose  not  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  but 
chose  the  tribe  of  Judah,  Mount  Zion 
which  he  had  loved  (Psalm  Ixxviii.  67). 
All  these   embers    of  dissatisfaction, 

163 


O0AP.  XL 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS, 


wliich  had  well  nigh  burst  into  a 
general  conflagration  in  the  revolt  of 
Sheba,  were  still  glov  ing ;  it  needed 
but  a  breath  to  blow  it  into  a  flame. 
There  was  one  man  who,  by  his  office 
and  character,  had  long  ago  been  indi- 
cated as  the  natural  successor  of 
Joshua.  This  was  Jeroboam.  — 
Stanley. 

—  Hitherto  the  chief  restraint  upon 
the  people  had  lain  in  the  notion  that 
the  Lord  had  guaranteed  the  throne 
over  all  Israel  to  the  house  of  David, 
and  the  most  turbulent  spirits  had  been 
kept  under  restraint  by  the  fear  of  re- 
sisting the  purposes  of  God.  The 
intimation  of  the  nomination  of  Jero- 
boam under  Divine  authority  fel]  like 
a  spark  upon  fuel.  The  important 
principle  involved  —  freedom  from  a 
restriction  which  had  become  intoler- 
able—  at  once  raised  the  agent,  in 
whose  person  it  had  been  set  forth,  to 
the  height  of  popularity  among  the 
tribes  under  the  influence  of  the  house 
of  Joseph ;  and  although  he  had  been 
warned  that  no  change  was  to  take 
place  until  after  the  death  of  Solomon, 
he  found  himself  driven,  by  the  force 
of  circumstances,  if  not  by  the  prompt- 
ings of  his  own  ambition,  into  some 
immediate  demonstrations.  The  move- 
ment was  not  attended  with  the  result 
he  expected,  and,  finding  that  he  had 
become  a  marked  man  to  Solomon,  he 
deemed  it  prudent  to  evade  the  storm 
he  had  raised  by  retiring  into  Egypt, 
and  there  awaiting  the  progress  of 
events. — Kitto. 

Verses  26-28.  God  is  wont  to  chas- 
tise the  rebellion  of  princes  against 
His  will  by  means  of  the  rebellion  of 
their  own  subjects;  as  Solomon  raised 
his  hand  against  Jehovah,  so  did  his 
servant  Jeroboam  against  him.  De- 
struction from  above  unites  with  ruin 
from  below.  Whatever  Solomon 
undertook  after  his  fall  was  depiived 
of  God's  blessing.  By  the  building 
of  Millo  he  intended  still  further  to 
strengthen  his  dominion  over  all  his 
enemies,  and  to  render  impregnable  his 
dwelling-place  ;  but  this  very  build- 
ing was  the  cause  why  his  throne 
began  to  totter,  and  why  he  lost  the 
184 


greater  part  of  his  kingdom.  Here 
applies  Psalm  cxxvii.  1.  It  was  by 
Divine  decree  that  Solomon  himself, 
without  his  own  will  or  knowledge, 
should  raise  from  the  dust  to  hi  oh 
places  the  very  man  appointed  by  God 
to  abase  him  and  to  dismember  his 
kingdom.  Conspiracies  and  rebellions 
are  chiefly  led  by  those  who  have  to 
complain  least  of  injustice  or  oppres- 
sion, but  have  been  pampered  and 
favoured  until  ambition  incites  them 
to  suppress  every  feeling  of  gratitude 
(John  xiii.  18). — Lange. 

Yerse  28.  The  man  of  industry. 
1.  Improves  the  powers  he  already 
possesses.  2.  Attracts  the  notice  of  the 
great.  3.  Is  intrusted  with  important 
undertakings.  4.  Acquires  a  position 
of  honour  and  influence. 

Verse  29.  Here  we  meet  with  an- 
other representative  of  that  interesting 
order  of  men — Divine  messengers — 
who  appear  so  often  and  so  prominently 
during  the  time  of  the  Hebrew 
monarchy.  Ahijah  seems  to  have 
been  to  Jeroboam  very  much  what 
Samuel  was  to  Saul,  and  Nathan  was 
to  David.  He,  too,  probably,  an- 
nounced to  Solomon  the  word  of  the 
Lord  as  recorded  in  verses  11-13. 
His  two  genuine  and  authentic  prophe- 
cies, each  of  great  importance  to  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  are  recorded  here, 
verses  29-39,  and  chap.  xiv.  6-16. 
Ahijah's  oracles  seem  like  a  voice  from 
that  olden,  sacred  past — the  voice  of 
the  God  of  Joshua  and  of  Eli — still 
proclaiming  blessings  on  the  obedient, 
and  penal  woes  on  them  that  forget 
His  name. —  Whedon 

Verse  30.  Here  we  find  the  first 
instance  of  that  mode  of  delivering  a 
Divine  message  which  became  so  com- 
mon in  later  times,  and  which  has  been 
called  **  acted  parable."  Generally 
the  mode  was  adopted  upon  express 
Divine  command  (see  Jer.  xiii.  1-11 ; 
xix.  1-10  ;  xxvii.  2-11  ;  Ezek.iii.  1-3  ; 
iv.  1;  V.  1).  In  this  instance  we  may 
trace  a  connection  between  the  type 
selected  and  the  words  of  the  announce- 
ment to  Solomon,  in  verses  11-13 — 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


**  I  will  surely  rend  the  kingdom  from 
thoe" — where  the  kingdom  is  likened 
unto  a  glorious  mantle  upon  the  king's 
shoulders,  as  in  1  Sam.  xv.  28. 

Verse  31.  All  the  world  must  con- 
fess, upon  beholding  the  abasement  of 
the  house  of  David  and  the  elevation 
of  Jeroboam,  that  the  Most  High  has 
power  over  the  kingdoms  of  men,  and 
bestows  them  on  whom  He  will  (Dan. 
iv.  29  ;  1  Sam.  ii.  7,  8  ;  Luke  i.  62). 

Yerse  36.  Even  in  the  midst  of 
His  just  anger  the  Lord  is  merciful, 
and  the  inconstancy  of  man  can  never 
shake  His  fidelity.  The  fulfilment  of 
2  Sam.  vii.  14,  15,  is  seen  in  Solomon's 
history.  The  house  of  David  remained 
a  light  for  ''  ever,'*  until  that  Son  of 
David  came  who  is  the  Light  of  the 
world,  which  lighteth  all  men  who 
come  into  the  world  (Jno.  i.  9 ; 
Bom.  XV.  12). — Lange. 

Yerse  39.  The  severity  and 
tenderness  of  God.  1.  God  will 
punish  the  evil-doer.  2.  God  will 
punish  with  awful  severity.  3.  God 
will  temper  justice  with  mercy.  4. 
The  severity  of  God  does  not  destroy 
His  tenderness  (Rom.  xi.  22). 

—  **  But  not  for  ever."  Eor  some 
kings  of  Judah — as  Asa,  Hezekiah, 
Josiah — grew  very  great.  But  espe- 
cially is  this  to  be  understood  of  Christ, 
in  whom  the  glory  was  restored  to 
David's  house,  such  as  never  any 
mortal  king  had. — Trapp. 

—  In  no  case — not  even  if  Jeroboam 
and  his  seed  continued  faithful,  serving 
God  as  David  had  served  Him — was 
the  seed  of  David  to  be  afflicted  for 
ever.  David  had  been  distinctly 
promised  that  God  should  never  fail 
his  seed,  whatever  their  short-comings 
(Psa.  Ixxxix.  28-37).  The  fulfilment 
of  these  promises  was  seen,  partly  in 
the  providence  which  maintained 
David's  family  in  a  royal  position  till 
Zerubbabel,  but  mainly  in  the  preser- 
vation of  his  seed  to  the  time  fixed  for 
the  coming  of  Christ  and  the  birth  of 
Christ — the  Eternal  King — from  one 
of  David's  descendants.  —  Speaker^ a 
(Jomm. 


Yerse.  40.  Fickle  humanity.  1. 
Solomon  at  one  time  promotes  Jero- 
boam to  honour,  at  another  seeks  to 
murder  him.  2.  Jeroboam  at  one 
time  is  the  faithful  and  diligent  ser- 
vant of  Solomon,  at  another  his  vexa- 
tious and  rebellious  foe.  3.  Unhappy 
subject  whose  sovereign  is  so  fickle, 
unhappy  sovereign  whose  subject  is  so 
faithless ! 

—  From  the  time  when  they  fur- 
nished to  their  nation  the  great  con- 
quering leader  who  settled  Israel  in 
the  possession  of  Palestine  (ITum.  xiii. 
8),  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  already 
encouraged  to  hope  for  high  things  by 
the  blessing  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xlviii. 
17-22 ;  xlix.  22-26),  had  claimed, 
and,  in  the  main,  enjoyed,  a  pre- 
eminence above  their  brethren.  But 
the  transfer  of  power  to  the  rival 
tribe  of  Judah  involved  in  the  eleva- 
tion of  David,  and  the  loss  of  prestige 
both  by  Shiloh  and  Shechem  through 
the  concentration  at  Jerusalem  of  both 
the  temporal  and  the  ecclesiasti- 
cal, must  have  been  bitterly  felt  by 
the  Ephraimites.  When  David  boasted 
that  God  refused  the  tabernacle  of 
Joseph,  and  chose  not  the  tribe  of 
Ephraim,  but  chose  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  he  touched  a  sore  place  in  the 
hearts  of  his  Ephraimite  subjects. 
They  felt  themselves  the  **  strength  " 
of  Israel,  while  Judah  was  the  **  law- 
giver" (Ps.  Ix.  7;  cviii.  8).  The 
military  glory  of  David's  reign,  and 
the  splendour  of  his  son's  in  its  earlier 
portion,  had  prevented  the  discontent 
of  the  Ephraimites  from  gathering  to 
a  head.  But  as  Solomon's  lustre  faded, 
as  his  oppression  became  greater  and 
its  object  more  selfish,  and  as  a  pros- 
pect of  deliverance  arose  from  the 
personal  qualities  of  Jeroboam,  the 
tribe,  it  is  possible,  again  aspired  after 
its  old  position.  Jeroboam,  active, 
energetic,  and  ambitious,  placed  him- 
self at  their  head,  and,  encouraged  by 
the  prophet's  words,  commenced  a 
rebellion  (verse  26).  The  step  proved 
premature.  The  power  of  Solomon 
was  too  firmly  fixed  to  be  shaken  ; 
and  the  hopes  of  the  Ephraimites  had 
to  be  deferred  till  a  fitter  season. 
Speaker's  Comm, 

185 


CHAP.  XI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


—  Rebellion.   1.  Is  easily  fomented  4.  Is  always  attended -with  great  rists. 

where   conscious    wrong    exists.      2.  6.  Is  powerless  in  frustrating  Divine 

Is  the  opportunity  of  the  ami  itious.  arrangements.     6.  Is  vigilant  and  im- 

3.  Is  often  ill-timed  in  its  movements,  patient  to  accomplish  its  purpose. 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  41—43. 
The  Death  of  Great  Men. 

I.  Is  not  always  a  calamity  to  a  nation.  When  the  powers  of  a  great  mind 
are  devoted  to  the  best  interests  of  the  people  irrespective  of  selfish  and  ulterior 
designs,  and  when  the  nation  is  flourishing  under  the  sagacious  and  virtuous 
policy  adopted,  the  death  of  such  a  character  is  an  irreparable  loss,  a  lamentable 
disaster.  But  a  great  man  may  be  a  great  curse  to  a  nation.  He  may  be  a 
genius  in  wickedness,  aggrandising  and  indulging  himself  by  cruel  oppressi  )n 
and  shameless  fraud.  The  death  of  such  a  man,  terrible  as  it  may  be  to  him- 
self, is  a  blessing  to  the  nation  he  has  so  wofully  wronged.  It  is  well  for 
humanity  that  death  does  come  to  the  great  tyrants  of  society,  else  life  on  earth 
would  become  intolerable.  The  world  would  be  transformed  into  a  Gehenna 
of  unutterable  torture. 

II.  Is  a  humbling^  spectacle  when  it  happens  after  they  have  outlived 
their  reputation.  Napoleon  Bonaparte  lamented  that  he  did  not  fall  at 
Waterloo.  And  it  is  said  of  Daniel  O'Connell,  the  great  and  gifted  Irish 
patriot,  that  he  ought  to  have  died  thirty  or  forty  years  before  he  did,  and 
while  he  stood  on  the  highest  pinnacle  of  fame  he  ever  reached,  after  the 
victories  he  achieved  on  behalf  of  Catholic  emancipation.  So  it  might  be  said 
of  Soloriion  that  had  he  died  immediately  after  the  great  event  of  his  reign — 
the  dedication  of  the  Temple — he  would  have  fallen  in  the  midst  of  glory  un- 
tarnished and  of  greatness  unexampled,  and  bequeathed  to  history  a  character 
of  wondrous  moral  symmetry  and  unrivalled  leputation.  But  Solomon  lived 
too  fast,  and,  though  not  old,  lived  too  long.  His  death,  which,  had  it  occurred 
years  before,  would  have  produced  a  profound  impression  and  wrung  the 
nation's  heart  with  sorrow  and  wailing,  was  chronicled  without  emotion. 
*'  Solomon  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David"  (verse 
43).  Death  in  any  form  is  a  saddening  sight — in  bird,  or  beast,  or  flower. 
Decay  is  a  subtle,  mysterious,  but  all-potent  power,  which  baffles  inquiiy  and 
conquers  all  opposition.  It  is  heart-breaking  to  watch  the  ravages  we  are  so 
powerless  to  arrest.  The  death  of  a  good  man  is  sad ;  but  it  is  a  still  sadder 
sight  to  witness  the  death  of  one  who  once  was  great  and  noble,  and  has  sunk 
into  obscurity  and  dirgrace.  Oh,  the  \\  eakness  and  vanity  of  man  !  How  little 
is  he  to  be  trusted,  how  deeply  to  be  pitied  !  How  manifold  are  the  changes 
through  which  he  passes  during  the  course  of  one  brief  life-time ! 

III.  Does  not  hinder  the  progress  of  the  Divine  purpose  concerning  the 

race.  The  individual  may  prove  unfaithful,  God  never.  Great  as  is  the  power 
for  evil  of  one  erring  spirit,  the  evil  is  circumscribed,  and  will  not  be  allowed  to 
imperil  the  good  which  God  has  provided  for  sinning  humanity.  **  Where  sin 
abounded,  grace  doth  much  more  abound."  It  is  humbling  to  observe  how  soon 
and  how  easily  the  greatest  men  can  be  dispensed  with.  The  defection  of  Solomon, 
and  of  the  nation  he  governed,  did  not  prevent  Jehovah  from  carryinj^  out  his 
merciful  intention  of  redeeming  humanity.  By  methods  the  most  insignificant 
and  unexpected  He  can  accomplish  His  gracious  designs. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Death  brings  loth  great  and  small  to  one  common  level,     2.  The 
most  hrilliant  gifts  will  not  protect  man  from  committing  the  most  ruinotis follies, 
3,  Greatness  is  supremely  contemptible  when  divorced  from  goodness, 
186 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CnAP.  XL 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES, 


Verse  40.  Sin  obscures  the  soul. 
He  who  turns  aside  from  God  departs 
from  wisdom ;  and  let  those  who, 
instead  of  bowinj^  and  submitting  with 
resionation  to  the  chastisements  of 
God,  haughtily  strive  against  them, 
contemplate  the  fate  of  Jeroboam, 
who  doubtless  stirred  up  the  plot 
against  Solomon,  since  he  afterwards 
eagerly  abetted  the  desertion  of  the 
ten  tribes.  Even  as  Solomon,  when 
he  sought  to  slay  Jeroboam,  must 
have  felt  that  in  vain  he  resisted  the 
Divine  decrees,  and  was  powerless  to 
hinder  them,  so  likewise  Jeroboam, 
compelled  to  fly  to  Egypt,  must  have 
become  conscious  that  in  vain  he 
strove  rashly  and  insolently  to  antici- 
pate the  execution  of  the  Divine 
decrees.  We  mast  ever  make  bitter 
expiation  when  we  haughtily  resist 
and  oppose  the  Lord,  or  when  we 
strive  to  hasten  His  designs,  or  to 
appoint  time  and  place  for  their  ful- 
filment. The  life  of  Solomon  closes 
with  the  words — *'  Therefore  Solomon 
sought  to  kill  Jeroboam.**  Instead  of 
seeking  forgiveness  from  Him  who 
forgiveth  much,  and  himself  granting 
forgiveness,  he  is  thinking  of  murder 
and  vengeance.  How  great  and  noble 
the  contrast  between  this  and  the 
figure  of  Him  who  in  the  face  of  death 
upon  the  cross  cried — ''Eather,  for- 
give them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do."  Let  us  strive  to  become 
like  unto  His  image,  and  that  our  last 
thought  in  life  may  be  of  love  and  re- 
conciliation, and  not  of  revenge  and 
hatred.  Solomon  possessed  the  fairest 
and  noblest  crown  that  mortal  can 
wear,  yet  it  was  perishable,  not  endur- 
ing beyond  death  and  the  grave.  The 
Lord  promises  an  immortal  crown  to 


those  who  love  and  follow  Him.  Be 
faithful  unto  death,  then  He  will  give 
thee  the  crown  of  life  :  blessed  is  he 
who  endureth  unto  the  end. — lloos. 

Verses  40-43.  These  three  truths 
are  nowhere  more  powerfully  exempli- 
fied than  in  the  lite  of  Solomon.  1. 
What  is  a  man  profited,  &c.  (Matt  xvi. 
26).  2.  Vanity  of  vanities  (Eccles.  i. 
2).  3.  The  world  passeth  away  (1 
Jno.  ii.  17). — Lange. 

Verse  43.  Solomon  died  in  almost 
the  flower  of  \\'a  age,  and,  it  appears, 
unregretted.  His  government  was  no 
blessing  to  Israel,  and  laid,  by  its 
exactions  and  oppressions,  the  founda- 
tion of  that  schism  which  was  so  fatal 
to  the  unhappy  people  of  Israel  and 
Judah,  and  was  the  most  powerful 
procuring  cause  of  the  njiseries  which 
have  fallen  upon  the  Jewish  people 
from  that  time  until  now. — A.  Clarke. 

—  His   son   followed   him   in   the 

throne.  Thus  the  graves  are  filling  in 
with  the  generations  that  go  off,  and 
houses  are  filling  in  with  those  that 
are  growing  up.  As  the  grave  cries — 
Give,  give ;  so  land  is  never  lost  for 
want  of  an  heir. — M.  Henry. 

—  Solomon  a  type  of  Christ. 
1.  As  the  child  of  promise.  2.  As 
the  king  of  Israel,  though  ready  to 
spare,  yet  finally  executing  and  des- 
troying every  obstinate  rebel  against 
his  government.  3.  As  the  Prince  of 
Peace.  4.  As  the  builder  of  the 
Temple  of  the  Lord.  5.  As  the  em- 
bodiment of  wisdom.  6.  As  attract- 
ing multitudes  towards  him,  even  of 
the  most  distinguished  rank. — 
Rohinson. 


Reflected  Bays  feom  the  Best  Litera^ey  Lights  on  the  Chaeacteb  and 

Cakeee  of  Solomon, 

You  have  seen  a  blight  in  summer.  The  sky  is  overcast,  and  yet  there  are 
no  clouds ;  nothing  but  a  dry  and  stifling  obscuration,  as  if  the  mouth  of  some 
pestilent  volcano  had  opened,  or  as  if  sulphur  mingled  with  the  sunbeams. 
**  The  beasts  groan ;  the  cattle  are  oppressed."    Prom  the   trees  the  embryo 

187 


JHAP.  XL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


fruits  and  the  remaining  blossoms  fall  in  an  unnoticed  shower,  and  the  foliage 
curls  and  crumples.  And  whilst  creation  looks  disconsolate,  in  the  hedgerows 
the  heavy  moths  begin  to  flutter,  and  ominous  owlets  cry  from  the  ruin.  Such 
a  blight  came  over  the  Hebrew  summer.  By  every  calculation  it  ought  to  have 
been  high  noon ;  but  the  sun  no  longer  smiled  on  Israel's  dial.  There  was  a 
dark  discomfort  in  the  air.  The  people  murmured.  The  monarch  wheeled 
along  with  greater  pomp  than  ever ;  but  the  popular  prince  had  soured  into  the 
dc  spot,  and  the  crown  sat  defiant  on  his  moody  brow ;  and  stiff  were  the 
obeisances,  heartless  the  hosannas,  which  hailed  him  as  he  passed.  The  wavs 
of  Zion  mourned ;  and  whilst  grass  was  sprouting  in  the  temple-courts, 
mysterious  groves  and  impious  shrines  were  rising  everywhere ;  and  whilst  lust 
defiled  the  palace,  Chemosh  and  Ashtoreth  and  other  Gentile  abominations 
defiled  the  Holy  Land.  And  in  the  disastrous  eclipse  beasts  of  the  forest  crept 
abroad.  From  his  lurking  place  in  Egypt  Hadad  ventured  out,  and  became  a 
life-long  torment  to  the  God-forsaken  monarch.  And  Rezon  pounced  on 
Damascus,  and  made  Syria  his  own.  And  from  the  pagan  palaces  of  Thebes 
and  Memphis  harsh  cries  were  heard  ever  and  anon,  Pharaoh  and  Jeroboam 
taking  counsel  together,  screeching  forth  their  threatenings  and  hooting  insults, 
at  which  Solomon  could  laugh  no  longer.  For  amidst  all  the  gloom  and  misery 
a  message  comes  from  God:  the  kingdom  is  rent;  and  whilst  Solomon's 
successor  will  only  have  a  fag-end  and  a  fragment,  by  right  Divine  ten  tribes 
are  handed  over  to  a  rebel  and  a  runaway. 

What  led  to  Solomon's  apostasy?  And  what,  again,  was  the  ulterior  effect 
of  that  apostasy  on  himself?  As  to  the  origin  of  his  apostasy  the  Word  of  God 
is  explicit.  He  did  not  obey  his  own  maxim.  He  ceased  to  rejoice  with  the 
wife  of  his  youth ;  and  loving  many  strangeis,  they  drew  his  heart  away  from 
God.  Luxury  and  sinful  attachments  made  him  an  idolater,  and  idolatry  made 
him  yet  more  licentious;  until  in  the  lazy  enervation  and  languid  day-dreaming 
of  the  Sybarite,  he  lost  the  perspicacity  of  the  sage  and  the  prowess  of  the 
sovereign ;  and  when  he  woke  up  from  the  tipsy  swoon,  and  out  of  the  kennel 
picked  his  tarnished  diadem,  he  woke  to  find  his  faculties,  once  so  clear  and 
limpid,  all  perturbed,  his  strenuous  reason  paralysed,  and  his  healthful  fancy 
poisoned.  He  woke  to  find  the  world  grown  hollow,  and  himself  grown  old. 
He  woke  to  see  the  sun  bedarkencd  in  Israel's  sky,  and  a  special  gloom  encom- 
passing himself.  He  woke  to  recognize  all  round  a  sadder  sight  than  winter — 
a  blasted  summer.  Like  a  deluded  Samson  starting  from  his  slumber,  he 
sought  to  recall  that  noted  wisdom  which  had  signalized  his  Nazarite  days;  but 
its  locks  were  shorn ;  and,  cross  and  self-disgusted,  wretched  and  guilty,  he 
woke  up  to  the  discovery  which  awaits  the  sated  sensualists.  He  found  that 
when  the  beast  gets  the  better  of  the  .nan,  the  man  is  abandoned  by  his  God. 
Like  one  who  falls  asleep  amidst  the  lights  and  music  of  an  orchestra,  and  who 
awakes  amidst  empty  benches  and  tattered  programmes — like  a  man  who  falls 
asleep  in  a  flower-garden,  and  who  opens  his  eyes  on  a  bald  and  locust-blackened 
wilderness — the  life,  the  loveliness  was  vanished,  and  all  the  remaining  spirit 
of  the  mighty  Solomon  yawned  forth  that  \erdict  of  the  tired  voluptuary — 
"Vanity  of  vanities!  vanity  of  vanities  !  all  is  vanity!'* — Dr.  James  Hamilton. 

Less  varied  and  less  profound  is  the  insight  afforded  into  the  private  experi- 
ence of  the  Wise  King.  The  insufficiency  of  the  most  perfect  human  wisdom 
to  guard  the  heart,  and  of  the  loftiest  eminence  of  power  and  earthly 
magnificence  to  satisfy  its  cravings,  are  almost  painfully  prominent.  From 
amid  the  lustre  of  his  throne,  and  the  depth  of  an  experience  that  had 
fathomed  every  created  element  of  happiness,  issues  the  plaintive  voice  still 
repeating  its  witness  of  the  vanity  of  all  human  things.  It  is  a  happiness 
to  turn  from  Ecclesiastes  to  the  Song  of  Solomon,  and,  in  its  rich  and  gorgeous 
allegory,  to  read  that  not  in  vain  had  he  searched  for  the  secret  of  human 
188 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  xi. 


happiness,  but  had  found  it  in  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  and  the  unutterable 
joys  of  His  espoused  Church.  There  is,  however,  another  point  of  view  in 
which  this  period  of  imperial  splendour  stood  in  very  close  relation  to  the 
Divine  plan.  For  it  constituted  a  new  appeal  to  the  consciences  and  even  to 
the  interests  of  Israel,  such  as  they  had  not  previously  experienced.  It  was, 
indeed,  the  fault  of  their  own  sin,  and  of  that  alone,  that  they  had  hitherto, 
with  the  brief  exception  of  the  latter  days  of  Joshua,  tasted  the  bitterness  of  the 
warning,  and  not  the  glory  of  the  promise.  The  alternatives  presented  by 
Moses,  and  again  reiterated  by  Joshua,  were  two:  an  extraordinary  blessing 
upon  obedience,  and  an  extraordinary  curse  upon  disobedience.  They  had 
perversely  chosen  the  second  course,  and  had  already  experienced  the  first 
blows  of  the  scourge,  to  culminate  hereafter  in  their  dispersion  among  all 
nations.  But  thus  it  happened,  that  of  the  other  alternative  they  had  enjoyed 
no  experience  up  to  the  time  of  David.  It  might,  therefore,  have  been  open  to 
object  against  God's  final  dealings  with  His  chosen  race,  on  the  ground  that 
reward  had  not  been  adequately  tried.  The  opposition  hardened  by  the 
storm  would  have  melted,  it  might  have  been  thought,  amid  the  sunshine.  Had 
they  actually  known  by  experience  what  the  blessing  was,  who  can  tell  what 
effect  it  may  have  had  upon  Israel?  This  possible  objection  has  been  foreclosed 
by  the  glory  of  the  times  of  David  and  Solomon.  Daring  this  period  God,  by 
His  own  gracious  acts — not  by  virtue  of  any  meritorious  obedience  of  theirs — 
gave  them  the  enjoyment  of  the  blessing ;  not  wholly,  for  the  sinful  luxury  and 
profusion  of  Solomon  rapidly  introduced  the  elements  of  evil,  but  sufficiently 
to  indicate  the  nature  of  what  God  had  in  store  for  them.  Both  alterna- 
tives were  tried,  and  both  the  frown  and  the  smile  equally  failed  to  conquer  the 
stubbornness  of  their  disobedience.  Hence  over  this  brief  period  of  national 
magnificence  and  religious  progress  the  clouds  soon  gathered  again.  Here  the 
fortunes  of  the  Hebrew  race  culminated  at  their  highest  point,  and  then  hasted 
to  their  decline.  Not  that  God  wearied  in  blessing,  but  that  Israel  wearied  in 
obeying.  If  neither  the  wise  king  himself,  nor  the  people  he  ruled,  could  bear 
that  time  of  glory  without  introducing  elements  of  decay  amid  such  a  full  flush 
of  life,  what  wonder  that  others  have  proved  unable  to  do  so ;  and  that  the 
history  of  every  nation  under  heaven  has  hitherto  been  one  invariable  story 
of  growth,  prosperity,  corruption,  decline,  and  ruin !  Christianity  has,  indeed, 
introduced  into  nations  a  new  principle  of  life,  and  extended  the  duration  of 
their  strength  far  beyond  all  the  limits  of  the  ancient  world ;  but  whether, 
even  among  them,  the  purifying  salt  will  permanently  correct  the  festering 
elements  of  moral  corruption,  is  a  lesson  still  to  be  learned. — Oa/rheWt  Divine 
Plan  of  Eevelation. 

Solomon's  character,  as  drawn  in  the  Scriptures,  is  surely  many-sided.  The 
simple,  unpretending  child — the  darling  of  Jehovah — the  chosen  king — the 
seeker  after  wisdom  :  choosing  her  above  all  other  things — the  wise  and  sagacious 
judge — the  powerful  ruler,  and  glorious  sovereign — surpassing,  in  many  ways, 
all  the  kings  of  the  nations  round  about  him  ;  his  navies  traversing  many  a  sea, 
and  kings  and  princes  from  afar  bringing  and  laying  at  his  feet  their  gifts  :  but 
in  his  old  age  a  despot,  a  polygamist,  and  an  idolater.  These  last  were  doubtless 
the  immediate  causes  of  his  own  decline,  and  of  the  subsequent  misfortunes  of 
the  nation.  In  his  reign  the  Israelitish  monarchy  reached  the  highest  pitch  of 
worldly  splendour,  the  memory  of  which  is  still  preserved  in  many  an  oriental 
legend  and  tradition.  But  that  very  splendour  seemed  to  pervert  the  nation's 
heart,  and  cause  the  cloud  of  Jehovah's  glory  to  depart  from  His  people  and 
His  Holy  Habitation.  The  outer  splendour  of  his  court  and  empire,  the  magni- 
ficence of  his  buildings,  and  his  commerce  with  foreign  nations  were,  perhaps, 
not  in  themselves  wrong.  They  might  have  been  made  the  means  of  leading 
other  nations  to  the  knowledge  of  the  One  True  God ;  but  they  were  fraught 

18'J 


OHAP.zi.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINQ8. 


with  danger.  Worldly  glory  has  ever  had  the  tendency  to  take  away  the  heart 
from  the  pure  and  the  good  rather  than  to  win  it  to  the  worship  of  God.  So  it 
was  with  Solomon,  and  so  it  ever  has  been-  "  IIow  hardly  shall  a  rich  man 
enter  the  kingdom  of  God  !  "  The  thing  is  not  impossible  with  God ;  but  the 
dangers  of  wealth  and  worldly  splendour  far  surpass  their  probable  advantages 
to  their  possessor.  And  so  the  Church,  whenever  she  has  sought  to  increase 
her  strength  by  a  showing  of  worldly  forces,  has  become  shorn  of  her  spiritual 
power.  Viewed  from  the  theocratic  stand-point,  Solomon's  reign  was  a  grand 
failure.  It  corresponded  largely  with  the  sad  failure  of  Saul,  the  first  king  of 
Israel.  SauFs  misfortunes,  however,  were  largely  owing  to  his  incapacity  for 
government,  as  well  as  to  moral  obliquity.  He  was  unequal  to  the  exigencies 
of  his  age,  and  the  task  of  successfully  moulding  into  a  monarchy  the  nation 
so  long  ruled  by  judges  exceeded  his  powers.  But  with  Solomon  there  was  no 
lack  of  ability.  His  wisdom,  sagacity,  and  power  were  equal  to  any  possible 
emergency.  But  his  grievous  sins  and  neglect  of  God's  law  brought  on  his 
ruin.  His  greatness  and  glory  weaned  his  heart  from  God,  and  his  wives  led 
him  into  idolatry.  Speculation  as  to  his  probable  repentance  and  final  salva- 
tion is  idle  and  fruitless,  and  will  always  be  governed  by  preconceived  opinions. 
The  sacred  writers  pass  it  over  in  utter  silence,  and  give  no  shadow  of  intima- 
tion that  he  ever  turned  from  his  idolatry.  A  mighty  shadow  clouds  his  latter 
days :  and  there,  in  Holy  Writ,  he  stands  depicted — one  part  of  his  life  and 
character  in  strangest  contrast  with  the  other — the  grandest  and  saddest 
personage  of  sacred  history. —  Whedon. 

The  danger  came,  and,  in  spite  of  the  warning,  the  king  fell.  Before  long  the 
priests  and  prophets  had  to  grieve  over  rival  temples  to  Moloch,  Chemosh,  and 
Ashtoreth,  forms  of  ritual,  not  idolatrous  only,  but  cruel,  dark,  impure.  This 
evil  came  as  the  penalty  of  another.  He  gave  himself  to  **  strange  women.'* 
He  found  himself  involved  in  a  fascination  that  led  to  the  worship  of  strange 
gods.  The  starting  point  and  the  goal  are  given  us.  We  are  left,  from  what 
we  know  otherwise,  to  trace  the  process.  Something  there  was,  perhaps,  in  his 
very  '^  largeness  of  heart,"  so  far  in  advance  of  traditional  knowledge  of  his  age, 
rising  to  higher  and  wider  thoughts  of  God,  which  predisposed  him  to  it.  In 
recognising  what  was  true  in  other  forms  of  faith,  he  might  lose  his  horror  at 
what  was  false.  With  this  there  may  have  mingled  political  motives.  He  may 
have  hoped,  by  a  policy  of  toleration,  to  conciliate  neighbouring  princes,  to 
attract  a  larger  traffic.  But  probably  also  there  was  another  influence  less 
commonly  taken  into  account.  The  widespread  belief  of  the  East  in  the  magic 
arts  of  Solomon  is  not,  it  is  believed,  without  its  foundation  of  truth.  Disasters 
followed  before  long  as  the  natural  consequence  of  what  was  politically  a 
blunder  as  well  as  religiously  a  sin.  The  strength  of  the  nation  rested  on  its 
unity,  and  its  unity  depended  on  its  faith.  Whatever  attractions  the  sensuous 
ritual  which  he  introduced  may  have  had  for  the  great  body  of  the  people,  the 
priests  and  Levites  must  have  looked  upon  the  rival  worship  with  entire  disfavour. 
The  zeal  of  the  prophetic  order  was  now  kindled  into  active  opposition.  The 
king  in  vain  tried  to  check  the  current  that  was  setting  strong  against  him. 
The  old  tribal  jealousies  gave  signs  of  renewed  vitality.  Ephraim  was  prepared 
once  more  to  dispute  the  supremacy  of  Judah,  needing  special  control.  And 
with  this  weakness  within  there  came  attacks  from  without.  The  king,  pre- 
maturely old,  must  have  foreseen  the  rapid  breaking  up  of  the  great  monarchy 
to  which  he  had  succeeded.  Of  the  inner  changes  of  mind  and  heart,  which 
ran  parallel  with  this  history.  Scripture  is  comparatively  silent.  We  may  not 
enter  into  the  things  within  the  veil,  or  answer  either  way  the  doubting  ques- 
tion— Is  there  any  hope  ? — Smithes  Bible  Dictionary,  (See  also  SmiWs  Old 
Testament  History f  p.  419-424;  also  Stanley^ i  Jewiih  Church,  second  series, 
p.  256-260.) 
190 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTABT:  KINQ8,  OHAP.xi. 


It  is  extremely  difficult  to  give  a  portraiture  of  Solomon  which  can  harmonize 
at  once  both  the  demand  for  historic  truth  and  the  general  estimation  which 
tradition  assigns  to  him.     The  story  is  extraordinary.     David,  the  father  of  the 
wise  king,  founded  and  consolidated  the  kingdom.     His  life  was  stormy  and 
chequered.     His  character  was  romantic,  chivalric,  and  generous.     He  showed 
himself  capable  of  both  self-sacrifice  and  of  revolting  criminality  and  treachery. 
He  was  tender,  and  he  was  brave.     His  soul  rested  upon  the  covenant-keeping 
Jehovah,  yet  he  dared  to  violate  all  the  duties  of  the  Decalogue  which  concern 
man's  dealings  with  his  brother  man.     Solomon  did  not  inherit  the  personal 
traits  of  his  father.     He  was  not  warlike ;  he  was  a  man  of  peace.     He  sought 
wisdom,  and  he  sought  it  from  Jehovah.     He  desired  to  administer  his  govern- 
ment according  to  the  law  and  will  of  God.     He  had  fine  talent  for  observation. 
He  was  a  naturalist  of  rare  attainments.     He  knew  much  of  the  earth ;  he  knew 
much  of  men.     He  was  a  man  of  understanding,  expressing  his  thoughts  and 
observations  in  proverbs.     He  was  splendid  in  his  tastes.     He  sought  wealth 
by  commerce  and  by  trade  with  heathen  nations.     He  made  Israel  a  kingdom 
of  this  world.     At  the  same  time  he  built  the  Temple,  lavishing  upon  it  untold 
sums  of  money,   and   aiming  to  make  it,  according  to  Eastern  conceptions, 
splendid  in  all  respects.     Certainly  at  its  dedication  he  is  one  of  the  most  im- 
posing and  majestic  figures  in  all  history.     But  by  degrees,  enervated  by  luxury, 
by  pleasure,  by  plenty,  he  lost  the  strength  of  his  convictions.     He  became  wise 
in  this  world.     The  law  of  Jehovah  lost  its  hold  upon  his  conscience.     He 
began  to  justify  idolatry.     By  degrees  the  splendour  passed  away,  and  darkness, 
and  weariness,  and  hopelessness,  and  an  ignoble  old  age  came  on.     He  forsook 
the  noble  path  of  his  youth,  and  his  glory  was  lost.     The  sun  of  his  life  rose  in 
all  splendour  and  shone  brilliantly,  to  go  down  at  last  amid  the  heavy  dark- 
ness of  impending  storm  and  night.     The  people  lost  their  sense  of  the  exclusive 
sovereignty  of  Jehovah  ;  their  burdens  were  heavy,  and  the  brief  glory  of  Israel 
as  a  kingdom  of  this  world  passed  away  for  ever.— -i?r.  E.  Harwood  in  Lange. 

It  is  impossible  not  to  perceive  that  such  a  time  as  this  of  Solomon  (the 
dedication  of  the  Temple),  though  really  a  great  one,  is  a  critical  one  for  any 
nation.    The  idea  of  building  a  house  which  the  Lord  would  fill  with  His  glory 
was  a  recognition  of  God  as  eternally  ruling  over  that  people  and  over  all 
people.     Yet  there  lay  close  to  it  a  tendency  to  make  the  invisible  visible  ;  they 
represent  the  holy  presence  as  belonging  to  the  building,  instead  of  the  building 
as  being  hallowed  and  glorified  by  the  presence.     There  was  no  necessity  that 
this  evil  should  grow  out  of  that  good ;  in  a  very  important  sense  one  is  the 
testimony  against  the  other ;  still  all   experience,  and   none  more  decisively 
than  the  experience  of  the  Israelites,  prepares  us  to  expect  such  a  result.     And 
here  I  believe  is  the  precious  moral  of  Solomon's  history,  that  which  makes  it  a 
perfectly  harmonious  history  in  spite  of  the  incongruities  in  his  own  life. 
There  was  the  eeed  of  idolatry  in  him,  as  there  is  in  every  man.     That  early 
prayer  for  an  understanding  heart  was  the  prayer  against  it — the  prayer  for  an 
inward  eye  to  look  through  the  semblances  of  things  to  their  reality  ;  for  a  con- 
tinual revelation  of  that  which  passeth  show.     The  prayer  was  answered  as 
fully  as  any  prayer  ever  was.     The  Divine  judgment,  the  discrimination  of  good 
and  bad,  came  to  Soloman :  it  was  not  limited  in  any  direction ;  it  could  be 
exercised  on  persons  as  on  things ;  it  was  shown  to  be  the  faculty  which  a  king 
requires,  because  it  is  that  which  a  man  requires,  since  by  it  God  perceives  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.     But  there  comes  a  moment  when  the  king 
or  the  man  ceases  to  desire  that  the  light  should  enter  into  him,  should  separate 
the  good  and  the  bad  in  him.     There  comes  a  time  when  his  faculty  begins  to 
be  regarded  as  a  craft,  when  he  half  suspects  that  the  light  by  which  he  sees  is 
his  own.     Then  appears  the  tempter.     He  may  come  in  the  form  of  an  Egyptian 
princess,  or  any  other ;  but  he  will  in  some  way  appeal  to  the  senses ;  he  will 

191 


CHAP.  XL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


point  the  road  to  idolatry.  The  secret  desire  of  the  heart,  mightily  resisted 
once,  will  be  allowed  to  prevail ;  it  will  convert  all  that  once  checked  it  to  its 
nourishment.  The  gold  and  the  silver,  not  of  the  palace  only,  but  of  the  temple 
— not  the  glory  only  of  the  kingdom,  but  of  the  sanctuary — will  strengthen 
and  deepen  the  falsehoods  of  the  inner  man.  The  glorious  power  of  judging, 
which  enabled  one  who  knew  not  how  to  go  out  or  come  in,  to  look  into  the 
hardest  cases,  and  to  resolve  them,  itself  receives  the  yoke  and  bows  to  the 
image ;  its  keenness  and  subtilty  only  inventing  arguments  and  apologies  for 
the  shame.  And  the  sympathizing  king  who  sent  his  people  away  with  glad- 
ness of  heart,  sure  that  God  was  the  king,  and  that  they  had  a  human  king, 
who  felt  towards  them  as  he  felt,  would  gradually  become  a  tyrant,  laying  on 
his  subjects  Egyptian  burdens,  compelling  them  to  do  the  work  of  beasts,  proving 
that  he  valued  the  stones,  the  iron,  and  the  brass  which  formed  the  materials  of 
God*8  house,  above  the  living  beings  who  were  to  draw  nigh  to  offer  their 
supplications  in  it.  So  the  wise  king  may  prepare  his  subjects  for  rebellion, 
and  his  kingdom  for  division.  A.  lesson  surely  full  of  instruction  and  wisdom 
for  all  kings  and  all  men  ;  for  those  who  think,  and  for  those  who  act ;  for  those 
who  study  the  secrets  of  the  human  heart,  and  for  those  who  investigate  the 
meaning  of  nature  ;  for  those  who  despise  the  arts  and  wealth  of  the  world,  and 
for  those  who  worship  them  ;  for  those  who  hold  strength  and  glory  to  be  the 
Devil's,  and  for  those  who  covet  them  and  hunt  after  them  as  if  they  were 
Divine ;  for  nations  upon  which  God  hath  bestowed  mechanical  knowledge,  and 
the  blessed  results  of  it ;  for  nations  which  look  upon  human  beings  as  only  the 
machines  and  the  producers  of  a  certain  amount  of  physical  enjoyments.  But 
though  so  full  of  instruction,  it  would  be  utterly  melancholy  and  oppressive, 
seeing  that  it  speaks  of  retrogression  instead  of  progress,  of  folly  coming  forth 
from  wisdom — death  from  life  — if  there  were  no  sequel  to  the  story.  But  the 
wisdom  which  Solomon  prayed  for  and  pursued  with  so  great  and  earnest  a 
heart  was  not  a  wisdom  which  could  die  with  him,  or  which  his  forgetfulness 
of  it  could  kill.  **  The  Lord  possessed  me,"  says  the  writer  of  the  Book  of 
Proverbs,  **in  the  beginning  of  His  way,  before  His  works  of  old.  I  was  set 
up  for  everlasting,  from  the  beginning  or  ever  the  earth  was."  **  In  the 
beginning  was  the  Word,"  says  St.  John,  **  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and 
the  Word  was  God.  All  things  were  made  by  Him,  and  without  Him  was  not 
anything  made  that  was  made.  In  Him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of 
men."  **  And  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld 
His  glory,  as  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Pather,  full  of  grace  and  truth." 
This  is  the  King  **  who  shall  be  found  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endureth, 
whom  all  nations  shall  call  blessed."  This  is  that  Son  **  who  shall  judge  the 
people  with  righteousness  and  the  poor  with  judgment."  This  is  He  in  whom 
the  prayers  of  David  are  ended.  Brethren,  every  one  of  us  may  ask  that  Divine 
Word  who  is  near  to  us  and  with  us,  for  an  understanding  heart.  Every  one 
of  us  who  feels  that  a  great  work  is  laid  upon  him,  and  that  he  is  in  the  midst 
of  a  people  which  God  hath  chosen,  and  some  of  whom  at  least  he  must  teach 
and  judge,  and  that  he  is  but  a  little  child,  may  crave  for  a  spirit  to  discern 
the  good  and  the  bad  in  himself  and  in  all  others.  And  if  we  feel,  as  most  of 
us  perhaps  do,  that  we  need  above  all  things  else,  is  that  sense  of  responsibility, 
that  consciousness  of  a  calling,  that  feeling  of  feebleness  which  were  the  source 
of  Solomon's  prayer — let  us  ask  for  these  gifts  first.  And  so  we  shall  under- 
stand more  and  more  clearly  that  we  are  called  to  be  kings  and  priests  in  that 
city  which  He  hath  set  up,  and  in  which  He  reigns,  a  city  in  which  there  is  one 
visible  temple ;  for  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  Temple  of  it ; 
a  city  into  which  the  kings  of  the  earth  shall  at  last  bring  their  glory  and 
honour. — F.  D.  Mav/rice, 


193 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAUT:  KINO 8,  chap.  XIL 


CHAPTEB  XII. 

THE    DISRUPTION    OF    THE    EJNGDODC. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  I.  Behoboam  went  to  Shechem — Instead  of 
remaining  in  Jerunalem^  whither  Israel  should  have  corae  10  him,  as  they  did  to  David 
(2  Sam.  V.  1),  and  sworn  allegiance  to  their  king.  To  make  him  king — They  had  no  right 
to  "  niakfli"  a  king,  since  Jehovah  was  the  Maker  of  their  kings,  and  had  assigned  perpetual 
sovereignty  to  David's  posterity.  By  summoning  Rehoboam  to  Shechem^  Israel  showed 
the  intention  to  depart  from  loyalty  to  authorized  usages ;  and  in  the  avowal  that  they  deter- 
mined to  "  wA^re  "  H  king,  instead  of  submitting  homage  to  the  rightful  heir,  the  spirit  of 
rebellion  is  plainly  indicate  d.  Verse  2.  When  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  was  yet  in 
Egypt,  heard— Heard,  not  "  of  it^*' — i.  e.,  the  convocation  at  Shechem— but  of  Solomon's 
death.  The  Vulgate  inserts  "  heard  that  Solomon  was  dead."  This  act  of  Israel  in  recalling 
a  rebel  against  iSolomouy  and  placing  him  at  their  head,  shows  their  determination  to  revolt. 
It  must  be  evident  thut  they  sent  for  Jeroboam  before  they  assembled  at  Shechem,  since  it 
would  have  required  considerable  time  for  them  to  send,  and  for  him  to  return.  It  was  all  pre- 
arranged. Accordingly,  the  Sept.  and  Vulg.  add  to  verse  2  these  words : — "  He  returned 
from  Egypt  and  came  unto  his  city,  unto  the  land  of  Zerira,  which  is  in  the  hill  country  of 
Ephraim.  And  they  sent  and  calkd  him."  Verse  4.  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  grievous — 
In  order  to  make  his  cities  majestic,  and  to  maintain  the  splendours  of  his  court.  But  his 
peaceful  and  prosperous  reign  gave  wealth  and  civic  benefits  to  his  people,  which  more  than 

repaid  the  heavy  taxation.  The  ofience  was  this:  Solomon  laid  on  them  a  "yoke/*  7^ 
is  a  yoke  laid  on  beasts  of  burden,  and  suggests  their  indignation  at  having  been  compelled 
to  do  what  ttiey  regarded  as  servile  work  {coutp.  Notes  on  xi.  27).  Verse  7.  If  thou  wilt  be  a 
servant  ,  .  they  will  be  thy  servants  for  ever  -  Conciliate  and  concede  to  ibtin  for  "  this 
day,"  thus  turning  aside  their  dijcontent,  and  they  will  be  won  to  loyalty.  Had  he  for  the 
time  become  "T^J7  of  the  people,  he  would  have  removed  from  the  malcontents  every  pretext 

for  revolt     But  he  heeded  the  **  young  men  " — D>"77^— who  knew  his  haughty  and  ambitious 

nature,  and  flattered  him  by  recommending  an  attitude  of  despotic  tyranny.  Verse  15.  The 
cause  was  from  the  LORD— ^i^.,  a  turn  from;  it  was  brought  about  by  the  Lord.  Verse  16. 
^ept.  renders  the  verse  thus : — *'  And  the  whole  people  as  one  man  said  each  one  to  his  neighbour, 
and  all  cried  out,  We  have  no  part  in  David,  nor  any  inheritance  in  the  son  of  Jesse  !  Eary 
man  to  thy  tents,  0  Israel !  For  this  man  is  not  (Jit)  to  he  a  ruler  nor  to  he  a  prince^  Now 
see  to  thine  own  house,  HoMi^—Keil  remarks  that  in  this  cry  "  the  rooted  dislike  to  David's 
royal  houf-e  is  strongly  expressed,  and  we  can  perceive  a  more  potent  cau;-e  for  the  partition 
than  the  alleged  oppression  of  Solomon,"  Verse  18.  Adoram,  who  was  over  the  tribute — 
A  flagrant  blunder  to  send  thi^  chief  of  the  socagers  (chap.  iv.  6)  to  negotiate  with  tiiem.  It 
incensed  them  the  more,  and  his  fate  opened  the  king's  eyes  to  the  furious  antagonism  of  the 
tribes  of  Israel.  Verso  20.  Made  him  (Jeroboam)  king  over  all  Israel — This  exasperated 
Rehoboam  to  prepare  war,  from  which  God  restrained  him.  Verse  26.  Now  shall  the  king- 
dom return  to  the  house  of  David — Recognizing  the  immediate  peril  of  Israel's  visits  lo  the 
temple,  he  sought  to  alienate  their  hearts  from  Jehovah's  w^orfhip.  Verse  28.  It  is  too  much 
for  you— A  specious  plea  that  it  would  save  them  the  costs  and  toils  of  a  long  journey.  Two 
calves  of  gold— Egy])tian  figures,  Apis  and  Muevis.  These  winged  hulls,  by  their  slight  re- 
seaiblance  tu  the  cherubim,  might  captivate  their  imagination  and  souilie  their  scruples. 
Verse  30.  The  people  went  to  Dan—*'  Bethel  was  at  the  southern  extremity  of  the  kingdom, 
and  within  sight  of  Jerusalem ;  but  the  people  preferred  to  turn  from  all  associations  with  the 
city  of  Judah,  and  went  to  **  Dan,**  on  the  far  norlhern  frontier.  Verse  30.  Priests  of  the 
lowest  of  the  people— Rather,  of  all  classes.  For  the  Levitss  would  not  assist  in  his  idolatry, 
arid,  moreover,  Jeroboam  wished  to  destroy  all  the  sacred  associations  of  Israel's  former  life. 
Verse  32.  Ordained  a  feast  in  the  eighth  month-  Most  probably  to  divert  tiie  memories  of 
the  tribes  from  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  which  fell  on  the  15th  day  of  the  seventh  month,  in 
order  further  to  eradicate  sacred  memories.  He  had  a  plausible  pretext  for  this  change,  in 
that  the  harvest  ripened  later  in  the  northern  districts.  Verse  33.  He  offered  upon  the 
altars — Thus  assuming  to  himself  the  functions  of  the  high  priest.  Two  reasons  may  have 
led  to  this  act  of  usui,  tion:  he  had  observed  that  the  Egyptian  king  united  in  his  person 
both  the  royal  and  s  icerdotal  oflBces ;  and  he  may  have  distrusted  the  prudence  of  vesting  in  a 
subject,  at  so  critical  an  hour  in  Israel's  career,  the  power  which  a  high  priest  possessed  over 
A  people  so  controllable  by  religious  impulses. — W.  H.  J. 


198 


OHAP.  XII-  EOMILETia  COMMENTARJ  :  KINGB. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  FESSBS  1-24. 
Betolt:  Its  Cavsb  ajsh  Conseqxtenc&. 

Theee    i8    an    intimate  and  necessary    connection  between    sin  and  its 

punishment ;  and  we  may  trace  the  political  and  moral  causes  of  the  disruption 
of  the  kingdom  in  the  excessive  luxury  of  Solomon  and  the  sins  of  his  Litter 
days.  The  rebellion  of  the  ten  tribes  was  an  event  of  supreme  importance 
in  its  bearing  on  the  future  history  of  Israel.  It  was  not  a  temporary  division 
like  those  which  occasionally  took  place  under  the  Judges,  but  was  sullenly 
permanent,  and  defied  the  power  of  all  subsequent  monarchs  to  reconcile.  The 
breach  was  healed,  like  many  other  long-standing  enmities,  only  by  the  fall 
and  extinction  of  the  contending  factions.  The  whole  history  is  another 
illustration  of  the  cause  and  consequence  of  revolt  so  frequently  repeated  in 
the  development  of  all  national  life. 

I.   That  the  cause  of  revolt  is  manifold,  and  lies  far  back  in  the  history 
of  a  nation.     1.  In  the  existence  of  tribal  Jealousy  and  ambition.     The  super- 
cilious  and   reckless  conduct  of  Rehoboam  was  not  the  immediate  cause  of 
rebellion.     The  loyalty  of  a  people  is  not  destroyed  by  a  single   act  of  im- 
periou^ness,  or  even  wrong,  on  the  part  of  the  sovereign  :    it  is  a  patient,  long- 
suifering,  forgiving  principle ;   and  only  after  long  continued  and  exaggerated 
wrong  does  it  assume  an  attitude  of  determined  opposition  (vide  the  I^etherlanda 
under   Philip   II.,  France  and   Spain    under  the   Bourbons,   England   under 
Charles  I).     The  answer  of  Kchoboam  (verses  13,  14)  was  as  a  lighted  match 
falling  on   a   powder    magazine    whose    stores   had    been   accumulating  for 
years.     The  supremacy  of  the  tribes   of  Judah   over   the  powerful  tribe    of 
Ephraim  was  a  cause  of  perpetual  jealousy  and  heartburning.     "  There  was  a 
difi'erence  in  the  character  and  pursuits  of  the  tribes ;  whilst  Judah  was  the 
leader  and  head  of  the  theocracy  and  the  covenant,  therefore  of  higher  religious 
life  (Genesis   xlix.    10;    Psalm    Ix.  9;    Ixxviii.  67;    cxiv.    1,    2),  Ephraim 
represented  the  nature-side   of  the  people's   life;    and   the  consciousness  of 
natural  material  strength  and  earthly  abundance  appears  with  it  (Genesis  xlix. 
22;  Deuteronomy  xxxiii.  13;   Psalm  Ixxviii.  9)."     So,  in  the  moral  world, 
there  are  two  antagonistic  forces  continually  warring  with  each  other — the 
carnal  and  the  spiritual,  the  sensuous  and  the  supersensuous,  the  world-principle 
and  the  lofty  moral  aims  of  church  life.     But  the  time  is   coming  when  the 
strife  shall  end,  when  **  Ephraim  shall  not  envy  Judah,  and  Judah  shall  not  vex 
Ephraim"   (Isaiah  xi.  13).     2.  In  oppressive  exactions.     The  monarchy,  as  it 
grew  in  power  and  magnificence,  imposed  still  heavier  taxations  upon  the  people, 
both  in  labour  and  in  money.     The  king  became  a  despot ;  and  the  people,  who 
had  no  means  of  obtaining  redress,  groaned  under  ever  accumulating  burdens. 
But,  all  the  time,  the  national  feeling  was  ripening  for   revolt.      The   pro- 
phets and  the  chief  leaders  of  the  people  saw,  now  that  Solomon  was  dead, 
that  a  change  must  take  place  in  the  government ;  and  they  were  ready  to 
take    part   in   the   movement.      The    revolution    might   have    been   effected 
peacefully  and  without  division ;    but  the  youthful  monarch  was  blinded  by 
self-confidence  and  fiattery,  and  was  swept  away  before  the  storm  of  national 
indignation    he    was   too    powerless   to   arrest.     Tyranny  is  short-lived,  and 
^vill,  sooner  or  latter,  meet  with  its  deserved  punishment.     The   whips  and 
scorpions  it  has  twisted  for  the  chastisement  of  others  will  be  used  to  flagellate 
itself.     3.  In  the  idolatry/  of  king  and  people.     This  was  the  head  and  front  of 
offence.     When  Jehovah  is  insulted  and  forsaken^  the  way  is  open  for  every 
folly  and  enoniiity,  and  retribution  will  inevitably  ensue.     Idolatry  is  the  germ 
194 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  OHAP.xn. 


of  many  other  sins.  The  king  erred  as  much  in  the  licence  and  sanction  he 
gave  to  heathenish  religions  as  in  the  severity  of  his  imperial  exactions.  Sin  is 
a  great  disintegrating  force— it  loosens  the  loyalty  of  a  people,  it  shakes 
the  foundations  of  a  throne,  it  hreaks  up  the  cohesion  of  a  nation. 

II.  That  revolt  is  haneful  in  its  results.     1.  It  produces  disunion.    The 
work  of  Saul,  David,  and  Solomon  in  consolidating  the  kingdom — a  work  of 
time  and  infinite  pains — was  undone  in  a  single  day.     Rebellion  stirs  up  the 
worst  passions,  animosities  are  created  which  are  not  forgotten  in  a  lifetime,  the 
nearest  relationships  are  despised,   and  the  tenderest   ties   unbound.     It  is  a 
political  earthquake  producing  social   disorder  and  confusion.     The  revolt  of 
man  from  the  authority  of  heaven  has  filled  the  earth  with  the  elements  of 
moral  discord  and  disunion.     2.  It  is  attended  with  violence  and  suffering  (verse 
18).     On  this  occasion  an  officer  of  the  crown  was  stoned  to  death,  and  the 
king  himself  obliged  to  fly.     It  is  rare  for  a  national  revolution  to  be  bloodless : 
thousands  have  fallen  victims  to  its  lawless  fury.     A  people  in  rebellion  is 
like  a  fierce  dog  unchained.     ^'Nothing  is  more  untractable  and  violent  than 
an   enraged   multitude.     It  was  time  for   Rehoboam    to   betake   himself  to 
his  chariot:    he  saw  those  stones  were  thrown  at  him  in  his  Adoram.     As 
the  messenger  suff"ersfor  his  master,  so  the  master  sufi'ers  in  his  messenger.  Had 
Rehoboam  been  in  Adoram's  clothes,  this  death  had  been  his ;  only  flight  can 
deliver  him  from  those  that  might  have  been  subjects."     The  evil  consequences 
of  rebellion  are  often  felt  for  a  century.     The  blood  of  rebellion  makes  a  dark 
stain  which  it  is  difficult  to  wash  out. 

III.  That  revolt  may  be  Divinely  overruled  for  good  (verse  24).  This 
thing  was  from  the  Lord.  Without  violating  the  exercise  of  moral  freedom, 
Jehovah  used  the  disasters  of  the  kingdom  in  carrying  out  His  great  purpose  of 
Mercy  towards  the  race.  A  word  from  the  prophet  dismissed  the  armies  which 
had  met  to  plunge  into  a  fratricidal  war;  and  both  sides  obeyed  the  authori- 
tative word  of  the  Lord.  To  fight  against  God  may  aggravate,  but  can  never 
redress  human  miseries.  ^  **  While  the  disruption  of  the  Hebrew  people  into 
two  nations  was,  in  one  point  of  view  a  chastisement  upon  sin,  we  can  see  from 
another  point  of  view  that  God  made  this  very  calamity  instrumental  to  the 
maintenance  of  Jewish  isolation,  and  the  preservation  of  His  revealed  truth. 
The  national  life  was  concentrated  into  an  intenser  form  among  the  two  chosen 
tribes  than  when  diffused  among  the  ten.  Their  circumstances,  as  brought 
into^  closer  local  proximity  with  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  and  with  all  its 
services  and  associations,  were  favourable  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  main- 
tenance of  true  religion  among  them,  and  the  deepening  of  all  the  ties  of  Jewish 
life.  Withm  the  narrower  area  the  circle  of  idolatrous  temptation  was  corres- 
pondingly narrowed.  The  very  rivalry  between  the  two  kindred  nations,  and 
their  common^  possession  of  the  same  Scriptures,  drove  the  Jew  back  more 
intensely  on  his  peculiar  privileges,  and  guarded  him  thus  from  the  contamina- 
tion of  the  idolatrous  apostasy  established  by  Jeroboam.  As  regards  the  sacred 
writings  themselves,  it  quickened  the  jealousy  with  which  they  were  preserved, 
and  has  provided  two  independent  lines  of  evidence  instead  of  one  ;  and  lastly, 
m  conjunction  with  these  varied  results,  it  narrowed  the  line  of  Messiah's 
descent,  and  drew  into  definite  shape  the  proofs  of  His  personal  identity.  The 
separation  retarded,  but  did  not  avert,  the  final  catastrophe.'*— G'^rfi^^^.  The 
history  affords  another  example  of  how  God  can  make  the  sins  and  follies  of 
men  subservient  to  His  higher  pui  poses. 

^  EssoNsi^l.  Jehovah  is  the  Righteous  Governor  of  the  nations,  2.  A  nation 
%$  trongonly  while  it  is  faithful  to  Him,  3.  It  it  m  who  redresses  national 
wrongs  while  He  promotes  the  welfare  of  the  whf^U  rave. 

195 


Oiur.UL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAUT :  KINGS, 


ThB   BenSIKO  OVTHS  KiKOSOlC, 

Verses  21-25. 

The  thing  which  the  prophet  declared  to  be  from  the  Lord  was  the  separation 
of  the  tribes  of  Israel — the  revolt  of  Jeroboam  from  the  house  of  David — the 
establishment  of  a  new  kingdom.  Yet  these  events,  to  all  appearance,  contra- 
dicted the  very  purpose  for  which  the  chosen  people  existed,  and  confused  their 
history.  And  this  conclusion  appears  to  be  strengthened  by  all  subsequent 
experience  of  the  effects  of  this  revolt.  Jeroboam,  the  author  of  it,  is  represented 
througjhout  Scripture  as  the  man  who  made  Israel  to  sin.  The  history  of  the 
ten  tribes  is  a  record  of  continually  deepening  degeneracy.  From  this  time, 
too,  all  the  brilliancy  passes  away  from  the  house  of  David.  His  grand  antici- 
pations of  what  should  come  to  pass  in  after  times,  if  they  had  a  partial  accom- 
plishment in  the  days  of  his  son,  seemed  to  be  belied  by  the  history  of  his  son's 
Bons.  ^  Prophets  mourn  over  a  land  devoured  by  strangers,  "whose  princes  were 
rebellious  and  companions  of  thieves,  loving  gifts  and  following  after  rewards ; 
who  judged  not  the  fatherless,  neither  did  the  cause  of  the  widow  come  before 
them."  The  noblest  specimens  of  the  royal  race  were  men,  the  main  business 
of  whose  reigns  was  to  remove  the  corruptions  of  their  predecessors.  The  last 
and  most  zealous  of  all  was  unable,  by  his  reforms,  to  avert  the  downfall  and 
captivity  of  his  people.  All  these  evils  are  evidently  connected  in  the  minds  of 
the  prophets  with  the  schism  of  the  tribes.  They  look  upon  their  division  as 
containing  the  principle,  and  illustrating  the  effects,  of  all  divisions  which 
should  happen  in  all  nations  in  times  to  come.  Their  belief  that  some  day 
unity  would  be  restored  to  their  land  is  identified  with  the  hope  of  peace  and 
righteousness  for  the  whole  earth. 

I.  "We  must  not  suppose  that  the  sentence  which  afllrms  that  this  great 
calamity  was  from  the  Lord  is  an  isolated  one,  or  that  it  can  be  explained  into 
some  general  notion  that  all  mens'  doings,  good  or  evil,  may  be  attributed  to  an 
omnipotent  ruler.  "We  shall  find  presently  how  little  that  general  notion  accords 
with  the  language  or  teaching  of  Scripture  (read  chap.  xi.  26-39).  In  this 
passage  we  are  distinctly  told  that  a  prophet  stirred  up  those  thoughts  in  the 
mind  of  Jeroboam  which  led  him  to  rise  against  Solomon.  This  prophet  is  not 
represented  as  a  deceiver,  who  spoke  words  out  of  his  own  heart ;  he  is  a  true 
witness  for  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  He  announces  an  eternal,  unchangeable 
law.  It  had  been  declared  that  idolatry  must  produce  degradation  and  division 
in  the  land.  The  very  ground  of  the  unity  of  the  nation  had  been  taken 
away — its  acknowledgment  of  a  one  Lord.  What  would  follow  if  the  semblance 
remained  when  the  reality  was  gone  ?  This  would  follow  :  a  perpetual  growth 
of  internal  corruption — of  internal  division  ;  falsehood  spreading  in  the  vitals 
of  the  people,  with  nothing  to  remind  them  that  it  was  falsehood,  with  nothing 
to  prove  that  their  kingdom  had  another  foundation  than  that  which  they  were 
trying  to  rest  it  upon.  Such  a  state  of  things  is  inconceivable  if  we  suppose 
that  human  beings  are  as  much  under  a  Divine  order  as  natural  things  are. 
That  order  must  vindicate  itself — must  show  what  it  is  :  the  punishment  of  the 
transgression  must  be  the  way  of  proclaiming  the  principle  which  has  been 
transgressed. 

II.  But  moral  laws,  though  they  are  as  powerful  defenders  of  themselves  as 
natural  laws,  do  not  defend  themselves  in  the  same  way.  Human  beings, 
voluntary  creatures,  are  the  instruments  of  carrying  out  the  one,  as  the  hidden 
powers  in  sea,  or  earth,  or  fire,  are  of  fulfilling  the  other.  A  personal  God 
dealing  with  men  will  employ  mun  as  the  agents  and  executors  of  His  purpose. 

196 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAUT:   KINGS.  chap.  xii. 


Jeroboam  has  risen  by  hi«  induptry  in  the  service  of  Solomon.     He  appoints  the 

charges  or  burdens  for  the  house  of  Joseph.     He  is  thus  acquainted  with  the 

discontents  of  the  people  ;  apparently  he  sympathises  with  them.     The  tyranny 

grew  out  of  the  idolatry.     Though  Jeroboam  might  not  perceive  the  root,  he 

could  perceive  the  evil  fruit,  which  deserved  to  be  hated  for  its  own  sake ;  he 

was,   therefore,  qualified  to  execute  Ahijah's  prophecy,  not  merely  as  a  dull 

instrument,   but  as  one  who  had,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  righteous  purpose.     A 

promise  is  given  him,  not  of  immediate,  but  of  ultimate,  success.     At  the  same 

time,  it  is  clearly  declared  to  him  that  the  Divine  purpose  has  not  been  altered 

by  the  sin  of  the  Jewish  king.     The  tribe  of  Judah,  the  house  of  David,  the 

city  of  Jerusalem,  had  a  sacredness  attached  to  them  which  would  not  be  lost. 

The  tribe  had  been  chosen,  the  kingdom  had  been  established,  the  Temple  had 

been  built  in  the  capital,  as  assurances  for  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future, 

which  nothinjjj  could  set  aside.     That   which  seemed  to  destroy  the  harmony, 

even  the  existence,  of  the  nation,   would,   in  fact,  bring  out  the  secret  of  its 

harmony,  the  ground  of  its  existence,  more  fully  than  they  had  ever  been  brought 

out  yet. 

III.  This  part  of  the  narrative  will  seem  mysterious  and  supernatural.     Such 
assuredly  it  is ;  and  it  explains  to  us  how  supernatural  and  mysterious  every 
event  or  series  of  events  must  be  which  concerns  the  life  of  nations  and  the 
sins  of  rulers  and  subjects.     But  we  soon  find  ourselves  in  the  region  of  ordinary 
human   life.     (Read   chap.  xii.    3-11).     How  rapidly  the   interval  of   three 
thousand  years  and  all  the  difference  between  a  small  Syrian  province  of  the 
old  world,  and  a  nation  of  Europe  in  the  nineteenth  century,  seems  to  disappear 
as  we  read  this  story !     Have  we  not,  in  one  sphere  or  other,   among  the 
patriarchs  of  a  village,  or  the  statesmen  of  a  kingdom,  met  and  conversed  with 
some  of  these  grave  old  men,  who  did  not,  perhaps,  set  before  themselves  the 
highest  standard  of  moral  excellence,  who  did  not  at  once  pronounce  upon  the 
right  or  wrong  of  an  action,  but  whom  long  experience  had  taught  the  might 
which  lies  in  gentle  words,    and  the  real  desire    there  is  in  human   beings 
to  obey,  if  there  be  but  sense  and  somewhat  of  sympathy  in  those  who  rule  ? 
Have  we  not  also — and,  alas  !  far  more  frequently — encountered  those  young  men 
flushed  with  insolence  and  wine,  who  talked  loudly  of  putting  down  the  pre- 
tensions of  inferiors,  and  of  maintaining  their  own  position  and  dignity,  who  had 
never  yet  learnt  in  what  superiority  or  dignity  consists,  who  had  never  begun 
to  reverence  their  fellow-men  because  they  did  not  reverence  themselves ;  who 
thought   they   could   meet  the   demands  of   suffering  and  wronged  men  by 
boasting  words  and  a  frantic  determination  to  maintain  privileges  which  they 
ought  never  to  have  possessed,  because  they  were  not  privileges  based  upon  any 
real  relations,  upon  any  law,  human  or  Divine,  but  merely  upon  accident  or 
assumption,  which  must  perish  as  rapidly  as  they  liave  grown  up.     And  ytt 
these,  as  the  story  teaches,  and  as  all  subsequent  history  has  proved,  are  the 
favourite  and  triumphant  advisers  of  those  whom  their  own  vanity  and  folly 
have  doomed,  and  who  want  parasites  to  put  into  words  the  doctrines  which 
they  have  already  received  into  their  cold,  empty  hearts.    "  My  father  chastised 
you  with  rods;  I  will  chastise  you  with  scorpions.'^     This  in  all  ages  has  been 
the  childish  bluster  of  men  who  have  made  themselves  blind  to  the  future  by 
refusing  to  use  their  eyes  in  judging  of  that  which  is  before  them,  who  fancy 
that  the  power  will  be  their  own  for  ever,  at  the  very  moment  when  the  hand- 
writing on  the  wall  is  declaring  that  it  has  been  taken  from  them  and  given  to 
another. 

rV.  **  TVTierefore,"  the  historian  goes  on,  "  the  king  hearkened  not  unto  the 
people.  For  the  cause  was  from  the  Lord,  &c.  (verses  15-20).  Here  again  we 
are  on  the  mysterious  and  Divine  ground ;  yet  there  is  no  sudden  or  violent 

197 


OHAP.  xn.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


transition  from  that  common  homely  earth  upon  which  we  were  standing  a 
moment  ago.  The  prophecy  of  Ahijah,  the  Shilonite,  is  not  hrought  to  pass  by 
any  strange  combination  of  events.  The  folly  of  Rehoboam  and  his  gay 
counsellers,  their  utter  incapacity  for  estimating  their  own  weakness  or  the 
force  of  indignation  and  conviction  in  the  minds  of  other  men — these  are  the 
Ways  by  which  the  Divine  counsels  are  brought  forth  into  act ;  these  are  the 
messengers  of  God*s  wrath,  as  much  as  the  volcano.  Deep  and  unfathomable 
mystery,  worthy  to  be  meditated  on  by  those  who  are  fighting  with  evil  upon 
earth,  and  by  those  who  have  won  the  victory  ;  the  key  to  all  the  puzzles  of 
history,  the  comfort  and  consolation  amid  the  overwhelming  evils  which  we  see 
around  us  and  feel  within  us;  the  deliverance  at  once  from  the  debasing 
Pantheism  which  teaches  that  sin  is  only  another  form  of  righteousness — wrong 
only  an  aspect  of  right — and  from  the  Manicheeism  which  would  lead  us  to 
think  that  evil  may  at  last  triumph,  or  hold  a  divided  empire  with  God.  The 
wrath  of  man  has  praised  Him,  and  will  always  praise  Him.  Sin,  and  death, 
and  hell,  must  do  Him  continual  homage  now,  and  will  be  led  as  His  victims 
and  grace  His  triumph  when  His  glory  is  fully  revealed.  But  neither  now  or 
then  will  they  ever  blend  with  His  works,  or  be  shown  to  have  their  origin  in 
Him,  or  be  known  as  anything  but  the  contradictions  of  His  nature. 

V.  Jeroboam  then  was  established  on  the  throne  of  Israel.  The  heir  of  the 
house  of  David  tried  to  crush  the  revolt,  and  to  recover  the  tribes ;  but  tried  in 
vain.  The  thing  was  from  the  Lord.  Rehoboam  could  no  more  put  down  the 
rebellious  servant  of  Solomon,  than  Saul  could  put  down  David.  The  decree 
which  had  said  that  the  ten  tribes  should  remain  distinct  was  as  Divine  a  decree 
as  that  which  established  an  everlasting  covenant  with  the  man  after  God's  own 
heart.  And  yet  this  is  the  sequel  of  the  story  (read  verses  26-32).  As  this 
passage  receives  great  light  from  those  which  precede  it,  so  also  it  throws  back 
a  light  upon  them.  We  see  now  more  clearly  than  ever  why  the  separation  of 
the  kingdoms  was  a  thing  from  the  Lord.  It  asserted  the  real  dignity  of 
Jerusalem  as  the  place  in  which  it  has  pleased  God  so  put  his  "Name,  not 
merely  or  chiefly  as  the  place  in  which  David  or  Solomon  chanced  to  reign.  It 
asserted  the  real  unity  of  a  nation  to  be  not  in  a  king,  but  in  the  King.  It 
showed  that  the  only  basis  of  any  political  fellowship  among  the  tribes  lay  in 
that  name  which  was  revealed  to  the  first  father  of  them.  The  revolt  of 
Jeroboam  would  have  done  this,  if  he  had  continued  faithful ;  his  unxaithf  ul- 
ness  discovered  the  same  principle  through  another  and  a  sterner  discipline. 
The  miseries  to  which  it  led,  justified  all  the  groans  of  the  prophets;  the 
light  which  broke  through  those  miseries,  showing  the  cause  of  them  and  the 
deliverance  from  them,  justified  all  their  hopes. 

VI.  All  Christians  have  felt  that  the  principle  of  separations  and  schisms  in 
different  lands  and  ages  must  be  contained  in  this  schism  of  the  tribes.  The 
great  schism  of  the  Latin  and  Greek  Churches  strikes  the  student  of  eccle- 
siastical records  as  a  most  startling  contradiction  in  the  history  of  a  body  which 
was  to  include  all  nations  and  races.  Yet  surely  it  was  from  the  Lord.  Idola- 
trous habits  and  feelings  had  been  spreading  in  both  divisions  of  the  church. 
The  sense  of  union  in  an  invisible  Head,  though  not  lost,  was  fearfully 
weakened.  A  seeming  union  must  have  been  preserved  by  the  loss  of  all 
witness  for  real  union ;  the  division  remains  a  standing  witness  against  the 
possibility  of  a  visible  Head  ever  holding  the  Catholic  body  together.  The 
schism  of  rival  popes  in  the  Western  Church  during  the  fifteenth  century  was 
as  great  a  scandal  to  Christendom  as  can  be  conceived.  Yet  it  was  surely  from 
the  Lord.  It  led  men  to  perceive  that  there  was  corruption  in  the  head,  and  in 
the  members  of  the  ecclesiastical  polity ;  it  led  to  those  disputes  respecting  the 
relative  power  of  popes  and  councils  which  showed  that  neither  could  heal 

198 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  cnAP.  xn. 


the  wounds  of  the  Church,  or  preserve  its  unity.  It  led  to  that  movement  in 
the  sixteenth  century  which  we  all  helieve  to  have  been  from  the  Lord,  and 
which  was  really  a  declaration  of  faith  in  a  living  God,  against  a  system  of 
idolatry  that  was  rapidly  passing  into  a  system  of  organized  unbelief.  In  each 
of  these  cases  there  were  chances  of  reconciliation,  such  as  were  offered 
to  Eehoboam  when  the  people  besought  him  to  lessen  their  burdens.  In  each 
case  there  were  grave  counsellors  advising  reconciliation,  and  noisy  fanatics 
preaching  uncompromising  resistance.  In  each  case  the  infatuation  of  princes 
and  rulers,  ecclesiastical  and  civil,  was  carrying  out  a  Divine  and  eternal 
principle,  even  when  they  were  defying  it.  They  could  not  restore  unity  by 
declamations,  by  concessions,  or  by  persecution.  Facts  spoke  louder  than  the 
I'rophet  spoke  to  Eehoboam :  **  It  cannot  be.  The  thing  is  from  the 
Lord." 

Reflections : — Oh,  brethren !  how  intolerable  would  be  these  facts  and  recol- 
lections which  show  every  party  in  Church  and  State  to  have  been  the  cause  of 
shameful  scandals,  which  forbid  us  to  cast  stones  at  others  because  we  are 
in  the  same  sin,  if  we  might  not  recur  again  and  again  to  the  words  which 
1  have  quoted  so  often.  But  if  ''the  thing  is  of  the  Lord,"  there  must  be  an 
end  of  all  those  strifes  by  which  He  has  ordained  that  our  idolatries  against  Him 
and  cruelties  to  our  brethren  should  punish  themselves.  There  must  be  a  day 
when  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  which  consist  only  by  Christ,  shall  be 
gathered  manifestly  together  in  Him,  when  it  shall  be  known  and  confessed  that 
there  is  one  king,  one  priest,  one  sacrifice;  that  we  have  been  at  war  with  each 
other  because  we  have  not  done  homage  to  that  one  king,  drawn  nigh  to  God 
through  that  one  priest,  omitted  to  present  that  one  perfect  sacrifice.  And  those 
who  are  willing  before  God's  altar  to  own  that  their  self-seeking  and  self-will 
have  been  rending  asunder  their  families,  the  nation,  the  Church,  the  world, 
may  hope  that  God's  Spirit  will  work  in  them  henceforth  to  do  all  such  acts  as 
shall  not  retard,  but  hasten  forward,  the  blessed  consummation  for  which  they 
look.  They  may  ask  to  be  taught  the  mystery  of  daily  self-sacrifice — how 
to  give  up  their  own  tastes,  opinions,  wishes.  They  may  ask  that  they  may 
never  be  tempted  to  give  up  one  atom  of  God's  truth,  or  to  dally  for  one  moment 
with  the  falsehoods  of  themselves  or  of  their  brethren  ;  because  truth  is  the  one 
ground  of  universal  peace  and  fellowship,  because  falsehood  and  division  are  ever 
increasing  and  reproducing  each  other. — (Condensed  from  F,  D,  Maurice). 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verses  1-24.  The  rebellion  and  its  us  from  rash  designs ;  and  they  are  our 
lessons.  1.  Many  a  base  design  lurks  greatest  enemies  who  soothe  our  folly 
under  the  most  specious  appearances.  and  flatter  our  pride,  7.  At  court, 
2.  The  best  government  will  not  be  too  commonly,  not  the  profit  of  the 
without  factious  spirits,  ready  to  blow  kingdom,  but  the  pleasing  of  the  king, 
the  coals  of  sedition  among  the  popu-  is  the  object  most  in  view.  8.  They 
lace.  3.  The  avarice  of  a  kept  mis-  who  know  the  great  sin  of  rebellion 
tress  is  insatiable.  4.  Most  men  are  will  suffer  much  rather  than  rise  to 
more  concerned  how  to  save  their  vindicate  themselves  by  so  dangerous 
money  than  their  souls.  5.  That  a  measure.  9.  When  God's  will  con- 
government  which  subsists  only  by  tradicts  our  designs,  we  must  patiently 
severity  is  in  a  tottering  condition  :  submit.  10.  Love  to  our  brethren 
no  throne  is  sure  where  a  king  reigns  should  make  us  put  up  with  many  in- 
not  in  the  heart  of  his  subjects.  6.  juries,  rather  than  seek  a  redress  which 
They  are  our  best  friends  who  dissuade  may  be  ruinous  to  both.     11.  If  we 

199 


OhIp.  xU. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAnY:  KINGS. 


fight  against  God  there  can  he  no  hope 
o£  success :  it  is  wise,  therefore,  betimes 
to  leave  olf  meddling. 

Verses  1-20.  The  departure  of 
Israel  from  the  House  of  David. 
I.  The  grievances.  II.  The  decision. 
III.  The  rebellion. 

—  The  division  of  the  kingdom. 
I.  A  consequence  of  manifold  sins — of 
Solomon,  Jeroboam,  Eehoboam.  II. 
A  Divine  dispensation — for  their  hu- 
miliation and  chastisement,  and  for  a 

•  direction  towards  the  heavenly  eternal 
Kingdom. 

—  The  sources  and  causes  of  the 
rebellion.  I.  In  general  estrange- 
ment from  God,  indiiferentism,  and  un- 
belief. II.  In  particular — these  sins 
on  the  part  of  the  people  (Prov.  xiv.  34), 
and  on  the  part  of  the  princes  (Prov. 
XX.  28).  Where  prince  and  people 
fear  God  there  will  be  no  rebellion ; 
but  where  no  covenant  with  God  exists, 
all  human  considerations  fall  in  pieces. 
— Lange, 

Verse  1 .  It  should  seem  to  be  in  the 
course  of  nature  that  sons  brought  up 
under  the    nurture    of   wise   fathers 
should  be  themselves  wise.     But  it  is 
not   always  seen,  perhaps   not   often 
seen,  that  wise  fathers  have  wise  sons. 
How  is   this  ?    It  may   be   that  the 
wisdom  of  the  son,  the  formation  of 
bis  character,   depends   more  on   the 
mother   than  the  father,   and  that  a 
wise  mother  is  even  more  essential  than 
a  wise  father  to  the   formation  of  a 
wise  son.      We  may  hear  of  foolish 
sons  having  wise  fathers,  and  of  loolish 
fathers  having  wise  sons,  but  rarely  of 
a    wise   son     having    had    a    foolish 
mother.      Several  young    men,    who 
were  associated  in  preparing  for  the 
Christian  ministry,  felt  interested  in 
ascertaining  what  proportion  of  their 
number   had    pious   mothers.      They 
were  greatly  surprised  and  delighted 
in  finding  that,  out  of  120  students, 
more  than  lOo  had  been  blessed  by  a 
mother's  prayers,  and  directed  by  a 
mother's  counsels  to  the  Saviour. — 
Kitto, 

—  Many  a  poor  man  hath  a  houseful 
of  child  len  by  one  wife,  while  this  great 
200 


king  has  but  one  son  by  many  housefuls 
of  wives.  How  often  doth  God  deny 
this  heritage  of  heirs  where  He  gives 
the  largest  heritage  of  lands,  and  gives 
most  of  these  living  possessions  where 
He  gives  least  of  the  dead,  that  His 
blessings  may  be  acknowledged  free 
unto  both,  entailed  upon  neither.  All 
Israel  found  that  Solomon's  wit  was 
not  propagated.  Many  a  fool  hath 
had  a  wiser  son  than  this  wisest 
father.  Amongst  many  sons  it  is  no 
news  to  find  some  one  defective.  Solo- 
mon hath  but  one  son,  and  he  no  mira- 
cle of  wisdom.  God  gives  purposely 
so  eminent  an  instance  to  teach  men 
to  look  up  to  heaven  both  for  heirs  and 
graces. — Bp.  Kail. 

—  The  first  step  taken  by  the  new 
king   was  a  most  judicious  one ;  and 
we  may  probably  trace  in  it  the  advice 
of  those  wise  heads  whose  counsels  he 
soon  after  rejected.     If  anything  could 
have  removed  the  disatfection  of  the 
Ephraimites  and  caused  them  to  sub- 
mit a  little  longer  to  the  ascendency  of 
Judah,  it  would  have  been  the  honour 
done  to  their  capital  by  its  selection  to 
be   the  scene  of  the   new  monarch's 
coronation.      Shechem  (now  Nahlas) 
lay  on  the  flank  of  Mount  Gerizim, 
directly  opposite  to  Mount  Ebal,  in  a 
position  second  to  none  in  all  Palestine. 
It  possessed  the  bones  of  Joseph  (Josh, 
xxiv.  32),  and  had  been  the  place  of 
geneial  meeting  in  the  days  of  Joshua 
{ib.  viii.  30-35  ;  xxiv.  1-28).     Abime- 
lech  had  also  reigned  there  (Judg.  ix, 
1-23) ;  and  though  he  had  destroyed 
the  place,  it  had  probably  soon  risen 
again,  and  was  once  more  a  chief  city, 
or  perhaps  the  chief  city  of  Ephraim. 
There  wasJoseph  sold  by  his  brethren — 
as  if  the   very  soil  had   been  stained 
with  perfidiousness. 

Verses  2,  3.  Experience  teaches 
that  those  who  ha\e  once  set  up  an  op- 
position to  legitimate  authority  will 
ever  persist  in  their  resolve,  even  if 
their  design  fail  or  is  pardoned ;  they 
only  await  another  opportunity  to 
carry  out  their  plans ;  therefore  they 
should  never  be  trusted. 

Verse  2.  Had  not  Israel  been  some- 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTAR}  :  KINGS. 


OHAf.  zn. 


what  predisposed  to  a  mutiny,  they 
had  never  sent  into  Kgypt  for  such  a 
spokesman  as  Jerohoara,  a  fugitive,  a 
traitor  to  Solomon ;  long  had  that 
crafty  conspirator  luikcd  in  a  foreign 
court.  The  alliances  of  princes  are 
not  ever  necessary  bonds  of  friendship; 
the  brother-in-law  of  Solomon  har- 
bours this  snake  in  his  bosom,  and 
gives  that  heat,  which  is  repaid  with 
a  sting  to  the  posterity  of  so  near  an 
ally.  That  Israel  would  entertain  a 
rebel  was  an  ill  sign  ;  worse  yet,  that 
would  countenance  him  ;  worst  of  all, 
that  they  would  employ  him.  No- 
thing doth  more  bewray  evil  intentions 
than  the  choice  of  vicious  agents. 
Those  that  mean  well  will  not 
hazard  either  the  success  or  credit  of 
their  actions  upon  offensive  instru- 
ments; none  but  the  sluttish  will 
wipe  their  faces  with  foul  cloths. 
Jeroboam's  head  had  been  a  fit  pre- 
sent to  have  been  tendered  unto  their 
new  king ;  and  now,  instead  thereof, 
they  tender  themselves  to  Jeroboam  as 
the  head  of  their  faction. — Bp.  Hall, 

Verses  3,  4.  Eebellious  people 
easily  seek  and  find  in  public  circum- 
stances means  which  they  amplify 
and  exaggerate  in  order  to  give  an 
appearance  of  justice  to  their  wicked- 
ness, and  to  have  some  pretext  for  their 
criminal  designs.  It  is  a  universal 
fact  that  men  exclaimed  more  con- 
cerning oppression  than  concerning 
godlessness  and  other  sins ;  are  more 
careful  for  the  body  than  for  the  soul ; 
and,  so  that  they  are  free  in  action, 
,  give  little  heed  to  the  soul's  nurture 
(Ex.  xvi.  3).  A  people  which  pre- 
scribes to  its  lawful  sovereign  the 
conditions  of  its  obedience  to  him,  and 
directs  him  how  to  govern,  assumes 
to  itself  royal  authority,  and  overturns 
the  appointed  order  of  God,  thus 
rushing  surely  on  to  its  own  des- 
truction.— Lange. 

Verse  4.  The  cry  of  the  oppressed. 

1.  Will  one  day  make  itself  heard. 

2.  WiU  not  fail  to  reheaise  all  the 
injuries  of  the  past.  3.  Is  an  appeal 
for  justice  and  mercy.  4.  Is  not 
uttered  in  vain  in  the  ears  ol  the 


prudent  ruler.     5.    Cannot  be  disre- 
garded with  impunity. 

—    The   complaint   was    probably 
twofold.      The    Israelites    no    doubt 
complained    in    part    of    the    heavy 
weight   of   taxation  laid  upon   them 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  monarch 
and  his  court.     But  their  chief  griev- 
ance   was     the     forced     labour     to 
which    they    had     been     subjected. 
Forced  labour   has   been   among  the 
causes  leading  to  insurrection  in  many 
ages  and  countries.     It  alienated  the 
people  of  Rome  from  the  last  Tarquin  ; 
it  helped  to  bring  about  the  French 
revolution  ;  and  it  was  for  many  years 
one    of   the    principal    grievances   of 
the  Russian  serfs.     It  is  a  reasonable 
conjecture  that  Jeroboam's  position  as 
superintendent  of  the  forced  labours 
of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  revealed    to 
him  the  large  amount  of  dissatisfac- 
tion   which    Solomon's    system    had 
produced,  and  that   his  contemplated 
rebellion  in  Solomon's   reign  was    to 
have  been  connected  with  this  stand- 
ing grievance. — Speaker's  Comm. 

—  Doubtless  the  crafty  head  of 
Jeroboam  was  in  this  suit  which  his 
mouth  uttered  in  the  name  of  Israel. 
Nothing  could  have  been  more  sub- 
tle :  it  seemed  a  promise,  but  it  was  a 
threat ;  that  which  seemed  a  suppli- 
cation was  a  complaint :  humility 
was  but  a  vail  for  discontentment — 
one  hand  held  a  paper,  the  other  a 
sword.  If  Rehoboam  yield,  he  ble- 
mishes his  father;  if  he  deny,  he 
endangers  his  kingdom.  His  wilful- 
ness shall  seem  worthily  to  abandon 
his  sceptre,  if  he  stick  at  so  un- 
reasonable a  suit.  Surely  Israel  came 
with  a  purpose  to  cavil ;  Jeroboam 
had  secretly  troubled  these  waters, 
that  he  might  fish  more  gainfully. — 
Bp.  Mall. 

Verse  6.  A  prince  who,  upon  his 
accession  to  the  throne,  requires 
time  to  decide  if  his  rule  shall  be 
mild  and  merciful,  or  harsh  and 
despotic,  cannot  have  assumed  his 
high  responsible  post  in  the  fear  and 
love  of  God ;  therefore  he  must 
expect  no  Divine  blessing.  It  is  well 
and  good,    indeed,   in    all    weighty 

201 


CHIP.  xn. 


EOMJLETIO  COMMEI^JTAliY:  KINGS, 


matters,  to  take  time  for  reflectioD,  but 
in  time  of  sudden  danger,  rapid,  firm 
decision  is  equally  necessary.  One 
accustomed  to  walk  in  God's  ways 
will  at  sucli  times  take  no  step  which 
will  afterwards  cause  him  bitter 
repentance. — Lange. 

—  The  supreme  value  of  a  pause 
in  the  midst  of  a  national  crisis. 
How  pregnant  with  importance  were 
those  three  days !  1 .  Affording  oppor- 
tunity for  the  rectifying  of  wrongs. 

2.  Deepening  the  gravity  of  the 
situation   to   the    opposing    factions. 

3.  Suspending  the  destiny  of  the 
nation  on  the  next  step  taken.  4. 
Requiring  the  most  consummate 
wisdom  in  counsel  and  action. 

—  To  hesitate  in  such  a  crisis  is  ruin. 
Even  a  prompt  refusal  had  been  less 
dangerous  than  delay.  But  Eehoboam 
could  not  trust  his  own  understanding. 
He  asked  three  days  lor  deliberation. 
Even  consent  alter  such  delay  would 
lose  the  generous  aspect  of  spontaneous 
grace,  and  would  have  the  appearance 
to  the  people  of  having  been  extorted 
from  his  fears.  And  it  rendered  refusal 
doubly  ruinous.  The  indication  of 
reluctance  gave  warning  of  the  result 
that  might  be  expected,  and  afforded 
time  for  the  disaffected  to  mature  their 
plans  and  preparations  for  revolt.  We 
cannot  doubt  that  these  three  days 
were  among  the  busiest  of  Jeroboam's 
life. — Kitto. 

Verses  6-11.  Rehoboam  holds  a 
council.  I.  With  whom  ^  With  his 
own  servants,  old  and  young,  but  not 
with  the  Lord  his  God  and  His  servants. 
In  difficult  and  grave  matters  we 
should  not  neglect  to  take  counsel  with 
men,  but  chiefly  should  we  go  to  Him 
for  counsel  of  whom  it  may  be  said  : 
**  He  has  the  way  of  all  ways,  and  never 
fails  in  counsel  (Jas.  i.  5 ;  Isaiah 
zxx.  1).  If  He  sit  not  in  the  council, 
in  vain  do  young  and  old  advise.  Had 
Rehoboam  sought  light  from  above  in 
those  three  days,  and  prayed  as  once 
his  father  did  (Ch.  iii.  9),  or  as 
Jeremiah  (Jer.  xxxii.  19),  or  entreated 
like  Jehoshaphat(2  Kings  iii.  11),  then 
202 


he  would  not  have  been  like  a  reed 
shaken  by  the  wind,  but  his  heart 
would  have  been  strong.  II.  The 
a'lvice  given  him.  Neither  counsel  was 
Divine,  but  both  merely  human  (Matt. 
xvi.  23).  The  old  men,  oa.t  of  their 
fear  and  apprehension,  advised  :  re- 
nounce for  the  present  thy  royal  pre- 
rogative, and  bow  before  the  will  of 
the  people ;  later  thou  canst  act 
differently.  This  advice  ran  counter 
to  his  piide  and  despotism,  so  he  re- 
fused the  counsel  of  the  old  men. 
Through  flattery  and  insolence  com- 
bined, the  young  men  counselled  a 
course  actually  inhuman — to  abuse  his 
royal  prerogative — to  care  nothing  for 
his  people  and  their  wishes,  but  simply 
to  treat  them  with  violence.  This 
advice  suited  him  well,  because  it 
corresponded  with  his  rough,  harsh, 
selfish,  and  violent  character.  But 
this  produced  the  exact  reverse  of  what 
he  wished  and  hoped.  When  you  re- 
ceive confiicting  counsels  from  men, 
apply  to  both  the  test  of  God's  Word 
(Psa.  xix.  8;  cxix.  104). — Lange, 

Verses  6,  7.  The  sedate  caution 
of  age.  1.  The  result  of  manifold 
experience.  2.  Is  valuable  in  counsel. 
3.  Sees  the  best  time  to  make  con- 
cessions. 4.  Merits  respectful  con- 
sideration. 

Verse  6.  It  is  the  first  privilege 
and  duty  of  a  king  to  seek  to  surround 
himself  with  men  who,  fearing  no 
man,  either  high  or  low,  and  regardless 
of  their  own  profit  or  advantage,  shall 
advise  him  as  befits  men  responsible 
before  a  just  and  holy  God.  One  such 
man  alone  outweighs  whole  hosts  of 
soldiers  (Prov.  xx.  28). 

Verse  7.  The  ruler  that  would  hold 
the  affections  of  his  people  must  first 
learn  to  be  their  servant.  He  must 
consult  their  wishes  and  interests  so 
as  not  to  seem  unmindful  of  his  most 
humble  subject.  But  it  is  easy  to  see, 
as  Bahr  remarks,  that  such  a  proposi- 
tion might  not  be  very  agreeable  to  a 
rash  and  imperious  young  king  ic 
whose  veins  Ammonite  blood  flowed. 

•—  A  king  who  refuses  to  be  a 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAT.    XII. 


**  servant  of  God  "  readily  finds  him- 
self in  a  situation  where  he  is  compelled 
to  be  a  servant  of  the  people.  The 
splendour  of  majesty  is  enhanced  by 
benevolence,  goodness,  and  mercy,  but 
never  by  timid  yielding  and  submission 
to  the  popular  will. 

Yerses  8-11.  The  reckless  frivolity 
of  youtlL  1.  Is  blind  to  surrounding 
dangers.  2.  Is  defiant  of  conse- 
quences. 3.  Is  not  to  be  trusted  in 
grave  emergencies.  4.  May  goad  a 
nation  into  rebellion. 

—  The  young  heads  are  consulted. 
This  very  change  argues  weakness. 
Some  reason  might  be  pleaded  for 
passing  from  the  younger  council  to 
the  aged ;  none  for  the  contrary.  Age 
brings  experience ;  and  it  is  a  shame 
if  with  the  ancient  be  not  wisdom. 
Youth  is  commonly  rash,  heady, 
insolent,  ungoverned,  wedded  to  will, 
led  by  humour,  a  rebel  to  reason,  a 
subject  to  passion,  fitter  to  execute 
than  advise.  Green  wood  is  ever 
shrinking  and  warping,  whereas  the 
well-seasoned  holds  a  constant  firmness. 
Many  a  life,  many  a  soul,  many  a 
flourishing  state,  hath  been  ruined  by 
undisciplined  monitors.  Such  were 
those  of  Eehoboam,  whose  great 
stomach  tells  us  that  this  conditionat- 
ing  of  subjects  was  no  other  than  an 
affront  to  their  new  master,  and  sug- 
gests to  them  how  unfit  it  is  for 
majesty  to  brook  so  saucy  a  treaty ; 
how  requisite  and  princely  to  crush  this 
presumption  in  the  egg.  There  can 
be  no  good  use  of  an  indefinite  pro- 
fession of  I'igour  and  severity.  Fear 
is  an  unsafe  guardian  of  any  state, 
much  less  of  an  unsettled :  which  was 
yet  worse — not  the  sins  of  Israel  were 
threatened,  nor  their  purses — but  their 
persons ;  neither  had  they  desired  a 
remission  of  justice,  but  of  exactions  ; 
and  now  they  hear  of  nothing  but 
burdens  and  scourges  and  scorpions. — 
Bp.  Ball, 

—  Where  the  counsels  of  the  aged 
are  rejected,  be  it  in  a  kingdom  or  in 
a  house,  and  those  only  of  the  youth- 
ful followed,  there  men  pursue  an  un- 
hallowed path.  For  to  a  true  wisdom 
of  life  experience  is  necessary,  and  this 
youth  cannot  have.    Those  who  grow 


np  with  us  have,  unconsciously  and 
involuntarily,  a  vast  influence  over 
our  modes  of  thought  and  views  of 
life,  therefore  parents  must  have  a 
watchful  eye  over  the  intimacies  of 
their  children. 

Verses  10,  11.  A.  vaunting  speech 
is  by  no  means  a  proof  of  courage. 
The  more  boastful  a  man's  speech  the 
less  resolute  he  will  be  in  peril  and 
temptation;  a  truly  strong,  firm,  and 
calm  man  is  silent.  Time  sf^rving  and 
flattery  are  most  dangerous  for  a 
prince  ;  they  wear  the  garb  of  fidelity 
and  devotion,  and  in  reality  are  the 
greatest  treachery.  Chiefly  distrust 
those  who  counsel  thee  to  do  what 
gratifies  thy  vanity,  thy  selfishness, 
and  thine  own  desires,  and  costs  thee 
no  sacrifice. — Lange. 

Verse  11.  Gesenius  understands  by 
scorpions,  whips  having  leaden  balls 
at  the  ends  of  their  lashes  with 
hooks  projecting  from  them.  And  the 
latter  Romans  seem  certainly  to  have 
called  by  this  name  a  certain  kind  of 
whip  or  rod.  Others  have  supposed 
the  thorny  stem  of  the  egg  plant, 
called  from  the  irritating  wounds 
which  it  inflicted  "  the  scorpion 
plant,"  to  be  intended.  But  it  seems 
best  to  regard  the  expression  as  a 
mere  figure  of  speech. — Speaker^s 
Comm. 

Verses  12-15.  The  answer  of  the 
king  to  the  people.  I.  Jt  is  hardr — 
not  merely  a  refusal,  but  imperious, 
tyrannical,  unbecoming  in  any 
sovereign,  but  especially  one  who 
ought  to  be  servant  of  the  compassion- 
ate and  merciful  God,  with  whom  is 
great  truth  and  loving  kindness 
(Exod.  xxxiv.  6).  Authority  is  the 
handmidd  of  God  to  thee  for  good 
(Rom.  xiii.  4),  and  not  a  terror. 
Government  is  not  built  upon  whips 
and  scourges,  but  upon  justice,  love, 
and  confidence.  That  rule  alone  is 
thoroughly  right  where  **  mercy  and 
truth  are  met  together  "  (Psa.  Ixxxv. 
II).  How  entirely  diff^erent is  David' s 
example  of  sovereignty  (Psa.  ci). 

II.  A  rash  and  inconsiderate  counsel, 

203 


CHAP.  ML  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KW98, 


that  of  the  young  men  throwing  oil  on  But  neither  Solomon's  sins  nor  Reho- 
the  flames  instead  of  quenching  them,  hoam's  blind  folly  and  rash  imprudence 
and  exciting  uproar  and  revolt  instead  were  from  the  Lord.     For  them  their 
of  disposing  to  submission  and  obedi-  human  authors  were  solely  responsible, 
ence.     Passion  always  blinds.     When  But  He  whose  Omniscience  takes  in 
the  heart  is  perverted  the  head  is  like-  all  future  events  as  foreseen  certainties 
wise     dulled,     and    those     who    are  (not  as  decreed  necessities)  may  well, 
generally  shrewd  become  unwise  and  in  lespect  to  events  affected  by  human 
unreasonable;  for  it  is  not  the  head  agency,  determine  and  decree  His  own 
which   rules  the  heart,   but,    on   the  future  judgments  or  mercies  according 
contrary,  the  inclinations  and  desires  to  what  he  foresees  men  will  freely  do. 
of  the  heart  are   stronger   than  the  So,  too,  in  infinite  holiness  His  deter- 
though  ts  of  the  head.     (Prov.  xv.  1 ;  minute  counsel  and  foreknowledge  even 
XXX.  33;  Jas.  i.  19,  20  ;  Eph.  v.  15-  delivers  up  Jesus  of  Nazareth  to  death, 
17). — Lange.         ^  but  this  decree  influences  not  causa- 
—  The  almost  insane  fatuity  of  the  tively    the   action    of    those   wicked 
man  who  could  expect  any  good  efi'ect  hands  that  crucify  and  slay  Him  (Acts 
from    an    answer    like    this    to     an  ii.  23). —  Whedon. 
aggrieved    and    exasperated    people,  — The  Divine  purpose.     1.  Does 
whom    the  mere  fact   of   Jeroboam's  not  interfere  with  individual  freedom 
presence  must,  to  an  ordinary  under-  of  action.     2.  Is  accomplished  by  hu- 
standing,  have  shown  to  be  ripe  for  man    instrumentality.      3.  Is    often 
any  ulterior  consequences,  can  scarcely  openly  and  distinctly  declared.     4.  Is 
be  explained,  but  on  the  interpretation  steadily  prosecuted  amid  confusion  and 
that  the  king  was  subjected  to  judicial  disaster.     5.  Is  ever  in  harmony  with 
blindness,  that  wisdom  and  common  the  best  interests  of  mankind, 
sense  had  been  withheld  from  him  in 

order  that  the  doom  which  had  abeady  Verse  16.  As  is  the  question,  so  is 

gone  forth  against  the  house  of  David  the  answer.     He  who  makes  an  un- 

might  be  accomplished. — Kitto,  principled  speech  must  not  wonder  if 

he  receive  a  like  reply.  The  same  people 

Verse  14.  The  voice  of  the  King  of  who  once   came  to  David   and  said  : 

kings  comes  to  us  utterly  unlike  that  of  **  See,  we  are  thy  bone  and  thy  flesh, 

liehoboam ;  therefore  should  we  listen  thou  hast  led  us,  thou  shalt  be  our 

the  more  8ubni:'ss'v(4y  and  obediently  king"  (2  Sam.  v.  1,  2),  nowsaid  :  "We 

to  it.     The  Mo.-t  High  is  ever  at  hand  have  no  part  in  David ;  what  is  the 

to  change  the  darkest  prospects  of  the  shepherd's  son  to  us  ?  "     This  is  the 

childrenof  men  to  a  happy  termination,  way  of  the  multitude.     To-day   they 

and  the  accomplishment   of    His  all-  cry, '*  Hosanna,  blessed  be  who  cometh 

holy  will,  even  as  Joseph  said  to  his  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  I  "  Tomorrow 

brethren  (Gen.  1.  20).     God  disposes  it  is,  "  Crucify  him !  we  will  not  that 

not  the  thoughts  of  man  to  folly  and  he  reign  over  us !  '*     To-day,   if  for- 

sin,  but  brings  them  to  judgment  by  tune  smile,they  are  fawning  and  bland: 

their    very    perverseness,    and    thus  to-morrow,  if  misfortune  threaten,  they 

makes  it  serve  to  carry  out  His  own  cry,  *'  Look   to  thyself."     Their   cry 

designs.  is :   "  We  will  be  free,  and  servants  of 

no  man" — not  seeing  that  they  are  the 

Verse  15.   "  The  cause  was  from  the  blind  tools  of  one  or  more  leaders,  who 

Lord."     Better,  for  it  was  a   change  seek  to  reign  over  them.     With  the 

from  Jehovah.     The  meaning  is,    this  house  of  David,  Israel  flung  aside  the 

great   change   or    revolution   in    the  great    promise  (2    Sam.   vii.   10-16; 

Hebrew   state  was  brought  about  in  xxiii.  5)  which  depended  on  that  house, 

the  providence  of  God  as  a  judgment  For  us  has  come  tliat  Son  of  David 

on  the  nation  for  the  sins  of  Solomon,  whose  kingdom   shall   have   no    end 

He  decreed  it  and  foretold  it  by  the  (Luke  i.  32).     Let  us  hold  stedfastly 

prophet  Ahijah    (chap.   xi.    30-33).  by  Him,  and  not  be  led  astray  by  the 
204 


EOMILETIC  COMMIT  TAUT:  KIXOS. 


CHAP.  XII. 


nproar  of  tlie  world — **  We  will  have 
no  part  in  Him."  He  will  finally 
destroy  all  enemies  under  His  feet. 
Thus  went  Israel  to  his  tent,  but  not 
as  formerly,  blest  by  tlie  king,  and 
blessing  him,  rejoicing  over  the  good- 
ness of  the  Lord  to  David  and  to  His 
people  Israel  (chap.  viii.  66).  He 
who  has  not  a  good  conscience  cannot 
return  in  peace. 

Terse  18.  The  people  desired  free- 
dom ;  but  a  tree  of  liberty  watered 
with  innocent  blood  can  only  bear 
poison  fruit.  He  who  asks  nothing  of 
God  can  only  lead  otliers  to  folly :  he 
who  cannot  stand  in  the  gap  can  never 
protect  others.  It  is  a  judgment  of 
God  when  a  monarch,  instead  of  being 
able  to  repose  in  the  bosom  of  any  one 
of  his  subjects,  must  needs  fly  before 
him  to  save  his  life.  To  yield  to 
superior  force  is  no  disgrace,  but 
shameful  is  the  flight  which  is  the  re- 
sult of  arrogance  and  overbearing 
pride. 

Verses  19,  20.  The  great  majority 
fell  away,  and  the  small  minority  re- 
mained faithful :  the  first  was  ruined 
and  had  no  future ;  from  the  latter 
came  forth  the  One  before  whom  every 
knee  bowed,  and  whom  every  tongue 
acknowledged  to  be  the  Lord  (Matt. 
ii.  6;  Phil.  ii.  11).  In  the  Kingdom 
of  God  there  is  no  question  of  majori- 
ties and  minorities,  but  it  is  simply, 
are  we  steadfast  and  faithful  unto 
death.  The  pretended  deliverers  of 
the  masses  well  know  how  to  manage 
so  that  they  will  become  rulers  of  the 
people :  they  allow  themselves  to  be 
summoned,  and  a])parently  persuaded, 
to  the  very  object  which  was  the  sole 
aim  of  their  efi'orts. — Lange, 

Verse  19.  Sin  a  revolt.  1.  Against 
God.  2.  Has  introduced  anarchy  and 
disorder  in  the  moral  world.  3.  Will 
be  subdued  by  the  triumph  of  moral 
goodness. 

Verse  20.  Blessed  be  God  for  lawful 
government;  even  a  mutinous  body 
cannot  want  ahead.  If  the  rebellious 
Israelities    have    cast  otf   their  true 


sovereign,  they  must  choose  a  false. 
Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  must  be 
the  man.  He  had  need  be  skilful  and 
sit  sure  that  shall  back  the  horse  which 
hath  cast  his  rider.  Israel  could  not 
have  anywhere  met  with  more  craft 
and  courage  than  they  found  in  this 
leader.  Rehoboam  returns  to  Jerusa- 
lem lighter  by  a  crown  than  he  went 
forth  :  Judah  and  Benjamin  still  stick 
fast  to  their  loyalty.  God  will  ever 
reserve  a  remnant  free  from  the  common 
contagion. — Bp.  Hall* 

Verses  21-24.  The  authority  of  the 
Divine  Word.  1.  Is  superior  to  the 
power  of  the  sword  and  of  the  throne. 
2.  Is  sufficient  to  prevent  the  most 
terrible  wars.  3.  Should  be  acknow- 
ledged by  all  nations.  4.  Will  dis- 
concert the  cleverest  plottings  of  the 
wicked. 

Verse  21.  What  Rehoboam  had  lost 
through  insolence  and  weakness, 
through  wickedness  and  folly,  he  now 
sought  to  regain  by  violence  and 
battle  :  instead  of  humbling  himself 
before  the  All-powerful  hand  of  God, 
he  is  haughty,  and  depends  upon  his 
own  arm  of  flesh.  The  natural  heart 
of  man  is  a  Eroward  and  timorous  thing 
(Jer.  xvii.  9),  without  safe  resting 
place  or  firm  support,  now  buoyed  up, 
now  cast  down,  the  football  of  every 
storm  of  fortune.  But  blessed  is  the 
man  whose  trust  and  confidence  are  in 
the  Lord.  In  the  renewed  heart  is  no 
pride  and  no  fear. 

Verses  22-24.  The  Word  of  the 
Lord  to  the  king  and  to  the  host. 
I.  The  command — Ye  shall  not  go  up, 
nor  fight.  II.  The  cause  of  the  com- 
mandment— For  this  thing  is  from  me. 
III.  The  obedience  to  the  command — 
They  hearkened.  Civil  wars  are  the 
most  unnatural  and  likewise  the 
fiercest  and  bitterest.  He  who  stirs 
up  strife  between  brethren  commits  a 
crime  which  never  goes  unpunished. 

—  Shemaiah,  a  tjrpe  of  the  Lord's 
servants.  1,  He  is  a  man  of  God, 
and  as  such  he  brings  good  tidings  of 
peace  (Isa.  lii.  7).  2.  He  has  no 
other   arms   than   the    sword   of  the 

205 


OHAP.xn.  EOMILETIC  COMMEKTAMT:   KINGS, 


Spirit,  which  i8  the  Word  of  God  (Eph.  — "We  see  here  with  what  great 
vi.  17).  3.  With  His  word  he  comes,  might  the  God  of  truth  maintains  His 
strong  and  fearless,  before  the  king  and  word.  By  the  prophet  Ahijah  He 
his  whole  host  (Acts  iv.  20  ;  ix.  15).  announced  to  Jeroboam  that  he  should 
—  With  this  man  of  God  we  have  rule  over  ten  tribes  of  Israel :  that  is 
met  for  the  first  time,  and  though  our  accomplished  here.  He  had  promised 
knowledge  of  him  is  limited  to  a  few  to  leave  one  tribe  to  the  house  of 
scattered  notices,  we  see  in  them  how  David :  that  is  accomplished  here.  He 
vast  a  moral  power  the  prophets  of  promised  to  Ephraim,  or  to  his  father 
this  age  wielded  over  the  king  and  the  Joseph,  that  kings  should  proceed  from 
nation.  They,  and  the  converts  of  them  (Gen.  xlix. ;  Deut.  xxxiii.), 
their  ministry,  were  the  salt  that  pre-  and  that  is  fulfilled  here,  since  Jero- 
served  the  nation  through  many  along  beam  becomes  king  through  Ephraim. 
year  of  idolatrous  rebellion.  Shemaiah  Thus  nothing  remains  unfulfilled  of 
seems  to  have  been,  during  Rehoboam's  all  that  God  has  spoken,  promised,  or 
reign,  pre-eminently  the  prophet  of  threatened.  Solomon  and  Eehoboam 
Judah.  His  word  on  this  occasion,  strove  to  prevent  thefulfilment  of  God's 
though  doubtless  much  against  the  word  in  Jeroboam,  for  which  purpose 
royal  will,  awed  the  king  into  sub-  Solomon  planned  to  kill  Jeroboam,  and 
mission.  Again,  in  the  time  of  Shis-  Rehoboam  assembled  a  great  army 
hak's  invasion,  he  appeared,  and  his  against  him ;  but  all  in  vain.  There- 
ministry  was  instrumental  in  averting  fore  let  all  men  believe  and  seek  after 
the  possible  consequences  of  that  in-  the  Word  of  God,  and  not  strive  to 
vasion — the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  resist  it  (Luke  xxi.  33).  —  Wurt, 
(2  Chron.  xii.  6-7).— ?FA^c?(?».  Summ, 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  26—83. 

A  Majt-madb  Keligioit. 

The  genius  of  Jeroboam  was  equal  to  every  emergency.  He  was  in  his  element 
when  fomenting  rebellion.  He  was  equally  at  home  as  ruler  of  the  newly- 
formed  state,  and  adopted  prompt  and  vigorous  measures  for  the  establishment 
of  his  kingdom.  He  soon  saw  that  his  authority  would  be  weakened  if 
provision  was  not  made  for  the  religious  instincts  of  his  people.  And  here 
we  get  a  glimpse  at  the  bold,  reckless  daring  of  the  man's  nature.  He  quails 
not  before  the  demand  made  upon  him,  but  at  once  constructs  a  religion  which 
was  intended  to  serve  his  own  crafty  purposes,  rather  than  to  promote 
the  piety  of  the  people  and  the  glory  of  God.  In  the  system  of  worship  thus 
established  we  have  the  leading  characteristics  oj  a  man-made  religion. 

L  It  is  regarded  as  a  necessary  element  in  state-craft  (verses  25,  27).  It 
may  be  that  Jeroboam  neither  wished  nor  designed  to  introduce  heathenish 
idolatry  into  his  kingdom ;  the  revolt  by  which  he  had  reached  the  throne  was 
brought  about  as  the  result  of,  and  as  a  protest  against,  the  abominations  of 
such  idolatry.  He  was  apprehensive  that  if  all  his  people  went  up  to  Jerusalem 
to  worship,  their  hearts  would  be  weaned  from  him  and  won  over  to  the 
government  of  Hehoboam.  He  therefore  instituted  a  new  system  of  worship, 
not,  perhaps,  with  the  intention  of  countenancing  idolatry,  although  in  reality 
caring  little  about  the  result,  but  as  a  modification  of  the  true  worship  of  God 
demanded  by  the  changed  circumstances  of  the  kingdom.  His  religious  reform 
was  dictated  by  a  shrewd  state-policy,  not  by  the  Word  of  God.  There  is  a 
class  of  politicians  who  regard  religion  as  an  erratic  and  troublesome  supersti- 
tion, but  a  necessary  part  of  state  organization ;  and  who  maintain  that  the 
206 


EOMIIETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  xii. 


religion  of  a  people  is  determined  by  the  condition  of  their  national  life.  Now 
this  is  inverting  the  order  of  things,  as  if  a  pyramid  was  intended  to  rest  upon  its 
apex  rather  than  its  base,  or  a  tree  to  produce  fruit  by  stretching  its  branches 
underground  and  its  roots  in  the  upper  air.  The  fact  is,  religion  is  the 
mightiest  force  in  a  nation,  and  that  which  determines  the  conditions  and 
development  of  national  life.  The  government  that  trifles  with  the  religion 
of  a  people  cannot  be  permanent. 

II.  It  is  the  snggestion  of  an  unbelieving  and  wicked  heart.  The  king 
took  conns(4  (verse  28),  not  with  God,  but  with  his  own  wicked  heart  (verse  33), 
and  with  those  whom  he  knew  would  support  and  carry  out  his  views.  Had 
Jeroboam  believed  in  God,  and  been  obedient  to  His  commandments,  his 
kingdom  would  have  been  established  as  David's  (chap.  xi.  38).  But  when 
God  is  ignored,  the  unbeliever  is  left  to  his  own  devices;  and  there  is  no 
possible  folly  and  wickedness  to  which  he  may  not  have  recourse.  The 
infamy  that  Jeroboam  heaped  upon  his  name  is  a  terrible  example  to  all  who 
would  set  up  a  religion  irrespective  of  the  Divine  word  and  sanction.  What  is 
religion  without  faith,  and  what  scope  is  there  for  faith  in  a  religion  in  which 
the  originator  himself  has  no  faith  ?  Yain,  empty,  sinful  man  is  in  too  sore 
need  of  supernatural  help  and  grace  to  find  either  comfort  or  elevation  in  a 
religion  that  springs  only  from  himself! 

III.  It  is  essentially  idolatrous  (verses  28-30).  1.  It  is  thus  a  violation 
of  a  specific  Divine  commandment  (Exodus  xx.  4).  The  breaking  of  one 
commandment  leads  the  way  to  the  breaking  of  others.  It  is  like  the 
letting  out  of  waters:  the  wider  the  breach,  the  more  impetuous  and  over- 
whelming the  deluge.  A  single  fault  in  the  foundation  impeiils  the  whole 
structure.  Whatever  is  based  on  wrong-doing  is  unstable  and  perishable. 
2.  Its  tendency  is  thus  to  insult  and  supplant  the  One  True  God  (verse  28).  These 
calves  were  not  set  up  to  be  worshipped  as  idols,  any  more  than  were  the  ark 
and  cherubim,  and  other  sacred  shrines  at  Jerusalem,  but  were  designed  to  be 
symbols  of  Jehovah.  And  yet  the  inevitable  tendency  was  to  lose  sight  of  the 
invisible  in  the  visible,  as  the  subsequent  history  of  Israel  so  painfully  proved. 
What  an  enormity  is  it  to  liken  the  glory  of  the  invisible  God  to  an  ox  that 
eateth  grass  I  Man  creates  his  own  idols,  and  falls  down  and  worships  them. 
Any  creature,  real  or  imaginary,  which  we  invest  with  Divine  properties  is  an 
idol ;  or,  it  may  be  the  true  God  falsely  conceived.  Idolatry  is  a  sin  against 
which  the  most  faithful  warnings  have  been  uttered  in  all  ages,  and  on  account 
of  which  the  severest  judgments  have  been  inflicted;  yet  it  is  that  to  which 
humanity  is  most  prone.  3.  It  is  thus  the  occasion  of  great  moral  corruption. 
"  And  this  thing  became  a  sin  "  (verse  30).  It  was  not  without  reason  that  the 
Israelitish  king  was  branded  in  sacred  history  as  '*  Jeroboam,  tbe  son  of  ITebat, 
who  made  Israel  to  sin."  That  sin  consisted  in  a  one-sided  construction  and  use 
of  the  facts  of  sacred  history,  and  an  arrogant  assumption  to  improve  the  religious 
worship  of  the  nation  by  most  dangerous  methods  that  had  no  proper  sanction 
from  Jehovah  or  His  prophets.  He  may  be  regarded  as  a  typo  of  the  Koman 
hierarchy,  which,  in  its  efforts  to  bind  the  people  to  St.  Peter's  chair,  has  verily 
set  up  graven  images  in  connection  with  its  worship,  and,  assuming  to  represent 
the  sanctities  of  a  holy  antiquity,  has,  in  fact,  reproduced  the  forms  of  heathen 
idolatry.     Idolatry  is  the  fruitful  source  of  many  other  sins. 

rV.  It  is  not  scrupulous  as  to  the  agents  it  employs  (verse  31).  Not  that 
the  king  selected  priests  from  persons  of  low  birth  or  infamous  character.  This 
would  have  brought  his  system  of  worship  into  contempt.  The  priesthood  had 
hitherto  been  hereditary  and  confined  to  the  tribe  of  Levi.  But  it  is  probable 
that  the  Levites  opposed  the   unauthorised  innovations,  and  refused  to    give 

207 


OHlP.xiL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


their  sanction  to  the  new  religion  ;  indeed,  they  left  their  possessions  and  came 
to  Jerusalem,  where  they  found  a  more  congenial  sphere  for  their  sacred 
functions  (2  Chron.  xi.  13-17).  But,  not  to  be  foiled  in  his  purpose, 
Jeroboam  created  a  new  priestly  order,  taken  indiscriminately  from  the  entire 
population,  irrespective  of  rank  or  tribes.  The  wily  schemer  never  lacks 
instruments  to  work  out  his  designs. 

V.  It  has  all  the  outward  seeming  of  a  genuine  institution  (verse  32,  33). 

There  was  the  Temple,  the  feast  of  dedication,  the  altar,  the  sacrifice,  the  priests. 
Nothing  is  more  delusive  than  religious  form  and  ceremony.  There  may  be  the 
most  elaborate  ritual,  while  the  spirit  of  religion  is  extinct.  The  most  gorgeous 
tapestry  may  hide  a  wall  honey-combed  with  decay. 

Lessons  : — 1.  A  Man-Made  Religion  is  deficient  in  fundamental  truth.  2.  In 
spiritual  life.  3.  In  authority.  4.  In  practical  morality/,  6.  In  saving 
efficacy, 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verses  25-33.     The  demoralizing  An  evil  conscience  makes  the   most 

influence   of  idolatry    on    national  stout  hearted  and  the  strongest  timid 

life.     1.  It  leads   to   a   national   en-  and  anxious,   so  that  he  sees  dangers 

feeblement,  against  which  the  strongest  where  there  are  none,  and  then,  to 

fortresses  afford  no  protection  (verse  insure  his  own  safety,  devises  wrong 

25).     2.  It  distorts  the  idea  of  God  and  evil  instruments.     One  false  step 

(verse  28).     3.  It  loosens  the  bonds  of  always  requires  another. — Lange. 

morality   (verse    30).     4.     It    leaves  —  Humanly  speaking,  Jeroboam*s 

the  people  an  easy  prey  in  the  hands  fear  was,  it  must  be  confessed,  well- 

of  a  selfish  and  unscrupulous  ruler,  founded.     We  cannot,    therefore,    be 

5.  It  caricatures  the   solemnities    of  surprised   that   he  gave   way  to  the 

worship  (verses  31-33).     6.  It  issues  temptation    of    helping   forward    the 

in  national  extinction.  plans  of  Providence    by  the  crooked 

devices   of  a   merely   human   policy. 

Verse     25.     Shechem     had     been  His   measures  for   counteracting   the 

ruined   and  sowed  with  salt  (Judges  tendency  to  reunion  with  Judah  were 

ix.  45),  it  had  been  rebuilt  (1  Kings  cleverly    devised,     and    proved    him 

xii.  1),  but  now  made  a  royal  city,  as  **wise  in  his  generation."     The  later 

being  in  meditullio  regni,  in  the  middle  history  shows  that  they  were  efi'ectual, 

of  the  kingdom  :  as  Constantinople,  for  Like  all   measures   which   involve   a 

its  situation,  is  said  to  be  a  city  fatally  dereliction  of  principle,  they  brought 

founded,  to  command  a  great  part  of  certain  evils  in  their  train;  and  they 

the  world. — Trapp.  drew  down  a  Divine  judgment  on  him- 

—  As  soon  as  Jeroboam  obtained  self  which  he  had  not  faith  enough  to 
the  wish  of  his  heart,  namely,  the  anticipate.  But  they  fully  secured 
rulership,  he  asked  no  longer  about  the  the  object  at  which  he  aimed.  They 
condition  under  which  it  was  promised  prevented  all  healing  of  the  breach 
to  him,  and  with  which  it  was  bound  between  the  two  kingdoms.  They 
up  (chap.  xi.  38).  How  often  we  for-  made  the  separation  final.  They  pro- 
get,  when  God  has  granted  to  us  the  duced  the  result  that  not  only  no  re- 
desire  of  our  hearts,  to  walk  in  His  union  took  place,  but  no  symptoms  of 
ways.  He  who  obtains  rulership  by  an  inclination  to  re-unite  ever  mani- 
the  path  of  rebellion,  must  always  be  fested  themselves  during  the  whole 
in  fear  and  anxiety  lest  he  lose  it  again  period  of  the  double  kingdom. — 
in  the  same  way,  for  the  populace  Speaher'*8  Comm. 
which  to-day  cries,  Hosanna !  will  on 

the  morrow  shout,  Crucify  1  crucify  I  Verses  28-33.   The  sinof  Jeroboaw 
208 


EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS 


CHAP.  XII. 


wherewith  he  caused  Israel  to  sin. 

1.  He  erected  images  of  God  against 
the  supreme  commandment  of  God 
(Exod.  XX.  4).  II.  He  set  aside  the 
prescribed  order  of  the  servants  of  God, 
and  made  his  own  priests.  III.  He 
altered  the  feast,  which  was  a  reminder 
of  the  great  deeds  of  God,  and  made  it 
a  mere  nature-and-harvest  feast.  That 
is  the  greatest  tyranny  when  the  ruler 
of  a  land  makes  himself  the  master 
also  of  the  faith  and  conscience  of  his 
subjects. 

—  In  the  estimation  of  the  people 
of  the  world  this  policy  of  Jeroboam 
is  held  to  be  proper,  because  they  con- 
sider that  religion  is  to  be  established, 
held,  and  altered  as  may  be  useful  and 
good  for  the  land  and  the  people  and  the 
common  interest,  and  that  the  regimen 
is  not  for  the  sake  of  the  religion,  but 
the  religion  for  the  regimen.  Conse- 
quently Jeroboam  acted  well  and 
wisely  in  the  matter.  But  God  says, 
on  the  other  hand,  all  that  I  command 
you,  that  shall  ye  observe,  ye  shall 
not  add  thereto  (Deut.  xii.  32).  For 
godliness  is  not  to  be  regulated  by  the 
common  weal,  but  the  common  weal 
is  to  be  regulated  by  godliness.  Every 
government  which  employs  religious 
instrumentalities,  and  interferes  with 
the  faith  of  the  people,  not  for  the 
sake  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  souls, 
but  for  the  attainment  of  political  ends, 
shares  the  guilt  of  the  sin  of  Jeroboam, 
and  involves  itself  in  heavy  responsi- 
bilities.—  Cramer, 

Yerse  28.  "  Whereupon  the  king 
took  counsel."  Compared  with  verse 
26 — "And  Jeroboam  said  in  his 
heart."  The  mental  toils  of  the 
cunning.  1.  A  wicked,  crooked 
policy  involves  far  more  anxiety  and 
labour  than  a  straightforward  policy. 

2.  The  sinful  plotter  is  in  a  perpetual 
fever  of  fear — he  is  in  antagonism  with 
both  God  and  man.  3.  Many  of  the 
schemes  of  the  cunning  are  too  dia- 
bolical to  be  divulged;  they  must 
be  hidden  within  one  solitary  breast. 
What  a  horrible  picture  is  presented 
by  such  a  mind  to  the  eye  of  the 
Omniscient !  4.  A  temporary  success 
intensifies   the  mental   pressure.      5. 


The  most  complicated  contrivances  of 
the  cunning  end  in  humiliating  defeat. 

—  He  invented  a  political  religion, 
instituted  feasts  in  his  own  times  dif- 
ferent from  those  appointed  by  the 
Lord,  gave  the  people  certain  objects 
of  devotion,  and  pretended  to  think  it 
would  be  more  inconvenient  and  op- 
pressive to  them  to  have  to  go  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  worship.  This  was  not 
the  last  time  that  religion  was  made  a 
state  engine  to  serve  political  purposes. 
It  is  strange  that  in  pointing  out  his 
calves  to  the  people  he  should  use  the 
same  words  that  Aaron  used  when  he 
made  the  golden  calf  in  the  wilder- 
ness, when  they  must  have  heard  what 
terrible  judgments  fell  upon  their  fore- 
fathers for  this  idolatry. 

—  Oh,  the  mischief  that  comes  of 
wicked  infidelity  !  It  was  God's  pro- 
phet that  had  rent  Jeroboam's  garment 
into  twelve  pieces,  and  had  given  ten 
of  them  to  him,  in  token  of  his  sharing 
the  ten  tribes ;  who,  in  the  san)e 
breath,  also  told  him  that  the  cause 
of  this  distraction  was  their  idolatry. 
Yet  now  will  he  institute  an  idolatrous 
service  for  the  holding  together  of 
them  whom  their  idolatry  had  rent 
from  their  true  sovereign  to  him.  He 
says  not,  God  hath  promised  me  this 
kingdom ;  God  hath  conferred  it ;  God 
shall  find  means  to  maintain  his  own 
act ;  I  will  obey  Him,  let  Him  dispose 
of  me.  The  God  of  Isiae]  is  wise  and 
powerful  enough  to  fetch  about  his 
own  designs  ;  but,  as  if  the  devices  of 
men  were  stronger  than  God's  provi- 
dence and  ordination,  he  will  be  work- 
ing out  his  own  ends  by  profane 
policies.  Jeroboam,  being  born  an 
Israelite,  and  bred  in  the  court  of  a 
Solomon,  could  not  but  know  the  ex- 
press charge  of  God  against  the  making 
of  images,  against  the  erection  of  any 
rival  altars  to  that  of  Jerusalem ;  yet 
now  that  he  sees  both  these  may  avail 
much  to  the  advancing  of  his  ambitious 
project,  he  sets  up  those  images,  those 
altars.  Wicked  men  care  not  to  make 
bold  with  God  in  cases  of  their  own 
commodity.  If  the  laws  of  their  Maker 
lie  in  the  way  of  their  profit  or  promo- 
tion, they  either  spurn  them  out  or 
tread  upon  them  at  pleasure.    Aspiring 

V  209 


GHAT.  XlL 


EOMILETJC  COMMBNTAUY:  KINGS. 


minds  will  know  no  Gocl  but  honour. 
Israel  sojourned  in  E^ypt,  and  brought 
home  a  golden  calf ;  Jeroboam  sojourns 
there,  and  brought  home  two.  It  is 
hard  to  dwell  in  Egypt  untainted. 
Not  to  savour  of  the  sins  of  the  place 
we  live  in  is  no  less  strange  than  for 
wholesome  liquor  tunned  up  in  a  musty 
vessel  not  to  smell  of  the  cask.  The 
best  body  may  be  infected  in  a  con- 
tagious air.  Let  him  beware  of  Egypt 
that  would  be  free  from  idolatry.— 
Bp.  Rail. 

—  To  the  perverted  man,  what  he 
shall  do  for  his  God  is  forthwith  too 
much.  In  matters  of  faith  and  of  the 
homage  due  to  God,  we  should  not 
consider  what  is  convenient  and  agree- 
able to  the  great  mass,  but  should  en- 
quire only  for  what  God  prescribes  in 
His  Word.  He  who  conciliates  the 
sensuousness  and  the  untutored  ways 
of  the  masses,  and  flatters  their  unbe- 
lief or  their  superstition,  belongs  to 
the  false  prophets  who  make  broad  the 
way  of  life.  Doctrines  and  institutions 
which  depart  from  the  revealed  Word 
of  God  are  often  praised  as  progress 
and  seasonable  reforms,  while  in  truth 
they  are  steps  backward  and  corrupt- 
ing innovations.  In  Christendom  we 
pray  no  longer  to  wood  and  stone,  and 
to  golden  calves,  and  think  ourselves 
thereby  raised  far  above  a  darkened 
heathenism,  but,  nevertheless,  we 
often  place  the  creature  above  the 
Creator,  and  abandon  ourselves  to  it 
with  all  our  love,  and  consideration, 
and  service.  Behold  the  things  and 
persons  thou  lovest  with  thy  whole 
heart  and  strength,  these  are  thy  gods. 
What  use  of  typical  representations  in 
the  worship  of  God  is  permitted,  and 
what  is  forbidden  ? —  Calwer. 

Yerse  30.  Idolatry  a  sin.  1.  It  is 
a  violation  of  the  Divine  command- 
ment (Ex.  XX.  4).  2.  It  ignores  the 
claims  of  the  Most  High.  3.  It  is 
degrading  to  the  votary.  4.  It  is  per- 
nicious in  its  example  to  others.  5. 
They  who  think  to  secure  their  saf  ty 
by  sin  only  hasten  the  ruin  they  would 
avoid. 

—  As  a  great  tree  in  a  forest,  when 
it  falls  drags  down  many  others  with 

210 


it,  60  also  are  many  others  carried 
along  by  the  bad  example  of  those 
who  rule  when  they  fall  away  from 
their  religion,  or  sin  otherwise  grossly 
against  God. — Starhe. 

—  Every  accessory  to  sin  is  filthy, 
but  the  first  authors  of  sin  are  abomin- 
able. How  is  Jeroboam  branded  in 
every  of  these  sacred  leaves.  How  do 
all  ages  ring  of  his  fact  with  the  accent 
of  dishonour  and  indignation.  *  *  Jero- 
boam, the  son  of  Nebat,  that  made 
Israel  to  sin."  It  was  a  shame  for 
Israel  that  it  could  be  made  to  sin  by 
a  Jeroboam;  but  0,  cursed  name  of 
Jeroboam,  that  would  draw  Israel  to 
sin  !  The  followers  and  abettors  of 
evil  are  worthy  of  torment,  but  no 
hell  is  too  deep  for  the  leaders  of  pub- 
lic wickedness. — Bp.  Hall. 

Verse  3 1 .  We  have  in  the  new  cove- 
nant no  Levitical  priesthood,  indeed, 
but  a  pastoral  and  preaching  office 
which  the  Lord  has  instituted,  so  that 
thereby  the  body  of  Christ  may  be  edi- 
fied (Eph.  iv.  11).  He  who  despises 
this  office,  and  thinks  that  any  one 
without  distinction  and  without  a  law- 
ful calling  may  exercise  it,  is  a  par- 
taker in  the  sin  of  Jeroboam.  "  JS'o 
one,"  says  the  Augsburg  Confession, 
**  shall  teach  or  preach  publicly  in  the 
church,  or  administer  the  sacrament, 
without  due  calling." 

—  It  is  not  the  metal  that  makes 
their  gods,  but  the  worship — the  sacri- 
fices. What  sacrifices  could  there  be 
without  priests  ?  No  religion  could 
ever  want  sacred  masters  of  Divine 
ceremonies.  God's  clergy  was  select 
and  honourable,  branches  of  the  holy 
stem  of  Aaron.  Jeroboam  rakes  up 
bis  priests  out  of  the  channel  of  the 
multitude :  all  tribes,  all  persons,  were 
good  enough  to  his  spurious  devotion. 
Leaden  priests  are  well  fitted  for  golden 
deities,  lleligion  receives  either  much 
honour  or  blemish  by  the  quality  of 
those  who  serve  at  her  altars.  We 
are  not  woithy  to  profess  ourselves 
servants  of  the  true  God  if  we  do  not 
hold  his  service  worthy  of  the  best.^- 
Bp.  HalL 

Verses  32, 33.  The  empty  pretences 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAEY :  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XII. 


of  Ritualism.  1.  Ritualism  is  not 
absolutely  essential  to  spiritual  reli- 
gion. 2.  Its  highest  function  is  only 
as  a  means,  and  that  chiefly  to  the 
most  rude  and  ignorant.  3.  It  may 
be  altered  according  to  the  whim  or 
■wish  of  an  irreligious  sovereign.  4, 
It  is  most  elaborate  and  showy  where 
the  worship  is  most  idolatrous.  5.  It 
is  disappointing  to  the  sincere  and 
spiritual  worshipper.  6.  All  pretences 
to  religious  zeal,  contrary  to  God^s  re- 
vealed will,  are  but  the  devices  of 
Satan,  more  fatally  to  delude  men's 
souls. 

—  We  must  not  conceal  from  our- 
selves that  there  are  many  persons 
who,  at  the  bottom  of  their  hearts,  will 
think  that  Jeroboam  acted  wisely  in 
the  course  he  took,  and  cannot  see  how 
he  could  have  got  over  the  difficulty 
in  his  path  but  by  some  such  course 
as  that  which  he  adopted.  How  could 
he  otherwise  have  managed?  The 
answer  is,  he  need  not  have  managed 
at  all.  He  had  been  appointed  king 
under  the  Divine  sanction.  He  held 
his  crown  under  the  condition  of  obedi- 
ence, and  on  that  condition  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  crown  to  his  house  was 
pledged  to  him.  Nothing  was  wanted 
on  his  part  but  unreserved  faith  in 
that  promise.  If  Jeroboam  had  pos- 
sessed that  faith  he  would  have  been 
free  from  any  anxiety  on  the  subject, 
he  would  have  felt  that  it  was  safer 
to  incur  an  apparent  danger  in  pur- 
suing the  career  of  duty  and  right 
doing,  than  to  seek  exemption  from  it 
by  unlawful  doing  and  tortuous  policy. 
The  Lord  had  given  him  every  reason 
to  trust  in  the  sufficiency  of  His  pro- 
tection when  He  had  compelled  king 
Eehoboam  to  dismiss  the  forces  with 
which  he  was  prepared  to  fall  upon  him 
in  his  comparatirely  helpless  condition. 
If  it  be  asked  how  he  was  to  be  secured 
from  the  danger  which  stood  so  dis- 
tinctly before  him,  we  can  only  an- 
swer, **  We  do  not  know."  Nor  had 
Jeroboam  any  need  to  know.  God 
knew ;  and  it  was  his  clear  course  to 
do  right,  trusting  all  the  rest  to  God. — 
Kitto. 

Verse  32.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles, 


to  be  observed  in  the  seventh  month 
(Lev.  xxiii.  34),  Jeroboam  transferred 
to  the  eighth  month.  A  plausible 
occasion  for  this  arbitrary  deviation 
from  the  law  which  repeatedly  names 
the  seventh  month  as  the  time  ap- 
pointed of  the  Lord  (Lev.  xxiii.  34, 
39,  41),  might  be  found  in  the  circum- 
stance that  in  the  northern  districts  of 
his  kingdom  the  grain  ripened  at  least 
a  month  later  than  in  the  southern 
Judah,  as  this  festival  was  to  be  kept 
at  the  ingathering  of  the  fruit  of  the 
land  (the  grain) ;  the  proper  ground, 
however,  lay  in  the  design  to  make 
the  separation  also  in  a  religious  aspect 
as  complete  as  possible,  although  he 
adhered  to  the  day  of  the  month  on 
account  of  the  weak,  who  might  ta.ke 
offence  at  the  innovations.  For  that 
there  were  many  besides  the  priests 
and  Levites  who  were  highly  dis- 
satisfied with  these  illegal  proceedings 
appears  from  the  notice  (2  Chron. 
xiii.  16)  that  Israelites  out  of  all  the 
tribes  devoted  in  heart  to  the  Lord 
went  to  Jerusalem  to  sacrifice  there 
to  the  God  of  their  fathers.  Still,  not 
content  with  all  this,  with  erecting 
sanctuaries  and  places  of  worship, 
instituting  priests  and  changing  feasts, 
Jeroboam  himself  offered  sacrifice  at 
the  altar  at  Bethel,  in  order  to  prove 
himself  to  be  the  spiritual  head  of  his 
kin  gdom . — Keil, 

—  The  festivals  which  an  entire 
people  celebrate  in  remembrance  of  the 
great  deeds  of  God  for  them  are  the 
support  of  their  faith  and  of  their  life 
of  fellowship.  It  is  to  destroy  this 
life  when,  from  prejudice  and  for  the 
sake  of  outward  worldly  consider- 
ations, arbitrarily  they  are  altered  ox 
abandoned. 

Yerse  33.  As  it  is  good  and  praise- 
worthy when  kings  and  princes  engage 
in  the  service  of  God  along  with  their 
subjects,  and  set  them  a  good  ex- 
ample, so  also  is  it  blameworthy  when 
they  do  it  only  to  win  the  people  over 
to  themselves,  and  to  secure  their 
authority  over  them. — Lange. 

—  **  Which  he  had  devised  of  his 
own  heart."  The  entire  system  of 
Jeroboam    receives  its  condemnation 

211 


OHAF.  xm.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


in  these  words.     His  main  fault  was,  would   accrue  from   them.     He  was 

that  he  left  a  ritual   and  a  worship  placed  in  difficult  circumstances,  but 

where  all  was  divinely  authorized,  for  he  met  them  with  the  arts  of  a  poli- 

ceremonies  and  services  which  were  tician,  not  with  the  single-mindednesa 

wholly   of   his   own   devising.      Not  of  a  saint.     His  arrangements  had  a 

being  a  prophet,  he  had  no  authority  certain  cleverness,  but  they  were  not 

to    introduce    religious    innovations,  really  wise  measures  ;  instead  of  secur- 

Not  having  received  any  commission  ing  and  strengthening,  they  tended  to 

to  establish  new  forms,  he  had  no  right  corrupt,  and  so  to  weaken  the  nation, 

to  expect  that  any  religious  benefit  — Speaker*8  Comm, 


CHAPTER  Xni. 
THE    ilYSTEBIOUS    PROPHET    OP    JXTDAH, 

Crttioal  and  Explanatobt  Notes. — Verse  1.  There  came  a  man  of  God:  an  nnknown 
prophet.  Josephus  suggests  Jadon,  confounding  him  with  Iddo  (2  Chron.  xiii.  22),  but  he 
lived  on  during  Abijah's  reign  ;  whereas  this  man  died  immediately.  Names  fade ;  ministries 
endure.    By  the  word  of  the  Lord— ")n"T2— "  ^y  the  word"  means  not  commanded  by,  but 

»«  the  power  of  the  word,  obeying  its  impulsion.  Jeroboam  stood  by  the  altar  (see  notes  on 
xii.  33) — Acting  a  foremost  part  in  the  national  apostasy.  Verse  2.  "Cried  against  the 
altar,"  as  if  ignoring  the  king ;  for  the  profaned  altar  possessed  a  vaster  solemnity  than  the 
mere  agent  of  its  profanation.  And  the  prediction  of  its  ruin  would  carry  with  it  and  include 
the  doom  of  the  violator  of  God's  temple — the  lesser  included  in  the  greater.  The  "altar" 
also  symbolically  stood  for  the  whole  system  of  idolatry  imposed  now  upon  Israel.  Josiah  by 
name — One  of  the  most  minutely  delineated  prophecies  of  Scripture,  and  most  minutely  ful- 
filled, after  a  lapse  of  360  years  (2  Kings  xxii.  1  ;  xxiii  16).  Evidence  of  literal  inspiration 
of  prophets.    Possibly  the  word  IH^tt^i^^ — Josiah — may  be  (as  Keil  suggests)  descriptive  of 

the  child  who  should  do  this  work  of  retribution,  and  not  necessarily  his  personal  name,  the 
word  meaning  '^tvhom  Jehovah  sustains.**  Yet  Divine  Providence  arranged  that  the  prophecy 
should  assert  itself  even  in  the  name  which  the  predicted  person  bore.  Verse  3.  A  sign  the  same 
day — A  portent  and  pledge  of  the  coming  event.     /iB'lD  means  a  prodigy  rather  than  a  simple 

"  sign.**    Verse  6.  Entreat  now  the  face  of  the  Lord  thy  God—**  Entreat,"  TwTl-,  to  soften ; 

T    • 

*^  entreai  the  face,'*  soften  the  rigour  of  its  expression.  Verse  7.  Come  home  with  me— A 
gnilesome  attempt  to  get  the  man  under  his  influence,  since  he  had  experienced  his  alarming 
power;  or  to  lessen  the  startling  impression  which  the  event  of  his  arm  withering  had  produced 
on  the  people — an  event  calculated  to  convey  an  appearance  of  Divine  rebuke  of  the  king. 
If  the  people  became  alarmed  the  king's  control  would  be  gone.  Verse  1 1 .  An  old  prophet 
in  Bethel :  who  had  been  faithless  amid  surrounding  faithlessness.  His  alertness  to  win  the 
prophet  of  Judah  to  his  house  arose  from  (1)  his  interest  (professional)  in  a  fellow-prophet's 
mission — this  feeling  awoke  immediately  he  heard  of  one  of  his  own  class  being  near.  (2)  A 
sense  of  shame  may  have  stirred  in  him  that  a  prophet  from  a  distance  should  have  come  to  do 
what  he  himself,  being  near,  should  have  long  ago  done.  (3)  He  may  have  desired  to  rein- 
state himself  in  the  king's  confidence,  and  in  public  estimation,  by  uniting  himself  in  this  way 
with  a  distinguished  and  true  prophet.  There  may  have  been  no  desire  on  his  part  to  induce 
the  prophet  of  Judah  into  sinning,  but  he  himself  prevaricated  in  order  to  succeed  in  his  wish 
to  gratify  his  curiosity  or  calm  his  self-rebuke  by  this  act  of  courtesy.  Verse  18.  An  angel 
spake  nnto  me  by  the  word  of  the  Lord—  Not  **  the  Lord  spake,"  but  an  "  angel,"  or  messen- 
ger, one  of  his  eons  ;  hiding  the  real  facts,  and  conveying  a  false  impression.  Verse  20.  The 
word  of  the  Lord  came,  &c.— Making  deceitful  lips  speak  truth.  Vers^  21.  And  he  cried  — 
Rather,  *' it  cried."  The  man  was  but  the  passive  agent;  the  Word  of  God  used  the  man's 
organs  of  utterance.  Verse  31.  Bury  me  in  the  sepulchre  wherein,  &c.— Deeply  impressed 
now  that  he  was  a  true  prophet,  and  that  it  was  an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing  to  sin  against  the 
Lord.  Po>sibly  he  had  a  superstitious  hope  that  by  burial  with  this  true  prophet  he  himself 
might  be  advantaged  when  the  dead  should  be  raised,  or  that  his  own  bones  would  be  allowed 
k>  rest  undisturbed  in  company  with  a  man  of  God. — W.  H.  J. 
212 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTABJ  :  KINQ8,  chap,  xul 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-10. 
The  Invincible  Coubaob  of  a  Dxvdtelt  Authorised  Messengeb 

The  audacity  of  Jeroboam  must  not  go  unreproved  or  unpunished.  He  had 
assumed  sacerdotal  functions,  and  stood  by  the  altar  to  ofi'er  sacrifice.  He  had 
introduced  dangerous  innovations,  and  involved  the  whole  nation  in  the  guilt  of 
idolatry.  His  conduct  is  to  be  denounced  at  the  very  altar  where  his  ofi'ence 
culminated  in  its  highest  aggravation.  It  required  more  than  ordinary  bravery 
to  confront  so  strong-willed  and  reckless  a  king,  who  seemed  impatient  of  con- 
tradiction, and  was  accustomed  to  be  obeyed..  But  Jehovah  had  already  provided 
an  agent,  and  qualified  him  for  the  work.  A  stem-visaged  prophet  of  Judah, 
like  a  spectral  figure  emerging  out  of  misty  space,  appears  upon  the  scene,  armed 
with  supernatural  powers  before  which  the  proud  king  was  humbled  and  made 
to  tremble.  The  passage  illustrates  the  invincible  courage  of  a  divinely  authorized 
messenger, 

I.  It  aided  him  in  the  fall  and  faithful  declaration  of  the  Divine  message 
(verses  1-3).     1.  As  to  the  promise  of  a  coming  avenger.     *'  Behold,  a  child  shall 
be  born  unto  the  house  of  David,  Josiah  by  name.'*     The  very  name  of  the 
avenger  is  predicted,  an  unusual  instance  of  particularity  in  Divine  prophecies. 
Only  three  other  similar  instances  are  recorded:  Israel  (Gen.  xvii.  19)-  Solo- 
mon (1  Chron.  xxii.  9) ;  and  Cyrus  (Isa.  xlv.  1).     The  All-Prescient  Jehovah, 
who  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning,  may  cause  events  to  be  foretold  minutely 
by  His  prophets,  though  in  the  general  law  of  His  providence  He  does  not  do  so. 
He  only  can  be  the  most  capable  judge  as  to  how  much  of  the  future  should  be  re- 
vealed.    2.  As  to  the  particular  character  of  the  punishment  to  he  imposed.     ' '  Upon 
thee  shall  he  ofi'er  the  priests  of  the  high  places,"  &c.  (verse  2).     This  prophecv 
was  exactly  fulfilled  (2  Kings  xxiii.  15-20).     God  is  too  righteous  to  indulge 
in  idle  threats.     They  who  disregard  warning  are  without  excuse  when  the 
punishment  falls.     3.  As  to  the  visible  tokens  of  the  authenticity  of  the  message 
'And  he  gave  a  sign  the  same  day,"  &c.   (verse  3).     The  altar  was  rent,  and 
the  ashes    poured  out    (verse  5),  as    an  evidence    that    the    prophet    was 
Jehovah  s  ambassador,  and  spoke  with  the  Divine  sanction.     Without  this  sign 
the  prophecy  of  an  event  that  did  not  take  place  for  three  hundred  and  fifty 
years  would  have  wanted  authority  with  those  who  knew  nothing  about  the 
strange,  mysterious  messenger.     God  gives  to  His  servants  all  the  power  neces- 
sary to  accomplish  their  difficult  and  often  unwelcome  mission ;  and  woe  be  to 
him  who  has  not  the  courage  or  fidelity  to  act  in  harmony  with  his  commission- 
neither  to  fall  short  of  it,  nor  to  go  beyond. 

II.  It  rendered  him  fearless  in  the  presence  of  an  angry  and  unscrupulous 
monarch  (verse  4).  Like  all  usurpers  and  tyrants,  Jeroboam's  remedy  for  all 
dithculties  was  force.  He  would  have  made  short  work  of  the  man  who  had 
dared  to  interrupt  him  in  the  very  act  of  perfoi  ming  the  highest  function  of  his 
selt-assumed  priesthood,  and  who  denounced  him  and  his  idolatrous  policy  in  the 
presence  of  his  courtiers  and  supporters.  The  divinely  authorised  messenger  is 
as  bold  as  a  hon  (Prov.  xxviii.  1).  and  is  not  to  be  intimidated  by  the  fear  of 
consequences.  Few  prophets  suff'ered  more  than  Jeremiah ;  yet  aU  the  cruelties 
olhis  enemies  were  impotent  in  bribing  him  to  silence,  or  in  impairing  his 
bdelity.  A  sense  of  the  Divine  caU  to  service,  however  painful  and  perilous, 
falls  the  soul  with  an  incorruptible  bravery. 

III.  It  was  supported  by  unmistakable  evidences  of  supernatural  power 

213 


CHAP.  int.  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


The  king's  hand  was  withered,  and  the  altar  rent  asunder  (verses  4,  5).  He 
who  had  not  scrupled  to  stir  up  rehellion  and  to  seize  a  crown,  did  not  scruple 
to  lay  his  hand  menacingly  on  God's  servants ;  but  in  vain.  How  unexpected 
was  the  result !  God  will  protect  His  messengers,  who  are  ever  the  special 
butts  of  malice :  he  who  touches  them,  touches  the  apple  of  His  eye.  Before 
God  strikes.  Be  warns :  He  willeth  not  that  any  should  perish,  but  rather  that 
they  should  come  to  repentance.  It  does  not  appear  that  either  Jeroboam  or 
his  followers  were  moved  to  repentance  by  all  they  witnessed — another 
example  of  the  hardening  nature  of  sin,  and  the  powerlessness  of  external 
miracles  to  affect  and  transform  man's  spiritual  nature.  How  many  beheld  the 
miracle-working  power  of  Christ,  and  yet  died  in  unbelief ! 

IV.  It  was  not  inconsistent  with  an  act  of  mercy  (verse  6).  Jeroboam 
prayed,  not  for  pardon,  but  for  the  restoration  of  his  withered  limb.  An  im- 
penitent heart  ever  betrays  itself  in  greater  concern  for  its  sufferings  than  its 
sins.  They  who  in  prosperity  reject  the  warnings  of  God's  messengers  are 
ready  enough  in  distress  to  have  recourse  to  their  prayers.  To  pray  for  those 
who  despitcfully  use  and  persecute  us  is  the  way  to  obtain  the  promised 
beatitude  (Matt.  v.  10,  44).  Those  who  are  most  severe  and  faithful  in  telling 
us  of  our  sins  are  the  most  eager  and  genuine  in  rendering  sympathetic  help 
when  we  are  in  trouble.     Courage  and  tender-heartedness  go  together. 

V.  It  enabled  him  to  resist  the  strongest  temptation  to  disobedience 
(verses  7-10).  1.  The  temptation  appealed  to  his  physical  needs.  "Come  home 
with  me  and  refresh  thyself"  (verse  7).  "Weary  and  faint  as  he  must  have  been 
with  his  journey,  this  invitation  would  cost  the  prophet  some  self-denial  to 
resist.  Satan  ever  tempts  most  powerfully  at  the  weakest  point  and  at  the 
weakest  moment.  But  the  prophet  must  have  no  fellowship  or  communion 
with  their  works  of  darkness — not  so  much  as  even  to  eat  and  drink  with  them. 
He  was  not  to  accept  the  hospitality  of  any  dweller  at  Eethel,  in  order  to  show 
in  a  marked  way,  which  men  generally  could  appreciate,  God's  abhorrence  of 
the  system  which  Jeroboam  had  "devised  of  his  own  heart."  2.  The  temptO' 
tion  offered  immediate  temporal  advantage.  "  And  1  will  give  thee  a  reward  " 
(verse  7).  It  was  customary  to  honour  a  prophet  with  a  gift  if  he  performed 
any  service  that  was  requested  at  his  hands  (1  Sam.  ix.  7,  8  ;  1  Kings  xiv.  3 ; 
2  Kings  V.  5 ;  viii.  9).  The  prophet  was  tempted  with  three  things :  royal 
hospitality,  refreshment,  and  reward.  How  far  these  offers  influenced  the 
future  action  of  the  prophet  can  be  only  imperfectly  conjectured.  At  this  point 
of  his  history  they  had  no  power  to  corrupt  his  fidelity.  Neither  offers  nor 
threats  must  be  allowed  to  prevail  with  us  to  swerve  a  single  step  from  the 
path  of  duty.  3.  The  temptation  was  resisted  hy  a  rememlrance  of  God's  Word. 
"Por  so  was  it  charged  me  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord"  (verse  9).  This  was 
the  weapon  by  which  the  Sinless  One  conquered  the  most  furious  onslaughts  of 
the  great  adversary  (Matt.  iv.  4,  7,  10).  The  Word  of  God  is  an  impregnable 
defence,  against  which  the  arrows  of  temptation  are  shot  in  vain. 

Lessons: — 1.  Faithful  rehulces  often  produce  proud  wrath.  2.  In  the  way  of 
duty  the  Divinely-authorized  messenger  need  fear  no  danger,  3.  To  reject  Divine 
warnings  aggravates  transgression  and  invites  vengeance. 


The  Calp  Woeship  Denounced. 

I.  The  great  business  of  the  prophet  is  evidently  to  denounce  the  altar  and 
the  sacrifices  in  Bethel.     Of  course,  the  rationalist  teacher  exclaims,  "  These 
were  the  offences  of  Jeroboam.     He  was  an  intruder  upon  the  special  privileges  of 
214 


SOMTLETIC  COMJ^fENTARi  :   Kl^Ub.  OHap.  zm. 


the  Jerusalem  hierarchy ;  he  had  courage  to  introduce  priests  taken  from  the 
lowest  of  the  people  ;  he  broke  through  the  formalities  of  the  Levitical  law. 
Such  a  man  in  our  days  would  bo  called  a  reformer  or  asserter  of  national  and 
individual  independence.  Therefore  he  is  denounced  by  the  ecclesiastics  who 
have  compiled  the  Jewish  records."  Yes,  if  the  establishment  of  visible  sensible 
worship  be  a  great  step  in  the  progress  of  the  human  intellect — if  the  introduc- 
tion of  a  set  of  priests  continually  at  work  to  make  that  worship  more  visible, 
more  sensual,  more  gross,  to  be  a  mode  of  fulfilling  the  aspirations  of  those  who 
desire  moral  and  spiritual  liberty — if  the  breaking  through  the  fetters  of  a  law 
which  restrained  all  sacerdotal  inventions  whatsoever,  and  bore  witness  con- 
tinually that  sacrifices  were  not  offered  to  appease  a  tyrant,  but  to  j^cmove  an 
obstacle  between  a  righteous  Lord  and  His  unrighteous  subjects — if  the  con- 
sequent establishment  of  a  devil-worship  be  that  which  wise  men  of  the 
nineteenth  century  after  Christ  call  reformation,  Jeroboam  deserves  all  their 
patronage,  and  the  man  of  God  who  came  out  of  Judah  to  pronounce  a  curse 
upon  his  altar,  all  their  wrath. 

II.  And  this  is  precisely  the  question,  not  for  this  passage  of  the  history  only, 
but  for  every  subsequent  passage  of  it.  The  revolting  kings  of  Israel,  in  whom 
modem  enlightenment  discovers  the  champions  of  human  progress,  were  intro- 
ducing the  most  unlimited  sacerdotal  tyranny,  were  making  that  sacerdotal 
tyranny  an  instrument  of  regal  tyranny.  The  priests  of  the  high  places,  the 
prophets  of  the  grove,  were  building  their  own  power  upon  the  degradation  of 
the  multitudes  whom  they  drew  after  them,  were  using  that  power  to  confirm 
every  unrighteous  decree,  to  remove  every  real  moral  restraint  from  the  kings. 
The  prophets,  who,  we  are  told,  would  never  have  been  praised  except  in  a  book 
compiled  by  the  supporters  of  a  certain  set  of  caste  interests,  were  bearing  a 
protest,  at  the  hazard  of  their  lives,  for  a  righteous  order  which  no  caprices  of 
human  superstition  or  human  will  could  set  aside,  for  a  spiritual  authority 
which  not  only  did  not  demand  the  slavery  of  the  conscience,  but  was  incom- 
patibb  with  it,  for  an  actual  relation  between  the  Most  High  and  His  creatures 
which  not  only  did  not  involve  their  regarding  Him  as  an  object  of  terror  or 
distrust,  but  proved  such  habits  of  mind  to  contain  the  very  essence  of  sin. 

III.  Men  like  the  one  we  are  now  considering  are  said  to  speak  the  Word  of 
the  Lord,  or  sometimes  in  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  Their  function  assumes  that 
the  thoughts  of  man's  heart  and  the  utterances  of  it  are  of  all  things  the  most 
sacred ;  that  a  presence  is  there  which  men  are  seeking  in  dark  groves,  on  high 
places,  in  sun,  or  sea,  or  air ;  that  this  Presence  is  not  a  phantom,  not  a  creation 
of  their  own,  but  He  who  is.  He  who  formed  them  ;  that  the  best  and  wisest 
man  is  He  who  confesses  this  presence  with  awe  and  wonder,  who  believes  that 
he  is  standing  before  a  living  Being  to  whom  all  within  is  naked  and  open,  who 
desires  that  that  Being  should  direct  him,  act  upon  him,  use  him  for  His  own 
purposes,  who  knows  that  those  purposes  are  right  purposes,  who  is  sure  that 
they  cannot  concern  him  more  than  they  concern  his  fellows.  To  a  man  thus 
taught  and  trained,  idolatry  was  something  absolutely  appalling.  He  had 
no  measure  of  its  enormity,  only  he  was  sure  that  a  people  worshipping 
calves,  seeking  God  in  high  places,  were  flying  from  a  friend  and  a  deliverer, 
to  enemies  and  destroyers  ;  from  the  living  and  the  true,  to  death  and  falsehood. 
He  knew  that  it  was  so.  He  was  certain  that  he  was  not  uttering  himself  or 
his  own  fancies,  when  he  said  that  it  was  so.  God  was  speaking  through  his 
lips:  God  was  pronouncing  sentence  upon  that  which  defied  him.  What 
signified  who  might  stand  before  the  altar,  who  might  be  burning  incense 
upon  it  ?  He  no  more  could  or  dared  tremble  at  the  worshipper  than  at  the 
thing  woi shipped.  Both  were  creatures  of  the  Eternal  God.  The  one  was 
setting  himself  up,  the  other  was  set  up  in  contempt  of  Him  :  each  alike  must 
come  down.  The  truth  must  stand  fast  and  fulfil  itself.  He  had  only  to  pro- 
claim the  truth. 

215 


CHAP.  xm.  SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KIN98. 


lY.  But  how  shall  the  idolater  know  it  and  be  convinced  of  it  ?  The  ai'm, 
we  are  told,  which  was  stretched  out  to  perform  the  sacrifice,  and  then  to 
seize  the  prophet,  was  dried  up  so  that  he  could  not  pull  it  again  to  him. 
"  Here,"  you  say,  "  is  a  miracle  ;  such  a  one  as  we  expect  in  all  records  of  this 
kind."  Precisely,  such  a  one  as  you  might  expect  in  a  record  of  this  kind,  and 
as  you  would  not  expect  and  not  meet  with  in  a  record  of  another  kind  written 
by  the  supporters  of  a  body  which  was  interested  in  superstition,  and  trying  by 
all  means  to  sustain  the  reputation  of  it.  The  man  of  God  testifies  to  Jeroboam 
that  the  juices  and  springs  of  life  are  renewed  from  an  invisible  source,  that  it 
is  another  than  the  dead  thing  which  he  is  worshipping  who  can  dry  them  up 
or  give  them  their  natural  flow — a  protest  exactly  in  accordance  with  that 
which  Moses  bore  against  the  gods  of  Pharoah,  a  protest  on  behalf  of  regularity 
and  law,  and  for  a  Uod  of  regularity  and  law,  with  whom  are  the  issues  of  daily 
life  and  death,  against  the  seeker  of  charms  in  natural  things,  against  the 
worshipper  of  capricious  deities.  The  other  part  of  the  sign  is  precisely  of  the 
same  kind.  The  altar  is  rent  and  the  ashes  are  poured  out  from  the  altar,  as  a 
sure  and  everlasting  testimony  that  law  and  order  shall  not  be  violated  with 
impunity  by  any  ruler,  under  any  religious  pretext,  that  his  religious  acts  are 
more  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God  than  all  his  other  acts,  and  must  hasten  the 
vengeance  upon  those. 

V.  The  story  of  the  prophet  is  continued  in  these  words.  (Read  verses  7-10). 
The  invisible  teacher  who  had  bid  him  go  forth  on  his  journey  and  carry  the 
message  to  the  king,  had  made  him  understand  as  clearly,  that  when  he  had 
done  his  errand,  he  was  to  go  back  into  Judah.  He  had  no  doubt  that  this  was 
what  he  ought  to  do.  It  was  part  of  his  commission.  The  other  part  of  it 
would  not  be  faithfully  discharged  if  this  was  forgotten.  These  words  and  acts 
of  the  prophet  were  connected  with  his  own  life,  they  belonged  to  his  very  self. 
His  conscience,  as  well  as  his  powers  of  thought  and  reflection,  were  not  crushed 
or  stifled  by  the  Divine  communication,  but  were  awakened  by  it  into  activity. 
And  the  conscience  so  awakened  wa?  proof  against  any  solicitations  of  the  king. 
(Condensed  from  F,  B,  Maurice,) 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  1-10.  The  man  of  God  out  power  of  the  Divine  "Word.  That  is 
of  Judah.  1 .  He  comes  led  by  the  the  manner  of  the  Lord  in  His  king- 
Word  of  God,  and  goes  on  his  dark,  dom.  He  accomplishes  by  means  of 
difficult  way  in  faith,  without  taking  small,  insignificant  instruments,  what 
counsel  with  flesh  and  blood.  2.  He  no  king,  with  all  his  power,  can  do. 
stands,  strong  and  bold,  before  the  The  altars  of  heathendom  are  shat- 
king,  fears  him  not,  testifies  against  tered  by  means  of  the  testimony  of 
his  sins,  and  announces  the  judgment  fishers  and  tax-gatherers  (1  Cor.  i. 
of  God.  3.  He  makes  entreaty  for  27-29),  even  as  were  the  altars  of  the 
him  who  was  about  to  lay  hold  on  false  worshippers  of  God  by  means  of 
Him,  and  heaps  coals  of  fire  on  his  a  poor,  world- despised  recluse.  2.  It 
head.  4.  He  resists  the  offers  of  the  was  received  at  first  with  scorn, 
king,  and  will  not  be  secured  by  wrath,  and  violence ;  but  the  wrath 
bribes.  is  powerless  and  avails  nothing;  the 

—    The   testimony    against    the  altar  is  rent,  and  the  threatening  arm 

service  of  the  false  gods.     1.  It  pro-  is  dried  up.     Humble  entreaties  then 

cecdeth  from  a  nameless,   unknown,  take  the  place  of  wrath  (Isa.  xxvi.  16). 

insignificant     man,      who,      without  But  though   the    withered   arm    be 

worldiy  consequence,  has  nothing  and  restored,  the  heart  remains  withered 

knows  notMng,  except  only  the  as  before.  Physical  aid  is  always 
216 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  xnL 


readily  received  by  men,  whilst  they 
shut  their  hearts  to  the  testimony 
against  their  sins. — Lange, 

Verse  1.  But  0,  the  patience  and 
mercy  of  our  long-suffering  God,  that 
will  not  strike  a  very  Jeroboam  un- 
warned! Judgment  hovers  over  the 
heads*  of  sinners,  ere  it  light.  If 
Israel  afford  not  a  bold  reprover  of 
Jeroboam,  Judah  shall.  When  the 
king  of  Israel  is  in  all  the  height 
both  of  his  state  and  his  superstition, 
honouiing  his  solemn  day  with  his 
richest  devotion,  steps  forth  a  pro- 
phet of  God,  and  interrupts  that 
glorious  service  with  a  loud  inclama- 
tion  of  judgment.  Doubtless,  the 
man  wanted  not  wit  to  know  what 
displeasure,  what  danger  must  needs 
follow  so  unwelcome  a  message;  yet, 
dcres  he,  upon  the  commission  of  God, 
do  this  affront  to  an  idolatrous  king, 
in  the  midst  of  all  his  awful  magnifi- 
cence. The  prophets  of  God  go  upon 
many  a  thankless  errand.  He  is  no 
messenger  for  God  that  either  knows 
or  fear  the  faces  of  men. — Bp.  HalL 

Yerse  2.  God  announces  beforehand 
His  judgments  to  sinners,  that  they 
may  have  time  and  space  for  repent- 
ance. Woe  to  them  who  misemploy 
the  respite,  for  the  measure  of  their 
sins  will  be  full.  In  the  new  cove- 
nant we  have  a  far  weightier  pro- 
phecy. Unto  us  is  born  a  Son,  named 
Jesus,  out  of  the  House  of  David  ; 
who  will  come  again  and  pronounce 
judgment  upon  those  who  know  not 
God,  and  who  obey  not  the  gospel 
(2  Thess.  i.  8,  9). — Lange, 

—  The  prophet  directed  his  speech 
to  the  altar  out  of  detestation  of 
such  an  abomination :  and,  as  having 
no  hope  to  prevail  with  Jeroboam, 
who  stood  by  it,  and  was  more  insen- 
sible than  that  altar,  or  than  the 
heap  of  stones  which  Bede  once 
preached  unto. — Trapp. 

—  It  was  the  altar,  not  the  person 
of  Jeroboam,  which  the  prophet  thus 
threatens :  yet  not  the  stones  are 
stricken,  but  the  founder  in  both  their 
apprehensions  ;  so  dear  are  the  devices 
of  our  own   brain  to  us,  as  if  they 


were  incorporated  into  ourselves. 
There  is  no  opposition  of  which  we 
are  so  sensible  as  that  of  religion. 
That  the  royal  altar  should  be  thus 
polluted  by  dead  men's  bones  and  the 
blood  of  the  priests,  was  not  more 
unpleasing  than  that  all  this  should 
be  done  by  a  child  of  the  house  of 
David ;  for  Jeroboam  well  saw  that 
the  throne  and  the  altar  must  stand 
or  fall  together  ;  that  a  Son  of  David 
could  not  have  such  power  over  the 
altar,  without  an  utter  subversion  of 
the  government,  of  the  succession ; 
therefore  is  he  thus  galled  with  this 
comminatory  prediction, 

—  Probably  a  prophecy  against 
Jeroboam's  own  person,  instead  of 
against  the  insensate  altar,  would 
have  touched  him  less  nearly.  But 
this  showed  that  his  policy  would 
come  to  nought,  and  that  the  power 
he  was  establishing  with  so  much 
solicitude  would  be  utterly  subverted, 
while  the  house  of  David  would  still 
subsist  in  its  strength,  for  only  so 
could  a  king  of  that  house  be  able  to 
do  this  upon  an  altar  in  this  realm. 
The  king  grasped  the  full  meaning  of 
this  message,  and  it  filled  him  with 
rage  against  the  man  who  had  dared 
to  deliver  it  then  and  there. — Kitto. 

Verse  3.  The  miracles  which  the 
Lord  our  God  performs  are  not  only 
proofs  of  his  almighty  power  to  amaze 
us,  but  likewise  significant  signs  which 
reveal  to  us  His  eternal  decrees,  and 
lead  us  to  the  recognition  of  that 
heavenly  truth  which  sanctifies  our 
hearts. 

Verse  4.  Although  faithful  teachers 
often  accomplish  nothing  and  fail  most 
signally  with  men  of  high  degree,  yet 
must  they  never  on  this  account 
abandon  their  office.  For  if  thou  warn 
him  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul 
(Ezek.  iii.  19),  and  although  the 
obdurate  remain  untouched,  yet  it 
shall  not  remain  without  fruit  (Isa.  Iv. 
10).  How  did  even  this  warning 
work  itself  out  and  bear  fruit  after 
three  hundred  years  (2  Kings  xxiii. 
15).  Sinners  eminent  by  wealth  and 
position  will  only  listen  to  prophets 

217 


OHAF.  zni* 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KIN&8. 


who  are  dumb  dogs  and  cannot  bark 
(Isa.  Ivi.  10).  When  a  true  servant 
of  the  Lord  cries  out,  "The  axe  is 
already  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree," 
they  arise  in  wrath  and  cry  out,  **  Seize 
him"  (2  Tim.  iv.  1-5).  He  who 
attacks  a  servant  of  God  becau'se  of 
his  testimony,  never  remains  un- 
punished. In  vain  doth  the  enemy 
stretch  forth  his  hand  against  those 
who  are  under  God's  protection  (Job 
vii.  44  ;  Lev.  iv.  29  ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  17). 
Those  who  will  not  listen  to  the  word 
of  truth,  God  often  visits  with  bodily 
pain  in  order  to  humble  them  and 
teach  them  to  pray  and  supplicate. — 
Cramer, 

—  A  fearful  stroke,  had  he  well 
considered  it ;  but  his  heart  was  as  hard 
as  his  hand  withered.  Jeroboam  had 
as  great  a  miracle  wrought  before  him 
herein,  as  St.  Paul  had  at  his  conver- 
sion ;  but  without  the  Spirit's  con- 
currence, neither  miracle,  nor  ministry, 
nor  misery,  can  in  the  least  measure 
mollify  the  heart  of  an  obdurate  and 
obstinate  sinner.  Yalens,  the  Arian 
emperor,  would  have  signed  a  sentence 
of  banishment  against  Basil,  but  could 
not  by  reason  of  a  sudden  trembling 
of  his  right  hand,  so  that  he  could  not 
write  one  letter  of  his  own  name,  but 
for  anger  tore  the  paper  in  pieces,  and 
let  Basil  alone.  There  is  a  story  of 
one  of  our  late  innovators,  who,  turn- 
ing with  the  times  and  beginning  to 
bow  towards  altars,  never  went  up- 
right more;  and  of  another  who, 
hearing  perjury  condemned  by  a  godly 
preacher,  and  how  it  never  escaped  un- 
punished, said  in  a  bravery,  **  I  have 
often  forsworn  myself,  and  yet  my 
right  hand  is  no  shorter  than  my  left." 
These  words  he  had  scarce  uttered, 
when  such  an  inflammation  arose  in 
that  hand,  that  he  was  forced  to  go  to 
the  chirurgeon  and  cut  it  off  lest  it 
should  have  infected  the  whole  body ; 
and  so  it  became  shorter  than  the 
other.  The  Jews  tell  us,  that  when 
Jeroboam's  hand  was  dried  up,  the 
false  prophets  told  him  that  this  fell  out 
by  chance,  and  so  kept  him  from 
thinking  of  God  who  had  smitten  him. 
Let  the  saints  learn  to  put  their  con- 
fldence  in  God;  for  if  He  deny  con* 
218 


course  and  influence,  the  arm  of  all 
adverse  power  shrinketh  up  presently. 
— Trapp, 

Verses  4,  5.  The  importance  of  the 
authentication  of  the  man  of  God  by  a 
miraculous  sign  appears  from  the  con- 
duct of  Jeroboam  towards  him.  With- 
out waiting  for  the  confirmation  of  his 
word  by  the  announced  miraculous 
sign,  the  king  stretches  his  hand  to- 
wards him  with  the  words,  "  Lay  hold 
on  him  ;"  but  must  now  experience  in 
the  hand  with  which  he  could  set  aside 
the  prophet  who  was  disagreeable  to 
him,  the  omnipotence  of  the  Lord  who 
has  power  to  protect  his  servants.  The 
outstretched  hand  is  withered  by  a 
miracle — that  is,  stiffened,  deprived  of 
vital  juice — so  that  he  cannot  draw  it 
in  again.  On  this  follows  the  miracu- 
lous sign  announced,  and  Jeroboam's 
wicked  arrogance  is  broken  down  by 
the  double  miracle ;  he  is  constrained 
to  entreat  the  prophet  to  intercede 
for  him  with  the  Lord  his  God,  that  his 
hand  may  be  restored.— ifeiV. 

—  Resolute  wickedness  is  impatient 
of  reproof,  and,  instead  of  yielding  to 
the  voice  of  God,  rebelleth.  Just  and 
discreet  reprehension  doth  not  more 
reform  some  sinners  than  exasperate 
others.  How  easy  is  it  for  God  to 
cool  the  courage  of  proud  Jeroboam  I 
The  hand  which  his  rage  stretches  out, 
dries  up  and  cannot  be  pulled  back 
again;  and  now  stands  the  king  of 
Israel,  like  some  antique  statue,  in  a 
posture  of  impotent  endeavour,  so 
disabled  to  the  hurt  of  the  prophet, 
that  he  cannot  command  that  piece  of 
himself.  What  are  the  great 
potentates  of  the  world  in  the  power- 
ful hand  of  the  Almighty  ?  Tyrants 
cannot  be  so  harmful  as  they  are 
malicioas.  It  must  needs  be  a  great 
strait  that  could  drive  a  proud  heart 
to  beg  mercy  where  he  bent  his 
persecution;  so  doth  Jeroboam,  hold- 
ing it  no  scorn  to  be  beholden  to  an 
enemy.  In  extremities  the  worst  men 
can  be  content  to  sue  for  favour  where 
they  have  spent  their  malice. — Bp, 
Rail. 

Verse  6,    He  who  desiree  for  him* 


JtLUMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS,  chap.  xm. 

self  the  intercession  of  others   must  him,  that  which  God  has  commanded 

himself     draw     near     humbly     and  him  seems,  in  all  times  and  all  places, 

penitently   to   God  and  implore    His  in  evil  as  in  good  days,  the  fixed  and 

mercy.     In  this  wise  can  we  know  if  definite   plan    of    action.     The    best 

we  are  indeed  children  of   God   and  weapon  and  defence  against  the  snares 

guided  by  His  Spirit,  if  we  pray  and  of  our  spiritual  enemy  is  the  law  and 

supplicate  for  those  who  have  done  Word  of  God.     It  is  far  from  being 

their  worst  to  us,  and  thus  overcome  unimportant  with  whom  we  eat  and 

evil  with  good  (1  Pet.  iii.  9).  drink,  i.e.,  in  fellowship  and  intimate 

—  The  faith  of  the  wicked  in  the  alliance  (1  Cor.  v.  ii). — Starke. 
prayers  of  the  g^ood.     1.  Shows  that 

religion  maybe  respected  while  it  is  Verse  9.  The  reasons  for  the  Divine 
personally  ignored.  2.  That  religion  commands.  I.  Are  not  always appa- 
bears  external  evidence  of  its  own  rent.  2.  Are  always  grounded  in 
superiority.  3.  That  the  wicked  are  wisdom  and  righteousness.  3  Dis- 
ever  ready  to  share  in  the  benefits  of  obedience  is  inexcusable  even  where 
religion  while  they  reject  its  claims,  the  Divine  reasons  are  not  understood. 
4.  That  the  example  of  a  religious  —  He  was  charged  also  not  to  re- 
life  has  a  powerful  influence  for  good,  turn  by  the  way  that  he  came;  pro- 

—  The  display  of  miraculons  bably  lest  the  account  of  what  was 
power  will  not  avail  to  change  the  done  should  have  reached  the  ears  of 
heart.  1 .  It  appeals  mainly  to  the  any  of  the  people  through  whom  he 
external  senses.  2.  The  judgment  had  passed,  and  he  suffer  inconveniences 
may  be  convinced  while  the  will  re-  on  the  account,  either  by  persecution 
mains  unchanged ;  men  reject  religion,  -  from  the  idolaters,  or  from  curious 
not  for  want  of  evidence,  but  for  want  people  delaying  him  in  order  to  cause 
of  will.  3.  To  refuse  divinely  attested  him  to  give  an  account  of  the  trans- 
truth  is  to  incur  the  greater  guilt.  actions    which  took  place  at  Bethel. 

This  is  a  reason   why  he  should  not 

Verse    7.    Although   the    ungodly  return  by  the  same   way ;  but  what 

often  hold  in  high  esteem  these  holy  the  reason  of  this  part  of  the  charge,  if 

men  especially  raised  up  by  God,  yet  not  the  above,  is  not  easy  to  see. 

they  never  follow  their  instructions  —  This  command  seems  to   have 

and  warnings  (Mark  vi.  19).     What  been  given  simply  to  test  the  obedience 

bootsitthat  we  gratefully  acknowledge  of  the  prophet  by  laying  him  under  a 

the  material  blessings  which  meet  us,  positive  as  well  as  a  moral  obligation, 

if  we  leave  unfulfilled  the  very  object  Wh(  n    he  turned  back  with  the  old 

of  these  blessings,  namely,  the  turning  prophet,  and  retraversed  a  road  over 

of  our  hearts  from  sin  and  the  world  which  he  had  already  passed,  he  dis- 

to   God.      Unbelief  and   impenitence  obeyed  this  injunction,  as  by  eating 

cannot  be   outweighed   by  even   the  and  drinking  he  disobeyed  the  other. — 

highest    friendship     and    humanity.  Speaher^t  Comm. 
"When  the  world  can   effect  nothing 

more  by  force  and  threats,  it  seeks  to  Verse  10.  If  in  a  certain  position 

gain  its  ends  by  plausible  love  tokens,  thou  hast  done  what  God  commanded, 

^^Osiander.  and  left  undone  what  He  forbade,  then 

go  on  thy  way  peaceful  and  content, 

Verses  8,  9.  There  is  no  bribe  to  how  dark  and  unknown  soever  it  may 

which  the  man  of  God  will  yield:  to  seem  to  thee. 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  11—32, 

Temptations  to  Disobedience. 

I.  Assail  us  at  the  moment  we  are  most  clearly  conscious  of  duty  done. 
The  mysterious  prophet  of  Judah  had,  with  great  effort  and  at  great  peril, 

219 


CHAP.  xin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


accomplished  his  important  mission,  and,  in  obedience  to  the  positive  directiona 
he  had  received,  was  returning  homeward  by  a  different  route,  when  a  tempta- 
tion came  upon  him  from  a  most  unexpected  quarter.  It  is  ever  so.  There 
is  little  space  afforded  for  self-gratulation  on  the  achievement  of  one  difficult 
task  ere  we  are  confronted  with  another ;  and  woe  to  him  who  is  off  his  guard 
at  that  moment.  It  is  not  always  in  the  midst  of  the  storm  that  the  mariner 
finds  his  greatest  danger,  but  in  the  deceitful  and  uncertain  calm  when  some 
sudden  and  unexpected  gust  may  strike  his  vessel  unprepared.  It  was  only 
lately  that  the  Eurydice^  a  noble  British  man-of-war,  after  successfully  naviga- 
ting the  world,  was  approaching  the  shores  of  England  with  every  stitch  of 
canvas  spread,  when  her  sails  were  smitten  with  a  terrific  blast,  and  in  a  few 
numients  she  heeled  over  and  sank  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  with  hundreds  of 
brave  seamen  whose  hearts  were  beating  with  joy  in  the  near  prospect  of 
home!  (1  Cor.  x.  12). 

II.  Are  most  dangerous  when  they  come  to  us  with  a  pretended  religious 
sanction  (verse  18).  The  prophet  of  Bethel  was  old  (verse  I't),  and  com- 
manded the  reverence  that  belongs  to  age.  He  was  recognized  as  n prophet,  and 
had  so  much  regard  for  his  sacred  office  as  to  be  absent  from  the  king's  idola- 
trous sacrifices,  though  he  allowed  his  sons  to  be  there  (verses  11,  12).  His 
object  might  be  to  curry  favour  with  the  king  by  making  the  man  of  God  con- 
tradict himself,  and  thus  impair  the  moral  weight  and  authority  of  the 
message  that  had  been  so  faithfully  delivered,  and  weaken  its  impression  on  the 
minds  of  the  people.  He  gained  his  end  by  telling  a  lie — a  lie  that  was  aggra- 
vated by  its  boldness  and  profanity  (verse  18).  The  prophet  of  Judah  was  too 
guileless  to  suspect  the  trap  that  was  laid  for  him,  though,  being  himself  in 
direct  communication  with  Jehovah,  he  ought  not  to  have  acted  upon  a  contra- 
diction of  the  command  imparted  to  himself,  or  any  other  authority  than  that 
from  which  he  had  received  it.  He  was  beguiled ;  he  turned  back,  and  his 
doom  was  sealed.  The  most  dangerous  allurements  of  evil  are  presented 
when  it  robes  itself  in  the  external  garb  of  goodness.  When  rack,  and  sword,  and 
faggot  fail  to  intimidate,  a  false  show  of  piety  will  fatally  deceive  I  Ah !  how 
much  need  have  we  to  cry — 

Awake,  my  soul,  when  sin  is  nigh. 
And  keep  it  still  awake. 

III.  Cannot  be  yielded  to  with  impunity.  1.  The  disoledient  are  made 
conscious  of  their  sin  (verses  20-22).  The  two  prophets  were  startled  at  their 
humble  meal  by  hearing  the  voice  of  the  Lord  uttering  unmistakable  condemna- 
tion ;  and  this  time  the  false  prophet  was  made  the  vehicle  of  a  true  message 
from  heaven,  which  he  understood,  we  may  well  suppose,  with  real  concern,  and 
delivered  with  reluctance.  A  conviction  of  wrong-doing  always  precedes 
punishment :  the  sinner  will  be  made  to  understand  what  it  is  for  which  he 
suffers.  2.  The  disobedient  are  certainly  punished  {Yev&es  2^ ,  24).  The  punish- 
ment may  be  strange,  singular,  and  in  a  form  utterly  unexpected ;  but  it  will 
be  certain.  Here  a  lion  was  made  the  instrument  of  vengeance.  It  is  said 
that  lions  like  not  to  attack  man  unless  driven  to  extremity  tor  prey,  and  that 
an  ass  is  choice  food  for  a  lion,  while  it  is  well  known  that  a  lion  kills  to  eat. 
But  in  this  case  we  see  the  natural  instinct  of  the  brute  controlled  by  a  superior 
power  :  the  man  is  assailed  and  slain  ;  his  body  and  that  of  the  ass  remain  un- 
molested. God  is  not  restricted  to  any  one  method  of  punishing  transgression  : 
all  the  powers  of  the  universe  wait  on  His  bidding.  3.  The  punishment  of  the 
disobedient  is  evident  (verse  25).  The  scene  was  patent  to  every  passer-by,  and 
soon  became  the  common  talk  of  the  city.  Where  the  offence  was  committed, 
there  its  punishment  was  witnessed.  Jehovah  will  vindicate  His  righteous 
220 


SOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chapxiif. 


government  of  the  universe  by  the  most  public  and  terrible  punishment  of  sin 
(2  Cor.  V.  10).  4.  21ie  punishment  of  the  disobedient  is  not  unlamented  (verses 
26-30).  The  awful  transactions  in  which  the  prophet  of  Bethel  was  thus  called 
to  take  a  part  could  not  but  make  a  profound  impression  on  his  mind,  and 
might  be  ben(  ficial  in  promoting  his  spiritual  reformation.  He  sorrowed  over 
the  unfortunate  fate  of  his  brother-prophet,  and  interred  his  body  in  his  own 
tomb  (verses  29  30).  Do  not  think,  0  sinner !  that  your  transgressions  are 
unnoticed,  or  that  you  are  the  only  one  affected  by  them :  they  cannot  be 
regarded  with  indifference  by  a  Just  and  Beneficent  God.  And  if  you  will  per- 
sist in  your  disobedience,  breaking  through  all  restrictions,  and  spurning  all 
help — if  you  will  court  ruin,  and  voluntarily  surrender  youself  to  the  inevitable 
consequences  of  your  sins — He  who  has  done  all  He  consistently  can  to  recall 
you  to  obedience  resolves  you  shall  not  perish  unwept  and  unlamented ;  and 
as  you  drop  into  the  abysmal  depths  of  unutterable  woe  the  voice  of  Infinite 
Pity  shall  exclaim  in  tones  which,  though  not  intended  to  do  so,  can  only 
sharpen  the  stings  of  remorse :  0  1  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  my  command- 
ments, &c.  (Isa.  xlviii.  18). 

IV.  Will  not  prevent  the  ultimate  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  Word  (verses 
31,  32).  "  The  saying  which  he  cried  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord  shall  surely 
come  to  pass."  Thus  did  the  faithless  prophet  bear  his  testimony  to  the 
faithfulness  of  God.  Jehovah  is  stronger  than  the  Tempter,  and  will  ere  long 
expose  his  most  plausible  deceptions,  baffle  his  wicked  designs,  and  consign 
him  to  his  own  place. 

Lessons  : — 1,  False  prophets  are  the  most  dangerous  and  fatal  enemies  of  God's 
people.  2.  They  who  seek  to  seduce  the  soul  from  its  allegiance  to  God's  Wordy 
however  specious  their  pretexts,  are  the  emissaries  of  Satan.  3.  We  may  he  tempted 
to  do  evil  hy  counterfeit  appearances  of  piety  y  when  we  should  not  he  driven  to  it  hy 
any  fea/r  of  suffering. 

This  passage  may  also  be  homiletically  treated  as  follows  :— 

An  Unfaithpul  Peophet. 

I.  Is  content  to  live  in  the  midst  of  idolatry  and  moral  corruption 
without  lifting  up  a  protesting  voice  (verse  11).  The  prophet  of  Bethel 
could  not  be  ignorant  of  the  innovations  of  the  idolatrous  king;  and  while  it 
does  not  appear  that  he  actually  sanctioned  them  by  his  presence,  he  did  not 
restrain  his  sons  from  worshipping  at  the  unholy  altar.  He  lacked  the  courage 
to  protest  against  the  wickedness  of  the  king,  though  he  might  be  often  power- 
fully moved  to  do  so.  He  resisted  the  impulse  until  it  became  feebler ;  and  he 
sank  down  a  voiceless  witness  to  the  insults  that  were  daily  offered  to  his  God. 
**  He  seemed  to  be  one  of  those  mixed  characters,  true  to  history  and  human 
nature,  which  perpetually  appear  among  the  sacred  persons  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment;  moved  by  a  partial  wavering  inspiration  ;  aiming  after  good,  yet  failing 
to  attain  it ;  full  of  genuine  tender  admiration  for  the  prophet  of  whose  death 
ho  had  been  the  unwilling  cause,  the  mouthpiece  of  truths  which  he  himself 
but  faintly  understood."  To  disobey  repeated  calls  to  duty  only  confirms  the 
Boul  in  its  unfaithfulness,  and  renders  it  content  with  evils  against  which  it  was 
wont  to  loudly  and  faithfully  protest.  There  are  times  when  silence  becomes 
a  sin. 

II.  Will  descend  to  the  most  deceptive  practices  to  tempt  the  faithful 
from  their  allegiance  (verses  12-iy).    What  the  prophet  of  Judah  did,  showed 

221 


OflAP.xm.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


the  old  prophet  what  he  should  have  done.  Filled  with  shame  for  his  neglect, 
and  wishful  to  restore  himself  in  his  own  opinion  and  in  the  opinion  of  others 
who  had  perhaps  accused  him  of  unfaithfulness,  he  sought  to  have  intercourse 
with  so  courageous  a  witness  for  God,  and  to  gain  prestige  by  having  him  under 
his  own  roof.  The  objects  were  thoroughly  selfish,  and  to  accomplish  it  he  did 
not  scruple  to  tell  a  lie  (verse  18).  The  most  abandoned  crave  for  companion- 
ship in  their  sins,  and  will  resort  to  all  kinds  of  methods  to  bring  down  others 
to  their  own  level.  It  is  impossible  to  say  to  what  depths  of  iniquity  one 
single  act  of  unfaithfulness  may  lead  (Luke  xvi.  10). 

III.  Is  compelled  to  own  the  solemn  reality  and  authority  of  the  Divine 
Word.  A  messa<?e  came  to  the  old  prophet  the  source  and  meaning  of  which  he 
could  not  mistake  (verses  20-22).  God  may  often  speak  through  a  wicked 
prophet.  He  did  so  through  Balaam,  uttering  the  sublimest  oracles  of  blessing, 
though  that  sooth-sayer  would  fain  have  cursed  Israel.  The  Bethel-prophet 
was  also  firmly  convinced  that  the  prophecy  against  the  altar  would  cerlainly 
come  true  ;  and  he  therefore  directed  his  sons  to  bury  his  corpse  in  the  same 
grave  as  that  of  the  Judah-prophet  (verses  30-32).  **  The  bones  of  the  seducer 
and  seduced  being  thus  intermingled  in  the  tomb,  it  so  happened,  as  the  former 
probably  intended,  that  his  bones  escaped  at  the  appointed  time  the  defilement 
to  which  they  would  otherwise  have  been  subjected.  The  tomb  of  the  prophet 
that  came  out  of  Judah  was  then  recognised,  and  for  his  sake  the  contents  were 
spared  from  dishonour"  (2  Kings  xxiii.  17,  18).  The  Word  of  God  will 
vindicate  itself,  even  in  the  lips  of  those  who  have  sometimes  ignored  its  authority, 

rV.  Involves  his  victims  in  fatal  disaster  (verses  23-26).  We  are  ready  to 
admit  that  the  old  prophet  did  not  intend  to  bring  upon  his  victim  the  result  that 
really  happened.  He  might  have  a  vague  impression  that  his  disobedience 
would  not  escape  some  kind  of  punishment ;  but  had  he  foreseen  how  awful  and 
immediate  that  punishment  would  be,  he  would  not  have  persisted  in  his  plot. 
But  that  is  ever  the  way  with  wrong-doing;  it  goes  farther  than  it  intended, 
and  stands  aghast  at  the  ruin  it  has  itself  produced. 

V.  Need  not  he  devoid  of  brotherly  sympathy  and  respect,  nor  be  beyond  the 
reach  of  reformation  (verses  28-30).  The  Bethel-prophet  sincerely  mourned 
over  the  sad  fate  of  his  brother  prophet,  and,  with  the  most  genuine  respect, 
reverently  interred  his  body  in  his  own  grave.  The  heart  that  was  thus  touched 
with  fraternal  pity  was  perhaps  also  smitten  with  grief  on  account  of  sin.  He 
repented  his  unfaithfulness  in  the  past ;  and  he  showed  his  desire  to  henceforth 
imitate  the  spirit  and  example  of  the  dead  prophet,  by  giving?  particular  direc- 
tions that  his  body  should  be  laid  in  the  same  grave.  As  if  he  said: — **If  I 
can  have  no  more  fellowship  with  my  brother  in  life,  I  will  at  least  be  united 
to  him  in  death  ;  our  common  grave,  to  which  I  shall  soon  go  down  in  sorrow, 
shall  be  a  lasting  testimony  against  the  sin  of  Jeroboam." 

Lessons: — 1.  It  is  a  great  honour  and  a  great  responsilility  to  he  a  prophet 
of  the  Lord.  2.  An  unfaithful  prophet  has  a  great  power  for  evil.  3.  The  un- 
faithfulness of  the  messenger  does  not  invalidate  the  Divine  authority  of  the  message. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Verses  11-82.  The  history  of  these  of  Judah  we  see  a  man  of  God  fnll  of 

two  prophets  offers  an  important  view  life  and  strength,  but  who  yet  proved 

of  the  relation  of  this  class  to  the  new  unstable  in  these  disturbed  times;  in 

order  of  things ;    in  the  prophet  out  the  old  Israelite    we  look  upon  on© 
n'4 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS. 


OHAP.  XIII. 


in  whom  the  fire  is  almost  quenched, 
it  only  glimmers  faintly — a  type  of  the 
expiring  high  and  manly  strength  of 
Israel ;  he  is  still  upheld  by  faith  in 
God's  Word  rather  than  by  self- 
reliance.  They  both  yet  speak  and 
testify  in  death.  The  fall  and  death 
of  the  man  of  Judah  set  forth  two 
great  truths.  1.  He  who  thinketh 
he  standeth,  let  him  take  heed  ( I  Cor. 
X.  12).  He  had  conducted  himself 
grandly  and  nobly,  and  victoriously 
withstood  a  severe  temptation,  yet 
he  yielded  to  a  lesser  one.  The 
higher  a  man  stands  the  deeper  is  his 
fall,  and  to  whom  much  is  given 
from  him  will  much  be  required 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  13;  x.  13).  Only  those 
who  are  true  unto  death  can  obtain  the 
crown  of  life.  2.  How  unsearchable 
are  His  judgments,  and  His  ways  past 
finding  out  (Rom.  xi.  33).  He  who 
is  holy  in  all  His  ways,  knows  bow  to 
establish  firmly  that  which  is  threat- 
ened with  destruction  and  annihila- 
tion by  human  treachery  and  deceit. 
The  death  and  the  grave  of  the  man 
of  God  announc  e,  in  louder  and  more 
threatening  accents  than  did  his  lips, 
the  altar  is  rent.  —  Von  Gerlach. 

Verses  11-19.  I  do  not  know  any 
passage  more  useful  than  this  for  dis- 
abusing us  of  a  prejudice  which  the 
mere  word  prophet  is  liable  to  create 
in  our  minds.  "If  the  man  was 
inspired,"  we  say  to  ourselves,  "  in- 
spired by  God,  we  must  be  sure  he 
would  do  the  right  thing,  and  say  the 
right  thing.  It  would  destroy  all  our 
security  if  we  thought  otherwise." 
Is^o,  brethren;  it  would  destroy  no 
security  at  all  which  the  Eible  de- 
signs to  give  us.  On  the  contrary,  we 
shall  lose  a  great  security,  we  shall 
fall  into  a  great  danger,  if  we  do  not 
strictly  adhere  to  the  teaching  of  the 
Bible  on  this  subject,  but  set  up  certain 
canons  of  our  own.  The  first  obvious 
lesson  which  this  passage  teaches  us 
is,  that  a  prophet,  a  true  prophet,  a 
prophet  of  God,  might  be  grossly 
deceived.  The  second  is,  that  he 
must  be  deceived  if  he  yielded  to  any 
pretences  of  inspiration  on  the  part  of 
any  man,  though  that  man  were  called 


a  prophet,  and  were  a  prophet,  when 
what  he  said  went  against  a  sure  wit- 
ness and  conviction  as  to  his  own  duty 
The  third  is,  that  a  prophet,  not 
habitually  a  deceiver,  might  on  a 
certain  occasion  wilfully  deceive — in 
the  plain  language  of  Holy  "Writ, 
might  lie.  All  these  statements  we 
accept  on  the  authority  of  Scripture. 
And  if  we  accept  them,  we  may 
derive  the  very  greatest  profit  from 
them.  We  are  often  apt  to  suppose 
that  a  prophet  or  inspired  man  is  one 
who  is  raised  above  laws  and  govern- 
ment, who  can  lay  down  laws  for 
himself,  whose  internal  power  is  itself 
the  rule  for  others  and  for  his  own 
conduct.  The  Scripture  teaches  us 
quite  a  different  lesson.  The  charac- 
teristic quality  of  the  prophet,  when  he 
is  true,  is  obedience.  He  is  nothing 
in  himself.  He  is  merely  a  servant. 
In  the  acknowledgment  of  his  service, 
of  the  power  which  is  upon  him, 
his  strength  consists.  But  it  is  no 
mere  impulse  to  which  he  yields 
himself.  He  is  liable  to  all  the 
same  chances  and  foolish  impulses  as 
other  people.  He  is  particularly 
liable  to  confound  these  impulses 
with  God's  teaching  and  commands. 
He  is,  therefore,  to  be  more  suspicious 
of  himself,  more  watchful  against  this 
confusion,  than  other  men.  If  he  once 
forgets  the  Invisible  Euler  and  Law- 
giver, no  one  will  commit  such  fla- 
grant errors,  such  falsehood,  such 
blasphemy . — Maurice, 

Verses  11-15.  The  old  prophet, 
when  he  hears  of  the  man  of  God, 
hastens  upon  his  way,  and  spares 
neither  care  nor  pains  to  see  him  and 
bring  him  to  his  house.  How  much 
time,  pains,  and  money  are  expended 
by  the  children  of  this  world  to  see 
and  hear  what  will  gratify  their 
senses,  whilst  they  stir  neither  hand 
nor  foot  to  acquire  that  which  per- 
tains to  their  peace  and  salvation! 

Verse  11.  Doubtless  he  was  a 
prophet  of  God,  but  corrupt,  resty, 
vicious.  Prophecy  doth  not  always 
presuppose  sanctification  :  many  a  one 
bath  had  visions  from  God,  who  shall 

i22d 


OHAP.  XIII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


never  enjoy  the  vision  of  God.  A 
little  holiness  is  worth  much  illumi- 
nation.— Bp.  Hall, 

Yerse  14.  The  danger  of  delay. 
1.  Gives  an  opportunity  to  be  over- 
taken by  the  tempter.  2.  The  diffi- 
culties of  our  mission  seem  to  multiply. 
3.  Often  involves  suffering  and 
disaster. 

Verses  16-19.  So  in  indifferent 
ordinary  matters,  which  God  has 
either  ordered  or  forbidden,  we  must 
observe  unerring  obedience.  What- 
ever obtains  success  and  position  by 
means  of  deceit  cannot  be  followed  by 
blessing,  but  rather  by  a  curse.  The 
Scripture  is  not  silent  concerning  the 
sins  of  the  man  of  God ;  and  this,  not 
that  we  may  excuse  our  sins  by  his, 
but  that  we  may  guard  ourselves  from 
haughtiness  and  spiritual  pride. 

Yerse  18.  There  is  no  temptation 
so  dangerous  as  that  which  comes 
shrouded  under  a  vail  of  holiness,  and 
pretends  authority  from  God  Himself. 
Jeroboam  threatens,  the  prophet  stands 
undaunted :  Jeroboam  fawns  and 
promises,  the  prophet  holds  constant. 
Now  comes  a  grey-headed  seer,  and 
pleads  a  counter  message  from  God  ; 
the  prophet  yields  and  transgresses. 
Satan  may  affright  us  as  a  fiend,  but 
he  seduces  us  as  an  angel  of  light. 
Who  would  have  looked  for  a  liar 
under  hoary  hairs  and  a  holy  mantle  ? 
—£p.  Hall. 

—  Falsehood.  1 .  Is  always  inex- 
cusable. 2.  Aggravated  when  in  the 
garb  of  sanctity.  3.  Never  fails  to 
produce  mischief.  4.  An  evidence  of 
moral  degradation. 

—  The  door  of  his  heart  seems  to 
have  been  standing  ajar,  almost  half 
opened  already,  to  the  invitations  of 
the  old  man.  Otherwise,  surely  he 
would  have  said  :  "Thou  a  prophet ! 
How  is  it,  then,  that  thou  dwellest  at 
Bethel,  the  house  of  Jeroboam's 
corrupt  worship  ?  If  thou  hadst  been 
indeed  a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  thou 
wouldst  have  denounced  that  worship, 
and  I  should  not  have  been  sent  from 
Judah  to  lift  up  my  voice  against  it." 
^-  Wordsworth, 

224 


Yerses  20-22.  The  same  sentence 
which  the  old  prophet  pronounced 
upon  the  man  of  God  he  pronounced 
upon  himself,  while  he  had  led  and 
betrayed  him  to  disobedience.  How 
often  does  the  judgment  which  we 
utter  for  others  fall  upon  ourselves, 
when  we  have  sinned  equally,  or  in 
greater  measure  (Eom.  ii.  1). — Lange. 

—  0  wofiil  prophet!  when  he 
looks  on  his  host,  he  sees  his  execu- 
tioner; while  he  is  feeding  his  body, 
he  hears  of  his  carcase ;  at  the  table 
he  hears  of  his  denied  sepulchre ;  aad 
all  this  for  eating  and  drinking  where 
he  was  forbidden  by  God,  though 
bidden  as  from  God.  The  violation 
of  the  least  charge  of  God  is  mortal ; 
no  pretences  can  warrant  the  trans- 
gression of  a  Divine  command. — Bp. 
Hall. 

—  Punishment.  1.  Results  from 
disobedience.  2.  Is  not  inflicted 
without  due  warning.  3.  Is  certain. 
4.  In  the  hands  of  God,  is  never  un- 
just. 

Yerse.  21.  It  has  been  asked,  how 
did  the  prophet  from  Judah  sin  ?  or, 
at  any  rate,  how  did  he  sin  so  griev- 
ously as  to  deserve  the  punishment 
of  death  ?  Was  he  not  justified  in 
believing  that  God  might  revoke  His 
command  ?  Would  it  not  have  been 
wrong  in  him  to  suspect  the  old 
prophet  of  telling  a  lie  ?  To  such  en- 
quiries it  may  be  replied :  With  God 
is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of 
turning.  He  cannot  revoke  a  com- 
mand until  the  circumstances  under 
which  the  command  was  given  are 
materially  changed.  The  circum- 
stances here  were  not  changed.  Again, 
if  God  gives  a  command  and  revokes 
it,  He  will  revoke  it  as  plainly  and 
with  as  much  evidence  as  He  gave  it. 
Here  there  was  neither  the  same 
plainness,  nor  as  strong  evidence. 
The  evidence  to  the  man  of  God  was 
in  the  one  case  the  mere  word  of  a 
man,  and  of  a  man  who,  by  his  linger- 
ing at  Eethel,  yet  not  rebuking  Jero- 
boam, was  clearly  not  a  very  good 
man ;  while  in  the  other  case  the  evi- 
dence had  been  the  direct  word  of  God. 
It  was  not  the  duty  of  the  man  of  God 
to  disbelieve  the  old  prophet ;  but  it 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XIII. 


was  his  duty  not  to  have  suffered  him- 
self to  be  persuaded.  He  should  have 
felt  that  his  obedience  was  being  tried, 
and  should  have  required,  ere  he  con- 
sidered himself  released,  the  same,  or 
as  strong  evidence  as  that  on  which  he 
had  received  the  obligation.  With 
respect  to  the  question  whether  the 
sin  was  such  a  heinous  one  as  to  deserve 
death,  we  may  answer — first,  that  the 
sin,  disobedience  to  certain  positive 
commands  of  God,  was  one  which  it 
was  at  this  time  very  important  to 
punish  signally,  since  it  was  exactly 
the  sin  of  Jeroboam  and  his  adherents ; 
and  secondly,  that  femporal  death  is 
not  among  God's  heaviest  punishments, 
that  it  comes  on  men  both  naturally 
and  miraculously  for  light  offences, 
and  that  in  such  cases  we  may  regard 
it  as  sent  in  lieu  of  future  punishment, 
and  therefore  as  in  some  sort  a  mercy. 
We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  man 
of  Judah  perished  eternally  because 
he  perished  temporally. — Speaker*  s 
Vomm. 

Yerses  23-31.  A  stern  punishment, 
it  will  be  said,  for  such  a  crime.  An 
actual  punishment,  certainly — one 
which  asserted  the  fact  that  a  prophet 
will  not  be  more,  but  less,  excused  for 
his  transgressions  than  another  man. 
What  was  the  magnitude  of  the  punish- 
ment, we  are  no  judges.  A  man  who 
has  been  witness  of  a  great  national 
sin,  and  has  foretold  a  great  national 
calamity,  who  has  found  out  the  false- 
hood of  a  friend  and  a  prophet,  and 
who  is  conscious  of  having  done  wrong 
himself,  may  not  think  the  sentence  a 
very  hard  one  which  calls  him  out  of  a 
confused  world  ;  or  more  hard  because 
it  comes  in  a  form  which  assures  him 
that  there  is  an  eternal  order  which 
will  vindicate  itself  in  spite  of  his 
errors  and  those  of  all  other  men.  A 
man  of  God  who  had  learnt  to  trust 
God,  could  trust  Him  when  He  was 
slaying  him,  and  see  that  there  was  a 
deep  and  awful  righteousness  and  wis- 
dom in  the  way  in  which  the  creatures 
of  God  going  forth  to  seek  their  meat 
from  Him  may,  without  the  least 
departure  from  the  ordinary  law  of 
theii'kind,  be  made  the  instruments  of 


punishing  man's  transgressions.  The 
prophet  who  betrayed  him,  and  then 
had  the  heavy  punishment  of  being 
forced  to  proclaim  the  wrong  which  he 
himself  instigated,  is  surely  the  greater 
object  of  compassion,  especially  if,  as 
the  narrative  half  leads  us  to  suspect, 
his  conscience  was  blunted,  and  he  was 
able  to  understand  Jeroboam's  sin 
without  any  keen  sense  of  his  own.  A 
man  with  a  clear  apprehension  of  the 
evil  doings  of  rulers,  and  admiration 
for  those  who  protest  against  them 
with  a  prophetical  power  of  uttering 
the  truth,  yet  with  no  love  of  truth  or 
resolute  abhorrence  of  falsehood,  is  a 
very  painful  but  a  very  instructive 
spectacle.  Everyone  mast  be  conscious 
of  something  akin  to  such  a  state  of 
mind — some  possibility  of  it,  at  all 
events,  in  himself.  He  should  think 
of  that  with  trembling  and  with  the 
prayer — '*  See  if  there  be  any  wicked 
way  in  me.  Lead  me  in  the  way  ever- 
lasting." There  is  something  very 
pathetic  in  the  homage  to  a  truer  and 
better  man,  which  is  expressed  in  the 
words — "  Lay  my  bones  beside  his 
bones."  The  lion  slew  him  for  return- 
ing with  me  to  eat  bread  and  drink 
water;  yet  I  should  have  been  glad 
to  die  his  death ;  for  I  feel  that  he 
was  right  within,  and,  therefore,  that 
there  is  a  sacredness  in  his  carcase 
which  I  would  wish  mine  to  share! 
Maurice, 

Verses  23-25.  The  judgments  of 
God  often  fall  suddenly  and  unex- 
pectedly, thus  proving  that  though 
long  delayed,  they  are  sure  to  come, 
even  as  this,  after  the  lapse  of  three 
hundred  years,  was  the  punishment 
threatened  for  the  golden  calf- 
worship. 

Verses  23,  24.  The  last  dread  jour- 
ney. 1.  Was  entered  on  with  the 
oppressive  consciousness  that  it  must 
lead  to  death.  2.  Was  occupied  with 
tormenting  apprehensions  as  to  what 
might  be  the  particular  form  of  death. 
3.  Was  suddenly  terminated  by  the 
appointed  agent  of  retribution.  4. 
How  many  sad,  painful  journeys  there 
are  in  the  course  of  human  life  I     5. 

1!25 


CHAP.  XIII, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


Who  can  tell  the  issue   of  a  single 
journey  ? 

Yerse  23.  This  old  Bethelite  that 
had  taken  pains  to  come  and  fetch  the 
man  of  God  into  sin,  will  not  now  go 
back  with  him  to  acc.ompany  his  depar- 
ture. Doubtless  he  was  afraid  to  be 
enwrapped  in  the  judgment  which 
he  saw  hanged  over  that  obnoxious 
head.  Thus  the  mischievous  guides 
of  wickedness  leave  a  man  when  they 
have  led  him  to  his  bane,  as  familiar 
devils  forsake  their  witches  when  they 
have  brought  them  once  into  fetters. 

Yerse  24.  The  very  wild  beasts  are 
led  by  a  providence ;  their  wise  and 
powerful  Cieator  knows  how  to 
serve  himself  of  them.  The  lions 
guard  one  prophet,  kill  another,  ac- 
cording to  the  commission  received 
from  their  Maker.  What  sinner  can 
hope  to  escape  unpunished  when  every 
creature  of  God  is  ready  to  be  an 
avenger  of  evil?  Where  a  holy  man 
buys  BO  dearly  such  a  slight  frailty, 
what  shall  become  of  our  heinous  and 
presumptuous  sins  ?  Yiolent  events  do 
not  always  argue  the  anger  of  God; 
even  death  itself  is  to  His  servants  a 
fatherly  castigation. — £p,  Mali, 

Yerse  25-29.  The  chastisement  with 
which  God  visits  our  fellow-men  for 
their  sins  is  both  a  warning  to  reflect 
upon  our  sins  and  deserts,  and  a  call 
to  work  active  deeds  of  love  with  all 
our  might,  in  life  and  in  death. 

—  The  fierce  beast  stands  by  the 
carcase,  as  to  avow  his  own  act  and  to 
tell  who  sent  him,  so  to  preserve  that 
body  which  he  had  slain.  0  wonder- 
ful work  of  God!  The  executioner 
is  turned  guardian  ;  and  as  the  officer 
of  the  Highest,  commands  all  other 
creatures  to  stand  aloof  from  his  charge, 
and  command  the  fearful  ass  that 
brought  this  burden  thither  not  to  stir 
thence,  but  to  stand  ready  pressed  to 
carry  it  to  the  sepulchre;  and  now, 
when  he  hath  sufficiently  witnessed 
to  all  passengers  that  this  act  was  not 
done  upon  his  own  hunger,  but  upon 
the  quarrel  of  his  Maker,  he  delivers 
up  his  charge  to  that  old  prophet  who 
226 


was  no  less  guilty  of  this  blood  than 
himself. — JBp.  Hall, 

Yerse  28.  These  strange  circum- 
stances at  once  showed  the  miraculous 
nature  of  the  death,  and  were  of  a  na- 
ture to  call  men's  attention  to  the 
matter,  and  cause  the  whole  story  to 
be  bruited  abroad.  By  these  means 
au  incident  which  Jeroboam  would 
have  wished  to  be  hushed  up,  became, 
no  doubt,  the  common  talk  of  the 
whole  people. 

^  Yerses  30,  31.  We  often  for  the  first 
time,  at  the  grave  of  a  friend,  recog- 
nise what  we  possessed  in  him,  and 
how  we  have  sinned  against  him.  One 
look  into  the  open  grav«  of  one  dear 
to  us  in  life  is  adapted  beyond  any- 
thing to  remind  us  of  our  own  end.  It 
is  a  very  natural  thing  to  rest  in  death 
near  those  who  were  closely  bound  to 
us  in  life  by  ties  of  blood  or  strong 
affection;  but  yet  stronger  should  be 
the  wish  to  die  in  the  Lord,  and  enter 
into  eternal  glory.  Then,  whatevei 
in  the  providence  of  God  we  may  find 
our  grave,  there  shall  we  rest  in  peace, 
for  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the 
fulness  thereof  (Psa.  xxiv.  1). — Lange, 

Yerse  30.  Grief.  I.  One  of  the 
fruits  of  sin.  II.  Is  never  out  of 
place  at  the  grave.  III.  Is  intensified 
when  at  the  grave  of  one  whose  death 
we  have  accelerated.  lY.  May  lead  to 
a  blessed  reformation  of  life. 

—  It  is  hard  to  find  a  man  absolutely 
wicked :  some  grace  will  betray  itself 
in  the  most  forsaken  breasts.  It  is  a 
cruel  courtsey  to  kill  a  man,  and  then 
to  help  him  to  his  grave ;  to  betray  a 
man  with  our  breath,  and  then  bedew 
him  with  our  tears.  The  prophet  had 
needed  no  such  friend,  if  he  had  not 
met  with  such  an  enemy. 

Yerse  32.  The  infallibility  of  the 
Divine  Word.  I.  Is  not  affected  by 
time  or  the  opposition  of  men.  II. 
Is  sustained  by  the  testimony  of  com- 
petent witnesses.  III.  Is  a  powerful 
reason  for  placing  implicit  faith  in  it. 
lY.  Constitutes  it  an  unerring  standard 
of  judgment. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS,  oha».  xtti. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  33, 34, 
An  Invetera.te  Sinneb. 

I.  That  an  inveterate  sinner  is  indifferent  alike  to  entreaty  and  warning^. 

**  After  this  thing  Jeroboam  returned  not  from  his  evil  way."  There  is  some- 
thing exceedingly  obstinate  and  perverse,  as  well  as  blinding  and  infatuating, 
in  idolatry.  The  gracious  overtures  of  Jehovah  through  the  prophet  Ahijah 
(chap.  xi.  37,  38),  the  prediction  against  the  altar  and  the  miraculous  and  awe- 
inspiring  events  in  connection  with  it,  sent  as  much  in  mercy  as  in  anger,  were 
surely  sufficient  to  have  affected  and  alarmed  any  heart  not  wholly  and  in- 
corrigibly hardened:  and  yet  they  had  no  effect  on  Jeroboam!  **All  these 
wonderful  accidents,  as  God's  hammers,  did  but  beat  upon  cold  iron."  This 
state  of  mind  is  not  acquired  all  at  once.  It  is  the  result  of  repeated  rejections 
of  God's  grace,  of  stifli  d  convictions,  and  a  love  of  sin  for  its  own  sake.  An 
inveterate  sinner  is  an  occasion  of  sorrow  to  ministers,  to  angels,  to  God  I 

II.  That  an  inveterate  sinner  adds  to  Ms  guilt  by  a  stolid  persistency  in 
the  same  course  of  iniquity.  **But  made  again  of  the  lowest  of  the  people 
priests  of  the  high  places."  Among  the  worst  of  heathens,  the  priesthood  was 
filled  with  respectable  men  :  but  Jeroboam  made  no  discrimination.  Any 
strolling  vagrant  who  offered  himself  was  accepted,  irrespective  of  moral  or 
intellectual  fitness.  The  king  became  more  and  more  careless  as  to  the  character 
and  motives  of  the  men  he  appointed.  The  spiritual  office  is  put  to  shame  if 
borne  by  men  who  make  a  traffic  of  religion,  and  are  intent  only  on  filling  their 
own  hands.  Wicked  men  grow  worse  and  worse,  till  they  have  filled  up  the 
measure  of  their  sins,  and  so  wrath  come  upon  them  to  the  uttermost  (Eev.  ix. 
21  ;  xvi.  9,  11). 

III.  That  an  inveterate  sinner  will  not  escape  the  most  complete  punish- 
ment. **  And  this  thing  became  sin  unto  the  house  of  Jeroboam — even  to 
destroy  it  from  the  face  of  the  earth."  Sin  will  not  always  triumph.  Its 
glaring  abominations  cry  to  heaven  for  vengeance ;  and  that  vengeance,  though 
long  delayed,  will  fall  with  terrible  and  desolating  power.  When  neither  the 
severity  nor  the  patient  long-suffering  of  his  God  brings  to  repentance  a  man 
who  walks  in  evil  ways,  he  is  brought  by  his  own  sin  under  the  sentence  for  the 
obdurate,  namely,  temporal  and  eternal  ruin  (2  Tim.  iii.  13  ;  John  viii.  34). 

Lessons  : — 1.  Unrepented  sin  hardens  the  heart.  2.  The  goodness  of  God  will 
not  leave  the  most  inveterate  unwarned,  3.  Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked 
shall  not  go  unpunished, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Yerses  33,  34.  Apparently  the  wit-  tiplying  itself.     At  last  the  sense  of 

ness  which  the  man  of  God  bore,  and  being  under  any  authority  will  vanish 

the  death  which  he  died,  were  in  vain.  almost  wholly  from  the  mind  of  the 

The  destruction  of  an  altar,  and  the  rebellious  ruler.     He  will  say — using 

withering  of  a  hand  which  was  cured  the  words  in   precisely  the   opposite 

again,    were   lessons    soon   forgotten,  sense  to  that  in  which  they  are  used 

A  law  once   broken,  there    must  be  in  the  parable — "  May  I  not  do  what 

continual  new  transgressions  to  justify  I   will   with   mine   own?"     As    the 

the  first.     A  superstition  once  estab-  necessary  retribution  for  such  a  state 

lished  will  go  on  increasing  and  mul-  of  mind,  he  will   become  more  and 

227 


OHAP.  XIY. 


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


more  a  slave.  The  priests  whom  he 
has  made  will  insist  on  ever  higher 
prizes  for  their  ignominious  work.  To 
soothe  the  fears  which  haunt  him 
after  the  fear  of  a  llightcous  Being 
has  been  cast  aside,  he  will  ask  those 
whom  he  has  put  in  the  place  of  his 
conscience  what  acts  he  must  do  that 
he  may  seem  a  religious  man  to  them, 
possibly  at  last  to  himself. — llaurice. 

—  The  means  to  strengthen  or  ruin 
the  civil  power  is  either  to  establish  or 
destroy  the  right  worship  of  God.  The 
way  to  destroy  religion  is  to  embase 
the  dispensers  of  it.  This  is  to  give  the 
royal  stamp  to  a  piece  of  lead.  It  is  a 
sad  thing  when  all  other  employments 
shall  empty  themselves  into  the  min- 
istry ;  when  men  shall  repair  to  it  not 
for  preferment,  but  refuge,  like  male- 
factors flying  to  the  altars  only  to  save 
their  lives,  or  like  those  of  Eli's  race 
(1  Sam.  ii.  36),  that  should  come 
crouching  and  seeking  to  be  put  into 
the  priest's  office  that  they  may  eat  a 
piece  of  bread. — R,  South, 

Yerse  33.  Idolatry.  I.  An  evil 
way.  JI.  Delusive.  III.  Dangerous. 
IV.  Corrupting.  Y.  Leads  to  des- 
truction. 

—  He  exercised  no  discretion,  but 
allowed  anyone  to  become  a  priest, 
without  regard  to  birth,  character, 
or  social  position.  We  may  suspect 
from  this  that  the  office  was  not 
greatly  sought,  since  no  civil  gover- 


nor who  cared  to  set  up  a  priesthood 
would  wish  to  degrade  it  in  public 
estimation.  Jeroboam  did  impose  one 
limitation,  which  would  have  excluded 
the  very  poorest  class.  The  candidate 
for  consecration  was  obliged  to  make 
an  offering  of  one  young  bullock  and 
seven  rams  (2  Chron.  xiii.  9). — • 
Speaker^ s  Comm. 

—  The  authoritative  source  of 
the  ministry.  I.  Is  not  the  will  of 
the  aspirant.  II.  !N^ot  the  exigencies 
of  a  false  religious  system.  III.  Not 
the  appointment  of  the  crown.  lY. 
But  the  call  of  God. 

Yerse  34.  This  persistence  in  wrong, 
after  the  warning  given  him,  was 
such  a  sin  as  to  bring  a  judgment,  not 
only  on  Jeroboam  himself,  but  on  his 
family.  Jeroboam's  departure  from 
the  path  of  right  forfeited  the  crown 
(chap.  xi.  38),  and  in  that  forfeiture 
was  involved  naturally  the  destruction 
of  his  family,  for  in  the  East,  when  one 
dynasty  supplants  another,  the  ordi- 
nary practice  is  for  the  new  king  to 
destroy  all  the  males  belonging  to  the 
house  of  his  predecessor. 

—  Diminution,  disquiet,  and  deso- 
lation of  families,  is  the  fruit  of  sin. 
He  promised  himself  that  the  calves 
would  secure  the  crown  to  his  family, 
but  it  proved  they  lost  it  and  sunk  his 
tamily.  Those  betray  themselves  that 
think  by  any  sin  to  support  them- 
selves.— M,  Senry* 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


THE  BEIGNS  OF  JEROBOAM  AND  REHOBOAM. 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Abijah,  the  son  of  Jeroboam— Natural 
heir  to  the  kingdom.  His  sickness,  tberpfore,  seemed  to  imperil  the  continuance  of  Jero- 
boa,m'8  house.  Verse  2.  There  is  Ahijah  the  prophet— He  was  appropriately  selected,  because 
Abijah  was  the  prophet  who,  in  Solomon's  days,  pledged  the  kingdom  to  Jeroboam  (chap,  xi, 
29).  And  since  Ahijah  promised  him  a  "  sure  house  "  (xi.  38),  though  conditional  upon  his  piety, 
he  sent  to  him  to  learn  how  this  illness  accorded  with  the  prediction :  he  desired  the  rewards, 
though  he  forsook  the  course,  of  righteousness.  Verse  3.  Take  with  thee  loaves,  cracknels, 
and  honey — These  were  gifts  which  a  humble  pe^isant  woman  would  take,  and  accorded 
with  the  disguised  appearance  of  the  king's  wife.  The  ♦♦  ten  loaves  "  were  more  probably  a 
kind  of  hearth  cake— D>"^pJ,  /coAAuptSes  {Sept.)  Cnistula  fVulg.J.    Verse  4.  Could  not  see,  for 

his  eyes  were  set— Keil  thinks  that  he  suffered  from  **  grey  cataracts,"  resulting  from  th« 
228 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  chap.  xiy. 


decay  of  the  optic  nerves  through  age,  as  in  the  case  of  Eli  (1  Sam.  iv.  15).  Verse  9.  Done 
evil  ahove  all  that  were  hefore  thee— Inasmuch  as  he  had  established  idolatry  as  a  legalised 
"  state  institution."  Hast  cast  Me  behind  thy  back — The  most  forcible  expression  possible, 
signifying  delibeiate  insult  and  contempt  of  Jehovah.  It  only  occurs  again  in  F'^zek.  xxiii.  35, 
q.  V.  Verse  10.  Cut  off  from  Jeroboam  him  that,  &c. — "  An  expression  no  doubt  originally 
used  of  dogs"  (Langc),  and  therefore  a  contemptuous  description  of  ignominious  persons. 
Only  U!?ed  of  those  in  great  disfavour  in  parallel  Scriptures.  Keil^  however,  differs  from  this 
exposition  of  the  phrase,  and  regards  it  as  a  forceful  and  figurative  expression  of  "extermina- 
tion of  a  family  to  the  last  man."  Him  that  is  shut  up  and  left— An  alliterative  phrase — 
Hl?^*)   ")*)i{^— probably  meanmg  those  under  guardians^  not  of  age.     Keil  suggests,  him  who 

T  :  T 

is  left  to  himself— unmarried.  Thenius  renders  the  whole  sentence  thus:  '^^  All  the  male 
descendants  of  the  king,  even  the  minors  also,"  were  threatened  with  destruction.    Verse  14. 

Cut  off  the  house  of  Jeroboam  that  day ;  hut  what  %  even  now.     '« That  day,"  U)^r\  HT ; 

-       » 

this^  to-day^  viz.,  cut  off  the  house  of  Jeroboam,  this  very  day^  in  the  death  of  his  son.  "  But 
what?     Even  «o«^"— nnV"D3  HDT    And  what  is  happening  even  now?  or,  but  what 

r  ~       ~         •* 

[say  I]?  Even  now  [the  usurper  is  raised  up].  See  how  truly  this  was  a  fact  (chap.  xv. 
27).  Verse  15.  Made  their  groves— Their  Asherahs ;  statues  of  the  female  deity  elsewhere 
called  Ashtarte.  Verse  17.  Tirzah— Now  Taltise,  a  scene  of  eminent  beauty  (Song  Sol.  vi.  4), 
chosen  as  a  scene  of  royal  residence  on  this  account,  situate  about  three  hours'  journey  east  of 
Samaria. 

Verses  21-31.  From  incidents  associated  with  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  the  historian  now  turns 
to  JuDAH.  Verse  28.  Naamah  an  Ammonitess— /S^jo^.  reads  :  "Daughter  of  Ana  [Hannu  ?] 
son  of  Naas  [Nahash],  king  of  the  Ammonites.  Her  heathen  extraction  is  marked  as  indicating 
her  natural  alienation  from  the  religion  of  Jehovah.  As  queen-mother,  she  had  great  influence 
in  the  Government.  Verse  23.  Images  and  groves— On  "  groves,"  vide  Note  on  verse  15. 
supra.  Here  nUiii'^'  "images  "  ox  pillars,'*  from  T\^1i  to  be  firmly  set,  or  made  fast ;  pro- 
bably stone  pillars,  or  monumental  idols,  representing  the  male  deity,  Baal,  as  the  Ashterahs, 
wooden  idols,  represented  the  female  deity.  Verse  24.  There  were  also  sodomites  in  the 
land— D^^lpH-     These  were  vicious  paramours,  detestable  persons  who  practised,  as  a  reli- 

gious  rite,  a  vile  self -desecration.  They  were  male  prostitutes,  and  are  ranked  in  Scripture 
with  harlots  (Ueut.  xxiii.  17).  Verse  25.  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt— On  the  Karnak  bas- 
relief  this  Sheshonk  (as  he  is  named  in  Egyptian  monuments)  is  represented  as  dragging 
Jewish  captives.— W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIG8   OF  VERSES  1-20. 

Divine  Judgments. 

Calamities  are  now  fast  closing  round  and  accumulating  upon  the  head  of 
the  impenitent  Jeroboam.  The  power  he  has  defied  and  provoked  must  make 
itself  felt ;  and  the  righteousness  of  the  Divine  mercy,  so  long  and  so  often 
despised,  must  be  vindicated.  The  crisis  of  his  fate  is  approaching.  Yet 
another  and  last  effort  is  made  to  save  him.  As  the  coming  tempest  gives 
signals  of  its  advance,  and  reaches  the  climax  of  its  fury  by  graduated  stages,  so 
the  judgments  of  heaven  do  not  overtake  the  wicked  without  pre-admonition  and 
ample  opportunity  for  repentance. 

I.  That  Divine  judgments  are  not  sent  without  due  warning.  1.  This 
warning  is  repeated.  "At  that  time  "  (verse  1).  The  force  of  this  phrase  is  to 
connect  the  narrative  which  follows  with  Jeroboam's  persistence  in  his  evil 
courses.  The  withered  hand,  the  rent  altar,  the  solemn  message  of  the 
mysterious  prophet  of  Judah  and  his  melancholy  fate,  were  so  many  warnings 
to  the  impenitent  king.  To  all  these  yet  another  is  added  ;  and  the  event  here 
related  is  the  first  judgment  upon  Jeroboam  for  his  obduracy,  the  beginning  of 
the  cutting  ofi"  of  his  house  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  God  never  wearies  in 
His  efforts  to  save  the  sinner :  His  voice  is  ever  calling  him  to  repentance.  2. 
This    warning  appeals  to  the  tenderest  human  feelings  (verses  2,  3).     In  this 

229 


OHAP.  XIV.  KOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


instance  it  appeals  to  the  instinct  of  parental  love,  a  love  awakened  and 
intensified  by  the  immediate  danger  of  a  sick  and  dying  child.  The  darling 
child  is  often  snatched  away  as  a  warning  to  the  family.  As  a  solitary  flower 
is  more  lovely  because  of  the  barrenness  that  surrounds  it,  and  as  a  little  light 
is  heightened  in  brilliancy  by  its  darkened  background,  so  the  simple  piety  of 
a  child  is  all  the  more  suggestive  in  its  warning  and  teaching  when  discovered 
in  the  midst  of  prevalent  iniquity.  3.  This  warning  is  often  given  hy  the  same 
personwho  has  lefore  uttered  promises  of  good  (verse  4-6,  comp.  with  xi.  29-39). 
Ahijah,  who  had  before  spoken  words  of  promise  and  of  hope,  was  com- 
missioned to  convey  **  heavy  tidings"  of  coming  judgment.  This  fact  should 
have  led  Jeroboam  to  reflection,  and  to  pause  before  he  took  the  next  fatal  step 
to  self-abandonment  and  ruin.  The  faithful  minister  must  speak  of  judgment, 
as  well  as  of  mercy  (1  Sam.  xv.  26-28). 

II.  That  Divine  judgments  are  explicitly  declared.  1.  The  reasons  for  the 
Divine  judgments  are  given  (verses  7-9).  Jeroboam  had  been  exalted  with 
honour,  power,  and  greatness,  even  to  the  detriment  and  humbling  of  the 
favourite  tribe  of  Judah  ;  and  he  had  treated  the  gracious  intentions  of  Jehovah 
with  colossal  ingratitude  and  unexampled  impiety.  Whate^^er  idolatries  the 
Israelites  had  been  guilty  of  previously,  whether  in  the  earlier  or  the  later 
times,  by  their  worship  of  Baal  and  Ashtoreth,  of  the  groves,  of  the  gods  of 
Syria,  Moab,  and  Ammon  (Judg.  ii.  13  ;  iii.  7  ;  vi.  25 ;  x.  6 ;  1  Kings  xi.  33), ! 
yet  hitherto  none  of  their  rulers  had  set  up  the  idolatrous  worship  of  ephods, ' 
teraphim,  and  the  like  (Judg.  xviii.  17),  as  a  substitute  for  the  true  religion,' 
or  sought  to  impose  an  idolatrous  system  on  the  nation.  Gideon's  ephod 
"  became  a  snare  contrarily  to  his  intentions  (Judg.  viii.  27).  Solomon's  high 
places  were  private-built  for  the  use  of  his  wives,  and  not  designed  to  attract 
the  people.  Jeroboam  was  the  first  ruler  who  set  himself  to  turn  the  Israelites 
away  from  the  true  worship  and  establish  a  poor  counterfeit  of  it,  which  he 
strove  to  make,  and  succeeded  in  making,  the  religion  of  the  great  mass  of  his 
subjects.  Of  all  this,  he  is  plainly  reminded  when  the  Divine  judgments  are 
declared  against  him.  2.  The  nature  of  the  Divine  judgments  is  stated.  (1.)  It 
is  personal  (verses  10-14).  Jeroboam  and  his  house  shall  be  cut  off.  The 
prophet  associates  no  dignity  with  any  portion  of  Jeroboam's  doomed  house. 
He  sees  in  it  only  the  vile  slave,  or  the  slaughtered  victim  of  Divine  judgment, 
whether  already  a  prisoner,  or  still  fighting  to  keep  free  from  the  hands  of  the 
foe,  or  the  lone  few  that  may  have  escaped  death  during  the  siege.  They 
suffer  the  horrible  punishment  threatened  in  the  law  to  the  impious  transgressor 
(Deut.  xxviii.  26),  and  the  foulest  indignity  that  a  conquered  and  slaughtered 
foe  could  be  exposed  to  (comp.  v.  11,  with  1  Sam.  xvii.  46).  He  who  trans- 
mits sin  to  his  descendants  involves  them  in  the  punishment  connected  with  its 
continued  commission.  (2).  It  is  national  (verses  15,  16).  Here  is  the  first 
positive  announcement  of  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  exiles  as  a  punishment 
of  Israel's  sins.  Already,  in  earlier  times,  had  a  rooting  up  and  scattering  of 
the  people  been  threatened  in  cases  of  disobedience  (Deut.  xxviii.  63 ;  xxix.  27 ; 
Josh,  xxiii.  16) ;  but  Ahijah  is  the  first  of  that  long  line  of  prophets  that  hold 
up  exile  beyond  the  river  Euphrates  as  a  certainly  coming  woe.  The  people 
that  share  in  a  monarch's  sin  will  inevitably  share  in  its  punishment.  3.  The 
agent  of  Divine  judgments  is  mentioned  (verse  14).  This  king  was  Baasha  j  and 
we  learn  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophetic  threat  from  chap.  xv.  27-30.  The 
agents  of  Divine  vengeance  are  already  stationed  all  down  the  lines  of  future 
human  history. 

III.  That  Divine  judgments  are  inevitable  (verses  17-20).  Already  the 
judgment  had  begun  in  the  death  of  this  innocent  and  pious  son.  Jeroboam  soon 
followed,  struck  down  by  a  dire  disease  which  di  agged  him  down  to  a  miserable 

230 


BOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XIT. 


death  (2  Cliroii.  xiii.  20).  Destruction  often  overtakes  sinners  in  the  midst  of 
their  career.  Death  pays  no  more  respect  to  palaces  than  to  the  clay-built  hut. 
No  power  in  earth  or  hell  can  avert  the  righteous  punishment  of  wrong-doing. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Ruin  is  not  far  from  a  kingdom  when  righteousness  is  expelled  and 
iniquity  triumphant.  2.  We  cannot  plead  the  examples  of  others,  however  high  in 
office  and  power,  to  screen  our  sins  from  the  Divine  judgments,  3.  A  genuine 
repentance  is  the  only  protection  against  threatened  judgments. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 


Yerse  1-20.  Jeroboam  in  need  and 
in  distress.  I.  He  is  only  concerned 
about  the  taking  away  of  the  need  and 
the  lifting  off  of  the  punishment,  not 
in  the  renunciation  of  his  sin  and  the 
conversion  of  the  heart,  which  should 
have  been  the  result  of  his  need,  as  it 
is  the  case  now  with  so  many.  II. 
He  seeks  consolation  and  help,  not  at 
the  hands  of  his  false  priests  and  spi- 
ritual hirelings,  whom  he  himself  did 
not  trust,  but  from  the  prophet,  about 
whom  he  did  not  trouble  himself  after 
he  had  nothing  to  ask.  Thus  it  is 
always.  In  need  and  necessity  unbe- 
lievers and  the  children  of  this  world 
seek  for  consolation  and  comfoi  t  from 
a  spiritual  preacher,  and  despise  the 
finery  of  the  hirelings  who  care  only 
for  the  wool,  and  not  for  the  sheep. 
III.  He  does  not  himself  apply  to  the 
prophet,  because  he  has  an  evil  con- 
science, and  he  sends  his  wife  in  a  dis- 
guise, for  before  the  world  he  does  not 
wish  to  be  viewed  as  one  who  cares 
much  for  prophets.  This  is  the  folly 
of  the  wise  of  this  world,  that  they 
suppose  they  can  deceive  God  as  they 
deceive  men.  But  the  Lord  sees  what 
is  concealed  in  the  darkness,  and  gives 
to  every  one  what  he  has  deserved. — 
Zange. 

1-16  The  sight  of  the  sick  boy  whom 
he  cared  for  brought  back,  perhaps,  the 
thought  of  himself  when  he  had  still 
youthful  freshness  and  hope,  when  he 
felt  the  wrongs  which  Solomon  was 
inflicting  upon  the  land,  and  dreamed 
that  he  might  be  its  deliverer.  And 
with  these  thoughts  would  come  the  re- 
collection of  the  man  who  had  told  him 
how,  if  he  walked  in  right  ways,  God 
would  make  him  a  sure  house.  A  sad 
and  profitable  reflection  if    he  had 


paused  to  dwell  upon  it.  But  the 
lying  habit  of  mind  which  he  had  con- 
tracted by  converse  with  the  priests  of 
the  high  places  only  urged  him  to 
consider  how  he  could  bribe  Ahij  ah  to 
tell  him  something  about  the  child 
which  he  would  like  to  hear.  This 
fragment  of  Ahijah's  history  marks 
out  with  much  clearness  the  office  of  a 
prophet  in  Israel.  Living  under  the 
brilliant  government  of  Solomon, 
where  all  had  the  outward  face  of 
prosperity  and  continuance — living 
under  the  tyranny  of  Jeroboam,  where 
all  was  new  and  revolutionary — he 
had  still  to  say,  *'  There  is  an  eternal 
order  which  cannot  be  violated.  Who- 
soever defies  it  will  bring  ruin  upon 
himself  and  upon  his  house.  God  is ;  a 
power  which  sets  Him  at  nought  and 
substitutes  changeable  things  in  His 
place,  cannot  abide.  It  may  be  ap- 
pointed to  punish  an  evil  which  has 
been  working  secretly  ;  it  will  last  its 
hour  ;  but  it  is  doomed.  The  mouth 
of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  The  pro- 
phets could  speak  this  word  knowing  it 
to  be  true.  And  they  could  speak 
another  which  was  more  terrible. 
They  could  say,  "  Israel  must  suffer 
for  Jeroboam^s  sins.  Not  by  an  arbi- 
trary decree,  which  punishes  one  for 
thft  crimes  of  another ;  but  because  the 
heart  of  the  people  has  gone  along  with 
the  ruler ;  because  a  ruler  embodies  it 
himself,  and  presents  in  open  act  the 
temper  and  spirit  of  those  whom  he 
rules ;  because  if  they  would  be  saved 
from  the  consequences  of  his  evil 
doings,  they  must  turn  to  the  everlast- 
ing King.  This  is  an  universal  prin- 
ciple which  comes  out  with  fresh 
power  in  each  stage  of  Jewish  history. 
— Maurice. 

231 


CHAP.  xrr. 


EOMILETIC  C0M3IENTAltY :  KIKGS» 


Yerses  1-6.  Anxious  forebodings. 
1,  Arisefrom  a  consciousness  of  wrong- 
doing. 2.  Aggravated  by  family 
affliction.  3.  Cannot  be  concealed  by 
the  cleverest  disguise.  4.  Are  only 
too  surely  realised, 

Yerse  1.  "When  the  threatening, 
warning  word  of  God  bears  no  fruit, 
God  at  last  sends  the  cross,  especially 
the  cross  in  the  household,  to  humble 
us,  to  bring  us  to  a  knowledge  of  our 
sins,  and  to  lead  us  to  the  cross  of 
Christ.  God  generally  lays  hold  upon 
men  in  those  respects  where  it  is 
mostly  grievous  to  them  (2  Sam.  xii. 
14;  John  iv.  47). — Siarhe. 

Yerses  2,  3.  Extremity  draws  Jero- 
boam's thoughts  to  the  prophet,  whom 
else  he  had  not  cared  to  remember. 
Certainly  his  heart  despised  those 
base  priests  of  his  places;  neither 
could  he  trust  either  to  the  gods  or  to 
the  clergy  of  his  own  making ;  his 
conscience  rests  upon  the  fidelity  of 
that  man  whose  doctrine  he  had 
forsaken.  How  did  the  idolater 
strive  against  his  own  heart,  while  he 
inwardly  despised  those  whom  he 
professed  to  honour,  and  inwardly 
honoured  them  whom  he  professed  to 
despise.  Wicked  breasts  are  false  to 
themselves,  neither  trusting  to  their 
own  choice,  nor  making  choice  of  that 
which  they  may  dare  to  trust. 
But,  0 !  the  gross  folly  mixed  with 
the  craft  of  wickedness.  Could  Jero- 
boam think  that  the  prophet  could 
know  the  event  of  his  son's  disease, 
and  did  he  think  he  could  not  know 
his  wife's  disguise?  The  one  was 
present,  the  other  future ;  this  was 
but  wrapt  up  in  a  clout,  that  event 
was  wrapt  in  the  counsel  of  God ;  yet 
this  politic  head  presumes  that  the 
greater  shall  be  revealed,  where  the 
lesser  shall  be  hid.  There  was  never 
a  wicked  man  that  was  not  infatuate, 
and  in  nothing  more  than  in  those 
things  wherein  he  hoped  most  to  tran- 
scend the  reach  of  others. — Bp.  Hall. 

Yerse  2.   Jeroboam  did  not  wish  to 
be  seen  having  anything  lo  do   with 
the  prophet  by   any   one.     Worldly 
232 


people  are  ashamed  to  make  it  known 
that  they  believe  in  anything,  even 
if  it  be  a  superstitious  faith.  If  God 
send  thee  necessity  and  distress,  take 
no  bye- ways,  but  go  to  Him  and  pour 
out  thine  heart  before  Him  ;  He  hears 
all  who  call  upon  Him,  all  who  ear- 
nestly cry  unto  Him.  Disguise  thy- 
self, that  no  one  mark  who  and  what 
thou  art.  This  is  the  bad  advice 
which  the  world  gives  for  the  conduct 
of  life,  and  which  passes  current  with 
it  as  the  true  wisdom  thereof.  How 
social  life  is  vitiated  by  this  sin,  by 
the  endeavour  to  seem  before  people 
rather  than  to  be — often  it  is  like  a 
masquerade !  It  is  even  more  de- 
ceived by  actions,  by  mien,  and 
manner,  than  by  words.  The  art  of 
disguise  corrupts  man  in  the  pro- 
foundest  ground  of  his  being,  and 
transforms  him  into  an  incarnate  lie. 
— Lange. 

He  would  not  have  it  known  in 
Israel  that  his  queen  went  on  such  an 
errand.  It  would  show  that  neither 
his  calves  nor  his  self-made  priests 
could  help  him  in  the  time  of  trouble. 
His  heart  had  become  so  infatuated 
and  clouded  by  his  false  worship  as 
to  imagine  that  Jehovah's  prophet 
might  not  detect  his  guile.  He  dared 
not  meet  the  old  prophet,  but  sent  his 
wife,  for  a  sense  of  his  own  sins  ad- 
monished him  that  he  deserved  con- 
demnation, and  would  receive  it  if  he 
went  in  person  to  Ahijah. —  Whedon, 

Yerses  3,  4.  The  little  bit  of  faith 
which  worldly  people  often  exhibit 
is  but  part  of  their  selfishness.  The 
fore-knowledge  of  the  future  in  the 
affairs  of  daily  life  man  would  gladly 
possess,  because  he  will  not  yield  him- 
self in  faith  to  the  will  of  God.  Hence 
flow  often  superstition,  fortune-telling, 
dream  interpretation,  astrology,  both 
among  the  heathens,  as  well  as  among 
Christians.  The  gilt  of  God  neither 
should  nor  can  be  sold  or  bought  for 
money.  As  a  rule,  unbelief  is  bound 
with  superstition.  Jeroboam  did  not 
believe  when  God  spoke  to  him  by 
word  and  deed,  and  yet  he  believed 
that  by  means  of  a  few  loaves  and 
cakes  he  could  persuade  God  to  reveal 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  ZIT. 


the  future  to  him.  The  history  of 
religion  in  modern  times  confirms  and 
illustrates  this. — Cramer, 

Verse  3.  Henry  well  calls  attention 
to  the  "notion  of  fatality"  evinced 
in  this  enquiry  of  Jeroboam,  and  also 
in  that  of  Ahaziah  (2  Kings  i.  2), 
and  that  of  Benhadad  (2  Kings  viii. 
8).  They  enquire  simply  what  the 
end  will  be,  not  what  means  they 
should  use  for  recovery. —  Whedon. 

Verses.  4-6.  The  wife  of  Jeroboam 
before  the  prophet.  1.  She  means  to 
deceive  the  aged  blind  prophet  by  a 
disguise,  but  the  Lord  gives  him 
sight  (Ps.  clvi.  8).  He  gives  strength 
to  the  w(  ary,  and  power  to  the  feeble. 
The  Lord  ever  gives  sight  to  his  true 
servants,  so  that  the  world  cannot 
deceive  and  blind  them.  2.  She  hopes, 
by  her  present,  to  secure  the  desired 
answer;  but  at  the  hour,  the  Lord 
gives  him  the  word  he  shall  speak. 
It  is  the  spirit  of  God  who  speaks 
through  him  (Matt.  x.  19).  A  true 
servant  of  God  proclaims  the  word  of 
truth  to  every  one,  without  respect  of 
persons,  no  matter  how  hard  it  be  for 
him.  This  often  is  his  hard  but  sacred 
duty. — Lange. 

Verse.  4.  Putting  off  her  royal 
attire,  and  putting  on  more  demure 
apparel,  like  as  many  hypocrites  do, 
conforming  themselves  to  the  company 
they  come  into,  and  walking  in  a  dis- 
guise till  God  detect  them. — Trapp, 

Verse.  6.  The  visions  of  Ahijah 
were  inward ;  neither  was  his  bodily 
sight  more  dusky  than  the  eyes  of  his 
mind  were  clear  and  piercing.  It  was 
not  the  common  light  of  men  whereby 
he  saw,  but  divine  illumination  ; 
things  absent,  things  future,  were  no 
less  obvious  to  those  spiritual  beams, 
than  present  things  are  to  us.  Ere 
the  quick  eyes  of  that  great  lady  can 
discern  him,  he  hath  espied  her  ;  and, 
BO  soon  as  he  hears  the  sound  of  her 
feet,  she  hears  from  him  the  sound  of 
her  name,  *'  Come  in,  thou  wife  of 
Jeroboam."  How  God  laughs  in 
heaven  at  the  frivolous  fetches  of  crafty 


politicians,  and  when  they  think  them- 
selves most  sure,  shames  them  with  a 
detection,  with  a  defeat!  What  an 
idleness  it  is  for  foolish  hypocrites  to 
hope  they  can  dance  in  a  net,  unseen 
of  heaven. — Bp.  Hall, 

Verses  7-16.  "Woful  tidings  these 
for  a  mother's  heart ;  and  scarcely,  per- 
haps, intelligible  to  her  stunned  in- 
tellect. Here  was  the  beginning  of 
judgment  upon  Jereboam  and  upon  her, 
because  she  was  his — judgment  in 
taking  away  the  only  well-conditioned 
and  worthy  son  ;  and  judgment  stored 
up  in  and  for  the  ill-conditioned  ones 
who  were  suffered  to  remain.  God, 
when  it  suits  the  purpose  of  His  wis- 
dom and  His  justice,  can  afflict  no  less 
by  what  He  spares  than  by  what  He 
takes.  Yet  there  was  mercy  in  this 
j  udgm  ent — mercy,  strange  as  it  seems 
to  say,  to  that  amiable  youth  on  whom 
the  sentence  of  death  was  passed.  It 
is  so  stated  ;  and  it  is  more  intelligible 
than  it  seems.  It  was  because  there 
was  some  good  thing  found  in  him  that 
he  should  die.  Death  was  to  be  for 
him  a  reward,  a  blessing,  a  deliverance. 
He  should  die  peaceably  upon  his  bed ; 
for  him  all  Israel  should  mourn  ;  for 
him  many  tears  should  be  shed,  and  he 
should  be  brought  with  honour  to  his 
tomb ;  more  than  all,  he  would  be  taken 
from  the  evil  that  hung  over  his  house ; 
and  the  Lord's  vindicatory  justice 
would  thus  be  spared  the  seeming 
harshness  of  bringing  ruin  upon  a 
righteous  king  for  his  father's  crimes. 
Alas !  how  little  do  we  know  the  real 
objects  ot  the  various  incidents  of  life 
and  death — of  mercy,  of  punishment, 
and  of  trial !  In  this  case,  the  motives 
were  disclosed,  and  we  are  suffered  to 
glance  upon  some  of  the  great  secrets 
of  death,  Avhich  form  the  trying 
mysteries  of  life.  With  this  instance 
in  view,  we  can  find  the  parallels  of 
lives,  full  of  hope  and  promise,  prema- 
turely taken,  and  that  in  mercy,  as  we 
can  jwdge,  to  those  who  depart.  The 
Heavenly  Husbandman  often  gathers 
for  his  garner  the  fruit  that  early 
ripens,  without  suffering  it  to  hang 
needlessly  long,  beaten  by  storms,  upon 
the  tree.     Oh !  how  often,  as  many  a 

233 


OHAP.  XIT. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


grieved  heart  can  tell,  do  the  Lord's 
best  beloved  die  betimes — taken  from 
the  evil  to  come — while  the  unripe, 
the  evil,  the  injurious,  live  long  for 
mischief  to  themselves  and  others. 
Roses  and  lilies  wither  far  sooner  than 
thorns  and  thistles. — Kitto, 

Yerses  7-16.     Terrible  is  that  ven- 
geance which   God   thunders  against 
him  by  his  prophet,  whose  passion- 
ate message  upbraids  him    with   his 
promotions,  charge th  him  with  his  sins, 
and,  lastly,  denounceth  his  judgments. 
No  mouth  was  fitter  to  cast  this  royalty 
in  the  teeth  of  Jeroboam  than  that  by 
which  it  was  foretold,  fore-promised ; 
every   circumstance  of  the   advance- 
ment aggravates  the  sin.     **  I  exalted 
thee ; "  thou  couldst  not  rise  to  honour 
alone.     **  I  exalted  thee  from  among 
the  people ;  "  not  from  the  peers,  thy 
rank  was  but  common  before  this  rise. 
**  I    exalted   thee   from    among    the 
people,  to  be  a  prince  ;  '*  subordinate 
height  was  not  enough  for  thee ;  no 
seat  would  serve  thee  but  a  throne ; 
**  yea,   to  be  a  prince  of  my  people 
Israel."     !No  nation  was  for  thee  but 
my  chosen  one;  none  but  my  royal 
inheritance ;  neither  did  I  raise  thee 
into  a  vacant  throne ;  a  forlorn  and  for- 
saken principality  might  be  thankless, 
but  "  I  rent  the  kingdom  from  another 
for  thy  sake."     Yea.  from  what  other 
but  the  grandchild  of  David !     Out  of 
his  hand  did   I  wrest  the  sceptre,  to 
give  it  into   thine.      0,    what   high 
favours  doth  God  sometimes  cast  away 
upon  unworthy   subjects  !      How  do 
His  abused  bounties  double  both  their 
sin  and  judgment! — Bp.  Hall, 

Verse  9.  Unexampled  wickedness. 
Seen — 1.  In  the  basest  ingratitude  for 
great  favours.  2.  In  the  reckless 
abuse  of  great  privileges.  3.  In  the 
persistent  and  defiant  commission  of 
great  crimes.  4.  In  stolid  indifi'er- 
ence  to  the  most  awful  warnings.  5. 
In  the  utter  rejection  of  God.  6. 
Merits  unexampled  punishment. 

Yerses  10-15.  Not  a  blessing,  but 
a  curse  rests  upon  a  house  which  turns 
its  back  upon  the  Lord  and  His  com- 
234 


mandments.  And  so,  also,  a  people 
who  forget  the  faith  of  their  fathers 
lose  all  territory,  are  given  up  to  all 
convulsions  from  within  and  from 
without,  and  go  to  destruction.  Sin 
is  the  destruction  of  the  people  (Ileb. 
X.  28-30). 

Yerse  11.  Dogs  are  the  chief  scaven- 
gers of  Oriental  cities.  Troops  of  dogs, 
more  than  half  wild,  scour  the  streets 
by  night,  clearing  away  all  the  off;  ^ 
and  carrion  they  can  fin  J.  'Jhe  vul- 
ture in  the  country  districts,  assisted 
sometimes  by  kites  and  crows,  does 
the  work  of  the  dog  in  towns. — 
Mawlinson. 

—  To  be  cast  out  unburied  is  no 
great  matter,  natural  men  slight  it. 
There  is  little  difference  to  lie  eaten 
of  beasts  above  ground,  or  of  worms 
beneath  ;  yet  when  foretold  to  a  man 
as  a  judgment  denounced  from  God,  as 
against  that  king  (Jer.  xxii.  19),  it 
hath  its  own  weight,  carrying  some 
stamp  of  God's  despising  him ;  and 
though  a  man  feels  it  not  when  it  is 
done,  yet  he  feels  it  looking  on  it 
beforehand,  especially  as  threatened 
of  God;  sees  himself,  as  it  were, 
dragged  about  and  torn. — Leighton, 

—  The  ancient  Medes  are  said  to 
have  thrown  the  bodies  of  their  dying 
relatives  to  dogs,  supposing  it  dis- 
honourable to  expire  on  their  beds, 
or  be  deposited  in  the  earth. — Mavor. 

Yerses  12,  13.  The  death  of  a  be- 
loved child,  for  whom  God  has  pre- 
pared good,  is  often  the  only  and  the 
supreme  means  of  turning  away  the 
heart  of  the  parents  from  sin  and  the 
world,  and  of  winning  them  to  the  life 
in  God  to  which  they  are  strangers. 
For  many  a  child  it  is  a  Divine  bless- 
ing when  it  is  early  taken  out  of  this 
vain  world,  and  called  away  from 
surroundings  in  which  there  is  danger 
of  the  corruption  both  of  soul  and 
body, 

Yerse  13.  Imperfect  goodness. 
We  are  taught  here — I.  That  goodness 
may  he 'partial  and  yet  true.  1 .  Abijah's 
goodness  was  true,  (1).  It  was  a 
*'  good  thing  in  him.''    In  whatevex 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap. xiv. 


particular  acts  liis  piety  found  mani-  aim  at  the  highest,  work  for  it,  hope 
festation,  it  sprang  from   his  heart,  for  it,  and  He  shall  not  cast  you  out. 
(2).  It  was  "a  good  thing  found  in  — W.  Z.  Wathinson. 
him."     The  Hebrew  word  here  used         —  Dr.  Kane,  finding  a  flower  under 
signifies  "finding  without  seeking."  the  Humbolt  glacier,  was  more  affected 
In  other  words,  his  goodness  was  evi-  by  it  because  it  grew  beneath   the  lip 
dent,  manifest.     (3).  It  was  **a  good  and  cold  bosom  of  the  ice,  than  he 
thing  toward  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,"*^  would  have  been  by  the  most  gorgeous 
True  goodness  springs  from  the  love  garden  bloom.     So  some  single  strug- 
and  fear  of  God.     The  goodness  of  the  gling  grace  in  the  heart  of  one  far 
text  was  heart-felt,  sincere,  fruit-bear-  removed  from  Divine  influences  may 
ing,   God-honouring   goodness.     Yet,  be  dearer  to  God  than  a  whole   cata- 
(2)  Abijah's  goodness  was  imperfect,  logue  of  virtues  in  the  life  of  one  more 
"  Some  good  thing."     This  is  not  the  favoured  of  heaven, 
fullest  eulogy.     Not  like  the  eulogy         —  And  let  me  tell  you,  that  as  it  is 
of  Job,  Caleb,    Nathaniel,    &c.      All  a  eulogy  in  any  one  to  be  good  in  a 
the  surroundings  of  Abijah  were  most  bad  family,  so  it  must  proportion  ably 
unfortunate.      The     tender     opening  be  a  horrid  brand  upon  any  one  to  be 
flower  was  surrounded  by  a  vicious  bad  in  a  good  family.     It  was  thought 
atmosphere ;  and  no  wonder  that,  in  fit  to  be  put  upon  record,  concerning 
some  respects,  it  lacked  completeness ;  Abijah,   the   son   of  Jeroboam,    that 
no  wonder  that  some  of  its  leaves  bore  **  there   was  some   good  thing  found 
the   taint   of    mildew.     A    true  dis-  in  him ;"  good  desires,   good  inclina- 
ciple — he  was  a  weak  one ;  a  bright  tions,  even  in  so  wicked  a  family,   as 
light — he  was  not  the  brightest.     II.  Jeroboam's  was.     It  is  proportionably 
That  real,    hut  imperfect  goodness   is  a  horrid  mark  upon  that  person  who 
recognized  and  accepted  b^  God.     God  continueth  ungodly  in  a  godly  family ; 
praised  and  rewarded  the  piety  of  the  that  is,  a  prayless  wretch  in  a  praying 
young   prince.     God   cannot   overlook  family;  whose  heart,  at  least,  never 
imperfect  goodness.     The  eye  readily  prayeth,  hath  no  desires  after  God ;  no 
discovers  that  in  which  we  delight ;  contrition,  no  sense  in  the  confession 
God  loves  goodness,  and  wherever  it  of  sin ;   no  love,  no  gratitude  in  the 
springs — in   unlikely   places,   in  un-  acknowledgment  of  mercy.     For  one 
likely  hearts — God  knows  it.    And  He  to  continue  ungodly  in  a  godly  family, 
accepts  it.     Learn  here:  I.  A  lesson  in  or  to  go  out  ungodly  from  a  godly 
fudging  of  others.     "We  must  be  chari-  family,  what  a  horrid  thing  will  this 
table — men   may    be   true,    and  not  be  !     How  much  of  terror  and  amaze- 
perfect.     The  jewel  may  have  a  flaw,  ment  will  it  carry  in  it  at  last,  when 
and  yet  be  a  jewel.     2.  There  is  a  the  case  comes  to  open  itself  to  view, 
solemn  lesson  in  this  subject  for  those  and  to  be  looked  upon  and  considered 
toho,  in  most  favourable  circumstances,  in  its  proper  and  native  aspect !     And 
lack  true  goodness.     Abijah,   in  most  even  as  it  now  is,  to  think  with  one- 
unfavourable  circumstances,  was  true  self,  **That  such  or  such  children  or 
and  beautiful.     And  so  there  are  ever  fellow-servants  in  a  family  where  I 
such.     With  nothing  to  help  them  but  may  have  lived  a  considerable  time, 
the  grace  of  God,  they  live  pure,  godly,  may  have  had  their  hearts  melted  in 
noble  lives.     What  shall   be   said  of  hearing  the  Word  read  and  applied, 
those  who  lack  true  goodness  despite  but  mine  was  always  hard;  they  have 
the  fact  that  they  have   every  help  had  their  souls  humbled  in  the  ac- 
and  encouragement  ?     God   is  not   a  knowledgment  of  sin,  but  mine  was 
hard  master ;  but  He  must  condemn  unhumbled ;    they  have   had  desires 
such.     3.  A  lesson  of  encouragement  enlarged  in  seeking  for  mercy,  but  I 
formany  who  feel  that  with  many  failings  had   no  desire  after   spiritual  good." 
they  yet  have  the  root  of  the  matter  in  To  live  so  in  a  good  family,  and  to  go 
them.     Your  flowers  are  half  hidden  out  such  from  a  good  family.    Oh!  the 
in  the  weeds ;  but  be  of  good  comfort ;  horror  of  this  case,  and  the  reflectiona 

235 


CHAP.  xir. 


EOMILE TIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


it  will  cause  in  the  close  of  time  ;  or, 
if  not  so,  in  an  eternity  of  misery  that 
will  never  end ! — Howe. 

—  If  we  would  wish  to  discover 
whether  there  were  any  particles  of 
steel  in  a  large  quantity  of  rubbish,  it 
would  not  be  the  wisest  way  to  search 
for  them,  and  especially  in  the  dark, 
but  to  hold  a  large  and  efficacious 
magnet  over  it.  And  this,  if  it  be 
there,  is  the  way  to  discover  true 
religion  in  our  souls.  The  truths 
and  promises  of  God  are,  to  a  princi- 
ple of  religion  in  the  mind,  that 
which  the  magnet  is  to  the  steel ;  if 
there  be  any  in  us,  the  proper  exhi- 
bition of  the  Gospel  will  ordinarily 
draw  it  forth. — A.  Fuller. 

Yerse  16.  The  fatal  consequences 
of  sin.  I.  Sin  corrupts  the  individual 
the  more  if  is  conwiitted.  "  The  sins 
of  Jeroboam  who  did  sin."  II.  Is 
contagious  in  its  nature  and  tyrannical 
in  its  rule.  "  And  made  Israel  to  sin." 
III.  Involves  a  whole  nation  in  degra- 
dation and  ruin,  "  And  He  shall  give 
Israel  up." 

—  To  tempt  and  lead  another  into 
sin,  is  worse  than  to  sin  thyself.  It 
shows  sin  to  be  of  great  growth  in  that 
man  that  doth  it  knowingly  and 
willingly.  Herbs  and  flowers  do  not 
shed  their  seed  till  ripe ;  creatures 
propagate  not  till  they  are  of  stature 
and  age !  "What  do  those  that  tempt 
others,  but  diffuse  their  wicked 
opinions  and  practices,  and,  as  it  were, 
raise  up  seed  to  the  devil,  thereby  to 
keep  up  the  name  of  their  infernal 
fatber  in  the  world  ?  This  shows  sin 
to  be  mighty  in  them  indeed ! — 
Gurnall. 

—  If  the  Lord  say,  he  who  offends 
one  of  the  least  of  these  (Matt,  xviii. 
6),  what  will  He  say  to  those  who 
give  offence  to  an  entire  people,  at  the 
head  of  which  they  stand,  through 
unbelief  and  immorality,  and  beguile 
them  into  an  apostasy  from  the  living 
God? 

Verse  17.  Doleful  were  the  tidings 

the  disguised  princess  had  to  bear  back 

to  the  beautiful  town  of  Tirzah.     All 

remoter  griefs  were  probably  to  her 

236 


swallowed  up  in  this — which  rung 
continually  in  her  ears  in  all  her  home- 
ward way — '*  When  thy  feet  enter 
into  the  city  the  child  shall  die."  It 
is  heavy  tidings  to  a  mother  that  she 
must  lose  her  well-beloved  son  ;  but  it 
is  a  grievous  aggravation  of  her  trouble 
that  she  might  not  see  him  before  she 
died.  They  who  were  about  hira 
knew  not  that  he  was  to  die  to-day, 
and  therefore  could  not  estimate  the 
preciousness  of  his  last  hours,  and  the 
privilege  of  being  then  near  him,  and 
of  receiving  his  embrace.  She  knew  : 
but  she  might  not  be  near,  nor  pour 
out  upon  her  dying  son  the  fulness  of 
a  mother's  heart.  Knowing  that  her 
son  lay  on  his  death  bed,  her  first 
impulse  must  have  been  to  fly  home  to 
receive  his  dying  kiss ;  but  her  second 
to  linger  by  the  way,  as  if  to  protract 
that  dear  lifa  which  must  close  the 
moment  she  entered  the  city.  Never, 
surely,  before  or  since,  was  a  distressed 
mother  so  wof  ully  torn  between  the 
antagonist  impulses  of  her  affection ! 
At  last  her  weary  steps  reached  the 
city ;  and  as  she  entered  the  gates  her 
son  died,  and  she  was  only  in  time  to 
press  to  her  arms  the  heart  still  warm, 
although  it  had  ceased  to  beat. — Kitto. 

Verse  18.  Sorrow  for  the  dead. 
1.  May  melt  the  hardest  heart.  2. 
Is  profound  and  general  at  the  grave 
of  the  good.  3.  Does  not  always  lead 
to  the  abandonment  of  sin. 

—  A  nation  in  mourning.  1.  A 
pathetic  sight.  2.  Shows  an  appre- 
ciation of  a  virtuous  life  in  the  midst 
of  national  corruption.  3.  Affords  an 
opportunity  for  making  serious  reso- 
lutions to  live  a  truer  life. 

—  Yet  what  a  mixture  is  here  of 
severity  and  favour  in  one  act ! — favour 
to  the  son,  severity  to  the  father : 
severity  to  the  father,  that  he  must 
lose  such  a  son  ;  favour  to  the  son,  that 
he  shall  be  taken  from  such  a  father. 
Jeroboam  is  wicked,  and  therefore  he 
shall  not  enjoy  an  Abijah ;  Abijah 
hath  some  good  things,  therefore  he 
shall  be  removed  from  the  danger  of 
the  depravation  of  Jeroboam.  The 
best  are  fittest  for  heaven,  the  earth  is 
fittest    for  the   worst;    this  is    the 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


CHAP.  xrr. 


region  of  sin  and  misery,  that  of 
immortality.  It  is  no  argument  of 
disfavour  to  be  taken  early  from  a 
well-led  life,  as  not  of  approbation  to 
age  in  sin. — Bp.  SalL 

Verses  19,  20.  The  Scripture  says, 
the  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed,  but 
the  name  of  the  godless  will  perish 
(Prov.  X.  7).  The  first  is  true  of 
David,  the  last  of  Jeroboam,  whose 
name  is  not  like  an  ointment  pouring 
out  diffusing  sweet  perfume  (Eccles.  i. 
S),  but  is  a  savour  of  death  unto  death  ; 
for  with  his  name,  for  all  the  future, 
this  word  is  connected,  "  Who  sinned, 
and  made  Israel  to  sin."  Of  what  use 
is  it  to  have  worn  a  worldly  crown 
two-and-twenty  years,  to  have  striven 
and  fought  for  it,  when  the  crown  of 
life  does  not  succeed  it,  which  they 
alone  obtain  who  are  faithful  unto 
death!  (Eev.  ii.  10). — Lange, 

Yerse  20.  He  lay  down.  "  This 
shall  ye  have  of  my  hand,  ye  shall  lie 
down  in  sorrow  "  (Isa.  1. 11).  He  died 
not  the  common  death  of  all  men,  but 
by  some  remarkable  stroke  :  beside  the 
loss  of  five  hundred  thousand  of  his 
men  in  one  battle  with  Ahijah  king  of 
Judah  (2  Chron.  xiii.  17-20). 

—  The  details  of  Jeroboam's  end 
are  lost  to  us.  It  is  overclouded  by 
unsuccessful  wars  with  Judah,  by 
wasting  illness,  and  by  the  violent 
convulsion  in  which  his  remains,  and 
those  of  his  children,  were  torn  from 
their  sepulchres.  To  observe  clearly 
Avherein  his  sins  consisted,  is  to  ob- 
serve the  moral  of  the  whole  part  of 
the  history.  It  was  not  that  he  had 
revolted  against  the  house  of  Judah, 
for  this,  according  to  the  narrative,  had 
been  put  upon  him  by  the  direct  pro- 
vidence and  sanction  of  God.  !N"or 
that  he  had  fallen  into  idolatry.  This 
was  the  sin  of  Solomon  and  Eehoboam, 
against  which  his  whole  life  was  a  per- 
jictual  protest.  It  was  that  to  secure 
certain  good  ends,  he  adopted  doubt- 
ful and  dangerous  means.  The  anti- 
cipations of  the  prophets  concerning 
him  had  been  frustrated.  Like  the 
apostolic  Las  Casas,  in  the  sad  history 
of  South  America,  they  saw  with  bitter 


grief  the  failure  of  the  institution 
which  they  had  fostered,  and  from 
which  they  had  hoped  so  much.  It 
is  this  reflection  which  gives  a  keen- 
ness of  regret  to  the  epithet  so  many 
times  repeated,  **  The  sin  of  Jero- 
boam, the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made 
Israel  to  sin."  To  keep  the  first 
commandment,  he  broke  the  second ;  to 
preserve  the  belief  in  the  unity  of  God, 
he  broke  the  unity  and  tampered  with 
the  spiritual  conception  of  the  national 
worship.  The  ancient  sanctity  of 
Dan  and  Eethel,  the  time-honoured 
Egyptian  sanction  of  the  Sacred  Calf, 
were  mighty  precedents ;  the  Golden 
Image  was  doubtless  intended  as  a 
likeness  of  the  one  true  God.  But  the 
mere  fact  of  setting  up  such  a  likeness 
broke  down  the  sacred  awe  which  had 
hitherto  marked  the  Divine  presence, 
and  accustomed  the  minds  of  the 
Israelites  to  the  very  sin  against  which 
the  new  form  was  intended  to  be  a 
safeguard.  From  worshipping  God 
under  a  false  and  unauthorized  form, 
they  gradually  learnt  to  worship  other 
gods  altogether,  and  the  venerable 
sanctuaries  at  Dan  and  Bethel  prepared 
the  way  for  the  temples  of  Ashtaroth 
and  Baal  at  Samaria  and  Jezreel ;  and 
the  religion  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel 
at  last  sank  lower  even  than  that 
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  against 
which  it  had  revolted.  "  The  sin  of 
Jeroboam,  the  eon  of  Nebat,"  is  the 
sin  again  and  again  repeated  in  the 
policy,  half  worldly,  half  religious, 
which  has  prevailed  through  large 
tracts  of  ecclesiastical  history.  Many 
are  the  forms  of  worship  in  the  Chris- 
tian Church  which,  with  high  preten- 
sions, have  been  nothing  else  but  "  so 
many  various  and  opposite  ways  of 
breaking  the  second  commandment." 
Many  a  time  has  the  end  been  held  to 
justify  the  means;  and  the  Divine 
character  been  degraded  by  the  pre- 
tence or  even  the  sincere  intention  of 
upholding  His  cause :  for  the  sake  of 
secular  aggrandisement ;  for  the  sake 
of  binding  together  good  systems, 
which,  it  was  feared,  would  otherwise 
fall  to  pieces ;  for  the  sake  of  support- 
ing the  fiiith  of  the  multitude,  from  the 
fear  lest  they  should  fall  away  to  rival 

237 


CHAP.  xiT.  SOMILETIG  COMMENTABT:  KlUm. 


sects,  or  lest  the  enemy  should  come  mined  by  the  very  means  intended  to 

and  take  away  their  place  and  nation,  preserve  it.     The  whole   subsequent 

false  arguments  have  been  used  in  sup-  history  is  a  record  of  the  mode  by 

port  of  religious  truth,  false  miracles  which,    with  the   best    intentions,  a 

promulgated  or  tolerated,  false  readings  church  and  nation  may  be  corrupted. — 

in  the  sacred  text  defended.     And  so  Stanley. 
the  faith  of  mankind  has  been  under- 


SOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  21-31. 
Idolatry  as  a  Gaxtsb  op  National  Decay. 

I.  That  idolatry  is  a  degradation  to  the  holiest  place.  "  Jerusalem,  the 
city  which  the  Lord  did  choose  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  put  His  name 
there  "  (verse  21).  The  spot  was  hallowed  as  the  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah 
and  by  manifold  revelations  of  His  glory.  It  was  no  slight  degradation  that 
this  holy  city  should  be  debased  by  the  idolatrous  rites  of  the  heathen.  Idolatry 
pollutes  everything  it  touches.  **  There  was  no  visible  church  upon  earth  but 
here  ;  and  this  what  a  one !  0  God,  how  low  dost  thou  sometimes  suffer  thine 
own  flock  to  be  driven  !  what  woful  wanes  and  eclipses  hast  thou  ordained  for 
this  heavenly  body.  But  the  gloomy  times  of  corruption  shall  not  last  always, 
the  light  of  truth  and  peace  shall  at  length  break  out,  and  bless  the  sad  hearts 
of  the  righteous." 

II.  That  idolatry  is  the  originator  and  patron  of  the  most  abominable 
vices.  1.  It  corrupts  a  whole  nation.  **  And  Judah  did  evil  above  all  that  their 
fathers  had  done  "  (verses  22,  23).  It  is  no  longer  the  individual  monarch  who 
is  111  lined,  but  the  people;  the  evil  practices  have  become  national.  One  sinner 
destroyeth  much  good ;  one  false  officer  may  corrupt  an  entire  army ;  an  idola- 
trous king  is  a  curse  to  a  country.  The  mother  of  Eehoboam  was  an  Ammon- 
itess  (verse  21),  a  bad  wife  for  a  king  of  Israel ;  and  her  son  soon  partook  more 
of  the  temper  of  Ammon,  the  idolater,  than  of  the  spirit  of  Abraham.  2.  It 
sanctions  the  most  abominable  vices  (verse  24).  What  a  strange  incongruity  is 
this — Sodom  in  Jerusalem !  idols  in  Judah !  Surely  debauched  profession  proves 
desperate ;  admit  the  idols,  you  cannot  doubt  of  the  sodomy.  If  they  have 
changed  the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible  God  into  an  image  made  like  to  cor- 
ruptible man,  and  to  birds  and  four-footed  beasts  and  creeping  things,  it  is  no 
marvel  if  God  gave  them  up  to  uncleanness,  through  the  lusts  of  their  own 
hearts,  to  dishonour  their  own  bodies  between  themselves.  They  dishonoured 
God  by  one  sin,  and  God  left  them  to  dishonour  themselves  by  another.  The 
most  outrageous  sins  have  been  committed  under  the  sanction  of  idolatrous 
worship.  3.  It  is  specially  offensive  to  God.  **  They  provoked  Him  to  jealousy 
with  their  sins'*  (verse  22).  This  expression  is  a  metaphor  which  views  the 
relation  of  God  and  His  people  as  the  marriage  covenant,  in  which  the  people 
are  represented  as  a  faithless  wife.  'No  act  of  infidelity  can  be  so  secret  as  to 
elude  the  eyes  of  God.  ''Judah  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  "What 
emotions  must  arise  in  the  heart  of  God  as  He  is  a  silent  and  invisible  Spectator 
of  the  sins  of  His  people ! 

III.  That  idolatry  destroys  the  bravery  of  a  nation.  1.  It  is  powerless 
to  repel  the  invasion  of  an  enemy  (verse  25).  It  may  be  that  Jeroboam  incited 
the  Egyptian  king  to  make  war  against  Judah ;  but  it  is  a  revelation  of  the 
condition  of  weakness  into  which  the  kingdom  had  sunk  that  Jeroboam  saw  his 
rival  would  become  an  easy  prey  to  the  Egyptian  army.  How  great  a  change 
was  this  to  the  vigour  and  bravery  of  the  days  of  David,  when  the  surround- 

238 


^OMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  ohAp.  xir. 


ing  nations  were  kept  in  awe  by  his  victorious  sword,  and  the  Jewish  kingdom 
acquired  the  position  of  a  first-rate  military  power  !  Idolatry  emasculates  the 
manhood  of  a  people,  and  it  becomes  demoralized  and  cowed  in  the  presence  of 
an  enemy  which  before  it  had  confronted  with  bravery.  2.  It  reduces  a  nation 
to  poverty  (verses  26-28).  Keligion  promotes  the  wealth  of  a  nation  and  guards 
it  from  spoliation.  AVhile  Rehoboam  and  his  people  walked  in  the  fear  of  God 
(2  Chron.  xi.  17),  the  accumulated  riches  of  Solomon  remained  undisturbed ;  but 
when  they  forsook  the  Lord  {ih.  xii.  1 ),  then  Shishak,  the  instrumogat  of  Divine 
retribution,  was  permitted  to  invade  Jerusalem  and  carry  away  its  immense 
treasures.  And  now,  instead  of  the  golden  shields  which  glittered  in  the  pre- 
sence of  Solomon  on  great  state  occasions,  Rehoboam  is  glad  enough  to  substi- 
tute brass — an  emblem  of  the  degeneracy  of  Judah.  How  soon  the  mention  of 
the  profusion  of  gold  in  the  age  of  Solomon  is  succeeded  by  this  mention  of 
brass  in  its  place  !  Such  are  the  evanescent  vanities  of  this  world^s  riches  ! 
Idolatry  will  bring  the  most  prosperous  nation  to  beggary. 

IV.  That  idolatry  is  a  fruitful  source  of  fraternal  enmity.  *' There  was 
war  between  Rehoboam  and  Jeroboam  all  their  days  "  (verse  30).  Not  merely 
a  feeling  of  hostility,  but  frequent  wars.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the 
"Word  of  the  Lord  by  Shemaiah  (xii.  24)  was  any  more  observed  in  the  later 
history  of  Rehoboam  than  it  was  by  his  sons.  Of  all  quarrels,  those  between 
people  of  near  kindred  are  the  most  bitter  and  disastrous.  Where  true  religion 
is  ignored,  the  bond  of  unity  and  brotherhood  is  destroyed.  Idolatry  encourages 
a  restless  strife  after  an  unholy  and  tyrannical  supremacy,  rather  than  contends 
for  the  honour  of  God  and  the  supreme  authority  of  His  law. 

V.  That  idolatry  hurries  its  votaries  to  an  untimely  and  dishonoured 
grave  (verse  31).  Brief  as  was  the  reign  of  Rehoboam,  that  of  his  son  and 
successor  was  briefer  still  (chap.  xv.  2).  Sin  shortens  human  life,  robs  it  of 
many  pleasures,  and  surrounds  its  close  with  gloom  and  misery.  Even  the 
pious  are  impressed  with  the  brevity  of  life.  "  Alas  !  '*  was  the  touching  lament 
of  Grotius,  *'  I  have  lost  my  life  in  doing  nothing  with  great  labour  !  "  What 
can  be  said  of  the  close  of  a  life  wasted  in  folly  and  in  wicked  opposition  to 
God? 

Lessons: — 1.  Religion  is  the  secret  of  a  nation^ s greatness.  2.  iVb  nation  can 
prosper  when  it  forsakes  God,  3.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  abominations  of  a  nation 
when  it  gives  itself  up  to  idolatry. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Verses  21-30.     The   deep  fall   of  Verses  21,  22.     Wherever  God  has 

Judah.     I.  Whence  it   came   (Deut.  a  house,  the  Devil  always  builds  a 

xxxii.  15;  Hoseaxiii.6;  i'rov.  XXX.9).  chapel   close    at   hand.      How   often 

II.  Whither  it  led  (Rom.  i.  25  28).  docs  it  happen  that  cities  and  countries. 

Amongst   individual   men,    as  in  en-  whence  it  has  been  ordained  by  God 

tire  communities,  cities,  and  nations,  that  the  light  of  His  knowledge  should 

revolt  against  the  living  God  results  shine  forth,  have  become  the  seat  alike 

from  haughtiness,  over-prosperity,  and  of  superstition  and  of  scepticism,  and 

carnal  security,  bringing,  as  inevitable  thus  infinitely  sink  below  the  level  of 

consequences,  poverty,  ruin,  and  mis-  those  lands  which  have  never  heard 

fortune  in  war.     High  as  stood  Judah  His  blessed  Word, 
under  David  and  Solomon,  so  deep  in 

proportion  did  it   sink   under  Reho-  Verse   22.     The   enormity  of  sin. 

^oam.—Zan^e.  J.  Jg  not  unnoticed  by  the  Omniscient 

^39 


OHAP.  xir. 


EOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


One.  It  IS  committed  **  in  the  sight 
of  God."  II.  Is  a  trial  to  the  love  of 
God.  **  They  provoked  Him  to 
jealousy  with  their  sins."  III.  Is  a 
flagrant  evidence  of  faithlessness  to  the 
Divine  Covenant.  IV.  Earns  an  un- 
enviable notoriety.  "  Above  all  that 
their  fathers  had  done." 

—  Idolatry  and  immorality  rather 
increased  than  decreased,  and  the  fall 
of  Judah  seems  to  have  been  even 
deeper  than  that  of  Israel.  However, 
the  condition  of  Judah  was  not  so  bad 
as  the  condition  of  Israel  in  this  re- 
spect ;  as  in  the  latter  the  breach  of 
the  fundamental  law  had  become  the 
state  religion  and  institution  of  the 
kingdom,  the  separate  existence  of 
which  depended  on  the  new  worship ; 
whilst  in  Judah  the  apostasy  was  only 
permitted,  and  the  lawful  worship  of 
Jehovah  had  always  a  firm  footing  at 
the  central  sanctuary.  Many  good 
elements  also  still  existed  in  Judah 
(2  Chron.  xx.  12).  Judah  always 
repented  as  often  as  they  fell  into 
idolatry,  and  they  continued  to  be  the 
guardian  of  the  law  ;  whilst  Israel,  on 
the  contrary,  never  completely  re- 
turned to  the  right  way. — Lange. 

Yerses  23,  24.  Wherever  profligacy 
and  fornication  are  in  the  ascendant, 
there  is  true  heathendom,  how  many 
soever  may  be  the  churches.  King 
Rehoboam,  too,  sinned  grievously  in 
this  wise  he,  although  not  himself 
an  idol-worshipper,  yet  failed  as  a 
servant  of  God,  in  that  he  did  not 
oppose  idol  worship  with  aU  his  might, 
and  even  regarded  it  as  having  equal 
rights  with  the  service  of  the  true 
God — even,  alas!  as  we  find  Christian 
sovereigns  who  permit  unbelief  and 
revolt  from  the  truth  to  rank  upon 
a  level  with  faith  and  confession  of 
God  in  Christ. — Ihid. 

Verse  23.  One  great  object  of  the 
Mosaic  dispensation  was  to  maintain, 
in  the  persons  of  the  Israelites,  a 
living  testimony  against  the  polytheism 
which  had  overspread  the  nations ; 
and  whatever  might  directly  or  in- 
directly tend  to  the  worship  of  many 
240 


gods,  or  to  the  associating  of  other 
gods  of  man's  devising  with  the  only 
real  God,  Jehovah,  the  Creator  of 
heaven  and  earth,  was  carefully 
guarded  against  and  discouraged. 
When,  in  process  of  time,  the  high 
places  and  groves  of  primitive  wor- 
ship became  consecrated  to  divers  idols, 
the  danger  was  that,  in  adopting  the 
use  of  them,  the  Israelites  should 
retain  some  lingering  recollection  of 
the  God  to  whom  they  had  been  set 
apart ;  and  this,  gathering  strength, 
would  insensibly  lead  them  into  idola- 
try, and  to  the  association  of  other  gods 
with  Jehovah. — Kiito, 

Verse  25.  Where  the  carcase  is, 
there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  to- 
gether (Matt.  xxiv.  28).  The  chas- 
tisements of  God  are  never  delayed 
where  immorality  and  godlessness 
prevail,  but  they  do  not  always  lead, 
as  with  Judah,  to  the  humble  con- 
fession, "  The  Lord  is  righteous " 
(2  Chron.  xii.  6).  Sovereigns  are 
often  only  the  instruments  of  God  in 
their  undertakings,  although  they  do 
not  or  will  not  recognize  the  fact. — 
Calwer. 

—  So  long  as  Rehoboam  continued 
in  a  right  course,  the  king  of  Egypt 
was  restrained  by  the  Lord  from  the 
measures  he  contemplated;  but  no 
sooner  had  the  king,  with  his  people, 
sinned  against  Jehovah,  than  the 
hands  of  this  powerful  prince  were 
loosened,  and  he  proceeded  to  invade 
the  land  with  a  mighty  host.  This 
was  the  first  time  the  Egyptians  had 
appeared  in  the  sacred  land  with  hos- 
tile purposes  against  the  Hebrews ;  and 
it  is  probable  that  so  formidable  a  body 
of  chariots,  horsemen,  and  infantry 
had  never  before  invaded  the  country. 
The  appearance  of  this  new  enemy, 
whose  power  and  resources  they  well 
knew,  must  have  filled  the  Judahites 
with  dread — the  rather,  as  their  un- 
faithfulness had  disentitled  them  to 
the  right  of  looking  to  the  Lord  for  his 
protection. — Kitto, 

Verse  26.  The  true  treasures  of  the 
Temple  are  the  worship  of  God  in 
spirit  and  in  truth,  prayer,  faith,  love. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XV. 


and  obedience :  these  no  thieves  nor 
robbers  can  steal,  and  wilhout  them 
all  the  gold  and  silver  in  temples  and 
churches  is  vain  and  empty  show. 
Golden  or  copper  shields  are  alike  in 
value  if  only  we  can  say  :  "  The  Lord 
is  our  shield,  and  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  our  King." 

Verses  27,  28.  The  pride  of  poverty. 
I.  Descends  to  paltry  imitations.  II. 
Delights  in  pompous  parade.  III. 
Exaggerates  the  value  of  what  it 
possesses. 

—  It  is  better  to  pray  to  our 
Heavenly  Father  in  our  closet,  rather 
than  to  worship  with  pomp  in  church 
to  be  seen  by  men.  Yet  now  there 
are  many  who  ceremoniously  frequent 
the  churches,  but  neglect  to  maintain 
the  fear  of  God,  discipline,  and  good 
morals  in  their  own  houses  and  neigh- 
bourhood. 

Verses  30,  81.  It  is  not  to  a  man's 
honour  when,  at  his  grave,  these 
words  are  said  :  There  was  life-long 
enmity  between  him  and  his  neigh- 
bour.— Lange. 


Verse  30.  Jealousy  a  fruitful 
source  of  mischief.  I.  Engenders 
hatred  among  the  nearest  kindred. 
II.  Is  the  cause  of  the  most  horrible 
wars.     III.  Is  very  difficult  to  allay. 

Verse  31.  We  are  not  to  conclude 
that  Eehoboam  himself  served  idols; 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  emphatically  said, 
that  in  solemn  procession,  accompanied 
by  his  whole  body-guard,  he  con- 
tinually visited  the  Temple,  and  thus 
showed  himself  publicly  to  the 
people  as  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah. 
But  he  forsook  the  law  in  so  far  that 
he  did  not  obey  its  injunctions  ;  he 
suffered  idolatrous  worship  in  Jerusa- 
lem, and  did  nothing  towards  extermi- 
nating it.  This  was  the  evil  he  was 
accused  of :  he  continued  Jehovah's 
servant,  but  he  wanted  firmness  and 
decision.  Sometimes  fiery  and  arro- 
gant, sometimes  yielding  and  weak,  he 
was  unstable,  as  he  had  shown  himself 
in  Shechem  at  the  commencement  of 
his  reign.  He  seems  also  to  have  been 
under  the  influence  of  his  idolatrous 
mother  (verse  31),  and  wife  (chap. 
XV.  13),  and  of  his  many  wives 
(2  Chron.  xi.  21). — Lange, 


CHAPTER  XV. 

THE    BEIGNS    OF    ABIJAM,    ASA,    XADAB,    AND    BAASHA. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Abijam— Original  form  of  his  name  wa« 
Abijah  (2  Chron.  xii.  16),  the  sacred  terminal  "  jah  "  being  contjected  therewith.  But,  pro- 
bably on  account  of  his  evil  reign,  his  name  was  altered  to  Abijam.  Verse  2.  Maachah, 
daughter  of  Abishalom — i.e.,  Micbaiah,  daughter  of  Absalom  ;  more  properly,  granddaughter 
of  Absalom,  hy  Uriel  and  Tamar,  who  was  Absalom's  daughter  [vide  2  Chron.  xiii.  2).  Verse  4. 
Give  him  a  lamp  in  Jerusalem — An  Oriental  figure  of  speech.  Having  a  lamp  in  the  house 
indicates  the  coutinuance  of  the  family  name.  Verse  6.  And  there  was  war  between  Reho- 
boam  and  Jeroboam,  &c. — ie.,  rancorous  rivalry,  and  consequent  frequent  border  skirmishes. 
A  mistake  to  think  that  "  Rehoboam  "  is  a  scribe's  blunder  for  Abijam,  as  given  in  end  of 
verse  7.  The  feudal  antaq;onism  is  reasserted  here,  having  been  already  stated  in  chap.  xiv.  20. 
The  two  records  respecting  Rehoboam  (ver^e  H)  and  Abijam  (verse  7)  simply  denote  that  the 
hostile  feehng  between  Israel  and  Judah  continued  thrjugh  the  reigns  of  botk  father  and  son. 

Verse  12.  The   sodomites— vide  Notes  on   xiv.  24.     All   the  idols— D^^^i),  a  word  for 

despicable  things.  The  Rabbins  render  it  mud-gods ;  Ewald  renders  it  doll-images  ;  Gesmius, 
idol-blocks.     Verse  13.  An  idol  in  a  grove — This  is  a  word  of  far  different  meaning  from 

that  in  verse  12.     Jlji  7H)D  means  horrendum,  as  from  the  verb  y  73,  to  terrify,  horrify.     It 

b  conjectured  that  this  was  an  obscene  figure,  a  phallus  image,  a  symbol  of  the  productive 
powers  of  nature,  specially  (according  to  the  Rabbius)  revolting  to  the  Hebrews.  '*  In  a  grove,^* 
nay  read,  unto  Asherah;  but  this  ''  grove  "  was  one  of  similar  scenes  of  licentious  indulgence 

ft  241 


CHAP.  XV.  EOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


practised  in  the  name  of  religion.  Terse  17.  Baasha,  king  of  Israel — Third  sovereign  of  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  son  of  Ahijah,  probably  of  lowly  origin  (chap.  xvi.  2).  Built  Bamah — In 
the  tribal  territory  of  Benjamin,  about  six  miles  (Roman)  from  and  on  the  highway  to  Jeru- 
salem, thereby  cutting  off  king  Asa's  communication  with  the  north.  Verse  18.  All  the 
silver,  &c.,  left  in  the  treasures— Shishak  had  "ie/<"  but  little  (chap.  xiv.  26) ;  indeed,  he 

**  took  away  all.^    So  that  the  Q^"1Jn')ijn'>  t^^  remainder,  means  what  Asa  had  placed  therein  ; 

•    T  ~ 

nrh  evpeOeu,  as  the  Sept.  gives  it,  what  he  found.  Verse  20.  With  all  Naphtali — Or,  unto  the 
land  of  Naphtali.  Verse  22.  Made  a  proclamation  throughout — or,  called  together.  None 
excepted — The  Septuagint  has  misapprehended  the  adverbial  sense  of  >p^  y^^  *'  none  ex- 

cepted,"  and  given  it  as  a  proper  name — els  'EvukIh.  Verse  27.  Gibbethon,  which  belonged 
to  the  Philistines — A  town  given  to  the  Levites  (Josh.  xix.  44),  situate  within  the  tribe  of 
Dan.  Verse  29.  Smote  all  the  house  of  Jeroboam — Vide  Notes  on  chap.  xiv.  verses  10  and 
14.  Customary  in  Oriental  scenes  for  usurpers  to  exterminate  all  rivals  to  the  throne.  But 
hereby  was  fulfilled  Ahijah's  prophecy.  Left  not  any  that  breathed — A  more  inclusive  de- 
scription than  in  xiv.  10,  for  this  embraces  both  male  aud  female.  Verse  31.  Now  the  rest 
of  the  acts,  &c. — The  historian  cares  not  to  write  them  ;  he  aimed  not  to  preserve  a  detailed 
record  of  the  reigns  and  deeds  of  kings  ;  all  he  set  himself  to  do  was  to  show  the  conduct  of 
kings  in  reference  to  Jehovah  and  His  worship,  and  the  condign  punishment  which  overtook 
defiance  of  the  theocratic  law  ;  thereby  tracing  the  fact  that  "sin  "  (verse  26),  in  the  odious 
form  of  national  apostasy,  wrought  the  overthrow  of  the  Israelitish  dynasties,  until  the  king- 
dom of  Israel  itself  perished. — W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-8. 
The  Peemanent  Inplxtence  of  a  Good  Example, 

1.  That  a  good  example  is  acquired  by  a  life  of  obedience  to  the  Divine 
commandments.  "David  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
and  turned  not  aside  from  anything  that  He  commanded  him  all  the  days  of 
his  life  "  (verse  6).  David  became  the  pattern  and  model  to  all  kings  of  right 
conduct  towards  Jehovah.  Great  and  many  as  were  his  defects  and  failures, 
he  was  never  guilty  of  idolatry,  nor  did  he  permit  it  to  exist  under  his  rule. 
A  good  example  is  not  formed  by  aiming  at  it  as  a  distinct  object,  but  by 
quietly  and  faithfully  doing  the  duty  of  the  moment,  without  reference  to 
ulterior  results.  The  beautiful  is  unconscious  of  its  own  beauty,  the  sublime 
knows  not  its  own  sublimity ;  so  the  obedient  and  the  good  are  unconscious 
of  the  impressions  made  by  their  upright  example.  It  is  always  safest  and 
best  to  obey  God. 

2.  That  a  good  example  may  be  marred  by  serious  blemishes.     "  Save 

only  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  Hittite  *'  (verse  6).  This  was  David's  great 
crying  offence,  which  drew  down  on  him  the  judgments  of  God,  and  is  ever  men- 
tioned to  his  shame.  But  he  was  guilty  of  other  sins  :  as  the  neglect  to  properly 
disciplining  his  sons,  the  primal  cause  of  Absalom's  and  Adonijah's  ruin;  his 
falsehoods  before  Achish  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  10)  ;  and  his  sin  in  numbering  the 
people  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  10).  Eut  all  these  are,  in  comparison  with  his  guilt  in 
adultery  with  Bathsheba  and  in  the  murder  of  Uriah,  as  sins  of  infirmity  and 
ignorance.  Laoge  points  out  that  "  the  sin  of  David  against  Uriah  was  great 
indeed,  but,  apart  from  the  fact  that  he  repented  of  it  bitterly,  it  was  not  one 
which  broke  the  fundamental  law  of  the  theocracy,  the  covenant  and  its  chief 
commandment,  and  it  did  not,  therefore,  undermine  the  foundation  of  the 
Israelite  nationality."  David  is  not  held  up  as  a  perfect  example  of  goodness ; 
it  is  only  the  Sinless  One  who  can  be  so  considered.  How  often  does  it  happen 
that  in  great  natures,  great  virtues  and  great  vices  are  unhappily  commingled  I 
Their  sins  are  beacons  to  warn ;  their  virtues  indicate  the  possibilities  of  good- 
ness to  which  human  nature  may  rise. 
242 


BOMILETIG  COMMBNTARl:  RINGS,  oHAr.  xv. 


III.  That  a  good  example  is  not  always  imitated.  1.  Because  of  thr 
feehlenefis  of  the  religious  principle.  His  heart  was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord 
his  God,  as  the  heart  of  David  his  father"  (verse  3).  Yet  Abijam  prepared 
precious  offerings  for  the  temple  service  (verse  15),  probably  to  replace  vessels 
which  Shishak  had  carried  off,  and  in  his  war  with  Jeroboam  professed  himselt 
a  faithful  servant  of  Jehovah  (2  Chron.  xiii.  10  12).  Many  boast  of  their 
profession  of  godliness  who  are  strangers  to  the  power  of  it,  and  plead  the 
truth  of  their  religion  who  yet  are  not  true  to  it.  He  seemed  to  have  zeal 
for  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  but  he  lacked  sincerity :  he  still  sanctioned 
idolatry.  In  order  to  have  the  courage  to  follow  a  good  example,  we  must 
have  deep  and  forceful  religious  convictions :  these  are  to  the  soul  what  the 
ballast  and  the  driving  power  are  to  the  steamship.  What  is  wanted  is  a 
strong,  deep,  faith -compelling  conviction  of  the  awful  truth  and  saving  power 
of  the  Divine  Word. 

2.  Because  of  the  demoralizing  influence  of  a  had  example.  *'He  walked  in  all 
the  sins  of  his  father  which  he  had  done  before  him  "  (verse  3).  It  is  easier 
to  copy  a  bad  example  than  a  good  one,  especially  when  bad  examples  are 
abundant  and  are  continually  before  us,  and  when  good  examples  are  so  rare. 
Amid  the  prevalent  idolatry  of  Israel  there  was  only  one  Abijah  in  whom  was 
**  found  some  good  toward  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  Iniquity  is  a  common 
weed :  goodness  is  an  exotic.  One  evil  example  has  many  imitators,  and  its 
pernicious  influence  is  long  continued.  It  aggravates  the  sin  of  a  degenerate 
seed  that  they  fare  the  better  for  the  piety  of  their  ancestors,  and  owe  their 
blessings  to  it,  and  yet  will  not  imitate  it. 

rV.  That  the  influence  of  a  good  example  is  a  permanent  blessing  to  a 
nation  (verse  4,  comp.  with  ch.  xi.  36).  For  David's  sake,  Jehovah  did  not 
utterly  abandon  Jerusalem,  but,  from  time  to  time,  provided  a  successor  to  the 
throne  who  should  be  as  a  light  in  the  midst  of  surrounding  darkness.  Asa, 
the  immediate  successor  of  Abijam,  was  such  a  light.  It  was  a  promise  made 
to  David  that  his  house  should  be  made  a  perpetual  light  (Psa.  xviii.  28  ; 
cxxxii.  17);  and  the  history  of  God's  people  records  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise,  notwithstanding  much  individual  unfaithfulness  and  sin.  The  influ- 
ence of  a  good  man  is  immortal. 

Lessons: — 1.  Every  facility  is  provided  for  living  a  holy  life.  2.  A  pious 
ancestry  entails  great  blessing  and  great  responsibility.  3.  A  good  example  does 
not  always  restrain  from  flagrant  sins. 

GJBRM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Yerses  1-8.  The  fruit  falls  not  far  The  throne  of  David  oft  changeth 

from  the  tree.     What  the  old  sing,  the  possessors,  and  more  complaineth 

the  young  chirp.     The  parental  house  of  their  iniquity  than  their  remove, 

is,  for  the  child,  the  preparatory  school  Abijam  inherits  the  sins  of  his  father 

of  life  ;  what  he  there  sees  and  hears  Eehoboam,  no  less  than  his  crown;  and 

is  never  forgotten  through  life.     No  so  spends  his  three  years  as  if  he  had 

example  is  so  weighty  and  important  been  no  whit  of  kin  to  his  grandfather's 

as  that  of  the  parents.     How  great,  virtues.     It  is  no  news  that  grace  is 

then,  is  their  responsibility!     Abijam  not  traduced,  while  vice  is  :  therefore 

followed   not    after   the   example    of  is  his  reigu  short,  because  it  is  wicked. 

David,  great  and  glorious  as  it  was  ;  It  was  a  sad  case  when  both  the  kings 

but  after  that  of  bis  father  Rehoboam,  of  Judah  and  Israel,  though  enemies, 

which    he    saw    immediately    before  yet  conspired  in  sin.     Rehoboam,  like 

him. — Langs,  his  father  Solomon,  began  graciously, 

243 


CHA?.  XT.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


but  fell  to  idolatry;  as  he  followed  — The  blessing  of  pious,  God-fearing 

his  father,  so  his  son,  so  his  people,  forefathers  often  falls  to  the  advantage 

followed  him.     Oh !  what  a  face  of  a  of  even  degenerate  children,  through 

church   was   here  when  Israel  wor-  the  mercy  of  God. 
shipped     Jeroboam's     calves,    when 

Judah  built  them  high  places,  and  Verse  5.  Ko  human  example,  how- 
images,  and  groves  on  every  high  hill,  ever  glorious  it  may  be,  is  perfect,  for 
and  under  every  green  tree !  On  both  even  the  greatest  and  best  are  want- 
hands  God  is  forsaken,  His  temple  ing  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  miserable 
neglected,  His  worship  adulterate,  and  sinners.  Therefore,  we  are  referred 
this  not  for  some  short  brunt,  but  to  the  example  of  Him  who  alone  is 
during  the  succession  of  two  kings :  sinless,  and  out  of  whose  mouth  pro- 
for,  after  the  first  three  years,  Reho-  ceeds  no  guile.  He  alone  can  say : 
boam  changed  his  father's  religion,  as  **  He  who  follows  Me  walketh  not  in 
his  shields,  from  gold  to  brass ;  the  darkness,  but  has  the  Light  of  Life  " 
rest  of  his  seventeen  years  were  led  in  (1  Pet.  ii.  21;  John  viii.  12).  The 
impiety.  His  son  Abijam  trod  in  the  children  of  this  world  often  quote  and 
same  miry  steps,  and  Judah  with  them  excuse  their  sins  by  citing  the  example 
both.  If  there  were  any  (and  doubt-  of  good  and  holy  men  who  have  fallen, 
less  there  were  some)  faithful  hearts  but  never  take  pattern  after  their  re- 
yet  remaining  in  both  kingdomsduring  pentance  and  humiliation,  and  refuse 
these  heavy  times,  what  a  corrosive  it  to  know  anything  of  the  wrong  and 
must  needs  have  been  to  them  to  see  smitten  heart  of  a  David  (Psa.  li.  19), 
so  deplored  and  miserable  a  deprava-  or  of  the  tears  of  a  Peter  (Matt.  xxvi. 
tion  ! — £p.  Ball,  75). — Lange. 

Verse  4.     The  idolatry  of  Abijam  Verses   6-8.      The   enmity,   strife, 

deserved  the  same  punishment  as  that  and  war  between  the  sister-kingdoms 

of  Jeroboam  (ch.  xiv.  10-14),  of  Baasha  was  the  result  of  their  broken  covenant 

(ch.  xvi.  2-4),  or  of  Zimri  {ib.  verse  19),  with  the  Lord  God.     Wheresoever,  be 

the  cutting  oif  of  his  seed  and  transfer  it  amid  a  nation,  a  community,  or  a 

of  the  crown  to  another  family.     That  family,  the  fear  of  the  living  God  and 

these  consequences  do  not  follow  in  the  bond  of  union  with  Him  is  des- 

the  kingdom  of  Judah  is  owing  to  the  troyed,  there  will  ever  be  strife  and 

faithfulness  of  David,  which  brings  a  discord ;  peace  is  only  to  be  found  where 

blessing  on  his  posterity.     Certainly,  the  God  of  peace  reigns  in  the  heart 

few  things  are  more  remarkable  and  (Col.  iii.  15).     To  go  out  of  the  world 

more  difficult  to  account  for,  or  more  at  enmityis  not  a  blessed  death. — Ihid. 
ground    of    human    reason,  than   the 

stability  of  the  succession  in  Judah,  Verse  7.     Sharp  wars  by  a  just  hand 

and   its   excessive    instability  in   the  of  God  upon  both  those  kingdoms  for 

sister  kingdom.     One  family  in  Judah  their  idolatry.     And  for  like  cause  the 

holds  the   throne   from  first  to  last,  dissensions  between  England  and  Scot- 

during  a  space  but  little  short  of  four  land  consumed  more  Christian  blood, 

centuries;  while  in  Israel  there  are  wrought  more  spoil  and  destruction, 

nine  changes  of  dynasty  within  two  and  continued  longer  than  ever  quarrel 

hundred  and  fifty   years. —  SpeaherU  we  read  of  did  between  any  two  people 

Comm,  of  the  world. — Trapp. 

SOMILETICS  OF  VEESES  9-li, 

Religious  Reform. 

I.  That  relig^ious  reform  is  a  commendable  work,  in  which  even  a 
monarch  may  engage.     As  the  evil  which  had  debased  the  nation  originated 
flora  the  throne,  it  was  fitting  that  the  remedy  should  issue  from  the  same  potent 
244 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  ohaf.  xv. 


source.  Asa  was  the  first  monarch  who  made  a  bold  and  determined  stand 
against  the  prevalent  idolatry.  The  sin  of  the  nation  had  grown  into  colossal 
proportions,  and  it  required  no  ordinary  courage  and  strength  of  will  to  attack 
it.  Asa  threw  all  the  authority  of  the  crown  on  the  side  of  reform,  and  was 
himself  the  zealous  leader  of  the  movement.  The  king  can  do  himself  no 
greater  honour,  nor  confer  upon  his  people  a  greater  good,  than  by  making  the 
interests  of  true  religion  his  chief  care.  If  persons  in  the  highest  rank  refuse 
to  use  their  influence  in  the  removal  of  acknowledged  abuses,  the  Lord  will 
raise  from  obscurity  an  agent  who  will  faithfully  and  effectually  do  the  work. 
The  humble  peasant  may  be  raised  up  to  rebuke  the  careless  and  unfaithful 
monarch. 

II.  That  religious  reform  is  inspired  by  a  desire  to  do  the  right.  "Asa 
did  that  which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  ;  his  heart  was  perfect  with 
the  Lord  all  his  days"  (verse  11,  comp.  with  verse  14).  The  need  of  reform 
is  suggested  by  the  wide  divergence  observed  in  the  actual  state  of  things  from 
the  inner  consciousness  of  right.  The  man  who  studies  the  law  of  God,  and 
conscientiously  strives  to  keep  its  commandments,  cannot  fail  to  have  a  sense 
of  what  is  right ;  and  this  sense  of  right  will  be  the  guide  and  inspiration  of  all 
his  actions.  This  was  the  case  with  Asa,  though  the  standard  of  perfection  by 
which  we  are  to  measure  the  perfect  ones  of  the  Old  Testament  history  is  not 
the  fulness  of  spiritual  light  and  religious  attainment  which  is  set  before  us  in 
the  ]S"ew  Testament.  It  is  rather  a  singleness  and  earnestness  of  pious 
purpose  to  obey  God  and  maintain  the  honour  of  His  name  and  worship.  ♦*  All 
these  were  noble  and  excellent  acts,"  writes  Bishop  Hall  concerning  the  reform 
of  Asa:  "but  that  which  gives  true  life  unto  all  these  is  a  sound  root. 
*  Asa's  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord  all  his  days.'  JS'o  less  laudable  woiks 
than  these  have  proceeded  from  hypocrisy,  which,  while  they  have  carried  away 
applause  from  men,  have  lost  their  thanks  with  God.  All  Asa's  gold  was  but 
dross  to  his  pure  intentions."  Holiness— a  perfect  heart  towards  God— is  the 
strongest  motive  to  work,  and  imparts  a  courage  which  no  difficulties  can 
daunt. 

III.  That  religious  reform  aims  at  the  suppression  of  the  most  glaring 
forms  of  public  vice.  1.  It  uproots  gross  immorality  (verse  12).  In  a  time  ot 
reformation  the  most  flagrant  abominations  are  the  first  to  fall ;  the  rising  tide 
of  righteous  indignation  sweeps  them  away.  No  prince  or  people  can  prosper 
while  the  festering  pest-houses  of  immorality  are  suffered  to  exist.  2.  It 
destroys  idolatry  (verses  12,  13).  Asa  removed  all  the  idols,  demolished  their 
temples,  and  devastated  their  groves ;  and  doubtless  many  of  the  idol  worship- 
pers would  take  part  in  this  work  of  destruction.  When  the  mind  is  once  un- 
deceived, its  anger  against  the  instrument  of  its  deception  is  sometimes  terrific 
and  unbounded.  During  the  tyranny  of  the  Spanish  Inquisition  in  the  Nether- 
lands, m  the  sixteenth  century,  a  spirit  of  fury  suddenly  arose  in  Antwerp  and 
elsewhere  against  the  images  used  in  the  Romish  worship  :  the  cathedrals  and 
churches  were  dismantled,  the  images  and  religious  relics  broken  to  shivers, 
and  yet  not  a  single  coin  of  the  church  treasures  was  appropriated;  the  de- 
structive mania  was  wholly  confined  to  objects  of  idolatrous  worship.  Terrible, 
indeed,  is  the  vengeance  which  will,  ere  long,  overtake  the  idols  and  their 
worshippers  (Isa.  ii.  18).  3.  It  purifies  the  court  (verse  13).  Maachah  was 
deposed  from  being  queen-mother  because  of  her  idola'ry,  and  the  disgusting 
If^mp  *?  1^^^^^  ^^®  ^^^  homage  was  burnt,  and  its  ashes  cast  into  the  river. 

The  idols  which  his  fathers  had  made  "  were  all  destroyed.  All  respect  for 
flesh  and  blood  must  be  subservient  to  the  duty  we  owe  to  God.  A  good  king 
who  would  promote  religion  among  his  subjects  must  begin  by  discountenancing 
aU  wickedness  at  court.     A  pure  court  is  a  great  safeguard  to  a  nation. 

245 


QKkr.  XV. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


IV.  That  religious  reform  is  not  always  thorough  and  complete.  "  But 
the  high  places  were  not  removed  "  (verse  14) :  such  as  were  set  up  for  the 
worship  of  God ;  for  as  for  those  that  were  set  up  in  honour  of  idols,  he 
removed  them.  But  he  should  have  done  both,  as  did  afterwards  zealous 
Hezekiah  and  Josiah.  It  is  with  the  saints  as  with  Jonathan's  signal  arrows, 
two  fell  short,  and  but  one  beyond  the  mark ;  so  where  one  shooteth  home  to 
the  mark  of  the  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus,  many  fall  short. — Trapp.  Re- 
formation often  proceeds  slowly  and  under  great  difficulties.  It  may  leave 
untouched  institutions  that  may  become  a  snare  and  a  source  of  corruption  to 
future  generations.     Vested  interests  in  a  superstitious  system  are  hard  to  slay. 

V.  That  religious  reform  enriches  the  temple  of  God  (verse  15).  The 
practical  evidence  of  a  genuine  reformation  is  shown  in  costly  free-willing 
offerings  to  God.  The  true  riches  of  a  temple  are  not  the  silver  and  gold  and 
superb  furniture,  but  the  gratitude,  praise,  and  devotion  of  which  these  are 
but  the  outward  manifestations.  The  soul  is  only  rich  in  what  it  really  lays 
up  in  the  treasury  of  God.  We  must  not  only  cast  away  the  idols  of  our 
iniquity,  but  cheerfully  dedicate  ourselves  and  our  substance  to  the  cause  and 
glory  of  God. 

Lessons: — 1.  Abuses  mil  creep  into  the  lest  organized  religious  systems. 
2.  The  work  of  the  reformer  is  one  of  great  sacrifice  and  labour,  3.  The  monarch 
who  is  lealous  for  religious  reform  deserves  the  gratitude  and  support  of  his  people. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 


Verse  11.  It  is  to  he  regarded  as  a 
merciful  providence  of  God,  when  a 
son  who  has  grown  up  with  evil  sur- 
roundings and  the  bad  example  of  a 
father  and  mother,  yet  holds  steadily 
to  His  word  and  commandments,  and 
resists  firmly  all  ungodly  influences. 

—  The  standard  of  right.  I.  Is 
the  will  of  God.  II.  By  it  every  act 
of  man  is  unerringly  estimated.  III. 
Is  but  imperfectly  represented  by  the 
best  human  examples. 

—  In  vain  should  he  have  hoped 
to  restore  God  to  his  kingdom,  while 
these  abominations  inhabited  it.  It 
is  justly  the  main  care  of  worthy  and 
religious  princes  to  clear  their  coasts 
of  the  foullest  sins.  0,  the  impartial 
zeal  of  Asa!  There  were  idols  that 
challenged  a  prerogative  of  favour,  the 
idols  that  his  father  had  made.  All 
these  he  defaces  :  the  name  of  a  father 
cannot  protect  an  idol;  the  duty  to 
his  parent  cannot  win  him  to  a  liking, 
to  a  forbearance  of  his  misdevotion : 
yea,  so  much  the  more  doth  the  heart 
of  Asa  rise  against  these  puppets  for 
that  they  were  the  sin,  the  shame  of 
his  father.     He  doth  not  more  honour 

246 


a  father  than  hate  an  idol.  Ko  dear- 
ness  of  person  should  take  off  the  edge 
of  our  detestation  of  the  sin. — Bp, 
Hall, 

Verses  12,  13.  Against  sins  of  licen- 
tiousness no  authority  can  be  powerful 
enough,  for  where  this  evil  has  crept 
in,  there  comes  a  moral  corruption 
which  works  destructively  upon  all 
relations  of  life.  Authority  being 
ordained  of  God,  as  the  Apostle  says, 
its  duty  and  task  is  to  oppose  with 
severity  all  godless  conduct,  without 
fear  or  favour  of  man,  and  to  vindicate 
the  eternal  Divine  laws.  Therefore  it 
is  that  we  have  the  church  prayer  for 
those  in  authority. —  Lange, 

Verse  13.  There  can  be  no  queen- 
consort  where  there  is  more  than  one 
wife  ;  and  in  the  East,  where  there  is 
no  more  than  one,  she  is  not  a  queen, 
she  is  simply  the  Zan-i-shah,  the  king's 
wife—  that  is  all.  There  is,  however, 
in  most  cases,  some  one  in  the  harem 
who,  on  one  account  or  other,  is  recog- 
nised as  the  chief  lady.  There  was 
one  whose  claim  to  be  chief  lady,  or 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS,  chap.  xr. 


queen^  was  superior  to  all  others,  and  Yerse  14.     To  remove  deep-rooted 

that   was   the   mother   of    the   king,  and  long-standing  evils  suddenly  and 

The    prevalent    usage    of    the    East  completely   is  impossible,  even  for  a 

assigns  the  first  rank  in  every  house-  well-intentioned  and  powerful  ruler; 

hold,  not  to  the  wife  of  the  master,  for  in  that  case  he  would  bring  about 

but  to  his  mother,  to  whom  the  wife  resistance   to   the    good    rather   than 

merely    becomes    another    daughter.  further  it. 

And  so  the  rank  of  the  king's  mother  —  Yet,  in   2   Chron.    xiv.   3,   we 

was  the  nearest  approach  to  the  rank  read  that  Asa  *'  took  away  the  altars 

and  dignity  of  a  non-regnant  queen,  of    the    strange    gods   and    the   high 

— Kitto,  places,'*  and  in  verse  5  that  "  he  took 

—  Nature  is  worthy  of  forgetful-  away  out  of  all  the  cities  of  Judah  the 

ness  and  contempt  in  opposition  to  the  high  places  and  the  images,"  which 

God  of  nature  :  upon  the  same  ground  would  seem  at  first  sight  to  imply  that 

as  Asa  removed  the  idols  of  his  father  he  entirely   put   down    the   worship. 

Abijam,  so  for  idols  he  removed  his  The  author  of   Chronicles,   however, 

grandmother   Maachah.       She   would  himself  after svards  allows  that  "the 

not  be  removed  from  her  obscene  idols  ;  high  places  were  not  taken  away  out 

she   is   therefore   removed   from    the  of  Israel,"  though  the  heart  of  Asa 

station   of  her  honour.      If  all   the  was  perfect  all  his  days.     The  expla- 

world  had  been  an  idolater,  he  knew  nation  would  seem  to  be,  either  that 

how  little  that  precedent  could  avail  the  idolatry  was  at  one  time  put  down, 

for  disobedience.      Practice  must  be  but  crept  back  afterwards ;    or  that, 

corrected   by  law,   and   not  the  law  while  Asa  endeavoured   to  sweep  it 

yield  to  practice.    Maachah,  therefore,  wholly  away,  his  subjects  would  not 

goes  down  from  her  seat,   her  idols  be  controlled,  but  found  a  means  of 

from  their  grove  ;  she  to  retiredness,  maintaining  it  in   some  places — not, 

they  to  the  fire,  and  from  thence  to  perhaps,  in  the  cities,  but  in  remote 

the  water.     "Woeful  deities  that  could  country    districts,    where    the    royal 

both  burn  and  drown  ! — Bp.  Hall.  authority   was   weaker,    and    secresy 

more  practicable. — Speaker^ 8  Comm. 

Verses  12-15.     True  reformation. 

1.  Is  wrought  for  the  divine  glory.  Verse  15.     Hence  noble  and  pious 

2.  Is  not  to  be  hindered  by  family  princes  should  bethink  themselves  of 
considerations.  3.  Should  be  national  using  their  gold  and  silver,  not  only 
in  its  progress  and  results.  4.  Should  for  worldly  objects,  but  to  enrich 
destroy  every  vestige  of  corruption.  churches  and  schools,  necessary  to 
5.  Is  evidenced  by  practical  generosity,  the  accomplishment  of  godly  designs. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  16—24. 

Symptoms    op    Religious     Reaction, 

I.  Seen  in  a  growing  distrust  of  the  protecting  power  of  God.  The  build- 
ing of  a  fortress  by  his  rival  Eaasha,  which  would  have  the  effect  of  interrupt- 
ing a  free  and  open  intercourse  with  his  capital,  filled  Asa  with  fear;  and 
instead  of  putting  his  trust  in  that  God  whom  he  had  so  zealously  served,  he 
relied  on  his  own  crooked  and  short-sighted  policy.  He  bribed  the  king  of 
Syria  to  break  the  league  existing  between  his  own  kingdom  and  the  two  rival 
Jewish  kingdoms,  so  that  Baasha  wai  compelled  to  abandon  the  building  of 
Ramah,  and  Asa  used  the  stones  for  the  fortifying  of  his  own  cities  (verses  1 7-22). 
**  0,  what  great  and  many  infirmities  miy  consist  with  uprightness  !  what 
alloys  of  imperfection  will  there  be  found  in  the  most  refined  soul !  Asa  doth 
not  only  employ  the  Syrian,  but  relies  on  him,  relies  not  on  God :  a  confidence 
less  sinful  ^lost  his  grandfather  David  dear."     Religion  is  losing  its  influence 

247 


CHAP.  XV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


over  the  soul  when  man  is  trusted  more  than  God.  A  dishonest  and  wicked 
project  may  succeed,  but  the  success  is  always  embittered  sooner  or  later.  It 
is  a  dangerous  thing  to  be  too  clever. 

II.  Seen  in  the  misappropriation  of  consecrated  treasure  (verse  18).  It 
is  sad  to  notice  that  he  who  so  recently  dedicated  these  spoils  to  the  Lord 
should  make  such  use  of  them  as  is  here  described.  Only  on  extraordinary 
occasions  was  the  king  justified  in  employing  the  temple  treasures  ;  but  it  was 
downright  sacrilege  for  Asa  to  use  them  in  bribing  a  foreign  and  heathen  king, 
for  whose  help  there  was  no  urgent  necessity.  *'  What  is  bestowed  in  faith 
must  be  regarded  as  sacred,  and  under  no  pretext  must  it  be  diverted  to  worldly 
purposes.  Nothirg  but  a  rude  power,  knowing  neither  fear  nor  awe  of  God, 
could  commit  such  a  robbery,  and  no  blessing  can  ever  rest  upon  it.  He  who 
gives  with  one  hand,  and  takes  back  with  the  other,  has  his  just  recompense 
therein.*'  The  money  power  of  the  world  is  largely  in  the  hands  of  the  Chris- 
tian church,  and  there  is  an  immense  respon^-ibility  resting  upon  the  wealthy 
members  of  that  church  as  to  the  righteous  use  of  their  riches.  They  are  but 
stewards,  and  that  only  for  a  brief  space,  when  they  will  be  called  to  render 
an  account  of  their  stewardship  to  God.  Indifference  to  financial  responsibilities 
is  a  sure  token  of  religious  decay. 

III.  Seen  in  the  disrespect  and  cruelty  shown  towards  God's  faithful 
messengers  (2  Chron.  xvi.  7-10).  An  important  incident  in  the  life  of  Asa, 
omitted  by  the  writer  of  Kings,  is  supplied  by  the  author  of  Chronicles. 
Hnnani,  the  seer,  was  sent  to  rebuke  and  threaten  the  king  for  his  sin  in  for- 
saking the  Lord  and  in  relying  upon  the  Syrian  for  aid.  To  be  thus  chided  and 
exposed  when  his  diplomatic  policy  had  seemed  to  prosper  so  well,  was  more 
than  one  so  little  used  to  contradiction  could  bear,  and  in  his  rage  he  thrust  the 
too  faithful  prophet  into  prison,  adding  to  his  original  fault  the  grievous  sin 
of  persecuting  an  inspired  messenger  of  Jehovah.  "Here  we  have  the  melan- 
choly spectacle  of  a  prophet  of  God  imprisoned,  not  by  an  idolatrous  or  notori- 
ously wicked  king,  but  by  one  who  has  hitherto  borne  a  noble  character,  and 
whose  heart  was  substantially  right  with  God.  2^ot  so  did  David  receive 
Nathan's  more  stern  rebuke.  This  descendant  of  his  does  that  for  only  attempt- 
ing to  do  which  Jeroboam  had  his  arm  palsied."  There  is  little  power  of  reli- 
gion left  when  the  servants  of  God  are  treated  with  contempt  and  hardship. 

IV.  Seen  in  the  way  in  which  God  is  ignored  even  in  affliction  (verse  23, 
comp.  with  2  Chron.  xvi.  12).  from  the  whole  narrative  of  Chronicles  we 
gather  that  the  character  of  Asa  deteriorated  as  he  grew  old,  and  that  while 
he  maintained  the  worship  of  Jehovah  consistently  from  first  to  last,  he  failed 
to  maintain  the  personal  faith  and  pi(  ty  which  had  been  so  conspicuous  in  his 
early  youth.  In  his  great  and  fatal  affliction  **  he  sought  not  to  the  Lord,  but 
to  the  physicians."  Not  that  he  was  blamed  for  adopting  the  best  means  within 
his  reach  for  his  recovery,  but  he  was  blamed  for  relying  more  upon  the  skill 
of  the  physicians  instead  of  upon  the  Lord's  blessing  upon  the  means  they  em- 
ployed. It  is  in  affliction  that  man  realises  his  helplessness  and  need,  and  when, 
more  than  at  any  other  time,  he  is  called  upon  to  depend  upon  the  gracious 
interference  and  help  of  God.  It  is  a  lamentable  proof  of  how  sadly  and 
deeply  the  religious  spirit  has  declined  when  God  is  forgotten  at  a  period  of 
great  extremity,  and  in  the  near  prospect  of  death ! 

Lessons  :— 1 .  A  time  of  high  religious  tension  is  usually  followed  hy  a  time  of 
reaction.     2.  Beligious  reaction  is  fraught  with  great  danger^  and  calls  for  patient 
and  skilful  treatment  on  the  part  of  the  church.     3.  In  a  time  of  religious  reaction 
there  is  always  much  to  disappoint  and  grieve  the  hearts  of  God's  people. 
248 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTART:  KINGS, 


OHAF.   XT. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


V  rse  16.  The  enemies  who  rise  up 
against  us  and  brinp:  us  into  straits 
must  often  serve,  in  the  hand  of  God, 
to  try  and  prove  whether  our  faith  is 
looted  in  the  deepest  soil  of  the  heart, 
and  our  zeal  in  religious  things  no 
fleshy  one,  but  a  high  and  holy  one. 

Verse  17.  The  devices  of  the 
wicked.  I.  Are  maliciously  planned 
to  place  hindrances  in  the  way  of  the 
good.  II.  Are  prodigal  of  labour  and 
expense  in  accomplishing  the  desired 
end.  III.  "Will  be  ignominiously 
defeated. 

Yerses  18-21.  The  eloquence  of 
gold.  1.  Is  often  more  potent  than 
words.  2.  Is  an  irresistible  argument 
to  the  avaricious.  3.  Has  made  many 
a  one  a  traitor  to  the  most  solemn 
engagements.  4.  Will  set  an  army  in 
motion  for  any  purpose.  5.  Rarely 
fails  in  winning  a  victory. 

Verse  18.  To  confront  his  rival  of 
Israel,  Baasha,  this  religious  king  of 
Judah  fetches  in  Benhadad,  the  king 
of  Syria,  into  God's  inheritance,  upon 
too   dear  a   rate,   the  breach   of  his 
league,  the  expilation  of  the  temple. 
All  the  wealth   wherewith  Asa   had 
endowed  the  house  of  the  Lord  was 
little  enough  to  hire  an  Edomite  to 
betray  his  fidelity  and  to  invade  Israel. 
Leagues  may  be  made  with  infidels  : 
not  at  such  a  price,  upon  such  terms. 
There  can  be  no  warrant  for  a  wilful 
subornation    of    perfidiousness.       In 
these   cases  of   outward    things,    the 
mercy  of  God  dispenseth  with  our  true 
necessities,  not  with  the  affected.     0 
Asa!  where  was  thy  piety  while  thou 
robbest  God,  to  corrupt  an  infidel,  for 
the  slaughter  of  Israelites  ?  0  princes ! 
where    is   your   piety  while   ye  hire 
Turks  to  the  slaughter  of  Christians, 
to  the  spoil  of  God's   church? — Bp. 
Ball, 

Verse  19.  This  is  the  curse  resting 
upon  the  strife  of  brethren  :  each  forms 
a  league    with   the    common  enemy 


rather  than  resolve  npon  peace  with 
each  other.  The  least  reliable  friend 
and  companion  in  need  is  he  who  can 
be  bought  with  gold,  and  is  always  at 
the  disposal  of  the  highest  bidder. 
He  who  persuades  another  to  break 
faith  must  be  prepared  to  find  that  he 
will  not  maintain  the  word  given  to 
him.  In  every  strait,  seek  first  the 
support  and  aid  of  thy  God,  without 
whom  no  man  can  help  thee. 

Verse  20.  Whoso  diggeth  a  pit 
shall  fall  therein,  and  he  that  rolleth 
a  stone,  it  will  return  upon  him  (Prov. 
xxvi.  27).  Baasha  wished  to  become 
possessed  of  an  additional  city,  and 
thus  lost  a  series  of  his  own  cities ; 
with  the  same  stones  with  which  he 
purposed  to  strengthen  Ramah,  Asa 
built  two  strong  cities. — Lange, 

Verse  22.  Factious  opposition.  1. 
Is  ever  short-sighted  and  short-lived. 
2.  Is  liable  to  a  sudden  collapse.  3. 
May  have  the  materials  it  gathered 
used  against  itself. 

Verse  23.  As  the  life,  so  the  death- 
bed of   Asa   wanted   not   infirmities, 
long    and   prosperous   had   his   reign 
been :  now,  after  forty  years'  health 
and  happiness,  he  that  imprisoned  the 
prophet    is    imprisoned    in   his    bed. 
There  is  more  pain  in  these  fetters 
which  God  put  upon  Asa,  than  those 
which  Asa  put  upon  Hanani.     And 
now,  behold,  he  that  in  his  war  seeks 
to  Benhadad,  not  to  God,  in  his  sick- 
ness seeks  not  to  God,  but  to  phy- 
sicians.    We  cannot  easily  put  upon 
God  a  greater  wrong  than  the  alien- 
ation  of   our   trust.     Earthly  means 
are  for  use,   not  for  confidence;    we 
may,  we  must,  employ  them  ;  we  may 
not  rely  on  them.      Well   may   God 
challenge  our  trust  as  his  peculiarly, 
which,  if  we  cast  upon  any  creature, 
we  deify  it.     Whence  have  herbs  and 
drugs  and  physicians  their  being  and 
efficacy,  but  from  that  Divine  hand? 
No  marvel,  then,  if  Asa's  gout  struck 
to  his  heart,  and  his  feet  carried  him 

249 


CHJLP.   XT. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


to  his  grave,  since  his  heart  was  mis- 
carried, for  the  cure  of  his  feet,  to  an 
injurious  misconfidence  in  the  means, 
with  neglect  of  his  Maker. — Bp.  Hall. 
—  The  teachings  of  affliction.  1. 
Affliction  is  often  sent  in  mercy.  2. 
Suggests  topics  for  serious  reflection. 
3.  Is  the  more  admonitory  when  asso- 
ciated with  age.  4.  Oiten  leads  the 
wanderer  back  to  God.     6.  Can  only 


increase  the  distress  of  the  obstinately 
impenitent. 

Verse  24.  Sickness  in  old  age,  pre- 
vious to  death,  is  a  Divine  chastise- 
ment and  trial,  to  wean  men  from  the 
world  and  ripen  them  for  eternity. 
How  many  men  would  die  uncon- 
verted if  God  did  not  visit  them  be- 
fore death  with  sickness  I 


E0MILETIG8  OF  VERSES  26-34. 

The  Punishment  op  the  "Wicbied  by  the  Wicked. 

The  sacred  writer  having  traced  the  history  of  the  kings  of  Judah  to  .the 
death  of  Asa,  in  the  sixty-first  year  of  the  divided  kingdom,  proceeds  at  this 
point  with  an  account  of  the  contemporary  kings,  the  narrative  occupying  seven 
chapters,  beginning  with  I^adab,  who  ascended  the  throne  in  Asa's  second  year, 
and  concluding  with  Ahab,  in  whose  fourth  year  Asa  died.  During  the  single 
reign  of  Asa,  the  government  of  the  rival  kingdom  of  Israel  was  in  six  different 
hands,  and  the  record  of  that  period  is  stained  with  conspiracy,  crime,  and 
bloodshed.  In  this  paragraph  we  have  an  example  of  how  the  wicked  are 
sometimes  punished  by  the  wicked,  which  suggests  a  few  obvious  reflections. 

I.  That  a  life  of  wickedness  is  fall  of  danger  (verses  25-28).  It  was  so  to 
Nadab.  It  made  him  an  incompetent  and  unreasonable  ruler.  It  multiplied 
his  miseries.  It  shortened  his  days.  It  alienated  the  attachment  of  his  subjects 
— not  one  of  them  cared  to  avenge  his  murder,  or  seemed  to  be  horrified  at  the 
foulness  of  the  crime,  though  this  was  the  first  regicide  that  was  committed  in 
the  history  of  the  kingdom.  Sin  is  a  state  of  unnature  ;  it  is  a  breach  of  the 
order  of  the  universe,  and  it  is  impossible  to  escape  its  penalties,  except  by 
finding  the  refuge  in  Him  "  who  bare  our  sins,  and  carried  our  sorrows." 
"  The  seeds  of  our  own  punishment,"  says  Hesiod,  **  are  sown  at  the  same  time 
we  commit  sin." 

We  rave,  we  wrestle,  with  Great  Nature's  plan, 

We  thwart  the  Deity  ;  and  'tis  decreed, 

Who  thwart  His  will  shall  contradict  their  own. 

A  life  of  wickedness  is  menaced  with  a  thousand  perils,  and,  if  persisted  in, 
will  terminate  in  misery  and  woe. 

II.  That  the  wicked  are  sometimes  used  to  punish  the  wicked.  Baasha, 
a  hitherto  obscure  military  adventurer,  a  bold,  pitiless  conspirator,  was  the 
instrument  who  punished  the  hapless  Nadab,  and  who  carried  out  the  long- 
threatened  vengeance  against  the  house  of  Jeroboam  (verses  29,  30).  He  would 
do  this  to  secure  himself  on  the  throne  he  had  so  wickedly  usurped,  without 
thinking  of  Ahijah's  prophecy  (chap.  xiv.  10-14) — perhaps  without  knowing 
it.  He  might  be  influenced  by  some  personal  quarrel  with  Nadab,  or  to  be  re- 
venged on  the  house  of  Jeroboam  for  some  injury  received  from  them,  or  to  rid 
the  country  of  the  cruel  tyranny  of  an  unpopular  prince,  or  to  clear  the  way  for 
carrying  out  his  own  ambitious  and  daring  schemes.  Yet  he  signally  fulfilled 
the  Divine  threatenings  with  a  more  savage  barbarity  than  was  originally  in- 
tended. He  not  only  slew  every  male,  but  **  he  left  not  to  Jeroboam  any  that 
breathed  ";  and  thus  the  dynasty  of  Jeroboam  became  utterly  and  hopelessly 
extinct.     It  is  a  terrible  thmg  to  be  abandoned  to  the  remorseless  cruelty  of  the 

260 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAF.  XT. 


wicked.  The  sack  of  Rome  by  the  Goths  {vide  Gibbon,  c.  xxxi.)  is  a  graphic 
example  of  the  merciless  and  unbridled  ferocity  with  which  one  wicked  nation 
may  punish  another.  Well  might  David  pray,  ''Let  us  now  fall  into  the  hands 
of  the  Lord ;  and  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  man  "  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14). 

III.  That  the  use  of  the  wicked  as  instruments  of  punishment  does  not 
necessarily  turn  them  from  their  wickedness  (veree  34).  Baasha  continued 
in  the  same  evil  courses  which  had  brought  such  frightful  sufferings  upon  his 
predecessors,  and  in  inflicting  which  he  had  been  the  unconscious  instrument — 
another  illustration  how  little  influence  the  most  notable  punishments  of  sin 
has  in  deterring  the  wicked  from  their  sins  **The  entail  of  iniquity  cannot 
be  cut  off  but  by  a  thorough  conversion  of  the  soul  to  God ;  and  of  this  these 
bad  kings  seem  to  have  had  no  adequate  notion.  The  wicked  followed  the 
steps  of  the  wicked,  and  became  still  more  wicked.  Sin  gathers  strength  by 
exercise  and  age."  The  sinner  cannot  reform  himself;  and  he  vainly  strives 
to  maintain  his  authority  and  prestige  by  the  mad,  purblind  policy  of  commit- 
ting still  more  outrageous  a^ts  of  iniquity.  What  would  be  the  condition  of  the 
world  if  wickedness  had  unchecked  and  unrestricted  sway  ?  What  must  be  the 
nameless  horrors  of  that  Gehenna  where  all  moral  restrictions  to  evil  are  removed ! 

Lessons  : — 1.  The  forlearance  of  God  has  its  limits.  2.  A  similar  punishmetit 
to  that  which  the  wicked  have  inflicted  on  others  may  overtake  themselves.  3.  A 
life  of  sin  leads  to  misery  and  death. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yerses  25-34.  Nadab,  the  son  of 
Jeroboam,  reigned  but  two  years  over 
Israel.  Then  Baasha,  of  the  tribe  of 
Issachar,  conspired  against  him  and 
slew  him.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
records  of  conspiracies  like  this  which 
separates  the  Bible  history  from 
ordinary  history.  We  have,  on  a  very 
small  scale,  in  the  annals  of  a  few  petty 
tribes,  just  what  we  have  expanded 
to  its  highest  power  in  the  history  of 
the  Roman  or  of  the  Byzantine 
Empires.  Nor  is  the  result  different. 
The  new  house  is  like  the  old.  The 
rebel  and  murderer  becomes  a  tyrant. 
It  will  be  said.  There  is  a  grandeur 
about  crimes  and  miseries  which  affect 
a  world ;  but  what  interest  can  we 
feel  in  the  story  of  men  so  diminutive 
in  influence,  so  insignificant  in 
character,  as  Jeroboam  or  Baasha? 
I  answer,  The  Scripture  wishes  us  to 
feel  none,  except  so  far  as  by  a  small 
experiment  we  may  discover  a  truth 
for  all  ages  and  nations. — Maurice. 

Verses  25-31.  The  ruin  of  the 
house  of  Jeroboam  proclaims  these  two 
great  truths :  Sin  is  the  destruction  of 
a  people  (Prov.  xiv.  34) ;   and :    He 


who  heareth  not  My  word,  of  him 
will  I  require  it  (Deut.  xviii.  19). 
God  does  not  punish  the  innocent 
children  for  the  sins  of  their  fathers, 
but  those  who,  despising  the  Divine 
patience  and  long-suffering  shown  to 
their  fathers,  perpetuate,  without  any 
shame,  the  sins  of  their  fathers  (Ex. 
XX.  5,  6).  A  gi"ven  example  of  evil  is 
rarely  without  imitation  ;  as  Jeroboam 
rebelled  against  the  house  of  David,  so 
did  Baasha  against  the  house  of 
Jeroboam.  Desire  for  rule  and  envy 
beget  first  dissatisfaction  with  the 
condition  in  life  ordained  by  God,  lead 
then  to  breach  of  faith,  and  end  at  last 
with  murder  and  homicide. — Lange. 

Verses  27,  28.  Conspiracy.  1.  Is 
often  provoked  by  a  reckless  and 
tyrannical  government.  2.  Is  often 
the  dangerous  policy  of  the  wicked 
and  ambitious.  3.  Is  often  associated 
with  cruelty  and  murder. 

Verse  27.  It  is  curious  to  find 
Issachar  furnishing  a  king.  This 
tribe  had  never  made,  and  could  have 
no  grounds  for  making,  a  claim  to 
pre-eminence.     It  had  furnished  one 

251 


CHAP.    XVI, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


undistinguished  judge,  Tola  (Judges 
X.  1),  who,  on  obtaining  his  office, 
had  at  once  settled  himself  in  the 
territory  of  Ephraim.  Otherwise  the 
tribe  was  as  little  famous  as  any 
that  could  be  named.  The  **  ass 
crouching  between  two  burthens  "  was 
a  true  symbol  of  the  patient,  plod- 
ding cultivators  of  the  Esdraelon 
plain,  who  **  saw  that  rest  was  good, 
and  the  land  that  it  was  j)leasant ; 
and  bowed  their  shoulder  to  bear,  and 
became  servants  unto  tribute  (Gen. 
xlix.  14,  15).  It  cannot  have  been  in 
consequence  of  any  claims  or  merits 
on  the  part  of  his  tribe  that  Baasha 
became  king.  He  probably  owed  his 
rise  simply  to  his  own  audacity  and 
his  known  valour  and  skill  as  a 
soldier.  He  appears  not  to  have  been 
even  a  person  of  good  position  in  his 
tribe  (chap.  xvi.  2). — Speaker^s  Comm. 

Verses  29,  30.  Divine  vengeance. 
I.  Though  delayed,  is  certain.  II. 
May  be  unconsciously  carried  out  by 
wicked  and  cruel  men.  III.  Is  not 
meaningless  in  its  threatenings.  IV. 
Is  manifested  on  account  of  inveterate 
wickedness. 


Verse  29.  Conspirators  and  rebels 
profess  to  overthrow  tyranny  and  to 
throw  off  its  yoke  ;  but  when  they 
obtain  power  and  sovereignty  they  are 
themselves  the  most  violent  and  cruel 
tyrants. 

Verse  34.  Baasha  trod  in  the  foot- 
steps of  Jeroboam  just  as  if  Jeroboam 
had  been  good  and  upright.  And  yet 
Baasha  himself  was  an  instrument  in 
the  hand  of  God  to  punish  Jeroboam 
on  account  of  his  sins.  What  folly ! 
When  Jeroboam's  son,  Nadab,  did  as 
his  father,  we  can.  explain  it  by  pater- 
nal influence  ;  but  that  Baasha  should 
have  pursued  the  same  course  is  a  proof 
of  monstrous  blindness.  The  world 
does  not  allow  itself  to  be  interrupted 
in  its  purposes  ;  vaiu  conduct  after  the 
way  of  those  who  live  before  is  always 
inherited  (1  Peter  i.  18). —  Calwer. 

—  Sin  morally  blinding.  I. 
Hides  from  the  soul  the  excessive 
turpitude  of  sin.  II.  Eenders  the 
soul  incapable  of  learning  lessons  from 
the  most  terrible  punishments  of  sin. 
III.  Prevents  the  soul  from  seeing  the 
danger  and  misery  into  which  it  is 
surely  drifting. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


THE    DYNASTIC    TROUBLES    OP    ISRAEL. 

CRrnOAL  AND  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  I.  Word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jehu — His 
father  was  a  prophet  (2  Ghron.  xvi.  7).  This  is  the  only  incident  on  record  of  Jehu.  Verse  2. 
Forasmuch  as  I  exalted  thee — Not  that  God  sanctioned  the  method  by  which  Baasha  attained 
the  throne,  but  Divine  Providence  allowed  the  attainment.  Verse  3.  Behold  I  will  take 
away — ''  By  me  kings  reign."  Having  reproduced  the  iniquities  of  Jeroboam,  he  should  ex- 
perience the  same  doom  ;  the  similitude  of  their  fate  extending  to  their  '*  posterity."  Verse  9. 
His  servant  Zimri—Josephus  states  that  Zimri  took  advantage  of  the  absence  of  the  army  and 
its  chief  to  undertake  the  siege  of  Gibbethon.  Doubtless  this  arrangement  for  debauching 
Elah  in  Aza's  house  was  a  part  of  the  plot  of  Zimri.  He  thought  to  consolidate  his  sovereignty 
by  the  massacre,  not  only  of  the  relatives,  but  also  of  "  the  friends  "  of  the  royal  house. 
Verse  15.  Did  Zimri  reign  seven  days— A  brief  possession  of  a  throne  won  by  such  crimi- 
nal deeds  I     The  Israelites  repudiated  the  villainous  usurper.     Verse  18.  Into  the  palace  of 

the  king's  house — ]iD"lJ^  means  the  highest  place  in  the  king's  house;  "  the  fortress  of  the 

palace,  the  securest  and  inmost  place  ;  for  the  royal  palace  contained  a  great  number  of  build- 
ings" (^esmiMs).  Burnt  the  king's  house  over  him— The  Syriac  says,  the  besiegers  fired 
the  royal  house  over  his  head.  Verse  19.  For  his  sins  .  .  and  in  walking  in  the  way  of 
Jeroboam — As  he  only  reigned  "seven  days,"  this  must  refer  to  his  previous  career,  although 
^*the  sins  which  he  sinned  "  well  describe  his  saoguinary  deeds  in  seizing  the  throne.  Verse  22. 
So  Tibni  died,  and  Omri  reigned— According  to  Josephus  {Antiq.  viii.  12,  5),  Tibni  was 
slain ;  which  seems  the  necessary  termination  of  the  struggle.  The  phrase,  *'  So  he  died/' 
does  not  allow  of  the  thought  of  a  natural  death,  whereby  Tibni  conveniently  left  the  posi- 
252 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  RINGS. 


OHAP.  XVI. 


«on  unchall.yd   to  Omri ;  but  a  forced  coDcludon  of  the  rivalry  by  the  death  of  Tiboi 
However,  JID^I  does  not  definitely  indicate  a  violent  death.     Veree  24.  Bought  the  hill 

eaet  and  weet,  an"d^iLl  'otoreoVSarveXti^'^lnl  /.i^.  ""^Tl T'^'f^ 

vet  at  ^A\Tfhf--f  £|^S^~^^^^ 

wife  Jezehpl      Filh     /  ?  1  i~r  ^^^^  fraught  with  woe  for  Isiael !     Verse  30    Took  to 

r^^t:^tf^i-^.^i-^^^^^^ 

handed  over  his  kingdom  to  the  Tjrian  idolatry.     bv^r\  i.  the   Phcenician  sun-god  ,    the 
"altar,"  n^SO,  was  a  pillar  or  image  {comp.  Notes  on  xiv.  23).     Verse  33.  And  Ahab  made 

L^n7»7e'x';m1rie1ftol"bre°ierand*-Jez?b7  ''''T''>.  T""""?  '^^  "^  -^'"  ™-"-8- 
St^rn'-tbe^d  tr?£  S^^^ 


HOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-14. 
The  Doom  op  the  Usurpee. 

"  I 'eial 'ef  t&oufnf  tl  yr^Z''^  ?  '^"'"^''^  *"  '""'^  '  -^^^^^  '^^"'•'•y 
r^t  o\  i;  1"  °*^"'''  •^"'*'  ''"•^  "a'Je  tliee  prince  over  my  peoole  Israpl  » 
(verse  2).     Though  the  means  by  which  Baasha  seized  the  Throne  was  fonlv 

reform       He    it         oPPortun.ty  of  using  his  influence  in  favour  of  religious 

years,  caus.ng  even  Asa  to  call  in  the  aid  of  the  Syrian  LT  shTwed    hat 
mtnToTGofrlinV'^h    ""^^  ''^  f  "^^^^  *°  -''"^  InVe  elm  nd 

rfnet-'anTlir-:/;?  rt^f  ^  Tr-^llH^Hf  1 
persutently  followed      "  Thou  hast  walked!    he  wa/o   J  r  lofm 'WvteT^ 

enforced  on  o^hers!^wiil  brlngltfot  "dotm!'"''''^'-'  ^'""°  '^°'*  P''^'*^^^'  -<1 
refeL^ce  t^thc^ff  thar?h"'^  (verses  H,  7  ).     This  is  made  clear  by  a  doutle 

253 


CHAP.  XVI,  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


punish  Jeroboam's  sins,  yet,  as  he  received  no  command  to  execute  God's  wrath 
on  the  offender,  and  was  instigated  solely  by  ambition  and  self-interest  his 
guilt  was  just  as  great  as  if  no  prophecy  had  been  uttered.  The  proud  usurper 
blinded  by  success,  and  still  more  by  a  life  of  impenitent  wickedness,  is  apt  to 
be  indiflferent  to  the  awful  doom  which  is  certainly  descending  on  his  head. 
But,  in  his  mercy,  God  sends  His  faithful  messengers  to  warn  and  prepare  •  and 
he  that  taketh  warning  shall  deliver  his  soul  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  4).  The  warnings 
of  God  are  manifold  and  constant ;  and  dull  indeed  must  be  the  ear  that  cannot 
hear,  and  hard  indeed  the  heart  that  cannot  feel.  The  sinner's  can  not  is  his 
will  notj  and  his  will  not  is  his  condemnation. 

III.  Will  be  terrible  and  complete  (verses  11-13).  The  doom  so  Ion?  and 
so  plainly  threatened  fell  at  length  with  fearful  and  desolating  severity.  Zimj  i 
exterminated  tlie  race  of  Baasha ;  and  the  Jews  say  when  such  a  matter  is  d  - 
termined,  they  not  only  destroy  the  house  of  the  person  himself,  but  the  five 
neighbouring  houses,  that  the  memory  of  such  a  person  may  perish  from  the 
earth.  **The  excesses  of  our  youth  are  drafts  upon  our  old  age,  payable 
with  interest  about  thirty  years  after  date."  Philo  Judaeus  says  that  the 
builders  of  Babel  engraved  everyone  his  name  upon  a  brick,  with  a  view  of  per- 
petuating their  memory:  yet  this  did  not  serve  their  purpose.  It  is  just  with 
God  to  bury  those  names  in  the  dust  which  are  raised  by  sin.  The  atrocities 
of  the  usurper  will  not  go  unpunished. 

ly.  Extends  to  his  posterity  (verses  9,  10).  Elah  inherited  all  the  low,  gross 
instincts  of  his  father,  without  any  of  his  courage  and  ability.  When  an 
oriental  monarch  indulges  in  intoxication  he  is  expected  at  any  rate  to  do  it 
secretly.  He  is  further  precluded  by  etiquette  from  accepting  the  hospitality 
of  his  subjects.  Elah  appears  to  have  set  at  defiance  this  restiaint,  and,  like 
the  Egyptian  Amasis,  to  have  continually  reminded  men  of  his  low  origin  by 
conduct  unworthy  of  royalty.  It  is  sometimes  the  curse  of  a  bad  man  that  his 
sins  descend  to  his  children,  and  their  punishment  too.  When  a  man  lays  the 
foundation  of  his  own  ruin,  others  will  be  too  apt  to  build  upon  it.  As  the  winds 
of  winter  chase  the  withered  leaves  hither  and  thither,  so  are  the  wicked  chased. 
They  flee  at  their  own  shadow,  and  death  opens  to  them  all  the  errors  of  a  mis- 
spent life.     When  too  late  they  shut  their  eyes  in  despair — undone  !  undone  ! 

Lessons: — 1.  A  possession  unlawfully  acquired  is  a  fruitful  source  of  evil. 
2.  God  warns  before  he  strikes,  3.  To  harden  the  heart  in  iniquity  is  to  bring 
ruin  on  one's  own  head, 

QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verses  1-14.      Of  the   two   kings,  Zirari  was  still   worse;  ambition  led 

Elah  and  Zimri,  we  learn  nothing  be-  him   to    unfaithfulness    and    treason; 

sides   that   they   held   to   the  sin  of  he  not  only  murdered    his  king  and 

Jeroboam,    except    how    they    died.  master,   but  the  king's  whole  house. 

This  was,  however,  sufficient  to  cha-  How  little  esteemed  and  respected  he 

racterise  them.      We  see   that  Elah  was,  appears  from  the  fact  that  the 

did  not  even  inherit  energy  and  cou-  whole  army,  as  soon  as  they  heard  of 

rage  from  his  father  Baasha,  but  was  his  having  ascended  the  throne,  imme- 

a   coward  and  a  low-souled  glutton,  diately     made     another      king,    and 

because   when   the   whole   army  was  marched  against  Zimri.     Then  when 

engaged  in  combat  with  the  Philistines  shut  in  and  surrounded,   he  set  fire 

before  Gibbethon,  he  not  only  remained  to  the  citadel  over  his  head,  and  gave 

at   home,   but    drank   and    caroused,  himself  to  the  flames — his  act  was  one 
254 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CHAP.    XVI. 


of  despair  rather    than    of    heroism 
(verses  17,  18). — Lange. 

Verses    1-4.     The   general   law   is 
repeated  with  the  same  stern  simpli- 
city   to    one    man     as    to    another. 
"Whether    you    came    in   by   right 
means  or  foul;    whether  you   are   a 
legitimate  heir  or  a  conspirator,  God 
has  made  you  a  prince ;  your  crime  is 
your    own.       Your    power    is    His. 
Trying  to  be  something  in  yourself, 
you    pronounce   your    own   sentence. 
When  you  think  to  make  gods,  God 
unmakes  you."    The  principle  is  again 
affirmed,  that  a  regular  succession,  a 
sure  house,  is  a  blessing  to  a  land  : 
that  a  man  who  desires  to  found  such 
a  one,  desires  a  good  gift ;  but  that  it 
is  a  gift ;  that  as  a  witness  of  God's 
permanence  and  presence  it  is  good  ; 
that  succession,  apart  from  Him,  is  a 
mere    transmission    of    curses.      The 
particular   phrase,    ''  provoke   me    to 
anger,"  is  used  here  as  it  is  every- 
where else  in  the  Bible.     God  is  con- 
templated as  jealous  orer  His  people, 
feeling  like  a  husband  or  father  to  a 
rebellious  wife  or  child.     It  is  pre- 
sented with  all  boldness  to  men  who 
had  the  lowest,  most  grovelling  con- 
ceptions of  the  divine  nature,  not  to 
flatter  them,  but  to  counteract  them, 
to  destroy  the  fiction  that  God  is  in- 
different  to   His   creatures    or   hates 
them,  which  is  the  foundation  of  all 
idolatry,  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
full  revelation  of   that  truth    which 
interprets    His  jealousy,   and   is   the 
ground  of  all   right  faith  in  man — 
*'  God  is  Love." — Maurice. 

Verses  2-4.  The  sins  of  the  common 
people  which  they  have  learned  from 
thtir  ].rinces,  as  well  alpo  as  those 
which  these  do  not  restrain  when  they 
can,  are  charged  to  them.  Those  who 
are  lifted  up  out  of  the  dust  are  often 
the  proudest  and  most  arrogant, 
because  they  think  they  must  thank 
only^  themselves  for  their  exalted 
position,  and  they  forg.  t  what  is 
written  in  1  Sam.  ii.  7.  For  Eaasha, 
also,  the  hour  struck  wheii  it  was 
eaid,  Behold,  oh  !  most  proud,  &c. 
(Jer.  1.    31).     The   throne   that   has 


been  obtained  by  lying,  deceit,  false- 
hood, and  bloodshed,  has  no  stability. 
The  judgment  of  God,  though  delayed 
for  a  time,  will  not  always  tarry 
(Psa.  V.  6,  7).  Robbers  and  murderers 
are  not  always  in  caves  and  the  hidden 
recesses  of  forests ;  sometimes  they  are 
seated  upon  thrones:  but  the  Lord 
will  sweep  them  away,  and  their  end 
will  be  with  horror.  Before  His 
tribunal,  no  people,  no  crown  is  a 
protection. —  Osiander, 

Verse  2.  The  responsibilities  of 
rank.  I.  Afford  exceptional  oppor- 
tunities for  doing  great  good,  or  great 
mischief.  II.  Are  rarely  used  for  the 
noblest  purposes  when  unrighteously 
acquired.  III.  Merit  corresponding 
punishment  when  abused. 

Verse  6.     The  little  that  is  told  of 
Baasha  is  sufficient  to  show  that  he 
was  an  ambitious,  rough,  and  violent 
—indeed,  even  a  blood-thirsty—man. 
He  did  not  conspire  against  his  lord 
and  king,   and  usurp  the   throne   in 
order  to  bring   the  fundamental  law 
of  Israel  into  force  again,  and  to  make 
an  end  of  the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  for  he 
himself  adhered  firmly  to  it  all  his  life, 
in    spite   of    all    the    warnings    and 
threatenings  of  the  prophets.    He  only 
cared  for  dominion,   and  for  this  he 
esteemed  the  sin  of  Jeroboam  as  neces- 
sary as  the  latter  had  done.     In  short, 
he  seems  to  have  been  a  rough  soldier 
who   cared    little   or   nothing    about 
religion.      He    was    the    firt^t    king- 
murderer  in  Israel,  and  led  the  way, 
as  it  were,  to  this  crime,  which  was 
afterwards  so  often  imitated.—  Lange. 

Verses  8-10.  King  Elah.  I.  He 
riots  and  carouses  whilst  his  people 
are  poui  ing  out  their  blood  in  war.  It 
is  a  sign  of  great  barbarousness  and 
rudeness  amid  extirior  refinement, 
when  the  great  and  rich  lead  a  frivolous 
and  luxurious  life,  whilst  the  masses 
eat  their  bread  in  the  sweat  of  their 
brow,  and^  are  famishing.  A  riotous 
court  life  is  the  usual  precursor  of  the 
storm  which  shakes  or  desiroys  the 
throne.  II.  Death  suddenly  overt  ikes 
him  in  drunkenness.     To  go  suddenly 

255 


CHAP.  XVI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


and  unprepared  from  time  into  eternity 
is  a  heavy  fate  :  but  it  is  still  more 
fearful  to  leave  the  world  in  drunken- 
ness. The  nearer  chastisement  comes 
to  the  ungodly,  the  more  secure  are 
they.  It  is  fearful  when  one  can  say 
nothing  more  of  a  man  than  *'  He  has 
despised  God  and  His  word,  served  his 
belly,  and  ended  his  life  with  a  revel." 
Better  to  famish  and  be  miserable  with 
Lazarus,  and  then  be  borne  by  angels 
into  Abraham's  bosom,  than  with  the 
rich  man  to  live  in  splendour  and 
revelry,  and  afterwards  to  suifer  the 
pains  of  Hell. —  IVurt.  ISumm. 

Verse  8.     The   crime  of  murder. 

1.  Is  heinous  in  the  sight  of  God  and 
man.  II.  Is  ever  a  ready  weapon  in 
tlie  hand  of  an  unscrupulous  usurper. 
IK.  Never  goes  unavenged.  IV.  Is 
a  stain  of  infamy  on  succeeding  gene- 
rations. 


Verse  9.    Drunkenness.     1.  Is  an 

evidence  of  great  moral  degradation. 
2.  Forfeits  the  respect  of  others.  3. 
Renders  a  man  an  easy  victim  to  his 
enemies.  4.  Is  closely  associated  with 
violence  and  crime.  5.  Incapacitates 
for  the  most  obvious  duties.  6.  In- 
evitably issues  in  a  miserable  death. 

—  Drunken  revels  are  an  abomina- 
tion to  the  Lord,  and  only  occur  where 
the  fear  of  God  is  absent.  The  drun- 
kards rank  with  those  who  will  not 
inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God  (1  Cor. 
vi.  9,  10);  and  the  Lord  Christ  warns 
— Take  heed  to  yourselves,  &c.  (Luke 
xxi.  34). 

Verse  13.  The  emptiness  of  idola- 
try. I.  It  is  a  "  vanity  " — "vapour," 
*'  nothingness."  II.  As  a  creation  of 
man  it  is  inferior  to  hi'nself.  III.  It 
is  unsatisfying  to  man.  IV.  It  pro- 
vokes the  anger  of  God, 


EOMILETICS  OF  F ERSES  15-28. 
Sin  the  Pholific  Soubce  of  National  Calamities. 


I.  It  degrades  the  throne  and  vitiates  its  authority  (verses  15-20).  It 
places  the  crown  at  the  disposal  of  ambitious  adventurers.  At  this  period  in 
the  history  of  Israel  there  is  a  remarkable  resemblance  to  the  events  which  led 
to  the  accession  of  the  Flavian  dynasty  at  Rome  ;  and  the  character  and  career 
of  the  Roman  GaU>a,  Otho,  Vitellius,  and  Vespasian  bear  a  curious  similarity 
to  the  Israelitish  Elah,  Zimri,  Tibni,  and  Omri.  Whoever  could  best  succeed 
in  bribing  the  army  was  sure  to  gain  the  crown  ;  and  the  monarch  for  the  time 
being  used  his  exalted  position  and  power  lor  purpo-^es  of  personal  indulgence 
and  debauchery.  "  It  is  an  abomination  to  kings  to  commit  wickedness;  for 
the  throne  is  established  by  righteousness"  (Pro v.  xvi.  12). 

He's  a  king, 
A  true,  right  king,  that  dare  do  aught  save  wrong  5 
Fears  nothing  mortal  but  to  be  unjust: 
Who  is  not  blown  up  with  flattering  puffs 
Of  spongy  sycophants  ;  who  stands  unmoved 
Despite  the  jostling  of  opinion. 

But  wtere  sin  is  triumphant,  and  justice  and  righteousness  are  disregarded,  no 
throne  can  be  stable.  The  very  army  which  has  elevated  the  monarch  may  be 
the  instrument  of  his  fall  and  ruin.  Sin  tarnishes  the  crown,  breaks  the  sceptre 
of  uthority,  and  weakens  the  whole  nation.  The  usurper  is  otten  the  dupe  of 
his  own  wickedness.  You  smile  when  you  see  a  child  trying  to  grasp  its  own 
shadow;  but  how  many  have  been  grasping  shadows  all  their  lives,  and  will 
continue  to  reach  out  and  grasp  as  long  as  breath  and  eyesight  last ! 

II.  It  divides  the  people,  and  introduces  all  the  horrors  of  civil  war  (verses 
21,  22).  For  four  years  the  rival  claimants  ot  the  crown  carried  on  the  fratri- 
cidal contest,  and  iu  all  probability  Tibni  suffered  a  violent  death.     As  soon  as 

256 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS  chap.  xti. 


Zimri — Sardanapalus-like — came  to  such  a  suicidal  end,  it  would  appear  that  the 
authorities  at  Tirzah,  disliking  a  military  despotism,  elected  Tibni  as  kirl^^  and 
as  the  army  had  already  elected  Omri,  the  nation  was  plunged  into  all  the 
miseries  of  civil  war,  which  was  terminated  by  Omri  gaining  the  supremacy. 
Bitterly  do  the  seceding  tribes  reap  the  fruits  of  evil  sowing  ;  for  not  only  are 
thoy  given  up  to  idolatry,  but  are  half  swallowed  up  in  anarchy.  Both  Tibni 
and  Omri  would  have  done  well  to  refuse  these  proffered  honours,  considering 
what  had  befallen  the  kings  that  had  gone  before  them.  Macro,  captain  of 
the  guard,  and  Laco,  knight  of  the  watch,  Romans  who  had  been  active  in 
ruining  Sejanus,  had  great  honours  bestowed  upon  them  by  the  Senate.  But 
they  refused  them  ;  and  Dion  attributed  the  reason  of  their  refusal  to  the  terrors 
of  an  example  so  fresh  in  their  memories.  *'  The  nation  from  whose  heart  rec- 
titude is  gone,  in  whose  soul  vice  runs  riot,  has  its  throne  built  on  moral  gun- 
powder." 

III.  It  encourages  tlie  ruling  power  to  perpetrate  acts  of  unexampled 
wickedness  (verses  25,  26).  Omri  "  did  worse  than  all  that  were  before  him." 
Worse  than  Jeroboam,  TTadab,  Baasha,  and  Elah.  He  was  an  idolater  in 
principle  and  in  practice.  He  led  the  people  to  idolatry  by  precept  and  example ; 
and  he  went  beyond  all  his  predecessors  in  legalising  and  enforcing  idolatry 
upon  his  subjects  by  statutes,  for  we  read  in  Micah  vi.  16,  of  **  the  statutes  of 
Omri,  the  keeping  of  which  made  Israel  a  desolation."  Taking  this  in  con- 
nection with  the  character  which  the  historian  ascribes  to  him,  we  cannot 
doubt,  remarks  Kitto,  that  these  **  statutes  of  Omri,"  which  were  but  too  well 
maintained  by  his  successors  and  observed  by  the  subjects  of  his  kingdom,  were 
measures  adopted  for  more  completely  isolating  the  people  of  Israel  from  the 
services  of  tlie  House  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem,  and  for  perpetuating,  perhaps 
increasing,  their  idolatrous  practices.  Jeroboam  made  Israel  to  sin  by  temp- 
tation, example,  and  allurement;  but  Omri  did  it  by  compulsion.  Thus  when 
a  people  forsake  God,  they  go  from,  worse  to  worse,  till  destruction  comes  upon 
them  to  the  uttermost. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  frequent  end  of  ambitious  projectors  is  to  perish  in  the  flames 
they  have  themselves  kindlect.  2.  Envy  and  revenge^  even  in  death,  forsake  not  the 
wicked,     3.   Of  all  inflictions  on  a  nation,  none  are  more  terrihU  than  civil  wars. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verses  15-20.   The  vanity   of  an  revenge.      IV.    Frequently   ends    in 

ill-gotten  success.     I.    An  ill-gotten  suicide. 

success  is  evanescent  in  its  character  —  The  doom  of  despair  is  the  end 

(verse    15).      II.    Creates   numerous  of  a  life  given  over  to  sin,  which  has 

en(>mie^  (verse  16).     III.  Has  to  con-  lost  sight  of  the  living  God,  and  can 

tend  with  violent  opposition  (verse  17).  never  again   find  Him.      Frequently 

IV.     Drives    to   acts    of   desperation  what  the  world  regards  as   heroism 

(verse  18).     V.  Brings  its  own  inevit-  and    contempt   of    death    is    simply 

able   ])uuishraent    (verse     19).      VI.  cowardice  and  crime  in  the  sight  of 

Acquires     an     unenviable     notoriety  God.     The  Lord  has  no  pleasure,  &c. 

(verse  20).                                              '  (Ezek.  xviii.  23).     It  requires   more 

courage     and    bravery    to    bear   the 

Verse  18.  Despair.     I.    Often  the  merited  punishment  of  one's  sins  than 

result   of    baffled    ambition.     II.    Is  to  escape  from  it  by  suicide. 

one  of  the  sharpest    stings  of  a  guilty  —  Zimri's  desperate  act  has  been 

conscience.     III.    Is   associated   with  repeated  more  than  once  in  the  world's 

the   bitterest  feelings   of  hatred  and  history.       That    the    last    king    of 

8  257 


CHAP.  XVI.  JIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


Assyria,    the    Sardanapalus    of   the  transmitted  to  succeeding  generations 

Greeks,     thus    destroyed   himself,  is  (verse  28). 
almost  the  only  fact  which  we  know 

concerning  him.     Herodotus  gives  a         Yerses  24-26.  Omri  built  Samaria, 

similar  account  of  a  contemporary  of  making  it   the  strong   centre  of  the 

his,  a  certain  Bogc  s,  a  Persian  general  kingdom ;  but  he    walked  in  all  the 

left  by  Xerxes  to  defend  Eion  when  sins  of  Jeroboam,  and  did  worse  than 

he  retired  from  Europe  after  Salamis.  all  who  went  before  him.      It  is  not 

He  also  relates  that   the   Xanthians,  said  in  what  respect  he  was  worse,  but 

when  pressed  by  Harpagus,  burnt  their  it  certainly  implies  that  he  maintained 

wives,  their  children,  and  their  slaves  the  anti-theocratic  institutions  of  Jero- 

in  the  Acropolis,  and  then  threw  them-  boam  with  great  zeal  and  d(  cision.    It 

selves  on  the  Persian  swords.  appears  that  he  stood  well  as  captain 

of  the  army,  for  it  was  in  the  camp 

Verges  21,  22.   Anarchy.    I.  The  ^^*  \^  ^^'  ^'^'"^^  ,\  ^^^  *';«°«- 

'.  ^,^  V      *.'      1  •  JLCt,  however   valiant   he   may  have 

inevitable  consequence  oi  national  ir-  ,      '  .       •     .1       i  •  p.i  • 

T   •  TT    T     i"         LA       ;\  been  as  a  warrior,  in  the  chief  thinff — 

religion.      11.  Is  lomented  and   sus-  1     •    i,-       ^  *.'      i.    t  i,       i,       j 

A.  '  M     •  i.     4.     J  1  namely,  m  his  relation  to  J  ehovah  and 

tamed  by  incompetent  and  unscrupulous  .1       .v  i.*     j?     j  1.  ^   ^  1 

1  TTT   T       i.  A     '1.x.     i.  the   theocratic  lundamental  law — he 

rulers.    III.  Is  not  suppressed  without  .     -,  .,  ni-         -, 

much  crueltv  and  suffering  ^*°°^  ^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^  ^'^  predecessors, 

^  **  and  was  lurth est  from  being  what  was 

especially  required  of  a  theocratic  king, 

Yerses    23-28.    The     power    of   a  that  is,  a  servant  of  Jehovah.     A  man 

wicked  life.     I.  Is  the  more  dangerous  maybe  skilful  and  useful  to  himself 

when   associated  with  material   pros-  and  others  in  all  material  and  worldly 

perity  (verse  24).     II.  Transforms  a  things,  whilst  in  spiritual  and  divine 

king   into  a   tyrant    (verses  25,  26).  things  he  works  only  mischief  and  de- 

III.  Is  the  less  excusable  in  a  man  of  struction.     What,  without  religion,  is 

valour  and  capacity  (verse  27).   IV.  Is  BO-called  civilization  ?—  Lange^ 


EOMILETIGS  OF  FERSES  29-34. 
The  Bejection  of  God  jhr  Acme  op  "Wickedness. 

The  beginning  of  Ahab's  reign  commences  a  new  epoch  in  the  history  of 
Israel ;  new,  not  so  much  in  the  flagrant  forms  of  wickedness  that  manifest 
themselves,  as  in  the  relative  importance  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  during  the 
reigne  of  Ahab,  Ahaziah,  and  Jehoram.  With  the  exception  of  Jeroboam,  the 
reigns  of  AhaVs  predecessors  are  very  briefly  noticed,  occupying  but  parts  of 
two  chapters;  but  the  incidents  of  the  three  following  reigns,  embracing  a 
period  of  about  thirty-five  years,  extend  from  this  passage  to  the  tenth  chapter 
of  2  Kings.  During  this  period  the  kingdom  of  Judah  receives  comparatively 
little  notice,  and  then  only  as  an  ally  of  the  Northern  kingdom,  which  stands 
out  predominantly  as  the  mightiest  ruling  power  in  the  land.  During  the  same 
period  appeared  those  greatest,  sternest,  most  mysterious  of  prophets,  Elijah 
and  Elisha,  whose  lives  and  acts,  with  strange  romantic  blendings,  present  on 
the  one  hand  the  fierce  vindictiveness  of  the  theocratic  spirit  towards  sin,  and, 
on  the  other,  the  tender  and  shrinking  humanity  which  £hows  them  up  as  men 
of  like  passions  with  ourselves.  By  means  of  Jezebel,  the  Sidonian  princess, 
Phenician  idolatry  is  introduced  and  sanctioned  in  the  kingdom,  and  Baal's 
prophets  are  multiplied  by  hundreds.  A  fierce  persecution  arises  against  the 
worshippers  of  Jehovah — faithfulness  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  being  by  the 
court  regarded  as  disaff'ection  to  the  government  and  its  measures.  Wars, 
attended  with  varying  fortunes,  are  carried  on  with  several  hostile  kingdoms, 
while  within  the  land  the  lew  pious  weep  in  desolate  sadness,  and  hide 
258 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  xvi. 


themselves   in  caves   and   dens  of  the  earth.      Israel  seemed    to  reach  the 
summit  of  its  wickedness  during  the  reign  of  Ahab.     Observe 

I.  That  a  wicked  son  may  exceed  the  iniquity  of  a  wicked  father. 
"  And  Ahab,  the  son  of  Omri,  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  above  all 
that  were  before  hiui "  (verse  30).  The  name  of  Ahab  has  attained  an  evil 
eminence  in  the  world's  history.  Like  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and  Nero,  he 
had  a  love  of  art,  and  he  was  not  destitute  of  generous  impulses;  but  he 
stands  forth  an  example  of  the  lengths  of  wickedness  to  which  a  weak  selfish- 
ness may  be  driven  by  the  influence  of  a  stronger  will.  The  great  sin  of  Ahab 
— that  by  which  he  differed  from  all  his  predecessors,  and  exceeded  them  in 
wickedness — was  his  introduction  of  the  worship  of  Eaal,  consequent  upon 
his  marriage  with  Jezebel,  a  name  even  more  infamous  than  his  own ;  and 
his  formal  establishment  of  this  gross  and  palpable  idolatry  as  the  religion  of 
the  state.  He  was  but  carrying  out  to  its  inevitable  results  the  vile  policy 
of  his  father.  It  is  an  unspeakable  curse  to  be  under  the  training  of  a 
wicked  father ;  and  it  is  no  wonder  if  a  son  thus  trained  should  outvie  his 
father  in  vice  and  profanity. 

II.  That  a  wicked  wife  may  exert  a  still  more  baneful  influence  over  a 
wicked  husband  (verse  31).  "  The  marriage  of  Ahab  with  this  princess,'* 
writes  Stanley,  **  was  one  of  those  turning  points  in  the  history  of  families 
where  anew  influence  runs  like  poison  through  all  its  branches,  and  transforms 
it  into  another  being.  Jezebel  was  a  woman  in  whom,  with  the  reckless  and 
licentious  habits  of  an  Oriental  queen,  were  united  the  fiercest  and  sternest 
qualities  inherent  in  the  old  Semitic  race.  Her  husband,  in  whom  generous  and 
gentle  feelings  were  not  wanting,  was  yet  of  a  weak  and  yielding  character, 
which  soon  made  him  a  tool  in  her  hands.  Even  after  his  death,  through 
the  reigns  of  his  sons,  her  presiding  spirit  was  the  evil  genius  of  the  dynasty." 
This  is  the  first  recorded  instance  of  an  Israeli tish  king  choosing  his  chief  wife 
from  among  the  cursed  Canaanitish  race,  and  both  king  and  people  had  good 
reason  for  bitterly  repenting  the  choice.  The  character  of  Jezebel,  as  por- 
trayed in  the  following  chapters,  is  an  embodiment  of  all  that  is  most  awful 
and  terrible  in  the  Clytemnestra  of  the  Greek  tragedians,  and  in  the  Lady 
Macbeth  of  Shakespeare.  Woe  to  the  man  who  is  under  the  thumb  of  a  clever, 
designing,  enterprising,  but  radically  wicked  wife  I 

III.  That  the  public  sanction  and  practice  of  idolatry  amounts  to  a  total 
rejection  of  God  (verse  32).  Hitherto  the  Israelites  had  not  cast  oflf  their  alle- 
giance to  Jehovah,  nor  ceased  to  worship  Him,  though  their  worship  was 
damaged  by  the  presence  of  unworthy  emblems,  and  degraded  by  maimed  rites 
and  an  unlawful  priesthood.  But  in  the  dark  times  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  while 
they  did  not  in  so  many  specific  terms  formally  renounce  Jehovah,  they  did 
what  was  practically  the  same  by  setting  up  other  gods  besides  Him,  and  holding 
Him  of  no  more  account  than  them.  Baal-worship  became  the  fashionable  and 
court  religion  ;  and  the  mass  of  the  people,  prepared  by  the  idolatrous  experi- 
ences of  previous  reigns,  would  readily  adopt  it.  Baal  was  the  chief  male 
divinity  among  the  Phenicians,  as  Ashtoreth  was  their  female  divinity.  Jehovah 
can  tolerate  no  rival ;  and  a  divided  worship  cannot  be  acceptable  to  Him.  If 
idolatry  is  preferred,  then  Jehovah  is  rejected;  and  the  result  is  misery  and 
death, 

IV.  That  the  rejection  of  God  is  the  very  acme  of  wickedness  (verse  33). 
**  Ahab  did  more  to  provoke  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  anger  than  all  the  kings 
of  Israel  that  were  before  him."  We  can  be  guilty  of  no  greater  sin  than  to 
reject  God  and  the  salv^Ation  He  has  provided  through  His  son.     *'  This  is  the 

259 


CHAP.  XVI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


coudemnation,"  &c.  (Jno.  iii.  19  compared  with  verse  36).     It  is  not  the  enor- 
mity  or  number  of  our  sins  which  causes  our  condemDation;  but  theunbelieviua 
rejection  of  the  Divine  liedeemer.     When  we  give  up  God,  we  give  up  everv- 
thiug— all  help  all  hope,  all  happiness,  and,  like  a  rudderless  and  saiUess  vessel 
dritt  towards  the  gloomy  rocks  of  destruction.  ' 

V.  That  in  a  time  of  abounding  wickedness  tlie  most  presumptuous  acts 
are  attempted  (verse   34).     The  attempt  to  rebuild  Jericho  is  aclduced  as  a 
proof  of  the  general  impiety  of  Ahab's  time.     The  curse  of  God  against  the  man 
who  should  rebuild  that  city  (Josh.  vi.  26)  had   hitherto  been  believed  and  re- 
spected, and  several  hundred  years  had  passed  with  no  one  so  impious  as  to 
despise  that  curse.     The  place  had  been  inhabited,  but  no  one  had  ventured  to 
tortify  It  and  set  up  the  gates.     Eut  now  faith  in  the  old  religion  had   so 
decayed  that   Joshua's  malediction,  terrible  as  it  was,  no  longer  exercised  a 
deterrent  power.     Hiel,  a  Bethelite— a  native  of  that  city  which  had  so  long 
been  the  scene  of  Israelitish  calf- worship,  and,  perhaps,  a  despiser  of  Jehovah 
^x'f  V       l^aws-undoubtedly  a  man  of  wealth  and  station,  perhaps  instigated  by 
Ahab,  undertook  to  restore  the  long  ruined  fortress,  in  spite  of  Joshua's  menace 
But  he  suffered  for   his  temerity.     In  exact  accordance  with   the  words  of 
Joshua's  curse,  he  lost  his  firstborn  son  when  he  began  to  lay  anew  the  foun- 
dations of  the  walls,  and  his  youngest  when  he  completed  his  work  by  setting 
up  the  gates,  and,  it  is  supposed,  all  his  other  children  between.     Of  all  sins 
presumptuous  sins  are  most  offensive  to  God,  and  never  fail  to  meet  with  their 
due  meed  of  punishment.     But  when  man  abandons  God,  there  is  no  degree  of 
wickedness  of  which  he  is  not  capable.     Hiel  paid   dearly  for  his  presump- 
tion.    He  sought  for  a  name,  but  he  left  it  for  a  curse  (Isa.  Ixv.    15).     The 
man  who  defies  the  Almighty  must  bear  the  consequences. 

LESSONS  :— 1.  It  is  a  life-long  plague  for  any  man  to  be  united  to  a  wicked  and 
abandoned  ivoman.  2.  If  the  idolater  spares  no  expense  or  labour  in  serving  his 
c^ominations,  with  what  generosity  and  zeal  onght  the  Christian  to  serve  his  God. 
3.  Idolatry  has  degrees  of  wickedness—the  highest  is  reached  when  God  is  rejected. 

Ahab  and  Baal, 

I.  The  worship  of  the  calves  which  Jeroboam  set  up  in  Bethel  and  in  Dan  is 
carefully  distinguished  in  Scripture  from  the  worship  of  Baal  which  was  intro- 
duced by  Ahab  into  Samaria.     Jeroboam  wished  to  separate  the  ten  tribes  from 
those  which  followed  the  house  of  David,  by  giving  them  sacrifices  and  priests 
of  their  own.     From  the  words  which  he  is  said  to  have  used—*'  These  are  thy 
gods,  0  Israel,  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  "—it  is  probable 
that  he  affected  to  restore  the  idolatry  which  Aaron  had  sanctioned  in  the 
wilderness.     He  or  his  priests  would  suggest  the  thought  to  the  people,  or 
their  own  hearts  would  suggest  it  to  them,  that  what   the  high  priest  approved 
could  not  be  very  wrong,  that  Moses  had  no  right  to  break  the  calf  in  pieces, 
that  the  people  in   Jerusalem  who  followed   the  law  of    Moses  were  really 
departing  from  a  good  old  example,  that  they  were  returning  to  a  national  ser- 
vice.    The  step  from  this  ultra  local  worship  to  a  foreign  Phoenician  worship 
seems  a  very  long  one,  yet  it  was  natural   and  easy.     We  cannot  tell  exactly 
what  the  calf  signified  to  the  Egyptian,  still  less  what  it  signified  to  the  Hebrew 
slave  in  the  desert,  or  to  the  revolted  tribes.     It  may  have  been  merely  adopted  as 
a  traditional  symbol,  no  special  force  being  attached  to  it.     But  a  people  trained 
in  the  law  of  Moses  must  have  associated  some  recollection  of  an  unseen  Bein"- 
even  with  the  most  worthless  image.     How  strong  such  associations  may  be  in 
any  mind,  how  long  they  may  continue,  we  have  happily  no  means  of  deter- 
260 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  CBap.  xvi. 


mining.  We  only  know  that  the  conscience  of  the  idolater  becomes  at  once 
stupefied  and  sensitive  ;  more  and  more  incapable  of  appreciating  moral  di>tinc- 
tions ;  more  and  more  alive  to  terrors.  The  thought  of  a  lighteous  being  is 
appalling;  from  an  object  of  trust  he  passes  into  an  object  of  horror.  How  to 
appease  Ilim  is  the  question.  The  old  forms  may  not  be  the  right.  Otlier 
nations  which  seem  happier  and  more  prosperous,  have  other  gods  and  sacrifices. 
It  might  be  well  to  try  them.  The  most  powerful  neighbour  must  be  most 
worthy  of  imitation. 

II.  A  king  like  Ahab  meets  the  demand  of  a  people  in  this  state.  The 
Scripture  which  speaks  of  the  cities  which  he  built,  and  his  ivory  house,  and  his 
might,  and  the  wars  which  he  warred,  leaves  the  impression  upon  us  that  he 
was  intellectually  superior  to  his  predecessors,  of  a  higher  ambition,  less  narrow 
in  his  notions.  He  had  not  the  dread  which  Jeroboam  felt  of  intercourse  with 
Jerusalem,  he  cultivated  the  friendship  of  Jehoshaphat.  At  the  same  time  he 
took  to  wife  Jezebel,  the  daughter  of  Ethbaal,  king  of  the  Sidonians,  and  with 
her  he  naturalized  a  worship  certainly  more  imposing  and  august  than  that 
which  had  been  practised  by  the  kings  that  were  bcibre  him.  There  may,  or 
may  not,  have  been  animal  forms  connected  with  the  service  of  this  God  of 
Ekron.  The  la  ne  would  seem  only  to  impart  a  comprehensive  notion  of  lord- 
ship, a  notion  which  might  express  itself  in  a  numbi  r  of  different  symbols, 
which  certainly  would  not  be  as  limited  to  the  one  of  the  calf,  or  be  likely  to 
adopt  that  as  its  favourite.  Baal  would  become  Eaalim,  the  general  lord  or 
ruler  would  soon  be  multiplied  and  divided  into  a  number  of  lords  and  rulers ; 
but  there  would  be  attached  to  them  all  a  much  grander  feeling  of  dominion 
than  could  ever  have  entered  into  the  mind  of  one  who  was  bowing  to  the  like- 
ness of  a  calf  which  eateth  hay. 

III.  Ahab  would  therefore  seem  to  himself,  as  well  as  to  a  great  many  of 
his  people,  an  improver  and.  expander  of  the  popular  faith.  Poreign  priests 
with  much  more  knowledge,  probably,  than  those  lowest  of  the  people  whom 
Jeroboam  had  consecrated,  would  come  into  the  land.  A  number  of  the  native 
priests  would  be  quite  ready  to  adopt  the  worships  which  the  king  and  queen 
favoured.  Though  they  might  have  some  new  rites  to  learn,  though  they 
might  not  like  the  strangers,  or  might  be  despised  by  them,  yet  they  would  not 
be  conscious  of  any  great  change  in  then^ selves  or  their  devotions.  In  their 
groves,  on  their  hill  altars,  they  had  been  seeking  to  propitiate  some  unknown 
fearful  divinity.  For  that  divinity  they  had  now  found  a  name.  The  Egyptian 
idol  might  suggest  thoughts  sometimes  of  the  dark  power,  sometimes  of 
Him  who  had  made  a  covenant  with  their  fathers ;  the  Phoenician  taught  them 
to  understand  the  distinction,  to  feel  and  know  that  they  were  invoking  another 
than  the  Lord  God  whose  presence  Solomon  had  prayed  might  fill  His  temple. 

lY.  You  see,  then,  why  Ahab  is  said  to  have  provoked  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel  more  than  all  that  were  before  him.  The  Eaal  worship  was  essentially 
the  worship  of  mere  power.  I  do  not  say  that  abstractedly  or  originally  it 
was  the  worship  of  an  evil  power  ;  but  it  was  the  worship  of  power  ;  therefore, 
of  that  which  man  sees  without  him  in  nature,  not  of  that  which  he  feels  within 
speaking  tohimsilf.  "When  we  think  that  the  things  themselves  exeici.-e 
the  power,  and  do  not  receive  it  from  One  in  whom  dwells  eternal  justice  and 
rectitude,  forms  which  denote  the  most  violent  and  inexplicable  outbursts  of 
fury,  the  fire  and  the  tempest,  are  speedily  thought  to  represent  the  nature  of 
the  Baal  or  Baalim  of  the  lord  or  lords  of  the  universe.  At  all  events,  these 
are  what  man  must  address  himself  to.  Some  joyous  feasts  may  be  celebrated 
with  wild  and  reckless  licence  to  the  gentler  and  humaner  powei3  which 
manifest  themselves  in  the  propitious  breeze,  the  quiet  evening,  the  sun  that 


CHAP.   XVI. 


BOMlLETIG  COMMEXTARl :  KINGS. 


ripens  the  autumn  fruits ;  but  the  most  serious  services,  the  sacrifices  which 
those  very  enjoyments  have  made  necessary,  the  libations  of  blood,  must  be 
presented  to  some  malevolent  nature  which  would  destroy  unless  it  were  soothed. 
Thus  the  worship  of  power  becomes  literally  the  worship  of  evil.  Ey  a  regular 
and  awful  process,  Baal  or  Baal-zebud  became  in  the  minds  of  his  devout 
servants  what  his  name  imported  to  Jews  of  later  time — the  Prince  of  the 
Devils. — Maurice, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Verses  29-34.     The  king  Ahab.  I. 

His  union  with  Jezebel — a  marriage  con- 
tracted not  in  obedience  to  God's  holy 
will,  but  merely  upon  worldly  grounds 
and  political  considerations,  and  was, 
therefore,  the  source  of  great  mischief 
to  himself  and  to  his  people.  II.  The 
upliftivg  of  idolatry  over  the  religion  of 
the  country.  The  calf- worship  was 
merged  in  the  Baal-worship.  The 
greatest  tyranny  is  the  tyranny  over 
conscience,  which  pretends  to  rule  also 
over  belief.  The  worst  rule  is  1  hat 
which,  instead  of  demanding  recogni- 
tion of  the  truth,  substitutes  lies  and 
errors,  and  exercises  its  power  in  aid 
of  unbelief  and  of  superstition.  III. 
The  rebuilding  of  Jericho.  By  means 
of  ^' faith"  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell 
(Heb.  xi.  30).  Idolatry  will  build 
them  up  again ;  but  the  curse  rests 
upon  them.  He  who  builds  up  what 
the  Lord  has  destroyed,  falls  under 
His  judgment.  Julian,  who  rebuilt 
the  heathen  temple,  and  the  Jews,  who 
rebuilt  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  were 
confounded  and  brought  to  shame. — 
Lange. 

Yerse  30.  And  what  manner  of  man 
was  he— this  Ahab,  son  of  Omri — who 
gave  his  royal  countenance  and 
sanction  to  all  these  doings?  Excuse 
is  sometimes  made  for  him  as  not  an 
essentially  wicked,  but  only  a  weak 
man,  overborne  by  the  powerful  will  of 
a  resolute  woman.  But  **  all  wicked- 
ness is  weakness,*'  and  it  is  also  true, 
that  all  weakness  is  wickedness,  and 
most  of  all  in  a  king.  He  to  whose 
care  the  welfare  of  a  nation  has  been 
entrusted,  has  no  right  to  be  weak. 
The  weakness  ascribed  to  Ahab  seems 
to  us  merely  indolence  of  character,  a 
love  of  ease,  an  indisposition  to  exer- 
tion, unless  when  thoroughly  roused 
262 


by  some  awakening  stimulus.  He  was 
such  a  man  as  would  rather  allow  what 
he  feels  to  be  wrong,  for  the  sake  of  a 
quiet  lite,  than  take  the  trouble  of 
asserting  what  he  knows  to  be  right. 
To  shake  off,  to  battle  against  this  sloth 
of  temper,  which  made  him  the  tool  of 
others,  and  rendered  him  impotent  for 
all  good,  was  his  duty  as  a  man,  and 
tenfold  more  his  duty  as  a  king ;  and 
to  neglect  that  duty  was  wickedness, 
was  ruin.  And  it  ended,  as  all  such 
neglect  does,  in  bringing  down  upon 
him  tenfold  the  tiouble  and  disturbance 
of  ease  which  he  had  striven  to  avoid. 
"Anything  for  an  easy  life,"  seems  to 
have  been  Ahab's  rule  of  conduct.  But 
a  king  has  no  right  to  an  easy  life. 
It  is  hard  work  to  be  a  king.  Espe- 
cially is  it  hard  work  in  an  Eastern 
country,  where,  on  the  person  of  the 
sovereign,  are  devolved  many  duties  of 
decision,  of  judgment,  and  of  action 
which,  in  Western  countries,  he  assigns 
to  his  advisers  and  ministers. — Kitto. 

—  The  progress  of  wickedness. 
I.  Rapid.  II.  Encouraged  by  notori- 
ous examples.  III.  Begets  an  emula- 
tion to  outstrip  all  predecessors.  IV. 
Sinks  a  nation  into  moral  degradation 
and  ruin. 

—  Moral  corruption  the  cause 
of  decay.  /.  TJiat  the  judgments  of 
God  upon  the  wicked  are  not  arbitrary^ 
but  are  regulated  by  law.  Nothing 
whimsical  or  arbitrary  may  be  ascribed 
to  Him  who  is  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever,  and  who  sees  the 
end  from  the  beginning.  The  idea 
that  God  is  variable  in  His  doings  has, 
like  all  false  things,  created  a  reaction 
which  threatens  to  be  serious.  The 
changing  notions  of  theology  have 
stirred  the  thoughts  of  men  outside 
the  theological  circle,  and  led  to  the 
earnest  study  of  these  positive  sciences 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


CHAP.  xvi. 


which  reveal  the  order  and  regularity 
of  all  God's  works.  From  this  source 
has  sprung  a  doctrine  of  God  which 
represents  Him  as  so  fixed  and  change- 
less that  it  is  painful  from  its  very- 
immutability.  Even  from  this  teach- 
ing of  the  Positivists  we  may  learn 
that  which  may  help  our  faith  and 
clear  our  conceptions  of  God.  In  the 
physical  world,  God  rules  by  law — 
law  fixed  and  changeless — since  the 
perfection  of  His  wisdom  forbids  the 
necessity  of  change.  May  we  not 
learn  thence,  that  in  the  moral  and 
spiritual  world  the  same  order  will  be 
observed,  the  same  plan  of  government 
carried  on  ?  This  thought  is  strength- 
ened when  we  remember  that  the  two 
worlds  are  ultimately  one ;  the  physi- 
cal is  only  the  type  of  the  spiritual. 
The  one  plan  of  government  pervades 
the  whole.  Effects  follow  causes  in 
the  sphere  that  belongs  to  the  soul,  as 
punctually  as  in  the  world  of  matter. 
If  you  break  loose  from  the  Divine 
plan  of  spiritual  life,  or  refuse  to  be 
loyal  to  the  spiritual  laws  of  the  king- 
dom, it  is  at  your  peril.  II.  The 
illustrations  of  this  law  which  the  history 
of  the  world  presents.  History,  when 
written  and  read  rightly,  corroborates 
the  declarations  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Think  of  the  time  when  the  young 
world  was  filled  with  wickedness  :  the 
eternal  laws  of  riaht  and  goodness 
were  trampled  under  foot;  God  was 
forgotten,  and  human  nature  exasper- 
ated by  its  own  rebellion.  The 
punishment  did  not  tarry  long  after 
the  sin.  So  was  it  in  like  manner 
with  the  cities  of  the  plain.  So  was 
it  with  the  Jews.  The  cup  of  their 
iniquity  was  full.  Through  the  ages 
their  rebellion  had  been  great.  They 
obtained  times  for  repentance  without 
number,  but  always  fell  back  to  their 
old  sin.  With  the  Jews  all  life  of  the 
hiirhest  kind  was  gone  ;  every  inspira- 
tio  I  to  nobleness  was  eaten  up.  Only 
the  carcase  of  a  dead  people  was  left, 
and  where  that  is,  *'  there  will  the 
eagles  be  gathered  together.''  What 
is  to  be  said  of  all  those  empires, 
kingdoms,  and  people  which  made  such 
progress  for  a  season,  and  whose  glory 
fiUed   the  habitable  globe?     Where 


are  Assyria,  Greece,  Home,  Carthage  ? 
In  proportion  as  the  conscience  of  a 
people  is  true  to  its  own  ideas  of  right 
and  wrong  will  the  energy  of  the 
people  increase  and  their  existence  be 
prolonged ;  when  it  is  otherwise, 
decay  and  death  are  certain.  Let  us 
not  tempt  God  as  did  the  Jews.  0 ! 
do  not  continue  in  sin ;  do  not  play 
with  the  poison,  lest  it  eat  out  the 
life,  deaden  your  sensibility  to  God 
and  right,  leave  you  with  your  virtue 
utterly  ruined,  your  God  offended, 
your  destiny  lost. — J.  Coyle. 

Verse  31.  Jezebel  w.is  just  the 
woman  to  manage  such  a  man ;  and 
she  soon  found  how  to  manage  Ahab 
as  she  pleased,  and  to  become,  in  fact, 
througli  him,  the  regnant  sovereign  of 
Israel,  while  on  him  devolved  the  public 
responsibility  of  her  acts.  It  was  not 
by  imperious  temper,  though  she  was 
imperious,  nor  by  palpable  domi- 
neering, that  she  managed  this, 
^o.  She  made  herself  necessary  to 
him — necessary  to  his  ease,  his  com- 
fort, his  pleasures.  She  worked  for 
him,  she  planned  for  him,  she  de- 
cided for  him.  She  saved  him  a  world 
of  trouble.  She  taught  him  to  consider 
the  strength  of  her  will  necessary  to 
supply  the  weakness  of  his  own — 
necessary  to  save  him  the  labour  of 
exertion  and  thought.  Prompt  in  de- 
cision, ready  in  resource,  quick  in 
invention,  ruthless  in  action — she  saw 
her  way  at  once  to  the  point  at  which 
she  aimed,  and  would  cut  with  a  sharp 
stroke  through  knotty  matters  which 
the  king  shrunk  from  the  labour  of 
untying.  She  was  thus  often  enabled 
to  secure  for  her  husband  the  object  of 
his  desires  which  he  himself  hesitated 
to  pursue,  or  despaired  to  obtain; 
and  in  accepting  it  from  her  hands,  he 
cared  not  too  nicely  to  enquire  whether 
it  were  not  stained  with  blood,  or 
whether  it  heaped  not  upon  his  head 
coals  of  fire  which  would  one  day 
consume  him. — Kitto. 

—  A  native  of  Zidon  and  the 
daughter  of  its  king,  from  the  very 
first  hour  Jezebel  set  foot  in  Israel 
she  became  its  poison  and  curse  ;  and, 
indeed,  among  ail  who  have  disgraced 

263 


CHAP.  XVI. 


BOMILETIC  COMMJEKTARY:  KINGS, 


the  Barae  of  -svoman,  she  must  ever 
hold  a  loftily  inglorious  rank.  Vv^e 
place  her  on  the  same  platform  -with 
Lucretia  Uorgia,  who  shrauk  from  no 
crime ;  with  Mary,  the  daughter  of 
Hemy  YIII.,  who  sent  Cramner, 
Latimer,  Hooper,  and  Eidley  to  the 
stake  ;  with  Catherine  de  Medici,  the 
leal  author  of  Black  Bartholomew, 
when,  in  one  single  night,  70,000 
Huguenots  perished  ;  with  Lady  Mac- 
beth, the  oiiginal  of  whom,  it  is  be- 
lieved by  many,  our  national  drama- 
tist found  in  Jezebel.  Theie  is  some- 
thing in  the  very  sound  of  that  name 
that  makeg  one  scared  and  cold.  What 
muther  would  call  her  daughter 
J  ezebel  ?  "W  hat  epithet  of  more  utter 
soorn,  of  more  withering  contempt, 
could  be  applied  to  any  woman,  the 
worst  and  most  wicked  ?  Even  in  her 
own  day  the  character  of  Jezebel  be- 
came a  national  byeword  and  proverb, 
and  to  the  end  of  time  her  memory 
will  rot  as  rotted  her  body  when, 
trampled  by  horse  and  licked  by  dogs, 
they  buried  what  remained,  unwept, 
in  a  dishonoured  grave.  —  i/.  T, 
Howat. 

—  An  unholy  alliance.  I.  Would 
never  be  entered  into  it  tlie  soul  were 
not  first  demoralized.  II.  Yields  the 
ascendency  to  the  stiongest  will.  III. 
Is  a  terrible  weapon  of  mischief 
where  a  bad  woman  is  the  ruling 
genius. 

—  Mixed  marriages  eir.inently 
inexpedient  and  dangerous. 
Whether  Scripture  speaks  or  is  silent, 
the  facts  of  life  cannot  be  denied. 
They  abundantly  testify  that  a  want 
of  mutual  religious  convictions  be- 
tween husband  and  wife  injuriously 
alfects  their  sacred  lelationship. 
True  marriage  rests  on  common  ad- 
miration and  symj  at  by,  it  is  the  union 
of  heai  ts  in  the  bonds  of  holiest  love. 
If,  however,  religion,  which  concerns 
the  deepest  emotions  and  noblest 
thoughts,  is  excluded,  the  union  of  the 
two  natures  is  disastrously  incomplete, 
the  real  foundation  of  married  lite  be- 
comes fearfully  insecure.  A  husband 
may  love  his  wife  because  of  her  beau- 
tiful face  or  figure,  her  gentle  manners, 
her  intellectual  gifts,  her  housewifely 

264 


skill ;  but  that  love  is  meagre,  partial, 
unsatisfactory  ;  the  richest  chords  of 
the  soul  remain  untouched.  If  he  be 
a  devout  man,  serving  Christ,  that 
whi(h  he  esleems  the  best  thing  in 
life  she  docs  not  possess.  The  same 
is  true  on  the  other  side.  A  Christian 
woman  may  feel  that  her  husband  is  a 
noble  man,  but  if  he  be  not  religious, 
he  is  not  everything  to  her ;  she  is 
perpetually  craving  sympathy  which 
he  cannot  give.  There  is  no  union 
of  soul.  Then  the  hindrances  and 
sorrows  that  spring  from  this  spiritual 
isolation  are  incalculable.  Man  and 
wile  do  not  understand  each  other, 
they  look  at  numberless  experiences 
from  opposite  standpoints,  words  of 
strife  olten  follow,  motives  are  imputed, 
sometimes  sneers  at  saiutliness  are 
given  on  the  one  side  and  denuncia- 
tions of  godlessness  on  the  other,  which 
leave  wounds  behind  them  not  soon 
healed,  it  is  no  secret,  but  a  well- 
known  fact,  that  multitudes  of  family 
quarrels  arise  because  of  this  want  of 
spiritual  union,  and  the  highest  aspii  a- 
tions  of  the  godly  soul  are  perpetually 
thwarted  by  it.  Then  how  perplexing 
is  the  education  of  the  children.  The 
parents  are  not  at  one,  and  while  the 
example  of  one  would  lead  them  to  an 
early  consecration,  the  conduct  of  the 
other  nullifies  the  intended  result.  If 
children,  with  their  keen  eyes  and 
sure  instincts,  see  one  parent  indifi'er- 
ent  to  religion,  they  will  naturally 
conclude  that  they  may  neglect  it  too. 
To  marry  an  unbelieving  husband  or 
wife  may  involve  the  future  destiny  of 
the  ofi'spring  !  If  the  children  of  such 
a  union  grow  up  in  the  fear  of  God  it 
will  be  in  spite  of  the  bad  example  of 
one  parent  at  home. —  W\  Braden. 

Verse  32,  33.  A  false  worship. 
I.  Is  expensive.  II.  Is  strengthened 
by  organizatiin.  III.  Becomes  more 
pernicious  the  longer  it  is  tolerated. 
IV.  Gi  adually  supplants  and  then  per- 
secutes the  true  worship.  V.  Is 
specially  offensive  to  God. 

Verse  34.  The  audacity  of  un- 
belief. I.  An  inevitable  result  when 
idolatry  is  in  the  ascendant.     II,  Kot 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap,  tvu 


intimidated  by  the  most  a^vful  impre-  to  others.     I.  A  warning  against  the 

cation.     III.  Meets  with  the  punish-  commission  of  sin.       II.  A  warning 

tn en t  it  defies.  against  associations  with  sinners.    111. 

—  The  victims  of  sin  a  warning  A  warning  against  tempting  others. 


CHA^PTER  XVII 

THE  FIBST  APPEARANCE  OF  ELIJAH  THE  TISHBITB. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Elijah  the  Tishbite— This  is  the  first 
mention  of  him  in  Scripture;  an  abrupt  introduction,  which  seems  to  imply  that  already  he 
was  known  as  a  prophet ;  or  the  startling  development  of  national  apostasy  under  Ahab  may 
have  called  out  Elijah  into  sudden  protestation.  Tishbite— Not  an  Israelite,  therefore,  but  a 
Gentile,  whose  employment  in  the  prophetic  ministry  was  itself  a  rebuke  to  the  nation.  Was 
there  none  in  all  Israel  to  speak  for  Jehovah  ?     The  name  "  Elijah,"  Pi^'^i^  signifies,  My  God 

is  Jehovah.  Israel  was  rejecting  Him  for  idols,  but  this  Gentile  had  rejected  idols  for  Him. 
"Tishbite,"  from  Tisbe,  a  place  east  of  Jordan.  'J  obit  i.  2  refers  to  eia^e  as  being  "at  the 
right  hand  of  the  city  properly  called  Naphtali,  in  Galilee  above  Aser."  Said  unto  Ahab  — 
It  is  suggested  that  this  penal  prediction  proved  the  closing  application  of  an  unrecorded  speech. 
All  reasoning  being  ineffective,  the  prophet  leaves  the  king  with  this  prophetic  sentence.  Yet 
Elijah's  manner  was  to  accost  the  guilty  with  few,  yet  significant  words,  and  then  depart. 
Verse  3.  Hide  thyself  by  the  brook  Cherith—  He  should  "  hide,"  in  order  to  escape  alike  the 
king's  violence  and  importunities  ;  also  to  allow  his  words  to  vindicate  themselves  as  true,  and 
give  men  time  to  learn  their  need  of  him  and  his  God.  Cherith — Site  unknown.  Various  con- 
jectures have  attempted  to  locate  it,  but  all  is  uncertain.     Its  obscure  site  indicates  its  great 

security  as  a  hiding  place.     Verse  4.  I  have  commanded  the  ravens— D^H'^i^j  which  some, 

on  account  of  these  birds  being  legally  "  unclean,"  and  notably  voracious,  have  interpreted 
Arabians.  The  word  is  so  used  in  Ex.  xxvii.  27;  2  Chron.  xxi.  16;  Neh.  iv.  17.  others 
regard  the  w^ord  as  pointing  to  the  inhabitants  of  Orbo,  near  by  the  supposed  brook.  Michaehs, 
objecting  to  the  supernatural  altogether,  suggests  that  Elijah  was  merely  told  to  feed  himself 
from  the  raven's  nest,  by  plundering  them  of  the  game  they  seized  I  'Verse  9.  Zarephath, 
which  belongeth  to  Zidon— Sarepta,  situate  between  Tyre  and  Sidon,  in  the  native  land  of 
Jezebel,  let  this  "widow"  knew  Jehovah  (verse  12),  and  appealed  to  His  High  Name  in 
verification  of  her  words.  Verse  13.  Fear  not;  go  and  do,  &c.— A  severe  test  of  faith,  for 
there  was  nothing  between  her  and  death  except  the  promise  of  verse  14.  Nevertheless,  with 
nought  save  a  promise  to  assure  her,  she  made  her  solitary  cake,  and  saw  it  eaten  by  Elijah. 
y  et  starvation  was  not  the  issue,  but  salvation.  Verse  17.  Fell  sick.  .  .  no  breath  left 
in  him— This  phrase  does  not  absolutely  imply  death  (comp.  Dan.  x.  17  ;  also  1  Kings  x.  17). 
Josephus  renders  the  incident  thus—  ws  «al  r^v  ^vx^t^  dc^eTvaj  nal  SS^at  v€Kp6u.  We  may  con- 
cede that  the  boy  was  in  a  state  of  fatal  exhaustion,  sinking  away  into  death,  and  not  abso- 
lutely dead.  But  whichever  was  the  case,  his  recovery  was  as  really  supernatural  and  miracu- 
lous. ^  Verse  18.  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?— The  bitter  upbraiding  of  incoherent  grief. 
My  sin  to  remembrance  -  No  particular  sin,  but  the  current  error  that  afiliction  was  a 
punishment  (comp.  John  ix.  3).  In  the  first  passion  and  dismay  of  sorrow  we  strangely  mis- 
read God's  design.  Verse  19.  Carried  him  into  a  loft— The  upper  chamber;  alone  there 
with  God,  to  plead  for  Divine  interpretation  and  removal  of  this  unexpected  calamity.  Verse 
21.  Stretched  himself  upon  the  child  three  times— "^^rc^c^^-^  himself,"  &c.,  thereby  em- 
ploying rati..nal  means  for  warming,  and  thus  revivifying  the  body  ;  but  not  relying  on  natural 
methods  for  his  rectoration,  but  on  Gud's  intervention,  using  means  of  themselves  ineffectual 
for  the  miraculous  result.  '*  Three  times,"  '•  because  the  calling  np-n  the  name  of  Jeho^-ah  in 
the  old  covenant  was  a  threefol  I  act  (Psa.  Iv.  18  ;  Dan.  vi.  10)  ;  thrice  in  the  high  priestly 
benediction  was  the  name  of  Jehovah  laid  U})on  Israel  (Numb.  vi.  22)  ;  thrice  did  the  seraphim 
before  the  throne  of  Jehovah  cry  out  holy  (Isa.  vi.  2,):'—Lange.  And  Jesus  himself  "  left 
them  and  went  away  and  prayed  the  thi'd  time,  saying  the  same  words"  (Matt  xxvi.  44). 
Verse  24.  Now  by  this  I  know-  "  Because  thou  hast  se*  n  thou  hast  believed ;"  yet  she  had 
already  shown  fuith  when  proof  was  not  visible.  This  was  a  most  gracious  seal  to  her  faith, 
which  had  thus  been  doubly  pnd  sorely  tried.— W.  H.  J. 

265 


OHAP.xviL  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 

E0MILETIG8  OF  VERSE  1. 
The  Teue  Peophet  and  His  Significant  IMessage. 

ISBAEL  had  gone  from  barl  to  worse,  and  the  cup  of  her  iniquity  was  fast 
filling  to  the  brim.  Eoligion  was  little  more  than  a  name.  Jehovah  was  no 
longer  worshipped  as  a  living  person,  but  was  only  thought  of  as  a  far  distant 
andbutdimly  comprehended  being.  Faith  darkened  into  a  grim  unbelief,  and  virtue 
wallowed  in  the  filth  of  a  royalty-sanctioned  sensuality,  or  hid  itself  in  solitude 
with  fear  and  trembling.  The  nation  had  revolted  from  the  beneficent  sway  of 
Jehovah,  and  rushed  with  reckless  haste  into  the  embrace  of  a  she -fiend,  who 
held  it  as  with  a  grip  of  iron,  while  she  tantalized  it  with  her  voluptuous  wiles, 
and  goaded  it  to  despair  with  her  heartless  cruelties.  Surely  the  spell  of  the 
vile  enchantress  could  not  last  for  ever.  The  end  must  be  at  hand  :  the  iniquity 
of  the  land  cried  to  heaven  for  vengeance.  A  sense  of  approaching  doom  took 
possession  of  many  minds  ;  and  it  seemed  as  if  a  strange,  mysterious  stillness, 
like  that  which  sometimes  precedes  the  terrific  tempest,  settled  on  the  nation — 
a  stillness  broken  only  now  and  then  by  the  murmur  of  the  idolatrous  wor- 
shippers in  the  groves,  or  the  loud,  coarse  laughter  of  the  licentious  priests  as  they 
feasted  at  Jezebel's  table.  Suddenly — like  a  meteor  newly  kindled  in  the 
heavens,  or  like  a  thunderbolt  hurled  from  the  clouds  by  the  hnnd  of  the 
Almighty — Elijah  bursts  upon  the  scene.  The  revellers  tremble  and  the  king 
grows  pale,  as  the  bold  and  fearless  prophet  denounces  their  wickedness,  and 
warns  them  of  the  sufferings  which  their  sins  would  inevitably  bring.  Thus  the 
daikest  night  of  Israel's  spiritual  declension  was  broken  by  the  appearance  of 
that  bright  luminary  Elijah,  the  g  eatest  of  all  the  prophets  since  Moses,  and 
the  type  of  that  great  preacher  of  repentance  who  was  the  forerunner  of  Christ. 

I.  That  the  true  prophet  is  often  called  to  his  work  out  of  comparative 
obscurity.  '*  Elijah,  the  Tishbite,  who  was  of  the  inhabitants  of  Gilead,"  It 
seemed  very  unlikely  that  a  reformer  would  spring  from  the  midst  of  the  rough, 
uncouth  inhabitants  of  Gilead.  It  was  a  wild,  rocky,  mountainous  region,  a 
country  of  chase,  and  the  favourite  haunt  of  robbers — something  like  what  some 
pai'ts  of  Palestine  are  rendered  by  the  Bedouins  of  the  present  day ;  or,  in  rela- 
tion to  the  rival  kingdoms  on  the  west  side  of  the  Jordan,  very  much  what  the 
Highlands  were  to  the  Lowlands  of  Scotland  in  the  days  of  chieftain  feud  and 
foray  (vide Ma caula^/'s  England).  And  yet  it  was  just  the  place  where  the  very 
qualities  that  were  so  essential  in  a  prophet  who  would  successfully  contend 
with  an  Ahab  and  a  Jezebel  would  be  likely  to  be  nurtured — the  capacity  of 
endurance,  the  fleet  action,  the  intrepid  boldness,  the  sternness  of  reproof 
amounting  almost  to  fierceness.  How  true  is  it  that  God  is  not  limited  to 
locality  in  the  choice  of  His  servants !  There  was  an  Abraham  in  Ur  of  the 
Chaldees,  a  Moses  in  the  land  of  Midian,  a  JN^icodemus  in  the  Sanhedrim,  a 
Joseph  of  Arimathea  among  the  aristocracy  of  Jerusalem,  a  Cornelius  in  the 
Roman  camp ;  there  were  saints  in  CaBsar's  household,  and  in  half -heathen 
Gilead  there  was  found  an  Elijah. 

II.  That  the  true  prophet  bears  unmistakable  testimony  as  to  the  character 
of  the  only  True  God.     "  As  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  liveth."     Jehovah  is  the 

ivinff  God.  This  truth  was  uttered  by  the  fearless  prophet  with  an  abruptness, 
a  solemnity,  and  a  ringing  vehemency  that  must  have  startled  the  guilty  Ahab, 
and  have  reminded  him  that  the  dumb,  dead  idols  to  which  he  was  yielding 
homage  were  incomparable  with  the  All-powerful  and  Ever-living  Jehovah 
whom  he  and  his  people  had  so  wickedly  forsaken.  Elijah  means  God-Jehovahy 
80  that  even  in  his  name  the  great  reformer  carries  a  rebuke  to  the  Baal-serving 
king.  The  great  need  of  Israel  at  this  time  was  a  revival  among  them  of  just 
ideas  concerning  God.  Notwithstanding  the  special  privileges  they  had  enjoyed 
266 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  Ohap.  xvit. 


in  becominn:  acquainted  with  the  True  God,  they  were  now  in  danger  of  losing 
all  faith  in  Him,  and  of  sinking  down  into  a  worse  state  of  heathenism  than 
that  of  the  idolatrous  nations  by  which  they  were  surrounded.  All  true  reform 
must  begin  by  restoring  to  the  mind  clear  and  exalted  conceptions  of  the 
character' of  God.  This  Elijah  did,  not  so  much  by  eloquence  of  speech,  as  by 
picturesqueness  and  significance  of  action.  He  was  the  prophet  of  action— the 
great  hero— prophet  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes :  *'  the  grandest  and  most 
romantic  character  that  Israel  ever  produced."  His  whole  career  was  one  of 
intense  activity,  during  which  he  wrote,  as  if  in  fiery  hieroglyphics,  the  awful 
character  of  the  God  he  so  diligently  served.  His  mission  was  to  proclaim  the 
living  God  in  opposition  to  Ahab's  deadf  senseless  idols. 

III.  That  the  true  prophet  receives  his  commission  from  the  Highest 
Authority.  **  ]3efore  whom  I  stand."  How  honourable,  how  sublime,  how 
awful  the  position  of  him  who  stands  to  minister  in  the  presence  of  God  as  His 
servant  and  ambassador !  He  receives  his  commission  direct  from  the  throne, 
he  speeds  on  his  errand  with  ready  obedience,  he  is  oppressed  with  the  respon- 
tibility  of  his  office,  he  utters  his  message  as  if  standing  in  the  presence  of  God. 
Elijah  was  '*  the  loitiest,  sternest  spirit  of  the  True  Eaith  raised  up  lace  to  face 
with  the  proudest  and  fiercest  spirit  of  the  old  Asiatic  paganism,  against 
Jezebel  rose  up  Elijah  the  Tishbite."  Whenever  the  powers  of  darkness 
appear  incarnate  in  some  such  ruling  personage  as  Jezebel,  with  her  hosts  of 
Baal  and  Asherah  prophets,  then  God  pro\ides  an  incarnation  of  his  Divine 
Spirit  and  power,  with  suitable  signs  and  wonders  to  confuse  and  confound  the 
ministers  of  8atan.  Such  an  incarnation  was  Elijah.  The  power  that  may  be 
exerted  by  an  individual  life  is  something  appalling,  especially  when  it  derives 
its  inspiration  diiect  from  heaven.  Lord  Rochester  fled  from  Eenelon,  crying, 
**If  I  stay  here  any  longer,  I  shall  become  a  Christian  in  spite  of  myself." 
T^e  greatest  power  over  humanity  to-day  is  spiritual  power. 

IV.  That  the  true  prophet  is  commissioned  to  announce  the  judgments  of 
God  against  prevalent  iniquity.  *'  There  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain  these 
years  but  according  to  my  word."  1.  Jehovah  has  absolute  control  over  all  the 
elements  of  nature.  The  worshippers  of  Baalim  invested  their  deities  with  the 
lordship  over  the  processes  of  nature ;  and  the  time  had  come  when  they  must 
be  undeceived.  The  prophet  demonstrates  that  the  dew  and  rain-clouds  are  not 
of  Baal's  giving,  but  are  wholly  in  the  hands  of  God,  who  can  bestow  or  with- 
hold their  blessings  according  to  His  will.  2.  Jehovah  can  make  the  elements  of 
nature  the  instruments  of  a  nation^ s  punishment  which  have  been  the  means  of  its 
sin.  Israel  had  ignored  God  in  nature  and  ascribed  all  power  to  Baal :  nature 
is  now  to  wield  the  rod  which  is  to  punish  them  for  their  apostasy  and  sin.  It 
is  to  be  shown  how  utterly  fictitious  is  the  control  of  their  deities  over  the  dew 
and  the  rain,  and  how  terrible  is  the  judgment  which  Jehovah  can  impose  by 
drying  up  the  moisture  of  earth  and  sky.  Drought  was  a  punishment 
threatened  against  idolatry  (Deut.  xi.  16,  17)  ;  and  in  this  particular  instance 
the  obstinacy  of  Ahab  continued  it  for  three  years  and  a  half.  To  Eastern  and 
Southern  nations  the  withholding  of  rain  is  the  withholding  of  pleasure,  of 
sustenance,  of  life  itself.  It  is  only  in  abject  distress  and  suffering  that  man 
can  see  the  falseness  and  vanity  of  the  idols  in  which  he  has  so  blindly 
trusted. 

Lessons: — 1.  In  the  worst  times  God  can  raise  up  faithful  men  to  do  the  most 
difficult  and  most  needed  work.  2.  They  who  dare  to  be  hold  for  God  may  safely 
trust  to  him  for  protection,  3.  We  learn  how  great  may  be  the  power  of  an 
individual  life, 

267 


CHAP.  xvn.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS- 


The  Life  and  Lessons  of  the  Great  Hebeew  Eefoemek. 

N'o  story  so  bewitches  us  as  the  story  of  Elijah's  life.  His  meteoric  appear- 
ances, his  lonely  life  spent  hermit-like  for  the  most  part  in  caves  and  deserts, 
his  fearlessness  in  the  presence  of  Ahab  and  hostile  priests,  his  sublime  trans- 
lation, his  appearing  900  years  after  with  our  Lord ;  these  and  other  circum- 
stances invest  his  memory  with  a  romantic  interest  such  as  belongs  to  no  other 
prophet.  He  is  a  prophet,  and  some  of  the  events  in  his  life  can  only  occur  in 
a  prophet's  ;  but  he  is  also  a  maUf  a  man  struggling  against  weaknesses  like  our 
own.     His  life  will  touch  ours  in  many  parts.     Consider 

I.  The  abruptness  of  his  appearance  on  the  arena  of  action.  Where  does 
the  wild,  stern-looking  being  come  from  ?  Who  knows  anything  of  his  parents  ? 
What  is  his  trade  ?  But  we  wait  in  vain  for  an  answer.  This  throws  such  a 
weirdness  over  him.  There  was  design  in  sending  the  prophet  with  such  abrupt- 
ness into  the  presence  of  the  king.  Ahab  had  become  hardened  in  sin.  For  a 
long  time  the  prophets  had  been  silent;  Jehovah  dumb.  No  stern  protest  had 
been  lifted  up  ;  and,  his  conscience  drugged,  the  man  a  mere  puppet  of  his  im- 
perious queen  and  her  fawning  priests,  Ahab  oan  be  aroused  only  by  shattering 
peals  of  thunder,  or  a  bursting  volcano.  Into  his  palace  rashes  the  wild  solemn 
man  of  the  desert,  and  at  the  drowsy  idolatrous  king  fliogs  his  stern  threat. 
Thus  God  has  to  act  still.  To  many  a  man  the  tenderest  utterances  of  the 
Gospel  have  become  as  opiating  drugs.  A  fire-brand,  a  thunderbolt,  only  will 
wake  him  up.  Eiugers  of  forked  lightning  must  write  fiery  words  of  doom 
on  his  chamber  walls.     Ahab  needed  an  Elijah. 

II.  The  words  suggested  some  idea  of  his  previous  training.  Gilead  must 
have  had  much  to  do  with  the  character  of  the  man.  When  he  stood  amid  the 
crags  of  Mount  Sinai  unappalled  by  the  bursts  of  thunder  that  shook  the  foun- 
dation of  the  hills,  and  shrunk  not  when  the  sheets  of  flame  lit  up  the  ravines, 
it  was  because  he  had  been  accustomed  to  similar  impressive  scenes  in  his  own 
rugged  land.  It  was  a  fitting  cradle  for  such  a  spirit.  The  Highlands  of  Scot- 
land have  produced  a  race  of  men  stern,  hardy,  daring ;  quite  a  contrast  to  the 
Lowlanders.  The  wide  prairies  of  America  tend  to  produce  a  race  of  Indians 
swift  of  foot,  passionate  in  the  chase,  stealthy,  and  spurning  settled  abodes. 
Jehovah  has  found  His  Elijah  in  the  right  country.  Very  little  is  said  about 
his  personal  aspects,  but  we  s;  all  always  recognise  him  when  he  appears — the 
tawny,  shaggy-haired  man;  around  his  shoulder  the  loose  cape  or  mantle  of 
sheep-skin,  fastened  at  his  breast  with  a  leathern  girdle.  The  appearance 
of  the  hitherto  unknown  prophet  suggests — 

III.  How  God  had  been  steadily  preparing  an  instrument  for  His  work. 

His  eye  rested  upon  the  nation's  sin,  and  away  in  the  solitude  of  Gilead 
He  was  shaping  the  man  who  would  be  as  a  sweeping  tornado  in  the  land, 
who  would  be  the  Kegenerator  of  His  people,  the  mighty  Reformer  in  Israel. 
The  world's  history  illustrates  the  principle.  Israel  needs  to  be  led  out  of 
Egypt.  In  the  very  palace  of  the  Pharaohs  is  young  Moses  being  prepared  as 
the  future  leader  of  Israel.  God  looks  with  holy  anger  upon  the  corruption 
of  the  Church  of  Eome,  but  in  secret  He  is  fitting  the  brave,  heroic  miner's 
son  to  shatter  the  huge  fabric  of  superstition.  To  turn  this  principle  round, 
and  look  on  the  other  side,  it  conveys  encouragement  to  God's  people.  To 
them,  when  in  trouble,  an  Elijah  of  deliverance  shall  appear.  A  soldier 
whipped  for  a  trifle,  leaped  from  his  ship  into  the  heavy  sea.  A  large  alba- 
tross swooped  like  magic  down  at  the  man.  In  his  death  struggle,  he  seized 
the  monstrous  bird,  and  was  thus  kept  afloat  until  aid  arrived.  Over- 
263 


R)MILETIG  (JOMME-NTAUY:   KINGS, 


CHAP.   XVII. 


whelmed  in  the  water,  there  may  be  an  albatross  overhead  to  help  the 
Christian.  God  may  be  preparini^  in  secret  an  Elijah,  not  to  speak  words  of 
lire   as  to  Aliab,   but  to  be  a  deliverer.     This  mention  of  Thisbe  and  Gilead 

suggests 

IV.  From  what  obscurity  the  Lord  brought  the  mighty  prophet,    l^o 

rabbi  or  learned  doctor  does  God  produce  as  the  great  instrument  to  effect  His 
purpose,  but  a  "Lay  Preacher  from  the  Highlands  of  Gilead."  One  likes 
to  think  how  God  employs  the  lowly,  and  works  out  his  plans  through  the 
obscure.  lie  is  constantly  rebuking  us  for  thinking  a  place  must  be  so 
many  miles  square,  a  man  must  have  such  an  amount  of  brain,  or  wealth, 
before  he  can  work.  A  rock  in  mid  ocean  may  prove  a  cage  large  enough  to  con- 
tain the  proud  eagle  of  France.  A  small  smithy  in  Micklefield  can  produce  a 
Sammy  Hick,  whose  name  shall  be  known  and  influence  felt  to  the  extremities 
of  the  land.  Bethlehem  is  large  enough  for  the  Redeemer  of  a  world  to  be 
horn  in.  A  fisherman's  craft  is  respectable  enough  to  produce  a  Peter.  Eoen 
an  insignificant  obliterated  Thishe  can  send  forth  an  Elijah! — fTh$  Lay  Preacher 
for  1874). 

GERM  NOTES  ON  VERSE  1. 


—  A  strange  speech,  certainly,  to  be 
reported  of  a  man  of  whom  as  yet  we 
have  heard  nothing.  What  had  been 
passing  in  his  mind  up  to  that  day, 
what  he  had  to  do  with  Ahab,  how  he 
came  to  think  that  dew  or  rain  would 
obey  his  commands,  we  are  not  told. 
"We  are  to  judge  of  their-e  things  as  we 
can.  Our  only  help  for  judging  of 
them  lies  in  the  words  themselves. 
And  tliere  is  the  secret — **  As  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel  liveth  before  whom  I 
stand."  Here  we  have  the  key  to  the 
education  and  faith  of  Elijah,  as  well 
as  to  his  relation  with  the  king  of 
Israel.  "  I  have  learnt  that  there  is 
a  Liad  God  of  Israel,  and  that  He 
lives,  and  that  I  am  in  His  presence. 
I  am  sure  that  He  is  my  Guide,  and 
Teacher,  and  Judge ;  I  am  sure  that 
He  is  the  Guide,  and  Teacher,  and 
Judge  of  this  land  and  of  its  king. 
And  this,  Aliab,  is  just  what  thou  dost 
not  believe,  just  what  thou,  by  thine 
acts,  art  denying.  Thou  believest  in 
a  Lord,  or  in  many  lords,  far  off  from 
thee,  exercising  no  government  over 
thy  actions,  enforcing  no  duties  upon 
thee  towards  thy  subjects ;  a  lord 
seated  somewhere  in  the  clouds,  or  on 
the  summit  of  some  hill;  a  cloud-com- 
peller, a  giver  of  dew  or  rain  when 
your  offerings  please  him,  or  when  of 
mere  sovereignty  he  chooses  to  do  it. 
And  I  tell  you  that  it  is  not  this  lord 


or  these  lords  who  send  rain  and  dew  ; 
but  that  it  is  the  God  of  you  and  of 
your  fathers,  the  God  who  has  ordained 
the  course  of  seasons,  who  has  appointed 
summer  and  winter,  seed-time  and  har- 
vest ;  who  has  appointed  you  to  till  the 
land  upon  which  His  rain  descends  and 
His  sun  shines ;  who  claims  first  of  all 
your  trust  and  your  obedience,  since 
though  you  stand,  as  I  stand,  before 
Him,  it  is  not  your  eyes  that  will  tell 
you  of  Him  ;  you  must  believe  in  Him 
if  you  would  know  Him.  And  as  a 
sign  and  witness  that  it  is  even  so,  I 
declare  to  you,  that  the  rain  and  the 
dew  shall  not  come  except  at  the  word 
of  me,  a  poor,  insignificant,  unknown 
man,  by  whom  it  pleases  God  to  declare 
what  He  is,  and  what  the  being  whom 
He  has  formed  in  His  image  is  meant 
to  be."  Herein  consists  the  force  of 
this  audacious  sentence.  It  at  once 
proclaims  that  relation  between  the  un- 
seen God  and  the  spirit  of  man  which 
Jezebel's  priests  by  their  services,  and 
Ahab  by  his  tyrannical  acts,  were  alike 
setting  at  nought. — Maurice, 

—  Men  in  general  have  never  been 
willing  to  recognize,  and  are  still  un- 
willing to  recogvize  the  fact,  that  need 
and  misery  upon  earth  stand  in  the 
closest  relation  to  their  conduct  towards 
God  ;  that  through  their  need  they  may 
be  called  back  to  Him  whom  they  have 
forsaken,  and  feel  what  it  is  when  God 

269 


OhAp.  xva; 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTAET:  KINGS, 


withdraws  His  hand,  when  they  are 
left  to  themselves,  when  the  Almighty 
withholds  His  gifts  and  blessings,  and 
sends  His  punishments  and  plagues. 
The  God  of  Israel  is  the  living  God, 
because  He  has  spoken  to  Israel  and 
has,  through  His  Word,  revealed  Him- 
self to  them  (Psa.  cxlvii.  19,  20). 
God  has  spoken  unto  us  by  His  son, 
the  image  of  His  being,  and  has  re- 
vealed Himself  in  Him  much  more 
gloriously  to  us ;  therefore  Christendom 
knows  no  other  living  God  than  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Who 
can  venture  to  say  that  he  stands  before 
God?  He  who,  like  Elijah,  has  firm 
faith,  is  unconditionally  obedient  to  the 
Word  of  God,  and  fearlessly  and 
courageously  pursues  the  path  God  has 
prescribed  for  him. — Menken. 

—    National  apostasy    and   na- 
tional    chastisement.      Par     away 
among  the  craggy  glens  of  Gilead  the 
prophet  has  become  acquainted  with 
the  wickedness  of  the  court  and  the 
people.     Ah!  there  was  one  faithful 
heart  who  mourned  over  a  nation's  sin, 
and  took  it,  where  we  ought  to  take 
our  country's  sins,  into  the  presence  of 
God.     I.  J^ational  chastisement  follow- 
ing  upon  national  apostasy.     Does  this 
surprise  us  ?   If  an  individual  commit 
an  infamous  crime  and  escape  punish- 
ment here,  there  awaits  him  a  stem 
avenger  among  the   shadows   of  the 
world  to  come.     But  there  cannot  be 
a  wholesale  retribution  dealt  out  to  a 
nation  or  tribe  in  that  future  state. 
Prosperity  attends  upon   a   virtuous 
nation,  or  fell-ruin  overwhelms  a  de- 
generate one  Jiere.     ]S"o  kingdom  ever 
perished  through  its  high-toned  mora- 
lity.    1.  This  punishment  was  not  ar- 
bitrary and  prejudiced.     The  law  pro- 
nounced it  ages  befoie  this  threat,  if 
the  people  forsook  God  (Lev.  xxvi.  19 ; 
Deut.  xi.  16  ).  No  calamity  came  from 
spite    or    caprice.      Jehovah     knows 
nothing  of  the   despicable   venom   of 
some  human  hearts  when  He  deals  in 
severity  with  men.     2.  The  punish- 
ment threatened  was    adapted   to  the 
special  character   of  the   nation^ s    sin. 
5aal  was  worshipped  as  the  source  of 
fruitful  harvest.     Now  there  is  to  be 
a  test  of  strength  between  God   and 
270 


His     rival    Baal.     If    drought    and 
barrenness  succeed  the  prophet's  words, 
that  will  be  a  tangible  proof  of  the 
impotence  of  their  favourite  idol.    This 
is  God's  method  still.     The   punish- 
ment sent   often  suits  with    terrible 
appropriateness    the    sin    committed. 
II.     These  words  reveal  the  source  of 
the  prophet^ s  holy  boldness.     **  As  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel  liveth  before  whom 
I  stand."     He  has  a  deep  conviction 
that  he  is  the  servant  of  Jehovah.     He 
is  powerfully  conscious  of  the  continual 
presence  of  the  Divine  Being.     Every 
Christian  should  have  a  conviction  of 
being  summoned  to  his  particular  work 
in  the  church.     Here  was  the  prophet's 
incentive  to  faithfulness.    Moving  about 
in  the  presence  of  the  Holy  One  would 
have  a  salutary  effect  upon  him.     To 
one  conscious  of  standing,  living  before 
the  Holy  God,  as  if  he  were  always  in 
the  Holy  of  Holies,   irreverence,  un- 
faithfulness, would  be    exceptionally 
aggravated.     Let     the     thought     of 
"  standing  before  God,"  in  the  home, 
behind  the  counter,  and  in  the  exchange, 
be  an  incentive  to  faithfulness. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  The  influence  of  a  man 
in  position.  Ahab^s  idolatry  had  led 
the  nation  astray.  2.  Learn  to  identify 
yourself  with  the  nation's  conditions, 
and  make  it  a  subject  for  prayer, — The 
Lay  Preacher. 

—  The  unusual  efflux  of  miraculous 
energy  at  this  time  is  suitable  to  the 
unusual  energy  and — may  we  not  say, 
evoked  by  it? — God  mercifully  adapting 
Bis  gifts  to  men's  needs.  It  is  not 
here  as  in  legendary  histories.  There 
the  supernatural  diminishes  as  the 
writer  descends  the  stream  of  time 
and  comes  nearer  to  his  own  day. 
Here  miracles  are  abundant  or  scanty 
without  any  reference  to  time  ;  but  in 
very  evident  proportion  to  the  spirit- 
ual necessities  of  the  people. — 
Speaker's  Coynm. 

—  Suddenly  Elijah  appears  before 
us  in  the  narrative  as  he  appeared  in 
his  lifetime  before  Ahab  and  the 
children  of  Israel.  Suddenly  he 
appears,  like  Melchizedec,  and 
suddenly  he  disappears,  **  without 
father,  without  mother,  without 
descent,  having  neither  beginning  of 


nOMILETlC  COMMENTAIiT:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  XVII. 


days,  nor  end  of  life."  Not  unnatur- 
ally did  the  ancient  rabbis  believe 
him  to  be  tlie  fiery  Plnueas  returned 
to  earth,  or  an  angel  hovering  on  the 
outskirts  of  the  world.  Not  unnatur- 
ally have  the  Mussulman  traditions 
confounded  him  with  the  mysterious 
being,  the  Immoitul  one,  the  Eternal 
Wanderer,  who  appears  ever  and  anon 
to  set  right  the  wrongs  of  earth  and 
repeat  the  experience  of  ages  past. 
Not  unnaturally  did  the  mediaeval 
alchemists  and  magicians  strive  to 
trace  up  their  dark  arts  to  Elijah  the 
Tishbite,  the  Father  of  Alchemy. 
The  other  prophets — Moses,  Samuel, 
Elisha,  Isaiah — were  constantly  before 
the  eyes  of  their  countrymen.  Eut 
Elijah  they  saw  only  by  partial  and 
momentary  glimpses. — Stanley. 

—  Peculiar  and  hopeless  as  the 
exigency  in  Israel  appeared,  the  Lord 
found  a  man  fit  for  it — a  man  fitted 
beyond  all  others,  by  the  force  of  his 
character,  his  grasp  of  faith,  and  his 
fearless  spirit,  to  ''stem  the  torrent 
of  a  faithless  age."  This  man  was 
Elijah  the  Tishbite.  He  was  one  of 
the  most  extraordinary  characters 
mentioned  in  the  Eible.  Great  evils 
require  great  remedies ;  extraordinary 
diseases,  extraordinary  physicians  ;  gi- 
gantic corruptions,  gigantic  reformers. 
And  such  was  Elijah,  who  in  his  gifts 
and  qualities  assumes  a  figure  scarcely 
human  fiom  its  gigantic  proportions, 


and  towers  aloft  like  one  of  the  sons 
of  Anak  among  common  men.  He 
was  such  stuff  as  the  heathen  made 
their  gods  of;  and  had  he  appeared 
in  a  heathen  country  he  would  have 
come  down  to  us  as  scarcely  less  than 
a  god,  side  by  side,  perhaps,  with 
Hercules,  instead  of  being  only  some- 
thing more  than  a  prophet.  There 
are  two  soits  of  prophets — prophets  of 
deeds,  prophets  of  words.  Of  the 
latter  the  greatest  is  doubtless  Isaiah ; 
of  the  former,  there  has  not  been 
among  men  born  of  women  any  greater 
than  Elijah. — Kiito. 

—  Israel  had  never  such  a  king  as 
Ahab  for  impiety ;  never  so  miraculous 
a  prophet  as  Elijah.  He  comes  in  like 
a  tempest,  who  went  out  in  a  whirl- 
wind. I  do  not  so  much  wonder  at 
the  boldness  of  Elijah  as  at  his  power. 
Yea,  who  so  sees  his  power,  can  no 
whit  wonder  at  his  boldness:  how 
could  he  but  be  bold  to  the  face  of  a 
man,  who  was  thus  powerful  with 
God  ?  While  he  knows  himself  a  pro- 
phet, he  remembers  to  be  a  man.  He 
doth  not  therefore  arrogate  his  power 
as  his  own,  but  published  it  as  his 
master's.  This  restraint  must  be  "  ac- 
cording to  his  word,"  and  that  word 
was  from  a  higher  mouth  than  his. 
Man  only  can  denounce  what  God  will 
execute,  which,  when  it  is  once  re- 
vealed, can  no  more  fail  than  the 
Almighty  Himself. — Bp.  Hall, 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  2-7, 


Thb    Teach|ing8    op    Solitude. 

Elijah  had  become  the  most  popular  man  in  Israel.  His  strange,  abnipt 
entrance  upon  the  scene,  and  the  terrible  import  of  his  message,  tended  to  fasten 
all  eyes  upon  him,  and  to  raise  him  into  a  position  of  personal  importance.  But 
it  was  a  popularity  not  to  be  envied.  It  was  full  of  peril.  It  raised  up  a 
number  of  enemies.  It  was  perhaps  a  temptation  to  the  prophet  himself.  God 
called  him  away  into  retirement,  and  amid  the  rocky  solitudes  of  Cherith,  with 
its  solitary  brook,  he  was  to  learn  lessons  of  humility,  of  patience,  and  of  faith. 

I.  Solitude  affords  protection  from  threatened  peril.  **Hide  thyself  by 
the  brook  Choi  ith  "  (verse  3).  The  enraged  and  deluded  Ahab  clamoured  for 
the  life  of  the  loyal  prophet,  and  the  fawning  paiasites  of  Jezebel  would  fain 
have  torn  him  in  pieces.  They  ransacked  every  imaginable  hiding-place  in  the 
kingdom,  but  in  vain.  They  are  well  hid  whom  God  doth  hide.  Moses  fled  to 
Midian  from  the  fury  of  the  Egyptians,  and  was  safely  lodged  there  for  forty 

271 


CflAP.xvn.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


years.  David  fonnd  shelter  from  the  malice  of  Saul  among  the  fastnesses  of 
Engedi ;  John  the  Evangelist,  from  persecution,  in  the  Isle  of  Patmos  ;  Luther, 
from  his  enemies,  in  the  lonely  castle  of  Wartbuig,  in  the  Forest  of  Thuringia ; 
Tyndale,  the  first  translator  of  the  English  Bible,  was  a  fugitive  in  hiding  at 
Marburg,  Worms,  Antwerp,  and  Cologne ;  John  Knox,  the  Scottish  Elijah,  was 
several  years  a  prisoner  in  the  Erench  galleys ;  and  the  great  prophet  of  Gilead 
is  sent  to  Cherith  for  safety  and  for  culture.  The  faithful  worker  for  God  is 
scathless  till  his  work  is  done. 

II.  Solitude  is  relieved  by  special  manifestations  of  Divine  care.     *'  And 

the  ravrns  brought  him  bread  and  flesh,"  &c.  (verse  6).  These  words  record 
an  undoubted  miracle,  and  there  are  fewer  difficulties  in  believing  the  miracle 
than  in  trying  to  explain  the  transaction  on  natural  grounds.  The  miracle  is 
all  the  more  impressive  that  ravens,  the  most  voracious  of  birds,  are  the  un- 
failing purveyors  of  the  prophet.  Since  the  raven  is  a  carrion  bird,  and  a 
devourer  of  all  manner  of  dead  flesh,  some  have  wondered  how  Elijah  could 
eat  without  scruple  all  that  was  brought  to  him ;  but  they  absurdly  assume 
that  ravens  miraculously  sent  by  Divine  command  would  bring  what  was 
common  or  unclean.  *'  When  men  disobey,"  says  Wordsworth,  *'  God  reproves 
them  by  the  obedience  of  the  inferior  creatures.  The  old  world  disbelieved 
God's  warnings  by  Noah,  and  would  not  go  into  the  ark,  and  so  perished  in  the 
flood ;  but  the  inferior  animals  went  in  and  were  fed  there.  Ualaam  was  re- 
buked for  his  disobedience  by  the  ass  on  which  he  rode.  The  disobedient  pro- 
phet (chap.  xiii.  26)  was  slain  by  the  lion  which  God  sent  from  the  forest,  and 
which  spared  the  ass  and  the  carcase  of  the  prophet.  The  disobedience  of 
Ahab  and  Israel  was  rebuked  by  the  obedience  of  the  ravenous  birds  in  bring- 
ing food  to  Elijah.  Jonah  fled  from  God,  and  God  sent  the  whale  to  bring  him 
back  to  prophesy  against  Nineveh.  The  lions  spared  Daniel  when  his  colleagues 
would  have  slain  him.  Christ  was  with  the  wild  beasts  in  peace  (Mark  i.  13) 
when  He  was  about  to  be  rejected  by  mankind."  Jehovah  has  all  nature  under 
His  control,  and  it  is  an  easy  thing  for  Him  to  make  it  minister  to  the  neces- 
sities of  His  tried  and  faithful  servants.  He  who  provides  meat  for  the  fowls 
of  the  air  will  nmke  the  fowls  of  the  air  provide  meat  for  man,  rather  than  his 
dependence  on  God  shall  be  disappointed. 

III.  Solitude  often  severely  tests  the  genuineness  of  our  faith  (verse  7). 
A  period  of  enforced  inactivity  is  most  difficult  to  endure,  especially  to  an  ardent 
nature.  Why  am  I  doomed  to  this  gloomy  solitude  ?  what  good  purpose  can  it 
serve  ?  Time, opportunities,  strength  to  labour,  are  all  passing  away  unimproved. 
Ought  I  not  to  break  away  from  this  tedious  imprisonment,  and  rush  at  ouce 
into  the  conflict  that  on  every  hand  demands  the  stalwart  arm  and  the  enter- 
prizing  soul?  Is  there  no  testimony  to  bear,  no  work  to  be  done,  no  warfare 
to  wage  ?  Such  are  the  questions  sometimes  asked  by  the  solitary  recluse. 
The  restraint  tries  our  faith,  while  on  the  other  hand  faith  generates  strength 
to  bear  the  strain.  Nor  is  a  time  of  retirement  without  its  suffering.  "  It  came 
to  pass  that  the  brook  dried  up."  The  lessening  flow  of  the  life-giving  stream 
and  its  final  exsiccation  was  an  additional  trial  of  faith  and  source  of  suffering. 
It  is  in  extremity  that  our  faith  becomes  more  daring,  and  yields  the  most 
solid  comfort.  **  Good  bye,  dear  Lucy,"  said  a  drowning  youth  to  his  betrothed, 
after  they  had  both  held  on  to  the  last  possible  point  of  endurance  to  a  piece  of 
the  floating  wreckage  of  a  foundered  steamer ;  "we  shall  soon  meet  in  heaven! " 

IV.  Solitude  is  an  opportunity  for  mental  and  moral  discipline.    It  was 

to  Elijah  a  time  of  deep  and  pensive  musing.     He  thought  of  God,  on  whos>3 
bounty  he  was  so  absolutely  dependent.     He  thought  of  Israel,  its  delusions, 
its  vices,  its  sufferings,  its  needs.     He  thought  of  himself  and  the  work  to 
272 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


OUAP.   XVII 


which  he  was  call';d.  He  strove  to  rectify  defects,  and  sought  to  brace  himseli 
up  for  the  conflict  before  hiui.  He  discovered  the  true  source  of  his  strength, 
and  was  enabled  more  completely  to  consecrate  his  whole  being  to  the  service 
of  God.  Most  public  men  have  thoir  Cheriths  of  retirement  and  preparation. 
When  the  disciples  of  our  Lord  returned  from  their  first  mission,  and  reported 
all  they  had  done  and  taught,  He  said  unto  them,  **  Come  ye  yourselves  apart 
into  a  desert  place,  and  rest  awhile '*  (Mark  vi.  30,  31).  In  this  way  tempta- 
tions to  pride  and  self-sufiiciency  are  conquered,  and  lessons  of  humility  and 
self-abasement  are  learnt.  *'The  sufficiency  of  my  merit,"  said  Augustine, 
**  Ib  to  know  that  my  merit  is  not  sufficient." 

"The  bird  that  soars  on  highest  wing 
Builds  on  the  ground  her  lowly  nest; 
And  she  that  doth  most  sweetly  sing. 
Sings  in  the  shade  when  all  things  rest. 
Nearest  the  throne  itself  must  be 
The  footstool  of  humility." — Herbert, 

Lessons  : — a  .  The  withdrawal  of  a  puhlic  instructor  is  a  calamity  to  a  nation. 
2.  Solitude  is  fraught  with  trial  and  sorrow.  3.  Seasons  of  solitude  should  he 
diligently  improved. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Yerses  2-7.  Characteristics  of  a 
child-like  faith.  1.  It  accepts  the 
Word  of  God  without  questioning 
(verse  2).  2.  It  flinches  not  in  the 
presence  of  the  severest  demands 
(verse  3).  3.  It  is  not  staggered  by 
apparent  improbabilities  (verse  4). 
4.  It  is  prompt  in  obedience  (verse  5). 
6.  Enjoys  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine 
promise  (verse  6).  G.  Pails  not  when 
most  severely  tried  (verse  7). 

—  Elijah  at  Cherith.  1 .  Men  must 
he  prepared  to  accept  the  coiisequences  of 
their  obedience  to  God.  We  do  not 
always  see  such  consequences,  and 
when  they  come  upon  us  they  very 
often  find  us  unprepared  to  meet  them. 
Obedience  to  God  often  exposes  men  to 
hatred,  scorn,  ridicule,  opposition,  in- 
convenience, loss  of  trade,  loss  of 
Lberty,  and  even  life  itself.  But  when 
we  choose  God's  service  we  choose 
these  consequences,  and  when  they 
come  they  should  not  deter  us  from 
our  duty.  2.  Ihat  God  males  pro- 
vision for  the  exigencies  into  which  obedi- 
ence to  the  Divine  commands  may  bring 
Bis  servants.  He  imposes  no  task,  but 
He  provides  strength  for  its  accom- 
plishment. Whatever  may  be  the 
consequences  ot  their  obedience,  He 
will  not  leave  His  servants  to  meet 


them  alone.  He  goes  before  His  peo- 
ple, providing  for  their  necessities — • 
strength  in  weakness  and  temptation, 
light  in  darkness,  comfort  in  sorrow, 
consolation  in  bereavement,  hope  in 
death.  3.  This  provision  is  frequently 
not  made  known  to  the  obedient  until 
their  need  is  pressing.  It  is  after  we 
have  entered  upon  our  chosen  path  of 
duty,  and  the  difficulties  begin  to  ap- 
pear, that  God  reveals  the  provision 
He  has  made  to  enable  us  to  meet 
them.  It  is  when  the  darkness 
gathers  around  us  that  the  light  of 
heaven  appears.  AVhen  the  drought 
comes  upon  the  land,  God  will  not  for- 
sake His  people ;  but  His  voice  shall 
be  heard  directing  them  to  Cherith, 
where  their  need  shall  be  amply  pro- 
vided for. — The  Study  and  Pulpit. 

Verse  3.  Obscurity.  1.  Eepugnant 
to  some  men.  2.  Sometimes  the  ap- 
pointment of  God.  3.  Xecessary  for 
self-discipline.     4.  A  means  of  safety. 

—  Even  that  God  sends  him  to  hide 
his  head  who  could  as  easily  have  pro- 
tected as  nourished  him.  He  that  wil- 
fully stands  still  to  catch  dangers 
tempteth  God  instead  of  trusting  Him. 

—  **Get  thee  hence,  and  hide  thy- 
self.'^    A  hard  word  for  a  heroic  man 

273 


OHAP.  xvn. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTAItT :  KINGS. 


like  Elijah,  who  had  threatened  the 
king  and  the  whole  people,  and  must 
now  flee  and  expose  himself  tou  scorn 
and  contempt.  Going  away  often  re- 
quires more  self-denial  than  remaining. 
Every  man  who  has  done  anything 
great  in  the  kingdom  of  God  has  passed 
a  long  time  in  retirement  and  solitude. 
But  to  every  faithful  Christian  also 
the  command  has  come,  hide  thyself, 
go  into  the  stillness  and  solitude. 
The  hidden  man  of  the  heart,  with 
soft,  still  spirit,  does  not  thrive  in 
the  perpetual  tumult  and  babbling 
noise  of  the  world.  There  is  no  man 
who  has  not  felt  the  need  of  some 
time  and  place  to  collect  his  thoughts, 
and  to  be  alone  with  his  God ;  they 
who  avoid  such  are  not  fit  for  the 
kingdom  of  God. — Lange. 

Verse  5.  He  went  in  faith  along  the 
hard,  dark  path  into  the  wilderness, 
-as  a  genuine  son  of  Abraham,  the 
father  of  all  the  faithful,  who  knew 
that  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God,  and  that  man  can  offer  to 
God  no  higher  and  nobler  homage  than 
to  believe  in  His  promises.  Who  so 
chooses  the  dear  God,  and  always  hopes 
in  Him,  him  will  He  sustain  wonder- 


fully in  all  need  and  affliction  (Psa 
iv.  4;  cxlvii.  5).  Go  whithersoever 
thou  wilt,  means  shall  not  fail  thee, 
thy  deed  is  pure  blessing,  thy  course 
pure  light. — Menken. 

Verse   6.  Divine  Providence.     1. 

Cares  for  the  most  solitary.  2.  Has 
absolute  control  over  all  supplies.  3. 
N'ever  disappoints  the  believer.  4. 
May  sometimes  make  use  of  ravens— 
i.  e.,  abandoned  and  godless  men — to 
help  the  children  of  God. 

Verse  7.  Faith  tried.     1.  By  the 

gradual  failure  of  that  on  which  life 
depends.  2.  By  the  suffering  caused 
by  privation.  3.  By  the  uncertainty 
of  the  future.  4.  Is  ever  rewarded 
by  timely  relief. 

—  The  prophet  feels  the  smart  of 
this  drought  which  he  had  denounced. 
It  is  no  unusual  thing  with  God  to 
suffer  his  own  children  to  be  in  wrapped 
in  the  common  calamities  of  offenders. 
He  makes  difference  in  the  use  and 
issue  of  their  stripes,  not  in  the  inflic- 
tion. The  corn  is  cut  down  with  the. 
weeds,  but  to  a  better  purpose. — Mp, 
Mall. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  8-16. 
Rescue  in  Exteemitt. 


I.  That  a  time  of  extremity  reveals  the  Divine  source  of  our  daily  com- 
forts. The  water  of  the  brook  on  which  Elijah  had  depended  for  daily  refresh- 
ment gradually  diminished,  and  at  length  altogether  disappeared,  and  the  pro- 
phet was  again  reminded  of  his  a^^solute  dependence  on  God  for  hourly  susten- 
ance. The  greatest  blessings  are  apt  to  be  regarded  with  indifference  because 
of  the  constancy  of  their  supply.  The  daily  return  of  the  sunlight,  the  equal 
diffusion  of  the  air  we  breathe,  the  regular  beat  of  the  life-pulse,  the  abundant 
yield  of  the  soil  on  which  we  tread,  are  bestowed  with  such  uniformity  and  faith- 
fulness, that  there  is  danger  we  should  forget  the  great  source  of  them  all. 
"When  we  are  deprived  for  a  time  of  the  most  ordinary  blessings  of  life,  then 
do  we  become  vividly  conscious  of  their  former  presence  and  of  their  unspeakable 
value.  Every  new  day  shoul  Ibe  vocal  with  new  thanksgivings  and  praises  for 
the  new  mercies  which  it  brings. 

II.  That  a  time  of  extremity  induces  a  spirit  of  ready  obedience.    ''  So 

he  arose  and  went  to  Zarephatli  "  (verse  10).  Elijah  might  be  tempted  to 
question :  Why  may  not  the  same  Divine  power  which  sends  the  ravens  with 
food  keep  the  Cherith  in  perpetual  flow  ?  And  if  I  must  remove,  why  not  go 
back  to  Israel  rather  than  into  Phoenicia,  the  idolatrous  home  of  Jezebel,  whose 
274 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  xmi. 


enormities  I  am  commissioned  to  punish?     But  the  instinct  of  obedience  was 
stronger  than  all  such  questionings ;  and  that  instinct  was  sharpened  by  the 
difficulties  in  which  he  found  himself.     To  remain  was  to  perish,  and  to  obey 
opened  the  only  prospect  of  relief  and  sustenance.     "  Servants  rise  when  the 
bell  rings,"  says  the  proverb  ;  and  Elijah  at  once  set  out  on  his  long  and  adven- 
turous journey.     He  was  like  Israel  in  the  wilderness.     "  At  the  commandment 
of  the  Lord  they  rested  in  their  tents,  and  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they 
journeyed."     So  God  often  leads  his  people  out  by  a  way  that  they  know  not, 
and  the  reluctance  to  follow  the  Divine  leading  is  overcome  by  the  utter  per- 
plexity of  the  circumstances  into  which  they  are  sometimes  brought,  and  their 
inability  to  discover  a  better  way  than  the  one  indicated.     It  is  the  triumph  of 
self-surrender  to  God  when  the  believer  can  say 

Nor  will  I  hear,  nor  will  I  speak, 
Of  any  other  will  but  Thine. 

III.  That  a  time  of  extremity  encourages  faith  in  God  amid  the  most 
unfavourable  appearances  (verses  ?0-l2).  The  prophet  was  to  be  dependent 
on  a  woman,  and  she  a  Gentile,  when  there  were  many  women  in  Israel  any  of 
whom  would  have  counted  it  a  coveted  honour  to  minister  to  the  wants  of  the 
persecuted  champion  of  Jehovah  ;  a  widow  woman,  and  a  widow  woman  in  such 
abject  poverty  that  she  and  her  emaciated  son  were  reduced  to  the  last  point  of 
starvation  (verse  12).  It  seemed  very  unlikely  that  a  woman  in  whose  home 
famine  had  wrought  such  havoc  should  be  the  future  hostess  of  the  famishing 
prophet.  But  Elijah,  undaunted  by  the  ghastly  and  unpromising  appearance 
of  things,  had  faith  in  God;  he  who  quailed  not  in  the  presence  of  Ahab  and 
Jezebel,  yielded  not  in  the  presence  of  improbabilities  which  were  even  more 
difficult  to  confront.  True  faith  triumphs  over  the  most  forbidding  circum- 
stances ;  above  all  external  things  it  sees  God  and  His  all-conquering  promise. 
Abraham  "  staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God  through  unbelief,  b  ing  fully 
persuaded  that  what  He  had  promised  He  was  able  also  to  perform  "  (Rom.  iv. 
20,  21).     Faith  eats  its  way  through  all  Alps  of  opposition. 

IV.  That  a  time  of  extremity  affords  opportunity  for  the  most  signal 
display  of  Divine  power  (verses  12-16).  1.  It  reveals  how  God  has  His  hidden 
ones  in  the  most  unlikely  places.  This  Gentile  woman  was  not  ignorant  of 
Jehovah,  and  she  at  once  recognized  Elijah  as  His  prophet.  *'  As  the  Lord  thy 
God  liveth  "  (verse  12).  She  was  probably  a  believer  (Luke  iv.  26),  however 
imperfect  might  be  her  faith,  and  the  narrative  shows  she  was  capable  of  the 
most  disinterested  kindness,  and  of  the  most  implicit  confidence  in  the  word  of 
God  (verses  14,  15).  '*  Phenicia  was  the  last  place  in  the  world  to  have  found 
a  worshipper  of  the  Lord,  the  living  God.  It  was  also  the  last  place  in  the 
world  to  have  found  an  Elijah.  And  yet  both  are  here — the  one  a  lily  among 
thorns,  the  other,  in  the  quaint  but  fine  thought  of  Lightfoot,  the  first  apostl» 
to  the  Gentiles."  The  rarest  virtues  are  sometimes  found  in  the  most  unex- 
pected places.  During  the  last  journey  of  Livingstone,  the  veteran  African 
traveller,  he  was  compelled,  in  consequence  of  a  tribal  war,  to  change  his  route, 
and  pass  through  a  country  where  no  rain  had  fallen,  and  the  grass,  mostly 
burnt  off,  left  a  surface  covered  with  black  ashes,  fiom  which  the  heat  radiated 
as  from  a  furnace.  ^  Yet,  out  of  this  hard,  hot  surface,  the  flowers  would  persist 
in  coming.  So  amid  the  moral  wastes  of  heathendom,  where  the  soil  is  hard 
and  black,  and  apparently  unfertile,  and  where  our  missionaries  have  toiled  so 
long  with  such  earnestness  and  devotion,  the  delicate  flowers  of  Christian 
virtues  have  pushed  their  way,  displaying  their  modest  beauty,  and  scattering 
their  hallowing  fragrance —foretokens  of  the  coming  period  when  the  wilderness 
and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad,  and  the  desert  rejoice  and  blossom  as  tho 

275 


CHAP.  xvn. 


SOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


rose  "  (Isa.  xxxv.  1)  2.  It  reveals  the  boundless  resources  of  Jehovah  in  supply- 
ing the  needs  of  His  people  (verse  16).  "With  God  nothing  is  impossible,  and 
rather  than  His  people  should  perish  He  will  work  a  miracle.  The  same  power 
that  multiplied  the  loaves  and  fiishes  to  the  multitude  on  the  shores  of  Galilee 
could,  with  equal  ease,  replenish  the  meal  barrel  and  oil  cruse  in  the  home  of 
the  Sareptan  widow  "So  that,"  writes  Maurice,  '''•the  peison  from  whom 
Elijah  was  to  receive  sustenauce,  and  whom,  as  a  return  for  that  favour,  he  was 
to  teach  trust  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  that  her  barrel  of  meal  should  not  waste, 
neither  her  cruse  of  oil  fail,  was  a  woman  of  that  very  country  from  which 
Jezebel  had  come — the  very  country  from  which  the  Baal  worship  had  been 
imported.  The  Lord  God  of  the  nation,  then,  was  one  in  whom  the  weak  and 
poor  of  all  nations  might  confide,  one  from  whom  they  might  ask  their  daily 
bread,  and  on  whom  they  might  cast  their  heaviest  cares."  God  will  be  no  debtor 
to  them  who  trust  Him  in  extremity,  or  who  show  kindness  to  His  servants. 

Lessons: — 1.  God  is  not  indifferent  to  the  wants  and  suffermgs  of  His  people. 
2.  A  time  of  temporal  straitness  is  often  one  of  richest  spiritual  blessing,  3.  We 
cannot  grieve  God  more  than  by  distrusting  Him, 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


Verses  8-16.  The  barrel  of  meal 
and  the  cruse  of  oil.  Learn  from 
this  incident :  I.  The  uncertainty  of 
earthly  comforts.  When  Elijah  went 
to  Cherith  he  would  never  dream  of 
that  brook  becoming  exhausted.  He 
would  settle  down  there  till  the 
drought  passed  away.  But,  when  least 
expecting  it,  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came:  **  Arise,  get  thee  to  Zarephath." 
Cherith,  with  all  its  pleasant  associa- 
tions, had  to  be  left.  "What  a  picture 
of  human  life  !  How  many  are  there 
of  whose  worldly  comforts  it  may  be 
said  :  "After  a  while  the  brook  dried 
up."  One  man  is  settled  in  life,  with 
circumstances  all  that  could  be  desired, 
and  he  contemplates  the  future  with 
pleasure  ;  but  unexpectedly  something 
arises — bank  failure  or  commercial 
crisis — which  tells  him  that  the  brook 
is  dried  up,  and  he  has  to  leave  his 
Cherith.  Another  looks  with  pride 
and  hope  upon  a  child — his  pleasure 
and  joy  flow  from  that  child — but, 
unnoticed,  disease  settles  upon  it  and 
takes  it  away.  So  with  earthly  com- 
forts. They  are  uncertain,  and  do 
not  warrant  the  eagerness  with  which 
they  are  sought,  or  the  value  with 
which  they  are  invested.  II.  27(e 
certainty  of  God''8  care.  God  made 
provision  for  Elijah  at  Zarephath  be- 
fore He  commanded  him  to  leave 
Cherith.  Decay  and  change  may 
2.6 


characterise  all  our  earthly  comforts, 
but  they  do  not  characterise  God  ;  He 
remains  the  same,  and  His  care  can 
never  fail.  Many  changes  are  per- 
mitted to  our  circumstances,  to  lead 
us  to  more  implicit  confidence  in  the 
unchangeable  God.  III.  Godly  gene- 
rosity hhall  not  lose  its  reward.  This 
woman  had  a  truly  generous  spirit, 
which  was  bounded  only  by  her  means. 
She  listened  readily  to  Elijah's  request, 
and  showed  a  spirit  willing  to  accede 
to  it ;  and  her  generosity  secured  her 
abundance.  God  blessed  her  house  for 
entertaining  His  servant,  as  He  blessed 
the  house  of  Obed  Edom  for  sheltering 
the  ark. — Ihe  JStudy  and  Pulpit, 

Yerses  10-13.  Now  here  was  a  de- 
mand upon  the  faith  of  this  woman — 
from  a  foreign  man  and  a  foreign  God — 
as  large  as  any  exacted  from  the  great 
prophet  himself.  See  how  it  stands : 
Eirst,  she  was  to  make  up  her  pro- 
visions for  Elijah,  trusting  that,  as  he 
had  said,  more  would  then  come  mira- 
culously to  supply  her  own  wants. 
What  a  trial !  "What  would  the  bird 
in  the  hand  worth  two  in  the  bush 
principle  say  to  this?  Who  could 
have  it  in  his  heart  to  blame  her  had 
she  declined  to  run  what  was,  under 
the  circumstfinces,  so  hard  a  risk? 
Who  would  condemn  her  if  she  had 
discredited  this  stranger  ?    How  could 


nOMILETiC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XVII. 


she  know  but  that,  after  he  had  eaten 
up  her  precious  bread,  he  might  laugh 
in  her  face  ?  Besides,  was  not  his  very- 
anxiety  to  be  served  first  of  all  very 
suspicious?  Looked  it  not  as  if  he 
were  determined,  at  all  hazards,  to 
secure  a  meal  for  himself;  and  could 
we  call  it  unreasonable  had  she  asked 
for  the  proof  first — which  could  be 
given  as  well  before  as  after — that  it 
should  be  as  he  had  said  ?  But  nothing 
of  this  occurred.  She  went  and  did 
as  Elijah  had  told  her,  and  found  the 
result  as  he  had  promised.  This  was 
faith  of  the  true  sort,  heroic  faith,  the 
faith  that  asks  no  questions. — Kifto. 

Yerse  10.  "So  he  arose  and  went 
to  Zarephath."  Compared  with  verse 
15:  Obedience  to  God.  I.  Should  be 
prompt  and  unquestioning.  II.  In- 
volves sacrifice  and  suffering.  III.  Is 
always  rewarded  with  blessing. 

Verse  12.  Happy  was  it  for  this 
widow  that  she  did  not  shut  her  hand 
to  the  man  of  God,  that  she  was  no 
niggard  of  her  last  handful;  never 
com  or  oil  did  so  increase  in  growing 
as  here  in  consuming.  This  barrel, 
this  cruse  of  hers,  had  no  bottom  ;  the 
barrel  of  meal  wasted  not,  the  cruse 
of  oil  failed  not.  Behold,  not  getting, 
not  saving,  is  the  way  to  abundance, 
but  giving.  The  mercy  of  God  crowns 
our  beneficence  with  the  blessing  of 
store.  "Who  can  fear  want  by  a  merci- 
ful liberality,  when  he  sees  the  Sarep- 
tan  had  famished  if  she  had  not  given, 
and  by  giving  abounded  ?  With  what 
thankful  devotion  must  this  woman 
every  day  needs  look  upon  her  barrel 
and  cruse,  wherein  she  saw  the  mercy 
of  God  renewed  to  her  continually  ? 
Doubtless  her  soul  was  no  less  fed  by 
faith  than  her  body  by  this  super- 
natural provision. — Bp.  Sail, 


Verse  13.  Fear  not!  Ah!  how 
often  has  a  child  of  God  bemoaned — 
Now  all  is  lost !  I  have  nothing  more, 
and  know  nothing  more.  The  openi- 
tions  of  the  Spirit  of  God  have  ceased 
for  me  ;  the  meal  and  oil  are  gone  ! 
And  yet,  where  there  is  nothing  more 
amid  the  night  and  the  darkness, 
the  morning  brings  something  upon 
which  one  can  live  and  find  nourish- 
ment for  the  soul,  although  the  time 
be  miserable. — Lange, 

Verse  15.  It  was  one  of  those  sud- 
den recognitions  of  unknown  kindred 
souls,  one  of  those  cross-purposes  of 
Providence,  which  come  in  with  a 
peculiar  charm  to  chequer  the  common- 
place course  of  ecclesiastical  history. 
The  Phoenician  mother  knew  not  what 
great  destinies  lay  in  the  hand  of  that 
gaunt  figure  at  the  city  gate,  worn 
with  travel,  and  famine,  and  drought. 
She  obeyed  only  the  natural  instinct 
of  humanity ;  but  she  saved  in  him 
the  deliverer  of  herself  and  her  son. 
It  may  be  that  this  incident  is  the 
basis  of  the  sacred  blessing  of  the  Pro- 
phet of  prophets  on  those  who,  even 
by  a  cup  of  cold  water,  receiving  a 
prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet, 
shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward. — 
Stanley, 

Verse  16.  The  same  God  who  spoke 
by  means  of  Elijah — The  meal  in  the 
barrel  shall  not  be  wasted,  and  the  oil 
in  the  cruse  shall  not  fail — has  also 
promised,  as  long  as  the  earth  lasts, 
seed-time  and  harvest,  frost  and  heat, 
summer  and  winter,  day  and  night, 
shall  not  cease  (Gen.  viii.  22).  We 
are  astonished  at  the  little  miracle  in 
the  cabin  at  Sarepta,  but  we  pass  over 
with  indifference,  and  without  atten- 
tion, the  large  miracle. — Lange. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  17-24. 
The  Mabvellous  Power  of  ls  Intrepid  Faith. 

I.  We  see  here  how  an  intrepid  faith  may  be  sorely  tried.    1.  By  sudden 

and  unexpected  bereavement  (verse  17).     The  youth  who  had  escaped  from  the 
merciless  fangs  of  famine,  and  who,  for  some  time,  was  su.stained  by  a  miracu- 

277 


CHAP.Jtvu.  ROMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


lous  supply  of  God,  is  smitten  down  with  a  mysterious  disease,  and,  as  it  would 
appear,  with  appalling  suddenness,  expires.  It  is  sad  to  lose  our  health,  sad  to 
lose  our  fortune,  but  it  is  sadder  still  to  lose  the  loved  ones  of  our  hearth  and 
home. 

*Tis  hard  to  lay  our  darling 

Deep  in  the  cold,  damp  earth  ; 

His  empty  crib  to  see,  his  silent  nursery, 

Once  gladsome  with  his  mirth. 

The  thought  of  death  gives  a  tinge  of  melancholy  to  every  event  of  life,  and 
reveals  the  frailty  and  ti  ansitoriness  of  all  earthly  things.  The  Eoman  Emperor . 
who  had  commanded  a  world,  exclaimed,  when  he  came  to  die,  "I  was  every- 
thing, and  have  found  that  everything  is  nothing.''  And  yet,  if  it  were  some- 
thing, in  one  moment  death  robs  us  of  it  all.  No  wonder  that  while  complaining 
of  life  we  turn  away  irom  death.  **  We  live  hating  life,  yet  full  of  fear  to  die.'* 
And  when  d(  ath  comes,  slowly  or  suddenly,  it  tests  the  faith  of  the  staunchest 
believer.  2.  By  the  spectach  oj  a  hewildering  sorrow  (verse  18).  Only  a  mother 
knows  a  mother's  grief.  How  ready  we  are,  says  Bishop  Hall,  to  mistake  the 
grounds  of  our  afflictioi  b,  and  to  cast  them  upon  false  causes.  The  passionate 
mother  cannot  find  wl  e  h  r  to  impute  the  death  of  her  son  but  to  the  presence  of 
Elijah,  to  whom  she  co  liCS  distracted  with  perplexity,  not  without  an  unkind 
challenge  of  him  from  whom  she  had  received  both  that  life  she  had  lost  and  that 
she  had :  **  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  0  thou  man  of  God  ?  "  As  if  her  son 
could  not  have  died  if  Elijah  had  not  been  her  guest,  whereas  her  son  had  died  but 
for  him.  Why  should  she  think  that  the  prophet  had  saved  him  from  the  famine 
to  kill  him  with  sickness?  He  who  had  appeased  God  towards  her  is  suspected 
to  have  incensed  him.  This  wrongful  misconstruction  was  enough  to  move  any 
patience.  Elijah  was  of  a  hot  and  fiery  temperament,  and  a  strain  was  put 
upon  his  self-control.  Eut  his  faith  in  God,  and  the  sympathy  roused  within 
him  for  the  afflicted  widow,  not  only  taught  him  forbearance,  but  made  him  the 
more  anxious  to  do  what  he  could  to  alleviate  her  anguish. 

II.  We  see  here  how  an  intrepid  faith  is  sustained  and  strengthened  by 
earnest  and  importunate  prayer  (verses  19-'^^!).  This  incident  brings  out  for 
the  first  time  in  his  history  one  of  the  most  marked  and  powerful  features  of 
Elijah's  character  as  a  man  of  prayer  He  was  peisoually  deeply  moved  by  the 
distress  which  this  bereavement  had  brought  into  the  widow's  home  ;  and  his 
prayer  is  an  urgent  appeal  to  God,  as  a  just  and  merciful  and  righteous  Eeing. 
He  pleaded  for  the  restoration  of  life  to  the  dead  boy — a  bold  and  hitherto  un- 
heard of  request  from  the  lips  of  mortal  man  !  **  We  can  imagine  the  Tishbite 
pacing  up  and  down  his  little  chamber  in  importunate,  impassioned  prayer ; 
but  yet  with  no  doubt  as  to  the  result  of  his  intercession.  It  was  a  mighty 
demand,  indeed,  for  a  mortal  to  make  a  request  that  had  no  previous  parallel  in 
praying  lips.  It  was  nothing  short  of  this  :  that  unassailable  death  be  stormed 
in  his  own  strongholds ;  tliat  the  iron  crown  be  plucked  from  the  head  of  the 
king  of  terrors.  When  Elijah  does  manifest  faith,  it  is  always  of  the  noblest 
type."  The  higher  exercises  of  faith  are  possible  only  to  earnest,  resolute,  and 
incessant  prayer. 

III.  We  see  here  how  an  intrepid  faith  is  honoured  by  a  signal  display  of 
Divine  power  (verses  22,  23).  This  is  the  first  recorded  instance  of  a 
resurrection  from  the  dead.  Many  suppose  that  this  youth  afterwards  became 
the  servant  of  Elijah  (xviii.  43  ;  xix.  3)  :  and  an  old  Jewish  tradition  identifies 
him  with  the  prophet  Jonah.  "  It  was  a  proud  thought  for  Greece  that  on  one 
and  the  same  day  she  gained  the  battle  of  Plataea  on  the  land,  and  the  battle  of 
Mycal^  on  the  sea.     And.  what  would  be  the  grateful  joy  of  this  widow  woman 

278 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS.  chap.  xvii. 


that  by  one  and  the  same  agency,  in  the  retirement  of  her  home,  and  in  a 
period  of  the  severest  national  distress,  in  place  of  two  victims  there  had  hcen 
two  victories — a  victory  over  famine,  a  victory  also  over  death."  Nothinfi;  is 
impossible  to  believing  prayer.  If  Elijah  by  liis  fervent  supplications  cc  \ld 
bring  about  supernatural  results,  why  should  we  fail  in  securing  blessings  witlAn 
the  ordinary  sphere  of  nature,  by  the  agency  of  prayer? 

IV.  We  see  here  how  an  intrepid  faith  is  the  means  of  strengthening 
and  confirming  the  weak  (verse  24).  This  Sareptan  widow  believed  in  God 
before,  but  she  is  a  stronger  and  more  decided  believer  now.  The  miraculous 
replenishing  cf  her  store  convinced  her  of  the  mercy  and  love  of  God,  and  the 
raising  of  her  son  from  the  dead  gave  her  a  still  deeper  insight  into  the  Divine 
Majesty  and  power,  and  invested  the  mission  of  the  prophet  with  a  still  more 
awlul  authority.  The  design  of  miracles  is  not  for  display,  or  to  excite  wonder, 
but  for  the  confirmation  of  truth.  The  strongest  faith  sometimes  gives  way 
and  needs  heavenly  support.  Had  this  widow's  son  continued  dead,  her  belief 
had  been  buried  in  his  grave  :  notwithstanding  her  meal  and  oil,  her  soul  had 
languished.  The  condescension  of  God  provides  new  helps  for  our  infirmities, 
and  meets  us  on  our  own  ground,  that  he  may  work  out  our  faith  and  salvation. 
The  onus  of  unbelief  is  thrown  wholly  on  man.  God  takes  care  there  shall  be 
no  lack  of  evidence  for  the  encouragement  and  building  up  of  faith. 

Lessons: — 1.  Bereavement  and  sorrow  intensify  our  sympathy  with  humanity. 

2.  T^ie  soul  in   itn  deepest   suffering  finds   rest   and  consolation  alone   in    God, 

3.  Faith  in  God  achieves  the  grandest  moral  victories. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES 

Verse      17-24.     Raising     the  tanity  of    exercising   His    power  in 

widow's    son.      1.    No  home    exempt  raising  him  from  the  dead.     By  means 

from  the  trials  and  sufferings  of  this  life,  of  this  she  was  enlightened,  and  her 

This  widow  would  doubtless  be  looked  faith  in  God  confirmed.     She  was  on 

n])on  with  envy  by   her   neighbours,  the  borderland  ot  true  faith  before; 

They  would  think  that  in  the  midst  of  now  she  enters  into  its  fulness.   *'  IS'ow, 

the  distress  sufi'eied  by  them  she  was  hy  this,   I  know,  &c."      Many  have 

free  and  protected  by  an  unseen  hand  been  similarly   blessed   by    trial  and 

from   wretchedness  and  woe.     But  a  sorrow ;  they  have  obtained  clearer  and 

deeper   sorrow    than    they    imagined  loftier  views  of  God  and  stronger  faith 

was  soon    her    portion.       In  looking  in  Him.     'i  hey  have  been  raised  up 

upon  some  homes,  we  are  apt  to  think  into  a  higher  region  of  life  and  affec- 

they    are    strangers   to   the    ordinary  tion  (Heb.  xii.  11).     3.  An  illustration 

trials  and  sorrows  of  life.     But  there  of  the  power  of  prayer.     How  differ- 

is  no   home   that  can   exclude  these,  ently  would  this  woman  regard  pra}  er 

However  well   provided   temporarily,  to  Jehovah    to   what    she    had    done 

however  diligent  and  devoted  in  the  before!     She  would  see  that  it  was  the 

path  of  Christian  duty  the  inmates  may  way  of  access  to  God  and  of  prevailing 

be,  still  there  comes  to  them,  more  or  with   Him;    and  lead   her  to  imitate 

less,  trial  and  suffering  of  one  kind  or  that  earnest   and  confident  prayer  of 

another — affliction,       disappointment,  Elijah  which   brought  her    son  back 

bereavement.      To  know  this   should  from   the  regions   of  the  dead.      We 

prepare  us  to  meet  tiials  when  they  have  many  rich  and  valuable  illastra- 

come.     2.  The  deepest  sorrow  may  he  tions  of  the  power  of  prayer  in  Holy 

the    instrument    of  our   highest    good.  Writ  and  in  our   own  history,  which 

Nothing  could   have  been    a    greater  should  lead  us  to  a  more  earnest  and 

affliction  to  this  woman  than  the  death  persevering  use  of  it. — The  Study  and 

of  her  son ;  but  it  gave  God  the  oppor-  Fulpit, 

279 


OHAP.  XVU. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


Terse  18.    Ths  voice  of  conscience. 

1.  Is  heard  in  the  midst  of  calamity. 

2.  Is  an  unfailing  remembrancer  of 
sin.  3.  May  mislead  as  to  the  reasons 
for  which  calamity  is  permitted  to 
overtake  us.  4.  Should  be  listened  to 
with  a  view  of  moral  improvement. 

Terse s  19-21.  Behold  this  great 
man  in  his  chamber,  alone  with  the 
corpse  of  that  fair  child.  See  how 
vehemently  he  strides  up  and  down, 
gradually  working  himself  up  to  the 
height  of  the  great  demand  which 
gleams  before  his  thought,  a  demand 
which  had  not  crossed  the  mind  of 
man  since  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
only  because  no  man  before  had  had 
the  same  degree  of  faith — the  faith  to 
deem  it  possible  that  the  dead  might 
be  restored  to  life  at  man's  urgent 
prayer.  It  is  done.  His  purpose  is 
taken.  The  child  may  live.  Noth- 
ing is  too  hard  for  the  Lord.  It  is  as 
easy  for  Him  to  give  back  life  as  to 
take  it;  and  He  will  do  this  if  asked 
with  adequate  faith.  Elijah  knew  that 
men  too  often  expect  to  move  the 
mountains  by  such  faith  as  suffices  not 
to  shake  the  mole-hills ;  and  that 
because,  from  the  insufficiency  of  the 
means,  the  hoped-for  results  do  not 
follow,  the  power  of  faith  is  disparaged. 
But  he  felt  the  true  mountain-moving 
faith  heaving  strong  within  him,  and 
he  gave  it  unrestrained  vent.  He 
threw  himself  upon  the  corpse,  as  if, 
in  the  vehement  energy  of  his  will,  to 
foicc  his  own  life  into  it ;  and  he  cried 
with  mighty  and  resistless  urgency  to 
God  to  send  back  to  this  cold  frame 
the  breath  he  had  taken  away.  Faith 
conquered.  It  was  adequate^  and 
therefore  irresistible. — Kitto. 

Terse  22.  Even  if  the  Lord  do  no 
miracle,  there  are  still  a  thousand  ways 
and  means  by  which  He  sends  comfort 
and  strength,  or  help  and  salvation,  in 
answer  to  the  believing  prayer  of  His 
faithful  servants.  Each  granting  of 
prayer  is  indeed  a  miracle,  and  never 
is  owe  humble,  believing  prayer  uttered 
in  vain — no,  not  even  when  it  is  re- 
fused . — Menken . 

—  The  illimitable  power  of  God. 
280 


1.  Has  absolute  control  over  life  and 
death.  2.  Can  accomplish  whatever 
does  not  imply  a  contradiction :  it  is 
never  uselessly  employed.  3.  Is  ex- 
erted in  answer  to  believing  prayer. 
4.  Confirms  the  faith  of  the  wavering. 

Terse  23.  He  who  testified  that 
man  did  not  live  from  hour  to  hour 
by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that 
proceedcth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God, 
testified  also  to  a  stranger  from  the 
commonwealth  of  Israel  that  God  can 
give  back  that  life  which  He  has 
taken  away.  The  poor  woman  of 
Zidon  learnt  the  amazing  lesson  that 
the  power  which  she  had  looked  upon 
as  emphatically  the  destroyer,  is 
warring  with  death,  and  can  win  a 
victory  over  it,  not  for  some  great  and 
holy  person,  but  for  her  whose  sins 
had  been  brought  to  remembrance  by 
the  presence  of  the  prophet  and  the 
death  of  her  child  — Maurice, 

Terse  24.  Real  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  I.  2here  is  a  kind  of  know- 
ledge of  scriptural  things  which  leaves  a 
man  perfectly  satisfied  with  himself 
This  widow  seems  to  have  been  ac- 
quainted with  the  God  of  Israel,  in 
the  way  of  providence,  and  seems  to 
have  known  Elijah  to  be  a  prophet  by 
his  dress ;  and  her  obedience  appears 
to  have  been  of  that  kind  which 
springs  from  the  intellectual  know- 
ledge that  a  man  has,  that  God  is  al- 
mighty ;  that,  being  perfect,  He  is 
therefore  faithful ;  and  that  what 
He  says  must  come  to  pass ;  but 
it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  that 
which  springs  from  a  heart  know- 
ledge of  Him  as  a  just  God  and 
a  Saviour,  who  **pardoneth  ini- 
quity," and  which  knowledge  be- 
gets an  appropriation  of  God  as  *'  my 
God  "  to  the  heart — for,  you  observe, 
she  says,  "As  the  Lord  thj  God 
liveth."  She  does  not  say,  "  As  the 
Lord  my  God  liveth !"  This  lesson 
of  knowing  God  as  our  God  she  has 
yet  to  learn.  And  this  she  was  to 
learn  in  the  school  of  affliction — a 
furnace  in  which  many  of  God'a 
children  are  chosen  and  made  to  know 
Him.     There  are  many  persons  in  the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS, 


CHAP.  XVII. 


same  state  as  tlie  widow  of  Zarophath 
before  the  prophet  came  to  her.    Like 
her,  they  have  heard  of  God ;    they 
have  heard  that  there  is  a  God  ;  they 
do  not  deny  the  truth  and  power  of 
God  ;    they  believe  that  the  Word  of 
God  is  true  ;   they  do  not  hesitate  to 
render  a  sort  of  outside  obedience  to 
His  commands.     We  find  them  con- 
tinually speaking    calmly    of  death, 
just  as  this  woman  did ;    but  all  the 
peace  which   apparently  accompanies 
this   calm   statement   about   death  is 
false.     It  arises  from  ignorance  of  sin. 
When    this   is  brought   vividly   and 
clearly  to   remembrance,    then   their 
peace  flies  away,  because  there  is  no 
real  acquaintance  with  Christ.    They 
know  the  inconvenience  of  sin,  they 
know  the  disgrace  of  it ;  but  as  to  the 
real  mature  of  sin,  they  are  ignorant  of 
it,    because  no  man    ever    can  abide 
under  a  knowledge  of  the  nature  of 
sin  without  fleeing  to  Jesus  for  the  re- 
medy that  God  has  provided  in  Him. 

II.  27iis  kind  of  knowledge  is  shown 
not  to  he  a  real  acquaintance  with  truth, 
by  impatience  under  affiiction.  *'  What 
have  I  to  do  with  thee,  O  thou  man  of 
God  ?  Art  thou  come  unto  me  to  call 
my  sin  to  remembrance,  and  to  slay  my 
son  ?"  By  some  this  is  understood  to 
express  her  deep  sense  of  the  vast 
difference  betwten  herself  and  the 
prophet,  and  the  feeling  she  enter- 
tained in  cc  ^sequence ;  as  when  Peter, 
astonished  at  the  marvellous  draught 
of  fishes,  exclaimed,  **  Depart  from 
me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord.'* 
But  it  seems  as  if  the  words  are  ex- 
pressive of  a  feeling  of  impatience  of 
the  sorrow  which  had  come  upon  her, 
in  consequence,  as  she  thought,  of  the 
presence  of  the  proplu  t :  as  if  she  had 
said,  **If  this  be  the  consequence  of 
thy  visit,  would  I  had  never  seen  tliee." 
She  forgets  God's  goodness,  and  thinks 
only  of  her  trial.  Are  there  not  many 
who  go  on  for  years  partaking  of  God's 
bounty,  who  are  favoured  above  thou- 
sands around  them,  but  who  have  no 
knowledge  of  the  state  of  their  own 
hearts,  and  who,  when  the  Lord  afflicts 
them,  are  irritated,  and  think  them- 
selves hardly  dealt  by ;  or  when,  by  the 


preaching  of   the  Word  of   God,  He 
graciously    opens    their  eyes    to    the 
condition  of  their  hearts,  are  impatient 
at  those   doctrines,   those  statements, 
which  God  frequently  makes  use  of  to 
affirm  His  purpose   of    love?       This 
widow  saw  in  Elijah  not  the  servant 
of    the  Lord,   so    much    as  one    who 
brought  her  sins  to  i  emembrance,  and 
slew  her  son  ;  and  this  she  could  not 
bear.     Trials  which  mellow  and  ripen 
the  saint,  irritate  and  enrage  the  grace- 
less    sinner ;      and       heart-searching 
preaching  leads  men  to  speak   evil   of 
the  way  of  truth.     This  woman  could 
not  have  talked   so  calmly  of  dying 
if  she  had  known  what  her  sins  were  ; 
but  when  she  was  stripped  of  self-con- 
fidence, of  all  those  false  hopes  which 
were  dear  to  her  as  her  son — and  when 
God  calls  upon  men  now-a-days  to  re- 
linquish their  all  to  Him,  in  His  love 
He  will  take  them  off  from  every  false 
confidence,  till  they  are  left  like  the 
childless  widow,  with  their  sins  staring 
them  in  the  face,  and  all  their  creature- 
comforts  gone,  stripped  and  made  bare 
by  God's  Holy  Spirit,  then   they  are 
alive  to  the  Scripture  truth  that  they 
are    in    themselves    *'  wretched,    and 
miserable,  and   poor,  and  blind,  and 
naked." 

III.  It  is  generally  under  a  deep 
sense  of  sin,  or  through  deep  waters^ 
that  God  leads  to  real  acquaintance  with 
the  truth.  '^  Aud  he  said  unto  her, 
Give  me  thy  son  :  and  he  took  him  out 
of  her  bosom."  The  dead  son  she  can 
part  with  readily ;  she  is  brought  so 
low,  she  is  willing  to  do  anything  for 
a  remedy.  She  sees  matters  cannot  be 
worse,  and  therefore  she  is  willing  to 
listen  to  any  remedy  which  may  make 
them  better.  Aud  that  is  just  the 
point  which  a  man  is  brought  to  who 
receives  the  Lord  Jesus  with  thankful- 
ness. He  sees  things  cannot  be  worse  ; 
he  sees  a  truth  which  the  world  is  very 
slow  to  believe,  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  exaggerating  the  evil  of  sin. 
And  when  tiie  Lord  says  to  the  con- 
victed sinner,  **  Give  me  thine  heart," 
that  heart  which  is  dead  to  every  hope 
but  that  which  the  Gospel  gives,  it  is 
immediately  yielded  up.    As  God  gave 

281 


CHAP.  xvm.  nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS- 


back  life  to  the  widow's  son,  so  in  re-  death,  and  yet  not  knowing  that  Word 

generation  does  God   gire  back  that  experimentally  to  be  truth, 

principle  of  eternal  life  which  was  for-  2.  Until  we  are  brought  to  know  the 

feited  in    Adam;  God   breathes    into  evil  of  sin,  we  shall  be  ignorant  of  the 

man's  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  spiritual  meaning  of  the  Word  of  God, 

man  becomes  a  living  soul  again,   in  and  in  that  degree  resist  the  truth, 

contradistinction  to  what  he  is  natu-  3.  Until  we  yield  ourselves  wholly 

rally,  in  Scripture  language,  "  dead  in  to    God,     we    shall   never  know   the 

trespasses  and  sins."     Thus  was  the  truth  savingly,  or  find  peace  really. — 

widow  taught  what  she  did  not  know,  The  Pulpit. 

perhaps,  in  heart  before,  and  by  means  —  We  pass  through  much  grief  and 

which  were  utterly  at  variance  with  humiliation   before,    with  joyful    as- 

her  best  affections ;  and  thus  also  our  surance,   we  can  say  to  Him  who  is 

proud  hearts  are  humbled,  and  made  greater  than  Elijah,  Now  know  I  that 

to   know    that    those  doctrines    and  thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Living 

statements  of  the  Word  of  God  which  God.     Only  by  means   of  individual 

they  long  scofi'ed  at  are  truth.  experience  does  each  man  come  to  the 

blessed  confession  that  the  Word   of 

Lessons. — 1.  There  is  such  a  thing  the  Lord  is  truth.     He  only  is  a  ser- 

aa  being  acquainted  with  the  Word,  vant  of  God  in  whose  mouth  the  Word 

and  obeying  it  in  a  certain  outward  of  the  Lord  is  truth,  not  mere  appear- 

sense,  and  being  calm  in  the  prospect  of  ance  and  sham. — Lange, 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

ELIJAH'S    CONTEST    WITH    AHAB    AND    BAAL. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  After  many  days  .  in  the  third 
year— In  Luke  iv.  26,  James  v.  17,  the  drought  is  paid  to  have  lastea  *for  the  space  of 
three  years  and  six  months."  In  the  natural  order  of  things,  rains  f(  11  regularly  in  March  and 
October — "the  early  and  latter  rains."  Their  ce-?ation  might  be  dated  either  from  the  March 
when  the  last  rain  fell,  or  fiom  the  October  when  the  rain  tirst  failed  to  fall.  The  later  reckou- 
iug  wonld  make  the  period  six  months  less  than  the  former,  yet  both  computations  would  be 
equally  correct.  Verse  2.  There  was  a  sore  famine  in  Samaria— "Entirely  without  refer- 
ence to  the  Old  Ttstament,  Meuandros  (Joscp/tus,  Antiq.  viii.  13.2)  makes  mention  of  a  severe 
drought  lasting  for  a  year  under  the  Syrian  king  Ithobal,  a  contemporary  of  Ahab  "  {Ewald), 
Verse  4.  Obadiah  took  an  hundred  prophets — i.  e.,  scholars  in  the  schools  of  the  prophets. 
This  indicates  that  they  must  have  been  numerous,  even  though  Jezebel  had  sought  to  extir- 
minate  them,  with  all  that  connected  Jehovah's  name  and  worfehipwith  the  land.  Hid  them 
in  a  cave— Most  probably  in  the  clefts  of  Mount  Carmel  [Winer).  "Verse  7.  Art  thou  that 
my  lord  Elijah  %— Luther  translates  the  words,  HT  ^m^^^,  "  Art  thou  not  my  lord  Elijah  ?  " 

T 

The  Sept.  renders  them,  et  ah  it ahrSs  Kvpt4  fiov  'HAi'a.  But  Obadiah  was  in  no  doubt;  "he 
knew  him."  It  is  rather  a  question  of  wonder  [Keil).  "Art  thou  here?"  Verso  12.  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  carry  thee  whither  I  know  not—  Either  by  a  supernatural  bodily 
transition  (Acts  viii.  39),  or  by  an  inward  impulse  from  God  (Matt.  iv.  1).  Cannot  find  thee  — 
The  effectual  secresy  of  Elijah  for  so  long  a  time,  though  search  had  everywhere  been  made 
for  him  (verse  10),  convinced  Obadiah  that  Elijah  could  hide  from  discovery.  Verse  16.  As 
the  Lord  of  hosts  liveth— *'The  /^IK^^J  with  niH^  elevates  the  solemnity  of  the  oath" 

T  ;  T      : 

{Keil).  Verse  17.  Art  thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel?-  1D^*,  to  bring  into  trouble.  The 
words  may  be  rendered,  Art  thou  there,  0  troubler  of  Israel  ?  They  mean,  Do  I  at  last  meet 
thee,  thou  bringer  of  trouble  upon  Israel?  Verse  18.  Thou  hast  followed  Eaalim— TAe 
Baalim  ;  not  alluding  to  the  numerous  images  and  statues  of  Baal,  but  the  various  personifi- 
cations of  that  god— Baal-Berith,  Baal-Zebul  {Winer).  Verse  19.  Prophets  of  Baal,  &c.— 
Soothsayers  and  oracle  priests.  Groves— Asherah.  J3aal  and  Astarte  were  the  male  and 
female  divinities.  Jezebel  was  the  patroness  of  the  prophets  of  this  female  divinity.  Verse  21. 
282 


HOMILETIC  C0MMEMAR7:   KINGS.  chap,  xviii. 


How  long  halt  ye,  &c.— From  the  root  C^^D,  to  divide,  dissever.  In  Psalm  cxix.  113,  the 
same  word  is  rendered  by  "  vain  thoughts,"  Le.,  double-minded,  ambiguous.  The  F«?5;- trans- 
lates  here,  Usquequo  claudicatis  in  duas  partes  ?  To  go  tiom  one  to  another.  Notwithstand- 
ing all  Ahab  and  Jezebel  had  done  to  exterminate  Jehovah-worsbip,  there  was  vacillatiou 
between  Jeh  )vah  anl  Baal-not  decision  against  Jehovah,  only  mclecision  Verse  24.  me 
God  that  answereth  by  fire -A  speciallv  favourable  test,  for  Baal  was  the  fire-god,  the  sun. 
Verse  25.  For  ye  are  many- An  ironical  taunt.  You  are  the  more  numerous  rc-hgious  paity 
in  Israel,  and,  as  being  in  the  ascendant,  you  have  the  right  of  first  choice!  U-t,  U  how 
near  the  moment  of  their  reverse  from  this  ascendancy !  Verse  'iC.  Leaped  upon  the  altar— 
The  pantomimic  heathenish  dance.  Verse  27.  Cry  aloud ;  for  he  is  a  god  -  A  «''-th'"g  satire, 
a  most  mocking  taunt.     Talking,  or  meditating  ;  pursuing,  gone  astray.     Verse  28.  Out  tnem- 

selves  after  their  manner— niilJ?"!  means  more  than  a  mere  puncturing  or  scratching. 


\   - 


The  superstition  existed  that  the  hlood  of  priests  was  specially  virtuous  m  constraining  the 
deity  to  action;  and  now  they  were  in  extremis.  Verse  32.  Two  measures  of  seed—ihe 
measurement  is  not  very  definite,  and  cannot  be  conjectured  with  any  accuracy,  bnt  it  must 
have  been  both  deep  and  wide.     Verse  38.  The  fire  of  the  Lord  fell-rnn"'-rh^  does  not 

mean  lightning  (comp.  Lev.  ix.  24).  Verse  40.  Slew  them  there-For  they  were  deadly 
criminals,  perilous  to  the  theocracy,  and  had  incurred  the  pdialty  of  death  (Deut.  xvii. 
2-4  ;  xiii.  13).  Verse  41.  Sound  of  abundance  of  rain— The  cause  of  the  curse  of  drought 
being  now  removed,  the  blessi-g  came  quick.  Verse  42.  Cast  himself  down  upon  the  earth— 
Beto(.k  him^e^f  to  prayer.  This  kept  him  from  becomiBg  elate,  and  indicated  his  deep  con- 
cern for  the  mercy  of  God  to  come  upon  the  stricken  land.  Verse  4G.  Hand  of  the  Lord- 
Supernatural  energy,  and  a  Divine  ecstacy.  Entrance  of  Jezreel- Where  Ahab  had  a  summer 
palace  (xxi.  1). — W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8   OF  VERSES  1-18. 
Ahab  the  Txpe  op  a  Weak  aistd  Wicked  Kino. 

I.  He  was  the  occasion  of  prolonged  national  distress  (verses  1,  2).  For 
three  years  and  a-half  Israel  lay  gasping  under  a  parching  drought,  with  all  its 
attendant  horrors  of  famine  (Luke  iv.  2b  ;  James  v.  17).  Everywhere  was 
desolation  and  barrenness ;  the  soil  seemed  scorched  up  with  the  wrath  of  God. 
The  labours  of  the  field  had  ceased,  and  the  joy  of  the  harvest  and  vintage  was 
hushed.  The  market-places  were  empty  and  silent,  and  the  cottages  were  occu- 
pied by  thin,  bony  forms,  in  which  the  pulse  of  life  but  faintly  throbbed.  The 
bright-plum  aged  birds  had  fled,  and  none  but  carrion  fowl  hovered  in  the  air, 
or  fattened  on  the  carcases  that  were  strewn  in  ghastly  plenty  on  the  plains. 
The  calamity  was  so  great  and  widespread  that  the  indolent  and  reckless  Ahab 
was  compelled  to  bestir  himself,  and,  in  harmony  with  the  simple  manners  of 
many  Eastern  monarchs,  went  in  search  of  provender.  And  yet  the  thought 
never  seemed  to  dawn  on  the  mind  of  the  king  that  he  was  a  principal  cause 
of  the  suffering  he  everywhere  witnessed.  Unhappy,  indeed,  is  the  people 
whose  sovereign  is  both  weak  and  wicked  1 

II.  He  was  served  by  a  God-fearing  officer.  It  is  no  unusual  coincidence 
for  a  Godless  king  to  desire  God-feyring  men  for  his  ministers  and  counsellors. 
Many  a  prince,  though  himself  no  Christian,  holds  in  his  service  a  Chiistian, 
and  esteems  him  more  highly  than  the  others  who  are  not  Christian.  1.  Oha- 
diaKs  piety  was  practical  {mqi^q^  3,  4,  13).  He  protected  the  prophets  of  the 
Lord  from  the  persecuting  fury  of  Jezebel,  and,  at  considerable  personal  cost, 
when  everything  was  at  famine  prices,  fed  them  with  bread  and  water,  when 
bread  and  water  were  luxuries  very  difficult  to  procure.  Religion  does  very 
little  for  a  man  if  it  does  not  inspire  him  to  generous  activity.  Noble  thoughts 
look  better  when  cryotallized  into  noble  deeds.     2.   OhadiaNs  piety  was  main- 


CHAP.  XVIII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


iaiued  in  the  mulH  of  moral  corruption  and  danger  (verses  9-14).  It  is  credit- 
able to  Ahub  that  he  had  an  officer  like  Obadiah,  and  though  he  had  steadily- 
refused  to  bow  the  knee  to  Eaal,  and  though  it  was  publicly  known  that  he 
had  befriended  the  prophets,  Ahab  must  have  been  so  attached  to  him  that 
even  Jezebel  had  not  ventured  to  bring  about  his  dismissal  from  the  court. 
And  yet  Obadiah  could  not  fully  trust  the  king ;  he  was  compelled  to  confess 
that  he  might  be  unrighteously  put  to  death  by  him  (verse  14).  Obadiah  was 
not  located  in  a  remote  and  lonely  place,  but  in  the  midst  of  a  busy  court,  where 
he  saw  and  heard  nothing  good,  surrounded  by  Godless  men,  and  exposed  to 
every  temptation  to  Godlessness,  frivolity,  rioting,  and  licentiousness.  '*  To  be 
pious  with  the  pious,  to  maintain  one's  faith  in  the  midst  of  the  faithful,  is  not 
difficult ;  but  in  the  midst  of  the  world,  to  preserve  one's  self  unspotted  from  it, 
to  keep  a  pure  heart,  and  have  God  before  our  eyes  and  in  our  hearts,  wherever 
the  Lord  places  us,  this  is,  indeed,  greatly  to  fear  the  Lord."  3.  Ohadiah's 
piety  was  put  to  a  severe  test  (verses  7-16).  The  faith  that  had  sustained  the 
soul  amid  the  corruptions  of  idolatry  was  staggered  by  the  simple  request  of  a 
man  of  God.  That  Elijah,  journeying  on  his  weary  way,  should  meet  the  very 
man  who  was  the  only  true  friend  of  the  prophet  at  the  court,  was  no  more 
accidental  than  that  Obadiah,  going  forth  in  search  of  provender  for  the  cattle, 
should  find  the  man  who  was  to  test  severely  his  faith  and  his  fear  of  God. 
Even  those  who  fear  the  Lord,  and  walk  by  faith,  are  sometimes,  in  the  hour  of 
peril,  overcome  by  an  agony  of  fear,  which  bows  them  down  as  reeds  before  a 
whirlwind.  Peter,  who  first  threatened  with  the  sword,  became  suddenly 
terror-stricken  before  a  damsel.  It  is  good  for  us  to  recognize  our  human  weak- 
ness, for  this  knowledge  preserves  us  from  over-security,  and  leads  us  to  pray : 
Lord,  strengthen  our  faith. 

III.  He  was  callously  indiiFerent  to  the  sufferings  of  his  people  (verses 
5,  6).  He  was  more  concerned  about  his  horses  and  mules  than  the  condition 
of  his  subjects.  How  totally  unfit  was  such  a  mean-spirited  man  to  wear  a 
crown  !  It  is  the  fatal  result  of  idolatry  to  steel  the  heart  against  human  sym- 
pathy. It  is  a  melancholy  sight  to  see  in  Ahab  one  who  can  submit  to  great 
personal  inconvenience  to  search  for  **  grass,"  but  who  has  no  desire  to  enquire 
after  a  justly-offended  God;  while  in  his  whole  conduct  in  this  transaction  we 
have  the  type  of  all  grovelling,  sordid  souls,  who  will  spend  more  upon  their 
kennels  in  a  month  than  upon  their  cottagers  in  a  year,  and  who  will  lose  in  a 
few  seconds,  amid  the  gambling  of  the  turf,  what  would  endow  many  an 
orphanage,  and  establish  a  hundred  schools. 

IV.  He  was  mistaken  as  to  the  true  cause  of  national  suffering  (verse  17). 
**  Art  thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel  ?"  All  men  who  deal  faithfully  with  care- 
less souls  are  denounced  as  troublers.  There  are  hundreds  who,  like  Ahab, 
think  of  the  trouble,  but  ignore  the  sin  that  causes  the  trouble,  Ahab  attri- 
buted the  national  distress  to  the  man  who  had  plainly  announced  to  him  its 
cause,  and  the  method  by  which  cause  and  effect  could  be  removed.  In  his 
mad  delusion  he  sought  in  every  country  (verse  10)  for  the  life  of  the  heroi( 
prophet.  He  was  swallowed  up  in  revenge  when  he  ought  to  have  been 
swallowed  up  in  penitence.  Idolatry  was  continued  with  all  its  shameless 
enormities,  and  its  punishment  was  continued  too. 

V.  He  was  cowed  by  the  fearless  indictment  of  the  faithful  prophet 
(verse  18).  '1  he  meeting  of  Ahab  and  Elijah  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel  was  of  a 
very  remarkable  character;  it  was  one  of  those  scenes  which  become  historic. 
The  savage,  hot-tempered  accusation  of  Ahab  is  met  by  the  calm,  stern  reply 
of  Elijah  :  "I  have  not  troubled  Israel,  but  thou  and  thy  father's  house." 
The  monarch  quails  before  the  man  in  sheepskin,  and  at  once  becomes  pliant  in 

28-t 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap,  xyta 


his  hand.  A  conscioTisness  of  right  fills  the  heart  with  courage.  Truth  never 
fears  the  light ;  torch  like,  "  the  more  it's  shook  it  shines,"  and  every  falsehood 
is  exposed  by  its  searching  glare. 

Lessons  : — 1.  It  is  an  awful  responsihility  to  he  a  king,     2.  The  worst  kings 

have  often  the  most  exemplary  servant*.  3.  Idolatry  is  an  unmitigated  curse  to 
king  and  people, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Yerses  1-18.  Elijah's  re-appear-  no  famine  subscriptions;  no  relief 
ance.  In  this  incident  we  have  three  fund  for  the  poor.  This  is  the  fruit 
eminent  men  brought  before  us,  and  of  sin  and  heathenism.  What  a  con- 
the  conduct  of  each  suggests  some  use-  trast  to  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  the 
f  ul  lessons.  I.  With  regard  to  Elijah  conduct  of  Christian  nations,  especially 
ipe  have — 1.  an  illustration  of  self-  our  own  nation!  Let  distress  come 
denial.  It  would  be  no  easy  matter  upon  any  portion  of  our  people,  and  at 
for  Elijah  to  leave  Sarepta.  He  was  once  efforts  are  put  forth  to  relieve 
surrounded  with  many  inducements  to  them.  And  Ahab  was  not  only  hard 
remain — peace,  security,  plenty,  com-  and  selfish,  but  he  was  blind  to  the 
fort,  ease,  enjoyment.  On  the  other  true  cause  of  the  famine.  Heattri- 
hand,  the  duty  to  which  he  was  called  buted  it  to  Elijah.  He  did  not  see  it 
was  by  no  means  a  pleasant  one.  The  was  his  own  sin  against  God  This  is 
prospect  of  meeting  Ahab  would  one  of  the  fruits  of  sin ;  it  is  bHnd- 
awaken  any  but  agreeable  feelings  in  folding.  It  throws  a  veil  over  the 
his  heart.  He  had  no  reason  to  expect  mind  of  men,  so  that  they  do  not  see 
anything  from  such  a  wicked  king  but  themselves  as  sinning  against  God. 
harshness  and  severity.  But  in  the  Hence  the  need  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
face  of  these  circumstances  he  is  ready  to  convince  of  sin.  III.  With  regard 
to  obey  the  voice  of  God.  That  voice  to  Obadiah  we  have — 1.  An  illustration 
is  supreme,  and  he  follows  it,  whatever  of  fidelity.  Obadiah's  position  would 
self-denial  it  may  involve  on  the  one  expose  him  to  many  temptations,  but 
hand,  or  risk  on  the  other.  2.  An  in  the  midst  of  all  he  was  enabled  to 
illustration  of  courage.  The  righteous  be  faithful  to  his  master  and  true  to 
are  as  bold  as  a  lion.  Elijah  showed  his  God.  He  could  relieve  and  help 
such  boldness  on  this  occasion.  He  the  people  of  God  amid  distress  and 
was  the  messenger  of  God,  doing  His  persecution,  and  at  the  same  time  dis- 
bidding,  and  he  could  rely  upon  his  charge  his  duty  to  the  king.  Similar 
God  for  safety  and  help ;  therefore  he  illustrations  of  fidelity  we  have  in  the 
had  no  fear  at  the  prospect  of  meeting  case  of  Joseph  in  Egypt,  and  of  Daniel 
Ahab.  And  when  he  did  meet  him,  in  Babylon.  2.  An  illustration  of  the 
he  boldly  charged  the  calamity  of  the  advantage  of  early  piety.  Obadiah 
country  upon  his  wickedness  and  feared  God  from  his  youth.  This  is 
idolatry.  We  need  not  only  self-  the  secret  of  his  excellent  character, 
denial  to  withdraw  ourselves  from  the  Touth  is  the  time  to  form  those  habits 
pleasant  associations  of  life,  but  also  which  fit  men  for  positions  of  useful- 
courage  and  determination  to  do  ness  and  importance.  When  youth  has 
Christ's  work  in  the  face  of  difficulty  been  neglected,  one's  after  years  are 
and  danger.  II.  With  regard  to  Ahaby  of  much  less  value  in  the  world  and 
we  see  the  hardening  and  blinding  injlu-  in  the  church. — The  Study  and  Pulpit, 
ence  of  sin.     While  the  famine  pressed 

sorely  upon  all  the  land,  the  king  was  Yerses  1,     2.    The   commands   of 

most  anxious  about  himself  and  his  God.       I.    Are   made   known    at    the 

royal  stud.     We  read  of  no  effort  to  right  time.      "  And  it  came   to  pass 

alleviate  the  sufferings  of  the  people :  after  many  days."     II.  Are  authori' 

286 


OEAf.  xwm,  SOMIIETIC  C0MMFNTAE7  :  KINOH. 


tative  and  peremptory.  "  Go,  show  witnesses  for  the  truth  at  the  peril  of 
thyself  unto  Ahab."  III.  Have  ever  his  own  life  and  at  the  expense  of  his 
a  promise  of  blessing  linked  on  to  them,  own  fortune.  Thus  many  people  by 
**And  I  will  send  rain  upon  the  the  maintenance  of  the  witnesses '  for 
earth."  lY.  Are  promptly  obeyed  by  evangelical  truth,  by  the  spread  and 
His  believing  servants.  **  And  Elijah  promotion  of  the  Christian  Scriptures 
went  to  show  himself  unto  Ahab."  do   much  for  the   kingdom    of    God' 

which  otherwise  they  could  not  do, 
"Verse  2.  Famine.  1.  Imposes  in-  andlay  up  a  reward  in  heaven,  if  they 
describable  sufferings.  2.  May  be  do  not  shun  disgrace,  nor  prefer  earthly 
used  as  a  scourge  to  punish  a  sinful  and  perishable  gains  to  the  celestial 
and  idolatrous  people.  3.  Presents  and  imperishable. — Menken. 
ample  materials  to  the  conscientious  —  0  degenerate  state  of  Israel ! 
ruler  for  repentance  and  reform.  anything  was  now  lawful  there,  saving 

—  Daily  bread  was  scarce,  for  the     piety.     It  is  well  if  God's  prophets 
land  was   dried   up    and    unfruitful ;     can  find  a  hole  to  hide  their  heads  in. 
but  the  bread  of  life,  the  Word  of  God,      They  must  needs  be  hard  driven  when 
was   likewise  scarce,  for    the  nation     fifty  of  them  are  fain  to  crowd   to- 
itself  was  dried  up,  and  those    who     gether  into  one  cave  :  there  they  had 
would  have    sown   the   seed   of  the     both  shade  and  repast.     Good  Obadiah 
Word  were  persecuted  and  compelled     hazards  his  own  life  to  preserve  theirs, 
to  silence  and  concealment.     Woe  to     and   spends  himself  in  that  extreme 
that    country     upon     whom   famine,      dearth,    upon    their    necessary    diet, 
bodily  and    spiritual,  both    fall,  and     Bread  and  water  was  more  now,  than 
who  yet  are  driven  by  neither  to  re-     other    whiles    wine    and     delicates. 
pentance  and  conversion.  Whether  should  we  wonder  more  at 

the  mercy  of  God  in  reserving  a  hun- 
Yerses  3,  4.  Eminent  piety.  I.  dred  prophets,  or  in  thus  sustaining 
Is  found  in  the  highest  social  rank,  them,  being  reserved  ?  When  did 
and  in  the  most  unlikely  places.  II.  God  ever  leave  His  Israel  unfurnished 
Consists  in  **  fearing  the  Lord  great-  of  some  prophets  ?  When  did  He 
ly."  III.  Is  intensely  practical  in  its'  leave  His  prophets  unprovided  of  some 
aims.  IV.  Has  a  lofty  regard  and  Obadiah?  How  worthy  art  thou,  0 
generous  care  for  the  suffering  "pro-  Lord,  to  be  trusted  with  thine  own 
phets  of  the  Lord."  charge  !     While  there  are  men  upon 

earth,  or  birds  in  the  air,  or  angels  in 
Verse  4.  Obadiah  could  not  do  this     heaven,  thy  messengers  cannot  want 
without  great  risk  and  the  exposure     provision. — Bp.  Hall. 
of  his  own  person  to  great  danger ; 

neither  in  that  extreme  famine  could  Verses  5,  6.  A  heartless  monarch, 
he  maintain  those  hundred  prophets  1.  A  monstrosity  in  a  time  of  famine, 
without  great  expenditure  of  his  own  2.  Is  more  concerned  about  his  stables 
substance.  Obadiah  not  only  pre-  than  the  lives  of  his  famishing  sub- 
served the  lives  of  a  hundred  innocent  jects.  3.  Prepares  for  himself  inevit- 
men,  he  saved  a  hundred  worshippers  able  punishment, 
of  Jehovah,  and  yet  more,  a  hundred  —  Pitiful  man !  Anxious  care  for 
men  who,  immediately  the  persecution  the  life  of  his  horses  and  the  mainten- 
was  over,  and  the  Baal-worship  in  ance  of  his  stables — this  is  all  that 
Israel  destroyed,  became  useful  to  the  the  three  years  and  a  half  of  chastise- 
ignorant  and  bewildered  people  as  ment  of  the  Almighty  had  callel  forth 
their  instructors  in  doctrine.  Thus,  in  his  soul.  How  often  does  one  think 
although  Obadiah,  as  the  lieutenant  of  of  a  person,  "  JN^ow  he  will  be  quite  a 
the  royal  watch,  could  not  do  much  different  person  " ;  and  then,  behold  I 
for  the  kingdom  of  God  by  direct  testi-  where  one  hopes  to  find  at  length 
mony  and  instruction,  yet  indirectly  thoughts  of  God  and  eternity,  there 
he  did.  a  great  deal  by  preserving  these  are  only  thoughts  of  horses  and  mules ; 
286 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


OHAP.  xvm. 


and  in  place  of  holy  emotions,  instead 
of  aspirations,  prayers,  and  reflections 
upon  the  great  and  eternal  interests  of 
life,  you  find  a  thick  swarm  of  pitiful 
cares  and  considerations  which  hover 
about  the  soul,  and  hover  with  it  into 
an  awful  eternity.  Ahab  and  Obadiah 
both  journey  on  together  through  the 
land,  but  each  goes  his  own  way  alone 
— a  picture  of  their  life  journey. 
Ahab  walks  in  the  broad,  Obadiah 
in  the  narrow,  way :  the  latter  alone 
leads  to  the  green  pastures  and  still 
waters  which  refresh  the  soul. — 
Krummacher. 

Terse  5.  The  terribleness  of  unim- 
proved warnings.    What  a  mournful 
picture    have    we   here!     For  three 
years  God  had  tried  this  monarch  with 
sore  judgments.     He    had    shut   up 
heaven,    closed  the   fountains  of  the 
land,    decimated     his     people    with 
famine.     The  voice  seemed  too  loud, 
too  solemn  and  awful  to  be  disregarded. 
We  might  have  expected  to  see  Ahab, 
like  the  heathen  king  of  Nineveh,  put 
sackcloth  on  his  loins  and  dust  on  his 
head,  calling  his  people  to  humiliation 
and  repentance.     But  alas!  the  Divine 
monition   seems    utterly  disregarded. 
God  has  emptied    His   quiver    upon 
him ;    but    arrow    after    arrow    has 
bounded    back   from    that    heart    of 
adamant.     He  has  neither  tear  for  his 
own  guilt,  nor  tear  for  his  suffering 
subjects.     So  far  as  we  are  told,  the 
one  miserable,  petty  thought  that  fills 
that  narrow  soul  is,  to  get  provender 
for  his  stables,  and  save  his  mules  and 
horses.    Ah !  terrible  indeed  it  is  when 
judgments  thus  lead  to  an  open  defi- 
ance and  resistance  of  the  Divine  will ; 
a  mocking  of  his  hand,  a  laughing  to 
scorn  of  His  righteous  reproofs;    no 
penitence,   no  remorse ;  but  rather  a 
more  intense  selfishness.  Anunsancti- 
fied  trial  becomes  a  curse.  It  indurates 
if  it  does  not  soften.     It  is  like  the 
heat  of  the  sun,  which  melts  the  wax, 
but  hardens  the  clay. — Macduff. 

Verse  6.  Ahab  had  found  Obadiah 
faithful,  and  therefore  trusted  him  in 
this  weighty  business,  rather  than 
any    other.     Of  a    man  that    truly 


feareth  God  it  may  better  be  said  than 
of  Cato,  that  he  never  did  well  that  he 
might  appear  to  do  so,  but  because  he 
could  not  do  otherwise. — Trapp, 

Verses  8-14.    Obadiah  finds  this  load 
too  heavy ;  neither  is  he  more  stricken 
with  the  boldness  than  with  the  un- 
kindness  of  this  comraaud — boldness  in 
respect  of  Elijah,  unkindness  in  respect 
of  himself ;  for  thus  he  thinks—"  If 
Elijah  do  come  to  Ahab,  he  dies ;  if  he 
do  not  come,  I  die.     If  it  be  known 
that  I  met  him  and  brought  him  not, 
it  is  death.     If  I  say  that  he  will  come 
voluntarily,  and  God  shall  alter  his  in- 
tentions, it  is  death.     How  unhappy  a 
man  ain  I  that  must  be  either  Elijah's 
executioner  or  my  o  wn  !     Were  Ahab's 
displeasure  but  smoking,  I  might  hope 
to  quench  it ;  but  now  that  the  flame 
of  it  hath  broken  forth  to  the  notice, 
to  the  search,  of  all  the  kingdoms  and 
nations  round  about,  it  may  consume 
me;    I   cannot  extinguish   it.      This 
message  is  for  an  enemy    of  Elijah, 
for  a  client  of  Baal.     As  for   me,   I 
have  well  approved  my  devotion    to 
God,  my  love  to  His  prophets.      What 
have  I  done  that  I  should  be  singled 
out  either  to  kill  Elijah,  or  to  be  killed 
for  him  ?  "     Many  a  hard  plunge  must 
that  man  needs  be  driven  to  who  would 
hold  his  conscience  together  with  the 
service  and  favour  of  a  tyrant      It  is 
a  happy  thing  to  serve  a  just  master; 
there  is  no  danger,  no  stain,  in  such 
obedience. — Bp,  Hall. 

Verses  15,  16.  A  consciousness 
of  right.  I.  Nerves  the  soul  with 
invincible  bravery.  II.  Brings  the 
soul  in  contact  with  the  most  colossal 
embodiments  of  iniquity.  III. 
Prompts  the  soul  to  the  most  faithful 
denunciations  of  wrong. 

—  A  strong,  resolute  word  of  faith 
exercises  power  over  the  heart.  It 
strengthens  the  weak,  supports  the 
tottering,  encourages  the  fearful,  and 
tranquillizes  the  anxious-minded.  A 
teacher  must  not  shrink  from  his  office 
through  fear  or  cowaidice,  let  tyrants 
look  grim  as  they  may  (1  Peter  iii. 
14). — Lange. 

Verse  15.  The  fear  of  God  putteth 

287 


CHAP.  XVlIl. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


out  the  fear  of  any  mortal  wight,  as 
the  sunbeams  do  the  fire  on  the 
hearth.  When  Gardiner,  Bishop  of 
Winchester,  said  to  Dr.  Taylor,  the 
martyr — "  Art  thou  come,  thou  ■vil- 
lain ?  How  darest  thou  look  me  in 
the  face  for  shame  ?  Xnowest  thou 
not  who  I  am?"  ''Yes,"  quoth 
Taylor,  **I  know  who  you  are;  you 
are  Dr.  Gardiner,  Bishop  of  Win- 
chester and  Lord  Chancellor,  yet  but  a 
mortal  man,  I  trow.  But  if  I  should 
be  afraid  of  your  lordly  looks,  why 
fear  you  not  God,  the  Lord  of  us 
all  ?  How  dare  you  for  shame  look 
any  Christian  man  in  the  face,  seeing 
you  have  forsaken  the  truth,  denied 
our  Saviour  Christ  and  His  Word, 
and  done  contrary  to  your  own  word 
and  writing  ?  "  Thus  spake  that  vali- 
ant martyr,  like  another  Elias. — Trapp, 

Verses  17,    18.     The    source    of 
national  trouble.      1 .  Is  not  in  the 

messenger  who  announces  its  pre- 
sence. 2.  But  in  the  infidelity  and 
wickedness  of  the  throne.  3.  In  the 
national  desertion  of  God.  4.  In  the 
adoption  and  practice  of  idolatry. 

—  A  remarkable  meeting.  1.  A 
numerously  attended  monarch,  and 
a  lonely  prophet.  2.  The  impersona- 
tion of  great  moral  weakness  in  the 
presence  of  great  moral  strength.  3. 
An  angry  question  met  by  a  calm, 
overwhelming  reply.  4.  The  autho- 
rity of  the  prophet  triumphing  for 
the  time  over  that  of  the  king. 

—  At  last  the  mysterious  prophet, 
whom  each  had  desired  to  see  for  so 
long,  appeared  suddenly  before  them. 
"  Behold  Elijah  !"  was  the  message 
which  the  faithful  Obadiah  was  to  take 
back  to  Ahab — two  awful  words 
which  he  thrice  repeats,  before  he 
can  be  induced  to  return.  "  Art  thou 
my  lord  Elijah  ?"  was  the  reverential 
salute  of  the  minister.  "Art  thou  the 
troubler  of  Israel?"  was  the  angry 
question  of  the  king.  But  it  was  an 
anger  which  soon  sunk  into  awe. 
Pace  to  face  at  last  they  met,  the  pro- 
phet and  the  king.  In  that  hour  of 
extreme  despair,  the  voice  of  Eiijah 
sounded  with  an  authority  which  it 
had  never  had  before.     The  drought, 

288 


we  are  told,  had  been  threatened  by 
him.  It  was  then,  doubtless,  as  it 
still  is,  the  belief  of  Eastern  countries 
that  seers  and  saints  have  the  power 
of  withholding  or  giving  rain.  In  the 
convent  of  Mount  Sinai  the  Arabs 
believe  that  there  is  a  book,  by  the 
opening  or  shutting  of  which  the 
monks  can  disperse  or  retain  the  rain 
of  the  peninsula. — Stanley, 

Yerse  17.  Doubtless  Ahab,  startled 
to  hear  of  Elijah  coming  to  meet  him 
as  one  that  did  not  more  hate  than 
fear  the  prophet.  Well  might  he 
think,  "  Thus  long,  thus  far,  have  I 
sought  Elijah ;  Elijah  would  not  come 
to  seek  me  but  under  a  sure  guard, 
and  with  some  strange  commission. 
His  coarse  mantle  hath  the  advantage 
of  my  robe  and  sceptre.  If  I  can 
command  a  piece  of  the  earth,  I  see 
he  can  command  heaven."  The  edge 
of  his  revenge  is  taken  off  with  a 
doubtful  expectation  of  the  issue;  and 
now,  when  Elijah  off'ers  himself  to  the 
eyes  of  Ahab,  he  who  durst  not 
strike,  yet  durst  challenge,  the  pro- 
phet— "  Art  thou  he  that  troubleth 
Israel?"  Jeroboam's  hand  was  still 
in  Ahab's  thoughts  ;  he  holds  it  not 
so  safe  to  smite  as  to  expostulate.  He 
that  was  the  head  of  Israel  speaks 
out  that  which  was  in  the  heart  of  all 
his  people,  that  Elijah  was  the  cause 
of  all  their  sorrow.  Alas  !  what  hath 
the  righteous  prophet  done?  He 
taxed  their  sin ;  he  foretold  the  judg- 
ment, he  deserved  it  not,  he  inflicted 
it  not;  yet  he  smarts,  and  they  are 
guilty ;  as  if  some  fond  people  should 
accuse  the  herald  or  the  trumpet  as 
the  cause  of  their  war;  or,  as  if  some 
ignorant  peasant,  when  he  sees  his 
fowls  bathing  in  his  pond,  should  cry 
out  of  them  as  the  causes  of  foul 
weather. — £p.  Hall. 

Verse  18.  This  stern  rebuke  led 
the  poor  king  to  feel  that  he  had  his 
master  before  him,  and  that  the  hairy 
mantle  of  the  prophet  was  a  symbol 
of  greater  power  than  the  royal  robe, 
and  his  staff  an  emblem  of  higher 
authority  than  his  own  sceptre.  He 
quailed  before  the  fearless  prophet; 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINOS.  chap,  xvui. 


and  the  same  facility  of  temper  which  —  0,  the  heroic  spirit  of  Elijah  » 

inclined  him  to  evil  when  under  the  He  stands  alone  amid  aU  the    train 

influence  of  Jezebel,  swayed  him   to  of  Ahab,   and  dares   not  only  repel 

good  m  the  presence  of  Elijah.     We  this  charge,  but  retorts  it.     "I  have 

have  heard   of  men   whose    whisper  not  troubled  Israel,  but  thou  "     No 

could  quell  the   rage  of  the   eldest  earthly  joy  can  daunt  him  who  hath 

horse,  and  bend  him  down  to  sudden  the  clear  and  heartenincr  visions  of 

tameness.     Power  of  the  like    kind  God.     This  holy  seer  discerns  the  true 

some   men   possess   over   other   men.  cause  of  our  sufferings  to  be  our  sins 

Mijah  possessed  it  eminently;  it  was  Foolish   men   are   plagued   for  their 

the  gitt  of  God,  and  such  a  man  as  offences,  and  it  is   no  small  part  of 

Ahab  was  a  proper  subject  for  its  in-  their  plague  that  they  see  it  notT    The 

fluence.     Besides,  Ahab  seems  to  have  only  common  disturber  of  men   fami- 

had  some  capacities  for  right  feeling  lies,  cities,   kingdoms,  worlds,   is  sin 

when  away  from  under  the  deadly  in-  There  is  no  such  traitor  to  any  state 

fluence  of  his  wife  ;  and  whatever  may  as  the  wilfully  wicked  ;  the  quietest 

have  been  his  first  purpose  when  he  and  most  plausible  offender  is  secretly 

heard  that    Elijah    awaited  him,  he  seditious,    and   stirreth    quarrels    in 

had  time  to  cool  on  the  way  to  the  heaven.— i?i?  Ball. 
place  where  he  was. — Kitt  . 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  19-40. 

The  Teiai  and  Defeat  op  Idolatet. 

The  grand,  imposing  spectacle  on  Mount  Carmei  described  in  these  verses  has 
an  interest  and  a  lesson  to  humanity  for  all  time.     As  in  other  ages  and  countries 
a  great  delusion   was   here  tested,    exposed,   and  overthrown.     Truth   lon^ 
despised  and  persecuted  had  the  opportunity  of  vindicating  itself,  and  the  vin"^ 
dication  was  so  pubhc  and  complete  as  to  constitute  an  example  for  universal 
reference.     The  place  was  worthy  of  the  scene  to  be  enacted  there.     Carmei 
was  the  pecuhar  haunt  of  Elijah.     Situated  on  the  west  of  Palestine,  immediately 
to  the  south  of  the  Bay  of  Acre,  it  rises  at  its  highest  point  sixteen  hundred 
teet  above  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  from   the  shores  of  which  it 
stretches  m  a  south-eastern  course,  and  in  ranges  of  different  heights,  for  five  or 
BIX  miles,  commanding  a  view  of  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelou,  iust  where  the 
glades  ot  the  forest  sink  into  the  usual  bareness  of  the  hills  of  Manasseh-     In 
the  distance,  and  on  its  commanding  position,  overlooking  the  whole  valley  rose 
the  stately  city  of  Jezreel,  with  Ahab>s  palace  and  JezebePs  temple  embosomed 
in  Its  sacred  grove.     Immediately  under  their  feet  spread,  far  and  wide   that 
noble  plain-the  battle-field  of  sacred  history^the  plain  of  Megiddo  o7  JeWeel 
r       wi.    1       i^'?^''  P^'''^^  (^'^^^  name  implies)  in  countless  windin-s 
w3\      level  valley-that  ancient  stream  on  whose  banks  had  perished  the 
host  of  Sisera  and  the  host  of  Midian,  before  the  army  of  Deborah  and  Barak, 
before  the  sword  of  the  Lord  and  of  Gideon.     In  suchi  scene,  with  such  recoil 

io?.r;?X  l^l'^i!  ^T/^'  ^'"P^.'  "^-^^^^^^^  ^''^^'^'^^  ^^^  ^  conflict  as  momen- 
tous as  any  which  had  taken  place  in  the  plain  beneath.  On  the  one  side  were 
ranged  the  king  and  people,  with  the  four  hundred  and  fifty  prophets  of  Baal 
tossed  m  their  splendid  vestments;  and  on  the  other  side  tVone  solitary 
figure  of  the  prophet  of  the  Lord  in  his  rough  sheepskin  cloak,  though  supported 
all  the  time  by  an  invisible  throng  of  heavenly  inteUigences.     Observe-^ 

I.  That  idolatry  was  here  put  on  its  trial  under  the  most  favourable 
circumstances  to  secure  its  triumph.  1.  Took  place  at  the  r/V^^S.^ 
C^7w  ^^°^^^^y  ,^^^  ^^^  established  religion  of  Israel,  and  those  who  d^  not 
heartily  accept  it  were  awed  into  submission   by  the  terrors  of  persecution 


V  289 


CHAP.  XVIII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


The  multitude  now  gathered  on  Carmel,  from  the  king  downward,  were  wor- 
shippers of  Baal,  and  were  ready  to  defend  their  favourite  deity.  It  seemed 
a  daring  and  hopeless  thing  to  offer  the  slightest  opposition.  2.  Was  accepted 
ly  its  acknowledged  leaders.  The  four  hundred  and  fifty  priests  might  have 
declined  the  contest,  and  the  king  might  have  forbade  it ;  but  whether  com- 
pelled by  the  unanimous  voice  of  the  people,  or  assured  of  victory  by  observing 
the  lonely  and  unfriended  condition  of  Elijah,  or  urged  by  an  influence  they 
were  powerless  to  resist,  they  accepted  the  challenge.  Could  it  be  that  they 
had  any  real  confidence  in  the  power  of  Baal?  Alas!  there  is  no  knowing  to 
what  depth  of  delusion  idolatry  may  sink  its  victims.  The  maddening  earnest- 
ness of  the  reiterated  appeals  to  Baal  (verses  26,  28)  was  a  sight  to  make  one 
sad.  3.  Appealed  to  what  the  worshippers  believed  was  the  most  prominent  attri- 
bute of  their  deity  (verse  24).  Baal  was  the  sun-god,  and  his  worshippers 
might  readily  suppose  that,  having  at  his  command  the  source  of  light  and  fire, 
he  would  in  such  a  strife  vindicate  himself  by  answering  by  fire.  Surely, 
Elijah  might  have  urged,  your  sun-god  should  find  it  easy,  in  the  use  of  his 
own  element,  to  triumph  over  Jehovah  !  He  takes  the  Baalites  on  their  own 
ground,  and  agrees  that  by  a  sign  from  heaven  in  the  form  of  fire  the  claims  of 
their  respective  religions  shall  be  determined.  The  proposition  is  startling, 
because  it  was  of  the  very  essence  of  Judaism  that  there  was  no  other  God  but 
Jehovah.  It  was  a  great  concession  on  the  part  of  Elijah  to  heathen  notions, 
where  contests  as  to  the  power  of  rival  deities  were  of  frequent  occurrence. 
Thus  Baal  had  everything  in  his  favour,  and  if  he  could  do  anything  at  all,  now 
was  his  opportunity. 

II.  That  idolatry  exhausted  all  its  resources  in  the  contest  (verses  26-29). 
Confident  of  success,  tlie  priests  of  Baal  dress  the  bullock,  and  place  the  cut 
pieces  dripping  on  the  altar.  The  condition  was  they  should  put  no  fire  under ; 
although  St.  Chrysostom  has  preserved  an  old  tradition  which  asserts  that  inside 
their  altar  the  Baalites  had  secreted  an  accomplice  who  waste  kindle  a  fire,  but 
that  in  the  act  of  so  doing  he  died  of  suffocation.  And  now  for  three  long  hours 
theory  is  heard — the  anxiety  of  king,  and  priests,  and  people,  growing  more  in- 
tense and  feverish  with  each  repetition — "0  Baal,  hear  us!  "  But  there  was 
no  voice,  nor  any  that  answered.  To  hurry  the  answer,  they  begin  the  wild, 
frantic  pagan  dance.  **  As  the  Mussulman  dervishes  work  themselves  into  a 
frenzy  by  the  invocation  of  Allah  /  Allah  !  until  the  words  themselves  are  lost 
in  inarticulate  gasps ;  as  the  pilgrims  round  the  church  of  St.  John  at  Samaria 
formerly,  and  round  the  chapel  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  now,  race,  run,  and 
tumble,  in  order  to  bring  down  the  Divine  fire  into  the  midst  of  them  ;  so  the 
four  hundred  and  fifty  prophets  of  Baal  performed  their  wild  dances  round  their 
altar,  or  upon  it,  springing  up  or  sinking  down  with  the  fantastic  gestures  which 
Orientals  alone  can  command,  as  if  by  an  internal  mechanism,  and  screaming 
with  that  sustained  energy  which  believes  it  will  be  heard  for  its  much  speak- 
ing." Still  no  answer.  This  afforded  an  opportunity  Elijah  could  not  resist, 
and  he  mocked  the  devotees  with  words  of  bitter  irony  (verse  27).  His  object 
was  to  stimulate  the  priests  to  greater  exertions,  and  so  to  make  their  failure 
more  complete,  and  to  suggest  to  the  people  that  such  failure  would  prove  abso- 
lutely that  Baal  was  no  God.  Elijah's  scorn  has  the  effect  intended;  it  rouses 
the  Baalites  to  increased  effort.  Louder  and  louder  grow  their  cries,  wilder  and 
more  rapid  tlicir  dance,  more  frantic  their  gesticulations.  At  length,  when 
the  frenzy  has  reached  its  height,  knives  are  drawn  from  their  sheaths,  lances 
are  upraised,  and  the  blood  spurts  forth  from  hundreds  of  self-inflicted  wounds. 
And  this  was  all  idolatry  could  do  :  Baal  was  unresponsive  to  the  most  piteous 
cries,  was  powerless  to  help,  and  his  worshippers  are  driven  to  suicide  and 
despair !  Could  anything  more  completely  expose  the  utter  helplessness  and 
vanity  of  i(iolitry  ? 
290 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  OHAp.  xviii. 


III.  That  idolatry  suflfered  a  signal  and  crushing  defeat  (verses  30-38). 
1.  Was  defeated  hy  the  Being  it  ignored  and  insulted.  Elijah  was  careful  in  all 
his  arrangements  to  give  prominence  to  Jehovah,  of  whom  he  was  but  the 
humble  and  intermediate  agent.  The  altar  was  built  in  the  name  of  Jehovah 
(verse  32);  the  offering  was  arranged  according  to  the  injunctions  of  the  law  of 
Jehovah  (verse  33  compared  with  Levit.  i.  3-9);  and  the  short,  simple,  and  beauti- 
fully suggestive  prayer  was  designedly  addressed  to  '*  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  of  Israel ^^  (verses  36,  37).  Jehovah  had  been  forgotten;  His  ever- 
living  presence  is  again  asserted  :  He  had  been  ignored  and  insulted ;  His  peer- 
less majesty  and  righteous  claims  are  again  vindicated.  2.  The  defeat  was 
signal  and  complete  (verse  38).  As  the  sky  was  still  perfectly  clear,  this  fire 
cannot  have  been  a  flash  of  lightning.  It  was  altogether,  in  its  nature  as  well 
as  in  its  opportuneness,  miraculous.  From  the  clear  blue  ether  overhead, 
deepening  as  the  sun  declined  towards  the  sea,  the  whole  multitude  saw  the 
bright  white  flame  descend,  and  in  a  moment  consume  everything — the  frag- 
ments ol  the  ox  on  the  summit  of  the  altar,  the  pile  of  wood  heaped  from  the 
forest  of  Carmel,  the  very  stones  of  the  altar,  the  dust,  and  also  the  water  that 
filled  the  trench,  till  everything  is  consumed,  and  the  crackle  and  hiss  are  gone. 
"  The  prayer  of  a  moment  has  accomplished  what  the  bowlings  of  a  whole  day 
have  failed  to  achieve."  The  most  obdurate  heart  could  not  fail  to  be  convinced. 
The  neglected  and  insulted  God  of  Israel  has  triumphed,  as  He  ever  must. 
3.  The  defeat  was  publicly  acknowledged  (verse  39).  Unable  to  endure  the  brilli- 
ance of  the  Divine  light,  the  people  fell  on  their  faces  before  it,  and  hid  their 
eyes  lest  they  should  be  blinded  (Lev.  ix.  24  ;  2  Chron.  vii.  3).  The  people 
understand  thoroughly  the  nature  and  bearing  of  the  whole  scene,  as  a  trial  to 
determine  whether  Baal  or  Jehovah  is  the  true  God.  And  they  now  pronounce 
the  matter  to  be  clearly  and  certainly  decided  !^aal  is  overthrown;  he  is 
proved  to  be  no  god  at  all.  The  Lord  Jehovah,  He  and  He  alone,  is  God.  Him 
will  they  henceforth  acknowledge,  and  no  other.  The  time  is  coming  when 
truth  shall  universally  triumph,  and  the  supremacy  and  glory  of  God  be  every- 
where adored  (Phil.  ii.  10,  11). 

rV.  That  idolatry  involves  its  votaries  in  disgrace  and  punishment 
(verse  40).  The  vindicator  of  Jehovah  becomes  His  avenger.  The  slaughter 
of  the  idolatrous  priests  was  in  harmony  with  the  express  commands  of  the  law 
(Deut.  xiii.  5  ;  xvii.  2-5  ;  xviii.  20).  Moreover,  a  prophet  under  the  theocracy 
had  a  right  to  step  in  and  execute  the  law  when  the  king  failed  in  his  duty. 
In  this  act  we  may  see  some  retaliation  for  Jezebel's  slaughter  of  the  prophets 
of  the  Lord.  It  is  an  unalterable  principle  of  the  Divine  government  that  evil- 
doers shall  be  punished  for  their  sins,  and  often  by  the  same  instruments  with 
which  they  have  wrought  the  evil.  Eobespierre  perished  on  the  same  scaffold 
on  which  he  had  shed  some  of  the  best  and  bravest  blood  of  France. 

Lessons: — 1,  Error  is  sure  to  fail  when  fairly  put  to  the  test,  2.  The  claims  of 
God  to  universal  homage  are  absolute  and  unchangeable^  3.  The  enemies  of  Qod 
will  meet  with  their  merited  punishment. 

eSRM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEESES. 

Verses    19-40.       The    challenge,  interested — an  object  which  may  in- 

Whenever  we  read  of  a  meeting  of  volve  the  welfare  of  a  people,  or  the 

crowned  heads  or   prominent  states-  destiny  of  a  nation.     And  when  Elijah 

men,  we  generally  infer  that  they  have  and  Ahab  met  face  to  face,  such  an 

been  called  together  by  some  pressing  object  as  this  engaged  their  thought 

object  in   which   they  are   mutually  and  discussion.     The  people  of  Israel 

291 


ohAp.  xvm. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


had  for  a  long  time  been  sujffering 
from  a  severe  famine,  and  the  king 
attributes  it  to  Elijah,  who  disclaims 
the  responsibility,  and  charges  it 
upon  the  conduct  of  the  king.  Not 
only  does  he  makes  this  charge,  but 
he  is  anxious  to  put  it  to  a  fair  trial, 
and  consequently  he  gives  Ahab  the 
challenge  contained  in  the  above 
verses.  Concerning  the  challenge,  we 
shall  notice  the  object,  the  test,  the 
decision,  the  result. 

I.  The  object.     1.  To  confirm  his 

statement  that  Ahab  was  responsible 
for  the  prevailing  distress.  This 
could  only  be  obtained  on  the  assump- 
tion that  Jehovah  would  support  Eli- 
jah in  his  denunciation  of  the  king  by 
some  manifestation  of  Himself  which 
would  carry  conviction  to  the  mind  of 
Ahab  and  others;  and  by  this  chal- 
lenge Elijah  sought  such  a  manifesta- 
tion of  God.  2.  To  establish  his  claim 
as  the  prophet  of  God.  In  all  proba- 
bility the  people  would  regard  Elijah 
with  the  same  unbelief  and  hostility 
as  Ahab  did.  And  before  Elijah  could 
gain  a  hearing  from  them,  he  needed 
to  overcome  their  unbelief  and  opposi- 
tion. This  could  be  done  by  means  of 
the  challenge.  3.  To  prove  that 
Jehovah  was  the  only  true  God,  and 
that  Baalim  was  no  god.  This  was 
the  most  important  object  of  the  chal- 
lenge. At  this  time  the  people  be- 
lieved Jehovah  to  be  one  among  many 
gods.  Elijah  sought  to  show  them 
that  besides  Him  there  was  no  god ; 
that  Baalim  and  all  other  supposed 
gods  were  the  creations  of  men's 
minds,  and,  therefore,  false.  4.  To 
restore  the  people  of  Israel  to  their 
allegiance  to  Jehovah.  They  had  for- 
saken Him,  and  transferred  their 
allegiance  to  Baalim.  Elijah  seeks  to 
recover  them  from  this  apostacy  ;  and 
the  means  by  which  he  sought  it  was 
admirably  adapted  to  his  purpose. 
If  God  should  answer  Elijah,  then  the 
people  would  be  reminded  in  a  forcible 
manner  of  their  own  past  history,  the 
most  prominent  and  grandest  feature  of 
which^was  the  appearance  of  Jehovah 
at  various  times  to  their  fathers ;  to 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ;  to  Moses 
292 


in  the  burning  bush  ;  in  Egypt ;  at  the 
Red  Sea ;  throughout  the  wilderness ; 
to  Joshua  at  the  Jordan;  at  Jericho; 
and  in  giving  them  possession  of  the 
land  wherein  they  dwelt.  A  similar 
manifestation  to  themselves  would 
surely  impress  them  with  a  sense  of 
their  sin,  and  awaken  repentance  in 
their  hearts. 

II.  The  test.  1.  This  test  was  fair 
to  the  Baalites.  They  acknowledged 
Baal  as  the  god  of  fire.  If  he  could 
manifest  his  power  in  any  way,  surely 
he  could  in  the  way  proposed.  2.  It 
was  honourable  to  Elijah.  His  appeal 
was  to  the  special  prerogative  of  Baal. 
He  does  not  ask  for  a  manifestation  of 
power  not  claimed  for  him  by  his 
followers.  3.  It  was  adapted  to  the 
multitude.  It  was  one  upon  which 
they  could  all  j  udge.  It  would  appeal 
to  their  senses,  involving  no 
mystery,  and  leaving  no  room  for 
doubt. 

III.  The  decision.  Elijah's  pro- 
posal being  accepted,  he  suggested  to 
the  Baalites  that  they  should  be  the 
first  to  make  the  trial  to  which  they 
agreed.  No  sooner  had  they  retired, 
than  Elijah  steps  forward  to  prepare 
the  altar  for  his  bullock.  His  prepa- 
ration is  more  elaborate.  He  has  a 
trench  dug  round  it,  and  water  poured 
upon  the  sacrifice  and  the  wood  ;  this 
is  repeated  three  times.  Here  we  see 
his  wisdom  and  his  faith.  He  is  pro- 
tecting himself  against  any  charge  of 
procuring  fire  by  false  means.  He  can 
afford  to  do  this,  because  he  believes 
that  God  can  send  sufficient  fire  to 
consume  the  sacrifice,  notwithstanding 
the  water.  With  what  excited  feeling 
would  the  multitude  watch  Elijah,  as 
he  came  near  and  asked  the  God  of 
Abraham  to  show  Himself  this  day 
that  He  was  God  in  Israel,  so  that  His 
apostate  people  might  be  convinced  of 
their  sins  and  return  unto  Him.  At 
the  close  of  his  prayer,  the  fire  fell 
and  consumed  the  sacrifice,  the  wood, 
the  stones,  and  the  dust,  and  licked  up 
the  water  that  was  in  the  trench.  It 
required  no  deliberation  to  form  a 
judgment   upon  the  point  at  issu^. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


CHAP.  XVIII. 


When  all  the  people  saw  it,  they  fell 
on  their  faces,  and  said  :  *'  The  Lord 
B  e  is  the  God,  the  Lord  He  is  the 
God!" 

IV.  The  result.  The  prophets  of 
Baal  were  slain.  There  are  some 
objections  raised  against  the  conduct 
of  Elijah  in  such  a  slaughter.  Could 
he  slay  these  prophets  in  the  face  of 
the  authority  of  the  king?  Would 
the  people  obey  Elijah  in  this  thing  ? 
How  is  it  to  be  reconciled  with 
justice?  To  these  objections  we  may 
answer:  1.  Ahab  was  a  coward;  he 
would  be  overwhelmed  with  fear,  and 
would  shrink  from  opposing  his  autho- 
rity to  one  who  could  in  such  a  way  in- 
voke the  God  of  Heaven.  2.  The  people 
knew  that  God  had  spoken  against 
idolatry,  and  His  law  was  that  those 
who  practised  it  were  to  be  put  to 
death.  3.  God  sought  to  establish 
His  claim  to  be  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords  :  that  He  was  a  jealous 
God,  and  would  not  share  His  glory 
with  another.  The  people  needed  to 
be  taught  this,  and  by  such  terrible 
means  they  would  learn  the  lesson. 
Let  us  learn  :  1.  That  God's  claims 
are  submitted  to  our  intelligence  and 
judgment,  as  well  as  to  our  hearts.  2.  It 
is  our  duty  to  examine  His  claims  and 
to  yield  to  them.  3.  It  is  unreasonable 
and  dangerous  to  be  undecided  with 
regard  to  them. — The  Study  and  Fulpit. 

— A  memorable  day.  1.  Because  of 
the  unique  assemblage  it  gathered. 
2.  Because  of  the  distinguished  person- 
ages it  engaged.  3.  Because  of  the 
extraordinary  nature  of  its  transactions. 
4.  Because  of  the  momentous  truths 
involved.  5.  Because  of  the  impor- 
tant results  that  followed. 

Verse  1 9-38.  Elijah  on  Mount  Car- 
mel,  surrounded  by  all  Israel,  while  the 
prophets  of  the  groves,  and  those  that 
ate  at  Jezebel's  table,  were  ofFeiing  their 
bullocks,  or  crying  *'  0  Baal,  hear  us! " 
and  leaping  upon  the  altars,  and  cut- 
ting themselves  with  knives,  is  a  picture 
with  which  we  are  all  familiar.  If  you 
try  to  recall  the  impressions  which  it 
has  made  upon  you,  I  think  you  will 
feel  that  it  has  not  proceeded  mainly 


from  the  sudden  appearance  of  the  fire 
which  came  forth  to  consume  Elijahs 
sacrifice,  but  from  the  contrast  between 
the  fever  and  restlessness  of  the  priests, 
and  the  calmness  and  minute  regularity 
of  all  the  proceedings  of  the  prophet. 
To  testify  by  the  form  of  the  altar  that 
the  people  were  even  then  a  portion  of 
the  twelve  tribes,  that  they  were  united 
in  God's  sight,  though  visibly  separated 
by  the  sins  of  men,  was  one  great  part 
of  Elijah's  work.  But  it  was  not  a 
less  important  part  of  his  duty  to  re- 
mind the  people  that  God  had  appointed 
the  method  and  time  of  the  sacrifice  ; 
that  prayer  to  Him  was  not  a  violent 
effort  to  bring  about  some  mighty  re- 
sult desired  by  the  worshipper,  but 
was  an  act  of  quiet  obedience,  of  self- 
surrender  :  all  its  earnestness  being  de- 
rived from  a  belief  in  the  willingness  of 
God  to  make  His  creature  that  which 
without  Him  he  cannot  be.  **  ()  Lord 
God,  turn  the  heart  of  this  people  back 
again  !  they  are  in  an  unnatural,  dis- 
orderly condition  ;  they  are  trying  to  be 
independent  of  Thee.  And  they  have 
so  fixed  and  rooted  themselves  in  that 
which  is  false,  that  they  cannot  break 
loose  from  it.  The  evil  power  to  which 
they  have  done  homage  holds  them 
fast  bound  in  his  fetters.  Good  has  be- 
come evil  to  them ;  evil  has  become 
good.  Euler  of  the  heart  and  reins, 
who  dcsirest  good  and  nothing  but 
good  for  them,  make  them  reasonable 
beings,  restore  them  to  the  state  of 
men !"  To  this  prayer  the  fire  was  an 
answer.  It  came  down  as  a  witness 
that  God  himself  is  the  Author  as  well 
as  the  Accepter  of  every  sacrifice ;  that 
all  fire  must  be  false  which  He  has  not 
kindled. — Maurice. 

Verse  21.  The  necessity  of  decisioa 
in  religion.  1.  Because  of  its  superior 
claims.  2.  Because  of  its  exalting 
benefits.  3.  Because  of  the  moral 
deterioration  and  inevitable  misery 
involved  in  prolonged  hesitation. 

—  1.  Israel's  donble-mindedness. 
2.  Israel's  unreasonableness.  3. 
Israel's  coldness  and  indifference 
under  appeal. 

—  "  And  the  people  answered  him 

993 


CHAP.  xvni. 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


not  a  word."  The  snllenness  of 
unbelief.  1.  TJnbeli(f  is  slow  to  ac- 
cept evidence.  2.  Is  reluctant  to 
admit  conviction.  3.  Stubbornly  re- 
fuses to  act  in  harmony  with  both 
evidence  and  conviction. 

—  Israel  is  met  together.  Elijah 
rates  them  not  so  much  for  their 
superstition,  as  for  their  unsettledness 
and  irresolution.  Nothing  is  more 
odious  to  God  than  a  profane  neutra- 
lity in  main  oppositions  of  religion. 
To  go  upright  in  a  wrong  way  is  a  less 
eyesore  to  God  than  to  halt  betwixt 
right  and  wrong.  The  Spirit  wished 
that  the  Laodiceans  were  either  hot  or 
cold ;  either  temper  would  be  better 
borne  than  neither,  than  both.  In 
reconcileable  differences,  nothing  is 
more  safe  than  indifferency  both  of 
practice  and  opinion ;  but  in  cases  of 
so  necessary  hostility  as  betwixt  God 
and  Eaal,  he  that  is  on  neither  side  is 
the  deadliest  enemy  to  both.  Less 
hateful  are  they  to  God  that  serve 
Him  not  at  all,  than  they  that  serve 
Him  with  a  rival. — £p.  Hall, 

Verse  22.  The  solitariness  of  the 
good.  1.  A  picture  of  indomitable 
bravery  when  menaced  by  overwhelm- 
ing numbers.  2.  Calls  forth  pro- 
found sorrow  in  view  of  the  popular 
and  prevailing  iniquity.  3.  Yearns 
for  companions  to  share  the  bliss  of  a 
holy  life. 

Verse  24.  We  see  the  god  of  the 
blind,  mad  world ;  and  the  God  of 
Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob. 
The  generation  of  to-day  thinks  itself 
elevated  far  above  the  Baal  worship, 
which  in  its  nature  was  deification  of 
nature  and  the  world ;  and  yet  how 
often  does  it  happen  that  it  serves  the 
creature  rather  than  the  Creator ! 
Men  no  longer  make  gods  out  of  wood 
and  stone,  but  construct  them  out  of 
their  own  thoughts,  and  worship  their 
own  ideas.  The  world  wishes  to  hear 
nothing  of  the  God  who  is  holy  and 
ready  to  sanctify  the  sinful  heart  of 
man  ;  who  is  just,  and  metes  to  each 
man  the  measure  which  he  deserves; 
who  does  not  sufter  Himself  to  be 
Bcorned ;  of  the  rebukes  and  chastise- 
294 


ments  of  such  a  God  as  He  has  re- 
vealed Hinnsclf  in  His  Word,  the 
world  makes  nothing ;  and  will  only 
hear  of  a  God  who  never  rebukes  or 
punishes,  who  is  no  avenging  judge, 
who  works  no  miracles,  can  hear  no 
prayers.  Elijah,  could  he  return  to 
earth,  would  scorn  such  a  divinity 
no  less  than  he  did  the  idol  Baal. — 
Zanffe, 

—  The  people  now  find  a  voice. 
They  had  hesitated  before,  not  wish- 
ing to  decide  between  the  two  wor- 
ships, or  wholly  to  relinquish  either. 
They  now  readily  accept  a  proposi- 
tion which  promises  them  an  exciting 
spectacle,  and  will  relieve  them  of  the 
trouble  of  making  a  decision  by 
mental  efforts  of  their  own. — Speaker^s 
Comm. 

Verses  26-29.  The  infatuation  of 
idolatry.  1.  May  beguile  minds  of 
the  highest  order.  2.  Incites  its 
votaries  to  the  most  extravagant  acts. 
3.  Is  more  resolute  the  less  it  suc- 
ceeds. 4.  Presents  a  painful  picture 
of  what  self-deceived  humanity  may 
become. 

Verses  36-39.  The  sublimity  and 
efficacy  of  true  prayer.    1.  If  we 

consider  the  glorious  Being  to  whom 
it  is  addressed  (verse  36).  2.  If  we 
contrast  it  with  the  wild  iterations 
of  raving  idolaters  (verses  26-28).  If 
we  consider  the  practical  good  it  seeks 
to  confer  on  men  (verse  37).  3.  If 
we  consider  the  remarkable  answers 
vouchsafed  (verses  38,  3y). 

Verse  37.  All  knowledge  and  re- 
cognition of  God  is  inseparable  from 
the  conversion  of  the  heart  to  Him. 
That  is  the  aim  of  every  testimony 
and  revelation  of  God,  and  for  that 
every  true  servant  of  God  should  daily 
pray  in  behalf  of  those  entrusted  to 
his  care.  Elijah,  unlike  the  priests 
of  Baal,  who  called  upon  their  god 
the  whole  day,  used  few  words, 
yet  was  he  heard,  because  in  those 
few  words  he  expressed  infinite 
meaning,  and  his  prayer  came  from 
the  depths  of  a  believing,  unquestion« 
ing  soul. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


OHAP.  XVIII. 


Verse  38.  What  is  the  miracle  of 
that  fire  which  devoured  the  burnt 
oflfering  and  compelled  the  whole  peo- 
ple to  cry  out:  *'The  Lord  He  is 
God,"  in  comparison  with  the  miracle 
that  God  hath  sent  His  Son  into  the 
world  to  kindle  the  greatest  fire  which 
has  ever  burnt  in  the  world ;  compared 
with  the  miracle  that  the  Word  has 
become  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us,  and 
we  have  seen  His  glory  ?  In  Bethle- 
hem, and  upon  Golgotha,  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  is  infinitely  higher  in  its 
manifestation  than  upon  Carmel. — 
Lange, 

Terse  40.  The  appeal  of  Elijah 
was  to  the  people.  He  called  upon 
them  to  inflict  then  and  there,  upon 
these  ringleaders  of  the  people  in 
idolatry,  the  punishment  which  the 
law  denounced,  and  such  as  would  have 
been  inflicted  upon  himself  had  the 
victory  been  on  their  side;  and  the 
king  seems  to  have  been  too  awe- 
stricken  to  interfere.  From  the  cha- 
racter of  Elijah,  we  have  no  doubt 
that  he  executed  this  act  of  blood 
heartily  and  with  entire  satisfaction. 
It  is  not  for  us  to  vindicate  him  ;  the 
only  question  is :  "Was  this  in  accord- 
ance with  the  law  and  with  the  spirit 
of  the  times  ?  It  certainly  was ;  and 
Britons,  not  so  much  as  fifty  years  ago, 
performed  under  their  own  laws,  with 
perfect  peace  of  mind,  upon  far  less 
heinous  off'enders,  the  deadly  execu- 
tions which  we  now  regard  with  horror. 
If,  then,  in  looking  back  upon  the  last 
generation,  we  make  allowance  for  this 
great  change  of  law  and  sentiment 
within  so  short  a  time,  we  must  needs 
make  the  same  allowance  in  surveying 
the  more  remote  and  less  refined  age 
in  which  Elijah  lived.  — iT/^^o. 

—  A  fearful  vengeance,  surely ! 
Does  the  thought  occur  to  you — *'  If 
this  book  be,  as  is  alleged,  not  a  mere 
history  of  that  which  is  strange  and 
exceptional,  but  a  revelation  of  perma- 
nent laws  and  principles,  may  not  this 
act  be  pleaded  in  justification  of  any, 
even  the  most  outrageous  punishment 
of  worshippers  false,  or  thought  to  be 
false,  that  has  ever  taken  place  in  any 
age  of  the  Christian  church  ?  "  1  answer, 


I  conceive  this  story  «a  a  revela- 
tion of  permanentpriniciples,  just  as  I 
believe  Elijah's  declaration  that  there 
should  be  no  rain  nor  dew,  or  his  com- 
manding the  widow's  cruse  not  to  fail, 
is  the  revelation  of  a  permanent  princi- 
ple. The  one  shows  forth  God's  indig- 
nation against  those  who  corrupt  and 
demoralize  a  nation  by  trading  in 
religious  arts  and  fears,  just  as  the 
others  show  God's  continual  govern- 
ment over  the  outward  universe,  and 
His  protecting  care  over  every  person 
who  dwells  in  it.  The  method  in 
which  the  revelation  of  these  truths 
was  made  belongs  to  a  peculiar  period 
of  the  world's  history.  In  a  general 
way,  it  may  be  said  to  belong  to  the 
whole  Jewish  dispensation.  Including 
in  that  the  period  down  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem.  In  another  sense, 
it  belonged  to  the  special  circumstances 
of  the  time  in  which  Elijah  was  liv- 
ing. We  do  not  need  to  have  pro- 
phets executing  these  purposes  of  the 
Divine  government,  which  famines, 
pestilences,  revolutions  execute  with- 
out them,  or  those  which  are  accom- 
plished through  the  intervention  of  the 
ordinary  minister  of  health  and 
nourishment.  But  if  no  prophet  had 
ever  been  commissioned  to  do  one 
kind  of  work  as  well  as  the  other, 
we  should  not  have  known  to  whom 
we  might  refer  them.  An  infinite 
darkness  would  have  rested  both  upon 
human  and  natural  proceedings,  which, 
except  through  our  own  fault  and  un- 
willingness to  profit  by  God's  illumi- 
tion,  does  not  rest  upon  them  now. — 
Maurice. 

—  The  sentence  upon  the  idol- 
priests  was  a  terrible  but  necessary 
one,  which  should  serve  us  not  as  an 
example,  but  as  a  warning ;  for  al- 
though under  the  new  covenant  super- 
stition and  unbelief,  idol- worship  and 
apostacy,  are  not  chastised  with  fire  and 
sword,  yet  there  is  not  wanting  a 
certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment 
and  fiery  indignation  which  shall 
devour  the  adversaries.  Those  who 
tread  under  foot  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 
will  shrink  from  the  wrath  of 
the  Lamb  (Luke  ix.  54-56 ;  Heb.  z. 
27-31 ;  Bev.  vi.  l^),—Lange, 

296 


CHAF.  xvni.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS, 


HOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  41-46. 
Suggestive  Phases  op  the  Peating  Spirit. 

I.  It  is  quick  to  perceive  the  indications  of  coining  blessing  (verse  41), 

**  There  is  a  sound  of  abundance  of  rain."  To  the  keen,  sensitive  ears  of  the 
prophet,  the  splash  of  the  long-wished  for  rain  was  already  falling  on  the 
parched  soil,  and  roaring  along  the  hitherto  empty  torrent  beds.  He  heard  in 
reality,  or  by  anticipation,  the  gentle  wind  sighing  through  the  forest  of  Carm el, 
and  waving  the  tree  tops  which  have  been  poetically  spoken  of  as  so  many  bell^ 
summoning  this  lone  worshipper  to  prayer  :  and  in  the  East  the  wind  is  thb 
precursor  of  the  approaching  shower.  A  certain  Polish  Jew,  whose  great  musical 
genius  raised  him  to  eminence  and  wealth,  had  become  so  familiar  with  the 
different  kinds  of  wood  of  which  he  made  his  flutes  and  reeds  when  in  the 
capacity  of  a  poor  shepherd,  that  he  knew  every  tree  of  the  forest  by  the  pecu- 
liarity of  its  sound.  So,  long  practice  in  prayer  sharpens  every  sensibility  of  the 
soul,  and  familiarizes  it  with  the  faintest  indications,  unheard  by  other  ears, 
of  the  nearness  and  character  of  advancing  benedictions. 

II.  It  seeks  retirement  (verse  42).  **  Elijah  went  up  to  the  top  of  Carmel." 
Leaving  Ahab  to  take  his  meal  at  the  place  where  the  sacrifice  had  been  con- 
sumed, the  prophet  ascended  not  quite  to  the  highest  elevation,  as  appears  from 
his  words  to  his  servant  (verse  43),  but  to  a  point  little  below  the  highest, 
whence  the  sea  was  not  visible.  He  needed  to  retire  only  a  short  distance  to 
the  West,  and  there,  on  the  slope  just  below  the  summit,  sequestered  by  bushes 
and  trees,  such  as  are  still  to  be  found  there,  he  could  pour  out  his  heart  to  God 
in  secret.  Devotion  needs  times  of  quietness  and  solitude  in  order  to  store  up 
spiritual  strength  for  the  bustle  and  conflict  of  life.  How  often  is  it  said  of  the 
great  prophet  of  mankind  that  **  he  went  up  into  a  mountain  apart  to  pray !  " 
And  all  who  would  catch  his  spirit  and  tone,  in  however  humble  a  degree,  must 
seek  it  in  private  communion  (Matt.  vi.  6). 

III.  It  has  ever  some  special  subject  for  personal  supplication.  Elijah 
had  prayed  before  that  it  might  wo^  rain,  and  a  prolonged  period  of  drought  and 
famine  was  the  answer.  But  now  the  great  burden  of  his  prayer  was  for  the 
rain  that  had  been  so  long  withheld  (James  v.  17,  18).  1.  This  supplication 
was  intensely  earnest.  "He  cast  himself  down  upon  the  earth  and  put  his  face 
between  his  knees  "  (verse  42),  by  this  unusual  attitude  indicating  the  extra- 
ordinary intensity  of  his  prayer.  The  highest  results  of  prayer  can  be  attained 
only  by  fervent,  agonising  efforts.  The  greatness  of  the  blessing  sought  stimu- 
lates the  urgency  of  the  petitioner.  2.  2  his  supplication  was  persevering  (verse 
43).  "  Go  again  seven  times."  There  was  spiritual  discipline  here.  Delaying 
is  not  denying.  The  blessing  is  withheld,  partly  to  certify  the  fact  that  it  comes 
from  God,  to  show  the  necessity  of  hourly  dependence,  and  to  teach  that,  whatever 
apparent  difficulties  there  may  be  in  the  way,  **  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and 
not  to  faint."  Six  times  the  messenger  returned  with  the  disappointing  intelli- 
gence, "There  is  nothing"  ;  but  the  Tishbite's  faith  was  undaunted;  he  had 
unswerving  confidence  in  the  prayer  hearing  God.  Though  he  had  the  definite 
promise  of  God  that  rain  should  be  sent  (verse  1),  and  had  caught  with  pro- 
phetic instinct  the  procursive  sign  of  its  coming  (verse  41),  yet  he  continued 
pleading  with  unabated  earnestness.     Persevering  prayer  wins  the  victory. 

IV.  It  is  privileged  to  witness  substantial  answers  to  prayer  (verses 
44,  46).     "  A  speck  at  length  darkens  the  distant  heavens. 

Comes  a  vapour  from  the  margin,  blackening  over  heath  and  bolt^ 
Cramming  all  the  blast  before  it,  in  its  breast  a  thunderbolt. 
?96 


BOMJIFTTC  COMMEKTART:  EINOS.  ofap.  xviit. 


It  is  tlic  first  that  has  been  seen  for  three  years  and  a  half.  It  is  abundantly 
visible  in  a  sky  which  too  clear,  like  a  too  beautiful  cheek,  tells  there  is  surely 
something  wrong.  It  rises  higher  and  higher — it  becomes  broader  and  broader 
— it  moves  with  amazing  celerity.  The  glow  of  the  sunset  is  lost  in  gloom. 
Long  raven  wings  are  extended  all  over  the  hill.  The  banks  of  the  Kishon  put 
on  a  ghastlier  hue.  It  breaks  ;  and  there,  amid  a  hoarse  thanksgiving  murmur 
from  the  forest  around,  lains  down  the  grateful  deluge — token  that  the  prayers 
of  the  bent  prophet  have  been  graciously  heard,  and  that  his  victory  ovc*  Baal 
is  now,  in  fire  and  water,  visibly  complete."  Few  of  God's  praying  people  but 
can  refer  to  some  period  in  their  history  when  their  prayers  were  answered  with 
overwhelming  copiousness. 

V.  It  is  tlie  best  preparation  for  active  and  important  service  (verse  46). 
Divinely  directed  and  divinely  upheld,  Elijah,  instead  of  resting  after  the 
excitement  and  fatigues  of  the  day,  girded  up  his  loins,  and  ran  in  advance  of 
the  king's  chariot,  which  was  no  doubt  driven  at  speed,  the  entire  distance  of  at 
least  sixteen  miles  to  the  entrance  of  Jezreel.  He  thus  showed  himself  ready  to 
countenance  and  uphold  the  irresolute  monarch,  if  he  would  turn  from  his  evil 
courses,  and  proceed  to  carry  out  the  religious  reformation  which  the  events  of 
the  day  had  inaugurated  {JSpeaJcer's  Comm.).  The  stern  and  fiery-spirited  prophet 
was,  alter  all,  a  faithful  and  obedient  subject ;  though  severe  in  matters  of 
religion,  he  was  constitutional  and  loyal  in  matters  of  state.  His  aim  was,  not 
to  injure  king  or  people,  but  to  defend  and  restore  the  worship  of  the  God  of 
Israel.  Praying  and  working  must  never  be  disjoined.  The  best  work  is  done 
by  him  who  prays  the  best. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Some  characters  would  have  no  greatness  at  all  if  it  were  not  for 
their  spirit  of  prayer,  2.  Fr ay er  should  not  he  less ^  lut  more ,  earnest  because  of 
the  evident  approach  of  the  answer  3.  Frayer  is  absolutely  essmtialfor  ejjiciency 
in  all  Christian  work. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Yerses.  41-46.  The  rain.  In  this  procure  rain  for  the  parched  land 
incident  Elijah  reaches  the  great  crisis  Let  us  learn  from  his  example  to  keep 
of  his  life.  It  was  to  him  a  time  of  a  clearly  defined  object  before  our 
suspense  and  anxiety.  He  would  faith.  With  regaid  to  God — His 
wonder  whether  God  would  now  hear  fatherhood,  His  mercy  and  love,  His 
him  by  sending  rain,  as  He  had  re-  nearness  to  us  and  readiness  to  help: 
cently  done  by  sending  fire.  If  God  with  regard  to  our  life — the  con- 
should  answer  him  this  time,  then  his  quering  of  sinful  temper  or  passion, 
great  work  would  be  accomplished,  the  increase  of  holiness  and  devoted- 
and  he  should  ejpeiience  the  joy  of  ness  to  God  :  with  regard  to  our  work 
success.  It  was  for  this  hour  he  had  — in  the  family,  in  the  Sunday  school 
been  living  during  the  last  few  years,  class,  in  the  pulpit.  II.  The  means 
This  was  to  be  the  crowning  point  of  "by  which  he  sought  this  object, 
his  life — that  point  in  which  the  past  The  attitude  of  prayer.  He  might 
and  the  future  meet — when  his  soul  have  been  tempted  to  have  left  God 
would  be  filled  with  anxiety  and  to  fulfil  His  own  promise,  but  he  did 
concern  as  to  the  issue.  Such  were  not.  His  faith  was  operative,  and  led 
the  feelings  with  which  Elijah  for  the  him  to  pray  eainestly.  True  faith 
second  time  ascended  Cuimel  to  seek  will  always  influence  us  to  labour  and 
the  manifestation  of  God's  presence  pray  for  its  object.  III.  The  en- 
and  power.     I^otice —  conragement  he  received.    **  A  sound 

I.    The  object  of  his  faith.     To  of  abundance  of  rain."     This  was  an 

297 


OHAp.  xvm. 


BOMIZFTJC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


indication  of  God's  nearness  to  him, 
and  a  token  that  his  prayer  would  be 
answered.  This  sound,  in  all  likeli- 
hood, was  heard  only  by  himself.  And 
so  is  it  ever  with  the  man  who  has 
strong  faith  in  God,  and  who  lives  in 
close  union  and  intimate  fellowship 
with  Him.  He  has  visions  of  God 
unseen  by  others.  It  is  by  such  tokens 
that  he  is  sustained  and  stimulated  in 
the  work  God  has  given  him  to  do. 
IV.  The  discouragement  he  met 
with.  "  There  is  nothing."  He 
hoped  for  intelligence  of  the  clouds 
rising  and  bearing  in  their  bosoms  the 
plentiful  showers ;  but  there  was  no 
sign  of  them.  The  discouragement 
came  to  Elijah  from  the  servant  and 
the  circumstances  of  the  case ;  not 
from  God — from  Him  he  received 
encouragement  and  stimulus.  Like 
the  prophet,  2^?^  receive  discouragement 
every  day  from  men  and  from  circum- 
stances. Prom  men  and  things  we 
receive  constant  disappointment;  but 
from  God  we  receive  no  disappoint- 
ment— He  never  fails.  V.  The 
perseverance  he  manifested.  *'Go 
again  seven  times."  Many  a  one 
would  have  grown  weary  on  being 
told  by  the  servant  two  or  three  times, 
**  There  is  nothing."  But  Elijah  was 
not  to  be  turned  aside  from  his  object 
by  having  to  wait.  He  continues  to 
watch  and  pray.  While  doing  so  he 
was  the  object  of  conflicting  influences, 
of  a  discouraging  and  encouraging 
character;  but  by  the  assistance  of 
the  latter  he  was  enabled  to  overcome 
the  former,  and  to  persevere.  Like 
him  we  are  exposed  to  the  two  classes 
of  influences,  but  we  are  encouraged  to 
perse veje.  VI.  The  success  realized. 
**  There  was  a  great  rain."  Though 
he  had  to  wait,  yet  God  heard  him. 
Who  can  imagine  the  feeling  of  joy 
that  would  rush  into  the  prophet's 
heart  as  he  received  the  answer  to  his 
prayer?  His  character  as  a  true 
prophet  would  be  established,  and  God 
would  be  honoured  by  the  steadfastness 
and  perseverance  of  His  servant. — 
The  Study  and  Pulpit, 

Yerses   41,    42.      Wretched   man ! 
He  was  no  more  touched  by  the  great, 
298 


heartsearching  events  of  the  day,  than 
if  he  had  witnessed  an  interesting  but 
very  long  play,  after  which  refresh- 
ment is  most  welcome,  and  food  tastes 
well.  Yet  where  are  not  such  Ahab- 
souls  to  be  found?  Ah  !  woe  to  you 
who  permit  the  strongest  evidences, 
the  most  powerful  appeals  to  consci- 
ence, and  the  most  touching  works  of 
God,  to  glide  before  you  like  a  magic- 
lantern  before  your  eyes :  you  enjoy 
it  a  little,  perhaps,  but  you  bring  home 
from  the  churches  and  meetings  noth- 
ing except  some  complaints  over  the 
long  divine  service,  or  some  matter  for 
lively  conversation  or  self-satisfied 
criticism,  and  a  2:00 d  appetite  for  the 
meal  that  now  follows,  and  a  gay  look- 
ing forward  to  the  pleasures  and  enjoy- 
ment which  the  evening  of  the  Sabbath 
day  will  bring  you.  Who  has  greater 
cause  than  Ahab  to  seek  solitude,  fall 
down  upon  his  knees  and  say,  God 
be  merciful  to  me,  and  blot  out  my 
sins  after  Thy  great  mercy,  and  make 
us  glad  according  to  the  days  wherein 
thou  hast  afflicted  us  (Psa.  li.  3 ;  xc. 
15).  But  of  all  this,  not  a  word.  The 
rain  alone  was  of  importance  to  him, 
not  the  Lord  and  His  mercy.  How 
many  like-minded  ones  in  our  day ! — 
Krummacher. 

Verse  41.  The  sensitiveness  of 
faith.  1.  Is  on  the  alert  for  answers 
to  prayer.  ^.  Is  conscious  of  the 
nearness  of  great  blessings.  3.  Pre- 
pares the  soul  for  the  reception  and 
use  of  heavenly  visitations.  4.  Gives 
additional  urgency  to  prayer. 

—  No  ears  but  Elijah's  could  as 
yet  perceive  a  sound  of  rain :  the 
clouds  were  not  yet  gathered,  the 
vapours  were  not  yet  risen,  yet  Elijah 
hears  that  which  shall  be.  Those  that 
are  of  God's  counsel  can  discern  either 
favours  or  judgments  afar  off.  The 
slack  apprehensions  of  carnal  hearts 
make  them  hard  to  believe  that  as 
future  which  the  quick  and  refined 
senses  of  the  faithful  perceive  as  pre- 
sent.— Bp.  Hall. 

—  Glad  and  grateful  must  that 
moment  have  been  to  the  many  thou- 
sands of  Israel,  when  the  gasping 
earth  that   had  for  three  long  yeara 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTAnT:  KINGS, 


OtiAP.  xnii. 


suffered  in  dumb  agony,  drank  in  tlie 
refreshing  flood  of  God  ;  when  the  true 
church,  who  had  beheld  in  that  sky 
of  brass  and  these  furrows  of  iron  the 
visible  tokens  of  the  Divine  curse,  now 
witnessed  the  heavens  unfolding  their 
black,  inky  scroll,  with  the  joyful 
tidings  that  the  curse  was  removed! 
Can  we  participate  in  this  joy  in  a 
loftier  spiritual  sense  ?  Do  we  see 
the  curse  of  sin  taken  away;  God 
propitiated ;  and  from  the  rain  with 
which  He  is  filling  the  pools,  are  we 
drawing  all  needful  supplies  for  our 
parched  souls  ?  If  we  are  drooping 
and  desponding ;  if  our  cry  is,  **  My 
flesh  longeth  for  thee  in  a  dry  and 
thirsty  land  where  no  water  is  "  ;  we 
again  echo  Elijah's  words,  **  Get  thee 
up,  for  there  is  the  sound  of  abundance 
of  rain."  Our  privileges  are  many. 
The  spirit  of  God  is  ever  and  anon 
moving  "  on  the  tops  of  the  mulberry 
trees."  The  small  clouds  have  been 
rising,  and  copious  showers  have  fallen. 
Go,  get  thee,  like  Elijah,  get  thee  to 
the  oratory,  pray  that  the  cloud  may 
spread,  that  it  may  stretch  across  the 
heavens ! — Macduff, 

Verses  42,  43.  Elijah  praying. 
"We  propose  to  consider  the  conduct  of 
Elijah  as  suggestive  of  important 
lessons  to  the  people  of  God  in  refe- 
rence to  a  subject  which  claims  their 
utmost  solicitude,  namely,  the  descent 
of  spiritual  blessing,  the  coming  of  a 
gracious  rain  upon  the  church  and  the 
world.  Mark — I.  The  circumstances 
hy  whichJEUjaN 8 prayer  is  distinguished, 
1.  The  place  to  which  he  resorted. 
He  "  went  up  to  the  top  of  Carmel." 
It  was  a  place  of  privacy,  retirement, 
seclusion.  Hence  we  read  of  those 
who  did  **hide  themselves  in  the  top 
of  Carmel "  (Amos  ix.  3).  It  is  by 
secret  prayer  manilestations  of  power 
and  blessing  are  secured,  and  revivals 
ushered  in.  "Come!  my  people! 
enter  into  thy  chambers,  and  shut  thy 
door  about  thee  1 "  *'  Enter  into  thy 
closet,"  &c.  (Matt.  vi.  6).  2.  The 
attitude  he  assumed.  "  He  cast  him- 
self down  upon  the  earth,"  &c.  In- 
dicative of  reverence,  humility,  fer- 
Tour.     Our  prayers   should   be   thus 


distinguished.  Thiiik  of  the  majesty 
of  the  Being  we  address ;  the  disparity 
existing  between  ourselves  and  Him  ; 
the  infinite  importance  of  the  blessings 
sought  (Isaiah  vi.  3  ;  Gen.  xix.  27  ; 
Exodus  iii.  5).  3.  The  faiih  which  he 
exercised.  That  for  which  Elijah 
prayed,  God  had  promised  (verse  1). 
The  promise  of  God  is  faith's  warrant. 
Prayer  is  the  condition,  the  promise, 
the  encouragement  (Ez.  xxx.  37). 
Elijah  believed  God  ;  hence  he  "  said 
to  his  servant,  Go  up  now,  and  look 
toward  the  sea,"  whence  clouds  and 
^  apours  usually  arise.  Oh  !  how  un- 
like Elijah  have  we  frequently  been  ! 
How  does  his  conduct  proclaim, "  Have 
faith  in  God."  4.  The  perseverance  he 
manifested.  Six  times  he  sent  his  ser- 
vant up  the  hill,  and  he  sees  nothing, 
brings  no  good  news  to  his  master;  yet 
Elijah  continues  praying.  Like  his 
father  Jacob,  his  conduct  says,  '*  I  will 
not  let  thee  go  unless  Thou  bless  me." 
(See  xvii.  2 1  ;  Psalm  Ixxx.  5-7 ; 
xc.  13-16.)  Delays  are  not  denials. 
**  Though  the  vision  tarry,  wait  for 
it."  Send  your  prayers  up  the  hill  of 
Zion,  not  seven  times,  but  seventy 
times  seven.  Though  the  cloud  cannot 
be  seen,  the  promise  can. 

*' Faith,  mighty  faith,  the  promise  sees, 
And  looks  to  that  alone.'* 

II.  The  success  with  which  EhjaKs 
prayer  was  crowned.  1.  And  it  came  to 
pass  at  the  seventh  time  (44,  45).  The 
cloud  was  small  at  first ;  but  it  was  the 
precursor  of  **  a  great  rain."  2.  Every 
succeeding  age  has  supplied  examples 
equally  remarkable.  The  disciples  in 
the  "upper  room";  Cornelius  at 
Caesarea  ;  Paul  and  Silas  at  Philippi ; 
Peter  in  prison,  &c.  3.  Other  in- 
stances besides  those  which  the  inspired 
record  supplies— ^.y.,  the  lltformation 
of  the  sixteenth  century ;  the  Wes- 
leys  at  Oxford ;  the  Revival  in 
America  and  Ireland  in  1857 ;  per- 
sonal history.  You  prayed  till  you 
could   praise — the  blessing  came,  &c. 

III.  The  encouragement  which  KlijaKs 
servant^  and  that  of  past  ages,  supplies  to 
the  church  of  the  present  day.  Seen  in 
the  unchangeable  character  of  God. 
"  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not."  What 

299 


OHAP.  xvni. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


He  was  to  Elijah  on  Mount  Carmel, 
He  is  to  us.  2.  The  unalterahle  effi- 
cacy of  prayer.  It  is  still  the  way  of 
approach,  the  medium  of  success,  the 
hand  which  moves  the  arm  which 
moves  the  world.  3.  The  immuta- 
bility of  God's  promises.  The  great 
rain  which  is  to  precede  the  world's 
harvest  is  the  subject  of  explicit 
promise  (see  Isaiah  xliv.  3;  Joel  ii. 
29 ;  Psalm  Ixxii.  6-8  ;  Numbers  xiv. 
21). — The  Lay  Preacher, 

Yerse  42.  The  worldly  and  the 
religious  spirit— a  contrast.  1.  The 
worldly  spirit  finds  relief  in  festivity ; 
the  religious  spirit  in  prayer.  2.  The 
worldly  spirit  is  but  temporarily 
affected  by  the  most  imposing  spec- 
tacles of  divine  power ;  the  religious 
spirit  bows  in  reverence  and  humility 
before  God.  3.  The  worldly  spirit 
is  moi  e  intent  in  looking  for  temporal 
results ;  the  religious  spirit  for  spiri- 
tual reformation. 

Verses  43,  44.  All  that  while  is  the 
prophet  in  his  prayers,  neither  is  any 
whit  undaunted  with  that  delay.  Hope 
holds  up  the  head  of  our  holy  desires, 
and  perseverance  crowns  it.  If  we 
receive  not  an  answer  to  our  suits  at 
the  sixth  motion,  we  may  not  be  out 
of  countenance,  but  must  try  the 
seventh.  At  last  a  little  cloud  arises 
out  of  the  sea — a  handbreadth.  So 
many,  so  fervent  prayers  cannot  but 
pull  water  out  of  heaven  as  well  as  fire : 
those  sighs  reflect  upon  the  earth,  and 
from  the  earth  reflect  upon  heaven, 
from  heaven  rebound  upon  the  sea,  and 
raise  vapours  up  thence  to  heaven 
again.  If  we  find  that  our  prayers 
are  heard  for  the  substance,  we  may 
not  cavil  at  the  quantity.  From  how 
small  beginnings  have  great  matters 
arisen !  It  is  no  otherwise  in  all  the 
gracious  proceedings  of  God  with  the 
soul.  Scarce  sensible  are  these  first 
works  of  His  spirit  in  the  heart  which 
grow  up  at  last  to  the  wonder  of  men 
and  applause  of  angels. — Bp.  Hall, 

Yerse  43.  "  There  is  nothing."    A 
common  verdict.  1.  Of  the  world  con- 
cerning the  church.    2.  Of  the  church 
concerning    the    world.     3,    Of  the 
800 


disappointed  worshipper  concerning 
idolatry.  4.  Of  the  baffled  inquirei 
concerning  infidelity.  5.  Of  the  sur- 
feited votary  concerning  pleasure. 

—  Oftentimes  we  look  in  vain,  and 
yet  see  nothing  of  the  comfort  of  the 
Lord,  nothing  of  His  help  and  salvation. 
He  leaves  us  awhile  prostrated  in  dust 
and  misery,  does  not  at  once,  hearken- 
ing and  comforting,  raise  us  up,  but 
appears  as  if  the  voice  of  our  crying 
reached  Him  not.  But  if  we  do  not 
lose  our  confidence  in  Him,  if  we  re- 
double our  prayers  and  entreaties,  He 
will  not  let  us  be  ashamed  (Isa.  xlix. 
23).  He  will  comfort,  help,  and 
hearken  to  us  at  His  own,  the  best 
time.  A  man  must  not  weary  of 
prayer,  even  though  it  appears  to  him 
useless  (Jer.  xviii.  1  ;  Col,  iv,  2 ; 
Eph.  vi.  1). — Menken, 

—  "Go  again  seven  times."  Here 
was  an  act  of  faith  on  Elijah's  part, 
and  on  that  of  his  servant,  and  also  a 
prophecy.  The  cloud,  which  promised 
the  long  expected  rain,  appeared  at  the 
seventh  time.  The  walls  of  Jericho 
fell  down  after  they  had  been  com- 
passed seven  times,  on  the  seventh 
day  (Josh.  vi.  15-20).  Naaman  was 
cleansed  after  he  had  washed  seven 
times  (2  Kings  v.  14).  There  are 
seventy-seven  generations  from  Adam 
to  Christ. —  Wordsworth, 

Yerses  44,  45.  All  the  merciful 
works  of  God  seem  small  and  un- 
important in  the  beginning,  but  thence 
they  are  seen  to  be  nobler  and  greater 
in  the  end.  Let  the  man  rejoice  who 
sees  even  so  much  as  a  little  cloud  of 
divine  mercy  and  peace  arising  upon 
the  horizon  of  his  life!  The  time 
approaches  \\  hen  this  cloud  will  cover 
his  whole  heaven.  "When  the  hour 
strikes,  help  comes  in  with  mighty 
power;  and,  to  put  thy  mistrust  to 
shame,  it  must  come  unexpectedly. — 
Lange, 

Yerse  44.  "  There  ariseth  a  little 
cloud  like  a  man's  hand."  The 
gradual  development  of  the  greatest 
good.  1 .  In  the  world  of  nature.  2. 
In  the  world  of  mind.  3.  In  the 
spiritual    sphere.    4.  In  the  aggre« 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  xlx. 


gate  of  national  life.     5  .  In  the  con-  he  ran  for  miles  like  a  gazelle  in  front 

version  of  the  world  to  Christianity.  of  the  royal  train.     Alarmed  at  his 

success,  and  fearing  the  promise  would 

Verse    46.    Divine   strength.     1.  have  to  be  kept,  the  monarch  dropped 

Increases  the   capacity    for    physical  his  whip  ;  but,  scarce  pausing  in  his 

endurance.     2.    Makes  us  willing  to  progress,    the   adroit,    skilful    runner 

occupy  the  humblest  position  to  gain  picked  it  up  with  his  foot.  Next  the 

over  the  morally  weak.     3.    Prepares  monarch  dropped  his  ring,  and  finding 

us  for  future  obedience  and  service.  that  that  he  could  not  recover  with  his 

—  The  picture  of  the  fleet  runner  is  foot,  the  runner  exclaimed,  **  0  King, 

suggestive  to  the   Christian  of  many  you  have  broken  your  word,  but  1  am 

profitable  thoughts,  and  chiefly  of  this,  true    to   the   last" — stooped   to    the 

that  loyalty  to  God  is  simply  "running  ground,  picked  up  the  ring  with  his 

in   the  way  of  His  comraandments."  finger,  gp^ve  a  deep  groan  of  pain,  fell 

And  with  this  let  nothing  interfere.  down,  and  expired.     Eut  with  God  and 

Let  us  run  in  the  right  spirit,  stripped  the  runner  in  the  Christian  race  there 

of  every  encumbrance,  with  concentra-  is  no  deceit.     He  who  has  said,    **  So 

tion  of  purpose,  in  humble  reliance  on  run  that  ye  may  obtain,"   will  confer 

God.     Elijah-like,    in  the    way,    His  the  mark  of  the  high  calling  of  God  on 

strength  and  support  shall  never  be  the  humblest  who  reaches  the  goal  at 

wanting ;  for,  "  the  hand  of  the  Lord  "  the  last. — JELowat, 

shall  be  onus;  and  then,  in  the  end,  —  Elijah,  a  true  shepherd,  he  goes 

we  shall  have,  what  at  least  at  Jezreel  after  the  lost  sheep,  and  leaves  them 

Elijah  had  not,  the  chaplet  of  glory  to  not  when  he  sees  the  wolf  coming  ;  but 

crown  our  brow.     There  is   an    old  the  Lord,   who  is  neither  weary   nor 

eastern  tale  of  the  swift  Persian  Shatirs.  faint,  giveth  power  and  strength  to  the 

To  one  his  sovereign  had  promised  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might, 

hand  of  a  princess  if  he  accomplished  in  so  that  no  way  is  too  far,  no  toil  too 

running  a  certain  feat.  Girt  as  tightly  heavy, 
as  possible,  when  to  stoop  was  death, 


CHAPTER  XIX. 
ELIJAH    DEJECTED,    BEPBOVED,    AND    ENOOUBAGED. 

Critical  and  Explanatory   Notes. — Verse  2.  So  let  the  gods  do  to  me— The  pL 

D^rt /2^  is  used  commonly  for  God,  Jehovah  ;  but  here  appears  for  Jezebel's  idols.    The  S^pt. 

prefixes  to  this  oath  the  words,  Ei  <rv  cl  'H\ioh  koI  iyi)  'Icfc^cA— "If  thou  art  Elias,  and  I 
Jezebel."    Verse  3.  And  when  he  saw  that— J^il'^l  may  be  future  of  ^^^"l,  he  saWy  or  2«i")>, 

:  — —  T  T  ••T 

he  feared.  Accordingly  the  ^S^jo^,  Vulff.,  and  Feskito  read,  "  And  he  was  afraid.*'  But  the 
former  is  preferable ;  for  would  Elijah  be  likely,  after  facing  the  Carmel  ordeal,  to  take  fright 
at  this  miserable  threat  of  Jezebel  ?  Verse  4.  Juniper  tree— Broom  plant,  "  the  most  longed 
for  and  most  welcome  bush  of  the  desert"  {Robinson).  It  is  enough— "I  have  already 
endured  tribulation  enough "  {Kelt).  "I  have  now  lived  lon^  enough"  {Lange).  Verse  6. 
Cake  baken  on  the  coals —On  hot  stones  among  ashes  and  coals  (Gen.  xviii.  6).  Verse  8. 
"Went  in  the  strength  of  that  meat,  &c.— This  does  not  state  that  he  occupied  forty  days  and 
forty  nights  in  the  journey  to  Horeb,  distant  only  forty  geographical  miles  from  Beersheba, 
but  that  he  went  in  the  strength  of  that  meat  during  that  prolonged  period  ;  was  supernaturally 
sustained  by  that  supernaturally  provided  meal.  Verse  9.  What  doest  thou  here  1  -  Not  a 
reproach,  but  an  interrogation,  designed  to  call  out  the  depressed  ciy  of  his  soul,  that  God 
might  correct  and  alleviate  his  despondency.  Verse  11.  Go  forth,  and  stand  upon  the  mount — 
Go  forth  to-morrow  (so  Sept.^  but  without  any  authority).  **  To  the  complaint  of  the  prophet, 
the  Lord  answers,  first,  by  the  manifestation  of  Sis  nature  in  deed*  (verses  11-14) ;  and  thoB 

301 


CHAP.  XIX.  EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


by  the  declaration  of  His  will  in  words  (verses  15-18) "  Keil.  Great  and  strong  wind — earth- 
quake—fire— Natural  phenomena,  calculated  to  impress  the  min  1  with  Jehovah's  power,  and 
indicate  the  Divine  resources  for  de.struction  of  His  enemies.  Verse  12.  Still  small  voice — 
nDDI  7ip  rTi^T,  lit.,  sound  of  a  soft  blowing.     This  gentle  phenomenon  suggested,  in  con- 

T  T     :  '  't  - 

trast,  the  tenderness  and  compassionateness  of  God  towards  His  people.  Verse  13.  Wrapped 
his  face  in  his  mantle— As  even  the  seraphim  veil  their  faces  in  reverent  awe.  Verse  18. 
Yet  I  have  left  me  7,000— To  be  taken  as  future:  **  I  will  leave  in  Israel."  In  the  judg- 
ments which  Hazael,  Jehu,  and  Elisha  shall  execute,  that  number  would  remain  faithful  to 
Jshovah.    Verse  20.  Go  back  again;  for  what,  &c.— 31^  'T},  Lather  renders,  "  Go  (to 

thy  parents),  and  come  (then)  again."  {Keil)  "Go,  but  return  soon,  for  it  is  a  great  thing 
that  thou  shouldst  be  my  successor."  {Lange)  "  Return  to  thy  parents  as  thou  wishest ;  I 
have  not  intended  to  coerce  thee ;  I  leave  the  decision  as  to  thy  prophetic  call  to  thy  free 
will.  What  have  I  done  to  thee  1— Bids  him  recognise  the  solemn  meaaingof  the  symbolical 
action  in  casting  his  mantle  upon  him.  It  laid  him  under  obligation  to  assume  the  prophetic 
mission. — W.  H.  J. 


H0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-18. 

The  Weak  Moments  op  a  Great  Mait. 

L  Here  we  see  a  great  man  giving  way  to  an  unworthy  fear  (verses  1-3). 
1.  Elijah  quailed  before  the  threat  of  an  unscrupulous  woman  (verse  2).  The 
hero  of  Carmel  is  the  coward  of  Jezreel.  He  who  had  overawed  Ahab  and  the 
host  of  Baal  worshippers  fouud  more  than  his  match  in  Jezebel.  He  was  not 
prepared  for  so  sudden  a  collapse  of  the  influence  he  had  gained :  he  had  ex- 
pected that  the  bare  rehearsal  of  the  victory  of  Carmel  would  have  subdued  the 
idolatrous  queen,  and  prepared  her  to  listen  with  respect  to  the  prophet,  and 
to  encourage  the  king  in  bringing  about  religious  reform.  On  the  contrary,  all 
the  wild,  savage  nature  of  the  idol-enthusiast  was  aroused,  and  she  swore  a 
tremendous  oath  to  be  avenged  for  the  slaughter  of  her  priests  by  compassing 
the  prophet's  death.  Like  the  Lady  Macheth,  of  the  great  English  dramatist, 
her  spirit  of  revenge  might  be  expressed  in  similar  terms ; — 

Come,  come,  you  spirits 
That  tend  on  mortal  thoughts,  and  fill  me 
Top-full  of  direst  cruelty ! 
That  no  compunctious  visitings  of  nature 
Shake  my  fell  purpose. 

Elijah  was  seized  with  fear  to  which  he  had  hitherto  been  a  stranger,  and 
trembled  before  the  threat  of  a  Jezebel.  And  alas  !  he  is  not  the  only  brave 
and  noble  spirit  who,  after  performing  the  most  heroic  exploits  in  the  cause  of 
morality  and  religion,  has  succumbed  before  the  scowl  and  scorn  of  a  wicked 
and  deceitful  woman.  2.  He  deserted  the  post  of  duty  from  fear  of  death 
(verse  3).  For  a  lesser  man  to  have  run  away  might  have  been  excused,  but  for 
Elijah  to  prove  renegade  was  a  calamitous  blow  to  all  trust  in  human  great- 
ness. The  work  of  the  prophet  was  so  public  and  so  important  to  the  religious 
interests  of  the  nation,  that  even  the  fear  of  death  ought  not  to  have 
prompted  him  to  relinquish  it :  and  had  he  been  absolutely  certain  thi.t  God 
would  not  have  interposed  to  protect  him,  and  that  to  remain  was  death, 
how  could  he  know  but  that  the  cause  of  Jehovah  might  be  better  promoted, 
and  His  name  glorified,  by  his  death  than  by  his  life  ?  ( )f  all  men,  we  should 
have  looked  to  Elijah  for  a  display  of  the  true  martyr-spirit.  But  when  faith 
in  God  is  impaired,  the  loftiest  fall  and  the  bravest  flee. 
80:2 


EOMTLETIC  CO.VJtfFN-TART  :  KING 8.  chap.  xn. 


II.  Here  we  see  a  great  man  giving  way  to  querulousness  and  despair 
(verse  4).  The  disappoiutment  of  his  expectations,  the  failure  of  his  mission 
following  so  closely  on  the  heels  of  such  signal  success,  his  long  abstinence 
from  food,  and  great  physical  exhaustion  arising  from  rapid  and  extended 
travelling,  would  all  tend  to  prostrate  his  powers ;  and  when  he  sank  down 
under  the  sheltering  broom  tree,  he  gave  utterance  to  the  deep  dejection  of  his 
mind  in  the  querulous  words,  *'It  is  enough;  now,  0  Lord,  take  away  my 
life."  Strange  contradiction  !  says  Kitto.  Here  the  man  who  was  destined 
not  to  taste  of  death,  flees  from  death  on  the  one  hand,  and  seeks  it  on  the  other. 
And  who  told  him  it  was  enough  ?  God  did  not.  He  knew  what  was  enough 
for  Elijah  to  do  and  to  suffer.  God  had  more  to  teach  him,  and  more  work 
for  him  to  do.  It  is  an  affecting  sight  to  see  a  great,  strong  man  sink  into 
helf)lessness  and  despair ;  and  yet  in  the  hour  of  disappointment  and  defeat  many 
a  gallant  spirit  has  cried  out  for  the  oblivion  of  death  !  Desertion  of  duty— a 
fleeing  from  the  word  of  God — is  sure  to  be  followed  by  trouble,  and  often  the 
deepest  mental  anguish. 

III.  Here  we  see  a  great  man  miraculously  sustained  in  the  moment  of 

his  greatest  weakness  (verses  5-8).  God  granted  Elijah  not  the  oblivion  of 
death,  but  the  refreshing  oblivion  of  sleep — riches  to  the  poor,  health  to  all ; 
and  while  he  was  locked  in  the  arms  of  forgetfulness,  a  repast  was  prepared  for 
him  by  angel-hnnds,  to  which  he  was  summoned  by  an  angel's  touch.  In  the 
strength  of  that  meat  he  went  forty  days  and  forty  nights  across  the  platform 
of  the  Sinaitic  desert,  till  he  came  to  Horeb,  the  mount  of  God.  "The 
journey  "  was  not  simply  a  pilgrimage  to  Horeb,  which  was  less  than  two  hun- 
dred miles  distant,  and  might  have  been  reached  in  six  or  seven  days ;  it  was  to 
be  a  wandering  in  the  wilderness,  not  unlike  that  of  the  Israelites  when  they 
came  out  of  Egypt,  only  it  was  to  last  forty  days  instead  of  forty  years.  It 
was  not  without  significance  that  Elijah  was  directed  to  Horeb  :  amid  its  sacred 
solitudes  he  was  to  Iparn  a  lesson  never  to  be  forgotten.  God  is  a  wise 
physician — food  first;  instruction,  rebuke,  after.  He  comes  to  man  in  the 
moment  of  his  greatest  helplessness,  restores  and  strengthens  him,  and  then 
prepares  him  for  future  usefulness  and  more  splendid  triumphs. 

IV.  Here  we  see  a  great  man  Divinely  instructed,  (verses  9-14).  "What 
doest  thou  here?" — a  question  ever  pertinent  and  timely.  The  answer  of  Elijah 
betrays  in  him  what  some,  have  called  "  a  spirit  of  pious  fault-finding,"  and 
also  a  disposition  to  exalt  himself  above  measure.  He  does  not  accuse  Jehovah, 
but  his  words  imply  that  he  himself  was  the  only  saint  in  Israel,  and  it  was 
too  bad  that  Divine  power  had  allowed  idolatry  so  far  to  triumph.  Elijah's 
notions  of  the  Divine  government  were  manifestly  shaped  too  much  by  external 
displays  of  awful  power,  and  he  needed  to  learn  a  profounder  lesson  of  the 
Divine  nature.  He  is  directed  to  "go  forth,  and  stand  upon  tlie  mount  before 
the  Lord  "  (verse  11),  and  in  rapid  succession  the  most  demonstrative  symbols  of 
Jehovah's  mighty  power  in  storm,  earthquake,  and  fire,  pass  before  him.  Eut 
not  in  these,  but  in  the  "still  small  voice,"  the  prophet  detected  the  true 
grandeur  and  comfort  of  the  Divine  presence.  Humbled  at  the  revelation,  he 
wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle,  and  listened  for  further  instruction.  The 
thoughts  under  this  heading  may  be  arranged  and  treated  in  the  following 
order: — 1.  The  pointed  expostulation  {yqv^q^).  2.  The  attempt  at  self -justification 
(verse  10).  S.  Ihe power  of  Divine  gentleness  {\qvs,g%  W-Vd).  4.  The  influence 
of  Divine  gentleness  not  always  immediately  apparent  (verses  13,  14).  The 
question  is  now  put  again  to  the  prophet  by  the  Lord  himself.  Will  he  have 
taken  to  heart  the  lesson  of  the  great  parable  which  has  been  acted  before  him, 
and  make  a  humbler  and  more  gentle  answer  ?  No ;  he  is  satisfied  with  his 
own  statement  of  his  case,  and  does  but  repeat  his  former  words!     "He  has 

303 


CHAP.  XIX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAJtY:  EIKOS, 


been  very  jealous — he  is  left  alone — his  life  is  sought — he  has  done  right,  there- 
fore, to  quit  an  ungrateful  country,  and  relinquish  a  thankless  office." 

V.  Here  we  see  a  great  man  encouraged  to  return  to  the  work  he  had 
forsaken  (verses  15-18).  The  best  remedy  for  dejection  is  work  ;  absorbed  in 
the  duties  of  a  lofty  mission,  man  forgets  his  sorrow  and  regains  his  normal  tone. 
Elijah  is  reminded  that  God  did  not  overlook  the  sins  of  Israel,  and  he  is 
instructed  to  anoint  others  who  shall  carry  out  His  judgments  against  the  house 
of  Ahab.  Again,  Elijah  had  supposed  he  was  alone  in  his  witness  for  God. 
"It  was  a  thought  of  anguish,"  says  Maurice,"  and  yet  it  was  a  thought  of 
pride.  He  felt  the  misery  of  solitude,  yet  there  was  self-exaltation  in  it.  *'  I 
alone  am  left,  and  they  seek  my  life."  No  ;  there  are  seven  thousand  who  have 
not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal.  Is  it  so  indeed  ?  What,  Elijah,  the  great  prophet, 
after  all,  does  not  know  more  than  a  multitude  beside !  He  is  not  more  faithful 
than  they  are  !  God  has  called  them  as  well  as  him.  Who  can  tell  whether 
Elijah  could  have  borne  that  discovery  a  few  hours  before  ?  The  still  small 
voice  had  made  it  the  most  blessed  of  all  discoveries.  That  voice  had  taught 
him  not  to  care  whether  he  was  better  than  his  fathers,  or  better  than  his 
brethren ;  to  desire  only  that  God  might  be  glorified  in  his  strength  and  in  his 
nothingness."  It  is  at  once  a  humiliation  and  an  encouragement  to  reflect  that 
man  is  only  one  amid  a  host  of  seen  or  unseen  workers  for  God ! 

Lkssons: — 1.  Great  men  are  liable  to  failure.  2.  Great  men  often  fail  at  the 
point  where  they  are  considered  strongest — the  fearless  become  cawardly,  the  pure 
immoral,  the  honourable  dishonest,  Sfc.  3.  God  restores  the  erring  soul  by  a  method 
which  is  best  suited  at  once  to  humble  and  encourage, 

Elijah's  Despondency. 

If  there  were  anything  for  which  Elijah  is  remarkable,  we  should  say  it  was 
superiority  to  human  weakness.  Like  the  Baptist,  he  dared  to  arraign  and 
rebuke  his  sovereign  ;  like  the  commander  who  cuts  down  the  bridge  behind 
him,  leaving  himself  no  alternative  but  death  or  victory,  he  tauoted  his  adver- 
saries, the  priests  of  Baal,  on  Mount  Carmel,  making  them  gnash  their  teeth 
and  cut  themselves  with  knives,  but  at  the  same  time  ensuring  for  himself  a 
terrible  end,  in  case  of  failure,  from  his  exasperated  foes.  Now  it  was  this 
man— so  stern,  so  iron,  so  independent,  so  above  all  human  weakness — of  whom 
it  was  recorded  that  in  his  trial  hour  he  gave  way  to  a  fit  of  petulance  and 
querulous  despondency,  to  which  there  is  scarcely  found  a  parallel. 

I.  The  causes  of  Elijah's  despondency.     1.  Relaxation  of  physical  strength. 
On  the  reception  of  Jezebel's  message,  Elijah  flies  for  his  life,  toils  on  the  whole 
day,  sits  down  under  a  juniper  tree  faint,  hungry,  and  travel- worn,  the  gale 
of  an  Oriental  evening,  damp  and  heavy  with  languid  sweetness,  breathing  on 
his  face.     The  prophet  and  the  man  give  way.     He  longs  to  die.     You  cannot 
mistake  the  presence  of  causes  in  part  purely  physical.     We  are  fearfully  and 
wonderfully  made  ;  of  that  constitution  which,  in  our  ignorance,  we  call  union 
of  soul  and  body,  we  know  little  respecting  what  is  cause  and  what  is  effect. 
We  would  fain  believe  that  the  mind  has  power  over  the  body,  but  it  is  just 
as  true  that  the  body  rules  the  mind.     Causes,  apparently,  the  most  trivial ;  a 
heated  room,  want  of  exercise,  a  sunless  day,  a  northern  aspect,  will  make  all 
the  difference  between  happiness  and  unhappiness,  between  faith  and  doubt, 
between  courage  and  indecision.     To  our  fancy  there  is  something  humiliating 
in   being  thus  at  the  mercy  of  our  animal  organism.     We   would  fain  find 
nobler  causes  for  our  emotions.     We  talk  of  the  hiding  of  God's  countenance, 
304 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xix. 


and  the  fiery  darts  of  Satan.     But  the  picture  given  here  is  true.     The  body  is 
the  channel  of  our  noblest  emotions,  as  well  as  well  as  our  sublimest  sorrows 
2     Want  of  sympathy.     «;  I,  even  I  only,  am  left."     Lay  the  stress  on  onki 
The  loneliness  of  his  position  was  shocking  to  Elijah.     Surprising  this:  for 
Mijah  wanted  no  sympathy  in  a  far  harder  trial  on  Mount  Carmel.     It  was  iu 
a  tone  of  triumph  that  he  proclaimed  that  he  was  the  single,  solitary  prophet 
of  the  Lord    while  Eaal  prophets  were  450   men.      Observe,   however    the 
ditterence.     Ihere  was  m  that  case  an  opposition  which  could  be  grappled  with  • 
here  there  was  nothing  against  which  mere  manhood  was  availin"-      The  excite ' 
ment  was  passed,  the  chivalrous  look  of  the  thing  gone.     To  die  as  a  martyr  • 
yes,  that  were  easy,  in  grand  failure ;  but  to  die  as  a  felon,  to  be  hunted,  caught' 
tciken  back  to  an  ignominious  death— flesh  and  blood  recoiled  from  that.     And 
Lhjah  began  to  feel  that  popularity  is  not  love.      The  world  will  support 
you  when  you  have  constrained  its  votes  by  a  manifestation  of  power,  and  shrink 
trom  you  when  power  and  greatness  are  no  longer  on  your  side.     "I    even  I 
only,  am  left.       What  greater  minds  like  Elijah^s  have  felt  intensely,  aU  we 
have  felt  m  our  own  degree.     Not  one  of  us  but  what  has  felt  his  heart  aching 
for  want  of  sympathy      We  have  had  our  lonely  hours,  our  days  of  disappoint^ 
ment,  and  our  moments  of  hopelessness-times  when  our  highest  feelings  have 
been  misunderstood,  and  our  purest  met  with  ridicule-days  when  our  heavy 
secret  was  lying  unshared  Hke  ice  upon  the  heart.     And  then  the  spirit  gives 
way  :  we  have  wished  that  all  were  over;  that  we  could  lie  down  tired,  and 
rest  like  the  children,  from  life  ;  that  the  hour  was  come  when  we  could  put 
down  theextinguisher  on  the  lamp,  and  feel  the  last  grand  rush  of  darkness  on 
the  spmt.     Now  the  final  cause  of  this  capacity  for  depression—the  reason  for 
Z^f^  H  II  f  "Jt^f  t^^Vt ^^y  ^^te  God  necessary.     In  such  moments 

iU   VV'l,  ^3^^P^t^hy  beyond  human  is  needful.     Alone,  the  world  against 
him,  El,iah  turns  to  God  :  -  It  is  enough,  now,  0  Lord.-     3.    TFant  of  occupa- 
twn.     As  long  as  Elijah  had  a  prophet's  work  to  do-severe  as  that  work  waf- 
aU  went  on  healthily ;  but  his  occupation  was  gone.     To-morrow,  and  the  dav 
after,  what  has  he  left  on  earth  to  do?     The  misery  of  havinrnothfng  to  do 
proceeds  from  causes  voluntary  or  involuntary  in  their  nature.     Multitudes  of 
our  race,  by  circumstances  over  which  they  have  no  control,  in  single  life  or 
widowhood,  m  straightened  circumstances,  are  compelled  to  endure  lonely  davs 
and  still  more  lonely  nights  and  evenings.     They  who  have  felt  the  hours  hang 
so  heavy  can  comprehend  part  of  Elijah's  sadness.     The  law  of  life  is,  in  thf 
sweat  of  thy  brow  thou  shalt  eat  bread.     No  man  can  evade  that  law  with 
impunity.     Like  all  God's  laws,  itis  its  own  executioner.     It  hasstranc^e  pe^al 
ties  annexed  to  it    Would  you  kr,ow  them  ?     Go  to  the  park  or  the  esplanade 
or   he  solitude  after  the  night  of  dissipation,  and  read  the  penalties  of  befng 
useless  m  the  sad    jaded,  listless  countenances-nay,  in  the  very  trifles  which 
must  be  contrived  to  create  excitement  artific  i .lly.   \,t  these  very  eye   TouW 
dull  as  they  are,  beam  with  intelligence;  on  many  of  those  brows  irstamped 
the  mark  of  possible  nobihty.     The  fact  is,  that  the  capacity  of  ennui  is  one  of 
the  signatures  of  man's   immortality.     It  is  his  very  greatness  which  makes 
inaction  misery.     I   men  with  souls  live  only  to  eat  and  drink  and  be  amused 
IS  It  any  wonder  if  life  be  darkened  with  despondency  ?     4.  i^.^.otr.^     >; 
the  expectatzon  of  success.     On  Carmel  the  great  object  for  which  EZrhSved 
seemed  on  the  point  of  being  realized.     Eaal's  prophets  were  sla  n-J^^^^^^^^^^ 
acknowledged  with  one  voice-false  worship  put  down.     Elijah's  ll  aim-the 
transformation  of  Israel  into  a  kinoVlnm  nf  an/i_^o.  „n  v,,^  .A        .-.    ^'"^  .^^® 


transformation  of  Israel  into  a  kiMo.:^^^^^^^^^^ 

r.^!!f  Z^i^  *A^  \"S}}'  P>t-^^  was  annihilated.     The  tradesman'sees  the  noble 

the  representative  of  so  much 
i  son.     The  purest  statesmen 

«aa  look  back  on  life  -^•'^^i^i^:;Z^Z^'^  b^n^rfaS'  l.t 

X  on  a 


fortune  for  wh  oh  Zv    ^^'  ^as  annihilated.     The  tradesman  sees  the  noble 
«rr     ;°^7'^"'^  he  lived,  every  coin  of  which  is  the  representative  of  so  much 


CHAP.  XIX.  EOMILETIC  COMiMENTAET:   KINGS. 


the  most  part  life  is  disappointment,  and  the  moments  in  which  this  is  keenly 
realized  are  moments  like  this  of  Elijah's. 

II.  God's  treatment  of  Elijah's  despondency.     1.  First  Re  recruited  Hia 
servant's  exhausted  strength.     Miraculous  meals  are  given — then  Elijah  sleeps, 
wakes,   and  eats;    on   the  strength   of  that   goes  forty   days'   journey.      In 
other  words,  like  a  wise  physician,  God  administers  food,  rest,  and  exercise,  and 
then,  and  not  till  then,  proceeds  to  expostulate  ;  for  before,  Elijah's  mind  was 
unfit  for  reasoning.     Persons  come  to  the  ministers  of  God  in  seasons  of  des- 
pondency;  they  pervert  with  marvellous  ingenuity  all  the  consolation  which  is 
given  them,  turning  wholesome  food  into  poison.     Then  we  begin  to  perceive 
the  wisdom  of  God's  simple  homely  treatment  of  Elijah,  and  discover  that  there 
are  spiritual  cases  which  are  cases  for  the  physician  rather  than  the  divine. 
2.  Next  Jehovah  calnvd  his  stormy  mind  ly  the  healing  influences  of  Nature.     He 
commanded  the  hurricane  to  sweep  the  sky,  and  the  earthquake  to  shake  the 
ground.     He  lighted  up  the  heavens  till  they  were  one  mass  of  fire.     All  this 
expressed  and  reflected  Elijah's  feelings.     The  mode  in  which  nature  soothes 
us  is  by  finding  meeter  and  nobler  utterance  for  our  feelings  than  we  can  find 
in  words — by  expressing  and  exalting  them.      In  expression  there  is  relief. 
Elijah's  spirit  rose  with  the  spirit  of  the  storm.     Stern,  wild  defiance,  strange 
joy,  all  by  turns  were  imaged  there.     Observe,  God  was  not  in  the  wind,  nor  in 
the  fire,  nor  in  the  earthquake.     It  was  Elijah's  stormy  self  reflected  in  the 
moods  of  the  tempest,  and  giving  them  their  character.     Then  came  a  calmer 
hour.      Elijah  rose  in  reverence,  felt  tenderer  sensations  in  his  bosom.     He 
opened  his  heart  to  gentler  influences,  till  at  last,  out  of  the  manifold  voices  of 
nature,  there  seemed  to  speak,  not  the  stormy  passions  of  the  man,  but  the 
"still  small  voice"  of  the  harmony  and  the  peace  of  God.     There  are  some 
spirits  which  must  go  through  a  discipline  analogous  to  that  sustained  by 
Elijah.      The  storm-struggle  must  precede  the  still  small  voice.     There  aie 
minds  which  must  be  convulsed  with  doubt  before  they  can  repose  in  faith ; 
there  are  heaits  which  must  be  broken  with  disappointment  before  they  can 
rise  into  hope.     3.  Besides,    God  made  Elijah  feel  the  earnestness  of  life.     What 
doest   thou  here,  Elijah  ?     Life  is  for  doing — a  prophet's  life  for  nobler  doing — 
and  the  prophet  was  not  doing,  but  moaning.     Such  a  voice  repeats  itself  to  all 
of  us,  rousing  us  from  our  lethargy,  or  our  despondency,  or  our  protracted  leisure, 
*'  What  doest  thou  here  " — here  in  this  short  life  ?     There  is  work  to  be  done, 
evil  put    down,   God's  church  purified,  good  men  encouraged,  doubting  men 
directed,  a  country  to  be  saved,  time  going,   life  a  dream,  eternity  long,  one 
chance,  and  bat  one  for  ever.     What  doest  thou  here  ?     Then  he  went  on  fur- 
ther :    **  Arise,  go  on  thy  way."     That  speaks  to  us  :  on  thy  way.     Be  up  and 
doing ;  fill  up  every  hour,  leaving  7io  crevice  or  craving  for  a  remorse  or  a  re- 
pentance to  creep  through  afterwards.     Go  !  return   on  thy  way,  if  thou  art 
desponding — on  thy  way,  health  of  spirit  will  return.     4.    God  completed  the  cure 
hy  the  assurance  of  victory  (verse  18).     So,  then,  Elijah's  life  had  been  no  failure 
after  all.     Seven  thousand  at  least  in  Israel  had  been  braced  and    encouiaged 
by  his  example,  and  silently  blessed  him,  perhaps,  for  the  couiage  which  they 
felt.     In  God's  world,  for  those  that  are  in  eainest,  there  is  no  failure.     No 
work  truly  done,  no  word  earnestly  spoken,  no  sacrifice  freely  made,  was  ever 
made  in  vain.     We  turn  naturally  from  this  scene  to  a  still  darker  hour  and 
more   august  agony.     If  ever  failure  seemed  to  rest  on  a  noble  life,  it  was 
when  the  Son  of  man,  deserted  by  his  friends,  heard  the  cry  which  proclaimed 
that  the  pharisees  had  successfully  drawn  the  net  around  their  Divine  victim. 
Yet,  from  that  very  hour  of  defeat  and  death,  there  went  forth  the  world's 
life ;  from  that  very  moment  of  apparent  failure  there  proceedeth  forth  into 
the  ages  the  spirit  of  the  conquering  Cross.     Surely,  if  the  Cross  says  any- 
thing, it  says  that  apparent  defeat  is  real  victory,  and  that  there  is  a  heaven  for 
306 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KMGS.  chap.  xix. 


those  "who  have  nohli/  and  truly  failed  on  earth.  Distinguish,  therefore,  be- 
tween the  real  and  the  apparent.  Elijah's  apparent  success  was  in  the  shouts 
of  Mount  Carmel.  His  real  success  was  in  the  unostentatious,  unsurmised 
obedience  of  the  seven  thousand  who  had  taken  his  God  for  their  God. 

Lessons  : — 1.  For  all  teachers  who  lay  their  heads  down  at  night,  sickening 
over  their  thankless  task.  Remember  the  power  of  indirect  influences — those 
which  distil  from  a  life,  not  from  a  sudden  brilliant  effort.  The  former  never 
fail:  the  latter  often.  2.  For  ministers,  again,  what  is  ministerial  success? 
Crowded  churches,  full  aisles,  attentive  congregations,  the  approval  of  the 
religious  world — much  impression  produced?  Elijah  thought  so :  and  when 
he  found  out  his  mistake,  and  discovered  that  the  applause  on  Mount  Carmel 
subsided  in  hideous  stillness,  his  heart  well-nigh  broke  with  disappointment. 
Ministerial  success  lies  in  altered  lives  and  obedient,  humble  hearts :  unseen 
work  recognized  in  the  Judgment  Day.  3.  Get  below  appearances,  below 
glitter  and  show.  Plant  your  foot  upon  reality  ;  not  in  the  jubilee  of  the 
myriads  on  Carmel,  but  in  the  humble  silence  of  the  hearts  of  the  seven  thou- 
sand, lay  the  proof  that  Elijah  had  not  lived  in  vain. — F,  W,  Hobertson. 


The  Subduing  Powee  op  the  Divine  "Whispeb. 

Elijah  hastened  first  to  the  court  to  find  the  queen  overwhelmed  with  defeat 
and  humiliation ;  but  Jezebel,  so  far  from  being  terrified  into  conviction  by  the 
appalling  wonders  of  Carmel,  was  preparing  to  take  his  life.     This  was  so  heavy 
and  sudden  a  blow  to  Elijah's  faith  in  the  converting  power  of  judgments,  that 
courage  and  dignity  forsook  him  for  a  time,  and  he  fled  like  a  frighted  deer 
because  a  woman  had  threatened  him  !     An  angel  of  God  found  him  in  the 
wilderness  of  Beer-heba,  lying  under  a  juniper  tree,  bitterly  complaining  of  his 
lot,  and  praying  the  Lord  to  take  his  life.     It  was  now  that  Jehovah  explained 
to  His  servant,  by  the  impressive  signs  described  in  these  verses,  that  power 
might  avenge  and  destroy,  but  could  not  win ;  that  the   silent  intellectual 
process  of  instruction  and  spiritual  influence  can  alone  reach  the  heart,  and 
change  the  man.     The  theatre  of  these  signs  was  Horeb,  celebrated  of  old  for 
displays  of  the  Divine  terrors.     Here  Moses  saw  the  flaming  majesty  of  the  I  am 
in  the  bush.     Here  was  Sinai,  the  mount  that  might  be  touched,  that  burned 
with  fire,  and  trembled  when  the  trump  of  God  gave  forth  the  voice  of  words. 
Becalling  these  events,  and  impressed  by  these  associations,  Elijah,  after  a  jour- 
ney of  forty  days,  drew  near  to  this  Horeb,  the  mount  of  God ;  and,  entering 
a  cave  or  grot  hollowed  out  in  one  of  its  sides,  he  lodged  there.     There  God 
found  him.     *'  What  dost  thou  here,  Elijah  ?  "     The  prophet  answered,  in  a  dis- 
tempered mood,  that  he  had  been  jealous  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts :  that  in  spite 
of  all  he  had  done  to  reclaim  Israel,  the  Divine  covenants  were  yet  broken,  the 
altars  profaned,  the  prophets  slain,  and  himself,  the  sole  remaining  witness  for 
the  truth,  they  were  seeking  to  destroy.     Then  the  Lord  commanded  the  melan- 
choly and  despaiiing  seer  to  ascend  to  the  top  of  the  mount ;  and  while  he  stood 
there,  surrounded  by  bleak  and  barren  hills,  fit  images  of  power  and  desolation, 
the  Lord  passed  by  in  a  succession  of  grand  and  suggestive  phenomena.     There 
were  four  signs ;  of  which  three  were  material,  and  the  fourth  intellectual.     1 .  A 
strong  wind  swept  by,  rending  the  imbedded  cliffs  of  Horeb,  and  scattering  them 
like  stubble.  The  stormy  soul  of  Elijah  found  a  congenial  element  in  this  untamed 
and  mighty  agent ;  and  he,  perhaps,  wished  he  could  ride  upon  its  wings,  turn  its 
head  toward  Samaria,  and  demolish  the  usurpation  of  Baal.  But  while  he  watched 
for  some  particular  appearance  to  indicate  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  some  strange 
glory  or  voice,  to  show  that  the  hurricane  was  a  fit  chariot  for  the  career  of 
Gody  the  storm  fell ;  and  the  prophet  knew  that  the  Lord  was  not  in  the  wind* 

d07 


CHAT.  XIX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


2.  Then  followed  another  sign,  more  terrific  than  a  teinpest.     Perhaps  in  all 
nature  there  is  nothing  which  so  nearly  resembles  what  we  should  think  to  be 
the  immediate  interposition  of  God  as  an  earthquake.     "  After  the  wind  an 
earthquake."     As  the  prophet  felt  that  ancient  and  lofty  pile  of  hills,  apparently 
immortal  in  their  steadfastness,  give  way  beneath  his  feet,  writhing  helplessly  in 
the  grasp  of  some  unseen  power,  like  a  convulsed  child,  he  must  have  thought, 
"  Surely  God  is  here !     These  fearful  shakings  and  hurlings  are  the  tokens  of 
His  dread  presence ; "  and  he  might  have  repeated  to  himself  the  triumphant 
chant  of  a  psalm  he  had  often  sung,  **  What  ails  ye,  ye  mountains,  that  ye  skip 
like  rams ;  and  ye  little  hills  like  lambs  ?     Tremble,  thou  earth,  at  the  presence 
of  the  Lord,  at  the  presence  of  the  God  of  Jacob."     But  the  Lord  was  not  in 
the  earthquake  ;  the  convulsions  subsided  without  a  sign.     3.  The  third  wonder 
that  passed  before  the  eye  of  the  now  perplexed  prophet  was  an  element  as 
destructive  as  an  earthquake,  but  far  more  imposing.     Shining  above  the  bright- 
ness of  the  sun,  roaring  and  consuming,  a  huge  fire  played  about  the  rocks  on 
which  Elijah  stood.     And  as  he  saw  its  nimble  tongues  of  flame  lick  up  the 
hard  verdure  of  the  ground,  and  split  and  melt  the  rocks  with  its  devouring 
heat,  he  knew  that  this  fierce  brightness  had  been  from  the  beginning  a  chosen 
vehicle  of  Jehovah.     He  remembered  Sodom  and   Gomorrah;  he  remembered 
Sinai,  part  of  the  very  hill  that  now  blazed  around  him,  when  lightnings  had 
accompanied  the  declaration  of  law,  and  he  probably  waited  to  receive  from  that 
fire  another  commandment  for  Israel.     There  stood  the  stern  man  in  the  midst 
of  devastation.     The  wind  had  shaken,  the  earthquake  had  swallowed  up,  the 
fire  had  consumed  ;  but  God  had  not  spoken  !     The  prophet  had  been  awed,  but 
not  instructed.     He  had  gone  to  the  mount  doubtful,  dissatisfied,  perhaps,  self- 
condemned  ;  the  material  signs  gave  him  no  relief.     They  were  splendid  and 
dreadful,  but  there  was  no  mind  in  them.     4.  While  he  thus  stood  bewildered, 
debating  with  himself  what  this  might  mean,  the  last  sign  explained  all :  it  was 
a  still  small  voice.    It  was  still,  because  no  sound  struck  audibly  on  the  ear ;  it 
was  small,  because  no  ostentatious  medium  conveyed  it ;  it  was  the  voice  of 
mind  whispering  to  mind.     God  spake  to  Elijah,  and  without  any  symbol  there 
were  thoughts  interchanged  that  bowed  the  prophet's  soul  to  the  dust.     And  it 
came  to  pass  when  Elijah  heard  it,  or  felt  it,  he  wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle, 
and  returned  to  his  cave,  standing  in  the  entrance  to  hear  the  voice  again,  as  if 
repeating  the  words  of  Samuel — "  Speakj  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heareth^ 

I.  My  dear  brethren,  that  which  bows  the  mind,  that  which  makes  a  man 
wrap  his  face  in  his  mantle  in  silent  and  intelligent  reverence,  is  not  a  sign 
that  strikes  upon  the  senses,  but  a  thought  understood  and  felt  in  the  heart. 
Miracles  have  an  historic  value,  but  they  have  seldom  produced  in  those  who 
witnessed  them  a  moral  benefit;  neither  error  nor  vice  can  spring  from  a  miracle, 
nor  can  either  be  rejected  by  a  miracle :  they  arise  from  the  connection  of  mind 
with  mind,  and  must  be  destroyed  by  a  new  mental  fellowship. 

II.  This  will  be  manifest  if  we  follow  the  course  of  the  Divine  revelation. 

The  patriarchs  transmitted  a  few  simple  and  fixed  beliefs;  the  Jewish  economy 

dispensed  miracles  and  types ;  the  knowledge  of  God  became  more  defined  and 

enlarged ;  it  was  systematized  in  laws,  but  national  and  local  in  its  application. 

When  Christ  came,  He  made  the  gospel  the  subject  and  instrument  of  teaching, 

fulfilling  the  prediction — And  they  shall  he  all  taught  of  God.     Divine  knowledge, 

in  coming  down  to  us  from  the  past,  has  become  more  and  more  a  voice  speaking 

to  the  heart,  more  and  more  free  from  material  mediums.     When  Abraham 

embraced  the  knowledge  of  God,  it  was  on  its  way  to  us  ;  when  Moses  lodged  it 

in  the  Jewish  Tabernacle,  it  was  purifying  itself  for  us ;  when  Christ  found  it 

there,  and  baptized  it  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire.  He  sent  it  forth  to  us. 

It  is  now  doing  its  greatest  vork,  flot  by  flood  and  fire,  although  tl)ere  are  citiea 

308 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTART :   KINGS.  chap.  xix. 

in  the  world  as  wicked  as  Sodom  ;  not  by  miracles,  althouo^h  there  is  as  hard  u 
scepticism  as  ever  reigned  in  Jndea  or  Rome ;  but  by  the  still  small  voice  of  in- 
struction, supported  and  carried  out  to  gracious  results  by  the  silent  communion 
of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

III.  These  are  the  last  and  crowning  means  of  Christianity ;  every  thing  else, 
by  whatever  name  you  call  it,  belongs  to  the  three  first  signs.  And  what  a 
fondness  we  have  for  these  signs,  the  picturesque  and  the  striking !  But  what 
do  they  gain  who  seek  to  embellish  the  church  with  a  gorgeous  architecture  ; 
who  cultivate  the  sublimity  of  domes  and  capitals ;  who  subdue  by  a  solemn 
colouring  the  very  light  that  falls  upon  the  worshippers ;  who  place  in  imposing 
situations  the  picture,  the  statue,  the  emblem  ;  who  burnish  their  altars  with 
gold,  and  bring  to  the  holy  crucifix  the  homage  of  tapers  and  the  genuflexions 
of  surplice  and  mitre ;  who  enter  the  assembly  with  the  music  of  cii  anted  litanies, 
and  terrify  the  people  by  the  thunder  of  anathemas  ?  The  Lord  is  not  in  the 
architecture,  the  picture,  the  music,  the  pomp  ;  you  see  no  more  here  than  the 
thres  signs  of  the  prophet.  You  must  seek  the  Lord  in  the  voice  of  the  con- 
science ;  this  is  the  sign  of  the  gospel  dispensation — the  word,  and  not  the  picture; 
Christ,  and  not  the  crucifix ;  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  not  the  seven  candles. 

lY,  If  we  stop  with  the  three  signs,  we  go  no  farther  than  the  heathen. 
The  negro  falls  down  before  the  whirlwind  and  the  earthquake,  and  cries,  Lo ! 
God  is  here !     The  Parsee  worships  the  shining  fire.     But  their  impressions  are 
sensuous  and  temporary  ;  fading  before  the  heart  is  touched,  for  the  still  small 
voice  of  instruction  is  wanting.     Look  at  the  people  around  us  !     We  see  whole 
nations  prostrate  before  the  three  signs.     To  the  Hindu  the  splendours  of  Hin- 
duism are  the  whirlwind,  the  earthquake,  and  the  fire ;  and  his  homage  is 
fear  and  admiration.     When  I  have  seen  an  idol  arrayed  in  traditionary  terrors, 
and  magnificently  paraded  through  the  streets  of  a  large  native  town — and  in 
the  night  too — and  when  ten  thousand  human  beings  have  pressed  near  to  wor- 
ship amid  the  gleaming  of  innumerable  torches  of  coloured  lights,  and  rockets 
and  candles  of  every  device  shooting  up  into  the  air,  and  when  the  priests  have 
sung  in  solemn  cadence,  and  the  multitudes  have  shouted  their  acclamations,  I 
have  caught  the  prevailing  awe.     With  all  my  better  knowledge,  I  could  not 
resist  the  terror  and  beauty  of  the  spectacle ;  but  the  Lord  was  not  there.     The 
multitudes  returned  to  the  homes  with  an  intoxicated  sense,  and  a  fevered  ima- 
gination ;  but  no  silent  voice  to  instruct  and  win  them  to  God.     But  I  have 
taken  one  of  those  Hindus  whom  the  earthquake  and  the  tire  had  dazzled,  but 
not  changed ;  I  have  drawn  him  away  from  the  three  signs,  and  invited  him  to 
await  with  me  for  the  fourth  ;  and  while  we  listened,  a  still  small  voice  spoke 
in  our  henrts ;  and  when  he  heard  it,  he  wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle,  and 
cried.  What  must  I  do  to  he  saved  ?     And  the  effect  of  that  voice  was  a  new  heart 
and  a  new  life.     It  was  the  silent  winning  of  Calvary,  and  not  the  fiery  testi- 
mony of  Carmel.     It  was  not  Moses  or  Elijah  thundering  forth  the  law  upon 
the  senses,  but  Jesus  breathing  truth  and  grace  into  the  soul. 

Y.  Have  you  ever  bowed  before  this  voice,  and  hidden  your  face  in  penitence  ? 
Perhaps,  amid  the  clamour  and  discord  of  louder  voices,  the  still  accents  of 
Jesus  escaped  you.  We  cannot  catch  the  sound  without  profound  listening. 
When  we  do  hear  it,  speaking  pardon  from  the  Cross,  speaking  help  from  the 
right  hand  of  God,  speaking  victory  in  the  conflict — 

'Tis  music  in  the  sinner's  ear, 
*Tis  life,  and  health,  and  peace. 

For  the  comfort  of  those  who  have  been  terrified  by  the  storm  and  fire  of  the 
law,  X  am  commanded  to  promise  that  the  blessed  sign  of  a  Saviour's  presence 

309 


Chap.  xix. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


Bhall  follow.  You  have  been  convinced  of  sin;  have  quaked  beneath  the 
threatenings  of  Horeb  ;  a  storm  of  distemper  and  doubt  is  rending  your  soul. 
But  follow  ElijaVs example;  wait,  be  of  good  courage,  and  He  shall  strengthen 
your  heart.  The  thick  cloud  of  sin  shall  pass  away  before  the  still  small  voice 
of  heavenly  peace. — K  K  Jenkins'  Madras  Sermons, 


OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Yerses  1-8.  Elijah  under  the 
juniper  tree.  How  are  the  mighty 
fallen  !  He  who  stands  before  us  in 
the  preceding  chapter  as  the  fearless 
champion  of  the  God  of  Israel,  putting 
to  shame  the  worshippers  of  Baal,  and 
slaying  his  prophets,  is  presented  to 
us  in  this  chapter  as  being  overcome 
with  fear,  the  victim  of  cowardice  and 
despondency.  He  who  could  boldly 
defy  the  king  is  now  terrified  by  the 
threat  of  a  vile  and  angry  queen,  and 
flees  for  his  life,  until  the  shade  of  a 
juniper  tree  in  the  wilderness  affords 
shelter  to  his  exhausted  frame.  I. 
Mis  dejection.  "  He  requested  for 
himself  that  he  might  die.**  This  is 
the  feeling  which  dejection  generally 
awakens,  the  desire  to  be  separated 
from  the  object  of  trial  or  annoyance. 
Whenever  men's  hearts  fail  them  in  any 
work,  their  first  wish  is  to  get  away 
from  it.  This  will  account  for  the 
frequent  instances  we  hear  of  desertion 
from  the  post  of  duty.  In  this  dejec- 
tion of  Elijah  we  have  an  instance  of 
men  breaking  down  in  the  strong  point 
of  their  character.  He  was  fearless, 
bold,  and  courageous,  yet  these  were 
the  points  on  which  he  failed — he  was 
afraid  of  Jezebel.  Moses  was  the 
meekest  man,  yet  it  was  for  impati- 
ence and  anger  that  he  was  excluded 
from  Canaan,  Peter  was  fearless  and 
impetuous,  yet  he  denied  his  Lord. 
Men  generally  fear  their  weak  points, 
their  besetting  sins ;  but  they  have 
nefid  to  fear  as  well  those  they  think 
strong.  What  were  the  causes  of  his 
dejection?  1.  Physical  exhaustion. 
The  anxiety  and  excitement  of  Carm el 
would  be  extremely  exhausting  to 
him  After  such  a  strain  there  would 
come  a  reaction ;  the  nerves  unstrung 
— irritable ;  taking  a  gloomy  view  of 
things.  This  is  the  common  experi- 
ence of  those  who  suffer  from  bodily 
310 


exhaustion.        2.       Disappointment. 

Elijah  in  all  likelihood  expected  that 
after  the  scenes  on  Carmel  the  whole 
of  Israel,  including  Ahab  and  the 
royal  house,  would  be  converted  and 
restored  to  God.  He  would  think 
that  the  evidence  afforded  would  be 
irresistible  in  favour  of  Jehovah. 
But  instead  of  Jezebel  being  converted, 
she  was  enraged,  and  her  enmity  in- 
creased. At  this  unexpected  result, 
the  prophet  would  be  disappointed, 
and  his  heart  would  sink  within  him. 
3.  Eclipse  of  faith.  The  figure  of 
Jezebel  so  appeared  before  him  as  to 
hide  or  obscure  his  vision  of  God. 
When  he  saw  '*  that,^^  the  threat,  he 
arose,  and  went  for  his  life.  **  The 
God  before  whom  I  stand,"  were  the 
words  with  which  he  confronted  Ahab, 
and  he  was  as  bold  as  a  lion.  Now  he 
saw  nothing  but  Jezebel's  threat,  and 
fear  takes  hold  upon  him.  Men  are 
strong  and  steadfast  only  as  they  see 
God.  Let  anything  obscure  this 
vision,  and  their  strength  is  gone — in 
temptation,  in  work,  in  sorrow,  in 
death. 

II.  His  recovery.  **  And  as  he  lay 
and  slept  under  a  juniper  tree,  behold, 
then  an  angel  touched  him,  and  said 
unto  him.  Arise  and  eat."  There  is 
no  rebuke  here.  Men  often  notice 
the  words  most  which  are  spoken  in 
anger  or  irritation.  But  God  passes 
over  those  whioh  escaped  Elijah's  lips 
in  his  time  of  depression.  They  repre- 
sented his  despondency,  not  his  real 
self.  Undeterred,  therefore,  by  the 
prophet's  request  for  death,  God  pro- 
vides him  with  food  to  refresh  his 
exhausted  frame.  He  also  addressed 
to  him  words  of  kindness  to  comfort 
his  mind  :  *'  I'he  journey  is  too  great 
for  thee."  What  a  beautiful  instance 
ia  this  of  the  watchfulness  and  con- 


EOMILETIC  COMMEJS'TART:  KINGS. 


CHAP.   XIX, 


sideration  with  which  God  attends 
His  servants.  In  their  times  of  des- 
pondency and  difficulty  they  may 
forget  Him,  and  wander  from  His 
ways,  but  he  does  not  forget  them, 
or  leave  them  to  themselves.—  The 
Study  and  the  Pulpit. 

Verses  2,  3.  The  tyranny  of  fear. 

1 .  May  overpower  the  bravest  spirit. 

2.  Is  intensified  when  life  is  threat- 
ened with  a  cruel  termination.  3. 
May  be  wielded  by  the  most  con- 
temptible individual.  4.  Drives  the 
hitherto  dauntless  worker  from  the 
post  of  duty. 

Veise  2.  Neither  scourges  nor 
favours  can  work  anything  with  the 
obstinately  wicked.  All  evil  hearts 
are  not  equally  disaffected  to  good : 
Ahab  and  Jezebel  were  both  bad 
enough,  yet  Ahab  yields  to  that  work 
of  God  which  Jezebel  stubbornly 
opposeth.  Ahab  melts  with  that 
water,  with  that  fire,  wherewith 
Jezebel  is  hardened ;  Ahab  was  bash- 
fully, Jezebel  audaciously,  impious. 
The  weaker  sex  is  ever  commonly 
stronger  in  passion,  and  more  vehe- 
mently carried  with  the  sway  of  their 
desires,  whether  to  good  or  evil.  She 
swears  and  stamps  at  those  whereat 
she  should  have  trembled ;  she  swears 
by  those  gods  of  hers,  which  were 
not  able  to  save  their  prophets,  that 
she  will  kill  the  prophet  of  God,  who 
had  scorned  her  gods,  and  slain  her 
prophets. — Bp.  HalL 

Verse  3.  Strange  spectacle !  The 
man  at  whose  words,  but  yesterday, 
the  fire  of  Jehovah  miraculously  fell, 
and  five  hundred  and  fifty  false  pro- 
phets were  slain,  now  flies  for  his  life 
before  the  threat  of  an  idolatrous 
queen!  Jehovah  seems  to  have  left 
him  for  a  season  to  himself.  Perhaps 
there  was  danger  that,  like  the  Apos- 
tle, he  might  become  exalted  above 
measure  by  the  abundance  of  revela- 
tion and  of  power  which  were  mani- 
fested through  him,  and  it  was  needful 
to  remind  him  by  an  impressive  ex- 
perience that  he  was  still  a  man  en- 
compassed  with  human  passions  and 


infirmities.  To  many  it  may  seem 
that  a  great  opportunity  to  reform 
the  worship  of  the  kingdom  was  lost 
by  Elijah's  flight.  The  people  were 
convinced.  Ahab  was  awed  to  reve- 
rent silence  and  submission.  Only 
Jezebel  and  Asherah  priests  seem  to 
have  remained  an  obstacle  in  the  way 
of  reform  ;  and  how  easily  might  they 
have  been  removed  by  the  Divine 
power  which  had  already  wrought 
such  wonders  !  So  we  might  judge. 
But  there  is  a  point  beyond  which 
Divine  power  will  not  multiply  mira- 
cles, and  the  turning-point  here  was 
the  instability  of  Ahab.  He  had  the 
power,  and  ought  to  have  shown  the 
courage,  to  silence  the  ravings  of  his 
impious  wife,  and  to  command  his 
household  and  the  whole  kingdom  to 
keep  the  way  of  the  Lord.  But  he 
was  governed  by  his  wife,  became 
false  to  his  deepest  convictions  of 
truth,  and  Jehovah  would  proceed  no 
further  at  that  time  to  magnify  His 
name.  But  the  moral  lessons  of  the 
scene  at  Carmel  have  never  been  lost. 
Though  failing  to  reform  the  king  and 
the  nation,  they  speak  to  every  after 
age,  and  form  a  part  of  that  Divine 
revelation  which  claims  the  admira- 
tion and  reverence  of  all  that  desire  to 
know  and  worship  the  true  God.— 
Whedon. 

—  The  fear  and  flight  of  Elijah 
are  very  remarkable.  I3ut  yesterday 
he  was  a  conqueror  in  the  full  glory  of 
an  unprecedented  triumph,  imposing 
his  will  as  law  on  king  and  people. 
To-day  he  is  an  outcast,  a  fugitive, 
broken  down  in  spirit,  only  anxious  to 
place  the  greatest  possible  distance 
between  himself  and  his  enemies. 
What  had  produced  the  extraordinary 
change?  Not,  probably,  Jezebel's 
threat  alone,  but  in  part,  perhaps, 
physical  reaction  from  the  over-excite- 
ment of  the  preceding  day:  in  part, 
internal  disquietude  and  doubt  as  to 
the  wisdom  of  the  course  which  he  had 
adopted. — Speaker's  Comm. 

Verses  4-13.  The  prophet's  hour 
of  darkness.  We  learn  more  from 
example  than  from  precept.  The 
human  weakness  of  Scripture  charac- 

311 


OHAF.  XB. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


ters,  as  well  as  their  spiritual  strength, 
is  shown  us.  We  are  taught  as  much 
by  the  one  as  by  the  other.  I.  The 
human  sorrow.  After  the  prophet's 
triumph  came  his  time  of  depression. 

1.  When  Elijah  overcame  the  pro- 
phets of  Baal  it  was  his  time  of 
triumph.  Then  came  the  reaction. 
He  heard  of  Jezebel's  threat,  and  fled 
into  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  We  can 
picture  to  ourselves  the  wearied  old 
man  resting  under  the  shade  of  the 
juniper  tree.  He  complained  of  the 
failure  of  his  life,  and  desired  to  die. 
Then  there  fell  upon  him  sleep,  God's 
gift  to  the  wretched.  Thus  it  is  with 
us ;  after  our  time  of  triumph  comes 
our  time  of  reaction.  In  the  day  of 
joy  we  scarcely  believe  it,  but  it  is 
so.  It  is  very  difficult  to  make  the 
child  who  has  never  before  seen  the 
sea  understand  that  in  a  few  hours  the 
waters  will  have  ebbed  from  the  bay, 
and  left  it  covered  with  long  stretches 
of  brown-ribbed  sand  and  jagged  rocks. 

2.  It  is  so  in  the  Christian  life.  We 
may  have  our  hours  of  raptuie,  but 
they  will  be  succeeded  by  our  hours  of 
depression.  The  glow  of  first  love 
will  not  always  last.  Kor  is  it  well 
that  it  should.  It  is  beautiful,  but 
not  deep.  The  flowers  must  fall  from 
the  fruit  tree,  if  the  autumn  store 
is  to  hang  on  its  boughs.  If  it  were 
not  so,  we  should  walk  by  sight,  not 
by  faith.  3.  It  is  so  with  tempta- 
tion. Our  sins  often  seem  to  be 
trodden  down ;  but  unless  we  are 
careful,  they  will  rise  again.  It  may 
be  painful  to  be  told  this,  but  it  is 
true,  and  therefore  it  is  well  to  know 
it.  4.  Is,  then,  our  religion  a  delu- 
sion ?  By  no  means.  It  is  a  discip- 
line. Look  at  the  Saviour's  hour  of 
trial ;  it  came  after  the  glorious  life, 
and  before  he  was  able  to  throw  open 
the  gates  of  immortality  to  all  be- 
lievers. 5.  After  trial,  God  sends 
sleep,  or  rest.  **He  giveth  his  beloved 
sleep."  II.  The  Divine  consolation. 
1.  But  the  time  of  refreshment 
came  :  it  was  the  darkness  before  the 
daybreak,  not  the  darkness  of  death  ; 
yet  the  deliverance  was  not  such  as 
the  prophet  wished.  He  was  a  wan- 
derer for  forty  days  more  before  he 

312 


saw  the  morning.  Thus  it  is  with 
us ;  our  gloom  lasts  a  long  time,  but 
not  for  ever.  We  do  not  understand 
Christ's  way  of  working.  We  want 
to  arrange  everything.  Yet  it  were 
better  to  put  a  child  to  manage  machi- 
nery than  entrust  us  with  the  concerns 
of  our  own  lives.  2.  The  prophet 
said  all  was  dark,  that  there  was  no 
godliness  left  in  the  land.  But  the 
Lord  showed  him  that  it  was  not  so 
evil  as  he  feared — seven  thousand  had 
not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal.  3. 
After  his  journey  of  forty  days,  when 
he  was  at  Horeb,  the  Lord  commanded 
him  to  stand  upon  the  Mount.  Fir>t 
there  came  a  whirlwind  which  rent 
the  rocks,  then  an  earthquake,  and 
afterwards  a  fire.  But  God  was  not 
in  the.^e.  With  any  of  these  forces 
He  could  have  destroyed  the  guilty 
king  and  queen  ;  but  such  was  not  His 
way  of  working.  Last  of  all  came 
a  still  small  voice  ;  and  by  this  Jehovah 
spoke  to  His  servant.  Thus  God 
comes  to  us,  and  speaks  to  us,  not 
with  a  voice  of  desolation,  but  with  a 
whisper  of  love.  The  wind,  the 
earthquake,  the  fire,  are  the  law  :  the 
still  small  voice  is  the  Gospel.  Christ 
thus  addresses  us,  and  by  it  assures 
us  of  returning  peace. 

Lessons: — 1.  Our  day  of  triumph 
8  not  always  our  day  of  prosperity. 
*2.  In  the  silence  of  the  desert,  and  the 
solitude  of  own  hearts^  we  have  our 
deepest  communion  with  God.  3.  lie 
speaks  to  us,  not  in  a  voice  of  terror, 
but  by  the  quiet  consolations  of  the 
Gospel  of  forgiveness  and  peace. — Pul- 
pit Analyst. 

Verse  4.  Despondency.  1.  The 
reaction  from  a  state  of  high  mental 
excitement.  2.  Renders  the  victim 
indifferent  to  physical  sustenance. 
3.  Indulges  in  excessive  self-depre- 
cation. 4.  Seeks  relief  in  personal 
oblivion. 

Yerses  5-8.  The  visit  under  the 
juniper  tree.  The  guardianship  of 
Divine  grace  becomes  evident.  1.  In 
the  hearing  vouchsafed  to  the  pro- 
phet's prayer.     2.  In  the  appearance 


EO^riLETIC  COMMENTARY:   KIN08. 


CHAP.   XIX. 


of  an  ang(4  which  the  Lord  sends  to 
him.  3.  In  the  wonderful  nourish- 
ment which  he  experiences.  4.  In  the 
delightful  prospect  which  God  opens 
before  him.  5.  In  a  supernatural 
strengthening  for  his  wandering 
through  the  wilderness. — Krum- 
macher. 

—  Divine  succour.  1.  Is  adminis- 
tered in  extremity.  2.  Is  supplied 
by  unexpected  agencies.  3.  Affords 
strength  in  a  time  of  unusual  but  salu- 
tary trial. 

—  Oh !  the  never-ceasing  care  and 
providence  of  the  Almighty;  not  to  he 
barred  hy  any  place,  by  any  condition  ! 
When  means  are  wanting  to  us,  when 
we  are  wanting  to  ourselves,  when  to 
God,  even  then  doth  He  follow  us  with 
His  mercy,  and  cast  favour  upon  us, 
beyond,  against  expectation!  What 
variety  of  purveyance  doth  He  make 
for  His  servant!  One  while  the 
ravens,  then  the  Sareptan,  now  the 
angel  shall  be  his  caterer ;  none  of 
them  without  a  miracle ;  those  other 
provided  for  him  waking,  this  sleeping. 
Oh,  God !  the  eye  of  Thy  providence 
is  not  dimmer,  the  hand  of  Thy  power 
is  not  shorter ;  only  teach  Thou  us  to 
serve  Thee — to  trust  Thee. — Bp.  Hall. 

Verse  5.  There  have  been  in  all 
ages  faithful  servants  of  God  and 
Christ,  who  have  been  weakened  and 
discouraged  by  the  thought  that  it  was 
all  in  vain,  all  their  anxiety  and 
labour  were  fruitless,  nothing  more 
could  possibly  be  gained  for  the  Lord, 
and  no  more  work  of  any  importance 
could  be  done  by  them  for  His  cause 
and  kingdom,  and  they  have  been  on 
the  point  of  finding  joyous,  spirited, 
zealous  work  in  the  service  of  the  Lord 
— nay,  even  life  itself — distasteful. 
But  they  have  always  found  consola- 
tion from  the  Lord  in  His  Word,  and 
have  been  aroused  and  strengthened  by 
His  Spirit  to  new  courage  and  to  un- 
remitted perseverance  in  their  work 
for  the  truth.  They  have  learned  to 
think  of  Him  who  endured  similar 
contradiction  of  sinners  against  Him- 
self. The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  taught 
them  not  to  estimate  the  value  of  their 
labour  according  to  the  effect  which 


they  produced  by  it,  nor  according  to 
the  visible  results  perceptible  to  them- 
selves, but  with  joy  and  confidence  to 
persevere  unweariedly,  even  though  it 
should  appear  as  though  all  they  said 
was  addressed  to  an  uninhabited 
desert. — Menken. 

Terse  8-18.  Elijah  on  Mount 
Horeb.  I.  The  wonderful  consola- 
tion which  he  enjoyed  on  his  journey 
thither.  2.  The  exalted  revelation 
which  he  there  received.  3.  The  new 
duties  and  encouragements  which  were 
his  lot  even  there. — Bender. 

—  The  lessons  Elijah  learned  at 
Horeb  were  full  of  instruction.  The 
symbols  of  wind,  earthquake,  and  fire, 
followed  by  the  still  small  voice,  have 
a  wide  and  varied  significance  and 
application.  1.  The  central  lesson  of 
these  symbols  is,  that  there  are 
mightier  influences  at  work  in  human 
history  than  physical  force.  Men  are 
ever  prone  to  think  otherwise,  or,  at 
least,  to  disregard  this  fact.  That 
which  is  tangible  to  the  outer  senses, 
which  blows,  and  shakes,  and  bums 
before  the  eyes  of  men ;  confounding 
and  confusing,  and,  for  the  time,  over- 
whelming and  crushing  all  opposi- 
tion— that  is  too  apt  to  exhaust  all  our 
ideas  of  mightiness.  We  should,  there- 
fore, be  reminded  that  in  the  silent 
workings  of  mind  and  heart  there  are 
often  developed  forces  stronger  than 
the  whirlwind,  mightier  than  the 
earthquake  shock,  and  fiercer  in  their 
burnings  than  fires  which  many  waters 
cannot  quench.  In  this  we  may  dis- 
cover just  the  relation  of  miracles  to 
the  truth,  which  they  have  often  served 
to  introduce  and  confirm.  We  are  in 
danger  of  esteeming  the  former  above 
the  latter,  whereas  the  law  and  the 
prophets  and  Christ  have  taught  a 
different  lesson.  The  seven  thousand 
devout  hearts  in  Israel  are  a  mightier 
power  for  good  than  even  all  the 
miracles  of  Elijah.  So,  too,  Jesus 
taught  his  disciples  that  it  is  better  to 
have  one's  name  written  in  heaven 
than  to  have  power  to  work  miracles 
(Luke  X.  20),  and  that  the  true  be- 
liever, led  by  the  Spirit,  shall  do 
even  greater  works  than  th(^  Messiah* 

813 


CHAP.  XIX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS, 


2.  The  immediate  application  of  this 
lesson  was  to  Elijah's  undue  estimate 
of  the  miracles  at  Carmel.  He  seems 
to  have  supposed  that  the  answer  by 
fire  that  consumed  his  sacrifice,  and 
the  mighty  wind  and  rain  that  came 
so  quickly  after,  together  with  the 
slaughter  of  the  false  prophets,  would 
accomplish  the  speedy  reformation  of 
Israel ;  but  because  they  did  not,  he 
yielded  to  discouragement  and  despair. 
His  radical  error  was  in  placing  too 
much  confidence  in  the  outward  and 
the  marvellous.  So  the  still  small 
voice,  as  it  developed  itself  into  the 
sure  word  of  prophecy,  showed  him 
how  groundless  was  his  despair,  how 
mistaken  his  notions  of  Jehovah's 
ways,  and  how  manifold  might  be 
other  agencies  of  judgment  yet  at 
God's  command.  3.  At  the  same 
time,  the  lesson  might  remind  him 
that  the  impious  Jezebel  from  whom 
he  fled,  and  who  now,  after  all  his 
work  against  her  gods,  seemed  to  be 
triumphant  still,  was  trusting  in  the 
outward  appearance  of  power  at  her 
command.  She  might  array  against 
him  and  his  fellow-prophets  all  the 
forces  of  government,  and  all  the  pomp 
and  pretensions  of  the  idolatry  to  which 
she  was  devoted ;  but  these  would 
soon  exhaust  themselves,  for  God 
would  not  be  in  them.  The  wind  and 
fire  of  her  presumptuous  wrath  would 
soon  pass  by,  and  after  all  its  fury 
was  spent,  there  would  rise  the  seven 
thousand  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee 
to  Baal ;  a  silent  force,  perchance,  but, 
with  God  in  them,  mightier  far  than 
all  that  could  come  against  them. 
4.  But  the  deeper  and  grander  lesson 
of  these  symbols  is  the  contrast  they 
present  between  the  Old  Dispensation 
and  the  New — the  Law  and  the  Gospel. 
The  miracles  of  the  Exodus,  the  clouds 
and  thunders  and  lightnings  that 
attended  the  giving  of  the  Law  at  this 
same  Sinai,  and  all  the  later  marvels 
in  the  sacred  history  of  Israel,  only 
prepared  the  ear  of  man  to  catch  more 
readily  and  appreciate  more  fully  the 
gentle  voice  of  Him  who  did  not  cry 
or  lift  up  His  voice  in  the  streets,  but 
still  spake  as  no  other  man  spake.  The 
Eweetesty  holiest  sound  that  ever  steals 
814 


upon  the  soul  of  man  is  the  voice  of 
the  Word  that  was  made  flesh  ;  and 
that  voice,  ever  speaking  in  the  Gospel, 
shall  go  forth  throughout  the  earth, 
and  its  words  unto  the  end  of  the  world, 
until  all  idols  fall,  and  all  tongues  con- 
fers that  Jesus  is  the  Christ. — 
Whedon. 

Verse  9-14.  The  powerlessness  of 
the     terrible  in    moral    teaching. 

Storm,  earthquake,  and  fire,  are  the 
symbols  of  the  Divine  punishments 
exterminating  the  ungodly.  God  is 
not  in  the  storm,  not  in  the  earth- 
quake, not  in  the  fire,  to  show  that 
His  sway  in  the  theocracy  is  not  im- 
placable, annihilating  vigour  and  all- 
consuming  jealousy.  Jehovah  appears 
in  the  sound  of  a  gentle  blowing  or  soft 
murmur — the  sign  of  the  nearness  of 
God — which  is  the  love  that  endures 
the  sinner  with  sparing  mildness,  with 
patience  and  long-suflering,  and  delays 
the  punishment  as  long  as  mercy  is 
possible.  The  acted  parable  is,  in  fact, 
an  anticipation  of  the  evangelical 
rule — a  condemnation  of  that  '*  zeal  " 
which  Elijah  had  gloried  in,  a  zeal 
exhibiting  itself  in  fierce  and  terrible 
vengeance  ;  and  an  exaltation  and  re- 
commendation of  that  mild  and  gentle 
temper  which  "  beareth  all  things, 
belie veth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things, 
endureth  all  things."  Eead  in  the 
light  of  after  revelation,  we  can  thus 
understand  the  true  drift  of  this  most 
marvellous  scene ;  but  it  may  be 
questioned  how  far  Elijah  was  able  to 
perceive  its  meaning.  Perhaps  he  felt 
dimly  something  of  the  true  force  of 
the  lesson ;  perhaps  for  a  while  it 
moderated  his  excessive  zeal,  and  in- 
clined him  to  gentler  courses. — 
Speaker'*s  Comm. 

—  Though  I  do  not  read  in  this 
story  of  Elijah's  deep  despondency 
the  condemnation  of  his  last  act — the 
slaughter  of  the  priests  of  Baal — I  do 
see  in  it  the  natural  effects  of  any 
great  exercise  of  destructive  power, 
perhaps  of  power  at  all,  upon  the  mind 
of  him  to  whom  it  has  been  entrusted. 
The  sense  of  exhaustion,  the  cry,  **  1 
am  no  better  than  my  fathers,"  though 
I  have  done  such  wonders ;  the  hopeless- 


nOMILFSIC  COMMENTAltT:  KINGS. 


CHAP,  XTX. 


ness  of  the  future  becoming  all  the 
more  deep  from  the  apparently  useless 
triumph  that  had  been  won  already — 
surely  every  prophet  must  have  these 
bitter  experiences,  if  he  is  not  to  sink 
into  a  Baal- worshipper,  and  after  all  to 
regard  the  God  of  Truth  and  Kighteous- 
ness  merely  as  a  God  of  Might.  Elijah, 
though  he  wrought  so  many  miracles, 
was  comparatively  still  a  novice  when 
he  sat  under  the  juniper  tree.  When 
he  left  the  cave  he  was  an  initiated 
man.  He  had  thought  that  the 
earthquake,  the  fire,  the  wind  that 
rent  the  mountaina,  must  be  the  great 
witnesses  of  the  Lord.  Uut  He  was 
not  in  them.  I^ot  they,  but  the  still 
small  voice,  had  that  awe  in  it  which 
forced  the  prophet  to  cover  his  face 
with  his  mantle.  What  a  blessed  and 
a  beautiful  conclusion  of  all  the  past 
history  !  What  an  interpretation  of  its 
meaning  !  The  glaring  outward  signs, 
which  the  priests  of  Eaal  sought  for, 
were  feeble;  the  living  power  which 
spoke  to  the  heart  within,  this  only 
demanded  and  compelled  reverence. 
He  who  could  rend  bread  to  the  woman 
of  Zarephath  was  indeed  the  God  who 
answered  by  fire. — Maurice. 

Yerses  9,  10.  Elijah  at  Horeb. 
We  may  feel  a  little  surprised  to  find 
him  at  Horeb,  so  far  away  from  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  the  place  to  which 
God  had  sent  him  to  make  known  His 
will,  and  to  fulfil  His  purpose.  But 
it  may  be  that  Horeb  had  special 
attractions  for  him.  It  was  far  away 
from  the  scenes  through  which  he  had 
been  passing,  and  it  was  in  the  midst 
of  a  mountainous  region,  away  from 
the  habitations  of  men,  abounding  in 
caves  and  ravines ;  so  that  its  solitude 
and  security  would  afi'ord  him  a  quiet 
retreat  where  he  could  rest  awhile  and 
feel  secure  from  the  wrath  of  his 
enemies.  Its  religious  associations, 
too,  would  doubtless  exert  a  healthy 
influence  upon  his  mind.  It  was  here 
that  God  appeared  to  Moses  while 
tending  the  sheep  of  Jethro,  his  father- 
in-law,  and  commissioned  him  to 
deliver  His  people  from  the  bondage 
of  Egypt.  It  afterwards  became  a 
place  of  encampment  for  the  Israelites 


during  their  journey  through  the  wilder- 
ness, and  it  was  from  the  adjoining 
mountain  of  Sinai  that  God  delivered  to 
Mosesthe  Ten  Commandments.  But  he 
was  not  long  left  alone  there.  He  little 
thought  how  he  was  watched,  until  he 
was  surprised  by  the  voice  of  the  Lord. 
I^otice — I.  The  rebuke  administered. 
"  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah?" 
Elijah  was  now  in  a  fit  state,  both  of 
body  and  mind,  to  be  dealt  with. 
He  was  a  deserter.  It  was  necessary 
to  make  him  teel  his  cowardice  and 
his  want  of  faith  in  God.  When  under 
the  juniper  tree,  he  was  too  weak  in 
body  and  too  dejected  in  mind  to  re- 
ceive rebuke,  and  God  dealt  tenderly 
and  considerately  with  him.  But  now 
he  was  stronger,  and  able  to  bear  con- 
viction. In  this  question  he  is  rebuked 
for  forsaking  duty.  He  was  sent  to 
Israel  as  the  messenger  of  God,  and  to 
remain  there  during  the  Divine  plea- 
sure. In  former  instances  of  his  life 
God  showed  him  when  to  leave  and 
when  to  return,  but  now  he  did  not 
wait  for  God's  direction ;  he  goes  him- 
self. He  had  chosen  his  own  way, 
and  so  set  God  aside.  He  would  be 
reminded  of  this  by  the  question : 
"What  doest  thou  heref^ — so  far 
away  from  the  place  whither  he  had 
been  sent ;  as  much  as  if  God  had 
asked  him,  '*  Who  is  to  do  the  work 
in  Israel  when  thou  art  here?  "  The 
question  would  also  be  a  rebuke  to 
his  want  of  faith  in  God.  What 
doest  thou  here  ?  He,  above  all  men, 
should  have  remained  at  his  post. 
His  past  experience  ot  God's  favour 
should  have  served  him  now;  his 
faith  should  have  been  strengthened 
by  the  remembrance  of  such  favour,  so 
that  whfn  Jezebel  threatened  him,  he 
would  have  fled  instinctively  to  Him 
who  could  restrain  her  wrath  and  pro- 
tect his  servants.  How  often  do  men 
still  act  as  Elijah  did?  They  forsake 
God's  way,  and  choose  their  own.  He 
has  assigned  them  some  special  work, 
but  they  have  withdrawn  from  it. 
And  God  follows  them  into  their  wan- 
derings, as  He  followed  Elijah,  and 
proposes  the  same  question  to  them, 
Sinner !  backslider !  lukewarm  pro- 
fessor 1    what  doest  thou    here  f    II. 

315 


OHAT.  XIZ. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


The  defence.  He  does  not  frankly 
acknowledge  his  error,  and  come  to 
Grod  with  a  penitent  heart,  seeking  to 
be  restored,  but  he  seeks  to  justify 
himself,  and  that  upon  these  grounds. 
1.  Former  service.  **I  have  been 
very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of 
hosts."  He  looked  with  satisfaction 
upon  his  past  labours,  and  claimed 
some  merit  because  of  them,  and  that 
now  he  might  retire  from  his  arduous 
toil.  Thus  he  clung  to  a  feeling  of 
self-righteousness.  He  overlooked  his 
obligation  to  God.  As  it  was  God  who 
called  him  to  work,  so  it  was  for  God 
to  release  him  from  it.  2.  Isolation. 
"I,  even  I  only,  am  left."  No  doubt 
he  felt  weary  of  continuing  his  work 
by  himself,  without  sympathy  from 
anyone.  But,  admitting  the  influence 
of  loneliness,  his  service  had  not  been  a 
very  long  one — three  and  a-half  years 
at  the  utmost.  And  he  overlooked 
the  never-failing  presence  of  God.  Our 
Lord  experienced  this  loneliness,  but 
He  did  not  yield  to  it.  He  said,  "  I 
am  not  alone,  for  the  Father  is  with 
me."  3.  Persecution.  **  They  seek 
my  life,  to  take  it  away."  He  shrunk 
from  the  opposition  which  his  enemies 
now  raised  against  him,  and  fled  from 
it,  thinking  he  was  justified  in  doing  so. 
But  he  had  been  in  as  much  danger 
before,  when  the  king  had  searched  the 
country  for  him.  He  forgot  this,  and 
forgot  also  the  Arm  by  which  he  was 
then  protected.  These  are  the  grounds 
upon  which  Elijah  sought  to  defend 
his  conduct  before  God.  But  that 
defence  reveals  to  us  a  departure  from 
God.  He  had  lost,  for  the  time,  faith 
in  God  ;  his  heart  was  not  aglow  with 
love  and  devotion  to  Him.  These  were 
the  true  reasons  of  his  being  at  Horeb. 
And  the  example  of  Elijah  is  often 
imitated  by  those  who  wander  from 
God,  and  who  are  arrested  in  their 
wanderings  by  the  question :  "  What 
doest  thou  here  ?  "  The  sinner  will 
excuse  himself — time  enough  yet — a 
more  convenient  season.  The  back- 
slider may  blame  difficulties,  associates, 
change  ot  circumstances.  The  luke- 
warm Christian  hides  hi qi self  beneath 
the  increase  of  other  duties,  want  of 
success  in  his  work  for  God,  weariness. 
316 


All  these  excuses  reveal  a  departure 
from  God  in  heart,  and  the  only  safe 
course  is  to  acknowledge  this,  and  re- 
turn to  Him  at  once. — 2he  Study  and 
Fulpit, 

Verse    10.     Elijah's  zeal  for  the 
Lord.     1.  A  pure  and  sincere  zeal.     It 
was  solely  for  the  Lord,  not  for  him- 
self, for  his  opinion,  honour,  glory,  or 
advantage,  just  as  with  the  apostle  who 
counted  all  things  but  loss    that  he 
might  win  Christ  (Phil.  iii.  8).     How 
often  folly,  dogmatism,  passion,  and 
injustice  are  mingled  with  zeal  for  the 
Lord  and  for  His  kingdom !     Would 
that  all  who  would  be,  or  pretend  to 
be,  zealous  for  the  cause  of  God,  could 
stand  before  the  Searcher  of  hearts  and 
say  in  sincerity,  I  have  been  zealous 
for  the  Lord.     2.  A  persevering  and 
regardless  zeal.     Like  Paul,  he  shrunk 
from  no  distress  or  labour,   from  no 
strife   or  affliction,  nor  hunger,    nor 
nakedness,  neither  scoffing  nor  disgrace 
(Phil.  iv.  12,  13  ;    2  Cor.  vi.  4-10). 
He  had  no  respect  of  persons,  did  not 
ask  whether  he  was  a  king,  serving 
Baal,  or  a  beggar ;  whether  he  was  lord 
or    servant;   whether  his   opponents 
were  few  or  many.     It  could  be  said  of 
him — The  zeal  of  thine  house   hath 
eaten  me  up.     How  few  of  those  have 
any  knowledge  of  such  a  zeal,   who 
follow  their  calling  mechanically,  and 
never   become   warm  in    its  behalf; 
whose  zeal  is  like  a  smothered  fire, 
and   grows  less   and    inefficient,  and 
coob,  both  when  temptation  arises,  and 
when  they  are  in  prosperity. — Lange, 

Verses  11-17.  The  disclosure  on 
the  mount.  We  learn  from  this 
incident — 1.  That  men  are  not  brought 
to  acknowledge  God  merely  by  outward 
manifestations  of  power  or  greatness, 
Elijah  needed  this  lesson.  Our  Lord, 
in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  constantly 
met  with  those  who  sought  signs  and 
wonders  as  the  only  means  of  produc- 
ing faith.  The  rich  man  prayed  that 
Lazarus  might  be  sent  to  warn  his  five 
brethren,  pleading  that  if  one  went  to 
them  from  the  dead,  they  would  repent. 
And  the  same  feeling  is  still  shown  by 
men  in  the  importance  they  attach  to 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EIKOS. 


OHAP.  XIX. 


some  outward  circumstances  for  pro- 
ducing repentance — calamity,  bereave- 
ment, affliction.  Others  look  with 
great  confidence  to  special  means  or 
special  men,  the  various  revivalistic 
agencies,  revival  preachers,  thinking 
that  without  these  the  work  of  God 
cannot  be  promoted.  We  need  to 
learn  that  all  these  may  be  present 
to  us,  and  still  God  be  absent.  2. 
That  outward  circumstances  may  he 
helpful  in  bringing/  men  to  acknowledge 
God,  While  some  depend  too  much 
upon  the  outward  and  circumstantial, 
others  go  to  the  opposite  extreme,  and 
ignore  them  altogether  in  the  work  of 
God,  whereas  they  have  a  place  in 
that  work.  Calamity  or  affliction  may 
not  produce  repentance,  but  they  tend 
to  subdue  the  spirit,  and  make  it  more 
susceptible  to  the  work  of  God.  They 
break  up  the  fallow  ground,  and  pre- 
pare it  for  the  seed  of  truth.  3.  That 
true  repentance  is  produced  by  the  voice 
of  God.  It  was  when  Elijah  heard 
the  still  small  voice  that  he  wrapped 
his  face  in  his  mantle,  and  went  out, 
and  stood  at  the  entrance  of  the  cave. 
He  had  been  prepared  for  such  sub- 
mission by  the  t.^rrible  displays  he 
had  witnessed.  And  so,  when  the 
voice  of  God  speaks  to  the  con«?cience 
of  the  guilty,  or  to  the  heart  of  the 
sorrowful,  there  comes  peace  to  the 
one  and  comfort  to  the  other.  4.  That 
Christian  work  is  needful  to  spiritual 
health.  Elijah  was  commanded  to 
return  to  the  wilderness  of  Damascus, 
and  to  do  the  work  assigned  him.  He 
obeyed,  and  we  never  read  of  him 
wandering  away  again.  Many  Christ- 
ians get  low-spirited,  and  wander  into 
forbidden  paths,  because  of  inactivity. 
Earnest  work  for  God  would  restore 
and  preserve  them. — The  Study  and 
Fulpit. 

Yerse  11.  Go  forth  and  stand  upon 
the  mount  before  the  Lord !  This 
call  is  issued  to  all  those  who,  like 
Elijah,  lodge  in  caves  and  dens.  The 
caves,  however,  are  of  various  kinds. 
Our  heart  is  a  cave,  a  dark  tomb.  The 
soul  attacked  and  tormented  by  doubts 
is  in  a  cave.  Bodily  distress  and  exter- 
nal affliction  may  be  called  a  cave.    0, 


go  forth  and  go  upon  the  mount,  and 
look  aloft  to  Him  who  hangs  upon 
the  tree.  Go  forth !  spread  the  wings 
of  hope,  soar  and  place  thyself  upon 
the  lieights  of  the  everlasting  promises 
of  God,  which  are  yea  and  amen,  and 
from  thence  cast  a  look  of  confidence 
into  the  heart  of  Him  whose  council 
is  truly  wonderful,  but  who,  never- 
theless, doeth  all  things  gloriously. — 
Krummacher. 

Yerse  12.  In  that  God  was !  Behold, 
in  that  gentle  and  mild  breath  there 
was  omnipotcncy;  there  was  but 
powerfulness  in  those  fierce  represen- 
tations; there  is  not  always  the  greatest 
efficacy  where  is  the  greatest  noise. 
God  loves  to  make  way  for  Himself  by 
terror ;  but  he  conveys  Himself  to  us 
in  sweetness,  It  is  happy  for  us  if, 
after  the  gusts  and  flashes  of  the  law, 
we  have  heard  the  soft  voice  of  evan- 
gelical mercy. — Bp.  HalL 

Yerses  15-18.  The  answer  of  the 
Lord  to  Elijah.  Includes — 1.  A  direc- 
tion. **  Go,  return  ! "  which  is  the 
answer  to — Thus  far  have  I  been 
zealous  in  vain.  Carry  forward  the 
work  already  begun,  doubting  not  the 
result ;  let  thy  hands  fall  not ;  fear  not, 
for  I  am  with  thee.  So  the  Lord 
always  calls  to  all  workers  in  the 
vineyard.  2.  A  commission.  "Anoint 
H  azael, "  &c .  That  is  the  answer  to — 
They  have  forsaken  thy  covenant, 
thrown  down  thine  altars.  Through 
Hazael  will  I  chastise  rebellious  Israel, 
through  Jehu  destroy  the  house  of 
Ahab,  through  Elisha  preserve  the 
order  of  the  prophets.  Observe  how 
the  royal  government  of  the  Lord  in- 
fluences so  deeply  and  so  powerfully, 
and  yet  so  quietly  and  noiselessly,  all 
human  undertakings,  contrivances, 
and  conditions,  all  worldly  events;  and 
how  so  much  happens  under  His  direc- 
tion which  s(^ems  to  happen  without 
Him,  as  if  by  accident.  3.  A  pro- 
mise. "  Yet  have  I  left,  «S:c."  This 
is  the  answer  to— I  only  am  left,  and 
they  seek  my  life.  The  race  of  be- 
lievers will  never  perish ;  no  storm, 
no  earthquake,  no  fire  will  destroy 
them.     They  are  the  salt  of  the  earth 

317 


OHAP.  XIZ. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


which  preserves  the  world  from  cor- 
ruption and  ruin. — Lange. 

Verses  15-17.  Return  to  active 
duty  the  cure  of  despondency.  1. 
The  soul  finds  true  health  and  vigour 
in  obedience  to  God.  2.  The  exam- 
ple of  a  faithful  worker  is  an  inspira- 
tion to  others.  3.  The  vengeance 
of  God  against  evil-doers  will  never 
lack  instruments  to  carry  it  out — 
Hazael,  Jehu,  Elisha. 

Verse  18.  God's  hidden  ones.     I. 

Exist  in  the  worse  times,  and  in  the 
most  unexpected  places.  2.  Illus- 
trate the  unremitting  care  of  God  over 
His  persecuted  people.  3.  Are  often 
made  manifest  for  the  encouragement 
of  the  solitary  worker. 

—  Thou  art  deceived,  0  Elijah ! 
Thou  art  not  left  alone ;  neither  is  all 
Israel  tainted.  God  hath  children 
and  propliets  in  Israel,  though  thou 
see  them  not.  Those  clear  eyes  of 
the  seer  discern  not  the  secret  store  of 
God  :  they  looked  not  into  Obadiah's 
caves,  they  looked  not  into  the  closets 
of  the  religious  Israelites.  According 
to  the  lashion  of  the  wealthy,  God 
pleaseth  Himself  in  hidden  treasures : 
it  is  enough  that  His  own  eyes  behold 
His  riches.  Never  did  He,  never  will 
He,  leave  Himself  unfurnished  with 
holy  clients,  in  the  midst  of  the  foulest 
depravations  of  His  church.  The 
sight  of  His  faithful  ones  hath  some- 
times been  lost,  never  the  being.  Do 
your  worst,  0  ye  gates  of  Hell !  God 
will  have  his  own.  It  was  a  true 
cordial  for  Elijah's  solitariness  that 
he  had  seven  thousand  invisible  abet- 
tors; neither  is  it  a  small  comfort  to 
our  weakness  to  have  companions  in 
good. — Bp.  Hall. 

—  Learn.  1.  JSTever  to  take  too 
gloomy  or  desponding  a  view  of  the 
position  and  prospects  of  the  Church. 
2.  Beware  of  harsh  judgments  on  our 
fellow-men  and  fellow-Christians.  3. 
The  influential  power  of  a  great 
example. — Macduff, 

Verse  18.  The  faithful  seven  thou- 
sand. We  learn  from  these  words. 
I,  That  men  may  he  oft$n  deceived  with 


regard  to  the  strength  of  God's  church. 
Many  have  possessed  a  similar  feeling 
to  that  expressed  by  Elijah.  They 
have  looked  upon  the  prevalence  of 
sin,  in  all  ranks  and  conditions  of  life  ; 
they  have  looked  upon  the  wide-spread 
indifference  to  religion,  and  that, 
too,  in  the  midst  of  religious  privilege 
and  effort ;  and  at  such  a  sight  their 
hearts  have  failed  them ;  they  have 
thought  that  the  people  of  God  were 
very  few,  and  they  have  been  tempted 
to  think  that  their  efforts  to  increase 
the  number  were  vain  and  useless, 
and  under  such  temptation  many  have 
relinquished  their  work.  Such 
thoughts  and  feelings  as  these  often 
arise  in  consequence  of  ignorance  and 
a  partial  view  of  the  subject.  And 
are  we  not  often  very  narrow  in  our 
Tiews  of  Christian  life  ?  We  are  apt 
to  look  for  that  life  to  manifest  itself 
in  one  particular  form  ;  for  those  who 
profess  discipleship  to  conform  to 
one  outward  mode  of  conduct,  with- 
out taking  into  consideration  the  differ- 
ence of  temperament,  education,  &c. 
God^s  spirit  comes  into  men  as  they 
are  ;  He  does  not  change  the  constitu- 
tion of  their  minds ;  He  inspires  the 
powers  already  there,  and  brings 
them  into  submission  to  His  will.  2. 
That  God  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of 
His  own  people.  The  children  of  God 
may  bo  unable  to  recognize  each  other, 
especially  in  times  of  persecution, 
which  may  restrain  men  from  making 
an  open  avowal  of  their  faith.  And 
even  in  ordinary  times  there  are  many 
who  may  not  feel  called  upon  to  make 
this  avowal,  so  that  their  relation  to 
God  remains  unknown  to  those  around 
them.  But  God  sees  and  knows  them. 
3.  That  God  can  keep  His  people 
amid  the  most  widespread  sin  and  evil. 
It  is  not  without  reason  that  Christian 
people  fear  for  themselves  and  for 
others  when  sin  and  evil  abound,  and 
when  temptations  are  numerous  and 
powerful.  They  know  their  own 
weakness,  and  they  know,  too,  how 
many  have  fallen  in  the  conflict  with 
sin.  But  they  may  be  delivered  from 
tlieir  fears  by  the  assurance  that  God  is 
able  to  keep  that  which  they  commit  to 
Him.     Nothing    can  separate 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  chap.  iix. 


from  the  love   of  God.     Trusting  in  doing.     They  have  forgotten  that  they 

Him,  they  shall  never  be  confounded.  were   responsible   for  the  faithful  dis- 

4.    That   men    should    be    faithful  to  charge  of  their   duty,  not  for  the  re- 

their  duty,  and  leave  results  with  God.  suits.      And    whilst  they   have   been 

Elijah  was  so  discouraged  at  not  see-  mourning  over  failure,    their    efforts 

ing  the  result  he  looked  for,  that  he  may  have  been   bringing  forth  fruit 

shrank  from   his  work,  and  fled  from  which  they  little  thought  of.     And  in 

the  post  of  duty.     And  many  since  his  the  great  harvest  of  the  world,  many 

day  have   acted  in  a  similar  manner,  who  in  this  life  mourned  over  a  want 

They  have  looked  for  certain  results  to  of  success  to  their  efforts  will  find  that 

their  labours,  and  have  not  seen  them  ;  their  labours  were  not  in  vain. — The 

then  their  hearts  have  failed  them,  Study  and  Pulpit* 
and  they  have  grown  weary  in  well 


E0MILETIC8  OF  FEMES  19-21. 

The  Divine  Call  to  Duty. 

These  words  describe  the  call  of  Elisha  to  the  office  and  work  of  a  prophet 
of  Jehovah.  The  contrast  between  Elijah  and  Elisha  was  striking  and  complete. 
Elijah  appears  on  the  scene  abruptly,  without  warning  and  with  an  unknown 
history ;  Elisha  is  first  introduced  to  us  as  a  domesticated  man,  at  home  with 
his  father  and  mother,  and  familiar  with  the  pastoral  scenes  and  employments 
of  the  rich  Jordan  valley.  Elijah  is  the  solitary,  haunting  the  grots  and  caves 
of  the  wilderness  and  the  solitudes  of  the  hills ;  Elisha  tarries  at  Jericho 
(2  Kings  ii.  18),  is  a  frequent  visitor  at  Shunem  (2  Kings  iv.  8,  9),  has  his  own 
house  in  Samaria  (2  Kings  v.  9),  and  lingers  now  and  again  among  the  schools 
of  the  prophets  (2  Kings  iv.  38  ;  vi.  1):  Elijah  is  robed  in  a  rough  mantle  of 
sheepskin,  with  his  massy  hair  waving  in  long  shaggy  locks  ;  Elisha  is  attired 
in  the  ordinary  dress  of  the  period,  and  with  a  shaven  crown  at  which  the  young 
men  mocked  (2  Kings  ii.  23)  :  when  Elijah  appears  in  connection  with  kings 
and  courts  it  is  as  their  opponent ;  Elisha  as  their  counsellor  and  friend  : 
Elijah  was  fierce,  furious,  stern,  unbending ;  Elisha  gentle,  peaceful,  calm, 
approachable  :  Elijah  was  the  bold,  intrepid  Luther  of  his  age ;  Elisha  the 
Melanchthon.     Observe — 

I.  That  the  Divine  call  to  duty  is  significant  and  unmistakable.  *'  And 
Elijah  cast  his  mantle  upon  him"  (verse  19).  Elisha  at  once  understood  the 
meaning  of  this  act.  It  was  a  formal  investiture  with  the  prophetic  ofiice,  and 
a  sign  of  adoption  as  a  son.  This  ceremony  is  considered  by  the  Eastern  people 
as  an  indispensable  part  of  the  consecration  to  the  sacred  ofiice.  It  is  in  this 
way  the  Brahmins  are  still  invested  with  the  priestly  chaiacter,  a  yellow  mantle 
being  thrown  across  their  shoulders,  which  is  buckled  round  the  waist  with  a 
sacred  ribbon :  in  this  way,  too,  the  Persian  suffecs  are  appointed.  Elisha 
realized  the  solemnity  and  obligation  of  the  call,  and  as  soon  as  he  recoveied 
from  his  surprise,  *'  he  left  the  oxen  and  ran  after  Elijah."  The  Lord  leaves 
his  servants  in  no  doubt  as  to  the  reality  and  meaning  of  their  call  to  work  for 
him.  In  some  way  or  otherwise,  sufficiently  distinct  and  impiessive,  that  call 
will  be  made  known  ;  it  may  be  in  a  deep  inward  impression  which  no  self- 
battling  against  can  remove,  it  may  be  by  significantly  favourable  providential 
events,  or  by  the  unanimous  call  of  the  church.  The  call  is  always  so  plain  and 
unmistakable  that  it  cannot  be  disobeyed  without  involving  acute  sufi'ering; 
and  what  suffering  is  more  constant  and  aggravated  than  to  feel  every  day  of  a 
rapidily  fleeting  life — **  I  am  in  my  wrong  gioovej  I  have  missed  my  way  "? 

ai9 


CHAP.  XIX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


II.  That  the  Divine  call  to  duty  is  the  occasion  of  much  anxions  thought. 
**Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  kiss  my  father  and  my  mother"  (verse  20).  Can  it  be 
wondered  at  if  Elisha's  heart  still  clung  to  home  and  kindred — a  home  where 
he  had  every  comfort,  and  that  in  abundance,  and  where,  perhaps,  he  was  the 
only  child  of  fond,  loving  parents  ?  The  prospect  was  not  inviting.  The  un- 
tamed Jezebel  still  reigned;  and  every  prophet  of  Jehovah  would  be  exposi^^to 
her  vindictive  fury.  Elijah  had  no  luxuries  to  offer,  for  he  had  none  himself ; 
sustenance  was  at  least  sure,  if  the  fare  was  coarse  and  simple  ;  but  to  Elisha  it 
was  exchanging  affluence  for  comparative  poverty.  Besides,  there  was  the  sense 
of  personal  unworthiness  for  so  high  and  holy  a  calling,  and  this  to  a  sensitive 
nature  is  the  exciting  cause  of  much  mental  anguish.  It  is  a  duty  we  owe  to 
ourselves  as  well  as  to  God  to  give  to  the  Divine  call  the  most  pains-taking 
consideration.  At  such  a  time  the  destiny  of  an  individual  life  is  at  stake ;  and 
who  can  say  how  many  will  be  affected  by  the  decision  either  way  ? 

III.  That  the  Divine  call  to  duty  demands  an  immediate  and  absolute 
response  (verse  21).  I,  It  is  superior  to  the  claims  of  the  most  lucrative  worldly 
calling.  Elisha's  occupation  is  an  indication  of  his  character.  He  is  emphati- 
cally a  man  of  peace.  He  lives  in  the  rich  Jordan  vale,  on  green  meadowland, 
where  village  festivals  are  held  with  dance  and  song.  He  passes  the  year  in 
those  rural  occupations  which  are  natural  to  the  son  of  a  wealthy  yeoman, 
superintending  the  field-labourers  himself,  and,  with  the  simplicity  of  primitive 
manners,  taking  a  share  in  their  toils.  But  all  this  he  willingly  surrenders. 
The  most  flattering  worldly  prospects  may  turn  to  bitter  disappointment  if  we 
resist  the  Divine  call  on  their  behalf.  2.  It  is  superior  to  the  claims  of  home 
and  kindred.  It  was  at  this  point  that  Elishp  seemed  to  show  hesitation.  This 
may  account  for  Elisha's  somewhat  cold  r~,ply,  "Go  back  again;  for  what 
have  I  done  to  thee  ? — i.e.^  *'  Go,  return  to  thy  ploughing  ;  why  shouldst  thou 
quit  it  ?  Why  take  leave  of  thy  friends,  and  come  with  me  ?  What  have  I 
done  to  thee  to  require  such  a  sacrifice  ?  for  as  a  sacrifice  thou  evidently  re- 
gardest  it.  Truly  I  have  done  nothing  to  thee.  Thou  canst  remain  as  thou 
art"  (vide  Speaker'' s  Comm.).  But  Elisha  has  meanwhile  made  up  his  mind  to 
choose  the  better  part.  The  exigencies  of  a  Divine  call  supersede  human 
duties  and  relationships  (Luke  ix.  61,  62).  3.  It  is  justly  regarded  as  a  dis- 
tinguished honour.  No  longer  hesitating,  Elisha  returns  a  few  steps  to  his  oxen 
and  labourers,  indicates  the  complete  relinquishment  of  his  home  and  calling  by 
the  slaughter  of  two  oxen  and  the  burning  of  the  instruments,  makes  a  feast  to 
his  people  to  show  his  gratitude  for  his  call  and  his  sense  of  the  honour  done  to 
him,  and  then,  leaving  father  and  mother,  cattle  and  land,  good  position  and 
comfortable  home,  attaches  himself  to  the  fortunes  of  the  wandering  Elijah. 
It  is  no  small  dignity  put  upon  man  when  he  is  called  to  be  a  "  co-worker  with 
God."  4.  It  brings  man  into  association  with  the  noblest  spirits.  *'  Then  he 
arose  and  went  after  Elijah,  and  raiuisteied  unto  him  "  (verse  21).  Elisha  had 
heard  of  the  startling  exploits  of  ,'ie  mountain -prophet,  and  it  would  be  with 
feelings  of  reverence  and  awe  that  he  found  himself  in  such  intimate  fellowship 
with  the  fearless  and  august  Tishbite.  They  were  together  as  father  and  son, 
as  is  evident  from  the  final  address  of  Elisha  to  Elijah  :  "  My  father  I  my  father! " 
(2  Kings  ii.  12);  and  in  the  request  for  a  ** double  portion  "  of  Elijah's  spirit  {ib.y 
verse  9).  God  calls  us  into  companionship  with  the  loftiest  and  choicest  spirits 
of  the  universe :  these  are  ever  in  the  vanguard  of  the  holiest  progress.  Above 
all,  we  have  the  exalting  and  sublimating  friendship  of  God  Himself! 

Lessons  : — 1,  It  is  disastrous  to  embark  in  any  sacred  work  without  a  consciousness 
of  the  Divine  call,     2.  Everything  should  be  freely  su?'rendered  in  obedience  to  the 
Divine  call.     3.  To  persist  in  resisting  the  Divine  call  is  to  entail  the  bitterest 
remorse  and  suffering, 
820 


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XIX. 


QERM  NOTES  UN  TRE  VERSES, 


Yerses  19-21.  The  call  of  Elisha. 
jq"ote — 1.  The  variety  of  character 
among  God's  servants.  2.  The  honour 
God  puts  on  the  ordinary  secular  occu- 
pations of  life.  3.  The  spirit  of  joy- 
ful self-sacrifice  manifested  at  the  call 
of  duty. — Macduff, 

Verse  19.  The  dig^nity  of  labour. 
1.  A  blessing  to  man.  2.  Kot  to  be 
despised  by  any.  3.  Sanctioned  and 
approved  by  God. 

—  Though  master  of  the  ground  and 
oxen  and  servants,  yet  he  himself  laid 
his  hand  to  the  plough.  Idleness  is 
no  man's  honour,  nor  is  husbandry  any 
man's  disgrace.  An  honest  calling 
in  the  world  does  not  put  us  out  of 
the  v^ray  of  our  heavenly  calling. 

—  Elisha  is  found,  not  in  his  study, 
but  in  the  field ;  not  with  a  book  in 
his  hand,  but  a  plough.  His  father 
Shaphat  was  a  lich  farmer  in  Abel- 
meholah,  himself  was  a  good  husband- 
man, trained  up,  not  in  the  schools  of 
the  prophets,  but  in  the  thrifty  trade 
of  tillage ;  and  behold  this  is  the  man 
whom  God  will  pick  out  of  all  Israel 
for  a  prophet.  God  seeth  not  as  man 
seeth;  neither  doth  He  choose  men 
because  they  are  fit,  but  therefore  fits 
them  because  He  hath  chosen  them. 
His  call  is  above  all  earthly  institu- 
tion. I  hear  not  aught  that  Elijah 
said ;  only  he  casts  his  cloak  upon 
Elisha  in  the  passage :  that  mantle, 
that  act,  was  vocal.  He  finds  a  strange 
virtue  in  that  robe ;  and,  as  if  his 
heart  was  changed  with  that  habit, 
forgets  his  team  and  runs  after  Elijah. 
The  secret  call  of  God  off'ers  an  inward 
force  to  the  heart,  and  insensibly 
draws  us  beyond  the  power  of  our 
resistance. — £p.  Hall. 

—  Another  in  his  place  would  long 
before  have  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  he  was  too  good  for  the  plough ; 
he  was  born  for  a  higher  sphere  than 
that  of  a  simple  peasant ;  he  was  not 
at  liberty  to  withhold  his  talents  from 
mankind  ;  he  must  study,  and  then 
enter  upon  the  theatre  of  public  action 
to  help  to  enlighten  and  govern  the 


world.  Consider:  the  lights  have 
the  fairest  and  clearest  lustre  which 
know  not  that  they  shine ;  and  those 
flowers  of  God  scatter  the  sweetest 
perfume  around  them  which,  well  con- 
tented with  the  little  spot  the  Lord 
has  appointed  them,  bloom  hidden  in 
silent  dales.  It  does  not  follow  from 
the  calling  of  Elisha  away  from  the 
plough  to  become  a  prophet,  that  every 
one  without  much  gifts  and  without 
much  knowledge  can  leave  the  plough, 
or  any  other  ordinary  occupation,  and 
take  up  the  prophet's  calling.  Men 
often  think  the  Lord  calls  them  to 
another,  higher  position,  while  it  is 
only  their  vanity  and  the  over-estima- 
tion of  their  gifts  and  powers  which 
impel  them.  If  God  has  called  thee 
to  anything,  he  will  also  open  the 
way  for  thee,  and  furnish  the  means 
that  are  requisite  thereto. — Krum- 
macher. 

Yerses  20,  21.  Grace  is  no  enemy 
to  good  nature :  well  may  the  respects 
to  our  earthly  parents  stand  with  our 
duties  to  our  Father  in  heaven.  I  do 
not  see  Elisha  wring  his  hands  and 
deplore  his  condition,  that  he  should 
leave  the  world  and  follow  a  prophet ; 
but  for  the  joy  of  that  change  he 
makes  a  feast ;  those  oxen,  those  uten- 
sils of  husbandry,  whereon  his  former 
labours  had  been  bestowed,  shall  now 
be  gladly  devoted  to  the  celebration  of 
that  happy  day  wherein  he  is  honoured 
with  so  blessed  an  employment.  If 
with  desire,  if  with  cheerfulness,  wo 
do  not  enter  into  the  works  of  our 
Heavenly  Master,  they  are  not  like  to 
prosper  in  our  hands.  He  is  not  worthy 
of  this  spiritual  station  who  holds  not 
the  service  of  God  his  highest,  his  rich- 
est preferment. — Bp.  Hall. 

—  Elisha  in  comparison  with  the 
three  followers  of  Christ  (Luke  ix. 
57,  62).  1.  Although  the  son  of  rich 
parents  and  heir  to  a  great  possession, 
yet  he  forsakes  and  renounces  all,  for 
he  considers  it  a  greater  gain  to  follow 
and  serve  the  poor  prophet.  2.  He 
takes  leave,  indeed,  of  his  parents,  but 

321 


CHAP.  XX. 


EOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


he  does  not  put  off  the  succession  to  a 
later  time,  until  after  their  death  ;  he 
does  not  disavow  filial  affection,  but 
it  does  not  keep  him  from  entering 
upon  his  succession  immediately.  3. 
He  looks  not  backward  after  his  call, 
but  forward,  and  has  no  longing  after 
that  which  he  gives  up ;  he  follows 
on  and  serves  with  undivided  heart 
in  complete  and  joyful  consecration. 
How  deeply  this  Elisha  shames  many 
amongst  us,  to  whom,  however,  not  an 
Elijah,  not  a  prophet,  but  the  Lord  of 
glory  calls — Pollow  me  I — Lange, 

Verse  20.    A  good  home.     1.   A 

privilege  to  be  improved.  2.  An 
opportunity  to  prepare  for  public  life. 
3.  A  centre  of  peace,  sympathy,  and 
affection.  4.  Never  too  good  to  be 
left  at  the  call  of  duty. 

Yerse  21.  Obedience  to  the  Divine 
call.  1.  Should  be  prompt:  **He 
returned  back  from  him."  2.  Should 
be  thorough  and  complete  :  ''Took  a 
yoke  of  oxen  and  slew  them  and  boiled 
their  flesh  with  the  instruments  of  the 


oxen."  3.  Should  be  cheerful:  **And 
gave  unto  the  people,  and  they  did  eat.'* 
4.  Should  be  apparent :  "  Then  he 
arose  and  went  after  Elijah." 

—  Self-sacrifice  for  God  is  here 
plainly  inculcated.  In  the  case  of 
Elisha  we  read  of  no  struggle  between 
duty  and  convenience,  between  per- 
sonal interest  and  obedience  to  the 
unmistakable  will  of  heaven.  There 
was  compliance  at  once,  hearty  and 
unreserved;  and  of  his  surrender  to 
Elijah  it  may  be  said,  as  of  the 
disciples  with  reference  to  a  higher 
master,  he  *'left  all  and  followed 
him."  The  example  is  lofty,  and  the 
invitation  becomes  us  all.  We  are 
not  asked  to  relinquish  our  homes, 
and  our  friends,  and  our  substance  to 
anything  like  the  same  extent;  but 
if  the  sacrifice  in  our  case  be  easier,  it 
should  be  all  the  more  willingly  and 
cheerfully  made.  Why  speak  of  un- 
reasonable demands  in  relation  to  Him 
who  gave  what  even  He  could  never 
exceed  in  gift — "  that  whosoever 
believeth  should  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting  life"  ? — Howat, 


CHAPTER  XX. 
THE    DEFEAT    OF    THE    SYRIANS. 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notks. — Verse  I.  Benhadad — Son  of  the  king  of  the  same 
name  mentioned  (chap.  xv.  20).  Thirty  and  two  kings  with  him — ^Vassals  or  viceroys  who 
ruled  single  cities  or  districts  (comp.  Josh.  xii.  7).  With  him — ^ijni<^  ;  not  confederated  as 
equals,  but  connected  as  dependent  and  tributary.  Verse  4.  According  to  thy  saying, 
I  am  thine,  &c. — Not  an  ironical  taunt,  "  according  to  thy  saying  "  it  is  so  ;  for  Ahab  had  not 
spirit  enough  to  resent  Benhadad's  insolent  domination  ;  it  was  timorous  submission.  Verse  10. 
If  the  dust  of  Samaria  shall  suffice,  &c. — Braggart  menacing.  Its  purport  is :  Thou  re- 
fusest  me  thy  treasures,  but  with  so  great  an  army  will  I  cover  Samaria  that,  if  every  soldier 
wished  to  carry  away  a  handful,  its  sand  would  not  suffice.  Josephus  incorrectly  interprets 
the  words  thus  :  "  He  could  with  his  army  ca«t  up  a  dyke  higher  thaa  his  walls  were,  if  every 
one  of  his  people  contributed  only  a  handlul  ot  earth."  Verse  11.  Boast  himself,  &c. — 
Answered  Beuhudad  with  a  good  and  apt  proverb.  The  Latins  say  :  Ne  triumphum  canas  ante 
victoriam — the  victory  must  be  won  before  it  is  celebrated  (Xeil).  Verse  14.  The  young  men 
ol  the  princes — The  D^H^J  Thenius  interprets  as  "  pages  unaccustomed  to  fight  ;*'  Etvald,  as 

*' young  lads  of  very  tender  age" — rather,  the  armour  bearers  of  the  princes,  a  small  and  un- 
equal band  (see  verse  15).  Order  the  battle  1 — Open  it,  or  make  attack.  Verse  17.  There 
are  men  come  out — Scornful ;  not  an  army,  not  warriors,  but  only  a  few  men  !  Benh  idad 
ordered  their  capture,  thinking  it  easy,  and  being  content  to  drink  on,  contemptuous  and  self- 
indulgent.  Verse  20.  On  an  horse  with  the  horsemen — i  e.,  with  horsemen  surrounding  him. 
Verse  22.  At  the  return  of  the  year — n^^H  Dil'l^/T?)  with  the  beginning  of  the  year — 

T    T 

the  spring — ^until  which  time  the  winter  rains  would  prevent  another  campaign.    Verse  21, 
322 


SOM'.l.KTIG  COMMENTARY        KJKGS.  cukt.  xs. 


Put  captains  in  their  roo-ms — Not  mere  military  ornaments,  but  experienced  warriors. 
Benhadad  now  realises  that  he  is  eugaged  in  no  trifling  conflict,  to  be  airily  undertaken  and 
easily  won.  Verse  26.  "Went  up  to  Aphek — In  the  valley  of  Jezreel,  not  far  from  Endor 
(1  Sam.  xxix.  1),  "the  largest  plain  of  Palestine,  whore,  from  the  times  of  Joshua  to 
Napoleon,  so  many  great  battles  have  been  fought"  (Keil).  There  is  also  an  Aphek  near 
Be'hshemesh,  on  the  mountains  of  Judah  'Josh.  xv.  53),  where  the  Philistines  lost  the  ark  in 
battle  (I  Sam.  iv  1).  Verse  30.  A  wall  fell  upon  27,000  — Interpreters  say,  by  miracle  or 
earthquake  ;  but  most  probably  the  fugitives  crowded  on  to  the  old  walls  and  attempted  to 
make  a  stand  against  their  pursuers,  whereupon  the  walls  gave  way  under  the  wei^'ht  and 
pressure,  burying  the  vast  host  in  their  ruins.  Verse  33.  Men  did  diligently  observe — Took 
his  words  as  a  good  omen.  Did  hastily  catch  it — Hastened  to  seize  or  quote  the  words,  "  my 
brother."  Ahab  found  his  vanity  flattered  by  their  abject  suit,  and,  losing  sense  and  wit,  yielded 
to  a  sentimental  magnanimity.     Verse  34.  Make  streets  for  thee— Jliijn  means  business 

thoroughfares.  Verse  38.  Ashes  upon  his  face — Rather,  head  bandage  for  wounds  (verse  37). 
Verse  42.  Thou  hast  let  go  a  man,  &c. — It  was  a  weakminded  act,  an  injustice,  a  clear 
neglect  of  duty,  and  a  dishonour  to  the  God  of  Israel,  whom  the  king  of  Israel  represented. 
Ahab  knew  Benhadad  was  Israel's  enemy,  and  the  fact  that  God  had  so  signally  defeated  him 

showed  Jehovah's  anger  towards  him.     Verse  43.  Heavy  and  displeased — ^^V\  "ID*  vexed 

'"t;      - 

and  refractory,  from  n"lD>  to  be  stubborn  (Deut.  xxi.  18) ;  more  than  gloomy  and  uneasjr — 
fretful  and  resentful. — ^W.  H.  J. 


EOMILETICS   OF  FERSES  1-21, 
The  Yice  op  DauNKENNESs. 

A  TIME  came  that  tested  the  value  of  Baal  as  the  guardian  deity  of  Israel. 
The  Syrian  king  invaded  the  country,  attended  hy  a  gay  retinue  of  regal  courtiers 
and  an  immense  army.  Samaria  was  speedily  invested,  and  threatened  with 
complete  destruction.  There  is  no  appeal  to  Baal  now  :  he  is  impotent  to  help 
in  time  of  trouble.  ITor  is  the  help  of  Jehovah  sought  in  this  extremity.  Israel 
is  at  the  mercy  of  the  foe ;  and  the  godless,  unbelieving  Ahab,  with  cowardly 
supineness,  surrenders  himself  to  his  fate.  But  the  Lord  has  still  a  regard  for 
His  deluded  people,  and  sends  a  prophet  to  assure  them  of  deliverance.  Formid- 
able as  the  army  of  Benhadad  appeared,  there  was  an  element  of  weakness  in 
it  which  might  readily  bring  about  its  defeat.  The  wine  cup  passed  round 
freely,  and  the  Syrian  king  and  his  military  staff  became  intoxicated  (verses 
12-16).  This  paragraph,  therefore,  while  recording  the  fact  of  supernatural 
interference  on  behalf  of  Israel,  also  illustrates  the  evils  that  may  arise  from  the 
vice  of  drunkenness.     Observe — 

I.  That  the  vice  of  drunkenness  inflates  the  mind  with  the  most  arrogant 
pretensions  (verses  1-9).  Benhadad  proudly  demanded  possession  of  all  the 
treasures  of  Ahab  and  of  his  people — money,  wives,  and  children — and  threatened 
to  search  the  palace  and  dwelling  of  the  city  for  whatever  was  worth  taking 
away.  The  insolence  of  this  is  almost  beyond  precedent.  Such  treatment  is 
the  worst  that  could  be  expected  for  a  city  taken  by  main  force ;  and  even  an 
unscrupulous  Eastern  conqueror  could  hardly  demand  it  of  a  garrison  that  had 
yielded  without  fighting.  The  whole  conduct  of  Benhadad  is  another  example 
of  how  the  consciousness  of  irresistible  power  is  apt  to  breed  a  spirit  of  arro 
gance,  especially  when  under  the  influence  of  intemperance.  **  When  drink's  in, 
wit's  out."  The  drunkard  blusters  and  boasts  what  he  has  done,  and  what  he 
will  do  ;  and  though  not  backed  by  an  immense  force  like  that  which  surrounded 
Benhadad,  he  threatens  terrible  destruction  to  every  opponent.  But  alas!  it  is 
only  the  froth  of  a  pot-valiant  swagger  :  when  the  fumes  of  the  liquor  are  gone, 
so  is  the  courage. 

323 


CHAP.  XX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EINB8. 


II.  That  the  vice  of  drunkenness  is  closely  associated  with  the  vice  of 
blasphemy  (verse  10).  Benhadad  swore  by  his  gods,  as  the  blasphemous 
Jezebel  had  done  by  hers  (chap.  xix.  2).  The  meaning  of  Benhadad's  oath  has 
been  differently  understood.  **  In  its  general  sense  it  is  undoubtedly  a  boast 
that  the  number  of  Benhadad's  troops  is  such  as  to  make  resistance  vain  and 
foolish.  We  may  parallel  it  with  the  saying  of  the  Trachinian  at  Thermopyloe, 
that  the  Persian  arrows  would  darken  the  light  of  the  sun.  Probably  the  exact 
meaning  is — When  your  town  is  reduced  to  ruins,  as  it  will  be  if  you  resist,  the 
entire  heap  will  not  suffice  to  furnish  a  handful  of  dust  to  each  soldier  of  my 
army,  so  many  are  they.  Thus  there  was  a  threat  in  the  message  as  well  as  a 
boast"  (^Speaker'' s  Comm.),  Such  blasphemous  presumption  does  not  go  un- 
punished. Thus  Julian,  the  apostate,  going  against  the  Persians,  swore  at  his 
return  to  sacrifice  the  blood  of  the  Christians.  So  the  Constable  of  France  vowed 
the  destruction  of  Geneva :  but  God  forbad  it.  The  drunkard  swears  oaths  of 
which  he  is  ashamed  in  his  sober  moments.  Intemperance  and  blasphemy  are 
twin  vices. 

III.  That  the  vice  of  drunkenness  excites  to  deeds  of  recklessness  (verse 

12).  The  Syrian  king  was  so  enraged  with  the  final  message  of  Ahab,  given  in 
the  terms  of  a  proverb  (verse  11),  and  which  was  the  only  evidence  of  anything 
like  a  courageous  spirit  shown  by  Ahab  during  the  whole  transaction,  that  he 
gave  orders  for  the  battle  to  begin  forthwith,  little  dreaming  what  would  be  the 
result  to  his  own  army.  A  step  taken  in  a  moment  of  intemperate  recklessness 
is  difficult  to  recall,  and  may  involve  ruinous  consequences.    ' 

IV.  That  the  vice  of  drunkenness  renders  the  inebriate  unable  to  discern 
the  hand  of  God  in  public  events  (verses  13-15).  It  seemed  that  Israel  was 
doomed ;  in  a  few  hours  Samaria  would  be  a  heap  of  ruins,  and  Ahab  and  his 
treasures  in  the  hands  of  the  warlike  Syrian.  But  a  power  was  at  work,  un- 
noticed by  the  Syrians,  too  long  despised  by  Ahab  and  ignored  by  his  people. 
God  interposed,  once  more  sent  His  prophet  to  explain  the  method  of  rescue,  and 
once  more  to  call  the  apostate  Ahab  back  to  his  allegiance.  It  was  an  evidence 
of  the  feeble  condition  of  Samaria  at  the  time  when  7,000  people  comprised  all 
its  inhabitants,  and  out  of  these  was  formed  the  little  army  that  was  to  be  led 
by  the  230  young  men  of  the  princes.  It  was  a  paltry,  insignificant  force  to 
oppose  against  the  swarming  host  of  the  Syrians.  But  Jehovah  was  working  His 
purpose  through  that  tiny  band  of  soldiers ;  and  such  was  the  blind  infatuation 
of  the  intoxicated  king  that  he  saw  it  not.  Drunkenness  blears  both  the  natural 
and  the  mental  eye,  and  darkens  and  impairs  the  moral  sense. 

V.  That  the  vice  of  drunkenness  incapacitates  at  a  critical  moment 

(verses  16-18).  The  Syrians  observe  the  sally  of  the  young  men  from  the  city, 
and  inform  Benhadad ;  but  such  was  his  sovereign,  almost  sottish,  indifference 
to  any  force  that  Samaria  could  send  forth,  that  without  troubling  himself  about 
the  matter,  he  simply  gave  orders  to  take  them  alive.  This  was  easier  said  than 
done.  It  was  the  crisis  of  the  campaign,  when  the  utmost  vigilance  and  activity 
should  have  been  shown  ;  but  the  drunken  king  could  not  see  it  until  it  was 
too  late.  It  is  a  great  blunder  to  despise  an  enemy ;  and  to  be  intoxicated 
gives  the  enemy  a  double  advantage.  ''Drunkards  are  besotted  and  disabled; 
as  a  snuff  of  a  candle  in  a  socket  drowned  in  the  tallow  yieldeth  little  or  no 
light,  but  only  a  stench." 

VI.  That  the  vice  of  drunkenness  subjects  its  victims  to  humiliating^ 

defeat  (verses  19-21).     The  enemy  that  had  been  treated  so  contemptuously 
proved  to  bo  more  powerful  than  was  supposed.     The  230  young  men  smote 
right  and  left,  and  laid  prostrate  all  who  opposed  them ;  and  the  Syrians,  seeing 
324 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xx. 


the  7,000  coming  out  of  the  city  to  join  in  the  fight,  were  seized  with  a  sudden 
panic  and  fled,  Eenhadad  escaping  on  horseback,  leaving  his  army  to  be  massa- 
cred by  the  victorious  Israelites.  So  that  it  now  might  be  said  to  Benhadad 
what  Zebul  once  said  to  Gaal :  Where  is  now  thy  mouth  which  just  now  boasted 
such  great  things  ?  (verse  10)  Is  not  this  the  people  that  thou  hast  despised  ? 
Go  out,  I  pray  now,  and  fight  with  them  (Judges  ix.  38).  Any  undertaking 
begun  and  carried  on  in  drunkenness  is  sure  to  end  in  confusion  and  misery. 
Intemperate  boasting  is  often  the  prelude  of  defeat.  Wisely  did  the  Romans 
say  :   **  Sing  not  the  triumphal  song  before  the  victory." 

Lessons  : — 1.   Drunkenness  is  a  prolific  source  of  national  vice,     2.  It  is  offen- 
sive to  God  and  injuriotts  to  man,     3.  It  is  certain  to  he  severely  punished, 

OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Yerses  1-21.    The  pride  and  inso-  not  to  have  been  recorded.    Here  the 

lence  of  power. — I.  Making  extrava-  excessive  demand  of  the  Syrian  king, 

gant  demands  (verses  1-6).     II.  Using  coming  close  upon  the  first  announce- 

blasphemous      threats      (verse     10).  ment  of  the  siege,  and  placed  at  the 

III.  Provoking  the  weak  tj  cautious  very   commencement  of  the  negocia- 

and  courageous  opposition  (verses  7-9,  tions  for  peace,   strikes  us  as  some- 

11,  13-15).     IV.  Giving  way  to  sen-  thing  very  unusual.     But  if  we  sup- 

sual     indulgence     (verses   12,      16).  pose  a  considerable  time  to  have  passed 

V.    Contemptuously     indifferent     in  in  the  siege,  and  the  city  to  be  reduced 

moments  of  danger  (verses    17,    18).  to  an  extremity,   and  ambassadors  to 

YI.  Brought  to  an  ignominious  down-  have  been  sent  by  Ahab  to  ask  terms 

fall  (verses  19-21).  of  peace  short  of  absolute  surrender, 

then  we   can   quite  understand   that 

—   Who  can  look  for  other  than  Benhadad  might  make  such  a  demand 

war  when  he  sees  Ahab  and  Jezebel  in  reply.     He  would  expect  and  intend 

on  the  throne,  Israel  in  the  groves  and  his  demand  to  be  rejected,   since  the 

temples  of  Baalim  ?     The  ambition  of  voluntary  surrender  of  his  seraglio  by 

Benhadad  was  not  so  much  guilty  of  an  oriental  monarch  would  be  regarded 

this  war  as  the  idolatry  of  that  wicked  as  so  disgraceful  that  no  prince  of  any 

nation.     How  can  they  expect  peace  spirit  could  for  a  moment  entertain  the 

from   earth    who    do    wilfully    fight  idea.     The  rejection    of  his   demand 

against  Heaven  ?    Bather  will  the  God  would  have  left  him  free  to  plunder 

ot  hosts  arm  the  brute,  the  senseless  the  town,  which  was  evidently  what 

creatures,  against  Israel,  than  He  will  he  desii'ed  and  purposed. — Speakw's 

suffer  their  defiance  unavenged.  Ahab  Comm, 
and  Benhadad  are  well  matched ;  an 

idolatrous  Israel  with  a  paganish  Idu-         Yersei  1-4.     In  these  two  kings  we 

mean.     Well  may   God  plague  each  see  what  a  thing  the  human  heart  is, 

other  who  means  vengeance  to  them  how  insolent  and  timorous  by  turns 

both  \—Bp.  Hall.  (Jer.  xvii.  9).     It  is  insolent  when 

man,  grown  prosperous,  powerful,  and 

Yerse  2.  The  sacred  historians  rich,  places  his  confidence  in  his  suc- 
study  brevity  so  greatly,  that  their  cess,  and  haughtily  despises  his  neigh- 
narrative  is  often,  at  the  first  look,  hour.  But  it  is  timid  when  man  falls 
abnormal  and  strange.  But  in  view  of  into  difficulty,  and  neither  sees  nor 
this  brevity,  it  is  always  lawful,  as  it  knows  any  help,  just  as  was  the 
is  most  reasonable,  to  supplement  their  despairing,  womanly  heart  of  king 
narrative  by  supposing  circumstances  Ahab,  who  took  it  for  granted  that 
of  small  moment,  which  would  remove  everything  was  lost  when  he  saw  the 
the  strangeness,  to  have  happened,  but  hosts  ol  hi  enemies. —  Wwrt,  Summ, 

325 


OHIP.  ZZ. 


SOMILETIC  COMMJEKTARY:  KINGS, 


Verses  1-3.  Benhadad  thought  that 
because  he  had  the  power  to  rob  and 
appropriate,  he  also  had  the  right  to  do 
so.  But  God  gives  power  and  might  to 
kings,  not  to  distort  the  right,  but  to 
protect  it.  The  power  of  that  one 
who,  confiding  in  his  own  strength, 
treads  the  right  under  his  feet,  will 
sooner  or  later  miserably  decline. — 
Lange. 

Yerses  3,  4.  Benhadad  knows  his 
own  strength,  and  offers  insolent  con- 
ditions. It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  be  in 
the  mercy  of  an  enemy :  in  case  of 
hostility  might  will  carve  for  itself. 
Ahab  now,  after  the  division  of  Judah, 
was  but  half  a  king :  Benhadad  had 
two-and-thirty  kings  to  attend  him. 
What  equality  was  in  this  opposition  ? 
Ahab,  therefore,  as  a  reed  in  a  tempest, 
stoops  to  the  violent  charge  of  so 
potent  an  enemy.  It  is  not  for  the 
overpowered  to  capitulate ;  weakness 
may  not  argue,  but  yield.  Tyranny  is 
but  drawn  on  by  submission;  and, 
where  it  finds  fear  and  dejection, 
insulteth. — £p.  HalL 

Terse    4.      Abject     submission. 

1.  Unbecoming  the  dignity  of  a  king. 

2.  A  revelation  of  a  cowardly  spirit. 

3.  Subjects  to  increased  insults  and 
degradation. 

~  Those  who  no  longer  have  a  Lord 
in  Heaven  whom  they  fear,  and  before 
whom  they  bow,  cringe  and  fawn 
before  all  men  who  can  harm  or  serve 
them.  If  Ahab  had  said  to  the  Xing 
of  kings  what  he  sent  as  a  response  to 
the  royal  robber  and  boaster  :  **  I  am 
Thine,  and  all  that  I  have,"  he  would 
then  have  had  the  trust  and  assurance : 
He  that  dwelleth  in  the  secret  place  of 
the  Most  High,  &c.  (Psa.  xci.  1-3). 
He  who  bows  before  God  is  sure  to  be 
humble  before  men  ;  but  he  does  not 
cringe  to  them  nor  throw  himself 
away.  To  submit  to  the  superior 
power  and  force  that  demands  gold  and 
silver  is  no  disgrace ;  but  to  surrender 
wife  and  child  is  contrary  to  honour, 
duty,  and  conscience. 

Yerses  5,  6.  Haughty  and  insolent 
men  grow  all  the    more  overbearing 
826 


and  ungovernable,  and  the  more  one 
submits  to  them,  and  crawls  before 
them,  and  gratifies  their  desires,  the 
more  exorbitant  they  become  in  their 
demands.  It  is  the  curse  that  rests 
upon  avarice,  that  the  more  the  appe- 
tite after  money  and  property  is  grati- 
fied, the  more  it  grows,  not  diminishes 
(Prov.  xvi.  8). — Lange, 

Yerses  7,  9.  Overstrained  subjection 
turns  desperate.  If  conditions  be  im- 
posed worse  than  death,  there  needs 
no  long  disputation  of  the  remedy. 
The  elders  of  Israel,  whose  share  was 
proportional  in  this  danger,  hearten 
Ahab  to  a  denial;  which  yet  comes 
out  so  fearfully,  as  that  it  appears 
rather  extorted  by  the  peremptory  in- 
dignation of  the  people,  than  proceed- 
ing out  of  any  generosity  of  his  spirit, 
Neither  doth  he  say,  I  will  not ;  but, 
I  may  not. — Bp,  Hall. 

—  Ahab  and  Ms  people.  1.  Ahah 
feels  himself  helpless  and  perplexed. 
Adversity  teaches  us  how  to  pray, 
but  Ahab  had  turned  from  the  living 
God,  who  is  a  helper  in  every  time  of 
trouble,  to  a  dumb  idol  that  cannot 
help.  He  had  forgotten  how  to  pray. 
He  had  sought  to  help  himself  by 
cowardly  submission,  and  now  he 
seeks  help  of  men.  In  every  distress 
we  should  turn  first  to  the  Lord  (Psa. 
cxviii.  8,  9;  cviii.  13).  II.  The  elders 
and  the  people  reproach  Ahah.  Instead 
of  his  giving  instructions  to  them 
with  the  words  of  Joel  iii.  15,  like  a 
king,  they  gave  commands  to  him. 
He  is  no  real  king,  realizing  the  posi- 
tion which  has  been  given  to  him  by 
God,  whom  the  people  control,  in- 
stead of  allowing  themselves  to  be 
controlled  by  him.  Tyrants  are  of 
this  class.  At  first  they  do  not  con- 
sult the  people,  and  do  not  scruple  to 
appropriate  their  most  sacred  posses- 
sions, take  away  their  faith,  and 
burden  their  consciences.  Ahab  did 
not  consult  his  people  about  the  in- 
troduction of  the  worship  of  Baal  and 
the  persecution  of  the  prophets ;  but 
now,  when  he  does  not  know  how  to 
counsel  or  help  himself,  he  applies  to 
the  wish  of  the  nation — the  aid  of  the 
people  is  now  very  acceptable. — Lange. 


SOMILETIG  COMMEA TAJtY :  KINGS. 


CHAP.     XX. 


Verses  10,  11.  The  proud  Sjrrian, 
■who  would  have  taken  it  in  foul  scorn 
to  be  denied,  though  he  had  sent  for 
all  the  heads  of  Israel,  snuffs  up  the 
wind  like  the  wild  ass  in  the  wilder- 
ness, and  brags,  and  threats,  and 
swears.  0  vain  boaster !  in  whom  I 
know  not  whether  pride  or  folly  be 
more  eminent.  Victory  is  to  be 
achieved,  not  to  be  sworn ;  future 
events  are  no  matter  of  an  oath  ;  thy 
gods,  if  they  had  been,  might  have 
been  calhd  as  witnesses  of  thy  inten- 
tions, not  of  that  success  whereof  thou 
wouldst  be  the  author  without  them. 
Thy  gods  can  do  nothing  to  thee, 
nothing  for  thee,  nothing  for  them- 
selves !  All  thine  Aramites  shall  not 
carry  away  one  corn  of  sand  out  of 
Israel,  except  it  be  upon  the  soles  of 
their  feet  in  their  shameful  flight ;  it 
is  well  if  they  can  carry  back  those 
skins  which  they  brought  thither. 
There  is  no  cause  to  fear  that  man 
that  trusts  in  himself.  Man  may  cast 
the  dice  of  war,  but  the  disposition  of 
them  is  of  the  Lord. — £p.  Sail, 

Yerse  11.  The  Christian  warrior. 
"Very  generally  the  young  and  inex- 
perienced, when  about  to  enter  on  any 
new  enterprize,  commence  with  feel- 
ings of  more  or  less  self-confidence. 
The  young  convert  is  often  more  con- 
fident than  the  old  Christian,  and 
thinks  that  he  shall  attain  higher 
eminence  in  piety  than  others  who 
are  older  in  Christian  experience.  It 
is  well  to  aim  high,  but  we  must  not 
be  too  confident  in  our  own  strength, 
lest,  like  Peter,  we  suffer  a  grievous 
fall,  or  like  others,  sink  down  under 
great  disappointment.  In  this  verse 
we  shall  notice  the  contrast  between 
the  young  Christian's  anticipations, 
and  the  old  Christian's  experience. 

I.  The  Christian  soldier  commenc- 
ing his  career.— 1.  The  oath  of  allegi- 
ance and  servitude.  When  a  young  man 
determines  to  enter  the  army,  he 
accepts  the  bounty,  is  examined, 
Bworn-in  to  serve  his  sovereign  and 
country,  clothed  in  regimentals,  and 
joins  the  army  tor  actual  service.  So, 
when  God  in  His  mercy  converts  a  soul, 


He  is  drawn  by  the  cords  of  love  and 
the  bands  of  a  man.  He  feels  his 
vast  obligations;  first  gives  himself  up 
in  solemn  covenant  to  God,  and  then 
to  His  people.  Then,  in  the  Lord's 
house,  in  the  presence  of  God,  of  angels, 
and  men,  takes  the  sacramental  cup 
and  swears  allegiance  to  Christ.  We 
know  no  act  so  solemn  as  this  but  the 
act  of  dying.  It  is  a  public  dedication 
of  the  soul  to  God  and  to  His  service 
from  henceforth.  2.  The  service  he 
enters  upon.  As  a  soldier  soon  com- 
mences actual  service  to  protect  his 
country  and  defend  its  laws,  so  a 
soldier  of  Christ  immediately  enters 
on  the  Christian  duties.  He  must 
oppose  sin,  fight  against  Satan,  and 
withstand  all  the  unhallowed  influ- 
ence of  an  ungodly  world,  and,  as  far 
as  in  him  lies,  promote  the  extension 
of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  The  stand- 
ard around  which  he  is  to  rally  is 
*'  The  Cross,"  and  he  must  die  rather 
than  strike  his  colours.  His  en- 
couragement is  that  he  shall  come  off 
more  than  a  conqueror.  3.  'J he  a)  mour 
he  wears.  Ancient  soldiers  wore 
armour  (1  Sam.  xvii.  5,  6,  54.)  The 
Christian  soldier  has  a  complete  suit 
from  the  armoury  of  God  (Kph.  vi. 
13-15):  "The  girdle  of  truth,"  or 
Christian  sincerity ;  "  The  breastplate 
of  righteousness,"  being  blest  with 
imputed  and  imparted  righteousness ; 
**  The  shoes  of  the  Gospel,"  having 
gospel  truths  as  the  foundation  of  his 
religion;  "The  shield  of  faith,"  an 
indispensable  thing,  for  without  con- 
fidence in  Christ  he  would  always 
fail;  "The  helmet  of  salvation,"  ever 
keeping  his  salvation  in  view  and  aim- 
ing after  it ;  "  The  sword  of  the  Spirit, 
which  is  the  word  of  God,'*  which 
must  be  well  handled  both  for  offen- 
sive and  defensive  warfare,  and  always 
used  with  much  prayer  and  with  great 
determination  and  courage.  4.  The 
ardent  feelings  he  evinces.  The  soldier 
prepares  himself  with  high  expecta- 
tions, and  a  determination  not  to  desert 
his  post  or  betray  his  cause.  And  so 
the  young  Christian  soldier  espouses 
the  cause  of  Christ  with  ardent  feel- 
ings, holy  determination,  and  high 
anticipations   of    final    success.      He 


OUAr.  XX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


knows  that  an  almighty  arm  is  on  his 
side,  that  grace  is  promised,  and  final 
victory  insured.  He  has  much  reason 
to  rejoice,  but  none  for  self-confidence, 
for  the  conflict  will  often  he  severe  ; 
he  will  frequently  be  discouraged,  and 
perhaps  occasionally  wounded,  though 
not  finally  defeated.  Let  him  not 
boast  except  in  the  Lord  and  in  His 
strength.  5.  The  manner  in  which  he 
should  conduct  himself.  It  should  be 
with  prayer,  watchfulness,  and  perse- 
verance (Eph.  vi.  18).  A  Christian 
cannot  feel  too  much  liis  entire  depen- 
dence upon  God  for  all  he  needs.  He 
is  commanded  to  **  watch  and  pray." 
Whatever  be  the  strength  of  the  foes, 
their  mode  of  attack,  the  severity  of 
the  conflict,  he  must  never  lay  down 
his  arms  ;  the  decisive  victory  is  often 
won  when  the  conflict  is  most  severe, 
and  the  soul  most  discouraged.  Then 
it  is  that  the  power  of  the  Great  Cap- 
tain is  seen. 

II.  The  Christian  veteran  at  the 
close  of  his  career. — 1.  His  retrospect. 
As  the  old  soldier  loves  to  recount  his 
past  career,  so  the  old  Christian,  on 
the  bed  of  death,  can  look  back  on 
his  past  experience  with  adoring 
gratitude,  as  he  thinks  of  the  begin- 
ning of  his  Christian  life,  the  enemies 
he  has  had  to  face,  the  hard  battles  he 
has  been  in,  the  wounds  he  has 
received,  the  victories  he  has  won,  the 
honours  he  has  gained  ;  but  even  then, 
and  though  about  to  put  oflt  his  armour, 
he  feels  that  he  has  nothing  to  boast  of, 
but  much  to  be  thankful  for.  He  has 
lower  thoughts  of  himself  than  ever, 
and  higher  thoughts  of  Christ,  feeling 
that  all  his  failings  were  from  himself, 
and  that  the  praise  of  all  his  victories 
belongs  to  the  captain  of  his  salvation. 
2.  Bis  glorious  end.  The  putting  off 
his  armour,  which  is  at  death,  not 
before.  When  he  has  by  grace  con- 
quered the  last  enemy,  then  his 
warfare  is  accomplished,  and  his 
honourable  career  ended ;  then  he 
exchanges  the  sword  for  the  palm,  the 
helmet  for  the  crown,  the  armour  for 
the  victor's  robe,  and  conflict  for 
triumph,  3.  Sis  eternal  triumph.  Ko 
sooner  is  the  last  conflict  over,  and  the 
328 


victory  won,  than  he  enters  heaven 
in  triumph  beyond  all  description  or 
conception.  What  more  could  he 
wish  for  ?  He  now  thinks  nothing  cf 
the  warfare  in  the  greatness  of  his  joy. 

Lea  rn  :  —  1 .  That  if  you  would  enjoy 
this  glory  you  must  hecome  a  soldier  of 
Christ.  2.  That  if  you  w<uld  he 
victorious  you  must  put  on  the  whole 
Christian  armour,  and  looh  to  God  for 
grace,  i^.  That  in  order  to  stimulate 
you  in  the  conflict,  you  should  think  of 
the  victory  promised  and  the  glory  that 
follows. — Fulpit  Sketches. 

Yerses  13-15.  Who  can  wonder 
enough  at  this  unweariable  mercy  of 
God  ?  After  the  fire  and  rain  fetched 
miraculously  from  heaven,  Ahab  had 
promised  much,  performed  nothing; 
yet  again  will  God  bless  and  solicit 
him  with  victory.  One  of  those  pro- 
phets whom  he  persecuted  to  death 
shall  comfort  his  dejection  with  the 
news  of  his  deliverance  and  triumph. 
Had  this  great  work  been  wrought 
without  premonition,  either  chance, 
or  Baal,  or  the  golden  calves  had 
carried  away  the  thanks.  Beforehand, 
therefore,  shall  Ahab  know  both  the 
author  and  the  means  of  his  victory  : 
God  for  the  author ;  the  two  hundred 
and  thirty  young  men  of  the  princes 
for  the  means.  What  are  these  for 
the  vanguard,  and  seven  thousand 
Israelites  for  the  main  battle,  against 
the  troops  of  three  and  thirty  kings, 
and  as  many  centuries  of  Syrians  as 
Israel  had  single  soldiers  ?  An 
equality  of  numbers  had  taken  away 
the  wonder  of  the  event ;  but  now  the 
God  of  hosts  will  be  confessed  in  this 
issue,  not  the  valour  of  men.  How 
indiff'erent  is  it  with  thee,  0  Lord,  to 
save  by  many  or  by  few,  to  destroy 
many  or  few !  A  world  is  no  more  to 
thee  than  a  man  ;  how  easy  is  it  for 
thee  to  enable  us  to  be  more  than 
conquerors  over  principalities  and 
powers  ! — Bp.  Mall. 

Verse  13.  Formerly  Ahab  wished 
no  instruction  from  the  prophets  ;  now, 
in  his  danger  and  distress,  he  admits 
them  and  listens  to  them.     In  days  of 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


CHAP.  XX. 


prosperity  the  world  does  not  care  for 
any  advice  from  faithful  servants  of  the 
Divine  Word ;  it  looks  down  upon 
them  and  despises  them ;  hut  in  the 
hour  of  sorrow  and  mourning  it  grants 
them  access,  and  is  glad  to  avail  itself 
of  their  consolation.  Before  a  great 
troop  which  has  been  abandoned  of 
God,  you  have  no  cause  to  fear  if  God 
has  said  to  you,  I  will  help  thee 
(Isa.  xli.  13). — Starke, 

Yerse  16.  Benhadad  must  have 
sorely  repented  his  drunkenness,  as  it 
resulted  in  the  loss  of  his  army,  his 
horses,  and  chariots.  How  often  still 
is  drunkenness  the  original  cause  of 
great  sorrow  and  distress  (Eph.  v.  18 ; 
Isa.  V.  22 ;  Prov.  xxiii.  29,  30)  ! 

—  There  was  nothing  in  Benha- 
dad's  pavilion  but  drink  and  surfeit 
and  jollity,  as  if  wine  should  make 
way  for  blood.  Security  is  the  cer- 
tain usher  of  destruction.  We  never 
have  so  much  cause  to  fear,  as  when 
we  fear  nothing.  This  handful  of 
Israel  dares  look  out,  upon  the  pro- 
phet's assurance,  to  the  vast  host  of 
Benhadad.  It  is  enough  for  that  proud 
pagan  to  sit  still  and  command  amongst 
his  cups.  0  the  vain  and  ignorant 
presumptions  of  wretched  men,  that 
will  be  reckoning  without,  against 
their  Maker  ! — Bp.  Ball. 

Yerse  18.  Great  men  often  think, 
when  they  have  been  disturbed  in 
their  carnal  rest  and  security,  that  they 


only  need  to  speak  the  word  of  com- 
mand in  order  to  be  relieved  from  e  very- 
thing  disagreeable  and  wearisome  ;  but 
they  must  learn  that  they  cannot  rid 
themselves,  by  a  command,  of  what 
God  has  sent  for  their  humiliation, 

Yerses  19-21.  The  way  of  the  god- 
less shall  perish  (Psa.  i.  6).  Their  way 
is  covetousness  and  pillage  (verses  3-6), 
haughtiness,  insolence,  and  assurance 
(verses  10-18),  service  of  their  belly, 
wantonness  (verse  16).  This  way 
shall  perish  ;  they  are  as  chaff  which 
the  wind  driveth  away,  utterly  con- 
sumed with  terrors  (verses  20,  21 ; 
Psa.  Ixxiii.  19). — Lange. 

—  How  easy  is  it  for  Him  who  made 
the  heart  to  fill  it  with  terror  and  con- 
sternation, even  where  no  f  earis !  Those 
whom  God  hath  destined  to  slaughter 
He  will  smite ;  neither  needs  He  any 
other  enemy  or  executioner  than  what 
He  finds  in  their  own  bosom.  We 
are  not  the  master  of  our  own  courage 
or  fears  :  both  are  put  into  us  by  that 
overruling  power  that  created  us.  Stay 
now,  oh  stay !  thou  great  king  of 
Syria,  and  take  with  thee  those  for- 
gotten handful s  of  the  dust  of  Israel. 
Thy  gods  will  do  so  to  thee,  and  more 
also,  if  thy  followers  return  without 
their  vowed  burden !  Learn  now  of 
the  despised  king  of  Israel,  from  hence- 
forth, not  to  sound  the  triumph  before 
the  battle,  not  to  boast  thyself  in  the 
girding  on  of  thine  harness  as  in  the 
putting  off. — Bp.  Ball, 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  22-80. 
The  Supreme  Power  op  Jehovah  Yiia)icATED. 

I.  Against  the  flippant  calumny  of  the  heathen  (verses  22,  23).    The  Syrian 

chiefs  placed  the  God  oi  Israel  on  the  same  level  as  their  own  heathen  deities,  and 
attributed  their  failure  to  the  power  of  the  Israelitish  gods,  who  were  gods  of  the 
hills.  The  local  power  and  influence  of  deities  was  a  fixed  principle  of  the  ancient 
polytheism.  Each  country  was  considered  to  have  its  own  gods;  and  wars 
were  regarded  as  being  to  a  great  extent  struggles  between  the  gods  of  the  nations 
engaged  in  them.  But  not  thus  could  the  God  of  Israel  be  localised.  His  omni- 
presence, as  well  as  his  omnipotence,  must  be  vindicated ;  and  the  slanders  and 
misconceptions  of  the  heathen  answered  in  a  way  they  could  understand.  It  is 
one  of  the  most  mournful  results  of  sin  that  it  distorts  the  true  idea  of  God ; 
and  there  are  those  to-day  who  have  even  less  noble  ideas  of  His  being  and 
attributes  than  many  of  the  ancient  heathen.  Jehovah  is  continually  declaring 
His  power  and  godhead — in  His  works,  by  His  ministers,  in  the  events  of  Hii 
Providence,  in  the  story  of  redemption. 

329 


CHAP.  XX.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


II.  By  means  apparently  disproportionate  (verses  24-27).  The  Syrian^ 
were  numerous — **  filled  tlie  country  "  :  the  Israelites  were  comparatively  few— 
'*  like  two  little  flocks  of  kids."  The  Syrians  were  well  appointed :  the  Ir-raelites 
but  indifferently  equipped.  The  Syrians  chcse  their  own  battle-ground  where 
their  peculiar  method  of  chariot  warfare  would  have  everything  in  its  favour: 
the  Israelites  cautiously  kept  to  the  hills,  and  for  six  days  harrassed  the  invaders 
as  they  marched  along  the  plains,  until  on  the  seventh  day  the  battle  was  joined, 
and  it  would  seem  to  a  spectator  that  the  little  band  of  Israelites  would  be 
instantly  swallowed  up  by  the  Syrian  hosts.  But  Jehovah  is  not  confined 
to  numbers,  or  to  the  be&t- considered  human  methods.  He  makes  the  weak 
things  of  the  world  confound  the  things  that  are  mighty,  to  show  that  the 
excellency  of  the  power  is  not  of  man,  but  of  God, 

III.  By  gaining  a  signal  victory  over  the  enemies  of  His  people  (verses 
29,  30).  Through  the  might  of  the  Lord  the  Israelites  were  again  victorious. 
They  fell  upon  the  Syrians,  and  slew  great  numbers  of  them.  Seized  with  panic, 
the  rest  fled  to  Aphek,  where  a  wall,  probably  cast  down  by  an  earthquake, 
crushed  some  thousands  more  in  its  fall.  The  vain  boasting  of  the  heathen 
was  silenced ;  the  Syrian  host  was  scattered,  and  their  king  a  fugitive  and  a 
suppliant.  They  had  learnt  that  Jehovah  was  something  more  than  the  god 
of  the  hills.  How  terribly  was  their  blasphemy  rebuked  !  A  day  is  approach- 
ing when  all  the  detractors  and  enemies  of  God  will  be  overthrown  and  punished, 
and  the  glory  of  His  Name  vindicated  in  the  presence  of  an  adoring  universe. 

IV.  For  the  instruction  of  the  nations  (verse  28).  The  Lord  has  no  delight 
in  war,  nor  does  He  take  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked  ;  but  He  is  jealous 
for  His  own  honour.  The  Israelites  do  not  deserve  deliverance ;  but  the 
Syrians  have  blasphemed  Him  by  denying  His  attributes  of  omnipotence  and 
omnipresence,  and  this  sin  of  theirs  must  be  punished.  By  destroying  the 
Syrians  Jehovah  shows  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  nations  round  that  He  is  not  tl.e 
god  of  the  hills  only,  but  also  of  the  valleys.  It  was  similarly  a  denial  of 
Jehovah's  power  which  brought  destruction  on  the  host  of  Sennacherib  (2  King 
xix.  35).  All  the  actions  of  God  are  full  of  significance,  and  are  intended  to 
reveal  Himself  more  distinctly  to  the  world.  The  more  Jehovah  vindicates  His 
character,  the  higher  the  blessedness  possible  to  man. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  The  presence  of  Jehovah  is  not  confined  to  one  locality.  2.  Jehovah 
is  specially  jealous  of  His  glory ,  3.  It  is  in  great  defeats  that  man  discovers  his 
own  helplessness  and  the  Almighty  power  of  a  righteous  God, 


QEBM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Verses   22-30.    The  two   victories  put  an  end  to  idolatry  at  once,  had 

over  the  Syrians  were  designed,  ac-  at  least  broken  its  power,   as  was  al- 

cording  to  the  declaration  of  both  the  ready  evident  from  the  mere  fact  tliat 

prophets  who  foretold  them,  to  effect  the  prophets    were   no  longer   perse- 

that  thou  (the  king)  and  ye  (the  en-  cuted   and   put  to  death,    but   could 

tire   nation)    may    know  that    I  am  again  go   about  openly,   and  continue 

Jehovah — that  is  to  say,  that  Jehovah  the  work  begun  by  Elijah.     Still  the 

is  the  only  true  God,  the  God  of  Israel,  conversion  was  by  no  means  complete, 

In  this  declaration  we  have  specified  but  rather,  being  weak,  it  needed  sup- 

the  purpose  of  the    entire  narrative,  port  and  strength   from   above,   if   a 

and,  at  the  same  time,  the  standpoint  complete  relapse  was  to  be  prevented 

from  which  it  is  comprehended.    That  from  setting  in.     This  assistance  came 

day  on  Mount  Carmel,  if  it  did  not  from  a    display    of    the    power    of 
830 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XK. 


Jetovah ,  a  power  which  rescued  in  a 
time  of  great  need  and  distress.  The 
attack  of  the  Syrian  king  who  had 
grown  60  mighty  threatened  Ahab 
and  his  kingdom  with  destruction. 
At  this  crisis  God,  who  never  forsakes 
His  people,  repeatedly  grants  the  m  the 
victory,  which  was  so  extraordinary 
and  wonderful  that  it  could  not  possi- 
bly be  ascribed  to  human  power  and 
strength,  but  only  to  God,  to  His 
might,  His  grace  and  truth.  We 
have  thus,  in  this  account,  not  merely 
an  ordinary  history  of  wars,  but 
a  part  of  the  divine  history  of  salva- 
tion before  us.  Although  the  first 
victory  is  a  marked  evidence  of  the 
saving  might  and  grace  of  Jehovah, 
the  second,  by  which  the  entire 
Syrian  power  was  destroyed,  was  for 
Israel,  as  well  as  for  the  Syrians  them- 
selves, a  still  more  remarkable  proof 
of  the  fact  that  Jehovah  was  no  mere 
mountain  and  local  or  national  divi- 
nity, but  that  the  whole  earth  was 
His,  and  He  was  God  of  all  nations 
(Ex.  xix.  5 ;  Psa.  xxiv.  1).  He  who 
reduces  the  God  of  Israel  to  a  mere 
local  or  national  deity,  as  is  so  often 
done  even  now-a-days,  stands  on  the 
same  footing  with  the  servants  of  the 
king  of  Syria  (verses  23,  28). — Lange, 

Verses  22-25.  The  invariable 
symptoms  of  warlike  policy.  I. 
Eestless  vigilance  and  expensive  pre- 
parations (verse  22).  TI.  A  facility  in 
finding  reasons  for  recent  defeat 
(23,  24).  III.  A  thirsting  for  re- 
venge (verse  25). 

Verse  22.  God  purposeth  the  deli- 
verance of  Israel,  yet  may  not  they 
neglect  their  fortifications  ;  the  merci- 
ful intentions  of  God  towards  them 
may  not  make  them  careless;  the 
industry  and  courage  of  the  Israelites 
fall  within  the  decree  of  their  victory. 
Security  is  the  bane  of  good  success. 
It  is  no  contemning  of  a  foiled  enemy  ; 
the  shame  of  a  former  disgrace  and 
miscarriage  whets  his  valour  and 
sharpens  it  to  revenge.  No  power  is 
60  dreadful  as  that  which  is  recollected 
from  an  overthrow. — Bp,  IlalL 

—  The  advice  of  the  prophet,  Go, 


strengthen  thyself,  &c.,  is  applica- 
ble in  another  and  higher  sense  to  us 
all.  Our  enemies  are  not  idle,  they 
are  constantly  returning  to  the  attack. 
Even  if  we  have  by  the  help  of  the 
Lord  obtained  a  victory  over  sin,  the 
world,  and  the  devil,  that  is  not  all 
there  is  to  be  done ;  we  must,  even 
after  the  victory,  be  on  our  guard  and 
arm  ourselves,  so  that  the  enemy  may 
not  fall  on  us  unawares  (1  Cor.  xvi. 
13;  Eph.  vi.  10;  1  Peter  v.  8). 

Verses  23-25.  The  evil  counsellors 
of  Benhadad.  I.  They  urge  him  on 
to  war  and  battle  instead  of  counsel- 
ling peace,  because  their  pride  was 
wounded,  and  their  hope  of  booty  had 
been  fnistrated.  Place  no  confidence 
in  the  man  who  incites  you  to  begin  a 
quarrel.  II.  They  plead  religious 
reasons,  and  make  use  of  the  supersti- 
tion of  their  unwitting  lord.  It  is 
possible  for  a  bad  unholy  thing  to 
become  confirmed  through  supersti- 
tion ;  the  man  who  plants  himself  on 
truth,  however,  will  not  permit  him- 
self to  be  deceived  on  such  a  founda- 
tion. III.  They  shove  the  blame  of 
the  ignominious  defeat  on  to  the 
thirty-two  kings,  instead  of  seeking 
for  it  in  themselves.  A  man  always 
prefers  to  find  the  cause  of  his  own 
misfortune  and  distress  in  another's 
rather  than  in  his  own  sin  and  guilt. 

Verse  23.  What  doltish  conceits 
doth  blind  paganism  frame  to  itself  of 
a  godhead !  As  they  have  many  gods, 
so  finite :  every  region,  every  hill, 
every  dale,  every  stream  hath  their 
several  gods ;  and  each  so  knows  his 
own  bounds,  that  he  dares  not  offer  to 
encroach  upon  the  other ;  or,  if  he  do, 
buys  it  with  loss.  Wno  would  think 
that  so  gross  blockishness  should  find 
harbour  in  a  reasonable  soul  ?  A  man 
doth  not  alter  with  his  station :  he 
that  wr(  stled  strongly  upon  the  hill, 
loseth  not  his  force  in  the  plain  ;  all 
places  find  him  alike  active,  alike 
valorous.  Yet  these  barbarous  Aram- 
ites  shame  not  to  imagine  that  of  God 
which  they  would  blush  to  affirm  of 
their    own  champions.     Superstition 

331 


CHAP.   XX. 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


infatuates  the  heart  out  of  measure ; 
neither  is  there  any  fancy  so  absurd 
or  monstrous,  which  incredulous  infi- 
delity is  not  ready  to  entertain  with 
applause. — Bp,  Hall. 

Verse  26c  Benhadad  followed  their 
foolish  and  perverse  advice,  because 
it  was  entirely  in  accordance  with  his 
own  wish.  So  strong  and  over- 
powering is  sinful  desire  in  the  human 
heart,  that  even  the  bitterest  dispensa- 
tion and  chastisement  of  God  sup- 
presses it  only  for  a  time,  and,  as 
soon  as  the  external  impression  ceases, 
it  breaks  forth  afresh. 

Terse  27.  The  conditions  of  vic- 
tory. I.  Are  not  always  decided  by 
numbers.  II.  Are  in  the  hands  of 
God.  III.  It  is  vain  for  the  most 
powerful  armies  to  fight  against  the 
Divine  purpose.  IV.  Valuable  lessons 
are  gained  by  defeat. 

Verse  28.  The  declaration  of  the 
Divine  Majesty.  I.  Is  made  by  com- 
petent messengers.  II.  Seen  in  the 
overthrow  of  blasphemous  detractors. 
III.  Is  intended  to  teach  and  reassure 
the  people  of  God. 

Verse  29.  Nothing  among  mortal 


affairs  is  so  inconstant  as  temporal 
prosperity.  There  is  a  time  for  every- 
thing. For  that  reason  let  no  man 
place  his  dependence  on  his  good  for- 
tune, and  exalt  himself  on  its  account, 
for  he  does  not  know  whether  he  shall 
possess  in  the  evening  what  was  his  in 
the  morning. —  Wurt.  Summ. 

Verse  30.  We  may  suppose  a  terrific 
earthquake  during  the  siege  of  the 
place,  while  the  Syrians  were  manning 
the  defence  in  full  force,  which  threw 
down  the  wall  where  they  were  most 
thickly  crowded  upon  it,  and  buried 
them  in  its  ruins.  The  great  earth- 
quake at  Lisbon  in  1765  is  said  to  have 
destroyed  60,000  persons  in  a  little 
more  than  five  minutes. — Speaher^s 
Comm. 

—  "  Benhadad  fled  into  an  inner 
chamber."  Glad  to  hide  himseK  in 
any  hole.  So  Manasseh,  that  faced  the 
heavens  in  his  prosperity,  in  trouble 
basely  hides  his  head  among  the  bushes 
(2  Chron.  xxxiii.  12).  Gidlimer  over- 
come by  Bellisarius  and  besieged,  sent 
to  beg  of  him  three  things:  1.  A 
piece  of  bread  to  ease  his  hunger; 
2.  A  sponge  to  dry  his  eyes;  3.  A 
harp  to  cheer  up  his  heart,  well-nigh 
broke  with  grief. — Trapp. 


E0MILETIG8  OF  VERSES  81-48. 


The  Remorse  op  Neglected  OppoEiuifrrrES. 


Lite  is  but  brief,  yet  it  is  full  of  great  opportunities  for  usefulness.  Those 
opportunities  correspond  to  our  position,  our  means,  and  our  abilities.  God  ex- 
pects fi'om  no  man  what  He  has  not  given  him  power  to  do.  He  who  is  wise  to 
see  and  prompt  to  act  when  the  opportunity  is  presented  will  win  success  and 
honour.  Not  to  do  the  plainly  revealed  duty  of  the  moment  is  to  entail  weak- 
ness, disappointment,  and  suffering.  "We  shall  be  punished  for  the  good  we 
neglect,  as  well  as  for  the  evil  that  we  do. 

I.  That  opportunities  occur  when  we  are  called  to  do  a  great  work  for 
God.  1.  Hvery  opportunity  hrings  with  it  corresponding  responsibility  (verses 
31,  32).  Victory,  a  victory  achieved  by  direct  Divine  interference,  had  placed 
Benhadad — the  enemy  of  God  and  of  Israel — ^in  the  power  of  Ahab.  It  was  an 
opportunity  not  to  be  thrown  away.  The  Lord  had  appointed  this  man  to 
**  utter  destruction"  (verse  42),  and  Ahab  knew  it.  Benhadad  was  to  be 
taught  to  know,  in  avenging  justice,  the  greatness  of  that  God  he  had  blas- 
phemed ;  and  the  power  of  the  state  he  ruled  was  to  be  so  broken  as  to  render 
832 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  xx. 


it  incapable  of  giving  further  trouble  to  Israel.  The  purpose  of  God  and  the 
safety  of  Israel  were  placed  in  the  hands  of  Ahab ;  the  enemy  might  now  be 
punished,  and  his  power  for  ever  crushed.  Ahab  neglected  the  opportunity, 
and  he  lived  long  enough  to  see  and  regret  it.  It  is  a  grave,  solemn  moment 
when  we  are  brought  into  the  presence  of  an  acknowledged  evil  which  we  have 
power  to  destroy.  We  have  need  to  pray  for  courage  and  fidelity  to  act  wisely 
and  decisively.  2.  We  are  not  just ^ed  in  indulging  private  sentiment  at  the 
sacrifice  of  public  duty  (verses  33,  34).  It  was  here  that  Ahab  failed.  What  at 
first  sight  might  seem  an  act  of  magnanimity  becomes,  when  rightly  viewed,  a  gross 
weakness ;  and  the  generosity  which  might  entitle  a  man  to  praise  if  shown 
towards  a  private  enemy,  may  become  a  crime  in  a  king  towards  a  public  adver- 
sary. What  would  have  been  thought  of  the  Eegent  of  England,  after  the  victory 
of  Waterloo,  if,  when  JS'apoleon,  the  great  troubler  of  Europe,  was  brought  a 
prisoner  to  our  shores,  he  had  been  set  free?  The  sense  of  duty  was  weakened 
in  Ahab  by  his  past  disobedience  and  by  his  unlawful  sympathy  with  idolatry. 
The  neglect  of  one  duty  incapacitates  the  soul  for  doing  another  ;  and  so  when 
a  great  emergency  comes  upon  us,  we  find  ourselves  unequal  to  its  demands. 
The  king  must  lose  sight  of  selfish  ends  and  feeling  in  a  righteous  anxiety  to 
promote  the  public  good. 

II.  That  a  time  will  come  when  we  shall  be  made  painfully  conscious 
of  opportunities  neglected.  1 .  This  may  he  done  through  the  sufferings  of  others 
(verses  35-38).  A  son  of  the  prophets  submitted  to  be  wounded  that  he  might 
the  more  effectively  bring  home  to  Ahab  his  sin.  The  faithful  teacher  must  not 
shrink  from  suffering.  It  is  rarely  we  can  be  faithful  to  others  without  pain  to 
ourselves.  The  most  powerful  method  of  preaching  the  truth  is  learned  in  the 
school  of  trial.  2.  Will  he  done  in  a  way  not  to  he  mistaken  {Yex^Qs'6^-i:2).  (1).  It 
was  symbolic.  This  is  the  first  example  of  those  symbolical  actions  of  the  pro- 
phets which  occur  so  often  in  the  subsequent  history  of  Israel  and  Judah.  The 
man  who  refused  to  smite  the  son  of  the  prophet  became  a  representative  of  Ahab 
in  his  refusal  to  obey  the  word  of  the  Lord.  The  prophets  mentioned  inverses 
13,  22,  and  28  had  said  enough  to  show  Ahab  that  when  his  royal  enemy  fell 
into  his  power  he  must  not  covenant  with  him,  but  smite  and  utterly  destroy 
him.  But  his  making  a  covenant  with  him  and  sending  him  away  (verse  34) 
was  a  refusal  to  smite  him.  (2).  It  was  faithful  and  pointed  (verse  42).  Here 
Ahab,  like  David  on  another  occasion  (2  Sam.  xil.  5,  6),  pronounces  his  own 
condemnation.  As  the  son  of  the  prophet  was  to  answer  by  his  life  for  letting 
his  supposed  prisoner  free,  so  Ahab  is  to  answer  with  his  life  for  granting  liberty 
to  the  doomed  Syrian  monarch.  The  sin  of  neglect  will  sooner  or  later  be 
brought  home  to  every  bosom,  and  the  guilt  will  be  self-acknowledged. 

III.  That  the  consciousness  of  neglected  opportunities  will  fill  the  soul 
with  bitter  remorse  (verse  43).  The  slumbering  conscience  of  the  weak, 
easy-going  Ahab  was  once  more  awoke,  and  he  went  to  his  home  depressed  and 
angry — angry  with  himself,  and  angry  with  the  means  which  had  been  intended 
to  bring  him  to  repentance  and  disobedience.  He  felt  the  burden  of  a  sense  of 
Divine  wrath  upon  him,  and,  instead  of  humbling  himself  and  seeking  for  mercy, 
he  became  sulky  and  soured.  He  was  still  refractory  and  rebellious  ;  and  yet 
he  could  not  shake  off  the  gloomy,  stinging  remorse  of  neglected  opportunities. 
His  experience  is  a  picture  of  the  tortures  which  will  for  ever  afflict  the  impeni- 
tent :  lor  ever  conscious  of  oft-repeated  sin,  and  for  ever  incapable  of  ridding 
himself  of  its  consequences ! 

Lessons: — 1.  Every  soul  ivill  he  judged  according  to  its  opportunities  in  life. 
2.  Opportunities  for  well-doing  are  offered  to  all,  3.  2b  neglect  opportunities  for 
good  is  to  condemn  ourselves, 

d33 


CHAP.  XX. 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


Terses  31-43.  "When  authority  is 
compassioDate  out  of  the  proper  season, 
and  neglects  its  office  of  correction,  it 
draws  upon  itself  the  guilt  of  the  other. 
God  wants  no  mercy  to  be  shown  where 
He  has  ordered  punishment. —  Cramer, 

Verses  31-33.  Praise,  flattery,  and 
subserviency  are  only  too  often  the  snare 
with  which  kings  and  great  men  are 
caught,  so  that  under  the  appearance  of 
generosity  and  magnanimity  they  may 
be  led  astray  and  act  contrary  to  the 
will  of  God.  They  ought,  indeed,  to 
be  merciful  and  gracious,  but  not  forget 
that  to  do  justice  is  their  first  duty,  and 
that  they  do  not  carry  the  sword  in 
vain.  Ahab  persecutes  an  Elijah  in 
every  kingdom,  and  threatens  him  with 
death ;  but  he  permits  a  robber  and  a 
plunderer  to  sit  beside  him  in  his 
chariot,  and  makes  a  covenant  with  him. 
What  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  looks 
like  generosity,  in  the  eyes  of  God,  who 
trieth  the  heart  and  reins,  is  only  weak- 
ness and  folly.  Great  injury  can  be 
done  by  seeming  ill-timed  generosity. — 
Zanffe, 

Terse  31.  There  can  be  no  more 
powerful  attractive  of  humble  submis- 
sion than  the  intimation  and  conceit  of 
mercy.  "We  do  at  once  fear  and  hate 
the  inexorable.  This  is  it,  0  Lord, 
that  allures  us  to  thy  throne  of  grace, 
the  knowledge  of  the  grace  of  that 
throne  ;  with  thee  is  mercy  and  plen- 
teous redemption  ;  thine  hand  is  open 
before  our  mouths,  before  our  hearts. 
If  we  did  not  see  thee  smile  upon 
suitors,  we  durst  not  press  to  thy  foot- 
stool. Behold  now  we  know  that  the 
king  of  heaven,  the  God  of  Israel,  is  a 
merciful  God ;  let  us  put  sackcloth  upon 
our  loins  and  strew  ashes  upon  our 
heads,  and  go  meet  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel,  that  He  may  save  our  souls. — 
£p.  Hall, 

Yerse  32  compared  with  verse  10. 

Contrasts  in  the  same  individual  life. 

1.    The  king — the    slave.       2.    The 

proud  boaster — ^the  craven  suppliant. 

$34 


3.  The  confident  leader  of  a  gieat  army 
— the  defeated  and  dejected  fugitive. 

Yerse  32.  How  well  doth  this  habit 
become  insolent  and  blasphemous  Ben- 
hadad  and  his  followers !  a  rope  and 
sackcloth  !  a  rope  for  a  crown,  sackcloth 
for  a  robe !  He  that  was  erewhile  a 
lord  and  king,  is  now  a  servant ;  and 
he  that  was  servant  to  the  king  of  Syria, 
is  now  his  lord.  He  that  would  blow 
away  all  Israel  in  dust,  is  now  glad  to 
beg  for  his  own  life  at  the  door  of  a 
despised  enemy.  N"o  courage  is  so 
haughty  which  the  God  of  hosts  cannot 
easily  bring  under.  What  are  men  or 
devils  in  those  Almighty  hands  ? — Bp, 
Rail, 

Yerse  3  4 .  Complicity  with  idolatry. 
1.  Unfits  for  the  proper  discharge  of 
kingly  duties.  2.  Encourages  a  false 
leniency  towards  the  greatest  enemy. 
3.  Blinds  the  mind  to  true  conceptions 
of  public  justice.  4.  Sows  the  seeds 
of  future  troubles. 

—  Ahab,  without  *Mnquiringof  the 
Lord,"  who  had  given  him  so  great  a 
victory  (verse  28),  whether  he  should 
let  Benhadad  go  or  no,  at  once  agreesto 
the  terms  offered ;  and,  without  even 
taking  any  security  for  their  due  obser- 
vance, allows  the  Syrian  monareh  to 
depart  and  return  to  his  own  country. 
Considered  politically,  the  act  was  one 
of  culpable  carelessness andimprudence. 
It  let  loose  an  enemy  whose  talent, 
ambition,  and  personal  influence  made 
him  peculiarly  formidable  ;  and  it  pro- 
vided no  effectual  security  against  the 
continuance  of  his  aggressions.  Ben- 
hadad might,  or  might  not,  regard  him- 
self as  bound  by  the  terms  of  a  cove- 
nant made  when  he  was  a  prisoner.  If 
he  took  the  view  that  he  was  not  bound 
— as  his  after  conduct  shows  that  h'3 
did  (xxii.  verse  3) — Ahab  left  himself 
no  means  of  enforcing  the  obligations 
incurred  except  by  a  renewal  of  hostili- 
ties. And  if  Ahab's  conduct  was  thus, 
politically  speaking,  wrong  in  him  as 
the  mere  human  head  of  a  state,  much 
more  was  it  unjustifiable  in  one  who 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  XZ. 


held  his  crown  under  a  theocracy. 
*' Inquiry  at  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  was 
still  possible  in  Israel  (I  Kings  xxii, 
verses  5,  8),  and  would  seem  to  have 
been  the  course  that  ordinary  gratitude 
might  have  suggested. — Speaker's 
Coram, 

—  This  as  impolitic  as  untheocratic 
proceeding  of  Ahab  arose  by  no  means 
from  a  *' heart  naturally  very  good," 
but  from  weakness,  indecision,  and 
self-deluding  vanity.  To  free  a  cruel 
and  faithless  enemy  was  not  only  great 
harshness  towards  his  own  subjects, 
but  also  an  obvious  striving  against 
God,  who,  by  granting  the  promised 
victory,  had  given  the  enemy  of  His 
people  into  His  hand.  Even  though 
Ahab  had  no  express  command,  as  Saul 
had  regarding  Agag  (1  Sam.  xv.  '6\ 
yet  there  lay  upon  him,  if  as  theocratic 
ruler  ho  would  respect  the  will  of  the 
Lord,  inasmuch  as  the  Lord  had  given 
him  into  his  hands  as  a  despiser  of 
His  Divine  Majesty,  the  sacred  duty 
of  securing  rest  for  himself  and  his 
subjects  by  his  death;  as  it  was 
natural  to  presume  that  the  faithless 
adversary,  after  his  freedom  was  re- 
covered, would  not  adhere  to  a  treaty 
formed  on  compulsion,  which  accord- 
ingly happened  (xxi.  1).  The  punish- 
ment of  his  striving  against  God  is 
immediately  announced  to  Ahab. — 
Keih 

Verses  35-37.  He  who  has  his 
calling  and  service  from  the  Word  of 
God  ought  to  allow  no  danger  to  detain 
him  from  making  an  announcement  of 
the  fact  (2  Tim.  iv.  2),  and  must 
obediently  submit  himself  to  His  com- 
mands, even  when  the  fulfilment  of 
them  is  joined  with  pain  and  sacri- 
fice. 

Verses  35,  36.  Disohedience. 
1.  Is  aggravated  as  committed  against 
the  revealed  will  of  God.  2.  Is  not 
excused  from  a  reluctance  to  inflict 
pain.  3.  Is  faithfully  denounced. 
4.  Is  inevitably  punished. 

Verse  35.  "Smite  me,  I  pray 
thee.**  1.  That  hereby  I  may  show 
Ahab  how  he  hMh  wounded  his  own 


soul  by  sparing  Benhadad.  2.  "What 
a  wound  both  he  and  his  people  shall 
hereafter  receive  hereby.  3.  That  I 
may  seem  a  wounded  soldier,  and  so 
may  have  the  easier  access  to  Ahab, — 
Traj^p, 

Verse  36.  It  is  not  for  us  to 
examine  the  charges  of  the  Almighty : 
be  they  never  so  harsh  or  improbable, 
if  they  be  once  known  for  His,  there  is 
no  way  but  obedience  or  death.  Not 
to  smite  a  prophet  when  God  com- 
mands, is  no  less  sin  than  to  smite  a 
prophet  when  God  forbids.  It  is  the 
divine  precept  or  prohibition  that 
either  makes  or  aggravates  an  evil ; 
and  if  the  Israelite  be  thus  revenged 
that  smote  not  a  prophet,  what  shall 
become  of  Ahab  that  smote  not  Ben- 
hadad ! — Bjp.  Sail, 

Verse    40.      Lost     opportunities. 

I.  Important  interests  have  been  com^ 
mitted  to  our  care.  1.  Our  personal 
salvation.  2.  The  salvation  of  our 
neighbours.  3.  The  religious  educa- 
tion of  our  children.  4.  Sympathy 
and  relief  for  the  poor  and  suffering. 

II.  God  furnishes  an  opportunity  to  ail. 
1.  He  fits  the  opportunity  to  the 
work  required.  2.  He  provides  the 
means  essential  to  success.  3.  He 
gives  efficiency  and  certainty  to  the 
effort.  III.  Opportunities  lost  are  lost 
for  ever.  1.  AVe  lose  them  uncon- 
sciously. 2.  We  lose  them  while 
busied  here  and  there  with  minor 
things.  3.  Lost  opportunities  bring 
loss  of  happiness.  4.  The  conse- 
quences of  their  loss  will  be  eternal. — 
Wythe. 

—  The  danger  of  much  worldly 
business.  Consider — 1.  2'he  extreme 
brevity  of  seasons  of  spiritual  advan- 
tage.  Shortness  of  life — illustrate 
by  metaphors  of  Scripture.  Life  as 
the  commencement  of  eternity,  every- 
thing; in  competition  with  eternity, 
nothing.  Danger  of  procrastination. 
Importance  of  every  opportunity  of 
spiritual  instruction.  II.  21ie  diffi- 
culties and  dangers  against  which  W9 
have  to  guard,  if  we  would  not  sacri- 
fice them.  1.  The  absorbing  character 
of  worldly    business.     2.    Liable    to 

335 


CHAP.  ZXI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  RT :  KINGS. 


neglect  chief  ends  of  existence  for  in- 
ferior pursuits.  8.  Much  devotedness 
to  the  world  disqualifies  for  spiritual 
services.  4.  Positive  losses  of  reli- 
gious privilege  accrue  from  multitude 
of  engagements.  III.  The  appalling 
losses  we  may  sustain  through  a  soli- 
tary act  of  negligmce.  Great  business 
of  Satan  is  to  draw  off  men  from  the 
care  of  the  soul.  One  act  of  indis- 
cretion may,  in  the  things  of  this 
life,  involve  years  of  repentance  ;  but 
one  neglect  of  the  soul  may  be  the 
cause  of  its  everlasting  ruin.  *'  Oh, 
that  thou  hadst  known  at  least  in  this 
thy  day^''^  &c. 

Lessons. — 1.    Cultivate  a  spirit   of 
contrition    over  past   indifftrence.     2. 
Use  all  diligence  to  make  your  calling 
and     election     sure. — The    Freacher^s 
Portfolio. 

Yerses  42,  43.  Ahab  listened  well 
pleased  to  the  falsehood  from  the  lips 
of  the  Syrian  nobles,  for  it  gave 
nourishment  to  his  folly ;  the  truth 
from  the  mouth  of  the  prophet  made 
him   restless  and   angry,    because  it 


punished  his  folly.  There  is  no  help 
for  the  man  who  allows  himself  to 
be  irritated  by  the  truth  instead  of 
receiving  it  with  meekness  (Jas.  i. 
21).  There  is  nothing  that  so  rouses 
and  provokes  an  unconverted  and 
unbelieving  man  as  to  have  his  sinful 
character  so  unveiled  and  set  before 
his  eyes  that  he  can  no  longer  justify 
or  excuse  himself.-  Lange. 

Yerse  42.  The  equity  of  punish- 
ment. 1.  The  Divine  order.  2.  Is 
regulated  by  opportunities  granted. 
3.  Is  afflicted  according  to  nature  and 
degree  of  sin. 

Yerse  43.  "Heavy  and  displeased." 
Not  with  a  *'  sorrow  according  to 
God,"  but  such  as  arose  from  a  slavish 
fear.  This  heavy  message  in  the 
midst  of  his  triumph  being  worse  than 
the  whip  and  bell  hung  up  usually 
in  the  chariot  of  the  Roman  triumpher, 
to  show  him  what  he  might  one  day 
come  to — namely,  to  be  whipped  as  a 
slave,  yea,  to  lose  his  head  as  an  offeu- 
der.—  Trapp. 


CHAPTER  XXL 


AHAB  AND  THE  VINEYARD  OF  NABOTH. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Yerse  1.  Naboth  the  Jezreelite— JVaJo^A '  J1^21i» 

T 

fruits,  according  to  Ge^  enius  ;  but  pre-eminence,  according  to  Fiirst.  He  was  an  Israelite  resi- 
dent in  the  town  of  Jezreel  (the  Alex.  Sept.  follows  the  Hebrew,  and  designates  him  an 
Israelite  throughout  the  whole  chapter)  owning  a  plot  of  ground  (2  Kings  ix.  25.  26)  situate 
on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  hill  of  Jezreel,  as  well,  also,  as  the  vineyard,  whose  location  is  un- 
certain. Vineyard  in  Jezreel — a  town  in  the  tribe  of  Issachar  (Josh.  xix.  18),  where  the  kings 
of  Israel  jad  a  palace  (1  Kings  xviii.  45).  Hard  by  the  palace  of  Ahab— The  Sept.  reads 
instead,  "hard  by  the  threshing  floor  of  Ahab,  king  of  Samaria."  The  dispute  as  to  location 
of  the  vineyard  turns  upon  the  question  whether  "  the  palace  "  here  referred  to  was  the  king's 
residence  at  Jezreel  or  at  Samaria.  Note,  however,  that  the  words  in  verse  4 — Ahab  came  into 
his  house,  &c. — are  identical  with  those  in  chap.  xx.  43,  where  the  further  explanation  points 
to  Samoria  as  his  home.  F.^rther,  in  verse  8,  we  find  that  Jezebel  sends  her  letters  to  Jezreel, 
as  if  she  were  resident  in  some  other  place ;  and  that  the  elders  of  Jezreel  send  her  tidings 
(verse  14)  of  Naboth's  death,  which  would  certainlv  have  been  superfluous  if  she  were  at  the 
time  resident  in  Jezreel.  So  probably  the  vineyard  was  hard  hy  the  palace  in  Samaria^  and 
the  king  came  to  Naboth  at  Jezreel  to  ask  this  possession  of  its  owner  Verse  3.  Naboth  said, 
the  Lord  forbid  it  vaQ—Lit.,  Be  it  to  me  isix  from  Jehovah  ipSTVl^  "^y)  that  I,  &c.,  indicating 

T    ;  ••       • 

both  the  personal  loyalty  of  his  faith  in  Jehovah,  and  his  religious  purpose  not  to  sell  God's 
heritage  to  an  idolatrous  king.     Verse  5.  Why  is  thy  spirit  sad  1— See  for  n"'iD  note  on 

chap.  XX.  43— resentful.    Verse  7.    Dost  thou  now  govern  Israel  1 — Either  an  ironical  taunt^ 
36^ 


nOMlLETtC  COMMENTAJ^Y:  K1KQ8.  oiUJ*.  x%\. 


or  a  rallying  call ;  for  the  words  are  usually  translated  imperatively :  «  Thou !  exert  thy  royal 
sway  over  Israel!"  Verse  8.  She  wrote  letters— This  is  the  solitary  instance  recorded  in  the 
Bible  of  a  woman  being  able  to  write.  Female  education  in  the  East  then,  as  now,  rendered 
it  extremely  exceptional  for  a  woman  to  possess  such  a  qualification.  Sent  the  letters  {lit. 
the  letter)  unto  the  elders  and  nobles  that,  in  his  city,  dwelt  with  Naboth— a  statement 
which  affirms  both  that  Jezreel  was  the  native  city  of  Naboth,  and  his  usual  abode.  These 
elders  and  nobles  were  his  fullow-townsmen.  Verse  9.  Proclaim  a  fast — An  observance  only 
prop(r  on  occasions  of  great  distress  and  national  calamities  (Judg.  s  xx.  26  ;  1  Sf.m.  vii.  6  ; 
Joel  i.  14;  ii.  12).  This  would  impart  an  appearance  of  gravity  to  the  frivolous  but  foni 
procedure.     Verse  10.  Thou  didst  blaspheme  God  and  the  king— 'TT^'DI  D^i'lSi*^  riD"13.- 

The  word  "^^21  means  to  bless,  reverence,  adore.     "Thou  hast  blessed  Elohim  [not  using  the 

name  Jehovah]  and  the  king."  Keil  accepts  the  words  as  meaning.  Thou  hast  blessed — i.  e., 
bid  farewell  to,  taken  thy  leave  of  God  and  the  king ;  because  at  departure  one  utters  a  bene- 
diction [<?/.  Df  lit.  xiii.  11 ;  Lev.  xxiv.  14  sq.\  and  2  Sam.  xvi.  9].  Verse  U.  Did  as  Jezebel 
had  sent  unto  them— Shows  their  absolute  moral  degradation  and  slavish  submission  before 
the  tyranny  of  this  woman.  Verse  15.  Arise,  take  possession  ...  for  Naboth  is  not 
alive,  but  dead— His  possessions  became  confiscated,  falling  into  the  king's  hands  {cf.  2  Sam. 
xvi.  4 ;  Deub.  xiii.  16).  Verse  16.  Ahah  rose  up  to  go  down  to  the  vineyard — From  Samaria 
to  Jezreel.  Verse  19.  Hast  thou  killed,  and  also  taken  possession  T — Crime  traced  back  to 
the  true  criminal,  for  he,  even  more  than  Jezebel,  actuated  the  deed.  God  is  <'  swift  to  mark 
iniquity.'*    See  Note  on  chap.  xxii.  38.     Verse  20.  Hast  thou  found  me  1-  The  Vulgate  errs, 

and  Luther  is  thereby  misled.     "Hast  thou  ever  found  me  thine  enemy?"    ^^JlJ^^DrTi 

--    T  :  - 
from  ^^^{?D,  to  come  at,  overtake,  acquire,  arrest,  seize.     Verse  21.    Will  take  away  thy 

posterity — Lit.  "  Extinguish  thee  before  me."  Verse  29.  Seest  thou  how  Ahah  humbleth, 
&c. — Even  the  ext^Jrual  sign  of  Ahab's  repentance  God  regards  as  occasion  for  reprieve,  though 
Ahab  was  so  notable  and  manifold  a  criminal  (verses  25,  'IQ)  He  is  ♦♦  slow  to  anger  and  of 
great  mercy  "  But  the  sentence  would  come  upon  his  son,  Jehoram,  who,  met  by  Jehu,  was 
mortally  wounded,  and  the  house  of  Ahab  thus  ceased.  Elijah's  prophecy  of  Ahab's  despic- 
able death  was  literally  fulfilled,  as  the  following  chapter  shows. — ^W.  H.  J. 


H0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-16. 
The  Overmasteeinq  Power  of  a  Covetous*  Spibtf. 

I.  That  a  covetous  spirit  is  unsatisfied  with  the  most  ample  possessions 

(verses  1-3).  About  twenty-five  miles  from  Samaria  Ahab  hadhissummer  palace, 
his  vast  park  and  favouiite  hinting-  seat  at  Jezreel — the  Windsor  of  England, 
and  Fontainebleau  of  France.  After  his  successful  wars  with  Syria,  he  gives 
himself  to  luxury  and  pleasure,  and  employs  himself  in  enlarging  and  beautify- 
ing his  summer  residence.  Not  content  with  what  he  already  possesses,  he 
covets  what  belongs  to  his  subjects,  as  the  people  who  demanded  a  king  were 
forewarned  would  be  the  case  (1  Sam.  viii.  14).  More  particularly  is  he  anxious 
to  possess  a  vineyard  owned  by  one  Naboth,  of  an  illustrious  family,  and  to  add 
it  to  the  royal  demesnes.  But  Naboth  refuses  to  part  with  his  property,  and 
confirms  his  refusal  in  the  name  of  Jehovah.  It  is  the  curse  of  covetousness  to 
be  never  satisfied.  As  a  ship  may  be  overladen  with  gold  and  silver  even  unto 
sinking,  and  yet  have  compass  and  sides  enough  to  hold  ten  times  more,  so 
covetous  men,  though  they  have  enough  to  sink  them,  yet  have  they  never 
enough  to  satisfy  them.  '*  This  kyte-footed  corruption,  wherever  it  domineers, 
blasts  and  banishes  all  nobleness  of  spirit,  natural  affection,  humanity,  reason, 
discretion,  manliness,  mutual  entertainment,  intercourse  of  kindness  and  love ; 
80  that,  for  any  fair  dealing,  a  man  had  as  good  converse  with  a  cannibal  as 
with  a  truly  covetous  caitiff." 

•  3S7 


CHAP.  XXI.  EOMILETXC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


II.  That  a  covetous  spirit  gives  way  to  uiiinanly  and  helpless  distress 
when  it  eaii-iot  have  all  it  wishes  (verse  4).  Like  a  spoilt  child,  because  he 
cannot  have  his  toy,  Ahab  punishes  himself  by  yielding  to  a  fit  of  fretfulness 
and  sour  temper  that  completely  prostrated  him.  Avarice,  like  every  other 
evil  passion,  leads  to  moral  pauperism.  "Had  covetous  men,  as  the  fable  goes 
of  Briareus,  each  of  them  one  hundred  hands,"  writes  Dryden,  "  they  would  all 
of  them  be  employed  in  grasping  and  gathering,  and  hardly  one  of  them  in  giving 
or  laying  out ;  a  thing  in  itself  so  monstrous  that  no  thing  in  nature  besides  it 
is  like  it,  except  it  be  death  and  the  grave,  the  only  things  I  know  which  are 
always  carrying  off  the  spoils  of  the  world,  and  never  making  restitution.** 
Covetousness  has  been  well  called  **the  great  sepulchre  of  all  other  passions." 
The  covetous  monarch,  surrounded  with  the  luxuries  and  wealth  of  a  kingdom, 
blubbers  and  frets  because  he  does  not  own  a  paltry  herb  garden. 

**  Some,  o'er  enamoured  of  their  bags,  run  mad, 
Groan  under  gold,  yet  weep  for  want  of  bread." 

Towig, 

III.  That  a  covetous  spirit  is  utterly  unscrupulous  as  to  the  means  by 
which  its  wishes  are  gratified  (verses  6-14).  1.  It  is  at  the  mercy  of  the 
vilest  agents.  Jezebel  knew  how  to  take  advantage  of  the  weak  moments  of 
her  weak  husband,  and,  unhappily,  had  at  her  beck  the  agents  who  were  ready 
to  carry  out  any  diabolical  plot  she  might  invent.  **  Big  and  black  though 
the  villany  appear,  the  wicked  queen  resolved  that  ^N^aboth  should  be  executed 
for  treason,  and  then  his  property,  with  the  coveted  vineyard  included,  would 
all  revert  to  the  crown  as  a  criminaPs  possessions.  While  her  poor  fool  of  a 
husband,  therefore,  is  sleeping  off  his  wounded  pride,  she,  never  accustomed  to 
stand  upon  trifles,  commits  the  fourfold  crimes  of  forgery,  false-witness,  perjury, 
and  murder.  We  are  shocked  when  we  read  of  the  massacre  of  Glencoe  in  the 
very  midst  of  the  open-handed  hospitality  of  the  children  of  the  mountains. 
Our  whole  soul  shudders  at  the  story  of  that  Russian  soldier  who,  during  the 
Crimean  war,  solicited  in  his  dying  agonies  a  cup  of  cold  water  from  an  English 
officer,  and  then  pointed  his  pistol  right  at  his  benefactor's  heart.  And  with 
kindred  feelings  we  read  of  the  horrible  contradiction  before  us — an  unoffending 
follower  of  God  compelled  to  surrender  his  life,  a  victim  to  the  machinations  of 
a  heathen  queen,  screening,  but  only  in  reality  aggravating,  her  wickedness 
under  the  thin  disguise  of  a  new-born  religious  zeal."  2.  It  weakly  sanctions 
deeds  it  has  not  itself  the  courage  to  do  or  prevent.  Ahab  must  have  known 
about  the  execution  and  its  alleged  cause ;  and  he  knew  Jezebel  well  enough 
to  know  that  she  would  not  hesitate  at  any  means  by  which  her  ends  could  be 
gained.  IS'aboth  stood  between  him  and  his  avaiicious  purpose ;  and  he  cared 
not  how  the  obstacle  was  removed.  The  sufferings  of  Naboth  and  his  sons,  who 
perished  with  their  father  (2  Kings  ix.  26),  caused  the  king  no  uneasiness.  A 
covetous  spirit  is  essentially  mean,  cowardly,  heartless. 

IV.  That  a  covetous  spirit  eagerly  clutches  its  prize,  little  caring  how 
it  has  been  acquired,  and  little  dreaming  what  a  curse  it  may  bring 

(verses  15,  16).  Without  wasting  a  pang  of  regret  upon  the  cruel  fate  of  his 
harmless  victims,  Ahab  drives  with  all  speed  to  Jezreel,  and  jauntily  enters 
into  possession  of  the  confiscated  estate.  **  He  walks  round  and  round;  he 
admiies  trellis  and  cluster,  and  branches  hanging  over  the  wall.  He  plans  im- 
provement here  and  enlargement  there,  by  way  of  preparing  for  the  flower-garden 
he  has  in  view.  And  now  he  turns  to  leave,  when,  just  at  the  very  moment, 
let  us  indulge  the  fancy,  he  is  plucking  a  bunch  of  the  dead  man's  grapes  as  a 
gift  for  Jezebel,  there  confronts  him — like  an  apparition  from  the  other  world, 
like  the  ghost  of  IS'aboth,  like  Banquo  in  another  scene— one  he  has  not  seen  for 
more  than  seven  years,  never  since  they  parted  that  night  of  the  rushing  storm 
dad 


S'0^fILETIC  COMMEKTART :  KINGS.  OhAp.  xxi. 


at  the  gate  of  Jezreel — one  he  had  thought  Jezebel  had  either  effectually 
frightened,  or  who  had  gone  back  to  his  mountains,  or  down  to  his  grave ;  and 
yet  there  he  is !  still  with  the  long  shaggy  locks,  the  sheep-skin  mantle,  the  dark 
knitted  brows,  and  the  thunder  peal  about  to  issue  from  those  awful  lips." 
{Howat.)  It  is  Elijah  !  and  from  his  mouth  the  trembling  Ahab  receives  his 
doom — the  overthrow  and  ruin  of  his  house.  A  covetous  man  may  gain  his  un- 
holy ends,  but  he  gains  also  disappointment,  misery,  remorse.  What  is  wealth, 
when  peace  of  mind  and  the  hope  of  the  heavenly  inheritance  are  gone  ? 

Lessons: — 1.  The  demands  of  covetousness  are  insatiahle,  2.  A  covetous  spirit 
is  easily  tempted  to  commit  the  worst  crimes.  3.  Covetousness  prepares  the  tnstrU' 
ment  of  its  own  torment, 

OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Yerses  1-16.  Naboth's  vineyard,  soon  as  Jezebel  made  the  proposal  to 
In  this  narrative  we  have  an  exhibi-  murder  Naboth,  it  was  readily  exe- 
tion  of  the  following  topics  : — I.  cuted.  It  does  not  appear  as  if  there 
Covetousness,  Ahab  saw  Naboth's  was  any  protest  against  it,  either  on 
garden;  its  situation,  and  in  all  like-  the  ground  of  illegality  or  unrighteous- 
lihood  its  condition,  made  it  desira-  ness.  There  was  no  fear  of  any  legal 
ble  in  his  eyes.  He  offered  Haboth  a  consequences.  The  will  of  the  queen 
price  for  it  which  he  declined,  because  was  supreme,  and  there  would  be  no 
it  was  unlawful  and  dishonourable  to  desire  to  resist  it.  Such  deeds  as  the 
sell  it.  This  ought  to  have  satisfied  murder  of  I^aboth  fill  the  annals  of 
Ahab,  but  it  did  not ;  he  was  annoyed  despotism.  IV.  Divine  retribution. 
and  vexed  at  being  refused,  and  wil-  The  death  of  Naboth  was  duly  an- 
lingly  allowed  his  unscrupulous  wife  nounced  to  Ahab,  and  he  arose  to  go 
to  resort  to  any  means  to  secure  for  to  take  possession  of  the  coveted  vine- 
him  his  coveted  prize.  How  many  yard.  He  little  thought  that  the 
are  led  away  by  covetousness ;  resort-  whole  proceedings  were  watched  by 
ing  to  illegal  means  to  gain  the  ob-  another  King — that  the  blood  of 
ject  of  their  desire.  David  conceived  ITaboth  had  ascended  into  the  ears  of 
an  inordinate  desire  for  Uriah's  wife,  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  crying  for  ven- 
and  planned  the  death  of  her  husband  geance.  He  thought  not  of  these 
that  his  desire  might  be  gratified,  things ;  but  God  marked  his  sin,  and 
II.  Manly  independence,  Naboth  said  sent  Elijah  to  charge  him  with  it,  and 
to  Ahab  :  "  The  Lord  forbid  it  me  to  declare  unto  him  God's  vengeance, 
that  I  should  give  the  inheritance  of  Even  so  the  sinner  may  indulge  in 
my  father  unto  thee."  It  was  a  great  his  sinful  course,  never  thinking 
temptation  to  Kaboth  to  yield  to  the  that  there  is  an  all-seeing  eye  resting 
expressed  wish  of  the  king;  he  might  upon  him. — The  Study  and  Pulpit. 
gain  favour,  and  be  remembered  by  the  —  Voices  from  Naboth's  vineyard 
king  in  many  ways  to  his  temporal  I.  One  of  these  is — Beware  of  covetous- 
advantage.  Many  yield  to  tempta-  ness.  That  vineyard  has  its  coun- 
tions  of  this  kind  ;  they  will  do  almost  terpart  in  the  case  and  conduct  of 
anything  to  gain  the  favour  or  the  many  still.  Covetousness  may  as- 
kindly  notice  of  the  wealthy  or  the  sume  a  thousand  chameleon  hues  and 
infiuential  in  society.  But  Naboth  phases,  but  these  all  resolve  them- 
was  no  sneak.  He  would  not  satisfy  selves  into  a  sinful  craving  after 
right  to  the  pleasure  even  of  the  king,  something  other  than  what  we  have, 
and  told  him  so.  It  is  well  for  men  Covetousness  of  means :  a  grasping 
to  cultivate  kindliness  and  obliging  after  material  wealth,  the  race  for 
manners,  but  not  at  the  expense  of  riches.  Covetousness  of  place :  aspir- 
their  own  self-respect  and  manly  in-  ing  after  other  positions  in  life  than 
dependence.      III.     Despotism,      As  those  which  Providence  has  assigned 

S39 


C'ttAP.  ZXL 


EOMJLETIC  COMMEJSTARl :  KINGS, 


to  us,  not   because   they  are   better, 
but  because  they  are  other  thau  our 
God-appointed  lot,  invested  with   an 
imaginary  superiority.     And  the  sin- 
gular and  sad  thing  is,  that  such  in- 
ordinate longings  are  most  frequently 
manifested,  as  with  Ahab,  in  the  case 
of  those  who  have  least  cause  to  in- 
dulge  them.      How  many  there  are 
surrounded  with  all  possible  affluence 
and  comfort,  who  put  a  life  thorn  in 
their  side  by  some  similar  chase  after  a 
denied    good,    some   similar    fretting 
about  a  denied  trifle.     Be  assured  that 
carping  discontent  will  grow,  if  you 
feed  it,   till  it  comes  to  eat  out  the 
kernel  of  life's  happiness ;    a  discon- 
tented manhood  or  womanhood  culmi- 
nating in  that  saddest  of  conditions,  a 
peevish  old  age.     II.  Another  of  the 
voices  is,  Keep  out  of  the  way  of  tempta- 
tion.    If  Ahab,  knowing  his  weakness 
and  besetting  sin,  had  put  a  restraint 
upon  his  covetous  eye,  and  not  allowed 
it  to  stray  upon  his  neighbour's   for- 
bidden property,  it  would  have  saved 
a  black  page  in  his  history,  and  the 
responsibility  of  a  heinous  crime.     If 
Achan  had  not  cast  his  eye  on  the 
goodly    Babylonish    garment,        the 
shekels   of  silver  and   the   wedge  of 
gold,  he   would  have   saved  Israel  a 
bloody    discomfiture    and    himself    a 
fearful  end.     Each  has  his  own  strong 
temptation — his  besetting  sin.     That 
sin  should  be  specially  watched,  muz- 
zled, curbed ;  that  gate  of  temptation 
specially  padlocked   and   sentinelled. 
III.  Another  voice  is,  JBesureyour  sin 
will  find  you  out.     Ahab  and  Jezebel, 
as  we   have  seen,  had  managed  to  a 
wish  their  accursed  plot.     The  wheels 
of  crime  hai  moved  softly  along  with- 
out   one   rut    or   impediment   in  the 
way.     The  two  murderers  paced  their 
blood-stained  inheritance  without  fear 
of  challenge  or  discovery.     Their  time 
for     retribution     did    come    at    last, 
although  years  of  gracious  forbearance 
were  suffered  to  intervene.     And  are 
the  principles  of  God's  moral  govern- 
ment different  now? — Macduff. 

Verses    1-4.       An    undisciplined 
nature.       I.     "Fancies    it    may   gain 
possession     of    whatever    it    covets. 
340 


II.  Cannot  understand  the  motives  of 
those  who  refuse  to  gratify  its  desires. 

III.  Easily  overwhelmed  with  disap- 
pointment and  chagrin. 

Verse  1.  N'aboth  had  a  fair  vine- 
yard ;  it  had  been  better  for  him  to 
have  had  none  :  his  vineyard  yielded 
him  the  bitter  grapes  of  death.  Why 
do  we  call  those  goods,  which  are  many 
times  the  bane  of  the  owner?  N'a- 
both's  vineyard  lay  near  to  the  court 
of  Jezebel :  it  had  been  better  for  him 
had  it  been  planted  in  the  wilderness. 
It  was  now  the  perpetual  object  of 
an  evil  eye,  and  stirred  those  desires 
which  could  neither  be  well  desired, 
nor  satisfied  :  eminency  is  still  joined 
with  peril,  obscurity  with  peace. 
There  can  be  no  worse  annoyance  to 
an  inheritance,  than  the  greatness  of 
an  evil  neighbour. — Bp.  JSalL 

Verse  2.  Great  lords  often  have  fan- 
cies which  cost  them  more  time  and 
money  than  do  their  chief  and  holiest 
duties.  Thus  Ahab  thought  more  of 
the  enlargement  and  adornment  of  his 
garden  than  of  the  good  of  his  sub- 
jects. The  desire  for  things  which 
serve  for  pleasure  is  often  a  tempta- 
tion to  grievous  sin.  Therefore  says 
the  Scripture :  ''Thou  shalt  not  covet 
thy  neighbour's  goods,  nor  anything 
that  is  his.'.'  Let  the  needy  be  thy 
first  care,  not  thine  own  pleasure.  It 
is  a  great  gain  to  be  godly  and  con- 
tented. Watch  over  thine  heart,  for 
desires  apparently  lawful,  if  not 
resisted  and  denied,  may  lead  to  ruin. 
— Lange. 

Verse  3.  True  courage  the  fruit  of 
righteousness.  1  Begards  worldly 
possessions  as  a  sacred  trust.  2.  Wit- 
nesses for  God  in  the  midst  of  prevalent 
idolatry.  3.  Dares  to  oppose  the 
wishes  of  an  unrighteous  king. 

—  Naboth  shows,  by  the  very  first 
words  of  his  reply,  that  he  is  a 
worshipper  of  Jehovah,  not  of  Baal ; 
and  that  he  does  not  fear  to  confess 
his  faith  before  the  idolatrous  king. 
He  also  indicates  by  the  form  of  his 
asseveration  that  he  considers  it  would 
be  wrong  for  him  to  comply  with  the 


EOMILETtC  COMMFXTJUT:  ^^OJ^. 


ctiAr.  XXI. 


king's  request.  It  is  plain,  therefore, 
that  we  have  not  here  a  mere  refusal 
arising  out  of  a  spirit  of  sturdy  inde- 
pendence, or  one  based  upon  senti- 
ment— the  sentiment  which  attaches 
men  to  ancestral  estates.  Naboth 
objects  to  the  king's  proposal <?*  wrong. 
This  is  best  explained  by  those 
passages  of  the  law  which  forbid  the 
alienation  of  landed  property,  and 
especially  the  transfer  of  estates  from 
one  tribe  to  another  (Lev.  xxv.  23-28  ; 
Num.  xxxvi.  7). — Speaker's  Comm* 

Verse  4.  Godless  people  regard  the 
care  taken  by  the  pious  to  observe 
reverently  the  divine  law  as  so  much 
useless  scrupulousness.  Even  so,  in 
our  day,  does  the  worldling  look  with 
an  evil  eye  upon  the  Christian  who,  for 
the  sake  of  the  Divine  Word,  refuses 
to  yield  to  his  wishes,  for  either  he 
recognizes  no  divine  authority,  or 
exalts  his  own  above  it.  The  chil- 
dren of  this  world,  whose  aims  and 
designs  are  wholly  material,  will  often 
fret  and  grieve  for  days  when  they  are 
compelled  to  give  up  a  temporal  gain, 
or  a  promised  enjoyment,  whilst  the 
condition  of  their  souls  never  causes 
them  the  slightest  giief.  The  high 
and  mighty  ones  of  this  world  often 
think  that  all  other  people  are  placed 
here  simply  to  yield  obedience  to  their 
whims.  They  cannot  comprehend  that 
all  men  are  not  to  be  bought  with 
gold,  and  woe  to  that  inferior  whose 
refusal  destroys  their  darling  plans. — 
Lange. 

—  0  the  impotent  passion  and 
insatiable,  desires  of  covetousness ! 
Ahab  is  lord  and  king  of  all  the  terri- 
tories of  Israel :  Naboth  is  the  owner 
of  one  poor  vineyard.  Ahab  cannot 
enjoy  Israel  if  Naboth  enjoy  his  vine- 
yard. Whether  is  the  wealthier  ?  I 
do  not  heat  JN'aboth  wish  for  anything 
of  Ahab's ;  1  hear  Ahab  wishing,  not 
without  indignation  of  a  repulse,  for 
somewhat  from  Naboth.  Riches  and 
poverty  are  no  more  in  the  heart  than 
in  the  hand :  he  is  wealthy  that  is  con- 
tented ;  he  is  poor  that  wanteth 
more. — Bp.  RalL 

Verse     6-16.       Tlie     apparently 


fortunate,  but  really  unfortunate 
and  accursed,  marriage  of  Ahab  and 
Jezebel.  I.  She  seeks  the  sorrowful 
man,  shares  his  grief,  and  seeks  to  com- 
fort him,  as  is  the  province  of  a  wife  ; 
but,  instead  of  pointing  him  to  the  true 
Comforter,  and  leading  his  heart  to 
higher  and  better  things,  she 
strengthens  him  in  his  grasping  desire 
after  others'  property,  and  leads  him 
on  still  further.  II.  She  reminds  him 
that  he  is  the  lord  and  master,  and 
recognizes  him  as  such,  as  a  wife 
should ;  but,  at  the  same  moment,  she 
assumes  the  dominion,  and  the  weak 
man  lets  her  manage  and  rule,  as  if 
she  were  the  man  and  he  the  woman, 
III.  She  rejoices  to  accomplish  an 
ardent  wish  of  her  husband's,  and  to 
make  him  a  woithy  present,  as  every 
faithful  spouse  should  strive  to  do; 
but  it  is  a  blood-stained  and  stolen 
gift,  obtained  with  deceit  and  false- 
hood, and  Ahab  delights  in  it.  Thus 
both  husband  and  wife,  who  together 
should  be  blest  after  God's  ordinance, 
together  walk  on  to  ruin  and  destruc- 
tion.— Lange. 

Verses  5-14.  The  terrible  power  of 
an  impious  queen.  I.  Knows  how  to 
take  advantage  of  a  "weak  and  fretful 
husband  (verses  5-7).  II.  Shrinks 
not  from  adopting  the  most  diabolical 
means  of  accomplishing  her  designs 
(verses  8-10).  III.  (an  command 
accomplices  in  carrying  out  any  deed 
of  villany  (verses  11,  12).  IV.  Is 
permitted  to  perpetrate  the  most  hor- 
rible acts  of  cruelty  and  murder 
(verses  13,  14). 

Verses  5-7  He  that  caused  the 
disease  sends  him  a  physician.  Satan 
knew  of  old  how  to  make  use  of  such 
helpers.  Jezebel  comes  to  Ahab's 
bedside,  and  casts  cold  water  in  his 
face,  and  puts  into  him  spirits  of  her 
own  extracting.  Ahab  wanted  neither 
wit  nor  wickedness  ;  yet  is  he  in  both 
a  very  novice  to  this  Sidonian  dame. 
There  needs  no  other  devil  than  Jeze- 
bel, whether  to  project  evil  or  work 
it.  She  chides  the  pusillanimity  of 
her  dejected  husband,  and  persuades 
him  his  rule  cannot  be  free  unless  it 

341 


enxt,  txu 


jrOMILETIC  COHrMEKTJnT:  KINGS. 


be  licentious  ;  that  there  should  be  no 
bounds  to  sovereignty  but  will. 
Already  bath  she  contrived  to  have  by 
fraud  and  force  what  was  denied  to 
entreaty.  Nothing  needs  but  the 
name,  but  the  seal  of  Ahab  :  let  her 
alone  with  the  rest.  How  present  are 
the  wits  of  the  weaker  sex  for  the  de- 
vising of  wickedness ! — Bp.  Hall, 

Verse  9.  But  what  damnable  dissi- 
mulation was  it  in  this  devilish  crea- 
ture to  do  her  feats  under  pretext  of  a 
fast  I  This  was  like  that  Italian  de- 
vice of  a  pocket  stone  bow  which,  held 
under  a  cloak,  shoots  needles  with 
violence  to  pierce  a  man's  body,  yet 
leaves  a  wound  scarcely  discernible ; 
or,  rather,  that  other,  more  detestable, 
of  a  pocket  church-book  with  a  pistol 
hid  in  the  binding,  which  turning  to 
such  a  page  discharges— a  plot  to  en- 
trap him  you  hate,  whilst  you  are  at 
your  devotions  together,  when  there 
is  less  suspicion.  If  Jezebel  proclaim 
a  fast,  let  Naboth  look  to  his  life.  The 
Jesuits  enjoined  a  fast  and  set  forth  a 
sevenfold  psalmody  for  the  good  suc- 
cess of  the  gunpowder  plot ;  wherein, 
Rabshakeh-like,  they  would  persuade 
the  world  that  they  come  not  up  against 
us  without  the  Lord ! — Trapp. 

Yerses  11-14.  Evil  masters  can  ever 
find  evil  servants,  who  do  their  will 


from  ambition  or  covetousness.  Woe, 
where  such  things  befall !  and  shame, 
that  in  the  fairest  lands,  as  in  the 
plains  of  Jezreel,  are  often  the  worst 
men  to  be  found!  Godlessness  and 
corruption  in  courts  is  a  poison  which 
extends  throughout  the  whole  body 
politic,  even  to  the  lowest  rank;  no 
example  is  so  powerful  upon  all  classes 
of  society.  How  many  gross,  how 
many  refined,  sins  are  committed  out 
of  sheer  complaisance  to  high  person- 
ages, whose  favour  men  wish  to  seek 
or  preserve !  Woe  to  those  lords  who 
find  such  ready  tools  in  their  servants, 
who  will  be  accomplices  in  their  mis- 
doings, and  palliate,  or  even  laud  and 
praise,  all  their  perverse  dealings :  they 
undermine  the  throne  more  than  open 
enemies.  The  judgment  and  condem- 
nation of  Naboth  compared  with  that 
of  our  Lord.  There,  as  in  this  instance, 
offended  pride,  followed  by  hatred, 
accusation  of  blasphemy  and  riot ; 
false  witnesses  and  vile  judges ;  and  a 
blind,  infuriated  populace  crying  out, 
Crucify  I  Crucify  ! — Lar>ge. 

Yerses  15,  16.  Ill-gotten  gains. 
1.  Will  not  bear  examination  as  to 
the  methods  of  their  acquisition.  2. 
Are  eagerly  and  gladly  seized .  3 .  Never 
give  the  satisfaction  expected.  4.  En- 
tail unspeakable  anxiety  and  suffer- 
ing. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  17-29. 


The  Messenger  op  Appeoaching  Doom. 

The  histories  of  the  Old  Testament  were  designed  as  standing  h  ssons  of 
edification  to  the  church ;  by  them,  those  who  are  dead  may  be  con.^idered  as 
still  speaking  to  us.  They  speak  to  us  of  the  frailty  of  man,  of  the  evil  of 
sin  and  its  certain  punishment,  of  the  spirituality  of  the  law  of  God,  of  the 
need  we  have  of  a  Saviour  and  a  Sanctifier;  they  preach  to  us,  as  Paul  did 
to  Eelix,  of  temperance,  righteousness,  and  judgment  to  come,  and  they  make 
us  tremble.  He  who  gives  the  dew,  the  sunbeam,  the  rain,  and  the  snow  to 
refresh  and  fertilize  the  world  of  nature,  has  given  to  us  the  promises,  pro- 
phecies, doctrines,  and  histories  of  His  Word  to  enrich  and  vivify  the  world  of 
grace.  In  this  paragraph  we  learn  the  effect  of  the  message  of  God  sent  by 
Elijah  in  producing  in  Ahab  a  temporary  humiliation;  and  the  effect  of  Ahab's 
humiliation  in  securing  a  temporary  reprieve. 

I.  That  the  messenger  of  approaching  doom  is  divinely  commissioned 
(verse  17).     **The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Elijah."    Daring  and  fierce  as 
342 


BOMILETtC  COMMEKTAHY :  KINGS,  CftAP.  Xxi, 


was  Elijah,  lie  would  never  have  dared  to  pronounce  this  fearful  doom  on  the 
house  of  Ahab  if  he  had  not  been  divinely  authorized.  It  is  a  vast  privilege 
to  be  the  messenger  of  mercy  to  the  erring,  but  it  also  involves  the  responsi- 
bility of  sometimes  being  the  messenger  of  wrath  and  judgment.  Woe  be  to 
him  who  threatens  more  or  less  than  God  commands  :  in  the  one  case  he  sins 
by  presumption  ;  in  the  other,  by  lack  of  fidelity.  Some  men  are  more  fitted 
by  temperament  and  training  to  be  messengers  of  doom.  The  stern  and  faith- 
ful Elijah  would  not  shrink  from  declaring  all  the  counsel  of  God. 

II.  That  the  messenger  of  approaching  doom  comes  to  us  when  en- 
joying the  fruits  of  the  sin  he  denounces  (verse  18).  Ahab  got  his  vine- 
yard, entered  into  possession,  and  was  enjoying  its  produce  and  the  prospect 
of  what  he  intended  it  to  be,  when  he  is  startled  by  the  voice  of  vengeance 
sounding  in  his  ears.  The  scene  is  changed,  the  very  leaves  of  the  vineyard 
seem  dripping  with  the  blood  of  the  murdered  Naboth,  demanding  instant  re- 
tribution !  Every  sinner  carries  in  his  breast  an  Elijah — an  accusing  conscience, 
which  in  the  worst  is  never  wholly  extinct.  As  the  serpent  in  the  fable 
which,  while  frozen  with  cold,  was  torpid  and  insensible,  and  seemed  utterly 
bereft  of  all  vitality,  yet  when  brought  before  the  fi.re  quickly  recovered  its 
venom  and  its  strength,  so  conscience  may  remain  dull  and  lifeless  for  a  season ; 
but  when  once,  through  the  Providence  of  God  or  the  force  of  affliction  or 
the  sentence  of  the  law,  it  is  quickened  into  life,  the  sinner  will  assuredly 
find  that  it  has  not  lost  its  energy,  and  will  never  lose  its  sting.  The  spirit 
of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity  ;  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ?  By 
rendering  our  moral  consciousness  so  acute  and  discriminating,  God  retains  a 
powerful  hold  of  the  mind  of  man,  and  He  has  wonderfully  adapted  His  holy 
Word  to  act  upon  our  affections,  to  awaken  our  fears,  and  to  exhibit  before  us 
the  sad  consequences  of  guilt. 

III.  That  the  messenger  of  approaching  doom  delivers  his  message 
with  fearlessness  and  fidelity  (verses  19-26).  I.  The  doom  is  pronounced 
with  unmistakable  explicitjiess  and  fulness.  It  is  threefold  in  its  application. 
The  first  had  respect  to  Ahab  himself  (verse  19).  The  second  to  Jezebel 
(verse  23).  The  third  had  respect  to  the  posterity  of  both  (verses  21,  22,  24). 
As  the  sin  of  one  is  extended  to  and  shared  by  others,  so  is  its  punishment. 
The  sinner  will  be  made  fully  aware  of  the  sins  for  which  he  suffers,  and  it  is 
this  that  will  add  sharpness  to  his  suffering.  2.  I'he  doom  was  justified  ly  the 
excess  of  wickedness  committed  (verses  20,  25,»26).  These  words  intensify  the 
thought  of  Ahab's  extreme  wickedness,  and  show  the  reason  of  the  bitter  judg- 
ments that  were  pronounced  against  him.  lie  had  become  so  utterly  abandoned 
to  sin  and  crime  as  to  lose  all  moral  principle  and  po^ver  to  resist  evil.  He 
allowed  himself  to  be  completely  governed  by  his  wicked  and  imperious  wife. 
Her  influence  caused  him  to  intioduce  the  worship  of  Baal  (ch.  xvi.  31),  to 
allow  the  slaughter  of  the  prophets  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xviii.  4),  to  let  Elijah  be 
driven  into  banishment  (ch.  xix.  2),  and  finally  to  murder  Naboth  and  seize 
his  laud  (verses  6  and  15).  The  justice  of  God  provides  that  the  punishment 
of  the  sinner  shall  be  commensurate  with  the  nature  and  extent  of 
his  sin. 

IV.  That  the  messenger  of  approaching  doom  may  not  always  see  the 
fulfilment  of  the  prediction  he  is  commanded  to  announce.  1 .  Threatened 
doom  may  produce  a  temporary  repentance  (verse  27).  Under  the  severe 
threatening  of  the  prophet,  seconded  by  the  sure  voice  of  conscience,  Ahab  bowed 
himself  to  the  dust,  oppressed  by  a  burden  too  heavy  for  him.  What  could  be 
more  foreign  to  the  habits  of  this  proud,  luxurious,  and  tyrannical  prince  than 
sackcloth  and  fasting — than  torn  garments  and  the  slow  footstep  and  dejected 

343 


OHAP.  XXI.  BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


eye  of  penitential  grief?  What  can  be  a  greater  proof  of  tlie  power  of  God 
over  the  mind  of  sinners,  when  such  a  man  is  convinced,  though  he  is  not  con- 
verted ;  is  humbled,  though  he  is  not  renewed.  There  may  be  a  sorrow  of  the 
eyes,  but  not  of  the  heart ;  sorrow  for  the  threatened  judgment,  but  not  for  the 
sin  which  provoked  that  judgment.  2.  A  temporary  repentance  may  delay 
threatened  doom  (verses  28,  29).  It  is  evident  that  Ahab's  repentance,  if  repen- 
tance it  may  be  called,  was  partial,  transitory,  and  insincere,  accompanied  by 
no  change  of  heart  or  life ;  but  such  as  it  was  it  illustrates  God's  readiness  to 
notice  the  fiist  symptoms  of  return.  Ahab's  humiliation  shall  prorogue  the 
judgment:  such  as  was  the  penitence,  such  shall  be  the  reward— a  temporary 
reward  for  a  temporary  penitence.  If  a  partial  penitent  may  be  reprieved, 
surely  a  sincere  believing  penitent  will  be  justified  I 

Lessons  : — 1 .  Bin  cannot  remain  long  without  discovery.  2.  God  gives  ample 
warning  before  lie  punishes  the  sinner.  3.  God  gives  the  utmost  credit  to  the 
slightest  symptoms  of  repentance:  He  is  slow  to  wrath.  4.  Repentance,  if  not 
genuine  f  though  it  may  delay,  will  not  finally  avert,  the  deserved  punishment. 

Ahab  and  Elijah  (verse  20). 

The  keynote  of  Elijah's  character  is  force — the  force  of  righteousness.  The 
whole  of  his  career  is  marked  by  this  one  thing — the  strength  of  a  righteous 
man.  And  then,  on  the  other  hand,  this  Ahab — the  keynote  of  his  character 
is  the  weakness  of  wickedness,  and  the  wickedness  of  weakness  Think  of 
him  weakly  longing — as  idle  and  weak  minds  in  lofty  places  always  do — after 
something  that  belongs  to  somebody  else  ;  with  all  his  gardens,  coveting  the  one 
little  herb-plot  of  the  poor  Naboth;  weak  and  worse  than  womanly,  turning  his 
face  to  the  wall  and  weeping  when  he  cannot  get  it ;  weakly  desiring  to  have 
it,  and  yet  not  knowing  how  to  set  about  accomplishing  his  wish ;  and  then — as  is 
always  the  case,  for  there  are  always  tempters  everywhere  for  weak  people — that 
beautiful  fiend  by  his  side,  like  the  other  queen  in  our  great  drama,  ready  to  screw 
the  feeble  man  that  she  is  wedded  to,  to  the  sticking  place,  and  to  dare  anything, 
to  grasp  that  on  which  the  heart  was  set.  And  so  the  deed  is  done  :  Naboth  sale 
stoned  out  of  the  way  ;  and  Ahab  goes  down  to  take  possession  !  The  lesson  of 
that  is,  my  friend,  weak  dallying  with  forbidden  desires  is  sure  to  end  in  wicked 
clutching  at  them.  The  king  gets  the  crime  done,  shuffles  it  off  himself  on  to 
the  shoulders  of  his  ready  tools  in  the  little  village,  goes  down  to  get  his  toy, 
and  gets  it,  but  he  gets  Elijah  along  with  it,  which  was  more  than  he  reckoned 
on.  When,  all  full  of  impatience  and  hot  haste  to  solace  himself  with  his  new 
possession,  he  rushes  down  to  seize  the  vineyard,  he  finds  there,  standing  at 
the  gate,  waiting  for  him — black-browed,  motionless,  grim,  an  incarnate  con- 
science— the  prophet  he  had  not  seen  for  yeais,  the  prophet  he  had  last  seen  on 
Carmel  bearding  alone  the  servants  of  Eaal,  and  executing  on  them  the  solemn 
judgment  of  death;  and  there  leaps  at  once  to  his  lip,  *'  Hast  thou  found  me, 
0  mine  enemy  ?" 

I.  I  find  here,  in  the  first  place,  this  broad  principle  :  Pleasure  won  by  sin 
is  peace  lost.  That  is  my  first  thought.  Ah  !  my  brother,  it  does  not  need 
that  there  should  be  a  rebuking  prophet  standing  by  to  work  out  that  law. 
God  commits  the  execution  of  it  to  the  natural  operations  of  our  own  con- 
sciences and  our  spirits.  1.  Here  is  the  fact  in  men's  natures  on  which 
it  partly  depends :  when  sin  is  yet  tempting  us,  it  is  loved ;  when  sin  is  done, 
it  is  loathed.  Action  and  reaction,  as  the  mechanicians  tell  us,  are  equal  and 
contrary.  The  more  violent  the  blow  with  which  we  strike  upon  the  forbidden 
pleasure,  the  further  back  the  rebound  after  the  stroke.  "When  sin  tempts — 
when  there  hangs  glittering  before  a  man  the  golden  fruits  that  he  knows  he 
344 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTJRT:  KINGS.  chap.  xxi. 


ought  not  to  touch,  then,  amidst  the  noise  of  passion  or  the  sophistry  of  desire, 
conscience  is  silenced  for  a  little  while.  Like  a  mad  bull,  the  man  that  is 
tempted  lowers  his  head  and  shuts  his  eyes,  and  rushes  right  on.  The 
moment  that  the  sin  is  done,  that  moment  the  passion  or  desire  which 
tempted  to  it  is  satiated,  and  ceases  to  exist  for  the  time.  Passion  fulfils 
itself  and  expires.  The  desire  is  satisfied,  and  it  turns  into  a  loath- 
ing. The  tempter  draws  us  to  him,  and  then  unveils  the  horrid 
lace  that  lies  beneath  the  mask.  When  the  deed  is  done  and 
cannot  be  undone,  then  comes  satiety ;  then  comes  the  reaction  of  the 
fierce  excitement,  the  hot  blood  begins  to  flow  more  slowly;  then  rises  up  in 
the  heart,  conscience  ;  then  rises  up  in  majesty  in  the  soul,  reason ;  then  flashes 
and  flares  before  the  eye  the  vivid  picture  of  the  cod  sequences.  His  enemy 
has  found  the  sinner.  He  has  got  the  vineyard — Ay,  but  Elijah  is  there,  and 
his  dark  and  stern  presence  sucks  all  the  brightness  and  the  sunshine  out  of 
the  landscape  ;  and  !N"aboth's  blood  stains  the  leaves  of  Naboth's  garden !  There  is 
no  sin  which  is  not  the  purchase  of  pleasure  at  the  price  of  peace.  2.  The  silence 
of  a  seared  conscience  is  not  peace.  For  peace,  you  want  something  more 
than  that  a  conscience  shall  be  dumb.  For  peace*,  you  want  something  more 
than  that  you  shall  be  able  to  live  without  the  daily  sense  and  sting  of  sin. 
You  want  not  only  the  negative  absence  of  pain,  but  the  positive  presence  of 
a  tranquillising  guest  in  your  heart — that  conscience  of  yours,  testifying  with 
you,  blessing  you  in  its  witness,  and  shedding  abroad  rest  and  comfort.  It  is 
easy  to  kill  a  conscience,  after  a  fashion,  at  least.  It  is  easy  to  stifle  it.  As 
the  old  historian  says  about  the  Roman  armies  that  marched  through  a  country, 
burning  and  destroying  everything:  ''They  make  a  solitude,  and  they  call  it 
peace  ; "  and  so  men  do  with  their  living  consciences :  they  stifle  them,  sear  them, 
forcibly  silence  them  somehow  or  other,  and  then,  when  there  is  a  dead  still- 
ness in  the  heart,  broken  by  no  voice  of  either  approbation  or  blame,  but  dole- 
ful, like  the  unnatural  quiet  of  a  deserted  city,  then  they  say  it  is  peace,  and 
the  man's  uncontrolled  passions  and  unbridled  desires  dwell  solitary  in  the 
fortress  of  his  own  spirit !  You  may  almost  attuin  to  that.  Do  you  think  it 
is  a  goal  to  be  set  before  you  as  an  ideal  of  human  nature ?  The  loss  of  peace 
is  certain,  the  presence  of  agony  is  most  likely,  from  every  act  of  sin.  3.  And 
so  it  is  not  only  a  crime  that  men  count  it  when  they  do  wrong,  but  it  is  a 
blunder.  Sin  is  not  only  guilt,  but  it  is  a  mistake.  "  The  game  is  not  worth 
the  candle,"  according  to  the  French  proverb.  The  thing  that  you  buy  is  not 
worth  the  price  you  pay  for  it.  Sin  is  like  a  great  foiest-tree  that  we  may  some- 
times see  standing  up  green  in  its  leafy  beauty,  and  spreading  a  broad  shadow 
over  half  a  field  ;  but  when  we  get  round  on  the  other  side,  there  is  a  great  dark 
hollow  in  the  very  heart  of  it,  and  corruption  is  at  work  there.  It  is  like  the 
poison  tree  in  travellers'  stories,  tempting  weary  men  to  rest  beneath  its  thick 
foliage,  and  insinuating  death  into  the  limbs  that  relax  in  the  fatal  coolness  of 
its  shade.  It  is  like  the  apples  of  Sodom,  fair  to  look  upon,  but  turning  to 
acrid  ashes  on  the  unwary  lips.  It  is  like  the  magician's  rod  that  we  read 
about  in  old  books.  There  it  lies  ;  and  if  tempted  by  its  glitter,  or  fascinated 
by  the  power  it  proffeis  you,  you  take  it  in  your  hand,  the  thing  starts  into  a 
serpent  with  erected  crest  and  sparkling  eye,  and  plunges  its  quick  barb  into 
the  hand  that  holds  it,  and  sends  poison  through  all  its  veins.  Do  not  touch  it. 
Every  sin  buys  pleasure  at  the  price  of  peace.  Elijah  is  always  waiting  at  the 
gate  of  the  ill-gotten  possession. 

II.  Sin  is  blind  to  its  true  friends  and  its  real  foes.  **  Hast  thou 
found  me,  0  mine  enemy  ?"  Elijah  was  the  best  friend  he  had  in  his  kingdom. 
And  that  Jezebel  there,  the  wife  of  his  bosom,  whom  he  loved  and  thanked 
for  this  thing,  she  was  the  worst  foe  that  hell  could  have  sent  him.  Ay,  and 
80  it  ib  always.    The  faithful  rebuker,  the  merciful  inflictor  of  pain,  is  tha 

345 


CfHAP.  XXL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAET:  KINGS. 


truest  friend  of  the  wrong-doer.  The  worst  enemy  of  the  sinful  heart  is  the 
voice  that  either  tempts  it  into  sin,  or  lulls  it  into  self-complacency.  1.  And 
this  is  one  of  the  certainest  workings  of  evil  desires  in  our  spirits,  that  they 
pervert  for  us  all  relations  of  things — ^that  they  make  us  blind  to  all  the  moral 
truths  of  God's  universe.  Sin  is  blind  as  to  itself,  blind  as  to  its  own  conse- 
quences, blind  as  to  who  are  its  friends  and  who  are  its  foes,  blind  as  to  earth, 
blind  as  to  another  world,  blind  as  to  God.  The  man  that  walks  in  the  vain 
show  of  transgression,  whose  heart  is  set  upon  evil — he  fancies  that  ashes  are 
bread,  and  stones  gold  (as  in  the  old  fairy  story) ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
thinks  that  the  true  sweet  is  the  bitter,  and  turns  away  from  God's  angels 
and  God's  prophets  with  **  Hast  thou  found  me,  0  mine  enemy?"  That  is  the 
reason,  my  friend,  of  not  a  little  of  the  infidelity  that  haunts  this  world — that 
sin  perverted  and  blinded  stumbles  about  in  its  darkness,  and  mistakes  the  face 
of  the  fiiend  for  the  face  of  the  foe.  2.  And  then,  again,  God  sends  us  a  Gospel 
full  of  dark  words  about  evil.  It  deals  with  that  fact  of  sin  as  no  other 
system  ever  did.  There  is  no  book  like  the  Bible  for  these  two  things — ^for  the 
lofty  notion  that  it  has  about  what  man  may  be  and  ought  to  be,  and  for  the 
notion  that  it  has  of  what  man  is.  It  does  not  degrade  human  nature  because 
it  tells  us  the  truth  about  human  nature  as  it  is.  The  darkest  and  bitterest 
sayings  about  transgression,  they  are  veiled  promises.  It  does  not  make  the 
consequences  of  sin  which  it  writes  down.  You  and  I  make  them  for  our- 
selves, and  it  tells  us  of  them.  Did  the  lighthouse  make  the  rock  that  it 
stands  on  ?  Is  it  to  be  blamed  for  the  shipwreck  ?  If  a  man  will  go  full  tilt 
against  the  thing  which  he  knows  will  ruin  him,  what  is  the  right  name  for 
him  that  hedges  it  up  with  a  prickly  fence  of  thorns,  and  puts  a  great  light 
above  it,  and  writes  below,  **If  thou  comest  here,  thou  diest?"  Is  that  the 
work  of  an  enemy  ?  And  yet  that  is  why  people  talk  about  the  gloomy  views  of 
the  Gospel,  about  the  narrow  spirit  of  Christianity,  about  the  harsh  things  that 
are  here!  The  Bible  did  not  make  hell.  The  Bible  did  not  make  sin 
the  parent  of  sorrow.  The  Bible  did  not  make  it  certain  that  '*  any  trans- 
gression and  disobedience  should  reap  its  just  recompense  of  reward."  We  are 
the  causes  of  their  coming  upon  ourselves ;  and  the  Bible  but  proclaims  the  end 
to  which  the  paths  of  sin  must  lead,  and  beseechingly  calls  to  us  all,  "  Turn 
ye,  turn  ye  !  why  will  ye  die  ?"  And  yet,  when  it  comes  to  you,  how  many 
of  you  turn  away  from  it,  and  say,  **  It  is  mine  enemy  !'*  3.  Ay,  and  more 
than  that :  sin  makes  us  fancy  that  God  Himself  is  our  enemy  ;  and  sin  makes 
that  thought  of  God  that  ought  to  be  most  blessed  and  most  sweet  to  us,  the 
terror  of  our  souls.  God  will  not  let  us  alone  when  we  transgress.  God  in 
His  love  hath  appointed  that  sin  shall  breed  sorrow.  But  we — we  do  wrong; 
and  then,  for  God's  Providence,  and  God's  Gospel,  and  God's  Son,  and  God 
Himself,  there  rises  up  in  our  hearts  the  hostile  feeling,  and  we  think  that  He 
is  turned  our  enemy,  and  fights  against  us  !  But  oh  !  He  only  fights  against 
us  that  we  may  submit,  and  love  Him.  If  He  comes  to  you  with  rebuke,  and 
meets  you  when  you  are  at  the  very  door  of  your  sin,  and  busy  with  your  trans- 
gression, usher  Him  in,  and  thank  Him,  and  bless  Him  for  words  of  threatening, 
for  merciful  severity,  for  conviction  of  sin  ;  because  conviction  of  sin  is  the 
work  of  the  Comforter  ;  and  all  the  threatenings  and  all  the  pains  that  follow 
and  track  like  swiit  hounds  the  committer  of  evil,  are  sent  by  Him  who  loves 
too  wisely  not  to  punish  transgression,  and  loves  too  well  to  punish  without 
warning,  and  desires  only,  when  He  punishes,  that  we  should  turn  from  our  evil 
way,  and  escape  the  condemnation.  An  enemy,  or  a  friend — which  is  God  in 
His  truth  to  you  ? 

III.  The  sin  which  mistakes  the  friendly  appeal  for  an  enemy  lays  up 
for  itself  a  terrible  retribution.  1.  Elijah  comes  here  and  prophesies  the 
fall  of  Ahab.     The  next  peal,  the  next  flash,  fulfil  the  prediction.     There^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY':  KINGS,  Ohap.  xxi. 


where  he  did  the  wrong,  he  died.  In  Jezreel,  Ahab  died.  In  Jezreel,  Jezebc  1 
died.  The  threatened  evil  was  foretold  that  it  might  lead  the  king  to  repent- 
ance, and  that  thus  it  might  never  need  to  be  more  than  a  threat ;  but,  though 
Ahab  was  partially  penitent,  and  partially  listened  to  the  prophet's  voice,  yet, 
for  all  that,  he  went  on  in  his  evil  way.  Therefore  the  merciful  threatening 
becomes  a  stern  prophecy,  and  is  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter.  And  so  when 
God's  message  comes  to  us,  if  we  listen  not  to  it,  and  turn  not  to  its  gentle  re- 
buke, Oh !  then  we  gather  up  for  ourselves  an  awful  futurity  of  judgment, 
when  threatening  darkens  into  punishment,  and  the  voice  that  rebuked  swells 
into  the  voice  of  final  condemnation.  2.  AVhen  a  man  fancies  that  God's  pro- 
phet is  his  enemy,  and  dreams  that  his  finding  him  out  is  a  calamity  and  a  loss, 
that  man  may  be  certain  that  something  worse  wHl  find  him  out  some  day.  His 
sins  will  find  him  out,  and  that  is  worse  than  the  prophet's  coming  !  Picture  to 
yourself  this — a  human  spirit  shut  up  with  the  companionship  of  its  forgotten 
and  dead  transgressions !  There  is  a  resuri ection  of  acts,  as  well  as  of  bodies. 
Think  what  it  will  be  for  a  man  to  sit  surrounded  by  that  ghastly  company,  the 
ghosts  of  his  own  sins  ! — and  as  each  forgotten  fault  and  buried  badness  comes, 
silent  and  sheeted,  into  that  awful  society,  and  sits  itself  down  there,  think  of 
him  greeting  each  with  the  question,  **  Thou  too?  What!  are  you  all  here? 
Hast  thou  found  me,  0  mine  enemy  ?  "  And  from  each  bloodless  spectral  lip  there 
tells  out  the  answer,  the  knell  of  his  life:  **I  have  found  thee,  because  thou 
hast  sold  thyself  to  work  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.'*  3.  Ah!  my  friend,  if 
that  were  all  we  had  to  say,  it  might  well  stiff'en  us  into  stony  despair.  Thank 
God — thank  God !  such  an  issue  is  not  inevitable.  Christ  speaks  to  you.  Christ 
is  your  friend.  He  loves  you,  and  He  speaks  to  you  now — speaks  to  you  of 
your  danger,  but  in  order  that  you  may  never  rush  into  it  and  be  engulphed  by 
it;  speaks  to  you  of  your  sin,  but  in  order  that  you  may  say  to  him,  '*  Take 
thou  it  away,  0  merciful  Lord  ;"  speaks  to  you  of  justice,  but  in  order  that 
you  may  never  sink  beneath  the  weight  of  His  stroke  ;  speaks  to  you  of  love, 
in  order  that  you  may  know,  and  fully  know,  the  depth  of  His  graciousness. 
When  he  says  to  you,  **  I  love  thee;  love  thou  Me;  I  have  died  for  thee; 
trust  Me,  live  by  Me,  and  live  for  Me,'*  wiU  you  not  say  to  Him,  **  My  Friend, 
My  Brother,  My  Lord,  and  My  God'*? — {Condensed from  A,  JUacIaren), 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Yerses  17-29.  The  inevitable  doom  ning  flash  comes  the  word  from  heaven 

of  a  wicked  life.     I.  Hoes  not  come  into  the  dark  soul  of  Ahab,  and  made 

without  sufficient  warning.     II.  Will  him  feel  that  no  net  of  human  evil  can 

be    commensurate  with  the  sins  com-  be  woven  thickly  enough  to  conceal  the 

mitted.      III.  May    be   averted    by  crime  which  it  veils  from  the  all-seeing 

timely  repentance.  eye. — Menken, 

Yerse  17.  Though  much  wickedness         Yerse  19.    **  Hast    thou    killed?" 

goes  apparently  without  further  evil  Individual  responsibiHty  for  wrong 

results  and  without  the  chastisement  doings.     1.  Not  transferable.     2.  Not 

of  the  just  Judge  in  heaven,  yet  still  to  be  evaded,  though  others  commit  the 

all   will   be   demanded ;  and   at    the  wrong  to  which  we  consent.     3.  Hn- 

Divine  judgment-seat  everything  wall  alterably  recognised  in  punishment, 
be  discovered,  and  everything,  to  the  —  **  In  the  pladfe  where  dogs  licked 

uttermost  farthing,  accounted  for.  The  the  blood  of  Naboth,"  &c.     So  Aristo- 

blood  of  Naboth,  which  Ahab  thought  bulus,  king  of  Jewry,  vomited  abun- 

had  been  swallowed  up  by  the  eaith,  dance  of  blood,  and  soon  after  breathed 

cried  to  heaven,  and  found  there  judg-  his  last,  in  the  very  place  where  he 

ipent  and  vengeance.     Like  t^  light-  had  slain  hia  brother  Antigonus^  and 


CHAP.  XXI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


acknowledged  it  to  be  the  just  hand  of 
God  upon  himself.  So  Selymus,  the 
great  Turk,  struck  with  a  loathsome 
and  incu liable  disease,  ended  his  days 
at  Chiurlus  with  an  untimely  and  tor- 
menting death,  where  he  had  disloyally 
joined  battle  against  his  aged  father 
Eajazet,  a.d.  1511.  So  Henry  III., 
king  of  Prance,  was  stabbed  to  death 
by  a  Jacobin  friar  in  that  very 
chamber  where  he  and  his  bloody 
brother  Charles  IX.  had,  some  few 
years  before,  plotted  the  Parisian 
massacre. — Trapp, 

Verses  20-26.  Great  wickedness 
and  terrible  retribution.  I.  Idolatry 
is  a  great  abomiuation  in  the  sight  of 
God.  II.  There  is  no  possible  sin 
an  idolater  may  not  be  instigated  to 
commit.  III.  The  consequences  of 
sin  and  its  punishment  extend  to 
others. 

Yerse  20.  An  unwelcome  visitor. 

1.  The  question  of  Ahab,  *' Hast  thou 
found  me,  0  mine  enemy  ?  '*  1.  This 
question  indicates  past  association. 
"Thou!"  Ahab  had  frequently  met 
with  Elijah  before  :  in  the  previous 
chapters  we  find  the  prophet  and  the 
king  in  most  intimate   relationships. 

2.  The  question  indicates  disquietude 
on  the  part  of  Ahab.  Directly  the 
stately  form  of  Elijah  appeared  to  him, 
the  greed,  passion,  and  murder  of  the 
last  few  days  ciowded  in  upon  his 
memory.  How  happy  that  Christian 
man  whose  very  presence  strikes  terror 
into  the  sinful  heart  1  3.  This  ques- 
tion shows  that  criminal  offenders 
often  pyss  an  incorrect  judgment  upon 
men  who  administer  rebuke  to  them. 
Ahab  designates  Elijah  his  enemy. 
"What  a  mistake!  Had  not  the  pro- 
phet been  the  instrument  of  benefit  to 
the  king  and  his  country  ?  Had  he 
not  prayed  on  Mount  Carmel  that  the 
drought  might  cease,  and  had  he  not 
worked  at  the  same  time  for  the  ex- 
termination of  idolatry  ?  What  more 
could  he  have  done,  either  for  the 
temporal  or  spiritual  welfare  of  his 
compeers  ?  And  yet  Ahab  calls  such 
a  man  an  enemy,  when  he  was  in 
reality  his   truest   friend  I     See   the 

§i8 


blinding  power  of  covetousness  I  4. 
We  gather  from  this  question  that  the 
gratification  of  unholy  desire  never 
brings  tranquillity.  Humanly  speak- 
ing, Ahab  was  in  the  very  height  of 
success.  He  was  a  king,  the  long- 
desired  vineyard  had  come  into  his 
possession.  What  is  there  to  prevent 
enjoyment?  Surely  nothing.  Yes; 
God  vindicates  the  oppressed;  and 
though  Naboth  is  dead,  he  is  not  for- 
gotten. Heaven  will  not  permit  so 
foul  a  deed  to  go  unpunished.  Hence 
the  monarch's  unrest.  II.  The  re- 
spouse  of  Elijah.  *'  I  have  found 
thee."  1.  Elijah  was  divinely  com- 
missioned to  seek  Ahab.  **And  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Elijah 
the  Tishbite,  saying,  Arise,  go  down 
to  meet  Ahab,  king  of  Israel,  which 
is  in  Samaria:  behold,  he  is  in  the 
vineyard  of  Naboth,  whither  he  is 
gone  down  to  possess  it"  (verses  17, 
18).  How  God  pursues  evil  men  with 
mercy!  Even  punishment  is  but  love 
speaking  with  more  emphatic  voice. 
Elijah  was  obedient  to  the  expressed 
wish  of  God  ;  he  did  not  plead  timidity 
at  standing  to  rebuke  a  monarch ;  but 
went  boldly  and  faithfully  to  perform 
his  duty.  What  a  happy  pattern  of  a 
Christian  minister!  2.  The  reason 
assigned  for  the  search.  "  I  have 
found  thee  because  thou  hast  sold  thy- 
self to  work  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord."  The  prophet,  no  doubt,  came 
to  rebuke  Ahab,  and  also  to  be  instru- 
mental in  his  reformation.  The  king 
must  not  be  left  without  some  effort 
for  his  restoration  to  purity  of  cha- 
racter. When  ministers  know  that 
men  have  fallen  into  deep  sin,  they 
should  at  once  visit  them,  to  prevent 
further  apostacy,  and,  if  possible,  to 
repair  the  past.  In  doing  this  the 
prophet  may  meet  with  an  unkindly 
greeting,  but  the  ultimate  issue  will  be 
good.  3.  How  high  social  position 
is  frequently  degraded.  We  find  here 
that  a  king  had  sold  himself  to  sin. 
Kings,  of  all  men,  should  be  righteous 
in  their  conduct,  as  their  example  must 
necessarily  exercise  a  great  influence 
upon  the  nation  to  which  they  belong. 
How  fearful  their  responsibility! 
What  a  terrible   bargain  had   Ahab 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    KINGS. 


CHAP.   X»T. 


made  :  *'  Sold  thyself  to  work  evil ! " 
1 .  It  was  a  voluntary  bargain — *'  Thy- 
self." 2.  It  was  a  mad  bargain — 
**To  work  evil."  Por  how  many 
lives  would  this  be  a  fitting  inscrip- 
tion !  To  work  evil  seems  to  be  the 
life-purpose  of  many  around  us. 
Think  of  the  destiny  to  which  this  will 
lead  them  !  Let  the  time  past  of  our 
lives  suffice  in  which  we  have  wrought 
evil. — J.  S,  Exell. 

—  Great  is  the  power  of  conscience. 
Upon  the  last  meeting,  for  aught  we 
know,  Ahab  and  Elijah  parted  friends. 
The  prophet  had  lackeyed  his  coach 
and  took  a  peaceful  leave  at  this  town's 
end  :  now,  Ahab's  heart  told  him,  nei- 
ther needed  he  any  other  messenger  that 
God  and  His  prophet  were  fallen  out 
with  him.  His  continuing  idolatry, 
now  seconded  with  blood,  bids  him 
look  for  nothing  but  frowns  from 
heaven.  A  guilty  heart  can  never 
be  at  peace.  Had  not  Ahab  known 
how  ill  he  had  deserved  of  God,  he 
had  never  saluted  his  prophet  by  the 
name  of  an  enemy :  he  had  never 
been  troubled  to  be  found  by  Elijah, 
if  his  own  breast  had  not  found  him 
out  for  an  enemy  to  God.  Much 
good  may  thy  vineyard  do  thee,  0 
thou  king  of  Israel!  Many  fair 
flowers  and  savoury  herbs  may  thy 
new  garden  yield  thee  1  Please  thy- 
self with  thy  Jezebel  in  the  triumph 
over  the  carcass  of  a  scrupulous  sub- 
ject. Let  me  rather  die  with  Na- 
both  than  rejoice  with  thee  :  his  turn 
is  over,  thine  is  to  come.  The  stones 
that  overwhelmed  innocent  Naboth 
were  nothing  to  those  that  smite  thee. 
^Bp.  Sail. 

—  It  is  Ahab's  guilty  conscience 
which  forces  these  words  from  him 
the  moment  he  sees  Elijah.  He  has 
no  object  in  uttering  them.  He  feels 
that  the  last  man  whom  he  would  have 
wished  to  see  has  come  suddenly  upon 
him,  and  found  him — i.e.y  caught  him — 
in  the  act  of  doing  a  great  wrong. 
"  0  mine  enemy,"  may  refer  partly  to 
the  old  antagonism  (ch.  xvii.  1  ;  xviii. 
17,  18;  xix.  2,  3);  but  the  feeling 
which  it  expresses  is  rather  that  of 
present  opposition — the  opposition 
between  good  and  evil,  light  and  dark- 


ness, through  which  **  everyone  that 
doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither 
Cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his  'heds  should 
be  reproved*^  (Jno.  iii.  20). — Speaker^ 
Com. 

Yerse  25.  Woe  to  the  man  who, 
through  the  power  that  love  gives  him 
over  the  heart  of  another,  by  means 
of  which  he  might  become  a  minister- 
ing angel,  is  to  him  as  a  misleading 
fiend.  How  many  fires  of  ruinous 
passion,  of  anger,  of  discord,  of  un- 
righteousness, and  of  hatred  might  and 
should  be  quenched  and  extinguished 
by  the  power  of  love — the  power  of 
one  heart  over  another,  and  especially 
by  the  mildness  and  gentleness  peculiar 
to  woman ;  and  yet  so  often,  by  this 
means,  they  are  kindled  and  fanned. 
This  belongs  to  the  catalogue  of  un- 
confessed  sins  of  many  men,  and  espe- 
cially of  many  women. — Menken. 

Yerses  27-29.    A   royal  penitent. 

1 .  Humbled  by  the  terror  of  threatened 
wrath.  2.  Did  not  seek  to  repair  the 
wrong  he  had  done.  3.  Had  the  out- 
ward signs  of  sincerity.  4.  Was 
granted  a  temporary  reprieve. 

Yerse  27.  What  gave  Ahab's  re« 
pentance  its  worth,  and  wherein  it 
was  defective.  1 .  It  was  not  merely 
ostensible,  feigned,  it  was  a  wholesome 
dread  and  fear  of  the  judgment  of  God 
which  came  upon  him,  causing  him  to 
fear  and  tremble.  He  bowed  beneath 
the  mighty  hand  of  God,  and  was  not 
ashamed  to  confess  this  outwardly, 
but  laid  aside  crown  and  purple,  and 
put  on  sackcloth,  unheeding  if  he  thus 
exposed  himself  to  the  scorn  of  the 
courtiers  and  idol  worshippers.  There- 
fore the  Lord  looked  in  mercy  upon 
his  repentance.  AVould  that,  in  our 
day,  many  would  go  even  as  far  as  Ahab 
did  in  this  case.  2.  It  bore  no  further 
fruits.  He  retained  the  stolen  vine- 
yard, he  desisted  not  from  idol- worship, 
he  allowed  full  sway  to  Jezebel. 
Everything  in  his  house,  at  his  court, 
and  in  his  kingdom,  remained  as  of 
old.  He  did  not  hunger  and  thirst 
after  righteousness.  Electing  impres- 
sions and  emotions  are  not  true  repent- 

349 


CHAP.   XXll. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


nnce.  The  tree  which  brings  forth  no 
fruits  is  and  remains  a  corrupt  tree 
(Matt.  iii.  8).  How  wholly  different 
the  repentance  of  David  (Psa.  li). — 
Zan^e. 

—  The  very  devils  howl  to  be  tor- 
mented. Grief  is  not  ever  a  sign  of 
grace.  Ahab  rends  his  clothes,  he  did 
not  rend  his  heart ;  he  puts  on  sack- 
cloth, not  amendment ;  he  lies  in  sack- 
cloth, but  he  lies  in  his  idolatry ;  he 
walks  softly,  he  walks  not  sincerely. 
Worldly  sorrow  causeth  death.  Happy 
is  that  grief  for  which  the  soul  is  the 
holier. — Bp.  Hall. 

—  The  repentance  of  Ahab  resem- 
bles that  of  the  Ninevites  (Jonah  iii. 
6).  It  has  the  same  outward  signs — 
fasting  and  sackcloth — and  it  has  much 
the  same  Id  ward  character.  It  springs 
not  from  love,  nor  from  hatred  of  sin, 
but  from  fear  of  the  consequences  of 


sin.  It  is  thus,  although  sincere  and 
real  while  it  lasts,  shallow  and  exceed- 
ingly short-lived.  God,  however,  to 
mark  His  readiness  to  receive  the  sinner 
who  turns  to  Him,  accepts  the  imper- 
fect offering,  as  He  likewise  accepted 
the  penitence  of  the  Ninevites,  and 
allows  it  to  delay  the  execution  of  the 
sentence.  Because  Ahab  humbled 
himself,  the  evil  was  deferred  from  his 
own  to  his  son's  days  (verse  29).  So 
the  penitence  of  the  Ninevites  put  off 
the  fall  of  Nineveh  for  a  century. — 
Speaker^  s  Comm. 

Yerse  29.  Jehovah  makes  this 
announcement,  not  because  He  will 
punish  the  son  for  the  sins  of  his 
father,  but  because  He  foresees  that  the 
son  will  also  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  and  will,  therefore,  like  his 
father,  deserve  punishment. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


THE  DEATH  OF  AHAB. 


Cbtttoal  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  2.  Jehosliapliat  the  king  of  Jadah  came 
down  to  the  king  of  Israel — This  visit  is  accounted  for  in  Chronicles  (chap,  xviii.  1) : 
Jehoshaphat  came  to  Israel  for  the  marriage  of  his  son  Jehorara  to  Ahab's  daughter,  Athaliah 
(see  2  Kings  viii.  18).  Ahab  entertained  with  sumptuous  hospitality  Jehoshaphat  and  his  im- 
mense retinue,  composed  largely  of  military  officers ;  and  then  seized  the  occnsion  for  forming 
an  alliance  with  the  king  of  Judah  against  the  Syrian  king  for  the  recovery  of  Ramoth-in- 
Gilead.     Verse  14.  I  am  as  thou  art — The  Chrenicles'  account  omits  the  words  *'  my  horses 

as  thy  hoises,"  and  gives  instead  r\^vh^3,  ^B})\  "and  I  am  with  thee  in  the  war." 

T  T  J  •   —       ;  •  ■ 

Verse  5.  Enquire  of  the  Lord— The  king  of  Judah  had  conscientious  misgivings  ;  such,  indeed, 

as  were  unlikely  to  trouble  the  godless  Ahab.     Verse  6.  The  prophets — The  number,  '*  400," 

must  not  mislead.     They  were  not  the  Astarte  prophets  again  reinstated  (xviii.  19,  22),  but  a 

group  of  men  who  continued  Jeroboam's  Jehov^ah- worship  (calf  worship)  in  the  land,  and 

were  probably  employed  by  Ahab  for  seductive  religious  purposes,  to  estrange  the  nation  from 

the  true  worship  of  Jehovah.    Go  up ;  for  the  Lord  shall  deliver  it  into  the  hands  of  the 

king -Notice:    "it"  is  in  italics;  omit  the  word,  and  the  prophets  merely  affirm  that  the 

Lord  shall  deliver — what?  Ramoth  or  Israel? — into  the  hands  of  the  king.     What  king? 

Bamoth  into  Jehoshaphat's  (or  Ahab's)  hands,  or  Israel  into  the  king  of  Syria's  hands  ?  Couched 

as  their  prediction  is  in  ambiguous  terms  they  evade  the  responsibility  of  failure.     Thus  did 

the  Delphian  oracle  reply  to  Pyrrhus :  Aio  te  yEcida,  Romanos  vincere  posse :  Ibis  redibis 

nunquam  in  bello  per  ibis.     *'I  say  to  thee  Pyrrhus  the  Romans  shall  overcome  ;  thou  shalt  go, 

thou  shalt  return  never  in  war  shalt  thou  perish  ;  "  which  may  mean,  Pyrrhus  shall  overcome 

the  Romans ;  that  he  should  return  ;  never  in  war  should  he  perish  ;  or,  the  Romans  should 

overcome  Pyrrhus,  he  should  return  never ;  in  war  he  should  perish,     AH  depended  on  the 

punctuation  of  the  sentence.    This  prophecy  is  alike  equivocal.    Verse  7.   Is  there  not  a 

prophet  of  the  Lord  besides  ? — Perhaps  Jehoshaphat  had  heard  rumours  of   Elijah,   and 

referred  to  him.     Verse  8.  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah — Who  was  this?     Strong  probabilities 

favour  the  conclusion  that  he  was  the  nameless  prophet  of  chap.  xx.  13,  35-41.     Whether  this 

man  or  not,  Micaiah  had  incurred  the  guilty  king's  hatred,  which  is  to  the  honour  of  the  prophet, 

for  Ahab  counted  every  man  his  "enemy"  (xxi.  20)  who  denounced  his  iniquitous  conduct. 

350 


BOMtLETiC  COMMtlhTART:  KiNOS. 


OHA?.     XXil. 


Verae  9    Hasten  hitter  Macalah_He  was  doubtless  then  in  the  prison  to  which  ho  wa. 
afterwarc-s  carried  back  (verse  27).     Verse  10.  In  a  void  place-pa^,  p.obably  an  open 

iW     tkL        ''  J        '^:  **'*  aoi  prosper,  &c.-Micaiah  repeats  the  delusive  wordVR,in 

pa.b„Iicfor.otsWch7bra'roIeV„^^^^^^^^^ 

Ahab-Entrce.     Verse  21.  A  spiri^-nnrt,  «« spirit ;  definite  art.,  i.e,  t^e  prophetic  spirit 

p^;^4^ihT,-r<^:5,it^hL^^^^^^ 

lying  spirit— nj5B^  rt-TI— not  Satan,  assuredly,  nor  aliquem  ex  Satana  famitia  (as  Grot.) ; 
for  this  spirit  only  assumed  falsity  for  the   time,  whereas  Satan    was  "a  liar  frnm   ft.1 
beg,nnmg.»    Verse  24    Zedekiah    .     .    smote  Mioaiah-Feeling  himself  after  his  ostenta 
tious  conduct  (verse  1 1),  especially  insulted.     Keil  thiuks  Zedekiah  could  only  have  come  tht 
pSi         "i      f,,'?^"'"  he  was  conscious  to  himself  that  he  had  not  f°Ledhi«  oracle  " 
Tossibly  so ;  then  this  proves  how  the  "  spirit »  had  really  moved  these  meti  tn  „™i;  !    r  i    >' 
unknowingly  to  themselves.   Zcdek.ah's  in'solence  called  i"  J^Tbuke'frm  iLHor  SLSS 
endurance  his  praise.  Verse  28.  And  he  said,  Hearken,  0  neonle  everv  one  of  -^An     -p., 
the  words  with  which  Micah  the  prophet  opens  his  book  Tm  cah  f  2>  „  J  r.nT  h       "' 
mterpolated  by  some  scribe  whoidLtfiied  M^icaiah  wifh  Mi  "h.'V Wk'IC^nrn  dadd: 
to  fight  against  him- nD;_they  turned  to  him.     Se,t.^..  .-jJ^.^^TZ^t^^ 

sr;:tsierhTs'a^:un'rn"^;rif;;c:;:cf:ei7n^ 

and.'    Verse  49    Sen  sirkhLikh "   ,\\'''»V"' »' '"SH"*-^*'-  e==tia|uished  fr^m  th: 
JehoshaphaUn^a^Ji^e'S^^^^^^^^^^^  :£,  .^^^  "^^  f 

85-37.    Ezion-gebor  (verse  48)  abounds  in  perilous  and  destructive  rocks.-W.H.  J. 


BOMILMTICa  OP  VESSES  1-28. 
The  Faithpcl  Peophet. 


favoufof  the  wl  17'     ""■''1^''   '?r°P^'«  "^  ^'^»'>  '^^^'^''^d  u«anim«uSy  in 
lavour  ot  the  war,  and  assured  the  allied  monarchs  of  viotorv      Rut  thJlLT 

something  wanting.     The  pious  Jehoshaphat  was  aLirousoJthe  four  hundrld 
and  m  so  grave  a  crisis,  demanded  a  cleLr  indication  of  tee  DTyinewm      The 
care  Ind  th?ul*t  T  "'^t'^  .  ^''"^  •'^'**'""^'  emergencies  demand  d     utmos? 
hatred  of  Ztjl  .      "^  ^'17;°''  intelligence.     2.  /.  appealed  to  despite  the 

ProblTitwasThtMw'rt'*  T^f  ''"'^  «'^'^'  '"  '""^"^^  A««  (verse  8). 
ch  IX  42  "  n  .n  ft  who  uttered  against  Ahab  the  oracle  referred  to  in 
cH.  XX.  42.        0  corrupt  heart  of  self-condemned  Ahab  I    If   Micaiah  epake 

351 


CiiAt.xxtt  noMTLETiC  COMMBNTAnr :  KINGS, 


true  to  thee,  how  was  it  evil  ?  If  others  said  false,  how  was  it  good  ?  And  ii 
Micaiah  spake  from  the  Lord,  why  dost  thou  hate  him  ?  This  hath  wont  to 
be  the  ancient  lot  of  tiulh,  censure  and  hatred :  censure  of  the  message,  hatred 
of  the  bearer."  Yet,  however  much  the  faithful  counsellor  is  disliked,  his 
eervices  are  valued,  and  often  anxiously  sought.  Cincinnatus  was  twice  called 
from  his  farm  to  the  dictatorship  of  the  Roman  commonwealth,  though  the 
opposing  parties  would  have  dispensed  with  his  services  if  they  could. 

II.  Is  favoured  with  signal  opportunities  of  declaring  the  will  of  God 
(verses  9-12).  The  two  kings  were  seated  on  their  thrones  in  a  conspicuous 
place,  robed  in  royal  vestments,  attended  by  the  gaily  dressed  officers  of  the  court 
and  by  the  ministering  priests,  and  surrounded  by  warlike  horsemen  and  infantry. 
The  leading  representatives  of  church  and  state  were  assembled  together,  and 
the  people  in  great  number.  It  was  an  opportunity  not  to  be  neglected.  The 
faithful,  earnest  worker  will  never  lack  opportunities ;  and  his  divinely  im- 
planted instincts  will  teach  what  are  the  great  opportunities  of  life,  when  God 
can  be  most  honoured. 

III.  Declares  only  what  is  divinely  revealed.  1.  Re  spurns  all  attempts  at 
Irihery  (verses  13,  l4j.  The  messenger  who  went  for  Micaiah  seeks  to  influence 
him  to  speak  to  the  same  effect  as  the  false  prophets,  and  assured  him  that  by  doing 
60  he  would  win  the  royal  favour.  **  Those  who  adore  earthly  greatness  think 
every  man  should  doat  on  their  idols,  and  hold  no  terms  too  high  for  their  am- 
bitious purchases.  Faithful  Micaiah  scorns  the  notion  :  he  knows  the  price  oi 
the  word,  and  condemns  it.  Neither  fears  nor  favours  can  tempt  the  holily 
resolute.  They  can  trample  upon  dangers  or  honours  with  a  careless  foot ;  and, 
whether  they  be  smiled  or  frowned  on  by  the  great,  dare  not  either  alter  or  con- 
ceal their  errand."  2.  Is  not  intimidated  by  the  presence  of  royalty,  (1). 
Ironically  exposes  and  rebukes  the  false  (verse  \h).  Micaiah  uttered  the  same 
words  as  the  four  hundred  prophets ;  but  by  his  manner  of  voice  and  look 
imitated  the  irony  of  Elijah  at  Carmel,  as  if  to  suggest  to  Ahab  how  misleading 
and  unworthy  of  Jehovah  was  such  an  ambiguous  oracle  as  theirs.  This 
mocking  manner,  which  might  be  familiar  to  Micaiah,  galls  by  its  contemptuous- 
ness:  it  is  a  dangerous  weapon;  should  be  judiciously  used;  in  some  hands  it  is 
strikingly  effective.  (2).  Speaks  the  truth,  though  it  is  unpleasant  to  royal  ears 
(verses  16-18).  Micaiah  wholly  changes  his  tone,  becomes  profoundly  serious, 
and  relates  his  vision,  the  meaning  of  which  Ahab  could  not  possibly  mistake, 
especially  as  the  metaphor  of  **  sheep  and  shepherd"  for  king  and  people  was 
familiar  to  the  Israelites  from  the  prayer  of  Moses  (Num.  xxvii.  17).  **  He 
was  resolved  to  speak  the  naked  truth,  though  he  were  sure  to  kiss  the  stocks 
for  his  stiffness."  The  man  who  is  inspired  to  declare  the  Divine  will  is  raised 
far  above  the  fear  of  his  fellow-creatures,  whether  they  are  robed  in  silks  or  in 
rags. 

rV.  Is  sustainedandconfirmedinhis  work  by  heavenly  visions(verses  19-23). 

A  vision  like  this  of  the  ineffable  glory  of  Jehovah  was  a  great  favour,  and  only 
granted  on  special  occasions  and  for  special  ends.  It  was  granted  to  Isaiah 
(Isaiah  vi.  1),  who  immediately  supposed  he  must  die,  because  he  had  seen  the 
King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts  ;  to  Ezekiel  (Ezek.  i.  26) ;  to  Daniel  (vii.  9) ;  and  in 
Christian  times  it  was  allowed  to  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  56)  and  John  (Kev.  iv.  2). 
Thus  God  prepares  His  servants  for  special  work  by  a  course  of  training  and 
discipline  in  every  way  suited  to  bring  about  its  faithful  accomplishment — by 
special  arrangements  of  His  providence,  and  by  special  and  striking  displays  ef 
His  glory.  The  man  who  sees  the  Lord,  and  gains  an  insight  into  heavenly 
realities,  will  be  filled  with  indomitable  courage  and  perseverance. 
352 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTAMT:   KINGS. 


CHAP.  xxn. 


V.  Is  often  called  to  suffer  for  his  faithfulness  rverses  24  97^     tt.    ^  • 

made  maffistracv  msfirKiJhIo  ^t  f^.-=  ,  '^'^^""^^  ^eu  taten,  if  malice  had  not 
that  hatefS^S  anv  hanT"^Tr^^  '^''"''  T-^*^"  •'""t'^nt  to  see 
messengers  to  smart  for  sa^nTtrath  7^^ V7  """!'"°°  °*  ^"-J'^  ^'^^'Wul 
an3jh4  than  in  blowsrSKL,ltS^^^^^^ 

'A^^r^^^ ''''' "'  <^°^  *''-*'^-  tiThrriSstfrLTe^ji^ 
Th!ih':^Srdl5eSct^^^^^         ?^'---^«  (--  28). 

treatment  (verse  %7)  thtrlu^mJT  '  "-"f  threatened  with  the  harshest 
ness  of  hismessage  id  caU^  UDon^rntn^^^^^^^^  '"  maintaining  the  truthful- 
do  we  know  of  snCil  comZ?d  wJff  ^l^  .*"  ^^^l  ^'^^'^  *"  '*•  How  little 
truth.  We  should  be  more  eneritiland^'il  °Tl°''^fl^''?  '^"^""'^  f°'  the 
the  will  of  God.     Ther^rdangef  tLT^^^^^^^  ^^1^  °  ''^^^"^  known 

us  less,  rather  than  more    cSned  ir,  IZl/^       f  '"^'™^  ^'^""''l  '''°<ier 
We  prize  that  most  for  which  we  suferS!^         Propagating  the  truth. 

The  Mas  who  Saw  the  Eobd  (verse  19). 

coSroSfltrdfdeSstr^  P^f  the  people  hiss;  while  the  in- 
spirit of  that  great  mulSude  How  «  '^'r'  ""''^S^-  ^e  is  the  master 
power?     Thetezt  (verse  S'isfheHn!  Tf*?  ff"""*  f"'-  ^is  commanding 

which  unlocks  the  se^7et«V;ar^l^'Lj^'  wt'^''"''  '^''  "^^'"'^^^  '^'  "^'7 
the  effect  now  we  know  the  ca^P      wffi;-  ,      ^  "''^  ""*  ^'"'S''''  astonished  at 

behaviour ;  after  such  a  sight  earth'sToor™  ""'  '"t  r'^^''^*"'"^  ^^'  "^''"'^ 
indeed.  Faith's  nercentmn^f  pi  V  ^  P.^^P  ™"^t  have  appeared  trivial 
True-  P««ept.on  of  God  has  ever  been  the  strength  of  the  Church! 

"Not  with  our  mortal  eves, 
Have  we  beheld  the  Lord," 

yet,  Moses  like,  the  Church  "  endures,"  as  seeing  Him  invisible.    Notiee- 

l.VJtdT^aT?em;rto5te^S?^:A"*,  "^'f^'^'  "^^'^  -y^terie. 
not  the  only  one  who  Lih^ZeT^uJflV^'  ny denes.  The  Psalmist  was 
good  man's  faith  has  staggered  un^pfi^K^^  ^^f "  ^^^'"-  ^'l^).  Many  a 
Micaiah  was  a  "man  of  ]fke  pass w'  t^  "'"?'"'  of  mysterious  providences, 
him  to  see  godless  Ahab  upoTa  ?h,o„e  "f"^'  ".'""^*  ^"^«  ^'^'"'^7  «ed 
favour  and  popular  esteem  whillfi'  ^?'''^?  prophets  basking  in  royal 
trodden  the  path  of  du5!lw;s!hut  un  f77.   '  *'""  \  "^^  convictions,  had 

LTterd^^Ch':il£>^^^^^^^^ 

help  him  to  ^^^^t^X^7^-^\^r7^X^\^^>;r..^ 


CHAP.  XXII  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


Micaiah  also  understood  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  government,  '*  The  secret  oi 
the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him,  and  He  will  show  them  His  covenant." 
The  imprisoned  prophet  had  seen  the  moving  power — the  unseen  forces  that  had 
acted  upon  the  four  hundred  prophets.  He  had  heard  the  evil  spirit  obtain  per- 
mission to  lure  Ah  ah  to  his  ruin.  He  knew  that  the  king  was  given  over  to 
believe  a  delusion  and  a  lie,  that  his  damnation  might  he  more  speedy.  He 
alone,  of  all  the  crowd,  regarded  him  as  a  ruined  man.  While  others  were 
feasting  their  eyes  with  the  trappings  of  royal  pageantry,  he  saw  the  fingers 
writing  **  Mene,  mcne,  tekel,  upharsin."  He  understood  the  unanimity  of  the 
prophets.  There  were  four  hundred  Ayes,  to  one  JVo ;  a  miserable  minority, 
the  people  said,  and  Jehoshaphat  thought  so  too,  or  he  would  not  have  accom- 
panied the  doomed  expedition.  But  truth  is  never  in  a  minority.  The  man 
who  has  God  on  his  side  is  always  with  the  majority.  Such  was  Moses  in 
Pharaoh's  court ;  Luther  before  the  Diet  at  Worms ;  Whitfield  amid  the 
showers  of  rotten  eggs  on  Kennington  Common.  Such  is  the  God-fearing  young 
man  in  the  shop  or  warehouse ;  who,  amid  the  taunts  of  ungodly  associates, 
maintains  a  Christian  bearing,  and  testifies  to  the  Gospel's  worth. 

II.  The  man  who  sees  the  Lord  can  best  perforin  life's  duties.     1.  God 

sometimes  calls  His  people  to  very  unpleasant  duties.  It  is  not  pleasant  to  run 
counter  to  the  wishes  of  friends  by  giving  our  protest  against  their  cherished 
projects.  Yet  this  was  what  Micaiah  had  to  do.  He  knew  the  consequences  of 
such  a  course ;  he  would  exasperate  a  king  whom  he  had  already  offended  ;  he 
would  make  his  own  punishment  more  severe  and  intolerable  than  it  had 
already  been ;  he  would  become  the  object  of  popular  hatred  and  contempt. 
Yet  **none  of  these  things  moved  him."  God  had  the  first  claim.  He  had 
seen  the  Lord,  and  that  siglit  had  changed  unpleasant  duties  into  delightful 
pleasures  2.  The  sight  of  the  Lord  is  essential  to  the  possession  of  qualifications 
necessary  for  religious  work.  'Tis  the  basis  upon  which  faith  rests.  Strong 
faith  is  the  mainspring  of  earnest  work.  Unbelief  paralyzes  Christian  effort. 
The  man  who  has  never  seen  the  Lord  is  not  the  man  for  church  work.  Colleges 
cannot  give  this  qualification.  Ten  minutes  beside  the  burning  bush  was  more 
useful  in  preparing  Moses  for  his  work,  than  all  the  years  he  had  spent  in  ac- 
quiring "  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptian."  It  took  Gamaliel  years  to  train 
young  Saul  to  be  a  bigoted  persecutor.  It  didn't  take  five  minutes  for  Christ 
to  change  him  to  a  devoted  Apostle,  and  from  that  hour  his  life  testified  the 
truth  of  his  assertion,  that  he  "  looked  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen." 
3.  A  sight  of  the  Lord  will  cause  men  to  regard  worldly  interests  and  personal  comforts 
as  secondary  matters.  The  narrative  does  not  give  the  name  of  the  officer  who 
conducted  the  prisoner  into  the  royal  presence.  John  Bunyan  would  call  him 
Worldly  Wiseman.  The  man  regarded  his  prisoner  with  something  akin  to 
pity  ;  his  haggard  face  and  bent  form  moved  him  to  advise  him  concerning  his 
conduct  before  the  king :  **  Behold  now,  the  words  of  the  prophets  declare  good 
unto  the  king  with  one  mouth  ;  let  thy  word,  I  pray  thee,  be  like  the  word  of 
one  of  them,  and  speak  that  which  is  good."  The  man  didn't  mean  what  he 
said  ;  he  meant  :  **  Speak  that  which  is  pleasing."  And  Micaiah  said  :  **  As 
the  Lordliveth,  what  the  Lord  saith  unto  me,  that  will  I  speak."  How  that 
reply  would  annoy  the  officer,  who  would  regard  him  as  an  obstinate  and  foolish 
man,  whose  singular  folly  merited  all  the  punishment  he  would  get.  He  would 
not  understand  such  a  man.  A  word,  and  his  rags  would  be  exchanged  for 
purple  and  fine  linen  :  from  a  dungeon  to  a  court ;  from  famine  to  plenty ;  from 
degradation  to  position  and  fame.  But  he  would  not  speak  the  word  ;  he  was 
no  time-server  to  pander  to  popular  taste.  **  What  the  Lord  saith  unto  me,  that 
will  I  speak." 

III.  The  man  who  sees  the  Lord  can  best  endure  life's  sujfferings.    The 
prison  is  no  longer  a  prison  if  God  is  there.     God  loves  to  favour  His  suffering 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap,  xxii. 


people  with  manifestations  of  His  presence,  whether  it  be  the  three  young  men 
in  the  fiery  furnace,  or  Paul  in  prison,  or  John  on  Patmos ;   all  alike  shall 
testify  that  **  He  is  a  very  present  help  in  trouble/'     It  was,  probably,  when 
Paul  had  been  beaten  so  severely  by  his  foes  as  to  be  unconscious  of  all  around 
him,  afterwards  unable  to  tell  whether  he  was  ''  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body," 
that  he  was  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven,  and  heard  God  say :  **  My  grace 
is  sufficient  for  thee.''     We  know  it  was  when  they  had  many  stripes  laid  upon 
them,  after  they  had  been  subjected  to  the  rough  violence  of  a  brutal  mob,  and  had 
spent  hours  with  their  swollen  limbs  in  the  stocks,  that  "  at  midnight  Paul  and 
Silas  sang,  and  the  prisoners  heard  them."     Such  sounds  had  never  before  been 
heard  through  the  gloomy  comdors  of  the  prison ;  groans  and  curses  had  been 
frequently  heard  there,  but  joyous  Christian  song,  never.     That  inner  cell  was 
dark — so  dark,  that  though  bolts  and  bars  and  fetters  were  felt,  they  could  not 
be  B3en  ;  but  the  apostles  saw  the  Lord  that  night,  and  **  endured  as  seeing  Him 
who  is  invisible."     A  wild,  excited  mob  is  dragging  a  prisoner  along  to  execu- 
tion ;  the  most  brutal  passions  are  depicted  in  their  countenance ;  they  cannot 
reserve  their  insults  and  cruelty  until  they  reach  the  spot  where  the  bloody 
scene  is  to  be  enacted ;  as  they  drag,  they  beat  and  stone  him.     But  mark  his 
face,  how  calm,  how  joyous !     And  when  they  reach  the  place,  the  victim  stands 
until  the  stones  bruise  and  gash  his  frame,  but  the  bloDd  cannot  wash  out  the 
expression  of  joy  Irom  holy  Stephen's  face.     We  can  account  for  that  joy  :  had 
he  not  just  said:   ''Behold  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man 
standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God."     Such  a  sight  enabled  him  to  endure  the 
suffering ;  and,  in  an  atmosphere  charged  with  the  hatred  of  hell,  and  amid  a 
storm  of  death-dealing  missiles,  he  calmly  lay  down  and  *' fell  asleep."     The 
presence  of  God  is  the  saints'  solace  under  suffering.     Micaiah  saw  more  splen- 
dours in  his  prison  than  Ahab  in  his  palace.     That  cell  was  illuminated  by  the 
ineffable  light,   and  visited  by  the    aristocracy.      Rutherford   compared   his 
dungeon  to  the  king's  cellar,  where  all  the  best  wines  were  kept ;  and  like 
Micaiah  he  would  sing— 

•*  Thy  presence,  Lord,  can  cheer 

This  dungeon  where  we  dwell ; 
*Tis  heaven  itself  if  Thou  art  near— 
If  Thou  depart  'tis  hell." 

rv.  The  man  who  sees  the  Lord  can  best  wait  for  life's  rewards.    Alas ! 

how  many  have  sacrificed  truth  and  a  good  conscience  for  earthly  rewards ! 
Micaiah  could  wait  for  f utuie  rewards.  Ahab  could  not  have  rewarded  him — 
he  had  nothing  that  could  have  satisfied  him.  He  had  seen  the  Lord,  and  the 
light  of  the  Divine  presence  revealed  how  valueless  earth's  poor  tinsel  baublei 
are.     Nothing  but  heaven  could  satisfy  him — 

**  Had  I  a  glance  of  Thee,  my  God, 
Kingdoms  and  men  should  vanish  soon; 
Vanish  as  though  I  saw  them  not, 
As  a  dim  candle  dies  at  noon." 

We  can  imagine  the  same  officer  taking  him  back,  and,  as  the  jailor  pushed 
him  into  his  dark  cell,  he  would  say — ''Serve  him  right!"  And  then  he 
would  tell  the  jailor  about  the  events  of  the  day,  and  how  foolish  the  prisoner 
had  behaved  in  being  so  blind  to  his  own  interests,  and  then  they  would 
talk  about  what  Ahab  meant  by  kt  eping  him  until  "  I  come  in  peace."  Did 
he  mean  to  restore  him  to  liberty  then?  They  knew  better  than  that.  The 
day  of  Ahab's  return  would  be  the  day  of  Micaiah's  death.  Such  would  be 
their  rational  conclusion.  How  much  or  how  long  he  suffered  we  cannot 
tell,  but  we  know  it  was  well  with  him  to  the  last.  "  Say  ye  to  the  righteons, 
it  shall  be  well  with  him." — Condensed  from  Tlie  Christian  Age  for  1873. 

855 


CHAP.  xxn. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   KINGS, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


Verses  1-28.  King  Ahab  appears 
here  in  the  last  act  of  his  career,  just 
as  we  have  seen  him  always  hitherto, 
devoid  of  religious  or  moral  character. 
His  penitence,  which  seemed  so  earnest, 
and  which  certainly  falls  in  the  period 
immediately  preceding  the  renewed 
war  with  the  Syrians,  had,  as  we  see 
from  the  story  before  us,  borne  no 
fruit.  His  attitude  towards  Jehovah 
and  his  covenant  remained  the  same. 
There  is  not  a  sign  of  any  change  of 
heart.  He  is  now  enraged  against 
Benhadad,  whom,  after  the  battle  of 
Aphek,  he  called  his  ''brother,"  and 
suffered  to  depart  out  of  weakness  and 
vanity.  He  summons  the  chief  sol- 
diers to  a  war  against  Benhadad,  and 
calls  for  Jehoshaphat's  aid  also,  in 
order  to  make  sure  of  destroying  him. 
As  Jehoshaphat  desired,  before  engag- 
ing on  the  expedition,  to  hear  an  ora- 
cle of  Jehovah  in  regard  to  it,  Ahab 
summoned  only  those  in  regard  to 
whose  declarations  he  could  be  sure 
they  would  accord  with  his  own 
wishes ;  and  when  Micaiah,  being 
called  at  the  express  wish  of  Jehosha- 
phat, gives  another  prophetic  declara- 
tion, Ahab  explains  this  as  the  expres- 
sion of  personal  malice,  as  he  had  once 
done  in  regard  to  Elijah's  declarations 
(eh.  xxi.  20).  He  allows  Zedekiah  to 
insult  and  abuse  Micaiah,  and  even 
orders  the  latter  into  close  confinement. 
Then,  again,  he  becomes  alarmed  at 
the  prophet's  words,  though  before  he 
was  passionate  and  excited ;  and  he 
goes  into  battle  disguised. — Lange, 

Verses  1-4.  National  alliances. 
1.  Are  justifiable  against  a  dangerous 
and  powerful  enemy.  2.  Are  always 
attended  with  peril  where  there  is 
want  of  harmony  in  religious  beliefs. 
3.  Cannot  result  in  permanent  good 
without  the  Divine  blessing. 

Verse  3.  It  is  a  misfortune  when 
great  men  have  a  fondness  for  war. 
They  are  not  satisfied  when  they  must 
be  still,  but  seek  war  without  neces- 
sity, and  imperil  their  country.  Do 
356 


ye  not  know  that  heaven  is  ours,  yet 
we  be  still !  So  should  those  cry 
out  to  their  hearers  who  are  charged 
with  the  cure  of  souls,  and  should  en- 
courage them  to  take  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  by  force  (Matt.  xi.  12). — 
Wurt.  iSumm, 

Verses  5-12.  The  delusion  of  false- 
hood. I.  All  the  more  dangerous 
when  it  is  the  consentaneous  declara- 
tion of  acknowledged  religious  leaders 
(verses  6,  12).  II.  JS'ever  lacks  an  au- 
dacious and  ingenious  champion  (verse 
11).  III.  Meanly  obsequious  in  the 
presence  of  royal  pomp  and  circum- 
stance (verse  10).  IV.  Fears  expo- 
sure from  the  tongue  of  the  faithful 
(verse  8).  V.  Is  ever  suspected  by 
the  truly  good  (verses  5,  7). 

Verse  7.  Their  number  consent; 
confidence  hath  easily  won  credit  with 
Ahab :  we  do  all  willingly  believe 
what  we  wish.  Jehoshaphat  is  not  so 
soon  satisfied.  These  prophets  were, 
it  is  like,  obtruded  t-o  him  for  the  true 
prophets  of  the  true  God.  The  judi- 
cious king  sees  cause  to  suspect  them, 
and  now,  perceiving  at  what  altars 
they  served,  hates  to  rest  in  their  tes- 
timony. ' '  Is  there  nowhere  a  prophet 
of  the  Lord  besides?"  One  single 
prophet  speaking  from  the  oracles  of 
God  is  worth  more  than  four  hundred 
Baalites.  Truth  may  not  ever  be 
measured  by  the  poll.  It  is  not  num- 
ber, but  weight,  that  must  carry  it  in  a 
council  of  prophets.  A  solid  verity  in 
one  mouth  is  worthy  to  preponderate 
light  falsehood  in  a  thousand. — Bp. 
Ball. 

Verses  10-12.  There  is  nothing  that 
is  more  sinful  and  worthy  of  punish- 
ment than  to  flatter  the  great,  who 
need  to  hear  the  truth.  This  is  more 
sinful,  however,  in  the  clergy  than  in 
others.  Who  is  not  disgusted  by  those 
who  fashion  their  words  by  popular 
favour?  Yet  he  who  would  go  on 
smoothly,  easily,  and  prosperously 
must  do  this.     Then  he  will  not  meet 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.xxii. 


with  opposition,  nor  lose  his  place  at  (verses   19-23).      Y.    Refuses    to  be 

Jezebel's  table,  nor  his  other  emolii-  silent,  though  threatened  and  afflicted 

ments.     All  the  four  hundred  agreed  with  severest  sufferings  (verses  24-2 «). 
unanimously,  and  yet  their  prophecy 

was  false.  In  matters  of  Divine  truth  Yerses  19-23.  Heavenly  visions. 
it  matters  not  how  many  agree.  Here  I.  Present  sublime  and  elevating  re- 
voices  ought  tobe  weighed,  not  counted,  velations  of  truth.  II.  Sustain  and 
The  number  of  the  unbelieving  or  strengthen  the  suffering  faithful.  III. 
the  superstitious  was  always  greater  Are  intended  to  guide  and  instruct  in  a 
than  that  of  the  believers,  for  men  crisis  of  national  and  religious  difficulty, 
agree  in  error  or  falsehood  much  more  lY.  Aggravate  national  ruin  when 
easily  than  in  truth.  Be  not  deceived,  wilfully  disregarded, 
though  thousands  may  think  and  say 

the  same  thing,  and  though  the  greatest  .  Yerse   22.    The   difficulties    which 

and  most   learned    may   be    amongst  attach  to  this  passage  are  considerable, 

them ;  but  cling  thou  to  the  word  of  While,  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  hard  to 

Him  who  said,    **  Heaven  and   earth  suppose   that  one  of  the   holy  angels 

shall  pass   away,  but  my  word  shall  would   undertake  to  be,  and  be  per- 

not  pass  away."  Unanimity  of  opinion,  mitted  to  be,  a  ''lying  spirit,"  on  the 

even  in   the  largest  congregations  of  other,  it  is  not  what  we  should   have 

theologians,  is  not  always  a  proof  of  expected,    to  find  Satan,    or   an  evil 

truth,  for  a  great  company  may  err. —  spirit,   included   among    the    host    of 

Lange.  heaven  (verse  19),  and  acting  as  the 

minister  of  God.   Still,  as  Satan  appears 

Yerses  12-28.  Here  we  see  the  marks  sometimes  to  present  himself  to   God 

of  the  true  and  false  prophets.     The  among  the   angels   (Job.  i.  6;   ii.  1), 

false  teachers  say  what  is  popular,  so  he  may  have  done  so  on  this  occasion ; 

as  to  enjoy  rewards;    they  rely  upon  and  the  service  which  he  offered  may 

their  numbers ;  they  say  that  they  have  have  been   accepted.      On  the   other 

God's  Word,  though  they  have  it  not,  hand,  we  scarcely  know  enough  of  the 

and  claim  to  be  in  all  things  equal  to  Divine  government  in  its  action  upon 

the  true  teachers ;  they  dispute  more  evil  to  say  that  the  holy  angels  may 

with   blows   and   screams   than   with  not  sometimes  be  employed,  when  God 

proofs  from  the  Word  of  God ;  they  are  '*  sends  men  strong  delusion  that  they 

held  in  high  esteem.     On  the  contrary,  should  believe  a  lie"  (1  Thess.  ii.  12). 

true  teachers  do  not  speak  to  please  Finally,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  we 

anybody,  but  they  preach  fearlessly  the  ought  to  take  literally,  and  seek  to  in- 

truth  of  God's  Word,  letting  it  strilce  terpret  exactly,  each  statement  of  the 

whom  it  will,  refusing  to  be  turned  present  narrative.     Yisions  of  the  in- 

aside  and  submitting  to  persecution. —  visible  world  can  only  be  a  sort  of  para- 

Wurt.  Summ.  bles  ;  revelations,  not  of  the  truth  as  it 

actually  is,  but  of  so  much  of  the  truth 
Yerse  12.  These  were  fit  helves  for  as  can   be    shown    through    such    a 
such  a  hatchet  as  Ahab  was ;  fit  lettuce  medium.    The  details  of  a  vision,  there- 
for such  lips.     Itching  ears  shall  have  fore,  cannot  safely  be  pressed,  any  more 
clawing  preachers. — Trapp,  than  the  details  of  a  parable.     Portions 

of  each   must   be  accommodations  to 

Yerses  13-28.    The  intrepidity  of  human  modes  of  thought,  and  may  very 

truth.     I.  Is  superior  to  the  influence  inadequately  express  the  realities  which 

of  bribery  (verses  13,  14).    II.  Teaches  they  are  employed  to  shadow  forth  to 

when  to  use  judiciously  the  weapon  of  us. — Speaker^ s  Comm. 
irony  (verses  15,  16).     III.  Fearlessly 

declares   what  is    divinely    revealed,  Yerse  23.  These  men  called  prophets 

irrespective  of  consequences  (verses  17,  were    only    pretenders    to    prophecy, 

18).     lY.  Is    explicit    and     uncom-  whom  the  wicked  king  of  Israel  had 

promising  in  the  exposure  of  falsehood  in  his  pay,  and  who  knew  how  to  suit 

^^7 


CHAP.  xxM.  ROMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


his   humour  and  flatter    his  vanity,  escapes  and  spreads,  and  only  gains  in 

Micaiah  distinctly  calls  them  Ahab's  glory  by  our  attempts  to  oppress  it. — 

prophets.     The  address  of  Micaiah  is  Lange, 
not  a  real  representation  of  anything 

done  in  the  heavenly   world,  as  if  the  Verse  26.  To  prison,  whence  he  was 

Almighty  were  at  a  loss  for  expedients,  fetched,  and  whereof  he  might  say,  as 

or  had  any  hand  in  the  sins  of  his  that  maityr   did   to  the  bishop   who 

creatures.     It  is  a  parable,  and  tells  reviled  and  threatened  him :  Send  me 

in    figurative    language    the    events  back  to  my  frogs  and  toads,  where  I 

shortly  to   take  place,   and  the  per-  may  be  free  to  pray  for  your  lordship, 
mission  on  the  part  of  God  for  these 

agents  to  act.     It  is  a  known  idiom  of  Yerse.  27.  This   is    the    ercphatic 

the  Hebrew  language  to  express  things  clause  of  Aliab's  speech.     Micaiah  is 

in  an  imperative  and  active  form  which  to  be  once  more  put  in  prison,  but  not 

are  to  be  understood  only  permissively.  on  the  same  terms  as  before.     In  order 

— T,  n.  Home.  to  punish   him    for  his  uncomplying 

spirit,  he  is  to  be  placed  upon  a  poorer 

Verses  24-28.  Micaiah's  suffering  and  scantier  diet  than  he  had  been 
for  the  truth.  1.  He  is  publicly  in-  previously  allowed  ;  and  this  is  to 
suited  by  Zedekiah,  the  chief  of  the  continue  until  Ahab  returns  in  peace. 
prophets  (Matt.  v.  11).  2.  He  is  Ahab  introduces  this  expression  pur- 
thrown  into  prison  by  the  godless  king  posely,  in  order  to  show  his  entire 
Ahab  (1  Pet.  ii.  19).  3.  He  is  left  disbelief  of  Micaiah's  prophecy. — 
unprotected  by  the  pious  king  ISpeaher^s  Comm, 
Jehoshaphat  (Matt.  xxvi.  56), 

Verse  28.  The  hope  of  unjust  men 

Verses  2^'-28.  Ahab's  conduct  to-  perisheth  (Prov.  xi.  7).     Julian,  for 

wards  the  witness  of  the  truth.     I.  instance,  when  he  went  out   to  war 

It  was  tyrannical.     There  is  no  greater  against    the    Persians,    breathed   out 

tyranny  than  to  suppress  by  force  the  threatenings  against  the  Christians  on 

Divine  Word  and  the  truth.    11.  It  was  his  return,  which    was    never.     And 

foolish.     We   cannot  accomplish  any-  that  French  king  who  promised  to  see 

thing  against  the  truth  (2  Cor.  xiii.  8).  with  his  eyes  a  certain  female  martyr 

We  can  put  the   advocates   of  it  in  burnt,  had,  before  that  time,  one  of 

prison,  but  not  the  truth.     It  cannot  his  eyes  thrust  out  at  the  jousts,  of 

be  bound  in  chains,  nor  starved.     It  which  wound  he  died. 


M0MILETIC8  OF  FERSES  29-40. 
The  Death  op  a  Wicked  Kino. 

I.  That  the  death  of  a  wicked  king  may  be  precipitated  by  an  un- 
believing disregard  of  divine  warnings  (verse  29  compare  with  verses  17-23). 
1.  A  wicked  king  is  not  indifferent  to  human  threats  (verses  30,  31).  It  is  very 
likely  that  Ahab  had  heard,  through  the  agency  of  his  spies,  of  the 
order  of  the  Syrian  king  for  his  charioteers  to  fight  only  with  the  king  of 
Israel,  and  this  had  more  effect  upon  him  than  the  warning  words  of  Micaiah 
though  he  might  regard  them  as  an  evil  omen.  To  baffle  the  object  of 
Uenhadad,  and  perhaps  with  a  secret  wish  to  prove  the  words  of  Micaiah 
false,  Ahab  disguised  himself.  A  wicked  man  is  often  more  easily  scared  by 
the  bluster  and  bullying  of  a  weak,  sinful,  human  creature,  than  by  the 
threatenings  of  heaven.  2.  A  wicked  king  is  reckless  as  to  the  danger  in  which 
he  exposes  his  ally  (verses  32,  33).  Jehoshaphat  in  his  kingly  robes  was  mis- 
taken for  the  king  of  Israel,  and  very  nearly  fell  a  victim  to  the  Syrian  fury. 
858 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CQBJLP.  XXII. 


He  cried  to  Heaven  for  help  (2  Chron    xviii    81  ^    T.^rT.or.o       •       •.. 

together.  Selfislmess  is  the  eJulloP^-XXt  sTlZ  i^'^  >""' 
h.a.seH  escapes,  it  xnatters  little  to  hi.  what  ^ytZl  o]\^:L%Z^''' 

(verses  34,  35).  Aa  archer  shoofaHUwaaeaTr  tittle'' drf^-^'''''\"''f 
m,schiefzt  win  work;  it  is  the  death  warraTof  the  kl^' of  itaT'"!  f '* 
himself  mortally  wounded,  he  directed  his  chariot  to  be  ouiett^  •  ^^ 

that  he  might  have  his  wounds  dressed;  and  then  retnme^d  to  tL  K  h?  '''''' 
ported  in  his  chariot  in  sight  of  his  armv  iinHl  +),  J  I       C^^  ''^^^^^'  ^V' 

Let  us  give  Ahah  full  credit  L^ir/er'wal  tmrntw:Yn\'ir^^^^^^ 
Bad  as  he  was,  there  was  a  touch  of  t,ue  heroism  "n The  brave  resoW."'^- 

aL:Sl:t-:rhr^tit&uS^^ 
::^^^^^ras.:^  i°e^-=  tB¥ 

ali^tSLvi^^l^vr^^^^^^^  ;«;rgl:  '^^^^ff'^^^  SorXh' 

armour  in  which  he^was  dressed  and^the  I  ^'^T^^-^d  had  covered  both  the 
many  hours.  The  chaHot  IV^ht  ^y^  '^""°*  '"  ''^''=''  ^'>  had  stood  for  so 
to  one  ver  on  in  the   ank  "^T \f   ^'  ^™""I'-  "^^^  ^''='^^^'  *°  ^tatc-according 

Wl.  The\;Zde*^r^emom'  3^tClf  b°lid  st^Vd'^  ^^™!."' 
distant  battle  field   sfrpamprl  iT.f^  +1,^  tue  oiooa    sn(>a  as  it  had  been  on  the 

the  blood  of  mboth  trhis'sot  a:dTa:7a;s  S'tmihf''  ^''"r  .^ 

same  dogs  and  swine,  still  prowlin- Tnuml^rt.  ^  I  j  .,'"'''"8''' ''^  tl'e 
abandoned  outcasts  of  the  ctv-nrhohi  ir  ^^^P"*'' .«ad  that  when  the 
rites  of  the  temple  of  Ashtwh  ^T''^^^  those  who  had  assisted  in  the  profligate 

their  morning  Ch  in  tttooTthnv'r'''':^'^-?^  1"  ^^t  ^'"'"^'''^^  "^"Se-  f  ' 
apostate  king  of  Israel  So  we^^  t/  1°t  '\  'f.^  ^'*  ^'^^  ''J°°'J  «*  the  first 
Micaiah.  sf  ended  what  mlvLn^nf/M  *^  '"'''"'"Ss  of  Elijah  and 
House  of  Omri  (5^4     Wh^t  luldt   W  t^''  T*  of  the  traged}  of  the 

day  on  the  battle  field?    Alrefdv  he  h-'  --"^""^^^^^^^ 

Micaiah's  warnings  re-ardint  b,%,(..lf  a  ^  f  °*  *^  fulfilment  of  one  of 
the  rest  would  fXw.^  W  th  tha  horror  ^"'^,^1  '""f  ^  anticipated  that 
life-the  warnings  h^  had  sLlTted  ftT,  7""'*^  \'  f  ^"'=*  ^P°°  his  wicked 
pioned.  the  stolen  viLyard  of  Nab^tl  Vhi^''^.,''"  ^^  c,<"">"itted  and  cham- 
If  we  reject  the  warn  in  L  of  hL'^^n  '  *he  heartless  imprisonment  of  Micuiah  ! 
The  apparent  deTaTaffSds  tt  e  ZTl  f  "°'  ^''7^^  "'^'^^  accomplishment 
indiscriminate  leniJncy  or  foSutnes?'''*'""''   '^^  "  °°*  *°  ''^  "^^'"^^en  for 

ati^-  t^haf  ifoctSd  L\rSsfof  eT  ^'^^l  ""^  ^•^"'^'"^  ^^  "^"-"i- 
(verses  39,   40).    All  th^t  ll^^Lf f^^'^'l^^  magnificence  and  power 


CHAP.  XXII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS, 


the  kings  of  Judah — the  fortified  and  prosperous  cities  he  had  reared,  the  ease 
and  gaiety  of  his  luxurious  court,  must  be  abandoned  for  ever;  and  what  would 
he  get  in  exchange  ?  Death  is  no  respecter  of  persons  or  circumstances.  The 
mortal  scythe  is  master  of  the  royal  sceptre.  What  will  riches,  magnificent 
monuments,  or  heroic  deeds  avail  when  God  requires  the  sinner's  soul?  A 
wicked  life  does  not  pay. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  Royalty  is  no  defence  against  the  havoc  of  death.  2.  A  wicJced 
life  will  he  cut  short  hy  an  ignominious  end.  3.  A  monarch  who  has  lived  for 
himself  will  perish  unregretted. 


GERM  NOTES  UN  TEE  VERSES. 


Verses  29-40.  Ahab's  end  was  truly 
tragical.  It  was  brought  about,  not 
by  a  blind  fate,  but  by  a  God  who  is 
just  in  His  ways  and  holy  in  all  His 
works  (Psa.  cxlv.  17),  whose  judg- 
ments are  unsearchable,  and  His  ways 
past  finding  out  (Rom.  xi.  33).  The 
conflict  which  Ah  ib  had  sought,  and 
which  no  warning  could  induce  him  to 
abandon,  became  his  punishment.  He 
fell  in  battle  with  that  very  enemy 
who  had  once  been  delivered  into  his 
hands,  and  whom  he  had  released 
out  of  vanity  and  weakness,  to  the 
harm  of  Isiael;  and  so  he  made  good 
the  words  of  the  prophet  (ch.  xx.  42). 
He  thought  that  a  disguise  would 
render  him  secure  from  the  Syrian 
leaders  who  sought  to  find  him  out, 
and  he  did,  indeed,  escape  them  ;  but 
an  unknown  man,  who  did  not  know 
him  and  had  no  intention  against  him, 
shot  him,  while  Jeshoshaphat,  though 
undisguised,  escaped  unharmed.  The 
arrow  which  struck  him  was  not 
warded  off  by  his  corselet,  but  just 
struck  the  narrow  opening  between 
the  corselet  and  the  skirt,  where  it 
could  penetrate  and  inflict  a  fatal 
wound.  Everyone,  therefore,  who 
does  not  regard  all  incidents  as  acci- 
dents, must  recognize  the  hand  which 
guided  the  shaft.  The  words  of  the 
psalmist  held  true — "If  he  will  not 
turn,  he  will  whet  his  sword,  he  hath 
bent  his  bow  and  made  it  ready.  He 
hath  also  prepared  for  him  the  instru- 
ments of  death ;  he  ordaineth  his 
arrows  against  the  persecutors  "  (Psa. 
Vii.  12,  13).  Finally,  Ahab  did  not 
die  at  once,  but  at  evening,  in  conse- 
<juence  of  the  loss  of  blood.  His  blood 
360 


flowed  down  in  the  chariot,  which 
was  so  besmeared  by  it  that  it  had  to 
be  washed.  It  was  washed  at  the 
pool  before  the  city,  where  dogs 
drank  and  harlots  bathed.  So  it 
came  to  pass,  although  he  was  buried 
with  all  honour,  that  he  was  marked 
in  his  death  as  one  condemned  by 
God,  and  Elijah's  word  was  fulfilled 
(ch.  xxi.  19). — Lange, 

Terse  29.  It  might  have  been 
expected  that  Jehoshaphat,  who  had 
pressed  enquiry  at  the  Word  of  the 
Lord,  and  had  not  rested  till  a  real 
prophet  of  Jehovah  was  sent  for  and 
made  his  appearance,  would  have 
withdrawn  from  the  expedition  when 
he  heard  Micaiah  denounce  it  as  fated 
to  end  in  disaster.  It  must  be  re- 
membered, however,  that  he  had 
rashly  committed  himself  to  take  part 
in  the  war  by  a  solemn  promise, 
couched  in  the  strongest  teiins 
(v.  4),  hefore  he  bethought  himself  of 
enquiring  what  was  the  will  of  God 
in  the  matter.  His  honour  was  thus 
pledged,  and  he  would  be  ashamed  to 
draw  back,  especially  as  Ahab,  whom 
the  prophecy  chiefly  threatened,  was 
resolved  to  brave  it.  He  may  also  have 
had  a  personal  aff'ection  for  Ahab,  and 
so  have  been  loth  to  desert  him  in 
his  need.  This  seems  tv.  be  implied 
in  the  rebuke  addressed  to  him  by  the 
prophet  Jehu  after  his  return  to  Jeru- 
salem— ''Shouldest  thou  help  the 
ungodly,  and  love  them  that  hate  the 
Lord  ?  Therefore  is  wrath  upon  thee 
from  before  the  Lord  "  (2  Chron.  xix. 
2). — Speaher''s   Comm. 

—  Men  do  far  too   readily  what 


SOMTIF.TIO  COMMKNTARY:  KINGS, 


CHAP.   Xxlt. 


they  want  to  do,  although  it  is  con- 
trary to  God's  will^  putting  aside  God's 
Word,  or  the  warnings  of  others,  or  the 
voice  of  conscience.  The  event  was 
never  good.  How  often  men  ask  for 
advice,  yet  follow  their  own  will  only ! 
Jehoshaphat's  example  ought  to  make 
us  shy  of  the  society  of  the  wicked. 
The  sun  of  grace  in  his  heart  became 
gradually  dimmed.  At  first  he  had 
courage  to  remonstrate  with  Ahab,  but 
gradually  he  comes  to  silence  and  in- 
dijfference,  even  while  Micaiah  is  abused 
and  remanded  to  prison.  In  the  end 
this  evU  companionship  would  have 
cost  him  his  life,  if  God  had  not 
wonderfully  interposed. — Kylur%, 

Terse  30.  The  vanity  of  disguise. 

I.  An  evidence  of  cowardice  and  fear. 

II.  Easily  penetrated  by  the  eye  of  the 
Omniscient  Judge.  III.  Does  not  pre- 
vent the  catastrophe  it  seeks  to  avoid. 

—  Unbelief  in  Ahab  joined  hands 
with  superstition.  The  king  despises 
and  rejects  the  Word  of  God  which  is 
announced  to  him,  and  yet  he  is 
frightened,  and  seeks  to  escape  the 
threatened  dangers  by  disguising  him- 
self. This  stratagem  was  intended  to 
prove  the  prophet  fake,  Neither  cun- 
ning nor  might  avails  against  God's 
will.  Thou  mayest  disguise  thyself  as 
thou  wilt :  God  will  find  thee  when 
and  where  no  man  recognises  thee 
(Psa.  cxxxix.  7-12). 

Verse  31.  The  king  of  Syria  gives 
charge  to  his  captains  to  fight  against 
none  but  the  king  of  Israel.  Thus 
doth  the  unthankful  infidel  repay  the 
mercy  of  his  late  victor ;  ill  was  the 
snake  saved  that  requites  the  favour 
of  his  life  with  a  sting  :  thus  still  the 
greatest  are  the  fairest  mark  to  en- 
vious eyes.  By  how  much  more  emi- 
nent any  man  is  in  the  Israel  of  God, 
60  many  more  and  more  dangerous 
enemies  must  he  expect:  both  earth 
and  hell  conspire  in  their  opposition  to 
the  worthiest.  Those  who  are  ad- 
vanced above  others  have  so  much 
more  need  of  the  guard,  both  of  their 
own  vigilancy  and  others'  prayers. 
Jehoshnphat  had  liked  to  have  paid 
dear  for  his  love :  he  is  pursued  for 


him  in  whose  amity  he  offended ;  his 
cries  deliver  him — his  cries,  not  to  his 
pursuers,  but  to  his  God,  whose  mercy 
takes  not  advantage  of  our  infirmity, 
but  rescues  us  from  those  evils  which 
we  wilfully  provoke.  It  is  Ahab 
against  whom,  not  the  Syrians  only, 
but  for  himself  intends  this  quarrel; 
the  enemy  is  taken  off  from  Jehosha- 
phat. — Bp.  Rail, 

Verse  34.  The  greatest  calamities. 

I.  Often  brought  about  by  undesigned 
and  accidental  causes.  II.  Often  occur 
to  those  who  have  taken  the  greatest 
pains  to  avoid  them.  III.  May  be 
traced  to  the  unerring  operations  of 
retributive  justice. 

—  The  less  of  the  human  there  is  in 
those  things  which  we  commonly  call 
accidents,  the  more  there  is  of  the 
Divine.  The  weal  or  woe  of  whole 
nations  often  depends  on  those  things 
which  are  called  accidents. 

—  0  the  just  and  mighty  hand  of 
that  Divine  providence  which  directeth 
all  our  actions  to  His  own  ends,  which 
takes  order  where  every  shaft  shall 
light,  and  guides  the  arrow  of  the 
strong  archer  into  the  joints  of  Ahab's 
harness !  It  was  shot  at  a  venture, 
falls  by  a  destiny ;  and  there  falls 
where  it  may  carry  death  to  a  hidden 
debtor.  In  all  actions,  both  voluntary 
and  casual,  thy  will,  0  God,  shall  be 
done  by  us,  with  whatever  intentions. 
Little  did  the  Syrian  know  whom  he 
had  stricken,  no  more  than  the  arrow 
with  which  he  struck.  An  invisible 
hand  disposeth  of  both,  to  the  punish- 
ment of  i\hab,  to  the  vindication  of 
Micaiah.  How  worthily,  0  God,  art 
thou  to  be  adored  in  thy  justice  and 
wisdom  !  to  be  feared  in  thy  judg- 
ments !  Too  late  doth  Ahab  now 
think  of  the  fair  warnings  of  Micaiah, 
which  he  unwisely  condemned ;  of 
the  painful  flatteries  of  Zedekiah, 
which  he  stubbornly  believed.  That 
guilty  blood  of  his  runs  down  out  of 
his  wound  into  the  midst  of  his  chariot, 
and  pays  Naboth  his  arrearages. — Bp, 
Hall. 

Verses  37-40.  0  Ahab,  whatartthou 
the  better  for  thine  ivory  house,  while 

361 


CflAP.  XXII. 


nOMlLETIC  COMMBNTAUT:  KINGS, 


thou  hast  a  hlack  soul  ?  What  com- 
fort has  thou  now  in  those  flattering 
prophets  which  tickled  thine  ears  and 
secured  thee  of  victories  ?  What  joy- 
is  it  to  thee  now  that  thou  wast  great  ? 
Who  had  not  rather  he  Micaiah  in  the 
jail,  thanAhab  inthe  chariot?  Wicked 
men  have  the  advantage  of  the  way; 
godly  men  of  the  end.  The  chariot  is 
washed  in  the  pool  of  Samaria ;  the 
dogs  come  to  claim  their  due  ;  they 
lick  up  the  blood  of  the  great  king  of 
Israel.  The  tongues  of  those  brute 
creatures  shall  make  good  the  tongue 
of  God's  prophet.  Micaiah  is  justified, 
l^aboth  is  revenged,  the  Baalites  con- 
founded, Ahab  judged.  **  Eighteous 
art  thou,  0  God,  in  all  thy  ways,  and 
holy  in  all  thy  works"! — Bp.  Sail, 

Verse  37.  And  now  God  was  even 
with  him  for  his  idolatry,  persecution 
of  the  prophets,  cruelty  to  Naboth, 
who  now  was  in  far  better  condition, 
likely.  The  wicked  are  like  hawks, 
of  great  esteem  while  living,  but  after, 
nothing  worth.  The  godly  are  com- 
pared to  tamer  fowls,  which  are  hushed 
forth  and  little  heeded  whilst  living  ; 
but  after  death  are  brought  into  the 
parlour.  Then,  there  is  as  much 
difierence  as  betwixt  the  falcon  and 
the  capon,  the  hawk  and  the  hen. — 
Trapp, 

Yerses  37,  38.  The  death  of  Ahab. 
1.  It  was  sudden  (1  Sam.  xx.  3  ;  Luke 
xii.  20).  From  sudden  death,  good 
Lord,  deliver  us.  2.  It  was  unrepent- 
ant. Without  conviction  of  sin,  or  re- 
pentance for  it,  or  longing  for  grace 
and  pardon.  3.  It  was  shameful.  He 
was  indeed  buried  with  honour,  like 
the  rich  man  (Luke  xvi.) ;  but  the 
dogs  licked  his  blood,  and  his  memory 
does  not  remain  in  honour  (Ps.  Ixxiii. 
19;  therefore,  Ps.  xc.  12;  xxxix.  5). 
As  he  lived,  so  he  died ;  as  he  died, 
so  he  was  judged.  The  death  of  Ahab 
is  a  testimony  to  E,om.  xi.  33  ;  Gal. 
vi.  7 ;  Isa.  xl.  8. — Lange, 

Yerse  38.    The  inexorable  law  of 
retribution.       1.    Is   proportioned  to 
the  character  and  degree  of  the  sin  it 
362 


punishes.  2.  Is  the  terrible  comple- 
tion of  the  warnings  and  threatenings 
which  foreshadowed  it.  3.  A  proof 
of  the  unchanging  justice  of  Jehovah. 
4.  An  awful  yet  salutary  method  of 
instruction  to  all  nations  in  all  ages. 

—  From  a  narrative  like  this,  it 
need  scarcely  be  said,  the  stern  justice 
of  God  may  well  be  engraven  on  every 
heart.  The  examples  we  have  of  re- 
tributive providence  in  sacred  Scripture 
are,  to  say  the  least,  exceedingly 
striking.  Judas  hanged  himself. 
Herod  the  Great,  who  slew  the  children 
of  Bethlehem,  was  smitten  with  ulcers, 
from  which  issued  swarms  of  loathsome 
vermin,  and  died  inthe  greatest  agony  ; 
a  humbling  spectacle  to  his  meanest 
slave.  Herod  Agrippa,  who  permitted 
his  fawning  parasites  to  adore  him  as 
God,  *'  was  eaten  of  worms  and  gave 
up  the  ghost."  The  other  Herod,  who 
sent  and  beheaded  the  Baptist,  spent 
his  closing  years  with  his  guilty 
partner  an  exile  in  Lyons;  while 
Salome,  who  asked  the  Baptist's  head 
in  a  charger,  met  with  her  death,  as 
related  by  Nicephorus,  at  the  hand  of 
a  common  assassin.  Let  examples 
such  as  these  stand  alongside  of  Ahab, 
to  teach  that  even  in  this  world  these 
awful  words  have  frequently  an  awful 
meaning  :  '•  Yengeance  is  mine,  I  will 
repay,  saith  the  Lord." — Mowat, 

Yerse  39,  Nothing  is  known  of 
these  cities;  but  the  fact  of  Ahab's 
building  cities  is  important,  as  indicat- 
ing the  general  prosperity  of  the 
country  in  his  time,  and  his  own  ac- 
tivity as  a  ruler.  The  close  relations 
which  he  established  with  Phoenicia 
and  Judea  tended  naturally  to  bring 
about  a  flourishing  condition  of  things 
in  Samaria ;  and  thus  the  decay  of 
religion  was  accompanied  by  a  tempor- 
ary increase  in  the  material  prosperity 
(2  Kings  iii.  4),  the  commercial  enter- 
prize  (verse  49),  and  even  the  military 
vigour  of  the  country.  Such  prosper- 
ity, it  is  plain,  may  for  awhile  co-exist 
with  causes  which  are  sapping  the 
vital  power  of  a  nation,  and  leading 
it  surely,  if  slowly,  to  destruction.-^ 
Speaker' i  Coram, 


BOMIIETIC  COMMENTAItT:   KINGS.  CftAP.  :xxn. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  4,1-50. 

The  Phaisewobtht  Efforts  of  a  Good  Kino. 

An  agreeable  change  comes  across  the  character  of  the  history — ^like  a  waver- 
ing stream  of  light  which  silvers  and  beautifies  the  dark  and  restless  sea.  The 
last  seven  chapters  have  been  wholly  occupied  with  the  history  of  the  kingdom 
of  Israel ;  a  dismal  record  of  defection,  idolatry,  bloodshed,  ever  intensifying 
wickedness,  and  of  terrible  judgments.  Here  we  have  interposed,  as  if  to  re- 
lieve the  blackness  of  the  picture,  a  brief  epitome  of  the  career  of  the  good 
Jehoshaphat.  For  a  fuller  account  of  his  reign  consult  2  Chron.  xvii.-xx.  In 
the  paragraph  before  us  we  have  a  representation  of  the  pramworthy  efforts  of  a 
good  king, 

I.  He  is  solicitous  to  maintain  the  religious  prestige  of  the  nation  (verse 
43).  1.  I£e  follows  the  example  of  the  good.  *' He  walked  in  all  the  ways  of 
Asa,  his  father,  he  turned  not  aside  from  it."  On  the  general  piety  of  Asa  see 
ch.  XV.  11-15,  and  compare  2  Chron.  xiv.  2-5  ;  xv.  8-17.  Jehosphaphat  seems 
to  have  been  a  still  better  king,  for  he  did  not,  like  Asa,  fall  away  in.  his  old 
age  (2  Chron  xvi.  2-12).  It  is  an  unspeakable  advantage  to  have  an  early 
pious  training  ;  and  to  have  constantly  in  view  the  best  patterns  of  religious 
excellence  to  imitate.  2.  I£e  strives  after  personal  righteousness.  "  Doing  that 
which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord."  Goodness  should  be  sought  and 
practised  for  its  own  sake,  and  with  a  sincere  desire  to  please  God.  Nothing  is 
good  which  will  not  bear  the  test  of  the  Divine  scrutiny — which  is  not  right  in 
the  eyes  of  the  Lord."  3.  He  may  not  accomplish  all  the  religious  reforms  he 
desires.  **  Nevertheless,  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away."  The  only 
faults  with  which  Jehoshaphat  is  charged  are  his  allowance  of  the  high  places, 
and  his  tenderness  towards  the  house  of  Ahab,  which  led  him,  first,  to  take  a 
wife  for  his  eldest  son  from  among  Ahab's  daughters,  and  then  to  join  both  him 
and  his  successor  in  their  military  and  other  enterprises  (1  Kings  xxii.  29  ; 
2  Kings  iii.  7 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  85-37).  There  are  few  reformers  who  do  not  make 
some  mistakes;  and  few  who  accomplish  all  at  which  they  aim.  Even  to 
attempt  a  great  and  noble  enterprise  has  an  elevating  moral  influence  on  the 
zealous  reformer.  It  is  one  of  the  first  and  highest  duties  of  a  king  to  look  well 
after  the  religious  condition  of  his  people. 

II.  He  labours  to  promote  peace  (verse  44).  For  sixty  years,  from  the  first 
separation  of  the  two  kingdoms  down  to  the  accession  of  Jehoshaphat,  there 
was  an  uninterrupted  series  of  wars  between  Israel  and  Judah.  This  fratricidal 
policy  was  ended  by  the  declaration  of  a  formal  peace,  which  was  perhaps  at 
once  cemented  by  a  marriage  between  the  two  children  of  the  contracting 
parties,  Jehoram  and  Athaliah.  A  wise  and  judicious  king  will  use  all  legiti- 
mate means  to  promote  and  maintain  anhonouiable  peace,  without  the  surrender 
of  any  one  essential  right,  or  the  least  sacrifice  of  dignity. 

III.  He  is  alive  to  the  importance  of  a  judicious  manifestation  of  kingly 
power  (verse  45).  ''His  might  that  he  showed  and  how  he  warred."  He 
tries  to  promote  peaceful  relations  with  other  nations,  not  because  he  is  weak, 
but  because  he  is  strong !  He  discourages  war  in  others  by  being  always  pro 
pared  for  it  himself.  He  will  not  suff'er  his  authority  to  be  despised,  nor  will 
he  allow  a  wrong  to  his  nation  to  go  unpunished.  Government  that  is  not  backed 
with  power  will  soon  drift  into  rebellion  and  anarchy. 

IV.  He  is  anxious  about  the  morality  of  his  people  (verse  46).  Sensual 
indulgence  grows  into  still  more  abominable  enormities,  the  more  it  is  practised 
and  tolerated.     It  saps  the  foundations  of  national  Life  and  morality.     Much  had 

863 


OHAP.  xxii.  MOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


been  done  to  root  out  the  wretched  class  referred  to  in  this  verse  (ch.  xv.  12); 
but  the  evil  was  so  inveterate  and  deep-seated  that  it  could  not  be  all  at  once 
extinguished.  An  examination  of  the  social  life  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  when 
at  the  acme  of  their  national  greatness  shows  how  possible  it  is  for  the  most 
brilliant  attainments  in  literature,  science,  and  art,  to  co-exist  alongside  the 
most  debasing  and  shameless  immorality.  Christianity  is  the  apostle  and  donor 
of  the  highest  and  purest  morality. 

V.  He  encourages  the  exercise  of  good  government.  "  There  was  then  no 
king  in  Edom  :  a  deputy  was  king"  (verse  47).  The  last  reference  to  Edom  was 
in  the  time  of  Solomon,  when  Hadad,  having  returned  thither  from  Egypt,  was 
**an  adversary  unto  Solomon"  (ch.  xi.  14),  and  reigned  over  Egypt.  It  seems 
to  have  been  again  reduced,  and  to  be  dependent  on  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  being 
governed  by  a  deputy,  or  viceroy,  who,  however,  was  allowed  the  royal  title. 
This  government  of  dependencies  by  means  of  subject  kings  was  the  all  but 
universal  practice  in  the  East  down  to  the  time  of  Cyrus.  A  good  king  is  care- 
ful to  provide  effective  government  in  every  part  of  his  dominions.  When  the 
government  is  feeble,  every  other  interest  suffers. 

VI.  He  seeks  to  advance  commercial  enterprise  (verses  48,  49).    Jehosha- 

phat  sought  to  re-establish  the  maritime  trade  to  Ophir,  which  had  proved  such 
a  source  ot  wealth  in  Solomon's  reign  ;  and,  though  the  shipbuilding  in  this 
instance  proved  a  failure,  it  illustrates  the  active  desire  of  the  king  to  promote 
the  commercial  welfare  of  the  nation.  The  ships  were  wrecked  while  in  the 
harbour,  because  they  were  badly  built,  the  Jewish  sailors  having  but  an  im- 
perfect knowledge  of  the  sea  and  of  the  rig  and  management  of  ships ;  or,  accord- 
ing to  the  prophet  Eliezer,  as  a  Divine  judgment  against  Jehoshaphat  for  joining 
himself  with  the  idolatrous  Ahaziah  in  this  business  (2  Chron.  xx.  36,  37). 
The  commercial  genius  of  Jehoshaphat  would  find  scope  in  other  directions, 
which  would  all  tend  to  increase  the  national  prosperity.  If  commerce  is 
stifled,  the  nation  is  starved.  **  Every  profession  implies  system.  The  meanest 
trade  demands  it,  and  would  run  to  waste  without  something  of  it.  The  mar- 
vellous achievements  of  modern  commerce,  stretching  its  relations  over  distant 
seas  and  many  lands,  and  gathering  the  materials  of  every  civilization  within  its 
ample  bosom,  are,  more  than  anything,  the  result  of  an  expanding  and  victorious 
system,  which  shrinks  at  no  obstacles  and  adapts  itself  to  every  emergency." 
A  good  king  readily  appreciates  the  application  of  system  to  commercial  success, 
and  is  not  too  proud  or  too  indifferent  to  act  accordingly. 

VII.  He  transmits  a  heritage  of  good  to  his  successor  (verse  50).  Jehoram 
enters  upon  the  government  with  all  the  advantages  of  his  father's  achievements 
and  prestige.  Fortunate  indeed  is  the  youthful  king  who  succeeds  a  provident 
and  far-seeing  father ;  and  who  has  before  him,  as  a  constant  inspiration,  the 
example  of  a  holy  and  useful  life.  To  leave  a  good  name  to  posterity  is  better 
than  riches.  It  is  a  solemn  and  sacred  trust  to  receive  all  that  Jehoram  received. 
It  may  be  shamefully  abused,  as,  alas !  it  was  in  his  case  (2  Chron.  xxi.  6). 

Lessons: — 1.  A  crown  brings  great  opportunities  and  great  responsibilities. 
2.  The  best  king  cannot  accomplish  all  the  good  he  would.  S.  A  good  man  is 
honoured  for  the  good  he  attempted,  as  well  as  for  what  he  actually  accomplished. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Verses  41-50.  The  reign  of  Jehosh-  externally.     The  author  does  not  enter 

aphat  was  a  very  successful  and  prosper-  more  particularly  into  the  details  of  its 

CUB  one  for  Judah,  both  internally  and  history,  evidently   because,  from  the 
364 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   KINGS, 


CHAP.    XXll. 


time  of  the  division  of  the  kingdom, 
his  main  object  was  rather  to  give  a 
representation  of  the  monarchy  in  Israel 
until  its  downfall.  Jehoshaphat's  aim, 
after  he  had  established  legal  order  in 
his  dominions  as  far  as  possible,  reduced 
the  neighbouring  people  to  subjection 
again,  and  concluded  peace  with  the 
brother  kingdom,  was  to  restore  the 
times  of  prosperity  that  existed  in  the 
days  of  Solomon,  and  to  bring  his  king- 
dom up  to  the  height  of  that  of  Solo- 
mon once  more.  The  glory  of  the 
kingdom,  however,  as  it  had  existed 
under  Solomon,  was,  according  to  the 
purpose  of  God,  for  ever  gone  by.  Its 
return  was  not  a  part  of  the  divine 
plan  of  salvation,  and  every  human 
attempt  to  restore  it  must  necessarily 
fail.  The  fleet  of  Jehoshaphat  went 
down  in  the  harbour  of  Ezion-geber, 
even  before  it  had  sailed  out,  and  that, 
too,  not  by  human  fault,  but  by  a 
storm — that  is  to  say,  by  a  dispensation 
of  God. — Lajige. 

—  All  Christian  rulers  and  governors 
ought  to  follow  the  example  of  the 
pious  king  Jehoshaphat — to  do  what  is 
pleasing  to  God,  to  walk  in  His  ways 
without  departing  from  them,  to 
maintain  and  extend  pure  religon,  to 
remove  and  destroy  what  is  evil,  and 
especially  not  to  permit  whoredom,  but 
with  earnestness  to  do  away  with  it 
and  punish  it,  and  to  guard  themselves 
from  having  too  much  intercourse  with 
godless  persons,  or  from  entering  into 
any  covenant  with  them,  because  this 
leads  to  no  good,  as  indeed  Jehoshaphat 
got  only  danger  and  loss  by  it.  Every 
one  should  profit  by  the  life  experience 
of  Jehoshaphat.  All  that  he  under- 
took according  to  God's  word  and  will 
went  on  fortunately,  and  attained  good 
success,  and  was  attended  with  blessing; 
but  all  that  he  undertook  in  conjunc- 
tion withAhab  and  Ahaziah  turned  out 
unfortunately  :  there  was  no  blessing 
upon  that. —  TFurL  Summ. 


Yerse.  43.  An  upright  life.     1.  Is 

modelled  after  a  woithy  pattern.  2. 
Is  marked  by  fidelity  and  perseverance. 
3.  Is  approved  and  owned  of  God.  4. 
May  not  be  free  from  some  imper- 
fections. 


Verses.  48-49.  The  risks  of  com- 
merce. 1 .  Demand  great  toil  and  enter- 
prise. 2.  Liable  to  great  losses.  3. 
May  be  involved  in  unfortunate 
partnerships.  4.  Cultivate  decision 
of  character  :  **  Jehoshaphat  would 
not "  (verse  49). 

Yerse  48.  **Eor  his  ships  were 
broken."  This  cross  was  in  great 
mercy  to  Jehoshaphat.  *'  Thou  in  very 
faithfulness  hast  afilioted  me,"  said 
David.  This  should  be  a  patienting 
consideration ;  as  it  is  said  to  have 
been  to  Philip  of  Spain,  upon  the 
defeating  and  scattering  of  his  navy  in 
1588.  I 'e  gave,  and  commanded  to 
be  given  all  over  Spain,  thanks  to  God 
that  the  loss  was  no  more  grievous ; 
and  used  singular  mercy  in  relieving 
the  distressed  soldiers  and  sailors — 
I'rapp, 

Yerses  49-50.  The  heart  of  man 
proposes  its  own  way,  but  the  Lord 
alone  allows  it  to  proceed  therein 
(Prov.  xvi.  9).  He  often  confounds 
our  purposes  and  destroys  our  plans 
which  read)  so  far  and  so  high,  that  we 
may  not  become  puffed  up,  but  learn 
to  J  ield  to  His  holy  will,  and  to  say : 
**  It  is  the  Lord ;  let  Him  do  what 
seemeth  Him  good." — What  God  has 
clearly  destroyed  as  a  punishment,  that 
let  us  not  build  up  again  at  the  counsel 
or  d(^mand  of  any  man,  for  when  He 
breaks  in  pieces,  it  cannot  avail  to 
build  again  (Job.  xii.  14). — So  Jeho- 
shaphat would  not  build  again.  The 
03*0 rs  of  a  man  who  had  departed  from 
God,  even  if  he  offer  thee  ever  so 
much  profit  and  pleasantness,  do  thou 
reject  with  determined  will, — Lange. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  51  -53. 

The  Power  of  Evil  to  Pekpetuate   Itself. 

I.  That  evil  perpetuates  itself  by  the  force  of  parental  training  and 
example  (verse  62).  Ahaziah  was  cursed  with  a  wicked  ancestry.  The  evil 
wrought  by  a  wicked  father  may  be  counteracted  by  the  influences  of  a  pious 


OHAP.  xxn,  HOMILETIC  COMMEKTAHY :  K1NQ8, 


mother,  or  vice  versa.  But  where  both  father  and  mother  are  morally  bad,  and 
especially  where  the  mother  is  the  superior  genius,  no  wonder  that  the  worst 
features  of  their  characters  are  reproduced  and  perpetuated  in  their  children. 
It  is  a  fearful  calamity  for  children  to  be  born  of  the  ignorant,  the  idola- 
trous, the  vicious.  Parents  have  much  to  answer  for  who  train  up  their 
offspring  in  sin.  It  is  said  that  Plato,  seeing  a  child  doing  mischief  in  the  street 
went  forth  and  corrected  his  father  for  it. 

II.  That  evil  perpetuates  itself  when  it  is  individually  sanctioned  and 
practised.  **  Por  he  served  Baal,  and  worshipped  him  "  (verse  53).  Ahaziah 
made  the  sin  of  his  parents  his  own,  by  his  own  free,  voluntary  act.  He  re- 
jected the  God  of  Elijah,  of  Micaiah,  and  of  Jehoshaphat,  of  whom  he  must 
have  heard,  and  he  elected  to  serve  Baal  and  worship  him.  He  threw  all  the 
weight  of  his  kiogly  authority  on  the  side  of  the  national  idol.  Evil  is  strength- 
ened and  extended  by  the  independent  action  of  every  additional  votary. 

III.  That  the  perpetuation  of  evil  is  offensive  to  God.  "  Provoked  to 
anger  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  according  to  all  that  his  father  had  done  " 
(verse  53).  Sin  is  not  unnoticed,  nor  will  it  long  go  unpunished.  Every  act  of 
iniquity  provokes  the  Divine  anger,  and  though  God  is  slow  to  wrath  and  reluc- 
tant to  punish,  the  day  is  approaching  when  terrible  and  complete  vengeance 
will  overtake  the  evildoer.  'J  he  judgment  which  fell  on  the  house  of  Ahab  is 
a  signal  example  of  the  ultimate  fate  of  the  impenitent  wicked. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Parents  are  responsible  for  the  moral  condition  of  their  children, 
2.  Sin  is  a  germ  that  has  the  alarming  power  of  propagating  itself.  3.  Evil^ 
though  powerful f  is  not  omnipotent^  nor  will  it  for  ever  triumph, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSEK 

Verses  51-63.  As  regards  his  rela-  iniquity.  I.  Is  ever  displeasing  to 
tion  to  Jehovah,  which  was  the  main  God.  II.  Pollutes  succeeding  genera- 
point  for  every  Israelitish  king,  Aha-  tions.  III.  Is  aggravated  by  volun- 
ziah  was  one  of  the  very  worst  of  tary  adoption  and  individual  practice 
them.     This  is  marked,  in  the  general  of  iniquity. 

description^  by  the  fact  that  it  is  said  —  It  is  bad  enough,  indeed,  when 

of  him,  not  only  that  *'he  did  evil  in  one  or  the  other  of  one's  parents  is 

the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  and '' walked  godless,   but   how   much   more  when 

in  the  ways  of  Jeroboam,"  but  that  it  neither  fears  God  ?     How  can  we  hope 

is    also  added,    "in  the  way  of  his  for  the  good   nurture  of  children  in 

father,"  nay,  even  also,  which  is  ob-  that  case  ?     The  power  of  example  is 

served  of  no  other  king,  **  in  the  way  not  greater  in   any  relation   than  in 

of  his  mother,"   the  fanatical,   idola-  that  of  parents  to  children.     The  way 

trous,  and  bloodthirsty  Jezebel,  who  in  which  the  father  or  mother  walks 

was  still  living,  and  perhaps  controlled  has  more  influence  upon  the  children 

him  even  more  than  she  had  controlled  than  all  the  doctrines  and  teachings 

his  father.     All  the  acts  of  God  during  which  they  give  them.    It  is  not  praise- 

the  reign  of  his  father,  of  which  he  had  worthy,  nor  a  thing  for  which  one  can 

been  eye-witness  and  ear-witness,  the  satisfactorily   answer   before   God,    if 

proofs  of  God's  power,  long-sufl'ering,  the  parents  and  ancestors  have  been 

and  justice,  even  the  tragical  end  of  godless,  or  the  adherents  of  a  false  re- 

Ahab,  had  made  no  impression  upon  ligion,  that  the  children  should  do  the 

him.     All  had  passed  by  him,  and  left  -same,  and  follow  in  their  footsteps.  It 

no  effect  behind.    Por  this  very  reason,  will  not  suffice  before  God  to  say,  "  I 

then,  in  the  first  place,  he  is  worse  than  believe  what  my  parents  and  ancestors 

Ahab. — Lange»  believed.     They  were  of  this  religion, 

and  I  will  not  believe  that  they  have 

Verse  52.  The  curse  of  ancestral  been  damned." — Wurt,  Summ, 
366 


EOMILETtC  COMMENTART 


ON  THB 


SECOND    BOOK    OF    KINGS. 


CHAPTER  L 
THE   SICKNESS   AND    DEATH    OF    AHAZIAH. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Then  Moab  rebelled— Since  the  time  of 
David  the  Moabites  had  been  tributary  to  Israel  (2  Sam.  viii.  2  ;  xxiii.  20^.  On  the  death  of 
Ahab  and  accession  of  Ahaziah  (1  Kings  xxii.  51)  they  revolted  and  cast  off  the  yoke.  Verse  2. 
And  Ahaziah  fell  down,  &c. — This  accident  prevented  his  attempting  to  suppress  the  revolt. 
Through  the  lattice — HDHii^n — Either  the  wooden  parapet  (or  fence)  running  round  the 

flat  roof  and  which  probably  gave  way  as  Ahaziah  leaned  over  it ;  or  a  latticed  sJcylight  in 
the  roof  itself,  and  which  broke  under  him  when  he  heedlessly  stepped  upon  it.  The  latter  is 
most  probable  (and  the  Rabbins  so  regard  it),  for  he  fell  into  •'  his  upper  chamber."  The 
'  lattice  "  mR y  have  been  the  roof  window  of  this  chamber.  Baal-zebub,  the  god  of  Ekron  — 
Il"^3t  ^V'^ — ^^  other  mention  in  the  Old  Testament  of  Baal-zebub.     The  name  means  the 

fly-B*aal.  Sept.  &aa\  [xviau.  The  fly-god,  regarded  by  expositors  either  as  the  "defender 
against  flies,"  and  al^o  the  ''fly-god,"  an  idol  in  the  form  of  a  fly.  Ekron — probably  the 
present  Akir,  nearest  Samaria,  of  the  five  northern  Philistian  cities  (Joshua  xhi.  3).  Verse  3. 
But  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said—  Such  consultation  of  "  a  god  "  violated  a  fundamental  law 
of  the  theocracy  (Ex.  xx.  3 ;  Deut.  v.  7),  and  deliberately  repudiated  Jehovah.  Verse  6. 
There  came  a  man  up  to  meet  us — The  messengers  did  not  recognize  Elijah,  vet  they  were  so 
imprfssed  by  his  words — *'  his  authoritative  tone,  commanding  attitude,  and  affecting  message" 
(Jametson) — as  to  return  instantly  to  the  king.  Verse  8.  He  was  a  hairy  man — Not  meaning 
that  he  wore  long  locks  and  a  flowing  beard  ;  nor  that  his  whole  person  was,  as  Esau's,  hairy  ; 
but  that  he  was  robed  in  a  coarse  hair  garment  (of  sheep  or  goat  skin,  or  of  camel's  hair). 
Elijah  originated  this  distinctive  attire,  which  became  henceforth  the  mark  of  the  prophets  as 
preachers  of  repentance.  This  stern,  rough  garb  was  worn  not  as  an  act  of  mere  asceticism, 
but  as  a  symbol  of  sorrow  over  the  people's  iniquities  and  the  impending  judgments  of  God. 
A  girdle  of  leather — This  *y\}^  l)'\ii  was  the  ^wvri  Scpfiarii/ri  (Matt.  iii.  4)  of  John  the 
Baptist.  The  leather  girdle  was  symbolic  of  self-denial  and  contempt  for  indulgencies; 
the  ordinary  girdle  of  Hebrews  leing  fine  linen  or  more  costly  materials  elegantly  embroidered. 
Vere  9.  Captain  of  fifty  with  his  fifty — The  army  was  divided  into  sections  of  1,000,  100, 
and  50,  and  each  had  its  own  leader  (Numb.  xxxi.  14,  48;  1  Sam.  viii.  12).  He  sat  on  the 
top  of  an  hill— probably  on  Carmel  (see  ii,  25;  1  Kings  xviii.  42).  Thou  man  of  God! — > 
This  name  was  used  in  contemptuous  irony,  and  thus  the  captains  abetted  the  insolence  of  the 
king  towards  Jehovah,  whose  prophet  Elijah  was.  Verse  10.  Itl  be  n,  man  of  God,  then  let 
fire,  &c — Elijah  invoked  proof  of  his  having  Divine  authority  for  his  message  in  the  form  of 
a  judgment  upon  them  from  the  God  they  dared  to  insult.  The  destructive  fire  was  both 
proof  and  punishment  iu  one.  Verse  11.  Come  down  quickly — Greater  audacity  still  in  this 
demand — ihin'J  im — as  if  he  were  fortified  with  irresistible  authority.     Verse  13.    A 

captain  of  the  third  fifty — The  second  captain  learned  no  awe  from  the  fate  of  his  pre- 
decessor, but  showed  more  obstinacy  and  daring;  but  the  third,  though  commissioned  by  the 
still  wilful  and  wicked  king,  came  with  a  changed  attitude  and  tone.  Verse  16.  And  he 
arose,  and  went  down  with  him  unto  the  king— He  knew  how  Ahaziah  would  greet  him 
with  malice,  and  that  his  appearance  before  the  king  exposed  him  to  perils,  yet  he  fearlessly 
obeyed  God's  command.  Verse  17.  And  Jehoram  reigned — This  Israel-Jehorsim  is  here  said 
to  have  commenced  his  reign  in  the  second  year  of  the  Judah-3 ehorsim  ;  but  in  chap.  iii.  1  he 
is  said  to  have  come  to  the  throne  in  the  18th  year  of  Jehoshaphat.  It  would  therefore  appear 
that  Ahaziah  reigned  as  regent  during  the  seventeenth  and  the  larger  portion  of  the  eighteenth 
years  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  that  Jehoram  (or  Joram),  Ahaziah 's  brother,  succeeded  to  the  throua 
in  the  end  of  Jehoshaphat's  eighteenth  year. — W.  H.  J. 

d67 


CHAP.  I.  SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-18. 
The  Exposuke  and  Punishment  op  Idolatet. 

"We  have  seen  that  Ahaziah  imhibed  and  adopted  the  idolatrous  principles  of 
his  father ;  and  we  are  now  to  learn  that  he  also  possessed  the  ferocious  and 
God-defying  spirit  of  his  mother.  A  whole  chapter  is  here  devoted  to  the  reign 
of  Ahaziah  ;  not  because  of  its  importance,  for  it  was  both  brief  and  disastrous, 
but  to  expose  the  utter  imbecility  of  the  idolatry  in  which  he  tiusted,  and  to 
show  by  what  teirible  judgment  the  honour  of  the  insulted  and  forgotten  God 
of  Israel  would  be  vindicated.  The  incidents  of  this  chapter  are  also  full  of 
interest,  as  they  are  connected  with  the  last  public  exercises  of  Elijah's  pro- 
phetic office.  The  stern,  fearless  prophet  is  to  the  last  what  he  has  been  from 
the  beginning  of  his  career — the  messenger  of  wrath,  the  rebuker  of  iniquity, 
the  prophet  of  fire.     Observe — 

I.  That  idolatry  is  a  pitiable  infatuation  and  a  great  crime.    1.  It  is  an 

atrocious  insult  to  the  one  only  true  God.  By  Ahaziah  sending  to  a  foreign 
divinity  to  seek  help  and  counsel,  he  transgressed  not  only  the  general  and 
chief  commandment  (Ex.  xx.  3),  but  also  the  special  commandment  (Levit. 
xiv.  31 ;  XX.  6,  27  ;  Dent,  xviii.  10,  11),  which  threatened  with  extermination 
those  who  questioned  soothsayers  and  wizards.  It  was  a  public  and  practical 
declaration  that  he  esteemed  the  fly-god  of  the  Philistines  above  the  living  God 
of  Israel,  and  it  was  a  formal  degradation  and  contempt  of,  and  an  insult  to. 
Jehovah.  Such  a  crime  had  not  previously  been  committed  by  a  king,  and,  it 
ever,  then  certainly  now,  the  time  was  come  for  the  zealous  defender  of  the 
name  of  the  God  of  Israel  to  emerge  from  his  concealment  and  announce  to 
the  bold  scoffer  the  Divine  retribution.  All  idolatry  is  an  insult  to  the  majesty 
of  heaven,  and  will  not  be  allowed  to  pass  unchallenged  or  unpunished. 
2.  It  is  p'werless  to  help  in  extremity.  Idolatry  is  purely  a  human  creation, 
and  is,  therefore,  imperfect  and  limited.  While  all  goes  well,  the  infatuated 
worshipper  may  be  amused  and  satisfied  with  the  delusion  ;  but  when  trouble 
comes,  then  does  he  discover  the  vanity  and  helplessness  of  the  imagination  in 
which  he  had  misplaced  his  confidence.  The  man  who  has  forsaken  God  is 
without  refuge  in  his  distress.  3.  It  is  persisted  in,  notwithstanding  affliction 
and  threatened  death.  Even  the  terrible  announcement  of  Divine  vengeance 
was  not  sufiicient  to  humble  the  dying  man,  or  to  bring  him  to  repentance  ;  it 
rather  embittered  and  filled  him  with  anger,  and  even  with  plans  of  murder. 
All  this  he  does  while  on  his  death  bed,  face  to  face  with  death,  so  completely 
has  all  reverence  for  what  is  sacred  abandoned  him,  and  been  supplanted  by 
a  stubbornness  and  wilfulness  which  extend  even  to  madness.  Ahab  humbled 
himself  when  Elijah  announced  to  him  the  judgment  of  God  (1  Kings  xxi.  27). 
Even  Jeroboam  sent,  when  his  son  was  sick,  to  the  prophet  Ahijah  (1  Kings 
xiv.  2) ;  but  Ahaziah  perseveres  in  his  senseless  perversity,  and  so  falls  far 
below  both  of  these.  There  is  no  infatuation  so  hopeless  and  insensate  as  the 
infatuation  of  idolatry. 

II.  That  the  vanity  of  idolatry  is  repeatedly  exposed.     1.  By  its  own 

failures.  The  scene  on  Mount  Carmel,  and  the  public  failure  there,  could  not 
be  forgotten.  In  all  ages  and  under  all  circumstances  idolatry  has  been  a 
gigantic  failure,  notwithstanding  its  bombastic  pretensions  and  colossal  and 
imposing  proportions.  It  fails  to  meet  the  deepest  needs  of  man,  and  retards 
the  development  and  progress  of  the  race.  2.  It  is  exposed  hy  Divinely  com- 
missioned messengers.  Its  enormities  have  been  confronted  and  denounced  by  an 
Elijah.  Such  work  needed  a  man  divinely  endowed  with  fiery  strength  and 
368 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  i. 


with  a  fiery  tongue.  His  weighty,  irresistible  personality,  and  his  forcible, 
energetic  speech,  made  such  an  impression  on  the  messengers  of  the  king  that 
they  did  not  dare  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  their  despotic  master,  but  turned 
back  without  further  action.  As  always,  so  here  also,  when  they  sought  to 
seize  him  and  make  him  a  prisoner,  he  was  not  to  be  reached :  the  emissaries 
came  to  disgrace.  "Without  fear,  courageous  and  unterrified,  he  appears  before 
the  king  himself,  as  he  had  done  before  his  father,  and  announces  to  the  proud 
and  stubborn  man  his  approaching  death.  Elijah  is  the  representative  and 
instrument  of  the  jealousy  of  the  Divine  Judge,  the  herald  of  the  Divine  retri- 
butive justice,  and  on  that  account  the  prototype  of  all  the  forerunners  of  the 
great  and  terrible  day  of  judgment  {vide  Lange), 

III.  That  idolatry  is  punished  with  terrible  vengeance.  1.  Bij  personal 
affliction  (verse  2).  The  same  hand  that  guided  Ahab's  shaft  cracks  Ahaziah's 
lattice.  How  infinite  variety  of  plagues  hath  the  just  God  for  obstinate  sinners  ! 
Whether  in  the  field  or  in  the  chamber.  He  knows  to  find  them  out.  How 
fearlessly  did  Ahaziah  walk  on  his  wonted  pavement !  The  Lord  hath  laid  a 
trap  for  him  whereinto,  while  he  thinks  least,  he  falls  irrecoverably.  Ko  place 
is  safe  for  the  man  that  is  at  variance  with  God.  Affliction  has  brought  many 
to  reflection  and  prayer  who  might  have  gone  down  to  the  grave  impenitent 
and  unforgiven.  Suffering  that  does  not  soften,  hardens  the  heart  the  more. 
2.  By  fearful  and  signal  destruction  (verses  9-12).  Fire  comes  down  from  heaven 
and  consumes  the  insolent  and  idolatrous  soldiers.  What  madness  is  it  for  him 
whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils  to  contend  with  the  Almighty !  The  conduct  of 
Elijah  has  been  frequently  censured.  It  is  forgotten,  however,  that  such 
censure  is,  in  reality,  directed,  not  against  the  inferior  agent,  but  against  God 
Himself.  The  facts  were  these,  and  it  is  important  to  ponder  them  well :  As 
Israel's  king,  Ahaziah  was  bound  by  Israel's  laws;  in  religion  especially,  the 
God  of  Abraham  was  the  only  divinity  he  should  ever  have  known  ;  to  send  to 
Baal-zebub  was  to  this  jealous  God  a  great  affront ;  to  apprehend  His  prophet 
was  open  rebellion  ;  nay,  utter  excision  was  stated,  in  the  plainest  language,  to 
be  the  fate  of  all  idol  servers  (Deut.  vi.  14,  15).  In  harmony  with  this,  there- 
fore, our  wonder  should  be,  not  that  so  many  of  the  idolaters  were  slain,  but 
that  any  one  in  the  guilty  land  was  ever  suffered  to  go  free.  It  was  the  last 
warning  Elijah  was  permitted  to  give  to  the  house  of  Ahab ;  and  in  every  way 
it  was  rendered  memorable.  Even  then  it  was  not  too  late  for  Ahaziah  to 
return ;  there  was  mercy  wrapped  in  the  dark  sentence  of  dortm.  It  was 
unheeded  ;  and,  stubbornly,  fiercely  clinging  to  his  wretched  idolatry,  Ahaziah 
died !  Some  live  long  that  they  may  aggravate  their  judgment ;  others  die 
soon,  that  they  may  hasten  it. 

Lessons: — 1.  It  is  the  crime  of  idolatry  that  it  ignores  God.  2.  Idolaters  are 
sufficiently  loarned,  and  are  therefore  without  excu'^e,  3.  The  wrath  of  God  is 
directed,  not  against  the  idols,  but  against  the  idolaters. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yerses    1-4.      The  judgment    of  upon  the  staff  and  support  which  could 

Idolatry.     1.    Revolt    (verse    1).     2.  comfort    him,  but    upon    a    stalk   of 

Affliction     (verse    2).       3.    Warning  straw ;    he  makes    a  work  of  man's 

(verse  3).     4.  Death  (verse  4).  hands  his  consolation  in   life  and  in 

death :    that   is  the  height   of  folly. 

Verses   2-17.      The  folly   of  god-  2.  He  will  hear  nothing  of  death,  and 

lessness.      1.  In  the  dark    valley  in  hates  and  persecutes  him  who  reminds 

which  he  must  journey,  he  seizes,  not  him  of  death:  death  comes,  however; 


OHAF.  I. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


it  is  inevitable.  To  avoid  every 
thought  of  death,  and  to  escape  from 
everything  which  may  remind  us  of  it, 
is  the  greatest  folly,  for  we  must  all 
depart  sometime  (Psa.  xxxix.  5),  and 
nppear  before  Him  who  will  give  to 
each  according  to  his  deeds  (Rom.  ii. 
6).  3.  He  sends  soldiers  against  the 
prophet  who  announces  to  him  the 
judgment  of  God,  and  thinks  that  he 
can  thereby  set  aside  the  judgment 
itself.  But  to  attempt  to  do  away 
with  the  truth  of  God,  and  to  accom- 
plish something  perforce  against  the 
decision  of  God  by  means  of  human 
power  and  might,  is  the  greatest  folly, 
— Krummacher, 

Yerse  2.  By  such  mischance,  besides 
diseases,  men  may  be  taken  as  a  bird 
with  a  bolt,  while  he  gazeth  at  the 
bow;  which  made  Augustine  say  that 
he  would  not,  for  the  gaia  of  a  million 
worlds,  be  an  Atheist  for  one  half 
hour,  lest,  in  that  time,  death  should 
seize  him. 

—  Let  us  pause  for  a  moment,  and 
read,  from  the  case  of  Ahaziah,  the 
impressive  lesson  that  all  our  care, 
forethought,  and  caution  cannot  ward 
off  accident,  calamity,  and  inexorable 
death.  He  who  escaped  the  Syrian's 
venturous  aim  was  laid  low  by  an 
accidental  fall  from  the  platform  of  his 
palace  in  Samaria.  He  had  probably 
been  leaning  against  the  screen  or 
balustrade  common  on  the  tops  of 
Eastern  dwellings,  when,  overbalan- 
cing himself,  the  slender  rail  or  lattice- 
work had  given  way.  He  fell  on  the 
tesselated  pavement  below,  stunned 
and  mangled,  and  he  was  carried  to  a 
couch  from  which  he  was  never  to 
rise.  Age,  character,  rank,  position, 
station  can  afford  no  exemption  from 
such  casualties,  and  from  the  last  ter- 
minating event  of  all,  the  universal 
doom  of  dust.  These  royal  robes  en- 
circled a  body  perishable  as  that  of  the 
meanest  subject  of  his  realm.  The 
hand  grasping  that  ivory  sceptre,  as 
well  as  the  brawny  arm  of  the  strongest 
menial  in  his  palace,  must  moulder  to 
decay.  **  Trust  not  in  princes,  nor  in 
the  son  of  man,  in  whom  there  is  no 
help.  His  breath  goeth  forth.  He 
87Q 


returneth  to  his  earth.     In  that  very 
day  his  thoughts  perish."     Poor  and 
rich,  the  beggar  and  the  prince,  the 
slave  and  his  master.  Dives  with  his 
purple  and  gold,  and  Lazarus  with  his 
crumbs  and  rags,  are  on  a  level  here. 
The   path    of    glory  and   royalty,    of 
greatness  and  power,  leads  but  to  the 
grave.    The  lattice  on  which  the  strong 
man  leans — the  iron  balustrade  of  full 
health  and  unbroken  energy — may  in 
a  moment  give  way.     Sudden  accident 
or  fever  may,  in  a  few  hours,  write 
Ichabod  on  a  giant's  strength.     The 
touch   of  the   old   slave   in   the  con- 
queror's triumphant  car  is  never  more 
needful   than  when   we    are   moving 
through  life,    charioted  in    comforts, 
wreathed  with  garlands,  regaled  with 
music :  *'  Hemember  thou  art  mortal." 
And  when  accident  or  evil  does  over- 
take, it  is  our  comfort  to  know  that  it 
is  by  God's  permission.     It  is  He  who 
puts  the  arrow  on  the  bowman's  string-. 
It  is  He  who  loosens  the  balustrade  in 
its  sockets.     It  is  He  who  makes  the 
lightning  leap  from  the  clouds  on  its 
mortal  errand.     It  is   He  who   com- 
missions the  coral  builders  to  rear  the 
fatal  reef.     It  is  He  who  guides  the 
roll  of  that  destroying  billow  that  has 
swept  a  loved  one  from  the  deck  into 
a  watery  grave.     Saddest  of  all  is  it 
when  accident  or  sudden  death  over- 
take, without  due  preparation  for  the 
great   change.      How   much    nobler, 
wi^cr,  happier,  to  anticipate  the  neces- 
sities  of  that   inevitable   hour,    that 
whether  our  summons  shall  come  by 
the  fall  from  the  lattice,  or  the  gradual 
sinking  and  wasting  of  strength,  we 
may  be  ready,  in  calm  composure,  to 
breathe  the  saying  of  the  dying  patri- 
arch:   "I  have  waited  for  thy  salva- 
tion, 0  God  !" — Macduff. 

—  "Enquire  of  the  God  of  Ekron 
whether  I  shall  recover  of  this  disease." 
Augury  of  the  future.  1.  Possible 
only  to  God.  2.  Leads  men  to  pre- 
sumption and  extravagance.  3. 
Highly  offensive  to  God. 

—  Many  lessons  might  be  drawn 
from  that  darkened  chamber  where  lies 
the  son  of  Ahab,  arrayed  in  the  last 
robe  he  will  ever  need.  We  mention 
only  one — the  folly  of  men  when  they 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  U 


forsake  tlie  ways  of  God,  to  pay  homage 
to  idols  of  any  kind,  or  in  hopeless 
attempt  to  unveil  the  future.  As  to 
the  former,  all  the  Ekrons  of  earth — 
whether  pride  of  reason,  or  personal 
merit,  or  the  general  mercy  of  God — 
are  only  vanity  and  a  snare ;  there  is 
but  one  rock  of  hope,  security,  and 
strength,  and  that  rock  is  Christ.  As 
to  the  latter — the  attempt  to  unveil 
the  future — we  know  what  Saul  made 
of  it  in  his  visit  to  Endor,  and  we  have 
seen  what  Ahaziah  made  of  it  in  his 
proposed  message  to  Ekron.  The  pre- 
sent is  ours,  the  future  is  God's ;  let 
us  be  thankful  and  content.  !N^o  doubt, 
at  times,  in  anxious  suspense,  we 
should  like  a  glimpse  of  the  issue  of 
certain  affairs;  but  enough  for  our 
guidance,  sufficient  horoscope  for  all, 
that  the  great  Eible  principle  is  broadly 
set  down:  "He  that  soweth  to  the 
flesh,"  &c.  There  is  only  one  God 
who  can  answer  the  question,  whether 
put  by  Ahaziah  or  any  one  else,  **  Shall 
I  recover  of  this  disease  ?"  And  yet 
we  live  still  in  an  age  of  divination.  It 
were  useless,  it  were  false  to  deny  it. 
Happily,  not  so  much  in  this  country, 
but  in  France  to  some,  and  in  America 
to  a  fearful  extent,  we  are  told  of  all 
manner  of  ways  whereby  to  communi- 
cate with  the  other  world,  and,  from 
the  revelations  received,  to  regulate  in 
this  our  conduct,  present  and  future. 
Spiritualism  is  pursued  as  a  science, 
believed  as  a  creed.  It  has  its  learned 
societies,  its  weekly  journals,  its 
priestesses  and  priests,  its  thousands 
of  educated  and  rapt  devotees.  **  I 
would  as  soon  think  of  doubting  my 
own  existence  as  call  in  question  the 
facts  of  spiritualism,"  said  a  Unitarian 
minister  from  America.  "  Why, 
through  means  of  it  we  have  brought 
hundreds  of  infidels  to  believe  in 
another  world."  We  shall  not  go 
into  the  subject  at  length,  but  must  be 
permitted  to  say,  that  we  can  never 
understand  why  spiritual  revelations 
are  made  only  in  the  dark,  and  why 
the  presence  of  a  determined  sceptic  is 
always  unfavourable  to  the  manifesta- 
tions. We  feel  constrained  to  add, 
that  while  we  believe,  from  the  para- 
ble of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  that 


departed  spirits  do  not  forget  their 
earthly  history,  that  very  parable 
assures  us  there  is  no  possible  mode 
for  spirits,  either  good  or  bad,  to  com- 
municate with  the  world  they  have 
left.  Dives  found  it  impossible,  and 
hence  desired  Lazarus  to  send  to  his 
father's  house ;  Abraham  spoke  of  it 
as  both  unprecedented  and  impossible : 
**  Neither  will  they  be  persuaded 
though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  Just 
men  made  perfect  have  other  occupa- 
tion than  to  be  the  tools  of  the  clairvoy- 
ant :  and  lost  spirits  we  may  be  sure 
are  in  no  mood  for  such  work.  This 
revival  of  Pagan  superstition  would 
neither  deserve  mention  nor  serious 
refutation,  were  it  not  for  the  hold  it 
is  taking  of  the  popular  mind,  especi- 
ally in  the  United  States,  where  we 
are  amazed  that  a  nation,  so  acute  and 
quick-sighted  in  most  other  matters, 
shoul  d  be  j  u ggled  out  of  the  truth  of  their 
English  Bibles  by  raps  upon  tables, 
or  the  ridculous  presagings  of  idle  girls. 
Away  with  your  mediums,  their  ban- 
daged eyes  and  pencilled  messages, 
hands  waving  in  the  air,  and  all  the 
dark  arts  of  this  latest  charlatanry, 
the  most  wretched  and  profane  of  all 
modern  shams.  God  is  His  own  in- 
terpreter; and  neither  to  shrines  at 
Ekron  nor  Boston,  neither  to  B  uil- 
zebub  nor  Daniel  Home,  will  He  give 
the  power  of  unlocking  the  destinies  of 
men. — Sow  at, 

—  If  a  man  has  once  torn  himself 
away  from  the  living  God  and  His 
word,  he  does  not,  as  infidelity  pre- 
tends, become  wiser  and  more  enlight- 
ened, but  only  too  often  he  becomes 
the  prey  of  the  most  insipid  and 
foolish  superstition.  How  many  do 
not  believe  in  a  holy,  omniscient,  and 
just  God,  to  whom  they  must  give  an 
account  of  all  they  do  and  leave  un- 
done, but,  on  the  contrary,  in  ghosts, 
or  in  the  word  of  a  gypsy,  and  seize 
upon  the  most  senseless  means  in  need 
and  sickness.  It  is  possible  to  so  lose 
God  that  one  does  not  find  Him  even 
when  face  to  face  with  death. — Krum- 
macher, 

—  In  a  literal  sense,  the  parallel  to 
Ahaziah*8  folly  can  in  vain  be  sought 
now  in  the  changed  aspects  of  the 

d71 


CHAP.  L 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS, 


churcli  and  the  world.  The  heathen 
oracles  are  dumb.  The  prince  of  dark- 
ness, who  seems  in  former  ages  to  have 
wielded,  by  mean  s  of  these  in  rn  ntations, 
amysteriouspower,  hasnowchangedhis 
ground.  But  yet  how  many  in  another 
form  have  their  Ekrons  still  ?  There 
is  the  Ekron  of  self-righteousness — the 
pride  of  what  they  themselves  have 
done,  grounding  their  peace  and  confi- 
dences, alike  for  a  living  and  dying 
hour,  on  some  miserable  fragmentary 
virtue  of  their  own ;  their  charities  and 
alms-deeds  andmorallives — the  beggar 
proud  of  wearing  some  tinsel  on  his 
rags,  the  bankrupt  proud  of  paying  by 
farthings  a  debt  which  is  accumulating 
by  pounds  and  talents.  There  is  the 
Ekron  of  proud  reason.  Men  will  not 
trust  the  simple  word  of  the  living 
God.  The  iJible  doctrines,  or,  it  may 
be,  subordinate  facts,  do  not  square 
with  their  predilections  and  preposses- 
sions, their  preconceived  notions  and 
prej  udices,  and  they  send  their  impe- 
rious intellectual  messengers  to  this 
haughty  oracle.  Happy  are  they  who, 
spiritually  enlightened,  are  not  curious 
to  know  the  process  of  cautery  or  cure, 
but  who,  gazing  on  the  glorious  un- 
curtained beauties  of  the  moral  world, 
before  hidden  from  their  view,  can  tell 
in  the  utterance  of  a  simple  faith : 
**  This  one  thing  I  know,  that  whereas 
once  I  was  blind,  now  I  see." — Mac- 
duff, 

Verse  3.  The  word  of  God  is  the 
sole,  true,  and  correct  oracle  which  we 
are  to  question  and  to  take  counsel  of 
in  every  circumstance  of  life,  and  in 
all  darkness  and  doubt.  This  genera- 
tion, however,  seeks  light,  wisdom, 
and  truth  amongst  the  Philistines,  the 
wise  and  prudent  of  this  woild,  who 
give  out  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  is 
an  old  and  unreliable  book  which  no 
longer  satisfies  the  existing  grade  of 
cultivation.  They  that  will  not  en- 
quire of  the  Word  of  God  for  their 
comfort  shall  be  made  to  hear  it, 
whether  they  will  or  no,  to  their 
amazement. —  Comprehensive  Comm. 

Verses  4-8.     If  the  messenger  had 
1)10 ught  to  the  king  a  declaration  of 
873 


the  fly-god,  he  would  have  accepted 
it  with  faith;  but  he  rejected  the  word 
of  the  prophet  because  it  did  not  con- 
form to  his  wishes ;  nay,  it  even  filled 
him  with  anger  and  plans  of  murder. 
Men  value  the  falsehood  which  flatters 
their  inclinatiens  and  wishes,  higher 
than  the  truth  which  corrects  them 
and  demands  sacrifices  and  penitence 
of  them. — Lange. 

Verses  7-12.— With  the  fall  of  Ahab 
a  series  of  new  characters  appears  on 
the  eventful  scene.  Elijah  still  re- 
mained for  a  time,  but  only  to  make 
way  for  successors.  In  the  meeting 
of  the  four  hundred  prophets  at 
Samaria  he  was  not  present.  In  the 
reign  of  Ahaziah  and  of  Jehoram  he 
appears  but  for  a  moment.  There  was 
a  letter,  the  only  written  prophecy 
ascribed  to  him,  and  the  only  link 
which  connected  him  with  the  history 
of  Judah,  addressed  to  the  young 
prince  who  reigned  with  hia  father 
Jehoshaphat  at  Jerusalem.  There 
was  a  sudden  apparition  of  a  strange 
being,  on  the  heights  of  Carmel,  to  the 
messengers  whom  Ahaziah  had  sent  to 
consult  an  oracle  in  Philistia.  They 
were  passing,  probably,  along  the 
haunted  strand,  between  the  sea  and 
the  mountain  ;  they  heard  the  warning 
voice ;  they  returned  to  their  master. 
Their  description  could  apply  only  to 
one  man ;  it  must  be  the  wild  prophet 
of  the  desert  whom  he  had  heard  de- 
scribed by  his  father  and  grandfather. 
Troop  after  troop  is  sent  to  arrest 
the  enemy  of  the  royal  house,  to  seize 
the  lion  in  his  den.  On  the  top  of 
Carmel  they  saw  the  solitary  form. 
But  he  was  not  to  be  taken  by  human 
force ;  stroke  after  stroke  of  celestial 
fire  was  to  destroy  the  armed  bands. 
They  retired,  and  he  disappeared.  It 
was  to  this  act,  some  centuries  after- 
wards, not  far  from  the  same  spot,  that 
the  two  ardent  youths  appealed  and 
provoked  that  Divine  rebuke  which 
places  the  whole  career  of  Elijah  in  its 
fitting  place,  as  something  in  its  own 
nature  transitory,  precursive,  prepara- 
tory.— Stanley. 

VersQ  8,    Tlie   faithful  propliet» 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


OHAP.  I. 


I.    Kas  an  unmistakable   reputation,  wrath    for   His   enemies.     Who   can 

il.    Isi   easily  identified.     III.    Has  stand  before  his  indignation?  and  who 

great     nfluence    over   the   minds    of  can   abide   in  the    fierceness  of  Hia 

otheis.  ^  IV    Is  a  guarantee  of  truth-  anger?     His  fury  is  poured  out  like 

tulnuss  in  either  threatening  or  pro-  fire,  and  the  rocks  are  thrown  down  bv 

'^''^*  Him''  (I!^ahum  i.  2.(^),-Lange, 


Yerses  9-14.  The  judgment  by 
fire.  I.  A  token  of  the  indignation 
of  heaven  against  idolatry.  II.  An 
answer  to  the  stubborn  daring  of  a 
godless  king,  and  the  insolence  of  his 
troopers.  III.  May  be  avoided  by 
prayer  and  submission. 

—  We  have   here  not  the   act  of 
revenge  of  a  prophet  who  was  insti- 
gated by  personal  jealousy,  but  an  act 
of  divine  judgment,  and  a  revelation 
of  God's  wrath  against  all  godlessness 
and  wickedness  of  men  '*  who  hold  the 
truth  in  unrighteousness."     All  judg- 
ments of  God  are  represented  in  the 
Old  Testament   as  a  consuming  fire 
(JSTumbers  xi.    1  ;    xvi.    35 ;    Deuter- 
onomy xxxii.  22;  Psa.   xxi.   9;  Isa. 
xxvi.  11;  Ezek.   XV.   6  and  7  ;    Job 
XX.  26).     He   Himself,    even  in  His 
retributive  justice,  is  called  a  consum- 
ing fire  (Deut.  iv.   24  ;  ix.  3  ;    Heb. 
xu.  29 ;  X.  27).     It  is  therefore  per- 
fectly  in  accordance  with  the  concrete 
and  literal  character   which  the  Old 
Testament    economy   bears   through- 
out, that  this  actual  fire  should  be 
the  form  of  revelation  of  the  divine 
wrath,  so  that  in  many  places  we  can 
hardly  distinguish  whether  it  is  in- 
tended to  be  taken  literally  or  figura- 
tively.    Just   as   once  the   rebellious 
host  of  Korah  was  consumed  by  fire 
and  so  Moses'  authority  as  the  servant 
of  God  was  ratified  (Num.  xvi.  35)  ; 
8  )  the  scoffiag  band  of  the  idolatrous 
Ahaziah   perished,    and  thereby   the 
second  Moses  was  corroborated  as  the 
man  of  God.      As   an   act   of  divine 
judgment  this  catastrophe  is  rather  a 
revelation  of  the    highest    moral  in- 
tensity—a  testimony  to  the  unchange- 
able j  ustice  and  holiness  of  God.   Who- 
ever finds  it  shocking,    must   be  still 
more  shocked  at  the  prophetic  declara- 
tion, *'  God  is  jealous,  and  the  Lord 
avengeth ;  the  Lord  revengeth  and  is 
furious  ;  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance 
on  His  adversaries,  and  He  reserveth 


Verses  9-12.  Wherein  consisted  the 
grievous  crime  of  these  captains  and 
their  men,  who  merely  executed  the 
command  of  their   master?     Accord- 
ing to  the  simple  words  of  the  text  in 
the  address,  man  of  God.     Most  inter- 
preters   say,  the  captains  had   used 
this  designation  in  a  contemptuous  or 
ironical  sense.     But  this  is  not  satis- 
factory.    Two  cases  are  conceivable: 
either  the  captains  held  Elijah  to  be 
no  true  prophet,  and  then  their  ad- 
dress, as  an  insult   to  the  prophetic 
office  in  the  person  of  a  man  whom 
God  had  acknowledged   by  so  many 
miracles  as  His  servant,  was  a  direct 
insult    to   the    Lord;    or  they   held 
Elijah  to  be  a  true  prophet,  and  then 
the  summons  to  surrender  himself,  in 
order  to  be  led  bound  to  the  king,  was 
a  direct  and  still  more  daring  contempt 
of  the  prophet  as   well  as  of  the  Lord 
his   God.     In  either  ca^e,  therefore, 
the  punishment  was  just.     The  cap- 
tains did  not  merely  what    they  as 
servants  of  the  king  were  bound  to  do, 
but  shared  in  the  ungodly  disposition 
of  their  sovereign,   and  with  reckless 
audacity  insulted  the  Almighty  God 
in  the  person  of  the  prophet.     This 
wicked  opposition  tj  God  the  Lord  is 
punished,    and   certainly  not  by  the 
prophet,  but  by  the   Lord  Himself, 
who  realizes  the  word  of  his  servant. 
Whoever,   therefore,    on   account   of 
this    act   charges   the  prophet   with 
cruelty,    does    not   reflect    that   this 
charge  falls  not  on  the  prophets,  but 
much  rather  on  God  the  Jjovdi.— Kiel. 
^  —  The  time  was  when  two  zealous 
disciples  would  fain  have  imitated  this 
fiery  revenge  of  Elijah,  and  were  re- 
pelled with  a  check ;  the  very  place 
puts  them  in  mind  of  the  judgment ; 
not  far  from  Samaria  was  this  done  by 
Elijah,  and  wished  to  be  done  by  the 
disciples.     So  churlish  a  rejection  of 
a  Saviour  seemed  no  less  heinous  than 
the  endeavour  of  apprehending  a  pro- 

373 


CHAP.  I. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


phet.  **Lord,  wilt  Thou  that  we 
command  fire  to  come  down  from  hea- 
ven and  consume  them,  as  Elias  did  ?'* 
The  world  yielded  hut  one  Elias; 
that  which  was  zeal  in  him  might  he 
fury  in  another :  the  least  variation 
of  circumstance  may  make  an  example 
dangerous;  presently,  therefore,  do 
they  hear,  **Ye  know  not  of  what 
spirit  ye  are."  It  is  the  calling  that 
varies  the  spirit:  Elijah  was  God's 
minister  for  the  execution  of  so  severe 
a  judgment ;  they  were  but  the  ser- 
vants of  their  own  impotent  anger; 
there  was  fire  in  their  breasts  which 
God  never  kindled.  Ear  was  it  from 
the  Saviour  of  men  to  second  their 
earthly  fire  with  this  heavenly.  He 
came,  indeed,  to  send  fire  upon  earth, 
but  to  warm,  not  to  burn  ;  and  if  to 
burn,  not  to  persons  of  men,  but 
their  corruptions.  How  much  more 
safe  is  it  for  us  to  follow  the  meek 
prophet  of  the  New  Testament,  than 
that  fervent  prophet  of  the  Old! 
Let  the  matter  of  our  prayers  be  the 
sweet  dews  of  mercy,  not  the  fires 
of  vengeance. — Bp.  Mall. 

Yerse  9.  Every  servant  of  the 
Lord  who  is  really  earnest  in  his 
office  must  make  up  his  mind  that  rude, 
low,  and  godless  men  will  scorn  him 
and  name  him  **Man  of  God"  in 
mockery.  Although  no  fire  from  hea- 
ven falls  down  to  destroy  them,  yet 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  stands  firm  for 
all  time :  "He  that  despiseth  you," 
&c.  (Luke  X.  16);  and  the  Lord  will 
not  leave  those  unpunished  who 
despise  Him  in  His  servants,  and 
exercise  their  art  upon  the  calling  of 
reconciliation  (Isa.  xi.  10,  11). 

—  Great  rulers  always  find  people 
who  will  lend  themselves  as  instru- 
ments of  their  perverted  will,  who 
execute  with  exactness  and  without 
scruple  what '*  the  king  says";  but 
do  not  trouble  themselves  at  all  about 
what  God  says. — Lange. 

—  Behold  the  true  son  of  Jezebel ! 
The  anguish  of  his  disease,  the  expec- 
tation of  death,  cannot  take  off  his 
persecution  of  Elijah  ;  it  is  against  his 
will  that  his  deathbed  is  not  bloody. 
Had  Ahaziah  meant  any  other  than  a 

374 


cruel  violence  to  Elijah,  he  had  sent  a 
peaceable  messenger  to  call  him  to  the 
court.  He  had  not  sent  a  captain, 
with  a  band  of  soldiers,  to  ietch  him  ; 
the  instruments  which  he  useth 
carry  revenge  in  their  face.  If  he 
had  not  thought  Elijah  more  than  a 
man,  what  needed  a  band  of  fifty  men 
to  apprehend  one  ?  and  if  he  did  think 
him  such,  why  would  he  send  to 
apprehend  him  by  fifty  ?  Surely  Aha- 
ziah knew  of  old  how  miraculous  a 
prophet  was;  what  power  that  man 
had  over  all  their  base  deities;  what 
commands  of  the  elements,  of  the 
heavens  !  And  yet  he  sends  to  attack 
him.  It  isa  strange  thing  to  see  how 
wilfully  godh  ss  men  strive  against 
the  stream  of  their  own  hearts,  hating 
that  which  they  know  good,  fighting 
against  that  which  they  know  divine. 
What  a  gross  disagreement  is  in  the 
message  of  this  Israelitish  captain! 
**  Thou  man  of  God,  the  king  hath  said. 
Come  down."  If  he  were  a  man  of 
God,  how  hath  he  offended?  And 
if  he  hath  justly  offended  the 
anointed  of  God,  how  is  he  a  man  of 
God  ?  And  if  he  be  a  man  of  God, 
and  have  not  offended,  why  should  he 
comedown  to  punishment?  Here  is 
a  kind  confession,  with  a  false  heart, 
with  bloody  hands.  The  world  is  full 
of  these  windy  courtesies,  real  cruelties. 
Deadly  malice  lurks  under  fair  compli- 
ments, and,  while  it  flatters,  killeth. 
—Bp.  Hall 

Yerse  10.  This  was  a  miracle  of 
Divine  judgment,  and  in  perfect 
keeping  with  the  spirit  of  the  old  dis- 
pensation. In  this  respect  the  new 
dispensation  widely  differs  from  the 
old  (Luke  ix.  51-56).  But  it  must 
not  be  understood  that  when  our  Lord 
rebuked  the  two  disciples,  and  showed 
them  the  difference  between  the  Law 
and  the  Gospel  as  to  the  spirit  of 
each.  He  thereby  blamed  this  act  of 
Elijah's.  He  blamed  the  two  disci- 
ples who  dishonoured  Elijah  by  en- 
deavouring to  pervert  his  act  into  a 
precedent  for  a  proposal  which  was 
altogether  dissimilar  to  that  act  of 
Elijah  in  all  the  circumstano^s  of  the 
case,     ?)lijah  was  God's  minister  for 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  I. 


executing  His  Divine  judgment.  The 
two  disciples  were  but  the  servants  of 
their  own  anger. —  Wordsworth, 

Terse  12.  Ahaziah   could   not  fail 
by  this  time  to  be  fully  cognisant  of 
these  appalling  judgments.    He  might 
possibly    have    ventured    to   put   an 
Atheist  construction  on  the  death  of 
the  first  fifty;   that  they   had  been 
victims   of    unhappy   and    untoward 
accident;     that    the   lightnings,    the 
capricious  shafts  from  the  quiver  of 
nature,  had  by  sad  mishap  fallen  on 
the  slopes  of  Carmel,   where  his  sol- 
diers were.     But  now  that  the  very 
Bame    catastrophe  had  overtaken  the 
second  relay,    there   could  surely  be 
little  debate  that  a  Higher  Hand  had 
put  the  bow  on  the  string,  and  made 
ready   the    arrows.     Blinded  indeed 
must  tbat  dying  monarch  be,  if  he 
still   refuse   to  desist  from  his  mad, 
impotent  rage.     Alas!    how  much  it 
takes  to  humble  the  proud  heart !     It 
is  the  saddest  picture  of  moral  apos- 
tasy—1  ho   saddest    exponent    of  the 
enmity  of  the  unregenerate  heart — 
when  even  the  king  of  terrors  brings 
no  terror  to  the  seared  conscience  and 
indurated  soul ;  the  banner  of  proud 
defiance  against  God  and  His  Christ 
waved,  even  when  the  awful  gloom  of 
mortal    darkness  is   closing    in     all 
around ! — Macduff, 

Verses    13,    14.    What   marble   or 
flint  is  harder  than  a  wicked  heart  ? 
As    if    Ahaziab    would   despitefuUy 
Bpit  in  the  face  of  heaven,  and  wrestle 
a  fall  with   the   Almighty,    he   will 
needs  yet  again  set  a  third  captain 
upon   so   desperate    an   employment. 
How  hot  a   service   must   this  com- 
mander needs  think  himself  put  upon  ? 
Who  can  but  pity  his  straits !     There 
18    death  before    him,    death   behind 
him.     If  he  go  not,  the  king's  wrath 
18  the  messenger  of  death  :  if  he  go, 
the   prophet's  tongue  is  the   execu- 
tioner of  death.     Many  a   hard  task 
will  follow   the  service  of  a   prince 
wedded  to  his  passion,  divorced  from 
God^     Unwillingly,     doubtless,     and 
fearfully,  doth  this  captain  climb  up 
the  hill  to  scale  that  impregnable  fort- 


but  now,  when  he  comes  near  to  the 
assault,  the  battery  that  he  lays  to  it 
is^  his  prayers ;  his  surest  fight  is  upon 
his  knees.  This  was  the  way  to  offer 
violence  to  the  prophet  of  God,  to 
the  God  of  that  prophet,  even  humble 
supplications.  We  must  deprecate 
that  evil  which  we  would  avoid;  if 
we  would  force  blessings,  we  m'ust 
entreat  them.  There  is  nothing  to  be 
gotten  from  God  by  strong  hand ;  any- 
thing by  suit.— ^^.  Rail 

Verses  15-17.  A  memorable  death- 
bed scene.  I.  A  dying  monarch 
faithfully  warned.  II.  The  fearless 
prophet  alone  in  the  midst  of  danger- 
ous enemies— sees  no  peril  in  duty. 
III.  A  baffled  and  disappointed  king, 
unsubdued  by  suffering,  dying  in 
silence,  in  iin  penitence,  in  darkness. 

—  The  fifth  of  February,   sixteen 
hundred  and  eighty-five,  witnessed  a 
sad  scene  m  the  palace  of  Whitehall. 
The  second  Charles  lay  in  the    last 
agony,  while,  amid  the  courtly  circle 
around  his  bed,  stood  Sancroft,  arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury,  and  Ken,  Bishop 
of  Bath  and  Wells.      *<The  king  is 
really   and    truly  a  Catholic,"  whis- 
pered the  Duchess  of  Portsmouth  to 
the  French  Ambassador,  ''  and  yet  his 
bed-chamber    is   full    of    Protestant 
clergymen."     The  fact  had  been  long 
suspected,  and  gave  additional  earnest- 
ness to  the  holy  men  who  desired  to 
prepare   the  dying   monarch  for  his 
inevitable  and  solemn  change.  "  It  is 
time  to  speak  out,  sir,"  exclaims  Ban- 
croft, *^for  you  are  about  to  appear 
before  a  J  udge  who  is  no  respecter  of  per- 
sons."    "  Will  you  not  die  in  the  com- 
munion of  the  Church  of  England?  " 
anxiously  asks  Ken.     The  king  gave 
no  response.     On  which  the  Bishop 
put  forth  all  his  eloquence,  till  his 
pathetic  exhortation  awed  and  melted 
the  bystanders  to  such  a  degree,  that 
some  among  them  believed  him  to  be 
filled  with  the  same  Spirit  which  in 
the  old  time  had,   by  the  mouths  of 
JN  athan  and  Elias,  called  sinful  princes 
to     repentance.      To    complete    the 
parallel,  we  must  notice  another  inci- 
dent in  the  dying  scene.     *<  If  it  costs 
me  my  life,"  exclaims  the  Duke  of 

875 


Ohaf.  n. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


York,  afterwards  James  II.,  "I  will 
fetch  a  priest."  With  some  difficulty 
he  is  found.  He  is  smuggled  into  the 
royal  presence  and  the  chamher  of 
death.  "  He  is  welcome,"  says 
Charles.  The  monarch  who  refused 
to  listen  to  Sancroft  and  Ken,  has  an 
open  ear  for  Father  Huddleston.  The 
monarch  who  was  unwilling  to  die  in 
the  Church  of  England,  is  ptTfectly 
willing  to  die  in  the  Church  of  Eome. 
Apologising  to  his  attendants  that  he 
has  heen  "an  unconscionahle  time 
dying,"  he  breathes  his  last,  an 
apostate  from  the  faith  inseparable 
from  England's  throne,  and  for  his 
abandonment  of  which  his  own  suc- 
cessor died  an  exile  on  the  charity  of 
a  foreign  land.  Let  Ahaziah  take  the 
place  of  Charles  II. ;  let  his  idolatry  be 
represented  in  the  popery  of  the 
British  monarch ;  let  the  application 
to  the  god  of  Ekron  be  symbolized  in 
the  welcome  given  the  Romish  monk  ; 
and,  last  of  all,  let  Elijah  by  the  bed- 
side of  the  king  of  Israel,  dealing  faith- 
fully with  the  soul  departing  there,  be 
the  type  of  good  Sancrolt  and  Ken  by 
that  other  couch,  using  all  th(  ir  en- 
treaties to  make  the  sufferer  think  of 
his  approaching  end — and  the  parallel 
is  well-nigh  complete. — Ilowat. 


Yerses  15,  16.  A  minister  of  God 
must  not  fear  to  hold  up  t^^ir  sins 
before  sinners  and  scoffers  upon  their 
death  bed,  and  to  draw  their  atten- 
tion to  the  judgment  of  God,  in  order 
that,  if  possible,  even  in  the  last  hour 
they  may  eoDie  to  a  knowledge  of  that 
which  belongs  to  their  peace,  for  to 
offer  eternal  blessedness  to  the  rich 
and  great,  instead  of  calling  them  to 
repentance,  is  the  woist  trangression 
of  a  prophet ;  to  concer.l  the  approach 
of  his  end  from  one  who  is  sick  unto 
death,  and  to  hold  all  thoughts  of  it 
from  him,  or  even  to  console  him  with 
false  hopes  of  recovery,  is  no  genuine 
love  ;  lor  no  man  can  be  properly  pre- 
pared for  death  who  does  not  think  of 
it  often  and  much. — Lange, 

Verse  17.  His  death,  like  that  of 
the  two  companies  of  fifties,  was  a 
judgment  from  heaven.  It  would 
not  do  to  punish  these  messengers  of 
the  king  for  insolence  towards  Jeho- 
vah and  his  prophet,  and  let  the  king 
himself  go  clear.  So  this  impious 
monarch  is  made  to  diag  out  his  last 
days  under  a  consciousness  of  being 
an  object  of  Jehovah's  wrath. — 
Whedon, 


CHAPTER  11. 
THE    TRANSLATION    OF    ELIJAH    TO    HEAVEN. 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Elijah  went  with  Elisha  from  Gilgal— 
Not  the  Gilgal  in  Judah,  but  the  Gilgal  (now  Jilgil)  in  Ephraim,  near  Ebal  and  Gerizim 
(Deut.  xi.  30).  Both  Amos  (iv.  4)  and  Hosea  (iv.  16)  mention  it  as,  together  with  Bethel,  being 
the  chief  seat  of  the  calf-worship.  Here  was  one  of  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  and  from  these 
young  men  Elisha  followed  Elijah,  as  being  divinely  impelled  to  become  the  great  prophet's 
Buccessor.  Verse  2.  Tarry  here,  I  pray  thee — Elijah  thought  none  beside  himself  knew  of 
his  near  tran^lai  ion  ;  h\i.i  hlisha  knew  it  (verse  3)  — "  r<9a,  /  know  it;''  lit.,  I  also  know; 
and  "the  sons  of  the  prophets^'*  both  at  Bethel  (verse  3)  and  Jericho  (verse  5)  knew  it.  The 
Lord  hath  sent  me  to  Bethel— Obe}ing  the  Spirit's  impulse,  Elijah  paid  a  farewell  visit  to 
each  of  these  schools.    Verse  3.  Sons  of  the  prophets — The  D^i^^3^n-^J3,  were  the  scholars, 

and  not  necessarily  natural  sons,  of  the  prophets.  Take  thy  master  from  thy  head — Scholars 
sat  at  their  master's  feet  (Acts  xxii.  3)  ;  but  the  expression  here  haa  a  more  specific  meaning 
than  that  oust:  m  suffices  to  explain,  the  phrase  literally  rendered  being  ^*from  over  thy  head;** 
and  Keil,  Bunsen,  Thenius,  and  Bottcher  accept  it  as  intimating  his  removal  by  ascension,  as 
^vaXatifiavuv  in  Acts  i.  lO,  Hold  ye  your  peace — This  is  not  ft  surly  retort,  nor  meiely  aa 
37§ 


UOMlLETtC  COMMBNTAHY :  KINOB.  OHAp.  «. 


ippeal  that  they  would  not  spread  the  tidings,  which  might  arouse  public  excitement  and 
gather  a  concourse  ;  but  a  request  that  they  would  preserve  their  minds  calm,  and  neither 
aflflict  themselves  nor  him  by  sad  thoughts  of  Elijah's  near  departure.  Verse  7.  Stood  to  view 
fcfar  off — Watching  in  wonderment  and  anxiety  their  arrival  at  the  river  Jordan,  over  which 
there  was  no  arrangement  for  these  two  to  cross,  and  possibly  anticipating  for  them  some 
supernatural  accommodation  or  sign.  What  occurred  would  necessarily  remind  them  of  Moses 
act  (Exod.  xiv,  16).  The  "rod"  of  Moses  by  wh'ch  he  smote  the  waters  was  the  symbol  ot 
his  commission  as  leader  of  the  pilgrim  hosts  ;  the  "  mantle  "  of  Elijah  was  the  symbol  of  his 
prophetic  office.  And  the  parting  of  the  waters  was  in  each  instance  a  Divine  authentication 
of  his  office.    Verse  9.  A  double  portion  of  thy  spirit — The  "two  parts" — U^lp  ^D — 

was  the  legal  share  in  his  father's  posscdsions  appointed  to  the  firstborn  (Deut.  xxi,  17). 
Elisha  requests — ^n')'^3  D^^t^  '^B — "a  double  portion  in  thy  spirit  J*    Some  expositors 

have  sought  to  show  that  Elisha  asked  and  received  larger  prophetic  endowments  than  Elijah 
possessed;  but  this  is  a  false  interpretation  of  the  words.  Keil  wisely  says: — "He  that  is 
departing  cannot  bequeath  to  his  heir  more  than  he  himself  has."  Elisha  only  asks  that  he 
may  inherit  Elijah's  office,  not  merely  as  one  of  the  prophets,  but  as  a  worthy  successor  to  Elijah 
in  foremost  and  powerful  service  for  Jehovah.  Verse  10.  Asked  a  hard  thing — An  extra- 
ordinary blessing  andhonoui  which  is  not  mine  to  give,  but  God's  {pomp.  Christ's  answer  to  the 
sons  of  Zebedee,  Matt.  xx.  23) ;  yet  if  Elisha  was  divinely  allowed  to  aee  Elijah's  departure — 
a  favour  denied  to  all  other  "  sons  of  the  prophets  '* — it  would  doubtless  indicate  his  election  to 
succeed  his  master  to  eminent  prophetic  dignity.  Verse  11.  Chariots  of  fire  and  horses  of  fire — 
Oriental  imagery  {comp.  Psa.lxviii.  17  ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  15  ;  Hab.  iii.  8)  suggestive  of  Sinanc/elic  train  : 
"His  ministers  a  flame  of  fire"  (Psa.  civ,  4) ;  comp.  also  2  Kings  vi.  14-17'.  Observe  that 
the  words  "there  appeared"  are  not  in  the  text.  Possibly  a  supernatural  storm-cloud,  illu- 
mined with  lightning,  rushed  between  them.  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind— Not  in 
literal  "chariots,"  &c.,  at  all,  but  sinlply  in  a  whirlwind,  rTn^D2>  which  confirms  the  idea  of  a 

TT  -    : 

storm- cloud.  Verse  12.  My  father,  my  father — ^Thus  doubly  asserting  his  sonship,  and 
claiming  his  double  portion.  Own  clothes  and  rent  them — Expressive  of  extre  me  grief  over 
his  loss ;  perhaps,  also,  a  sign  ot  abandoning  his  own  past  humble  lot,  and  taking  up  the  mantle 
of  a  new  and  higher  career.  Verse  14.  Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  I  and  when,  &c. 
— In  the  Hebrew  text,  following  the  word  Elijah,  come  the  words  ^  IH  5]J*^,  which  have 
been  by  some  expositors  changed  into  various  forms,  but  unsatisfactorily  ;  their  natural  mean- 
ing is,  "  even  he,"  and  should  be  added  to  the  question,  Where  is  Jehovah,  God  of  Elijah, 
even  He? — Verse  16.  Lest  peradventure,  &c. — They  had  seen  Elijah  pass  miraculously  over 
Jordan,  but  did  not  witness  his  ascension.  Even  if  he  had  been  taken  up  to  heaven,  they 
imagined  that  his  body  would  be  remaining  somewhere  on  earth.  Verse  20.  A  new  cruse — 
"  A  symbol  of  the  renewing  power  of  the  "Word  of  God  *'  (Keil).  Verse  21.  Death  or  barren 
land;  death  or  abortion.     Verse   23.  Little  children — see  note  on  "1^0  in  1  Kings  iii.  7; 

same  word  a?  in  1  Kings  xii.  8,  10,  14,  young  men.     D^II^^  describes  ages  from  children  to 

young  men  inclusive.  Possibly  these  youthful  revilers  in  sceptical  Bethel,  scoffing  at  Elisha's 
report  of  Elijah's  translation  to  heaven,  derisively  taunted  him,  biddmg  him  likewise  "  go  up.** 
Baldhead — an  Eastern  epithet  of  contempt  used  regardless  of  the  person  being  bald  or  eld. 
Baldness  was  a  mark  of  shame  (Isa.  iii.  17,  24) ;  priesrs  were  forbidden  to  shave  (Levit.  xxi.  6). 
Their  destruction  was  appalling,  but  rendered  necessary  by  the  profanity  of  the  town.  Had 
no  judgment  followed  this  insolent  contemning  of  Jehovah  in  the  person  of  His  newly-designated 
prophet,  it  would  have  confirmed  the  people  in  their  defiance  and  impiety. — ^W.  H.  J. 


E0MILBTIC8  OF  VERSES  1-1«, 

The  three  great  dispensations  of  religion  has  each  its  iUustration  of  a  glorious 
ascension  into  heaven.  The  translation  of  Enoch  occurred  in  the  patriarchal 
age.  The  scene  on  Olivet  represents  the  ascension  or  translation  of  the 
Christian  era.  And  the  remarkable  translation  of  Elijah  recorded  in  this 
paragraph  veiy  appropriately  belongs  to  the  prophetic  age.  Eegaiding  this 
event  we  remark — 

877 


OHA?.  n.  nOMILEriO  C0M3IENTARY :   KINGS. 


I.  It  was  at  a  time  that  harmonized  with  the  Divine  purpose.  "And  it 
came  to  pass  when  the  Lord  would  take  up  Elij  h  "  (verse  1).  The  work  of 
the  great  prophet  was  done — a  work  never  agreeable  to  ordinary  men — a  work 
of  stern  reproof,  of  faithful  warning,  of  fiery  vengeance.  The  time  of  his 
departure  was  also  revealed  to  Elijah.  But  mark  the  modesty  of  true  greatness. 
He  does  not  assemble  Israel ;  he  does  not  summon  Jehoram  and  his  court, 
nor  his  great  opponent  Jezebel,  before  whom  he  had  once  fled,  to  witness  his 
triumphant  ascent  to  glory.  He  would  fain  be  alone ;  his  love  of  solitude 
remains  to  the  last,  and  he  would  like  to  leave  the  world  as  suddenly  and 
unobtrusively  as  it  had  been  originally  entered.  But  he  could  not  shake  off 
the  devotion  of  Elisha  ;  nor  could  he  hide  his  approaching  departure  from 
the  sons  of  the  prophets  whom  he  had  been  for  years  preparing  for  their 
work.  God  chose  the  time ;  and  it  was  not  until  due  arrangements  had  been 
made  to  carry  on  and  perfect  the  work  which  Elijah  had  for  a  time  carried  on 
almost  alone.  God  knows  the  best  time  to  send  and  take  away  His  instruments. 
Men  depart ;  but  the  work  of  God  proceeds. 

II.  It  was  in  a  manner  that  harmonized  with  the  spirit  and  character  of 
his  great  life-work  (verse  11).  The  prophet  whose  life  has  been  like  a  flame, 
bursting  out  now  and  then  into  an  irresistible  conflagration,  very  appropriately 
terminates  his  career  in  a  blaze  of  heavenly  light.  **  Suddenly  over  the  valley, 
as  in  Ezekiel's  vision,  there  breaks  an  unwonted  sight.  There  seems  a  burning 
equipage,  speeding  down  from  heaven,  swift  as  the  lightning,  and  more  vivid 
than  any  flash.  There  seems  a  chariot  of  fire,  with  wheels  of  flame,  and  horses 
of  fire  snorting  flame  from  mouth  and  nostril.  There  seem  reins  of  fire  and 
riders  of  fire,  and  wings  of  fire  from  fiery  hosts  on  every  hand.  The  aged 
prophet  bows  his  head,  conscious  that  his  hour  has  come ;  and  there,  as  the 
tempest  weaves  itself  around  him,  we  see  him  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  car  of 
flame,  and  in  the  sight  of  the  astounded  Elisha  and  the  fifty  students  on  the 
heights  of  Jericho,  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven."  If  our  life  has 
been  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God,  we  may  safely  leave  the  character  of  its 
close  to  Him. 

III.  It  was  a  type  of  the  triumph  of  the  good  over  the  power  of  death. 

Death  is  robbed  of  its  sting  and  shorn  of  its  terror  to  the  lovers  of  Elijah's 
God  ;  it  is  but  a  change  from  a  good  to  a  better  state  of  existence ;  it  is  not  to 
be  feared,  but  to  be  welcomed ;  it  is  the  gateway  into  a  more  glorious  life. 
The  change  which  must  have  taken  place  in  the  body  of  Elijah  was  only  more 
rapid  and  less  evident  than  what  must  take  place  in  ours.  Death  is  the  hour 
not  of  defeat,  but  of  triumph. 

Death  is  the  crown  of  life, 
Death  wounds  to  cure  ;  we  fall,  we  rise,  we  reign  ; 
Spring  from  our  fetters ;  fasten  in  the  skies, 
Where  blooming  Eden  withers  m  our  sight. 
Death  gives  us  more  than  was  in  Eden  lost. 

Tounff, 

rV.  It  intensified  the  power  of  the  prophet's  influence.  A  man  like  Elijah 
could  never  be  forgotten ;  but  the  miraculous  and  mysterious  character  of  his 
exit  tends  to  keep  alive  more  vividly  his  reputation  and  memory.  He  was 
grievously  missed,  and  his  absence  sincerely  mourned  (verse  12);  but  he  lived 
on  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elisha  ;  and  he  lives  to-day  in  the  spirit  of  every 
bold  and  faithful  champion  of  the  truth.  "  Where  is  the  court  of  Samaria  now  ? 
Passed  away  and  perished  like  the  smoke  of  its  own  idolatry.  It  is  Elijah  alone 
who  lives  in  deathless  and  fadeless  renown.  We  pass  by  Herod,  and  remember 
John  the  Baptist.  We  pass  by  Eelix,  and  remember  the  apostle  Paul.  We 
378 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINOS,  ottAi*.  ii. 


pass  by  Charles  Y.,  and  remember  Martin  Luther.     We  pass  by  Ahab  and 
Jezebel,  and  remember  only  Elijah." 

Lessons: — 1.  Extraordinary  times  call  Jorth  extraordinary  men,  2.  The 
greatest  men  are  made  so  hy  special  Divine  endowments,  3.  The  good  influence 
of  a  great  spirit  is  immortal. 

The  Paktino  op  Elijah  and  Elisha. 

All  partings  bring   with  them  a  measure  of  sadness.     Life  is  short,  and 
so  the  same  parting  can,  at  most,  be  only  repeated  a  certain  number  of  times  • 
life  is  uncertain,  and  so  each  parting  carries  with  it  the  possibility  that  it  may 
be  the  last  one.    And  if  this  is  so  with  regard  to  the  everyday  partings  of  life— to 
the  good-bye  said  to  the  child  as  he  leaves  the  hall  for  school,  or  the  cottage  for 
service,  to  the  farewell  kiss  to  a  daughter  on  her  wedding  morning,   or  to  a 
dear  son  about  to  go  abroad  for  some  indefinite  period,  how  is   it  with  us 
when  the  parting  is  known  on  both  sides  to  be  (for  this  world)  a  final  one? 
How  IS  It  with  us  when  a  father  about  to  commend  his  spirit  to  the  hands 
that   gave  it,   calls  his  children   about  him    to  receive   his   latest   blessing? 
When  some  loving  and  beloved  wife  commits  the  little  dear  ones  that  she  is 
forced  to  leave  behind  her  to  the  care  of  her  agonized  husband  ?     When  some 
bishop  like  Ambrose,    some   pastor  like  Bede,  is  solemnly  resigning  to   the 
Great  Shepherd  the  flock  over  which  he  has  long  and  faithfully  watched  ?     Let 
those  answer  who  have  passed  through  one  such  scene.     These  are  the  partings 
which  none  can  witness  and  remain  unmoved;  which  no  man  can  partake  in 
and  continue  altogether  the  same  man  that  he  was  before.  ' 

I.  Now  it  is  such  a  parting  that  this  chapter  sets  before  us.     The  elder  of 
those  two  men  who  are  going  down  together  to  Jordan   has  been  all  in  all  to 
the  younger  for  many  years.     From  the   time  when  Elijah   silently  cast  his 
mantle   on   Ehsha,    from  the  day    when  Elisha   '*  kissed  his  father    and  his 
mother,     and  left  his  home   to   follow  the    stern   prophet  of  the   deserts- 
he  has  watched,  he  has  listened,  he  has  reverenced,  and  now  he  is  watchino- 
he  is  listening  to  him  for   the  last  time.     And  not   on   Elisha  only,  thou-h 
on    him   most  heavHy,    falls   the   awe  of    the   coming   parting.     There    are 
many  young  men,   sons  of  the  prophets,  in  training  for  the  ministry  of  the 
Word,  to  whom  It  has  been  revealed  that  Elijah  has  now  paid  them  his  latest 
visit— has  taught,  warned,  and  advised  them  for  the  last  time.     Knowest  thou 
not  that  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy  master  from  thy  head  to-day?  were 
words  addressed  to  Elisha  at  each  school  of  the  prophets— whether  that  of 
(riJgal    of  Bethel,  or  of  Jericho,  to  which  he  had  accompanied  Eliiah  on  this 
his  last  visitation      And,  from  the  last-named  and  nearest  of  these  three  places 
hfty  young  men  had  followed  the  prophet  and  his  friend,  till,  left  behind  at 
their  miraculous  passage  of  the  Jordan,  they  stood  on  its  farther  bank  only  able  to 
send  wistful  glances  after  them,  in  spite  of  their  earnest,  longing  to  catch  at  least 
agimpse  of  the  glory  of  Elijah's  departure.     Thes3,  in  theii^  measure,  doubtless 
felt  the  pain  of  parting,  and  kept  treasuring  in  their  hearts  the  words  addressed 
to  them  by  their  great  teacher.     But,  if  such  the  sorrow,    such  the  love  of 
Elijah  s  scholars,  what  must  have  been  the  love,  and  what  the  sorrow,  of  his 
chosen  compamon  and  most  intimate  friend?     We  see  something  of  them  in 

fylt^  f  fr  ''^'  Z^  ^"^  '.*^^  "^'^^  ^'^  ^^^^^^  till  ^^  ^^8  o^«r-  We  hear  some- 
r.Wi  f  v'^r  l^iV^?!/^  ,^l^ich  he  cannot  vary,  let  it  sound,  if  it  will,  like  a 
refusal  of  his  loved  teacher's  last  request.  Thrice  Elijah  says  to  him,  -  Tarry 
^Za  f'%  thee  for  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  unto  Bethel,  or  to  Jericho,  or  to 
Jordan;     thrice  Elisha  answers,  with  a  firmness  that  admits  of  no  rejoinder, 

379 


OHir.  IL  EOMlLETtC  OOMMENTART :  KINGS. 


"Astlie  Lord  liveth,  and  as  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  leave  thee."  The 
apparent  disobedience  is  forgiven,  nay,  approved  of;  for  it  springs  from  the 
fountain  of  deep,  long-tried  holy  affection.  It  turns  Elijah's  mind  from  the 
thought  of  the  glorious  future,  from  the  backward  glance  on  the  eventful  past, 
to  think  how  it  is  to  fare  with  his  dear  Elisha  in  this  wicked  world  in  which 
he  must  leave  him  for  awhile. 

II.  "We  can  picture  the  prophet  to  ourselves  walking  on  absorbed  in 
solemn  memories  and  in  joyful  expectation.  Fearful  dangers,  wonderful 
deliverances,  fight  after  fight  with  crowned  and  sceptred  wickedness.  Ahab 
rebuked,  Jezebel  denounced,  Kishon  reddened  with  the  blood  of  Baal's 
prophets,  perils  in  the  city,  hidings  in  the  wilderness — all  these  things  lie 
behind  him  now.  He  is  going  to  meet  that  God  that  sent  the  ravens  to  feed  him 
by  the  lonely  brook,  and  His  angel  to  refresh  him  under  the  juniper  tree  of  the 
desert ;  the  God  who  granted  his  fervent  prayer  on  Carmel,  whose  still  small 
voice  spoke  to  him  at  the  entrance  of  the  cave  Horeb.  And  yet  neither  crowd- 
ing recollections,  nor  eager  thoughts  of  the  coming  glory  and  gladness,  make  him 
unmindful  of  his  friend  at  his  side.  He  turns  to  him  with  the  words,  **  Ask 
what  I  shall  do  for  thee,  before  I  be  taken  away  from  thee,'*  and  receives 
in  answer  the  wise  petition  for  a  first-born's  portion  of  his  spirit.  The  pro- 
phet's last  occupation  on  earth  is  to  prefer  this  request,  and  to  obtain  an  answer 
to  it  favourable — ^yet  suspended  on  a  condition  which  he  thus  reports  to 
Elisha:  **Thou  hast  asked  a  hard  thing;  nevertheless,  if  thou  see  me  when 
I  am  taken  from  thee,  it  shall  be  so  unto  thee ;  but  if  not,  it  shall  not  be  so.'* 
Now  to  see  this  great  sight  must,  in  any  case,  have  been  the  young  man's 
strongest  wish.  A\  ith  so  much  depending  upon  it,  how  earnestly  must  he 
have  prayed  for  strength  to  behold  it !  His  prayer  was  granted ;  when 
the  chariot  of  fire  and  horses  of  fire  came  down,  and  the  angels  of  God  carried 
Elijah  with  a  whirlwind's  speed  up  towards  heaven,  Elisha  was  enabled  to 
gaze  steadfastly  at  the  awful  light  that  wrapped  his  master's  form :  hidden 
in  which  it  retreated  from  his  view.  Then,  like  a  last  message,  Elijah's  mantle 
comes  floating  down  to  his  feet.  Elisha  lifts  it  up,  and  knows  by  this  token  that 
he  has  been  appointed  the  successor  to  the  great  prophet.  He  has  just  rent  his 
own  clothes  with  the  plaintive  cry  of  a  bereaved  heart,  '*  My  father,  my  father, 
the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof;"  but  now  something  tells 
him  that  the  God  who  commissioned  and  upheld  Elijah  is  giving  a  like  charge  to 
him,  and  will  assuredly,  therefore,  not  fail  to  give  him  a  like  support.  He 
hushes  the  voice  of  iamentatioo,  and  with  the  mantle  in  his  hand  he  goes  back  to 
Jordan.  An  hour  before,  Elijah  had  with  that  same  mantle  smitten  the  waters  of 
the  river,  and  they  had  parted,  **so  that  they  two  went  over  on  dry  ground." 
Now  it  is  Elisha  who  stands  alone  by  the  river's  brink,  crying,  "  Where  is  the 
Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?"  as  he  smites  the  waters  as  his  master  has  done.  And  he 
finds  Him  close  at  hand.  The  waters  part  for  Elisha,  as  they  parted  for 
Elijah.  The  young  prophets,  owning  that  the  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  Elisha, 
hasten  to  do  him  homage.  And  from  that  day  begins  Elisha's  long  and  noble 
career  of  wise  and  loving  teaching,  confirmed  by  sign  and  by  wonder. 

III.  How  often,  since  then,  have  two  gone  down  to  Jordan,  and  one  returned 
alone,  but  filled  with  the  spirit  and  power  of  the  other  !  An  Augustine  receives 
a  Monica's  last  words,  and  the  holy  mother  seems  to  live  on  in  her  holy  son. 
A  Timothy  stands  by  a  St.  Paul  in  his  condemned  cell  at  Eome,  and  returns  to 
Ephesus  to  earn  from  his  Lord  the  praise — **  Eor  my  name's  sake  thou  hast 
laboured,  and  hast  not  fainted !"  A  Polycarp  listens  to  the  aged  St.  John's 
short  sermon  on  love,  and  goes  forth  to  "be  faithful  unto  death."  How  often 
to  a  mind  overwhelmed — not  more  by  a  sense  of  personal  bereavement  than  by 
that  of  an  irreparable  loss  to  the  Church  at  large— has  come  the  intimation : 

380 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KIKOS.  OHAP.n. 

'*Tou  are  to  fill  this  vacant  place  :  it  may  be  with  weaker  powers,  yet  to  the 
best  of  your  ability  you  are  to  stand  where  that  standard-bearer  stood  before  !" 
And  with  the  call  there  comes  the  strength  to  obey  it.  Elijah's  mantle,  though 
grasped  by  a  feeble  hand,  can  smite  the  waters  asunder  still,  if  its  holder  oi3y 
call  faithfully  on  his  master's  God. 

lY.  But  no  Christian  can  stop  short  at  this  reflection,  without  going  on  to 
another :  can  look  at  one  of  the  plainest  foreshadowings  of  Christ  in  the  Old 
Testament,  and  not  have  the  apostles'  feelings,  as  they   witnessed  their  Lord's 
ascension,   vividly  brought  before  him.     For,  as  it  was  with  Elisha  beside  the 
Jordan,  so  (only  in  more  abundant  measure)  must  it  have  been  with  them  on 
Olivet.     Each  of  them  had  been  called  to  follow  Him,  as  Elisha  had  been  by 
Elijah :  one  of  them,  as  Elisha  did,  had  shown  his  joy  at  the  summons  by  a 
feast.     To  each  of  them,  doubtless,  it  would  have  been  a  grief  of  griefs  not  to 
have  been  allowed  to  follow  Christ  in  His  last  walk  on  earth,  past  the  Geth- 
semane  of  His  agony  to  the  mount  of  His  ascension.     But  we  do  not  find  that 
their  great  Master  tried  their  ajffections,  as  Elisha's  did  his,  by  a  request  to 
remain  behind.     On  His  way  to  resume  that  glory  which  was  His  from  eternity, 
our  Lord's  mind  could  not  be  filled  with  the  awe  caused  by  the  comin 
new  and  strange  thing,  which  made  even  the  undaunted  Elijah  shrink  from  all 
human  observation.     I^or  could  the  Son  of  God  doubt,   as  Elijah  did.  His  own 
power  to  bestow  the  firstborn's  portion — the  fulness  of  His  Holy  Spirit — on  each 
of  His  beloved  apostles.     His  word  to  them  was  not  '*  Ye  have  asked  a  hard 
thing,"  but  "  Behold,  I  send  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  you."     So  when, 
not  by  **  chariots  of  fire  and  horses  of  fire,"  but  by  the  might  of  His  own  Divine 
nature,   Christ,  with  His  hands  yet  raised  to  bless,   goes  up,  and  is  lost  to  the 
apostles*  sight  amid  the  clouds  of  heaven,  there  is  no  rending  of  their  garments  ; 
no  crying,  as  with  an  exceeding  bitter  cry,  for  a  vanished  defence,  for  a  suddenly- 
withdrawn  support ;  they  have  heard  and  believed  these  great  words,  *'  I  will 
not  leave  you  comfortless  ;  lo  !  T  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world  !'*   And  so  they  worship  their  ascended  Lord,  and  return  with  great  joy  to 
obey  His  commands  at  Jerusalem. 

V.  And  surely  this  grand  story  supplies  an  antidote  to  the  bitterness  of  every 
parting.  The  man  who  loves  Christ,  his  friend  in  Christ,  his  enemy  for  Christ's 
sake,  is  alone  safe  and  happy.  For  he  alone  loses  not  one  dear  to  him,  to  whom 
all  are  dear  in  Him,  who  cannot  be  lost.  And  who  is  this,  but  Thou,  0  our 
God !  Thee  none  loses,  but  he  who  leaves  Thee.  Whoever,  then,  may  be  taken 
from  our  sight,  Christ  still  remains  with  us.  Only  let  us  keep  close  to  His  foot- 
steps, cling  to  His  Cross ;  see  Him  strike  the  waves  with  His  sacred  body,  as 
He,  by  dying,  overcomes  death ;  behold  those  dark  waters  parted  by  His  resur- 
rection ;  see,  by  faith.  His  ascended  glory,  and  daily  seek  and  obtain  by  prayer 
Dur  own  double  portion  of  His  Spirit.  So,  grasping  our  Master's  mantle. 
His  word  and  His  sacraments,  shall  we  find  the  waters  of  sin  and  sorrow 
divide  before  them,  or  rather  before  His  might  who  will  come  with  them ;  till 
at  the  last  we  stand  beside  the  black  river  of  death,  yet  fear  no  evil,  for  Christ  is 
with  us  still :  and  that  toiTent,  too,  parts  asunder,  and  lets  us  safe  through  to 
the  other  side. — Day  of  Restioi  1879. 

The  Noblest  Legacy  of  thb  Depabted  Good  (verse  9). 

The  time  had  come  for  Elijah  to  leave  the  world  in  which  he  had  been  God's 
faithful  witness.  The  prophet's  stormy  life  is  to  receive  appropriate  termiTiation 
in  the  whirlwind,  whose  close  shall  be  in  the  calm  of  heaven.  He  is  to  be  dis- 
tinguished by  such  honour  as  have  no  others  of  God's  saints.     When  human 

381 


CHAP.  II.  EOMILETIG  GOMMENTART:  KINGS, 


greatness  sinks  and  ceases,  his  shall  be  most  manifest.  And  while  Ahah,  at  the 
end  of  his  days,  falls  from  his  chariot  into  the  dust,  and  dies  in  disliononr, 
Elijah  is  caught  up  behind  the  flaming  coursers,  and  in  more  than  royal  grandeur- 
passes  up  to  heaven.  His  own  personal  work  upon  the  earth  is  over.  All  that 
God  gave  him  to  do,  when  he  came  to  the  prophet  in  his  despair,  and  spake  to 
him  in  the  still,  small  voice,  has  been  accomplished.  There  is  no  regret  at 
departure,  no  desire  to  remain,  no  task  undone  that  yet  claims  his  presence. 
But  in  the  absence  of  any  personal  need,  he  turns  to  his  companion,  the  successor 
to  his  prophetic  office.  And  ere  yet  the  sound  of  the  whirlwind  is  heard,  or  the 
sky  is  lit  by  the  chariot  of  fire,  he  kindly  requires  of  Elisha,  "  Ask  what  I  shall 
do  for  thee,  before  I  be  taken  away  from  thee." 

The  inquiry  suggest  to  us  what  we  are  often  slow  to  recognise  :  The  greatest 
need,  the  most  solem?i  position,  is  not  with  those  who  are  leaving  the  world,  hut  with 
those  who  remain.  Not  Elijah,  but  Elisha,  requires  strength  and  help.  It  was 
a  perception  of  Elisha's  greater  need  that  prompted  the  invitation.  For  himself 
rest  is  at  hand  ;  the  perils  of  his  life  are  past ;  his  enemies  can  no  longer  harm 
him.  But  the  younger  man,  who  is  about  to  take  the  prophet^s  place  in  Israel, 
with  all  its  responsibilities  and  trials — his  was  the  need.  And  this  is  often  true 
where  no  chariot  of  fire  waits  to  convey  the  departing,  but  where  they  die  as 
other  men.  It  is  hard  to  die,  say  some.  It  may  be ;  but  it  is  a  great  deal 
harder  to  live.  And  when  in  peace  and  hope  the  good  man  is  sinking  down 
into  rest,  while  our  sympathy  and  affection  go  out  to  him,  yet  our  most  serious 
and  solemn  thought  should  be  for  ourselves ;  for  those  into  whose  lives,  because 
of  his  departure,  desolation  and  sorrow  must  come,  and  who  have  still  to  face  the 
responsibilities,  and  duties,  and  temptations  of  life.  Not  the  Elijah,  for  whom 
heaven's  chariot  is  waiting,  but  the  Elisha,  who  has  still  to  walk  the  world, 
and  before  whom  lie  years  of  toil  and  trial,  must  be  chiefly  considered.  It 
suggests  also  that — Our  power  to  hless  others  is  limited  hy  our  lives.  "  Before  I 
be  taken  away  from  thee."  Elijah  cannot  pledge  himself  to  anything  after  his 
departure.  While  he  yet  lingers  upon  the  earth  he  may  help  and  bless  his  suc- 
cessor. We  can  only  bless  the  world  while  we  are  present  in  it.  It  is  true  that 
many  have  conferred  good  and  blessing  upon  others  long  after  themselves  had 
passed  from  the  sight  of  men.  But  it  is  equally  true  that  the  good  has  come 
out  of  what  they  were,  and  what  they  did,  while  yet  present  with  men.  We 
have  entered  into  a  rich  heritage  of  blessing  from  the  departed  good ;  we  receive 
manifold  benefits  from  them  to-day ;  but  it  is  not,  so  far  as  we  know,  from  any 
direct  relation  in  which  they  stand  to  us  now — ^not  from  any  unseen  yet  mighty 
influence  they  consciously  and  directly  exert  over  us  now — not  from  any  efforts 
on  our  belvlf  made  by  them  now,  but  siojply  from  their  characters  and  lives, 
their  thoUj.iits  and  words,  before  they  were  taken  away  from  us.  Looking 
mainly  at  the  younger  prophet's  request,  it  seems  to  present  to  us — 'The  noblest 
legacy  of  the  departed  good;  and,  the  measure  in  which  we  should  seek  to  possess  it, 
*'  Let  a  double  portion  of  thy  spirit  be  upon  me."  This  was  the  wisest  request 
Elisha  could  have  presented.  There  were  other  things  which  he  might  have 
desired,  and  which  it  would  seem  natural  in  him  to  have  requested.  He  might, 
for  instance,  have  entreated  Elijah  to  delay  his  departure,  and  to  remain  a  little 
longer  on  the  earth  as  his  leader  and  friend.  Or,  failing  this,  he  might  have 
supplicated  in  passionate  devotion  that  he,  too,  should  accompany  his  father 
prophet  through  the  skies.  Or,  dazzled  by  the  glory  of  his  master's  departure, 
he  might  have  asked  that  for  himself  also  a  chariot  of  fire  might  be  dispatched 
when  his  work  on  earth  was  done.  But,  passing  by  all  the  common  instincts 
and  feelings  of  men,  he  earnestly  beseeches :  **  Let  a  double  portion  of  thy 
spirit  be  upon  me." 

What  are  we  to  understand  by  "thy  spirit?"  Did  Elisha  refer  to  any 
supernatural  endowment  by  which  the  prophet  was  of  old  distinguished,  and 
382 


BOMIIETIO  COMMENTART:  KINGS. 


OBAF.  II. 


by  which  he  was  fitted  for  the  duties  of  the  prophetic  office  ?    He  surely  could 
not  ref«r  to  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  sense  in  which  we  understand  the  blessinl 
We  think  he  must  mean  that  which  was  the  dominating  princ^l  of  El  kVs 
character-the  master  passion  of  his  soul-his  fidelity  to^G^  and  zeal  for  his 

I.  This  spirit  of  the  great  and  good  is  their  noble  lesacv- our  rirh«f 

this  wnich  had  made  him  so  mighty  in  Israel,  which  had  enabled  him  to  achilv, 
the  ransformation  on  Carmel,  and  rendered  him  stronger  in  his  sin  "e  self  thin 
the  hunrlreds  of  Baal's  priests  and  prophets  There  w-,^  muohlh^"  J 
and  marvellous  about  Sm;  much'iu\irgarba;7merand  speech  thaU^ 
pressed  and  overawed  men.  But  his  real  grandeur  was  interna^  not  external 
and  his  power  lay  not  m  natural  gifts  or  even  supernatural  end  .wrnLt  butli; 
naL  sTha:!  tr^ith  th^;'-"!"  ^,"-"^^^^'0-7  for  GodThlu'r"  nd 
Tave^been^'errldTexT  0  t'Zlt  ^'''wTLiLt  T:Cf  '^"^*"^<'  "^<' 
natural  gifts  and  external  advantage's.  ^niZl'lT;eef:ToZZlZTo 
work  of  the  lord,  a  simple,  earnest,  soul-possessing  flithfulness  ilsuperLto  all 
beside.     He  who  has  ,t,  whatever  else  he  ma/ have  or  have  not    s  a  true 

b^^^fpon^hVS^r",  *'Ars/«xir;i  ^'Tf -^^ """-" 

safe  for  their  departure  and  foi/  E  fsha  felt  thft  Elilll"  f  "'  ^^compen- 
looked  upon  tjfaithf  ul  prophet  of otd,  t"styt  in'  C"  if  I  cannot  W 
thy  presence,  let  me  have  thy  spirit.     I  can  bear  the  loss  of  the  one   a  T  ..  n 

e.;:nts'"Htin:themT''  ^^^  ''^".''r'?  ^'I^^"     ^""^  ^  .^onstantlv  removi.g'hS 

ta  wf  chart?  rf  Z  WhT''^^*""*"  *"'  '^^'''  "'^'^'^  Elijah  was  tfken 
m  nis  cnariot  ot  tire.     What  is  to  compensate   us  for  their  denarture  ?     Nnt 

generation  was  springing  up,  and  many  changes  had  taken  pee      The  nro 

stood.     We  are  not  reauired  to  tb^nt   ;„         i     .    *  f ''•"'^  ^^'^  ""'  ^''*<"^ 
thought,  and  spake   IndTcted      R  ,t  fh      '^"-l  W-*'  ""  *'^  '°"*t'^'"^  ^^  they 


CHAP.  11.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTAET:  KINGS. 


and  lessen  Ms  usefulness.  His  cry  was :  "  Let  me  have  Elijah's  spirit,  to 
work  through  my  own  powers  and  according  to  the  modes  God  shall  appoint 
and  teach."  We  do  not  honour,  nor  do  we  really  resemble,  the  great  and 
good  by  any  servile  imitation  of  them.  We  must  study  their  lives,  and  charac- 
ters, and  works,  not  that  we  may  conform  ourselves  in  all  things  to  them,  but 
that  their  spirit  may  animate  us,  and  work  with  equal,  or  even  greater  power, 
through  our  varied  gifts.  If  this  be  not  our  object,  we  shall  utterly  fail.  The 
man  who  studies  the  works  of  the  great  painters  simply  tliat  he  may  reproduce 
their  style,  imitate  their  lines  and  colouring,  will  never  attain  a  high  position 
in  the  world  of  art.  He  only  will  succeed  who  studies  those  works  in  order 
to  catch  therefrom  the  inspiration,  the  enthusiasm,  that  glowed  in  the  breasts 
of  those  who  transferred  to  the  canvas  the  visions  of  beauty  that  were  given,  to 
them. 

IL  The  measure  in  which  we  should  seek  to  possess  it.  "  Let  a  double 
portion  of  thy  spirit  be  upon  me."  The  request  may,  in  this  aspect  of  it, 
appear  somewhat  strange.  It  would  seem  as  though  Elisha  coveted  something 
higher  and  better  than  was  to  be  found  in  Elijah  himself.  Yet  it  may  have 
been  the  utterance  of  a  genuine  humility.  It  may  mean:  **My  nature  is  so 
weak  and  poor  compared  with  my  master's,  that  I  need  a  larger  measure  of 
his  spirit,  in  order  to  overcome  my  weakness  and  deficiency."  But,  in  any 
sense,  the  term  of  the  petition  is  justifiable,  and  should  serve  as  an  example  to 
us.  1 .  £ach  succeeding  age  brings  with  it  largely  increased  responsibilities.  We 
have  greater  means  of  knowledge,  larger  opportunities  of  usefulness,  than  men 
had  before  us.  Our  temptations,  if  not  so  gross  and  palpable,  are  yet  more 
refined,  and  subtle,  and  ensnaring.  The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  leading  a 
thoroughly  earnest  Christian  life,  and  of  fulfilling  its  duties,  are  greater  now 
than  they  ever  were.  The  tremendous  responsibilities  of  the  age  in  which  we 
live  should  prompt  a  prayer  of  this  kind.  2.  Christian  character  and  useful- 
ness should  partake  of  the  (jreat  law  of  progress  everywhere  observable.  There  is 
not  a  department  of  human  thought  and  human  life  but  is  afi'ected  by  it.  And 
we  should  seek  that  our  piety  should  be  of  a  higher  type,  more  complete,  and 
free  from  the  defects  that  have  been  manifested  in  others.  It  is  in  harmony 
with  all  that  we  see  elsewhere  that  we  should  present  for  ourselves  tliis  prayer. 
3.  Such  a  petition  in  relation  to  the  great  and  good  is  the  echo  of  their  own  thoughts 
and  wishes  concerning  us.  The  greater  and  better  men  have  been,  the  more 
conscious  have  they  been  of  their  own  infirmities  and  imperfections,  and  the 
more  anxious  that  others  should  be  free  from  them.  It  has  been  their  earnest 
and  continued  prayer  that  those  who  should  come  after  them  should  be  greater 
and  more  useful  than  themselves.  4.  This  petition  is  based  upon  the  great  prin- 
ciple that  absolute  perfection  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  simply  human  example.  We 
are  not  to  set  up  human  standards  for  ourselves,  or  limit  ours  Ives  by  the 
attainments  of  others.  We  must  learn  to  rise  above  the  highest,  to  look  through 
and  beyond  the  noblest,  of  God's  servants.  Our  limit  is  not  fixed  for  us  in  any 
like  ourselves.  We  are  called  "to  the  measure  of  the  siature  of  the  fulness  of 
Christ." —  W,  Perkins, 


GEJRM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Verses  1-15.  Heavenward.     It  is  His  manner  is  that  day   even  more 

clear  that  a  great  day  is  come.     The  than  commonly   solemn,  and  his  coun- 

young  men  in  the  schools  of  the  pro-  tenance    and    converse   more  heaven- 

phets   at   Gilgal,   at    Bethel,   and   at  ward;  and  all  his  demeanour  seems  to 

Jericho,    are    in    unusual    agitation,  say,  *'  Ye  shall  see  my  face  no  more." 

EHjaL  visits  them  all  in  succession.  They    fear   to     question   thejr   great 
384 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAnY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  IL 


master ;  but  they  venture  to  whisper 
to  Elisha  the  inquiry,  if  he  knows 
that  his  master  and  theirs  was  that  day 
to  be  taken  away  ?  They  seemed  to 
want  his  confirmation  of  a  fact  of 
which  they  hud  received  a  Divine 
intimation,  but  feared  to  misapprehend 
His  answer  was — **  Yea,  I  know  it. 
Hold  ye  your  peace."  Being  aware  of 
this,  Elisha  resolves  not  to  quit  his 
master  that  day,  notwithstanding 
Elijah  plainly  declares  a  wish  to  pro- 
ceed alone.  They  came  to  the  Jordan, 
for  even  an  Elijah  must  cross  the 
Jordan  before  he  passes  from  the  world, 
though  it  bo  not  by  the  gates  of  death. 
But,  lo,  a  wonder  I — the  prophet  takes 
his  mantle,  and  smites  therewith  the 
stream,  which  then  divides  to  let  the 
friends  pass.  Here,  again,  was  faith  ; 
but  Elijah  knew  that  seas,  rivers,  and 
mountains  are  no  obstruction  to  him 
who,  with  steadfast  feet,  walks  in  the 
path  of  duty.  It  was  because  he  Tas 
in  that  path,  and  because  he  knew 
that  what  he  asked  was  in  accordance 
with  God's  will,  that  his  faith  was  met 
by  miracles,  which,  apart  from  these 
conditions,  it  had  been  presumption  in 
him  to  demand.  Paith  must  have  the 
word  or  promise  of  God  on  which  to 
rest.  It  is  in  this  we  discern  the 
difference  between  the  sublime  and 
effectual  faith  of  the  devout  Elijah, 
and  the  insane  pretensions  of  such 
men  as  William  Hackett  (afterwards 
hanged),  who,  in  the  reign  of  Eliza- 
beth, had  the  hardihood  to  declare, 
that  if  all  England  prayed  for  rain,  and 
he  himself  prayed  against,  there  would 
be  dry  weather.  "  Thou,  Lord,"  he 
said,  **  hast  the  power,  and  I  have  the 
faith — therefore  it  shall  be  done  !  " 

It  was  when  they  had  passed  the 
Jordan  that  the  departing  prophet 
asked  his  faithful  disciple  what  last 
favour  he  desired  of  him.  This  was 
a  trying  question,  which  few  would  be 
able  promptly  to  answer  with  entire 
satisfaction  to  their  after-thouphts. 
But  Elisha  knew  that  of  spiritual 
blessings  too  much  could  not  be  asked. 
He  then^fore  said,  "Let a  double  por- 
tion of  thy  spirit  be  upon  me."  His 
master  confessed  that  this  was  a  hard 
thing ;  but  that  it  would  be  granted 

00 


if  he  took  care  to  be  present  at  the 
moment  of  separation.  But  what  was 
that  double  portion  of  Elijah's  spirit 
which  his  disciple  desired  ?  One 
would  think  that  it  expressed  the  pos- 
session of  such  qualities  as  should  make 
him  twice  as  great  a  prophet  as  his 
master.  But  it  was  not  so;  for  al- 
though Elisha  became  a  great  prophet, 
and  wrought  miracles  as  great  as  those 
of  Elijah,  and  in  greater  number,  no 
one  feels  that  he  was  greater  as  a  pro- 
phet or  as  a  man  than  his  mast(  r,  or 
so  great.  His  meaning  is  explained 
by  the  fact  that  the  heir  was  entitled 
to  a  double  portion  of  his  father's  goods; 
hence,  in  asking  for  the  double  portion 
of  his  master's  spirit,  Elisha  meant  to 
claim  the  heirship  or  succession  to  Eli- 
jah in  his  place  as  prophet  in  Israel. 
He  had  reason  to  suppose  that  it  was 
meant  for  him ;  but  he  wished  to  be 
assured  of  this  by  some  token  which 
should  be  satisfactory  to  himself  and 
others.  As  they  went  on,  conversing 
of  high  things,  suddenly  a  whirlwind 
reft  Elijah  from  his  companion,  and 
he  was  borne  aloft  like  an  ex- 
halation, in  a  chariot  with  horses 
of  fire,  or  glowing  like  fire,  to  heaven, 
followed  by  the  cry  of  the  forsaken 
disciple,  as  he  rent  his  clothes — '*  My 
father,  my  father  I  the  chariot  of 
Israel  and  the  horsemen  thereof !" 
Meaning,  as  is  generally  understood, 
that  he  regarded  Israel  as  bereft  of  its 
strength,  its  chariot,  and  its  horse- 
men, by  the  departure  of  this  great 
prophet.  He  failed  not,  however,  to 
take  up  the  precious  mantle  which 
fell  from  Elijah  as  he  rose  ;  and  he 
felt,  in  the  beating  of  his  own  heart, 
the  assurance  that  his  prayer  had 
been  granted.  And  he  knew  it 
still  more  when  he  reached  and  smote 
the  waters  with  the  mantle.  At 
first,  it  seems,  there  was  no  response ; 
but  when  he  repeated  the  stroke 
with  the  words — '*  Where  is  the 
Lord  God  of  Elijah?"  the  waters 
separated,  and  he  passed  over.  The 
sons  of  the  prophets  noted  this  on 
their  distant  watch,  and  recognized 
by  this  sign  their  new  master,  on 
whom  rested  the  spirit  of  Elijah, 
This  is  a  strange  transaction,  and  we 


CHAF.  U. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


cannot  hope  as  yet  to  understand  it 
fully.  It  seems  to  us,  however,  that 
it  is  but  an  isolated  anticipation  of 
that  which  shall  happen  collectively 
to  the  righteous  that  are  alive  on  the 
earth  at  our  Lord's  second  coming. 
(1  Thess.  iv.  16,  17).  And,  "  in  that 
sudden  strange  transition,"  the  body 
will  undergo  a  change,  divesting  it  of 
its  earthly  essence,  and  bringing  it  into 
conformity  with  the  glorified  bodies 
of  the  siiints  raised  from  the  dead. 

Then  what  hinders  that  this  rap- 
ture of  the  living,  and  change  in  the 
act  of  rapture — change,  because  the 
flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  God,  which  is  to  take 
place  on  so  large  a  scale  on  that 
great  day — should  be  exemplified  in 
one  or  two  instances  before — in  this 
instance  of  Elijah,  and  in  the  earlier 
instance  of  Enoch  ? 

Under  this  view,  there  is  no  more 
any  objection  to  the  departed  Elijah 
having  his  i)lace  in  heaven,  seeing 
that  his  body  must  have  undergone 
all  that  change  which  was  needful  to 
fit  it  for  abiding  in  that  place  where 
nothing  corruptible  can  exist.  !Not 
discerning  this,  the  old  schoolmen 
were  of  opinion  that  Elijah  was  taken 
to  some  place — doubtless  a  pleasant 
place — prepared  of  old,  as  they  sup- 
posed, for  those  pious  spirits  which 
awaited  the  coming  of  the  Messiah 
who  should  open  paradise  for  them. 
Others  have  staggered  at  the  text 
(John  iii.  16),  understanding  it 
to  allege  that  none  ascended  to 
heaven  before  Christ.  Hence  they 
imagine  that  Elijah  was  taken  to 
"Abraham's  bosom,"  which  they 
conceive  to  be  an  intermediate  state 
in  the  air,  granting,  however,  that  his 
garments  were  burned  in  the  fire, 
and  his  body  changed  and  made  im- 
mortal. But  is  that  really  a  stagger- 
ing text?  We  think  not.  It  is 
not  usually  supposed  to  refer  to  the 
Ascension  at  all ;  but  allowing  it  to 
have  that  reference,  it  could  only 
mean  that  none  of  the  dead  should 
ascend  to  heaven  before  Christ,  seeing 
that  He  was  the  first-fruits  of  them 
thcit  slept — that  is,  that  died.  But 
Elijah  did  not  die, 
Sb6 


Elijah  is  supposed  by  the  Jews  to 
be  frequently  employed  in  missions  to 
mankind,  and  as  in  some  sense  ubi- 
quitous, being  present  in  many  places 
at  one  time.  He  is  visible  only  to 
those  deeply  versed  in  the  Cabbala, 
and  is  described  as  a  venerable  old 
man  with  a  long  beard.  He  is  sup- 
posed to  be  alway  present  at  circum- 
cisions, and  there  is  a  chair  kept 
vacant  for  him.  Those  who  are  the 
special  objects  of  his  notice  are  highly 
favoured. — Kiito, 

Verses  1-15.  As  in  patriarchal 
times  Enoch  walked  with  God,  and 
was  translated  to  heaven  without 
tasting  death  (Gen.  v.  24  ;  Heb.  xi.  5), 
so  under  the  Mosaic  dispensation  we 
have  this  record  of  Elijah,  whose  whole 
life  was  a  monumental  wonder  of 
Divine  intercourse  and  power,  and 
whose  removal  from  the  world  without 
tasting  death  surpassed  in  sublimity 
and  grandeur  the  translation  of  the 
patriarchal  saint.  To  study  and 
appreciate  the  closing  scenes  in  the 
history  of  this  great  man  is  to  tread 
on  holy  ground.  The  ascension  of 
Elijah  has  ever  been  regarded  as 
typical  of  the  ascension  of  our  Lord ; 
and  there  are  points  of  resemblance,  as 
well  as  noticeable  contrasts.  Elijah, 
says  Kiel,  ascended  in  the  fiery  tem- 
pest, the  symbol  of  the  judicial  right- 
eousness of  God.  And  appropriately ; 
because,  as  a  servant  of  the  Lord,  as 
minister  of  the  law,  he  preached  with 
fiery  zeal  to  his  apostate  generation 
the  fire  of  the  anger  of  Divine  right- 
eousness. Christ  ascended  calmly  and 
silently  before  the  eyes  of  all  His 
disciples,  and  a  cloud  received  Him 
out  of  their  sight.  He  ascended  as 
the  Son,  to  whom  all  power  in  heaven 
and  earth  was  given.  He  was  trans- 
figured by  His  resurrection  and  ascen- 
sion into  the  imperishable  Divine 
nature,  and  returned,  by  virtue  of  His 
Eternal  Godhead,  to  the  Father. 
Since  Elijah's  ascension  took  place  near 
where  Moses  died  and  was  buried 
(Deut.  xxxiv.  5),  and  since  both  these 
holy  prophets  met  with  Jesus  on  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration,  it  is  natural 
for  us  to  compare  them  in  the  manner 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTAUY :  KINGS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


of  their  leaving  the  world.  Moses 
died  on  account  of  his  sin  at  Kadesh 
(DuLit.  xxxii.  50,  51),  and,  though  he 
was  lawgiver,  he  passed  from  his 
earthly  lifo  hy  the  way  of  the  law, 
which  worketh  death  as  the  wag(  s  of 
sin.  But  Elijah,  as  typical  forerunner 
of  Christ,  and  who,  appearing  again 
in  spirit  and  power  in  the  person  of 
John  the  Baptist,  prepares  His  way  by 
turning  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the 
children  (Mai.  iv.  5,  6;  Mutt.  xi.  14), 
ascends  to  heaven  without  tasting 
death,  and  thus  further  points  to  Him 
who,  by  His  resurrectioQ  and  ascen- 
sion, destroys  the  power  of  sin  and  of 
death,  and  abolishes  the  curse  of  the 
law  from  every  one  that  believeth. — 
Whedon. 

Verses  1-10.  The  approaching 
dissolution  of  the  good.  I.  While 
viewed  with  solemnity,  creates  no 
alarm.  II.  Does  not  interfere  with 
the  active  duties  of  the  hour.  III. 
Gives  a  special  significance  to  every- 
thing done  for  the  Church  of  God. 
lY.  Makes  one  anxious  to  catch  and 
retain  for  the  world's  good  the 
ennobling  influence  of  their  divinely- 
endowed  lives. 

Verses  1-6.    True  friendship.     I. 

Often  exists  between  persons  of  opposite 
characteristics.  Tlie  rough,  intrepid, 
fierce  Elijah  stood  in  marked  contrast 
with  the  calm,  gentle,  persuasive 
Elisha.  II.  Is  founded  on  mutual 
admiration  and  aj^ction.  Contrasts  of 
character  react  on  loving  friends. 
Elijah's  ruggedness  would  bo  some- 
what smootlied  by  the  tranquillising 
spirit  of  Elisha ;  and  the  timid  Elisha 
would  feel  more  courageous  under  the 
influence  of  the  fearless  Elijah.  III. 
Is  the  more  tenacious  in  the  near  prospect 
of  separation.  •*  I  will  not  leave  thee  " 
(verses  2,  4,  6).  It  was  known  to 
Elisha  and  to  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
thatEKjah  woidd  be  speedily  taken 
from  their  midst  (verses  3,  5), 
Notwithstanding  Elijah's  craving  to 
he  alone — a  craving  that  may  often 
be  noticed  in  the  dying  as  the  final 
hour  draws  near — Elisha  persisted  in 
his  attendance,  eager  to  prolong  to  the 
latest  hour  tne  hallowing  fellowship, 


and  perhaps  expecting  further  revela- 
tions  as  to  his  own  future  conduct. 

Verses  2-6.  The  faithful  love  of 
Elisha  to  his  master  and  lord.  1. 
Ihe  gi ound  and  source  of  it.  It  does 
not  rest  upon  a  natural,  human  basis, 
but  upon  a  divine  and  holy  one.  The 
bond  which  bound  him  to  Elijah  was 
living  faith  in  the  living  God,  and  life 
and  labour  in  and  with  Him.  He 
honoured  and  loved  his  father  after 
the  flesh  (1  Kings  xxx.  20),  but  he 
left  him  ;  with  his  spiritual  father  he 
wished  to  remain  unto  the  end.  2. 
Its  test  and  successful  endurance.  Thrice 
did  Elijah  beg  him  to  remain  behind, 
but  he  would  not  be  persuaded. 
Whithersoever  the  path  may  lead,  and 
whatsoever  may  come  to  puss,  I  will 
not  leave  thee  until  God  shall  take 
thee  from  me.  His  love  was  not  a  mere 
passing,  bubbling  enthusiasm,  but  it 
was  strong  as  death.  That  love  alone 
is  true  which  endures  trial,  and  will 
not  be  turned  aside  by  any  prayers, 
for  which  no  hindrance  is  too  great,  no 
journey  too  long  and  too  hard.  3. 
Its  victory  and  reivard.  Elijah  opens 
for  him  the  path  through  the  Jordan 
after  his  fidelity  has  stood  the  test. 
He  is  allowed  to  see  what  no  human 
being  besides  him  might  see.  He  at- 
tains to  that  which  he  has  prayed  for ; 
with  Elijah's  mantle  he  inherits  also 
Elijah's  spirit ;  he  is  a  witness  of  his 
master's  glory.  That  fidelity  conquers 
and  is  crowned  which  holds  fast  to 
God  and  Jesus  Christ. — Lange, 

Verse  3.  No  over-hasty  gossip  or 
sensation  ought  to  be  made  about  acts 
of  God,  especially  about  those  which 
are  still  future ;  they  may  not  be 
treated  as  objects  of  curious  or  worldly 
questionings.  The  acts  of  God  are 
meant  to  be  awaited  in  respectful 
silence.  Those  who  are  capable  of 
seeing  the  majesty  of  the  living  God 
kept  silent  of  themselves ;  upon  others 
they  have  to  enjoin  silence. —  Vilmar, 

Verses  6-8.  They  descended  the 
long,  weary  slopes  that  led  from 
Jericho  to  the  Jordan.  On  the  upper 
terraces,  or  on  the  mountain  heights 
behind  the  city,  stood  afar  otf ,  in  awe, 
fifty  of  the  young  disciples  ;  and  they 

387 


CHAP.  II. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


two  stood  by  Jordan.  They  stood  "by 
its  rushing  stream ;  but  they  are  not 
to  be  detained  even  by  this  barrier. 
"  Tho  aged  Gileadite  cannot  rest  till  he 
agaiu  sets  foot  on  his  own  side  of  the 
river."  He  ungirds  thorough  mantle 
from  around  his  shaggy  frame;  he 
rolled  it  together  as  if  into  a  wonder- 
working staff;  he  smote  the  turbid 
river  as  if  it  were  a  living  enemy,  and 
the  waters  divided  hither  and  thither, 
and  they  two  went  over  on  dry  ground. 
And  now  they  were  on  that  farther 
shore,  under  the  shade  of  those  hills  of 
Pisgah  and  of  Gilead,  where,  in  former 
times,  a  prophet  greater  even  than 
Elijah  had  been  withdrawn  from  the 
eyes  of  his  people,  whence,  in  his 
early  youth,  Elijah  had  himself  de- 
scended on  his  august  career.  He 
knew  that  his  hour  was  come,  he  knew 
that  he  had  at  last  returned  home,  and 
that  he  had  to  go  whither  Moses  had 
gone  before  him . — Stanley. 

Yerse  7.  Miracles  are  not  purposed 
to  silence  and  obscurity.  God  will 
not  work  wonders  without  witnesses, 
since  He  doth  them  on  purpose  to  win 
glory  to  His  name.  His  end  were  frus- 
trate without  their  notice.  Even  so, 
0  Saviour  !  when  thou  hadst  raised 
thyself  from  the  dead,  thou  wouldst 
be  seen  of  more  than  five  hundred 
brethren  at  once ;  and  when  thou 
wouldst  raise  up  thy  glorified  body 
from  earth  into  heaven,  thou  didst  not 
ascend  from  some  close  valley,  but  from 
the  Mount  of  Olives ;  not  in  the  night, 
not  alone,  but  in  the  clear  day,  in  the 
view  of  many  eyes,  which  were  so  fixed 
upon  that  point  of  thine  heaven  that 
they  could  scarce  be  removed  by  the 
check  of  angels ! — Bp.  Hall. 

Yerse  8.  On  the  other  side  of  Jordan 
is  the  place  of  the  glorification  of  the 
prophet.  Between  him  and  this  spot 
there  flows  yet  a  broad  and  deep  stream. 
Through  this  he  must  go.  There 
is  no  bridge,  no  ferryman ;  but  he  does 
not  despair.  He  knows.  He  who  has 
called  me  to  the  other  side  will  help 
me  to  the  other  side.  Such  incidents 
occur  to  many  on  the  pilgrimage  of  life. 
No  stream  is  so  deep,  and  no  flood  of 
calamity  so  dangerous,  that  God  could 
888 


not  lead  through  it  unharmed.  The 
prophet-mantle,  which  to-day,  as  ever^ 
when  it  falls  upon  any  Jordan,  divide, 
its  waves,  is  faith — strong,  glad,  living, 
rock-firm  faith. —  Wirth. 

—  Jordan  must  be  crossed  by 
Elijah  on  his  way  to  heaven.  There 
must  be  a  meet  parallel  betwixt  the 
two  great  prophets  that  shall  meet 
Christ  upon  Tabor — Moses  and  Elias. 
Both  received  visions  on  Horeb ;  to 
both  God  appeared  there  in  fire  and 
other  forms  of  terror  ;  both  were  sent 
to  kings  one  to  Pharaoh,  the  other  to 
Ahab;  both  prepared  miraculous 
tables — the  one  of  quails  and  manna 
in  the  desert,  the  other  of  meal  and 
oil  in  Sarepta ;  both  opened  heaven — 
the  one  for  that  nourishing  dew,  the 
other  for  those  refreshing  showers; 
both  revenged  idolatries  with  the 
sword — the  one  upon  the  worshippers 
of  the  golden  calf,  the  other  upon  the 
four  hundred  Baalites  ;  both  quenched 
the  drought  of  Israel — the  one  out  of 
the  rock,  the  other  out  of  the  cloud ; 
both  divided  the  waters — the  one  of 
the  Red  Sea,  the  other  of  Jordan; 
both  of  them  are  forewarned  of  their 
departure ;  both  must  be  fetched 
away  beyond  Jordan ;  the  body  of 
Elijah  is  translated,  the  body  of 
Mooes  is  hid;  what  Moses  doth  by 
his  rod,  Elijah  doth  by  his  mantle ; 
with  that  he  smites  the  waters,  and 
they,  as  fearing  the  Divine  power 
which  wrought  with  the  prophet,  run 
away  from  him  and  stand  on  heaps, 
leaving  their  dry  channel  for  the  pas- 
sage of  those  awful  feet. — Bp.  Hall, 

Yerse  9.  The  reply  of  Elisha  has 
been  much  misunderstood.  As  early 
as  the  days  of  Theodoret,  these  words 
were  interpreted  :  "  Let  a  gift  of  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  twice  as  large  as 
thine  own  rest  upon  me."  Luther 
renders  them:  "Let  thy  spirit  be 
double  in  me ;"  and  Krummacher, 
adopting  the  same  view,  justifies  it 
by  saying,  **  The  spirit  of  Elisha  as 
an  evangelical  spirit  was  twice  as 
great  as  the  spirit  of  Elijah  as  a  legal 
spirit."  In  all  humility,  we  venture 
to  differ  from  this  interpretation,  con- 
sidering it  entirely  opposed  to  Elisha'fl 


ROMILETIG  C0MMB2iTAliY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  n. 


humility,  entirely  out  of  the  power  of 
Elijah  to  grant,  and  contradicted  by 
the  history  of  Elisha  himself,  in  whom 
we  have  no  proof  of  such  superlative 
endowment.  Literally  translated  the 
language  of  Elisha  would  run,  **  Let 
there  be  a  mouthful  or  ration  of  two 
with  thy  spirit  to  me  " — ^the  reference 
being  to  the  inheritance  of  the  first-born 
son  among  the  Jews,  who,  by  reason  of 
his  primogeniture,  was  to  have  a  double 
portion,  or  the  ration  of  two,  among 
his  brethren,  which  peculiar  phrase- 
ology was  only  a  Hebrew  synonym 
or  figurative  expression  for  being 
served  heir  and  successor  to  the  father 
of  the  dwelling.  The  request  of 
Elisha,  then,  was  simply  this,  that 
Elijah,  the  great  father  or  head  of 
the  prophetic  school,  would  in  leaving 
the  world  complete  the  symbolic  act 
begun  in  the  field  of  Abel-meholah, 
by  constituting  him  the  inheritor  of 
his  position  in  the  land  of  Israel,  with 
authority  to  continue  the  work  which 
he  had  begun. — Mowat, 

Verses  11,  12.  The  Divine  esti- 
mate of  Elijah  and  his  work.  Seen — 
I.  In  the  glorious  method  of  his 
translation  to  heaven — a  unique  close 
to  a  unique  career.  II.  In  the 
testimony  Elisha  was  enabled  to  bear 
to  an  idolatrous  nation  as  to  Elijah's 
miraculous  exit — the  man  whose 
messages  had  been  despised  was 
honoured  by  a  removal  unlike  that  of 
ordinary  men.  III.  In  the  pro- 
vision made  for  carrying  on  Elijah's 
work  by  a  competent  successor. 

Yerse  11.  *'And  it  came  to  pass 
as  they  still  went  on  and  talked." 
A  memorable  conversation.  1.  If 
we  consider  the  characters  of  the 
talkers.  2.  The  probable  themes  dis- 
cussed. 3.  The  abrupt  and  extra- 
ordinary manner  of  its  termination. 

—  This  translation  of  Elijah  to 
heaven,  and  the  appearance  of  the 
chariot  and  horses  of  fire,  like  other 
similar  events  of  Old  Testament  Scrip- 
ture, teach  the  existence  of  another 
world  beyond  us,  unseen  by  the 
natural  eye ;  a  realm  whose  inhabi- 
tants and  hierarchies  and  orders  of 


ministries  are  numerous  beyond  all 
computation.  But  Elijah  entered  thi* 
heaven  without  tasting  death,  or  at 
least  by  a  marvellous  transformation. 
The  human  body,  with  its  earthly 
modes  of  life,  must  be  unsuited  to 
the  heavenly  state,  and  hence  we 
suppose,  in  harmony  with  the 
Scripture,  that  at  the  moment  of  his 
separation  from  Elisha,  Elijah  was 
changed,  as  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye,  and  ascended  with  a  renewed 
spiritualized  body,  made  compatible 
with  the  nature  of  heavenly  exist- 
ence. Thus  has  he  become  a  repre- 
sentative of  those  saints  who  shall  not 
die,  but  be  changed  at  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52; 
1  Thess.  iv .  1 7 ).  It  is  contrary  to 
the  evident  import  of  this  account 
of  Elijah's  departure,  and  contrary  to 
the  teachings  of  other  Scriptures,  to 
assume  that  his  body  must  have 
become  suddenly  decomposed  and  dis- 
solved into  dust,  or  that  it  was 
thrown  down  again,  as  some  of  the 
sons  of  the  prophets  thought,  on  some 
mountain,  or  in  some  valley,  a  lifeless 
corpse  (verse  16).  Elijah  truly  as- 
cended bodily  to  heaven,  but  his  body 
underwent  such  a  spiritualizing 
change  as  fitted  it  for  the  heavenly 
life ;  hence  our  doctrine  that  man  is 
all  immortal,  body  as  well  as  spirit. — 
Whedon, 

Verse  12.  In  this  inextricable 
interweaving  of  fact  and  figure,  it  is 
enough  to  mark  how  fitly  such  an 
act  closes  such  a  life.  "My  father, 
my  father,"  Elisha  cried,  '*  the 
chariot  of  Israel  and  the  horsemen 
thereof."  So  Elijah  has  stood  a  sure 
defence  to  his  country  against  all  the 
chariots  and  horsemen  that  were  ever 
pouring  in  upon  them  from  the  sur- 
roundmg  nations.  So  he  now  seemed, 
when  he  passed  away,  lost  in  the  flames 
of  the  steeds  and  the  car  that  swept 
him  from  the  earth,  as  in  the  fire  of 
his  own  unquenchable  spirit — in  the 
fire  that  had  thrice  blazed  around 
him  in  his  passage  through  his  troubled 
earthly  career.  According  to  the 
Jewish  legends,  he  was  at  his  birth 
wrapped  in  swaddling  bands  of  fire, 

'i%9 


CHAP.   II. 


EOAIILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


and  fed  with  flames.  During  the 
whole  of  his  course  "  he  rose  up  as 
a  fire,  and  his  word  blazed  as  a 
torch."  And  as  in  its  fiery  force  and 
energy,  so  in  its  mystery,  the  end 
corresponded  to  the  beginning.  He 
had  appeared  in  the  history,  we  know 
not  whence,  and  now  he  is  gone  in 
like  manner.  The  ascension  or 
assumption  of  Elijah  stands  out,  alone 
in  the  Jewish  history,  as  the  highest 
representation  of  the  end  of  a  great 
and  good  career ;  of  death  as  seen 
under  its  noblest  aspect ;  as  the  com- 
pletion and  crown  of  the  life  which 
had  preceded  it ;  as  the  mysterious 
shrouding  of  the  departed  within  the 
invisible  world.  Ey  a  sudden  stroke 
of  storm  and  whirlwind — or,  as  we  may 
almost  literally  say  of  the  martyrs  of 
old,  by  chariots  and  horses  of  fire — 
the  servants  of  God  pass  away.  We 
know  not  where  they  rest ;  we  may 
search  high  and  low,  in  the  height  of 
the  highest  peak  of  our  speculations, 
or  in  the  depth  of  the  darkest  shadow 
of  the  valley  of  death.  Legend  upon 
legend  may  gather  round  them,  as 
upon  Elijah ;  but  the  Sacred  Record 
itself  is  silent.  One  only  mode  or 
place  there  is  where  we  may  think  of 
them,  as  of  Elijah — in  those  who  come 
afterwards  in  their  power  and  spirit, 
or  in  that  One  Presence  which  still 
brings  us  near  to  them,  in  the  Mount 
of  Transfiguration,  in  communion  with 
the  beloved  of  God. — Stanley, 

Yerses    13-15.      The     conscious 
endowment  of    Divine    power.     1. 

7 esfed  and  verified  {verses  13,  H).  2. 
PuhUcly  recognhed.  '*  And  when  the 
sons  of  the  prophets  saw  him,  they  said, 
The  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  Elisha." 
3.  Commands  the  reverence  of  the  good. 
**And  they  came  to  meet  him,  and 
bowed  themselves  to  the  ground  before 
him." 

Verse  1 4.    The  Lord  God  of  Elijah. 

<*  Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?  " 
1 .  This  inquiry  is  suggested  amid  scenes 
of  temporal  emharrassment.  Next  in 
importance  to  the  consecration  of  our 
life,  and  the  cultivation  of  our  intellect, 
is  the  honourable  conflict  in  which  we 
390 


are  engaged  for  the  needed  finance,  the 
current  sustenance.  Its  importance 
secured  for  it  a  distinct  and  prominent 
place  in  the  model  prayer.  He  on. 
whose  shoulders  the  responsibility  of  a 
home  rests  has  the  highest  sanction  for 
praying,  as  the  morning  dawns, 
''Father  God,  feed  me  and  mine; 
give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread  ;  con- 
tinue to  us  our  nightly  shelter ;  keep 
the  fire  aglow  on  our  hearth,  and 
the  bread  sufficient,  if  not  abundant,  in 
our  cuphoard.  And  when  Satan  has 
suggested  that  the  monetary  obligation, 
when  due,  would  not  be  met,  and  the 
bread,  whenneeded,  woul^  not  he  found 
in  the  store,  then  the  cruise  of  oil  and 
the  barrel  of  meal  have  yielded  the  re- 
quired impetus.  The  mist  has  cleared 
away,  the  gathering  clouds  have  dis- 
persed, as  the  question  has  ascenrled, 
'  Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?'  " 

2.  This  inquiry  has  leen  suggested 
when,  disconcerted  hy  current  guiles,  the 
corruptions  of  society,  you  shrank  from 
a  task  which  seemed  to  have  the 
absorbed  attention  and  consecrated 
energy  of  but  a  few.  You  were 
lavish  of  health  and  life,  in  almost 
laborious  loneliness.  And  so  circum- 
stanced, you  were  tempted  to  suspend 
further  efforts ;  and,  in  comparative 
solitude,  bewail  the  apathy  of  the 
Church,  and  the  lapsed  state  of  the 
world.  But  you  thought  of  the  cave 
near  Horeb,  which  rung  with  the 
recalling  cry  of  Jehovah,  "  What 
doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ?  "  And  from 
that  date  you  have  never  indulged  in 
any  ideas  about  leaving  your  official 
duties,  and  passing  to  comfortable 
quietude.  Hiding  in  the  caves  has 
been  out  of  the  question.  You  mean 
now  to  toil  on,  until  at  the  close  of  a 
laborious  life  you  may  gratefully 
exclaim,  "  I  have  finished  the  work 
which  thou  gavest  me  to  do." 

3.  The  inquiry  is  suggested  hy  the 
controversies  upon  loliich  we  are  cast, 
the  disputes  with  the  settlement  of 
which  we  may  have  something  to  do. 
The  nineteenth  century  has  certainly 
its  Mount  Carmel.  Upon  truths  which 
we  hold  as  sacred  there  is  poured 
such  apparent  and,  in  some  instances, 
rather     acute     contempt.      Little   is 


nOMILETlC  COMMENTAnY  :  ^MGS. 


CHAP,  it. 


Bpured.  Venerable  names  are  tra- 
duced. Hoary  facts  are  changed  into 
airy  fictions.  A  volume  the  most  real 
is  now  regarded  as  the  most  mythical. 
Under  these  circumstances  what  is  our 
main,  our  supreme  want?  Our 
secondary  one  is  a  body  of  Christian 
schohirs  and  scientists  who  shall  be 
quite  equal  to  current  discussions.  Is 
the  development  theory  obtruded? 
Then  we  want  our  Hugh  Miller,  who 
shall  show  us  that  different  links  in 
the  development  chain  are  wanting, 
and  til  at,  therefore,  the  very  rocks 
thwart  the  whole  theory.  To  meet 
the  sophistries  of  Hume  we  need  the 
logical  acumen  and  elaborate  learning 
of  Campbell,  Chalmers,  and  Ward- 
law.  To  meet  the  detractors,  coarse 
and  scholarly,  of  our  adorable  Re- 
deemer, we  need  our  Pye-Smith,  with 
his  "  Testimony,^'  and  our  Hengsten- 
berg,  with  his  **  Christology.*'  Eut 
while  this  is  our  subordinate  want, 
we  have  a  paramount,  a  supreme  one, 
which  no  logic,  however  conclusive, 
and  no  scholarship,  however  extensive, 
can  supply.  We  want  the  influence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit — the  power  from  on 
high — the  baptism  of  fire.  The  fire  on 
Mount  Carmel  settled  the  controversy, 
and  nothing  else  would  have  done  it. 
Wo  may  have  everything  else,  but 
without  this  we  may  inevitably  fail. 
Elijah  reared  the  altar,  he  put  the 
wood  in  order,  he  adjusted  the  sacri- 
fice ;  but  it  wa?  the  descending  fire 
which  indicated  the  Divine  honour, 
which  clothed  and  crowned  the  whole. 
So  we  may  build  beautiful  places  of 
worship  ;  we  may  have  an  erudite 
ministry,  and  most  ornate  and  en- 
amouring music;  but  that  which  is 
essential  to  the  success  of  the  whole  is 
the  cloud  of  the  Divine  glory  over  the 
mercy-seat. 

4.  Ihis  inquiry  is  suggested  when, 
having  done  with  life's  responsibilities 
and  controversies,  we  arrive  at  the 
mystic  river — the  Jordan  of  death. 
Elisha,  having  wrapped  his  mantle 
around  him,  recalled  those  miraculous 
interpositions  which  were  associated 
with  the  life  of  his  prophetical  prede- 
cessor; then  the  waters,  having  been 
smitten,     *'they  parted    hither    and 


thither,  and  Elisha  went  over."  And 
are  we  to  ford  the  river  unescorted  ? 
Are  we  to  die  alone  ?  A  lone !  **  Whero 
is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?  "  About 
the  last  hour,  however,  be  not  over 
anxious.  Its  security  is  guaranteed. 
Be  most  anxious  about  the  current 
one.  As  they  speed  on,  gather  up 
the  moments,  as  if  they  were  grains  of 
gold.  Be  loyal  to  tlie  last.  Evade  no 
foe.  Shrink  from  no  encounter.  You 
are  in  the  militant  Church;  let  the 
standard,  therefore,  be  planted ;  let 
the  banner  wave.  The  clash  of  arms 
and  the  din  of  war  will  soon  be  hushed 
— ^hushed  for  ever.  You  will  be  more 
than  a  conqueror  through  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb.  Soon  you  will  have 
arrived  at  the  gates  of  pearl.  Soon 
there  will  be  thrown  over  your  whole 
life  the  accurate  interpretations  of 
eternity.  At  eventide  there  shall 
be  light.  May  you  have,  during  the 
vicissitudes  of  your  pilgrimage,  guid- 
ance which  is  unerring  ;  and  in  death, 
underneath  you,  may  there  be  the 
everlasting  arms — the  everlasting  arms 
of"  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah."— ^o;/ij- 
letio  Quarterly, 

Verse  15.  It  was  not  the  outside  of 
Elijah  they  were  wont  to  stoop  unto 
with  so  much  veneration ;  it  was  his 
spirit,  which,  since  they  now  find  in 
another  subject,  they  entertain  with 
equal  reverence  ;  no  envy,  no  emula- 
tion, raiseth  up  their  stomach  against 
Elijah's  servant ;  but,  where  they  see 
eminent  graces,  they  are  willingly 
prostrate.  Those  that  are  truly 
gracious  do  no  less  rejoice  in  the  riches 
of  others'  gifts,  than  humbly  under- 
value their  own.  These  men  were 
trained  up  in  the  schools  of  the  pro- 
phets— Elisha  at  the  plough  and  cart ; 
yet  now  they  stand  not  upon  terms  of 
their  worth,  and  his  meanness,  but 
meekly  fall  down  before  him  whom 
God  had  honoured.  It  is  not  to  be  re- 
garded who  the  man  is,  but  whom 
God  would  make  him.  The  more  un- 
likely the  means  are,  the  more  is  the 
glory  of  the  workman.  It  is  the  praise 
of  a  holy  ingenuity  to  magnify  the 
graces  of  God  wherever  it  finda 
them. — £p.  Mall, 

391 


OHAP.  Ti.  EOMILETIC  COMMEKTAUT:  KINGS. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  16-18. 
The  Mysteriousness  of  the  Divine  Actions. 


I.  -A  severe  trial  of  faith.  The  sons  of  the  prophets  were  slow  to  believe 
that  Elijah  had  so  utterly  vanished  as  to  return  no  more.  It  is  true  that  one 
moment  they  saw  him  in  company  with  Elisha ;  the  next  Elisha  was  alone,  and 
their  great  leader  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  Still  it  might  be  only  another  of 
the  many  sudden,  abrupt  disappearances  which  had  marked  Elijah's  erratic 
career.  Besides,  if  the  spirit  had  ascended  to  heaven,  his  body  mip;ht  have  been 
dropped  on  some  mountain  side,  or  into  the  depths  of  some  valley ;  and  this 
should,  if  possible,  be  recovered,  and  reverently  buried.  Elisha's  account  of  the 
great  prophet's  exit  only  increased  the  mystery,  and  they  wearied  him  with 
speculations  and  suggestions.  Paith  must  be  prepared  to  take  much  on  trust. 
Where  there  is  no  mystery,  there  is  no  faith.  '*  Trials,"  says  F.  W.  Eobertson, 
'*  bring  man  face  to  face  with  God — God  and  he  touch;  and  the  flimsy  veil  of 
bright  cloud  that  hung  between  him  and  the  sky  is  blown  away ;  he  feels  that 
he  is  standing  outside  the  earth,  with  nothing  between  him  and  the  Eternal 
Infinite." 

II.  Provokes  diligent  inquiry.  The  commonplaces  of  to-day  were  the 
mysteries  of  yesterday.  The  phenomena  of  nature,  which  to  our  fore-fathers 
were  occasions  of  superstitious  dread,  are  to  us  familiar  friends,  and  our  most 
valuable  servants.  Discoveries  have  been  made  by  the  diligent  investigator 
which  would  have  remained  unknown  secrets,  and  are  secrets  still,  to  the  indo- 
lent and  indifferent.  Mystery  piques  curiosity,  and  curiosity  keeps  alive 
the  investigating  faculty.  The  more  mystery  there  is  surrounding  a  subject,  the 
more  eager  is  the  earnest  student  to  solve  it. 

III.  Not  always  fathomed  by  the  most  laborious  human  endeavours.  The 

search  of  the  fifty  strong  men  among  the  mountains  of  Gilead  was  fruitless : 
they  found  no  trace  of  the  missing  Elijah,  and  they  were  compelled  to  accept 
the  testimony  of  Elisha  without  further  question.  Much  has  been  revealed  to 
the  diligent  seeker  after  truth,  there  is  much  that  is  yet  wrapped  in  mystery. 
We  cannot  know  everything  about  every  truth.  Revelation  is  necessarily 
limited  by  two  things  :  by  the  Divine  will — ^there  is  nothing  to  impel  the  Divine 
Being  to  reveal  Himself  beyond  what  He  wills  to  do — and  by  our  human  capa- 
city. However  effulgent  the  revelation  on  God's  part,  its  comprehension  is 
necessarily  limited  on  our  part.  We  soon  come  to  the  extreme  boundary  of  the 
known,  and  vainly  we  wave  our  hand  in  the  darkness  of  the  unknown.  Much 
as  we  may  discover  by  persevering  study,  more  yet  remains  undiscovered.  The 
pleasures  of  inquiry  and  discovery  are  endless.  The  investigation  of  all  truth 
is  ennobling,  but  none  more  so  than  the  contemplation  of  those  redemptive 
truths  which,  like  the  stars,  their  fittest  emblems,  fix  the  eye  above  in  the  very 
act  of  vision  ;  a  countless  procession  of  brightness  and  wonder,  lights  visible  to 
the  humblest  eye,  yet  fit  to  exercise  the  thoughts  of  angels :  their  full 
grandeur  to  be  approached  only  when  we  shall  have  passed  the  grave,  and,  not 
less  than  sons  of  God,  shall  be  free  to  enter  into  the  mystery  and  magnificence 
of  heaven. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  mystery  of  Divine  truth  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting 
it.     2.  The  truth  essential  to  salvation  is  plainly  revealed.     S.  More  mysteries  are 
solved  by  faith  than  by  the  most  daring  unbeliefs 
392 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  il. 


g:erm  notes  on  tee  verses. 

Verses  16-18.  An  obstinate  incre-  Verse  18.  Some  men  are  best  satis- 
dulity.  I.  Is  dissatisfied  with  the  fied  when  they  have  wearied  them- 
most  reliable  testimoD.y.  II.  Con-  selves  in  their  own  ways  l^othing 
struct s  theories  of  its  own  (v.  16).  will  teach  them  wit  but  disappoint- 
Ill.  Persists  in  hav  ng  its  own  way,  ment.  Their  painful  error  leads  them 
notwithstanding  repeated  efforts  to  to  aright  conceit  of  Elijah's  happier 
persuade  to  the  contrary  (v.  17).  IV.  transportation.  Those  that  would 
Suff'ers  ignominious  defeat  (v.  18).  find  Elijah,    let   them   aspire    to   the 

—  How  many,  especially  young  and  heavenly  paradise.     Let  them   follow 

inexperienced  persons,  will  not  be  dis-  the  high  steps  of  his  sincere  faithful- 

suaded  from  their  opinions,  views,  and  ness,     strong     patience,     undaunted 

doubts,  and  will  not  heed  the  words  of  courage,    fervent    zeal,    and  constant 

their  teachers  and  parents,  who  have  obedience.     Then  God  shall  send  the 

the  best  intentions  towards  them,  and  fiery  chariot  of  death  to  fetch  them  up 

far     more     experience.     They    must  to  that  heaven  of  heavens  where  they 

become  wise  by  bitter  ejiperience,  and  shall  triumph  in  everlasting  joys. — 

then  hear  to  their  shame,  "  Did  I  not  Bp*  EalL 
say  unto  you,  Go  not  ?  ^* 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  19-22, 
The  Healed  Waters  a  Symbol  op  the  Efficacy  op  the  Gospel, 

It  is  a  proof  of  the  confidence  Elisha  has  already  won  that  the  dignitaries  of 
the  city  came  to  consult  him  about  a  matter  of  great  public  concern  ;  they 
believed  he  could  cure  the  malefic  waters.  How  potent  is  the  influence  of  a 
good  man  1  It  is  in  times  of  distress  and  difficulty  that  his  neighbours  discover 
his  real  value.  The  transactions  related  in  this  paragraph  may  be  used  to 
symbolize  the  power  of  the  Gospel  to  heal  the  poisoned  waters  of  humanity. 
Observe — 

I.  Humanity  enjoys  many  privileges.  **  The  situation  is  pleasant."  All 
travellers  agree  in  representing  the  site  of  Jericho  as  exceedingly  beautiful ; 
its  external  surroundings  were  all  that  could  be  desired.  So  man's  position  in 
the  world  has  its  peculiar  advantages.  Scenes  of  beauty  and  of  grandeur  meet 
his  gaze  in  every  direction.  He  is  rich  with  the  wealthy  accumulations  of 
the  historic  past.  He  is  surrounded  by  living  examples  of  noble  enterprise  and 
chivalry.  He  is  on  the  current  of  an  ever-advancing  civilization.  Opportu- 
nities of  usefulness  open  invitingly  at  every  step,  and  there  is  everything  to 
call  out  and  sustain  his  best  energies.  Life  on  earth  is  a  grand  opportunity 
which,  wisely  used,  will  be  fruitful  in  everlasting  good. 

II.  Humanity  is  infected  with  a  dangerous  and  fatal  malady.    **  The 

water  is  naught,  and  the  ground  barren."  In  the  fairest  prospect  there  is  some 
deformity ;  in  the  clearest  and  brightest  crystal  we  may  detect  a  flaw.  So 
the  beauties  of  Jericho  were  shadowed  by  the  sufferings  and  disappointment 
of  its  inhabitants.  The  water  was  bad,  and  the  land  unfruitful.  So  is  it 
with  man.  The  springs  of  his  being  are  poisoned  with  sin.  Every  part  of 
his  nature  is  tainted :  "the  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint." 
The  fatal  malady  infects  every  stream,  disorders  every  project,  blackens  every 
proi^pect,  chills  every  aspiration,  withers  every  hope.  The  soil  of  the  heart 
is  barren,  and  every  attempt  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  righteousness  is 
abortive. 

d9d 


OHAP.  n.  nOMILETIG  COMMENTAMT :  KIKGS. 


III.  The  Gospel  provides  the  power  to  heal  humanity  of  its  malady. 
1.  It  is  a  Divine  provision.  ''Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  healed  these 
waters."  The  healing  power  was  not  in  Elisha,  or  in  the  cruse  or  the  salt; 
but  in  God.  So  the  new  cruse  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  salt  of  Christian 
doctrine,  would  he  ineffectual  to  heal  humanity  of  its  evils  without  the 
permeating  presence  and  active  power  of  God.  "We  should  be  careful,  like 
Elisha,  to  give  to  God  all  the  glory  of  His  own  work.  Man  cannot  cure 
himself,  any  more  than  the  broken  pitcher  can  repair  itself.  2.  It  is  efficaoions. 
'*  So  the  waters  were  healed.'*  The  prophet  cast  the  salt  into  the  spring  ol 
the  waters.  The  fountain  being  healed,  all  its  streams  participated  in  the  cure. 
So  the  Gospel  begins  its  restorative  work  in  the  heart,  the  fountain  head  of 
human  life.  True  reformation  should  ever  begin  at  the  source  of  evil ;  it  will 
then  be  thorough  and  permanent.  ''  If  God  cast  into  the  fountain  of  our 
hearts  but  one  crusef  ul  of  the  salt  of  His  spirit,  we  are  whole ;  no  thought  can 
pass  between  the  receipt  and  the  remedy."  If  we  have  not  streams  of  Divine 
blessing  in  abundance,  we  may  have  enough  to  refresh,  to  heal,  and  fertilize. 

If  not  full  showers  of  rain,  yet,  Lord, 
A  little  pearly  dew  afford  ; 
A  little,  if  it  come  from  thee, 
Will  bo  of  great  avail  to  me. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  gospel  has  a  remedy  for  every  evil.    2.  The  remedy  must 
he  prayerfully  nought,     3.  Mud  he  helievingly  applied. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Verses  19-22.     As  we  see  in  the  Surely    our    city    stands    upon    the 

translation  of  Elijah  a  type  of  Christ's  delectable   mountain  whence   on  any 

ascension   into    heaven,    so   may   we  clear  day  we  may  have  fair  prospects 

also  see  in  the  subsequent  career  of  of  the  goodly  land  that  lies  beyond  the 

Elisha  a  type  of   the   holy  apostolic  swelling  Jordan.     Yet,  pleasant  as  all 

church,  clothed  with  the  spirit  of  the  things  seem,   it  is  not  well  with  us. 

Master,   and   working    even    greater  **  The  ground  is  barren." — Kitto. 

miracles  than  he.  — A  crook  in  every  lot.     1.  True 

of  the  most  pleasantly  situated  city. 

Verse   19.     The  material  facts  thus  2.     Of    the    most    highly    favoured 

combined   and   contrasted    are     very  nation.     3.     In  the  history  of  every 

suggestive   to   the   mind   of  spiritual  individual  life, 
conditions.     The   situation   in  which 

we  stand  is  pleasant.     While  so  many  Verse  20.     The  injurious  property 

fair    regions    of    the    earth    lie    in  and  effect  was   not   taken   from   the 

spiritual  darkness,  the  full  and  blessed  water  by  the  salt  poured  in ;  for  even 

light  of  God's  truth  shines  upon  our  if  the  salt  actually  possessed  this  power, 

habitations.      We    have   the   written  a  whole  spring  could  not  be  corrected 

word  of  truth. — we  have  the  uttered  by  a  single  dish  of  salt,  even  for  one 

word  of  truth — one  of  the  first  sounds  day,  much  less  for  a  longer  time  or  for 

that  entered  our  infant  ears  was  that  ever.     The  pouring  in  of  the  salt  was 

name   which   is   above   every  name ;  a   symbolic  act    with    which    Elisha 

and  not  a  day  passes  in  which,  under  accompanied  the  word  of  the  Lord,  by 

some  form  or  other,  we  may  not  see  which   alone  the   spring  was   healedL 

or  hear  the  words  of  salvation.    What  Salt,  on  account  of  its  power  of  pre- 

situation  could  be  more  pleasant,  more  serving  from  putrescence  and  decay,  is 

favourable  to  our  spiritual  progress  ?  the  symbol  of  incorruptibility  and  ol 
394 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  n. 


life  removing  death.     The  new  dish  trict    of  Jericho.      May  the  Lord  ol 

was  also  a  symbol  of  purity  and  invio-  Elisha  raise  up  those  who  shall  carry 

lateness. — KeiL  the  healing  salt  also  into  these  foun- 
tains.— Krummacher. 

Verse  21.     In  a  place   where  the  — Moral  reformation.    1.   Begins 

spiritual  fountains  are  poisoned,  and  in  the  soul — '*  He  went  forth  unto  the 

the  people  receive  to  drink,  from  all  spring  of  the  waters."     2.  Is  accom- 

the  pulpits  and  school-teachers'  desks,  plisJied  ly  human  agtncy — '^  And  cast 

not  the  water  which  streams  forth  unto  the  salt  in  there."     3.    Is    a    divine 

eternal  life,  but  the  death-draught  of  work — ''Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  have 

that      modern      babble       of      deceit  healed  these  waters."     4.  Is  thorough 

and     falsehood,     there     is     a    more  and  permanent — '' There  shall  not  be 

deadly    curse    upon    the    land   than  from     thence    any     more     death    or 

that  which   once   lay  upon  the  dis-  barrpn  land," 


EO MILE  TICS  OF  VERSES  23-25. 
The  Doom  op  the  Scoffee, 

I.  The  scoffer  reveals  a  spirit  of  hatred  and  opposition  to  that  which 
is  good.     Bethel  was  the  headquarters  of  the  great  apostasy — the  home  of 
idolatry.     Here  schools  were  established,   in  imitation  of  the  schools  of  the 
prophets,  to  instruct  the  people  in  idolatrous  practices,   and  to  inflame  their 
hearts  with  hatred   towards  Jehovah   and   His  worship.     Where  people  are 
taught  to  despise  and  detest  that  which  is  good,  no  wonder  they  are  ever 
ready  to  indulge  in  profane,  coutemptuous,  and  splenetic  scorn.     1.    Scoffing 
is  too  common  a  sin  of  depraved  youth,     "There  came  forth  little  children  out 
of  tlu)  city,  and  mocked  him."     We  are  not  to  understand  infantile  or  irres- 
sponsible  children,  but  those  who  had  attained  to  youthful  manhood,  as  distin- 
guished from  the  middle-aged  and  the  old.     Perhaps  these  young  people  were 
the  pupils  of  a  teacher  of  the  calf  worship  at  Bethel,  and,  meeting  with  Elisha 
as  they  came  from  school,  they  assailed  him  with  the  contempt  and  ridicule  in 
which  they  had  been  too  well  instructed.     Wicked  and  badly  trained  youth 
take  delight   in  holding  the  truth  up  to  derision  and  mockery ;   they  make 
sport  of  the  holiest  things,  and  glory  in  their  own  wickedness — '*  Fools  make 
a  mock  at  sin."     The  scoffer  is  the  lowest  type  of  depravity ;  ''  the  seat  of  the 
scornful"  is  the  nearest  seat  to  hell.     2.   To  scoff  at  the  servants  of  God  is  an 
insult  to  God  himself — *' Go   up,  thou  bald  head;    go  up,   thou  bald   head." 
It  is  not  likely  that  Elisha  was  really  bald-headed,  as  he  was  then  compara- 
tively young.     The  word  was  applied  to  him  out  of  pure  contempt,  and  in  51 
way  that  would  be  most  insulting.     It  was  **  a  term  of  great  indignity  with  the 
Israelites — baldness  being  usually  seen  among  them  as  the  effect  of  the  loath- 
some  disease  of   leprosy.      It  was   equivalent   to  calling    him   a   mean  and 
unworthy  fellow — a  social   outcast.     In  this  sense  it  is  still  used  as  a  term 
of  abuse  in  the  farther  East,  and  is  often  applied  as  such  to  men  who  have  ample 
heads  of  hair."     These  profane  mockers  had  heard  that  Elijah  had  been  taken 
up  to  heaven,   and  they  sneeringly  expressed  their  wish  that  Elisha  might 
share  the  same  fate,  and  they  would   be  well   rid  of  him.     But  the  sequel 
shows  that  Jehovah  regarded  the  insult  to  His  servant  as  directed  against  Him- 
self.    He  is  jealous  for   the    character,    reputation,    and   influence   of    His 
servants;     he    that    "  toucheth    them,    toucheth    the    apple    of    His   eve" 
(Zech.  ii.  8).  ^ 

II.  The  scoff'er  may  rouse  the  indignant  threatening  of  the  gentlest  nature. 
"  And  he  turned  back  and  looked  on  them  and  cursed  them  in  the  name  of  theLord."* 

395 


OHAP.  II.  E03I1LETIC  COMMENTAMT:  KINGS, 


How  unlike  the  gentle,  kindly,  tendor-liearted  Elisha,  as  we  have  so  far  been 
led  to  regard  him  !  It  is  more  like  the  fierce  outbreak  of  the  fiery  Eljah^  the 
prophet  of  denunciation  and  wrath.  But  even  the  placid  spirit  of  Elisha  is 
aroused  when  the  honour  of  His  God  is  concerned.  He  cursed  the  mocking 
youths,  **  not  from  personal  resentment,  but  under  a  Divine  impulse,  without 
which  no  prophet  ever  dared  to  pronounce  a  curse.  He  cursed,  and  that  was 
all.  He  did  not  punish."  The  servant  of  God  may  patiently  endure  the  scoffs 
and  frowns  and  persecution  of  the  world  when  they  refer  to  himself  only ;  but 
when  the  character  of  his  God  is  maligned  and  His  grandest  work  derided,  the 
meekest  become  bold  in  vindicating  the  Divine  glory.  When  Terantius, 
captain  to  the  emperor  Adrian,  presented  a  petition  that  the  Christians  might 
have  a  temple  to  themselves  in  which  to  worship  God  apart  from  the  Arians, 
the  emperor  tore  the  petition  in  pieces  and  threw  it  away,  bidding  the  soLlier 
to  ask  something  for  himself  and  it  should  be  granted.  Terantius  modestly 
gathered  up  the  fragments  of  the  discarded  petition,  and  said,  with  true 
nobility  of  mind,  **  If  I  cannot  be  heard  in  God's  cause,  I  will  never  ask  any- 
thing for  myself." 

III.  The  scoffer  is  sometimes  signally  punislied.  "  And  there  came  forth 
two  she- bears  out  of  the  wood  and  tare  forty  and  two  children  of  them."  The 
offence,  writes  Kitto,  involving  as  it  did  a  blasphemous  insult  cast  upon  one  of 
the  Lord's  most  signal  acts,  made  a  near  approach  to  what  in  the  IN'ew  Testa- 
ment is  called  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  became  the  Lord  to  vindicate 
His  own  honour  among  a  people  governed  by  sensible  dispensations  of  judgment 
and  of  mercy ;  and  it  became  Him  to  vindicate  the  character  and  authority  of 
His  anointed  prophet  at  the  outset  of  His  high  career.  The  pride,  irreverence, 
and  heartless  disregard  of  the  scoffier,  will  sooner  or  later  meet  with  due 
recompense. 

Hear  the  just  doom,  the  judgment  of  the  skies : 

He  that  hates  truth  shall  be  the  dupe  of  lies ; 

And  he  who  will  be  cheated  to  the  last, 

Delusions,  strong  as  hell,  shall  bind  him  fast. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Not  the  least  evil  of  idolatry  is  that  tt  produces  a  race  of  scoffers  of 
the  true  God,  2.  A  scoffer  is  hardened  against  ordinary  rebukes.  3.  But  erelong 
the  scoffer  meets  with  the  just  punishment  of  his  sin. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Verses  23,  24.     The  demoralizing  moral  and  religious  ideas  which  exists 

effects  of  idolatry  upon  the  young,  in    public    opinion.      The    separate 

I.  It  trains  them  in  false  ideas  of  God.  bearers   and   supporters  of  the  truth 

II.  It  destroys  their  appreciation  of  which  is  deep,  and  hence  misunder- 
the  truly  good.  III.  It  inflates  them  stood  by  the  masses,  are,  for  the  most 
with  basest  impertinence.  lY.  It  part,  objects  of  blind  scorn  to  wild 
exposes  them  to  confusion  and  suffer-  youth.  That  which  found  expression 
ing.  against  Elisha   has   also  fallen  upon 

many  in  later  times.     He  who,  in  the 

Verse  23.    Young  people  are  always  exercise  of  his  calling,  goes  up  to  per- 

ready  to  make  wanton  sport  of  any  verted    Eethel,    must    expect    it.— 

peculiar  appearance  which  they  do  not  Cassel. 
understand.     The  unripe  behaviour  of 

the  young  generation  which  is  grow-  Verse  24.     As  Elisha  was  not  silent, 

ing  up,  always  forms  a  shadowy  re-  so  also  now  a  faithful  servant  of  the 

flection  of  the  shallow  opposition  in  Lord  may  not  keep  silent  if  youn^ 
396 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OBAT.  nr. 


people  are  brought  up  badly  and  god- 
lessly.  He  ought  not  to  let  pass  un- 
noticed their  wickedness  and  impu- 
dence, and  their  contempt  for  that 
which  is  holy.  It  is  bis  duty  to  warn 
them  and  their  parents  of  the  Divine 
punishment.  "Woe  to  the  watchmen 
who  are  dumb  watch-dogs,  who  cannot 
punish — who  are  lazy,  and  who  are 
glad  to  lie  and  sleep. — Lange. 

—  0  fearful  example  of  Divine 
justice  !  This  was  not  the  revenge  of 
an  angry  prophet,  it  was  the  pun- 
ishment of  a  righteous  judge.  God 
and  His  seer  looked  through  these 
children  at  the  parents,  at  all  Israel : 
he  would  punish  the  parents'  mis- 
nurturing  their  children,  to  the  con- 
temptuous usage  of  a  prophet,  with 
the  death  of  those  children  which  they 
had  mistaught.  He  would  teach 
Israel  what  it  was  to  misuse  a  pro- 
phet :  and  if  he  would  not  endure 
these  contumelies  unrevenged  in  the 
mouths  of  children,  what  vengeance 
was  enough  for  aged  persecutors? 
Sp,  Ball. 

—  So  Dr.  Whittington,  returning 
from  martyring  a  good  woman  at 
Chipping-Sadbury,  was  gored  by  a 
bull.  Dr.  Story,  who  narrated  that 
he  had  burned  so  many  heretics,  was 


hanged  at  Tyburn  for  treason.  Hem- 
ingius  tells  of  a  lewd  fellow  in  Den- 
mark, who,  showing  great  contempt 
against  a  preacher,  as  he  passed  out 
of  the  church,  was  brained  with  a  tile 
falling  on  him.  Luther  tells  of 
another  who,  going  to  the  fields  to 
look  to  his  sheep,  after  he  had  railed 
most  bitterly  against  a  godly  minister, 
was  found  dead — his  body  being 
burned  as  black  as  coal.  **Be  not 
ye  m\ockers,  lest  your  bands  be  in- 
creased."— Trapp. 

Verse  25.  The  uses  of  retirement. 
I.  Is  sometimes  sought  by  the  most 
active  spirits.  II.  Affords  an  oppor- 
tunity for  study  and  preparation. 
III.  Gives  new  strength  to  grapple 
with  sin  in  its  greatest  strongholds. 

—  Whither  dare  not  a  prophet  go 
when  God  calls  him  ?  Having  visited 
the  schools  of  the  prophets,  Elisha 
retires  to  Mount  Carmel,  and,  after 
some  holy  solitariness,  returns  to  the 
city  of  Samaria.  He  can  never  be  a 
profitable  seer  that  is  either  always  or 
never  alone.  Carmel  shall  fit  him  for 
Samaria;  contemplation  for  action. 
That  mother  city  of  Israel  must  needs 
afford  him  most  work. — Bp,  Ball, 


CHAPTER  ni. 


THE  REVOLT  AND  DEFEAT  OF  MOAB. 

(Dritioal  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Jehoram,  the  son  of  Ahab— See  on  chap. 
i.  17.  The  more  distinctive  name  of  this  king,  together  with  a  helpful  chronological  state- 
ment, will  be  found  in  chap.  viii.  16.  In  character  and  conduct  he  was  only  comparatively 
better  than  his  parents :  bad,  but  not  so  bad  as  they.  Verse  2.  He  put  away  the  image  of 
Baal— There  were  "  images  "  (chap.  x.  26)  in  the  house  of  Baal,  which  Ahab  erected  (1  Kings 
xvi.  32)  in  Samaria ;  but  there  was  one  distinctive  (probably  very  vast)  statue,  called  here, 
and  in  chap  x.   27,  "  the  image.'*    Probably  those  Jl'l^^D  were  wooden  images ;  whereas 

this  7yBn  /15^?  ^^^  *  statue  in  stone  or  metal.    Verse  4.  An  annual  tribute  on  Moab 

The  custom  is  common  in  the  East  to  pay  custom  or  taxes  with  the  products  of  the  land. 
For  a  Moabitish  king,  with  rich  pastures  in  his  own  territory,  and  also  in  the  Aiubian  wilder- 
ness, this  was  but  a  small  tribute  to  pay.  Verses  6  and  7.  Confederation  of  Jehoram  and 
Jehoshaphat— This  was  effected  '*  at  the  same  time  "  (verse  6)  as  Jehoram  began  his  reign  and 
Moab  rebelled ;  and  the  confederation  was  with  the  design  of  crusbmg  Moab.  The  kins'  of 
Israel  "numbered,"  or  mustered,  a  considerable  army  from  his  subjects  throughout  "all  Israel," 
and  mvited  the  king  of  Judah  to  join  him  in  the  campaign.  Verse  8.  The  way  through  the 
wilderness  of  Edora-i.  e.,  not  crossing  the  Jordan,  but  marching  down  by  the  Dead  Sea  to  its 
southern  extremity,  and  thence  up  through  the  wilderness,  and  over  the  mountains  of  Edom, 

397 


CHAP.  iiL  EOMILETIG  COMME^'TART:  KINGS, 


approaching  Moab  from  the  sonth.  Moab  was  best  fortified  on  its  northern  boundary ;  besides 
which,  to  reach  Moab  by  a  northerly  route  they  would  have  had  to  risk  a  collision  with  the 
Syriaus,  whereas  Edom  was  at  this  time  ruled  by  a  deputy,  whom  Jehoshaphat  had  appointed 
(1  Kings  xxii.  47).  Verse  9.  Seven  days'  journey — It  was  a  weary  route  over  the  desert 
legion  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  while  also  "  the  deep  rocky  valley  of  Ashy  "  {Keii)  was  mo^t 
difficult  of  penetration.  They  found,  to  their  distress,  that  the  Wady  of  this  valley  was  dry. 
Ve-ses  10  and  11.  Jehoram  despairs;  Jehoshaphat  seeks  a  prophet  of  Jehovah.  Verse  U. 
Which  poured  water  on  the  hands  of  Elijah — i.  e.^  "  who  was  about  Elijah  daily  as  his 
servant,  and  v»ho  is  certainly  the  most  reliable  prophet,  since  he  [Elijah]  is  gone"  {2'henius). 
The  phrase,  ^Vwi^  113,  '*  H^re  is  Ulishay**  means  that  he  was  in  the  camp  or  close  at  hand. 

Perhaps,  as  Keil  suggests,  the  prophet,  led  by  Divine  impulse,  had  come  near  the  armies 
to  guide  their  kings  in  the  hour  of  embarrassment  and  despair.  Elisha's  ministry  might  now 
convert  Jehoram  from  idolatrous  sympathies,  by  showing  him  the  true  God.  Verse  13.  Elisha 
said  to  Jehoram,  •' What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  V— Elisha  meets  him  with  sternness  to 
rebuke  his  pride  and  impiety,  and  then  ironically  refers  him  to  the  idols  for  which  he  had 
deserted  Jehovah.     "Nat  " — 'p^^ — i.  e.,  not — not  so  ;  do  not  so  answer  and  refuse  me  ;  or,  It 

will  not  help  me  to  go  to  the  prophets  of  Baal.  Verse  15.  Now  bring  me  a  minstrel  -To 
soothe  and  elevate  his  mind  into  preparedness  to  heed  the  voice  of  God's  spirit  within  him.  On 
n^il"'  "T%  "  the  hand  of  the  Lord,"  see  Notes  on  1  Kings  xviii.  46.    Verse  19.  Mar  every 

good  piece  of  land — !2i^3i  to  inflict  pain ;   grieve  the  land.     Verse  20.   Came  water  by 

~  T 

the  way  of  Edom — Occasioned  by  sudden  rains  suiiernaturally  given,  which  fell  on  the  mouu- 

tam  heights  of  Edom,  and   quickly  filled  the  "VVady,  and  overflowed   into  the  "ditches.'* 

Verse  23.  This  is  blood— For  the  rancour  between  the  king?  of  Israel  and  Judah  was  well 

known  ;  hence  the  Moahites  supposed  they  had  slaughtered  each  other  in  some  quarrel  on  ttieir 

march.     Thus  deluded  by  the  sight  of  the  water — reddened  by  the  sun's  rays,  or  with  the 

colour  of  the  earth  into  which  they  had  dug  (verse  16),  the  Moabites   hastened,  unprepared, 

into  the  hands  of  their  foes.     Verse  25.  Jl^i^Tl  "1\'!) — Called  Kir  Moab  (Isa.  xv.  1).     It 

...  T  -:      ' 

was  the  capital  city,  and  fortified — now  called  Kerak.     Verse  27.  Eldest  son,  and  offered  him 

for  a  burnt  offering  upon  the  wall— In  the  sight  of  the  assailing  armies ;  and  this  spectacle 

of  horror  roused  in  the  aUies  of  Israel  such  revulsion,  because  that  their  support  of  Israel  had 

driven  the  king  of  Moab  to  this  dreadful  act,  that  they  fell  back  from  the  siege,  and  left  Israel 

to  its  own  fortunes. — W.  H.  J, 


nOMILBTICS  OF  FEBSES  1-8. 
Paetiai  Refoematiok". 

I.  That  partial  reformation  is  brought  about  by  a?'30ciation  with  the 
good  (verse  l).  This  verse  reminds  us  of  the  intimacy  existing  between  Jeho- 
ram, the  son  of  the  idolatrous  Ahab,  and  the  God-fearing  Jehoshaphat.  It  was 
by  the  mediation  of  the  latter  monarch  that  the  war-like  rancour  so  long 
cherished  between  Israel  and  Judah  was  subdued,  and  more  friendly  intercourse 
encouraged  (1  Kings  xxii.  44).  The  company  of  the  good,  if  it  does  not  change 
the  character  of  the  wicked,  greatly  modifies  their  conduct.  The  influence  of 
a  holy  life  makes  itself  felt  in  the  most  abandoned  society.  Example  is  more 
potent  than  precept.  The  power  of  Jesus  when  on  earth  coTisisted  more  in 
what  He  did  than  in  what  He  said — more  in  the  significance  of  His  conduct  than 
in  the  fulness  of  His  argument.  *'  Far  more  of  God  was  revealed  in  what  He 
was,  in  what  He  did,  and  in  what  He  suffered,  than  in  what  He  taught."  If 
all  the  good  withdrew  from  society,  one  of  the  most  powerf^^l  moral  restraints 
would  be  removed  from  the  wicked,  and  the  world  would  soon  become  a  very 
Tophet  of  unbearable  sufi'ering. 

II.  That  partial  reformation  is  seen  in  the  abolition  of  the  grosser  forms 
of  sin.     '*  He  put  away  the  image  of  Baal  that  his  father  had  made  "  (verse  2), 

398 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  hi. 


The  worship  of  the  Tyrian  Baal  was  encouraged  by  Ahab  and  Jezebel  to  such  an 
extent  as  at  once  to  degrade  and  disgust  the  people.  It  was  a  national  scandal. 
Jehoram  did  his  best  to  wipe  out  that  disgrace,  and  to  dry  up  that  fountain  of 
popular  pollution.  So  far  good.  It  is  a  gain  to  the  community  when  vice  is 
prevented  from  flaunting  Itself  before  the  public  gaze.  If  it  cannot  be  at  once 
abolished,  let  it  be  narrowed  to  the  smallest  space  and  reduced  to  the  minimum 
of  mischief.  Partial  reformation  of  abuses  is  better  than  leaving  things  as  they 
are.  The  vice  in  our  large  cities,  notwithstanding  all  attempts  to  hide  and  cir- 
cumFcribe  it,  is  something  appalling.  It  is  said  that  there  are  in  London 
10,000  prostitutes — a  procession  a  mile  long,  walking  double  file — all  some- 
body's daughters ;  and  there  are  20,000  thieves,  making  two  more  miles  of  that 
dread  procession.  What  would  be  the  effect  on  public  morality  if  all  these 
criminals  were  allowed  unchecked  and  unrestricted  scope  ? 

III.  That  partial  reformation  does  not  deliver  from  sins  which  have 
become  established  by  a  generation  of  wicked  examples.  **  ^Nevertheless  he 
cleaved  unto  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  "  (verse  3).  How  prolific  is  the  progeny  of 
a  single  sin — ^how  tenacious  the  effects  of  one  evil  example !  It  requires  more 
than  ordinary  courage  to  break  away  from  sins  that  are  hereditary  and  that  have 
been  fastened  on  a  nation  by  long  usage  and  enforced  by  kingly  example  and 
authority.  JN'o  partial  and  half-hearted  efforts  will  avail.  **  Men  do  less  than 
they  ought,  unless  they  do  all  that  they  can."  Only  by  Divine  help  can  a 
thorough  and  lasting  reformation  be  effected. 

Lessoi^s: — 1.  Any  efforts  after  sincere  reformation  are  commendahle.  2.  Noth- 
ing short  of  a  thorough  reformation  can  he  acce^taUe  to  God,  3.  Ihe  evil  of  a  had 
example  may  he  counteracted  hy  a  good  one, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Verses  2,   3.     If  we  do   in  truth  T.     "Weakens   kingly   authority.     II. 

tear  down  a  statue  of  Baal  or  two,  Is   easily    discouraged    in  a  woyk  of 

and  adhere  nevertheless  to  the  sins  of  religious   reform.     Ill,    Is  hampered 

Jeroboam,  and  to  his  calf  images — to  by  the    influence    of    evil     parental 

those    ordinances  which  for   political  example.      IV.     Never   accomplishes 

reasons  have  been  introduced  and  es-  anything  great. 

tablished  in  the  church  contrary  to  the         —  Even  iato  the  most  wicked  fami- 

will  of  the  Lord — what  will  it  help  us  ?  lies  it  pleases  God  to  cast  His  powerful 

He  who,   for  himself,    abstains  from  restraints,    that   aU    are  not    equally 

that  which  is  opposed  to  God's  word  vicious.     It  is  no  news  to  see  lewd 

and  commandment,  but  continues  to  men  make  scruple  of  some  sins.     The 

tolerate  it  in  those  who  are  connected  world  were  not  to  live  in,  if  all  sins 

with  him,  or  subject  to  him,  shows  were  affected  by  all.     It  is  no  thanks 

thereby  that  he  is  not  in  earnest  in  his  to  Ahab  and  Jezebel  that  tlieir  son  is 

own  obedience  to  God,   and  that  his  no  Baalite.     As  no  good  is  traduced 

principles  are  deduced  only  from  ex-  from  parents,  so   not  all  evil ;    there 

ternal  considerations  and  relations. —  is  an  Almighty  Hand  that  stops  the 

Lange.  foul  current  of  nature  at  His  pleasure. 

Ko  idolater  can  say  that  his  child  shall 

Verse  2.    A    vacillating    spirit,  not  be  a  convert. — Bj^,  Mall, 


9d9 


OHAP.  ni.  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KIN08. 


EOMILETIGS  OF  VERSES  4-20. 
The  Powee  op  a  Good  Man  in  Exteemitt. 

On  the  death  of  Ahab  the  Moabites  rebelled  against  Israel,  and  refused  any 
longer  to  pay  the  heavy  tribute  they  had  been  accustomed  to  render.  During 
the  short  and  un warlike  reign  of  the  unfortunate  Ahaziah,  nothing  was  done 
to  chastise  the  Moabites  for  their  revolt ;  but  as  soon  as  Jehoram  seized  th 
sceptre,  he  organized  an  expedition  against  Moab  to  compel  the  payment  of  th 
accustomed  tribute.  The  whole  undertaking  would  have  ended  in  terrible 
disaster  and  loss,  but  for  the  timely  intervention  of  the  despised  Elisha.  It  is 
in  extremity  that  man  discovers  his  own  helplessness,  and  learns  to  venerate 
and  love  that  God  who  is  a  present  help  in  trouble. 

I.  That  the  most  carefully  planned  enterprise  may  be  unexpectedly 
reduced  to  great  extremity  (verses  4 — 9).  Israel,  Judah,  and  Edom  united 
their  armies,  and  marched,  a  formidable  host,  against  the  revolted  Moabites, 
led  in  person  by  the  monarch  of  each  nation.  A  route  was  selected  which,  by 
attacking  the  Moabites  from  the  South,  was  intended  to  take  them  by  surprise, 
as  they  would  hardly  expect  an  attack  from  Israel  in  that  quarter.  The  plot  was 
well  laid — success  was  certain — the  Moabites  would  be  diiven  into  immediate 
submission  ;  when  suddenly  the  advancing  host  found  itself  menaced  by  a  danger 
more  distressing  than  that  of  the  mightiest  army — there  was  no  water  for  man 
or  beast !  Of  what  avail  now  was  their  multitude  of  warriors,  and  the  im- 
posing splendour  of  their  equipment  ?  Their  numbers  aggravated  the  suffering, 
and  their  proud  display  added  to  the  ignominy  of  the  failure.  The  most  con- 
summate strategist  is  often  baffled  by  unlooked-for  difficulties.  History 
furnish^^d  a  melancholy  example  in  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  invasion  of  Russia 
and  his  disastrous  retreat  from  Moscow. 

II.  That  in  a  time  of  extremity  the  help  of  a  good  man  is  anxiously 
sought  (verses  10-12).  1.  Heathenism  is  powerless  to  help  in  extremity. 
Jehoram  yields  at  once  to  despair,  and  can  see  no  possible  way  of  deliver- 
ance (verse  6).  What  an  acknowledgment  of  the  imbecility  of  his  gods! 
Idolatry  had  no  comfort  for  the  sorrowing,  no  resources  in  times  of  difficulty. 
It  breeds  a  spirit  of  sullen  and  forlorn  fatalism.  2.  The  worshipper  of  Jehovah 
knows  where  to  go  for  help  (verse  11).  How  different  is  the  conduct  of  the 
two  kings !  Jehoram  wrings  his  hands  in  utter  helplessness ;  Jehoshaphat  calls 
for  a  prophet.  The  believer  in  Jehovah  has  resources  to  fall  back  upon 
in  adversity  of  which  the  world  knoweth  not.  A  tender-hearted  doctor  once 
said  to  a  patient  who  was  suffering  excruciating  pain,  *'  It  is  a  brave  heart 
that  bears  all  this  so  grandly."  *' Ah!  no,  Doctor,"  was  the  meek  and  gentle 
response,  ^*it  is  not  the  brave  heart  at  all ;  Jesus  hears  it  all  for  m<?."  '6.  In 
extremity  goodness  commands  the  homage  of  greatness.  ^'  So  the  king  of  Israel 
and  Jehoshaphat  and  the  king  of  Edom  went  down  to  him  '*  (verse  12).  They 
did  not  summon  Elisha  into  the  royal  presence,  as  was  the  case  with  Micaiah 
(1  Kings  xxii.  9).  They  were  in  distress.  It  was  not  a  time  to  stand  on 
ceremony,  or  to  make  a  vain  display  of  royal  pomp  and  greatness.  They 
eagerly  and  humbly  sought  the  help  of  the  mm  of  God.  True  worth  will 
triumph  in  the  end,  however  much  it  may  be  ignored  and  vilified ;  and  will 
command  the  respect  even  of  its  enemies. 

III.  That  a  time  of  extremity  affords  an  opportunity  for  a  good  man  to 
exalt  the  Lord.  1.  Sif  is  fearless  in  reproving  wrong,  Elisha  repudiates 
Jehoram's  claim  to  any  consideration,  and  tells  him  to  go  **  to  the  prophets  of  his 

400 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    KINGS.  CHAP.  HI. 


father  and  to  the  prophets  of  his  mother"  (verse  13).  He  has  already 
discovered  the  powerlessncss  of  his  national  idol;  and  keenly  as  he  must  have 
felt  the  rebuke  of  the  man  of  God  at  this  time,  he  could  not  but  admit  its 
justice.  No  opportunity  for  reproving  wrong  should  be  neglected,  and  cir- 
cumstances sometimes  arise  in  which  such  neglect  would  be  specially  repre- 
hensible. 2.  He  achnowledges  the  good  in  lohomsoever  found.  **Were  it  not 
that  I  regard  the  presence  of  Jehoshaphat,  the  king  of  Judah,  I  would  not 
look  towards  thee,  nor  see  thee  "  (verse  14).  One  sovereign  is  condemned, 
while  another  is  commended,  as  if  to  show  that  no  disrespect  is  intended  to 
the  royal  office,  but  that  sin  must  be  reproved,  whether  found  in  the  person 
of  the  sovereign,  or  in  that  of  the  meanest  subject.  **  What  shall  not  be  done 
for  a  Jehoshaphat  ?  For  his  sake  shall  those  two  other  princes,  and  their 
vast  armies,  live  and  prevail.  It  is  in  the  power  of  one  good  man  to  oblige  a 
world.  We  receive  true  though  insensible  favours  from  the  presence  of  the 
righteous.  Next  to  being  good,  it  is  happy  to  converse  with  them  that  are 
so ;  if  we  be  not  better  by  their  example,  we  are  blest  by  their  protection." 
3.  He  recognizes  the  Divine  source  of  all  true  help  (verse  15).  Elisha  calls  for 
music  to  soothe  and  tranquillize  his  mind,  and  prepare  himself  for  the  reception 
of  Divine  communications.  He  was  fully  aware  that  God,  and  God  only, 
could  render  help  in  such  an  extremity.  Help  is  found,  not  in  the  multitude  of 
an  host,  not  in  the  power  of  the  crown,  not  in  the  charms  of  song  and  the 
grandeur  of  sacrifice,  not  in  the  goodness  and  greatness  of  the  individual  instru- 
ment, but  only  in  God.  This  cannot  be  too  frequently  iterated,  or  too  constantly 
acknowledged.  4.  He  is  favoured  with  revelations  of  the  Divine  intentions  (verses 
16 — 19).  Not  only  is  water  promised  to  relieve  their  present  distress,  but  the 
kings  are  assured  of  victory  over  the  Moabites.  The  good  man  is  privih  ^e  1  to 
know  more  of  the  Divine  mind  than  can  be  understood  by  the  ungodly. 
**  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him ;  and  He  will  shew  them 
His  covenant"  (Psa.  xxv.  14). 

IV.  That  Divine  aid  in  extremity  is  not  sought  in  vain  (v^rse  20).  It 
seemed  very  unlikely  that  the  dry  channels  of  the  Edom  valley  should  be 
filled  with  water.  The  air  was  still,  the  sky  was  clear,  not  a  shred  of  rain- 
cloud  was  visible ;  and  the  work  of  the  busy  multitude  in  digging  trenches 
seemed  a  mockery.  Paith  in  Elisha  and  in  the  God  of  Elisha  was  put  to  the 
test.  Evening  sank  into  night,  and  night  gave  place  to  morning.  But  "  at 
the  hour  of  the  morning  sacrifice,  no  sooner  did  the  blood  of  that  oblation  gush 
forth,  than  the  streams  of  water  gushed  forth  into  their  new  channels,  and 
filled  the  country  with  a  refreshing  moisture.  Elijah  fetched  down  his  fire  at 
the  hour  of  the  evening  sacrifice  ;  Elisha  fetched  up  his  water  at  the  hour  of 
the  morning  sacrifice.  How  seasonably  doth  the  wisdom  of  God  pick  out  that 
instant  wherein  He  might  at  once  answer  both  Elisha's  prophecy  and  His 
people's  prayers.*'  The  Lord  will  never  disappoint  His  people's  confidence. 
It  is  in  extremity  that  He  most  signally  displays  His  power  and  goodness. 

Lessons: — 1.  Extremity  reveals  the  helplessness  of  man.  2.  Calls  for  special 
Divine  interference,     3.   Teaches  the  most  wholesome  lessons, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verse  4.  When  kings  and  lords  fall  also  be  disobedient  to  them,  for  their 

away  from   God,  then  their  subjects  punishment. 
must  fall   away   from    them.       And 

when  the  fathers  are  disobedient  to  Verses  10,  11.  What  are  the  great- 
God,  the  children  and  servants  must  est  monarchs  of  the   world,  if  they 

DD  401 


OHAP.ni.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


want    but   water    to   their   mouths !  Is  easily  recognized  by  all  lovers  of 

What  can  their  crowns   and   plumes  truth.     II.  Is  invested  with   Divine 

and  rich  arms  avail  them,  when  they  authority.       III.      Is     eagerly    and 

are  abridged  but  of  that  which  is  the  humbly  consulted  in  time  of  need, 

drink  of  beasts  ?     With  dry  tongues  —  So  long  as  men   are  free   from 

and  lips  do  they  now  confer  of  their  distress  and  danger,  they  ask  nothing 

common   misery.      Jehoram   deplores  about  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  they 

the  calamity   into   which  they  were  take  no  notice  of  them,  they  wish  to 

fallen  ;  Jehoshaphat  asks  for  a  prophet,  have    nothing  to  do  with  them,  they 

Every  man  can  bewail  a  misery ;  every  throw  their  faithful  warnings  to  the 

man  cannot  find   the  way  out  of  it.  wind  ;  but  when  an  accident  or  a  death 

Not  without  some  specialty  from  God  occurs,  then  they  are  glad  to  see   the 

does  Elisha  follow  the  camp ;  else  that  despised  preacher,  and  they  desire  to 

had  been  no  element  for  a  prophet,  make   use   of    his   services   and    his 

Little   did  the  good  king  of    Judah  prayers.     Three   kings   descend  from 

think    that     God   was   so   near   him,  their  elevation  and  come  humbly  and 

Purposely  was  this  holy  seer  sent  for  with  petitions  to  the  man   who  was 

the  succour  of  Jehoshaphat  and  his  once   a   servant   of  Elijah,   of   whom 

faithful  followers  when  they  were  so  they  had  not  even  known  so  much  as 

far  from  dreaming  of  their  delivery  that   he   had  joined  the    expedition, 

that  they  knew  not  of   a  danger.     It  So  now  emperors  and  kings  bow  the  knee 

would  be  wide  with  the  best  men  if  the  before  Him  who  came  to  His  ownandHis 

eye  of  Divine  Providence  were  not  open  own  received  Him  not,  who  did  not  have 

upon  them,  when  the  eye  of  their  care  a  place  to  lay  His  head,  but  who  is  now 

is  shut  towards  it.     How   well   did  confessed  to  be  the  Lord,  to  the  glory 

Elisha  in  the   wars !     The    strongest  of  God  the  Eather. —  Wart,  Summ, 
squadron  of    Israel  was  within   that 

breast ;  all  their  armour  of  proof  had  Verses  13,  14.  The  vain  pretences 

not  so  much  safety  and  protection  as  of  idolatry.    I.    Truthfully  rebuked. 

his  mantle. — Bp,  Mall.  II.  Unmistakably   apparent  in   times 

—  In  need  and  distress  the  state  of  of  difficulty.      III.     Invalidate     all 

a  man's  heart  is  brought    to   light,  claim  for  help. 
Jehoram  falls  into  despair,  he  does  not 

know  what  counsel  to  take,  nor  how  Terse  13.     How  sharply  dares  the 

to  help  himself.     Instead   of  seeking  man  of  God  to  chide   his  sovereign, 

the  Lord  and  calling  to  Him  for  help,  the  king   of   Israel !     The  liberty  of 

he  accuses  Him  and  cast  the  reproach  the  prophets  was  no  less  singular  than 

upon  Him  that  He  means  to  destroy  their  calling ;   he  that  would  borrow 

three   kings   at   once.      Jehoshaphat,  their   tongue   must  show  their  com- 

who  had  always  bent  his  heart  to  seek  mission.     As  God  reproved  kings  for 

God   (2    Chron.    xix.    3),     does  not  their  sakes,   so  did  not  they  stick  to 

wring  his    hands  in  despair,    but  is  reprove   kings   for    His  sake.     Thus 

quiet  and  composed.     He  thinks  with-  much   freedom   they   must    leave    to 

in  himself,  The  Lord  has  neither  now,  their  successors,  that    we   might  not 

nor  ever,  withdrawn  Himself  from  His  spare  the  vices  of  them  whose  persons 

people.     Therefore  he  trusts,  and  asks  we  must  spare. — Bp.  Hall. 

for  a  prophet  of  the  Lord. — Lange.  —   Elisha  stood   before  the  Lord, 

the  living  God ;   Jehoram  before  the 

Yerse  10.  Despair.  I.  A  natural  calf -god.  That  was  not  only  a  differ- 
fruit  of  idolatry.  II.  Shows  the  ence  in  religious  views  and  opinions, 
helplessness  of  man.  III.  Is  ever  but  also  an  entirely  different  stand- 
ready  to  throw  the  blame  of  misfor-  point  in  life.  Where  there  is  a  life 
tune  on  others.  in  God,  there  there  can  be  no  fellow- 
ship with  those  who  have  denied  and 

Verse  12.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  abandoned  the  living  God :  the  two 

is  with  him.''     A  true  prophet.     I.  ways  diverge  directly  and  decidedly. 
402 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARl  :  KINGS. 


CHAP.  m. 


The  relation  in  which  a  man  stands 
to  God  is  decisive  for  his  relation  to 
other  men ;  it  divides  from  some  by 
a  separation  which  is  just  as^  wide  as 
the  communion  into  which  it  brings 
him  with  others  is  close. — Starke. 

Yerse  14.  He  who  has  renounced 
God  and  His  word  can  make  no  claim 
to  esteem,  even  though  he  be  a  king, 
ridelity  to  God  and  holding  fast  to 
His  word  are  what  make  a  man 
truly  estimable,  even  though  he  were 
the  poorest  and  lowliest.  God  does 
not  let  the  righteous  perish  with  the 
unrighteous ;  it  rather  comes  to  pass 
that,  for  the  sake  of  a  single  righteous 
man,  many  godless  persons  are  saved 
and  preserved. — Lange. 

Verse  15.  The  power  of  music. 
I.  Soothes  and  tranquillizes  the  soul 
ruffled  by  contact  with  wrong.  II. 
Prepares  the  heart  for  the  reception  of 
Divine  blessing.  III.  Finds  its 
loftiest  use  in  the  worship  of  God. 

—  Who  wonders  not  to  hear  a  pro- 
phet call  for  a  minstrel  in  the  midst 
of  that  mournful  distress  of  Israel 
and  JTudah?  Who  would  not  have 
expected  his  charge  of  tears  and 
prayers  rather  than  of  music  ?  How 
unseasonable  are  songs  to  a  heavy 
heart !  It  was  not  for  their  ears,  it 
was  for  his  own  bosom,  that  Elisha 
called  for  music;  that  his  spirits, 
after  their  zealous  agitation,  might  be 
sweetly  composed,  and  put  into  a 
meet  temper  for  receiving  the  calm 
visions  of  God.  None  but  a  quiet 
breast  is  capable  of  Divine  revela- 
tions ;  nothing  is  more  powerful  to 
settle  a  troubled  heart  than  a  melo- 
dious harmony. — Bp.  JIall. 

Verses    16—19.      The  Lord   gives 


beyond  what  we  pray  for,  beyond 
what  we  understand ;  He  not  only 
saves  from  need  and  danger,  but  He 
also  gives  the  victory  besides,  out  of 
pure  undeserved  grace.  That  is  the 
fundamental  feature  of  all  Divine 
promises.  The  Lord  not  only  does 
not  deal  with  us  according  to  our 
sins,  but  He  gives  us,  besides  that, 
tb3  victory. — Lange. 

Verse  16.  Preparatory  work. 
I.  Necessary  in  all  Divine  arrange- 
ments. II.  Must  be  done  because 
commanded,  not  always  because  it  is 
understood.  III.  Is  an  evidence  of 
genuine  faith.  IV.  Its  value  will 
be  made  apparent  (verse  20). 

Verses  17,  18.  The  methods  of 
Divine  relief.  I.  Often  unseen  and 
mysterious.  II.  Inevitably  sure. 
III.  Superabundant  in  supply 
(verse  18). 

Verse  19.  This  is  by  no  means  a 
mere  prophecy,  as  Wordsworth  says, 
a  simple  prediction  of  what  the  allied 
armies  would  inflict  on  Moab ;  but  a 
command  as  plain  and  positive  as  that 
by  which  he  had  formerly  authorized 
the  destruction  of  the  idolatrous 
Canaanites.  So  utter  a  destruction  of 
the  Moabites  did  the  Lord  now 
authorize,  that  He  even  suspended  the 
law  of  Deut.  xx.  19,  which  forbade 
the  destruction  of  the  fruit  trees  of 
the  enemy.  This  felling  of  the  good 
trees  would  be  to  the  surviving  Moab- 
ites a  memorable  woe.  Their  ruined 
cities  they  might  speedily  rebuild, 
and  unstop  their  wells,  or  dig 
new  ones,  and  clear  the  land  of 
stones  ;  but  years  must  pass  before 
new  fruit  trees  could  be  reared. — 
Whedon, 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  21-27. 
The  Danger  op  Teustinq  to  Appeabanoes. 

L  Appearances  may  deceive  those  who  fancy  themselves  well  prepared  for 

all  contingencies  (verse  21).  Moab  was  aware  of  the  approach  of  the  invad- 
ing army,  and  made  the  most  careful  and  elaborate  preparation  to  withstand  it. 
All  who  were  capable  of  bearing  arms  were  marched  to  the  frontier,  and  the 

403 


CHAP.  III.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


brave  little  nation,  keenly  watching  every  movement  of  the  enemy,  seemed 
determined  to  make  a  stout  and  desperate  defence.  It  is  important  to  prepare 
for  the  conflict  of  life  ;  to  be  armed  with  the  whole  armour  of  God,  and  ever 
on  our  guard  against  the  attack  of  our  spiritual  foes.  Eut  when  we  are  best 
prepared  we  are  liable  to  be  misled  by  false  appearances.  **  Let  him  that 
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 

II.  Appearances  may  surprise  the  most  cautious  into  committing  a  fatal 
blunder  (verses  22-24).  The  shining  of  the  early  morning  sun  upon  the  water 
that  filled  the  red  earth-pits  newly  dug  in  the  valley  was  mistaken  I'or  blood, 
and  the  Moabite  leader,  without  taking  any  pains  to  verify  his  impression, 
jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  the  invading  army  had  quarrelled,  and  what  he 
saw  shining  in  the  sunlight  was  the  blood  of  the  slain.  The  word  of  command 
was  given  to  advance,  with  the  expectation  that  there  was  now  nothing  to  do 
but  to  gather  the  spoil;  but,  too  late  to  remedy  it,  the  mistake  of  the  Moabitcs 
was  seen,  and  the  compact  little  army  that  was  strong  and  formidable  when 
entrenched  in  its  defences  was  speedily  smitten  and  put  to  flight  when  it  came 
into  unexpected  contact  with  the  refreshed  and  well-armed  Israelites.  A  false 
glitter  did  all  the  mischief,  Alas  !  how  many  have  been  thus  lured  on  to  their 
destruction — the  lover  of  strong  drink,  who  has  **  looked  upon  the  wine  when 
it  is  red,"  until  he  has  been  fascinated  with  its  mocking  sheen  and  whelmed  in 
its  intoxicatmg  vortex ;  the  insatiate  seeker  of  pleasure,  who  has  been  capti- 
vated by  beauteous  forms  and  pleasant  sounds,  and  lost  in  giddy  mazes ;  the 
grasping  money-getter,  for  whom  the  glare  of  wealth  has  had  an  iiresistible 
charm  that  has  robbed  him  of  the  love  of  home,  of  kindred,  and  of  honour. 
Enchanted  with  the  glamour  of  false  appearances,  the  generous  have  become 
penurious — the  modest,  bold — the  careful,  recklessly  extravagant — ^the 
virtuous,  base. 

III.  Trusting  to  appearances  is  often  followed  by  the  most  ruinous 
consequences  (verses  25-27).  In  this  case  we  see  an  army  utterly  routed — • 
a  fruitful  country  made  barren  and  desolate — and  the  only  heir-apparent  to  a 
throne  cruelly  immolated  by  a  distracted  father.  Many  a  promising  nation 
has  been  brought  to  naught  by  yielding  to  the  unholy  lust  of  power,  following 
the  ignis  fatuus  of  military  glory,  or  craving  for  the  crimsoned  reputation  of  a 
tyrannical  ascendency.  The  Sclavonians  have  a  legend  that  a  certain  river  was 
infested  with  a  water-demon  who  had  the  power  of  assuming  the  shape  of  a  clus- 
ter of  red  flowers  waving  and  spreading  themselves  out  in  graceful  and  attractive 
forms  on  the  surface  of  the  water ;  but  if  the  passer-by  was  tempted  to  put 
forth  his  hand  to  pluck  one  of  the  fragile  blossoms,  he  was  at  once  seized  by 
invisible  hands,  dragged  beneath  the  surface,  and  suffocated  in  the  treacherous 
stream.  It  is  perilous  to  trust  to  false  appearances :  it  may  lead  to  irrepara- 
ble disaster.  Many  who  have  plucked  the  flower  of  pleasure  have  found  it 
to  contain  a  fatal  sting. 

Lessons: — 1.  Appearances  have  a  great  influence  over  us*  2.  Are  of  ten  false 
and  fictitiom.    3.  Entice  many  into  hopeless  ruin, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verses    22-25.      They    rise     soon  Moabites  a  semblance  of  blood.     A  few 

enough  to  beguile  themselves.     The  eyes  were  enough  to  fill  all  ears  with 

beams  of  the  rising   sun,   glistening  a  false  noise  :  the  deceived  sense  mis- 

upon   those  vaporous  and  unexpected  carries  the  imagination.     Civil  broils 

waters,  carried  in  the  eyes  of  some  give  just  advantage    to    a   common 
404 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


OHAP.    III. 


enemy ;  therefore  must  the  camps  be 
spoiled,  because  the  kings  have  smitten 
each  other.  Those  who  shall  be  de- 
ceived are  given  over  to  credulity  :  the 
Moabites  do  not  examine  either  the 
conceit  or  the  report,  but  fly  in  con- 
fusedly upon  the  camp  of  Israel,  whom 
they  find,  too  late,  to  have  no  enemies 
but  themselves.  As  if  de:;th  would 
not  have  hastened  enough  to  them, 
they  come  to  fetch  it,  they  come  to 
challenge  it:  it  seizeth  upon  them 
unavoidably.  They  are  smitten,  their 
cities  razed,  their  lands  marred,  their 
wells  stopped,  their  trees  felled,  as  if 
God  meant  to  waste  them  but  once. — 
£p.  Ball 

Yerses  22-23.  Optical  illusions. 
I.  May  deceive  the  most  wary.  II. 
May  lead  to  very  serious  mistakes. 
III.  Should  be  carefully  tested. 

—  The  Divine  aid  by  which  the 
army  of  Israel  was  not  only  saved  from 
destruction,  but  even  obtained  a  com- 
plete victory  over  their  enemies,  con- 
sisted here  not  in  a  miracle  of  God  sur- 
passing the  known  laws  of  nature,  but 
only  in  this,  that  God  the  Lord,  as  he 
had  announced  before  by  His  prophet, 
introduced  the  laws  of  nature  working 
to  the  determinate  end  in  the  predeter- 
mined way.  As  the  suddenly  appear- 
ing mass  of  waters  was  affected  in  a 
natural  way  by  a  violent  rain  in  the 
distance,  so  also  the  illusion  that  was 
80  fatal  to  the  Moabites  is  explained 
in  a  natural  way,  indicated  even  in  the 
text.  From  the  red  earth  of  the  pits 
the  water  collected  in  them  had  assumed 
a  red  colour,  which  was  considerably 
increased  by  the  rays  of  the  rising  sun 
falling  upon  it,  so  that,  seen  from  a 
distance,  it  must  have  appeared  like 
blood.  But  the  Moabites  might  be 
the  less  disposed  to  think  of  an  optical 
illusion,  as  by  their  familiar  acquaint- 
ance with  the  region  they  knew  that 
the  Wady  had  at  that  time  no  water, 
and  they  had  seen  or  learned  nothing 
of  the  rain  which  had  fallen  far  from 
them  in  the  Edomite  mountains. — 
ReiL 

Verse  23.  The  self-destruction  of 
the  allied  armies  of  Moab,   Ammon, 


and  Edom  f2  Chron.  xx.  22-25)  was 

still  fresh  in  the  minds  of  the  Moabites; 
and  knowing  the  enmity  and  jealousy 
existing  between  Judah  and  Israel,  and 
confident  that  the  Edomites  were  no 
fast  friends  of  either  party,  they  very 
naturally  imagined,  from  the  sight  of 
what  appeared  so  much  blood,  that  the 
diff'erent  kings  had  fallen  out  among 
themselves,  and  destroyed  each  other. 
They  supposed  it  only  remained  for 
them  to  go,  as  did  Jehoshaphat  on  that 
former  occasion,  and  gather  up  the 
precious  jewels  and  other  spoil  from 
among  the  dead  bodies. 

Verse  25.  The  terrible  havoc  of 
war.  I.  Sacrifices  precious  lives. 
II.  Ruthlessly  destroys  the  work  of 
years.  III.  Exhausts  the  resources  of 
a  nation.  IV.  Checks  national  growth. 

Verses  26,  27.  JN'o  onsets  are  so 
furious  as  the  last  assaults  of  the  des- 
perate. The  king  of  Moab,  now  hope- 
less of  rccoveiy,  would  be  glad  to  shut 
up  with  a  pleasing  revenge.  With 
seven  hundred  resolute  followers,  he 
rushes  into  the  battle  towards  the 
king  of  Edom,  as  if  he  would  bid  death 
welcome  might  he  but  carry  with  him 
that  despitcd  neighbour,  and  now,  mad 
with  repulse,  he  returns ;  and,  whether 
as  angry  with  his  destiny,  or  as  bar- 
barously affecting  to  win  his  cruel 
gods  with  so  dear  a  sacrifice,  he  offers 
them,  with  his  own  hands,  the  blood 
of  his  eldest  son  in  the  sight  of  Israel, 
and  sends  him  up  in  the  smoke  to  those 
hellish  deities.  Oh,  prodigious  act, 
whether  of  rage  or  of  devotion  !  What 
a  hand  had  Satan  over  his  miserable 
vassals!  What  marvel  is  it  to  see  men 
sacrifice  their  souls  in  an  unfelt  obla- 
tion lo  these  plausible  tempters,  when 
their  own  flesh  and  blood  have  not 
been  spared !  There  is  no  tyrant  like 
to  the  prince  of  darkness. — Bp.   Hall. 

Verse  26.  Bravery.  I.  Called 
forth  by  the  stress  of  circumstances. 
II.  Challenges  admiration  irrespective 
of  the  cause  it  champions.  III.  Often 
unavailing. 


Verse  27.  The  offering  was  doubt- 

405 


OHAP.  in. 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTAUY:   KllWS. 


less  made  to  the  Moabitish  god  Che- 
mosli,  not  to  the  God  of  Israel.  Mesha 
supposed  that  his  misfortunes  were 
owing  to  the  vengeance  of  his  gods, 
whom  he  had  in  some  way  offended, 
and  by  this  costly  sacrifice  he  sought 
to  propitiate  them.  Human  sacrifices 
were  common  among  many  of  the 
ancient  heathen  nations.  The  story 
of  Iphigenia  sufiiciently  shows  the 
existence  of  the  practice  among  the 
Greeks.  It  prevailed,  also,  among 
the  Carthaginians  and  Phoenicians, 
and  most  of  the  nations  in  and  arc  und 
Palestine.  Causing  children  to  pass 
through  the  fire  to  Moloch  (chap, 
xiii.  10  ;  Deut.  xviii.  10)  is  an  allu- 
sion to  this  abominable  custom.  Dio- 
dorus  Siculus  relates  that  when  Aga- 
thocles  was  going  to  besiege  Carthage, 
the  people,  seeing  the  extremities  to 
which  they  were  reduced,  ascribed 
their  misfortune  to  the  anger  of  their 
god,  in  that  they  had  latterly  spared 
to  offer  him  children  nobly  born,  and 
had  fraudulently  put  him  off  with  the 
children  of  slaves  and  foreigners.  To 
make  an  atonement  lor  this  crime,  two 
hundred  children  of  the  best  families 
in  Carthage  were  at  once  offered  in 
sacrifice,  and  no  less  than  three 
hundred  of  the  citizens  voluntarily 
sacrificed  themselves.  Pliilo,  in  a 
fragment  preserved  by  Eusebius,  says : 
**  It  was  a  custom  among  the  ancients, 
on  occasions  of  great  disfciess,  for  the 
rulers  of  a  city  or  nation,  instead  of 
leaving  the  entire  population  to 
destruction,  to  sacrifice  the  beloved  of 
their  children  as  a  ransom  to  the 
vengeful  deities. —  Whedon. 

—  Various  accounts  of  the  origin 
of  human  sacrifice  have  been  given, 
but  all  are  necessarily  conjectural.  It 
Beems  to  us  that  the  practice  grew  out 
of  the  notion  that  whatever  was  most 
costly  and  precious  must  needs  be  most 
acceptable  as  an  offering  to  the  gods ; 
and  it  being  established  that  the  life  of 
an  animal  was  an  acceptable  offering, 
perverse  ingenuity  reasoned  that  the 
life  of  the  human  creature — thp  noblest 
of  creatures — and  his  life-blood  the 
most  precious  on  earth,  must  be  still 
more  acceptable  to  heaven,  still  more 
valuable  in  the  eight  of  the  gods. 
406 


This  being  the  case,  it  further  followed 
that  the  more  illustrious,  the  more 
pure  or  exalted  the  person  whoso  life 
was  offered,  the  more  proper  still  was 
the  offering,  and  the  more  cogent  its 
force  in  gratifying,  soothing,  or  render- 
ing propitious  the  stern  powers  that 
ruled  the  destinies  of  man.  As  to  the 
precise  object,  it  appears  to  us  that  in 
all,  or  nearly  all,  the  cases  fully  known, 
these  offeiings  were  propitiatory  at 
least,  if  not  expiatory. — Kitto. 

—  The  inhuman  cruelty  of 
heathenism.  I.  Immolates  the 
choicest  human  victims.  II.  Is 
prompted  by  despair.  III.  Bouses  the 
indignation  of  the  righteous.  IV.  Is 
specially  offensive  to  God. 

—  The  departure  of  the  Israelitish 
army  in  consequence  of  the  human 
sacrifice  of  the  king  of  Moab  is  a  very 
remarkable  sign  of  the  difference  be- 
tween the  fundamental  opinions  of  the 
Israelites  and  of  the  heathen. 
Whereas,  amongst  almost  all  heathen 
peoples,  sacrifice  culminates  in  human 
sacrifice,  and  this  is  considered  the 
most  holy  and  most  effective,  in  the 
Mosaic  system,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
is  re^^arded  as  the  greatest  and  most 
detestable  abomination  in  the  sight  of 
God.  It  is  forbidden,  not  merely  from 
considerations  of  humanity,  but  also 
because,  as  the  law  declares  with  special 
emphasis,  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  is 
thereby  defiled  and  His  Holy  Name 
profaned  (Lev.  xx.  1-5.  xviii;  21). 
Human  sacrifice  stands  in  the  most 
glaring  contradiction  to  the  revelation 
of  God  as  the  Holy  One,  in  which 
character  He  was  known  in  Israel 
alone  ;  hence  it  was  to  be  punished, 
without  respite,  by  death.  From  the 
preceding  narrative  we  see  how  deep 
roots  the  detestation  of  human  sacrifice 
had  struck  in  the  conscience  of  the 
people.  Neither  the  cultus  founded 
by  Jeroboam,  nor  that  of  Baal  which 
Ahab  had  imported,  with  all  its  bar- 
barism, had  been  able  even  to  weaken 
this  detestation.  It  was  still  so  strong 
that  a  victorious  army  allowed  itself  to 
be  led  thereby  to  withdraw  again 
from  a  land  it  had  already  subdued.— 
Lange, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS.  chap,  iv. 


CHAPTER  lY. 
THE  MIRACLES  OF  ELISHA. 

Critioal  and  Explanatory  Notes.— Verse  1.  Two  sons  to  be  bondmen— The  law  entiiled 
a  creditor  to  th  ■  slavery  or  service  of  debtors  till  the  year  of  Jul.iice.  Verse  2.  Pot  of  oil— 
Gesenius  suggests  unctio — "oil  for  anointing,"  as  the  rendering  of  ^^'0'^ — instead  of  "pot"; 

no  oil  left  for  food,  only  enough  for  the  anointing.  Verse  3.  Borrow  not  a  few — She  had 
none,  should  borrow  many.  Elisha  had  faith!  Verse  8.  Shunem,  in  the  plain  of  Esdracbn, 
at  the  base  of  Little  Hermon,  now  Sulam.  Verse  10.  Chamber  on  the  wall— Probably,  «s  in 
2  Sam.  xviii.  H;i,  a  chamber  in  the  oleahj  or  porch,  usually  appropriated  to  strangers  ;  secluded 
and  ^-uitabIe  for  quiet  retirement.  Verse  13.  I  dwell  among  mine  own  people— i.  e.,  1  do  not 
need  court  notice,  for  my  life  is  serenely  simple,  and  I  am  satisfied  with  the  esteem  of  my  neigh- 
hours.  Verse  16.  Thou  shalt  embrace  a  son— Thus  experiencing  the  same  proof  of  Divine 
favour  as  was  given  to  Sarah  in  he^-  old  age  (Gen.  xviii.  10-15).  Verse  22.  That  I  may  run 
to  the  man  of  Grod— Not  waiting  to  inform  her  husband  of  the  reason  of  her  mission,  lest  he 
sh  )uld  dissuado  her,  not  doubting  the  miraculous  help  she  would  gain  from  the  man  of  God. 
Verse  23.  She  said,  It  shall  be  well— Siaaply  US^Il),  peace.    With  the  one  single  word  she 

likewise  answers  G  hazi  (verse  26),  the  Eastern  Salam  !  "  it  is  well !"  for  she  desired  silence  till 
she  could  tell  all  the  truth  to  th3  servant  of  Jehovah.  Verse  27.  Let  her  alone,  for  her  soul 
is  vexed  within  her— Gehazi  thought  her  eager  attitude  an  undue  freedom,  not  sufficiently 
respectful  towards  his  mast«r.  But  fervid  grief  stays  not  at  punctilios,  "her  soul  is  bitter." 
Verse  31.  There  was  neither  voice  nor  hearing— 2:^i:3  ]''^J1^  ^P  ]''i^-i.  e.,  th?  dead  gave 

no  sign  of  life,  no  response  to  the  mere  staff.  The  act  was  aUowed  to  fail,  in  order  to  show 
that  only  through  humble  and  dependent  prayer  could  God's  power  be  entreated.  Verse  34. 
Lay  upon  the  child — Following  th^  method  of  his  great  predecessor,  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  21)! 
Yet  the  effects  differed,  the  resuscitation  was  by  gradual  and  progressive  sta^-es.  Verse  38.* 
Sons  of  the  prophets  were  sitting  before  him — This  means,  not  that  they  lived' in  comraoa 
with  b:iisha,  but  sat  as  scholars  before  him  for  teaching.  Seethe  pottage— A  kind  of  thick 
broth  of  rice  or  meal,  vegetables,  and  meat.  Verse  40.  There  is  death  in  the  pot— Proba  I7 
the  "  wild  gourds'*  (verse  39)  were  the  fruit  of  the  colocynth,  exceedingly  bitter,  and  causing 
severe  chohc.  Freely  eaten,  th^y  might  cause  death.  Verses  42-44.  Barley  loaves,  super- 
naturally  multiplied— A  foreshadowing  of  Christ's  greater  miracle  of  feeding  the  thousands. 
This  man  from  B  lal-shalisha  brought  the  first  fruits  (Dent,  xviii.  4,  &c.)  to  Elisha  as  be'ng 
''  the  man  of  God,"  rather  than  to  the  false  priests  of  Baal  who  overran  the  land,  but  were 
judged  by  this  man  to  be  less  worthy  to  act  as  Jehovah's  representatives  and  receive  his  reli- 
gious offering  than  the  prophet ^W.  H.  J. 


BOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-7. 

The  Mieacitlgus  Supply  op  Oil  Symbolic  of  the  Inexhaustibility  of  Divine 

Gkace. 

In  this  and  tlie  four  following  chapters  we  have  a  detailed  account  of  the 
miracles  of  Elisha.  We  catch  glimpses  of  the  quiet,  unohtrusive  life  spent  in 
the  schools  of  the  prophets;  and  we  cannot  but  observe  the  striking  difference 
m  the  spirit  and  character  of  Elisha's  ministry  as  contrasted  with' that  of  ids 
predecessor.  Elijah  represented  the  whirlwind,  the  earthquake,  the  fire  ; 
J^lisha,  tne  still  small  voice— less  terrible  and  imposing,  but  more  extensively 
influential  for  good.  As  Stanley  beautifully  puts  it :  ''  The  wliole  appearance 
ot  Elisha  revealed  the  difference.  The  rough  mantle  of  his  master  appears  no 
more  alter  its  first  display.  He  uses  a  walking  staff  like  other  grave  citizens 
(verse  29).  He  was  not  secluded  in  mountain  fastnesses,  but  dwelt  in  his 
own  house  in  the  royal  city  (chap.  v.  9,  24;  vi.  32;  xiii.  17),  or  lingered 
amidst  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  within  the  precincts  of  ancient  colleges, 
embowered  amidst  the  shades  of  the  beautiful  woods  which  overhang  the  crystal 
spring  that  is  still  associated  with  his  name ;  or  was  sought  out  by  admiring 

407 


CHAP.  IV.  ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


disciples  In  some  tower  on  Carmel,  or  by  the  pass  of  Dotlian ;  or  was  received 
In  some  quiet  balcony,  overlooking  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  where  bed  and  table 
and  seat  had  been  prepared  for  him  by  pious  hands.  His  life  was  not  spent, 
like  his  predecessor's,  in  unavailing  struggles,  but  in  widespread  successes. 
He  was  sought  out,  not  as  the  enemy,  but  as  the  friend  and  counsellor,  of 
kings.  His  deeds  were  not  of  wild  terror,  but  of  gracious,  soothing,  homely 
beneficence,  bound  up  with  the  ordinary  tenor  of  human  life."  The  miracle 
related  in  this  paragraph  indicates  the  sympathy  of  the  prophet  with  the 
troubles  and  needs  of  human  life.  In  treating  the  miracle  as  symbolic  of 
the  inexhaustihility  of  Divine  GracOy  the  following  thoughts  are  suggested. 

I.  That  humanity  is  reduced  by  sin  to  a  state  of  moral  bankruptcy  and 
ruin.  Like  the  widow  in  the  narrative,  we  are  hopelessly  in  debt,  and  have 
nothing  wherewith  to  discharge  our  liabilities.  The  law  of  Moses  provided 
(Lev.  XXV.  39-41)  that  in  case  of  inability  to  pay  his  debts,  a  man  and  his 
children  might  be  sold  and  remain  in  bondage  until  the  next  year  of  jubilee. 
The  laws  we  have  outraged  have  handed  us  over  to  a  bondage  of  the  worst 
kind — the  bondage  of  sin.  "  Know  ye  not  that  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves 
servants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey."  The  more  sin  is 
yielded  to,  the  greater  moral  ruin  it  works,  and  the  more  tyrannical  the  slavery 
it  entails. 

II.  That  every  provision  has  been  made  by  Divine  grace  to  restore 
humanity  to  a  state  of  moral  solvency.  Great  as  is  the  havoc  wrought  by 
sin,  the  remedy  is  greater.  *'Foras  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were 
made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous. 
Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound  '*  (Rom.  v.).  All  the  per- 
fections of  the  Divine  nature  are  engaged  in  the  restoration  of  fallen  humanity. 
The  redemption  by  Christ  Jesus  is  universally  applicable.  Restoration  is 
possible  to  the  most  abandoned — the  heaviest  debt  may  be  cancelled.  Heaven 
itself  is  too  narrow  for  the  full  display  of  the  Divine  goodness — its  streams 
flow  down  to  bless  and  replenish  the  neediest  on  earth. 

III.  That  individual  effort  is  demanded  in  order  to  participate  in  the 
ample  supplies  of  Divine  grace.  The  widow  in  her  extremity  seeks  for  help, 
and  readily  obeys  the  directions  given.  The  vessels  are  collected  and  the  oil  is 
poured  out  (verses  1-5).  So  Divine  grace,  to  be  enjoyed,  is  to  be  sought,  and 
the  Divine  commands  humbly  and  believin4y  obeyed.  **  Ye  have  not,  because 
ye  ask  not."  It  is  not  for  man  to  question  the  Divine  directions,  but  to  obey; 
not  to  slight  or  Ignore  the  Divine  provisions,  but  eagerly  and  gratefully  to  ac- 
cept them.  The  rarest  treasures  of  earth  are  discovered  by  the  diligent  and 
persevering  seeker.  The  blessings  of  heaven  are  woi  thy  of  the  most  laborious 
effort.     Conscious  need  sharpens  the  vision  and  stimulates  exertion. 

IV.  That  the  supply  of  Divine  grace  is  limited  only  by  the  capacity  of  the 
receiver.  Every  available  vessel  was  filled  with  the  oQ.  When  there  were  no 
more  vessels  to  be  obtained,  the  supply  ceased  (verse  6).  The  grace  of  God  is 
practically  inexhaustible;  it  is  limited,  not  in  itself,  but  by  the  capacity  of  the 
individual  receiver.  Copious  as  may  be  the  rain-fall,  a  very  limited  quantity 
will  suffice  for  the  needs  of  a  single  flower.  To  a  certain  extent  it  may  be 
true  that  the  grace  of  God  enlarges  the  vessel  which  it  enriches  with  its  blessings. 
The  enjoyment  of  spiritual  good  increases  the  desire  for  more. 

V.  That  the  reception  of  Divine  grace  furnishes  the  loftiest  motives  to  an 
upright  and  useful  life.  **  Go,  sell  the  oil  and  pay  thy  debt,  and  live  thou  and 
thy  children  of  the  rest "  (verse  7).     One  of  the  first  and  simplest  principles  of 

408 


E02IIZETIC  COMMEI^TAItY:  KINGS.  chap.  iv. 


true  religion  is  honesty — it  teaches  a  man  to  pay  his  debts.  He  is  to  do  justly- 
Some  time  ago  the  clothes  of  a  gentleman  were  found  on  the  seashore  wliere  he 
was  accustomed  to  bathe,  but  no  trace  of  his  body  was  discovered.  After  due 
delay  the  amount  for  which  his  life  was  insured  was  paid.  He  swam  out  to  a 
passing  ship,  assuming  to  be  a  political  offender  of  whom  the  police  were  in 
search,  and  was  taken  on  board.  Under  a  new  name,  in  the  United  States,  he 
prospered  ;  and,  what  was  more,  he  became  a  subject  of  renewing  grace.  In  a 
short  time  after  he  remitted  to  the  insurance  office  a  sum  of  money — principal 
and  interest — of  which,  it  had  been  robbed  under  such  false  pretences.  It  brings 
religion  into  disgrace  to  neglect  to  pay  just  debts  when  fully  able  to  do  so. 
"  For  the  grace  of  God  was  manifested,  bringing  salvation  to  all  men,  disciplining 
us,  in  order  that,  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we  should 
live  soberly,  justly,  and  godly  in  the  present  world  "  (Titus  ii.  11,  12). — Alford. 
lleligion  supplies  the  most  powerful  motives  to  live  the  highest  life,  and  teaches 
us  how  to  act  in  all  our  relationships  and  duties. 

Lrssoxs : — 1.  The  grace  of  God  is  universally  needed.  2.  Is  boimdiess  in 
generoHiti/,  3.  Has  wrought  marvellous  changes  in  the  condition  and  prospects  of 
humanity. 

The  Widow's  Pot  of  Oil. 

Very  abrupt  and  striking  were  the  transitions  in  the  life  of  Elisha.  Yesterday 
he  wrought  a  stupendous  miracle  which  supplied  the  wants  of  a  whole  army, 
and  was  the  means,  more  than  the  sword  of  Jehoram  and  Jehoshaphat,  of  sub- 
duing the  rebellious  kingdom  of  Moab  ;  to-day  he  works  a  miracle  for  the  relief 
of  a  poor  and  friendless  widow,  to  save  her  sons  from  slavery  and  herself  from 
starvation.  In  this  respect  Elisha  is  a  type  of  the  faithful  Christian  minister, 
who  has  to  pass  through  scenes  as  chequered  and  transitions  in  their  own  way 
as  sudden  and  remarkable,  who,  abstracted  from  common  interests  and  habits, 
and  lifted  by  his  unworldly  character  and  mission  above  all  human  precedences, 
is  debtor  alike  to  the  rich  and  the  poor. 

I.  To  this  widow  Elisha  stood  as  the  representative  of  the  compassionate 
Saviour,  before  whom  all  the  world's  glory  J)ales,  and  whose  presence  alone  can, 
without  disturbance  to  the  order  of  society,  equalise  all  human  ranks  and  level 
all  their  conventional  distinctions  in  the  dust.  She  was  in  circumstances  that 
made  her  feel  with  peculiar  painf ulness  the  gradations  of  ranks  and  the  vicissi- 
tudes of  life.  If  we  are  to  believe  the  voice  of  tradition  as  expressed  by  Josephus, 
she  was  one  who  had  seen  better  days,  being  the  widow  of  Obadiah,  the  lord 
bigh-chnmberlain  of  Ahab.  While  her  husband  lived  she  breathed  the  atmo- 
sphere of  a  court,  and  was  nourished  in  the  lap  of  luxury.  But  when  he  died, 
she  seems  to  have  been  reduced  to  the  utmost  poverty.  On  account  of  these 
trying  circumstances,  her  case  was  one  that  peculiarly  warranted  the  inter- 
position of  heaven.  But  she  had  another  claim  still,  besid(^  that  of  her  wretched- 
ness, upon  the  sympathy  and  help  of  Elisha.  Her  husband  f(>ared  the  Lord 
wliile  he  lived.  He  was  the  son  of  a  prophet,  and  cherished  the  deepest  regard 
for  the  person  and  the  work  of  those  who  filled  that  sacred  office.  If  he  was 
indeed  Obadiab,  the  steward  of  Ahab — and  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  the 
Jewish  tradition — then  the  sacred  story  informs  us  thr*t  during  the  fierce  perse- 
cution of  the  prophets  of  Israel  by  Jezebel  he  took  an  hundred  of  these  prophets, 
and,  at  the  peril  of  his  life,  hid  them  by  fifty  in  a  cave,  and  fed  them  with  bread 
and  water  during  the  whole  continuance  of  the  famine.  H  e  may  have  spent 
upon  the  prophets  of  the  Lord  what  he  meant  for  his  own  wife  and  children. 
Like  Joseph  in  Pharaoh's  court,  like  Daniel  in  Babylon,  the  upright  and  pious 
chamberlain  in  the  palace  of  Ahab  did  not  take  advantage  of  his  opportunities  ot 

409 


OTAP.iT.  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


enricliing  himself,  as  the  officers  of  Eastern  monarchs  have  so  often  done.  On 
the  contrary,  he  spent  his  fortune  in  benefiting  the  needy,  and  died  poor.  On 
this  ground  his  widow  might  well  appeal  to  Elisha  for  assistance. 

II.  Elisha  willingly  acknowledges  the  claim.  He  is  filled  with  pity  for  the 
poor  broken-hearted  widow.  Who  knows  what  terrible  privations  she  underwent 
without  complaining  while  she  had  the  company  of  her  sons  to  cheer  her?  Eut 
when  they  were  about  to  be  taken  from  her,  she  could  no  more  hide  her  suffering. 
She  must  get  help,  else  she  will  die.  Elisha's  first  question  to  her  evinced  a 
wonderful  knowledge  of  the  human  heart,  and  of  the  best  mode  of  dealing  with 
poverty  and  suffering.  Instead  of  volunteering  to  give  her  aid  at  once,  as  most 
persons  would  have  done,  carried  away  by  an  overpowering  impulse  of  compassion 
at  the  recital  of  the  tale  of  sorrow,  like  a  wise  and  judicious  friend  he  enquires 
how  far  she  herself  has  the  power  to  avert  the  threatened  calamity — '*  What 
hast  thou  in  the  house  ?  '*  Kis  assistance  must  be  based  upon  her  own  assis- 
tance. He  will  help  her  to  help  herself.  And  this  is  the  only  true  way  to 
benefit  the  poor.  Ey  reckless  and  indiscriminate  almsgiving,  by  wholesale  gifts 
of  money,  we  run  the  risk  of  pauperising  the  objects  of  our  charity.  Our  assist- 
ance, therefore,  should  be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  call  forth  the  resources  which 
they  themselves  possess,  and  to  make  the  most  of  them,  ^o  help  from  without 
can  benefit,  unless  there  be  a  willingness  of  self-help  within.  Of  course  such  a 
morle  as  this  of  administering  charity  is  more  trou1)lesome,  and  requires  a 
greater  expenditure  of  time  and  self-denial,  than  the  plan  of  throwing  a  dole  to 
a  beggar  to  get  rid  of  his  importunity.  Eut  putting  him  in  the  way  of  helping 
himself  will  be  truer  charity  than  any  gift  of  money. 

III.  The  widow  of  Obadiah  had  nothing  in  the  house  save  a  pot  of  oil.  Out 
of  this  last  pot  of  oil — the  sign  of  her  utmost  poverty — Elisha  furnished  the 
source  of  her  comfort  and  happiness.  Like  Elijah,  who  made  the  haudPul  of 
meal  and  the  cruse  of  oil  already  existing  an  unwasting  provision  for  each  new 
day's  want ;  like  a  greater  than  Elijah,  whose  miracle  of  the  multiplication  of 
the  loaves  and  fishes  took  its  point  of  departure  into  the  suj  eruJitural  from  the 
common  barley  loaves  and  fishes  before  Him ;  so  Elisha,  in  the  case  of  Obudiah's 
widow,  made  the  produce  of  nature  and  of  man's  labour  the  basis  of  his  wonder- 
ful act.  [n  the  fables  of  all  nations  we  are  told  that  a  magician,  by  a  mere  wave 
of  his  wand,  or  by  pronouncing  a  certain  charm,  produces  at  once  wealth  and 
luxuries  that  had  no  existence  before.  Aladdin  rubs  a  ring,  and  immedi- 
ately a  genius  appears,  and  at  his  command  provides  a  rich  feast  for  him  out  oi 
nothing.  He  rubs  an  old  lamp,  and  at  once  a  gorgeous  palace  rises  up  before 
him  in  substantial  reaUty  created  out  of  the  formless  ether  around.  By  putting 
on  Fortunatus's  wishing  cap,  the  lucky  possessors  of  it  can  get  anything  they 
want,  and  create  things  unknown  before.  Eut  there  is  nothing  like  this  in  the 
miracles  of  the  Eible.  The  prophets  and  godly  men  of  old  were  no  such 
magicians  as  these.  Their  most  wonderful  works  are  in  beautiful  accordance 
with  the  wise  laws  of  labour  and  economy  which  pervade  the  ordinary  arrange- 
ments of  life.  Even  the  miracles  of  Christ,  which  approached  nearest  to  crea- 
tions out  of  nothing,  rested  upon  a  fulcrum  of  existing  materials,  by  means 
of  which  their  supernatural  leverage  was  exerted.  In  miracles,  man  must  be 
a  fellow- worker  with  God  in  subduing  the  earth,  and  in  removing  the  limita- 
tions and  disabilities  of  the  curse.  In  these  actions  men  prepared  themselves 
by  the  miracle  wrought  within  them — the  triumph  over  natural  unbelief  and 
the  objections  rf  reason — ^to  believe  in  and  to  benefit  by  the  miracle  about  to 
be  wrought  without.  They  heated  the  iron,  as  it  were,  which  the  hammer  of 
Omnipotence  was  about  to  strike  and  to  mould  for  His  purposes. 

lY.  The  widow  of  Obadiah  might  well  be  astonished  at  the  command  of 
410 


ROmiETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap.  iv. 


Elisha.  But,  in  spite  of  all  the  objections  of  reason  and  common  sense  she 
hastened  to  obey  the  prophet.  Her  faith  triumphed  over  all  di faculties.  It  is  a 
significant  circumstance  that  he  should  have  commanded  her  to  shut  the  door 
up  )u  herself  and  her  sons.  Eevercnce,  stillness,  and  solitude  are  needed  for  the 
miracle,  and  therefore  the  door  must  be  shut,  and  the  unsympathetic  world  must 
be  excluded.  ^It  is  not  in  the  crowd  that  Grod  works  His  wonders  in  nature 
and  grace;  it  is  in  the  lonely  place,  to  the  solitary  individual.  Who  is  it  that 
sees  the  grander  revelations  of  nature,  but  he  who  turns  his  back  upon  the  human 
multitude,  and  seeks  communion  with  her  alone  in  the  sanctuary  of  her  hills 
and  desert  places  ?  But,  besides  being  necessary  to  prepare  the  widow  of  Obadiah 
for  receiving  the  benefits  of  the  miracle,  the  solitude  and  secrecy  which  Elisha 
enjoined  were  significant  of  the  mysterious  character  of  the  miracle  itself.  It 
was  veiled  in  the  same  obscurity  as  all  creative  acts — as  all  beginnings.  The  seed 
germinates — or,  in  other  words,  multiplies  itself— in  darkness  ;  animal  life  begins 
in  the  mysterious  secrecy  of  the  womb  ;  formless  matter  crystallizes  in  the  sunless 
caves  of  the  earth  into  more  than  the  glory  of  living  flowers.  Who  catches  the 
exact  moment  when  the  evening  star  first  twinkles  in  the  transparent  blue  ? 
AVho  has  noticed  the  unfolding  ox  the  full-blown  rose  from  the  bud  ?  God's 
arm  wrought  unseen  for  Israel  in  the  bosom  of  the  dark  cloud  which  rested  over 
the  Red  Sea  all  the  night ;  and  in  the  morning  the  dry  path  was  revealed  be- 
tween the  crystal  walls  of  water.  The  veil  of  darkness  concealed  the  falling  of 
the  manna  from  heaven  ;  and  the  dawn  only  disclosed  it  as  it  whitened  the  tawny 
sand  of  the  desert  around  the  tents  of  Israel.  Verily  God  hideth  himself— shuts, 
as  it  were,  the  door^  upon  all  His  origins  and  commencements,  and  leaves  us 
baffled  outside.  Science  and  religion  and  all  life  bring  us  back  to  unfathomable 
mystery — a  closed  door,  whose  magic  **  sesame  "  no  human  being  can  utter, 

V.  How  great  must  have  been  the  astonishment  of  the  widow  when,  pouring 
into  the  first  vessel  a  quantity  of  oil  from  her  pot,  the  vessel  filled  immediately 
after  the  first  few  drops ;  and  the  same  thing  happened  as  she  passed  from 
vessel  to  vessel,  each  filling  to  the  brim  as  soon  as  she  poured  a  little  fi'om  her 
own  store  into  it ;  until  at  the  end,  pouring  the  last  remaining  drops  into  the 
last  vessel,  her  own  stock  of  oil  and  the  supply  from  heaven  failed  together. 
The  process  fey  which  the  oil  was  multiplied  we  labour  in  vain  to  conceive.  We 
cannot  explain  the  phenomenon  by  the  observation  cf  any  known  laws ;  aiid  yet, 
in  truth,  the  miracle  is  not  more  strange,  save  in  the  rapidity  with  which  it  is 
efi'ected,  than  that  which  is  every  day  going  forward  in  nature  in  those  regions 
where  the  olive  tree  grows.  You  sow  the  seed  of  an  olive  tree ;  that  sccd^on- 
tains  a  very  small  quantity  of  oil.  It  grows  and  becomes  a  tree  and  produces  an 
immense  quantity  of  fruit ;  so  that  from  the  little  drop  of  oil  in  the  small  vessel 
of  the  seed,  you  have  thousands  of  vessels  in  the  shape  of  the  berries,  each  filled 
with  oil.  The  miracle  teaches  us  that  the  natural  process  is  not  the  result  of  an 
impersonal  law  or  of  a  dead  course  of  things,  but  the  working  of  our  Father  in 
heaven  -,  while  the  natural  process  in  its  turn  shows  to  us  that  God  in  the 
miracle  is  working  in  the  line  of  the  ordinary  events  and  dispensations  of  His 
providence. 

lY.  Awestnick  and  filled  with  amazement,  the  widow  went  and  told  the  '}.Lm 
of  God  what  had  happened.  She  asked  for  counsel  in  the  strange  and  unc-x- 
pected  emergency.  She  needed  assurance  of  the  reality  and  permanence  of 
this  marveUous  good  fortune.  The  oil  might  vanish  as  mysteriously  as  it 
carne.  How  calmly  the  prophet  receives  her!  He  knew  what  would  happen. 
And  does  not  this  show  a  wonderful  amount  of  faith  and  confidence  in  God  on 
the  part  of  Elisha  ?  He  told  the  widow  to  sell  the  miraculous  oil  and  pay 
her  debt  with  the  price  of  it,  and  use  what  she  could  not  sell  as  food  for  heis(df 
and  her  children.     The  miracle  goes  no  further  than  is  absolutely  necessary.    It 

411 


CHAP.  IV.  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


blends  with  common  life.  It  does  not  permanently  enricli  the  poor ;  it  pro- 
vides only  for  the  temporury  necessity.  How  strikingly  does  this  incident 
show  that  we  must  be  fellow- workers  with  God  throughout,  from  first  to  last, 
in  our  own  deliverance  aud  blessing-  ?  Thus,  in  a  most  interesting  manner,  was 
the  bread  cast  upon  the  waters  found  after  many  days.  The  widow  proved 
in  her  experience  the  truth  of  the  Saviour's  words :  ''  Blessed  are  the  merciful, 
for  they  shall  obtain  mercy;  "  or,  as  the  phrase  should  be  translated  literally, 
*'  Blessed  are  the  olive  givers,  for  olives  shall  be  given  to  them."  Obadiah  had 
poured  the  oil  of  his  bounty  into  the  afflicted  heart  of  God's  servants  ;  and  God's 
stjrvant  in  return  gave  his  widow  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  and  the  garment 
of  praise  for  tbe  spirit  of  heaviness. 

YII.  We  might  make  many  practical  uses  of  the  widow's  pot  of  oil,  for  it  is 
full  of  significance,  but  we  prefer  turning  the  incident  into  a  parable,  and  using 
it  as  an  encouragement  to  prayer.  We  are  all  in  the  condition  of  the  poor 
widow  ;  we  are  destitute  of  everything,  and  are  ready  to  perish.  But  God  is 
far  more  tender  and  considerate  to  us  than  Elisha  was  to  the  widow.  If  we 
have  but  the  feeling  of  want,  but  the  desire  for  God's  help,  that  very  want  or 
desire  will  be  to  us  what  the  pot  of  oil  was  to  the  widow — the  source  of  an 
abundant  supply  of  all  we  need.  If  we  come  to  God  with  the  longing  of  our 
hearts  for  His  salvation,  He  will  come  with  the  fulness  of  His  Godhead,  and 
supply  all  our  needs  according  to  the  riches  of  His  glory  in  Christ  Jesus.  If 
we  provide  vessels,  God  will  furnish  the  oil  with  which  to  fill  them.  For  our 
own  little  oil  He  will  give  us  overflowing  measure ;  for  our  feeble  desire. 
He  will  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think.  Let 
us,  borrow,  then,  many  vessels;  let  them  be  empty,  nothing  of  self  in  them, 
and  let  us  lay  them  before  Christ,  and  He  will  fill  them  to  the  brim  with  the 
oil  of  His  grace.  Gethsemane,  the  place  where  He  suffered  the  last  agony, 
means  a  press  for  olive  oil.  From  that  oil-press  of  sorrow  He  will  provide  a 
sufficient  supply  of  the  oil  of  gladness  for  us. — Condensed  from  the  Sunday 
Magazine  for  1873). 

OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Verses  1-7.    The  widow's  cruse.  I.  knows  what  we  have  need  of.    A  just 

The     widow' %    difficulty.      (1).     The  God.     Would  equally  defend  the  right 

nature  of  it.     A  debt.     One  that  she  of  the  creditor,  as  well  as  the  case  of 

could  not  pay.     Might  not  be  much,  the  widow.     (2).  In  harmony   with 

but  she  was  poor.     (2).  Had  come  upon  His  Word.    Widows  and  orphans  are 

her  suddenly.     Otherwise  her  husband  His  special  care.     (3).  In  aiding  her 

would  not  have  left  her  thus.     Some  He  employs  the  prophet.     It  may  be 

provision  would  have  been  made.     (3).  that  her  husband's  connection  with  the 

Aggravations  of   the  difficulty.     Her  prophets  had  brought   her    into  this 

sons,  instead  of  being  her  stay  and  stndt.     If  so,  th'  re  was  a  fitness  in 

support  in  her  widowhood,  must  now  the   selection  of    her  instrument    of 

Avork   for  another.     Instead  of  being  deliverance.     Man  the  helper  of  man. 

])rophets,  they  must  be  bondsmen.     It  Man  blessed  that  he  may  become  a 

does  not  necessarily  follow  that  her  blessing.     (4).   He  aided  in  answer  to 

creditor  was  hard-hearted.     He  may  prayer.     She  sought  and  found.     She 

have  been ;    he   seems   only   to   have  came  first  to  Elisha.     Trial  of   faith 

wanted  his  own.     He  may  have  been  and  reward  of  it.     III.   The  widow'' s 

poor.     On  the  other  hand,    he   may  deliverance.      (1).    Speedily   effected, 

have  rejoiced  at  breaking  up  such  a  Not  long  years  of  hard  service  of  her 

home.       II.      The    widow* %     helper,  sons  and  herself.     This  prompt  help 

God.    (1).   Agreeable  to  His  nature,  shows  the    prophet's    sympathy  and 
412 


EOMILETIC  OOMMEXTART:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


reuse  of  justice  too.  (2).  Strange 
method.  Vessels  borrowed.  Great 
many.  AUherneighbours'.  (3).  The 
command.  Close  doors.  No  prying 
eyes  of  people  who  might  misunder- 
stand the  whole  case.  **  Ponr  out." 
She  does  so,  and  her  cruse  fills  all  the 
vessels.  Sells  the  oil  and  pays  the 
debt.  (4).  The  effect.  Her  character 
for  honesty  vindicated.  Her  sons 
saved  to  her  and  to  their  high  vocation. 
She  is  saved  from  the  need  of  hard  and 
unaccustomed  toil.  The  Divine 
friend  of  tlie  helpless  and  poor  is,  by 
this  history,  commended  to  all  widows. 
The  story  is  one  of  many  encouraging 
events  that  may  lead  widows,  and 
such  as  lire  friendless,  to  trust  in  God. 
Many  sad  hearts,  empty  of  comfort, 
have  been  filled  with  the  oil  of  joy 
out  of  her  cruse. 

Learn  : — 1 .  The  best  people  are  some- 
times exposed  to  trial.  2.  God  is  a 
present  help  in  the  time  of  need.  3.  We 
should  sympathize  with  the  sad  as  Elisha 
with  the  widow.  4.  Our  little  may  go  far, 
with  God's  blessing.— 'The  Class  and  Desk, 

Verse  1.  The  griping  tyranny 
of  debt.  I.  May  fasten  upon  those 
who  do  their  best  to  avoid  it.  II.  Is 
the  more  keenly  felt  in  proportion  to 
the  desire  to  do  everything  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord.  III.  Brings  suffering 
and  slavei  y  upon  the  family. 

—  How  thick  did  the  miseries  of 
this  poor  afflicted  woman  light  upon 
her  !  Her  husband  is  lost,  her  estate 
clogged  with  debts,  her  children  ready 
to  be  taken  for  slaves.  Her  husband 
was  a  religious  and  worthy  man; 
he  paid  his  debts  to  nature,  he  could 
not  to  his  creditors.  They  are  cruel, 
and  rake  in  the  scarce  closed  wound 
of  her  sorrow,  passing  an  arrest  worse 
than  death  upon  her  sons.  Virtue 
and  goodness  can  pay  no  debts.  The 
holiest  man  may  be  deep  in  arrearages 
and  break  the  bank,  not  through 
lavishness  and  riot  of  expense,  but 
through  either  iniquity  of  times,  or 
evil  casualties.  Ahab  and  Jezebel 
were  lately  on  the  throne ;  who  can 
marvel  that  a  prophet  was  in  debt ! 
It  was  well  that  any  good  man  might 
have  his  breath  free,  though  his  estate 


were  not.  Wilfully  to  overlash  our 
ability  cannot  stand  with  wisdom  and 
good  government ;  but  no  providence 
can  guard  us  I'rom  crosses.  Holiness  is 
no  more  defence  against  debt  than 
against  death.  Grace  can  keep  us 
from  unthriftiness,  not  from  want. — 
Bp.  Hall. 

Verses  3-5.  In  temporal  affairs  ex- 
perience must  precede  and  faith  follow; 
in  spiritual  affairs  faith  must  precede, 
and  then  experience  follows,  for  we 
do  not  find  out  the  truth  unless  belief 
in  God's  Word  has  preceded  (Jno.  vii. 
17).  Whatever  a  man  does  in  the 
obedience  of  faith,  whether  it  appears 
foolish  or  vain  in  the  eyes  of  the  world, 
is  nevertheless  blessed  by  God,  and 
redounds  to  his  souFs  health. — 
Cramer, 

Verse  5.  It  was  time  to  shut  the 
door,  saith  a  reverend  man,  when 
many  greater  vessels  must  be  supplied 
from  one  little  one.  But  why  must 
the  door  be  shut  ?  1 .  That  she  might 
be  the  more  free  to  pray  (Matt.  vi.  6). 

2.  That  she  might  manliest  her  own 
faith,  and  not  be  hindered  by  the  un- 
belief of    others   (Mark   vi.    5,    6). 

3.  That  it  might  not  be  thought  that 
the  oil  was  by  anybody  secretly  con- 
veyed into  the  house  to  them. 

—  The  secrecy  of  the  Divine 
workings.  I.  Strengthens  the  con- 
victions of  their  supernatural  character. 

II.  Demands  a  more  implicit  faith, 

III.  Does  not  prevent  their  beneficent 
results  being  apparent  to  all. 

Verse  6.  Out  of  one  small  jar  was 
poured  out  so  much  oil  as  by  a  mira- 
culous multiplication  filled  all  these 
empty  casks  Scarce  had  that  pot  any 
bottom,  at  least  the  bottom  that  it  had 
was  to  be  measured  by  the  brims  of  all 
those  vessels :  this  was  so  deep  as  they 
were  high  ;  could  they  have  held  more 
this  pot  had  not  been  empty.  Even  so 
the  bounty  of  our  God  gives  grace  and 
glory  according  to  the  capacity  of  the 
receiver.  When  he  ceases  to  infuse,  it 
is  for  want  of  room  in  the  heart  to  take 
it  in.  Could  we  hold  more,  0  God, 
thou  would st  give  more :  if  there  be 

413 


ohap.it.  EOMILETIG  commentary :  KINGS. 


any  defect,  it  is  in  our  vessels,  not  in  above.    He  never  merely  takes  away 

thy  beneficence ! — Bp.  Roll.  distress,  He  gives  a  blessing  besides. 

—  This  is  a  good  emblem  of  the  He  desires,  however,  that  the  obliga- 

grace  of  God.  While  there  is  an  empty,  tion  to  our  neighbour^  should  first  be 

longing  heart,   there  is   a    continual  satisfied  before  we  begin  to  enjoy  His 

overflowing  fountain  of  salvation.     If  blessing. — Lange. 
we  find  in  any  place,  or  at  any  time, 

that  the  oil  ceases  to  flow,  it  is  because  —  Some  of  tlie  ancient  interpreters 

there  are  no  empty  vessels  there,  no  find  in  this  widow  an   image  of  the 

souls     hungering    and  thirsting    for  Gentile  clmrch.     The  husband  being 

righteousness. — Cla/rJce,  dead  sigiiities  that  she  was  no  lons:er 

joined  to  her  ancient  idolatri<  s.     Her 

Terse  7.     I^«mean8  are  given  thee  coming  to    Elisha  and     obeying  iiis 

to  satisfy  thy  creditor,  let  it  be  thy  word  is  explained  as  a  type  of  the 

first  duty  to  pay  him  before  thou  carest  eagerness   with   which   the    Gentiloa 

for  thyself !     He  who  can  pay  his  debts  sought  salvation  at  the  hands  of  Christ 

but  will  not,  takes  what  does  not  belong  and  His  apostles;   and  the  abundant 

to  him,   and  sins  against  the  eighth  supply  of  oil  represents  the  bountiful 

commandment.     When  the  Lord  gives  provisions  of  the  Gospel  to  deliver  all 

there  is  always  something  left  over  and  nations  from  the  bondage  of  sin. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  8-17. 

Genitinb  Kindness  is  Neveb  Unrewarded. 

I.  It  is  in  the  power  of  all  classes  to  show  kindness  (verso  8).  Elisha 
was  hospitably  entertained  by  a  **  great  woman  " — great  in  moral  goodness  as 
well  as  in  wealth.  It  is  in  the  power  of  the  rich  to  do  much  good  with  their 
riches.  All  honour  to  those  who  of  their  abundaace  take  pleasure  in  ministering 
to  the  wants  of  the  needy.  It  is  in  their  power  greatly  to  augment  the  happiness 
of  the  world.  But  alas !  how  many  there  are  who,  with  ample  means  to  do  good 
to  others,  have  not  the  disposition.  The  lack  of  the  disposition  is  more  sad,  and, 
unfortunately,  more  common,  than  the  lack  of  the  ability.  It  is  not,  however, 
the  exclusive  privilege  of  the  rich  to  show  kindness  to  others.  The  poor  may, 
and  do,  help  the  poor.  There  are  many  who,  like  the  poor  widow  of  Zarephath, 
are  ready  to  share  their  last  crust  and  their  la  t  cruse  of  oil.  There  are  arts  of 
kindness  more  precious  than  money.  These  it  is  in  the  power  of  all  classes  to 
show — rich  or  poor,  great  or  insignificant.  A  generous  spirit  is  governed  more 
by  the  actual  necessity  of  the  case  than  by  the  expense.  Great  acts  of  kindness 
are  not  accomplished  without  cost(l  Chron.  xxi.  24). 

II.  It  is  a  special  privilege  to  show  kindness  to  a  true  servant  of  God 
(verses  9,  10).  There  was  something  about  the  mien  and  spirit  of  Elisha  which 
impressed  the  women  of  Shunem  that  he  was  "  an  holy  man  of  God."  He  was 
so  different  from  the  prophets  of  Baal,  or  from  many  who  pretended  to  a  character 
of  sanctity  to  which  they  had  no  claim.  In  a  time  of  such  widespread 
degeneracy,  a  good  man  was  too  rare  not  to  be  easily  distinguished.  In  showing 
kindness  to  Elisha,  she  paid  deference  to  the  God  whom  he  worshipped  and 
whose  truth  he  taught.  The  love  of  kindness  should  spring  from  the  love  of 
goodness.  **  Those  that  are  truly  pious  and  devout  think  their  houses  and  their 
hands  cannot  be  too  open  to  the  messengers  of  God,  and  are  most  glad  to 
exchange  their  earthly  commodities  for  the  others  spiritual.  Superfluity  should 
not  fall  within  the  care  of  a  prophet,  necessity  must.  He  that  could  provide 
oil  for  the  widow,  could  have  provi<le|d  all  needful  helps  for  himself.     What 

414 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS,  CHAP.  IT. 


room  had  there  been  for  the  charity  and  beneficence  of  others,  if  the  prophet 
should  have  always  maintained  himself  out  of  power?"  A  judicious  use  of 
kindness  to  the  truly  good  is  more  fruitful  of  blessing  than  the  most  lavish 
generosity  towards  the  undeserving.  Indiscrimina^, charity  does  more  to 
pauperise  than  to  really  help. 

III.  A  grateful  heart  knows  how  to  appreciate  genuine  linliess  (verse 
11.13).  The  prophet  was  not  unmindful  of  the  thoughtfulucLS  and  liberality 
with  which  he  was  treated,  and  was  anxious  to  bestow  some  substantial  proof 
of  his  appreciation  and  gratitude.  Kindness  begets  kindness.  It  is  the  curse 
of  a  selfish  and  covetous  spirit  to  receive  .•  11  and  give  nothing  in  return.  The 
heart  that  cannot  respond  to  repeated  acts  of  kindness  is  past  all  feeling — it  is 
petrified  into  stony  hopelessness.  Gratitude  will  manifest  itself ;  it  is  restless  to 
show  its  appreciation  of  kindness.  **  An  ingenuous  disposition  cannot  receive 
favours  without  thoughts  of  return,  A  wise  debtor  is  desirous  to  retribute  in 
such  kind  as  may  be  most  acceptable  to  his  obligers.  Without  this  discretion. 
we  may  offer  such  requitals  as  may  seem  goodly  to  us — to  our  friends,  worthless." 

IV.  The  reward  of  genuine  kindness  often  comes  in  a  form  least  expected 
(verses  14-17).  The  kind  hostess  of  the  prophet  did  not  look  for  any  recompense. 
She  had  no  difficulty  in  which  Elisha's  influence  with  the  king  or  the  captain 
of  the  host  would  be  of  any  service  to  her.  She  was  not  conscious  of  needing 
anything.  The  recompense  came  in  a  way  wholly  unexpected — all  human  pro- 
babilites  seemed  against  her  being  thus  honoured — she  received  the  promise  of 
a  son.  To  an  Israelitish  wife  childlessness  was  a  reproach  and  disgrace 
(Gen.  XXX.  23 ;  Luke  i.  25).  In  some  way  unexpected,  but  in  a  way  that  will 
bring  much  satisfaction  and  joy,  kindness  will  meet  with  its  reward.  There  is 
a  special  blessing  connected  with  what  we  do  for  the  servants  of  God  (Matt,  x, 
40-42). 

Lessons  : — 1.  The  love  of  moral  goodness  begets  a  true  generosity,  2.  A  generous 
spirit  never  lacks  opportunity  for  its  exercise,  3.  Kindness  shown  to  the  servants 
of  God  is  never  lost. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VEESES, 

Verse  8.  There  are  always,  among  which  is  glad  to  take  the  Lord  Jesus 
those  whose  lot  it  is  to  have  wealth,  and  receive  Him  to  itself.  He  who, 
some  who  do  not  attach  their  hearts  to  like  the  Shut  aramite,  honours  and 
it,  and  do  not  trust  in  uncertain  riches,  loves  the  Lord,  and  is  anxious  to  lead  a 
but  in  the  living  God  ;  who  have  not  life  in  God,  honours  and  loves  also  the 
become  satiated  and  indifferent  in  their  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  seeks  their 
hearts,  but  hunger  and  thirst  alter  society.  He  does  not  seek  them,  how- 
righteousness,  and  have  an  earnest  ever,  as  pleasant  companions,  or  merely 
desire  for  the  bread  of  life.  The  ser-  in  order  to  claim  their  help  in  bodily 
vants  of  the  Word  ought  not  to  with-  need,  but  he  seeks  them  as  shepherds, 
draw  themselves  from  these,  but  as  soul-physicians,  as  guardians  of 
advance  to  meet  them  in  every  way.  God's  mysteries,  and  as  messengers  in 
God  always  gives  to  His  children  pious  Christ's  stead. — Lange. 
hearts,  so  that  they  open  their  houses 

and   shelter   strangers.     Though   the  Verses  9-11.     A   true  servant   of 

Gadarenes  beg  him  to   depart  (Luke  God.     I.  Distinguished  by  purity  of 

viii.  37),  though  there  are  Samaritans  life  and    character.     *' A  holy  man  is 

who  win  not  receive  Christ  (Luke  ix.  like  a  crystal  glass  with  a  clear  lamp 

62),  yet  there  is  always  a  good  soul  in  the  midst  of  it."     II.   Exerts  a 

415 


CHAP,  rr 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


beneficial  influence  on  all  with  whom 
he  comes  in  contact.  III.  Inspires 
generous  purposes  in  the  hearts  of  all 
lovers  of  goodness.  IV.  Sincerely 
appreciates  acts  of  kindness  done  for 
his  owner  his  Master's  sake. 

Verses  12-17.    The  conversation  of 
Elisha  with  the  Shunammite.  1.  The 

question  of  Elisha.  A  question  inspired 
by  gratitude,  although  the  woman 
had  far  more  reason  to  thank  him 
than  he  her.  A  noble  heart  does  not 
like  to  receive  a  favour  and  make  no 
return,  but  recognizes  its  obligation  to 
return  it.  It  is  also  a  test-question, 
to  see  if  the  Shunammite  had  received 
him  in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  and  not 
for  the  sake  of  a  reward,  or  for  any 
temporal  gain.  The  question  as  to  thy 
wishes  is  a  question  as  to  the  disposi- 
tion of  thy  heart.  2.  The  answer  of 
the  Shunammite.  She  seeks  no  recom- 
pense for  the  good  she  has  done ;  she 
wishes  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
court  of  the  king,  and  of  the  great  ones 
of  this  world ;  she  has  no  desire  for 
high  things — a  sign  of  great  humility 
and  modesty.  Although  she  lacked 
that  which  was  essential  to  the  honour 
and  happiness  of  an  Israelitish  wife — 
a  son — yet  she  was  contented,  and  no 
word  of  complaint  passed  her  lips — a 
sign  of  great  contentment.  The  Lord, 
according  to  His  grace  and  truth,  re- 
members even  the  wishes  that  we 
cherish  in  silence  and  do  not  express 
before  men,  and  He  often  gives  to  those 
who  yield  to  His  holy  will  without 
murmurs  or  complaints  just  that  which 
they  no  longer  dared  to  hope  for.  It 
makes  a  great  difference  whether  we 
doubt  of  the  Divine  promises  from  un- 
belief, or  from  humility,  or  want  of 
confidence  in  ourselves,  because  we 
consider  the  promises  too  great  and 
glorious,  and  ourselves  unworthy  of 
them. — Lange, 

Verse  13.  It  is  good  hearing  that 
an  Elisha  is  in  such  grace  at  the  court 
that  he  can  promise  himself  access  to 
the  king  in  a  friend's  suit.  It  was 
not  ever  thus.  The  time  was  when 
his  master  heard,  "Hast  thou  found 
me,  0  mine  enemy  ?  "  Now  the  late 
416 


miracle  which  Elisha  wrought  in 
gratifying  the  three  kings  with  water 
and  victory  hath  endeared  him  to  the 
king  of  Israel.  Bad  as  Jehoram  was, 
yet  he  honoured  the  man  of  God.  Not 
to  his  own  advancement  doth  Elisha 
desire  to  improve  the  king's  favour,  but 
to  the  behoof,  to  the  relief  of  others. 
There  cannot  be  a  better  office,  nor 
more  beseeming  a  prophet,  than  to 
speak  in  the  cause  of  the  dumb,  to 
befriend  the  oppressed,  to  win  great- 
ness unto  the  protection  of  innocence. 
^Bp,  EalL 

—  "I  dwell  among  mine  own 
people."  A  spirit  of  contentment. 
I.  Finds  its  happiness  in  its  immediate 
surroundings.  II.  Is  not  allured  by 
offers  of  greater  worldly  distinction. 
III.  Is  not  involved  in  troubles 
requiring  the  interference  of  the  great 
and  powerful.  IV.  Does  not  show 
kindness  to  others  with  the  design  of 
securing  any  advantage,  or  receiving 
anything  in  return. 

—  The  good  matron  needs  no 
shelter  of  the  great.  **  I  dwell  among 
mine  own  people."  As  if  she  said : 
The  courtesy  is  not  small  in  itself,  but 
not  useful  to  me.  I  live  here  quietly, 
in  a  contented  obscurity,  out  of  the 
reach  either  of  the  glories  or  cares  of 
a  court ;  free  from  wrongs,  and  free 
from  envies.  Not  so  hi  !;h  as  to  pro- 
voke an  evil  eye,  not  so  low  as  to  be 
trodden  on.  I  have  neither  fears  nor 
ambitions.  My  neighbours  are  my 
friends,  my  friends  are  my  protectors  ; 
and,  if  I  should  be  so  unhappy  as  to 
be  the  subject  of  main  injuries,  would 
not  stick  to  be  mine  advocates.  This 
favour  is  for  those  that  either  affect 
greatness,  or  groan  under  oppression. 
I  do  neither,  for  **  I  live  among  my 
own  people."  0  Shunammite  !  thou 
shalt  not  escape  envy.  Who  can  hear 
of  thy  happy  condition,  and  not  say, 
why  am  I  not  thus  ?  If  the  world 
afford  any  perfect  contentment,  it  is  in 
a  middle  estate,  equally  distant  from 
penury,  from  excess.  It  is  in  a  calm 
freedom,  a  secure  tranquillity,  a  sweet 
fruition  of  ourselves,  of  ours. 

Verse  16.  How  liberal  is  God  by 
His   prophet  in   giving  beyond  her 


EOMILETIG  CUMMENTART:  EINOS.  CHAP.  IT. 


requests.  Not  seldom  doth  His  loath  to  distrust  beneficial  events, 
bounty  overreach  our  thonglits,  and  She  well  knew  the  prophet's  holiness 
meet  us  with  those  benefits  which  we  could  not  stand  with  wilful  falsehood, 
thought  too  good  for  us  to  ask.  We  Perhaps  she  might  think  it  spoken  by- 
are  never  sure  of  what  we  desire.  We  way  of  trial,  not  of  serious  affirmation 
are  not  more  hard  to  believe  than  — £p.  Ball, 


E0MILETIG8  OF  VERSES  18-37. 
A  Great  Trial  and  its  Joyotts  Issue. 

Sorrow  and  joy,  tears  and  laughter,  lie  close  together  in  the  ever-changing 
experience  of  human  life.  The  source  of  greatest  joy  is  often  turned  into  a 
channel  through  which  flows  the  bitterest  anguish.  The  son  of  the  Shunamite, 
whose  advent  brought  gladness  into  the  home,  was  also  the  means  of  bringing 
over  it  the  darkest  shadow  of  trouble.  But  as  the  star  shines  brightest  in  the 
night,  so  in  the  gloomiest  moments  of  our  distress  are  we  most  conscious  of  the 
radiance  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  are  more  impressed  with  the  wisdom  and 
glory  of  His  works. 

I.  Here  we  have  the  trial  of  a  first  bereavement  (verses  18-21).  1.  It 
was  the  bereavement  of  an  only  son.  It  was  not  only  the  loss  of  a  child,  but  of 
the  only  child,  and  that  child  the  son  and  heir — a  child  sent  as  a  special  and 
unlooked-for  gift  of  heaven,  as  of  one  **  born  out  of  due  time.'*  The  first  and 
fondest  affections  of  the  parental  heart  had  centred  in  this  child,  and  his  loss 
was  the  heaviest  affliction  his  parent  had  ever  known.  Words  cannot  depict  the 
keen  and  bitter  pang  of  a  first  bereavement — the  heart  lies  pierced  and  bleeding, 
writhing  in  voiceless  and  helpless  agony.  Happy  is  the  sufferer  who  can  find 
relief  in  tears  !  2.  The  bereavement  was  sudden.  One  moment  the  lad  is  blithe 
and  merry  in  his  gambols  in  the  harvest  field — the  pride  of  his  father,  who 
already  sees  in  the  abundance  of  his  fields  the  means  of  blessing  the  future  of 
his  son  ;  the  next  moment  he  is  smitten  by  the  fierce  rays  of  the  sun  that  had 
ripened  his  father's  wealth,  and  he  is  carried  to  his  mother's  lap  to  die.  The 
eyes  that  had  watched  with  a  mother's  rapture  the  nimble  form  of  her  darling 
boy  as  he  bounded  towards  the  fields  in  the  golden  light  of  that  harvest  morning, 
with  his  parting  kiss  fresh  upon  her  lips,  are  now  bent  in  tearless  grief  over 
his  corpse.  A  few  brief  hours  have  brought  the  change  from  light  to  darkness, 
from  life  to  death.  Ah  !  how  sudden  are  the  great  changes  of  life — how  swift 
is  the  messenger  of  sorrow !  We  live  a  life-time  in  a  moment,  and  the  heart 
receives  a  scar  that  time  will  never  efface. 

II.  Here  we  have  a  trial  of  faith  in  the  Almighty  power  of  God  (verses 
22-30).  1.  Sorrow  should  not  destroy,  but  intensify,  our  faith.  As  soon  as  the 
fii  st  shock  of  alarm  had  subsided,  the  faith  of  the  Shunamite  woman  in  the 
God  of  Elisha  asserted  its  power.  She  believed  her  boy  might  be  restored.  So 
strong  was  this  belief  that,  for  the  time  being,  she  hid  the  fact  of  his  death  from 
her  husband.  She  heroically  bore  the  grief  herself,  strong  in  the  confidence  of 
Divine  interference.  The  soul  that  has  no  faith  in  God  is  paralyzed  and  help- 
less in  sorrow.  The  distress  that  drives  the  believer  to  God,  di'ives  the  unbc^- 
liever  to  despair.  **  Faith  is  the  best  lever  at  a  dead  lift."  2.  Faith  prompts 
to  the  use  of  all  legitimate  means  to  attain  our  most  ardent  desires.  With  all  speed 
she  sought  an  interview  with  the  prophet,  poured  her  grief  into  his  ears,  and 
passionately  entreated  his  help  ;  nor  would  she  cease  her  supplications  until  she 
prevailed  upon  him  to  accompany  her  to  the  home  where  the  dead  child  lay 
The  chamber  of  the  prophet  was,  for  the  first  time,  the  chamber  of  death. 

E  E  417 


CHAP.  IV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


Faith  without  works  is  dead.  It  is  presumption  to  expect  God  to  do  what  we 
can  do  for  ourselves.  Only  when  we  have  exhausted  all  human  means  may  we 
patiently  and  believingly  wait  for  the  Divine  interference.  We  cannot  save 
ourselves ;  but  we  are  directed  to  ask,  seek,  knock. 

III.  Here  we  have  the  trial  of  a  painful  suspense  (verses  32-35).    Elisha 

entered  the  chamber,  shut  the  door,  and  was  alone  with  the  dead  child  and  with 
God.  Who  can  describe  the  agony  of  suspense  that  tortured  that  mother's 
heart  during  the  few  hours  of  the  prophet's  absence — ^how  hope  and  fear  alter- 
nated? Will  the  door  never  open  again  ?  Will  the  prayers  of  the  holy  man 
prevail  ?  Will  she  clasp  again  her  living  son  ?  And  yet  most  of  us  are  acquainted 
with  such  moments  in  life.  How  much  has  sometimes  depended  upon  a  single 
hour — upon  a  letter—  upon  a  telegram  I  Such  moments  have  been  experienced 
at  the  rescue  of  a  wrecked  crew.  Will  the  vessel  hold  together — will  the  line 
bear  the  strain — till  the  last  man  is  saved  ? 

IV.  Here  we  have  the  sorrow  of  death  exchanged  for  the  joy  of  a  miracu- 
lous resurrection  (verses  36,  37).  The  faith  and  prayer  of  the  prophet  triumph. 
The  child  is  restored  to  life,  and  given  back  to  his  mother.  Who  can  describe  her 
rapture  ?  "This  my  son  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again."  A  symbol  of  the  rapid 
and  marvellous  changes  in  life.  After  a  storm,  a  calm.  Trial,  conflict,  despair, 
give  place  to  joyous  deliverance.  **  Sorrow  may  endure  for  a  night ;  but  joy 
Cometh  in  the  morning." 

Lessons: — 1.  There  is  no  home  into  which  death  does  not  sooner  or  later  enter, 
2.  The  only  refuge  and  relief  in  sorrow  is  tn  God.  3.  The  greatest  trials  lead  to 
the  realization  of  the  greatest  blessings. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Terse   18-37.     The  Shunammite's  A  mother  the  best  nurse.     (2).  She 

son.     I.   A  proud    mother's    delight,  sees  her  child  returning,  not  running 

(1).  Her  son.     The  pleasure  she  took  by  the  father's  side,  but  carried.    Her 

in  watching  his  childhood  and  growth,  anxiety.     Her  fears.     (3).  JN'urses  her 

&c.     He  was  her  treasure.     (2).  He  child.     The    time     drags     on.     The 

was  her  only  son.    This  would  increase  mother  does  not  tire.     The  child  dies, 

her  anxiety  and  also  her  delight  in  him  She  has  faith  left.     Faith  a  good  com- 

Judg.    xi.    34 ;  Luke  ix.    38).     (3).  panion    in    trouble.     This    child    of 

The  child  of  promise  (verse    16,    17).  promise    could    not   be  lost — should 

Hebrew  wives  anxious   to  have  chil-  not  die  if  she  could  help  it.     Carries 

dren — especially     to     have    a     son.  the  child  into  the  prophet's  chamber. 

This  desire  is  natural,  not  confined  to  III.    A   good   wife's   example.     (1). 

Hebrews.      Ber    husband   was   well  Considers  not  her  own  feelings  only, 

off,  and  here  was  a  son  to  inherit  the  but  her  husband's   also.     How  great 

father's    property   and    name.      (4).  his  grief  on  his  return,   and   finding 

Harvest  time.     Her  child  sent  out  to  death  in  his  house !     (2).  Kesolves  on 

play  in  the  harvest  field.     She  watches  immediate  action.     Will  visit  the  man 

him  depart,  and  thinks  of  the  happy  of  God.     Cannot  do  this  without  assis- 

day  he  would  have,  and  the  meeting  tance.     The  distance   is   very    great, 

at  night.     II.  A  tender  mother'' s  trial.  Calculates  the  time-   can  accomplish 

(1).  The  child  in  the  field.     Youthful  it  before  the  day  is  over.  (3).  Hastens 

sports.     Playing  at  harvesting.     The  to  the  field — begs  for  one  of  the  young 

father's    pleasure.     The     sunstroke,  men,  &c.     Does  not  tell  her  husband. 

'*  My  head!  my  head!"    The  father's  Would  not  grieve  him.     A  hint  for 

Borrow.    '*  Carry  him  to  his  mother."  those  who  unnecessarily  burden  other 
418 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  IV, 


people  witli  their  troubles.  IT.  A 
happy  mother'' 8  reward.  (1).  She 
returns  with  the  prophet.  Who 
would  bring  a  doctor  to  a  dead  child  ? 
Her  faith.  (2).  The  child's  wonder- 
ful restoration  to  life.  (3).  The  first 
reward.  Clasping  the  living  child  to 
her  heart.  (4).  Second  reward. 
The  father's  return  and  greeting. 
Pleased  to  find  that  the  child  is  well. 
Astonishment  at  learning  the  history 
of  the  day.  Men  at  their  occupations 
little  think  of  the  trials  at  home. 
Should  commend  their  dear  ones  to 
God.  (6).  Her  after  rewards.  The 
preservation  and  growth  of  this  child, 
Leahn  : — I.  To  repay  a  mother* a 
love  and  anxious  care.  2.  7ry  to  hear 
your  trial  nohly  without  making  other 
people  hear  it.  3.  Jesus  will  aise  all 
children  up  at  the  Last  Bay, — Class  and 
Desk, 

Verses  18,  19.  His  father  grew 
young  again  with  the  pleasure  of  this 
eight,  and  more  joyed  in  this  spring 
of  his  hopes  than  in  all  the  crops  of 
his  harvest.  But  what  stability  is 
there  in  earthly  delights  ?  The  hot 
beams  of  the  sun  beat  upon  that  head 
which  much  care  had  made  tender  and 
delicate.  The  child  complains  to  his 
father  of  his  pain.  Oh,  that  grace 
would  teach  us,  what  nature  teaches 
infants,  in  all  our  troubles  to  bemoan 
ourselves  to  our  Heavenly  Father ! 

Verse  18.  A  day  in  a  mother's 
life.  There  are  times  when  every- 
thing goes  on  smoothly,  and  one  day 
is  like  another.  Again  there  are 
times  when  changes  come,  and  whole 
years  of  joy  or  sorrow  may  be  concen- 
trated into  a  single  day.  So  it  was 
with  the  household  at  Shunem.  It 
was  a  hallowed  day  when  Elisha  first 
entered  the  house  (verse  8).  It  was  a 
joyous  day  when  a  man-child  was 
born  (verse  1 7).  But  most  memorable 
of  all  was  that  day  when  the  only  son 
was  ^  lost  and  found ;  was  dead,  and 
received  back  to  life  again  (verses 
18-37).  I.  Horning  joys.  It  is  the 
harvest  time.  "  Man  goeth  forth  unto 
his  work  and  to  his  labour  until  the 
evening"  (Psalm  civ.  22,  23).  First, 
we   see   mother   and   child   at   home. 


She  is  called  "a  great  woman" 
(verse  8).  This  implies  not  greatness 
in  wealth,  but  in  character  (Prov.  xii. 
26  ;  xxxi.  10-31).  Doubtless  she 
would  show  her  *'  greatness  "  not  only 
in  her  management  of  household  affairs, 
but  in  her  care  of  her  child.  How 
tenderly  she  would  watch  over  him ; 
with  what  gentle  wisdom  she  would 
train  him  in  the  ways  in  which  he 
should  go !  Day  by  day  he  grew 
before  her  in  strength  and  comeliness. 
He  was  herjoy  and  pride.  His  birthhad 
taken  away  her  reproach ;  his  training 
had  developed  all  the  deepest  feelings 
of  her  nature ;  his  fellowship  was  her 
delight,  and  his  future  the  dearest  hope 
of  her  life.  He  should  live  and 
prosper.  He  would  yet  do  worthily 
in  Shunem,  and  be  famous  in  Jezreel, 
Oh,  happy  mothers, 

**  Who  carry  music  in  their  heart ; 
Plying  the  daily  task  with  busier  feet 
Because  their  secret  souls  a  holy  strain 
repeat." 

The  next  scene  is  in  the  harvest  field. 
Here,  too,  all  is  joy.     The  father  is 
glad  at  sight  of  his  boy.     His  coming 
is  not  the  result  of  command,  but  of 
his  own  choice.     There  is  such  love 
between  him  and  his  father  as  makes 
their  meeting  and  intercourse  a  joy 
to  both.     They    are  happy    together. 
See   them  watching  the  reapers,    or 
walking  hand    in    hand   amidst  the 
yellow    corn.      The    father's     heart 
swells  with  gladness.     His  boy  is  more 
to  him  than  all  his  fields.     He  is  his 
only  son,   his  heir,  his  treasure,  the 
hope  of  his  old  age.     He  sees  in  him 
his  mother's  love  and  image,   and  the 
stay  of  her  heart  when  he  himself  is 
gone.      How    fervently    he     prays : 
"  The  God  of  Jacob  bless  the  lad." 
2.  Darkness  at  noon.     How  soon  may 
the  brightest  sky   be  clouded.     How 
quickly  may  the   happiest  home    be 
darkened  by  sorrow  and  the   shadow 
of  death  I     "  We  know  not  what  a  day 
may  bring  forth."     The  sun  is  high 
and  hot  in  the  heavens.     Suddenly  a 
cry   of  agony  is  heard — "  My   head, 
my  head  !  "     It  is  the  cry  of  a  child. 
How  strange   the  association — child- 
hood   and    pain!     Surely    here   is  a 
pi  oof  of  the  ravages  of  sin  (Rom.  v. 

4ir 


CHAP.    IV. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS, 


14).  "We  may  hear  many  sermons, 
and  give  no  heed ;  but  hard  and 
callous  is  the  heart  that  can  behold 
the  sufferings  of  a  child  and  yet  not 
feel  humbled  and  awed  before  God. 
It  is  a  cry  raised  in  the  midst  of  inno- 
cent  labour.  The  work  going  on  is  good, 
and  not  evil.  It  is  in  accordance  with 
God's  ordinance.  It  is  wholesome  and 
pure.  Old  and  young  may  join  in  it 
freely.  Such,  at  least,  it  was  in  the 
olden  time,  when  the  simplicity  of 
and  purity  of  pastoral  life  was  still 
known  in  the  land  (Ruth  ii.  4).  And 
yet  here  death  comes.  There  is  no 
place  safe.  There  is  no  people  or 
work  with  immunity  from  trouble. 
The  cry  hr ought  woe  to  the  father'' 8 
heart.  His  son's  voice  was  sweet  to 
his  ear.  Many  a  time  had  he  heard 
it  and  been  glad.  But  now  the  words 
**  my  head  "  are  like  a  sword.  Well 
did  he  know  the  import  of  that 
terrible  cry.  He  is  helpless.  But  he 
kuows  where  comfort  is  to  be  found. 
*  *  To  his  mother."  It  was  the  instinct 
of  his  heart.  It  was  what  the  boy 
himself  would  have  said,  could  he 
have  spoken.  Where  is  there  a  com- 
forter like  a  mother  ?  It  may  be  the 
child  is  hurt.  Others  may  make  light 
of  it :  not  so  his  mother.  It  may  be 
he  is  weary  of  learning.  Others  may 
be  hard  and  impatient:  not  so  his 
mother.  It  may  be  he  has  committed 
a  fault.  Others  may  be  severe  and 
unsympathizing :  not  so  his  mother. 
It  may  be  he  has  been  stricken  hy  sick- 
ness. Others  may  not  understand  or 
take  heed  :  not  so  his  mother.  Work 
is  laid  aside.  Comforts  are  got. 
Books,  pictures  are  bought.  Every- 
thing m  ust  give  way  to  the  littl  e  invalid. 
**  His  mother."  Sure  refuge  for  the 
weary ;  true  resting-place  for  the  sick 
and  stricken  child.  Picture  the  sad 
home-coming.  "  Carry  him."  The 
lad  obeys.  What  a  change !  He  came 
out  full  of  life  and  frolic  ;  he  is  borne 
back  helpless  as  a  clod.  **His 
mother."  Perhaps  on  household  busi- 
ness intent.  Perhaps  preparing  for 
the  return  of  father  and  child,  and 
busy  in  heart  shaping  joyous  things. 
Alas !  how  dreadful  the  awakening 
(verse  20).  Mark  her  gentleness. 
420 


'*  On  her  knees  " — where  often  she  had 
dandled  him  with  delight.  Her 
patience  and  hope.  Till  noon.  What 
suspense !  What  hoping  against  hope  ! 
Her  terrible  distress.  **  Died.^* 
Seemed  like  as  if  the  sun  had  gone 
down  at  noon.  All  was  dark.  In 
that  moment  what  thoughts  crowded 
upon  her  soul !  What  a  trial  to  her 
faith  I  God  seemed  to  have  forsaken 
her.     Thus  with  many — 

**  Too  common  !  Never  morning  wore 
To  evening,  but  some  heart  did  break.** 

///,  Light  at  evening  time.  All  is 
not  lost,  since  God  liveth.  This 
woman,  like  her  countryman  of  Gospel 
times,  was  great  in  faith.  Therefore, 
instead  of  gidng  way  to  despair,  she 
strengthens  her  heart  in  God.  Per- 
haps she  said  to  herself,  like  David, 
"  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  my  soul  ? 
Still  hope  in  God."  Mark  the  prepara- 
tion. What  promptitude  and  decision  ! 
The  lojig  ride  to  Carmel.  At  other 
times  might  have  admired  the  "  glory 
of  Carmel,"  but  now  she  is  pre- 
occupied— her  heart  is  fixed.  She  is 
silent.  The  passionate  appeal  to  the 
prophet  (verses  27-30).  Nothing  will 
satisfy  her  but  Elisha.  He  is  to  her 
the  man  of  God.  He  stands  as  the 
prophet  of  the  Lord  to  her,  in  sorrow 
as  in  joy.  She  will  not  leave  off  till 
he  yields.  Such  importunity  pleads 
not  in  vain.  2'he  return  and  restoration 
(verses  32-37).  Hope  has  sprung  up 
again  in  her  breast.  Nothing  is  too 
hard  for  the  Lord.  How  strange  and 
solemn  the  scenes  in  the  chamber 
of  death !  How  wonderful  the  revival ! 
God  is  great.  Oh,  what  joy  when  the 
mother  clasps  again  to  her  breast  her 
beloved  boy  !  Nothing  Diviner  could 
she  feel  short  of  heaven.  Think  of 
the  happy  close  of  the  day  in  that 
Hebrew  home !  Dearer  than  ever  was 
the  son  that  had  been  dead,  and  re- 
ceived back  to  life  again.  Stronger 
than  ever  was  the  faith  of  father  and 
mother  in  the  God  of  Jacob,  who  had 
proved  their  Refui^e  and  Help  in  the 
time  of  trouble.  With  what  quiet  and 
assured  peace  would  they  kneel  in 
prayer.  With  what  joyful  hearts 
would  they  sing  praises  to  the  God  of 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTAHY :   KINOS, 


CHAP.   IV. 


Israel  (Psalm  xxx.  11,  12).  What 
lessons  to  young  and  old  are  here 
(Ecc.  xii.  1  ;  Prov.  xxii.  6  ;  Eph.  vi.  4). 
Trials  will  come.  In  the  darkest  hour 
God  can  help.  Here  the  child  cries 
to  his  father,  the  father  sends  to  the 
mother,  the  mother  appeals  to  the 
prophet,  and  the  prophet  casts  himself 
on  God.  So  let  us  cast  ourselves  on 
Christ,  our  God  and  Saviour  (Isaiah 
Ixvi.  13  ;  John  xi.  25). — The  Study 
and  Pulpit, 

Verse  19.  What  an  undivine 
inference  was  that  of  the  Bishop  of 
Hereford,  in  his  sermon  at  Oxford  upon 
this  text,  in  the  reign  of  Edward  II., 
pursued  at  that  time  by  his  queen  and 
son,  that  an  aching  and  sick  liead  of  a 
kingdom  was  of  necessity  to  be  taken 
off,  and  no  otherwise  cured ! — Trapp. 

Yerse  20.  The  death  of  a  child. 
I.  Lightly  regarded  by  some.  II.  Is 
the  first  real  sorrow  to  many.  III.  A 
proof  of  the  prevalence  and  power  of 
sin.  IV.  Gives  a  deeper  interest  to 
the  bereaved  in  the  better  land. 

—  The  death  of  loved  children 
comes  often  suddenly,  like  the  light- 
ning from  a  clear  sky,  and  destroys 
our  joy  and  our  hopes.  Therefore, 
we  should  possess  these  gifts  as  not 
possessing  them.  The  Lord  will  not 
abandon,  in  days  of  adversity,  him  who 
trusts  in  Him  in  days  of  prosperity. 
He  who  in  the  latter  has  learned 
sobriety,  and  maintained  his  faith,  will 
not  be  without  wisdom  and  consola- 
tion in  the  former,  but  will  be  com- 
posed in  all  adversity. — Lange, 

Verses  22,  23.  A  prudent  wife. 
I.  Will  control  her  own  feelings  for 
the  sake  of  her  husband.  II.  Will 
consult  her  husband  on  every  needful 
occasion.  III.  Enjoys  the  respect  and 
confidence  of  her  husband  in  all  things. 
^ —  A  pious  woman  does  nothing 
without  her  husband's  knowledge,  and 
does  not  willingly  call  his  attention  to 
anything  by  which  he  may  be  sad- 
dened.— Starke, 

Verses  26,  27.  This  scene  is 
natural  and  very  graphic.  If  you  ask 
after  a  person  whom  you  know  to  be 
eick,  the  reply  at  fii'st  will  invariably 


be  Welly  thanh  God,  even  when  the 
very  next  sentence  is  to  inform  you 
that  he  is  dying.  Then  the  fallincr 
down,  clasping  the  feet,  &c.,  are 
actions  witnessed  every  day.  I  have 
had  this  done  to  me  often  before  I 
could  prevent  it.  So  also  the  ofiicious 
zeal  of  the  wicked  Gehazi,  who  would 
thrust  the  broken-hearted  mother 
away,  probably  thinking  her  touch 
pollution,  agrees  perfectly  with  wha 
we  know  of  the  man,  and  of  the  cus- 
toms of  the  East. — Thomson, 

Verse  26.  «*  It  is  well."  The  ver- 
diet  of  hope.  I.  May  be  uttered  when 
the  heart  is  full  of  sorrow.  II.  Indi- 
cates an  unwavering  faith  in  God. 
III.  May  be  true  in  a  higher  sense 
when  present  circumstances  do  not 
warrant  the  verdict. 

—  The  highest  Christian  optimism. 

I.  Teaches  that  all  is  well  in  its  rela- 
tion to  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God. 

II.  In  its  present  moral  bearing  on 
ourselves.  III.  In  its  relation  to  the 
compensation  and  glory  of  the  future. 

Verse  27.  Do  not  make  known  at 
once  to  every  one  you  meet  that  which 
distresses  you,  but  keep  it  to  yourself 
until  you  find  one  who  understands 
you,  and  whose  heart  you  have  tested. 
Beware  lest  thou  treat  harshly  sad 
souls  who  are  overcome  by  grief,  and 
who  seek  help  and  consolation,  and 
lest  thou  thrust  them  away  or  judge 
them  hastily.  Do  not  cause  still  more 
grief  to  a  bruised  heart. 

Verse  31.  The  powerlessness  of 
some  religious  acts  explained.  I.  Kot 
because  they  are  notdone  as  commanded 
and  with  all  due  propriety  and  solem- 
nity. II.  But  because  there  is  a  lack 
of  earnest,  acting,  living  faith.  III. 
Because  there  are  defects  and  incon- 
sistencies of  religious  character. 

—  Why  was  Gehazi's  mission  with 
the  staff  a  failure  ?  Eirst  of  all,  we 
maintain  that  it  is  far  from  certain  or 
evident  that  Elisha  expected  his  staff 
and  his  servant  would  be  effectual  in 
raising  the  dead.  On  the  contrary,  it 
is  very  possible  that  he  meant  Gehazi's 
mission  should  be  a  failure,  in  order  to 
show  that  the  miiacle  could   not  be 

421 


CHAP.  IV.  HO  MILE  TIC  COMMEKTART :   KINGS. 


wrought  by  any  supposed  magic  of  the     xiii.    58;  Marlv   vi.    56;    ix.    23). 

staff,    by    any    mere   human   agency      Whedon, 

whatever.     But  on  the  other  supposi-         —  The  staff  of  the  prophet  is  of  no 
tion,    certainly  admissible,    and  even     use  if  the  spirit  and  power  of  the  pro- 
probable,  that  the   prophet  expected     phet  are   wanting.     Do  not  mistake 
his  staff  to  resuscitate  the  child,  the     the  sign  for  the  thing  signified.     It  is 
failure  is  thus  well  explained  by  Kitto :     God  alone  who  can  help,  and  His  help 
"Elishadid  not  at  first  mean  to  go     is  not  dependent  on  external  instru- 
himftclf  to  Shunem,  and  for  that  reason     ments  and  signs, 
sent  his  staff  to  supply  the  lack  of  his         ye^ses  32-35.  The  power  of  prayer, 
own  presence.     Eut  alter  he  had  sent     i.  The  best   preparation   for  a  great 
away  the  servant  his  observation  of     spiritual  conflict.  2.  Inspires  an  invin- 
the  uneasiness  of  the  mother,  whom     cible  faith.     3.     Suggests  the  use  of 
he  had  expected  to  have  gone  home     the  best  means  for  obtaining  an  an- 
satisfied,  and  her  avowed  determination     g^gr.     4.  Achieves  great  victories, 
not  to  leave  him,  induced  mm  to  alter 

his  purpose,  and,  with  the  kindness  ^^^^^^  ^2,  33.— Merit  and  impor- 
natural  to  him,  to  forego  his  own  en-  ^^^^^Y  have  drawn  Elisha  from  Carmel 
gagements  at  Carmel,  and  to  accom-  ^^  Shunem.  Ho  finds  his  lodging 
pany  her  to  her  forlorn  home.  It  was  *^^^^  ^P  ^J  ^^^^^  P^^^*  corpse.  He 
probably  in  consequence  of  this  change  !f^*^  *^^  ^°°^  ^"^  ^^^^^  *o  prayer, 
of  plan  that  no  response  was  made  to  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^'  whatever  became  of 
the  first  claim  of  faith  by  means  of  the  *^®  °^^^'^»  ^^^  ^^^S  enough,  he  knew, 
staff.  That  appeal,  in  fact,  was  super-  *?  '"^^^^  ^P  *°  lieaven,  to  knock  at 
seded  the  moment  he  resolved  to  go  in  *^?^®  S^*^^'  ^^^^  ^^  wrench  them  open, 
person,  the  Lord  thus  reserving  for  the     ■"'^^^^P  Mall. 

personal  intercession   of  His  prophet         Verse  34.     He  knew  what  Elijah 
the  honour  of  this  marvellous  deed."     had  done  in  a  similar  case  (1  Kings 
But  Gehazi's   supposed    unfitness  to     xvii.  21),  and  followed  his  example ; 
work  the  miracle,  and  the   woman's     but  doubtless  both  Elijah  and  Elisha 
lack  of  faith  in  him,  are  facts  not  to     used  these  natural  means  in  accordance 
be  overlooked.     They  may  be  a  sufl-     with  some  special  revelation  that  was 
cient  reason  for  the  failure  of  Gehazi's     given    them.      This    placing    of  his 
mission.      Eor  in   the   realm   of  the     mouth,  eyes,  and  hands,  upon  those 
miraculous.  Divine  Power  works  not     of  the  child,  bore  the  same  relation 
blindly  nor  arbitrarily,  but  according     to  this  miracle  which  the  spittle  and 
to  sacred  laws.     To  affirm  that  there     the  washing  in   Siloam  did  to  the 
must  be  a  sympathetic  union  or  spon-     miracle  by  which  Jesus  gave  sight  to 
taneous  affiliation  between  the  human     the  man  blind  from  his  birth  ( Jno.  ix. 
agencies   employed  and  those  deeply     1-7).    Divine  power  could  have  raised 
concerned  in  a  given  miracle,  is  only     this  child  to  life  in  answer  to  Elisha 's 
to  say  what  is  abundantly  suggested  in     prayer  without  any  other  action  on 
the  Scriptures.     I^or  is  this  to  degrade     the  part  of  the  prophet,  but  Divine 
a  class  of  miracles  to  the  low  plane  of     wisdom   decreed   otherwise.      Christ 
animal   magnetism,  or  explain  them     opened  one  blind  man's  eyes  by  a  sin- 
away  on  naturalistic  principles ;   yet     gle  command ;  but  in  the  other  case 
it  need  not  be  denied  that  the  psycho-     He  adopted  peculiar  measures  to  work 
logical  basis  of  animal  magnetism  was     substantially  the  same  miracle.     We 
a  medium  through  which  many  mira-     cannot  tell  why,  but  we  accept  the 
cles  were  performed,  and  without  which     facts,  and  argue  from  them  the  depth 
Bome  miracles  could  not  have  been     of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and 
wrought.     "When  the  disciples,  after     knowledge  of  God  (Rom.  xi.  33).  "We 
their  failure  to  heal  a  lunatic  child,     do  not  presume  to  deny  that  our  God 
asked  Jesus  why  they  could  not  work     might  have  adopted  a  different  plan 
the  miracle.  He  replied,  **  Because  of     of  redemption  from  the  one  we  have, 
your  unbelief"  (Matt.  xvii.  20,  comp.     but  we  may  well  question  the  possi- 
422 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  iv. 


bility  of  a  wiser  one,  and  though  we  in  to  receive  a  new  life  in  her  twice- 

cannot   fathom   all   its   mystery,   we  given  son.      She  comes  in  full  of  joy, 

accept  with  joy  the  fact   of    ''  God  full  of  wonder,   bowa  herself  to  the 

manifest  in  the  flesh ; "    and  in   the  ground,    and   falls  down  before  those 

blessed  incarnation  of  our  Lord,  to  use  teet    she   had    so    boldly    laid   hold 

the  analo,2:y  of  this  miracle  of  Elisha,  of  in  Carmel.  Oh,  strong  faith  of  the 

we  see  with  wonder  how  the  God-man  Shunammite,  that  could  not  be  discou- 

stretches  himself  upon  our  cold,  life-  raged  with  the  seizure  and  continuance 

less    humanity    that    wps    dead    in  of  death,  raising  up  her  heart  still  in 

trespasses   and   sins,    and   even   con-  an  expectation  of  tliat  life  wliich  to 

tracts  himself  to  the  narrow  span  of  the  eyes  of  nature  had  been  impossible, 

our  infancy,  childhood,  manhood.  His  irrevocable !     Oh,  infinite  goodness  of 

blessed    mouth   and    eyes  and  hands  the  Almightv,    that  would  not  suffer 

come  into  contact  with  our  own.     He  such  faith  to  be  frustrated,  that  would 

breathes  upon  us  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  rather  reverse  the  laws  of  nature,  in 

we  are  quickened  and  warmed  into  a  returning  a  guest  from  heaven,  and 

new  and  eternal  life.     We  are  thus  raising  a  corpse  from  death,  than  the 

raised  from  spiritual  death,  and  our  ears  confidence  of  a  believing  heart  should 

hear,  and  our  eyes  see,  and  our  hands  be  disappointed  ! — Bislwp  Hall. 

handle  the  word  of  liiQ.—  JFhedon.  As  might  be  expected,  there  have 

not  been  wanting  rationalistic  inter- 
Verse  35.  Thus  the  work  is  done  preters  who  have  explained  this  mira- 
by  degrees  and  with  difficulty,  mys-  cle  as  a  case  of  suspended  animation, 
tically  showing  how  hard  it  is  to  raise  or  fit  of  apoplexy,  and  Elisha's  efforts 
one  dead  in  sins  and  trespasses,  and  to  as  the  manipulations  of  animal  mag- 
brmg  the  work  to  any  good  effect.  To  netism,  by  which  sensation  was  re- 
comfort  a  wounded  conscience  is  as  stored.  Of  course  such  expositors 
great  work,  saith  Luther,  as  to  raise  ignore  or  deny  the  plain  statement 
one  from  the  dead.— ^r^^^.  that  the  child  was  dead,   and  so  do 

not  explain,  but  contradict  and  torture 

V  arses  36,  37. — The  mother  is  called  the  word  of  Scripture. —  Whedon. 

E0MILETIG8  OF  VERSES  38-41. 
The  Poison  op  Sin  and  its  Cure. 

This  miracle  of  the  healing  of  the  poisonous  pottage  is  a  counterpart  of  that 
of  the  healing  of  the  waters  of  Jericho  (ii.  19-22).  There  the  power  of  Elisha's 
God  works  on  the  water ;  here  on  the  food  of  the  prophets.  The  chief  value  of 
both  miracles  lies  in  the  rich  typical  lessons  they  suggest  concerning  the  comino-  in 
of  Divine  grace  and  power  into  the  domain  of  man's  most  common  life  and 
wants,  to  leaven  and  heal  with  gracious  influences  all  the  disturbances  and 
bitternesses  of  earthly  experience.  The  incident  related  in  this  paragraph  is 
illustrative  of  the  poison  of  sm  and  Us  cure.     Observe — 

L  That  humanity  is  infected  with  the  poison  of  sin.  It  penetrates  all 
classes,  and  mingles  with  the  ever-changing  circumstances  of  human  life.  It  is 
60  subtle  m  its  workings,  and  so  deceptive  in  its  appearance,  as  to  escape  detec- 
tion till  its  effects  are  felt,  as  was  the  case  with  the  wild  gourds  innocently 
gathered  by  a  son  of  the  prophets  (verse  39).  It  weakens  everything  it  taints. 
It  is  a  foe  to  all  stability.  It  is  said  that  when  N'icephorus  Phocas  had  built  a 
strong  wall  about  his  palace  for  his  own  security,  in  the  nis-ht  time  he  heard  a 
voice  crying  1;o  him,  ''0  Emperor!  though  thou  build  thf  wall  as  high  as  the 
clouds,  yet  if  sm  be  within,  it  will  overthrow  aU.''  It  is  the  custom  of  hunters 
m  Africa,  when  they  have  killed  a  poisonous  snake,  to  cut  off  its  head,  and 
carefully  bury  it  in  the  ground,  well  knowing  that  if  a  naked  foot  trod  on  one 

423 


CflAP.  IT.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS, 


of  these  fangs  it  would  be  fatally  wounded ;  the  venom  is  as  deadly  after  the 
snake  is  dead.  But  sin  is  a  venomous  snake  which  no  human  hunter  can  slay  ; 
it  insinuates  itself  everywhere,  and  everywhere  spreads  its  deadly  virus. 

II.  That  the  poison  of  sin  is  fatal  in  its  effects.  **  There  is  death  in  the 
pot"  (verse  40).  Sin  when  it  is  finished  bringeth  forth  death  (James  i.  15). 
The  almond  tree  blossoms  before  the  foliage  appears.  The  splendour  of  its  ruby 
flowers  lures  the  winged  insects  of  the  air,  but  as  they  sip  its  poisoned  chalices 
they  fall  dead  in  myriads  at  its  root.  So  sin  is  like  that  tree,  attracting  human 
souls  to  drink  in  pleasure  from  its  luscious  flowers  until  they  fall,  deluded,  in- 
toxicated, dead.  '*  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin; 
and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned  "  (Eomans  v.  12). 

III.  That  the  poison  of  sin  is  neutralized  by  the  gracious  provisions  of 
the  Gospel  (verse  41).  There  was  no  virtue  in  the  meal  itself  to  dissipate  the 
poison  of  the  pottage  ;  it  ^vas  but  the  means  by  which  the  miraculous  power 
wrought  the  cure.  So  in  the  restoration  to  moral  health  of  sin-poisoned 
humanity,  while  means  are  used,  and  must  be  used,  the  healin^-,  saving  power 
is  Divine.  The  gospel,  divinely  devised,  divinely  developed,  and  divinely 
applied,  is  the  unfailing  panacea  for  the  world's  evil. 

Te  sons: — 1.  Sin  is  the  great  source  of  all  human  misery.  2.  The  remedy  for 
human  misery  is  Divinely  provided,  3.  Ood  is  not  indifferent  to  the  common  daily 
wdhts  of  human  life, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Yerse  38.    The  pursuit  of  truth.        Verpe  39.    Ignorance  of  simple 

I.  Is  carried  on  hy  earnest  ^ouls  in  the  things.       I.     Inexcusable,      because 

midst  of   national  distress.      **  There  withia  the   reach  of  all.      II.    Yet, 

was  a  dearth  n  the  lind."     LI.  Brings  alas  I  too  prevalent.  III.   May  be  the 

men  into  the  presence  of  the  great  and  occasion  oF  fatal  consequences. 
gooi.    ''The  sons  of  the  prophets  were 

sitting  be'bre  him."     III.   Contented         Verse   40.     The  deadly  power  of 

with  a  ihodest  supply  of  physical  needs,  sin,      I.    Mingles    itself     with     the 

*'  Set   on   the  great  pot,   and  seethe  sweetest    experiences    of    life.      II. 

potta^ie  for  the  sons  of  the  prophets."  Causes  many  to   turn  with  loathing 

—  The  prophets  were  poor,  and  glad  even  from  their  necessary  food.     III. 
of  pottage.     The  saints  are   kept   at  Beyond  all  human  power  to  conquer. 
hard  commons,  but  have  their  keeping  —  It  is  often  with  spiritual  good  as 
of  free  cost.     The  wicked  have  larger  it  is  with  bodily  good  :  it  looks  as  if  it 
cakes,  but  pay  sweetly. — 2rapp.  were  healthful  and   nourishing — i.e.y 

—  The  sons  of  the  prophets  had  to  the  words  are  beautiful  and  attractive — 
struggle  with  want  and  distress,  but  and  yet  there  is  soul-poison  in  it, 
no  want  could  hinder  them  from  en-  which  is  destructive,  if  we  are  not  on 
teiing  the  community,  or  could  induce  our  guard. 

them  to  separate.     Life  in  common, 

in  faith,  in  prayer,   in  the  praise  of         Verse  41.  What  was  there  in  the 

God,  was  dearer  to  them  than  pleasant  meal  to  counteract  the  bad  properties 

days,  and  enjoying  the  pleasure  of  sin.  of  the  gourds  ?     Nothing,  necessarily. 
Where  unity  of  spirit  and  true  love  The  meal,  like  the  salt  cast  into  the 

call  people  together  to  a  common  meal,  foul  waters  of  Jericho  (ii.  21),  and  the 

there  is  ^0  need  of  great  pieparations  tree  at   Marah    (Exod.   xv.  25),  was 

and  e  pensive  Uhes;  they  arc  readily  merely  the  suggestive  symbol  of  the 

satisfieu   with    the   simplest   food. —  Divine  powers  of  nourishment    and 

Lange.  healing  which  subsisted  in  Elisha's 
424 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  CHAP.  iv. 


God.     It  bore  a  similar  relation  to  this  doctrine,   entering  into  the  mind  and 

miracle  that  Elisha*s  stretching  him-  heart  of  the  church,  shall   counteract 

self  upon  the  body  of  the  dead  child  and  take  away  the  poison  of  ill-born 

did  to  the  Divine  power  that  raised  the  heresy. 

child  to  life.     It   was    the    earthly  —  Eminent  goodness.     I.  Is  not 

medium    through    which    the   spirit  lifted  above  the  commonest  wants  of 

worked.     All  the  bad  properties  of  the  life.    II.  Sympathizes  with  the  needy 

pottage  were  miraculously  taken  away.  and  the  suffering.  III.  Is  the  medium 

So,  say  some  of  the  older  divines,  the  of  timely  relief, 
healthsome  meal   of   sound  Christian 

EOMILETICS  OT   VERSES  42-44. 
The  Supeeabundant  Qoodijess  of  God. 

I.  Provides  for  the  daily  wants  of  man.  **  Give  unto  the  people  that  they 
may  eat  "  (verse  42).  How  enormous  are  the  thought  and  toil  involved  in 
supplying  the  daily  wantbof  a  simple  city — e.g.,  London  I  How  unremittiugthe 
care,  how  affluent  the  goodness,  of  that  God  who  supplies  the  multifarious  and 
incessant  demands  of  the  world  !  Vast  as  is  the  consumption,  the  supply  never 
fails.  "  The  eyes  of  all  wait  upon  thee ;  and  thou  givest  them  their  meat  in  due 
season.  Thou  openest  Thy  hand,  and  satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  living  thing  " 
(Ps.  cxlv.  15,  16). 

II.  Difficult  for  the  unhelieving  to  appreciate.  "  What,  shall  I  set  this 
before  an  hundred  men?"  (verse  43).  The  selfish  and  unbelieving  mind  is 
blinded  to  the  infinite  resources  of  the  Divine  goodness  :  the  limitation  of  the 
means  is  inadequate  to  the  greatness  of  the  need.  But  the  eye  only  sees  what  it 
brings  with  it  the  power  to  see.  The  eye  of  faith  sees  what  is  invisible  to  the 
ordinary  vision.  True  faith  is  undaunted,  even  when  it  sees  only  the  last  crust, 
and  the  last  pot  of  oil.  l^ecessity  is  a  great  test,  and  a  great  strengthener  of 
faith. 

III.  Multiplies  the  little  to  supply  the  needs  of  the  many.  "  And  they 
did  eat  and  left  thereof,  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  (verse  44).  What 
seemed  humanly  insufficient,  was  so  Divinely  blessed  as  to  be  more  than  enough. 
A  contented  mind  needs  but  little  to  ensure  its  happiness,  while  the  abundance 
of  the  rich  may  fail  to  give  satisfaction  and  peace.  '*  Too  much  wealth  is  very 
frequently  the  occasion  of  poverty.  He  whom  the  wantonness  of  abundance  has 
once  softened,  easily  sinks  into  neglect  of  his  affairs,  and  he  that  thinks  he  can 
aff'ord  to  be  negligent,  is  not  far  from  being  poor.  He  will  soon  be  involved  in 
perplexities  which  his  inexperience  will  render  in suimoun table ;  he  will  fly  for 
help  to  those  whose  interest  it  is  that  he  should  be  more  distressed,  and  will  be 
at  last  torn  to  pieces  by  the  vultures  that  always  hover  over  fortunes  in  decay." 
It  is  the  blessing  of  heaven  that  makes  the  little  more,  and  teaches  man  when 
he  has  enough. 

Lessons  : — 1.  The  goodness  of  God  is  most  evident  in  times  of  need.  2.  Should 
he  unhesitatingly  trusted.     3.  Should  he  gratefully  adored. 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  42-44.  The  grandeur  and  not  overlook  the  commonest  needs  of 

minuteness  of  Divine  Providence.    I.  man.     lY.  Makes  a  little  go  a  great 

So  blesses  the  earth  that  it  provides  way. 

for  the  wants  of  all.     II.  The  scarcity  —  Jehovah    ordered   it    so   that  a 

of  one  locality  is  counterbalanced  by  strange  man,  uncalled  and  unexpected, 

the  abundance  of  another.     III.  Does  should  bring  to    the    prophet   in  a 

425 


OSAP.  T.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


time  of  famine  the  first  fruits  which  few  barley  loaves  and  ears  of  com  are 

belong  to  Jehovah  according  to  law  made  to  supply  the   wants   of  many. 

(I^um.  XV.  19,  20;   Deut.  xxvi.  2);  As   the  one   suggests   the    power  ol 

and  He  blessed  this  gift    so  that   it  Divine  truth  to  counteract  the  evils  of 

sufficed  to  satisfy  the  entire  community  heresy,  the   other  may  represent  that 

of  the  prophets.     The  Lord  himself,  not  only  must  heresy  in  the  church  be 

at  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand,  offset  with  truth,    but,    to  keep   out 

makes  reference,  not  to  this  narrative,  heresy,  the  church  must  be  abundantly 

but  to  the  feeding  of  the  people  with  fed  with  the  true  bread  from  heaven, 

manna  in  the  wilderness,  and  He  gives  which  giveth  life  unto  the   world.— 

to  His  miracle  an  express  object  aTid  Whedon, 
significance  (John  vi.  3 J)  such  as  we 

cannot  at  all  think  of  in  this  case.     Be-  Yerse  43.    A  covetous  spirit.     I. 

sides  that,  the  historical   connection,  Would  withhold  from  others  even  the 

the  occasion,    the    persons,    all    are  necessaries  of  life.     II.  Has  no  faith 

utterly    different,    and    the    asserted  in  an  abundance  it  cannot  see ;  or  in 

similarity  is  reduced  simply  to  this,  the  axiom — "  There  is  that  scattereth 

that  through   the  Divine  influence  a  and   yet  increaseth."     III.  Is   often 

little  suffices  for  many — an  altogether  rebuked  by  acts  of  Divine  generosity, 
ordinary  truth  which  pierces  through 

many  other  incidents  in  the  history  of  Verse  44.  Here  is  a  specimen  of  the 

redemption      which      are      entirely  work  of  Christ  in  apostolic  churches, 

different  from  this  one. — Lange,  receiving  the  alms  of  the  faithful  at 

God's  altar,  and  seekini^  for  true  riches 

—  From  the  miracle  of  the  healing  by  bestowing  those   oiferings,  blessed 

of  the  bitter  pottage  it  is  appropriate  by  God   with  increase,  to  the  benefit 

to  pass  immediately  to  one  by  which  a  of  His  people.—  Wordsworth, 


CHAPTER  V. 
NAAMAN,     THE    SYRIAN    LEPER. 

Cbitical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.   Naaman  was  a  great  man  with  hia 
master — 7^  ")^2l]l  does  not  refer  to  mere  physical  force,  but  to  the  high  esteem  in  which 

he  was  held  at  Court.  Lord  had  given  deliverances  unto  Syria — Not  victories  only,  but 
national  prestige,  advantages,  and  prosperity.  Verse  2.  By  companies— ]Maraudin«-  bands. 
These  went  out  on  predatory  incursions.     Verse  3.  Would  God — '''^nj^  should  be  (as  in 

Pea.  cxix.  5),  *'0I  that,"  an  optative  particle  from  TOHi    which,  in  Piel,  means  to  caress, 

T   T 

to  beseech.  Verse  4.  And  one  went  in — i.  e.,  he,  Naaman,  went  in.  Verse  5.  Ten  talents  of 
silver,  &c. — The  silver  would  value  £3,421 ;  the  gold  is  not  definite,  but  doubtless  very  con- 
siderable.    Changes  of  raiment — These  Oriental  "holiday  garments" — 0^213,  D^lDvPT— 

are  costly  state  dresses,  worn  on  festal  occasions.  Verse  7.  King  of  Israel  rent  his  clothes— 
Not  from  horror  at  the  impiety  of  the  thought ;  the  unbelieving  Jehoram  was  not  likely  to  be 
so  much  troubled  by  the  religious  side  of  the  case,  as  by  the  fear  of  a  misunderstanding  which 
might  eventuate  in  war,  And  after  the  closing  events  of  previous  chapter,  deserted  as  he  then 
was,  he  had  a  barren  outlook  iiw&r  should  arise.  Verse  11.  Strike  his  hand  over  the  place — 
1^  Cl"'jn— to  wave  the  hand,  or  to  stroke  with  it.    Verse  12.  Abana  and  Pharpar — The 

former,  Amana,  coming  from  the  hill  Amana,  and  now  called  Barady  ;  the  latter,  also  a  small 
stream  flowing  from  the  Antilibanus,  probably  now  called  Fyjeh.  Verse  13.  My  father — An 
address  full  of  respect  and  regard.  How  much  rather— as  in  2  Sam.  iv.  11.  Verse  15.  Take 
a  blessing  of  thy  servant — i.e.,  a.  gift — HDIH — as  in  Gon.  xxxiii.  10,  11.     Verse  17.  Shall 

T  T   ; 

there  not  then— Should  read  literally,  "  And  Oh ! "  or,  *'  And  if  not."    Two  mules'  burden  of 
426 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap.  v. 


earth — For  an  altar  (see  Exod.  xx.  24),  nnder  the  idea  that  Jehovah  would  prefer  the  soil  of  His 
own  land,  on  wh-ch  sacrifices  should  be  offered  to  Him  by  Naaraan  in  Syria.  Verse  18.  House 
of  Rimmon — ]iD")»  either  from  DD"))  to  be  high  ;  or  ]^D"),  the  pomegranate,  the  Oriental  sym- 
bol of  fmitfulness.  Verse  19.  A  little  way — i.  e.,  a  length  of  country,  as  in  Gen.  xxxv.  IG^ 
Verse  21.  He  lighted  down  from  the  chariot— Not  merely  di>mounted,  but  quickly  did  so 

sprang  out  q/'the  chariot,  "^E)^)  to  cast  oneself,  to  throw  oneself,  to  rush.   It  indicates  Naaman's 

anxiety.  Verse  24.  Came  to  the  tower — ^DJ^H — the  hill,  t.  *.,  a  hill  well  understood  in  the 
locality  of  Elisha's  house.  Verse  26.  "Went  not  mine  heart — In  contrast  with  Gehazi's 
words,  "Thy  servant  went  no  whither.**     "My  heart*' — ^21/— t'^-,  in  spirit,  discerning  the 

entire  transaction.  Is  it  a  time  to  receive  money,  &c, — i.  e.^  in  any  other  case  rather  than 
this  thou  mightest  have  gratified  thine  avarice,  bi  '^  now,  with  so  many  hypocritical  prophets 
abroad,  this  is  no  time  for  bringing  the  true  pro^h  t*c  office  into  disrepute  by  an  act  which 
seems  to  imply  that  the  servant  of  the  High  God  i^  un\v  intent  on  selfish  aggrandisement  in 
his  sacred  and  supernatural  work. — W.  H.  J. 


H0MILET1C8  OF  VERSES  1-19. 
NAAHA17   A   PiCTUBB    OP  THE   HeATHEN   IN   SeAKCH   OP   SaVIHO   TEUTff, 

The  story  of  Naaman  is  full  of  bewitching  interest,  and  is  one  on  which 
volumes  have  already  been  written.  It  is  so  suggestive  of  spiiitual  analogies 
that  it  reads  like  a  page  of  New  Testament  doctrine  inserted  in  the  midst  of 
Old  Testament  history.  Though  dealing  with  simple  facts  of  history  that 
occurred  nearly  three  thousand  years  ago,  we  cannot  resist  the  temptation  to 
interpret  it  in  the  light  of  the  Christian  ideas  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It 
is  a  testimony  to  the  liberal  and  impartial  spirit  of  Judaism  that  does  not 
refuse  help  to  a  foreigner,  a  heathen,  and  he  belonging  to  a  people  who 
were  the  enemies  of  Israel.  It  recognised  the  religious  needs  of  humanity  ;  it 
was  the  bigotry  and  unfaithfulness  of  its  adherents  that  made  Judaism  exclusive 
and  intolerant.  There  were  many  Israelitish  lepers  in  Elisha's  time,  but  th(?y 
were  not  cleansed,  because  they  sought  it  not  from  the  God  of  Elisha  (Luke 
iv.  27).  Kaaman,  the  heathen,  manifests  a  faith  not  to  be  found  in  Israel, 
and  is  cleansed  of  his  leprosy.  He  thus  prefigured  the  gentiles  of  a  later  age, 
who  earnestly  sought  and  found  the  salvation  of  God  from  which  many  Jews 
were  cut  off  because  of  their  unbelief.  The  whole  narrative  is  the  scheme  of 
salvation  epitomised.  It  may  be  viewed  as  a  picture  of  the  heathen  in  search  of 
saving  truth, 

I.  Like  Naaman,  the  heathen  enjoys  many  worldly  advantages  (v.  i). — 

By  his  strength  and  bravery  Naaman  had  won  the  esteem  of  his  king ;  he  was 
loaded  with  honours,  and  surrounded  with  affluence  and  luxury.  So  the 
heathen  lives  among  the  fairest  scenes  of  earth. 

Whose  every  prospect  pleases, 
And  only  man  is  vile. 

He  is  often  raised  to  the  highest  dignities  of  earth,  has  unlimited  command  ol 
wealth,  and  has  the  resources  of  commerce,  science,  art,  and  refinement  minister- 
ing to  his  pleasure.  Heathen  is  not  always  synonymous  with  barbarian. 
Some  of  the  achievements  of  heathen  genius  have  excelled  the  best  productions 
of  Western  civilization.  To  be  a  li^atheu  is  not  to  be  bereft  of  honour,  of 
greatness,  or  of  power. 

427 


OHAP.T.  EOMILETIC  COMMEXTATtT:   KINffS, 


II.  Like  Naaman,  the  heathen  is  suffering  from  a  deadly  disease. — **  But 

he  was  a  leper"  (v.  1). — *'  Every  man  has  some  but  or  other  in  his  character, 
something  that  blemishes  and  diminishes  him,  some  alloy  to  his  grandeur,  some 
damp  to  his  joy.  He  may  be  very  happy,  very  good,  yet  in  something  or  other 
not  so  good  as  he  should  be,  nor  so  happy  as  he  would  be.  l^aaman  was  as 
great  as  the  world  could  make  him,  and  yet,  as  Bishop  Hall  quaintly  remarks, 
the  basest  slave  in  Syria  would  not  change  skins  with  him."  The  heathen  is 
smitten  with  the  leprosy  of  sin.  This  tarnishes  every  worldly  honour,  blights 
the  loveliest  scene,  dims  the  brightest  prospects,  moderates  every  joy,  poisons 
every  cup. 

III.  Like  Naaman,  the  heathen  hears,  often  through  insignificant  agencies, 
of  the  possibility  of  cure  (verses  2-4). — A  little  captive  maid,  strong  in  her 
simple  faith  in  the  God  of  Israel,  was  the  means  of  directing  the  proud  but 
afflicted  ITaaman  to  the  Divine  source  of  healing.  When  she  was  borne  away 
from  her  home  and  native  land,  it  seemed  very  unlikely  she  would  be  instru- 
mental in  bringing  the  light  of  a  higher  truth  to  illumine  the  darkness  of  a 
heathen  court.  It  has  often  happened  in  the  history  of  nations  that  an  obscure 
prisoner  has  been  the  means  of  acquainting  his  captors  with  the  knowledge  of 
the  only  true  God  ;  the  vanquished  has  been  crowned  with  a  brighter  glory 
than  that  of  the  conqueror.  Numerous  and  extensive  as  are  the  various 
agencies  of  the  Christian  church  in  heathen  lands,  they  are  but  feeble  and 
limited  compared  with  the  greatness  of  the  work  to  be  done.  **  But  God  hath 
chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  that  are  mighty  *' 
(Cor.  i.  27-29).  The  simple  words  of  a  solitary  missionary,  the  artless  conduct 
of  a  child,  the  stray  teaching  of  a  voiceless  tract,  the  impression  caused  by  a 
passing  incident,  may  be  Divinely  blessed  in  leading  a  soul  to  light  and  truth 
and  rest. 

IV.  Like  Naaman,  the  heathen  is  intensely  in  earnest  in  seeking  the  means 
of  deliverance  (verses  5-9).  The  interest  of  K aaman  is  roused,  a  ray  of  hope 
enters  his  breast,  his  prejudice  is  conquered,  and,  laden  with  rich  presents  and 
attended  by  an  imposing  retinue,  he  journies  into  the  land  of  Israel,  and  stands 
at  the  door  of  the  prophet.  He  is  conscious  of  his  malady,  is  distressed  with 
its  unsightly  ravages,  and,  sustained  with  the  prospect  of  recovery,  he  counts 
no  toil  too  great,  no  sacrifice  too  costly,  if  he  may  but  gain  relief.  So  the 
heathen,  when  convinced  of  his  deplorable  condition,  and  catching  a  glimpse  of 
the  promised  remedy,  seeks,  with  all  the  greedy  avidity  of  need  and  all  the 
cheering  buoyancy  of  hope,  the  help  that  brings  deliverance.  The  cry  of 
awakened  and  struggling  heathendom  enters  the  ear  of  a  merciful  and 
all-powerful  Saviour. 

V.  Like  Naaman,  the  heathen  is  offended  at  the  method  prescribed  for 
obtaining  the  needed  cure  (verses  10-12).  Naamun  expected  that  Elisha 
would  come  out  to  him,  and  make  certain  mysteiious  passes  and  signs,  after  the 
manner  of  a  professional  thaumaturge,  and  that  the  leprosy  would  vanish.  It 
was  a  severe  blow  to  his  pride  to  be  asked  to  bathe  his  stately  though  leprous 
limbs  in  the  turbid  waters  of  the  Jordan,  rather  than  in  the  clear  limpid  rivers 
of  his  native  Damascus.  The  ofi'ence  of  the  cross  has  not  yet  ceased.  Heathens 
and  Christians  alike  are  offended  at  the  simple  terms  of  salvation.  If  it  were 
necessary  to  do  some  exploit  that  would  afibrd  opportunity  for  the  display  of 
personal  prowess  and  skUl,  thousands  more  would  be  eager  candidates  for  salva- 
tion. But  to  repent — to  confess  sin — to  submit  to  self-humilation — to  trust  in 
the  power  and  virtue  of  another,  and  the  unseen  and  impalpable — this  is  too 
much  for  vain  human  nature^  and  stirs  up  a  spirit  of  rebellion. 

428 


HOMILETIC  C03IMEXTAIiT:   EIKOS. 


CHAP.  V, 


,.J^-  ^*°  Naaman,  the  heathen,  when  complyinff  with  the  nreserihed  r-nn 

dltions,  IS  cured  of  his  deadly  malady  (verses'^  13,  14).     The  ra'e  ofNaamau' 

passed  awny,   but  his  leprosy  ramaicod.'  In  his  Cooler  n,omonTs"  he  began  to 

reflect.     The  gent  e  persuasions  of  those  around  him  prevailed.     He  obeyed 

the  prophet's  directions,  perhaps  doubtfully,  almost  sullenly,  but  he  did  it      He 

dipped  himself  seven  times  in  Jordan,  and  was  healed,     ho  when  the  heathen 

IS  persuaded  to  submit  to  the  Divine  terms,  he  obtains  spiritual  healinfand 

IT^i-y  ^^'^"'''^  "  tl-e  P^t'i^ay  to  clearer  light,  to  the  highest  to  hs  and 
to  the  holiest  experiences.  o  ^»''  w  ums,  anu 

VII.  like  Naaman,  the  heathen  gratefuUy  acknowledges  and  adorP«  fhn 
power  and  goodness  of  God  (verses  ?5..9).  Vho  can  deSeThe  wonderand 
gladness  of  Naaman  as  he  witnessed  and  felt  the  marveUous  renovation  »  He 
hastens  to  the  man  of  God  to  express  his  gratitude,  to  acknowledge  the  supre- 
macy of  Jehovah,  and  his  determination  henceforth  to  worship  Him,  to  offer 
gifts,  and  to  seek  still  further  instruction.  His  ideas  of  Jehovah  are  stiU 
restricted.  He  is  convinced  of  His  superiority  orer  all  the  gods  of  the  Syrians 
but  he  has  no    yet  grasped  the  grand  thought  of  the  Divine  presence  S 

the  heathen,  after  witnessing  the  saving  power  of  God,  sees  the  vanity  of  the 
do  s  in  which  he  had   rusted  and  renders  homage  to  the  only  trulGod    With 

Lessons  :— 1.  Man  everywhere  is  tainted  with  the  moral  leprosy  ofstn  2  The 
remedy  for  hnmansm  t3  universally  available.  3.  The  eagernes!  o  the 'heathen  in 
Sr«3r^'  "  "  "''"'''"""  reHketothea^athy  !f„.ultitL  inTZ^ 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEB  VEMSES. 

restricted  m  its  operation  to  any  one 

nation  under    heaven.     II.  Is    often  ^^®  fairest  action  of  our  humnn  life 

revealed  bv  humble  instrumentalities  ^  scorDing  to  revenue  an  injury ; 

HI.  Is  offensive  to  human  pridetd  HlLt:.^^^^^^!,^'!^,^^' 

consequence.     IV.    Is   effectual   only  And 'tis  a  firmer  conquest,  trulv  said 

with  the  humble  and  obedient.     V.  Is  ^"^ '"'»  fis  heart  than  overthrow  the  head. 

an  inexhaustible  theme  for  universal  ^^^y  -S-  Carew. 

''P^i::^rMa„  .ouUfaln  heal  ^o( .r^J^^i^Tt  1::TT^X 
hmff,  hut  cannot.  2  Man's  only  disease,  and,  worse  still  of  a  pro?i 
Zsiof  "T\n     ;L*''""'^  '"*;     ¥"''•     M-*  receivrin'structL'of  a 

plans  and  human  thoughts. 

Verses  1-14.  Naaman  the  leper    1      §"'?^•^^^  '""r*  ^«'  »f  *»  ^leaven  we  go  ; 

The   captive   maid.     A  prisoner   in   k      ^'o  ''  \'.  '"'"^  ^^T^  ^1^*  '^'  ^^^'  ^'  ^^^  ' 
fitiano-p   Jonri       tI^^  ^'  ?.  ?       Whene'er  thou  speakest,Iouk  with  lowly  eye- 

Btiange  land,     lorn  from   home  and      Grace  is  increased  by  humility 

friends.     Carried  with  her  both   pity  Robert  Herrick, 

fortCmW?^^^^^^  }y^'   '^^^  rnagnanimom  prophet.     Wil- 


CHAP.  T, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EIN08, 


serve  man  only  in  God*s  way.  Is 
willing  to  bless  Naaman,  though  an 
enemy  of  Israel.  Though  he  knows 
the  restored  health  of  !N^aaman  may  he 
employed  against  his  countrymen. 
Cures  !N"aaman,  but  will  receive 
nothing  for  the  cure.  Might  have 
exacted  conditions — promises  of  peace. 
The  character  and  conduct  of  Elisha 
an  illustration  of  the  mercy  of  God  in 
a  wicked  age  and  amongst  rebels. 
The  mercy  so  luminous  in  the  Old 
Testament  shines  in  New  also.  One 
God  of  the  whole  Bible.  Would  not 
have  any,  even  rebels  perish. 

Leaen  : — 1.  To  forgive  injuries.  2. 
To  pity  the  unfortunate^  even  if  your 
enemies*  3.  To  guard  against  pride, 
4.  Our  cure  is  offered  without  money 
or  price, — The  Class  and  Desk, 

Terse  1.  The  lights  and  shadows 
of  life.  I.  There  is  always  something 
to  modify  the  pleasures  of  human  life 
— something  to  mar  the  most  brilliant 
success — the  fly  in  the  ointment — ^the 
skeleton  in  the  closet.  II.  Shows  the 
universal  prevalence  of  sin.  III. 
Teaches  the  necessity  for  moderation 
and  humility  at  all  times.  IV.  May  lead 
to  the  attainment  of  the  highest  good. 

—  Honour  with  degradation.  I. 
NaamanU  honours  were  as  varied  as 
they  well  could  be,  of  war  and  peace,  in 
the  camp  and  in  the  j  a^  ace.  He  had  the 
admiration  of  the  soldiery  and  the 
approval  of  the  king ;  was  the  trusted 
leader  in  battle  and  the  favoured 
attendant  in  the  house  of  Bimmon. 
Earthly  honours  may  imply  real  dis- 
honour before  God,  while  real  worthi- 
ness may  involve  a  present  degrada- 
tion. According  to  the  measure  of  our 
self-denial  will  ultimately  be  the 
measure  of  our  honour.  According  to 
the  excellence  of  our  motives  of  self- 
denial  will  its  worthiness  be  deter- 
mined at  the  last ;  and  the  value  of 
those  motives  depends  always  on  and 
everywhere  on  the  desire  to  serve  and 
honour  Jesus.  Great  and  mainfold  as 
were  Naaman's  honours,  he  seems  to 
have  deserved  them.  1.  He  was  a 
mighty  man  in  valour.  Strong  and 
brave  the  man  seems  to  have  been ; 
and  bodily  strength,  and  even  animal 
430 


bravery,  are  not  to  be  despised  or 
lightly  esteemed.  To  speak  to  young 
men  and  women  of  might  and  valour, 
of  health  and  bravery,  is  a  Christian 
duty ;  for  ominous  signs  of  the  lack  of 
both  abound.  Many  ways  of  living  and 
spending  time  nowadays  are  keeping 
back  the  young  from  the  might  and 
valour,  from  the  strength  of  body  and 
fortitude  of  spirit,  that  come  from  God. 
2.  As  a  mighty  and  valorous  man 
Naaman  had  been  God's  instrument  in 
Syria's  rise  and  prominence.  In  the 
front  rank  of  honourable  emotions  is 
the  love  of  country  and  of  kin,  honour 
to  our  race,  and  the  sense  of  duty  to 
our  fatherland.  The  spirit  of 
righteous  patriotism  is  continually 
appealed  to  in  the  word  of  God,  and 
sacrifice  for  the  land  of  one's  birth  has 
been  crowned  by  poet's  praise  and 
exalted  by  admiration.  "We  may  here 
notice  the  candour  of  the  writer  of  this 
book  and  the  breadth  of  his  conception 
of  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  in  that  he 
ascribes  Syria's  military  success  to 
God ;  and  that,  too,  at  a  time  when 
Syria  and  Israel  were  continually  at 
war.  Every  true  deliverance  of  a  soul 
or  of  a  nation  is  of  God.  3.  Out  of 
these  things  came  Naaman's  honours 
with  his  king  and  master.  Peace  as 
well  as  war  brought  him  greatness,  for 
he  had  the  approval  of  him  whom  he 
served.  Let  us  try  to  bring  honour 
and  give  honour  in  all  service,  in  the 
house  or  the  warehouse,  and  be  more 
than  parts  of  a  machine  that  works  out 
its  daily  round  aud  no  more.  There 
is  room  for  honour  everywhere,  if  one 
will  give  place  to  it;  and,  though 
lowlier  than  ^N^aaman,  we  can  each 
have  his  share  of  the  honour  that  God 
gives  to  the  valorous,  the  patriotic,  and 
the  faithful.  II.  But  to  this  strong, 
valorous,  honoured  man's  life  there 
was  another  side — of  degradation  and 
disappointment.  **  He  was  a  leper ;  " 
and  though  this  in  Syria  had  not  the 
same  terrible  social  consequences  as  in 
Israel,  yet  it  was  a  blight  and  a  curse. 
1.  Most  lives  have  some  qualifying,  if 
not  vitiating,  of  earthly  joy  and  human 
credit.  It  must  be  horribly  troubling 
to  stand  in  God's  beautiful  world 
infirm  and  blemished  when  we  would 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


CHAP.  ▼. 


be  strong,  humiliated  when  we  might 
have  been  exalted,  and  degraded  with 
bodily  weakness  in  a  world  whc  re  self- 
asserting  strength  suc^^eeds.  2.  Some- 
times these  **  buts,"  these  humilia- 
tions of  life,  are  self-made,  coming 
out  of  the  hotbed  of  our  pride  and  love 
of  consequence  and  attention.  Morbid 
self-seeking  will  blight  and  embitter 
a  life  that  might  be  happy  and 
honourable.  3.  But  of  more  value  is 
it  to  notice  the  sterling  woith  and 
bravery  of  Naaman,  in  that  with  the 
horrid  degradation  and  disadvantage  of 
leprosy  he  attained  to  glory  and  high 
esteem.  To  the  young  his  name 
ought  to  stand  as  a  bright  light  of 
encouragement,  he  being  the  man  who, 
with  a  leper's  hand,  plucked  honour 
from  the  red  grasp  of  war,  and  made 
it  no  shame  for  a  king  to  lean  on  a 
leper's  shoulder.  Think,  in  your 
humiliation,  of  Him  who  was  "despised 
and  rejected  of  men."  And  if  we  see 
shame  on  man's  face,  blemish  on  the 
body  of  his  humiliation,  and  the  degra- 
datioa  of  death  on  his  honour,  can  we 
not  look  up  from  disease  and  deformity 
and  death,  and  see  the  most  suffering 
and  dishonoured  —  even  Jesus  — 
crowned  with  glory  and  honour?— 
Condensed  from  Christian  World 
Pulpit. 

— "  But  he  was  a  leper."  Not 
from  his  birth,  nor  yet  to  his  death. 
Hence  a  learned  writer  compares  the 
whole  Church  of  Christ  in  all  ages  to 
this  Naaraan  the  leper.  He  was  first 
pure  and  sound,  and  did  many  honour- 
able acts,  and  thereby  represented  the 
Primitive  Church,  pure  and  clean, 
without  spot  or  disease  appearing  ; 
howbeit,  there  might  be  some  secret 
seeds  of  diseases  unperceived,  which 
in  continuance  of  time  grew  to  a  visi- 
ble leprosy.  In  his  middle  time 
Naaman  beoame  leprous,  diseased,  and 
deformed,  foully  iufected  in  himself, 
and  infecting  others ;  and  thereby  re- 
presented the  latter  Church  of  Rome. 
Afterwards,  by  the  prophet's  direction, 
he  was  washed  and  cleansed  from  his 
leprosy,  and  his  flesh  restored  to 
become  pure  and  perfect,  like  the 
flesh  of  a  young  child  ;  and  thereby 
represented  the  Reformed  Churches. 


And  as  Naaman  in  all  these  three 
estates  was  the  same  person,  and  not 
a  new,  diverse,  or  several  man,  so  our 
Church  is  not  a  new  Church,  but  the 
old  Church  reformed  from  errors  and 
corruptions,  and  restored  to  her  an- 
cient purity  and  soundness. — Trapp, 

—  Everywhere  where  there  is,  or 
seems  to  be,  something  great  and  for- 
tunate, there  is  also  a  slight  discordant 
hutf  which,  like  a  false  note  in  a 
melody,  mars  the  perfectness  of  the 
good-fortune.  A  worm  gnaws  at  every- 
thing pertaining  to  this  world ;  and 
everything  here  below  carries  the 
germs  of  death  in  itself.  We  ought 
to  consider  all  human  suffering  and 
misery  worthy  of  consideration,  whcre- 
ever  we  find  it.  It  is  found  every- 
where ;  it  dwells  in  the  palace  and  in 
the  hovel ;  it  is  interwoven  with  the 
life  of  prince  and  beggar,  and  it  is 
inseparable  from  all  worldly  happiness. 
The  poor  and  lowly  have  no  reason  to 
envy  the  rich  and  great.  That  which 
makes  us  happy  in  truth  and  for 
eternity  does  not  depend  upon  rank  or 
upon  wealth. — Menken, 

Verses  2-4. —  The  power  of  a 
child.  1.  Unspeakably  beneficent 
when  religiously  trained.  2.  May  ex- 
cite a  whole  court  with  religious 
interest.  3.  May  be  the  means  of 
great  and  lasting  good.  Naaman 
cured.  God  of  Israel  exalted.  Undy- 
ing interest  of  mankind  in  the  incident. 
How  much  would  the  world  have  lost 
had  the  story  of  N^aaman  been  un- 
known! **  A  small  chink  may  serve 
to  let  in  much  light.'* 

—  The  ministry  of  little  voices. 
I.  The  Utile  maid''8  pity.  It  seems  as 
though  the  shame  and  grief  of  iS'aaman 
found  opportunity  of  expression  at 
home.  So  acutely  did  the  sense  of 
his  dishonour  show  itself  in  his  house, 
that  the  little  slave  maid  one  day  ex- 
claimed, **  Would  God  my  lord  were 
with  the  prophet  that  is  in  Samaria, 
for  ho  wo'ild  recover  him  of  his 
leprosy ! "  Her  *'  young-eyed  " 
wonder  saw  what  the  strong  and 
valorous  soldier  hid  from  all  outside 
his  home.  Many  a  man's  children  see 
a  look  on  his  face  and  signs  of  agony 

431 


OHAP.  y. 


EOJIILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


that  the  associates  of  daily  life  never 
think  could  belong  to  the  strong  and 
vigorous  man,    who,   in  their    sight, 
fights  the  battle  of  life  more  manfully 
then  they.     There  are  known   those 
who,   honoured  in  public,  in  private 
wish  themselves  dead.     As   the  joys 
that  we  can  share  with  a  child  are  the 
simplest  and   the  purest,  so  those  are 
the  most  blessed  griefs  that  can  touch 
the  sympathy  of  a  little  maid.     Let  us 
try  to  bring  our  nature,  our  experience, 
our  life,  nearer  the  children.     It  may 
help  us  in  sad  days,  if  nothing   else, 
just  as  this  pity  of  the   Hebrew  girl 
led  to  the  cure  of  ^N'aaman's  leprosy, 
and  the  liberation  of    his  soul.     The 
soul  that  is  in  sympathy  with  children 
will  live  a  truer  life  because  of  it ;  and 
the  man  whose  grief  is  pitied  by   a 
strange  child  in  his  household  has  some 
gentleness  in  him.     God  teaches  us  by 
*'  little  voices  "  oftener  than  we  think, 
and  ministers  to  us  by  little  hands  that 
we  seldom  associate  with  the  almighti- 
ness  of  God.     All  our  little  children 
are  His  messengers,    and  out  of  their 
mouths  He  -vishes  to  ordain  strength. 
''Little  voices"  call  us  home,  as  well 
as  "God's  all-animating   voice,"    or 
rather  God  calls  us  by  them.     Just  as 
the  man  whose  child   was  lost  in  a 
mist  that  came  suddenly  down  on  one 
of  the  American  rivers  heard  the  little 
one  calling,    **  This   way,   Father!" 
was  led  at  last  to  hear  the  dead  child's 
call  as  from  heaven,  whither,  in  that 
night  of  mist  and  sorrow,  she  had  gone ; 
so  God   leads   many  home   by   these 
angels  in  the  clouds,  these  little  ones, 
dead  for  awhile  to  us,   but   who   are 
ever    living    unto     God,     II.     Over 
against  the  little  maid's  pity  we  have 
now  to  set  what  looks  like  her  mistresses 
neglect.     The  wife  of  Naaman  let  the 
word  of  the  Hebrew  girl  go  unheeded. 
Had   the   child   more   pity  than   the 
woman  ?     Was  the  Hebrew  slave  more 
tender  than  the  Syrian  wife  ?   P(;rhaps 
the  child,  from  her  Jewish  training, 
had  apecular  horror  of  leprosy  and  its 
shame,  that  the  Syrian  woman  would 
not  have.     May  we  not,  ought  we  not, 
to  call  one  another's  hearts  to  attend 
to  the  misery  of  sin  ?     When  God  has 
linked  hearts  in  home  life,  shall  we 
432 


slightly  regard  impenitence  and  un- 
cleanness  ?     Shall  the  parent  cease  to 
hope  and  pray  for  the  prodigal  child, 
and  the  goodly  child  be  careless  over  a 
father   or  mother   unsaved  ?     If    we 
wonder   at    the    seeming    apathy    of 
I^aaman's  wife,  what  shall  we  say  of 
many  of  ourselves,  for  negkcting  the 
eternal  welfare  of  each  other's  souls  ? 
While  we  wonder  at  this  woman  we 
condemn     ourselves.     III.   The    wise 
listener.     "Naaman  was  doubly  fortu- 
nate in  having,  not  only  a  pitiful  slave 
girl,  but  another  servant  who  listened 
wisely  to  what  the  girl  said.     He  was 
certain  of  this,  that,  true  or  not,  it  was 
worth  telling.     So  he  ''went  in  and 
told  his  lord."     Our  vitiated  nature 
inclines  us  to  speak  of  others  only  too 
readily  when  there  is  evil  to  be  re- 
ported, too  slowly  when  there  is  any- 
thing  good.     But  here  we  have  one 
ready  to  tell  helpful  news.     I^aaman 
must  have  been  more  fortunate  in  his 
servants  and  slaves  than  in  his  wife. 
IV.  !N'ow  we  come  to  the  last  link  in 
the  chain  of  influence  and  of  persons 
that  ultimately  led  to   Naaman's   re- 
covery,   and  this  is  the  Icing  of  Syriay 
the  wisely  acting  king,  who,  when  he 
heard  only  the  report  of  a  captive  girl, 
said  at  once,  "  Go,"  and  give  a  letter 
to  the  king  of  Israel.     First  there  was 
the  child,  then  the  prudently  listen- 
ing servant,  and  then  the  wise  king. 
Each  was  an  agent  of   God    in  this 
matter ;  each  was   needed,   and  who 
shall  say  which  was  most  necessary  ? 
Little  hands  have  brought  about  great 
things,  and  feeble  voices   have   often 
given   its  character  to  history.     The 
boy  dreamer  Joseph  telling  his  dreams 
is  the  occasion  ol  four   hundred  years 
of  Israclitish  history.     The  little  hand 
of  the  child  Samuel  was  lifted  by  God, 
and  his  little  voice  was  charged  by  God 
to  show  to  Eli  the  coming  of  an  awful 
doom.     We  know  not  how  delicate  is 
the  balance  of  human  affairs ;  but  we 
know  that  God  in  His  purposes  unites 
the  strong  and   the    weak,    and  that 
when  He  touches  the  faithful,  though 
they    may    be    feeble,    they   become 
miglitier  than  the  strong. —  C.  W.  P, 

Verses  2, 3.  The  children's  service. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  V. 


The  little  lady's  maid.— Syria  was  a 

kingdom  near  to  Canaan.  Por  some 
time  a  little  girl  lived  in  Syria.  Slie 
may  not  have  been  more  than  eight  or 
ten  years  old.  We  wish  to  say  seven 
things  about  her.  I.  2his  little  girl 
was  a  Jewess,  Abraham  was  the  first 
Jew.  To  him  and  his  descendants 
God  was  exceedingly  kind.  How  He 
spake  to  them,  and  what  Ho  gave 
them.  This  young  person,  as  the  text 
shows,  was  one  of  thera.  She  belonged 
to  the  best  land  and  the  best  people. 
What  advantages  she  had.  In  this 
respect  you  are  equal,  yea,  superior 
to  her ;  Canaan  and  the  Israelites  then 
compared  with  England  and  the 
English  now.  A  complete  Bible  and 
a  Saviour  who  has  come.  To  whom- 
soever much  is  given,  of  them  much 
shall  be  required.  2.  This  little  girl 
was  a  slave.  The  Syrians  were  the 
enemies  of  the  Jews.  Accustomed  to  go 
by  companies  to  Canaan.  Took  away 
grain,  cattle,  and  human  beings. 
This  girl  was  kidnapped  on  one  occa- 
sion. Think  on  her  sad  condition, 
forced  away  from  her  land,  home, 
friends,  and  parents. 

Many  children  have  been  in  the 
same  circumstances.  Homo,  Greece, 
America,  some  even  in  the  present 
day — Madagascar  and  Africa.  **  Slaves 
cannot  breathe  in  England."  Why  ? 
Education,  government,  above  all, 
the  gospel.  Should  you  not  believe  it 
and  love  it  ?  3.  This  little  girl 
worked  as  a  slave  in  the  house  of 
Naaman.  I^aaman  was  the  general 
of  the  Syrian  army,  and  a  great 
favourite  with  the  king.  He  had 
plenty  of  money,  and  lived  in  a 
splendid  house.  He  may  have  bought 
the  little  maid,  or  she  ni;iy  have  been 
his  share  of  the  spoils  of  the  war.  At 
any  rate,  she  was  in  his  house,  and 
waited  on  his  wife.  A  lady's  maid. 
From  this  we  learn  that,  though  young, 
she  was  clever,  and  did  all  her  work 
well.  Imitate  her  in  these  things;  never 
be  careless  about  what  you  do.  Try  to 
read,  write,  and  spell,  &c.,  in  the  best 
way,  so  in  after-life  you  will  do  these 
things  easily  and  well.  This  will  be  a 
great  comfort  to  yourselves  and  others. 
4.     This    little  girl    was    very  kind. 


Naaman,  her  master,  had  an  awful 
disease — leprosy.  It  was  painful, 
loathsome,  and  incurable  by  man. 
But  Kaaman  had  captured  the  little 
girl,  and  made  her  a  slave.  Had  she 
been  like  some  people,  she  would  have 
been  glad  because  her  master  was  a 
leper.  Instead  of  that,  she  thought 
about  his  disease.  It  was  to  her  a 
source  of  sorrow,  and  she  was  anxious 
that  he  should  be  delivered  from  it. 
Here  was  kindness  to  one  who  had 
not  been  kind  to  her.  This  was  the 
spirit  of  Jesus.  Hear  Him  and  see 
Him  on  the  cross.  It  should  be  your 
spirit.  You  cannot  have  it  without  a 
new  heart,  any  more  than  there  can  be 
a  stream  without  a  fountain.  Because 
the  little  maid  had  the  one,  she  had 
also  the  other.  He  who  gave  her  a 
new  heart  will  give  you  one.  Ask  Him 
for  it.  5 .  Th is  little  girl  was  exceedingly 
intelligent.  She  spoke  with  wisdom 
to  her  mistress  about  her  master  and  the 
prophet  in  the  land  of  Israel.  The 
prophet  had  never  cured  a  leper 
(Luke  iv.  21).  How,  then,  did  she 
believe  that  he  would  cure  her  master  ? 
Here  we  see  her  intelligence.  She 
had  heard  of  other  wonderful  things 
which  the  prophet  had  done.  See  the 
preceding  chapter.  This  is  how  she 
reasoned ; — Elisha,  who,  by  the  power 
of  God,  could  raise  a  d(  al  body  to  life, 
could  also,  if  it  pleased  God,  restore  a 
diseased  body  to  health.  Wonderful 
reasoning  for  a  little  girl.  Learn  to 
put  things  together  in  your  minds. 
Do  this  with  your  school  lessons  j 
when  you  are  reading  books,  looking 
at  persons,  watching  the  birds  flying; 
and  the  ships  sailing.  You  will  thcD 
be  not  dull,  but  clever,  and  so  be  able 
to  push  your  way  through  the  world. 
6.  This  little  girl  did  a  great  amount 
of  good.  She  moved  her  mistress,  the 
wife  her  husband,  the  husband  the 
Syrian  king,  the  Syrian  king  the  king 
of  Israel,  the  king  of  Israel  the 
prophet.  Naaman  was  delivered  from 
his  leprosy,  and  likewise  from  his 
heathenism.  Besides,  the  whole 
narrative  has  been  used  by  thousands 
to  illustrate  the  Gospel,  by  which 
multitudes  have  been  saved  from  sin 
to  holiness.  Similar  results  have  been 
p  F  483 


CHAP.  ▼ 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


produced  by  a  single  book,  tract, 
action,  or  word.  You  can  all  do  good  ; 
do  it  every  day.  7.  This  little  girl 
was  Mglilij  honoured.  Ey  the  attention 
she  received  from  so  many  in  Syria ;  by 
obtaining  a  place  in  the  Bible;  by 
having  thousands  speaking  well  of  her, 
as  we  have  been  trying  to  do.  Her 
case  illustrates  the  text,  *'  Them  that 
honour  Me,  I  will  honour."  Gro  ye 
and  do  likewise.  Speak  for  God  like 
her.  Speak  for  others,  and  especially 
the  suffering  like  her. 

A.  McAuslaney  B.D, 

Verses  5-14.  Danger  in  the  sim- 
plicity of  God's  ways.  1.  A  prophet 
in  Israel.  A  kindly  God  in  the  earth,  a 
healer  of  men  abroad  in  all  the  lands, 
a  loving  presence  with  us  in  dark  and 
troublesome  days,  a  light  lighting 
every  man  from  his  infant  obscurity 
and  slow  ascent  to  the  true  vision  of 
life,  to  the  swift  descent  into  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  How 
few  know  and  believe  this !  and  how 
few  of  those  who  profess  that  they  do 
can  direct  weary  lives  to  it  as  they 
ought !  And  yet,  if  we  cannot  say 
more  than  this  king,  if  we  cannot 
enter  into  Elisha's  confii't.  iice  both  for 
diseased  bodies  and  dead  or  leprous 
souls,  how  sad  are  we !  If  for  our 
bodies,  and  all  the  more  if  for  our 
souls,  we  know  no  other  help  than 
man,  and  can  turn  only  to  one  another 
in  our  necessities,  we  are  little  better 
than  the  king  who  rent  his  clothes 
overl^aavian's  leprosy,  and  knew  not 
what  to  do.  But  there  is  a  Divine 
healer  in  the  earth  now  as  then — a 
prophet  and  more  than  a  prophet,  who 
speaks  to  all  huinan  disease,  and  care, 
and  helplessness.  2.  'The  prophet^ s 
confidence.  Elisha  had  the  conviction 
that  through  himself  ]S"aaman  might 
be  healed.  What  a  dignifying  con- 
fidence in  God  this  i^  for  God's  workers 
to  have !  for  Elisha  to  know  that  God 
would  cleanse  by  him,  would  save  at  his 
faithful  word !  We  should  have  a  con- 
fidence like  Elisha's,  at  least  the 
spirit  of  it.  Eor  every  calamity  that 
befalls  men  Jesus  has  a  word  of  love 
and  hope  and  deliverance.  3.  Th 
leper' %  expectation.  It  was  just  wha 
43^ 


we  might  look  for  from  his  success 
and  honours  and  riches  and  power, 
and  his  ignorance.  He  evidently 
thought  that  Elisha  would  make  much 
of  him,  since  he  had  and  could  give 
so  much.  It  was  not  so  blameworthy 
in  a  Syrian  heathen  as  it  is  now  with 
many  who  seem  to  think  that  God, 
and  the  people  of  God,  must  make 
much  of  them  if  they  come  to  God. 
We  must  not  come  with  prejudices  or 
fancies  of  our  own  knowledge  and 
consetiuence  to  God  and  His  word  and 
people,  for  life  and  purity  and  health. 
God  will  not  minister  to  any  soul's 
seK-consequence  and  self- deceiving 
pride.  4.  The  process  of  cure  was 
different  from  what  Naaman  expected. 
It  was  so  absolutely  simple,  and  be- 
cause it  was  so  simple  it  was  so 
authoritative.  **  Go  and  wash  in 
Jordan  seven  times.'*  A  child  could 
understand  it,  a  child  could  do  it. 
So  simple  was  it  that  only  a  proud, 
and  therefore  a  foolisli,  man  would 
resent  it.  God  never  makes  His  way 
hard,  difficult,  obscure,  or  involved. 
His  simplicity  is  our  salvation.  5. 
Ih'j  leper'' s  pride.  There  is  much  dan- 
ger made  by  ourselves  in  the  simplicity 
of  God's  ways,  and  many,  like  Naaman, 
stagger  at  the  promise  of  God  through 
unbelief,  their  unbelief  rising  because 
the  way  is  so  light  and  plain.  In 
this  we  are  exposed  to  a  two-fold  dan- 
ger :  that  of  the  love  of  pleasure  in 
religion,  by  which  anything  will  pass 
for  religiousness  that  excites  or  soothes 
our  emotions  enjoyably,  and  that  of 
mingling  our  prejudices  with  our 
search  for  purity,  and  so  clouding  and 
hurting  our  sight  of  Jesus.  These 
were  practically  JS^aaman's  self-made 
dangers  in  the  way  of  his  leprosy 
being  cleansed,  and  they  are  the  old 
but  ever  new  miseries  of  seeking  after 
signs  and  wisdom,  when  all  that  God 
wants  is  the  acceptance  of  His  way 
and  the  use  of  His  means  of  saving 
grace  in  our  blessed  Lord.  6.  But 
Naaman  was  saved  from  utter  folly 
by  the  servants  good  sense  and  his  own 
true -hear  tedness.  The  servant's  word 
showed  Naaman  that  the  pride  of  a 
soldier  was  at  the  bottom  of  his  re- 
fusal and  rage.     ''  If  the  prophet  had 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS,  OHAP   ▼. 


bid  thee  do  some  great  thing,  wouldst  appreciated,  subsisting  upon  the  hos- 

thou  not  have  done  it  ?     That  gives  pitality  of  the  Shunammite.    And  how 

the  explanation  of  his  passion ;  there  often  do  God^s  nobility  live  and  die 

was  too  much  of  God  in  the  plan  of  unrecognized  ?      They    are    men    of 

cure,   and  too  little  of  self  to  make  it  whom  the  world  is  not  worthy.    They 

attractive  ;  there  was  too  great  a  call  are  unknown.     And  it  is  the  obscure 

on  unobjecting  obedience,  and  too  little  good  which  is  the  world's  foundation, 

of  self -pleasing  to  make  it  alluring,  the  salt  of  the  earth.     But  by  force 

The  same  thing  holds  good  of  most  of  of  circumstances  they  become   recog- 

us.   Do  not  let  the  simplicity  of  God's  nised.     There  are  crises  when  we  call 

way  become  a  hurt  to  your  soul.     By  for  the  good  we  have  despised.     God 

loving  obedience  end  the  uncleanness  has  many  uncrowned  kings — heirs  of 

of  sin  for  ever.     7.  Following  upon  immortality  in  flesh.     He  cometh  to 

his  trusting  obedience  came  Naaman'a  make  up  His  jewels,   and  they  shall 

cure.     He  was  fresh  and  pure ;  with  come   from  many  an  obscure  place, 

new  life  and  new  strength,  pure  life  "  They  shall  come  from  the  East  and 

and  pure  strength.    That  was  the  end  the  West."     **  The  last  shall  be  first, 

of  his   faith,  as  it   will   be  of  ours,  and  the  first  last."     Many  a  Lazarus 

Childlike  and  pure  for  ever  is  to  be  shall  find  his  home  in  God's  bosom, 

the     soul's     everlasting     portion.—  while  the  pampered  beast  shall  become 

(C.  W.  P.)  iPorm-ioodi  and  fire-iwal. 

There  is  much  modem  application 

Verses  5-7.  The    ignorance    and  in  these  Old  Testament  circumstances. 

imbecility  of  man.     I.  Man  is  slow  There  is  so  much  humaneness  in  the 

to  apprehend  the  nature  and  cause  of  Bible,  which  makes  it  always  a  new 

human      suffering      (verse    5).      2.  book.      Principles    know   nothing  of 

Believes  that  money  and   diplomacy  years.     Truth    is   not    hampered    by 

can  accomplish  anything  (verse  5,  6).  time.     The  Scriptures  are   as  old  as 

3.  Compelled  to  acknowledge  his  own  eternity,    and  yet  as  new  as  every 

powerlessness  in  dealing  with  human  morning.     The  Gospel  in  the  narrative 

misery  (verse  7).     4.  Sees  more  his  may  thus  he  developed,     1.  The  gospel 

own  danger  than  the  divine  teaching  appeals  to  the  man,  not  his  acci- 

in    the    significant    events    of     life  dents.     The  prophet's  message  was  to 

(verse  7).  the  lepery  not  to  the  courtier.  Naaman 

came  with   his  horses   and  with  his 

Verse  8.     The   counsel  of  a  good  pageantry.     He  came  in  a  lordly  air, 

man. — 1.  Valuable  to  king  and  coui-t  but  the  prophet  did  not  even  meetYnm, 

in  times  of  difficulty.     2.  Based  on  a  The  true  man  is  never  moved  by  glitter, 

profound  faith  in  the  power  and  good-  Some   of  us   would    have   bowed  as 

nuss  of  God.  3.  Prompted  by  gracious  sycophants ;  it   would  have  been  the 

intentions  towards  the  suffering  and  reddest-letter  day  of  our  lives,  if  the 

needy.  ^    4.  Tends    to  augment    the  premier  of  Syria  had  stood  at  our  doors, 

reputation  of  true  piety.  Even  if  a  trinket,  or  a  book,  be  given 

to  us  by  a  royal  hand,  we  transmit  it 

Verses    9-14.   The   haughty   sup-  as  an  heirloom.     When  will  all  this 

pliant.   God  made   the   prophet,  not  mammon- worship   and    man-homage, 

the  king,  the  medium  of  His  blessings  fawning,   and  cringing  end  ?     When 

to  T^aaman.     God^    selects    His   own  will  men   remember  that  there  is  a 

workmen,  and  His    selections    some-  higher    kingliness — that   instead     of 

times  chasten  our  pride.     *' His  ways  virtue  cringing  to    vice,  she   should 

are  not  as  our  ways ;  neither  are  His  stand  in    her    God-like    form  erect  ? 

thoughts  as   our  thoughts."     *at  is  There  is  a  nobility  oi  office,  but  there 

neither    by    might  nor  by    power."  is  a  higher  nobility  of  character.  There 

"  He  chooses  the  weak  things  to  con-  is  a  kingliness  of  name,   but  there  is 

found  the  wise.'*          ^          ^  also     a    kingliness    of    nature.     We 

Up  to  this  point  Elisha  lived  un-  should  not  judge  by  appearance,  but 

435 


CHAP.  V. 


UOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


judge  by  righteous   judgment.     The 
prophet  saw  through  all  the  haughti- 
ness of  Naaman,  a  leprous  man.     God 
sees  through  all  lifers  accidents — all 
our  intelligence,  parade,  wealth,   and 
respectability — a  heart  of  corruption 
and      sorrow.      He     sees    that    the 
**  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  man 
are  evil  continually."     The  message 
is  to  man,  not  to  his  circumstances. 
It  speaks  to  us  as  sinners.     It  speaks, 
not  to  contingencies,  but  to  the  human 
nature  that  is  in  us  all.     It  was  man 
that  fell,  and  to  mrm  the  message  is 
sent.     "  He  came  to  seek  and  to  save 
that  which  was  lost."    2.  The  gospel 
message  and  conditions  are  always 
simple.     It  speaks  in  a  language  all 
can    understand.      It    speaks  to  the 
heart,  and  the   heart    has    but    one 
language  the  wide  world  over.     The 
tongue  speaks  many  a  vernacular,  and 
the  lips  chatter  many  dialects,  but  the 
heart's  voice  never  varies.     The  great 
universal  heart  beats  in  us  all.     The 
gospel  sees  us  fallen,  and  it  sends  forth 
the  common  message  and  a  universal 
welcome,  **  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that 
labour    and  are  heavy  laden."     The 
message  is  one,  but  its  emphasis  is 
varied  according  to  our  deafness,  and 
its    strokes    to     our  hardness.     The 
stone  is  hard,  and  the  sculptor's  mallet 
must  be  heavy  and  his  chisels  sharp. 
The  wound  is  deep,  and  the  corrosive 
must  bum,  and  the  instrument  probe 
deeply.     The   jewel    is  encased     in 
adamant,  and  the  lapidary  must  select 
his    instruments     accordingly.      Our 
prejudices  are   great,  our  hearts  are 
haughty,     and     the    conditions     are 
adapted.     Christianity  is  to  tcs  what  we 
are.    Loving  in  disposition,  it  speaks 
in  a  still  small  voice.     Impenitent  in 
heart,  it  speaks  in  thun'^er  tones.  Some 
are  so  deaf  that  they  can  only  hear 
thunder,  others  are  so  divinely  sensitive 
they   can  hear  angels'  whispers  and 
God's  steps  on  the  wind.   According  to 
our  heart-life,  God  is  either  a  father,  or 
a  consuming  fire.    A  revengeful  God  is 
the  creation  of  a   wicked  life.     The 
Gospel  speaks  to  the    heart,  and  of 
necessity  must  temper  its  voice  to  its 
disposition    and    difficulties.     It  is  a 
message  so  simple  that  a  child  can 
436 


understand  it,  and  yet  its  inexhaus- 
tibleness  challenges  the  highest  minds. 
So  plain,  that  the  wayfaring  man 
need  not  stumble,  and  yet  its  sub- 
limity creates  a  sonsationnew  in  angel 
bosom.  Its  simplicity  reveals  its 
wonders,  as  its  stoop  manifests  its 
height.  3.  The  gospel  conditions 
are  repulsive  to  hnmin  prejudices. 
We  might  swear  that  it  is  night 
when  the  sun  shines,  but  the  light 
would  only  prove  our  insanity.  Wo 
may  curse  the  book,  but  its  truth  is 
inviolable.  We  may  blaspheme  the 
Gospel,  but  the  loudness  of  our  voice 
may  only  reveal  the  perfectness  of  our 
idiocy.     How  presumptuous  is  man ! 

**  Man,  proud  man,  dressed  in  a   little   briof 

authority, 
Plays  such  fantastic  tricks  before  high  heaven. 

As  make  the  angels  weep." 

1.  How  we  presume  on  God's  ways ! 
"  I  thought  he  would  surely  come  out 
to  me,"  &c.  2.  How  we  presume  on 
God's  means  !  **  Are  not  Abana  and 
Pharpar  ....  better  than  all 
the  waters  of  Israel  ?  "  3.  How  we 
presume  on  God's  patience!  **  And 
he  turned  away  in  a  rage."  4.  How 
we  presume  on  self-sufficiency ! 
"  Some  great  thing,  would  thou  not 
have  done  it  ?"  The  conditions  of  the 
Gospel  may  arouse  our  resentment, 
but  to  resist  is  to  be  bli  id  to  our  best 
interests.  The  prophet  said  :  **  Wash 
and  be  clean,"  and  l^aaman  turned 
away  in  a  rage.  Christ  says,  *^Sell 
all  thou  hast  and  give  to  the  poor ; " 
and  the  young  man  went  away  sorrow- 
ing. The  Gospel  says,  *'  Believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved;"  and  we  are  disgusted 
with  the  conditions.  The  answer  to 
all  our  prejudices  is — that  it  is  God^8 
appointed  loay.  There  is  no  royal 
road.  The  conditions  are,  believe  and 
live;  and  the  authority  is,  *'  he  that 
believeth  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that 
belie veth  not  shall  be  damned." 
Our  prejudices  may  recoil,  and  we 
may  turn  away  in  wrath ;  but  we 
turn  our  face  from  the  sun  only  to  see 
our  shadow. — W.  Mincheb  in  the 
^tudy  and  Pulpit, 

Verses  9-12.     Pride.    1.  Fond  of 


MOMILETIC  GOMMENTAUT :  KINGS, 


CHAf.    V. 


splendid  ostentation.  2.  Indulges 
lofty  expectations  of  notice  and  defe- 
rence. 3.  Is  keenly  sensitive  to  the 
sting  of  insult,  whether  intended  or 
not.  4.  Blinds  the  soul  to  its  best 
interests.  5.  Must  be  humbled  before 
the  soul  can  be  blessed. 

Yerses  9, 10.  The  cure  of  Kaaman. 
I.  Illustrative  of  the  influence  of 
humble  instrumentality.  II.  Of  the 
obstructive  power  of  pride.  III.  Of 
the  value  of  faithful  counsel.  IV.  Of 
the  blessedness  of  obedience,  1. 
Naaman*8  obedience  led  to  his  ob- 
taining a  perfect  cure.  2.  Naaman's 
cure  wrought  in  him  true   humility. 

3.  Naaman's   cure  led   him  to    God. 

4.  Naaman*8  cure  fiUed  his  heart  with 
gratitude. — E,  Workman, 

Verses  10-12.  Naaman,  an  ex- 
ample of  barriers  to  religious  deci- 
sion. I.  The  barrier  was  his  own  dis- 
position.    II,  Mis  choosing  the  means. 

III.  Mis    wanting    to    do    something, 

IV.  Mis  not  applying  the  remedy. — 
M,  Bom. 

Verses  11,  12.  We,  knowing  mucli 
better  than  Naaman  did,  the  character 
and  claims  of  Elisha,  are  apt  to  be 
amazed  at  the  petulance  and  pride  of 
Faaman.  Yet,  in  fact,  there  are  few 
of  us — are  there  any  ? — who  have  not 
manifested  many  times  in  the  course 
of  our  career,  as  much  or  more  resis- 
tance to  the  demands  upon  our  faith, 
and  to  the  exigencies  appointed  by 
God  for  the  humiliation  of  the  proud 
mind  of  the  flesh,  than  ever  Naaman 
did,  and  often  with  far  less  reason. 
Let  us  rather  admit  that  the  demand 
upon  the  faith  of  Naaman,  and  the  ex- 
tent to  which  he  was  required  to  bend 
down  his  natural  reason,  formed  some- 
what of  a  severe  exertion  from  one  so 
raw  and  inexperienced  in  the  things  of 
God.  Yet  it  is  the  common  course  of 
the  Lord's  dealings  with  those  whom 
He  brings  under  the  operation  of  His 
healing  grace.  The  course  is  paternal. 
As  a  father  deals  with  his  children,  so 
He  deals  with  us.  He  demands 
obedience,  exacts  submission.  He  re- 
quires faith ;  and  then,  the  mind  being 


brought  into  the  right  state,  He  teaches. 
He  leads.  He  heals. — Kiito. 

Verse  12.  Is  there  not  another 
way  ?  I.  Sinners  dislike  the  plan  oj 
the  Gospel.  1 .  Self-abandonment. 
2.  Salvation  by  faith.  II.  They  dis- 
like its  object.  1 .  Salvation  from  sin. 
2.  The  renewal  of  the  heart.  III. 
They  dislike  the  means  to  be  used.  1. 
Self-denial.  2.  Humility.  3.  Earnest- 
ness.    4.  Publicity. 

Verses  13,  14.  The  souFs  desire 
and  submission. — I.  A  desire  is  fre- 
quently shown  to  do  some  great  thing  to 
obtain  salvation.  Illustrate  from 
heathen  pilgrims,  Fakirs ;  devotees 
who  used  to  cast  themselves  under 
wheels  of  Jaggernaut,  also  Roman 
Catholic  austerities,  self-flagellations, 
crusades,  &c.  Both  (1)  condemn  and 
(2)  approve.  The  form  in  which  such 
zeal  shows  itself  superstitious.  The 
motive  wrong.  But  earnest  self- 
sacrificing  spirit  prompted  by  love  to 
Christ  very  admirable.  What  is  not 
permissible  is  seeking  t-j  do  something 
as  procuring  cause  of  salvation.  First 
receive  as  a  free  gift,  and  then  give 
and  do  as  much  as  the  heart  will 
prompt.  II.  The  simplicity  of  what 
has  to  be  done,  and  consequently  urgent 
reason  we  should  do  it.  {a)  Because 
no  act  of  ours  could  be  allowed  to  atone 
for  sin — {b)  the  work  of  Christ  com- 
plete, needs  no  addition — {c)  a  free 
salvation  comes  within  reach  of  all. 
Who  coald  say,  if  otherwise,  but  that 
even  in  our  great  things,  there  might 
be  some  coming  short,  and  multitudes 
would  be  excluded  from  hope  ?  All 
the  more,  then,  rejoice  that  the 
command  is  **  Believe  and  live,"  yet, 
remember,  there  is  wide  scope  after- 
wards, especially  a  daily  life  of 
patient  piety  and  godliness,  often 
more  difficult  than  a  single  act  of  self- 
devotion.  In  this  fulfil  the  desire 
and  glorify  God.  III.  The  wisdom 
and  blessedness  of  obedience.  Picture 
the  scene.  So  when  humbled,  anxious, 
submissive,  a  sinner  adopts  the  means 
of  mercy,  there  is  (1)  a  Divine, 
(2)  an  instantaneous,  (3)alastingefiect. 
From  darkness  to,  light  unregeneracy 

437 


CHAP.  V. 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


to  renewal.  How  wise  the  obedience  I 
The  only  chance  of  recovery.  How 
blessed  I  It  must  have  been  sweet  to 
feel  the  past  cancelled,  heart  set  right. 
Men  have  fabied  there  is  a  fountain 
of  youth.  Plunge  in  its  waters  and 
the  wrinkles  fade  out  of  the  brow. 
But  it  is  true  we  may  be  made  young 
and  happy  again  in  spirit — children  of 
God. — Eom.  Quarterly, 

Verse  13.  The  art  of  persuasion. — 
I.  Knows  when  to  select  the  right 
moment  to  speak.  II.  Knows  how 
to  subdue  the  most  violent  temper. 
III.  Appeals  to  the  strongest  motive 
in  man.  IV.  Should  be  used  in  turn- 
ing men  from  sin  to  virtue. 

Verse  14.  It  was  not  the  water 
either  of  Jordan  or  of  Abana  which 
could  heal,  it  was  the  obedience  of  this 
haughty  general  to  a  mandate  which 
seemed  to  him  frivolous  and  absurd. 
In  the  Gospels  faith  is  the  first  requi- 
site in  similar  cases  of  healing,  and  so 
it  was  here  also — faith  and  obedience. 
Naaman  came  with  his  mind  all  made 
lip  as  to  how  he  was  to  be  healed,  and 
he  turned  away  in  anger  and  disgust 
from  the  course  which  the  prophet 
prescribed.  Yet,  when  he  turned  back 
even  with  a  lame  and  half-doubting 
faith  and  a  half-unwilling  obedience, 
he  was  healed.  This  is  the  perma- 
nent truth  which  is  involved  in  the 
story.  Naaman  was  a  type  of  the 
rationalist  whose  philosophy  provides 
him  with  a  priori  dogmas  by  which 
he  measures  everything  which  is  pro- 
posed to  his  faith.  He  turns  away  in 
contempt  where  faith  would  heal  him. 
That  is  the  truth  which  the  story 
serves  to  enforce. — Editor  of  Lange. 

Not  the  unjust  fury  and  tetcbiness 
of  the  patient  shall  cross  the  cure ; 
lest  while  God  is  severe  the  prophet 
should  be  discredited.  Long  enough 
might  Naaman  have  washed  there  in 
vain,  if  Elisha  had  not  sent  him. 
Many  a  leper  hath  bathed  in  that 
stream,  and  hath  come  forth  no  less 
impure.  It  is  the  word,  the  ordinance 
of  the  Almighty,  which  puts  efficacy 
into  those  means  which  of  themselves 
are  both  impotent  and  improbable. 
488 


What  can  our  font  do  to  the  washing 
away   of  sin  ?     If   God's   institution 
shall  put  virtue  into   our  Jordan,  it 
shall  scour   off  the  spiritual  leprosies 
of  our  hearts,  and  shall  more  cure  the 
soul  than  cleanse  the  face. — Bp.  Rail, 
God's  plan  of  salvation.    We  take 
the   narrative   as   illustrative   of  the 
great    truth,    the    necessity   of  con- 
forming with  God's   plan    to    secure 
salvation.      I.    That    God^a    plan    ts 
contrary  to  the  expectations    of  man. 
So  it  was  here  that  Naaman  had  been 
thinking  within  himself  how  the  pro- 
phet  would   act.     He  merely  sent  a 
messenger  commanding  him  to  wash 
in  the  Jordan.     How  simple,  and   so 
he  thought,  how   foolish!     The  very 
simplicity  bewildered  him  and  kindled 
his  wrath.    But  if  his  own  plan  would 
have  been  sufficient,  he  might   have 
cured  himself  without  going  to   the 
prophet  at  all.  So  the  salvation  which 
is  in  Christ  Jesus  has  always  been  a 
stumbling  block  to  men   on   account 
of  its  simplicity,  and  many  have  dogged 
the  simple  Gospel  with  innumerable 
ceremonies  of  men's  devising,  painting 
the  pure  lily,   and  bringing  their  own 
faint  rush-light  to  increase  the  splen- 
dour of  the  noonday  sun.     Men  would 
cross  ocean  and  wander  in  far-off  lands 
in  search  of  wisdom ;  they  would  survey 
the  heavens,  and  descend  to  the  lower- 
most parts   of  the  earth  ;   but  God's 
word  of  life  is  nigh  unto  us,  in   our 
mouth  and  in  our  heart. 

"  0,  how  unUke  the  complex  works  ot  man 
Heaven's  easy,  artless,  unencumbered  plan  t 
From  ostentatitm  as  from  weakness  free, 
It  stands  like  the  cerulean  arch  we  see. 
Majestic  in  its  own  simplicity  ; 
Legible  only  by  the  light  they  give 
Stand  the  soul -quickening  words,  believe  and 
live,  CowpEB. 

II.  That  Qod''8  plan  tends  to  humble 
the  pride  of  man.  Naaman  thought 
there  was  some  royal  cure  for  a  royal 
patient,  and  an  honourable  way  to 
deal  with  such  an  honourable  man. 
How  indignant  he  felt  when  the 
prophet  only  sent  a  messenger  to  him, 
and  the  remedy  prescribed  being  so 
humiliating  too.  He  could  not  under- 
staud  going  to  wash  himself  in  the 
river  Jordan,  the  river  of  despised 


SOmiBTIO  C0MME^TAR7:  KINGS, 


CHAP.   ▼. 


Israel  ;  wliilst  if  it  was  necessary  to 
apply  the  waters  of  any  river,  could 
he  not  have  washed  himself  in  the 
proverbial  crystal  streams  of  Damas- 
cus? "  So  he  turned  and  went  away 
in  a  rage."  So  God's  plan  of  salva- 
tion is  mortifying  to  the  pride  of  the 
sinful  heart.  The  Pharisees  were 
offended  at  the  Saviour  for  making  no 
distinction  between  them  and  the 
sinners.  They  were  entangled  in  the 
snares  and  pride  of  life.  Their  plan 
was  to  glorify  self  and  humble  others ; 
but  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  first  step  required  is  for  a 
man  to  deny  himself.  Faith  consists 
in  leaving  our  own  frail  vessel  and 
taking  our  passage  on  board  the  ark 
of  God,  to  deem  ourselves  nothing  and 
God  all  in  all.  We  find  Peter,  having 
received  the  consent  of  the  Master, 
walking  on  the  sea  ;  but  the  moment 
he  began  to  trust  himself^  and  feel  safe 
in  the  power  of  his  own  strength,  the 
boisterous  winds  and  the  treacherous 
waves  frightened  him,  and,  conscious 
of  his  weakness,  he  with  gladness 
entered  the  ship  and  was  **safe  in 
the  arms  of  Jesus."  The  gate  is  strait 
and  the  road  is  narrow,  but  he  who  is 
humble  and  obedient  is  led  at  last  to 
safety  and  bliss.  3.  That  he  who  truly 
feels  his  need  will  accept  God'*s  plan. 
Though  ^aaman  was  at  first  most 
seriously  disappointed,  and  turned 
away  in  a  rage,  yet  on  the  counsel  of 
his  servants,  strengthened  by  his  own 
need  and  his  inward  conviction,  he 
complied  with  the  directions  given  by 
the  prophet.  A  sense  of  need  is  a 
propelling  power  that  will  work 
wonders,  and,  in  conjunction  with 
faith,  will  send  the  mountain  to  the 
sea,  and  chain  the  lion  that  is  on  the 
way.  This  feeling  impelled  that 
poor  woman  to  force  her  way  through 
the  crowd  and  touch  the  hem  of  the 
Saviour's  garment;  and,  urged  by  the 
same  motive,  the  blind  man  willingly 
went  to  the  lake  of  Siloam.  When 
the  sinner  really  feels  sin  a  burden, 
and  believes  that  the  meek  and  lowly 
Jesus  is  powerful  to  remove  it,  he  will 
not  quarrel  with  the  method  of  salva- 
tion, but  will  come  at  once  and  cast 
his  burden  down ;  and  when  he  truly 


feels  his  guilt  he  will  come  to  the 
fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  un- 
cleanness.     When  a  man  is  bent  upon 
becoming  rich,  or  learned,  or  great  in 
the   estimation   of  the    world,  he   is 
willing   to   comply  with  the   world's 
terms,   be  they  ever  so  hard.     Is  it 
wonderful  that  the  sinner,  with  his 
broken  heart  and  contrite  spirit,  closes 
in  with  the  overtures  of  the  gospel, 
and  accepts  the  salvation  which  is  in 
Christ?      IV.    That     conformify      to 
God's  plan  will  secure  a  man\  salva- 
tion.     Naaman    obeyed,  and  he  was 
accordingly   cured.      1.    Some  means 
are  generally  used.      The  miracles  of 
the    Old    and   IN'ow   Testaments    are 
similar  in  this,   that  means  were  used 
in    bringing    about    such    wonderful 
deeds.     It  would   have  been  all  the 
same  to  God  to  cure  I^aaman  with  a 
word,  but  Naaman  himself  would  have 
lost  the  valuable  lessons  he  received, 
and  the  necessary  training   he   went 
through.     2.  The  means  were  not  suffi- 
cient in  themselves  apart  from  the  bless- 
ing of  God  to  cure  his  leprosy,  but  as 
it  was  God's  plan  it  effected  its  pur- 
pose.    The  ark  was  rendered  safe  from 
the  waters  of  the  Deluge,  as  it  was  con- 
structed  according  to   the   directions 
given  by  God.     The  waters  of  Marah 
lost   their  bitterness  by  a  tree  being 
thrown  into  them,  because  that  was 
the  means  appointed  by  the  Lord.     To 
encompass  the  walls  of  Jericho  with 
rams'  horns  might  have  seemed  very 
foolish   and   useless   to  some,  but   it 
was  of  Divine  appointment,  and  so  it 
succeeded.     Men  are  thus  taught  to  do 
their  duty,  and  then  to  wait  for  the 
Divine  blessing.     J^aaman  could  wash 
himself  in  the  Jordan,  though  he  could 
not  cure  himself.     We  arc  to  come  to 
the  Saviour  to  be  healed,  we  are  to 
look   upon   Him,  to   stretch  out  our 
hands,  withered  as  they  are,  to  Him. 
3.  Naaman* s    cure   was    in>itantaneous. 
What  a  hiippy  moment  for  him  when 
he  discovered  that    the  cause  of  his 
anxiety,  trouble,  and  humiliation  was 
removed !     So  the  man  who  believes 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  flees  to 
Him  for  refuge,  is  from  that  moment 
free  from  condcnnnati'^n.     4.  Bis  cur§ 
was  complete.     His  flesh  was  made  like 

439 


dHAP.   ▼. 


BOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


the  flesh  of  a  little  child.  He 
possessed  a  thoroughly  renovated  body. 
No  taint  of  the  malady  to  cast  its  dark 
shadow  over  the  future.  So  he  who 
accepts  God's  plan  is  wholly  renewed, 
created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  True, 
he  retains  the  marks  of  the  leprosy  of 
sin  whilst  in  this  world.  As  Mr. 
Joseph  Cook  remarks,  although  the 
particles  of  the  body  have  been 
changed  many  times,  still  the  scars 
made  when  the  fingers  were  too  young 
to  be  trusted  with  edged  tools  continue 
through  the  years,  and  are  absolutely 
unchangeable  in  the  changing  flesh,  so 
the  scars  of  sin  continue  after  years  of 
reformation ;  but,  thanks  be  to  God, 
day  by  day  the  nature  becomes  sancti- 
fied, and  at  last  the  ransomed  soul 
will  take  its  flight  to  the  realms  of 
purity  and  bliss.  The  Church  will  be 
at  last  a  "  glorious  Church,  not  having 
spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing; 
holy,  and  without  blemish.'* — Horn. 
Quarterly. 

Verses  15-19.  Gratitude  to  God  and 
earthly  policy.  Naaman,  instead  of 
going  straight  away  to  Syria,  turned 
back  to  Samaria,  not  this  time  to  the 
king,  but  with  the  same  retinue  and 
wealth  of  gifts  he  came  back  to  Elisha's 
door.  In  this  act  he  takes  his  place 
with  that  one  Samaritan  leper  of  the 
New  Testament  who  turned  back  to 
Jesus  and  blessed  Him  for  His  mercy 
in  freeing  him  from  the  same  horrible 
curse,  while  nine  others  went  away 
healed,  but  ungrateful.  I.  Naaman's 
journey  back  was  a  grateful  return  to 
Elisha  and  an  honourable  but  only  duti- 
ful acknowledgment  of  God.  It  was  an 
owning  of  the  God  of  Israel  because  of 
Elisha's  work.  This  deduction  of 
spiritual  truths  from  bodily  blessings 
shows  health  of  soul  and  soundness  of 
mind.  Naaman  recognized  God  by 
His  mercies,  and  acknowledged  the  God 
of  Elisha  in  the  work  that  Elisha  had 
done.  Mercy  is  the  great  mark  of  our 
God ;  it  is  that  by  which  He  may  be 
most  easily  recognized  ;  and  works  of 
mercy  are  the  signs  of  the  true  and 
most  eminent  servants  of  His  pleasure. 
God  is  ready  to  let  His  claim  on  our 
loving  recognition  be  determined  by 
440 


what  every  heart  can  easily  discover 
of  His  merciful  kindness.  His  message 
and  work  among  us  are  still  the  same  ; 
His  servants  and  workers  now  are  all, 
if  they  are  true  to  Him,  workers  of 
mercy,  messengers  of  love  and  peace 
and  healing.  II.  Elisha^ s  refusal  of 
health.  In  this,  like  Abraham  with 
the  King  of  Sodom,  and  like  Paul  with 
the  Corinthians,  Elisha  kept  the  mercy 
of  God  as  God  intended  it  to  be, 
"  without  money  and  without  price.'* 
The  true  gift  in  return  for  God's  mercy 
is  the  oftering  of  ourselves  in  Christ, 
and  when  that  is  made  the  silver  and 
the  gold  will  find  their  proper  place. 
It  was  noble  in  Naaman  to  make  the 
ofi^er ;  and  it  would  have  been  wrong 
in  Elisha  to  have  taken  the  gift.  The 
greatest  blessings  cost,  at  first,  the 
least.  No  one  can  be  paid,  no  one  can 
pay,  for  the  mercy  of  God,  or  for  the 
conferring  of  spiritual  blessings.  God 
gives  us  His  mercy,  and  He  wants  our- 
selves as  His  right  and  due.  III. 
Ignorant  devotio7i  to  th"-  true  God.  Only 
a  little  wliile  ago,  in  rage  and  pride, 
Naaman  had  sneered  at  the  waters  of 
Israel ;  but  now  the  soil  of  the  land 
of  the  Lord  was  sacred  to  him, 
and  he  wanted  an  altar  of  it  in 
his  Syrian  home.  Nor  for  this  is  he 
to  be  condemned,  as  we  should  be 
justified  in  condemning  the  like  spirit 
when  it  is  foisted  upon  the  purity  of 
Christianity  or  associated  with  the  faith 
once  committed  to  the  saints.  Christi- 
anity knows  nothing  of  exclusively 
holy  places  and  days  and  services  and 
classes ;  for  now  all  places  and  times 
may  be  sacramental  and  holy  to  the 
Lord.  IV.  There  was,  however,  in 
Naaman' s  case  a  worse  thing  than  his 
excusable  superstition,  and  that  was 
— an  attempt  to  mingle  the  claims  of 
God  with  the  advanUKjes  of  earthly 
policy.  It  is  not  for  us  or  any  to  press 
heavily  on  the  conscience  of  a  man  in 
such  a  position.  The  only  thing  that 
gives  us  a  right  to  judge  the  case  at 
all,  for  our  own  caution  and  guidance, 
is  the  evidence  that  Naaman  himself 
felt  that  bowing  down  with  his  master 
in  the  house  of  Rimmon  might  be  in- 
consistent with  his  proposed  devotion 
to  the  God  of  Israel.     Erom  Naaman'a 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


CHAP.   V. 


easily  understood  mistake  let  us  learn 
to  hate  laxity  of  principle  in  ourselves, 
and  to  judge  gently  the  weakness  and 
fall  of  othcTs.  V.  Prom  Elishd's 
tenderness  to  a  weak  co'<vertj  learn  the 
more  to  trust  the  greater  tenderness 
that  Jesus  has  for  our  frailties  and 
dangers.  Do  not  think  that  Jesus 
does  not  see  the  wretchedness  of  your 
temptations  and  the  hazard  of  your 
position  when  all  things  seem  to 
beckon  you  to  sin,  and  sin  hides  its 
vile  image  under  a  mask  of  attractive- 
ness and  interest  and  prosperity. 

Then  learn  to  scorn  the  praise  of  men, 
And  learn  to  lose  with  God ; 
For  Jesus  won  the  world  through  shame, 
And  beckons  thee  His  road, 

C.  W.  P. 

I.  Gratitude.  The  mighty  Xaaman, 
who  had  doubtless  often  bathed  with- 
out benefit  in  the  waters  of  Damascus, 
tried  the  river  Jordan,  and  was  imme- 
diately cleansed.  He  returns  to  Klisha 
to  thank  him.  How  difi'erent  now  is 
Naaman,  old  things  passed  away  !  He 
acknowledges  the  supreme  God  as  the 
only  God.  Does  this  publicly  in  the 
presence  of  all  his  company.  Would 
make  an  acknowledgment  to  Elisha, 
not  as  a  recompense,  but  as  a  gift  of 
gratitude.  II.  Generosity.  Elisha  by 
no  means  a  man  of  great  wealth. 
Dependent  on  the  bounty  of  Providence. 
Followed  no  regular  calling.  Lived 
in  an  age  when  the  servants  of  God,  as 
such,  were  ill- re  warded.  Yet  would 
not  receive  a  gift  at  the  hands  of 
Naaman.  His  desire  to  lay  Naaman 
and  the  king  of  Syria  his  master 
under  an  obligation  to  Israel.  This 
is  to  preserve  peace.  Especially  he 
desired  to  impress  them  with  the 
greatness  and  goodness  of  God ;  to 
remind  them  of  those  higher  blessings 
which  God  would  freely  give.  Hence, 
for  the  sake  of  God's  honour,  and  his 
country's  welfare,  he  would  take  no 
reward.  III.  Superstition.  Although 
thus  grateful,  and  making  his  con- 
fession of  the  true  God,  Naaman  is  not 
fully  enlightened.  Still  regards  God 
as  a  local  deity.  The  mightiest  God 
in  the  world,  but  limited  to  Israelitish 
soil.  He  would  therefore  like  to  carry 
back  with  him  some  of  that  soil.    He 


thought  to  worship  in  any  spot  on 
that  soil  would  secure  th(5  favour  ol' 
God.  Elisha  makes  no  reply  to  this 
request.  Certainly  cannot  approve 
this  course.  Sends  Noaman  back  with 
his  blessing.  Naaman  felt  that  to 
worship  Eimraon  was  wrong,  but  hoped 
to  be  furgivea  by  him  on  whose  conse- 
caated  soil  he  stood.  Learn  : — I.  To 
cultivate  gratitude.  2.  To  do  good 
without  the  hope  of  any  return,  .-$. 
Guard  against  all  forms  of  superstition. 
The  class  and  Desk. 

Verse  16.  The  unselfishness  of 
goodness.  I.  Cannot  be  bribed  into 
showing  kii.dnes3.  II.  Kefuses  legiti- 
mate offerings  when  the  cause  of 
religion  would  suffer  by  accepting  them. 
III.  Falls  ba'  k  upon  God  for  all  need- 
ful supplies. 

Verses  17,  18.  Imperfect  religious 
ideas.  I.  Not  uncommon  at  the  early 
stage  of  religious  life.  II.  Leads  to 
imperfect  religious  practice  III. 
Attaches  too  much  importance  to  the 
externals  of  worship.  IV.  Hinders  a 
thorough  reformation  and  forsaking  of 
the  old  life. 

Verse  17.  As  Naaman  was  the  type 
of  the  converted  heathen  world,  and 
he  carried  the  soil  of  Palestine  to 
Aram,  so  did  the  heathen  carry  over 
into  their  own  lands,  together  with 
Christianity,  the  doctrine,  life,  dis- 
position, and  spirit,  which  had 
flourished  in  the  Holy  Land,  and 
thereby  they  established  themselves  a 
i^w  home.  When  we  hear,  here  and 
there  in  Christian  lands,  the  names 
Bethany,  Bethlehem,  Zion,  what  are 
they  but  holy  places  transfeired,  in 
their  spirit,  from  their  original  loca- 
tion, into  our  life,  and  thought,  and 
feeling?  In  their  religious  obser- 
vances, the  main  point  is  not  the 
correctness  and  tnith  of  thy  know- 
ledge, or  of  the  doctrine  which  thou 
proiessest,  but  the  truth  and  purity  of 
thine  own  character.  What  one  may 
do  under  his  circumstances  without 
violating  his  conscience,  the  conscience 
of  another,  under  other  circumstances, 
will  forbid  him  to  do.  We  have  no 
right  to  judge  him  :  to  the  Lord  each 

441 


CHAP.  ▼. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


one  stands  or  falls  (Rom.  xiv.  1 — 7). 

— Cassel. 

—  Well  did  this  Syrian  find  that 
the  man  of  God  had  given  a  super- 
natural virtue  to  the  water  of  Israel, 
and  therefore  supposed  he  might  give 
the  like  to  his  earth.  Doubtless  it 
was  devotion  that  moved  this  suit. 
The  Syrian  saw  God  had  a  propriety 
in  Israel,  and  imagines  He  willbe  best 
pleased  with  his  own.  On  the  sudden 
was  Naaman  half  a  proselyte;  still 
here  was  a  weak  knowledge  with 
strong  intentions. — Bp.  Hall, 

Verse   18.    The  compromises    of 
life.  The  significant  hut  in  the  social 
position    of    Naaman   is  to  find    its 
counterpart  in  his  religious  character. 
A  great  man,  but  a  leper ;  a  believer 
pleading  for  an  inconsistency.     Con- 
version   and  compromise.     When  he 
has  found    God  beyond  the   sign    of 
water,  and  come  back  to  the  prophet 
with  the  confession  of  his  new  faith, 
you  expect  a  complete  change  in  his 
exterior  life,  that  he  will  go  among 
his  heathen  countrymen  a  full-orbed 
religious  man  ;  but  he  counts  the  cost, 
or  perhaps  is  in  some  mental  perplexity. 
At  least  he  will  put  the  difficulty  to 
the  prophet,    and  be  guided   by  his 
decision.     We  are  startled  to  hear  the 
answer  "  Go   in   peace."     Here  was 
an  opportunity  to  rebuke  cowardice, 
to  chastise  the  poor  selfishness  that, 
having  received  so  much  from  God, 
asks,    "And   how   little  need  I  pay 
back  ?  "     An  opportunity  to  discuss  an 
interesting  question  of  casuistry  and 
to  decide  upon  the  comparative  forces 
of  conscience  and  necessity.  But  Elisha 
accepts  his  convert,  with   this  excep- 
tion,  whether    in    the   passive   non- 
aggressiveness    of  that   old   Hebrew 
religion,  or  in  the  conviction  that  the 
man   would   do  his   best  under    the 
circumstances,  we   cannot  tell.      Set 
Naaman  in  the   light  flung  back  by 
the  cross,  and  we  can  soon  pronounce 
judgment.     We  know  our  Lord  deals 
with  these  human  **  huts."  *'  Lot  the 
dead  bury  their  dead,"  &c.    **  If  a  man 
love  father  and  mother  more  than  me, 
he  is  not  worthy  of   me."     But  the 
judgment  would  be  unjust.     Men  are 
442 


always  more  or  less  in  subjection  to 
the  ideas  that  govern  the  age  in  which 
they  live.  It  is  only  the  few  who 
draw  themselves  apart,  and  press  for- 
ward to  a  grand  isolation.  The  Church 
has  ten  thousand  ITaamans  where  it 
has  one  Paul.  The  very  uncertainty 
in  which,  spite  of  Elisha's  benediction, 
the  incident  is  left,  suggests  some 
remarks  on  the  compromises  of  life. 

I.  Religious  decision,  as  it  is  affected 
hy  ea/rthly  relationships.      This  man 
was  a  servant,  and  the  conditions  of 
his  servitude  were  not  simple,  but  com- 
plex.     He  was  in   command  of  the 
army,  and  while  this  conferred  on  him 
a  large  authority,  it  imposed  a  large 
trust.    These  had  opened  to  him  wide 
opportunities  for  loyalty,  bravery,  and 
patriotism.     It  was  part  of  his  service 
to  go  with  his  master  into  the  house 
of  Rimmon,     Refusal  would  take  on 
it  an  ugly    air  of  ingratitude.      The 
king  had  made  him  the  man  he  was, 
and  a  feeling  of  indebtedness  and  ob- 
ligation may  enter  very  acutely  into 
questions    of    conscience    and   right. 
This  to  a  noble  mind  would  be  a  far 
greater  difficulty  than  the  loss  of  po- 
sition and  the   imminent   death  that 
might  result  from  the  wrath  of  an  abso- 
lute monarch,  unaccustomed  and  un- 
able to  enter  into  nice   questions  of 
religious  casuistry  ;  indeed,  the  line  of 
duty  between  the  obligations  imposed 
by  earthly  relationships,  and  our  ser- 
vices to  God,  is  not  always  so  distinct  as 
men  think.  Many  at  least  who,  withloud 
protestations,    scorn   all   compromise, 
have  never  found  that  line.     Clear  is 
the  right,  at  all  sacrifice,  if  king  or 
master  exact  the  positive  crime ;  ask 
me  to  disown  Christ,  to  give  up  prayer, 
to  outrage   any  distinct  conscientious 
conviction,    but  along  this  line  is  a 
very  borderland  of  mist  in  which  the 
traveller  is  often  brought  to  a  stand, 
asking   after   the   right   way.     It   is 
enough  to  instance  questions  of  poly- 
gamy,   of   slavery,    with   which  the 
early  Church  had  to  deal.     Of  course 
it  may  be  said,  if  a  heathen,  having 
two  or  more  wives,  became  a  convert, 
he  must  put  away  all  but  one.  Which 
one  ?  What  if  each  were  the  mother  of 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap,  v 


children  ?  The  Christian  master  must  tion  ;  but  Ms  neighbour  takes  that 
manumit  his  slaves.  Cornelius,  says  plea  to  a  far  wider  field,  and  justifies 
the  Peace  Advocate,  should  forsake  many  a  compromise  on  the  same 
the  Roman  service,  and  take  no  longer  ground.  It  is  convenient  to  charge 
the  heathen's  pay.  But  these,  and  our  personal  responsibility  on  an  in- 
a  multitude  of  similar  questions,  are  tangible  irresponsible  something  called 
not  decided  by  inspired  authority  at  society.  But  wh;it  society  is  to  sup- 
all,  or  are  decided  in  their  special  ply  our  code  of  ethics  ?  Syria  or 
instances  against  the  ruling  principle.  Israel?  England  or  Piji  ?  Evtiry 
The  New  Testament  has  faith  in  time,  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden.  The 
in  the  thousand  years  of  God's  work-  law  of  truth  is  in  and  from  the  change- 
in  g,  in  the  antagonism  of  the  spirit  of  less  God.  Customs,  fashions,  luxurious 
the  Gospel  to  every  form  of  injustice  living,  appearances,  amusements, 
and  wrong.  It  cares  less  to  estimate  friendships,  business,  all  tempt  to 
and  adjudge  the  difi'ering  shades  of  compromise  and  have  prophets  God 
darkness  in  the  night  of  error,  so  much  never  sent,  who  say  to  the  conformist, 
as  to  bring  in  that  daybreak  before  *^  Go  in  peace.'* 
which  all  the  shadows  shall  flee  away. 

Christianity  has  entered  as  a  sword  III.  By  the  necessities  of  life.     The 

into  many  a  worldly  home,  happy  in  plea,  we  must  do  this  to  live.     Refer 

its  own  way ;  it  has  resulted  in  wide  to    common    practices  in   trade,    the 

divisions  between  parent   and  child,  pressure  of  competition.     The  world's 

master  and  servant,  monarch  and  sub-  practices  contrary  to  the  great  princi- 

ject.   The  records  of  the  Church  glow  pie.     A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in 

with  bright  instances  of  heroic  sacri-  the  abundance  of  the  things  that  he 

fice,  of  daring  disobedience  to  man  in  possesseth. 
obeying   God.     And   yet   how  much 

has  to  be  borne,  how  much  ought  to  IV.  By  the  personal  temperament » 
be  borne,  before  the  daughter  forsakes  One  man's  supreme  difficulty  is  ano- 
her  mother,  or  the  son  breaks  asunder  ther  man's  agreeable  work.  The  cost 
the  bond  of  the  household  I  There  is  of  sacrifice  differs  with  different  men. 
much  in  I^aaman's  knowledge  of  the  To  one  it  is  easier  to  die  on  the  battle- 
inconsistency.  He  who  sins  against  field  than  to  confess  his  faith — to  give 
that  inner  light  will  be  scarcely  free  largely,  even  to  Gehazi,  with  generous 
from  sin  against  God.  or  grateful  subscriptions,  than  to  break 

with  former  friendships.     There  is  no 

ll.  By  society.     Naaman  does  not  open  confession  of  Christ's  name  by 

refer  to  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  a  secret  disciples,  to  whom  One  greater 

monotheistic  faith  in  a  pagan  land,  to  than  all  prophets  may  say,   **  Go  in 

the  power  of  many  against  the  one;  peace."  Let  character  only  be  of  so  pure 

but  society  is  full  of  suggested  com-  a  transparency  that  the  light  of  a  holy 

promises  resulting  from   these  condi-  conscience  may  shine  through.  1.  God 

tions.     There  is  a  compulsion  in  the  does  not  take  back  from  men  of  partial 

pressure  both  of  social  forces  and  of  failure  the  good  he  has  bestowed.  The 

civil  laws  ;  and  many  a  man  discovers  leprosy  does  not  return  to  the  cleansed 

that  the  house  of  Rimmon  is  co-exten-  leper,  if  one  leprous  spot  be  on  the 

sive  with  the  state  in  which  he  lives,  soul.     The  impotent  man  healed,  goes 

He  pays  the  tribute  money  to  Csesar,  straightway  to  our  Lord's  enemies  to 

or  the  temple  tax,   withholding  faith  tell  them  that  it  was  Jesus  who  made 

in  the  lawful  government  in  the  one,  him  whole,  and  the  strength  ungrate- 

and  really  teaching  that  the  other  must  fully  used  remains.     We  have  all  need 

pass  away.     He  t;ikes  up  his  share  of  to  say,  somewhere,  **  The  Lord  pardon 

the    country's    expenditure,    though  thy  servant  in  this  thing."     2.  Is  the 

part  of  it  may  go  toward  objects  from  silence  of  Scripture  as  to  any  useful 

which     he     conscientiously   dissents.  future  in  Naaman's  history  to  be  re- 

His  plea  is  the  necessity  of  his  posi-  garded  as  evidence  of  a  good  life  hin- 

443 


CHAP.  V.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EIN08, 


dered  by  the  appearance  of  evil?     3.  Verse  19.     One  does  not  know  what 

We  shall  destroy  no  house  of  Rimmon  to  admire  most  in  Elisha's  mild  and 

by  worshipping  in  it  on  any  pretence  simple  answer,   the  clear  and  correct 

whatsoever.     4.  In  the  Gospel,  this,  insight   into  a  genuine  heart  experi- 

at  least,  is  clear — he  that  putteth  his  ence,  which,  whatever  may  surround 

hand  to  the  plough,  and  looheth  back,  and  obscure  the  main  point,  'i  11  seizes 

is  not  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  God. —  this  quickly  and  clearly ;  or  the  holy 

Mom.  Quarterly.  moderation   which,   even  in  the  case 

—  Far,  therefore,  is  Naaman  from  where  it  is   its   prerogative  to  urge, 

being  a  pattern,    save   of  weakness;  limit,  bind,  loose,  or  burden,  still  re- 

since  he  is  yet  more  than  half  a  Syrian  ;  strains  itself  ;  or  the  pure  humanity  of 

since   he   willingly   accuses    himself,  disposition  which   can  so  thoroughly 

and,  instead  of  defending,  deprecates  sympathize,  so  completely  put  itself  in 

his  offence.     As  nature,  so  grace,  rises  the  position  and  at  the  standpoint  of 

by  many  degrees  to  perfection.     It  is  the  other.     The  knowledge  of  the  liv- 

not  for  us  to  expect  a  full  stature  in  ing  God,   and  the  experience  of  His 

the  cradle  of  con  version.     Leprosy  was  saving   grace,   is  the  fountain  of  all 

in  Naaman  cured  at  once,  not  corrup-  peace,  with  which  alone  a  man  can  go 

tion. — Bp.  Ball.  gladly  on  his  way. — Menken. 

BOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  20-27. 
The  Cuese  op  Avaeicb. 

I.  That  a  spirit  of  avarice  losos  no  opportL^nity  to  gratify  its  greed. 
Gehazi  was  the  Judas  Iscariot  of  the  Old  Testament.  Covetousness  was  his 
besetment.  He  was  doubtless  in  many  ways  valuable  to  Elisha,  and  perliaps  was 
at  first  a  sincere  enquirer  after  truth.  Eut  the  spirit  of  avarice  gained  the 
mastery  over  what  was  good  in  him,  and  ultimately  wrought  his  ruin.  The 
wealth  of  Naaman  was  too  great  a  temptation  to  him,  and  he  could  not  forego 
the  prospectof  benefiting  by  the  lavish  generosity  of  the  grateful  Syrian.  "  As 
the  Lord  liveth,  I  will  run  after  him  and  take  somewhat  of  him  "  (verse  20). 
Gehazi  acts  under  the  guise  of  religion  while  disregarding  its  teaching  of  dis- 
interestedness, which  it  was  particularly  needful  to  make  evident  in  those  days  of 
worldliness  and  time-serving  among  the  national  priesthood — the  sycophantic 
Baalites.  He  showed  contempt  for  the  judgment  of  his  master  in  the  matter  of 
receiving  gifts,  and  cared  not  how  far  he  disparaged  the  prophet  in  the  eyes  of 
his  new  convert.  He  mainly  misrepresented  Elisha  by  making  him  ask  for 
what  Naaman  had  just  heard  him  most  positively  refuse.  Avarice  knows  no 
scruples  ;  is  reckless  ot  results  ;  it  sees  only  what  is  to  be  gained,  and  cannot 
relinquish  the  slightest  hope  of  securing  it. 

II.  That  a  spirit  of  avarice  hesitates  not  to  employ  falsehood  in  at- 
taining its  purpose.  Covetousness  and  lying  go  together ;  they  are  twin- vices. 
The  burning  desire  for  gain  suggested  to  Gehazi  the  fabrication  of  a  plausible 
story  which  would  easily  deceive  the  unsuspecting  and  generous  Naaman 
(verses  21-23).  "What  a  round  tale  hath  the  craft  of  Gehazi  devised  of  the 
number,  the  place,  the  quality,  the  age,  of  his  master's  guests,  that  he  might  set 
a  fair  colour  upon  that  pretended  request,  so  proportioning  the  value  of  his  de- 
mand as  might  both  enrich  himself,  and  yet  well  stand  with  the  moderation  of 
his  master !  Love  of  money  can  never  keep  good  quarter  with  honesty,  with 
innocence.  Covetousness  never  lodged  in  the  heart  alone  ;  if  it  find  not,  it  will 
breed  wickedness.  What  a  mint  of  fraud  there  is  in  a  worldly  breast !  How 
readily  can  it  coin  subtle  falsehood  for  an  advantage  !"  To  find  out  the  covetous, 
go  round  with  a  subscription  book.  It  is  perfectly  appalling  what  lies  you  will 
hear  told  to  evade  giving. 

444 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  Chap.  t. 


IIT.  That  a  spirit  of  avarice  finds  its  pleasure  in  secretly  storing  its 
grains  (verse  24).  Gehazi  carefully  stowed  away  the  goods  with  which  the 
liberality  of  Naaman  had  supplied  him,  and  began  abeady  to  indulge  in  dreams 
of  increased  possessions  and  of  the  pleasures  his  wealth  might  purchase.  The 
miser  wastes  his  best  powers  in  the  fond  idolatry  of  his  money,  and  gloats  in  secret 
over  the  piles  of  treasure  which  he  counts  with  trembling  joy.  Avarice,  says 
Channing,  is  a  passion  full  of  paradox,  a  madness  full  of  method  ;  for  although 
the  miser  is  the  most  mercenary  of  all  beings,  yet  he  serves  the  worst  master 
more  faithfully  than  some  Christians  do  the  best,  and  will  take  nothing  for  it. 
He  falls  down  and  worships  the  God  of  this  world,  but  will  have  neither  its 
pomps,  vanities,  nor  its  pleasures  for  his  trouble  He  begins  to  accumulate 
treasure  as  a  means  to  happiness,  and  by  a  common  but  morbid  association  he 
continues  to  accumulate  it  as  an  end.  He  lives  poor  to  die  rich,  and  is  the 
mere  jailer  of  his  house  and  the  turnkey  of  his  wealth.  Impoverished  by  his 
gold,  he  slaves  harder  to  imprison  it  in  his  chest,  than  his  brother  slave  to  liberate 
it  from  the  mine.  The  avarice  of  the  miser  may  be  termed  the  grand  sepulchre 
of  all  his  other  passions,  as  they  successively  decay.  But,  unlike  other  tombs, 
it  is  enlarged  by  repletion  and  strengthened  by  age. 

IV.  That  a  spirit  of  avarice  is  unexpectedly  exposed  and  faithfully 
varned  (verse  25,  26).  Little  did  Gehazi  think  that  the  whole  transaction 
which  had  been  carried  out  with  such  consummate  craft  and  privacy  was 
already  known  to  his  Master.  He  seeks  still  further  to  hide  his  duplicity  by 
further  lying.  **  He  who  tells  a  lie,'*  says  Pope,  **  is  not  sensible  how  great  a 
task  he  undertakes;  for  he  must  be  forced  to  invent  twenty  more  to  maintain 
one."  The  wickedness  of  his  servant  was  discovered  by  the  prophetic  insight 
of  Elisha,  and,  to  the  utter  confusion  of  the  culprit,  he  is  addressed  in  words  of 
severe  and  faithful  remonstrance — **Is  it  a  time  to  receive  money,  &c?" 
Miserable  Gehazi !  how  didst  thou  stand  pale  and  trembling  before  the  dreadful 
tribunal  of  thy  severe  master,  looking  for  the  woful  sentence  of  some  grievous 
judgment  for  so  heinous  an  offence  !  "  It  is  well  when  the  money-loving  world- 
ling has  a  faithful  monitor  at  hand  to  warn  him  of  his  danger  and  reprove  him 
for  his  sin :  it  is  better  still  when  warning  and  reproof  lead  to  reformation. 

y.  That  a  spirit  of  avarice  is  cursed  with  a  terrible  doom  (verse  27). 
Swift  upon  the  heels  of  the  transgression  came  the  punishment,  and  that  a 
punishment  most  loathsome  and  abhorrent  :  it  was  like  a  living  death  ! — **  He 
went  out  from  his  presence  a  leper  as  white  as  snow."  0  heavy  talents  of 
Gehazi !  0  the  horror  of  this  one  unchangeable  suit  which  shall  never  be  but 
loathsomely  white,  noisom.ely  unclean  1  How  much  better  had  been  a  light 
purse  and  a  homely  coat  with  a  sound  body,  a  clear  soul!  Too  late  doth  that 
wretched  man  now  find  that  he  hath  loaded  himself  with  a  curse,  that  he  hath 
clad  himself  with  shame.  His  sin  shall  be  read  ever  in  his  face,  in  his  8;)ed. 
All  passengers,  all  posterities,  shall  now  say — Behold  the  characters  of  Gehazi's 
covetousness,  fraud,  sacrilege  ! — Bp.  Hall.  Perhaps  the  punishment  cured  the 
sin,  and  led  to  repentance.  Gehazi  the  leper  had  more  hope  of  salvation  than 
Gehazi  the  miser.  Gain  got  by  a  lie  will  burn  your  fingers,  burn  in  your  purses, 
rot  your  estates,  and  root  out  your  posterity. 

Lessons  : — 1.  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil.  2.  The  avaricious  spirit 
is  ever  ready  to  take  advantage  of  the  generous.     3.    Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts. 

Defilement  op  God's  Woek  by  Covetous  Men  (verses  20-24). 

It  is  saddening  to  know  that  some  of  the  best  wor.is,  nd  some  of  God's  most 
eminent  workers,  have  been  defamed  and  lowered,  if  their  influence  has  not  been 
actually  counteracted  and  nullified,  by  inferior  workers  and  by  unworthy  men. 

445 


OHAP.v.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


This  defiling  of  God's  work  has  generally  come  from  one  source,  and  is  the  result 
of  one  vile  lust  or  passion — covetousness.  As  illustrating  this,  read  the  repul- 
sive histories  of  Balaam,  of  Achan,  of  David's  impious  numbering  of  Israel,  the 
story  of  Gehazi  now  before  us,  and  the  dark  atrocity  of  the  life  and  death  of 
Judas  Iscariot. 

I.  The  action  and  duplicity  of  Gehazi  are  of  singular  unworthiness.  Like  so 
many  other  hist  ( ries,  they  show  that  intercourse  with  good  men  and  association  with 
God-like  worh  may  lecome  only  the  occasion  of  more  vileness  in  a  man.  To  the 
influence  of  his  noble-minded  master,  to  the  refining  and  elevating  power  of  such 
a  character  as  Elisha,  to  the  special  needs  of  his  fatherland  and  day,  Gehazi 
seems  to  have  been  insensible,  or,  if  not  insensible,  yet,  which  is  worse,  inclined 
to  undervalue  them,  and  to  use  the  privileges  and  opportunities  of  his  position 
for  the  gain  of  money.  Nor  is  Gehazi  lonely  in  this.  On  every  side  evidence  of 
the  like  iniquity  accumulates  when  we  look  into  Scripture  or  other  history. 
Few  followers  of  great  menhave  any  of  theirreal  greatness,  though  they  may  share 
their  honour.  Few  imitators  of  great  teachers  catch  sight  of  anything  but  their 
own  false  exaggeration  of  their  master's  position,  and  the  opportunities  thereby 
given  of  personal  advance.  The  followers  of  Luther  were  seldom  worthy  of  him. 
The  followers  of  Calvin  have  not  been  true  to  their  master.  The  adherents  of 
the  hallowed  AYesleys  did  not  take  their  sacred  work  only.  The  converts  of 
Paul  almost  broke  his  heart.  And  the  followers  and  servants  of  Jesus — where 
is  there  one  of  us  who  is  worthy  of  his  mister  ?  Do  not  many  of  us  come  to 
Christ  with  selfish  feelings  and  serve  our  God  for  hire  ?  We  may  find  it  helpful 
against  this  danger  ever  to  remember  that  God's  gift  of  salvation  was  both 
undeserved  and  unsolicited.  Eeing  with  the  good  and  great  will  not  necessarily 
make  us  similar ;  otherwise  Gehazi  would  have  been  a  better  man,  and  it  would 
not  have  been  Christ's  sorrowful  experience  that  **  he  who  had  eaten  bread  with 
Him  lifted  up  his  heel  against  Him." 

II.  Gehazi's  covetousness  was  of  a  gross]  material  kind — ^the  love  of  money; 
and  the  miserable  influence  of  it  upon  him  is  seen  in  this — that  it  produced  in- 
alility  to  appreciate  Kllsha's  spiritical  motives.  Ali  that  Gehazi  let  himself  see 
was  that  with  the  departing  !N^aaman  so  much  money  went  away  too.  As 
with  Gehazi,  so  generally  the  covetous  and  unpiincipled  man  lowers  himself  to 
a  level  on  which  he  is  unable,  in  daily  life  and  business,  to  appreciate  other 
motives  than  those  of  getting  gain,  or  measure  anything  in  life's  movements 
and  enterprises  by  any  other  gauge  than  that  of  the  money  that  can  be  gained  or 
must  be  lost.  Gehazi  could  not  feel  the  power  of  Elisha's  spiritual  motives  in 
sparing  Naaman  and  letting  him  go  free  of  payment.  Elisha's  noble  determi- 
nation that  the  mercy  of  his  God  should,  in  Naaman's  case,  be  had  literally  for 
the  asking;  his  resolve  that  the  goodness  of  God  should  be  then,  as  we  say 
now,  of  grace,  and  not  of  buying  or  selling — this,  to  such  a  soul  as  Gehazi's, 
was  useless,  fanciful,  intangible.  He  was,  evidently,  a  practical  vigorous  man, 
who  had  not  much  room  for  fancies,  whether  religious  or  any  other.  Covetous 
men  in  the  world,  and  Gehazis  in  the  Church,  are  too  many  and  too  influential. 
Too  many  of  us  have  this  coarse  grain  in  us,  and  when  there  is  ever  any  beauty 
or  tenderness  of  feeling  in  us,  we  get  into  the  habit  of  hiding  it  from  what  we 
think  would  be  the  rude  looks  and  unappreciating  touch  of  others. 

III.  In  several  other  ways  Gehazi's  covetousness  involved  li.ii  insitiy  and  fuither 
defiled  the  good  work  that  had  been  wrought  by  Elisha.  These  are  no  lonely, 
single  sins.  Sin  needs  sin  to  help  it  along,  to  buttress  it,  to  back  it,  and  give 
it  success.  One  deception  leads  to  another,  and  needs  it,  and  each  becomes  a 
pledge  of  worse.  Gehazi  had  to  lie  to  JS'aaman ;  and  it  speaks  of  the  power  of 
gi'eed  and  covetousness,  to  see  this  man  telling  the  lie  so  plainly  and  confidently, 
misrepresenting  his  master,  and  dishonoui '  ig  God's  work  as  done  by  his  master. 
All  the  food  and  fame  of  this  grand  world  are  not  worth  one  little  lie.  Let  us 
be  careful  not  to  want  anything  beyond  the  reach  of  honesty,  nor  to  go  where 

446 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS.  chap,  v 


we  need  lies  and  double-dealing  for  advancement.  To  be  simple-minded,  with 
Christ,  is  better  than  all  the  successes  of  duplicity.  Gczahi's  lie  deceived  a 
trusting  man,  and  made  the  liar  take  still  greater  and  more  ungenerous  advan- 
tage of  Naaman's  goodness,  in  doubling  the  amount  of  silver.  The  covetous 
liar  has  no  room  for  generosity. 

IV.  The  success  of  the  lie.  The  falsehood  has  thriven  ;  to  deceive  has  been 
found  to  be  the  short  road  to  wealth ;  to  insult  God,  to  defame  his  work,  to 
misrepresent  Elisha,  and  to  plunder  Naaman.  These  things  have  *'  paid,"  as 
men  say.  It  is  this  kind  of  thing  that  is  enough  to  shake  a  feeble  faith,  to  see 
the  wicked  in  great  power.  Gehazi  had  gotten  his  wealth,  but  what  could  he 
do  with  it  ?  He  hid  it,  hoarded  it  up  for  a  few  hours,  and  then  the  judgment 
came.  He  got  his  money  like  Achan,  he  hid  it  like  Achan,  and  God  troubled 
him  as  he  troubled  Achan.  This  is  the  life  of  those  who  are  greedy  of  gain. 
It  is  like  sowing  the  barren  sea.  We  can  only  hoard  earth's  gain,  or  hide  it 
away,  or  spend  it  on  the  world  that  passes  away,  for  a  few  hours,  and  then  God 
must  come,  and  judgment  must  begin. — C,  W.  P, 

One  Man's  JBlessino  Anotheb  Man's  Cuese  (verses  25-27). 

Gehazi  has  to  face  that  from  which  a  liar  never  escaped,  and  a  false  tongue 
never  was  delivered— even  detection,  exposure,  shame,  and  everlasting  contempt. 
The  whole  transaction  had  been  decided  on  so  quickly,  and  carried  out  so  easily, 
that  the  probabilities  were  all  in  his  favour,  and  warranted  his  hope  that  having 
gained  his  wealth  by  a  bold  stroke  he  would  be  able  to  keep  it  by  effrontery. 
I.  Lying  anil  false  ways  of  earthly  p^os^perity  always  leave  out  God.  Liars  and 
deceivers  ignore  God's  interest  in  their  life,  God's  knowledge  of  their  plans  and 
schemes,  and  the  execution  of  them.  And  in  their  apparently  untroubled  doing 
without  God  these  men  and  their  actions  become  most  hurtful  stumbling-blocks 
to  many  tender  souls.  Oh,  guard  in  your  daily  actions  against  this  perilous 
thought,  this  most  hurtful  habit  of  ignoring  God,  and  his  knowledge  of  your 
ways  1  Let  us  take  the  word  of  God  as  a  "  wholesome  "  blame  to  ourselves, 
and  as  a  wise  correction  of  many  shameful  things  in  our  daily  life.  Let  us 
really  and  solemnly  believe  in  God's  omnisicence,  not  as  a  theological  article  only, 
but  as  a  matter  for  daily  life  and  care  ;  and  let  us  try  to  cultivate  the  ever- 
present  sense  that  God  knows  all  our  ways,  and  understands  our  hearts  with 
their  pitiful  vileness.  Yea,  let  not  this  beget  terror  and  horror,  like  that  of 
the  prisoner  in  his  cell,  who,  having  been  condemned  to  have  some  one  day  and 
night  watching  him  through  a  hole  in  the  prison  door,  became  haunted  and 
horrified  by  the  eye  that  was  ever  looking  at  him  ;  but,  rather,  let  us  gladly 
believe  that  "the  Lord  has  searched  us,  and  known  us;  "  that  He  ''understands 
our  thoughts  afar  off ;  "  and  let  us  bare  and  open  ourselves  to  the  Infinite 
Searcher  of  hearts.  II.  They  who  will  not  do  this,  will  have  to  prove  the 
experience  of  Gehazi,  that  one  sin,  one  lie,  makes  others  easier  and  worse.  Gehazi 
presumed  that  Elisha  was  ignorant  of  his  doings,  and  when  he  went  in  and  was 
asked,  "  Whence  coraest  thou  ?"  he  had  his  answer  ready,  "Thy  servant  wont 
nowhither."  The  lie  came  from  him  easily  and  readily,  for  he  had  prepared 
himself  beforehand;  and  the  lie  he  had  told  to  JN'aaman  trained  him  to  insult, 
by  deceiving,  his  master.  The  way  to  perdition  is  downliill,  on  a  slippery  way, 
with  a  descent  that  is  ever  quickening.  The  first  step  down  gives  us  impetus, 
and  every  after  step  is  easier  to  the  soul  that  is  going  down  away  from  the 
light.  One  act  of  lying  or  deceiving  needs  another,  and  begets  its  own  kind 
until  the  liar  deceives  himself,  imagining  himself  to  be  secure,  when  he  is  on 
the  edge  of  perdition,  and  thinking  his  schemes  are  all  doing  well,  when  "  He 
that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  laughs  at  them,  and  the  Lord  has  them  in  derision." 
In  thus  leading  to  a  vile,  false  security  of  self-deception,  lying  becomes  its  owa 
enemy  and  judgment.     Though   others   may   be  hoodwinked,    and  conscience 

447 


OHAP.v.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


may  be  blindfolded,  so  that  rigbt  and  wrong  are  not  clearly  discernible,   yet 
deception  must  end  somewhere.     Somewhere,  and  with  some  one,  a  lie  must  be 
of  no  use,  be  wasted  breath  and  ruinous  sin.     It  is  of  no  use  with  God ;  it 
stops  at  the  throne  of  God ;  there  it  must  stand  revealed ;  and  we  have  yet  to 
see  whether  the  boldness  of  earth's  deceptions  will  be  continued  there.     Who 
shall  be  bold  in  the  day  of  God  ?     Certainly  not  the  false  man.     III.   GeJiazi'a 
exposure  and  shame  come  noAv  before  us.     How  soon  the  scheme  came  to  an  end, 
and  such  an  end !     How  soon  the  bubble  burst !     Gehazi  had  deceived  IS'aaman 
and  had    gotten   his    money,   but  he    had  misled  himself  much   more.     Por 
Elisha's  spirit  had  been  with  him,  and  it  is  notable  that  Elisha  says,  that  from 
the  moment  in  which  Gehazi  began  to  deceive  I^aaman,  he  knew  the  whole.     It 
is  not  a  light  thing  to  God  when  we  allow  ourselves  to  glide  into  an  iniquity, 
but  it  must  be  and  is  before  God  a  much  viler  thing  when,  in  addition  to  wrong- 
ing our  own  souls,  we  hurt  and  sin  against  others.     Sin   has  been  vile  enough 
when,  in  cases  that  have  come  before  our  law  courts,  men  have  lied,  and  forged, 
and  perjured  themselves ;  the  outrage  on  truth  has  been  bad,  but  when  widows 
and  orphans  and  others  have  been  ruined  by  trusting  their  money  to  such  men, 
has  there  not  risen  a  cry  to  God,  a  cry  clamorous  as  that  of  Abel's  unexpiated 
blood?    Samuel  Eutherford  spoke  tenderly  yet  terribly  when  he  said,  '^  I  find 
it  would  be  no  art,  as  I  see  now,   to   make  hypocrisy  a  goodly  web,  and 
to   go  through  the  market  as   a  saint  among  men,  and  yet  steal  quietly  to 
hell  without   observation,    so   easy  it  is  to   deceive  men.     Men  see    but   as 
men,  but  to  be   approved  of  God  (may  I  add  in  business?)  is   no  ordinary 
mercy."     Gehazi  got    Naaman's  money;  would  that   we  all  in   our  trading 
and  toil  had   the  spirit  that  would  lay  all  gains  before  God,  saying.  Lord, 
whose  money  have  1  ?     IV.  £lisha\<i  patriotism  cried  out  against   Gehazi' 8  sin, 
''  Is  it  a  time  to  receive  money  and  garments  and  oliveyards,  and  vineyards  and 
sheep,  and  oxen,  and  menservants,  and  maidservants  ?  "     This  protest  is  based 
not  only  on  Elisha's  desire  that  jN'aaman's   cure  should  be  from  beginning  to 
end  the  evident  work  of  the  free  grace  and  mercy  of  the  God  of  Israel,  but  rises 
also  from  the  condition  of  Israel  as  a  nation  at  that  time.     It  was  a  time  of  strife 
and  care,  of  war  and  rumour  of  war,  in  which  everyone  ought  to  have  been 
ready  for  the  call  of  self-sacrifice,  and  for  the  encouragement  of  self-denying 
motives  for  the  sake  of  the  time  and  the  fatherland.     During  all  the  period  of  war 
and  siege  and  famine  of  which  you  may  read  in  the  next  chapter,  Elisha  was 
the  leader  of  the  patriotic  and  no-surrender  party  in  Samaria.     He  it  was  who 
encouraged  the  people  to  resist  even  to  the  uttermost ;  and  even  when  the  city 
was  so  reduced  that  women  ate  their  own  children,  and  the  king  sent  a  man  to 
strike  off  Elisha's  head  as  the  leader  of  the  resisting  party,  Elisha  still  kept  the 
gates  of  the  city  shut  against  a  surrender.     Knowing  the  vigorous  patriotism  of 
this  man  of  God,  his  readiness  for  self-devotion,  we  may  well  and  easily  under- 
stand Elisha's  detestation  of  Gehazi's  conduct  when  all  that  he  seemed  to  wish 
for  was  the  increase  of  his  money  and  the  accumulation  of  hoarded  wealth.     It 
was  not  a  time  to  receive  money,  and  pander  by  false  ways  to  the  lust  for 
gain,  though  there  are  men  who,  in  any  crisis  of  a  nation  or  society  or  religion, 
will  put  the  claims  of  self-intcrcvst  in  the  foreground,  and  judge  only  under  the 
impulse  of  insatiable  appetite  for  wealth.     The  patriot  as  well  as  the  prophet 
spi  aks  to  us  here,  and  his  word  declares  that  a  man  is  required  by  the  condition 
of  his  country  and  the  state  of  the  times  in  which  he  lives  to  forbid  himself 
any  gain,  to  deny  himself  any  advance,  that  may  involve  him  in  meanness  and 
sinfulness.     With  broader  meaning  also,  out  of  which  all  other  special  applica- 
tions come,  we  must  learn  from  this  that  the  Christian  man  is  required  to  govern 
all  his  life  by  such  a  feeling  as  this  of  Elisha,  that  time  on  earth  is  to  bo  passed 
in  the  actual  subordination  of  earthly  gains  of  money,  or  rich  dress,   or  pro- 
perty, or  social  status.     The  present  time  is  a  time  for  honest  toil  and  labour  in 
the  fear  of  God  and  the  love  of  Jesus ;  but  not  for  aiming  at  the   miscalled 
448 


BOMtLETIG  GOMMEM'ART:  KINGS.  Ouap.  y. 


"  goods "  of  this  world.  Y.  Now,  coming  to  the  last  of  this  history,  we  see 
Gehazi  pierced  through  with  many  sorrows.  He  had  sought  his  good  here,  but 
with  Naaman's  money  he  got  his  leprosy  too.  The  blessing  of  the  Syrian 
became  the  curse  of  the  servant  of  the  man  of  God.  Let  us  get  this  matter 
close  to  ourselves.  The  day  of  God,  we  may  fear,  will  show  many  who  have 
blighted  themselves,  marked  themselves  with  a  curse  by  their  part  in  connection 
with  God's  word  ;  many  who  have  helped  to  do  good,  but  therein  doomed  them- 
selves by  the  spirit  that  they  have  allowed  to  grow  on  the  woik.  It  is  not  a 
light  thing  to  assume  leadership  in  the  Lord,  or  eldership  in  His  work,  for  if 
we  are  hurtful  in  these  things j  who  shall  heal  the  hurt  ? 

•  For  what  shall  heal,  when  holy  service  banes  ? 
Or  who  may  guide 
O'er  desert  plains 

Thy  lov'd,  yet  sinful  people  wandering  wide^ 
If  Aaron's  hand,  unshrinking,  mould 
An  idol  form  of  earthly  gold  ?" 

"What  shall  save  whenbeing  an  instrument  of  good  is  made  its  own  curse  by  any 
soul  ?  This  doom  of  Gehazi  is  prophetic  of  all  uncleansed  sin  and  its  miserable 
end.  Any  unrepented  wrong  against  man  or  God  must  come  back  to  the  wrong- 
doer. Sin  that  we  will  not  let  Christ  wash  away  must  ''  find  us  out,"  for  it  is 
our  sin,  our  own  ghastly  belonging  for  ever  and  ever.  We  are  its  author,  owner, 
and  home  for  ever.  We  raise  a  demon  that  we  cannot  lay  but  by  taking  it  home  to 
ourselves.  Unpardoned — that  is,  unrepented — sin  is  as  the  unclean  spirit  of  which 
the  Lord  spake  :  it  has  no  end  till  it  returns  whence  it  set  out.  We  began  with 
honour  and  degradation  in  Naaman ;  and  it  all  ends  in  this  dishonour  and  degrada- 
tion in  Gehazi.  **  He  went  out  a  leper  " — the  curse  of  God  had  fallen  on  him  by 
the  word  of  the  gentle  master  whose  work  he  had  defiled.  Eiisha's  kindliness  gave 
place  to  the  word  of  vengeance.  Oh,  remember  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
*' the  wrath  of  the  Lamb,"  and  that  when  the  gentleness  of  God,  the  Lamb  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne,  gives  way  to  judgment,  there  shall  be  found  no  place  for 
the  liar,  the  covetous,  or  any  impenitent.  In  the  free  grace  and  love  by  which 
Kaaman  was  washed,  and  purified  we  have  our  hope ;  and  in  the  outraged  love 
by  which  Gehazi  was  blighted  we  have  our  warning.  Take  both  the  hope  and 
the  warning. — C.  W.  P. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  20-24.      A  sordid   spirit.  Terse  20.     How  mighty  are  the  evil 

I.    Remains    unchanged,    though   in  inborn    lusts   of    the   human    heart! 

daily  intercourse  with  the  most  un-  Even  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  for 

selfish  nobleness.     II.  Cannot  appro-  years  enjoyed  the  society  of  the  noblest 

ciate  the  motive  that  relinquishes  a  and  most  pious  men,  who  have  heard 

single   opportunity  of    getting    gain.  and  read  the  Word  of  God  daily,  and 

III.  Deludes  itself  in  assuming  a  reli-  who  have  had  the  example  of  holy  con- 
gious  guise  for  its  basest  acts  (verse  20).  duct    daily  before   their   eyes,    lusts 

IV.  Displays  unseemly  haste  in  getting  arise,    take   possession   of  them,  and 
possession  of  coveted  treasure  (verse  carry  them  captive  (James  i.  13-15). 
21).      V.  Is  facile  in  manufacturing 

falsehood  (verse  22).  VI.  Does  not  Verse  23.  He  who  himself  thinketh 
scruple  to  take  every  advantage  of  the  no  evil,  and  is  sincere,  does  not  suspect 
generosity  of  others  (verse  23).  VII.  cunn  ng  and  deceit  in  others.  Good- 
Is  careful  to  conceal  the  extent  of  its  hearted,  noble  men,  to  whom  it  is 
hoardings  (verse  24).  more    lessed  to  give  than  to  receive, 

•  •  449 


CHAP.  V. 


BOMlLBTla  COMMENTAnY :  KINGS, 


are  easily  deceived,  and  they  follow 
the  inclination  of  their  hearts  instead 
of  examining  carefully  to  whom  they 
are  giving  their  benefactions. 

Yerse  24.  That  which  we  must 
conceal  brings  no  blessing. 

Yerses  25-27.  The  audacity  of  a 
liar.  I.  Stands  unabashed  in  the 
holiest  presence.  II.  Under  the  neces- 
sity of  adding  lie  to  lie.  III.  Un- 
expectedly exposed.  lY.  Does  not 
escape  signal  punishment. 

Yerse  25  compared  with  verse  27. 
**But  he  went  in  and  stood  before  his 
master.  And  he  went  out  from  his 
presence  a  leper  as  white  as  snow." 
A  never-to-be  forgotten  interview. 
I.  He  went  in  guilty,  yet  little  dream- 
ing of  detection ;  he  came  out  baffled, 
exposed,  humbled.  II.  He  went  in 
hardened,  impenitent,  and  prepared 
with  excuses;  he  came  out  smitten 
with  a  punishment  as  little  expected 
as  it  was  terrible.  III.  A  single  inter- 
view may  wither  the  happiness  of  a 
lifetime;  judgment,  though  unantici- 
pated, is  switt  and  sure.  lY.  The 
way  in  which  we  shall  come  out  of  the 
last  judgment  will  depend  upon  the 
character  with  which  we  go  in. 

Yerse  26.  It  is  folly  to  presume 
upon  sin  in  hopes  of  secrecy.  When 
thou  goest  aside  into  any  bye-path, 
does  not  thy  own  conscience  go  with 
thee?  Does  not  the  eye  of  God  go 
with  thee  ? 

—  Giving  is  kind,  and  taking  is 
courteous,  and  both  may  at  times  and 
in  some  cases  be  done  without  sin. 
There  is  much  use  of  godly  discretion, 
doubtless,  in  directing  us  when  to  open, 
when  to  shut  our  hands. — Trajpp, 

Yerse  27.  It  is  a  woful  exchange 
that  Gehazi  hath  made  with  Naaman ; 
Naaman  came  a  leper,  returned  a  dis- 
ciple. Gehazi  came  a  disciple,  re- 
turned a  leper.  !N"aaman  left  behind 
both  his  disease  and  his  money ;  Gehazi 
takes  up  both  his  money  and  his  dis- 
ease. Now  shall  Gehazi  neverlook 
upon  himself  but  he  shall  think  of 
Kaaman,  whose  skin  is  transferred 
450 


upon  him  with  those  talents,  and  shall 
wear  out  the  rest  of  his  days  in  shame, 
in  pain,  and  sorrow.  His  tears  may 
wash  off  the  guilt  of  his  sin,  but  shall 
not,  like  another  Jordan,  wash  off  his 
leprosy;  that  shall  ever  remain  as  a 
hereditary  monument  of  Divine 
severity.  Happy  was  it  for  him  if, 
while  his  skin  was  snow  white  with 
leprosy,  his  humbled  soul  was  washed 
white  as  snow  with  the  water  of  true 
repentance. — Bp,  Hall, 

—  The  leprosy  of  riches.  Gold  is 
tainted.  Strength  required  to  use  it 
aright,  A  curse  cleaves  to  it  when  it 
is  ill-gotten  or  ill-used.  This  curse 
crops  out  most  frequently  in  the 
children.  A  father  absorbed  in  the 
pursuit  of  wealth,  and  mother  absorbed 
in  fashion,  will  bring  up  corrupt  and 
neglected  children.  Parents  who  love 
gold,  fashion,  and  display,  train  their 
children  to  hold  these  the  chief  things 
in  life. 

—  As  I^aaman  was  a  living  monu- 
ment of  the  saving  might  and  grace  of 
Jehovah,  so  Gehazi  was  a  monument 
of  the  retributive  justice  of  the  Holy 
One  in  Israel ;  a  living  warning  and 
threat  for  the  entire  people.  By  his 
conversion  Naaman  was  taken  up  into 
God's  community  of  redemption  in 
Israel ;  by  his  unfaithfulness  and 
denial  of  this  God,  Gehazi  brings 
down  upon  himself  the  punishment 
which  excludes  him  from  the  society 
of  the  prophet-disciples  and  of  the 
entire  covenant  people.  AsKaaman's 
cure  and  conversion  was  a  physical 
prophecy  that  God  will  have  pity  upon 
the  heathen  also,  and  will  receive  him 
into  His  covenant  of  grace,  so  Gehazi's 
leprosy  prophesied  the  rejection  of  the 
people  of  Israel  who  should  abandon 
the  covenant  of  grace  and  persevere  in 
apostasy  (Matt.  viii.  11,  12;  xxi.  43). 
— Lange, 

—  Let  not  the  punishment  of  Gehazi 
be  thought  too  severe.  Important 
principles  were  involved  in  his  con- 
duct, for  it  was  a  time  when  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  sacred  office  needed 
to  observe  the  greatest  caution  against 
the  spirit  of  worldliness.  Gehazi's 
acts  on  this  occasion  were  a  complica- 
tion of  wickedness.    He  showed  con* 


HOMILETtG  COMMENTARl :  KIKGS.  chap.  vi. 


tempt  fortlie  judgment  of  his  master  exhibition  of  the  terrible  consequences 
in  the  matter  of  receiving  gifts  ;  he  of  human  sinfulness.  Gehazi's  poste- 
meanly  misrepresented  the  prophet  by  rity,  innocent  of  their  father's  sins, 
making  him  ask  for  what  Naaman  had  but,  like  many  others,  they  were  corn- 
just  heard  him  most  positively  refuse ;  polled  to  bear  the  consequences  of 
he  invented  a  false  story  to  blind  the  ancestral  crimes.  That  thousands  of 
eyes  of  I^aaman ;  and,  finally,  told  a  innocents  are  subjected  to  suffering 
miserable  lie  in  the  hope  of  escaping  because  of  the  sins  of  others  is  a  fact 
detection  from  Elisha.  Add  to  all  this  which  none  can  deny.  Why  this  is 
the  foul  spirit  of  CO vetousness  that  actu-  permitted  under  the  government  of 
ated  him  through  all  this  evil  course,  an  all- wise  God  is  a  question  which 
and  his  curse  will  not  appear  too  He  has  not  seen  fit  fully  to  answer. — 
great.  The  extending  of  his  curse  to  Whedon, 
his  children  after  him  is  but  another 


CHAPTER  YI. 
ELISHA    AND    THE    SYRIAN    INVASION. 

Oritioal  and  Explanatory  Notes. — ^Verse  2.  Take  thence  every  man  a  beam— The 

wooded  baDks  of  the  Jordan  would  furnish  timber  readily  ;  probably  Bethel  or  Jericho. 
Although,  evidently,  the  students  of  Ehsha  were  of  a  humble  character^  and  he  offered  them 
but  few  mdulgenees  and  delicacies,  yet  their  number  grew  so  as  to  need  a  larger  home,  or  a 
more  commodious  lecture-hall.  Verses  8,  9.  In  such  a  place  shall  be  my  camp,  i.e.,  shall  t/e 
hide  yourselves — Probably  the  word  here  is  from  the  .-ame  root  as  in  verse  9,  where  it  is  ren- 
dered, For  thither  the  Syrians  are  come  down,  i.e.,  there  the  Syrians  hide  themselves  ;  or  the 
two  words  may  have  as  their  roots  respectively  T^^'H  and  JIH^  ?  but  the  word  in  verse  8 

-  T  -  T 

occurs  only  there  in  that  form  throughout  the  Bible.  Verse  12.  Elisha  .  .  telleth  .  . 
the  words  thou  speakest  in  thy  bedchamber — Elisha  apprised  king  Jehoram  of  the  designs  oi 
the  Syrian  king,  who  thereby  was  enabled  to  anticijiate  and  defeat  his  guerilla  attacks. 
Verse  18.  Behold  he  is  in  Dothan — In  a  narrow  pass  through  mountains,  on  the  caravan  road 
from  Gilead  to  Egypt,  twelve  miles  north  of  Samaria,  in  the  Esdraelon  plain.  Verse  17.  The 
mountain  was  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire — For  in  this  case,  and  in  contrast  with  the 
mere  "horses  and  chariots"  (verse  16)  of  the  Syrian  army,  this  was  d^  fiery  host,  t^J^,  denoting 

their  supernatural  and  divine  origin,  for  it  is  the  symbol  of  Deity.  Verse  19.1  will  bring  you 
to  the  man  whom  ye  seek — This  was  an  evasion  for  a  good  purpose,  and  not  an  untruth,  for 
Elisha  did  bring  them  to  him,  vanquished  and  grateful ;  in  the  sense  of  having  won  them  to 
him,  capturing  them  in  the  meshes  of  kindness,  instead  of  their  capturing  him  in  hatred  and 
veng<  ance.  Verse  25.  A  great  famine  in  Samaria — The  high  prices  of  revolting  articles  of 
fof)d  is  given  to  show  the  extremes  of  distress  to  which  the  people  were  driven.  An  ass's 
head— Regarded  as  unclean  food,  yet  sold  for  £5  5s.  A  cab  of  doves'  dung — A  cab  was  the 
smallest  Hebrew  dry  measure,  about  half-pint,  and  its  price  was  1 2s.  6d.  Doves*  dung  ia 
probably  the  name  for  a  kind  of  pea  or  seed,  which  was  contemptuously  so  called.  Josephus, 
however,  relates  that  in  the  seige  of  Jerusalem  by  Titu-^,  the  sewage  even  of  the  city  was 
drained,  and  the  excrements  eaten  I  Verse  27.  If  the  Lord  do  not  help  thee — Rather,  Ifay  ! 
Jehovah  help  thee  !  Verse  29.  So  we  boiled  my  son — Misery  had  culminated  in  so  abhorrent 
a  deed !  The  other  woman  had  hid  her  son.  not  to  consume  it,  but  to  shield  it  from  such  a  fate. 
Verse  30.  Sackcloth  within  upon  his  flesh — Visible  under  his  torn  outer  garments  he  wears 
the  penitential  robe  of  sackcloth.  But  in  his  case  it  showed  no  humiliation  of  spirit  before  God ; 
it  was  but  as  the  phylacteries  of  the  Pharisees.  His  imprecation  on  Elisha  shows  his  evil  dis- 
position to  be  unsubdued.  He  blamed  not  himself,  but  the  prophet,  as  Ahab  did  Elijah 
(1  Kings  xviii.  17).  Verse  32.  Son  of  a  murderer — By  descent,  the  son  of  Ahab ;  and  in  dis- 
position like  him  (1  Kings  xxi.  19).  Hold  him  fast  at  the  door — Keep  him  off  with  the  f^oor, 
i  e.y  by  pressing  against  it.  Is  not  the  sound  of  his  master's  feet  behind  him?— t.^.,  of  the 
king's  feet,  who  would  impetuously  follow  on  the  heels  of  his  messenger.  Elisha  urges  the 
elders  not  to  let  the  king's  executioners  enter  at  once,  but  detain  him  till  the  king  himself 
arrives.    Verse  33.  The  messenger  came  down— For  "  messenxer,"  Ewald  and  Grata  read 

451 


OuAi'.  vi.  ItOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


**hinff*'  and  the  sense  requires  this.  Douhtless  he  would  he  admitted  to  the  prophet's  pre- 
sence ;  and  as  he  meets  E'isha  he  utters  a  cry  full  of  despair,  in  which  he  confesses  that  the 
Lord's  hand  is  against  him,  and  that  he  sees  now  no  hope  of  deliverance  from  the  prevailint^ 
distress  ;  yet  in  his  cry  of  despair  there  is  a  tremulous  suggestion  of  possible  help  from  the 
Lord  he  had  incensed. — ^W.  H,  J. 


BOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-7. 

The  Divine  Sympathy  for  Little  Sorkows. 

The  miracle  recorded  in  this  paragraph  presents  a  striking  contrast  to 
that  which  was  wrought  on  behalf  of  Naaman.  In  the  case  of  the 
great  Syrian  captain  his  cure  was  a  public  display  of  Divine  power 
and  mercy,  and  served  to  extol  the  God  of  Israel  among  the  nations. 
It  was  a  great  work,  wrought  upon  a  great  personage,  and  would  become 
the  talk  and  marvel  of  a  great  and  populous  nation.  The  miracle  we 
are  now  considering  was  of  a  humbler  character,  and  taught  a  different 
lesson.  An  obscure  and  nameless  prophet  of  Jericho  is  the  subject  of 
Divine  compassion,  and  the  Divine  power  is  put  forth  in  connection  with  the 
humblest  and  most  insignificant  affairs  of  human  life  and  toil.  The  omnipotence 
which  startles  a  world  with  its  wonders  is  also  available,  in  the  most  modest 
and  unobtrusive  form,  for  the  relief  of  genuine  distress.  Of  this  class  of 
Elisha's  wonderful  works,  this  is  the  last  one  recorded,  and  makes  a  fitting 
conplement  to  his  other  miracles  of  blessing.  The  healing  of  the  waters  of 
Jericho,  the  increase  of  the  widow's  oil,  the  raising  of  the  Shunammite's  son, 
the  healing  of  the  poisoned  pottiige,  the  multiplying  of  the  loaves,  and  the 
healing  of  Naaman,  all  had  more  direct  reference  to  the  wants  of  families  or 
societies,  and  did  not  so  much  enter  into  the  particular  anguish  of  one  single 
heart  as  did  this.  This  rt*/eving  of  a  comparatively  little  loss  and  that  of  a 
single  individual,  give  assurance  that  Divine  providence  will  work  for  the 
comfort  of  one  suffering  heart  as  well  as  for  the  interests  of  societies  or 
families  ;  and  shows  that  sorrows  which  we  may  think  of  little  moment  receive 
great  attention  from  Him  who  numbers  the  hairs  of  our  head.  It  presents  a 
touching  and  suggestive  picture  of  the  Divine  sympathy  for  little  sorrows.   Note — 

I.  That  the  Divine  sympathy  is  interested  in  the  temporal  comfort  of  the 
good  (verse  1-4).  The  school  of  the  prophets  had  outgrown  its  accommoda- 
tion, and  Elisha  was  consulted  as  to  a  more  commodious  dwelling.  The 
disciples,  not  content  with  simply  gaining  the  consent  of  their  revered  teacher 
to  the  undertaking,  prevailed  upon  him  to  accompany  them.  Elisha  repre- 
sented the  Divine  interest  and  intention  in  the  work.  God  is  not  indifferent 
to  the  temporal  welfare  and  happiness  of  His  people.  He  looks  down 
sympathizingly  on  a  good  man,  struggling  with  straitened  circumstances,  or 
upon  a  church  making  efforts  for  extension  in  the  midst  of  poverty  and  perse- 
cution. He  ensures  the  comfort  of  the  good  irrespective  of  external 
surroundings.  Riches  and  poverty  are  more  in  the  heart  than  in  the  hand ; 
he  is  wealthy  who  is  contented,  while  the  disconted  millionnaire  is  poor  indeed. 
The  Lord  bestows  upon  His  people  the  uupurchasable  blessing  of  contentment 
which  fills  up  all  the  chinks  of  desire  as  the  molten  metal  fills  up  the  minutest 
cavity  in  the  mould. 

II.  That  the  Divine  sympathy  does  not  overlook  the  individual  in  the 
many  (verse  5).     There  was  a  number  of  workers  in  the  forest,  all  engaged  in 

452 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  Oua^.  iri. 


the  same  occupation — felling  timber  for  the  house  of  the  prophets  ;  but  there 
was  one  only  of  the  number  who  specially  arrested  the  Divine  notice,  and 
called  forth  the  Divine  power,  and  he  was  unfortunate  and  distressed.  Man 
often  loses  sight  of  the  individual  in  the  multitude,  but  Jehovah  never.  It  i3 
easy  for  us  to  sympathize  with  a  nation,  and  shed  tears  over  its  sufferings  and 
sorrow^s,  while  we  have  no  particular  interest  in  any  one  member  of  the  nation. 
Jehovah  cares  for  the  whole  human  race,  by  caring  for  every  individual 
member  of  it.  And  if  there  is  one  who  more  quickly  than  another  attracts 
the  Divine  sympathy,  it  is  the  unfortunate  and  suffering.  The  tramp  and 
bustle  of  the  crowd  could  not  deafen  the  ear  of  Jesus  to  the  cry  of  blind 
Bartimeus.  The  unseen  touch  by  trembling,  but  believiu'^  fingers,  of  the 
fringe  of  his  robe,  awoke  a  sympathetic  response  in  tlie  Saviour's  heart,  and 
the  sufferer  for  years  was  in  a  moment  healed.  Amid  the  thousands  of  war- 
like Syrians  who  surrounded  the  city  of  Dothan  (verse  14),  the  Lord  did  not 
forget  the  solitary  Elisha,  but  provided  for  his  rescue  and  safety.  It  is  with 
significant  emphasis  the  psalmist  declares  a  truth  which  is  being  constantly 
exemplified :  "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him,  and  saved  him 
out  of  all  his  troubles  "  (Psa.  xxxiv.  6). 

III.  That  the  Divine  sympathy  does  not  hesitate  to  exert  miraculous 
power  to  alleviate  what  may  seem  the  little  sorrows  of  life  (verses  6,  7).  It 
might  appear  a  trifling  matter  to  lose  the  iron  head  of  an  axe,  but  to  this  poor 
prophet  it  was  a  real  and  serious  loss.  It  was  not  only  that  he  was  prevented 
taking  his  share  in  helping  his  fellow-workers,  but  it  was  the  loss  of  borrowed 
property  which  he  had  no  possible  means  of  replacing.  This  to  a  conscientious 
mind  would  be  torture  enough,  and  would  exalt  what  might  seem  a  small 
trouble  into  a  great  one.  But  with  our  God  these  are  no  little  things.  What 
we  regard  as  the  little  cares  and  sorrows  of  the  poor  may  have  a  magnitude 
in  God's  eye  as  great  as  the  cares  of  empire  and  the  afflictions  of  princes.  The 
loss  of  the  axe  was  to  the  hapless  borrower  a  calamity  greater  than  would 
have  been  to  Naaman  the  loss  of  all  the  treasures  he  had  brought  from 
Damascus.  The  sorrow  was  not  too  insignificant  to  evoke  the  Divine 
sympathy,  and  the  exertion,  through  the  prophet  Elisha,  of  miraculous  power 
for  its  assuagement.  The  greatness  of  God  appears  in  the  minute  attention  and 
finish  that  he  gives  to  little  things.  The  tiniest  flower,  the  smoothly-rounded 
pebble,  the  geometrically-shaped  snowflake,  the  delicately-tinted  ocean-shell, 
each  bears  witness  to  the  infinite  care  and  artistic  touch  of  the  Divine  hand. 
The  smallest  troubles  of  humanity  are  not  unnoticed.  The  tear  quickly  dashed 
away,  the  half-suppressed  sigh,  the  silent  hidden  anguish  of  the  heart, 
\)Yv^%  down  the  helping  arm  of  God  to  the  soul  that  appeals  to  Him — the  arm 
which  is  as  gentle  in  its  soothing  ministrations  as  it  is  mjghty  in  its  terrible 
vengeance. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  There  is  nothing  too  insignificant  for  the  Divine  notice,  2.  What 
may  seem  little  sorrows  to  others  are  great' enough  to  the  sufferer,  '6,  We  should 
carry  every  troullCy  however  minutCy  to  Qod, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Ve  es  1-7,  The  prosperity  of  the  man.  8.  Demands  harmonious  co- 
Church.  1.  Advances,  notwithstand-  operation  among  all  Christian  workers. 
ing  abounding  wickedness  and  per-  4.  Receives  the  divine  sanction  and 
secution.     2.  Often  results  from  the  blessing. 


earnestness  and  diligence  of  one  good 


46d 


OfiAP.  VI, 


EOMILBTIG  GOMMENTART:  KINGS. 


Verse  1.  There  was  no  loss  of 
Gehazi ;  when  he  was  gone  the 
prophets  increased.  An  ill  man  in  the 
Church  is  but  like  some  shrubby  tree 
in  a  garden,  whose  shape  keeps  better 
plants  from  growing.  The  kings  of 
Israel  had  succeeded  in  idolatry  and 
hate  of  sincere  religion,  yet  the 
prophets  multiply.  Persecution  en- 
larges the  bounds  of  the  Church. 
These  tempestuous  showers  bring  up 
flowers  in  abundance.  The  Church, 
like  the  palm  tree,  the  more  it  is 
pressed  with  weight,  the  more  it 
fructifies ;  like  camomile,  it  flourishes 
when  most  trodden ;  like  the  lily,  it 
grows  by  its  own  tears. 

Verses  5-7.  The  borrowed  axe. 
I.  The  loan.  1.  Kindly  lent  to  men 
in  need ;  probably  with  many  promises 
on  the  one  side,  and  many  injunctions 
on  the  other.  2.  A  very  valuable 
loan  at  that  time.  Manufacture  of 
metals  imperfectly  understood  then ; 
manufactured  articles  were,  therefore, 
more  expensive,  and  more  difiicult  to 
obtain,  3.  A  willingness  to  lend 
shows  a  kind  heart;  sympathy  with 
the  object  and  purposes  of  the 
borrower  should  not,  therefore,  be 
abused.  A  willingness  to  lend,  but 
never  to  borrow,  which  is  the  proud 
boast  of  some,  is  a  pitiful  spirit. 
Sometimes  to  give  one  the  opportunity 
of  lending,  is  to  do  him  good  by 
exercising  his  benevolence  and  good- 
will. II.  The  loss.  1.  Accidental. 
Not  altogether  void  of  thoughtless- 
ness. Should  have  taken  care  that 
the  head  was  more  firmly  united  to 
the  haft,  or  that  the  blow  was 
delivered  in  another  direction.  2. 
Serious.  Could  not  be  easily 
replaced.  Axe  heads  scarce  and  ex- 
pensive, and  the  borrower  poor  ;  but 
the  most  serious  part  of  the  loss  was 
the  moral  effect  of  it.  The  non-return 
of  loans  makes  lenders  chary  of  assist- 
ing those  who  need  such  help. 
People  who  are  remiss  in  returning, 
in  due  time  and  undamaged,  borrowed 
property,  little  think  what  injury  they 
do  to  benevolent  and  neighbourly 
feeling,  or  what  damage  they  infiict 
454 


upon  others.  III.  The  recovery,  1, 
He  who  had  lost  it  did  not  treat  the 
matter  as  of  no  importance.  His  con- 
cern a  good  sign.  Would  there  were 
more  of  it  in  the  world.  2.  He 
noticed  where  it  fell,  looked  anxiously 
at  the  water,  probably  sounded  it, 
found  it  deep  and  turbid.  Could  not 
find  or  recover  it.  He  went  in  dismay 
to  the  prophet.  3.  Elisha  compre- 
hended the  situation  at  once.  The 
axe  must  be  recovered  for  monetary, 
and,  above  all,  moral  reasons.  He 
was  not  the  man  to  work  miracles  on 
every  pretext.  This  was  no  slight 
matter ;  no  one  should  have  reason  to 
regret  he  had  aided,  even  by  a  loan, 
in  the  building  of  the  prophets' 
college.  Confidence  in  the  prophets 
should  not  be  damaged  by  the  loss  of 
the  axe.  Learn  : — 1.  To  be  conscien- 
tious in  the  matter  of  borrowing  and 
lending.  2.  To  be  more  anxious  con" 
cerning  the  safety  of  borrowed  articles 
than  even  of  our  own. — The  Class  and 
Desk. 

Verse  5.  Genuine  honesty.  1  An 
evidence  of  true  religion.  2.  Is 
found  among  the  poorest.  3.  Is 
scrupulous  in  caring  for  and  returning 
that  which  is  borrowed.  4.  Is  deeply 
distressed  in  losing  what  belongs  to 
another.  5.  Will  use  all  possible 
means  to  restore  what  is  lost. 

Verse  6.  O  God  I  how  easy  it  is 
for  thee,  when  this  hard  and  heavy 
heart  of  mine  is  sunk  down  into  the 
mud  of  the  world,  to  fetch  it  up  again 
by  thy  mighty  word,  and  cause  it  to 
float  upon  the  streams  of  life,  and  to 
see  the  face  of  heaven  again. — Bishop 
Ball. 

Verse  7.  God's  might  and  good- 
ness are  revealed  in  the  smallest  detail, 
as  well  as  in  the  greatest  combination. 
He  helps  in  what  are,  apparently,  the 
smallest  interests  of  the  individual,  as 
well  as  in  the  greatest  affairs  of  entire 
nations ;  and  He  rules  with  His  grace 
especially  over  those  who  keep  His 
covenant,  and  turn  to  Him  in  all  the 
necessities  of  life.  That  is  the  great 
truth  which  this  little  story  proclaimSi 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CHAP,  tl  . 


and,  jusl  for  the  sake  of  this  truth,  it 
was  thought  worthy  to  be  inserted  in 
the  history  of  the  theocracy.  The 
restoration  of  the  axe,  whereby  aid 
was  given  to  the  prophet-disciple  in 
his  need,  strengthened  all  the  others 
in  the  faith  that  the  God  in  whose 
honour  they  were  erecting  the 
building  was  with  them,  and  would 
accompany    their    work     with    his 


blessing.     They  worked  now  the  more 
zealously  and  gladly. — Lanqe. 

—  It  often  happens  that  the  Lord 
takes  from  us  some  possession,  or 
appears  to  do  so,  only  with  the  purpose 
of  returning  it  after  a  longer  or  shorter 
time  in  some  unexpected  way,  that  it 
may  thus  come  to  us  as  a  gift  of  Divine 
love,  and  a  pledge  of  His  grace. — 
Krummacher. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  8-17. 
The  Triumphs  of  Prater. 

We  have  seen  the  power  of  Elisha  in  the  working  of  miracles  in  the  realm 
of  private  life,  and,  for  the  most  part,  on  behalf  of  the  individual.  Now  we 
are  to  witness  the  beneficent  power  of  the  prophet  as  it  operates  in  the  wider 
sphere  of  public  and  national  life.  He  appears  as  the  seer,  the  man  of  super- 
natural insight,  the  prophet  who  is  in  habitual  and  prayerful  communion  with 
God,  the  adviser  and  friend  of  a  perplexed  sovereign  and  a  harassed  nation. 
In  him  is  a  combination  of  great  gentleness  with  great  power.  The  character 
in  which  the  history  now  reveals  him,  as  a  man  of  prayer,  may  explain  the 
source  of  his  enormous  power,  and  the  vast  range  of  his  influence.  The 
incidents  here  described  illustrate  the  triumphs  of  prayer, 

1.  Seen  in  giving  extraordinary  insight  into  the  plottings  of  the  enemy 
(verses  8-12).  Elisha  had  power  to  read  the  secret  counsels  of  the  invading 
Syrian,  and  thus  enabled  the  king  of  Israel  to  disconcert  the  plans  of  Benha- 
dad,  and  to  escape  his  ambuscades.  Prayer  intensifies  the  sensibilities  of  the 
soul,  and  makes  it  more  keenly  alive  to  the  movements  of  the  wicked  one;  it 
can  see  sights  and  hear  sounds  unperceived  by  others.  After  Elijah  had 
wrestled  with  God  in  prayer,  on  Mount  Carnal,  he  heard  **  a  sound  of 
abundance  of  rain,'*  though  others  heard  it  not.  The  sky  was  cloudless  and 
hard  as  steel,  the  earth  seamed  and  cracked,  vegetation  withered,  the  cattle 
were  perishing,  and  the  gaunt  figure  of  famine,  which  had  been  tightening  its 
grasp  upon  the  land  for  two  years  and  a  half,  was  as  pitiless  and  inflexible  as 
ever.  The  soul  that  is  quick  to  perceive  coming  good,  is  also  quick  to  detect 
coming  evil.     The  man  of  prayer  is  more  than  a  match  for  the  subtlest  adversary. 

2.  Seen  in  inspiring  a  fearless  courage  in  the  midst  of  threatened  danger 
(verses  13-16).  The  glittering  spears  and  chariots  surrounding  the  city, 
which  filled  the  servant  of  Elisha  with  so  much  alarm,  struck  no  fear  in  the 
breast  of  his  undaunted  master.  With  what  unutterable  confidence  he 
whispers  those  reassuring  words :  "  Fear  not ;  for  they  that  be  with  us  are 
more  than  they  that  be  with  them.'*  The  praying  spirit  is  ever  brave  and 
strong  in  great  emergencies.  It  was  prayer  that  sustained  Moses  when  at 
Rephidim  he  was  surrounded  by  the  mutinous  host  clamouring  for  water,  and 
threatening  to  stone  him  to  death  (Exodus  xvii.  1-4).  Before  Luther  went  to 
the  Diet  of  Worms,  where  he  expected  the  worst,  and  before  Knox  was  tried 
for  high  treason,  which  threatened  his  own  life  and  the  ruin  of  the  Reformation 
movement  in  Scotland,  they  both  found  relief  in  prayer.  When  a  steamer 
went  down  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay  a  short  time  ago,  what  enabled  the  minister 
and  his  wife  to  speak  with  such  calmness  and  hope  to  their  fellow-passengeri 

455 


CHAV.  VI.  lIOMILETiO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


and  the  crew  assembled  in  the  already  flooded  cabin,  when  they  expected  the 
next  lurch  of  the  vessel  would  be  the  last  ?  It  was  prayer.  The  solitary  praying 
prophet  felt  far  more  confidence  and  courage  than  did  Benhadad  with  all  his 

warlike  hosts. 

III.  Seen  in  giving^  the  soul  sublime  visions  of  the  nearness  and  all- 
sufficiency  of  heavenly  help  (verse  17).  The  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  were 
there  before  ;  but  they  were  not  seen  by  the  young  man,  though  they  were  seen 
by  Elisha.  Both  had  (he  ordinary  common  sense  by  which  external  objects  are 
apprehended ;  but  in  Elisha's  case  there  was  superadded  the  God-given  sense  of 
supernatural  vision.  Our  common  sense,  however  sound  and  accui  ate,  is  limited 
in  its  scope.  When  the  comet  of  1858  appeared,  an  observer  declared  that  its 
luminous  tail  was  just  four  feet  long,  while  to  the  educated  scientific  sense  it  was 
known  to  extend  for  millions  of  miles.  So  the  glories  of  the  heavenly  firmament 
are  diminished  or  altogether  hidden  to  the  ordinary  sense,  and  are  revealed  only 
to  the  eye  of  faith.  Prayer  intensifies  the  spiritual  vision,  and  the  soul  beholds 
around  it  the  shining  hosts  of  heavenly  ministrants  ready  to  do  the  bidding  of 
the  all-powerful  Jehovah. 

IV.  Seen  in  giving  power  to  baffle  and  defeat  the  foe  (verses  18-20). 
Through  the  prayer  of  Elisha  the  Syrian  host  is  smitten  with  blindness,  so  that 
they  could  not  recognise  him,  nor  the  way  in  which  he  led  tliem.  What  was 
their  astonishment  when,  the  blindness  being  removed  at  the  instance  of  the  man 
of  prayer,  they  beheld  themselves  in  the  midst  of  Samaria,  at  the  mercy  of  the 
soldiers  of  Jehoram.  The  soul  has  to  contend  with  enemies,  fierce  and  for- 
m  dable.  When  Napoleon  at  Waterloo  watched  the  tremendous  charge  of  the 
Scots  Greys,  and  witnessed  the  havoc  wrought  among  the  French  columns,  he 
exclaimed  "  How  terrible  are  these  Greys  !  '*  But  more  terrible  still  are  the 
enemies  with  which  we  have  to  fight.  Prayer  only  can  give  the  skill  and  power 
to  conquer.  Gideon  prayed,  and  though  his  army  was  reduced  from  32,000  to 
300,  he  inflicted  upon  the  Midianites  a  most  disastrous  defeat  (Judges  vi.  vii). 
Samson  prayed,  and  with  restored  strength  he  pulled  down  the  Philistian 
temple,  and  destroyed  more  of  his  own  and  the  Lord's  enemies  in  his  death 
than  he  had  done  in  his  lifetime. 

Y.  Seen  in  treating  a  conquered  and  distressed  enemy  with  clemency  and 
kindness  (verses  20-23).  The  king  of  Israel,  seeing  the  Syrians  thus  brought 
into  his  power,  was  anxious  at  once  to  despatch  them.  Perhaps  he  remembered 
Ahab's  great  mistake  in  not  slaying  the  Syrian  king  when  in  his  power,  and 
for  which  mistake  he  was  sternly  rebuked  by  one  of  the  prophets  (1  Kings  xx. 
35-43).  But  the  man  of  prayer  interposed  between  the  fury  of  the  king  and 
his  captives  ;  instead  of  being  slaughtered,  they  were  hospitably  entertained 
and  then  released,  refreshed  and  unscathed.  There  are  enemies  of  the  soul 
to  whom  no  mercy  should  be  shown  ;  no  opportunity  to  crush  them  should  be 
missed.  There  are  enemies,  again,  who,  when  their  wrong  is  exposed  and 
acknowledged,  we  may  generously  forgive.  Prayer  fills  the  soul  with  sympathy 
and  mercy,  and  expands  it  with  magnanimity.  Abraham  prayed  for 
Abimelech,  and  he  and  his  house  were  healed.  Moses  prayed,  and  Miriam, 
who  was  punished  because  she  had  joined  in  the  sedition  against  her  brother, 
was  cured  of  her  leprosy, 

VI.  Seen  in  giving  rest  and  security  to  a  harrassed  nation.    "  So  the  bands 

of  Syria  came  no  more  into  the  land  of  Israel  "  (verse  23).     The  prayers  and 

wisdom  of  one  man  relieved  the  troubles  of  the  court  and  of  the  people.     The 

nation  is  often  unspeakably  indebted  to  the  prayers  of  a  faithful  few.     Hezekiab 

456 


EOMILKTIC  C031MENTART:   KINGS.  chap.  n. 


prayed  when  Rabsliekah  thundered  at  the  gates  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  Assyrians 
were  smitten  with  death  (ch.  xix.  14-36).  Ezra's  prayer  led  to  national 
reform  and  prosperity  (Ez.  ix.  x).  More  solid  good  is  wrought  in  a  nation 
by  prayer  than  by  diplomacy  or  arms. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Prayer  is  essential  to  building  up  a  great  and  injluential  moral 
character.  2.  Prayer  intensifies  the 'perceptive  and  realizing  power  of  faith,  8. 
Prayer  is  an  all-potent  agency  in  conquering  spiritual  adversaries. 


The  Vision  PERanTTED  to  Elisha*s  Servant  as  Illustrative  of  the  True 

Faith  of  the  Soul  (verse  17), 

The  chariots  and  horses  are  not  here,  as  in  the  account  of  the  ascent   of 

Elijah  a  few  chapters  before,  vehicles  for  a  glorious  passage  to  the  skies,  but 
simply  symbols  of  the  Divine  power  and  protection ;  but  in  both  passages  the 
highest  intelligences  are  represented  as  taking  shapes,  like  the  forms  in 
Ezekiel,  which  imply  that  their  true  nobility  is  always  service.  The  imma- 
terial spirits  become  cognizable  by  the  servant  of  Elisha  under  forms  best 
calculated  to  reassure  his  fainting  faith.  Fire  is  a  symbol  of  the  Godhead, 
because  fire  is  the  most  ethereal  of  the  earthly  elements.  The  gift  of  Pentecost 
sat  as  tongues  of  fire  on  the  heads  of  the  apostles.  God  is  said  by  His 
prophet  and  His  apostle  to  be  *'  a  consuming  fire."  "  The  seraph  is  properly  the 
burning  spirit."  The  horses  and  chariots  mean,  therefore,  warlike  force.  Still, 
what  theservant  sees  is  nota material,  it  is  aspiritual  reality,  taking  a  form  which 
assures  him  of  God's  sure  protection,  through  the  agencies  of  these  ministers 
of  His  who  do  His  pleasure,  and  at  a  time  when  all  was  death  to  the  eye  of  flesh. 

I.  Now,  here  we  see,  as  if  through  a  microscope,  the  act  or  process  of  faith 
in  the  human  soul.     Faith,  first  of  all,  is  not  an  act  of  the  natural  imagina- 
tion.    It  is  necessary  to  say  this,   because  a  great  many  persons   constantly 
allude  to  faith  in  terms  which  imply  that  it  is.     They  speak  of  a  person  of 
great  faith,  meaning  that  he  is  a  very  imaginative  person,  that  he  has  quite 
an  unusual  share  of  that  privileged,  that  versatile  faculty  which  does  indeed 
achieve  so  much  in  society,  so  much  for  literature,  which  is  the   very  well- 
spring  of  poetry,  which  is  the  soul,  the  genius  of  constructive  art,   but  which 
is  l(>ss  welcome  in  the  sphere  of  religious  truth,  because  its  highest  efforts 
result  in  surrounding  us  with  the  unreal,  while  investing  it  with  the  attributes 
of  reality.     When  men  speak  of  faith  as  a  vivid  and  energetic  form  of  imagina- 
tion, they  mean  to  imply  this,  without  stating  in  terms  that  they  do  so  ;  they 
mean  to   imply  that  just  as  the  poet  Virgil  projected  a  picture  of  the  nether 
world  out  of  the  immense  wealth  of  his  fancy,  so  evangelists  and  apostles  have 
traced  their  own  beautiful  pictures  of  heaven,  and  their  awful  descriptions  of 
hell  and   of  judgment,  on  the   pages  of  our  testaments,   by  the   aid  of  an 
extraordinary   variety  of   the  religious    imagination.     The   evangelists   and 
apostles,  whatever  else  they  were — I  say  it  with  reverence — were  not  poets, 
they  were  eminently  prosaic  ;  and  the  remarks  of  Rousseau  that  the  inventor 
of  the  gospel  history  must  have  been  not  less  wonderful  than  its  hero  if  he 
were  entirely  unassisted  from  above,  is  at  least  a   satisfactory  reply  to  this 
theory  of  faith  doing  the  work  of   pure  imagination.     Id  the  case  before  us 
Elisha's  servant  did  not  create,  by  an  act  of  imagination,  a  splendid  picture  in 
the  air,  after  the  manner  of  a  Milton  or  a  Rubens,  a  picture  of  fiery  beings 
circling  round  the  form  of  his  beloved,  of  his  imperilled  master.     The  thing  is 
psychologically  impossible.     He  had  his  eye  upon  the  hard  and  menacing  fact 

457 


OHAF.  n.  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS, 


before  him,  upon  the  lines  of  the  Syrian  troops  who  were  sent  to  capture  the 
prophet  his  master.  He  could,  for  the  time,  see  nothing  beyond  the  sphere  of 
dense.  His  new  power  of  seeing  the  chariots  and  horses  of  fire  sweeping 
around  Elisha  did  not  create  these  spiritual  forms  and  beings ;  there  they  were, 
whether  he  and  other  men  saw  them  or  not,  just  as  the  more  remote  planets 
were  certainly  revolving  in  their  orbits  during  the  centuries  when  our  science 
had  not  yet  reached  them  by  her  reckonings  and  telescopes.  Elisha  had  been 
just  as  much  encompassed  by  the  spirit- world  the  moment  before  his  servant 
saw  that  this  was  the  case,  as  he  was  the  moment  afterwards.  The  man's 
new  sight  could  not  create,  as  his  blindness  could  not  have  destroyed,  the  super- 
natural reality, 

n.  Nor  is  faith  only  the  conclusion,  the  final  act,  of  a  process  of  natural 
reasoning.  If  this  were  the  case,  if  faith  were  merely  the  conclusion  of  a 
syllogism,  it  would  necessarily  follow  that  all  people  with  good  undertandings 
must  necessarily  be  believers  in  Christianity.  We  know,  my  brethren,  that 
this  is  not  the  case.  We  know,  alas  !  that  many  persons  of  great  natural 
abilities,  such  as  was  Voltaire,  are  and  have  been  unbelievers ;  and  this  alone 
would  seem  to  show  that  something  besides  intelligence  is  implied  in  an  act  of 
faith.  No  man  whose  mind  was  not  impaired  could  go  through  a  proposition 
of  Euclid  and  refuse  to  assent  to  a  conclusion ;  but  many  people  do  read 
*'  Paley's  Evidences,"  or,  what  is  more  to  the  purpose,  what  St.  Paul  himself 
says  about  the  resurrection,  and  yet  do  not  admit  Paley's  and  St.  Paul's  con- 
clusion that  Christianity  comes  from  God.  If  believing  in  Christianity  were 
simply  an  affair  of  the  natural  understanding,  this  could  not  be.  It  would  be 
just  as  inevitable  to  believe  St.  Paul  as  it  is  intellectually  to  believe  Euclid. 
The  affections  and  the  will  have  a  great  deal  to  say  to  every  pure  act  of  faith. 
The  understanding  cannot  compel  faith.  The  evidence  at  the  disposal  of  the 
understanding  is  always  less  than  absolutely  mathematical ;  it  does  not  convince 
unless  the  moral  nature  is  in  such  a  condition  that  it  is  possible  for  it  to  be  con- 
vincing. What  is  it  which  makes  the  desire,  the  heart  on  the  one  side,  and  the 
evidence  at  the  disposal  of  the  understanding  on  the  other  side,  result  in  the 
complex,  in  the  perfect  act  of  faith  ?  What  is  it  which  strikes  the  sacred  spark 
which  thus  combines  the  action  of  the  understanding  and  the  yearnings  of  the 
heart  into  the  single  act  which  supersedes  while  it  combines  them? 

ni.  Faith  is,  in  the  last  resort,  the  fire  which  is  lighted  up  in  the  soul 
by  a  ray  from  Heaven,  by  a  ray  of  grace.  It  is  a  gift  from  God.  It  is  a 
fresh  gift,  which  nature  can  neither  rival  nor  anticipate.  Elisha  might  have 
insisted  upon  many  considerations  which  ought  in  reason  to  have  satisfied  his 
servant  that  God  and  His  holy  ones  were  now,  as  of  old,  near  at  hand,  that 
the  near  presence  of  the  Syrians  did  not  amount  to  a  real  reason  of  despair. 
Elisha  did  not  argue.  There  are  times  when  it  is  worse  than  useless.  Elisha 
prayed  ;  he  prayed  that  the  Lord  would  open  the  eyes  of  the  young  man  to 
see  things,  not  as  they  appear  to  sense,  but  as  they  are ;  to  see,  not  merely 
the  world  of  sense,  but  the  world  of  spirit ;  and  his  prayer  was  granted.  Reason 
can  do  very  much  for  faith.  Reason  stands  to  faith  just  as  did  the  Baptist  to 
Christ  our  Lord.  She  is  the  messenger  which  goes  before  the  face  of  faith  to 
make  ready  its  path  within  the  soul.  Reason  can  explain,  she  can  infer,  she 
can  combine,  she  can  reduce  difficulties  to  their  true  proportions,  she  can  make 
the  most  of  considerations  which  show  what,  upon  the  whole,  is  to  be  expected ; 
but  here  she  must  stop.  She  cannot  do  the  work  of  God's  grace;  she  can- 
not transfigure  the  moral  nature  so  as  to  enable  it  to  correspond  to  the  conclu- 
sions of  the  illuminated  intellect ;  she  cannot  open  the  eyes  of  the  young  man 
and  make  him  see.  If  this  last  triumph  is  to  be  achieved,  it  must  be  by  grace 
given  in  answer  to  prayer* 
468 


ROMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap,  vu 


IV.  let  US  see  in  this  history  a  remedy  against  despondency,  such  as 
good  Christians  often  feel  on  contemplating  the  state  of  the  world  at  particular 
periods.  All  seems  to  be  going  against  the  cause  of  right,  of  truth,  of  God. 
Intellectual  assailants,  political  adversaries,  all  the  passions,  all  the  prejudices, 
all  the  misapprehensions  of  an  uniegenerate  humanity  come  down  and  besiege 
the  prophet  in  Dothan.  All  might  seem  to  be  lost  again  and  again,  if  it  were 
not  that  again  and  again  the  eyes  of  the  spirit  are  opened  to  perceive  that  they 
which  are  with  as  are  more  than  they  which  are  with  them.  Courage ;  the 
unseen  is  greater  than  the  seen,  the  eternal  will  surely  outlive  the  things  of 
time.  An  act  of  faith  may  cross  the  threshold  of  the  door  which  separates  us 
from  that  world  which  is  beyond  the  senses,  and  may  at  once  correct  the 
apparent  preponderance  of  evil  by  a  vision  of  the  throne,  and  the  resources  of 
the  All-good. 

V.  And  see,  too,  in  this  history,  our  true  pattern  of  nobility.  It  has  been 
a  common  saying,  quoted  again  and  again  of  late,  to  explain  and  justify 
changes  on  the  Continent  that  have  taken  place  within  the  last  ten  years,  that 
it  is  better  to  be  the  citizens  of  a  great  state  than  the  citizens  of  a  small  one. 
It  is  better  for  many  reasons  ;  for  this  among  the  rest,  there  is  an  inspiration 
for  good,  which  comes  from  the  sense  of  wide  and  noble  fellowship,  of  high 
and  distinguished  associates  and  guardians,  which  is  denied  to  those  who  are 
members  of  a  small  society  that  have  it  not.  And  in  His  kingdom  God  has 
provided  us  with  this.  All  the  races  of  the  world  furnish  their  contributions 
to  the  universal  church.  But  the  frontier  of  sense  is  not  the  frontier  of  the 
church  of  Christ.  It  embraces  both  worlds,  the  unseen  world  as  well  as  the 
visible.  The  church  is  a  mixed  as  well  as  a  world-embracing  society,  consist- 
ing, here  of  the  faithful,  there  of  the  blessed  angels  and  of  the  spirits  of  the 
dead,  united  in  the  bonds  of  one  indissoluble  communion,  and  all  ranged  beneath 
the  throne  of  thrones,  the  throne  of  God,  the  throne  of  Jesus.  The  Syrian 
host  may  press  us  hard ;  the  host  of  temptations  and  bad  thoughts  and  bad 
acquaintances;  of  haunting  memories  ;  but  when,  at  the  voice  of  prayer,  our 
eyes  open  upon  the  realities  around  and  above  us,  we  must  remember  that  we 
have  a  destiny  before  us,  and  means  at  hand  to  prepare  for  it. 

VI.  Lastly,  we  see  here  the  secret  of  real  effective  prayer.  Why  is 
prayer,  public  prayer  especially,  in  so  many  cases  nothing  better  than  the 
coldest  of  cold,  heartless  forms?  For  two  reasons  especially.  They  enter  on 
it  without  having  any  true  knowledge  of  themselves  whatever ;  of  their  sins  and 
wants,  as  well  as  of  their  hopes  and  fears  ;  of  their  real  state  before  God,  as 
well  as  of  their  reputed  character  in  the  eyes  of  men  ;  in  a  word,  they  have  no 
true  knowledge  of  that  for  which  prayer  wins  something  like  a  remedy,  and 
thus  they  have  no  personal  interest  of  their  own  which  they  can  import  into 
and  identify  with  the  public  language  of  the  Church.  This  is  the  first  reason. 
But  there  is  a  second.  Prayer  is  so  cold  and  heartless  a  thing  in  numbers  of 
instances,  because  men  see  nothing  of  Him  to  whom  prayer  is  addressed, 
nothing  of  God,  nothing  of  Jesus,  nothing  of  the  spirit-world  around  the  throne, 
nothing  of  the  majesty,  the  beauty,  the  glory  which  encircles  God,  such  as  is 
possible,  really  possible,  to  our  finite  and  purblind  gaze — nothing  of  the 
everlasting  worship  which  surrounds  Him,  nothing  of  the  ministers  of  His  that 
do  His  pleasure.  There  are,  believe  it,  few  better  prayers  on  entering  a  church 
than  Elisha*8,  "  Lord,  open  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  see."  **  I  do  not  wish  to 
mock  Thee  by  lip  service,  I  do  not  wish  to  pile  up  my  ordinary  business 
thoughts,  or  my  thoughts  of  pleasure,  on  the  very  steps  of  Thy  throne ;  open 
mine  eyes,  then,  that  I  may  see  in  Thy  beauty,  and  in  Thy  glorious  presence  may 
lose  all  relish  which  belongs  only  to  the  things  of  time.''    It  is  when  the  soul 

459 


CHAP.  VI. 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


struggles  thus  in  an  honest  spiritual  agony  that  it  is  really  emanicipated  from 
the  tyranuy  of  sense,  and,  like  the  young  man  in  this  history,  or  rather  like  the 
dying  martyr  of  the  gospel  times,  see  the  heavens  opened,  sees  Jesus  standing 
at  the  right  hand  of  God. — Canon  Liddon,  condensed  from  Horn,  Quarterly, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Verses  8-17.  Hints  of  the  course 
of  things  in  Zion.  1.  The  revealed 
plot.  2.  The  military  expedition 
against  one  man.  3.  The  peaceful 
abode.  4.  The  cry  of  alarm.  5.  The 
unveiled  protection  from  above.— 
Krummacher* 

Verses  8-12.  The  mischief  maker. 

1.  Consults  with  kindred  spirits  who 
are  most  likely  to  carry  out  his  designs. 

2.  Delights  in  plotting  evil  against  the 
weak  and  inoffensive.  3.  Fondly 
dreams  his  schemes  are  too  cunningly 
devised  for  discovery.  4.  Is  intensely 
mortified  when  his  plans  prove  abor- 
tive. 5.  Is  first  to  suspect  his  accom- 
plices of  treachery.  6.  Cannot  tole- 
rate a  superior. 

Verse  9.  It  is  no  treason  to  bring 
crafty  and  malicious  plots  to  the  light. 
It  is  a  sacred  duty  (Acts  xxiii.  1 6). 
Beware  of  going  into  places  where 
thou  wilt  be  in  jeopardy  of  soul  and 
body.  Be  on  thy  guard  when  the 
enemy  advances. — Osiander* 

Verse  11.  When  God  brings  to 
naught  the  plots  of  the  crafty,  they 
become  enraged,  and,  instead  of  recog- 
nizing the  hand  of  God  and  humbling 
themselves,  they  lay  the  blame  upon 
other  men,  and  become  more  malicious 
and  obstinate.  He  who  does  not 
understand  the  ways  of  God  thinks 
that  he  sees  human  treason  in  what  is 
really  God's  dispensation.  "Woe  to  the 
ruler  who  cannot  trust  his  nearest 
attendants. — Sta/rke, 

Verse  12.  God-given  wisdom.  1. 
Bestowed  on  men  eminent  for  prayer 
and  obedience.  2.  Enables  man  to 
discern  the  unsuspected  secrets  of 
others.  3.  Is  more  than  a  match  for 
the  most  consummate  subtlety  of  the 
460 


wicked.     4.  Should  be  used  in  warn- 
ing and  delivering  the  innocent. 

—  Tremble  with  fear,  ye  obstinate 
sinners,  because  all  is  bared  and  dis- 
covvjred  before  His  eyes,  and  shudder 
at  the  thought  that  the  veil  behind 
which  ye  carry  on  your  works  does  not 
exist  for  Him  !  All  which  ye  plot  in 
your  secret  corners  to-day,  ye  will  find 
to-moirow  inscribed  upon  His  book ; 
and  however  secretly  and  cunningly 
ye  spin  your  web,  not  a  single  thread 
of  it  shall  escape  His  eye  ! — Krumm, 

Verses  13-16.  Moral  courage.  1. 
Is  gained  by  communion  with  Gcd. 
2.  Is  a  tower  of  strength  to  man  in 
whatever  locality  he  may  dwell.  3. 
Is  not  intimidated  by  the  most  formid- 
able host.  4.  Inspires  confidence  in 
the  timid  and  fearful.  5.  [s  conscious 
of  being  backed  by  superior  force. 

Verse  17.  The  vision  of  the  super- 
natural. 1.  Hidden  from  the  most 
highly  educated  natural  powers.  2. 
Granted  by  a  special  operation  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  on  the  human  mind.  3. 
A  dazzling  revelation  of  heavenly 
power  and  beauty.  4.  Inspires  in- 
vincible bravery  in  times  of  peril. 

—  In  answer  to  Elisha's  prayer, 
God  opened  his  spiritual  eyes,  un- 
veiled his  inner  sense,  and  lifted  him 
for  a  moment  to  the  high  plane  of 
Elisha's  supernatural  vision,  whence 
he  obtained  a  view  of  the  mighty 
creations  of  the  spiritual  world  around 
him.  This  sight  into  the  spiritual 
world  was  not  an  instance  of  halluci- 
nation, but  a  miracle  of  grace ;  an 
instance  of  that  Divine  ecstacy  or 
trance  in  which  the  holy  seers  were 
enabled  to  behold  the  visions  of  the 
supersensual  world,  and  which  con- 
sists essentially  in  this,  that  the  human 
spirit  is  seized  and  compassed  by  the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS.  chap.  ti. 


Divine   spirit  with   such    force    and  mercy  lias  made  every  provision  for 

energy,  that,    being   lifted   from   its  the  present  and  future  welfare  of  the 

natural  state,  it  becomes  altogether  a  sinner.  6.  The  Divine  clemency  should 

seeing  eye,  a  hearing  ear,  a  perceiving  disarm  hostility,   and  promote  amity 

sense,  that  takes  most  vivid  cognizance  and  peace  among  men. 

of  thin  ITS  in  either  heaven,  earth,  or 

jiell. Whedon.  Yerse   18.    The  Lord  smites  with 

Invisible  armies  guard  the  ser-  blindness  those  who  fight  against  Him, 

vants  of  God  while  they  seem  most  not  in   order   that  they  may  remain 

forsaken  of  earthly  aid,  most  exposed  blind,   but   in   order  that  they  may 

to  certain  dangers.     If  the  eyes  of  our  truly  see,  after  they  shall  have  ob- 

faith  be  as  open  as  those  of  our  sense,  to  served  how  far  they  have  strayed,  and 

see  angels  as  well  as  Syrians,  we  can-  shall  have  recognized  the  error  of  their 

not  be  appalled  with  the  most  unequal  way. 
terms    of    hostility.      Those    blessed 

spirits  are  ready  either  to  rescue  our  Yerse  23.   The  king  of  Israel  has 

bodies,  or  to  carry  up   our  souls  to  done  by  his  feast  what  he  could  not 

blessedness. — Bp.  Eall.  have  done  by  his  sword.     The  bands 

of  Syria  will  no  more  come  by  way  of 

Yerses  18-23.  The   Divine   treat-  ambush  or  incursion  into  the  bounds 

ment  of  sin.     1.  Sin  blinds  the  soul  of  Israel,     l^ever  did  a  charitable  act 

60  that  it  does  not  justly  apprehend  go  away  without  the  retribution  of  a 

the  true  character  of  what  it  sees.     2.  blessing.     In  doing  some  good  to  our 

Sin  causes  the  soul  to  wander  in  dark-  enemies,  we  do  most  good  to  ourselves, 

ness  and  error.      3.  The  wicked  are  God  cannot  but  love  in  us  this  imita- 

always  eager  to  take  advantage  of  the  tion  of  His  mercy,  who  bids  His  sun 

mistakes  of  their  opponents.     4.  God  shine,  and  His  rain  fall,  where  He  is 

spares  the  sinner,  though  he  is  com-  most  provoked ;  and  that  love  is  never 

pletely  in  His    power.      6.    Divine  fruitless. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  24-88. 

The  Horboes  of  Faminb. 

I.  Famine  is  the  dread  companion  of  war  (verses  24,  25).  Benhadad  soon 
forgot  the  clemency  with  which'  his  soldiers  were  treated  when  in  the  power  of 
the  king  of  Israel  (verses  21-23).  Perhaps  he  was  chagrined  with  the  failure 
of  his  previous  attempts  with  detached  bands  of  warriors,  and  determined  to 
invade  Israel  with  a  vast  army.  The  Syrians  poured  into  the  ill-fated  country 
in  overwhelming  numbers,  and  so  thoroughly  invested  Samaria,  that  in  a  short 
time  the  city  was  reduced  to  a  state  of  abject  famine.  The  horrors  of  war 
and  of  famine  are  always  in  ghastly  association. 

"  Loud  the  shrieks  of  battle  roar. 
Streaming  down  the  hollow  wind ; 
War  and  slaughter  go  before, 
Want  and  death  are  left  behind." 

When  David  had  a  choice  of  three  punishments  for  his  sin  m  numbering  the 
people — famine,  war,  or  pestilence — he  was  in  a  strait  which  to  select,  and  in 
his  bewilderment  threw  himself  upon  the  mercy  of  God  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14) 
The  four  lepers  who  brought  the  intelligence  of  the  flight  of  the  Syrians 
evidently  concluded  there  was  nothing  to  choose  between  famine  and  the  sword 
(chapter  vii.  4).    The  pathway  of  war  is  streaked  with  blood,  and  strewn  with 

461 


CHAP.  TX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


the  bones  of  the  famished.  In  the  extremity  of  hunger  the  most  nauseous  articles 
are  seized  for  food.  The  history  of  besieged  cities  reveals  the  loathsome  dishes 
on  which  the  most  delicate  were  compelled  to  dine* 

II.  That  famine  blunts  and  demoralises  the  tenderest  feelings  of  human 
nature  (verses  26-29).  A  mother's  love  for  her  offspring  is  the  strongest  passion 
in  the  human  heart.  It  is  the  last  foul  stroke  of  famine  when  this  love  is 
shattered  ;  when  all  delicacy  and  refinement,  all  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  all 
fond  endearment  and  deep-seated  love  are  so  thoroughly  extinguished  that  a 
mother  can  share  a  meal  with  a  neighbour  on  the  boiled  body  of  her  own  child, 
then  the  horrors  of  famine  have  reached  their  climax !  And  yet  this  was 
among  the  woes  that  Moses  foretold  would  come  to  pass  with  this  people  in 
case  of  disobedience  (Dent,  xxviii.  53).  Kitto  furnishes  a  number  of 
particulars  concerning  a  terrible  famine  in  Egypt,  in  the  year  1200,  when  the 
people,  after  resorting  to  the  most  unclean  and  abominable  tood  in  the  extremity 
of  their  hunger,  began  to  feed  on  young  children  ;  and  it  was  not  uncommon 
to  surprise  parties  with  children  half  boiled  or  roasted.  At  first  this  was  treated 
by  the  authorities  as  a  horrible  crime ;  but  by-and-bye  the  horror  entirely  sub- 
sided, and  every  one  spoke  of  it,  and  heard  it  spoken  of,  as  an  indifferent  and 
ordinary  matter.  It  is  very  humbling  to  man  to  discover  the  overwhelming 
power  of  the  lower  passions  in  extremity.  There  seems  but  a  brittle  barrier 
between  civilized  man  and  the  savage.  The  restraints  of  Divine  grace,  direct 
and  indirect,  are  more  potent  upon  society  thau  the  artificial  laws  imposed  by 
*'  use  and  wont." 

III.  That  famine  is  the  source  of  great  distress  to  the  humane  ruler 
(verse  30).  The  first  duty  of  a  king  is  to  provide  for  the  immediate  physical 
needs  of  his  subjects.  This  much  is  recognised  among  the  wildest  tribes.  It 
is,  therefore,  a  cause  of  unspeakable  suffering  to  a  considerate  monarch  when 
he  is  unable  to  supply  his  own  and  his  people's  wants.  This  was  the  condition 
of  the  king  of  Israel  at  this  time.  The  barn-floor  was  swept,  and  the  winepress 
empty.  The  staple  articles  of  food  were  consumed,  and  king  and  people  were 
involved  in  a  common  suffering.  No  wonder  Jehoram  wore  the  sackcloth  of 
humiliation,  and  rent  his  clothes  in  despair.  Kings  have  their  troubles. 
Great  honour  means  great  responsibility.  In  famine,  the  king  is  as  powerless 
as  the  beggar. 

IV.  That  the  innocent  are  often  unjustly  blamed  and  threatened  as  the 
cause  of  famine  (verses  31 ,  32).  There  was  evidently  more  sorrow  in  the  king 
of  Israel  than  repentance.  He  was  not  yet  brought  to  see  that  all  this  suffering 
was  in  consequence  of  sin.  He  blames  Elisha,  and,  in  his  despair  and  fury, 
determines  to  take  away  the  prophet's  life.  And  yet  what  had  he  done  ?  ^  If 
Elisha  foretold  and  warned  them  of  the  famine,  did  not  their  sins  deserve  it  ? 
If  the  prophet  might  have  averted  the  calamity  by  his  prayer,  did  not  their 
impenitence  restrain  him?  If  he  advised  the  king  to  hold  out  the  siege,  did 
he  not  foresee  the  remarkable  deliverance  that  was  at  hand,  and  that  only  by 
suffering  would  both  king  and  people  be  prepared  to  acknowledge  the  hand  of 
God  ?  "  All  Israel  did  not  afford  a  head  so  guiltless  as  this  that  was  destined 
to  slaughter.  This  is  the  fashion  of  the  world  ;  the  lewd  blame  the  innocent, 
and  will  revenge  their  sin  upon  others'  uprightness."  If  the  soul  is  innocent  of 
the  sins  which  the  vileness  of  others  attributes  to  it,  it  can  afford  to  wait  for  the 
Divine  vindication.     The  character  of  His  servants  is  safe  in  the  hands  of  God. 

V.  That  famine  is  here  acknowledged  as  a  Divine  j  udgment.  **Behold,  this 
evil  is  of  the  Lord  "  (verse  33).    We  are  to  suppose  the  king  had,  on  reflectioo* 

462 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EIKGS, 


CHAP.  n. 


repented  of  his  rash  command  to  murder  Elisha,  and  immediately  hurried  after 
the  messenger  to  stay  the  execution.  He  is  convinced  the  famine  is  a  Divine 
judgment  on  the  nation  for  his  sins.  Having  reached  this  state  of  mind,  he 
enquires,  in  a  spirit  of  more  genuine  repentance  than  he  has  before  displayed, 
"  Why  should  I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  lo  -ger  ?  "  He  prays  for  a  removal  of  the 
famine.  "  The  passage  may  be  thus  paraphrased  : — I  acknowledge  that  this 
evil  is  a  punishment  for  my  sins  ;  the  Lord  thus  chastens  me  sorely ;  but  now 
when  all  this  people  are  brought  to  such  an  extremity  of  woe,  why  should  I  wait 
longer  for  the  Lord  to  interpose  and  deliver  this  people  from  their  sufferings  ?  " 
It  is  hard  to  acknowledge  tbe  hand  of  God  in  our  distresses;  itis  pleasanter  to 
trace  that  hand  in  our  gifts  and  prospeiities.  Jehovah  punishes  with  reluctance, 
and  of  the  manifold  instrumentalities  of  punishment  at  His  call,  the  one  to  be 
dreaded  is  famine.  It  is  well  when  suffering  operates  in  bringing  the  soul  to 
God. 

Lessons: — 1.  War  is  a  fruitful  source  of  suffering  and  ruin,  2*  National 
apostasy  from  God  is  punished  with  national  calamities,  3,  Famine  reveals  the 
helplessness  of  man^  and  his  absolute  dependence  on  God* 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 


Verse  24.  Evil  men  wax  worse  and 
worse.  As  Benhadad  accomplished 
nothing  by  his  raids,  he  made  an 
attack  with  his  entire  force.  A  per- 
verse and  stubborn  man  cannot  endure 
to  be  frustrated,  and  when  he  is,  in- 
stead of  leading  him  to  submissiveness, 
as  it  ought,  it  only  hurts  his  pride  and 
makes  him  more  irritated. — Lange» 


—  Of  all  the  judgments  of  God  in 
this  world,  none  is  more  terrible  than 
famine.  It  is  a  scourge  which  draws 
blood.  It  often  happens  that  God 
takes  this  scourge  in  hand  when,  in 
spite  of  manifold  warnings,  His  name 
is  forgotten  in  the  land,  and  apostacy, 
rebellion,  and  unbelief  are  prevalent. 
— Xrw  mmacher. 


Verse  25.  The  value  and  wortli-  Verses  26-29.    The   horrible     in 

lessness    of    money.     1.    Money    is      humanity.     1.    Revealed  in  its  most 
valuable  only  as  a  medium  of  exchange      revolting   aspects    in  extremity.     2. 


for  the  absolute  necessaries  of  life. 
2.  Is  freely  parted  with  under  the 
pressure  of  starvation.  3.  Is  power- 
less to  avert  death. 

—  The  famine  within  the  walls 
was  more  terrible  than  the  sword  with- 
out. Their  worst  enemy  was  shut 
within,  and  could  not  be  dislodged  of 
their  own  bowels.     Whither  hath  the 


Seen  in  the  triumph  of  sheer  animalism 
over  the  keenest  instincts  of  natural 
affection.  3.  Beyond  the  power  of 
king  or  council  to  obviate.  4.  Is  con- 
trolled only  by  the  restraints  of  Divine 
grace. 

—  Necessity  leads  to  prayer  when- 
ever there  is  a  spark  of  the  fear  of 
God  remaining ;  but  where  that  fear  is 


idolatry    of    Israel    brought   them  ?  wanting,  "  Necessity  knows  no  law," 

Before  they  had  been  scourged  with  becomes  the  watchword.     The  crime 

war,  with  drought,  with  dearth,  as  with  of  the  two  women  is  a  proof  that  where 

asinglecord;  they  remain  incorrigible,  men  fall  away  from  God    they   may 

and   now   God  twists  two   of    these  sink  down  among  the  ravenous  beasts, 

bloody  lashes  together  and  galls  them  Separate  sores  which  form  upon  the 

even  to  death.     There  needs  no  other  body  are  signs  that  the  body  is  diseased 


executioners  than  their  own  maws. 
Those  things  which  in  their  own 
nature  were  not  edible,  at  least  to  an 
Israelite,  were  now  both  dear  and 
4aint^. — £j^.  UaU. 


and  the  blood  poisoned.  Shocking 
crimes  of  individuals  are  proofs  that 
the  community  is  morally  rotten.— ' 
Lange, 

469 


CHAP.  n. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


Verses  30  -  33.  A  desperate 
monarch.  1.  Humbled  and  bewil- 
dered by  the  suiferings  and  extremities 
of  his  people  (verse  SO).  2.  Vows 
vengeance  on  the  innocent  (verse  31). 
3.  Repents  his  rash  decision,  and 
hastens  to  prevent  its  execution 
(verse  32).  4.  Is  constrained  to  ac- 
knowledge the  national  suffering  as  a 
punishment  for  sin,  and  to  seek  Divine 
help  in  its  removal  (verse  33), 

Verses  30,  31.  See  here  a  faithful 
picture  of  the  wrongheadednessof  man 
in  misfortune.  In  the  first  place,  we 
half  make  up  our  minds  to  repent  in 
the  hope  of  deliverance ;  but  if  this 
is  not  obtained  at  once  and  in  the 
wished-for  way,  we  burst  out  in  rage 
either  against  our  fellow-men,  or 
against  God  Himself.  Observe, 
moreover,  the  great  ingratitude  of 
men.  Jehoram  had  already  several 
times  experienced  the  marvellous 
interference  of  God  ;  once  it  fails, 
however,  and  he  is  enraged.  The 
garments  of  penitence  upon  the  body 
is  of  no  avail,  if  an  impenitent  heart 
beats  beneath  it.  Anger  and  rage, 
and  plots  of  murder,  cannot  spring 
from  the  heart  that  is  truly  penitent. 
It  is  the  most  dangerous  superstition 
to  imagine  that  we  can  make  satisfac- 
tion for  our  sins,  can  become  recon- 
ciled to  God  and  turn  aside  His  wrath, 
by  external  performances,  the  wear- 
ing of  sackcloth,  fasting,  self-chastise- 
ment, or  the  repetition  of  prayers. 
The  world  is  horrified  at  the  results  of 
sin,  but  not  at  sin  itself.  Instead  of 
confessing,  '*  We  have  sinned," 
Jehoram  swears  the  man  of  God  shall 
die. — Lange, 

Verse  31.  This  imprecation,  which 
the  king  wishes  immediately  to 
execute,  proves  that  his  distress  of 
mind  was  no  wholesome  fruit  of  the 
recognition  of  his  own  guilt,  such  as 
the  law  coming  to  his  view  must  have 
produced,  but  only  a  consequence  of 
bis  contemplating  the  heart-rending 
misery  that  now  for  the  first  time 
stands  before  his  eyes  in  all  its  fright- 
fulness,  for  which  he  wished  to  wreak 
464 


his  vengeance  on  the  prophet  whom 
he  held  to  be  the  prime  cause  of  the 
appalling  necessity,  probably  because 
he  had  given  the  advice  not  to  sur- 
render the  city  on  any  condition^  with 
the  promise  that  God  would  deliver 
them  if  they  humbled  themselves  be- 
fore Him  in  sincere  repentance  and 
implored  His  aid.  By  putting  on  a 
garment  of  hair,  the  king  believed  he 
had  done  his  part ;  and  since,  not- 
withstanding this,  the  expected  help 
did  not  come,  he  fell  into  a  rage 
which  was  to  be  expended  on  the 
prophet.  This  rage  arose,  indeed,  only 
from  a  momentary  ebullition  of  anger, 
and  soon  gave  way  to  the  better  voice 
of  conscience.  The  king  hastened 
after  the  messenger  whom  he  had  sent 
to  behead  Elisha,  in  order  himself  to 
prevent  the  execution  of  the  death 
order  which  he  had  given  in  the  haste 
of  his  burning  rage ;  but  it  proves 
that  true  repentance,  which  springs 
from  the  recognition  of  the  necessity 
as  a  judgment  imposed  by  the  Lord, 
was  still  wanting  in  the  king.  The 
act  of  desperation  to  which  his  violent 
passion  had  hurried  him  would  have 
taken  place  had  not  the  Lord  protected 
His  prophet  and  revealed  to  him  the 
design  of  the  king,  so  that  he  could 
take  measures  to  prevent  it. — KeiU 

Verse  32.  He  that  foresaw  his  own 
peril  provides  for  his  safety.  "  Shut 
the  door,  and  hold  him  fast  at  the 
door."  No  man  is  bound  to  tender 
his  throat  to  an  unjust  stroke.  The 
same  eye  that  saw  the  executioner 
coming  to  smite  him,  saw  also  the 
king  hastening  after  him  to  stay  the 
blow.  The  prophet  had  been  no  other 
than  guilty  of  his  own  blood  if  he  had 
not  reserved  himself  awhile  for  the 
rescue  of  authority,  O,  the  incon- 
stancy of  carnal  hearts !  It  was  not 
long  since  Jehoram  could  say  to 
Elisha,  *'My  father,  shall  I  smite 
them?*'  Now  he  is  ready  to  smite  him 
as  an  enemy  whom  he  honoured  as  a 
father.  Yet  again,  his  lips  had  no 
sooner  given  sentence  of  death  against 
the  prophet,  than  his  feet  stir  to  re- 
call it. — Bp,  Mall, 


^omizbtic  commMntahy  •  Ktm.^ 


fee7b^hinrhi;„^^^.X1ntncr'1^  despairing  „ani.  whose  soul,  how- 
Is  a  commendable  fedi^g  when  it  s  For^'in  T^  "^  ^"<^'  '^  ^''"  '="''^«^'«d- 
the  reversal   of  a  cruel   and   „n,f  1^  "  Ae   very  fact  that  the  king 

poh-cy.     2.  Loses  no  timet  seeWnt  tZV^'^   w"'  °/  "'■°''  ''^^^''^  *f 

to  undo  the  evil  that  was  threaiened^  Ct'^i'    f  ^"-V  ^"  ""'^^■•stood  that 

3.  leads  to  the  rer^ovafof  sXrint  of  I          ''\^"'H'  ^  ^"^^e   glimmer 

that  human  rage  is  impotelr:!:;^  ^L'^^l h^e^  ^^'^t^  di^ec!^^  ^^ 

Verse  33.  "  Behold,  this  evil  is  of  ZIT^^"^    ^^  .*^    P'"''P''^'-     This 

the  Lord."    These  ar;  the  ;:iVl  T^llTC-'Lr''"''''   '"-■ 


CHAPTER  VII. 
THE    FLIGHT    OP    THE    SYRIANS. 


Critioal  and  Explanatory  Vht^q     v^^o^  i     a 
probably  contain  about  tht™gIlbnroflIr    i  IhT^ir  o°/  t"  ''''"-™'  -*  "«"" 
Agricultural  aud  garden  produce  from  the  country  were  bf  outhM.tr"?— /•'  ^^^  """■''^'- 
Verse.  Tben  a  lord,  on  w.ose  hand  the  ^^Z^^X  ^  t^^  ^^^ 

S^?yeXt^^;'^S:cu°'Vvr^^^^  '  ^'"■^-•-  -^o. "-«'- »/  L 

highest  courtier,  resting  his  hand Ttira™  Be?;M^??1.VT"."'"''"^  '^^  »«»»*  d  by  h  s 
heaven-Omit ./.  Thf  lord  wUl,  &c  l!mn  Mn  H.  ,  ?  ^'"'"'  '""''^  ''°^°^»  ^ 
will"    tJtr.n„-  ^  ''^'7'    l'3'''«'"»°»t™t"'e:   "Zo.'fe/ioMtheLord 

will.      Strong  irony;  scoffing  incredulity     Vpi-»<.  <)    i?„       i  .  ™h  ijora 

some  lazar-house  outsid.  th?  gate  (see  Numb  y  /jf  v^""'.  men-Perhaps  living  in 
"twihght"-t)tyiia-was  not  the  ekriy  dawn    but  Ib^  '•.'"  *■">  ''^^Sl't-This 

verse  9,  and  also"  torn  the  king's  promnt  2  k   T"'"'  '""''^*'' ^  '^ -"»' f-m 

Verse  6.  Hear  a  noise-^to.    S  so  md  as  of  Ih!'  "''f  ™'  "'«  '-i*  ««^A*"  (verse  12) 
a  supernatural  illusion  ;  au'd  it  t  an  ummnortl       ^T^  °'.'™  '"'^«'«  '"■'"i'^s  ""s  evidently 
or  subjective.     God  created  it  fo  ffis  ol7 purpos^'KrWr'^f'^r  ^-^  '""''™  "^^  »Wect  ™ 
of  Egypt-General  phrases  for  the  C°JraT;»„^^\''''''*"i,"""    •    •     •    W» 
will  come  upon  us-e„i«,  or  punisbmen   „f  guUt      vtZmXl'     ^"iV'  '"""^  '"'^^''Sf 
the  tents- In  Eastern  encampments,  the  tents  arV  nl.^!^     '  Pf"'  *'^'^'  ^««««  ''^d,  and 
around  outs  de  as  a  defence.     H.-nce  he  leperf  feTcon  «  to  ,b«™'!:''''  *'"'  ']"  ■=""■»  P''^'^'="«d 
'tent^.'    Verse  11.  And  he  called  the  rorter^-S^tl.     u?'''' ''"'' *'''^'''' '''«'> '^ 'h'' 
leave  h,s  post,  so  called  to  other  soldiers  wkb  n  the  sl^  wh„  i    "  StJ"""^'  '"'  """W  ""t 
guards.     Verse    3.  One  of  the  servants  answered  &fHT.,/-''"f^'^,"<'"'^  ">  "">  P"'"'* 
a  stratagem,  i.  given  in  contused  words,  but  melns'    '^T^  „  ^  «  ""'^  *°  ""^  """S-  »''»»  suspects 
then- fateful  be  only  as  th.  fate  of  "the  ZStle  i^/r""' ^™  f-^""'^:  if  they  perish,  then 
deliverance  arises.      Verse  U.  Took  two  charitto      s-S^DID  ^dV;^-  '/  ""  ''""'% 
hordes.     After  the  host  of  the  Syrians    lif    .ft      ,.         O  DID  ^DT  W,  <„,„  ^.,„  „y 
went  ont-The  news  that  the  eneL Cled  in  amnt/.Tf.^     ^T"  ^^-  ^^  ">»  People 
poured  out  in  a  rush  t ,  seii.e  the  «t..res  and  spoifof^he  sS„  .  ""^'"'^''f  ^'  """^  '"e  crowds 
thai  food  was  so  d  at  nominal  prices  to  the  famished  neo^Lvi?"'P-„  ^^'^  P'™'-''  "'"^  f"-"! 
Thus  the  king  p  kced  his  "  knin-ht  "  mk«  »'  ""^"^^P^op's-     Verse  1 7.  Charge  of  the  rate 

very  positio„>r  the  predicted  fa'l^o^mtk'Sm^Bvtch'bf",'  ^'f^'^  P-Ph'c^lnlh^ 
do,  men  unwittingly  work  out  God's  fore-oidaine"  plans.-W  H?  j!"^'      "    ^^  "Ot  what  they 


""  409 


OHAt.vii.  MOMILETIC  COMMMMTARt:  KIKOS, 


SOMIZJETICS  OF  VERSES  1-20. 

The  Unfailing  Certainty  op  the  Divine  "Word, 

In  this  chapter  we  have  an  illustration  of  how  the  Scripture  narrative  sub- 
ordinates everything  to  the  setting  forth  of  the  Divine  word  and  purpose.  To 
the  historian  there  is  ample  material  for  the  most  graphic  picture-writing  :  the 
beleagured  city  wasting  in  famine — the  lepers :  their  desperate  decision,  their 
struggle  with  the  spirit  of  covetousness  in  the  midst  of  plenty ;  their  generous 
recognition  of  the  claims  of  a  common  brotherhood — the  alarm  and  rout  of  the 
Syrians — the  mad  stampede  of  the  famished  citizens  when  the  news  of  the  flight 
wasconfirmed,  andthewildavidity  with  which  theprovisions  and  treasures  of  the 
Syrians  were  seized — all  this  is  told  with  the  utmost  simplicity,  and  would  not 
be  told  at  all,  but  to  point  out  the  fulfilment  of  a  promise  and  a  threat  (compare 
verses  1,  2,  with  verses  18-20).  Jehovah  interposes  to  arrest  a  national  calamity 
at  the  last  moment,  and  the  people  are  taught  to  respect  His  prophet,  and  to 
receive  His  word  for  their  warning  and  instruction.  They  are  again  taught 
the  utter  worthlessness  of  their  heathen  deities  in  extremity.     Observe — 

I.  That  the  Divine  word  is  uttered  at  a  time  when  it  seems  very  unlikely 
that  its  promises  or  threatenings  will  ever  be  fulfilled.  1.  The  natural 
obstacles  to  its  fulfilment  seem  insuperable.  Samaria  was  closely  invested  by  a 
powerful  and  numerous  army.  Within  was  famine ;  without  was  the  sword. 
Every  passing  moment  was  in  favour  of  the  besieging  host ;  starvation  would 
soon  bring  the  victory  denied  to  their  arms.  It  seemed  very  improbable  that 
flour  and  barley,  that  had  become  almost  a  forgotten  luxury  to  the  besieged, 
should  be  both  abundant  and  cheap  on  th«  morrow.  How  often  are  the  Divine 
utterances  environed  with  mystery  and  improbability :  e.g.,  the  promise  to 
Abram  of  a  numerous  posterity  ;  the  threat  of  the  deluge ;  the  prophecies  con- 
cerning Messiah ;  the  gifts  and  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  the  call  and 
salvation  of  the  Gentiles.  What  appears  impossible  to  us  is  the  normal  order 
with  God.  Human  faith  is  tested  ;  Divine  power  is  vindicated.  2.  2'he  Divine 
word  IS  ridiculed  by  the  unbelieving.  "  If  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in 
Heaven  might  this  thing  be."  Such  was  the  sneer  of  a  Jewish  peer,  probably 
the  prime  minister  of  Jehorara.  We  can  almost  hear  his  scornful  laugh,  as  he 
pictures  Jehovah  opening  heaven,  and  showering  down  meal  and  grain  like  rain. 
Would  it  arrest  his  mockery  to  hear  his  doom  so  promptly  threatened  that  he 
should  see  it,  but  not  partake  of  it?  Unbelief  is  highly  offensive  to  God;  it  is 
the  parent  of  the  grossest  sins,  and  deprives  man  of  the  richest  blessings.  The 
discontented  Hebrews  saw  the  promised  land ;  but  their  unbelief  prevented 
them  entering  into  its  possession.  It  is  an  evidence  of  the  blindness  and 
audacity  of  sin,  that  it  questions  the  word  of  infinite  Goodness  and  Justice. 

II.  That  the  Divine  word  is  fulfilled  by  unexpected  agencies.  "  The  Lord 
made  the  host  to  hear  a  noise  "  (verse  6).  This  may  have  been  the  noise  of  the 
same  host  whose  movements  David  was  once  permitted  to  hear  in  the  tops  of 
the  trees,  and  which  led  him  on  to  the  conquest  of  the  Philistines  (2  Sam. 
V.  24).  Or  the  noise  may  have  had  no  objective  reality,  but  may  have  been 
a  mere  delusion  produced  in  the  minds  of  the  Syrians.  In  either  case  it  was 
caused  by  the  Lord,  and  the  Syrians  were  led  to  imagine  that  J ehoram  had 
hired  against  them  the  armies  of  other  nations.  The  sight  of  horses  and 
chariots  encouraged  the  servant  of  Elisha  (vi.  17).  The  noise  of  horses  and 
chariots  terrified  the  Syrians.  The  Lord  can  make  the  ordinary  senses  and 
faculties  of  the  human  mind  the  means  of  blessing  or  of  punishment.     The 

466 


BOMIlEtIC  COMMENTAST:  EJN08.  Ohap.  vn. 


Synans  fled  in  dismay,  and  in  such  headlong  haste  as  to  leave  their  provision, 
and  baggage  behind  them.  Samaria  was  delivered  and  knew  it  not  and 
might  have  remained  m  ignorance  for  several  days.  But  the  woid  of  the' Lord 
mmt  be  fulfiUed    and  the  lepers-beings  from  whom  every  one  shrank  with 

bSIJ  w-.h"''  -f  fTt^^^'l  "}  J°^*"'  ^••^^''S^-  ^^'0*  tin  "-  l«Pe-  were 
surfeited  with  spoil,  did  they  listen  to  the  dictates  of  a  common  humanity  • 

morrow  ^The  Z^^'^'^f^' ^^  '^^  -°rd  of  the  Lord  must  be  fulfilled  on  t^e 
morrow  Ihe  news  of  the  leprous  messengers  is  received  with  suspicion  and 
the  cautious  king  is  unwilling  to  act ;  but  the  morn  is  breaking,  and  the  word 
of  the  Lord  must  be  fulfilled.     The  counsel  of  the  king's  senants  prev^f 

fh?  f  "^f  .'  ''It  ^^r^\  ''""^  ^°^*'^'  tl^^  "«^^^  ^  '""fi'-ed,  and  the  camp  tS 
la^      Thn,    h^.'  ^'^  hours  before,  furnishes  in  abundance  the  necessaries  of 
ii!!'T^-  •     '  ^  *^  '"°'*  unlikely  agencies,  and  in  the  most  unexpected  wav 
the  Dmne  purpose  is  accomplished.  '  '' 

IIL  miat  the  Divine  word  is  fulflUed  with  unfailing  certainty.  "And 
It  came  to  pass  as  the  man  of  God  had  spoken  "  (verse  18).  The  spoil  oflhe 
deserted  Syrian  camp  fulfilled  the  promise  of  cheap  food:  and  the  death  of  th! 
unbelieving  nobleman,  who  was  c.4hed  by  the  oveLhetinrcrowd  of  f ilhtd 

'  TZ'sha  t's'^7''>rf.™'"  "^  ^'f'  *'^^'>"8'^  '""^  ^-'^'  ^"IS""*!  ae  threat, 
oif -f  ^  *.  ^^\^'\  *me  eyes,  but  shalt  not  eat  thereof."  With  what 
gratitude  and  with  what  awe  should  we  regard  the  word  of  God'  ^h 
gratitude,  because  its  promises  are  so  rich  and  sure;  with  awe  because  its 
threateningswillbeinevitablyfulfiUed.  As  certain  as  the  ^ovnggracierTZud 
by  an  imsistiWe  law,  bears  down  all  obstruction,  and  buries  iS  ruin  whatever 
lies  in  Its  course,  so  certainly  will  the  word  of  God,  impelled  not  bv  S 
unthinking  force,  but  by  the  loftiest  intelligence  and  r"e'p  oaehablelusttce' 
bring  to  pass  its  threatenings  against  the  impenitent  and  disobedient  That 
rttyteni^^g!''"'^  ''^'^  that  is  not  moved  a^d  instructed  by  eitfpromte 

9  ^rl!Tir<?'  V',"'  '"^"T  ««?"«»'«*%  to  declare  or  listen  to  the  word  of  God 

2.  The  moH  formdaUe  nation  cannot  prevent  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divini  w^d 

3.  The  word  of  God  should  be  reverently  feared,  and  implicitly  trusted. 

6ERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

rltr\  W'  ^K^^li'i*  "let'iod  Of  reflecting  that  they  thereby  bear  testi- 

relief.     1    Is  seen  m  the  moment  of  mony  to    their   own   inner  rudeness 

unoT^u'rllfth'*^-,  't  ¥-'^''^,?e--ds  vulgarity,  and  want  of  breeding      It 

the   rbelievL      4     '?.'^V^f>\^  i«  ?  bad   sign   of  the   chamctef  of  a 

the   unbelieving      4.    Magnifies    the  prince,  where  scoffers   form   the  most 

Dmne  power  and  generosity.  intimate  circle   of  his   retinue.    Z- 

Versp  9    Vh^  ^\.-iA         c  .i.-  , ,      '"^^^'^^  '^  ^o^^'  because  it  robs  itself  of 

Verse  2    The  children  of  this  world     the   blessing   which  is  the  portion  of 
consider  their  unbelief  to  be  wisdom      faith.-X««?..  ^ 

nuf  twtb-T-"*'  ^""^  ^^^  '^"'^  *°  Prophecies  before  they  be  fulfilled 

put  that  which  IS  a  consolation  and  an      are  riddles ;  no  spirit   can   read  them 

^uirustr"  Thl  T°  T'T  f ,"'^'-      Y  '''''  ''^  -''-^  tl^Vare  delter  d 
such  whfkednpl  .Will  not  leave      It  is  a  foolish  and  injurious  infidelity 

.^t  7.^.f     X  "°P"°J^^«^.    It    is      to   question  a  possibiUty,    where  w'e 

and^anmn.ntl       '„'">!%*'''*' '''^'^^^°''°      '^""^^   *«  "<'^^'»g«   i«   God's.     H^v 
tltn^  Zr^  ^^^-^'"^  "■«?  at  Court      easy  it  is  for  that  Omnipotent  hand  to 

Sand  of ?fT'^T  ""'''•  T'^      ''^'''  ^''^^^  "''"g^  ^hieh  surpass  ah 
01  Uod  and  of  Its  declarations,  without      the   reach   of  human   conceit'        H 


467 


OHiJ'.  vu.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTAMT:  KINGS. 


God  intended  a  miraculous  multiplica-  from  human  hands ;   instead  of  sub- 

tion,  was  it  not  as  easy  for  Him  to  mission  to  God,  a  dull  discontent — a 

increase  the  corn  or  meal  of  Samaria  despair  which  quarrels  with  the  eternal. 

as  the  widow's  oil  f    Was  it  not  as  And  what  language  is  this — "  If  they 

easy  for  him  to  give  plenty  of  victuals  kill  us,  we  shall  only  die  ?  " — as  if  the 

without     opening   the     windows    of  grave  was  the  end   of  men,   and  the 

Heaven,   as  to  give  plenty  of  water  great  beyond  were  only  a  dream;  eras 

without  wind  or  rain  ?     The  Almighty  if  it  were  a  matter  of  course  that  the 

hates  to  be  distrusted. — Bp.  Ball.  pain  of  death  atones  for  the  sins  of  a 

wasted  life,  and  most  rightfully  pur- 

Yerses  3,  10.  The  conduct  of  the  chases  their  pardon  and  a  reception  into 

lepers  illustrative  of  varying  phases  heavenly  blessedness.    Our  life  lies  in 

in  human  experience.     1.  Iiesperate  the  hand  of  God,  who  sets  its  limit 

in  extremity   (verses   3,    4).      Death  which  we  may  not  anticipate.    Circum- 

threatened  them  at  every  point.     To  stances    may  indeed   arise  in   which 

enter  the  city  was  to  starve — to  remain  a  man  wishes   for  death.     It  makes 

inactive  was  to  die — they  could  be  no  a  great  difference,  however,  whether 

worse  if  they  threw  themselves  upon  this  wish  comes  from  weariness  of  life, 

the  mercy  of  the  enemy.    A  drowning  or  whether  we  have,  with  Paul,   "a 

man  will  snatch  at   a  passing  straw,  desire  to  depart  and  to  be  with  Christ.'* 

The  dread  of  death  drives  many  to  the  Only  when  Christ  has  become  our  life, 

most  desperate  measures.    2.  Forgetful  is  death  a  gain. — Krummacher. 
and  selfish  in  sudden  prosperity  (verse  8). 

They  were  intoxicated  with  the  sight         Yerse  6.  It  is  only  necessary  that 

of  such  abundant  spoil,  and  not  content  in  the  darkness  a  wind  should  blow, 

with  allaying   the  pangs   of  hunger,  or  that  water  should  splash   in  free 

they  were  carried  away  with  the  spirit  course,  or  that  an  echo  should  resound 

of  greed,    and  hid  the  treasure  they  from  the  mountains,  or  that  the  wind 

had    so   suddenly    acquired.      Their  should  rustle  the  dry  leaves,  to  terrify 

captivity  rendered  them  forgetful  of  the  the  godless,    so  that  they   flee   as  if 

starving  city.    The  chief  butler,  when  pursued  by  a  sword,  and  fall,  though 

restored    to  his  wealth   and  dignity,  no  one  pursues  them.     It  happens  to 

forgot  the    imprisoned  Joseph  (Gen.  the  unconverted  man  as  it  did  here  to 

xi.  23).     Sudden  prosperity  brings  its  the  Syrians.     God  causes  him  to  hear 

special  perils.     3.  The  subjects  ofrefleG-  the  rumbling  of  His  anger,  the  roaring 

tion  and  of  humane  and  generous  impulses  of  the  death  floods,  the  thunder  of  His 

(verses  9,  10).  Their  consciences  smote  law,  and   the  trumpet  sounds  of  the 

them — they  thought  of  their  starving  judgment  day.     Then  he  flees  from  the 

brethren — they  could  no  longer  delay  doomed  camp  in  which  he  has  dwelt 

to  carry  the  tidings  of  deliverance  and  hitherto,    and  hurls   away  the   dead 

plenty.     The  grosser  demands  of  their  weight  of  his  own  wisdom,  justice,  and 

animal  nature  were  satisfied,  and  the  strength. — Lange. 
Instincts  of  their  higher  nature  began  to 

assert  themselves.     Hunger,    and  the         Yerses   8,    9.      Many  a    one    gets 

excitement    of    sudden    plenty,    had  chances     to    acquire    property     dis- 

demoralized  their  better  feelings ;  but  honestly,      to      enjoy     luxury     and 

when  the  famine  fiend  was  expelled,  debauchery,  to  gratify  fleshly   lu-ts, 

they  felt  again  the  generous  pulse  of  a  and  to  commit  other  sins  ;  and,  if  he 

common  brotherhood.     And  yet  how  is  secure  from  human  eye,  he  does  not 

few  who  are  blessed  with  abundance  trouble   himself  about  the   all-seeing 

are  remarkable  for  generosity  !  eye  of  God  ;  but  his  crime  is  discovered 

at  last  in  his  own  conscience,  and,  by 

Yerses  3,  4.    How  often   we   meet  God's  judgment,   it  is  revealed  and 

with  a  similar  disposition.     Instead  of  punished.     Conscience  can,  indeed,  be 

a    joyful    and    believing  look   up   to  benumbed  for  a  time,  but  it  will  not 

Heaven,  a  faithless  looking  for  help  rest  for  ever ;  it  awakes  at  last,  and 

468 


SOMILETIC  COMMElTTAItY:  ZimS. 


caifr.  trit. 


fltings  all  the  more  the  longer  it  has 
been  still.  He  who  conceals  what  he 
has  found  is  not  better  than  a  thief.— 
JFurt.  Summ<iry, 


Verse  9.  Glad  tidings,  l.  TVTien 
they  offer  life  to  the  perishing. 
2.  May  be  borne  by  the  afflicted  and 
despised.  3.  May  be  wickedly  sup- 
pressed. 4.  Should  be  eagerly  pro- 
claimed by  all  who  have  benefited  by 
•  them. 

—  How  far  self-love  carries  us  in 
all  our  actions,  even  to  the  neglect  of 
the  public !     ]^ot  till  their  own  bellies 
and  hands   and  eyes  were  filled  did 
these  lepers  think  of  imparting  this 
news  to  Israel.     At  last,    when   they 
themselves  are  glutted,  they  begin  to 
remember  the  hunger  of  their  brethren, 
and  now  they  find  room  for  remorse! 
JXature  teaches  us  that  it  is  an  injury 
to  engross  blessings,  and  so  to  mind  the 
private  as    if  we  had  no  relation  to 
a  community.     We  are  worthy  to  be 
shut  out  of  the  city  gates  for  lepers,  if 
the  respects  to  the  public  good  do  not 
oversway  us  in  all  our  desires,   in  all 
our  demeanour ;  and  well  may  we,  with 
these  covetous  lepers,  fear  a  mischief 
upon  ourselves  if  we  shall  wilfully  con. 
ceal  blessings  from  others.— ^p.  Mall 

(Terse  9).--The  moral  and  spiritual 
claims  of  London.  The  lepers  revelled 
for    some     hours,    forgetful    of    the 
many     of    their     countrymen     who 
were     starving    with    hunger,      and 
after  they  had  done  all  for  themselves 
that  they  could,  then  they  thought  of 
their  brethren.     We   may  apply  the 
circumstances  of  this  narrative  to  the 
conduct  of  the  citizens    of   London. 
Observe— I.  That  we  are  in  possession 
ot  a  blessing  peculiarly  adapted  to 
benefit  our  fellow-countrymen.   The 
gospel  contains    glad    tidings   to    all 
people,  and  is  adapted  to  benefit  man 
in  four   senses.      1.    Ast   conscious  of 
guilt.  All   men  know   that  they    are 
transpessors,  and  in  a  city  like  this 
who  has  not  to  look  upon  himself  as 
guilty     and    unholy?      The     gospel 
reveals  the  remedy ;  and  this  message 
It  18  m  the  power  of  the  humblest  to 
communicate.    It  is  not  necessary  he 


should    ascend    the     pulpit    or   the 
hustings ;  he  may  do  it  by  his  life  and 
by  his  visits.  2.    As  exposed  to  tempta- 
tion,    Great  cities  are  ever  the  focus  of 
vice.     Such^  was  Ninevah,   such  was 
Eome  such  IS  Paris,    such  is  London. 
6,  As  liable  to  suffering.    Sorrow  is  the 
portion  to  which  flesh  is  heir ;  and  as 
a  city  these  are  generallv  concentrated 
Ihmk  of  the  want  of  labour,  the  high 
price   of   provisions,   the   ravages  of 
disease,  the  frauds  of  the   designing 
the  failure  of  credit,  &c.    4.  As  sulject 
to  death.     It  is  the  law  of  nature  and 
the  sentence  of  God  that  all  must  die  • 
and  oh !  what  a  mass  does  this   city 
present  to  death!  XL  That  we  have 
been  guilty  of  a  culpable  omission  in 
neglecting   to    communicate  those 
things.     1.     Because    the   melancholy 
circumstances  of  our  fellow-citizens  have 
not  been  realized  by  us.     Had  these  four 
lepers  thought  of  the  extent  of  actual 
misery   among    their  fellow-citizens, 
they  would  have  hastened  to  them  as 
soon  as  they  had  satisfied  their  first 
cravings.     So  it  is  with  us ;  we  do  not 
think  of   our  fellow-men  around  us 
I.  Becaue  fhe  relative  importance  of  our 
fellow -citinens  hasnotbeen  byusregarded 
London,  as  it  is  the  seat  of  royalty* 
the  head  of  legislation,  the  residence 
ot  nobility   and  gentry,  the  mart  of 
commerce    is  the  resort  of  all  classes. 
We  forget  that  we  dwell  in  a  vortex 
which   draws    from    many    a  league 
around,    and   draws  many  into  ruin 
Ihat  gram  of  gunpowder,   yonder    if 
ignited,    will    explode,    but    wiu'do 
httle^  mi  chief,    because  it   is  alone 
±{ut  let  It  be  one  of  a  vast  magazine, 
and  where   shall  the   mischief    end  ? 
3.  Became  our  own  necessities  have  been 
exaggerated.     The   lepers    would   say 
they  had  not  had  a  meal  for  a  month 
that  they  were  so  naked  they  wanted 
clothing,  so  poor  they  wanted  treasure, 
so  sick  they  wanted  medicine.     True 
he  is  to  blame  who  does  not  keep  his 
own  vineyard;  but  there  is  reason  to 
tear    that  a   spiiit  of  selfishness  has 
hitherto    prevented    the    citizens    of 
London  doing  the  good  they  might. 
4.    Because  the  design    of  the  Divine 
goodness  has  been  overlooked.    You  are 
blessed  that  you  may  bless.     You  are 

469 


edjip.  vut. 


MOMILETIG  COMMENTART:  KiNQB. 


lights,  and  your  lights  should  shine. 
We  overlook  the  design  of  God  in  doing 
us  good,  if  we  suppose  it  for  ourselves 
alone.  III.  We  should  experience 
the  most  powerful  emotions  at  the 
rememhrance  of  our  past  indiffer- 
ence. 1.  An  emotion  of  shame  for 
our  criminal  neghct.  While  we  have 
thought  of  the  distant  village,  and  the 
distant  heathen,  we  have  forgotten 
those  who  breathe  the  same  air,  and 
reside  in  the  same  city.  2.  An 
emotion  of  sorrow  for  inseparable  mis- 
chief. While  the  lepers  were  eating 
almost  to  surfeit,  and  loading  them- 
selves with  treasures  almost  to  faint- 
ness,  another  and  another  in  the  city 
fainted  and  died.  3.  An  emotion  of 
alarm  for  threatening  evil.  We  are 
conscious  of  the  anti-social  and  de- 
moralizing effect  of  infidelity.  Could 
it  be  diffused,  it  would  do  infinite 
mischief.  4.  An  emotion  of  pity  for 
present  destitution.  Think  of  the 
claims  of  the  metropolis.  We  ask 
your  pity  for  those  by  whom  you 
got  your  wealth.  We  must  feel  for 
those  who  are  perishing,  as  He  who 
felt  beheld  a  devoted  city,  and  wept 
over  it. — The  Pulpit. 

—  The  day  of  good  things.  I.  The 
text  describes  the  times  in  which  we  live. 
"This  day  is  a  day  of  good  tidings.** 

1 .  Because  Jesus  Christ  has  obtained 
a  complete  conquest  over  all  our 
enemies.  2.  Because  He  has  procured 
an  ample  provision  for  all  our  necessi- 
ties. 3.  Because  He  has  made  many 
of  us  participate  in  the  provisions  of 
His  love.  4.  Because  He  has  opened 
channels  for  the  publication  of  these 
good  tidings  to  others.  II.  The 
text  reproves  our  indifference  to  the 
miseries  of  others.  **We  do  not  well; 
this  day  is  a  day  of  good  tidings."  1. 
While  this  disposition  exists  in  our 
minds,   we  dishonour   our  character. 

2.  We  disobey  Christ's  commands. 
III.  Consider  our  punishment  if  we 
delay  to  send  help  to  those  who  need  it. 
<*  If  we  tarry  till  the  morning  light, 
some  mischief  will  come  upon  us." 
1.  If  we  delay  in  the  work,  our  eyes 
shall  see  the  destruction  of  our 
kindred.  Our  souls  shall  want  the  joys 
of  God's    salvation.     3.  Our  conduct 

470 


will  receive  the  condemnation  of  Christ. 
lY.  The  text  suggests  the  course  of  con- 
duct  you  ought  to  adopt  under  the  present 
circumstances.  '*  Let  us  go  and  tell  the 
king's  household."  We  should  carry 
the  Gospel  to  our  poor  brothers  and 
sisters.  1 .  Because  they  are  perishing 
for  lack  of  knowledge.  2.  Because 
success  is  certain.  3.  Because  oppor- 
tunities are  vanishing. 

Verse  10.  Outcast  and  despised 
men  were  destined,  according  to  God's 
providence,  to  announce  to  the 
threatened  city  in  the  crisis  of  its 
danger  the  great  and  wonderful  act  of 
God.  God  is  wont  to  use  slight  and 
contemptible  instruments  for  His  great 
works,  that  He  may,  by  the  foolish 
things  of  the  world,  confound  the  wise. 
Fishermen  and  publicans  brought  to  a 
lost  world  the  best  good  news — the 
Gospel,  which  is  a  power  to  make  all 
blessed  who  believe  in  it. 

Verses  12-16.  Hunger  r.  Sus- 
picion. I.  Suspicion,  the  fruit  of  un- 
belief— ^readily  gives  up  the  hope  of 
Divine  deliverance.  II.  Suspicion 
regards  the  tidings  of  relief  as  a  ruse  of 
the  enemy — ^the  lack  of  truth  and 
righteousness  leaves  the  mind  a  prey 
to  endless  questionings.  III.  Hunger 
catches  at  the  faintest  shadow  of  relief — 
is  prepared  for  great  risks — the  enemy 
without  cannot  be  more  formidable 
than  starvation  within.  IV.  The  exi- 
gencies of  hunger  overcome  the  scruples 
of  suspicion.  The  wary  king  is  per- 
suaded to  despatch  two  chariots  to 
reconnoitre,  so  that  if  one  is  seized, 
the  other  may  escape.  The  news 
brought  by  the  lepers  is  confirmed. 
The  risks  of  hunger  are  rewarded  with 
the  much-needed  provision. 

Verse  12.  By  such  a  stratagem  as 
here  mentioned,  Tomyris,  the  Scy- 
thian queen,  circumvented  and 
destroyed  Cyrus  and  his  Persians.  So 
when  the  Christians  besieged  Ptole- 
mais,  and  were  themselves  at  the  same 
time  besieged  by  Saladin,  they  were 
so  hard  bested  for  victuals  that  they 
were  forced  to  beg  and  buy  it  of  their 
enemies.     This,    when    Saladin  per- 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  KIN08, 


tiHAf.  VUt. 


ceived,  he  pretended  to  go  his  way, 
leaving  his  camp  full  fraught  with 
plenty  of  all  things  ;  and  when  the 
hunger-starved  Christians  fell  upon 
the  spoil  in  a  confused  way,  he,  turn- 
ing short  again,  slew  them. — Irapp. 

Verse  17.  The  perils  of  a  crowd. 
In  this  incident,  God  speaks  to  us  by 
showing  us — 1.  What  a  terrible  thing 
is  a  crowd.  2.  What  a  terrible  thing 
is  thoughtlessness.  3.  How  terrible 
it  is  to  break  God's  laws,  natural  and 
moral.  4.  That  it  is  safest  to  do  always 
that  which  is  right.  5.  That  we  should 
prepare  to  meet  our  God. — Spence. 

—  The  judgment  of  the  king's 
officers  proclaims  aloud,  **Be  not 
deceived,  God  is  not  mocked.'*  His 
corpse  became  a  bloody  seal  upon  the 
words  of  Jehovah  and  of  His  prophet. 
In  the  last  days,  also,  when  the 
abundance  of  the  Divine  grace  shall 
be  poured  out  like  a  stream,  in  the 
midst  of  the  greatest  misery,  many 
despisers  of  the  glorious  promises  of 
God  will  see  the  beginning  thereof, 
but  will  not  attain  to  the  enjoyment 
of  it ;  they  will  be  thrust  aside  by 
marvellous  judgments. — Lange. 

—  Whether  he  had  been  an 
oppressor  of  the  people,  and  was  there- 


fore justly  trodden  to  death  by  them,  is 
uncertain;  but  that  he  had  shamefully 
trodden  underfoot  the  honour  of  God's 
power  is  upon  record,  wherefore  he 
was  worthily  trampled  on  by  the 
hungry  people  who  would  not  be  kept 
in  by  his  authority.  The  belly  hath 
no  ears ;  and  hunger  breaketli  through 
stone  walls  Such  a  like  death  Con- 
stantius  T  IcNjlogus,  the  last  Greek 
emperor,  sulfered  in  the  gate  of  Con- 
stantinople when  the  Turkish  army 
pressed  into  that  city  and  took  it, 
A.D.  1453. — Trapp, 

Verses  18-20.  Unbelief.  1.  Is 
rebuked  by  the  faithful  fulfilment  of 
the  Divine  word.  2.  Is  signally 
punished.  3.  Is  a  universal  danger  to 
man.  4.  Should  be  prayerfully 
guarded  against. 

Verse  20.  Extreme  hunger  has  no  re- 
spect to  greatness.  Not  their  rudeness, 
but  his  own  unbelief,  hath  trampled 
him  under  foot.  He  that  abased  the 
power  of  God  by  his  distrust,  is  abased 
worthily  to  the  heels  of  the  multitude. 
Faith  exalts  a  man  above  his  own 
sphere ;  infidelity  presses  him  into  the 
dust."  *  *  He  that  believes  not,  is  con- 
demned already." — Bj^,  Hall, 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

ELISHA    IN    DAMASCUS. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.— Verse  1.  Then  spoke  Elisha— The  pluperfect  tense : 
how  Elisha  had  spoken.  This  section  dates  prior  to  chapters  v.  and  vi.,  but  is  given  here  as  an 
intro.luction  to  the  narrative  which  follows.  Verse  4.  And  the  king  talked — IVas  (that 
moment)  talking.  Note  the  coincidence.  While  talkiu": ;  at  that  very  moment  "  beheld  the 
wouian  I  "  (verse  5).  God  times  incidents  with  precision  ;  "  things  work  together^*^  interweave 
(Kom.  viii.  28).    Verse  6.  King  appointed  a  certain  officer — D"'"1D-    Its  primary  meaning  is 

a  eunuch  ;  its  secondary,  a  court  minister.  All  the  fruits  of  the  field  since,  &c.— The  word 
ni^13JJ^  is  better  rendered  ^'fruits  "  or  produce,  than  rent ;  yet  it  has  also  the  meaning,  gain^ 

profits  (Prov.  iii.  14).  Verse  7.  And  Elisha  came  to  Damascus— Elijah,  his  master,  had  been 
civinely  commissioned  to  this  (1  Kmgs  xix.  15),  and  now  Elisha,  '« bv  the  instigation  of  the 
Spirit "  {Themus),  sets  out  to  the  ta.-k  he  inherited  to  perform.  Benhadad,  king  of  Syria,  was 
sick— He,  hearing  of  Elish  I's  arrival,  sent  to  enquire  if  he  should  recover  ;  his  messenger  bear- 
ing propiriatory  gifts  for  the  prophet.  Verse  9.  Took  a  present  with  him,  even  of,  &c.— /*/., 
present  m  his  hand,  and  of  every  good  thing  of  Damascus.  Forty  camels'  burden— A  camePs 
burden  is  some  six  hundred  pounds  ;  but  it  was  customary  to  give  only  a  small  burden  to  ( ach, 
in  order  that  the  presentation,  being  borne  by  many,  might  have  a  more  imposing  effect,  and 
express  greater  respect.    Verse  10.  Go,  say  unto  him,  thou  mayst  certainly  recover— A 

471 


OfiAt.  vm.  iXOMiLEttC  GOMMENTARt:  KlMB, 


sentence  which,  like  Delphic  oracles,  has  two  possible  meanings,  each  the  contradiction  of  the 
other.    The  words  are,  H^nn  H^H  N*?  I^h^-    The  second  word,  written  J^-7,  is  in  sound 

V  :   '  T  v: 

the  same  as  ^7.    The  keri  retains  the  form  given  in  our  text,  i4  7,  to  him,  "  Say  to  him,  thou  wilt 

live,"  The  kethibh  adopts  the  form  S/,  not — **  Say,  thou  wilt  not  live."  The  sentence  spoken 
would  convey  either  meaning,  and  each  form  has  equal  authority.  Doubtless  the  eager  king 
would  seize  the  hopeful  meaning  of  the  words,  while  Hazael  would  reserve  in  his  own  thoughts 
the  doom  which  the  words  held.     It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  Hazael  reports  the  prophet's 

words  without  utterin*?  either  the  K7  or  y).  Verse  11.  He  settled  his  countenance  stead- 
fastly— Elisha's  fixed  gaze,  followed  by  his  weeping,  must  have  convinced  Hazael  that  his 
guilty  purpose  to  usurp  the  throne  of  Benhadad  was  known  to  him.  Verse  13.  But  what,  is 
thy  servant  a  dog,  &c. — But  surely  dogs  are  less  capable  of  guilty  craft  and  horrid  atrocities 
than  base  men  are  I     The  more  brutal  Hazael  should  not  have  maligned  the  nobler  brute,  by 

suggesting  that  any  creature  except  man  was  capable  of  such  villany.    ^73 »  dog^  is  an  Eastern 

term  for  a  servile  and  despicable  man  (see  1  Sam.  xvii.  43,  &c.)  Verse  15.  Spread  it  over  his 
face — The  bed  coverlet,  a  quilt  of  thick  cotton  or  wool.  This,  steeped  in  water,  would  effec- 
tually suffocate.  It  is,  however,  suggested  that  in  warm  countries  guaze  nets  wetted,  to  keep 
off  flies  and  gnats,  or  in  cases  of  fever,  are  spread  over  a  sleeper's  face.  But  it  is  superfluous 
to  evade  Hazael's  murderous  design,  for  a  wetted  guaze  would  not  prevent  respiration.  The 
coverlet  is  properly  described  as  "a  thick  cloth,"  "I^DD  (comp.  Judges iv.  18),  a  mantle,  and 

it  killed  the  king — which  Hazael  desired.  Verse  16.  Joramthe  sonof  Ahab — See  Notes  on 
chap.  iii.  1.  Verse  18.  The  daughter  of  Ahab — Attaliah.  It  was  through  her  influence  the 
king  introduced  the  worship  of  Baal  into  Judah  (2  Chron.  xxi).  Verse  19.  To  give  him 
alway  a  light,  and  to  his  children — i.  e.^  *'even  in  his  children,"  that  his  kingdom 
should  be  kept  from  becoming  extinct.  Verse  21.  Zair — Vulgate  says  Seir ;  other  authorities 
suggest  Zoar.  The  people  fled  to  their  tents — i.  ^.,  the  men  of  Judah.  Verse  22.  YetEdom 
revolted  -aSo  Edom  revolted,  thus  fulfilling  Gen.  xxvii.  40,  for  though  the  Edomites  were  re- 
subjugated  for  a  brief  period  (chap.  xiv.  7,  22),  they  were  never  again  vanquished. — ^W.  H.  J, 

I 


KOMILETIGS  OF  VERSES  1-8. 
The  Potent  Influence  op  a  Good  Man". 

I.  His  counsel  is  valuable,  and  gratefully  acted  upon.  The  Shunammite 
had  good  reason  to  respect  the  word  of  Elisha.  She  had  evidence  of  the 
sympathy  and  power  of  the  prophet  in  the  restoration  of  her  dead  son.  When, 
therefore,  he  warned  her  of  the  coming  famine,  and  advised  emigration,  she  and 
her  son  promptly  obeyed.  The  result  showed  the  wisdom  of  the  advice,  and 
justified  their  confidence  in  the  prophet;  they  were  preserved  during  the  years 
of  famine,  and  received  again  the  property  they  had  relinquished.  Here  we 
see  how  the  kindness  shown  by  the  Shunaminite  receives  still  further  reward. 
There  is  nothing  so  fruitful  in  blessing  as  kindness.  In  the  great  dilemmas  of 
life  we  seek  counsel,  not  from  the  frivolous  and  wicked,  but  from  the  wise  and 
good.  A  good  man  has  the  destiny  of  many  lives  in  his  hands  ;  a  word  from 
him  has  great  weight.  W  ith  what  profound  reverence  and  loving  obedience 
should  we  accept  the  words  of  Him  who  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to 
nought !  who  maketh  the  devices  of  the  people  of  none  effect,  and  whose  counsel 
Btandeth  for  ever,  the  thoughts  of  His  heart  to  all  generations  (Ps.  xxxiii.  10,  11). 

II.  His  beneficent  acts  are  the  theme  of  popular  conversation  *'  The 
king  talked  with  Gehazi,  saying.  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  all  the  great  things 
that  Elisha  hath  done  '*  (verse  4).  A  good  action  cannot  be  hid.  Sooner  or 
later  it  will  emerge  from  the  obscurity  in  which  it  was  first  done,  and  become 
the  talk  of  a  nation,  until  it  reaches  even  royal  ears.  All  good  actions  do  not 
attain  such  distinguished  popularity.  There  were  many  good  things  that  Elisha 
said  and  did  of  which  history  takes  no  notice.    A  good  act  may  be  remembered  and 

472 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  OHAF.  mx. 


applauded  for  generations,  while  the  name  of  the  actor  is  unknown.  Who  can 
tell  bow  much  bloodshed  was  spared,  in  the  already  too  bloody  battle  of  the 
military  at  I^anci,  during  the  French  revolution  of  1790,  by  the  bold,  heroic 
woman  who  screamed  to  the  wild,  unmanageable  mutineers  not  to  fire  the  second 
cannon,  and  who  made  her  screams  effectual  by  flinging  a  pail  of  water  on  the 
dangerous  engine.  Her  name  is  unknown,  but  history  immortalises  the  deed. 
The  more  a  good  man  is  known  and  appreciated,  the  greater  interest  is  taken  in 
all  the  details  of  his  life.  Indeed,  there  is  danger  in  magnifying  the  most 
ordinary  sayings  and  doings  into  undue  significance  and  importance.  The 
nation  that  can  sing  of  the  exploits  of  its  heroes  **inthe  brave  days  of  old  " 
should  also  be  forward  in  extolling  the  nohle  efforts  of  good  men  in  modern 
times.  If  the  age  of  chivalry  is  past,  the  spirit  of  chivalry  lives  and  burns  in 
the  breasts  of  not  a  few  in  our  day. 

III.  His  holy  and  unselfish  life  is  a  testimony  for  Jehovah  in  the 
midst  of  national  apostasy.  ThelifeofElisha,  if  less  hold,  fierce,  and  meteor- 
like in  its  manifestations  than  that  of  Elijah,  was  more  profoundly  impressive  in 
its  influence  for  good.  The  idolatrous  tfehoram  was  smitten  with  admiration 
for  the  gentle-mannered  prophet,  and  must  be  convinced  of  the  superiority  of 
Elisha's  God.  But  the  better  feelings  of  the  king  were  transient ;  he  was  too 
closely  wedded  to  his  idolatry  to  thoroughly  break  away  from  it,  and,  with 
constant  calls  and  warnings  to  return  to  his  allegiance  to  Jehovah,  he  drifted 
towards  the  doom  in  which  all  his  house  was  to  be  involved.  As  every  star  in 
the  firmament  declares  the  glory  of  God,  as  every  flower  of  earth  reveals  some 
feature  of  the  Divine  beauty,  so  every  holy  life  testifies  of  the  character  of  God. 
Human  goodness  is  but  a  reflection  of  the  Divine.  In  the  darkest  night  of 
national  apostasy,  Israel  was  favoured  with  an  Elisha,  whose  divinely-illumined 
life  threw  a  bright  stream  of  light  across  the  gloom.  How  deplorable  the 
condition  of  that  nation  from  which  all  moral  worth  is  excluded  !  The  modern 
doctrine  of  ^N^ihilism  aims  at  this.  A  zealous  propagandist  of  this  rank  mate- 
rialism lately  defined  their  teaching  thus: — *' Take  heaven  and  earth,  state 
and  church,  kings  and  God,  and  spit  upon  them  ;  that's  our  doctrine !  "  This 
is  plain  enough.  And  what  would  they  substitute  for  God,  the  soul,  and  moral 
law  ?  A  wild,  conscienceless  demagogy,  without  belief  or  scruple,  giving  the 
rein  to  brute  humanity,  keeping  open  house  for  every  appetite  and  lust.  Such 
would  be  the  condition  of  the  nation  bereft  of  living  witnesses  for  God  and 
truth. 

IV.  His  reputation  is  the  means  of  promoting^  the  ends  of  justice  (verses 
5,  6).  There  was  surely  a  Divine  providence  at  work  that  brought  the  sup- 
pliant Shunammite  into  the  presence  of  the  king  at  the  very  moment  when 
Gehazi  was  rehearsing  the  great  works  of  Elisha.  During  her  absence  of  seven 
years  her  estate  was  occupied  by  others,  and  ordinarily  it  would  be  a  most 
difficult  proceeding  to  dislodge  the  occupants.  She  wisely  went  direct  to  the 
highest  authority,  and  while  the  influence  of  Elisha's  reputation  was  fresh  upon 
the  mind  of  the  king,  for  his  sake  the  prayer  of  the  Shunammite  was  immediately 
granted.  Justice  triumphed;  her  land  and  all  its  produce  for  the  seven  years 
were  restored  to  her.  It  requires  power  to  enforce  the  claims  of  justice,  and 
the  highest  kind  of  power  is  goodness.  The  arrangements  of  justice  are  more 
likely  to  be  permanent  when  brought  about  by  the  influence  of  righteous 
principles,  than  when  compelled  hy  physical  force.  The  presence  of  a  holy 
character  in  society  is  a  powerful  check  upon  injustice  and  wrong. 

Lessons: — 1.  Goodness  is  not  inherited,  but  divtneli/ bestowed,  2.  A  good  man 
IS  not  always  himself  conscious  of  the  value  and  extent  of  his  influence,  3.  It  is  an 
unspeakable  blessing  to  a  nation  to  possess  men  of  eminent  goodness, 

478 


€HAP.  ym. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Verses  1-3.  Famine,  pest,  war,  and 
all  other  forms  of  calamity,  form  an 
army  wliicli  is  subject  to  the  command 
of  God ;  which  comes  and  goes  at  His 
command  ;  which  is  ready  to  attack,  or 
ready  to  retire,  as  He  may  order ;  and 
which  can  assail  no  one  without  com- 
mand. They  are  sometimes  commis- 
sioned to  punish  and  to  be  the  agents 
of  the  Divine  justice,  sometimes  to 
arouse  and  to  bring  back  the  intoxicated 
to  sobriety,  sometimes  to  embitter  the 
world  to  sinners  and  push  them  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  and  sometimes  to  try 
thi  saints  and  light  the  purifying 
fires  about  them.  So  no  man  has  to  do 
simply  with  the  sufferings  which  fall 
upon  him,  but,  before  all,  with  Him 
who  inflicted  them — Krummacher. 

Yerse  1.  Lessons  taught  by  famine. 
I.  That  God  has  entire  control  over 
the  productive  powers  of  nature.  2. 
That  God  may  permit  famine  as  a  judg- 
ment on  account  of  national  sins.  3. 
That  a  time  of  famine  should  induce 
national  humiliation  and  repentance. 
4.  That  the  extremity  of  human 
suffering  is  the  opportunity  for 
magnifying  the  Divine  power  and 
goodness. 

—  It  is  a  long  famine  that  shall 
afflict  Israel.  He  upon  whom  the 
spirit  of  Elijah  was  doubled,  doubled 
the  punishment  inflicted  by  his  master. 
Three  years  and  a-half  did  Israel  gasp 
under  the  drought  of  Elijah ;  seven 
years'  dearth  shall  it  suffer  under 
Elisha.  The  trials  of  God  are  many 
times  more  grievous  for  their  sharpness 
than  for  their  continuance.  This 
scarcity  shall  not  come  alone;  God 
shall  caU  for  it.  Whatever  be  the 
second  cause.  He  is  the  first.  How 
often,  how  earnestly,  are  we  called 
to  repentance,  and  stir  not!  The 
messengers  of  God  fly  forth  at  the  least 
beck,  and  fulfil  the  will  of  His  revenge 
upon  those  whose  obedience  would  not 
fulfil  the  will  of  His  command. — 
Bp.  EalL 

Verse  2.    JS^o    nation    was    more 
474 


opposite  to  Israel  than  the  Philistine, 
none  more  worthily  odious ;  yet  there 
does  the  Shunammite  seek  and  find 
shelter.  Even  the  shade  of  these  trees 
that  are  unwholesome  may  keep  us 
from  a  storm.  Everywhere  will  God 
find  room  for  His  own.  The  fields  of 
the  Philistines  flourish,  while  the  soil 
of  Israel  yields  nothing  but  weeds  and 
barrenness.  IN'ot  that  Israel  was  more 
sinful,  but  that  the  sin  of  Israel  was 
more  intolerable.  The  offers  of  grace 
are  so  many  aggravations  of  wicked- 
ness. No  pestilence  is  so  contagious 
as  that  which  hath  taken  the  purest 
air. 

Verse  3.  She  that  found  harbour 
among  Philistines  finds  oppression  and 
violence  among  Israelites ;  those  of 
her  kindred,  taking  advantage  of  her 
absence,  had  shared  her  possessions. 
How  often  does  it  fall  out  that  the 
worst  enemies  of  a  man  are  those  of  his 
own  house !  Eoth  our  fears  and  our 
hopes  do  not  seldom  disappoint  us.  It 
is  safe  trusting  to  that  stay  which  can 
never  fail  us,  who  can  easily  provide 
us  both  of  friendship  in  Palestine  and 
justice  in  Israel.  We  may  not  judge 
of  religion  by  particular  action;  the 
very  Philistine  may  be  merciful  when 
an  Israelite  is  unjust ;  the  person  may 
be  faulty  when  the  profession  is  holy, 
-^Bp.  Sail 

Verses  4-6.  What  is  here  told  us 
by  king  Jehoram  presents  him  to  us 
from  his  better  side.  His  desire  to 
learn  all  of  Elisha's  acts,  still  more 
the  way  in  which  he  was  ready  to 
help  the  distressed  Shunammite  to 
the  recovery  of  her  property,  testify 
to  a  receptivity  for  elevated  impres- 
sions and  to  a  disposition  to  yield  to 
them.  By  the  fact  that  he  recog- 
nised all  that  was  extraordinary  in  the 
person  of  the  prophet,  and  yet  that  he 
did  not  desist  from  his  false  line  of 
conduct,  he  showed  that,  in  the  main 
point,  the  relation  of  himself  and  of 
his  people  to  Jehovah,  nothing  good 
could  any  longer  be  expected  of  him. 
His  better  feelings  were  transitory  an4 


EO  MILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


OHAP.  vin 


ineffectual.  He  continued  to  be  a 
reed  swayed  hitlier  and  thither  by  the 
wind,  easily  moved,  but  undecided  and 
unreliable,  so  that,  finally,  when  all 
the  warnings  and  exhortations  of  the 
prophet  had  produced  no  effect,  he 
fell  under  the  just  and  inevitable  judg- 
ment of  God. — Lange. 

Verse  5.  How  happily  does  God 
contrive  all  events  for  the  good  of  His 
own  !  This  suppliant  shall  fall  upon 
that  instant  for  her  suit  when  the 
king  shall  be  talking  with  Gehazi, 
when  Gehazi  shall  be  talking  of  her 
to  the  king :  the  words  of  Gehazi,  the 
thoughts  of  the  king,  the  desires  of 
the  Shunararaite,  shall  be  all  drawn 
together  by  the  wise  provi<lence  of 
God  into  the  centre  of  one  moment, 
that  his  oppressed  servant  might  re- 
ceive a  spredy  justice.  Oh,  the  infinite 
wisdom,  power,  mercy  of  our  God,  that 
insensibly  orders  all  our  ways,  as  to 
His  <  wn  holy  purposes,  so  to  our  best 
advantage  ! — Bj^.  Hall, 

Verse  6.  The  word  of  God  often 
extorts  from  an  unconverted  man  a 
good  and  noble  action,  which,  how- 
ever, if  it  only  proceeds  from  a  sudden 
emotion,  and  stands  alone,  resembles  a 


flower  which  blooms  in  the  morning 
and  in  the  evening  fades  and  dies 
True  servants  of  God,  like  Elislia,  are 
often  fountains  of  great  blessing,  with- 
out their  own  immediate  participation 
or  knowledge. 

—  The  widow  may  thank  Elisha 
for  this.  His  miracle  wrought  still, 
and  puts  this  new  life  in  her  dead 
estate :  his  absence  did  that  for  the 
preservation  of  life  which  his  presence 
did  for  restoring  it  from  death.  She 
who  was  so  ready  to  expostulate  with 
the  man  of  God  upon  the  loss  of  her 
son  might,  perhaps,  have  been  as 
ready  to  impute  the  loss  of  her  estate 
to  his  advice.  Now  that  for  his  sake 
she  is  enriched  with  her  own,  how 
does  she  bless  God  for  so  happy  a 
guest !  When  we  have  forgotten  our 
own  good  turns,  God  remembers  and 
crowns  them.  Let  us  do  good  to  all 
while  we  have  time,  but  especially  to 
the  household  of  faith. 

—  The  true  spirit  of  obedience. 
I.  Seen  in  a  ready  belief  in  the  Divine 
word.  II.  Seen  in  the  willingness  to 
abandon  home  and  property  at  the 
Divine  call.  III.  Puts  the  soul  and 
all  earthly  things  under  the  Divine 
care.  IV.  Has  restored  more  than 
was  abandoned. 


ROMILETICS  OF  VERSES  7-16. 
The  Lust  op  AMBixioir, 


I.  That  the  lust  of  ambition  makes  man  keenly  alive  to  every  opportunity 

of  accomplishing  its  aims.  Benhadad,  the  king  of  Syria,  was  sick.  The 
dream  of  Hazael,  cherished,  perhaps,  for  years,  was  coming  nearer  to  its  reali- 
zation. Death  may  come  any  hour ;  then  the  sceptre,  the  crown,  boundless 
pomp  and  power  are  his.  With  what  sinister  eagerness  would  he  watch  every 
changing  phase  of  the  sick  king's  affliction !  with  what  facility  would  his  busy 
brain  lay  down  the  plans  of  future  enterprises !  A  crown  has  a  dangerous 
fascination  for  some  minds.  Gibbon  describes,  in  his  vivid  and  stately  style, 
th(^  heroic  manner  in  which  Septimus  Severus  became  emperor  of  Rome,  an 
ambition  he  had  cherished  for  years.  He  waited  his  opportunity,  his  keen 
glance  took  in  the  bearing  of  every  revolutionary  change  in  the  imperial  city, 
and  when  the  crowning  disgrace  was  reached  of  off'ering  the  empire  by  auction 
to  the  highest  bidder,  he  saw  the  time  for  action  was  come.  Though  opposed 
by  two  formidable  rivals,  his  promptness  and  vigour  conquered  all  difficulties. 
He  ascend.  1  the  imperial  throne,  which  he  found,  as  others  have  done  before 
and  since,  was  more  difficult  to  sustain  than  to  acquire.  The  ambitious  man 
lives  an  anxious,  restless  life  :  he  is  ready  to  seize  on  every  favouring  circum- 
stance. 

476       * 


CHAP.  Tin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


II.  That  the  Inst  of  ambition  may  be  cherished  nnderthe  gnise  of  devotion 
to  its  victim.  Hazael  readily  complies  with  the  wish  of  the  sick  monarch,  and, 
with  all  the  oriental  display  of  profuse  generosity,  and  the  oriental  mingling  of 
pomp  and  humility,  he  enquires  of  the  lEan  of  God  as  to  the  recovery  of  his 
master.  It  would  seem  as  though  none  was  more  concerned  than  he,  and  yet 
the  while  plotting  the  most  effectual  way  of  removing  the  only  obstacle  to  his 
aspiring  designs.  An  unholy  ambition  generates  falseness  and  unreality :  the 
man's  outer  life  gives  the  lie  to  his  true  character.  The  great  dramatist  has 
depicted  this  in  the  double-faced,  hesitating  conduct  of  the  great  regicide 
— Macbeth — 

To  beguile  the  time, 
Look  like  the  time :  bear  welcome  in  your  eye, 
Your  hand,  your  tongue  :  look  like  the  innocent  flower^ 
But  be  the  serpent  under  it. 
A. way,  and  mock  the  time  with  fairest  show  : 
False  face  must  hide  what  the  false  heart  doth  know, 

III.  That  the  lust  of  ambition  blinds  man  as  to  the  atrocities  it  may  nrge 
him  to  commit.  When  Elisha,  looking  with  prophetic  insight  in  the  mirror  of 
the  future,  detailed  to  this  man  the  horrible  crimes  he  foresaw  he  would  commit, 
Hazael  stood  aghast  at  the  bare  possibility  of  sinking  down  into  such  a  monster 
of  iniquity ;  and  yet,  doubtless,  all  these  cruelties  were  perpetrated  in  the  wars 
which  this  usurper  carried  on  in  Israel.  Hazael  reigned  more  than  forty  years, 
and  during  that  time  greatly  harassed  and  oppressed  the  Israelites  (see  verses 
28,  29  ;  ch.  x.  32,  33  ;  ch.  xii.  17,  18 ;  ch.  xiii.  3-7,  22  ;  Chron.  xxiv.  23,  24). 
A  man  who  is  under  the  spell  of  an  unholy  ambition  is  hurried  on  to  sins  and 
excesses  of  which  he  little  dreamed,  and  from  which  in  earlier  days  his  better 
nature  stoutly  recoiled.     He  is  spurred  on  by  the — 

Vaulting  ambition  which  o'erleaps  itself. 

rV.  That  the  lust  of  ambition  is  unscrupulous  as  to  the  methods  by  whicli 
it  attains  its  ends.  1.  It  will  employ  falsehood  (verse  14).  Hazael  assures 
the  king  that  Elisha  prophesied  his  recovery — the  exact  opposite  of  what  the 
prophet  had  said.  He  purposely  deceived  Benhadad,  intending  to  put  him  off 
his  guard.  But  he  who  meditated  a  darker  crime,  and  in  whose  heart  Elisha's 
words  had  roused  a  boundless  ambition,  was  not  too  good  to  lie.  Truth  or  false- 
hood is  of  small  concern  to  one  who  grasps  at  power.  The  ambition  must  be 
sated,  though  truth  is  trampled  on  at  every  advancing  step.  2.  It  shrinks  not 
from  murder  (verse  15).  The  man  who  shrank  with  indignant  horror  at  the  simple 
enumeration  of  the  outrages  he  might  commit,  heartlessly  smothered  his  royal 
master  on  the  following  day — a  method  of  assassination  that  would  leave  no 
marks  of  violence  on  the  dead  body,  and  give  colour  to  the  suspicion  of  suicide 
rather  than  murder.  There  was  but  one  obstacle  now  between  Hazael  and  his 
long-coveted  prize — a  royal  life — and  that  is  sacrificed  without  compunction. 
0,  infatuate,  short-sighted  mortal !  The  sceptre  rashly  seized  with  the  red  hand 
of  the  murderer  will  change  into  a  cross  of  trial,  the  crown  into  one  of  thorns, 
the  throne  into  a  bed  of  torture  ! 

Lessons  : — 1.  Ambition  dissociated  from  sound  moral  principle  is  full  of  peril, 
2.  There  is  no  act  of  wickedness  of  which  unholy  ambition  is  incapable.  3.  The 
most  commendable  ambition  is  to  get  and  do  the  most  good. 

The  Influence  op  Ciecumstancfs  upon  Human  Chaeacteb  (verse  13). 

Hazael  came  to  the  prophet  to  inquire  whether  his  master  would  recover  from 
his  sickness.     The  answer  is  ambiguous.     So  far  as  the  disease  itself  was  con- 
cerned, he  mightTQQOY&c,    Tet  his  days  were  numbered ;  and  the  purpose  to  kill 
476 


EOKILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINOs, 


cm  AT,  Tin. 


one  day  inflict  dire  evils  uporisrad^  1^6  Z" -^f  ^^ J  "r"" '^''°  ^""^'^ 
come  to  his  people  made  the  m^n  ofGod  weet,  Tfllpf  C  ^k""'"'  "•"*"'  *" 
Borrow.     Elisha  tells  him  f,»„vivr    „  a-     .1^'  ,  .^'^^''el  asks  the  cause  of  his 

not  very  distant  f „tu,e  Sf 'starts  "aok  tfih'h"*  '""t"  "^'  "^^  ^  ^''^ 
prophetic  mirror  the  imi-e  nf  hL  ^^  „  k  ^"f?'''  '^^'"'  ^^  ^^es  in  this 

TI>e%rophet  seeL  to  e^df  the  anlHnn  r^'-  .-^^  %  servant  a  dog ?  " 
and  complete  expLXn  if  not^to  K^^ll  f  T"''  ?}'' ''^^^'  ^' ^'"'^  tJ^^full 
'.The  lU  hat/showeTm'f  that  ttS  bl  Tn      t-eX: '''t  th"'"-"'- 

Xde^al^fti^t  fcS^.   t^^e^  ^  ^^  ¥'  -^^  '^^^^^"^^ 

designs?    How  are  we  to  Tconnt  for  thlTT*;/? u''"'"'"'*^'  ^s  fiendish 

Elisha  foretold,  if  he  was  not  a  hvno.n>^  9     Jt     ^\^\  he  actually  did  all  that 

as  it  has  been  de.cribenn  ^et,/"^    ?         -?  '^^"'''''  humanity  as  it  is,  not 

prose,  we  shall  have  no  diffleu?tvi^n'  T    ^.""^'^^'l'  '°  ^'^"*  ^''^  '"t'^^'ded  to  be 

regarding  the  atrolwes  of  Hazael  and  tt  ^ff  Y^  t'^^^^^^t^-that  of  Elisha 

amazement  at  the  very  mention  of  Ap  1;         ^^^^  regarding  his  horror  and 

into  account  the  influeni^f  l^Llt  '  ™'"^';     ^^^T'  ''""^^^  ^'''^^^  to  ta^e 
c  luuueuce  oi  Circumstances  upon  human  character. 

thJte!chtgs"of\scSt:  but"iwith°?r  """^^'^  at  variance,  not  only  with 
of  ma„kind-a  docfatrwhlh  alertT  «  *'''  ^'^P^-ence  and  deepest  convictions 
make  men,  and  that  the  Ily  df&  ^n^e  beTw'eTth*:  ^T[\tJ^?t  «rcumstances 
ciiminal  is  a  difference  simnlv  in  tL=fT       *h."°5'^'''.*"""t ''°<1  the  basest 
of  the  surroundingf  Some'^men    eaoWV     tl  ^^^  ^""^^^^  the  character 
upon  it,  either  in  his  feelings  Tesne^H.^-     '  **",'  ","  "'^'^  ^^^'''^^^  ".  "^  acts 
.noral  character  of  the  acS  of  £^s°  Sd    Xt  wf'n"  f'  K^^'^''':''  "*  '"^^ 
doctrine  so  monstrous,   yet  rememberthat  in  f  J     ^'*'  ^^'^^.  ^"J^oting  a 
have  a  power  over  character  and  iTfr      W    '  ™  **  ^'"^J'  ^.'^''1  «ense,  circumstances 
among  ourselves.      How  ma^  promised  ar        T°  •  ''  "T  °f  *'^<'  «'»>^°>onest 
afterwards  be  kept  without  d^n/mor«t.        T"  "",  '''"'^  ^*«  that  cannot 
the  public  mind  is  filM  with°h™Tf  "^  *°.""''f^'' "''•^"thers!     When 

who  has  been  universally  tiuld  r/LT!  *''''°'-y'  O' ^^en  men  see  one 
the  tendency  is  to  denv  to  the  !^-™"    fl^''^'^'  convicted  of  some  base  crime, 
to  attribute  to  a  momenfarv  imnuW  jf    •'  "O"""";^  fe-^li^S^  of  humanity,  and 
come  of  longJormed  habits  of  t&f  ^  "'!!?!,""''''  '^^"^t  has  been  the  out- 
sudden  freaks  of  this  sort     but  ?ll  t>f  ^  ?""^  P.'""''"^^^-     ^^^'^  g™^«  =ot  by 
from  its  surroundiai    and    vear  hv         '"'?.*  "' ^''^'  '''"^^^  "^  nourishment 
assimilates  th.se  toftself'  Civil  L  f'        •'J"''  ''  ""^^  ""^  imperceptible, 
ever  requires  its  past    which  men  Ll  f™/'' -P""^'""'  and  its  future,  God 
a  lesson  from,  and  see   ome  ^aW  S\eTo.b'  '^T     1'  "^^  ^exele^m 
formation  of  the  solid  eartHn"  w Wh   t  teachings  of  geology  regarding  the 

from  its  formation  that  once  Tt  was  to?.     .  .'    .^^i"  ^^^  ™°'^'  ="^''  l^'*™ 
wind!     Behold  in  that  ropkL^  7   •r^x.^'^'''''"'*'   ^lown  about  by  every 

mark  left  by  the^Iv^^Ttl  Mit'w '^'  ^''f^*  "^  '^'  '^^  """'  t^^ripp^ 
fell  there  ages  before.  Now  all  "olid  ^'i,Tf  ^T"^  °^  ^^'  ^^»-''^°P  ^^^  it 
So  do  we  find  character  and  life  da  v  foimiu"*;-;  •?';*  °'^«"t^asf'^  otherwise. 
Blow  action  of  outward  circumstLcos  tZ^  itself  and  bemg  formed,  by  the 
physical  frame.  The  baWrowT^n?!  ,^  ^V"  *"  the  mind  as  food  is  to  the 
an^  healthy  exercise  t  does  :«"  melund""''''' ^ 
extent  by  means  of  what  is  su^  b  th:'srrroun^gf ""  '""'  ""^"^  "^ '"«« 

Ea?aeSgTsTa%5tlwS,ib*^r^  temptation,  never  felt  before 
..erent  person  Lm=lti'LS\:^^t^;Lr^jr&vi 


OHAF.  Till.  SOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


thought  passing  through  his  mind,  the  very  possibility  of  attaining  such  a 
position,  would  give  a  shock  to  the  moral  nature  of  a  man  who  had  been 
wont  to  regulate  his  life  by  expediency.  Circumstances  not  only  suggest 
new  temptations,  but  also  give  an  intensity  to  those  already  felt.  As  we  pass 
from  youth  to  manhood  and  womanhood,  we  enter  into  a  new  world,  peopled 
with  inhabitants  whom  we  may  have  seen  before,  but  only  as  trees  walking,  not 
in  distinct  and  definite  outline.  Now  they  become  actual  powers  in  life.  They 
speak  to  us  in  a  language  we  can  understand,  and  inspire  us  with  new  ideas. 
So  when  we  enter  into  new  relationships  in  life  we  extend  the  area  of  our  pleasures, 
it  may  be,  but  we  also  make  new  desires  and  wants  possible,  and  expose  our 
moral  nature  to  new  dangers.  It  is  a  mere  commonplace  to  say  that  city  life, 
to  those  who  have  been  brought  up  in  the  quiet  of  the  country,  will  awaken  new 
cravings.  A  few  years  amid  these  surroundings  will  be  sufficient  to  change  the 
old  ways  of  thought  and  habits  of  life.  It  is  not  so  much  that  the  promises 
before  made,  and  the  views  of  life  entertained,  betokened  any  unreality  or 
hypocrisy,  but  that  they  were  the  outcome  of  ignorance  and  inexperience  of 
life.  From  this  point  of  view,  and  in  their  bearing  on  this  subject,  nothing  can 
be  more  instructive  than  the  examples  recorded  for  our  guidance  in  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  '' profitable  indeed  for  correction  and  discipline  in  righteousness." 
Had  Cain  been  told  that  one  day  he  would  lift  up  his  hand  against  Abel  his 
brother,  he  would,  and  not  without  feeling,  have  said,  "  Am  I  a  dog?" 
Joseph*s  brethren  could  hardly  have  sold  their  brother  into  slavery  had  they  not 
first  fitted  themselves  for  this  by  envy,  malice,  and  hatred.  Nor  did  Potip bar's 
wife  persecute  Joseph  altogether  from  pure  hatred,  but  because  her  conduct  made 
this  necessary,  in  order  that  she  might  appear  righteous  in  the  eyes  of  his 
master.  Suppose  we  apply  the  same  principles  to  the  crimes  associated  with 
Christ's  death.  Pilate  was  not  a  dog,  yet  he  did  *'  great  things."  He  simply 
gave  way  to  popular  clamour,  in  order  to  gain  popular  favour  (a  vice  by  no 
means  confined  to  Eoman  governors),  and  out  of  this  weakness,  or  time-serving 
policy,  came  all  his  guilt  and  crime.  If  we  judge  the  traitor  Judas  by  the 
same  standard,  we  shall,  perhaps,  stand  more  in  awe  of  that  which  leads  men 
to  awful  crimes.  His  terrible  end  shows  that  he  did  not  realise  where  his 
avarice  and  his  greed  were  leading  him.  Step  by  step,  instead  of  resisting  the 
tempter,  he  yielded  to  circumstances,  and  at  last  found  himself  completely  under 
the  powers  of  darkness.     **  And  it  was  night,"  says  the  Evangelist. 

III.  If  we  could,  in  one  sentence,  point  the  moral  lesson  of  the  history  of 
crime  in  all  ages,  and  in  all  countries,  it  would  be  this  for  us  all :  *'Is  thy 
servant  a  dog  ?  "  No,  thy  servant  is  no  dog.  He  is  a  man — has  in  him  two 
natures  struggling  for  the  mastery.  He  is  not  without  his  good  impulses. 
Perhaps  he  often  resolves  to  give  himself  up  to  their  sway,  but  he  yields  too 
readily  to  the  passions  that  war  against  the  soul ;  he  gives  way  to  the  circum- 
stances that  surround  him,  and  that  appeal  to  him.  Visit  our  great  convict 
prisons.  Who  are  their  immates  ?  No  doubt  many  of  the  so-called  criminal 
classes  are  men  and  women  who  come  from  the  lowest  ranks  of  the  community. 
Yes,  but  they  are  not  all  such;  yea,  these  very  names  may  blind  us  to  the 
origin,  progress,  and  end  of  wicked  deeds.  The  ** criminal  classes"  are  what 
they  are  because  of  the  power  oi  circumstances  over  human  nature ;  because 
"  man  is  also  flesh,"  and  when  once  he  gives  way  to  the  baser  passions,  tends 
ever  to  sink  lower  and  lower  in  the  scale  of  being,  to  hand  down  his  very  vices 
to  his  childr(m.  But  you  will  find  many  in  these  crowds  to  whom  all  life's 
pleasures  are  now  denied,  who  have  belonged  to  the  higher  classes  of  society. 
They  yielded  to  the  lie,  they  gave  way  to  passion,  they  yielded  themselves  up  to 
the  pleasures  of  sin.  Now  they  stand  aghast  at  the  position  in  which  they  have 
placed  themselves,  and  the  depth  to  which  they  have  fallen.  Had  you  told  them 
of  this  terrible  fall  years  before,  they  would  have  been  amazed  and  incredulous. 
"  Therefore,  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 
478 


noMtL^TIC  COMMENTARY:   KlNO^.  OBap  Vill. 


IV.  ^ly  text  seems  to  suggest  that  much  of  what  passes  for  virtue  amongst  us 
may  simply  he  vice  not  manifested  by  circumstances.  How  much  do  women  who 
are  sometimes  boastful  owe  to  the  fact  that  the  world  is  harder  in  its  judgments 
on  their  sins,  than  in  the  case  of  the  other  sex  !  How  much  to  the  fact  they  are 
more  protected  by  circumstances !  The  rich  man  knows  nothing  of  the  tempta- 
tions of  the  man  hard  pressed  by  circumstances,  and  hence  his  hard  and  unjust 
censures.  Tlie  poor  man,  protected  by  his  very  poverty,  knows  not  the  tempta- 
tion of  those  nur.-ed  in  the  lap  of  wealth ;  hence,  when  he  liears  of  the  sins  of 
the  other,  he  flatters  himself  on  his  superiority.  He  owes  it  not  to  his  moral 
heroism,  but  to  his  surroundings.  We  have  spoken  much  of  the  power  of  cir- 
cumstances. Let  not  man  think  he  is  the  creature  of  his  surroundings.  By 
God^s  grace  he  may  rise  above  them,  and  triumph  over  them,  making  his  very 
passions  minister  to  his  success,  and  making  his  enemies  liis  benefactors.  There 
is  for  man,  frail,  weak,  temptable  as  he  is,  and  surrounded  by  every  thing  that  can 
minister  to  his  weakness,  one,  and  only  one  safe  path.  It  is  the  way  of  holiness. 
It  is  the  path  of  humility  and  obedience  to  the  Divine  word.  These  examples 
are  given  us  as  beacon  lights  to  warn  of  danger,  and  to  point  to  the  one  and  only 
way  of  safety.  He  only  is  perfectly  safe  who  commits  his  way  to  the  Lord,  who 
yields  himself  to  the  guidance  of  the  word,  who  is  conscious  of  weakness,  and 
who,  ceasing  from  man,  looks  above  him  to  the  strong  Son  of  God,  who  can 
succour  him  when  tempted.  He  only  is  safe  who  has  been  delivered  from  him- 
self, and  who  is  being  '*  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation." 
— C.  W.  P. 

GEBM  NOTES  OA  tb::e  vebses. 

Verses    7-15.   Hazael   discovered.  If  we  love  and  serve  God,  we  shall 

1.     Unconscious    wickedness       Hazael  not  be  anxious  to  know  whether  we 

had   a    heart   that    was    capable    of  shall  live  or  die.      3.   The  prediction 

planning  and  executing  great  wicked-  accomplished.  Elisha  looked  in  Hazael's 

ness,    yet  knew  it  not.     Would  not  face  and  read  his  character  and  history 

believe  it  when   told.     If  we   could  there.      Wept    at    that     sad     sight. 

have  the  wickedness  of  our  hearts  dis-  Hazael  was  indignant,  yet    did    the 

closed  to  us,   how  appalled  we  should  crime  predicted  of  him.     Had  he  tho- 

be.     We  judge  ourselves  by  the  past,  roughly  believed  it  to  be  possible,  and 

That  is  bad   enough      But  we  think  been    right-hearted,    how   he   would 

we  shall  and   can  do  nothing   worse  have  prayed.     Let  us  believe  the  pos- 

than  that.     We  forget  that  the  things  sibility  of  future  sin,  and  pray  earnest- 

of  the  past  furnish  only  a  hint  of  the  ly  for  delivering  grace.     If  we  stand, 

direction  of  the  future,   and  may  be  let  us  take  heed   est  we  fall.     Many 

excelled  in  the  future.     More  evil  in  strong  men  have  fallen  ;  let  us  not  be 

each  of  us,  even  the  best,  than  we  too  self-reliant.     Huzael  might  recall 

suppose.     We   should  fear  ourselves,  the  prophet's    words  when  too   late, 

distrust  ourselves,  and  only  trust  God.  So  may  we.    Let  us  seek  Divine  grace 

What    might    we   do    under    severe  betimes.     Learn^  : — ].   To  trust  in  the 

temptation.     No  safeguard  against  sin  Lord  at  all  times.     2.   To  put  no  con- 

but  in  the  help  of  God.     2.  Anxious  Jidence  in  the  flesh.     3.  Not  to  judyeof 

enquiry.      Benhadad    a    wicked    and  the  future  ly  our  present  feelings.     4. 

idolatrous  king.     Very  ill  and  full  of  S^eh  Bivine  forgiveness  of  the  past ^  and 

anxious     concern.      Has    no   one   to  Divine  guidance  for  the  future. — Class 

enquire   of  but  the    prophet   Elisha,  and  Btsh. 
whose  God  he  denied.     In  life  many 

deride  those  ministers  of  religion  whom  Verses  7-1 0.    The  power  of  a  holy 

they  send  for  in  sickness,  and  disobey  character.     1.   Is  recognised  every- 

that  God  whose  pardon  they  need  in  where,  even  by  the  enemies  of  God  : 

sickness  as  the  only  source  of  comfort.  "  The  man  of  God  is  come   hither  " 

479 


Ctti-P.  Vllt 


BOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS, 


(verse  7).  2.  Inspires  the  hope  of 
Buccour  in  affliction  :  "  Enquire  of 
the  Lord  by  him,  saying,  Shall  I 
recover  of  this  disease  ?  "  (verse  8). 
3.  Commands  the  deference  of  the 
rich  and  powerful  (verse  9).  4.  Gives 
the  deepest  significance  to  words 
spoken  at  a  critical  moment  (verse  10). 
—  The  subduing  power  of  suffer- 
ing. 1.  Bears  down,  the  strongest 
and  proudest  warrior  2.  Convinces 
the  idolater  of  the  helplessness  and 
vanity  of  his  own  deities.  3.  Eenders 
the  sufferer  ready  and  eager  to  receive 
help  from  any  quarter.  Benhadad 
humbly  seeks  assistance  from  the  man 
whose  life  he  had  threatened  (chapter 
vi.  13).  In  the  days  of  his  health 
and  prosperity  he  had  not  heeded  the 
lesson  of  Naaman's  cure,  but  in  the 
hour  of  sickness  he  consults  the  same 
wonderful  physician. 

Yersea  7,  8.  Benhadad  upon  the 
sick  bed.  1 .  The  rebellious,  haughty 
and  mighty  king,  the  arch-enemy  of 
Israel,  who  had  never  troubled  him- 
self about  the  living  God,  lies  in 
wretchedness ;  he  has  lost  courage,  and 
now  he  seeks  the  prophet,  whom  he 
once  wished  to  capture,  just  as  a 
servant  seeks  his  master.  The  Lord 
can  with  his  hammer,  which  breaketh 
in  pieces  even  the  flinty  rock,  also 
make  tender  the  hearts  of  men. 
Those  who  are  the  most  self-willed 
in  prosperity  are  often  the  most  des- 
pairing in  misfortune.  I^ot  until  the 
end  approaches  do  they  seek  God ;  but 
He  cannot  help  in  death  those  who 
have  never  thought  of  Him.  2.  He 
does  not  send  to  ask  the  prophet, 
What  shall  I,  a  poor  sinner,  do  that  I 
may  find  grace  and  be  saved  ?  but 
only  whether  he  shall  recover  his 
health.  The  children  of  this  world 
are  only  anxious  for  bodily  welfare  ; 
about  eternal  welfare  they  are  in- 
different. It  should  be  our  first  care 
in  severe  illness  to  set  our  house  in 
order  and  to  surrender  ourselves  to 
the  will  of  God.  The  time  and  the 
hour  of  death  are  concealed  from  men, 
and  it  is  vain  to  enquire  about  them. 

Verse 7.  The  man  of  God  is  come! 
480 


That  was  the  cry  in  the  heathen  city 
of  Damascus,  and  the  news  penetrated 
even  to  the  king,  who  rejoiced  to  hear 
it.  This  did  not  occur  to  Elisha  in  any 
city  of  Israel.  Blessed  is  the  city  and 
the  country  where  there  is  rejoicing 
that  a  Man  of  God  is  come  ! — Lange. 

—  Whether  for  the  idolatries,  or 
for  the  famine  of  Israel,  the  prophet 
is  gone  into  Syria,  no  doubt  Naaman 
welcomed  him  thither,  and  now  would 
force  upon  him  thanks  for  his  cure, 
which  the  man  of  God  would  not 
receive  at  home.  How  famous  is  he 
now  grown  who  was  taken  from  the 
team !  His  name  is  not  confined  to 
his  own  nation  ;  foreign  countries  take 
notice  of  it,  and  kings  are  glad  to  listen 
to  him,  and  woo  him  with  presents. 
The  king  of  Syria,  whose  counsels  he 
had  detected,  rejoiced  to  hear  of  his 
presence ;  and  now,  as  having  forgotten, 
he  had  sent  a  whole  host  to  beseige  the 
prophet  in  Dothan,  sends  an  honour- 
able messenger  to  him,  laden  with  the 
burden  of  forty  camels. — Bj^.  Kail, 

Verse  9.  What  will  not  princes  part 
with  for  their  life  and  health  ? 
"  Wherefore  should  I  die,  being  so 
rich?"  said  Cardinal  Beauford, 
Chancellor  of  England  in  the  reign  of 
Henry  VI.  **If  the  whole  realm  would 
save  my  life,  I  am  able  either  by 
policy  to  get  it,  or  by  riches  to  buy  it. 
Fie  !  will  not  death  be  hired  ?  Will 
money  do  nothing  ?  " 

Verses  11-13.  The  possibilities  of 
human  character  detected  and  ex- 
posed. I.  That  some  men  are  especially 
gifted  in  reading  the  tendencies  of  human 
character.  Elisha  had  supernatural 
discernment.  He  saw  in  the  eyes  of 
Hazael,  as  in  a  mirror,  the  reflection 
of  his  true  character,  and  had  the 
courage  to  tell  him  of  it.  Much  of  the 
real  man  is  imaged  in  the  face,  though 
it  is  possible  to  cherish  the  foulest 
villany  under  a  misleading  exterior. 
11.  That  the  vision  of  prof^pecttve 
wichedness fills  a  tender  heart  with  pro^ 
found  grief.  Elisha  beheld,  as  in  a 
panorama,  the  enormities  Hazael 
would  perpetrate,  and  the  prophet 
wept  not  only  because  of  the  obduracy 


EOMILETIG  COMALENTART:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  vni. 


and  cruelty  of  character  he  foresaw  in 
Hazael,  but  also  because  of  the  suffer- 
ings he  saw  coming  on  his  own  nation 
on  account  of  their  sins.  How  much 
grief  is  spared  to  some  parents  that  they 
cannot  see  the  crimes  their  children 
afterwards  commit !  Tl  ey  have  grief 
enough  when  they  dis  ov.r  the  un- 
doubted facts,  without  the  torture  of 
anticipation.  III.  That  man  indig- 
nantly spurns  the  imputation  of  great 
crimes  of  which  he  is  unconscious. 
*'  What  is  thy  servant — a  dog — that 
he  should  do  this  great  thing? "  The 
career  of  Hazael  illustrates  a  humiliat- 
ing truth,  that,  though  unconscious  of 
it,  there  is  in  human  nature  the  possi- 
bility of  the  greatest  crimes. 

Yerses  11,  12.  He  who  has  a  good 
conscience  is  never  disturbed  or  em- 
barrassed if  anyone  looks  him  directly 
in  the  eye ;  but  a  bad  conscience  can- 
not endure  an  open,  firm  look,  and 
trembles  with  terror  at  every  rustling 
leaf.  Elisha  weeps.  These  were  not 
tears  of  sentiment,  but  of  the  deepest 
pain,  worthy  of  a  man  of  God,  who 
knows  of  no  greater  evil  than  the 
apostacy  of  his  people  from  the  living 
God,  the  determined  contempt  for  the 
Divine  Word,  and  the  rejection  of  the 
Divine  Grace.  Where  are  the  men 
who  nowadays  weep  such  tears  ? 
They  were  also  tears  of  the  most  faith- 
ful love,  which  is  not  easily  provoked, 
thinketh  no  evil,  vaunteth  not  itself, 
and  is  not  puffed  up.  So  our  Lord 
wept  once  over  Jerusalem  (Luke 
xix.  41),  and  Paul  over  Israel  (Rom. 
ix.  1-3). — Lange, 

Yerse  11.     Heart  reading.     We 

believe  the  man  lives  not,  and  never 
did  live,  who  could  stand  such  inspec- 
tion without  quailing  before  it.  Is 
there  one  who  can  affirm  that  he  could 
stand  with  unblanched  cheek  before 
the  man  whom  he  believed  to  be  view- 
ing hie  naked  soul,  divested  of  all  the 
purple  and  fine  linen  which  cover  its 
littleness — its  foulness — its  deformi- 
ties —  its  soreness  from  the  outer 
world  ?  Is  there  one  who  could 
endure,  without  confusion  of  face — 
without  a  quivering  frame — the  keen 


dissection  of  his  character,  his  con- 
duct, his  spirit,  by  even  the  most 
friendly  hand  in  the  world  ?  Would 
he  be  content  that  any  human  eye 
should  trace  the  tortuous  meanderings 
of  feeling  in  regard  to  any  one  matter 
in  which  he  has  ever  been  engaged — 
the  unholy  thought — the  ungenerous 
imputation — the  low  suspicion — the 
doubt — the  dislike — the  covetousness 
— the  hate — the  contention — the  lust 
of  the  flesh — the  lust  of  the  eye — the 
pride  of  life — that  more  or  less  enter 
into,  and  defile  with,  the  prints  of 
viJlanous  hoofs  the  fairest  garden  of 
life  ?  In  this  we  show  how  much  more 
fear  we  have  of  man  than  of  God.  To 
us  it  is  of  infinitely  less  concernment, 
both  for  this  world  and  the  world  to 
come,  what  man  thinks  of  us,  than 
what  God  thinks — what  man  knows 
than  what  God  knows.  Yet,  while 
we  shrink  with  such  instinctive  dread 
from  the  too  near  survey  of  fellow- 
sinners,  we  manage  to  get  on  very 
quietly,  with  small  trouble  of  mind, 
in  the  perfect  knowledge  that  One 
who  cannot  be  mistaken  has  a  sleepless 
eye  fixed  with  unceasing  vigilance 
upon  our  hearts.  This  keen  suscepti- 
bility to  the  inspection  and  good 
opinion  of  man,  and  this  comparative 
indifference  to  the  constant  survey  of 
God,  is  a  familiar  thing,  and  strikes 
us  little  because  it  is  familiar ;  but  it 
is  nevertheless  one  of  the  strangest 
anomalies  of  our  nature,  and  is  beheld 
with  astonishment  and  grief  by  the 
angels  of  God.  In  their  view  it  is  an 
inversion  of  the  whole  order  of  life  and 
being.  To  them  God  is  all — His 
inspection  is  all;  and  that  different 
state  of  things  which  gives  more 
practical  importance  to  the  survey  of 
a  sinful  fellow-creature  like  ourselves, 
must  present  a  greater  mystery  than 
any  of  those  deep  problems  in  material 
or  spiritual  nature  which  men  have 
vainly  laboured  for  a  thousand  years 
to  solve.  To  us  it  is  plainer.  Evil  is, 
alas !  more  intelligible  to  man  than  to 
angels ;  and  the  good  and  the  true  is 
more  intelligible  to  them  than  to  us. 
It  is  sin  which  has  cast  a  veil  between 
our  souls  and  God — a  veil  transparent 
to  Him,  but  opaque  to  us.  He  sees 
H  48i 


CHAP.    VIH. 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


us  as  clearly  in  our  deformity  as  He 
did  in  our  beauty  ;  but  we  have  ceased 
to  see  Him  as  He  is.  "We  do  not  realise 
the  unseen.  We  live  by  sight,  and  not 
by  faith.  How  different  would  be  our 
conversation  and  our  walk  if  we  lived 
and  moved  in  the  ever-present  con- 
sciousness that  the  Unseen  Eye  was 
upon  us,  and  that  the  opinion  of  us 
hereafter  to  be  pronounced  in  the 
presence  of  the  assembled  universe 
is  a  matter  of  inconceivably  more  im- 
portance to  us  than  all  that  the  world 
can  think  or  say.  Let  us  believe  that 
to  walk  and  act  from  day  to  day  with 
this  as  a  vital  consciousness  about  us 
— without  any  supreme  anxiety  but 
to  walk  so  as  to  please  God — is  a  most 
pleasant  life — is  the  very  antepast  of 
Heaven.  There  is  no  bondage  in  it.  It 
is  perfect  freedom  ;  and  is  happiness  as 
complete  as  this  world  allows.— ^^^^o. 

Yerse  13.  "Wicked  men  are  carried 
into  those  heights  of  impiety  which 
they  could  not  in  their  good  mood  have 
possibly  believed.  Nature  is  subject 
to  favourable  opinions  of  herself,  and 
will  rather  mistrust  a  prophet  of  God 
than  her  own  good  disposition.  How 
many,  from  honest  beginnings,  have 
risen  to  incredible  licentiousness, 
whose  lives  are  now  such  that  it  were 
as  hard  for  a  man  to  believe  they  had 
ever  been  good,  as  to  have  pursuaded 
them  once  they  should  prove  so  des- 
perately ill ! — Bp.  Hall, 

—  Subserviency  before  men  is 
always  joined  with  falseness  and 
hypocrisy.  Therefore,  trust  no  one 
who  is  more  than  humble  and  modest. 
Hazael  called  himself  a  dog,  while  he 
plotted  in  his  heart  to  become  king  of 
a  great  people.  It  is  the  way  with  all 
hypocrites  that  they  bend  and  cringe, 
humble  themselves  and  conceal  their 
tricks,  until  they  perceive  their  oppor- 
tunity and  have  found  the  key  of  the 
situation.  There  is  scarcely  anything 
more  discordant  and  disgusting  than 
the  dialect  of  self-abasement  when  it 
bears  upon  its  face  the  stamp  of  affec- 
tation and  falsehood. 

Verses  14,  15.     The  regicide.     1. 
Does   not   scruple   to   tell  a  lie.     2. 
482 


Seeks  to  commit  his  great  crime  in 
such  a  way  as  to  create  least  suspicion. 
3.  Is  spurred  on  by  an  ungovernable 
ambition.  4.  Nevers  reaps  the  advan- 
tage for  which  he  has  sacrificed 
everything. 

—  It  is  the  curse  which  rests  upon 
him  who  has  sold  himself  to  sin,  that 
all  which  ought  to  awaken  his 
conscience  and  terrify  and  shock  him 
out  of  his  security,  only  makes  him 
more  obstinate,  and  pushes  him  on  to 
carry  out  his  evil  designs. 

Verse  15.  Buchanan  tells  of 
Natholicus,  the  thirty-first  king  of 
the  Scots,  that,  having  usurped  the 
crown,  he  sent  a  trusty  friend  to  a 
famous  witch,  to  know  what  success 
he  should  have  in  his  kingdom,  and 
how  long  he  should  live.  The  witch 
answered  that  he  should  shortly  be 
murdered,  not  by  an  enemy,  but  by 
his  friend.  The  messenger  instantly 
enquired,  by  what  friend  ?  "  Ey  thy- 
self," said  the  witch.  The  messenger 
at  first  abhorred  the  thought  of  any 
such  villany;  but  afterwards,  con- 
ceiving that  it  was  not  safe  to  reveal 
the  witch's  answer,  and  yet  that  it 
could  not  be  concealed,  he  resolved 
rather  to  kill  the  king  to  the  content 
of  many,  than  to  hazard  the  loss  of 
his  own  head.  Thereupon,  at  his 
return,  being  in  secret  with  the  king 
to  declare  to  him  the  witch's  answer, 
he  suddenly  slew  him. — Trapp. 

—  At  heart  proud,  haughty,  and 
imperious,  Hazael  affects  humility  and 
submissiveness.  Towards  his  master, 
who  had  entrusted  him  with  the  most 
important  commission,  he  is  false  and 
treacherous.  He  shrinks  from  no 
means  to  attain  his  object.  He  lies 
and  deceives,  but,  at  the  same  time, 
he  is  cunning  and  crafty,  and  knows 
how  to  conceal  his  traitorous  purposes. 
When,  alarmed  and  exposed  by  the 
words  of  the  prophet,  he  can  no  longer 
keep  them  secret,  he  marches  on  to  the 
crime  ;  although  he  seeks  to  execute  it 
in  such  a  way  that  he  may  not  appear 
to  be  guilty.  With  all  this  he  com- 
bines energy,  courage,  cruelty,  and  a 
blind  hatred  against  Israel,  as  the 
sequel  shows.      On  account  of  these 


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  vm. 


qualities  he  is  well  fitted  to  be,  in  the  even  in  thy  chair  of  state,  and  shall 
hand  of  God,  a  rod  of  anger,  and  a  staff  check  all  thy  royal  triumphs  with, 
of  indignation.  The  Lord  makes  the  ''Thou  hast  founded  thy  throne  in 
vessels  of  wrath  serviceable  for  the  blood  ! "  I  am  deceived  if  this  wet 
purposes  of  His  government ;  and  here  cloth  shall  not  wipe  thy  lips  in  thy 
we  have  again,  as  often  in  the  history  jolliest  feasts,  and  make  thy  best 
of  redemption,  an  example  of  wicked-  morsels  unsavoury.  Sovereignty  is 
ness  punished  by  wickedness,  and  of  painful  upon  the  fairest  terms ;  but 
godless  men  made,  without  their  will  upon  treachery  and  murder,  torment- 
or knowledge,  instruments  of  holiness  ing.  Woeful  is  the  case  of  that  man 
and  justice. —  Lange.  whose  public  cares  are  aggravated  with 
—  0  !  Hazael ;  thou  shalt  not  thus  private  guiltiness ;  and  happy  is  he 
easily  stop  the  mouth  of  thine  own  that  can  enjoy  a  little  with  the  peace 
conscience.  That  shall  call  thee  traitor,  of  an  honest  heart. — Bishop  Sail. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  16-29. 

The  Woeful  Disastees  of  an  Unholy  Alliance. 

In  this  paragraph  we  detect  traces  of  the  baneful  influence  of  the  iniquitous 
Jezebel.  The  brief  histories  of  Jehoram  and  Ahaziah  present  a  terrible 
example  of  the  way  in  which  one  bad  woman  can  radically  corrupt  entire 
dynasties  and  kingdoms,  and  of  the  curse  that  rests  upon  matrimonial  connec- 
tions which  are  only  formed  in  order  to  attain  political  objects.  The  kingdom 
of  Judah  became  tainted  with  the  idolatry  that  had  degraded  and  enfeebled 
Israel,  and  there  was  danger  that  the  social  morality  of  Jerusalem  would  sink 
to  the  low,  black  level  of  Samaria.  The  dynasty  of  Omri  was  the  most  disastrous 
in  the  annals  of  Israel,  and  is  stained  with  the  darkest  crimes.  Such  a  succes- 
sion of  weak  and  wicked  rulers  could  not  continue  for  ever.  The  doom  of  the 
dynasty  is  declared.  The  darkening  clouds  of  vengeance  are  closing  round. 
The  victims  and  the  avenger  are  being  prepared.  The  hour  to  strike  is  at 
hand.  We  have  here  an  indication  of  the  woeful  disasters  that  befell  Judah 
because  of  its  unhappy  connections  with  Israel,  and  how  the  wrong-doers  were 
ripening  for  punishment. 

I.  That  an  unholy  alliance  may  be  unwisely  sanctioned  by  good  and  holy 
parents.  Jehoshaphat,  the  father  of  Jehoram,  was  one  of  the  noblest  kings  of 
Judah.  Influenced  by  genuine  piety,  he  effected  important  reforms  in  his  king- 
dom. He  abolished  idolatry  ;  he  raised  a  formidable  army,  and  strongly  fortified 
the  frontiers  ;  he  promoted  a  flourishing  commerce  ;  he  administered  justice  with 
strict  impartiality  ;  he  maintained  and  encouraged  the  worship  of  Jehovah  ;  he 
was  beloved  by  his  people,  and  his  fame  spread  in  every  direction.  It  was  a 
serious  mistake  when  he  first  entered  into  confederacy  with  the  profane  court 
of  Israel.  His  connection  with  Ahab  in  war  (chap,  iii.),  and  with  Ahaziah  in 
commerce  (2  Chron.  xx.  35),  both  ended  disastrously.  But  the  greatest  wrong, 
and  what  became  a  fruitful  source  of  evil,  was  his  sanctioning  the  marriage  of 
his  son  with  a  daughter  of  the  house  of  Ahab.  If  he  was  induced  to  it  by 
the  prospect  of  advantage,  he  was  utterly  disappointed.  Not  only  did  he 
suffer  himself,  but  many  calamities  happened  to  his  descendants  in  consequence 
of  this  affinity.  Parents  cannot  be  too  careful  in  advising  their  children  as 
to  matrimonial  alliances ;  and  children  should  respect  the  counsel  and  riper 
judgment  of  parents  on  so  delicate  and  important  a  subject.  Mere  sentiment 
and  passion  should  not  be  allowed  to  blind  the  sense  of  what  is  just  and  wise 
and  holy.     The  best  of  parents  in  other  respects  may  be  weak  in  this.     And 

483 


CHAP,   viii.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


yet,  if  a  mistake  is  made,  it  is  made  for  life,  and  many  other  Kves  are  involved 

in  the  suffering. 

II.  That  an  unholy  alliance  often  leads  to  a  career  of  unexampled  wicked- 
ness (verse  18).  Thouiih  Jehoram  reigned  during  the  life-time  of  Jehosha- 
phat,  he  did  not  follow  the  good  example  of  his  fi:ther,  but  chose  Ahab  for  his 
pattern,  if  he  did  not  exceed  him  in  vileness  and  cruelty.  lie  murdered  his 
six  brothers,  as  it  would  appear,  for  no  other  reason  than  to  become  possessed 
of  the  treasures  which  his  father  bequ(  athed  to  them  (2  Chron.  xxi.),  not  from 
any  jealousy  that  they  would  interfere  with  the  succession  to  the  throne.  A 
king  who  did  not  shrink  from  fratricide  may  be  easily  conceived  capable  of 
any  crime.  Jehoram  grew  into  a  monster  of  impurity  and  wickedness,  and, 
after  a  brief  reign  of  eight  years,  he  died  of  a  horrible  desease,  unhonoured, 
and  unregretted.  It  is  some  consolation  to  society  that  the  career  of  its  most 
debauched  and  brutalised  members  is  brief.  Outraged  nature  retaliates  with 
suffering  and  premature  death.  A  bad  wife  may  drive  her  husband  to  the  vilest 
excesses  ;  there  is  no  escape  from  her  baleful  influence  but  in  the  grave.  How 
different  would  have  been  the  history  and  career  of  some  men  if  they  had 
married  differently ! 

III.  That  an  unholy  alliance  corrupts  and  demoralises  the  national  life. 

(verses  20-22).  Edom  and  Libnah  revolted.  They  despise  a  king  who  was  both 
weak  and  wicked.  Jehoram  made  some  attempt  to  put  down  the  rebellion,  and 
though  he  was  successful  in  a  night  engagement  against  the  Edomites,  his 
soldiers  gave  up  the  battle  and  ran  away  to  iheir  homes.  Edom,  which  had  been 
tributary  to  Judah  from  the  days  of  David,  was  thus  lost  to  Jehoram.  The 
national  life  was  demoralised,  and  the  people  were  heedless  as  to  what  became 
of  the  national  power  and  prestige.  Jehoram  had  the  memorable  distinction  of 
being  the  first  to  introduce  the  abominations  of  Baal  worship  to  Judah,  and  the 
result  was  soon  evident  in  the  lowering  of  the  moral  tone  of  the  national  character. 
In  the  rulership  of  Judah,  it  was  a  great  drop  from  Jehoshaphat  to  Jehoram ; 
but  in  the  moral  life  of  the  people  it  was  a  greater  drop  from  Jehovah  to  Baal ! 

IV.  That  an  unholy  alliance  infects  posterity  with  its  evils  (verses  25-29). 
The  bad  influence  of  Jehoram  did  not  die  with  him.  It  survived  in  Ahaziah, 
who  inherited  and  practised  the  worst  features  of  his  father's  example.  The 
history,  brief  as  it  is,  is  careful  to  point  out  his  relationship  to  the  worst  dynasty 
that  darkens  the  history  of  the  Jewish  kings,  and  to  show  the  predominating 
tendency  of  his  life  to  be  evil.  ''  He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  as  did 
the  house  of  Ahab."  Sin  hardens  the  heart  and  produces  obstinacy  of  disposi- 
tion. The  practice  of  sin  becomes  an  infatuation,  until  the  sinner  becomes 
incorrigible.    So  that 

'*  You  may  as  well 
Forbid  the  sea  for  to  obey  the  mooiii 
As  by  oath  remove,  or  counsel  shake^ 
The  fabric  of  his  lolly  ."—ShaJcspeare. 

But  the  network  of  retribution  is  being  drawn  tighter  round  its  victims.  It  is 
not  without  design  that  Joram,  Ahaziah,  and  Jezebel  are  brought  together  in 
Jezreel.  The  avenger  is  at  hand,  and  the  three  chief  representatives  of  the 
house  of  Ahab  must  be  the  first  to  fall. 

V.  That  the  worse  sins  of  an  unholy  alliance  cannot  revoke  the  Divine 
promise.  *'  Yet  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  Judah  for  David  His  servant's  sake, 
as  He  promised  him  to  give  him  alway  a  light  and  to  his  children"  (verse  19 
comp.  with  1  Kings  xi.  36).     By  the  formal  adoption  of  idolatry  Judah  had 

484 


MOMILETIC  COMMENFART:  KINGS, 


OHAP.  VIII. 


revolted  from  Jehovah  and  became  as  bad  as  Israel,  and,  but  for  the  Divine 
promise,  the  royaUamily  of  Judah  would  have  been  as  thoroughly  extirpated  as 
that  of  Israel.     0,  the  infinite  patience  of  God  !     The  basest  ingra   tude  the 
most  outrageous  sins,  cannot  invalidate  the  fidelity  of  God.     David  was  assured 
that  he  should  not  lack  a  successor  on  the  throne  of  Israel,  so  that  his  name 
thrM.       r  "  ''*'''•'  ^<>"'i°"f  J-.l'^Pt  burning  by  a  constant  Supply  of  oi ,  unTil 
the  Messiah  came,  in  whose  glorious  advent  the  greatest  earthly  luminarr  Should 
be  quenched      Tl,e  pledge,  though  in  at.eyanle  for  many  long   weary  years 
was  fully  redeemed.     And  now,  "while  ^vi.ked  men  from  generfiontoynera: 
tK>n  perish  in  their  sins,  the  son  of  David,  the  light  of  His  church,  evefuveth 
to  protect,  bless,  and  comfort  His  people." 

of^lffr^V~n  ,f'''"'l'>'"''.'\"''tfl>'t«ken  in  forming  the  friendships  andalUance, 
ilt-  \  ^'if!""^}"  "'^I'hief  has  resulted  from  an  ill  cmor led  marriage  T 
M  umon  should  be  entmed  into  that  is  not  based  on  the  muiual  lovt  of  God. 

OERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  FESSES. 

nouse  of  Ahab.     I.  Perversion  of  all  Ahab  and  Jezebel  to  his  son  as  a  wife 

divine  and  human  ordinances.  Wi(4ed  and  did  not  bear  in  mind  that  relationl 

and  corrupt  women  set  the  tone  and  ships  which  do  not  rest  upon  the  word 

ruled  over  their  weak  husbands.     II.  and'  cammandment  of  God  brin  Ts- 

Ld'ur in^;  ''S  °"7"'  r'':^'  r"--'"'  ''"'  '"^°-     therefore  beware 

^„   v,^r,^;u  ".I-  Contempt,  on  the  of  entering  into  relationships   which 

one  hand,  lor  the  richness  of  God's  long,  lack  the  bond  of  faith  and^unTtyof 

suffenug  and  goodness  ;  and,  on  the  spirit,  however  grand  or  advanta"  ous 

other,  for  the  warnings  of  God's  j  udg-  externally  they  may  seem  to  be      Do 

m.nts    and    chas  isen.ents.     What  a  not,   by  such  connections    transplant 

different  spirit  animated  the  household  the  Ahab  and  Jezebel  spWt  into  you 

fict^xvii '"8^^tf':"-?^'1%^i!^r'^'     '""''''   ^"^  "  -*«  ^^'-  cancer.'md 

(Acts  xvi  34?'  •■  *  ^^'^'PP'     t"'""^^   "'"^   <l«^'^°y«  t"    tte    very 

*  niL*      •  heart. — -Lange, 

—  The    importance    of    family 

relationships.  I.  The  great  influenee  Verse  18.  An  indiscreet  marriage 
^keh  they  exert  They  necessarily  I.  May  be  mistakenly  proSf; 
bring  about  relationship  in  spirit  and     the  best  of  parents.     IL  Takes  the 

mShliv      oin   '''f.r"^'  '"'     '"'-''"'^'"S    "^   --"^-i    life    morally 

^.^^l^^^t  t^irmisl^notei^rr^i 
r.t;;!rd%ux,%ih'^;^rd  '-''-  -'  ^^  "^^  -'  -«-^-'- 

rf'^ufetroVS  '^^o'''  "^"'"''^  n  ^'^t  ^'-  ^'^"^^  *^«  faithfulness  of 
nL  oKi  7       •  T'^u   ■     .^°^„'n'"»y  are      God,  who,  for  the  sake  of  the  fidelitv 

Jhlfi        T'*  **"  r  u  '''1»'''^o«^  of     of  the  father,  chastises  indeed  the  son 
these  connections,  and  therefore  make     but  yet  will  not  utterly  destrov  him 

cnaracter.       IL       The     duty     which  promise    to    sustain     His    church  — 

therefore     devolves     upon     us.        The  Cramer                                    cnuich.— 

calamities     which    even     the     pious  —The  Diviae  faithfulnP«      1     Ta 

Jehoshaphat  brought  upon  his  hLse,  not  rendo^ Taeffic^^^^^^^^^^ 

nay,  e.en  upon  his  country,  arose  irom  sin.     2.  Guarantees  the  f  uiaimearof 


485 


CHAP.  IX. 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


every  Divine  promise.  3.  May  well 
inspire  the  unbeliever  with  alarm.  4. 
Provides  the  light  of  hope  in  the 
darkest  period  of  human  history. 

Yerses  20-24.  A  demoralised 
monarch.     1.  Weakens    government. 

2.  Is  powerless  to  suppress  rebellion. 

3.  Loses  the  respect  and  attachment  of 
his  subjects.  4.  Dies  without  being  re- 
gretted, and  is  buried  without  sorrow. 

Verse  27.  The  influence  of  a  bad 
example.  1.  Is  felt  by  succeeding 
geneiations.  2.  Is  difficult  to  counter- 
act when  emanating  from  a  near  rela- 
tive. 3.  When  deliberately  followed 
tends  to  shorten  life,  and  leads  to 
misery  and  ruin. 

Yerses  28,  29.  Confederates  in  a 
false  religion.  1.  Are  capable  of 
strong  personal  attachments.  2.  Share 
with  one  another  the  risks  and  fortunes 
of  war.  3.  Not  devoid  of  sympathy 
in  affliction. 

Verse  29.    As  he  so  gladly  joined 


himself  to  Ahab's  family,  and  was  so 
fond  of  spending  his  time  with  them, 
there  it  was,  by  the  ordering  of  Divine 
providence,  that  he  mtt  his  end. 
Those  who,  by  their  hostility  to  the 
Lord,  belong  together,  must  come 
together,  that  they  may  perish 
together.  Jehoram  was  so  anxious  to 
be  healed  of  the  bodily  wound  which 
the  Syrians  had  given  him,  that  he  left 
the  army,  and  returned  to  Jezreel ; 
but  the  wounds  of  his  soul,  which  he 
had  inflicted  upon  himself,  caused  him 
no  trouble,  and  did  not  lead  him  back, 
as  they  should  have  done,  to  Him  who 
promised,  "  I  will  restore  health  unto 
thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy 
wounds"  (Jeremiah  xxx.  17).  The 
children  of  this  world  visit  one  another 
when  they  are  ill.  They  do  it,  how- 
ever, not  ia  order  to  console  the  sick 
one  with  the  word  of  life,  and  to 
advance  God's  purpose  in  afflicting 
him,  but  from  natural  love,  from 
relationship,  or  other  external  reasons. 
Their  visits  cannot,  therefore,  be  re- 
garded as  Christian  work. — Calwer 
Bib. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


THE    FALL    OF    THE    OMRIAN    DYNASTY. 


CRmcAL  AND  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Elisha  called  one  of  the  ehildren  of  the 
prophets — A  prophet-disciple,  occupying  towards  Elisha  the  same  relation  he  himself  once 
stood  in  towards  Elijah.  The  rabbis  suggest  it  was  Jut  ah.  This  anointing  of  Jf-hu  waa  a 
further  heritage  of  duty  bequeathed  by  Elijah  to  Elisha  (comp.  I  Kings  xix,  17  ;  seeiVo^e*  on 

2  Kiogs  viii.  7).   Box  of  oil — Fla>^k  or  vial,  "JTS)  from  JlDS-  to  trickle  down.    Ramoth-Gilead— 

'  -  T  r 

A  city  of  peculiar  importance  to  Judah  and  Israel,  as  aflfording  a  strong  defence,  east  of  Jordan, 
against  the  Syrians.  Verse  2.  Jehu — Doubtless  Joram's  ablest  general,  and  entrusted,  so 
Josephus  states,  with  supreme  command  of  the  Israelitish  army  at  Ramoth-Gilead  by  Juram 
on  his  being  wounded  (viii.  29).  Make  him  rise  up  from  among,  &c. — Do  it  privately,  for 
sake  of  thine  own  safety,  and  that  none  may  interrupt  thine  act  of  anointing  him.  Verse  4. 
Even  the  young  man  the  prophet — Or,  even  the  prophet's  young  man  ;  or,  himself  a  prophet 
(see  Note  on  v.  1,  supra).  Verse  8.  I  will  cut  off,  &c. —  Vide  Critical  Notes  on  1  Kings  xiv.  10. 
The  phrase  "  Shut  up  and  left  "  stands  for  those  who  are  of  age  and  those  who  are  minors. 
Verse  10.  In  the  portion  of  Jezreel — It  was  formerly  Naboth's  vineyard  (1  Kings  xxi.  16  sj., 

and  23).  The  "  portion  "—p^H  — in  its  wider  sense,  refers  to  the  strip  of  country  outside  the 
city's  wall,  hence  a  place  for  foul  deposits,  and  thus  suggests  Jezebel's  degradation  that  upon 

it  her  body  should  be  cast.    Verse  11.  This  mad  fellow— ^^Ilti^Dil— Wild  rhapsodist.    Soldiers 

▼  \  ;  - 
would  regard  the  grotesque  appearance  and  mysterious  conduct  of  this  young  man  as  indi- 
cating that  he  was  crazy.     Prophets  were  not  infrequently  regarded  as  "  mad  "  ;  the  divine 
fervour  in  them,  and  their  asceticism,  being  viewed  as  proof  (Jeremiah  xxix.  26;  Acts  xxvi.  26). 
486 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CHAP.   IX. 


Te  know  the  man  and  his  communication— Jehu  half  snsnAnfa  *»,o*  *u  i.  ^  , 
hoax  him  by  this  man's  action,  in  order  to  incite  him  to  revo  f^nr.  '  f •  ^^^  }^^  P.^^**"^  *« 
more  than  they  appeared  to  know.  Henc  their  SpW  '  False  MWv'uf'  T.''  '\'^  ^"7 
msmuation.  Verse  13.  Then  they  hasted  .  .  JehuisWThl?  ^'  T^^^^  ^.«°y  t^e 
in  Joram'8  overthrow,  and  their  proclamation  of  Jehu  proves  tratth'  f'^'^^t  ^/^"'^«<^«"«« 
for  Joram,  who  seems  to  have  quitted  the  scenes  of  w^r  nn  II  •  •  ^T^  ^^^  °°  '"^«P««'^ 

M.  29),  but  whose  wounds  weVnotsfs^ira^^^^^^^^^ 

IS  eaid  in  v.  16,  perhaps  satirically,  that  "Joram  lav  there  '•  v!t  Tif  l^l\  >•  *."'*"  " 
to  meet  Jehu  he  „aa  much  too  Jk  to  go  back  To X  scene  of  «:  ?  Su'h  to'^tuct' 7 -^f 
gence  or  md.Bference  would  make  his  captains  contemptuous,  which  premred Them  f  "'" 

Jehu,  who  was  evidently  popular  with  the  armv  !,»  n  ,»  rZi,  Prepared  them  to  welcome 
put  it  under  him-SprSs  it  on  thrflnnf  L  ^'  .^""^^^'y  man  his  garment,  and 
Verse  21.  Each  in  hisThanoVwent  out  asain^  "'  ''"T«=  («-*'■  "i-  7). 

-*  "n  t^'^'^r '"  7?^'  '<i-p4?firfhrtL':ttrkr  hfm  °  s  t:m.,:t':r'^ 
et:t\ttrter22':'y'up:L^^^^^^^^^^ 

as  to  the  war.  or  of  conspiracy  agLst  Wr^sdf.  WhTt'^ac  '  oTor"Zs'  LT  t  Y  "f  T 
from  a  subject  would  at  once  convey  to  Joram  Jehu's  revolt.  '  Sir  wftchir^aftT';;.' maty- 
Her  many  witchcrafts  continue  D^J  10],  spiritual  whoredom,  idolatry,  and  Q^3!^^^,  magLl 
incantations,  wMcmfts  in  general.     Verse  25.  Eemember  how  the  LorHS.,,1  ,v 

burden  upon  hin.-Or  "  took  up  this  oracle  concerning  him."  'a  divine^ttt'c'e  igainlt" 
person  or  place  .s  commonly  called  "a  burden"  (Isa.  xiii.  1,  &c.)     N^O  means  Lrden  ■ 
«methi,y  ^tercd,  amUcnce;  and  NtoJ  means  to  taheup,  lift  up;  hen'ce  bVi  i<t«'Z2  V(m 
tooJe  up  a  sentence  or  oracle.     Jehu  and  his  lientenanf  wpro  f^rr^+i,      •     *i    i.-       T~       "^^ 
overheard  the  prophets  sentence.     Verse  27  tmuTll'uKThrcL'rtt  'TZ^^" 
words  there  .a  an  om«s^n  in  the  MS.,  which  is,  however,  natura°y!u;ptd '^TntrU^X' 
verb  of  execution,  ma"!.     Verse  30.  Jezebel  painted  her  face  and  tired  her  head-i, 
decorated  herself  royally   brightening  her  eyes,  or  darkening  her  eyelids  with  antimon,  J 
lead-ore  powder,  and  building  up  her  head  adornments,  or  put  on  her  cr^n     He?oh^    f 
was  surely  less  to  captivate  Jehu  than  to  overawe  him  with  (,»,.  li,.?    t    crown.     Her  object 
Had  Zimrl  peace-Warning  Jehu  of  a  UkeTXa  ffings  xvi  To  18)!-^!  fT    ^'"'  ''• 


BOMIZETIOS  OF  VERSES  1-14. 
The  MnrasiEE  op  Divine  Vengeance. 


It  was  a  dark  day  for  Israel  when  Omri  became  its  king.     He  imposed 

dolatry  upon  the  people  by  the  strong  hand  of  law.     He  wa!  the  autZr  of 

those  celebrated  'statutes  "-celebruted  for  their  infamy-whfch'' made  Israel 

unon'?i-  •.  ^'""^  !>■  ^^)-  ^''^'^  ^°^  J^^-^bel  maintained  and  iroved 
upon  this  Idolatrous  policy.  Israel  became  utterly  corrupt,  and  as  an  Snce 
of  the  vigour  and  influence  of  the  rule  of  Ahab,  Judah  w^as  being  Lfectedwkh 
the  same  moral  poison.  Had  this  rule  continued  much  longed  There  was 
danger  that  the  Jewish  people  would  be  lost  in  heathenism,  andfhe  grand  nw 
pose  of  their  being  chosen  and  trained-the  maintenance  and  spread  of  the 
religion  of  Jehovah-would  have  been  frustrated.  In  furUieTance  of  he 
Divine  designs  and  m  the  interest  of  the  world,  the  dynasty  of  Omri  after  ! 
career  of  more  than  forty  years,  must  come  to  an  end.  All  warninrwere  dis 
regarded,  and  every  attempt  at  reformation  had  failed.     Jurment  can  be  ' » 

:T    I  Tslerrible ''  """'^''  "'  ""'ri  ^^"^'■^°-'  ^^  -a,ly\renter  upon  hU 
work      It  IS  terrible,  sanguinary  work  that  has  to  be  done   and  the  man  who 


487 


CHAP.  IX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 

I.  That  the  minister  of  Divine  vengeance  may  be  for  years  unconsciously 
preparing  for  his  work.  More  than  t\^enty  years  before,  the  Lord  revealed 
to  Elijah  the  agencies  by  which  the  wicked  house  of  Ahab  should  be  destroyed, 
and  among  them  was  Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi  (1  Kings  xix.  16,  l7).  This  man 
was  familiar  with  the  fearful  prediction  of  Elijah  against  Ahab  when  he  went 
to  take  possession  of  I^aboth's  vineyard,  and  though  fifteen  years  had  rolled 
away  since  then,  those  terrible  words  of  doom  were  vividly  remembered 
(1  Kings  xxi.  17-24  ;  comp.  with  verse  25).  Jehu  little  dreamed  that  he  waste 
be  the  selected  instrument  of  vengeance,  and  yet  circumstances  were  preparing 
him  for  the  office.  His  warlike  training  developed  the  qualities  necessary 
for  his  stern  and  sanguinary  work.  In  the  court  of  Ahab  was  being  prepared, 
all  unconsciously  to  himself,  the  agent  who  was  to  destroy,  with  unrelenting 
pitilessness,  the  whole  house  of  Ahab.  Wrong  cannot  triumph  for  ever.  It 
generates  the  power  which  by-and-bye  works  its  destruction.  The  very  means 
by  which  evil  gains  its  ends  are  used  for  its  punishment.  Napoleon,  the 
dictator  of  Europe,  won  his  power  by  war,  and  by  war  he  was  defeated  and 
humbled.     In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  bane  there  grows  the  antidote. 

II.  That  the  minister  of  Divine  vengeance  is  elevated  to  a  position  of 
power  and  authority  by  which  he  may  accomplish  his  mission.  1.  Jehu  is 
holemnly  anointed  king.  It  was  not  customary  to  anoint  kings,  except  on  the 
disturbance  of  the  succession,  as  in  the  case  of  Solomon  ;  or  on  the  interruption 
of  it,  as  in  the  case  of  Joash  (chap.  xi.  12) ;  or  on  the  transfer  of  the  govern- 
ment to  another  family,  as  in  this  case  of  Jehu.  It  seems  singular  that  a  man 
like  Elisha  should  lend  himself  to  conspiracy  and  rebellion ;  but  the  prophet 
was  acting  not  from  any  factious  spirit,  but  according  to  Divine  direction.  The 
time  to  act  was  come,  and  the  man  who  had  so  much  to  do — so  much  that 
ordinary  men  would  shrink  from — must  be  shown  by  the  solemn  and  significant 
act  of  anointing  that  he  is  fully  called  and  commissioned.  The  greater  the  work 
man  is  called  to  do,  the  more  important  is  it  he  should  be  powerfully  impressed 
he  is  empowered  to  do  it.  2.  Ilis  author iiy  is  speedily  and  publicly  recognised 
by  those  who  are  ready  to  help  him  in  his  mission  (verse  13).  The  validity  of 
Jehu's  appointment  to  the  kin^^hip  is  at  once  acknowledged  by  his  companions 
in  arms,  and  proclamation  is  mjide  with  trumpets  and  shouting.  The  army  is 
with  him;  his  authority  is  unquestioned;  his  power  is  supreme;  he  has  the 
means  of  carrying  out  his  terrible  woik  of  verg  ance.  The  readiness  with 
which  the  soldiery  acquiesce  in  the  new  order  of  things  indicates  how  feeble 
was  their  attachment  to  the  house  of  Ahab,  and  the  power  that  Jehu  must  have 
gained  over  them.  Peihaps  the  impression  was  deepening  on  the  popular  mind 
that  the  doom  of  the  house  of  Ahab  was  at  hand,  and  could  no  longer  be  delayed. 
"When  God  arises  to  judgment,  He  can  make  all  the  powers  of  heaven  and  earth 
contribute  to  the  accomplishment  of  His  vengeful  purposes. 

III.  That  the  minister  of  Divine  vengeance  is  clearly  informed  as  to  the 
character  of  the  work  he  is  called  to  do.  1.  It  is  a  work  of  compete  and 
terrible  vengeance  (vcrse^;  7-10).  The  whole  house  of  Ahab  is  to  be  cutoff; 
none  are  excepted.  "  When  wickedness  is  ripe  in  the  field,  God  will  not  let  it 
shed  to  grow  again,  but  cutteth  it  up  by  a  just  and  seasonable  vengeance."  A 
weak  man  would  have  quailed  and  trenbled  before  such  bloody  work  as  now 
lay  before  Jehu.  He  could  not  complain  of  ambiguity  ;  he  clearly  understood 
what  was  expected  of  him.  He  was  braced  up  for  the  occasion.  His  impetuous 
and  callous  nature  would  h  ad  him  to  do,  without  the  least  symptoms  of  com- 
punction, what  other  men  would  have  sickened  even  to  contemplate.  He  was 
reminded  by  the  reference  to  the  fate  of  Jeroboam  and  Baasha  (verse  9)  what 
would  be  his  own  fate  if  he  failed  to  carry  out  the  Divine  commands.  2.  The 
reason  for  the  vengeance  is  also  set  forth:  **  That  I  may  avenge  the  blood  of  my 

488  .  . 


nOMIlFTiC  COMMIBNTAltY:  KINGS, 


CHAP.  iX. 


servants  of  the  prophets,  and  the  blood  of  all  the  servants  of  the  Lord  "  (verse  7) 
God  does  not  forget  the  sufferings  and  wrongs  of  His  people.  Injury  done  to 
them  18  done  to  Himself,  and  His  justice  will  render  the  recompence.  Jezebel 
has  hunted  down  and  destroyed  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah,  wherever  found 
until  she  thought  they  were  extinct,  and  that  the  abominations  of  the  Baal- 
worship  were  universally  adopted.  It  was  a  savage  disappointment  to  her  that 
she  could  not  crush  Elijah  and  Elisha.  But  the  day  of  reckoning  has  come  • 
the  cry  of  innocent  blood  is  heard  ;  the  murdered  prophets  shall  be  avenged' 
It  18  an  addition  to  the  punishment  of  the  punished  when  they  clearly  under- 
stand the  reason  of  it.  Long-forgotten  sins  are  brought  back  vividly  to  the 
memory,  and  the  suff'ering  is  increased  by  the  consciousness  of  its  justice  Yet 
it  may  be  that  neither  executioner  nor  victim  fully  comprehend  all  the  reasons 
for  retribution. 

Lessons  :--1  .  It  is  utterly  futile  to  oppose  God.  2.  Though  the  patience  of  God 
delays  the  blow,  iniquity  shall  not  go  unpunished.  3.  The  ministers  of  Divine 
vengeance  are  ever  within  call, 

Elisha  and  Jehu  (verses  1-3). 

The  phrase,  "chiMren  of  the  prophets,"  in  this  passage,  indicates  men  who 
were  taught  by  a  prophet  or  prophets,  and  who  might  hope  in  due  time  to  fulfil 
the  office  themselves.     The  notion  of  a  class  of  men  under  this  kind  of  education 
18  very  puzzling  to  some  modern  readers.     *' Was  not  the  prophet  "  they  ask 
emphatically,  <nhe  inspired  man?     Were  not  hi.  words  false  if  they  did  not 
proceed  directly  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  ?     How  could  he  be  trained  or 
disciplined  to  utter  such    words?"      The  subject  is  a  very  important   one 
Elijah  was,  m  a  remarkable  sense,  the  solitary  man.     *<  1  alone,"  he  said    ''  am 
the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  while  the  prophets  of  Baal  are  four  hundred  an  J  fifty 
I  alone  am  left,  and  they  seek  my  life."     On  the  contrary,  his  successor,  Elisha* 
18  nearly  always  surrounded   by  companions,  disciples,  or  servants       Every 
passage  of  his  history   makes  us  understand  how   great  the  influence  of  the 
previous  teacher  had  been ;  how  true  it  was  that  there  were  numbers  who  had 
not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal  during  his  stay  upon  earth;  how  soon,  according 
to  what  seems  the  general  law  in  such  cases,  th(y  discovered  themselves  after 
he  had  left  it.     In  the  particular  instance  of  which  the  text  speaks,  a  younff 
man  out  of  the  schools  goes  by  the  direct  command  of  Elisha  to  execute  an  errand 
which  involved  nothing  else  than  the  overthrow  of  a  dynasty,  and  a  revolution 
of  two  kingdoms. 

I.  If  the  main  work  of  the  prophet  was  to  declare  that  such  an  event  would 
or  would  not  come  to  pass,  or  if  he  was  a  mere  ^olian  harp  from  which  a  chance 
breeze  drew  forth  certain  wild  and  irregular,  however  beautiful,  notes,  the  idea 
ot  preparation  involves  an  absurdity,  or  something  worse  than  an  absurdity 
On  that    supposition  it  must   mean,  if   it  means    anything,  an    initiation    of 
the   scholar  into   certain    tricks   by  which   his   predecessors   had   been   wont 
to  impose   upon  the  vulgar,  or  the  communication  to  him  of    certain   facts 
and  principles  known  to  them  by  which  he  might  acquire  a  reputation  for 
sudden  insight  and  discovery.     No  doubt  such  an  education  as  this  was  not 
unknown  in  the  old  world,  as  it  is  not  unknown  in  the  modern.     It  is  the 
ordinary  discipline  of  adepts  and  conjurors,  of  those  who  practise  on  men's 
tears   or  upon  their  curiosity,   of  those    who  appeal  to  their   conscience   by 
religious  deceptions,  or  to  their  sense  of  mysterious  powers  in  the  natural  world 
by  philosophical  deceptions.     But  the  Jewish  prophet  was  not  primarily  or 
characteristically  a  foreteller.     The  essence  of  his  office  did  not  lie  in  what  he 
announced  respecting  the  future.     His  sole  power  of  declaring  that  which  should 

489 


CHA1».  IX.  HOMIIETIC  COMMENTAUY:  KINGS. 


be,  arose  from  his  knowledge  of  that  which  had  been  and  which  was.  Fe 
meditated  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  in  that  law  did  he  exercise  himself  day 
and  night.  In  this  exercise  he  learnt  what  was  in  conformity  with  the  law, 
what  was  contrary  to  it.  In  this  exercise  he  learnt  to  believe  in  a  Divine 
Teacher,  and  to  commune  with  Him,  to  believe  in  Him  as  a  permanent  and 
continual  Teacher,  a^  the  Guide  of  his  own  heart,  to  believe  that  all  other.men's 
hearts  were  right  so  long  as  they  were  under  the  same  guidance,  and  wrong 
when  they  were  breaking  loose  from  it.  The  fruits  of  revolt,  the  inward 
monitor  enabled  hiai  to  foresee  and  predict.  The  prediction  might  take  a 
general  form  and  point  to  a  distant  issue,  or  a  number  of  issues ;  it  might  speak 
of  that  which  was  definite  and  immediate.  There  would  be  the  same  proof  in 
both  cases  that  the  word  came  from  a  hidden  source,  and  from  a  moral  being; 
a  proof  addressed  to  the  conscience  of  the  hearer,  seeing  that  the  prediction 
would  always  come  forth  with  some  warning  respecting  his  actual  conduct, 
some  denunciation  of  an  idolatrous  or  unrighteous  act.  Everything,  then,  that 
was  sudden  in  these  utterances,  bore  witness  to  previous  trains  of  thought  and 
habits  of  reflection.  So  far  from  wishing  to  deny  the  existence  of  these,  as  if 
they  interfered  with  the  genuineness  of  his  inspiration,  the  prophet  would  be 
grieved  if  his  hearer  did  not  give  him  credit  for  tliem.  The  knowledge  of 
passing  events,  too,  would  be  sought  for,  not  declined,  by  the  true  prophet. 
He  had  no  need  to  bandage  his  eyes  that  the  spectator  might  be  sure  he 
derived  his  insight  from  some  other  source  than  actual  observation.  All  facts 
were  to  him  signs  of  a  Divine  purpose,  solemn  indications  of  truths  which  they 
could  not  themselves  make  known,  but  which  nevertheless  lay  in  the  heart  of 
them,  and  which  God  could  discover  to  the  patient  and  faithful  seeker.  Nor 
can  I  suppose  that  the  knowledge  which  the  wise  king  is  said  to  have  possessed 
of  trees  and  plants,  from  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  to  the  hyssop  upon  the  wall,  so 
far  as  the  means  of  obtaining  it  lay  within  their  reach,  would  have  been  scorned 
or  scouted  by  these  men  of  God.  They  might  not  have  had  much  of  it — pro- 
bably much  less  than  the  soothsayers  and  magicians  of  Egypt  or  Assyria— less, 
perhaps,  of  traditional  information  on  such  matters  than  the  Phoenician  priests 
of  Jezebel's  court.  But  what  they  had  they  would  make  use  of,  looking  rather 
to  the  secret  powers  of  things  than  to  their  outward  mechanism ;  referring  the 
former  in  all  cases  to  the  government  of  a  Personal  Being ;  believing  that  in 
many,  perhaps  in  most,  cases  they  were  subject  to  man  as  His  vicegerent. 

IL  Supposing  the  habitual  belief  and  work  of  the  prophet  to  have  been  of 
this  kind,  it  does  not  seem  very  strange  that  he  should  have  been  an  educator 
of  others,  or  that  one  main  object  of  his  education  should  have  been  to  fit 
them  for  the  exercise  of  functions  like  his  own. 

It  would  have  been  the  most  glaring  contradictioQ  to  all  his  professions  if 
he  had  regarded  the  prophetical  power  as  something  bestowed  for  his  honour, 
a  gift  to  separate  him  from  the  rest  of  the  people.  In  a  prophet  of  Baal  such 
an  opinion  would  have  been  most  natural ;  in  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel  it  would  have  been  most  detestable.  God  had  given  His  law  to  the 
whole  nation  ;  all  were  under  it ;  therefore  all  might  study  it  and  delight  them- 
selves in  it.  It  was  a  law  which  imported  a  government  over  the  inner  man. 
The  conscience  and  heart  and  will  of  every  man  might  be  awakened  to  know 
the  nature  of  this  government,  to  receive  light  from  the  source  of  light.  And 
since  light  is  given  that  it  may  be  communicated,  since  it  shines  into  a  mind 
that  it  may  shine  forth  from  that  mind,  there  was  no  reason  why  any  one  of 
the  Lord's  people  should  not  be  prophets.  The  training  of  the  prophet  would 
teach  the  king  the  ground  of  his  authority,  his  relations  to  those  whom  he 
governed,  his  responsibility  for  the  government  of  them.  It  would  teach  the 
elders  of  the  city  that  they  were  not  to  obey  the  commands  of  an  evil  woman 
when  she  told  them  to  charge  an  innocent  man  with  blaspheming  God  and  the 
490 


SOMIIETIG  COMMENTARY:  KlJStGS.  ofiAP.  ix 


king,  that  she  might  get  possession  of  his  inheritance.  It  would  teach  tlie 
priests  that  they  were  not  to  pollute  the  sacrifices  of  God,  or  offer  them  to  devils 
and  not  to  Him.  It  would  teach  the  owners  of  the  land  that  the  land  was  held 
hy  them  of  Him  who  had  committed  it  to  them  in  trust  for  the  good  of  his  whole 
people.  It  would  teach  the  seller  the  sin  of  having  the  false  mt  asure  and  the 
hag  of  deceitful  weights.  It  would  teach  the  master  the  sin  of  oppressing  the 
hireling  in  his  wages.  It  would  teach  all  that  they  were  the  members  of  one 
commonwealth,  over  which  a  higher  than  Ahab  or  Jehoram  was  ruling  and 
would  set  aside  their  rule  to  assert  his  own. 

III.  The  sons  of  the   prophets,    then,   were   a   continual   witness  to   the 
Israelites  against  certain  errors  into  which  they  were  apt  to  fall  respecting  th(^ 
prophetical  office.     The  man  of  God  might  have  been  looked  upon  as  a  mere 
separate  being,  cut  off  by  the  awfulness  of  his  character  and  dignity  from  the 
rest  of  his  countrymen,  an  object  of  distant  admiration  or  dread,  not  an  example 
of  what  they  ought  to  be.     These  men,  taken  from  among  themselves  and  asso- 
ciated with  him,  declared  that  he  was  only  withdrawn  from  their  communion 
that  he  might  the  better  claim  privih^ges  for  them  which  they  were  in  hazard 
ot  losing ;  that  he  was  only  chosen  out  by  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  that  he  might 
the  more  clearly  understand  their  national  calling.     If  he  did  any  strange  acts 
or  put  forth  any  marvellous  powers,  the  people  would  see  that  they  were 
exercised  not  in  his  own  name,  but  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  ;  not  for  his 
sake,  but  for  theirs,  since  some  very  humble  person,  scarcely  distinguished  bv 
a  name   known  only  as  one  of  an  order,  could  perform  some  of  the  most  impor- 
tant  and  perilous  tasks  which  were  committed  to  his  master.     If  the  sons  of  the 
prophets  were  entrusted  with  messages  like  that  which  one  of  them  bore  to 
aehu,  a  proof  would  be  given  that  the  prophet  was  merely  declaring  and  carry- 
ing out  a  purpose  which  must  be  accomplished;  he  did  not  go  himself  to  plot 
against  an  existing  order,  or  to  earn  the  favour  of  some  particular  chieftain 
Ihe  repeated  allusions  to  these  sons  of  the  prophets  in  the  story  of  Elisha  are 
specially  worthy  of  note,  because  there  are  more  passages  in  that  story  which 
favour  the  notion  that  the  man  of  God  is  a  worker  of  prodigies  and  portent^  ' 
than  in  all  the  rest  of  the  Bible.     Not  tliat  there  is  any  great  number  of  those 
stones.     Open  at  hazard  the  life  of  almost  any  comspicuous  saint  in  the  middle 
ages   and  you  will  find  five  miracles  attributed  to  him  for  one  that  is  given  to 
^lisha      The  more  strong  one's  apprehension  is  of  the   degradation   of  the 
Israelitish  people  at  that  time,  of  their  low  sensual  idolatry,  of  their  reverence 
tor  evil  powers   the  more  one  feels  how  acts  of  this  kind  must  have  been  needed 
to  counteract  their  materialism,  to  undermine  their  religion  of  fraud  and  hatred 
to  establish,  as  no  words  or  arguments  could,  the  proof  of  an  actual  and  a 
gracioils  ruler. 

^17 \  ?  w^""*.'?!.''  ^}^  f  T  '""^i^"*  ^^  *^^  Scripture  narrative.  Elijah  had 
told  Ahab  that  the  blood  of  Ts^aboth  would  be  required  of  his  house.  hVs 
humiliation  had  delayed  the  sentence.     His  enemy,  who  had  found  him  out 

reraLd:r:fhf  '^  'r  '  •''  '^^  ^'^^^-  ^^^^^^'t^^  ^-^t  prophet  passed  t^i^: 
A  bl  .  J  ^  own  days  in  peace.  But  there  were  other  prophets  to  torment 
^wn  1 '  H  \'^'^}^''^^^IJ'^^^^^^  freshly  brought,  perhaps,  by  Jezebel  from  her 
Elmotb  rni%  'Tt  ^'^*  The  lying  spirit  in  their  mouths  drove  him  to 
Eamoth-Gilead  and  Israel  was  left,  as  Micah  had  foretold,  without  a  shepherd 
Y  f  r.v'Tr^^^'  Misha  almost  as  terrible  as  his  maste;  had  been  to  Ahab; 
Yet  their  relations  were  different.  Joram  is  less  of  a  Baal  worshipper  than  hi^ 
father.  He  consults  Elisha;  is  asked  by  him  why  he  does  not%o  to  the 
prophets  of  his  father  and  mother;  still  is  promised  deliverance  and  victory  in 
LT^lT  .'f  '  has  undertaken  with  the  Moabites,  and  is  saved  not  oncT  or 
twice  by  the  prophet's  knowledge  from  the  Syrians.     These  enemies  of  Israel 

491 


dHAP.  IX.  SO  M  J  IE  TIC  COMMEKrjUY:  KINGS. 


look  ■upon  the  prophet  with  especial  dread.  Once  he  is  surrounded  by  them  ; 
but  his  servant  is  permitted  to  see  invisible  hosts  which  are  on  his  side.  These 
visions,  Elisha's  acts  of  power,  his  wcrds  of  wisdom,  the  ruin  which  threatened 
the  land  from  the  Syrians,  its  unexp(  cted  rescue,  are  all  signs  that  the  God 
who  had  made  a  covenant  with  thtir  fathers  was  with  the  king  and  the  people 
then.  Trust  was  then,  as  always,  what  the  prophets  demanded  of  them. 
They  could  not  trust  too  boldly  or  unreservedly.  To  trust,  would  have 
been  to  repent  of  the  calf  worship,  to  rise  out  of  the  brutal  habits  which  it  had 
engendered,  to  begin  a  new  life  as  men.  But  the  custom  of  idolatry  had 
destroyed  trust  in  their  hearts.  They  could  only  worship  and  tremble.  The 
sin  of  the  father  descended  upon  the  son  with  the  weakness  and  cowardice, 
which  were  the  fruits  of  it,  increased  tenfold.  At  the  appointed  day  and  hour 
the  vengeance  came,  by  just  such  an  instrument  as  would  seem  likeliest  to  carry 
it  out.  Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi  had  been  declared  to  Elijah  as  the  joint 
successor  with  Elisha  in  the  work  he  had  left  unperformed.  No  two  men  in 
Israel  could  have  been  more  unlike.  One  cried  to  have  a  double  portion  of  his 
master's  spirit,  the  other  was  known  only  as  a  man  who  drove  furiously.  Yet 
Jehu  had  the  kind  of  faith  which  might  be  expected  in  a  soldier,  somewhat 
reckless,  but  with  his  sense  of  right  not  quenched  by  religious  falsehood.  He 
had  heard  the  burden  which  Elijah  had  pronounced  on  Ahab  as  he  sat  with  him 
on  his  chariot  when  they  entered  the  plot  of  ground  that  had  been  Naboth*s. 
He  felt  that  there  was  an  everlasting  truth  in  the  sentence,  and  that  it  must 
come  to  pass.  "Who  should  execute  it  he  did  not  know  then.  When  the 
anointing  oil  of  Elisha's  messenger  had  been  poured  on  his  head,  and  his  com- 
rades had  cried,  **  Jehu  is  king,"  all  the  savage  impulses  of  the  soldier  became 
quickened  and  elevated  by  the  feeling  that  he  was  commissioned  to  punish  evil- 
doers, and  assert  justice.  Esteeming  himself  a  scourge  of  God,  and  rejoicing 
in  the  office,  he  gives  full  play  to  all  his  bloody  instincts. 

V.  It  causes  great  scandal  to  many  amiable  and  worthy  people,  that  the 
Scripture  does  not  stop  to  comment  on  the  atrocities  of  Jehu,  but  appears  to 
commend  his  zeal,  and  to  rejoice  that  what  he  began  he  accomplished.  A  true 
portrait  can  never  be  a  mischievous  one,  and  this  is  essentially  true.  Nothing 
is  said  to  gloss  over  the  ferocity  of  Jehu  ;  it  is  exhibited  broadly,  nakedly.  You 
do  not  want  words  to  tell  you  that  you  must  hate  it.  Your  impulse — and  it  is 
a  right  one — is  to  do  so;  but  there  miy  be  in  the  most  ruffianly  and  brutal 
characters,  not  merely  strength,  not  merely  a  clear  distinct  purpose,  and  a  steadi- 
ness in  following  it  out,  but,  along  with  these,  an  intense  hatred  of  hypocrisy, 
a  determination  to  put  it  down,  not  for  selfish  ends,  but  because  it  is  hateful, 
which  determination  is  good,  and  inspired  by  God.  We  do  not  meet  with  these 
characters  in  the  world — characters  with  something  devilish,  going  close  beside 
something  which  is  really  divine  ;  and,  though  the  devilish  is  the  obtrusive,  and 
may  become  the  pervading,  part  of  the  man's  soul,  you  cannot  help  feeling  that 
the  other  is  in  the  very  depth  of  it,  and  marks  out  what  he  is  meant  to  be,  and 
can  be.  Honour  it ;  confess  that  it  is  not  of  earthly  origin ;  that  it  does  not 
spring  from  any  dark  root  in  the  selfish  nature.  Say  boldly,  "  that  honesty,  that 
zeal,  is  from  above  ;  it  has  the  sign  of  a  celestial  parentage ;  just  so  far  as  that 
governs  him,  he  will  be  a  servant  of  his  kind  ;  aftertimes  will  bless  him."  But  it 
is  also  true  that  the  grovelling  elements  of  his  character,  if  they  are  not  destroyed 
by  this  nobler  fire,  will  only  glare  the  more  fiercely  for  the  light  which  it  sheds 
upon  them,  and  that  soon,  when  the  fire  begins  to  burn  low,  you  will  see,  instead 
of  that  glare,  nothing  but  dull,  smouldering  ashes.  "Jehu  took  no  heed  to 
walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord."  It  is  in  the  quiet  time  that  a  man  is  tested  ; 
then  we  find  out  not  only  what  he  can  do,  but  what  he  is  ;  whether  his  zeal  for 
righteousness  means  that  he  will  obey  it ;  whether  his  hatred  for  what  is  false 
implies  an  adherence  to  the  true.  The  test  in  this  case  failed.  Jehu  destroyed 
492 


nOMtinnc  COMMENTAHY :  kings.  chap.  It. 


Baal- worship,  for  that  was  foreign.  He  clave  to  the  calf- worship,  for  that  was 
the  tradition  of  his  fathers;  and,  therefore,  the  people  wc^nt  on  in  the  down- 
ward course.     They  sought  after  evil  powers.     They  could  not  trust  God. 

YI.     EHsha,  \\iQ  son  of  Shnphat,  and  Jehu,  the  son  of  Nimshi,  did  then  carry 
out  together  the  words  of  tho  prophet.     For  these  woids  depended  upon  no 
mortal  agency.     Thoy  were  the  expressions  of  an  eternal  law  which,  in  some 
way  or  other,   would  fulfil  itself.     This  is  the  great  lesson  which  the  Bible 
teaches  m  every  pa^e.     The  righteous  Will  moves  on  steadily  and  irresistibly 
towards  Its  own  end.     The  unrighteous  will  struggles  with  it,  seems  to  prevail 
IS  brokenin  pieces ;  but,  seeing  that  it  is  Will,  and  not  a  blind  necessity,  which 
rult's  m  the  armies  of  Heaven  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  men,  it  is  all- 
important  whether  those  wlio  execute  its  decrees  work  in  cheerful  submission 
to  it    or,  in  blindness,   with  base  and  private  designs.      This  was  the  great 
question  for  the  ministers  of  God's  purpose,  whether  they  were  prophets  or 
soLliens  to  consider  then.     It  is  the  great  question  for  us  now.     Zeal  is  so 
precious  a  gift,  is  so  much  wanted  for  the  service  of  mankind,  it  is  so  rare 
that  the  evil  spirit  is  certain  to  assault  those  who  possess  it;  and,  seeing  that' 
there  are  a  multitude  of  kindly,  compromising  men,  who  represent  all  energetic 
indignation    against   wrong   as    unnecessary,  disturbing,   unphilosophical,  un- 
christian and  those  who  believe  that  no  form  of  falsehood  is  to  be  tolerated  but 
to  be  abhorred  are  stirred  up  by  the  indifference  which  others  exhibit  and  boast 
ot,  to  a  kind  of  sa^^ageness  and  fury.     They  must,  if  they  can,  hasten  on  the 
purpose  of  God,  and  themselves  execute  part  of  His  wrath.     Alas!  what  are 
they  striving  for  ?     "  It  is  the  driving  of  Jehu,  for  he  driveth  furiously."     This 
IS  the  best  memorial  that  will  remain  of  him  who  has  let  his  zeal  become  his 
master,  when  it  was  meant  to  be  his  servant,  and  who  has  counted  it  a  pleasure 
instead  of  a  hard  necessity,  to  destroy.     -  0  my  father,  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and 
the  horses  thereof  "     These  are  the  words  which  n  king  of  Israel,  of  Jehu's 
house,  spoke  to  Elisha  as  he  lay  sick  and  dying.     He  felt  that  a  power  was 
passing  out  of  the  world  which  was  greater  than  his  and  than  that  of  all  the  kings 
who  had  been  before  him,  because  it  was  a  power  that  had,  in  the  main,  been  con- 
secrated to  God,  had  been  used  in  conforn.ity  with  His  mind,  and,  therefore,  had 

frt  l^^  ^""^  P^'^^  ^'^"^^  ^^-  '^^'''^  ^^  ^e^^e^'  to  kill  the  seventy  sons  of 
Ahab,  or  to  bring  up  sons  of  the  prophets  ?  To  be  the  executor  of  God's  ven- 
geance  on  the  land,  or  to  show  that  He  was  the  healer  of  its  sicknesses  ?  To 
make  clear  that  death  is  the  certain  wages  of  sin,  or  to  affir.n  by  acts  and  words 
that  there  18  one  who  raiseth  the  dead  ?  Which  mission  was  the  nobler  in  the  old 
time  ?  Which  must  be  nobler  for  those  that  believe  that  God  gave  His  only 
begotten  Son  not  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  Him 
might  be  saved  ?— Condensed  from  F.  D.  Maurice. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEBSES. 

^  Verses  1-14.    Tears  had  rolled  away      his  mind.     The  army  which  he  com- 
since  Jehu  s  meeting  with   Elijah  in      manded  was  at  Ran.oth-Gilead      That 

no'w  h-rh^W.^^  ^^''^'-..^J  ^''  ^^^  ''^^  *^^  P--*  --d  which  the 
now  high  in  the  favour  of  Ahab's  son,       interest  of  the  Syrian  war  revolved. 

as  captain  of  the  host  in  the  Syrian      The  king  himself  had  been  present  at 

war.      In  that  war   of    chariots    and      the  siege,  had  been  in  personal  danger 

n^Ln"  I  r^""-''/  f"  ""V'^'^'  ^^^  ^'^^  ^^t"™^^  h^^e  to  Jezreel  to 
practised  by  the  infantry  of  the  be  cured  of  his  wounds  from  the 
ancient  Israelites.  He  was  known  arrows  of  the  Syrian  archers.  It  was 
through  the  whole  army  and  country  in  his  absence  that  a  young  man-said 
for  driving  his  horses  like  one  out  of     by  tradition  to  be  the  futurer  pophet 

493 


ClfAF.    IX. 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


Jonah,  son  of  the  widow  of  Zirephath 
— arrived  at  the  camp  with  a  small  flask 
in  his  hand.  His  garments  were  girt 
round  him  as  of  one  travelling  in  haste, 
and  his  appearance  was  wild  and 
excited  as  of  a  madman.  From  the 
midst  of  the  captains  he  singled  out 
Jehu.  Once  more  there  was  a  conse- 
crated king  of  Israel.  The  oil  of  in- 
auguration had  been  poured  on  the 
head  of  Jehu.  He  was  to  go  forth 
''the  anointed  of  the  Lord"  to  exter- 
minate the  house  of  Ahab.  It  was  as 
if  a  spark  had  been  set  to  a  train  long 
prepared.  There  was  not  a  moment's 
hesitation.  The  officers  tore  off  their 
military  cloaks  and  spread  them  under 
liis  feet  where  he  stood  on  the  top  of 
the  stairs  leading  down  into  the  court. 
As  he  stood  on  this  extempore  throne, 
with  no  seat  but  the  steps  covered  by 
the  carpeting  of  the  square  pieces  of 
cloth,  they  blew  the  well-known  blast 
of  the  ram's  horn  which  always  ac- 
companied the  inauguration  of  a  king 
of  Israel.  From  this  moment  the 
course  of  Jehu  is  fixed.  The  destiny 
long  brooding  over  him — the  design 
perhaps  raised  in  his  own  mind  from 
the  day  when  he  had  first  met  Elijah 
— is  to  be  accomplished. — Stanley^ 8 
Jewish  Church. 

Verses  1-10.  The  service  of  God 
and  the  young^.  I.  The  service  of 
God  is  the  highest  service  to  which 
youth  can  be  consecrated.  II.  The 
service  of  God  teaches  the  young  to 
reverence  and  obey  the  aged  good. 
III.  The  service  of  God  familiarises 
the  youthful  mind  with  the  procedures 
of  Divine  justice  and  equity.  IV. 
The  service  of  God  employs  youth  in 
enterprises  involving  great  risk  and 
difficulty.  V.  The  service  of  God 
teaches  youth  to  act  with  discretion, 
rapidity,  and  decision. 

Verse  1.  Old  Elisha  hath  neither 
cottage  nor  foot  of  land,  yet,  sitting  in 
an  obscure  corner,  he  gives  orders  for 
kingdoms,  not  by  way  of  authority — 
this  usurpation  had  been  no  less  proud 
than  unjust — but  by  way  of  message 
from  the  God  of  kings.  Even  a  mean 
herald  may  go  on  a  great  errand.  The 
494 


prophets  of  the  gospel  have  nothing  to 
do  but  with  spiritual  kingdoms,  to 
beat  down  the  kingdoms  of  sin  and 
Satan,  to  translate  souls  to  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  He  that  renewed 
the  life  of  the  Shunammite's  son  must 
stoop  to  age  :  that  block  lies  in  his  way 
t»  Jehu.  The  aged  prophet  employs 
a  speedier  messenger,  who  must  also 
gird  up  his  loins  for  haste,  l^o  com- 
mon pace  will  serve  us  when  we  go 
on  God's  message;  the  loss  o£  minutes 
may  be  unrecoverable.  He  is  prodigal 
of  his  success  that  is  slow  in  his 
execuiion. 

Verse  3.  How  is  it  that  of  all  the 
kings  of  the  ten  tribes  none  was  ever 
anointed  but  Jehu?  Is  it  that  the  God 
who  would  not  countenance  the  erec- 
tion of  that  usurped  throne  would 
countenance  the  altc-ation  ?  Or  is  it 
that  by  this  visible  testimony  of 
Divine  ordination  the  courage  of  the 
Israelitish  captains  might  be  raised  up 
to  second  the  high  and  bold  attempt 
of  him  whom  they  saw  destined  from 
heaven  to  rule  ? — Bp.  Hall. 

Verses  4-10.    The  prophet  disciple. 

I.  His  mission.  He  is  one  of  the 
humblest  in  Samaria,  a  poor  insignifi- 
cant boy,  and  he  carries  a  kingdom  to 
Ramoth !  How  great  the  Lord  appears 
in  this  incident,  but  also  with  what 
cutting  irony  He  meets  all  the  arro- 
gance of  the  self-made  gods  of  earth ! 

II.  Sis  obedience.  He  raises  no  ob- 
jections, though  the  task  is  hard  for 
him.  He  is  to  go  into  a  besieged  city, 
to  go  before  the  generals  of  the  army, 
to  put  his  life  and  liberty  at  stake. 
Yet  he  goes  with  no  sword  at  his  side  ; 
without  a  companion  he  ventures  into 
the  army  of  the  king  to  anoint  another 
to  be  king.  All  human  scruples  and 
fears  disappear  before  the  duty  of 
obedience.  In  obedience  he  does  not 
fear,  and  lets  not  danger  terrify  him. 

III.  Sis  fidelity.  He  does  no  more 
and  no  less  than  he  is  demanded.  He 
has  a  great  commission  entrusted  to 
him,  but  he  does  not  boast.  He  keeps 
the  secret,  and  departs  as  he  came.  He 
does  not  care  what  may  be  thought  of 
him,  or  what  people  may  say,  whether 


ffOMILJETIC  C0M3rENTART :  KINGS. 


CHAP.    IX 


they  think  him  a  mad  fellow  or  not. 
So  the  apostles  also  carried  the  secrets 
of  God  out  into  the  wic'e  world,  and 
had  no  other  interest  than  that  they 
might  he  found  true. — Lange. 

Yorse  5.  The  Divine  message  of 
mercy.  J.  Is  entrusted  to  the 
earnest  and  faithful,  notwithstanding 
their  youth.  II.  Is  often  delivered 
under  circumstances  of  difficulty  and 
peiil.  III.  Is  suited  to  all  classes  of 
society.  IV.  Is  personal  and  direct 
in  its  application:  ''To  theey  0  cap- 
tain ! " 

Verses  7-10.  Oh,  the  sure,  though 
the  patient  justice  of  the  Almighty  ! 
Not  only  Ahab  and  Jezebel  had  been 
bloody  and  idolatrous,  but  Israel  was 
drawn  into  the  paitnership  of  tluir 
crimes :  all  these  shall  share  in  the 
judgment.  Elijah's  complaint  in  the 
cave  now  receives  this  late  answer. 
Ilazeal  Fhall  plague  Israel,  Jehu  shall 
]>lugue  the  house  of  Ahab  and  Ji  zebel. 
Elisha's  servant  thus  seconds  Elisha's 
master.  Ahab's  drooping  under  the 
threat  hath  put  off  the  judgment  from 
his  own  days ;  now  it  comes  and 
sweeps  away  his  wife,  his  issue,  and 
falls  heavy  upon  his  subjects.  Please 
yourselves,  0  ye  vain  sinners  !  in  the 
slow  pace  of  vengeance ;  it  will  be 
neither  less  certain  nor  more  easy  for 
the  delay  ;  rather  it  were  to  pay  for 
that  leisure  in  the  extremity. — 
Bp.  Rail 

—  The  world  of  to-day  will  not 
hear  that  *'  the  Lord  will  take  venge- 
ance on  His  adversaries,"  and  declares 
that  this  is  only  an  Old  Testament 
notion,  and  that  the  Gospel  knows 
only  one  God,  who  is  a  God  of  love. 
It  is  true  that  God  does  not  seek 
revenge,  but  he  is  a  holy,  and  there- 
fore a  just  God,  who  requites  men  as 
they  have  deserved,  and  repays  each 
according  to  his  conduct  (Job  xxxiv., 
ii.  ;  Rom.  ii.  6).  A  God  without 
vengeance,  who  cannot  and  will  not 
punish,  is  no  God,  but  a  divinity 
fashioned  from  one's  thoughts.  The 
same  gospel  that  teaches  that  God  is 
love,  says  also,  **  It  is  a  fearful  thing 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living 


God,"  and  **  Our  God  is  a  consuming 
fire."  The  same  law  which  says  that 
God  is  an  avenging  God  towards  His 
enemies,  also  says  that  "  He  is  merci- 
ful and  "gracious,  long-suffering,  and 
abundant  in  goodness  and  truth." 

Verse  7.  The  Divine  concern  for 
the  martyrs.  I.  Sustains  them  in 
times  of  trial  and  suffering.  II.  Eh^- 
vates  them  to  sublime  examples  of 
heroism  and  devotion.  III.  Punishes 
their  tormentors  with  terrible  retribu- 
tion. 

—  ''The  blood  of  thy  servants." 
Listen  !  He  has  indeed  permitted  them 
to  lay  violent  hands  upon  His  servants, 
but  He  has  not  overlooked  or  forgotten 
it.  ^'othing  cleaves  more  irresistibly 
up  through  the  clouds  than  the  voice 
of  the  blood  of  persecuted  saints. 
Nothing  is  better  adapted  to  pour  oil 
upon  the  flames  of  the  Divine  wrath 
against  the  godless  than  the  sighs 
which  their  cruelty  forces  from  a 
child  of  God.  The  blood  of  the  saints 
has  often  cried  from  earth  to  heaven, 
and  what  judgments  it  has  called 
down !  Let  the  persecutors  of  all 
centuries  appear  and  bear  witnt  ss. 
Nebuchadnezzer,  Belshazzar,  Herod, 
Agrippa,  Nero,  Inquisitors  of  Spain, 
the  Louises  of  France,  Charles  IX. — 
bear  witness  all  what  a  dangerous 
thing  it  is  to  lay  hands  upon  the 
saints  of  the  Most  Bigh !  This  is  not 
the  only  instance  where  God  has  raised 
the  destroying  axe  over  a  dynasty 
whi(  h  was  morally  rotten.  He  often 
makes  use  of  royal  families  which 
have  fallen  into  moral  decay  for  the 
discipline  of  nations,  but  the  time 
never  fails  to  come  when  He  passes 
sentence  of  destruction  upon  them, 
and  brings  speedy  ruin  upon  the  con- 
demned. A  family  tree  does  not  stand 
firm  in  gilded  parchments  and  regis- 
ters :  only  when  it  is  planted  by  the 
waters  which  flow  from  the  sanctuary 
of  God  will  it  continue  to  flourish 
vigorously. — Krumm. 

Verse  10.  Work  for  God.  1.  Should 
be  entered  upon  with  due  preparation. 
2.  Should  be  done  expeditiously.  3. 
Should  be  left  to  work  its  own  results. 

495 


OHAP.  IX. 


SOMILETIG  GOMMENTART :  KINGS. 


"Verse  11.  "Wherefore  came  this 
mad  fellow  to  thee  ?'  *    Religious  zeal. 

I.  Obtains  its  purest  inspirations  from 
the  love  of  God  and  of  Hi^  service. 

II.  Often  leads  the  messenger  of  God 
to  adopt  methods  which  are  misunder- 
stood by  the  world.  III.  Is  regarded 
by  the  unbelieving  and  unspiritual  as 
a  species  of  insanity. 

—  So  God's  prophets  were  ever 
counted  and  called  by  the  mad  world, 
always  beside  itself  in  point  of  salva- 
tion (Jer.  xxxix.  26  ;  Hosea  ix.  7 ; 
Acts  xxvi.  24;  2  Cor.  v.  13).  These 
profane  ruffians  could  not  name  such 
a  one  without  a  flout,  because  the 
prophets  declaimed  against  their 
wickedness,  and  contemned  the 
world's  vanities  which  they  so  much 
esteemed.  But  though  their  tongues 
thus  spake  after  the  wicked  guise  of 
it,  miscalling  the  prophet's  innocency, 
yet  their  desire  to  know  what  he  said 
and  did,  did  abundantly  show  what 
credit  they  gave  him  secretly;  and 
after,  they  made  him  king  whom  that 
fellow  had  anointed,  to  the  hazard  of 
their  own  lives.  God  giveth  a  secret 
authority  to  His  despised  servants,  so 
as  they  which  hate  their  persons,  yet 
reverence  their  truth ;  even  very 
scorners  cannot  but  believe  them. — 
Trapp. 

Yerse  12.  If  the  generals,  when 
they  heard  that  God  had  anointed 
Jehu  to  be  king,  hastened,  spread  out 
their  garments,  ^nd  shouted,  "Jehu  is 
king,"  how  much  more  should  all 
shout  Hosanna  to  Him  whom  God  hath 
anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  has 
seated  Him  at  His  right  hand  in 
heaven,  who  will  rule  until  He  has 
subdued  all  enemies  under  his  feet. 

Yerse  13.  Theirreadiness  in  throw- 
ing off  their  allegiance  to  Jehoram  is 
something  remarkable.  Eut  it  was 
known  that  the  house  of  Ahab  was  in 
the  present  generation  doomed  to  ex- 
tinction. This  was  a  thing  people 
were  not  likely  to  forget.  It  was 
known  that  Elisha,  who  had  sent  this 
man,  was  a  commissioned  prophet, 
authorised  to  declare  the  will  of  the 
Lord,  who  had  reserved  the  right  of 
496 


appointing  whom  he  saw  fit  to  the 
kingdom.  And  it  is  probable  that  the 
military  were  dissatisfied  with  the  rule 
of  a  house  so  completely  under  the 
influence  of  one  bad  woman,  and  the 
errors  and  crimes  of  which  had  first 
and  last  brought  so  much  discredit 
upon  the  nation.  Add  to  this,  that  in 
the  absence  of  a  fixed  succession  to  a 
throne  which  so  many  aspiring  ad- 
venturers have  already  won,  loyalty 
sits  but  lightly  upon  the  soldiery ; 
and  they  are  very  prone  to  vote  a 
popular  commander  into  the  throne 
when  it  becomes  vacant,  or  even  to 
make  it  vacant  for  him. — Kitto, 

Yerse  14.  There  are  few  persons  in 
the  sacred  history  who  have  been  so 
variously  judged  as  Jehu.  To  some 
he  is  a  stirrer  up  of  rebellion  and  a 
bloody  despot ;  others  see  in  him  a  pure 
and  unimpeachable  servant  of  the  Lord. 
Both  equally  err,  for  both  depart  alike 
from  what  the  sacred  record  declares, 
and  all  depends,  especially  in  the  case 
of  Jehu,  on  allowing  ourselves  to  be 
led  simply  by  the  record.  If  we  re- 
stiict  ourselves  to  what  is  said  in  this 
chapter,  this  much  is  certain,  that  he 
did  not  make  himself  king.  There  is 
not  a  word  to  justify  the  suspicion 
that  he  plotted  and  conspired  before 
he  was  anointed  king ;  on  the  con- 
trary, the  story  shows  clearly  that  the 
prophetical  calling  to  be  king  sur- 
prised and  astonished  him,  and  also 
that  his  fellow-commanders  knew 
nothing  of  it.  He  ought  not,  there- 
fore, to  be  put  in  the  same  category 
with  Baasha,  Zimri,  Shallum,  Mena- 
kem,  Pekah,  and  Hoshea,  who,  insti- 
gated by  ambition,  without  authority 
and  in  self-will,  took  the  royal  power 
into  their  hands.  He  was  called  to 
be  king  by  the  prophet,  by  the  name 
of  Jehovah.  The  explanation  of  the 
selection  of  just  this  man  as  the  instru- 
ment for  the  destruction  of  the  house 
of  Ahab,  and  for  the  uprooting  of 
idolatry,  is  found  in  the  fact  that  at 
that  time  there  was  scarcely  a  man 
who  united,  as  he  did,  all  the  necessary 
qualifications.  In  the  first  place,  Jehu 
was  a  decided  opponent  of  idolatry, 
and  of  the  abuses  which  were  connected 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


CllAP.   IX. 


wi/boldne.s  anTenterSZTdel     be^Zt^X^'  ^"^"  thci,.  judg^nent 
and  pitiless,  he  shrank  back  before  no  ^' 

diffloiilty  (verses  20,  24,  32V     More.  TP  „  t. 

over,  he  dk  not  lack  pru'den  e  or  w t     ceelin,  chaoteV  r'.'"''  '°  f '  *r 
doni  (verses  U,  15,  18^      Finallv    >».     P?'''^'°°,'t"''P'8'^^*^^'«lioi-'0's  of  revoln- 

stood  high  in  the  popular  esteem  n,!  ^    ""  *''"  ?'  ''''°^''    '"'°<'  t^^^   less 

militaryleader.     W?see  from  theTov  f  ""'  """  ^''<'^ '»"d  how  revolution 

with    which    his  fellow-commande"  "'^r'!    •    *'"''''''''-'     "°^«^-^"y-     ^U 

caught  up  his  nomimtioIanTanoint  f,  JW.".^  mean.,  not  an  end.     It 

ment,   and  from   the  reaZess  wTth"  w!    "''>''"^'  ■•<^<'«g°V'«'i,  and  obeyed 

which  they  obeyed  his  command,  Tw  -T^    ".'   '".Tr    t^o^^    ends.     Its 

he   enjoyed  thL  fX^Tonfi;,!  "?i''.  1°"^  pnvileges  are   correlative 

(versei  1^4-16j     It  is  tte  that   h  !  vSv  '^"*'- ''  f  I'S^^""^-  =»"<!  ^esponsi- 

subsequent   conduct     is     fie  ce    and  f^r^T'  T'l'  *° '"='=°™PJl*  the  objects 

soldier-like ;  that   was     the    natural  f„"^2 ''       *  ""f  r'''^-     !*«  "'aims 

product  of  his  character  callinsr    and      L  rf^'?""?  ±,^''  '""^  *'''"  ^"h  **' 
education.-X««.,.    ^''"^' •"^"'°g'  a^"!     f^ifl'ty  in  fulfilling  its  trust.     If  it 

—  So  much  credit  hath  that  m«d  fh      '°      ■!'  '5''  S*"'  ^^'''her,  and  in 

fellow  with  these  gallants   of  ^1  "^^.P"''!"'*  "^  1*^  ««!«*  aims  and  the 

that  upon  his  word  they  will  ~  gratification    of    its     own    self-will, 

adventure  their  lives  ani  chante  the  ^^'^^''f^'''  «™^h  and  ruin  the  ver^ 

crown.     God  gives  a  secret  autho>-^-     ^  ^^'  "''"''•"*  *'  '''^''  ^^^ 

to  His  despised  servants     so  as  the^     ^'°"  'T''  ""^'^  obedience   ceases   to 

which  hate'their  perZ^et  reverence  a  crir"""f  T.^  ''T"'''  T'^P''"'^  ^"^ 

their  truth  ;  even  very  scorn^^  !!  l^-      ■^"  *^''  '"'h'^ence  of  prophetical 

not  but  believe  them^  TT.n  the'  tbeV'^i^  *",  '"  '''  *™^  ^°^  -^'^^Snate 

prophets  of  the  Gospel  te  1   ue   of  a  t  L  d^ffl?!  T  •■'^"«"r°?  allegiance, 

spiritual  kingdom,  they  be  distrustP^  X     •''®«"1*  *»  «««  who  is  to  judge  of 

of  those   wlioh'profL''%f„r:2     ^^t  ^^1^^%/^,^^-^*^ 

BOaiZSTIOS  OF  TBRSBS  16-S7. 
The  Terrible  Work  of  Revenge. 

This  politic  appeal  to  the  .vmT  '".'"'1''.'^'  """^  "^"  i'  i-^  •'e^reel  "  (verse  15). 
Jehu  were  fulTcommt,edt7th^'''''*'^"'r'P"f-     ^he  brother-officers  of 
drawing  back.  ^  WiU,  t  1  i^v  -,       "^T  "'t'  "^   '"^'"S^'  '^"•^   'here  was   no 
carry  out  his  woi-k  of  v—^T*^  '.",•"'   ''''"^«'  J«hu  was  prepared    to 
enterprise  invrit  ri  k  and  diJ'^^^'-^t'''''''''.^-     ^'  '^  ^""^  '»  '«'mpt  any 
preparation.     2mltZr  tf,      /,  ''"*"";'  '^'^  '""''  *=^"-'^'"'  "^"d  Judicious 
Jehu  mounts  hi  chariot Td  drt^f  ^''^"'^/"^  ^^  '^"''rj  (ver.e/  16-19). 
to  confront  the  deposed  kintTh.       '""'''  '^'''■''''  'l«'«'"""e'l  to  be  the  first 
prisoners.     Still  uncertain  of  f hT n  """''^"f  r' f "' ^"'  ^^  "^"'•'''"  ""•«  '^^ta'^e'l 
the  city  to  meet  him   1  ttle  dLi^-'^'""''f  t  "^  '^*''"'  "'^  '^°  "^'"S^  ''"^^  "«  of 
is  surely  something  spdallvlTn^    •     X.  ^'^  "^^'  ''^'''"'^  "'«'"  '  ^°<i  'here 
with  such  severe  and  /rVl!=     °     r  "'  'V*""*  ^"""^^  mentioned  in  the  narrative 
Naboth  thrjelre:  i?e ''  ':    se' 2?  ""^^^'  '""P  "  '"r'/™  '^  '"«  P-tion  of 
movements  gave  no  oDnortnni.t  L  h-       •^''"^"•>'  '""*  decisiveness  of  Jehu's 
were  at  once  placed  Z^TT^        Tu   ^'*="'"'  '°  P''*"^'='  themselves.     They 
»he  advantage'^b  :tery  e;trr;TS  '"'"  "'  Promptness  and  decision  hal 


£K 


497 


CHAP.  IX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTABT :  KINGS. 


II.  Is  committed  to  one  who  is  every  way  fitted  to  carry  it  out.    "  The 

driving  is  the  driviog  of  Jehu,  for  he  driveth  furiously  "  (verse  20).  In  this 
one  reference  w^e  have  the  key  to  Jehu's  character,  a  man  vrho  having  once 
made  up  his  mind  to  a  certain  course,  will  pursue  it  with  a  wild,  reckless, 
madcap  energy,  utterly  indifferent  to  all  sentiment  and  feeling.  It  was  horrible 
work  that  Jehu  had  to  do.  An  ordinary  man  would  have  recoiled  from  it 
with  fear  and  loathing.  Jehu  was  cautious,  crafty,  and  perhaps  slow  in  com- 
mitting himself  to  a  certain  course  of  action ;  but  having  done  so,  he  prosecuted 
it  with  a  hot,  hasty,  and  unrelenting  energy,  unmoved  either  by  pity  or  fear. 
"  He  did  not  shrink  from  difficulties,  did  not  hesitate  at  harsh  means  of 
accomplishing  his  purpose,  did  not  feel  pity  in  striking  down  those  who  stood 
in  his  way,  did  not  leave  behind  him  anything  that  might,  at  a  later  time,  rise 
up  to  mar  or  overthrow  his  work.  His  is  uot  a  lovely  character.  It  does  not 
present  the  amiable  virtues — patience,  pity,  mercy,  kinduess.  It  is  not  a 
character  to  be  imitated  in  modern  civilised  life;  neither  ought  it  to  be 
measured  or  judged  by  the  standards  of  a  society  trained  to  peace  and  order, 
fearful  of  revolution  and  encased  in  law.  In  the  providence  of  God  suchmen 
are  often  raised  up  for  great  crises  in  church  and  state.  The  man  is  swallowed 
up  in  the  movement.  His  personal  virtues  and  faults  are  lost  sight  of  in  the 
stormy,  tumultuous  crises  in  which  he  lived.  He  was  needed  and  was  called ; 
he  responded  and  accomplished  his  calling  well.  That  is  his  place  in  the 
history,  and  that  is  the  judgment  on  his  career." 

III.  Falls  upon  the  leading  representatives  of  the  wickedness  to  be 
punished  (verses  22-35).  Joram,  Ahaziah,  Jezebel — a  royal  trio — representa- 
tives of  the  idolatrous  curse  that  had  blighted  both  Israel  and  Judah,  and 
brought  down  the  judgment  of  heaven.  Jezebel,  whose  end  was  so  ignominious, 
and  which  is  described  with  such  dramatic  vigour,  was  at  the  roo  o  f  the 
nation's  apostasy,  and  her  crimes  hastened  the  catastrophe.  Joram,  though 
taking  his  part  in  war,  as  his  wound  testified,  appears  in  general  "in  the  light 
of  an  oriental  monarch,  indolent,  careless,  luxurious,  fond  of  ease.  His  death 
fulfilled  a  malediction  upon  his  father.  Ahaziah  seems  to  have  been  one  of 
those  weak  men  who  float  on  in  the  direction  which  their  education  and  family 
traditions  have  given  them.  He  followed  the  family  traditions  down  to  the 
family  ruin.  The  two  kings  appear  to  be  to  a  great  extent  the  victims  of 
the  sins  of  their  ancestors;  and  as  Jezebel  had  controlled  Ahab,  we  are  led 
back  to  her  as  the  origin  of  all  this  individual,  family,  and  national  calamity. 
She  was  one  of  those  strong,  bold,  wicked  women  who  have  played  such  im- 
portant ro/^s  in  history.  By  Ahab's  marriage  with  this  woman,  the  licentious- 
ness of  the  worship  of  Baal  and  Astarte,  the  freedom  of  manners  of  the  Phoe- 
nician court,  the  luxury  and  sensuality  of  the  heathen  nations,  were  imported 
into  Israel.  It  became  her  aim  to  override  and  destroy  all  that  was  peculiar 
and  national  in  Israel,  but  in  so  doing  she  was  contravening  all  that  belonged  to 
and  sustained  God's  plan  for  Israel  in  human  history.  She  braved  the  con- 
flict, and  re-asserted  it  in  her  last  hour ;  and  she  and  her  descendants  went 
down  in  the  catastrophe"  {Editor  of  Lang  e).  The  stroke  of  God's  vengeance 
never  misses  its  object,  and  never  mistakes  its  victim.  The  leaders  of  iniquity 
are  sure  to  be  smitten. 

IV.  Fulfils  the  Divine  word  wifh  significant  exactitude  (verses  36,  37). 
Fifteen  years  had  passed  away  since  Elijah  prophesied-  "  The  dogs  shall  eat 
Jezebel  by  the  wall  of  Jezreel  "  (1  Kings  xxi.  23) ;  and  now  the  Divine  word 
is  fulfilled  with  such  precision  that  the  body  of  the  proud,  luxurious  Jezebel 
is  not  recognizable — not  a  vestige  is  left  but  a  few  bones.  "  Though  so  great 
a  woman  by  her  birth^  oonuexions,  and  alliances,  she  has  not  the  honour  of  a 

498 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS. 


CHAP  EC. 


tomb.  There  was  not  even  a  solitary  stone  to  say,  Here  lies  Jezelell  not  even 
a  mound  of  earth  to  designate  the  place  of  her  sepulture !  Judgment  is  God's 
strange  work;  but  when  he  contends,  how  terrible  are  His  judgments  T' 
Thrones  totter  and  fall,  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  abideth  for  ever. 

Lessons:--!.  The  triumph  of  iniquity  is  short-lived,  2.  Jehovah  is  slow  to 
punish  but  when  he  does  so  it  is  with  terrible  severity.  3.  The  threatenings  of  God 
should  lead  to  repentance  and  reformation;  if  disregarded  and  defied,  ruinisinevit- 

OERM  NOTES  6>A  TEE  VERSES. 


Verse  15.     Jehu  is  no  less  subtle 
than  valiant.    He  knew  that  the  notice 
of  this  unexpected  change  might  work 
a  busy  and  dangerous  resistance.     He 
therefore  gives  order  that  no  messen- 
ger of  the  news  may  anticipate  his 
personal  execution,  that  so  he  might 
surprise  Jehoram  in  his  palace  of  Jez- 
reel,  whether  tending  his  late  wounds, 
or  securely  feasting  his  friends,  a  A 
dreaming  of  nothing  less  than  dan- 
ger.    Secresy  is  the  safest  guard  of 
any  design.     Disclosed   projects  are 
either  frustrated,  or  made  needlessly 
difficult.— J?j9.  Eall. 


O'er-watched  and  weary,  like  a  night-doe 
still  " 

Fixed  to  my  post;  meanwhile  the  rolling  year 
Moves  on,  and  I  my  wakeful  vigils  keep 
By  the  cold   star-hght    sheen    of  spangled 
SKies. 

In  the  present  case,  the  frequency 
of  reports  from  the  seat  of  war,  and 
the  king's  desire  for  intelligence, 
naturally  kept    the  attention    of  the 

watchman  much  in  that  direction. 

Kitto, 


Verses  17-20.->The  minister  of 
God's  word,  a  watchman.  L  He 
occupies  an  elevated  and  conspicuous 
position.  2.  He  keeps  a  vigilant  look- 
out. 3.  He  is  quick  to  discern  the 
signs  of  the  times.  4.  He  is  faithful 
in  reporting  what  is  good,  and  in 
warning  of  coming  danger.  5.  He 
has  keen  insight  into  character,  and 
the  tendency  of  human  conduct. 

Verse  17.  There  was  usually  in 
ancient  times  a  watch-tower  over 
the  royal  residence,  where  a  man  was 
always  stationed,  night  and  day,  to 
keep  a  good  look-out  in  all  directions 
from  which  any  sort  of  tidings  might 
be  expected.  What  he  beheld  that 
he  deemed  of  any  consequence  he 
declared  below  in  the  courts  of  the 
palace. 

The  Agamemnon  of  ^schylus  opens 
with  the  soliloquy  of  such  a  watch- 
man— 

For  ever  thus  ?  0  keep  me  not,  ye  gods. 
For  ever  thus  fixed  in  the  lonel/  toweT 
Qf  Atreus  Palace,  from  whose  iieight  I  gaze 


Verse     20.     Eeckless     drivers. 
"Like  the   driving  of  Jehu,   for  he 
driveth  furiously."     By  the  flash  of 
that  one  sentence,  we  discover  Jehu*s 
character.     He  came  with  such  speed, 
not  merely  because  he  had  an  errand 
to  do,  but  because  he  was  urged  on 
by  a  headlong  disposition,  which  had 
won   him    the   name    of  a   reckless 
driver,  even   among   the   watchmen. 
The  chariot  plunges  until  you  almost 
expect  the  wheels  to  crash  under  it, 
or  some  of  the  princely  party  to  be 
thrown  out,  or  the  horses  to  become 
utterly  unmanageable.    But  he  always 
goes  so;  and  he  becomes  a  type  of 
that  class  of  persons  to  be  found  in 
all  the  communities,  who  in  worldly 
and  religious  affairs    may  be   styled 
reckless  drivers. 

I.  To  this  class   belong  all  those 

who  conduct  their  worldly  affairs  in 

a  headlong  way,  without  any  regard 

to  prudence  or  righteousness.     Many 

a  man  sits  in  his  pew  on  Sunday  night, 

and  sings  Rock  of  Ages,  and  rolls  up 

his  eyes  very  piously,  who,  on  coming 

out  at  the  close  of  the  service,  shuts 

the  pew-door  and  says,   *' Good-bye 

religion,  I  will  be  back  next  Sunday !" 

A  religion  that  does  not  work  all  the 

499 


CHAP.  IX, 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


week,  as  well  as  on  Sunday,  is  no  re- 
ligion at  all.  There  are  to-day  in  our 
midst,  many  of  our  best  citizens  who 
have  come  from  affluence  into  straight- 
ened ciicnmstjtnces,  because  there 
was  a  partner  in  their  firm,  or  a  cashier 
in  their  bank,  or  an  agent  represent- 
ing their  house,  or  one  of  the  largest 
creditors,  who,  like  Jehu,  the  son  of 
Nimshi,  was  a  furious  driver.  Once 
in  a  while  a  swindler  is  arrested,  and 
if  the  case  be  too  notoriously  flagrant, 
the  culprit  is  condemned,  but  the  offi- 
cials having  him  in  charge  must  take 
the  express  train,  and  get  to  Sing  Sing 
in  briefest  time,  or  the  governor's  par- 
don gets  there  before  him.  We  have 
feet  of  lightning  when  we  get  on  the 
track  of  a  woman  who  has  stolen  a 
paper  of  pins,  or  a  freezing  man  who 
has  abstracted  a  scuttle  of  coals  ;  but 
when  we  go  out  in  pursuit  of  some 
man  who  has  struck  down  the  inter- 
ests of  a  hundred,  and  goes  up  along 
the  Hudson  to  build  his  mansion,  the 
whole  city  hangs  on  our  skirts,  crying, 
**  Don't  you  hurt  him  !"  If  a  teams- 
ter, passing  down  the  street,  dashes 
heedlessly  along  and  runs  down  a 
child,  the  authorities  catch  him ;  but 
for  the  reckless  commercial  drivers, 
who  stop  not  for  the  rights  of  others, 
and  who  dash  on  to  make  their  for- 
tunes over  the  heads  of  innocence, 
nrtue,  and  religion — no  chastisements. 
When  I  see  in  the  community  men 
mih.  large  incomes,  but  larger  out- 
goes, rushing  into  wildest  undertak- 
ings, their  pockets  filled  with  circulars 
about  gold  in  Canada,  and  lead  in 
Missouri,  and  fortunes  everywhere, 
launching  out  in  expenditures  to  be 
met  by  the  thousands  they  expect  to 
make,  with  derision  dashing  across 
the  path  of  sober  men,  depending 
upon  their  industry  and  honour  for 
success,  I  say,  *'  Here  he  comes,  the 
son  of  Nimshi,  driving  furiously." 

n.  Now  you  may,  in  worldly 
affairs,  be  cautious,  true,  honourable, 
and  exemplary ;  but  all  those  who 
are  speeding  towards  eternity  without 
preparation — flying  with  the  years, 
and  the  months,  and  the  weeks,  and 
tJie  days,  and  the  moments,  and  th© 
^00 


seconds,  towards  an  unalterable  des- 
tiny, yet  uncertain  as  to  where  they 
speed,  are  reckless  drivers.  What 
would  you  think  of  a  stage-driver 
with  six  horses  and  twenty  passengers, 
in  the  midnight,  when  it  is  so  dark 
that  you  cannot  see  your  hand  before 
your  face,  dashing  at  full  run  over 
bridges,  and  along  by  dangerous  pre- 
cipices? Such  a  man  is  prudent, 
compared  with  one  who,  amid  the 
perils  of  this  life,  dashes  on  towards 
an  unknown  eternity,  not  knowing 
where  he  goes.  If,  in  driving,  you 
come  to  the  forks  of  a  road,  and  one 
goes  to  the  right,  and  the  other  to  the 
left,  you  stop  and  make  enquiry  as 
to  which  road  you  ought  to  take.  To- 
night, you  have  come  to  the  forks  of 
a  road.  One  leads  to  heaven,  and  the 
other  to  hell.  Which  road  will  you 
take  ?  I  see  multitudes  of  people  who 
do  not  even  stop  at  the  forks  to  make 
enquiry.  The  coursers  behind  which 
they  go  are  panting  with  the  speed, 
nostrils  distended,  foam  dropping 
from  the  bit  and  whitening  the  flanks, 
but  still  urged  on  with  lash,  and  shout, 
and  laughter;  the  reins  undrawn,  the 
embankments  unwatched,  the  speed 
unnoticed.  Alas,  for  the  reckless 
drivers  !  They  may  after  awhile  see 
the  peril  and  seize  the  reins,  and  lay 
back  with  all  their  might,  and  put  on 
the  brakes,  and  cry  for  help  until  the 
hands  are  numb,  and  their  eyes  start 
from  their  sockets,  and  the  breath 
stops,  and  the  heart  chills,  as  over  the 
rocks  they  pi  ii  -Li^e,  courser  and  chariot 
and  horsemen  tumbling  in  long  re- 
sounding crash  of  ruin. 

III.  Some  are  drawn  along  by 
sinful  pleasures — a  wild  team  that  ran 
away  with  all  who  have  persisted  in 
riding  behind  them.  Once  fully  under 
way,  no  sawing  of  the  bit  can  stop 
them.  They  start  at  every  sudden 
sight  or  sound,  and  where  it  needs  a 
slow  step  and  great  care,  they  go  with 
bound  terrific.  Their  eyes  are  a  flame 
with  terrors,  and  their  hoofs  red  with 
the  blood  of  men  whose  life  they  have 
dashed  out,  and,  what  is  worse,  the 
drivers  scourge  them  into  more  furi- 
ous spee4?     W©  com^  out  aud   tell 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY  :  KIN08. 


CHAP.  ix. 


them  of  dangers  ahead,  but  with  jeer 
they  pass  on.     The  wild  team  smoke 
with   the  speed,  and  their  flying  feet 
strike  fire,  and  the  rumbling  of  swift 
wheels  over  rotten  bridges  that  span 
awful   chasms    is  answered    by    the 
rumbling  of  the  heavens,     "  Because  I 
called  and  ye  refused,  and  stretched 
out  my  hands  and  no  man  regarded, 
therefore  I  will  laugh  at  your  calam- 
ity, and  mock  when  your  fear  cometh  I" 
When  this  worid  gets  full  power  over 
a  man,  he  might  as  well  be  dead— he 
is  dead!     When  Siseracame  into  the 
house  of  Jael,  she  gave  him  some- 
thing to  drink,  and  got  him  asleep  on 
the  floor.     Then  she  took  a  peg  from 
the  side  of  her  tent,  and  a  mallet, 
and  drove  the  peg  through  the  brain 
of  Jael  into  the  floor.     So  the  worid 
feeds  a  man,  and  when  it  has  him 
sound   asleep,    strikes   his    life   out. 
Perhaps  there    are    some  who   say, 
"  Would  God  I  could  stop  my   bad 
practices!     But   I   cannot    stop.     I 
know  that  I  am  on  the  wrong  road, 
and  that  I  have  been  a  reckless  driver; 
but  I  try  to  rein  in  my  swift  appe- 
tites, yet  they  will  not  heed.*'     I  tell 
such  that  there  is  an  Almighty  hand 
which  can  pull  back  these  wild  racers. 
He  whose  beck  the  stars  answer,   and 
at   whose   mandate   the   chariots  of 
heaven  come  and  go,  is  more  than  a 
master  for  these  temptations.     Help- 
less  yourself,    and  unable   to   guide 
these  wild  coursers,  give  Jesus  Christ 
the  reins  ;  mighty  to  save  unto  the 
uttermost.     Better  stop  now.     Some 
years  ago  near  Princetown,  New  Jer- 
sey, some  young  men  were  skating  on 
a  pond  around  an  air-hole,  and  the 
ice  began  to  break  in.     Some  of  them 
stopped,  but  a  young  man  said,  "lam 
not  afraid,  give  us  one  round  more  '*' 
He  swung  nearly  round,  when  the  ice 
broke,    and   not  until  next  day  was 
his  lifeless  body  ionu^.-^Talmage. 

—  Impetuosity  of  disposition.  1. 
A  valuable  power  when  used  in  a 
good  cause.  2.  Should  be  under  con- 
trol without  being  utterly  crushed.  3. 
Absolutely  necessary  to  accomplish 
certain  results.  4.  May  hurry  one 
lato  dangerous  excesses. 


—  Dilatory  and  careless  people  dc 
not    accomplish      anything.        Only 
diligent  and  energetic  persons  succeed, 
lest  thyself  to  see  what  spirit  moves 
thee.     The  right  motive  power  is  the 
Holy  Spirit,  which   never  guides  to 
folly.     One   may    conduct    spiritual 
affairs  and  manage  the  concerns  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  with  folly,   want  of 
judgment,    and    heat    (Rom    x.   2). 
Those  only  are  children  of  God   who 
are  moved  by  the  spirit  of  God  (Rom 
vui.  14:).—  0smider, 

^  Verses  21-37.  A  terrible  day  of 
judgment.  1.  It  comes  with  awful 
suddenness.  2.  It  briii-s  destruction 
to  three  notable  monarchs  when  they 
little  expected.  3.  It  is  irresistible, 
and  leaves  no  possible  way  of  escape! 
4.  It  fulfils  and  confirms  the  Divine 
threatenings. 

Verses  22,    23.    Wicked    tyrant ! 
What  speakest   thou  of   peace   with 
men,  when  thou  hast  thus  long  waged 
war  with  the  Almighty  ?    That  cursed 
mother  of  thine  hath  nursed  thee  with 
blood  and  trained  thee  up  in  abomin- 
able idolatries.     Thou  art  not  more 
hers  than  her  sin  is  thine;  thou  art  pol- 
luted with  her  spiritual  whoredoms  and 
enchanted  with  her  hellish  witchcrafts. 
Now  that  just   God,  whom  thou  and 
thy  parents  have  so  heinously  despised, 
sends  thee  by  me  this  last  message  of 
His  vengeance,  which,  while  he  spake, 
his  hand  is  drawing  up   that   deadly 
arrow  which   shall  cure   the  former 
wounds  with  a  worse.     Too  late  now 
doth    wretched     Jehoram     turn    his 
chariot  and  flee  and  cry,  Treason,  O 
Ahaziah  I     There  was  treason  before, 
O    Jehoram!     Thy    treason    against 
the  majesty  of  God  is  now  revenged  by 

the  treason  of  Jehu  aofninst  thee 

£p.  Hall. 


Verse  22  <'  Is  it  peace  ?  "  So  it  is 
to-day  also  :  a  false  peace  is 
demanded  of  those  who  are  sent  to 
make  known  the  stern  truth,  in  order 
that  hoary  evils  may  not  be  exposed. 
Those  who  have  not  true  peace, 
generally  want  an  external,  shamefuJ 


COAP.  IX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


peace  at  any  price  (Ezek.  xiii.  16). 
Ask  thyself  first  of  all,  "  Is  there 
peace  in  thy  heart  ?  "  and  seek  peace 
from  Him  who  is  our  peace  (Eph.  ii. 
14).  There  can  be  no  lasting  peace 
where  there  is  apostasy  from  the 
living  God  and  His  word;  there 
licentiousness,  injustice,  tyranny, 
strife,  and  war,  with  all  their  atten- 
dant miseries  and  horrors,  must  come. 
Though  His  sword  rests  for  a  time, 
yet  it  does  not  rest  in  its  scabbard. — 
Lange. 

Verses  23-29.  The  death  of  the 
kings  of  Israel  and  Judah.  It  was 
sudden,  unforeseen,  and  fell  upon  them 
in  their  security  and  blindness.  '\  he 
proverb  applies  to  Ahaziah  :  *'  Hunt 
with  the  fox,  and  you  will  be  hung 
with  him."  Refrain  from  bad  com- 
panions, if  thou  wouldst  not  be 
punished  with  them.  The  one  is 
thrown  upon  Naboth's  field,  and  left 
without  a  grave  ;  the  other  is  brought 
indeed  to  the  sepulchre  of  his  fathers, 
but  what  is  the  use  of  a  royal 
sepulchre  to  him  who  has  lost  his  soul  ? 
—  TFurt.  Summ, 

Verses  25,  26-  The  inflexible 
exactitude  of  retribution.  1.  Is  not 
affected  by  the  changes  of  time.  2. 
Is  the  operation  of  a  Divine  law 
which  is  startlingly  minute  in  its 
application.  3.  Makes  the  place  of 
the  sin  the  place  of  the  punishment. 
*'  I  will  requite  thee  in  this  plat." 
4.  Should  lead  the  evil-doer  to  pause 
and  think. 

—  How  just  are  the  judgments  of 
God  !  It  was  in  the  field  of  Naboth 
wherein  Jehoram  met  with  Jehu ; 
that  very  ground  called  to  him  for 
blood.  And  now  this  new  avenger 
remembers  that  prophecy  which  he 
heard  out  of  the  mouth  of  Elijah  in 
that  very  place,  following  the  heels  of 
Ahab,  and  is  careful  to  perform  it. 
Little  did  Jehu  think,  when  he  heard 
that  message  of  Elijah,  that  his  hands 
should  act  it.  Now,  as  zealous  of 
accomplishing  the  word  of  a  prophet, 
he  gives  charge  to  Bidkar  his  captain 
thftt  the  bleeding  carcase  of  Jehoram 
502 


should  be  cast  upon  that  very  plat  of 
Naboth.  0  Naboth's  blood  well  paid 
for !  Ahab's  blood  is  licked  by  dogs 
in  the  very  place  where  those  dogs 
licked  Naboth's. — Bp.  Hall. 

Verse  25.  Jehu  remembers,  and  in 
substance  repeats,  the  word  of  the 
Lord  by  Elijah  (1  Kings  xxi.  19,  29), 
and,  conscious  that  he  himself  is  the 
minister  of  judgment,  he  fulfils  the 
word  of  the  Lord.  "  This,'*  says  Kitto, 
'*  completes  the  first  act  of  this  awful 
tragedy,  which  reads  like  the  old 
Greek  dramas — but  far  less  old  than 
this — of  accomplished  fate.  The 
appointed  executer  of  the  doom  was 
himself  the  witness  of  its  being  im- 
posed.    All  is  complete." 

Verse  27.  The  danger  of  evil 
associations.  1 .  Begets  a  distaste  to 
that  which  is  good.  2.  Leads  to  apos- 
tasy from  God,  and  to  excesses  of 
wickedness  at  one  time  indignantly 
deemed  impossible.  3.  Results  in 
suffering  and  premature  death. 

Verses  30-37.  What  does  the 
frightful  end  of  Jezebel  teach  ?  1 . 
The  transitoriness  and  nothingness  of 
human  might  and  glory.  Jezebel 
relies  upon  her  might.  Before  her  the 
people  tremble.  She  controlled  and 
directed  three  kings.  She  raged 
against  all  who  did  not  submit  uncon- 
ditionally to  her  will.  Now  she  lies, 
thrown  down  from  her  height,  like 
dung  upon  the  field,  so  that  no  one 
could  say,  "  That  is  the  great  and 
mighty  queen  Jezebel."  2.  The  cer- 
tainty of  Divine  retribution.  Jezebel 
was  an  enemy  of  the  living  God  and  of 
His  word.  She  seduced  old  and  young 
to  apostasy.  She  persecuted  all  who 
still  held  firmly  to  Jehovah.  Her 
terrible  end  proves  that  such  a  temper 
is  certainly  punished.  Her  end  has  no 
parallel  in  Israelitish  history.  It  calls 
aloud  to  all  unto  this  day,  **  Woe  unto 
him  that  buildeth  his  house  by 
unrighteousness"  (Jer.  xxii.  13),  and 
it  is  a  pledge  of  the  truth  of  this  asser- 
tion, "  Only  with  thine  eyes  shalt  thou 
behold  and  see  the  reward  of  the 
wicked  Ps.  xci.  8). — Zangs. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  FINOS. 


caiLf.  nc. 


Verses  30-35.    Jezebel :  the  igno- 
minious fall  of  pride  and  beauty.     1. 
The  proud  queen,  defiant  to  the  lavst, 
decks    herself   with    ornaments,    not 
hoping  to  captivate  the  impetuous  Jehu 
with  the  charms  of  her  beauty,  but  to 
awe  him  into  submission  by  her  impe- 
rious assumption  of  royal  state   and 
authority.      2.    Her     untamed,     un- 
daunted spirit  is  evident  in  the  stiugiug 
reproof  she  uttered  to  Jehu  as  soon  as 
he  came  within  earshot,  and  which  she 
seemed  almost   to   hiss   between  her 
clenched  teeth — "Had   Zimri  peace, 
who  slew  his  master  ?"     This  is  her  last 
glory,  to  remind  her  enemy  of  the  fate 
of  one  who  had,  like  him,  usurped  the 
royal  power,  and  killed  his  king,  and, 
as    Kitto    says,    "  to  cast  one   bitter 
buining  word  upon  the  head  of  the 
destroyer,   such  as  should  haunt  and 
scorch  him  all  his  life."    Eut  Jehu  was 
not  the  man   to    be    intimidated    by 
words,  though  such  fierce  expressive 
words,  and  from  the  lips  of  such  a 
woman.     3.  She  is  instantly  deserted 
and  betrayed  by  those  she  considered 
her   obsequious  and  obedient  slaves. 
At  the  word  of  command,  which  they 
saw  it  was  dangerous  to  disobey,  her 
decked  and  painted  body  is  ignomini- 
ously  flung  out  of  the  window,  dashed 
to  the  ground,  and  the  last  spark  of  life 
crushed  out  of  it  by  the  horses  and 
chariot  of  the  furious  driver,  the  blood 
of  the  royal  victim  splashing  against 
the  wall,   and  sprinkling  the  horses. 
**  This  is  one  of  the  most  terribly  vivid 
and  fearful  pictures  in  all  the  annals 
of  tragedy."     4.  Her  body  is  left  to  be 
devoured  by  the  pariah  dogs,  is  denied 
even  common  sepulture,  and,  in  a  short 
time — quicker  than  it  takes  the  king 
to  banquet — a  few  bones  are  all  that  is 
left  of  the  once  imperious,  queenly,  but 
cruel  and  idolatrous  Jezebel. 

—The  tidings  of  the  revolution 
under  Jehu,  and  of  the  death  of  Joram, 
spread  with  the  greatest  rapidity 
throughout  Jezreel,  and  quickly 
reached  the  ears  of  the  haughty 
Jezebel.  One  would  suppose  that,  on 
hearing  it,  she  would  have  trembled 
with  terror,  and  gone  to  hide  herself  in 
Bome  dark  recess  of  the  palace  ;  but  her 
fierce,    masculine,    vindictive    spirit; 


asserts  its  pre-eminence  to  the  very 
last,  and  if  she  has  to  perish  with  the 
rest  of  Ahab's  house,  she  resolves  to  die 
the  regal  mistress  she  had  lived. — 
Whedon. 

Verse     30.  How  accurately     this 
description  fits  many  of  her  sex.     The 
highest     occupation    they     can    con- 
ceive of  is  to   adorn   themselves,    to 
conquer,  and  produce   effects.     Thou 
fool !     If  God   demands   thy   soul    of 
thee  to-day,  what   shall  all  paint  and 
powder  upon  the  face  avail  before  Him 
who  tries   the  heart   and  the   reins  ? 
Can  velvet  and  silk  cover  thine  inner 
stains  (Isa.  iii.   IG)?     There  could  be 
no  sterner  reproof  of  vanity,  pride,  and 
coquetry,  and  no  more  severe  warning 
to  take   to  heart  the  apostle's   words 
(I  Peter    iii.     3)    than  the    fate   of 
Jezebel.     Lange. 

—     Who   would   not  have  looked 
that  Jezebel,    hearing   of  this   bloody 
end  of  her  son  and  pursuit  of  her  ally, 
and   the   fearful  proceedings    of  this 
prosperous  conspiracy,  should  have  put 
herself  into    sackcloth  and  ashes  ;  and 
now,  finding  no  means  either  of  defence 
or  escape,  should  have  cast  herself  into 
such  a  posture  of  humiliation  as  might 
have  moved  the  compassion  of  Jehu  ? 
Her  proud  heart  could  not  suddenly 
learn  to  stoop ;   rather  she  recollects 
her   high     spirits,    and,     instead    of 
humbling  her  soul  by  repentance,  and 
addressing  herseK    for  an  imminent 
death,  she  paints  her  face,  and,  as  one 
that  vainly  hopes  to  daunt  the  courage 
of  an  usurper  by  the  sudden  beams  of 
majesty,  she  looks  out  and  thinks   to 
fright   him   with   the  challenge  of  a 
traitor,  whose  either  mercy  or  justice 
could  not  be  avoided.    Extremity  finds 
us  such  as  our  peace   leaves  us.     Our 
last  thoughts  are  spent  upon  that  we 
most  care  for.     Those   that  have   re- 
garded their  face  more  than  their  soul, 
in  their  latter  end   are  more  taken  up 
with  desire  of  seeming  fair  than  being 
happy.     It  is  no  marvel   if  a   heart, 
obdured  by  the  custom  of  sin,  shut  up 
gracelessly.    Counterfeit  beauty  agrees 
well  with   inward  uncleanness. — Bp, 
Hall. 

Verse  31.  Who  can  be  more  perverse 

503 


OOAP.  IX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


and  pitiful  than  a  man  who  boasts  and 
puts  on  airs  in  the  very  face  of  death, 
and  passes  out  of  the  world  with  abuse 
and  insults  against  God,  instead  of 
begging  for  pity,  and  crying,  *'  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  !  "  Jezebel, 
who  murdered  the  prophets,  and  I^a- 
both,  who  revolted  against  the  Lord  of 
heaven  and  earth,  calls  Jehu  a 
murderer  and  a  rebel.  The  blind  and 
stubborn  human  heart  always  finds  in 
others  just  those  sins  of  which  it  is 
itself  guilty  in  a  far  higher  degree. — 
Lange. 

Verse  34.  This  scene  of  hilarity  and 
cheer  in  the  midst  of  such  fearful 
bloodshed  makes  one  shudder.  But 
the  minister  of  doom  to  Ahab's  guilty 
house  must  needs  be  such  a  one  as 
Jehu.  Tenderness  and  sympathy 
would  unfit  the  avenger  of  blood  for 
his  work  of  death,  l^ot  till  after  his 
feast  does  Jehu  reflect  that  so  much 
royalty  and  greatness  have  fallen.  He 
had  left  the  mangled  corpse  of  the 
once  mighty  Jezebel  on  the  mounds 
of  offal  outside  the  gate,  a  prey  to  the 
dogs  which  in  the  East  ever  prowl 
about  such  spots. —  Whedon, 

Terse  35.  The  vanity  of  human 
greatness.  I.  Its  extenial  splendours 
lade.  II.  Its  wicked  and  ambitious 
schemes  are  overthrown.  III.  Its 
boasted  and  bewitching  beauty  is 
represented  at  last  by  a  few  revolting 
fragments. 

—  In  illustration  of  this  shocking 
end  of  the  corpse  of  Jezebel,  it  remains 
to  remark  that  tbe  more  than  half- wild 
street  dogs  of  the  East,  living  upon 
their  own  resources,  and  without 
owners,  soon  make  a  rapid  clearance  of 
the  flesh  of  dead  bodies  left  exposed, 
whether  of  human  creatures  or  beasts. 
An  Eastern  traveller,  describing  the 
remains  of  some  human  bodies  that  had 
been  devoured  by  dogs,  says:  ''The 
only  portion  of  the  several  corpses  1 
noticed  that  remained  entire  and  un- 
touched, were  the  bottoms  of  the  feet, 
and  the  insides  of  the  hands ;  a  proof 
of  the  rooted  antipathy  the  dog  has  to 
prey  upon  the  human  hands  and  feet." 
Pr.  Thomson  supposes  that  th©  do^s 
^04 


under  JezebePs  palace  may  have  been 
taught  to  devour  the  wretched  victims 
of  her  cruelty,  in  which  case  the 
retribution  would  be  remarkably 
striking. 

—  The  dogs  have  anticipated  Jehu 
in  his  purpose,  and  have  given  Jezebel 
a  living  tomb,  more  ignoble  than  the 
worst  of  the  earth.  Only  the  skull, 
hands,  and  feet  remain — the  skull, 
which  was  the  roof  of  all  her  wicked 
devices;  the  hands  and  feet,  which 
were  the  executioners — these  shall 
remain  as  the  monuments  of  those 
shameful  exequies,  that  future  times, 
seeing  these  fragments  of  a  body,  might 
say  :  "  The  dogs  were  worthy  of  the 
rest."  Thus  Jezebel  is  turned  to  d  ung 
and  dog's  meat,  Elijah  is  verified, 
Naboth  is  revenged,  Jezreel  is  purged, 
Jehu  is  zealous,  and,  in  all,  God  is 
just. — Bp.  Roll, 

Verses  36,  37.  The  infallibility 
of  the  Divine  word.  1.  Seen  in  the 
precision  with  which  its  threatenings 
are  fulfilled.  2.  Is  acknowledged  and 
declared  by  those  who  are  called  to 
carry  out  its  threats.  3.  Is  as  precise 
and  full  in  the  fulfilment  of  its  promises 
of  blessing. 

—  The  story  of  the  end  of  Jezebel  is 
given  with  particular  detail,  because 
therein  the  prophet's  threat  was  ful- 
filled with  especial  frightfulness.  As 
the  sin  of  the  house,  Ahab  was 
represented  to  the  fullest  extent  in 
Jezebel,  the  originator  and  patroness 
of  idolatry,  so  her  terrible  end  forms 
the  crisis  of  the  Divine  punishment. 
Ah  jziah  is  fatrdly  wounded,  and  dies 
in  a  strange  place.  Joram  falls  dead, 
pierced  through  the  heart;  but  is 
thrown  upon  the  field  of  N'aboth,  and 
not  buried.  Jezebel  is  thrown  down 
from  the  windo  w  by  her  o  wn  attendants ; 
a^  she  lies  weltering  in  her  own 
blood,  she  is  trodden  under  foot  by 
horses,  and  the  corpse  lies  unburied, 
**  like  dung  upon  the  fields."  She 
appears  here,  in  her  last  moments, 
such  as  she  had  ever  been — proud  and 
impudent — arrogant  and  domineer- 
ing— defiant  and  insolent.  She  places 
herself  at  the  window,  painted  and 
grandly  dressed,  and  presumes  upon 


BOMILHTIC  COMMKNTART:  KlKOS. 


CHAP.  X. 


reTo/nislTln  T&"^1      ^f  *l".\  9^  T^S'^^^  Po^er,  with  destmction  if 

recomsing  in  the  judgment  which  18  he    persists.      Just    here     iudsment 

pt    e"  r"her  m^X^^'"-^?7'°;  overtakes  her;  hor  nea7est  I^Sl 

P  use    ror    nei    misJeeds,    instead  of  forsake  the  hated  aueen   and   h^^v^  Vi^r 

vengeance  as  a  murderer  and  a  traitor,  truth  of  the  wordT   '■  It^is  a  fearft,! 

fnr^Ltet  h'-  *'"/"''"'"•' ''''^'  '"■>St»fe>Hutofhehand  oftLlS 

ana  Uueatens  him,  relying  upon  her  Q,<A."—La>ige.                       lueimng 


CHAPTER  X. 
THE    FALL    OP    BAAT., 


LXX.  suggests  "Sama,ia»«nrt?h?r^  ,  *',•  ""^^  •^<""»«'<>"tatiTe  place  in  the  text.  Th« 
S^,»-,«;t  ,>  ""V  .""^  '^«''/«<<' supplies  W<.i<a(M;  othertranslators  have  changed 
7i<rii;.(Je.reel)  into  ^NT^I  (Israel).    Keil  suggests  that  "the  rulers  of  Jezreel"  mean 

•■the  supreme  court  officiak'of  the  royal  house  of  Ahab."  Them  that  brought  ap  Ahab'. 
children-These  D'JpNrr  are  the  guardiaus  and  educators  of  the  royal  princes  of  Ahab 

t!rHL?htra^-:/s;!:'riLt..^^^^^^^^^^ 

&c._Thi8  -  master  «*  meant  Joram.  Verse  6.  He  that  was  over  the  house --)Z;^5,  perfect! 
Verse  11    So   Jehu  slew  all -How  remarkable   this  honest   record  in  God's  bo'ok  I     Th« 

?rcZ|e  rihlvs^t^f  tr^'^''-'  f  .^-^  P^^P^^  "  (-  ^)  -^^  ^^^  idea  that  the  ctL  men 
LnW  1?  ^^^^s  house  had  conspired  to  murder  these  seventy  descendants  of  Ahab  and 
Ah  Vc^  hypocrisy  enough  to  quote  Elijah's  prophecy  as  being  fulfilled  in  the  extitatim?  J 

/n-S)^7,  to  cut  of  from,  the  Targum  and  others  read  Cl'l^jp^,  to  be  enraged,  wrath.     In  aU 
Sr :; llVeraai;-^^^^^  '^^  ^^^  ^^yo-^  Jordan  belonging  to  the 


605 


CHAP.x.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 

E0MILET1C8  OF  VERSES  1-17. 
Zeal  in  Executing  Divine  Judgments, 

I.  Is  not  deficient  in  resources  for  accomplishing  its  purpose  (verses  1-11). 
Joram,  Ahaziah,  and  Jezebel  have  fallen,  but  the  Divine  vengeance,  which  had 
so  long  and  patiently  slumbered,  will  not  have  finished  its  work  of  retribution 
till  every  member  of  Ahab's  guilty  house  is  brought  to  judgment.  Jezreel 
was  in  the  power  of  Jehu,  and  with  his  characteristic  promptitude,  he  seeks  to 
get  Samaria  in  his  grasp,  and  wreak  his  vengeance  on  the  children  of  Ahab 
there.  His  artifice  in  writing  to  the  rulers  in  Samaria  to  set  up  a  child  of 
Ahab's  as  king,  and  fight  for  him,  is  full  of  both  irony  and  menace — of  irony 
because  he  knew  how  unlikely  it  was  that  they  would  champion  the  cause  of 
a  fallen  house,  known  to  be  doomed  of  God,  and  of  menace,  as  it  seemed  to 
involve  a  demand,  either  to  surrender,  or  else  prepare  for  the  worst.  Bahr 
paraphrases  it  thus : — "  I  am  king,  but  if  ye,  who  have  in  your  possession  the 
chariots  and  horses  and  arms,  are  desirous  of  placing  a  prince  of  the  house  of 
Ahab  on  the  throne,  you  thereby  begin  a  war  with  me."  They  submitted  ; 
and  it  is  a  melancholy  evidence  of  the  utter  demoralisation  caused  by  the  pre- 
vailing idolatry,  that  the  guardians,  without  the  least  show  of  defence,  coolly 
massacred  the  seventy  sons  of  Ahab,  many  of  them  young  and  tender,  who 
had  been  committed  to  their  care,  and  sent  their  heads  to  the  blood-thirsty 
Jehu.  By  this  stratagem  it  would  seem  that  the  slaughter  of  these  descend- 
ants of  Ahab  was  charged  upon  the  rulers  of  Samaria,  and  that  Jehu  gained 
his  object  without  the  odium  of  the  guilt.  Not  so.  Jehu  takes  the  full  responsi- 
bility, and  regards  it  as  a  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  word  (verses  9-11).  The 
man  fired  with  zeal  to  do  a  work  which  is  so  congenial  to  his  own  taste  and 
aims,  knows  how  to  make  the  best  of  his  power  and  opportunities. 

II.  May  excite  a  love  of  slaughter  which  tempts  it  to  exceed  the  limits 
of  its  original  commission  (verses  12-14).  Jehu  moves  on  to  Samaria  to 
take  possession  of  the  capital  of  his  newly-acquired  kingdom,  and  every  stage 
of  his  progress  is  marked  with  blood.  When  the  thirst  for  blood  is  once 
aroused,  it  is  not  readily  slaked.  "  On  the  way  he  met  a  gay  and  gallant  party 
of  princes  from  Judah,  proceeding  on  a  visit  to  the  court  of  Israel,  whom  the 
tidings  of  the  revolution  had  not  reached,  so  rapid  had  been  Jehu's  movements. 
These,  in  his  still  unslaked-thirst  for  blood,  he  ordered  to  be  slain  on  the  spot ; 
and  it  is  quite  possible  that,  like  the  early  Moslem  conquerors,  he  sincerely 
thought  that,  while  performing  these  and  other  atrocities,  which  were  greatly 
beyond  his  commission,  though  under  cover  of  it,  he  was  doing  God  service, 
and  that  he  suffered  not  himself  to  perceive  that  he  was  following  to  a  greater 
extent  the  ferocious  instincts  of  his  nature,  or  that  sanguinary  excitement 
under  which  he  laboured,  combined  with  an  undercurrent  of  selfish  policy, 
which  taught  him  that,  after  such  a  beginning  as  he  had  made,  the  more  com- 
plete the  riddance  he  accomplished  of  all  the  adherents  of  the  house  of  Ahab — • 
whether  from  sympathy  of  principle,  or  from  alliance  of  blood — the  more 
thoroughly  the  power  of  future  reaction  would  be  weakened.  Jezebel's  question 
— r''  Had  Zimri  peace  when  he  slew  his  master  ?  "  rang  constantly  in  his  ears  ; 
and  he  was  answering  it  after  his  hard  fashion,  which  seemed  to  say  :  "  Zimri 
had  no  peace,  because  he  slew  only  his  master ;  I  slay  more  that  I  may  have 
peace." — (Kttto),  The  intoxication  of  slaughter  is  a  dangerous  symptom  in 
any  nature,  and  wUl  soon  hurry  one  beyond  the  bounds  of  duty  and  justice, 

506 


SOMllETtC  COmMEWTAUT:  KINGS.  CrrAP.  x. 


Til.  Finds  sympathy  and  encouragement  in  those  who  fully  believe  in 
the  righteousness  of  the  judgment  (verses  15,  16).     Here  Jehu  comes  across 
a  figure  who  might  have  reminded  him  of  Elijah  himself.     It  was  Jehonadab, 
the  son  of  Rechab— that  is,  the  son  of  the  "  Rider/'  an  Arab  chief  of  the  Ke- 
nite  tribe,  who  was  the  founder,  or  second  founder,  of  one  of  those  Nazarite 
communities  which  had  grown  up  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  which,  in 
this  instance,  combined  a  kind  of  monastic  discipline  with  the  manners  of  the 
Bedouin  race,  from  whom  they  were  descended.     It  seems  that  he  and  Jehu 
were  already   known  to  each  other.     The   king  knew   the  stern   tenacity  of 
purpose  that  distinguished  Jehonadab  and  his   tribe.     The  hand  was  grasped 
in  a  clasp  which  was  not  afterwards  parted.     The  king  lifted  him  up  to  the 
edge  of  the  chariot,  apparently  to  whisper  into  his  ear   the  first  indication  of 
the  religious  revolution  which  he  had  determined   to  make   with    the   poli- 
tical   revolution    already  accomplished.     Side  by   side  with  the    king,  the 
austere  hermit  sat  in  the  royal  chariot  as  he  entered  the  capital  of  Samaria, 
the  warrior  in  his  coat  of  mail,  the  ascetic  in  his  haircloth  {Stanley).     Jehona- 
dab had  probably  mourned  over  the  prevailing  idolatry,  and  hearing  of  what 
Jehu  had  done  and  said,  he  recognised  in  him  a  minister  of  Jehovah,  to  exe- 
cute judgment  on  the  wicked  house  of  Ahab,  and  went  forth  to  meet  him,  and 
declare  that  his  heart  was  with  him  in  this  ministry  of  judgment.     To  have 
the  sympathy  and  approval  of  such  a  man  would  be  no  small  advantage  to 
Jehu  ;  and  one  does  not  know  how  far  Jehonabab  restrained  him  from  excesses 
into  which  his  impulsive  nature  might  have  driven  him.     It  is  an  unspeakable 
benefit   to    any    cause    when   zeal    is   at    once  encouraged    and    controlled. 
Even  the^  fierce  minister  of  Divine  judgment  is  relieved  when  the  terrible 
responsibility    of    his  action   is   shared    by  a   congenial   and   sympathizing 
companion. 

IV.  Persists  in  fully  carrying  out  the  Divine  command  (verse  17).     Jehu 
was  commissioned  to  destroy  the  whole  house  of  Ahab,  and  he  rested  not  till 
he  had  done  in  Samaria   what  he  had  done  in  Jezreel— put  to  death  all  the 
members  of  the  doomed  house.     It  was  customary  in  the  East,  from  the  earli- 
est  times,  for  the  founder  of  a  new  dynasty  to  put  to  death,  not  only  the  de- 
posed monarch,  but  also  his  descendants  and  relatives— especially  all  the  males 
—and  we  have  several  examples  of  this  in  these  books  of  Kings  (1  Kings  xv. 
29;  xvi.   11;    2  Kings  xxv.   7).     Jehu,  therefore,    did   not  commit  an  un- 
heard of  crime,  but  followed,  m  this  respect,  the  example  of  other  founders  of 
new  dynasties,  though  there  was  in  his  case  the  solemn  charge  and  warrant 
from  Jehovah.     A  zealous  nature  is  restless  until  the  work  committed  to  it  is 
finished,  and  finished  with  all  fidelity  of  detail.     The  marvel  is  that  such 
strong,  fiery  spirits  do  not  oftener  exceed  their  commission  and  plunge  into 
deeper  crimes.    Naturalists  tell  us  that,  among  birds  and  butterflies,  the  swift- 
est, strongest  flyers  approach  man  much  nearer  than  those  with  weaker  wings, 
feeling  confident  that  they  can  dart  away  from  any  threatened   danger  ;  and 
this  misplaced  confidence  brings  them  into   the  net  of  the   collector.     How 
often  has  a  confidence  similarly  inspired,  and  similarly  misplaced,  brought  a 
strong  ardent  nature  to  the  very  brink  of  some  terrible  excess.     How  few  can 
do  just  as  much,  and  no  more,  than  he  is  authorised  to  do  I 

Lessons:—!.  It  is  no  enviable  office  to  he  the  executioner  of  Divine  vengeance. 
2.  Ihere  are  natures  to  whom  the  work  of  slaughter  is  congenial.  3.  If  so  much 
zeal  ts  shown  in  carrying  out  the  Divine  judgments,  with  how  much  eagerness  should 
the  JJivtne  mercy  be  proclaimed  I 

607 


cm^Y.  X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 


Verses  1-7.  Idolatry :  its  emascu- 
lating and  deg^rading^  tendency. 
I.  It  has  not  the  courage  to  defend  the 
interests  of  its  best  patron  but  trembles 
with  fear  before  the  ambiguous  threat 
of  a  usurper  (verses  1-4).  II.  It 
makes  a  cowardly  and  humiliating 
submission  (verse  5).  III.  Without 
even  a  remonstrance  it  surrenders  its 
guardianship  over  lives  it  had 
pledged  itself  to  protect  and  educate 
(verse  6).  lY.  It  does  not  hesitate  to 
commit  the  cruellest  and  most  infamous 
crimes  (verse  7). 

—  Moral  decline  among  the  highest 
ranks  of  a  nation  generally  proceeds 
from  a  corrupt  court  which  sets  the 
fashion.  As  is  the  master,  so  is  the 
servant.  He  who  has  the  power  in 
his  hands  always  finds  instruments 
among  the  great  and  those  of  high 
rank  who  shrink  back  from  no  demand 
which  is  made  upon  them,  however 
much  it  may  conflict  with  honour  and 
duty.  Those  who  no  longer  fear  God, 
must  fear  men.  Pear  of  men  may 
become  the  cause  of  the  greatest 
crimes. — Z  ange 

Yerse  1.  The  plentiful  issue  of 
princes  is  no  small  assurance  to  the 
people.  Ahab  had  sons  enough  to 
furnish  the  thrones  of  all  the  neigh- 
bouring nations — to  maintain  the  hopes 
of  succession  to  all  times.  How  secure 
did  he  think  the  perpetuation  of  his 
posterity  when  he  saw  seventy  sons 
from  his  own  loins.  Neither  was  this 
royal  issue  trusted  either  to  weak 
walls  or  to  one  roof;  but  to  the  strong 
bulwarks  of  Samaria,  and  thereinto  the 
several  guards  of  the  chief  peers.  It 
was  the  wise  care  of  their  parents  not 
to  have  them  obnoxious  to  the  danger 
of  a  common  miscarriage,  but  to  order 
their  separation,  so  as  one  may  rescue  the 
other  from  the  peril  of  assault.  Had 
Ahab  and  Jezebel  been  as  wise  for  their 
souls  as  they  were  for  their  seed,  both 
had  prospered. — Bp.  Hall, 

—  Though  a  large  family  of  chil- 
dren is  a  blessing  of  God,  yet  we  must 
not  rely  upon  them,  or  be  self-willed 
on  that  account,  as  if  the  family  could 

^08 


not  die  out ;  but  we  must  fear  God, 
must  not  stain  ourselves  with  sin 
against  our  consciences,  and  must  bring 
up  children  in  the  fear  of  God,  else 
He  will  take  them  away,  an^\  destroy 
the  entire  family. 

Yerse  5.  Unconditional  submis- 
sion. I.  Unjustifiable  when  it  in- 
volves a  greater  wrong  than  continued 
resistance.  II.  Should  not  be  made 
till  every  other  expedient  is  first 
exhausted.  III.  Evidence  of  a  weak 
and  cowardly  spirit.  lY.  May  involve 
irreparable  disgrace  and  ruin.  Y.  Is 
always  legitimate  when  made  to  the 
King  of  Heaven. 

—  Well  may  Jehu  think — These 
men  which  are  thus  disloyal  to  their 
charge  cannot  be  faithful  to  me ;  it  is 
their  fear  that  draws  them  to  this 
observation.  Were  thev  not  cowards, 
they  would  not  be  traitors  to  their 
princes,  subjects  to  me.  I  may  use 
their  hands,  but  I  will  not  trust  them. 
It  is  a  thankless  obedience  that  is 
grounded  upon  fear.  There  can  be  no 
true  fidelity  without  love  and  rever- 
ence. Neither  is  it  other  betwixt  God 
and  us.  If,  out  of  a  dread  of  hell,  we 
be  officious,  who  shall  thank  us  for 
these  respects  to  ourselves? — Bp.  Rail, 

Yerses  6,  7.  Here  we  have  an  ex- 
ample of  unfaithful  tutors,  governors, 
and  friends,  who  look  in  their  actions 
not  to  the  interests  of  the  orphans,  but 
to  their  own  advantage,  and  let  the 
orphans  and  their  cause  be  ruined.  As 
Jehu  nevertheless  destroyed  them  all, 
so  will  the  just  God  also  bring  upon 
the  heads  of  false  friends  and  trustees 
all  the  unfaithfulness  which  they 
inflict  upon  orphans  ;  therefore  let  such 
be  warned  against  all  violation  of  their 
trust.  How  they  probably  promised 
with  all  zeal  to  guard  the  life,  the 
honour,  and  the  rights  of  these 
princes.  Now  they  themselves  become 
their  murderers.  Let  no  man  trust 
the  golden  words  of  him  who  fears  man 
more  than  he  fears  God.  Unfaithful- 
ness ruins  those  who  practise  it. 
Though  the  crime  which  these  men 


B.OMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS. 


CHAP.  X. 


perpetrated  against  their  wards  could 
hardly  occur  in  our  day,  yet  instruc- 
tors and  guardians  are   not   wanting 
who  become  murderers  of  the  souls  of 
their    pupils,    in    that    they    mislead 
them  by   example    and  precept   into 
apostasy  from  the  living  God,  and  dis- 
belief in  His  holy  word,  instead   of 
educating  them  in  the  fear  and  admoni- 
tion of  the  Lord.     What  is  the  worth 
of  all  the  friendship,  favour,  and  trust 
of  this  world  ?     It  is  like  a  tree  in  soft, 
loose  ground,  which,   so  long  as  thou 
boldest  it  aright,  covers  thee  pleasantly 
with  its  shadow ;  but  which,  when  the 
storm  roars  through  its  top,  and  it  is 
overthrown,  no  longer  takes  account  of 

thee,    but  crushes  thee   in  its  fall. 

Lange. 


crazy  reeds  will  break  and  run  into 
our  hands.     How  worthy  were  Ahab 
and  Jezebel  of  such   friends!     They 
had  been  ever  false  to  God ;  how  should 
men  be  true  to  them  ?     They  had  sold 
themselves  io    work   wickedness,   and 
now   they  are  jequited  witli  a  merce- 
nary fidelity.     For  a  few  lines  have 
these  men  sold  all  the  heads  of  Ahab's 
posterity.     Could  ever  the  policy   of 
Jezebel  have  reached  so  far  as  to  sus- 
pect the  possibility  of  extirpation  of  so 
ample  an  issue,  iu  one  night,  by  the 
hands  of  her  trustiest  subjects  ?— i?«. 
Sail. 


Verse  7.     "Eo  doubt  among  so  many 
eons  of  Ahab  some  had  so  demeaned 
themselves  that  they  had  won  zealous 
professions  of  love  from  their  guar- 
dians.    WJiat  tears,  what  entreaties, 
what   conjurations   must    here  needs 
have  been  !     What  have  we  done,  0 
ye   peers   of   Israel,  that  we  deserve 
this   bloody  measure !     We  are    the 
sons  of  Ahab,  therefore  have  ye  hitherto 
professed  to  observe  us.     What  change 
is  this  ?     Why  should  that  which  hath 
hitherto  kept  you  loyal  now  make  you 
cruel  ?     Is  this  the  reward  of  the  long 
peace  able  government  of  our  father  ? 
Are    these    the  trophies    of    Ahab's 
victories  against  Eenhadad,  Jehoram's 
against  Hazael  ?     If  we  may  not  reign, 
yet  at  least  let  us  live ;  or,  if  we  must 
die,  why  will  your  hands  be  imbrued 
in  that  blood  which  ye  had  wont  to  term 
royal  and  sacred?     Why  will  ye  of 
tutors  turn  murderers  ?     All  pleas  are 
in  vain  that  are  deafened  with  their 
own  fears.     Perhaps  these  expostula- 
tions might  have  fetched  some  dews  of 
pity  from  the  eyes,  and   kisses  from 
the  lips  of  these  unfaithful  tutors,  but 
cannot  prevent  the  stroke  of   death. 
These    crocodiles    weep    upon   those 
whom  they  must  kill ;  and  if  their  own 
sons  had  been  in  the  place  of  Ahab's, 
doubtless  they  had  been  sacrificed  to 
the  will  of  a  usurper,  to  the  parents* 
safety.     It  is  ill  relying  upon  timorous 
natures:  ujon   every  occasion  those 


Verse  8.  This  cutting  off  of  heads 
in  collective  masses,  and  making  them 
into  heaps,  is  and  has  been  frightfully 
common  in  the  East,  and  an  Oriental 
familiar  with    blood    and    beheading 
from  his  cradle  would  read  this    por- 
tion of  Scripture  with  little,  if  any,  of 
the  disgust  and  horror,   and  certainly 
with  none  of  the  surprise,  with  which 
it  inspires  us.     After  a  battle,   or   a 
massacre,  or  the    rout  of  a   band   of 
robbers,  the  heads  are,  as  in  the   pre- 
sent instance,  heaped  up  pyramidally, 
face  outward,  on  each  ,side  the  palace 
gates;  and  the  builder  of  this  hoirid 
pile,    if  a   man   of   taste  and    fancy, 
usually  reserves  a  picturesque  head, 
such  as  one   with  a  fine   long  beard, 
to  form  the  crown  of  his  handiwork! 
Indeed,  we  have  it  on  credible  autho- 
rity, that  these  men  make  little  scruple 
of  taking  off  the  head  of  a  bystander 
for  the  purpose,  if  they  find  not  one  in 
their  stock  equally  becoming  for  the 
apex  of  the  pile.     Nothing  in  the  East 
so   much   shocks   a  European  as   the 
frightful  cheapness  of  human  life,  and 
with  it  of  human    heads.     In  Persia, 
the  king  has  not  seldom  been  known 
to  express  his  displeasure  at  a  town  or 
village  by  demanding  from  it  a  pyra- 
mid of  heads  of  given  dimensions  — 
Kitto. 

Verse  9.  *'  Who  slew  all  these  ?" 
The  terrible  havoc  of  sin.  I.  The 
fruitful  source  of  suffei  ing  and  misery. 
II.  The  instigator  of  anarchy  and 
confusion  in  the  family,  the  court,  the 
nation,  the  univerc=(\  IIT.  Provides 
the  ghastly  harvests  of  death. 

^09 


QMAt,  Z. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINQ8. 


Verses  9,  10.  He  wished  the  people 
to  understand  that  in  this  work  of 
blood,  there  were  other  ministers  of 
Divine  judgment  besides  himself. 
Most  commentators  explain  these 
words  as  the  language  of  sarcasm  or 
irony,  and  suppose  that  Jehu  either 
intended  to  involve  them  in  the  odium 
and  guilt  of  this  slaughter,  or  at  least 
to  keep  them  in  ignorance  of  the  fact 
that  he  had  himself  given  orders  for 
their  slaughter.  Uut  this  is  altogether 
unnecessary  and  unauthorised  by  any- 
thing that  appears  in  the  text. 
Doubtless  what  Jehu  had  done  to- 
wards this  massacre  was  well  known 
to  all  the  people  of  Jezreel.  He  had, 
indeed,  in  a  certain  sense,  ordered  it, 
but  yet  in  such  a  way  as  to  involve  the 
nobles,  elders,  and  guardians  in  the 
guilt  as  much  as  himself.  Their  ready 
and  prompt  obedience  in  beheading 
these  seventy  persons  was,  perhaps, 
hardly  expected  by  Jehu  ;  and  when 
he  saw  it,  he  at  once  began  to  feel  that 
he  was  comparatively  guiltless  of  their 
blood.  Jehu  wishes  them  to  under- 
stand that  these  massacres  are  no  works 
of  private  revenge,  but  a  most  signal 
fulfilling  of  Jehovah's  word  by  the 
prophet  Elijah  (1  King  xxi.  19-29). 
Strange  that  the  man  who  so  clearly 
recognised  his  mission  as  a  minister  of 
Divine  judgment,  utterly  failed  to  see 
that,  by  cleaving  to  the  sins  of  Jero- 
boam, he  exposed  himself  to  the  same 
judgment,  and  that  sooner  or  later 
Divine  righteousness  would  "  avenge 
the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the  house  of 
Jehu. " —  Whedon. 

Verse  10.  The  righteous  judg- 
ments of  God.  1.  May  be  wrought 
out  by  the  basest  villanies  of  man. 
2.  Are  brought  about  by  persistence  in 
disobedience  and  sin.  3.  Impress  the 
most  obdurate  with  awe.  4.  Should 
lead  to  humiliation  and  repentance. 

Verses  12-14.  A  thirst  for 
slaughter.  1.  A  dangerous  appetite 
to  indulge.  2.  May  impel  to  unneces- 
sary cruelty.  3.  Is  indifferent  to  the 
number  of  its  victims.  4.  May  be 
used  as  an  instrument  for  inflicting 
deserved  punishment. 
610 


Verse  15.  The  right  state  of  the 
heart.  Whatever  professions  of  kind- 
ness and  friendship  we  receive  from 
men,  their  whole  value  depends  on 
their  agreement  with  the  sentiment 
of  the  heart.  We  admit  this  so 
uniformly,  that  there  is  nothing  so 
detestable  as  insincerity.  The  most 
friendly  smiles,  the  most  engaging 
attentions,  become  the  objects  of 
aversion  when  seen  to  be  separated 
from  the  heart.  When  the  base  tinsel, 
which  had  given  currency  to  the 
counterfeit  coin,  is  worn  off,  we  cast 
the  piece  away,  notwithstanding  the 
correctness  of  Caesar's  image  and 
superscription  impressed  on  it,  and 
hold  its  utterer  as  a  deceiver  and  cheat. 
Nothing  is  so  thoroughly  contemptible 
as  hypocrisy,  when  once  the  mask  falls 
off.  If  we  exact  this  sincerity  from, 
each  other — and  this  is  what  Jehu 
required  from  Jehonadab — how  much 
more  strictly  may  we  not  expect  that 
it  should  be  required  from  us  by  the 
all- seeing  God!  He  claims  the  heart 
in  all  its  principles  and  feelings.  "  He 
searches  the  heart,  and  tries  the 
reins."  He  regulates  his  present  pro- 
ceedings towards  us  by  the  state  of 
our  heart,  and  by  this  will  He  judge  us 
at  the  last  day. 

I.  If  the  state  of  our  hearts  be 
right,  then  they  will  be  right  with 
God.  The  greatest  idea  that  can  be 
presented  to  our  mind  is  that  of  God. 
He  is  not  a  distant  being,  unconnected 
with  us,  unrelated  to  us  ;  and  the  state 
of  our  hearts  towards  Him  must  always 
be  either  right  or  wrong.  Every 
sentiment  we  cherish  contains  in  it,  as 
to  Him,  some  positive  good  or  evil. 

1.  A  heart  truly  right  with  God 
implies  that  we  venerate  him.  How 
little  of  this  is  expressed,  or  even  felt, 
on  earth!  Yet  in  Heaven,  where  all 
hearts  are  right,  the  seraphim  veil 
their  faces,  and  all  living  beings  fall 
prostrate  before  His  throne.  When, 
therefore,  we  are  conscious  of  His 
presence,  when  we  walk  as  under  His 
inspection,  fear  His  displeasure  more 
than  the  frowns  of  the  world,  and, 
bowing  before  His  Majesty  with 
lowliness  of  mind,  give  unto  Him  the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINOS, 


CHAT,  Z. 


honour  due  unto  His  name,  then  only- 
are  our  hearts  right  with  him.     2.  A 
heart  truly  right  with  God  implies  that 
we  entirely  submit    ourselves    to    him. 
The^  very   word  "  God,"  is  a  name  of 
dominion,   and  never  he  it  forgotten 
that  He  to  whom  it    belongs  has  a 
supreme  will    concerning  us.     There 
cannot  be  a  s.idder  spectacle  than  a 
heart  wrestling  with  its  Maker's  will ; 
but  when  we  recogoise  His  will  as 
our  only  rule,    when    we  keep  this 
before  us  as  our  supreme  law,  regarding 
it  as  the  light  and  guide  of  our  conduct, 
when  we  acknowledge  His  sovereignty 
in  providence,  take  our  place  in  society 
as  He  appoints,  submit  to  His  dispensa- 
tions, and,  even  in  the  greatest  afflic- 
tions,   even   when    nature    agonizes, 
meekly  bow,  like  Him  in  the  garden, 
and  say :  <'  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be 
done,"  then  is  our  heart  right  with 
God.     3.  A  heart  truly  right  with  God 
implies  that,  hy  the  cultivation  of  a  devo- 
tional spirit,    we    maintain    a   sacred 
intercourse   with   Him.     Prayer    and 
praise  are  the  great    instruments  of 
the  fellowship  of  our  spirits  with  God, 
and  illapses  of  light,    and  love,  and 
moral  power,   are  the  returns  which 
the  condescension    of    God  makes  to 
them.      Ever    since    created    intelli- 
gencies  existed,  to  desire  good  from 
God,  to  receive  supplies    of  it  from 
Himself,  to  be  devoutly  grateful,  and 
to  express  their  love—so  far  as  it  can 
be  expressed— in  praises,  has  been  the 
Heaven  of  happy  spirits.     It  is  the 
Heaven  even  of  earth,  the  only  one  to 
be  enjoyed,  and  which  all  may  enjoy. 
How  dead    the    heart  which  has  no 
intercourse  with  Heaven !     True  joy 
is  a  stranger  there,  and  all  is  darkness 
and  sin.     Barren  and  unwatered,    it 
bears  no  fruit  of  either  righteousness 
or  peace. 


11.  If  our  hearts  be  riffht,  thev 
are  right  with  Christ.  Till  this  be 
the  case,  the  heart  cannot  even  be 
nght  with  God.  Some  have  at- 
tempted, indeed,  to  produce  a  state  of 
mmd,  reverential,  submissive,  and 
devotional,  without  respect  to  Christ ; 
but  the  attempt  has  been  vain.  That 
our  heart  be  right  with  Christ  is  the 


foundation  of  all  religion.     1.  It  is  so 
when  it  accepts  His  sacrifice  as  the  only 
ground  on  which  to  claim  the  remission 
of  sins.     How  many  are  there  that  are 
not,  m  this  respect,  rioht  with  Christ ! 
One     depends    on    his   own   virtues, 
another     on     his     benevolence      and 
chanties;   and    more     still   (for  the 
heart  will  rest  its  hopes  somewhere) 
upon   some    undefined,     unscriptural 
views  of  God's  mercy.     Others,  more 
enlightened,     it    is    true,    but     still 
egregiously  wrong,  repose   a    general 
trust  m  the  merits  of  Christ;  forgetting 
that  this  trust  is  the  personal  specific 
act  of  a   broken   and   contrite   heart 
which  not  only  flees  to  that  atoning 
sacrifice,  but,  despairing  of  all  other 
help,  eagerly  embiaoes  this,     A  heart 
right  with  Christ  in  this  respect  has 
gone  through  the  process  of  awaken- 
ing, of  arousing  fears,  of  conviction  of 
utter  helplessness,  and  then  surrenders 
its  whole  case  to  Christ,  trusting  solely 
m  the    merit  of  his    death,   and   the 
power    of    his   intercession;    lookiuo- 
through  them  alone,  and  looking  now^ 
for  the  mercy  of  God  into  eternal  life! 
2.  The  heart  is  not   rijht  with  Christ 
unless  it  loves   him.       Considered    ab- 
stractedly, all    would  pronounce    it  a 
thing  monstrous,  and  almost  a  diabolical 
act,  not  to  love  the  Saviour,   and  yet 
sad  as  is  this  state  of  the  heart,  what  can 
be  more  common  ?     He  stands  before 
us  arrayed  in  the  perfection  of  virtue 
and  holiness,    and  yet  his    chaiacter 
possesses  no  interest  for  us,  as  though 
it  had  no  form  or  comeliness  that  men 
should  desire  Him   as  their  example. 
He  exhibits  the  tenderest  benevolence,* 
but  what  heart  is   moved    by   it,    or 
shows  forth  its  praise  ?    Men  are  under 
an  infinite  obligation  to  Him,  for  He 
died  to  save  them,  but  this  excite  s  no 
gratitude.     He  holds  out  to  them  the 
blessings  purchased  by  His  blood,  and 
they  spurn  them  for  every  trifle.    What 
a  state  of  the  heart  is  this  ?     You  see 
that  it  is  wrong,  awfully  wrong.    Yes 
and  it  never  can  be  right  till  it  loves 
Christ  supremely.     3.    When  the  heart 
ts  nght  with  Christ,  there  is  an  habitual 
confidence  in  Hin  intercession.     That  is 
what  is   called   the  life   of  faith,  or 
living  by  faith,and  it  is  by  tliis  that 

61] 


CUAP.  X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


the  real  is  distinguislied  from  tlie 
nominal  believer.  Faith  is  not  one 
single  act,  but  a  constant  reliance  on 
the  Saviour's  mediation,  as  that  which 
alone  stands  between  the  extreme  of 
justice  and  ourselves,  and  by  which 
we  are  looking  for  all  good,  for  the 
supply  of  every  want.  Thus  when  the 
heart  is  right  with  Him  it  rests  not  in 
acknowledging  His  merit,  but  draws 
its  virtue  from  heaven.  It  is  not  satis- 
fied with  acknowledging  a  fulness  of 
spiritual  blessings  to  be  in  Him,  but 
derives  them  from  Him  through  its 
specific  and  habitual  exercises. 


III.  If  our  hearts  be  right,  they 
are  right  with  the  church  of  Christ. 
1.  WTien  the  heart  is  in  a  right  state ^ 
the  church  is  avowed.  There  is  the 
church  and  the  world — the  one  is 
renounced,  the  other  embraced.  Bap- 
tism is  not  of  itself  a  sufficient  avowal. 
We  shall  unite  ourselves  to  some  por- 
tion of  the  visible  church,  and  so  place 
ourselves  under  its  discipline.  Where 
this  is  not  the  case  the  heart  is  not 
right.  That  which  keeps  us  in  the 
world  is  some  bad  principle  which  we 
will  not  renounce,  some  guilty  shame 
which  we  will  not  cast  off,  some  sinful 
association  which  we  will  not  break, 
some  evil  practice  which  we  will  not 
amend.  2.  Its  members  are  loved.  A 
new  sentiment  is  now  awakened,  and 
cherished  in  obedience  to  the  com- 
mandment of  Scripture,  "  Love  one 
another."  And  this  is  holy  charity. 
There  would  be  some  peculiarities  in 
the  opinions  and  practices  of  Jehona- 
dab ;  yet  Jehu  says  to  him,  **  Is  thine 
heart  right,  as  my  heart  is  with  thy 
heart  ?  If  it  be,  give  me  thine  hand." 
3.  When  our  heart  is  right  with  the 
church,  we  feel  we  are  identified  with  it. 
We  grieve  at  its  failures.  In  its  suc- 
cesses we  rejoice.  We  say,  with  the 
psalmist.  If  I  forget  thee,  0  Jerusalem, 
may  my  right  hand  forget  its  cunning." 
We  pray  for  its  prosperity,  and  say, 
*'  Peace  be  within  thy  walls."  We 
are  willing  to  labour  in  any  part 
which  the  providence  of  God  may 
assign  to  us,  if  we  may  but  promote 
its  interests. 
512 


lY .  If  the  heart  be  right,  it  will  be 
right  with  itself.  There  are  strange 
oppositions  and  divisions  in  the  heart, 
and  this  cannot  be  a  right  state  of  it. 
There  is  opposition  between  conviction 
and  choice.  Many  know  the  good, 
who  choose  it  not,  who  make  no  effort 
for  its  attainment.  There  is  opposition 
between  will  and  power.  To  will  is 
indeed  present  with  them,  but  how 
to  perform  they  find  not.  There  is  the 
struggle  between  the  flesh  and  the 
spiiit ;  the  counteraction  of  graces  by 
opposite  evils.  There  is  the  stunted 
growth.  The  seed  is  at  least  so  far 
choked,  that  there  is  no  fruit  unto 
perfection.  When  it  is  thus  with  us, 
the  heart  is  manifestly  wrong.  When 
it  is  right,  it  exerts  an  enlightened 
sway  over  the  whole  man.  All  its 
powers  are  in  obedient  order,  all  its 
graces  fruitful  and  abundant.  1. 
Perhaps  our  heart  is  wrong.  Let  us 
be  thankful  that  we  perceive  this ; 
but  be  patient  and  persevering.  Go 
to  the  very  depths  of  its  error  and 
wrong.  Heal  not  the  wound  slightly. 
The  case  may  be  hard ;  but  it  is  not  a 
hopeless  one.  2.  Perhaps  it  is  in  part 
right.  Por  this  be  thankful  ;  but  rest 
not  here.  Many  evils  have  already 
given  way.  I  see  you  laden  with  the 
spoils  of  some  conquered  enemies, 
more  are  nearly  overthrown.  0  pursue 
the  fugitives ;  seek  them  in  their  caves, 
and  dens,  and  hiding-places.  Be 
determined  on  their  final,  their  utter 
extirpation.  3.  Know  and  use  the 
mea?is  hy  whichthis may  he  accomplished. 
Exercise  faith  in  the  Saviour,  live  in 
habitual  watchfulness  and  self-denial, 
**  keeping  the  heart  with  aU  diligence, 
for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life." 
0  lovely  sight,  not  only  to  men  and 
angels,  but  to  God  also,  even  a  heart 
renewed,  stamped  with  the  Divine 
image,  warmed  with  the  Divine  life,  and 
sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is 
the  temple  of  God,  the  glorious  work- 
manship of  Christ ;  and  He  shall  ex- 
hibit it  at  the  last  day  as  the  Iruit  of  his 
passion,  and  the  monuments  of  his  all- 
subduing  all-restoring  grace.  —  R. 
Watson. 

—  Jehonadab  and  Jehu :  a  symbol 
1.  Of  war  and  peace.     2.  Of  the  man 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINOS. 


OHAP.  X« 


of  action  and  the  man  of  contemplation. 
3.  Of  zeal  and  prudence.  4.  Of  the 
union  of  various  gifts  and  graces  in  the 
common  service  of  God. 

—  Jehonadab  is  a  type  of  faithful 
adherence  to  the  faith  and  the  customs 
of  the  fathers  in  the  midst  of  an 
apostate,  wavering  people.  Decided 
and  firm  faith,  combined  with  a  strict 
and  earnest  life,  compels  respect  even 
from  those  who  themselves  follow 
another  course.  Where  there  is  agree- 
ment in  the  highest  and  most  impor- 
tant interests,  there  one  may  find  a 
speedy  and  easy  basis  of  intercourse, 
whatever  may  be  the  difference  of  rank 
or  nationality.  Jesus  says  to  me  and 
thee,  what  Jehu  said  to  Jehonadab — 
If  thine  heart  is  right  with  mine,  as 
mine  with  thine,  then  come  to  me  upon 
my  throne  (Eev.  iii.  21). — Lange, 

Yerse  16.  Zeal  for  God.  I.  A 
laudable  and  desirable  impulse.  II. 
Should  be  used  in  exposing  and 
punishing  wrong,  and  in  promoting 
that  which  is  good.  III.  Should  be 
under  the  control  of  a  heart  right  with 
God. 

—  Why  should  Jehu  so  desire  that 
his  zeal  should  be  noted  and  noticed  ? 
Hypocrisy      is      very      ostentatious. 
Drones  make   more   noise  than  bees, 
though  they  make  neither  honey  nor 
wax.     It  is  reported  of  John  Fox  that 
as  he  was  going  along  London  streets, 
a  woman  of  his  acquaintance  met  with 
him,  and  as  they  discoursed   together 
she  pulled  out  a  Bible,  telling  him  she 
was  going  to  hear  a  sermon ;  where- 
upon he  said  to  her.    If  you  will  be 
advised  by  me,  go  home  again.     But 
said  she,  when  shall  I  then  go  ?     To 
whom  he   ansv\^ered,    When  you  tell 
nobody  of  it. — Trapp. 

—  ^eal  for  the  Lord  is  a  great  and 


rare  thing  when  it  is  pure.  It  forfeits 
its  reward,  however,  when  it  aims  to 
be  seen.  How  many  a  one  deceives 
himself  with  his  zeal  for  the  Lord  and 
for  His  kingdom,  when  at  the  bottom 
he  is  zealous  only  for  himself,  for  his 
own  honour  and  fame,  his  own  interest 
and  advantage. — Lange. 

—  Some  have   thought    that    this 
was   all   pretended    zeal   and    showy 
hyprocrisy,  but  in  verse   30  the  Lord 
commends  Jehu  for  having  done  well, 
and  declares  that  his  bloody  work  was 
right  in  His  eyes  and  according  to  the 
feelings  of  His  own  heart.     In  other 
things  Jehu  sinned,  and  it  is  not  pre- 
tended   that    all  his    measures     and 
motives  in  his  work   of  doom  had  the 
approval   of    God;  but   in   executing 
judgment  on    Ahab's    house  his  zjal 
was  praised,  though  it  was  not  with- 
out  a   selfish    ambition,  and   perhaps 
other   elements   of  wickedness.     But 
we   need  not   call   Jehu  a    heartless 
boaster  and   a  murderous  hypocrite. 
Shall  he  be  blamed  as  murderous  and 
cruel  who   obeys  to  the  very   letter 
Jehovah's  positive  command  ?     If  the 
fall  of  the  tower  in  Siloam  were  really 
a  Divine   judgment  on  the  eighteen 
hapless   victims   whom   it  ground  to 
powder  (Luke  xiii.  4),  need  we  charge 
the  tower  with   blood-guiltiness  and 
cruelty  ?     Sometimes,     indeed,     God 
uses   wicked   hands    to   execute   His 
counsels,  and  holds  them  guilty  for 
their  deeds  (A.cts  ii.  23)  ;  but  never 
does  He  blame  a  minister  of  vengeance 
for  doing  what   His   own   word   has 
positively  commanded  him  to  do.     Let 
us  beware  how  we  curse  and  blame 
what  God  has  not  blamed.     There  are 
in  our  times  too  many  shallow   and 
unbiblical    attempts    to     ignore    the 
awful  severities  of  Divine  justice,  as 
revealed  in  God's  word. —  Whedon. 


E0MILETIG8  OF  VERSES  18-28. 

The  Punishment  of  Idolatry. 

Jehu's  thirst  for  blood  is  not  yet  satiated.  There  remains  one  more  power 
that  menaces  his  peaceful  and  safe  possession  of  the  throne.  The  Baal-idolatry 
was  so  closely  interwoven  with  the  fortunes  and  prestige  of  the  dynasty  of 
Ahab,  that  Jehu  must  feel  his  crown  insecure  while  that  cultus  was  allowed  to 

iL  5ia 


OHAP.x.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  K1NQ8, 


predominate.  He  rapidly  matures  a  scheme  by  which  the  priests  and 
worshippers  of  Baal  shall  be  utterly  exterminated,  and  the  very  name  of  the 
great  Phoenician  deity  degraded  and  made  an  abomination  for  ever.  It  was 
a  horrible  conception.  But  Jehu  was  in  the  temper  of  mind,  in  the  fever-flush 
of  slaughter,  when  such  conceptions  had  nothing  revolting  in  them.  Pie  had 
shed  too  much  blood  already  to  shrink  for  a  moment  from  shedding  more.  He 
was  the  more  confirmed  in  his  resolution,  as  he  had  the  countenance  and  co- 
operation of  the  God-fearing  Jehonadab,  who  saw  ia  this  subtle  plan  the 
necessary  and  deserved  punishment  of  idolatry. 

I.  That  the  punishment  of  idolatry  is  in  harmony  with  Divine  law. 
Judged  in  the  light  of  Mosaic  ethics,  the  destruction  of  idolaters  was  a  righteous 
and  laudable  work.  The  law  commanded  that  the  devotees  of  idolatry  should 
be  punished  with  death  (Deut.  xiii.  1-15;  xvii.  2-4;  xviii.  20).  There  is 
nothing  clearer  in  the  history  before  us  than  this — that  all  the  calamities  that 
fell  upon  Ahab  were  in  consequence  of  his  idolatry.  Two  of  the  grandest 
prophets  of  Old  Testament  times  were  sent  to  instruct  and  warn  him  and  his 
people.  Their  counsels  and  miracles  were  unheeded,  and  the  chosen  people 
of  God  were  in  danger  of  being  irredeemably  lost  in  idolatry,  and  His  gracious 
]iurpose  concerning  the  race  of  being  frustrated  or  indefinitely  postponed.  As 
a  just  punishment  for  disobedience  and  rejection  of  Jehovah,  and  in  the  widei 
interests  of  the  nation  and  of  the  world,  the  Baal-worship  must  be  utterly 
destroyed.     In  this  respect  Jehu  was  the   instrument  of  just  and  righteous 


II.  That  the  punishment  of  idolatry  may  be  accomplished  by  false  and 
unjustifiable  methods.  Here  we  cannot  but  blame  Jehu,  and  here  the  Old 
Testament  morality  rebukes  him.  He  interposed  the  cunning  and  plotting  of 
the  military  stategist  into  the  carrying  out  of  a  righteous  work.  His  Divine 
commission  doubtless  authorised  him  to  cut  off  the  worshippers  of  Baal,  but  not 
hy  guile,  God  praised  his  zeal  in  rooting  out  idolatry,  but  not  his  subtlety. 
His  craft  and  guile  on  this  occasion  were  in  fearfulness  equal  to  the  duplicity 
and  baseness  which  prepared  the  way  for  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew. 
Truth  never  requires  a  lie.  The  end  does  not  justify  the  means.  It  is  unjusti- 
fiable to  do  a  right  thing  in  a  wrong  way.  And  yet  what  a  large  class  of 
people  there  is  in  the  world  who  do  this  1  There  is  an  evil  that  is  damaging 
society ;  the  more  licence  it  has,  the  more  it  grows ;  it  must  be  put  down ;  let  all 
possible  force  be  put  into  operation  to  crush  it ;  irrespective  of  the  rights  and 
feelings  and  opinions  of  others,  root  it  out.  It  is  the  right  thing  to  do  ;  but  in 
the  majority  of  instances  it  is  done  in  the  wrong  way.  There's  a  friend  yonder 
going  wrong  ;  he  has  no  longer  the  humility  and  zeal  and  power  he  used  to 
have ;  he  must  be  remonstrated  with.  It  is  the  right  thing  to  do  ;  but  in 
nine  cases  out  of  ten  it  is  done  in  the  wrong  way,  and  more  harm  is  done  than 
good.  A  rude,  impulsive,  unsympathetic  spirit  hurried  Jehu  into  acts  of  un- 
necessary severity  and  cruelty  while  he  was  seeking  to  do  what  was  right,  and 
he  has  many  imitators  in  that  respect  in  modern  times. 

III.  That  the  punishment  of  idolatry  should  nevertheless  be  thorough 
and  final.  "  Jehu  destroyed  Baal  out  of  Israel  "  (verse  28).  In  slaying  the 
priests  and  worshippers  of  Baal,  the  sword  of  Jehu  completed  the  work  which 
Elijah  began  at  the  brook  Kishon  (1  Kings  xviii.  40).     The  deep  corruption 

uto  which  this  idolatry  had  sunk  the  nation  is  evident  in  the  fact  that  there 

was  not  one  man  with  spirit  and  bravery  enough  to  dispute  the  usurpation  of 

Jehu,  and  in  the  cowardice  and  cruelty  with  which  men  of  the  highest  rank 

assisted  in  the  murder  of  the  king's  sons.     It  was  time  that  a  system  that 

614 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINQ8.  chip.  x. 


Could  produce  such  utter  moral  degradation  as  this  should  be  extinguished. 
Jehu  was  at  home  in  such  work ;  it  was  everyway  congenial  to  his  instincts. 
The  images  of  Baal  are  shattered,  the  sacred  citadel  of  Baal  himself  is  invaded, 
his  colossal  figure  is  broken  in  pieces,  the  massive  temple  is  pulled  down  in 
ruins,  and  the  very  site  made  a  place  of  filth — a  degradation  which  would 
cover  the  name  of  Baal  with  everlasting  infamy  and  reproach.  Suc^»  must 
be  the  fate  of  all  that  seeks  to  oppose  and  substitute  itself  for  God.  Every  age 
of  shams  and  unrealities  has  its  Iconoclast  who  will  shatter  them  in  pieces. 
The  world  should  be  wiser  and  better  as  it  reads  the  history  and  fate  of  all 
false  systems. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Jehovah  cannot  tolerate  a  rival,  2.  All  idolatries  must  perish, 
3.  In  the  midst  of  the  deepest  degeneracy  God  ia  preparing  the  instrument  of  its 
punishment, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  18-28.  Idolatry  a  national  truth  with  the  weapons  of  falsehood, 
curse.  I.  Demoralizes  the  people.  What  things  one  may  do  by  outward 
II.  Is  hateful  to  Jehovah.  III.  Not  acts,  and  yet  be  internally  a  hypo- 
to  be  abolished  by  deceitful  and  un-  crite  I  Jehu  dissimulated  in  order  to 
just  methods.  IV.  Witnesses  in  its  circumvent  the  hypocrites  and  idola- 
destruction  no  greater  enormities  ters  in  himself.  Jehu  destroys  the 
than  it  generates  itself.  V.  Its  com-  worship  of  false  gods  by  the  sword, 
plete  uprooting  essential  to  national  and  by  external  violence.  He  had 
growth  and  prosperity.  full  justification  for  this  in  the  law, 

—  In  an  objective  light  the  slaying  for  under  the  old  covenant  idola- 
of  the  servants  of  Baal  was  quite  in  try  was  the  worm  at  the  root  of  the 
harmony  with  the  law,  and  quite  Israeli tish  nationality ;  it  was  high 
legitimate  on  theocratic  grounds  ;  but  treason  to  the  Israelitish  state.  Under 
the  subjective  motive  which,  irrespec-  the  new  covenant,  it  is  not  permitted 
tive  of  the  artifice,  influenced  Jehu  to  make  use  of  fire  and  sword  against 
was  thoroughly  selfish.  As  the  priests  heresy  and  superstition.  No  other 
and  prophets  of  Baal  in  the  land  of  weapon  may  here  be  used  than  that 
Israel,  with  all  their  interests  and  of  the  Spirit — i.e.,  the  word  of  God. 
their  whole  existence,  were  bound  up  Christianity  is  not  bound  to  any 
with  the  dynasty  of  Ahab,  they  might  people  ;  as  it  was  not  brought  into 
be  dangerous  to  Jehu,  if  he  did  not,  the  world  by  violence,  so  it  cannot  be 
from  political  considerations,  earnestly  extended  and  nourished  by  the  sword, 
promote  their  objects ;  whereas  by  Even  now,  every  evil  power  has  the 
their  extermination  he  might  hope  to  right  and  the  duty  to  proceed  to  ex- 
bring  to  his  side  the  whole  of  the  treme  measures  against  a  cultus  like 
certainly  very  numerous  party  of  the  that  of  Baal,  which  is  interwoven 
earlier  legally  constituted  worship  of  with  licentiousness  and  abominations. 
Jehovah  in  Israel,  and  thereby  give  — Lange* 

stability  to  his  throne.     But  that  Jehu 

used  religion  only  as  a  means  to  an  Verses  18-21.  What  a  dead  pale- 
end  is  proved  by  the  circumstance  ness  was  there  now  in  the  faces  of 
that  he  continued  the  worship  of  the  those  few  true-hearted  Israelites  that 
calves. — Keil.  looked  for  a  happy  restoration  of  the 

—  A  work  which  is  in  itself  pure  religion  of  God  !  How  could  they 
and  holy  loses  its  value  when  it  is  ac-  choose  but  think — Alas  I  how  are  we 
complished  by  falsehood  and  dissimu-  fallen  from  our  hopes  I  Is  this  the 
lation.     One   cannot   battle    for  the  change  we  looked  for  t     Was  it  only 

615 


CHAP.  X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


ambition  that  hath  set  this  edge  upon 
the  sword  of  Jehu?  It  was  not  the 
person  of  Ahab  that  we  disliked,  but 
the  sins ;  if  those  raiist  still  succeed, 
what  have  we  gained  ?  Woe  be  to 
us,  if  only  the  author  of  our  misery 
be  changed,  not  the  condition,  not 
the  cause  of  our  misery.  On  the 
other  side,  what  triumphs  sounded 
everywhere  of  the  joyful  Baalites ! 
What  glorying  of  the  truth  of  their 
profession,  because  of  their  success ! 
What  scorn  of  their  dejected  oppo- 
sites !  What  promises  to  themselves 
of  a  perpetuity  of  Baalism !  How 
did  the  dispersed  priests  of  Baal  now 
flock  together,  and  applaud  each 
other's  happiness,  and  magnify  the 
devotion  of  their  new  sovereign  ? 
Never  had  that  idol  so  glorious  a  day 
as  this,  for  the  pomp  of  his  service. 
Before,  he  was  adored  singly  in 
corners ;  now  solemn  sacrifices  shall 
be  offered  to  him  by  all  his  clients,  in 
the  great  temple  of  the  mother  city  of 
Israel.  I  can  commend  the  zeal  of 
Jehu  ;  I  cannot  commend  the  fraud 
of  Jehu.  We  may  come  to  our  end 
even  by  crooked  ways.  He  that  bade 
him  to  smite  for  Him,  did  not  bid  him 
to  lie  for  Him.  Falsehood,  though  it 
be  but  tentative,  is  neither  needful 
nor  approved  by  the  God  of  truth. 
If  policy  have  allowed  officious  un- 
truths, religion  never. — Bp.  Hall. 

Verses  18,  19.  Duplicity.  1. 
Should  be  beneath  the  dignity  of  a 
king.  2.  Not  allowable,  even  in  the 
execution  of  a  righteous  punishment. 
3.  All  the  more  detestable  when 
under  the  mask  of  religious  zeal. 

Verse  19.  That  it  was  possible  for 
a  large  number  of  persons  to  be  im- 
posed upon  by  this  pretence,  after 
what  Jehu  had  done,  painfully  evinces 
the  extent  of  religious  corruption  in 
Israel.  Something  may,  however,  be 
allowed  for  the  still  imperfect  know- 
ledge of  the  transactions  at  Jezreel. 
News  travelled  but  slowly  in  those 
days ;  and  the  men  who  had  come 
over  with  the  king  to  Samaria — his 
personal  followers  and  guards — had 
516 


perhaps  been  instructed  not  yet  to  dis- 
close the  full  particulars  of  the  great 
tragedy  at  Jezreel. — Kitto, 

Verses  20-22.  The  popularity  of 
religion  no  proof  of  its  genuineness. 
I.  The  court  set  the  fashion  in  re- 
ligion, and  the  people  followed.  II. 
Whatever  pleases  the  outer  senses — 
in  ceremony  or  vestments — is  sure  to 
be  popular.  III.  A  national  holiday 
soon  gathers  a  crowd.  IV.  A  crowd 
is  little  aware  of  the  peril  with  which 
it  is  sometimes  threatened. 

Verse  23.  Sincerity  in  worship. 
I.  Should  be  encouraged  by  self- 
scrutiny.  II.  Essential  to  spiritual 
profit.  III.  Demanded  by  an  all- 
seeing  God. 

Verse  25.  How  is  the  tune  now 
changed !  AYhat  shrieking  was  here  ! 
What  outcries  !  What  running  from 
one  sword  to  the  edge  of  another ! 
What  scrambling  up  the  walls  and 
pillars  1  What  climbing  into  the 
windows  !  What  vain  endeavours  to 
escape  that  death  which  would  not  be 
shunned  I  Whether  running,  or 
kneeling,  or  prostrate,  they  must  die. 
The  first  part  of  the  sacrifice  was 
Baal's,  the  latter  is  God's ;  the  blood 
of  beasts  was  offered  in  the  one,  of 
men  in  the  other.  The  shedding  of 
this  was  so  much  the  more  acceptable 
to  God,  by  how  much  these  men  were 
more  beasts  than  those  they  sacrificed. 
Bp.  Ball. 

Verses  26-28.  The  glory  of  Baal 
1.  Discovered  to  be  empty  and  decep- 
tive. 2.  Powerless  to  resist  the  fury 
of  righteous  retribution.  3.  Dragged 
down  to  the  most  loathsome  degrada- 
tion. 

Verse  28.  So  ended  this  great 
revolution.  The  national  worship  of 
Baal  was  thus  in  the  northern  king- 
dom forever  suppressed.  For  a  short 
time,  through  the  very  circumstances 
which  had  destroyed  it  in  Samaria, 
it  shot  up  afresh  in  Jerusalem.  But 
in  Israel  the    whole    kingdom   and 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  X 


chiTrch  returned  to   the  condition  in  political  reward,  and  he  took  political 

which  It  wns  before  the  accession  of  means  to  secure  it.     He  slew  all  the 

the  house  of  Omri.     The  calf -worship  possible  pretenders  to  the  crown  from 

of  Jeroboam  was  once  more  revived,  the  house  of  Ahab,  acconling  to  the 

and  m  that  imperfect  form  the  true  oriental  custom   in  such  cases    as  a 

religion  once  morebecame  established,  means    of    securing    himself  on   the 

Stanley.  „   ^.    ,.  ,  ^^^^"®-     He  stopped  short  with  his 

<r\Z  ;  ""^  I    Trf    r      ^^^  *^''  ^'^^^     ^^^^'g^'^"«  ^^^^^"^«'  a°^  <^id  not  destroy 
guen  to  us  by  the  text   to  estimate      the  golden  calves.     He  left  them  for 

Jehu  spersonalfeelinginregard  to  this  the  same  political  reasons  for  which 

revolution,  we  shall  reach  the  follow-  Jeroboam    erected    them^that    the 

ing  conclusion-Jehu  was  a  military  northern  kingdom  might  have  its  own 

man  to  whom    the  crown  presented  religious  centres  outside  of  Jerusalem, 

worfw ^"^  ^X    ?    ^'t^^^  ^™^^!^""  ^"  '^^  ^"  t^«   revolution  principally 

tXt!r  '  k'"'-     ^l^PP^^^^g  ^^f  '^  gratification  of  his  own^mbitioZ 

herPntnftlT  ^//^^rrT  ^?   \^"  ^e  was  willing  to  be  the  instrument  of 

herent  of  the  religion  of  Jehovah,  the  the    overthrow  of  a  wicked  dynastv 

cal   to  him  to  put  himself  at  the  head  and  a  corrupt  religion,  and  he  stepped 

of  a  reaction  in  favour  of  the  Jehovah-  just  where  his  personal  interests  were 

relig  on    and  the  anointment  to  the  in  danger  ot  being  impaired      It  is 

royal  office  by  a  prophet  of  Jehovah,  not  strange  that  his  contemporaries 

m.ght  move  him  to  make  the  attempt,  rejoiced  so  much  at  the  rescue'of  thdr 

Theadherence  of  thearmy  determined  ancestral    religion    that    they    were 

him      When  he  had  won  his  victory,  indifferent  to  the  excesses  by  which 

he  carried  out  faithfully  the  policy  to  Jehu  tried  to  eslablishhis  roya^  pmver 

which  he  was  bound  as  leader  of  the  nor  that  later  and  calmer  Lrs    on 

worbHip  ot  Baal.     The  crown,   how-      into   prominence   in    iudgin-  of    his 
ever,  was   his    reward.     It    was   a     career.-^^eY.r ./ Za.^    ^ 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  29-36. 

The  Imperfections  of  a  Great  Reforming  Work. 

The  fearless  and  energetic  efforts  of  Jehu  at  the  beginning  of  his  reio-n,  while 
they  filled  many  with  dismay,  excited  in  others  the  highest  hopes!  '  There 
were  the  hidden  ones,  the  secret  worshippers  of  Jehovah,  who  mourned  over 
the  degeneracy  of  the  ti  es,  and  sighed  and  prayed  for  a  brin-hter  day  to 
dawn.  It  seemed  as  if  their  prayers  were  heard,  and  they  recog'Iiised  in  the 
man  who  had  dealt  such  fierce  and  summary  justice  to  the  adherents  of  Baal 
one  who  would  again  establish  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  thus  save  the 
nation  from  the  whirlpool  of  ruin  into  which  it  was  rapidly  sinking.  It  was 
therefore  a  bitter  disappointment  to  all  lovers  of  the  truth  when  Jehu  stayed 
his  reforming  hand,  and  gave  his  public  sanction  to  the  calf-worship  of 
Jeroboam,  putting  back  the  nation  to  where  it  was  ninety  years  before.  The 
paragraph  suggests  the  imperfections  of  a  great  reforming  ivork. 

I.  That  reform  is  imperfect  when  it  does  not  thoroughly  root  out  the  evil 
against  which  it  is  directed  (verse  29).  If  the  worship  of  the  golden  calves 
was  not  so  gross  as  that  of  Baal,  still  it  was  idolatry,  and  as  such  should  have 
been  abolished.  It  was  a  standing  insult  to  Jehovah,  a  violation  of  the  Divine 
law,  and  a  source  of  moral  enfeeblement  to  the  people,  weighing  upon  them 
like  chains  of  habit  which  are  generally  too  small  to  be  felt  till  they  are  too 
strong  to  be  broken.     It  was  an  opportunity  for  Jehu  to  rid  the  nation  once  and 


OBkT.X,  EOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


for  ever  of  the  terrible  curse.  The  hand  that  struck  down  Baal  could  also 
crush  the  calves  of  Dan  and  Bethel  It  was  here  the  reformer  failed  ;  his 
work  was  ineffectual  because  it  lacked  thoroughness.  Half  reforms  are  always 
unsatisfactory.    An  admitted  evil  can  be  cured  only  by  complete  eradication. 

II.  That  reform  is  commendable  as  far  as  it  goes  (verse  30).  1.  It  has 
the  Divine  approval,  "The  Lord  said  unto  Jehu,  thou  hast  done  well  in 
executing  that  which  is  right  in  mine  eyes."  Every  attempt  at  reformation 
is  encouraged  by  the  Diviue  favour.  It  is  this  that  sustains  the  courage  of 
the  reformer  in  the  midst  of  formidable  diflBculties.  We  may  well  hesitate  to 
touch  any  work  of  reformation  that  has  not  the  Divine  sanction,  and  on  which 
we  cannot  ask  the  Divine  blessing.  Jehu  was  an  instrument  of  Divine 
vengeance  on  the  house  of  Ahab,  and  was  commended  so  far  as  he  carried  out 
his  commission. 

2.  It  has  the  Divine  reward,  *'  Thy  children  of  the  fourth  generation  shall 
sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel."  This  was  a  favour  not  vouchsafed  to  any  other 
king  of  Israel  since  the  division  of  the  kingdom.  Lange  supposes  that  the 
succession  is  limited  to  the  fourth  generation  because  Jehu  still  retained  the 
calf  worship  ;  but  we  prefer  the  pj'ima facie  teaching  of  the  text,  which  clearly 
indicates  a  promise  of  reward,  rather  than  a  threat  of  limitation.  God  will 
not  be  indebted  to  any  man,  nor  shall  those  who  do  or  suffer  aught  for  Him 
complain  of  a  hard  bargain.  The  final  reward  of  the  Christian  victor  will  be 
to  share  the  throne  and  honours  of  his  Lord  (Rev.  iii.  21). 

ni.  That  reform  is  imperfect  when  it  is  not  personal  and  sincere  (verse 
31).  ''  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  with 
all  his  heart."  It  was  not  with  him  so  much  a  question  of  religion  as  of 
politics.  He  was  not  anxious  first  to  have  his  own  heart  right  with  God,  and 
to  render  sincere  obedience  to  His  law,  as  he  was  to  secure  a  firm  footing  as 
king,  and  to  compel  obedience  to  his  authority.  Jehu,  as  Kitto  justly  remarks, 
"was  one  of  those  decisive,  terrible,  ambitious  yet  prudent,  calculating, 
passionless  men  whom  God  from  time  to  time  raises  up  to  change  the  fate  of 
empires,  and  to  execute  His  judgments  on  the  earth.  He  boasted  of  his  zeal 
— Come  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord — but  at  the  bottom,  it  was  zeal  for 
Jehu.  His  zeal  was  great  so  long  as  it  led  to  acts  which  squared  with  his  own 
interests,  but  it  cooled  marvellously  when  required  to  take  a  direction  in  his 
judgment  less  favourable  to  them."  All  true  and  permanent  reformation 
begins  with  the  individual.  If  the  heart  be  renewed,  the  whole  man  is  reformed: 
the  heart  right  with  God  is  the  motive-force  that  effects  all  necessary  outward 
reformation. 

IV.  That  reform  is  imperfect  when  it  is  not  national  and  general  (verses 
32,  33).  Had  the  nation  been  wholly  delivered  trom  idolatry,  neither  Hazael 
nor  any  other  enemy  would  have  been  permitted  to  invade  the  kingdom  and 
harass  the  people.  The  national  spirit  was  broken,  its  prestige  dimmed,  even 
the  love  of  fatherland  was  not  strong  enough  to  bind  all  the  people  together  to 
resist  and  repel  invasion.  In  the  latter  part  of  Jehu's  reign,  Israel  began  to 
suffer  those  fearful  punishments  of  invasion  and  conquest  from  the  North  and 
North  East,  which  finally  ended  in  the  total  captivity  of  the  land.  Jehu's 
name  occurs  on  the  Assyrian  monuments  among  others  who  paid  tribute  to 
the  king  of  Assyria,  and  Rawlinson  inclines  to  the  opinion  that  from  this 
date  both  the  Jewish  and  the  Israelitish  kings  held  their  crowns  as  fiefs,  de- 
pendent on  the  will  of  the  Assyrian  monarch,  with  whom  it  formally  lay  to 
confirm  eacn  new  prince  in  his  kingdom  (chap.  xiv.  5).  Partial  and  incom« 
618 


SOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap  X. 


plete  reforms  always  leave  elements  of  weakness  and  discord  behind  them. 
When  a  nation  is  united  in  acknowledging  and  serving  God,  it  is  invincible ; 
it  is  respected  and  feared  by  its  enemies. 

V.  That  reform  is  imperfect  when  it  is  employed  for  selfish  ends  (verses 
34-36).  Jehu  carried  on  the  revolution,  and  wrought  out  reforms  with  an 
'ron  hand,  to  serve  his  own  purposes — that  he  might  reign  securely  and  peace- 
fully— might  acquire  fame  and  power — might  establish  his  throne  for  years, 
and  be  able  to  leave  his  own  son  in  unquestioned  and  undisturbed  possession 
of  the  kingdom.  He  reigned  longer  than  any  of  his  predecessors,  and  his  suc- 
cessors reigned  seventy-six  years.  If  his  zeal  and  ambition  were  expended  in 
founding  a  royal  dynasty,  he  gained  his  end ;  but  that  was  all  he  did  gain. 
The  nation  was  not  permanently  benefited,  nor  was  it  long  arrested  in  its 
downfall.  It  destroys  the  dignity  and  efficacy  of  reform  when  it  is  carried  on 
from  selfish  motives  ;  and  yet  God  can  work  out  His  just  retribution  upon 
evil-doers  through  the  violence  and  selfishness  of  human  passions. 

Lessons  : — 1.  It  is  a  solemn  responsibility  to  he  a  public  reformer  *  2.  It  is  diS' 
appointing  and  disastrous  when  reform  is  not  radical.  3.  Every  step  of  reform  in 
the  right  direction  is  pleasing  to  God^  and  shall  not  go  unrewarded. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  29-33.    Jehu  is  a  type  of  Verse  30.     Zachariah,  of  the  fourth 

those  who  show  great  zeal  in  tearing  generation,  was  slain  by  Shallum,  and 

down  and  destroying  superstition  and  thus  was  this  word  of  the  Lord  ful- 

false  worship,  but  do  nothing  to  build  filled  (compare  chap.   xv.    12);  and 

up  the  faith,  because  they  themselves  thus,  too,  according  to  the  prophecy 

have  no  living  faith,  and  do  not  walk  of  Hosea  (i.  4),  did  the  Lord  **  avenge 

before    God  with   aU    their    hearts,  the  blood  of  jez reel  upon  the  house 

Jehu  did  indeed  destroy  idolatry,  but  of  Jehu."     For  when  the  minister  of 

he   did   not  touch   the  chief  sin  of  Divine  judgment   himself  turned  to 

Israel,  because  he  considered  it  the  idolatry,  the  \  <  i  y  blood  of  his  guilty 

chief  support  of  his  own  authority,  victims  might  well  call  for  vengeance 

So  many  a  one  renounces   gross,  ex-  on  him  for  doing  the  same  things  for 

ternal    sins,    but   will  not   think    of  which   he   had  executed  the  Divine 

denying  himself,  of -sacrificing  his  own  judgment   on   them   (Rom.  ii.   1). — 

interests,  and  of  turning  his  heart  to  Whedon. 

the  living  God.      He   who  remains  —  The    strict    impartiality     of 

standing  half-way  goes  backward  in  Divine  Justice.     1.  Kecognises   and 

spite   of   himself.      Jehu   would  not  commends  what  is  good  in  the  worst 

desist  from    the    sins    of    Jeroboam  characters.      2.  Apportions   to  every 

because  he  thought  it  would  cost  him  action  its  exact  measure  of  reward, 

his  crown,  but  on  that  very  account  3.  Does  not  interfere  with  the  exer- 

he  lost  one  province  after  another. —  cise  of  individual  freedom. 

Lange.  —  Jeha  first  receives  praise  for  the 

work  which  he  has  done,  and  after- 
Verse  29.  The  exigencies  of  wards  is  denounced,  in  his  posterity 
government.  1.  Cannot  ignore  the  at  least,  for  the  same  action  (compare 
influence  of  religion  upon  a  people,  verse  30  and  Hosea  i.  4).  The  first 
2.  Will  sanction  an  imperfect  religion  of  these  two  points  throws  much  light 
rather  than  lose  power.  3.  In  danger  upon  the  second.  The  defection  of 
of  placing  politics  and  dynastic  inter-  Jehu  showed  that  he  had  other  ends 
ests  above  religious  reformation,  in  view  than   the  pleasing  of  God. 

619 


(7HAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


Personal  ambition  had  been  at  the 
bottom  of  his  heart,  and  he  had  des- 
troyed  that  form  of  idolatry  which  was 
identified  with  the  house  of  Ahab. 
But  having  achieved  his  end,  he  took 
no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law  of  the 
Lord.  The  vengeance  which  had 
fallen  upon  Ahab's  house  had  been  the 
righteous  retribution  upon  Ahab's 
sins ;  but  the  executioner  gloated  over 
and  rejoiced  in  his  work.  He  had  his 
reward  in  the  establishment  of  his 
dynasty  for  four  generations.  What 
was  righteous  in  his  spirit — his  steadi- 
ness of  purpose  and  hatred  of  injustice 
— all  this  God  blessed.  B  ut  the  brutal 
ferocity,  the  remorseless  indifference 
to  agony  and  bloodshed,  these  evil 
elements  prevailed  over  the  better, 
and  when  the  fire  against  Baal  had 
burnt  itself  out  for  want  of  fuel, 
nought  was  left  but  dull  ashes.  His 
zeal  for  righteousness  did  not  turn 
inwards  and  burn  up  his  own  sins. 
When  there  was  nothing  left  to  des- 
troy, his  occupation  was  gone.  The 
same  thirst  for  blood  which  had 
marked  him,  passed  down,  a  ghastly 
bequeathment,  to  his  children,  and 
brought  the  Divine  curse  upon  them. 
— The  Bible  Educator, 

Yerse  31.  The  seductive  power 
of  unbelief.  1.  Arrests  and  paralyzes 
the  efi'orts  of  the  most  zealous  re- 
formers. 2.  Creates  indifference  to 
the  most  sublime  revelations  of  God's 
word.  3.  Unfits  the  soul  for  the 
highest  spiritual  experiences.  4.  Leads 
to  the  practice  of  the  basest  idolatry. 

—  It  is  an  entire  goodness  that 
God  cares  for.  Perhaps,  such  is  the 
bounty  of  our  God,  a  partial  obedience 
may  be  rewarded  with  a  temporal 
blessing,  as  Jehu's  severity  to  Ahab 
shall  carry  the  crown  to  his  seed  for 
four  generations ;  but  we  can  never 
have  any  comfortable  assurance  of  an 
eternal  retribution  if  our  hearts  and 
ways  be  not  perfect  with  God.  Woe 
be  to  us,  0  God,  if  we  be  not  all 
thine  !  Wc  cannot  but  everlastingly 
depart  from  Thee,  if  we  depart  not 
from  every  sin.  Thou  hast  purged 
our  hearts  from  the  Baal  of  our  gross 
idolatries.  0  clear  us  fi'om  the 
520 


golden  calves  of  our  petty  corruptions, 
also  that  Thou  mayst  take  pleasure 
in  our  uprightness,  and  we  may 
reap  the  sweet  comforts  of  Thy  glorious 
remuneration  ! — Bp.  Hall. 

Yerses  32,  33.  National  apostacy 
from  God.  1.  Will  be  Divinely 
punished.  2.  Leaves  the  nation  a 
prey  to  violent  enemies.  3,  Brings 
national  loss  and  def^radation. 

—  The    reign    of   Jehu    closed  in 
disaster.     The  Syrian  invasion,  from 
combating  which  he  had  hastened  on 
becoming  king,   had  been  vigorously 
pushed  forward  by  Hazael,  and  was 
now  successful.     The    whole  country 
east  of  Jordan,  comprising  half  of  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  was  wrested  away. 
And   this   had   been   done   with   the 
accompaniment  of  horrible  cruelty  on 
the   part   of    Hazael   (2    Kings   viii. 
12,  13).     The  reign  of  Jehu,  there- 
fore, was  one  of  misery  and  calamity. 
He  was  the  first  Israelite  king,  too, 
who  is  recorded  to  have  paid  tribute 
to  the  king  of  Assyria.     But  one  fea- 
ture of  his  reign  we  mast  not  forget. 
While   he  stands   before   us  the  one 
figure  in  the  picture,  red-handed  and 
remorseless,  we  might,  at  first  sight, 
take  him  as  the  embodiment  of  the 
whole  monarchy  and  people.     But  he 
is  not  so.     There  was  another  emissary 
of    God   at    work    in  the   kingdom, 
though  his  name  does  not  appear,  his 
hand  doubtless  busy  with  healing  and 
binding  up  the  broken  places.     Elisha, 
the  son  of  Shaphan,  was   he.     Many 
years   afterwards  he   lay  dying,  and 
Jehu's  grandson  came  to  bid  him  fare- 
well.    ''My  father,"  cried  the  king, 
"  the  chariots  of  Israel  and  the  horse- 
men   thereof ; "  that  is,  the  defence 
and    protection   of  the    kingdom  art 
thou,    and   thou   art    passing    away. 
Joash  was  hereby  confessing  the  truth 
that  deeds  of  violence  and  oppression 
like  Jehu's  have  no  power,  and  leave 
no  advantage,   but  the  Lord's  delight 
is  in  them  that  fear  Him  and  put  their 
trust  in  His  mercy. — The  Bible  Edu- 
cator. 

—  The  character  of  Jehu  is  not 
difficult  to  understand,  it  we  take  it  as 
a  whole,  and  consider  the  general  im- 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHIP.  XI, 


pression  left  us  by  the   Biblical  ac- 
count.    He  is  exactly   one  of  those 
men  whom  we  are  compelled  to  recog- 
nize, not  for  what  is  good  or  great  in 
themselves,    but  as  instruments    for 
destroying  evil  and  preparing  the  way 
for  good  ;  such  as  A.ugustu8  Caesar  at 
Eome,  Saltan  Mahtnond  II.  in  Turkey, 
or  one  closer  at  hand  in  the  revolutions 
of  our  own  time  and  neighbourhood. 
A  destiny,  long  kept  in  view  by  him- 
self or  others — inscrutable  secresy  and 
reserve  in  carrying  out  his  plans — a 
union   of   cold,  remorseless  tenacity, 
with  occasional  bursts  of  furious,  way- 
ward, almost  fanatical  zeal;    this  is 
Jehu,  as  he  is  set  before  us  in   the 
histoiical  narrative,  the  worst  type  of 
a  son  of  Jacob,   the  "  supplanter,"  as 
he   is  called,  without  the  noble  and 
princely  qualities  of  Israel — the  most 
unlovely  and  the    most  coldly  com- 
mended of  all  the  heroes  of  his  country. 
It  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  gradu- 
ally increasing    light,    even     in    the 
Jewish  dispensation,  that  in  the  wider 
and  more  evangelical  revelations  of  the 
later  prophets  the   commendation   on 
Jehu's  acts  is  repealed.     It  is  declared 
through  the  voice  of  Hosea,  that  for  the 
blood  even  of  Jezebel  and  Ahaziah  an 
account  must  be  rendered;   "I   will 
avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the 
house  of  Jehu  "  (Hosea  i.  4).     Their 
blood,  like  the  blood  which  has  been 
shed  again  and  again  in  the  convulsions 
of    nations    and   churches,       was     a 
righteous  retribution,  is  at  last  exacted 


by  the  just  judgm(3nt  which  punishes 
the  wrong-doer,  not  only  of  one  party 
in   the  church   or  state,  but  of  both. 
And  the  accursed  spot  of  the  ancient 
dynasty,  the  very  title  and  site    of 
Jezreel,  seemed  to  draw   down  upon 
itself  a  kind  of   Divine    compassion. 
The  innocent  child  of  the  prophet  was 
to  bear  the  name  of  Jezreel,  and  "  the 
vow"    of   Jehu's  house   "was  to  be 
broken.  ...  in    the   great  "day    of 
Jezreel"  (Hosea  i.  4,  5,   11).     it  is 
the    same   touching   thought   of   life 
growing  out  of  death  which    has   so 
often  forced  itself  on  those  who  have 
seen  the  rich  harvest  springing  up  out 
of  a  battlefield,  that  out  of  that  time 
and  place  of  humiliation  the  name  is 
to  go  back  to  its  original  signification 
as  derived  from  the  beauty  and  fertility 
of  the  rich  plain,    and   to   become  a 
pledge  of  the  revived  beauty  and  rich- 
ness  of   Israel.     "I  will    hear    and 
answer  the  heavens,    and   they   will 
hear  and  answer  the  earth,    and  the 
earth  shall  hear  and  answer,  and  the 
wine  and  the  oil  of  that  fruitful  plain, 
and    they    shall    hear     and    answer 
Jezreel  (that  is,  the  seed   of  God),  and 
I  will  sow  her  unto  me  in  the  earth." 
And  from  this  time  the  image  seems 
to  have  been  continued  as  a  propheti- 
cal expression  for  sowing  the  blessings 
of  God,  and  the  people  of  Israel,  as  it 
were  broadcast,   as  though  the  whole 
of  Palestine    and   the   world  were  to 
become,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  one    rich 
plain  of  Jezreel. — Stanley, 


CHAPTER  XI. 


THE    USURPATION    OF    ATHALIAH    IN    JUDAH. 


Critioal  and  Explanatory  Notes. — ^Verse  1.  Athaliah  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal- 
She  herself  usurped  the  throne  ;  and,  to  ensure  her  hold,  slew  all  rival  claimaats.  Jehu  had 
already  destroyed  "  forty-two  "  brethren  or  relations  of  Ahaziah  (x.  13).  Verse  2.  Jehosheba, 
&c. — Her  father  was  king  Jehoram,  but  her  mother  was  not  the  queen  Athaliah  ;  she  and  her 
sister  Ahaziah  were  daughters  by  another  wife  of  Jehoram.  Took  Joash  and  hid  him  in  the 
bedchamber— t.  e  ,  not  the  sleeping  apartment,  but  the  storeroom  in  which  bedding  was  kept, 
for  so  Jl'lZODn  *TTn3,  means.    No  one  would  be  supposed  to  occupy  that  storeroom.  Verse  3. 

Hid  in  the  house  of  the  Lord — After  a  temporary  hiding  in  the  storeroom,  he  was  removed 
into  one  of  the  temple  chambers,  and  thus  placed  in  greatest  security  under  Jehoiada,  the  high- 

621 


OMAT.  XL  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


priest's  care.  Verse  4.  And  the  seventh  year  Jehoiada  sent,  &c.— There  are  numerous  points 
of  difference  between  this  account  and  its  parallel  in  the  Chronicles ;  but  probably  both  accounts 
are  summarised  records  of  a  longer  original  account.  Their  divergences  are  not  disagreements. 
Verse  5.  The  watch  of  the  king's  house — This  '?T7Dil  JT'il  must  be,  not  the  royal  palace, 

but  part  of  the  temple  buildings  occupied  by  Joash,  the  young  king.  Verse  12.  Gave  him  the 
testimony — ^Presented  to  him  the  JTIIJ^Jl,  book  of  the  law,  as  the  rule  of  his  personal  con- 

duct  and  royal  government,  for  "The  Testimony*'  (Exod  xxv.  21  ;  xvi.  34)  was  the  law  for 
rulers  as  well  as  for  those  ruled  (Deut.  xvii.  l^^sq.).  Verse  14.  Athaliah  cried,  Treason! 
Treason! — Josephus supplies  the  record  that  she  went  from  her  own  palace  attended  by  her 
troops  {iiiTo,  T7}s  Wias  o-Tporms),  but  that  these  troops  were  prevented  going  with  her  into  the 
temple.  Verse  16.  And  they  laid  hands  on  her— Though  the  Sept.,  Vulg.,  Luther^  and 
others  take  the  words  as  the  A.  V.  gives  them ;  yet  the  Chald.^  Syr.,  Kimchi,  Maurer,  and 
others  render  QH^  H  7  -ID^l^^-    They  made  for  her  two  sides — i.  «.,  they  opened  in  ranks  on 

•-T         T  • T 

both  sides  for  her  to  pass  through.  Verse  20.  And  all  the  people  rejoiced — Becau&e,  with 
Athaliah's  death,  the  accursed  house  of  Ahab  ceased,  and  in  Jehoash's  person  the  royal  house 
of  David  was  again  established  on  the  throne  of  Judah.— W.  H.  J, 


S0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-8. 
The  Desperation  op  Revenge. 

I.  Is  mingled  with  an  ungovernable  ambition. — As  soon  as  Athaliah 
heard  of  the  death  of  her  son  Ahaziah,  and  of  the  sanguinary  policy  pursued 
by  Jehu,  she  determined  to  be  revenged,  and  she  set  about  the  work  with  all 
the  ferocity  and  unrelenting  hardihood  that  characterised  her  mother  Jezebel. 
Her  imperious  Zidonian  nature  and  love  of  power  were  gratified,  as  well  as  her 
thirst  for  revenge.  Through  the  path  of  vengeance  she  saw  her  way  to  a 
throne.  A  savage  nature  is  always  a  suspicious  one,  and  Athaliah  saw  that 
to  make  her  power  secure,  her  work  of  revenge  must  be  thorough  and  complete. 
Revenge  is  a  mean,  paltry  feeling,  and  cannot  be  cherished  long,  except  in 
connection  with  selfish  and  ambitious  schemes. 

II.  Hesitates  not  to  adopt  the  cruellest  measures  to  attain  its  object. — 
"  She  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed-royal  (verse  1).  This  insatiable  ogress, 
this  she-vampire,  was  so  utterly  insensible  to  all  natural  affection,  or  had 
become  so  consummate  a  mistress  in  the  art  of  dissembling  and  stifling  emotion, 
that,  without  a  tear  or  a  sob,  she  massacred  her  own  grandchildren.  She 
revelled  in  bloodshed,  and  rejoiced  to  "  wade  through  slaughter  to  a 
throne."  It  was  an  evidence  of  her  great  capabilities  and  domineering 
influence,  or  of  the  utter  moral  degeneracy  of  Judah,  that  she,  a  foreigner  and 
an  idolater,  should  be  allowed  to  reach  supreme  authority,  and  by  such  un- 
naturally cruel  methods.  Ambition,  rendered  desperate  by  revenge,  is  reck- 
less as  to  the  means  used  to  achieve  its  purpose. 

III.  Is  unconsciously  frustrated  when  its  plans  seem  most  completely 
carried  out  (verse  2).  Joash,  the  infant  son  of  Ahaziah,  was  snatched  from 
the  general  massacre,  and  hid  in  a  room  used  for  stowing  away  beds.  Little 
did  Athaliah  dream  that  that  helpless  infant  was  to  be  the  instrument  of  her 
fall.  Revenge  is  ever  a  mistaken  policy.  The  ancient  poet  tells  us  that 
Nemesis  was  transformed  by  Jupiter  into  a  goose,  to  point  out  the  folly  of 
revenge.  "  Suppose  a  mad  dog  bites  me,"  argues  Feltham  in  his  Resolves, 
"  shall  I  be  mad,  and  bite  that  dog  again?  If  I  kill  him,  it  is  not  so  much  to 
help  myself,  as  to  keep  others  from  harm.  My  interest  is  to  seek  a  present 
remedy,  while,  pursuing  the  cur,  I  may  at  once  both  lose  my  wit  and  my  cure- 

522 


EOMILBTia  OOMMENTABT:  KINGS.  chip,  xl 


If  a  wasp  sting  me,  I  pursue  not  the  winged  insect  through  the  air,  but  straight 
apply  to  draw  the  venom  forth."  The  right  of  vengeance  belongs  to  God 
alone.  To  take  the  matter  into  our  own  hands  we  usurp  His  authority  and 
insult  His  righteous  Majesty.  In  seeking  to  rectify  a  wrong,  we  inflict  a 
greater,  and  bring  ruin  and  confusion  upon  ourselves.  "  While  we  throw  a 
petty  vengeance  on  the  head  of  our  offending  brother,  we  boldly  pull  the 
Almighty's  on  our  own." 

IV.  Cannot  give  permanency  to  its  triumphs.  '*  He  was  hid  six  years. 
And  Athaliah  did  reign  over  the  land  "  (verse  3).  Only  six  years,  and  then — 
the  swift-footed  Nemesis — "  the  bitterest  of  the  immortals  " — overtook  the 
imperial  murderess.  Six  years  of  tyrannising  power,  of  regal  display,  of 
cringing  adulation  on  the  part  of  her  professed  supporters,  and  then— a  sudden 
and  ignominious  downfall.  Six  years  of  patient  waiting,  of  vigilant  watching, 
of  careful  preparation  on  the  part  of  those  who  had  to  redress  the  wrong,  and 
then — the  blow  fell  with  crushing  and  decisive  effect.  Was  it  worth  while  to 
commit  such  horrible  crimes  for  such  brief,  illusive,  and  equivocal  results  ?  It 
does  not  pay  to  sin.  The  triumph  snatched  by  the  red  hand  of  crime  withered 
in  the  grasp.  The  sceptre  is  transformed  into  an  avenging  sword,  the  crown 
into  a  wreath  of  torture,  and  the  throne  into  a  tomb. 

Lessons: — 1.  An  ambitious  spirit  has  great  temptations  to  do  wrong,  2.  Revenge 
is  blind  to  the  consequences  of  its  acts,  3.  It  is  God-like  to  forgive  rather  than 
retaliate^  to  suffer  wrong  than  resent  it, 

QERM  NOTES  OA  THE  VEESES^ 

Verses  1-8.  Queen  Athaliah.     1.  earlier  reigns.     The  friendly   policy 

Her   wicked    plans.     Idolatrous  and  of  the  two  royal  houses  had  culminated 

fond    of    power,    like     her  mother  in  the  marriage  of  Jehoram,  the  son 

Jezebel,  she  takesthe  royal  authority  of   Jehoshaphat,   with  Athaliah,  the 

into  her  own  hands,  in  self-will  and  daughter  of  Ahab.     In  her,  the  fierce 

contrary  to  right,  and  murders  all  the  determined  energy  which  ran  through 

male  seed,  in  order  to  put  an  end  for  the  Phoenician  princes  and  princesses 

ever  to  the  house  of  David.     We  see  of   that   generation — Jezebel,    Dido, 

here  whither  ambition  and   love   of  Pygmalion — was     fully     developed, 

rule  may  lead  men.     2.  The  frustra-  Already  in  her  husband's  reign  the 

tion  of  her  plans.     No  one  can  tread  worship  of  Baal   was   restored  ;  and 

down  him  whom  God  sustains.     Thus,  when  the  tidings  reached  Jerusalem 

Pharaoh   would   have   been   glad  to  of    the    overthrow   of   her   father's 

destroy  Israel ;  Saul  would  have  slain  house,   of  the   dreadful   end  of   her 

David;     Herod     the     child     Jesus,  mother,   and   of    the     fall    of    her 

They  could  not  accomplish  it.     They  ancestral  religion  in  Samaria,  instead 

only  injured  themselves  and  perished,  of  daunting   her    resolute   spirit,    it 

as  Athaliah  did. —  Wurt.  Summ.  moved  her  to  a  still  grander   effort. 

—  We  have  reached  the  eve  of  a  It  was  a  critical  moment  for  the  house 

great  revolution  and  counter  revolu-  of  David.     Once  from    a   struggle 

tion,  which  alone  of  all  the  events  in  within  the  royal   household  itself,  a 

the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  second   time    from  an    invasion     of 

possesses  the  dramatic  interest  belong-  Arabs,  a  third  time  from  the  revolu- 

ing  to  so   many  other   parts  of   the  tion  in  the  massacres  of  Jehu's  acces- 

sacred  story,  and  which  is  told  with  a  sion,  the  dynasty  had  been  thinned 

vividness  of  detail,  implying  its  lasting  and  thinned   till    all    the     outlying 

significance,  and  contrasting  remark-  branches  of   those  vast  polygamous 

ably  with  the  scanty  outlines  of  the  households  had  been  reduced  to  the 

623 


OHAP.   XI. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


single  family  of  Ahaziah.  Ahaziah 
himself  had  perished  with  his  uncle 
ou  the  plain  of  Esdrae'on,  and  now, 
when  Athaliah  saw  that  Ahaziah  was 
dead,  she  arose  and  destroyed  all  the 
seed  royal.  The  whole  race  of  David 
seemed  to  be  swept  away.  In  the 
general  massacre  of  the  princes  one 
boy,  still  a  babe  in  arms,  had  been 
rescued  by  Jehoslieba.  He  was 
known  as  *'  the  king's  son.'*  The 
light  of  David  was  burnt  down  to  its 
socket,  but  there  it  still  flickered. 
The  stem  of  Jesse  was  cut  down 
to  the  very  roots ;  one  tender  shoot 
was  all  that  remained  On  him 
rested  the  whole  hope  of  carrying  on 
the  lineage  of  David. — Stanley, 

Verse  1.  When  the  corpse  of  her 
son  was  brought  to  I  erusalem — when 
she  heard  how  horribly  her  mother 
and  how  treacherously  her  brother 
had  been  slain — that  her  son's  kindred 
had  been  cut  off  at  the  pit  of  the 
shearing  house,  and  that  the  wor- 
shippers of  Baal  had  been  immolated 
in  Samaria—  Athaliah  caught  the 
strong  contagion  of  blood-thirstiness 
from  the  report  of  these  doings.  She 
saw  herself  a  stranger  in  a  strange 
land,  an  alien  by  birth  and  by  religion, 
without  common  sympathies  between 
herself  and  the  people  among  whom 
she  occupied  so  high  a  place,  and  with- 
out support  from  the  remaining 
members  of  the  family  to  which  she 
had  become  allied.  All  the  strong 
ones  were  gone.  What  hindered  that 
she  should  herself  seize  the  dropped 
reigns  of  government,  and  guide  the 
fierce  steeds  of  ruin  which  threatened 
to  whirl  her  to  destruction  ?  What 
had  she  to  expect  from  the  spirit 
which  had  gone  abroad,  and  fromthe 
ulterior  designs  of  Jehu,  unless  she 
entered  upon  a  bold  course  of  reaction 
which  might  insure  both  her  safety 
and  her  greatness  !  There  have  been 
those  who  deemed  themselves  com- 
])elledto  leap  into  a  throne  to  save 
themselves  from  utter  ruin  ;  and  we 
would  fain  believe  this  was  the  case 
with  Athaliah. — Kitto. 

—  Such  another  imperious  woman 
524 


was  Semiramis,  Queen  of  Assyria; 
Irene,  empress  of  Constantinople  and 
mother  of  Constantinus  Copronymus, 
whose  eyes  she  put  out  to  make  him 
incapable  of  the  empire,  that  she  might 
reign  alone  {vide  *'  Gibbon's  Roman 
Empire,"ch.  xlvii.);  and  Briinichildis, 
queen  of  France,  who  is  said  to  have 
been  the  death  of  ten  princes  of  the 
blood,  and  was  herself  afterwards  put 
to  a  cruel  deadi.  But  the  likest  in 
cruelty  to  Athaliah  was  Laodice,  the 
wife  of  Ariarathes,  king  of  Cappa- 
docia,  who,  her  husband  being  dead, 
seized  upon  the  government,  raged 
cruelly  against  both  nobility  and 
commons,  whom  she  caused  to  be 
murdered;  poisoned  six  of  her  own 
sons  that  she  might  keep  the  kmgdom 
more  securely  ;  only  one  little  one 
escaped  her  fury,  whom  the  people 
at  last  advanced  to  the  crown,  and 
slew  her. — Trapp. 

—  Jehosh  aph  at's  m  arriage  of  his  son 
with  a  daughter  of  the  house  of  Ahab, 
although  he  brought  it  about  in  a  good 
intention,  produced  the  result  that 
Athaliah  ruled  over  Judah,  and 
brought  the  dynasty  of  David  to  the 
brink  of  ruin.  So  many  a  quiet, 
humble.  God-fearing  family  has  been 
brought  into  calamities,  affecting  both 
body  and  soul,  by  a  thoughtless 
marriage.  The  hope  that  those  who 
are  brought  up  by  godless  parents 
will  themselves  reform  and  turn  to 
the  fear  of  God  has  very  slight  foun- 
dation.— Lange. 

Verses  2,  3.  Stolen  from  death. 
Grandmothers  are  more  lenient  with 
their  children's  children  than  they 
were  wdth  their  own.  At  forty  years 
of  age,  if  discipline  be  necessary, 
chastisement  is  used ;  but  at  seventy, 
the  grandmother,  looking  upon  the 
misbehaviour  of  the  grandchild,  is 
apologetic,  and  disposed  to  substitute 
confectionary  for  whip.  There  is 
nothing  more  beautiful  than  this 
mellowing  of  old  age  toward  child- 
hood. But  here,  we  have  a  contrast. 
It  is  old  Athaliah,  the  queenly 
murderess.  She  ought  to  have  been 
honourable.  Her  father  was  a  king ; 
her  husband  was  a  king ;  her  son  was 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EINOS. 


QEkf,  XI. 


a  king.  And  yet  we  find  her  plotting 
for  the  extermination  of  the  entire 
royal  family,  including  her  own  grand- 
children. But  while  the  ivory  floors 
of  the  palace  run  with  carnage,  and 
the  whole  land  is  under  the  shadow  of 
a  great  horror,  a  fleet-footed  woman, 
a  clergyman's  wife,  Jehosheba  by 
name,  stealthily  approaches  the 
imperial  nursery,  seizes  upon  the 
grandchild  that  had  somehow  as  yet 
escaped  massacre,  wraps  it  up 
tenderly  but  in  haste,  flies  down  the 
palace  stairs,  her  heart  in  her  throat 
lest  she  be  discovered  in  this  Christian 
abduction.  "With  this  youthful  prize 
she  presses  into  the  room  of  the 
ancient  temple,  the  church  of  olden 
time,  unwraps  the  young  king,  and 
puts  him  down,  sound  asleep  as  he  is, 
and  unconscious  of  the  peril  that  has 
been  threatened ;  and  there  for  six 
years  he  is  secreted  in  that  church 
apartment.  Meanwhile  old  Athaliah 
smacks  her  lips  with  satisfaction,  and 
thinks  that  all  the  royal  family  are 
dead. 

I.  The  first  thought  is  that  the  exter- 
ruination  of  righteousness  in  an  impossi- 
hility.  When  a  woman  is  good,  she 
is  apt  to  be  very  good  ;  and  when  she 
is  bad,  she  is  apt  to  be  very  bad,  and 
this  Athaliah  was  one  of  the  latter 
sort.  She  would  exterminate  the 
last  scion  of  the  house  of  David, 
through  whom  Jesus  was  to  come. 
She  folds  her  hands,  and  says :  The 
work  is  done — is  completely  done.  Is 
it  ?  In  the  swaddling-clothes  of  that 
church  apartment  are  wrapped  the 
cause  of  God  and  the  cause  of  good 
government.  That  is  the  scion  of  the 
house  of  David ;  it  is  Joash,  the 
religious  reformer;  it  is  Joa?^h,  the 
friend  of  God ;  it  is  Joash,  the 
demolisher  of  Baalitish  idolatry. 
Rock  him  tenderly ;  nurse  him  gently. 
Athaliah,  you  may  kill  all  the  other 
children,  but  you  cannot  kill  him. 
Eternal  defences  are  thrown  all  around 
him,  and  this  clergyman's  wife, 
Jehosheba,  will  snatch  him  up,  will 
hide  him  for  six  years,  and  at  the  end 
of  that  time  he  will  come  forth  for 
your  dethronement  and  obliteration. 


Just  as  poor  a  botch  does  the  world 
always  make  of  extinguishing 
righteousness.  Just  at  the  time  when 
they  thought  they  had  slain  all  the 
royal  family  of  Jesus,  some  Joash 
would  spring  up  and  take  the  throne 
of  power.  Infidelity  says  :  '*  I'll  just 
exterminate  the  Bible,"  and  the 
Scriptures  were  thrown  into  the  street 
for  the  mob  to  trample  on,  and  they 
were  piled  up  in  the  public  squares 
and  set  on  fire,  and  mountains  of 
indignant  contempt  were  hurled  on 
them,  and  learned  universities  decreed 
the  Bible  out  of  existence.  If  there 
should  come  a  time  of  persecution  in 
which  all  the  known  Bibles  of  the 
earth  should  be  destroyed — all  these 
lamps  of  life  that  blaze  in  our  pulpits 
and  in  our  families  extinguished — in 
the  very  day  that  infidelity  and  sin 
should  be  holding  jubilee  over  the 
universal  extinction,  there  shall  be  a 
secreted  copy  of  the  Bible ;  and  this 
Joash  of  eternal  literature  would 
come  out  and  come  up  and  take  the 
throne,  and  the  Athaliah  of  infidelity 
and  persecution  would  fly  out  of  the 
back  door  of  the  palace,  and  drop  her 
miserable  carcase  under  the  hoofs  of 
the  horses  of  the  king's  stables. 
You  cannot  exterminate  Christianity. 
You  cannot  kill  Joash. 

II.  The  second   thought   is :   That 
there  are  opportunities  in  which  we  may 
save  royal  life.     You  know  that  pro- 
fane history  is  replete  with  stories  of 
strangled    monarchs    and   of    young 
princes  who  have  been  put  out  of  the 
way.     Here  is  the  story  of  a  young 
king  saved.     Jehosheba,  you  hold  in 
your  arms  the  cause  of  God  and  good 
government.     Fail,  and  he  is  slain ; 
succeed,  and  you  turn  the  tide  of  the 
world's  history  in  the  right  direction. 
It  seems  as  if   between    that   young 
king  and  his  assassins  there  is  nothing 
but  the  frail  arm  of  a   woman.     But 
why   should  we  spend  our  time   in 
praising  this  bravery  of   expedition, 
when  God  asks  the  same  thing  of  you 
and    me?     All    around    us    are    the 
imperilled  children   of  a  great  king. 
They  are  born  of  Almighty  parentage, 
and  will  come  to  a  throne  or  a  crown 

526 


CHAP.  XI. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EIN9S, 


if  permitted.  But  bid,  the  old 
Athaliah,  goes  forth  to  the  massacre. 
There  are  sleeping  in  your  cradles  by 
night,  there  are  playing  in  your 
nurseries  by  day,  imperial  souls  wait- 
ing for  dominion,  and  whichever  side 
the  cradle  they  get  out  will  decide 
the  destiny  of  empires.  For  each  one 
of  those  children  sin  and  holiness 
contend — Athaliah  on  the  one  side, 
Jehosheba  on  the  other.  Jehosheba 
knew  right  well  that  unless  that  day 
the  young  king  was  rescued,  he  would 
never  be  rescued  at  all.  The  reason 
we  don't  reclaim  all  our  children  from 
worldliness  is  because  we  begin  too 
late.  Parents  wait  until  their  children 
lie  before  they  teach  them  the  value 
of  truth.  They  wait  until  their 
children  swear  before  they  teach  them 
the  importance  of  righteous  conversa- 
tion. They  wait  until  their  children 
are  all  wrapped  up  in  this  world 
before  they  tell  them  of  a  better 
world.  May  God  arm  us  all  for  this 
work  of  snatching  royal  souls  from 
death  to  coronation.  Can  you 
imagine  any  sublimer  work  than  this 
soul  saving  ? 

III.  The  third  thought  is :  That  the 
church  of  God  is  a  good  hiding  place. 
Would  God  that  we  were  all  as  wise 
as  Jehosheba,  and  knew  that  the 
church  of  God  is  the  best  hiding- 
place.  Perhaps  our  parents  took  us 
there  in  early  days  ;  they  snatched 
us  away  from  the  world  and  hid  us 
behind  the  baptismal  font,  and  amid 
the  bibles  and  the  psalm  books.  Oh, 
glorious  enclosure  I  How  few  of  us 
appreciate  the  fact  that  the  church  of 
God  is  a  hiding-place !  There  are 
many  people  who  put  the  church  at 
60  low  a  mark  that  they  begrudge  it 
everything,  even  the  few  dollars  they 
give  towards  it.  They  make  no 
sacrifice.  If  your  children  are  to 
come  up  to  lives  of  virtue  and  happi- 
ness, they  will  come  up  under  the 
shadow  of  the  church.  If  the  church 
does  not  get  them,  the  world  will. 
Ah  1  when  you  pass  away — and  it 
will  not  be  long  before  you  do — it  will 
be  a  satisfaction  to  see  your  children 
in  Christian  Aociety.  You  want  to 
526 


have  them  sitting  at  the  holy  sacra- 
ments. You  want  them  mingling  in 
Christian  associations.  You  would 
like  to  have  them  die  in  the  sacred 
precincts  I  Oh  !  church  of  God,  gate 
of  heaven,  let  me  go  through  it  1  All 
other  institutions  are  going  to  fail. 
Jay  Cooke's  banking  institution  went 
down,  Duncan,  Sherman,  and  Co. 
went  down,  and  all  earthly  institutions 
will  perish ;  but  the  church  of  God, 
its  foundation  is  the  "  Rock  of  Ages," 
its  charter  is  for  everlasting  years,  its 
keys  are  held  by  the  universal  pro- 
prietor, its  dividend  is  heaven,  its 
president  is  God.  God  grant  that 
all  this  audience,  the  youngest,  the 
eldest,  the  worst,  the  best,  may  find 
their  safe  and  glorious  hiding-place, 
where  Joash  found  it,  in  the  temple.— 
{Talmage  in  G.  W.  P.) 

—  O  God  !  how  worthy  of  wonder 
are  thy  just  and  merciful  dispensa- 
tions, in  that  thou  sufferest  the  seed 
of  good  Jehoshaphat  to  be  destroyed 
by  her  hand  in  whose  affinity  he 
offended,  and  yet  savest  one  branch  of 
this  stock  of  Jehoshaphat  for  the  sake 
of  so  faithful  aprogenitor  I — Bp.  Hall, 

Verse  2.  The  great  agents  of  the 
world's  reformation.  1.  Are  pre- 
pared in  secret.  2.  May  depend 
upon  a  single  life.  3.  Cannot  be 
destroyed  by  the  hatred  and  cruelty 
of  the  wicked.  4.  AVill  inevitably 
come  to  the  front 

—  The  perils  of  a  good  move- 
ment. 1.  May  appear  to  be  extinct 
when  its  reviving  force  is  but  in 
hiding.  2.  Its  hopes  may  be  sus- 
pended on  a  frail  infant  life.  3.  1. 
is  opposed  with  unrelenting  cruelty. 
4.  It  is  unexpectedly  befriended  in 
its  greatest  extremity. 

—  We  have  an  instance  in  Jeho- 
sheba how,  even  in  the  midst  of  god- 
lessness  in  a  family,  any  one  who  will, 
can  make  an  exception.  Jehosheba 
stole  him.  That  was  not  stealing 
the  child,  but  saving  him.  What  can 
a  woman  do  better  and  nobler  than 
to  save  an  infant  from  danger  of 
soul  and  body,  and  take  him  under 


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  ZI. 


W  protectioa  for  the  sake  of  God  strengthened  by  large  accessions  of 

and  his  promises  ^.-lange.  fugitives  who  stole  away  from  Israel 

—Kitto. 

Verses.  As  mother  of  the  king  she  -  When  thegodtes  appear  to  have 

had  great  power,  high  influence,  and  succeeded  in  the  attainment  of  their 

inaiiy  dependants,  which  rendered  her,  objects,  and  believe  that  they  have 

in  d3fau  t  ot  a  king  and  of  a  capable  conquered,  the  very  moment  of  their 

.ie,r  to  the  throne,  the  most  powerful  victory  is  the  unperceived  commeuce- 

person  ,n  the  land.     She   was   thus  meat   of  their  iuin.     TheTross   of 

enabled  to  accomplish  all  her  objects  ;  Christ  was  the  victory  of  His  enemies 

and  Judah  beheld  the  strange  sight  but    this    very    victory    was   what 

of    a  woman,  and    that    woman   a  brought  about  their  total  defeat-' 

foreigner,  seated  upon  the  throne  of  Krummacher. 

David.     Undersuchauspices,  idolatry  —Mischief    sometimes    fails    of 

became  rampant  m  Judah.     It  would  those  appointments  wherein  it  thinks 

seem  that  nothing  had  been  gained  by  to  have  made  the  surest  work      God 

the  expression  of  idolatry  in  Israel ;  laughs   in   Heaven   at   the   plots   of 

the  same  thing  existed  still,  the  place  tyrants,  and   befools   them  in  their 

only  having  been  changed,  just  as  the  deepest    projects.      He   had  said  to 

piece  of  wood  which  disappears  for  a  David-"  Of  the  fruit  of  thy  body  will 

moment  under  the   water  comes  up  I  sel  upon  thy  seat."     In  vain  shall 

tIZ'TZ'f  ,N''<^°?''t,the     earth  akhelf conspire  to frus'atei 
cause    01      the    Baal-worship    was     Bp.  Sail. 

BOMIZBTICS  OF  VERSES  4-19. 
The  Restoeahon  op  Regai,  and  National  Rights, 

The  coronation  of  the  youthful  Joash  was  not  a  revolutionary  act,  but  the 
just  and  legal  restoration  of  a  right  that  had  been  cruelly  wrested  from  him 
Athaliah  was  the  revolutionary,  and  the  wrong  her  usurpation  had  inflicted 
sank  deep  into  the  national  conscience.     The  usurper  was  hated  while  she  was 

i-T.  l^"^  i  u^^'f  ^'^}  ^'^^"^  '"''■  overthrow  was  accomplished  showed  the 
slight  hold  she  had  on  the  popular  affection.  There  was  none  who  had  the 
courage  or  the  disposition  to  defend  her.  From  this  paragraph  we  learn  Tliat 
the  restoration  of  regal  and  national  rights— 

I.  Is  often  the  work  of  one  capable  and  resolute  mind.  Jehoiada,  the 
high  priest  was  in  every  way  a  remarkable  man  for  his  time.  He  was 
evidently  not  influenced  by  selHsh  and  ambitious  motives,  or  he  mi^ht  have 
aimed  to  raise  his  own  wife  Jehosheba  to  the  throne,  who,  as  the  sister  of 
Ahaziah,  had  certainly  a  better  and  stronger  claim  than  Athaliah.  But  as 
the  servant  of  Jehovah,  he  was  more  concerned  to  carry  out  the  Divine  pur! 
eZ;^^^  7?i.°'"^°",!''''T«"'"°"'^  >"  his  resolve  by  the  counsels  and 
caoacTv  in"  h/  '^''^'^-'t  ".^  ^'^'^  *''"^-  ^e  showed  great  shrewdness  and 
lhlTl^t^.-Tl  'I'^Y^  ^^  T"''^'^  '^"'y  ''«''"1  'n  the  restoration  of 
%u"l       ^f"*  '°,*/  ""•'"'«  "^  ^"^■'^-     1-  ^0  ''^  the  right   time  to  act. 

The  seventh  year"  (verse  4).      He  had  narrowly  watched  the  course  of 

ZIT:>^  "^""Ifl  '"i'"?"''^  '^^  ''^''"«"««  °f  ^'haliah  and  the  true  feehio  of 

neriod  r^ ''".     ^^  '""I'''"'  ''^'"''  "^^'^  ^^  ^'>°"'<i  "»'  ««'  ^^Me  ov  after  Z 
period  he  fixed  upon.     It  may  seem  to  us  that,  as  the  king  was  but  a  child   a 

few  years  either  way  could  make  but  little  difference.     But  JehoiadaU    a 

todo"  n  rhrf  "I^Tor*^'"/  "'   '^'^   «■"««'   t°   tnow  what  Israel  ought 
to  do     (1  Chron.  x«.  32).      In  all  great  national  movements  much  wisdom 


CHAP.  XI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAET:  KINGS, 


and  insight  are  needed  in  order  not  unduly  to  precipitate  or  delay  the  right 
moment  to  act.  Many  a  great  battle  has  been  lost  by  not  knowing  when  to 
attack,  or  when  to  wait.  2.  He  wins  over  the  leading  representatives  of  the  nation 
(verse  4).  He  consults  all  classes — civil,  military,  and  ecclesiastical — and 
when  the  day  of  trial  comes,  he  is  surrounded  and  sustained  by  an  enthusi- 
astic and  united  people.  He  succeeded  in  convincing  the  national  conscience 
of  the  existence  of  a  great  wrong,  and  the  people  rallied  round  him  to  seek 
its  redress.  *  Men's  hearts,"  says  Carlyle,  **  ought  not  be  set  against  one 
another,  but  set  with  one  another,  and  all  against  the  evil  thing  only."  3.  He 
makes  elaborate  provision  against  possible  defeat  (verses  5-11).  He  took  ad- 
vantage of  a  public  and  solemn  festival,  when  a  great  number  might  assemble 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  temple  without  suspicion ;  he  secured  two  relays 
of  Levites  within  the  temple ;  he  transformed  the  priests  into  soldiers,  and 
furnished  them  with  weapons  that  David  had  deposited  in  the  temple  years 
before,  little  dreaming  that  they  would  be  used  to  defend  his  throne  under 
such  circumstances  ;  and  he  surrounded  the  boy-king  with  a  strong  bodyguard. 

*' WheD  any  great  designs  thou  dost  intend, 
Think  on  the  means,  the  manner,  and  the  end." 

The  prudence  and  foresight  of  Jehoiada  not  only  indicated  his  ability,  but 
ensured  success.  A  great  man  cannot  be  more  nobly  employed  than  when  he 
is  planning  the  best  means  to  promote  the  prosperity  and  elevation  of  his  own 
country. 

II.  Is  accomplished  with  becoining  ceremonies,  and  attended  with  demon- 
strations of  public  joy  (verse  12).  I.  There  was  the  coronation.  '^He  put 
the  crown  upon  him."  The  kings  of  Judah  generally  succeeded  each  other 
with  little,  if  any  ceremony,  the  solemn  inauguration  of  the  founder  of  the 
dynasty  being  usually  considered  sufficient  for  his  descendants.  The  only 
kings  whose  accession  was  attended  with  ceremonial  observances  were  Saul, 
the  first  king  ;  David,  the  first  of  his  line  ;  Solomon,  who  had  an  elder 
brother  aspiring  to  the  crown;  and  now  Joash,  in  whose  person  the  broken 
line  was  restored.  By  this  it  is  seen  that  the  coronation  was  rather  an  excep- 
tional than  a  customary  ceromony,  resorted  to  only  when  peculiar  circumstances 
seemed  to  require  the  solemn  public  recognition  which  it  involved  (Kitto). 
2.  There  was  the  solemn  anointing.  "They  made  him  king  and  anointed  him.** 
There  is  nothing  in  the  law  respecting  the  anointing  of  kings.  It  speaks 
only  of  high  priests  ;  but  as  Samuel  anointed  the  two  first  kings,  and  as  it 
was  an  ancient  custom  to  anoint  them,  this  came  to  be  regarded  as  an 
essential  part  of  the  ceremony.  The  king  was  anointed  in  the  form  of  a 
diadem  encircling  his  head,  to  show  that  he  was  the  head  of  the  people;  but 
the  high  priest  was  anointed  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  one  line  drawn  in  the 
oil  running  down  his  forehead,  crossed  by  another  line  drawn  between  his 
eyebrows.  3.  There  was  the  recognition  of  the  Divine  law.  "And  gave  him 
the  testimony."  The  book  of  the  law  was  put  into  the  royal  hands,  and 
while  he  held  it,  he  entered  into  a  covenant  with  God  to  observe  and  keep 
His  commandments  as  set  forth  therein.  The  king  does  more  honour  to 
himself  than  to  the  Word  of  God  when  he  openly  accepts  that  Word  as  the 
guide  and  directory  of  his  regal  career.  4.  There  was  the  public  rejoicing. 
"  And  they  clapped  their  hands  and  said,  God  save  the  King.*'  The  feeling 
of  the  people,  so  long  suppressed,  breaks  out  in  joyous  acclamation. 

*'  One  hour  of  joy  dispels  the  cares 
And  sufferings  of  a  thousand  years." 

Little  joys,  says  Richter,  refresh  us  constantly  like  housebread,  and  never 
bring  distrust :  joys  are  our  wings,  and  sorrows  are  our  spurs.     Well  might 
528 


EOMILETIO  OOMMENTAJtY  :  KINGS,  OHAp.  xi. 


the  people  be  glad — they  saw  in  the  restoration  of  their  king  the  restoration  of 
the  national  rights  of  which  they  had  been  wickedly  defrauded. 

ni  Is  made  the  more  secure  by  the  ignominious  overthrow  of  the  usurper 
(verses  13-16).  The  noise  of  the  people  reached  the  ears  of  Athaliah  in  her 
palace.  What  did  it  all  mean  ?  Had  she  a  presentiment  that  it  boded  no  good 
to  her  and  her  rule!  Prompted  by  the  undaunted  spirit  that  animated  her 
mother  Jezebel  to  the  last,  she  determined  to  ascertain  for  herself  the  cause  of 
the  tumult.  Unguarded  and  alone  she  entered  the  temple,  and  the  scene  that 
met  her  gaze  revealed  the  true  state  of  affairs.  She  must  have  felt  her  fate 
was  sealed.  Her  wild  shrieks  were  unheeded  :  no  one  lifted  a  finger  in  her 
defence.  She  was  seized,  hurried  beyond  the  precincts  of  the  temple,  which 
was  not  to  be  desecrated  with  her  blood,  and  was  instantly  slain.  Her  over- 
throw was  complete  ;  and  the  throne  of  Joash  was  firmly  established. 

*' Though  usurpers  sway  the  rule  awhile, 
Yet  heaven  is  just,  and  time  suppresseth  wrongs." — Shakespeare, 

Lessons: — 1.  No  government  is  strong  that  is  not  based  on  the  affections  of  the 
people,  2.  Time  and  the  providence  of  God  are  always  on  the  side  of  right.  3, 
27ie  purpose  of  God,  though  hidden  and  apparently  defeated  for  a  time^  will  inevit- 
ably come  to  the  front, 

QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verses  4-12.  Joash's  elevation  to  not  be  stayed  or  impaired  when  the 

the  throne.      I.  JS^ow  it  was  determined  great  of  this  world  despise  and  perse- 

upon   and  prepared.      Jehoiada   took  cute  the  word,  which  will  sail  against 

the  initiative,  for  it  was  his  right  and  the  windof  courtly  or  popular  favour, 

duty.     It  was  no  rebellion  and  con-  and  will  persevere  in  patience.     The 

spiracy  against  a  just  authority,  but  a  servants  of  the  Church   in  the  New 

fact  by  itself.     Rebels  violate  law  and  Testament  have  not  the  same  calling 

right  in  order  that   they  may   rule  :  as  the  high  priests  in  the  Old,  so  that 

Jehoiada  restored  law  and  right,  and  they  have  not  to  meddle  with  worldly 

did  not  wish  to   rule ;    he   remained  affairs.     Where  spiritual  and  worldly 

what  he  was.     He  conducted  himself  authority   go  hand   in    hand,    where 

with  courage,  but  also  with  wisdom  both  unite  for  the  sake  of  God  and  for 

and  prudence.  His  cause,  there  the  Lord  gives  bless- 

II.    Sow  it   was  carried  out  and  ing  and  prosperity. — Lange. 
accomplished.     With  the  participation 

and  approval  of  the  different  classes         Verse  10.  New  uses  for  old  trophies, 

of  the  entire  people,  without  conspir-  After  Solomon  had  built  the  temple, 

acy,  bloodshed,   or  violence ;  in  the  the  trophies  of  David's  victories  were 

house  of  God  whose  servant  the  king  hung  up  there.     So  they  adorned  the 

was  ;   the  crown   and  the   law  were  walls.     So  they  illustrated  the  valour 

given  into  his  hands  ;  he  was  anointed  of   noble  sires.     So    they   served    to 

— significant  symbols  of  his  calling  as  kindle   emulation   in   the   breasts  of 

king  of  the  people  of  God.  true-hearted  sons.     Thus  it  was  while 

generations   sprung    up   and   passed 

Verse  4.  Jehoiada  a  fa  thful  priest,  away ;    till    at    length    other    days 

It  is  not  hard  to  proclaim  the  word  of  dawned,  darker  scenes  transpired,  and 

God  when   the  mighty  and  great  of  sadder  things   filled  up  the  chronicles 

this  world  hold  to  it ;  but  the  faithful-  of  the  nation.     I.  It  is  well  for  us  to 

ness  which  is  needed  in  the  stewards  hang  all  our  trophies  in  the  house  of  the 

of  God's  mysteries  is  that  which  will  Lord,    We,  too,  are  warriors.    Every 

MX  629 


CHAP.  XI. 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


ger»uinc  Christian  has  to  fight.  Some- 
times we  have  victories,  a  presage  of 
that  final  victory  we  shall  enjoy  with 
our  Great  Captain  for  ever.  We 
have  been  defeated  when  we  have 
gone  in  our  own  strength ;  but  when 
we  have  been  victorious  it  has  always 
been  because  the  strength  of  the  Lord 
was  put  forth  for  our  deliverance. 
Hang  up  the  shield,  hang  up  the 
spear,  let  Jehovah's  name  be  exalted. 
Bring  forth  the  forgotten  memorials 
of  loving-kindness,  expose  them  to 
public  view,  put  them  before  your 
mind's  eye,  gratefully  remember  them, 
lovingly  praise  Him  and  magnify  His 
name.  If  we  have  any  victories,  let 
all  the  trophies  be  dedicated  to  the 
Lord.  II.  Tliese  trophies  may  come  in 
useful  at  such  times  as  we  cannot  foresee, 
and  under  such  circumstances  as  we  wot 
not  of.  When  in  after  years  David 
hung  up  the  swords  and  shields  which 
he  had  taken  from  Philistine  heroes, 
he  did  not  surmise  that  one  of  his 
descendants,  of  the  seed  royal,  would 
find  the  need  to  employ  his  own,  his 
grandsire's,  or  further  back  from  him- 
self— his  forefather's  trophies — in 
^rder  to  establish  himself  on  the 
throne.  In  all  the  battles  we  fight, 
the  trophies  we  win  should  be  stored, 
for  they  may  come  in  for  future  use. 
There  is  no  experience  of  a  Christian 
that  will  not  have  some  ultimate  ser- 
vice to  render  him.  You  know  not 
what  may  be  the  history  of  your  life, 
it  is  unfinished  yet ;  if  you  did  know, 
you  would  see  that  in  this  present 
trial  there  is  a  preparation  for  some 
future  emergency,  which  will  enable 
you  to  come  out  of  it  in  triumph.  The 
shields  and  spears  of  David  are  hung 
up  for  future  action.  III.  Ancient 
weapons  are  good  for  present  use.  Turn 
to  the  seventy-seventh  Psalm,  and  you 
have  a  battle  there.  By  looking 
through  this  psalm  you  will  see  David's 
shields  and  spears,  and  will  soon  learn 
how  to  screen  yourself  with  the  one, 
and  how  to  do  exploits  with  the  other. 
The  first  weapon  he  drew  out  of  the 
scabbard  was  the  weapon  of  all  prayer 
— another,  that  of  remembering  God 
—another,  the  teaching  of  tradition 
530 


(he  '*  considered  the  days  of  old")— 
another,  his  own  experience — another 
an  appeal  to  God's  mercy  (Ps.  li.). 
But  the  great  master  weapon  was  the 
blood— ''Purge  me  with  hyssop," &c. 
Let  sins  come  on,  and  let  them  bo 
more  than  the  hairs  of  my  head,  loftier 
than  mountains,  and  deeper  than  the 
unfathomed  ocean  ;  let  them  come  on. 
God's  flaming  wrath  behind  them,  hell 
itself  coming  to  devour  me  ;  yet  if  I 
can  but  take  the  cross  and  hold  it  up 
before  me,  if  I  can  plead  the  precious 
blood,  I  shall  be  safe,  and  prove  a  con- 
queror. See  that  in  all  your  fights 
you  use  the  old,  old  weapons  of  David 
himself — his  shields  and  spears— by 
these  same  weapons  shall  you  also  win 
the  day.  IV.  Did  not  David  herein  pre 
figure  Him  that  was  to  come — JDavid* 
Son  and  David'' s  Lord  ?  Jesus  Christ 
our  King,  has  hung  up  many  shields 
and  spears  in  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
Siu — Christ  has  borne  it  in  himself, 
endured  its  penalty,  and  overcome  it ; 
he  has  hung  up  the  handwriting  of 
ordinances  that  was  against  us,  as  a 
trophy  in  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
Satan,  our  great  foe — He  met  him 
foot  to  foot  in  the  wilderness,  and  dis- 
comfited him — met  him  in  the  garden 
— overcame  him  on  the  cross.  Now 
hell,  too,  is  vanquished — ChristisLord. 
Death,  too,  the  last  enemy — Christ 
hath  taken  spoils  from  him.  And  the 
enmity  of  the  human  heart.  How 
many  of  these  enmities  has  Christ 
hung  up  in  the  hall,  for  he  has  con- 
quered that  enmity,  and  made  the  ha  tor 
into  a  lover.  There  are  some  great 
sinners  at  this  day  who  are  wonderful 
tokens  of  the  power  of  His  love. 
What  will  heaven  be  when  all  of  us 
shall  be  trophies  of  His  power  to 
save ! — C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

Verse  11.  The  true  safe-guard  of 
a  king.  1.  Not  the  weapons  of  the 
military.  2.  But  the  legality  and 
righteousness  of  his  claims.  3.  The 
respect  and  aifection  of  his  people. 
4.  The  overshadowing  presence  and 
blessing  of  Jehovah. 

Verse  1 2.    How  a  bright  morning 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


OHAP.  XI. 


became  a  dark  night — a  lesson  for 
the  young".  The  priest  Jehoiada  was 
a  very  wise  man,  and  the  young  king 
had  sense  enough  to  be  led  by  him  ; 
with  his  death  began  sins  and  mis- 
fortunes which  ended  the  life  and  the 
glory  of  king  Joash.  Learn: — 1. 
That  a  good  start  is  not  everything.  It 
does  not  follow,  because  as  boys  and 
girls  you  live  in  a  comfortable  home 
and  have  all  you  want,  that  it  will  be 
always  so.  Joash  was  a  king,  and  of 
course  had  many  delightful  things 
even  when  a  child ;  but  he  omme  to 
know  the  want  of  them  before  his 
death.  There  is  a  wretched  tramp 
on  the  roads  to-day,  who  will  sleep  in 
the  casual  ward  of  some  workhouse, 
who  has  had  a  better  education  than 
the  master  of  the  place.  There  are 
lads  in  the  forecastle  of  merchant 
ships  whose  real  names  are  not  those 
entered  on  the  ship's  books,  but  who 
might  have  been  graduates  at  Oxford 
if  they  had  chosen  to  do  well.  Have 
a  care,  boys  and  girls,  lest  the 
comforts  you  now  have  be  exchanged 
for  self-made  misery,  and  the  good 
start  only  land  you  in  darker  depths 
than  you  would  otherwise  have 
known.  Learn  : — 2.  That  crowns  do 
not  make  kings.  The  boy  never  was 
the  ruler  of  the  country.  His  uncle 
was  master.  Solomon  says  something 
about  a  jewel  in  a  swine's  snout ;  that 
seems  a  strange  place  to  put  a  jewel, 
but  you  might  as  well  look  for  it 
there  as  expect  a  coarse  nature  to 
become  gentle  because  it  is  wearing 
a  fine  coat.  Perhaps  you  have  yet  to 
learn  that  power  means  much  more 
than  strength.  Joash  was  crowned  ; 
but  when  the  old  man  died  his  real 
self  came  to  the  front.  He  chose 
foolish  companions,  turned  aside  to 
sin,  caused  the  son  of  his  benefactor 
to  be  murdered  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  21), 
and  finished  his  poor  vain  life  in 
shame,  and  was  buried  away  from  his 
kingly  ancestors,  while  the  priest  was 
laid  among  those  who  ruled  the  land 
(zi.,  verses  16  and  25).  It  will  pay 
us  to  think,  when  we  are  tempted  to 
do  wrong — How  will  this  appear 
when  I  am  dead  f  What  will  people 


say  as  they  carry  me  to  my  grave  ? 
Have  you  some  gift  which,  like  that 
crown  on  Joash's  head,  lifts  you  up 
above  your  companions?  Be  it  money, 
strength,  beauty,  or  learning,  it  will 
only  make  you  kingly  and  keep  you 
crowned,  as  you  use  it  in  the  service 
of  God,  and  in  unselfish  efforts  to 
make  others  good  and  happy. — 
T,  Champness, 

—  The  oil  wherewith  he  was 
anointed  signified  his  designation  to 
that  high  service  and  those  endow- 
ments from  heaven  that  might  enable 
him  to  so  great  a  function.  The 
crown  wherewith  he  was  adorned 
signified  that  glory  and  majesty 
which  should  both  encourage  and 
attend  his  princely  cares.  The  book 
of  the  testimony  signified  the  divine 
rules  and  directions  whereto  he  must 
frame  his  heart  and  actions  in  the 
wielding  of  that  crown.  These 
three—  the  oil,  the  crown,  the  testi- 
mony— that  is,  inward  powers,  out- 
ward magnificence,  true  piety  and 
justice — make  up  a  perfect  prince. 
None  of  these  may  be  wanting.  If 
there  be  not  a  due  calling  of  God,  and 
abilities  meet  for  that  greatness,  the 
oil  faileth  :  if  there  be  not  a  majestic 
grace  and  royalty  that  may  command 
reverence,  the  crown  is  missing :  if 
there  be  not  a  careful  respect  to  the 
law  of  God  as  the  absolute  guide  of 
all  counsels  and  determinations,  the 
testi  :  ony  is  neglected:  all  of  them 
concurring  make  both  king  and 
people  happy. — Bp.  Sail. 

Verses  13-16.  Athaliah's  fall. 
I.  Her  last  appearance.  She  comes 
boldly  and  impudently  into  the  midst 
of  the  people,  blinded  to  their  dis- 
position towards  her.  Insolently 
relying  on  her  imagined  majesty,  she 
commands  resistance  to  the  move- 
ment which  is  in  progress — a  faithful 
type  of  many  tyrants.  Pride  goes 
before  a  fall.  II.  Her  terrible  end. 
Abandoned,  despised,  and  hated  by  all 
the  people,  who  rejoice  over  her  fall, 
she  goes  to  meet  her  doom,  and 
receives  the  fate  which  her  deeds 
deserve.     She  is  punished  by  that 

631 


•HAP.  XI.  EOMILETIC  COMMSNTART:  KINGS. 


by  which  ^  she  has  sinned.     Sedition  I  thy  ambition  shed.     Wonder   rather 

treason  !  is  the  cry  of  Joram,  Jezebel,  at  the  patience  of  this  long  forbearance 

and  Athaliah,  and  of  all  those  who  are  than  the  rigour  of  this  execution, 
themselves    most    to   blame    for    it 

(Acts  xviv.  6).—Lange,  Verse  16.  How  like  is  Athaliah  to 

her   mother  Jezebel !  as  in  conditions 

Verse  14.  0   Athaliah!   to  whom  and  carriage,  so  even  in  death.     Both 

dost  thou  complain  ?     They  are  thy  killed   violently,    both   killed    under 

just  executioners  wherewith  thou  art  their   own   walls,    both    slain    with 

encompassed.     If  it  be  treason  to  set  treason  in  their  mouths,  both  slain  in 

up  the  true  heir  of  Ahaziah,    thou  the  entrance   of  a  changed   govern- 

appealest  to  thy  traitors — the  treason  ment ;  one  trode  on  by  the  horses,  the 

was    thine ;  theirs    is    justice.     The  other  slain  in  the  horsegate  ;  both  paid 

time  is  now  come  of  thy  reckonings  their    own  blood   for    the   innocent 

for  all  the  royal  blood  of  Judah  which  blood  of  others. — Bp.  llalL 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  17-21. 
The  Restoration  of  the  Public  Worship  op  Jehovah. 

I.  "Was  signalized  by  formal  and  impressive  covenant.  1 .  This  covenant 
recognized  the  supreme  claims  of  Jehovah,  "And  Jehoiada  made  a  covenant 
between  the  Lord  and  the  king  and  the  people  "  (verse  17).  This  was  a  re- 
newal of  the  national  covenant  with  Israel  (Exodus  xix.-xxiv  ;  Deut.  iv.  6; 
xxvii.  9)  to  be  unto  the  Lord  "a  people  of  inheritance,"  by  which  they 
solemnly  engaged  themselves  to  renounce  and  root  out  all  idolatry,  and  set 
up  and  maintain  God's  true  worship.  "When  the  national  conscience  has  been 
demoralized  by  idolatrous  practices,  it  is  important  to  present  the  supreme 
claims  of  God  to  our  homage  by  the  most  impressive  methods.  2.  This 
covenant  guarded  the  rights  of  both  ruler  and  ruled.  "  Between  the  king  also 
and  the  people."  This  was  a  civil  covenant  whereby  the  king  engaged  him- 
self to  rule  them  justly  and  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  the  people  obliged  them- 
selves to  defend  and  obey  him  (comp.  2.  Sam.  v.  2).  Government  is  im- 
possible where  the  rights  and  privileges  of  both  ruler  and  ruled  are  not  duly 
respected  and  observed. 

n.  Ensured  the  downfall  of  idolatry  (verse  18).  This  was  the  logical 
and  necessary  consequence  of  the  restoration  of  the  true  worship.  Athaliah 
had  transplanted  idolatry  into  Judah.  She  was  the  first  to  erect  a  temple  to 
Baal  in  the  holy  city,  and  plundered  the  temple  of  Jehovah  to  enrich  the 
shrine  of  her  favourite  deity.  The  people  looked  on  aghast  at  this  wanton 
sacrilege  to  their  sacred  fane  and  daring  insult  to  the  God  of  their  fathers ; 
but  they  were  powerless  to  prevent  it ;  they  were  held  in  check  by  the  threats 
and  tyranny  of  the  usurper.  Many  a  pious  soul  wept  in  secret  because  of  the 
prevalent  iniquity,  and  many  an  anxious  prayer  was  offered  for  a  day  of 
deliverance.  And  now  that  day  had  come.  The  people,  animated  by  a  spirit 
of  righteous  indignation,  rose  against  the  Baal  worshippers,  and  demolished 
their  idol  temple.  Jehovah  can  admit  no  rival.  The  idols  he  shall  utterly 
abolish  (Isaiah  ii.  18). 

No  more  at  Delos  or  at  Delphi  now, 

Or  e'en  at  mighty  Ammon's  Libyan  shrine. 
The  white-robed  priests  before  the  altar  bow, 

To  slay  the  victim  and  to  pour  the  wine, 

While  gifts  of  kingdoms  round  each  pillar  twlnei. 
Scarce  can  the  classic  pilgrim,  sweeping  free 

From  fallen  architrave  the  desert  vine, 
Trace  the  dim  names  of  their  divinity  ; 
Gods  of  th«  ruin'd  temples,  where,  oh.  where  ar«  ye  f — Beihtm$* 

532 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS,  chap.  xi. 


m.  Was  the  guarantee  of  stability  to  the  throne  (verse  19).  '*It  seems 
to  me  a  great  truth,"  says  Carlyle,  "that  human  things  cannot  stand  on  selfish- 
ness, mechanical  utilities,  economics,  and  law  courts ;  that  if  there  be  not  a 
religious  element  in  the  relations  of  men,  such  relations  are  miserable,  and 
doomed  to  ruin." 

Eing-becoming  graces 
Are  justice,  rerity,  temperance,  stableness, 
Bounty,  perseverance,  mercy,  lowliness 
Devotion,  patience,  courage,  fortitude. 

Where  can  such  virtues  be  found,  and  where  be  better  cultivated,  than  in  the 
humble  and  reverent  worship  of  Almighty  God  I  No  nation  can  be  permanent 
or  prosperous  where  king  and  people  ignore  the  obvious  claims  of  Divine 
worship. 

Safety  and  equal  government  are  things 

Which  subjects  make  as  happy  as  their  kings. — Waller, 

IV.  Was  the  occasion  of  national  joy  and  tranquility.  **And  all  the 
people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  and  the  city  was  in  quiet  '*  (verse  20).  The  good 
rejoiced  that  the  character  of  Jehovah  was  at  length  vindicated  :  their  sighs, 
their  tears,  their  prayers  for  Zion  had  not  been  in  vain.  The  aged  rejoiced 
that  before  their  eyes  closed  in  death  they  beheld  their  country  free  from  the 
oppressor,  and  their  loved  worship  once  more  restored.  The  young  rejoiced  in 
the  brightening  prospect  of  noblest  service  for  God  and  king  and  country. 
**  And  the  city  was  in  quiet.''  As  in  many  other  countries,  the  condition  of 
the  metropolis  ruled  the  provinces.  If  Jerusalem  was  in  anguish,  the  nation 
was  in  sorrow  ;  if  Jerusalem  was  happy,  the  nation  shared  the  joy.  If  the 
vast  populations  of  our  great  cities  were  penetrated  with  a  love  and  enthusiasm 
for  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  how  readily  would  the  rest  of  the  country  be  won 
over  to  share  in  a  like  experience !  It  is  not  without  significance  that  the  first 
preachers  of  the  Gospel  directed  their  earliest  endeavours  to  gain  a  footing  in 
the  great  populous  centres  of  their  day.  Flood  the  cities  with  light  and  joy, 
and  the  nations  will  soon  be  won.  Then  will  come  the  time  of  which  Alford 
sung— 

What  throbbings  of  deep  oy 
Pulsate  through  all  I  see  ;  from  the  full  bud 
Whose  unctuous  sheath  is  glittering  in  the  mooii) 
Up  through  the  system  of  created  things, 
Even  to  the  flaming  ranks  of  Seraphim  I 

Lessons  : — 1.  The  nation  is  a  prey  to  anarchy  when  God  is  not  publicly  acJcnow- 
ledged.  2.  The  pwre  worship  of  God  tends  to  develop  all  that  is  lest  in  national 
character,    3.  To  worship  God  aright^  we  must  get  rid  of  every  idolatrous  rival, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Verses  17,  18.  Covenanting  with  Jehoiada  renewed.  1.  The  covenant 
God.  I.  All  the  more  necessary  when  of  the  king  and  the  people  with  God. 
conscious  of  unfaithfulness.  II.  The  basis  and  fountain  of  all  national 
Should  be  solemn  and  impressive,  prosperity.  An  irreligious  state  is  a 
III.  Shown  to  be  sincere  by  the  folly  and  an  impossibility.  It  is  no- 
destruction  of  that  which  led  the  soul  thing.  II.  The  covenant  between  king 
astray.  IV.  Has  a  tendency  to  and  people.  It  is  built  upon  the 
foster  and  strengthen  right  relations  former.  There  is  prosperity  in  a 
between  God  and  king  and  people,      country  only  when  the  prince  rules 

before  and  with  God,  and  the  people 

Verse   17.  The    covenant  which      are   obedient  through  obedience   to 

683 


OHAP.  xli.  BOMILBtlG  COMMENTARt:  KIKQB. 


God.       Without    this    fundamental  settled  on  a  stable   foundation      11 

condition  all  constitutions,  laws,  and  When  religion  triumphs  over  idolatrv* 

institutions,  however  good  ihey  may  oppression,  and  wrong      III    When 

appear,  are  useless.     No  relation  of  peace  and  prosperty  are  guaranteed 
subjects  and  ruler  is  sound  if   it  has  o  beauteous  peace, 

not   the  covenant  of  God  as  its  basis  Sweet  union  of  a  state !  What  else  but  thou 

on  either  side. — Lange,  ^^^^^  safety,  strength,  and  glory  to  a  people. 

Governments  which  are  founded  in 

Verse   18.  It  is  a  grand  national  blood  always  end  disastrously, 
event  when  a  people  destroys  its  idols. 

He  who  stands  by  God  and  his  word         Verse  21.     The  sceptre  of  Judah  is 

tolerates    neither  gross   nor    refined  changed  from  a  woman  to  a  child; 

idolatry.      Where   there   is   decided  ^^^  ^,  child  trained  up  and  tutored  by 

faith  in  the  living  God,   the  altars  of  Jehoiada.     This  minority  so   guided 

the  false  gods  fall  of  themselves.  "^^^  not  inferior  to  the  mature  age  of 

many  predecessors.     Happy   is   that 

Verse  20.  National  joy.      I.  May  J^^^  ^^e  nonage  of  whose  prince  falls 

well  be  expressed  when  the  throne  is  ^°*°  ^^^7  ^°d  just  hands. — B^.  Hall. 


CHAPTER  Xn. 

THE    RESTORATION    OF    THE    TEfilPLE    BY    JO  ASH. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — ^Verse  2.  Jehoash  did  right  all  his  days  wherein 
Jehoiada,  &c. — The  word  •'  wherein  "  may  be  rendered  because^  and  that  alters  the  meaning 
irom  during  the  period  in  which  Jehoiada  instructed  him,  into  "all  his  days,"  t.  ^.,  during  the 
king's  entire  lifcy  because  Jehoiada  instructed  him.  This  difference  of  measing  depends  on  the 
preservation  or  rejection  of  the  suflSx  ^  in  the  word  VQ^«     Tl^©  account,  however,  in  the 

TT 

Chronicles  is,  that  Jehoash  acted  rightly  '*all  the  days  of  Jehoiada  the  priest."    But  the 
grammatical  construction  of  the  sentence  in  Kings  requires   ■)Ii^^^  because^  rather  than 

t    T 

"  wherein."    Verse  3.  But  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away — See  Notes  on  1  Kings 
lii.  2.     Consider  the  popular  tondness  for  the  evil  practices,  the  youthf ulness  of  the  king,  and 
the  sanction  given  to  all  such  idolatrous  iniquities  during  the  evil  sway  of  Athaliah,  and  this 
inabiliry  to  suppress  so  gross  an  impiety  is  not  unaccountable.    Verse  4.  All  the  money  of 
the  dedicated  things — i,  e.,  consecrated  money  ;  and  it  is  specified  as  threefold  :  1.  Money  of 
the  numbered  (so  read  the  words),  viz.,  those  who  pass  through  the  enumeration  (see  Exod. 
XXX.  12-14).    2.  Money  of  the  estimation^  viz.,  the  redemption  price  of  a  person  who  had 
devoted  himself  or  his  property  to  the   Lord,  and  wished  to  effect  his  or  its  redemption 
(Lev.  xxvii.  1-8).    3.  Freewill  offerings.     Verse  7.  Why  repair  ye  not  the  breaches  of  the 
house  1 — The  natural  interpretation  of  the  failure  is  that  the  priests  had  been  negligent,  and 
that  the  money  paid  in  liquidation  of  vows,  and  the  voluntary  gifts  of  the  people,  had  been 
used  for  other  purposes  than  those  the  king  intended.     But  that  the  king  consulted  these 
priests  concerning  a  new  method  indicates  that  he  did  not  regard  them  as  guilty  of  embezzle- 
ment.    The  case  probably  was,  that  the  current  expenses  of  the  maintenance  of  the  priests 
and  of  the  temple  worship  absorbed  all  the  finances,  leaving  no  surplus  for  repairs.     Yet  they 
ought  to  have  shown  more  teal,  and  this  is  to  their  reproach.     Verse  9.  Jehoiada  took  a 
chest — A  echemeiorpreserving  the  account  for  repairs  separate  from  the  current  and  incidental 
expenses.     The  people  welcomed  the  arrangement  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  9,  10),  for  they  knew  now 
that  their  gifts  would  go  to  their  intended  purposes.    Verse  10.  They  put  it  in  bags,  and 
told  the  money—  The  king  sent  his  own  secretary,  together  with  a  scribe  of  the  high  priesi, 
that  the  money  might  be  counted.    It  was  then  handed  to  the  overseers,  who  directed  the 
work  of  repairs.     In  Oriental  countries  money  is  still  counted,  put  in  bags,  labelled,  and  sealed 
by  a  duly  authorized  officer,  and  then  passed  into  currency.    Verse  13.  Howbeit  there  were 
not  made  bowls,  &c. — Until  the  repairs  were  completed,  this  money  was  not  used  for  neces- 
sary articles  of  temple  furniture.    Verse  15.  They  reckoned  not  with  the  men — Their  in- 
tegrity being  beyond  suspicion.    Verse  16.  It  was  the  priests — According  to  direct  enact< 
534 


SOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY'  KINGS.  Chap.  xiL 


ment  (T.ev.  v.  IR  ;  Numb.  v.  8).  Verso  17.  Hazael,  king  of  Syria,  fought  against  Gath— 
Gath,  formeil)'  a  town  of  the  Philistines  According  to  Chroriiclos,  the  exp<  dition  against 
Jeriisaltm  occurred  in  the  last  year  of  Jehoash's  reign,  and  it  is  there  marked  that  this  was  a 
punishment  from  the  Lord  for  the  king's  unfaithfulness  to  Ilim,  and  his  cruelty  to  the  pro- 
phet Zechariah.  To  secure  Jerusalem,  the  king  purchased  the  withdrawal  of  the  Syrians 
with  the  treasures  of  God's  house.  Verse  20.  His  servants  arose  and  slew  Jehoash  — lie  was 
at  the  time  in  his  bed  with  wounds,  probably  received  in  battle  with  the  Syrians.  Comp.  the 
account  in  Chronicles. —  W.  H.  J. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-3. 
The  Worth  op  Godly  Counsel. 

I.  That  godly  counsel  is  a  powerful  help  to  a  consistent  and  upright  life. 

"And  Jehoasli  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  There  is 
nothing  in  the  history  to  lead  us  to  suspect  the  sincerity  of  Jehoash's  religious 
devotion  in  the  earlier  years  of  his  reign.  He  was  carefully  instructed  in  his 
infancy,  and  grew  up  in  the  midst  of  godly  influences.  His  religious  character 
was  moulded  under  the  wise  and  capable  counsel  of  good  Jehoiada.  It  is  an 
unspeakable  advantage  to  grow  up  under  the  fostering  shelter  of  a  good  and 
holy  life.  A  few  words  of  warning  or  encouragement  at  the  right  moment  have 
often  saved  a  soul  from  ruin.  ''Good  counsels  observed  are  chains  to  grace 
which,  neglected,  prove  halters  to  strange  undutiful  children."  Sometimes  bad 
men  will  give  good  advice,  and  the  man  who  can  take  it  and  act  upon  it  shows 
his  good  sense  and  superiority.  He  who  is  wise  enough  in  youth  to  take  the 
advice  of  his  seniors,  unites  the  vivacity  and  enterprise  of  early,  with  the 
wisdom  and  gravity  of  later,  life. 

TI.  That  godly  counsel  is  potent  with  some  only  when  under  the  direct 
influence  of  a  living  personal  example.  "  All  his  days  wherein  Jehoiada  the 
priest  instructed  him."  While  Jehoiada  lived,  Joash  faithfully  observed  the 
covenant  he  had  made  with  Jehovah,  and,  though  the  fact  is  not  stated,  it  is 
implied  that  he  afterwards  departed  from  the  counsels  of  his  benefactor.  This 
defection  is  related  in  the  Chronicles.  It  is  difficult  to  do  wrong  in  the  presence 
of  the  good ;  their  holy  and  upright  example  is  a  rebuke  and  a  deterrent  to 
every  evil  tendency.  The  influence  of  Samuel  was  a  powerful  check  upon  the 
impulsive  rashness  and  violence  of  Saul;  and  when  that  influence  was  with- 
drawn, it  is  not  difficult  to  trace  the  degeneracy  of  the  unhappy  monarch,  and 
how  speedily  he  came  to  his  doom.  We  shall  never  know  how  much  we  owe 
to  the  holy  and  consistent  lives  of  those  with  whom  we  come  in  frequent  con- 
tact. ''  A  virtuous  man,"  says  Eelltham,  *'  shining  in  the  purity  of  a  righteous 
life,  is  a  light-house  set  by  the  seaside,  whereby  the  mariners  both  ir^ail  aright 
and  avoid  danger;  but  he  that  lives  in  noted  sirs  is  a  false  lantern  which  ship- 
wrecks those  that  trust  him.  I^othing  awakens  our  sleeping  virtues  like  the 
noble  acts  of  our  predecessors.  They  are  flaming  beacons  that  fame  and  lime 
have  set  on  hills  to  call  us  to  a  defence  of  virtue  whensoever  vice  invades  the 
commonwealth  of  man."  We  all  need  the  encouraging  influence  of  example  ; 
but  there  arc  some  natures  so  feeble  in  moral  stamina  that  they  cannot  stand 
alone.  They  have  been  so  accustomed  to  depend  upon  others,  that  when  their 
adviser  fails  them,  they  succumb.     It  would  seem  Joash' s  was  such  a  nature. 

III.  That  godly  counsel  does  not  always  avail  to  bring  about  the 
thorough  reform  of  long  standing  abuses.  ''  But  the  high  places  were  not 
taken  away"  (verse  3).  The  popular  fondness  for  the  private  and  disorderly 
rites  performed  in  the  groves  and  recesses  of  hills  was  so  inveterate  that  even 

535 


CHAP.  xn.  EOMILETIC  COMMEKTARY:   KINGS. 


the  most  powerful  monarchs  had  been  unable  to  accoraplish  their  suppression ;  no 
wonder  that  in  the  early  reign  of  a  young  king,  and  after  the  gross  irregularities 
that  had  been  allowed  during  the  mal-administration  of  Athaliah,  the  difficulty 
of  putting  an  end  to  the  superstitions  associated  with  the  high  places  was 
greatly  increased  (Jamieson).  Besides,  Jehoiada,  while  acting  with  surprising 
energy  in  the  restoration  of  the  dynasty,  was  an  old  man — a  hundred  years  old 
when  Joash  was  crowned,  and  he  lived  thirty  years  after.  He  might  therefore 
feel  himself  unable  to  cope  with  the  demolition  of  long-established  customs  that 
had  baffled  and  defied  younger  and  stronger  men.  If  his  counsel  halted  at  this 
point,  it  was  so  far  defective.  He  knew  the  danger  to  Judah  of  these  idolatrous 
practices,  and  should  not  only  have  counselled  their  extinction,  but  have  had 
the  courage  of  carrying  out  what  he  counselled.  The  unreformed  abuses  were 
a  snare  to  the  people  in  after  years,  and,  as  the  sequel  showed,  led  to  the  ruin 
of  the  king  whose  career  begun  so  auspiciously. 

Lessons  : — 1 .  They  who  give  counsel  to  others  should  he  exemplary  themselves. 
2.  It  is  the  mark  of  a  nolle  natu/re  to  receive  counsel  and  profit  by  it  without 
talcing  offence.  3.  Tf^e  should  he  prepared  to  carry  out  to  its  consequences  the  counsel 
we  give  to  others, 

GERM  NOTES  Oh  THE  VERSES. 

Verses  1-3.  That  which  appears  to  which  it  never  afterwards  altogether 

be  the  greatest  misfortune  for  a  child,  lost.      Through    the    priesthood    the 

to  b«  left  fatherless  and  motherless  at  lineage  of  David  had  been  saved,  and 

an  early  age,  often  becomes  a  great  the  worship  of  Jehovah  restored  in 

blessing  in  the  gracious  providence  of  Judah    even  more   successfully   than 

God.     What  would  have  become  of  it  had  been  in  Samaria  through   the 

Jehoash  if  he  had  been  brought  up  at  prophets.     During    the    minority    of 

the  court  of  his  idolatrous  father  and  Joash,    Jehoiada    virtually     reigned, 

his  depraved  mother  ?  God  gave  him  The  very   office  was   in  some   sense 

in  Jehoiada  far  more  than  he  had  lost  created  by  himself.     He  was  regarded 

in  his  father  and  his  mother.     None  as  a  second  founder  of  the  Order,  so 

need  instruction  more  than  those  who  that   in   after  days   he,  rather   than 

are  called  to  govern ;  there  is  no  more  Aaron,    is    described    as    the   chief 

responsible  calling  than  that   of  in-  (Jer.  xxix.  2Q). — Stanley. 

structing  those  who  will  have  to  rule.  —  A  statesman,  we  are  told,  should 

Unfortunately,  this  task  is  rarely  in-  follow  public  opinion.     Doubtless  as  a 

trusted  to   those  who,  like  Jehoiada,  coachman  follows  his  horses,  having 

are   fitted   for  it   by  age,  learning,  firm  hold  on  the    reins,  and   guiding 

experience,  and  piety.  them. — Hare. 

Verse    2.     A    faithful  teacher.        Verse  3.  The  inveterate  evils  of 

I.  A  great  boon  to  a  young   and  in-  idolatry.     I.  Have  a  powerful   ally 

experienced     king.       II.     Has    the  in  the  corruptions  of   human  nature, 

opportunity  of  exerting  a  potent  and  II.  Are  the  occasion  of  worse  evils  in 

widespread  influence  for  good.     III.  the  future.     III.    Survive  the   most 

Is     all    the    more     powerful    when  violent  efforts  of   reform.     IV.  Can 

associated  with  a  consistent  religious  be  cured  only  by  thorough  eradication, 
character.  —  Even  these  holy  and  just  hands 

The  part  played  by  Jehoiada  came  short  of  what  they  might  have 

raised  the  priesthood  to  an  importance  done.     The  high  places  remained  still : 

which,  with  the  single  exception   of  those  altars  were  erected  to  the  true 

Eli,  it  had  never  before  attained  in  God,  but  in  a  wrong  place.     It  is  a 

the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  marvel  if  there  be  not  some  blemishes 
536 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap,  xil 


found   in   the    best   government.      I  in  a  blind- fold  career,  as  it  fell  out  in 

doubt  Jehoiada  shall  once  buy  it  dear  England    when    King    Edward  VI. 

that    he   did    not   his   utmost. — Bp.  began  to  reform.-- 7 ra/>p. 

Hall,  —  Rulers  ought  not  to  allow  them- 

—  Custom    had  so  prevailed   that  selves  to  be  restrained  from  carrying 

Jehoiada  durst  not  advise  the  king  to  out  what  is  good  and  r  ght  from  any 

cross  the   people  in  this  superstition,  fear  of  persons,  lest  they  may  possibly 

lest  it  should   cause  a  tumult;  lest  incur   the   disfavour   of   the  people, 

they  should  more  regard  commotioners  There  never  was  a  prince    who  was 

than    commissioners,    and    be  more  not  himself  guilty  of  faults  and  errors, 

guided    by    rage    than    by    right —  as  we  see  here  from  the  example   of 

violence  and  obstinacy,  like  two  un-  Jehoash,    who    did    not  abolish  the 

tamed  horses,  drawing  their  desires  sacrifices  on  the  high  places. — Lange, 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  4-lG. 
The  Bestoration  op  the  House  of  God  a  Wouk  op  Genuine  Piety. 

The  prominence  given  in  the  history  to  the  repair  of  the  Temple  by  Joash 
indicates  that  it  was  the  chief  incident  of  his  reign.  As  David  was  the  founder, 
and  Solomon  the  builder,  of  the  House  of  Jehovah,  so  Joash,  with  whom  the 
house  of  David  recommenced,  was  the  restorer  of  the  Sanctuary.  It  must 
have  been  an  act  of  gratitude  and  joy  on  the  part  of  the  king  to  repair  the 
breaches  of  that  temple  which  had  been  his  shelter  and  home  from  his  tenderest 
years.  He  engaged  the  priests  and  people  in  the  work,  to  give  to  the  move- 
ment a  national  character,  and  to  give  this  outward  proof  that  the  king  and 
people  were  sincere  in  renewing  their  covenant  with  Jehovah.     Observe — 

I.  That  the  restoration  of  the  house  of  God  may  be  delayed  by  the 
indifference  of  those  who  might  be  supposed  most  anxious  for  its  promo- 
tion (verses  4-6).  The  work  was  committed  to  the  priests,  who  would  naturally 
be  expected  to  be  most  interested  in  hastening  its  completion  ;  but  in  this  both 
king  and  people  were  disappointed.  Years  rolled  away,  and  nothing  was 
done.  It  does  not  appear  that  the  priests  can  be  charged  with  any  intention  to 
misappropriate  the  money ;  but  it  is  evident  that  there  was  gross  mismanage- 
ment and  neglect  somewhere.  It  is  a  painful  spectacle  when  the  officers  of  the 
temple  are  apathetic  as  to  its  condition,  and  disappoint  the  expect^itions  of  those 
who  have  cheerfully  ofi"ered  their  help ;  worse  still  when  the  gifts  of  the  people 
are  wrongfully  applied.  There  are  those  in  the  churches  to-day  who  imbibe 
too  much  of  the  spirit  of  these  priests.  They  would  see  the  sanctuary  almost 
tumble  about  their  heads  in  ruins  before  they  would  initiate  any  movement  to 
repair  and  renovate  it,  and  would  do  all  they  could  to  debar  others  from 
working  in  that  direction.  Piety  is  at  a  low  ebb  in  that  soul  which  is  so 
indifferent  to  the  outer  fabric  of  God's  house. 

II.  That  the  restoration  of  the  house  of  God  is  a  work  worthy  of  a 

monarch's  zeal  (verse  7).  The  soul  of  David  burned  with  a  holy  and  fervent 
desire  to  build  a  house  for  God ;  but  he  was  permitted  to  do  nothing  more  than 
prepare  for  it.  The  climax  of  Solomon's  great  works  was  the  building  and 
dedication  of  the  Temple,  and  now  Joash  regards  it  as  an  honour  and  privilege 
to  repair  the  delapi  ations  of  that  sacred  fane.  He  stirred  up  the  zeal  of  his 
aged  instructor,  rebuked  the  priests  for  their  supineness  and  negligence,  and 
organized  the  enterprise  on  a  sound  and  popular  basis.  It  is  a  work  befitting  a 
king  to  be  concerned  in  the  honour  and  beauty  ot  God's  liouse.  The  prince 
who  is  interested  in  the  religious  welfare  of  his  people  will  not  be  inattentive 
to  inferior  matters. 

63  r 


CHAP.  XII.  EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


III.  That  the  restoration  of  the  house  of  God  is  accomplished  only  by 
resolute  and  united  effort.  1.  By  the  willing  and  liberal  offerings  of  the  people. 
Money  is  a  talent,  not  to  be  squandered  in  reckless  extravagance,  but  to  be 
wisely  and  discreetly  employed.  It  cannot  be  better  employed  than  in  cod- 
nection  with  the  house  of  God.  The  gift,  to  be  acceptable,  must  be  voluntarily 
and  cheerfully  offered  :  *'  All  the  money  that  cometh  into  any  man's  heart  to 
bring  into  the  house  of  the  Lord'*  (verse  4).  Where  this  spirit  of  generosity 
prevails  there  is  no  difficulty  in  carrying  out  great  religious  undertakings. 
*'  The  manner  of  giving,"  says  Lavater,  "  shows  the  character  of  the  giver  moro 
than  the  gift  itself." 

The  truly  generous  is  the  truly  wise ; 
And  he  who  loves  not  others,  lives  unblest. 

2.  By  the  strict  and  impartial  administration  of  funds  (verses  9-12).  The 
mismanagement  of  the  priests  had  brought  the  work  into  discredit,  and  checked 
the  flow  of  offerings  into  the  church  treasury.  All  this  was  altered.  An 
offertory  chest  was  especially  provided ;  to  show  that  the  priests  were  not 
regarded  as  intentionally  dishonest  in  the  misappropriation  of  previous  gifts, 
the  chest  was  placed  under  their  care.  At  stated  times  it  was  opened,  the 
money  counted  in  the  presence  of  the  high  priest  and  the  king's  secretary, 
and  handed  over  in  definite  sums  to  those  who  had  charge  of  the  work.  Public 
confidence  was  restored,  and  the  people  gave  cheerfully  of  their  substance. 
*'  Put  it  out  of  the  power  of  truth  to  give  you  an  ill  character,  and  if  anybody 
reports  you  not  to  be  an  honest  man,  let  your  practice  give  him  the  lie ;  and  to 
make  all  sure,  you  should  resolve  to  live  no  longer  than  you  can  live  honestly, 
for  it  is  better  to  be  nothing,  than  a  knave.  An  honest  death  is  better  than  a 
dishonest  life."  3.  By  the  judicious  avoidance  of  unnecessary  expense  {jersQ  13). 
Vessels  of  silver  and  gold  were  afterwards  provided  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  14)  ;  but 
not  until  the  substantial  part  of  the  restoration  was  completed.  Utility  and 
beauty  are  not  antagonistic,  but  may  be  gracefully  combined. 

Thoa  shalt  learn 
The  wisdom  early  to  discern 
True  beauty  in  uiWitj .— Longfellow. 

To  spend  money  in  decoration  and  display  to  the  neglect  of  actual  and  immediate 
necessities  is  an  unjustifiable  extravagance.  4.  By  the  consoicntious  and  faith- 
ful labour  of  the  workmen  (verses  14,  15).  A  vigorous  administration  makes  itself 
felt  in  every  detail  of  the  work  it  undertakes,  and  communicates  its  own 
enthusiasm  to  the  humblest  worker.  It  gives  a  dignity  to  labour  when  it  is 
done  conscientiously,  and  from  the  love  of  it.  '*  Where  love  is,  there  is  no 
labour;  aud  if  there  be  labour,  that  labour  is  loved."  In  this  re-organization 
of  the  restoration  movement  we  observe  all  the  elements  of  success — prompt 
decided  action,  generous  giving,  careful  but  not  stinted  expenditure,  earnest  and 
united  toil.  Addison  writes  :  **  If  you  wish  success  in  life,  make  perseverance 
your  bosom  friend,  experience  your  wise  counsellor,  caution  your  elder  brother, 
and  hope  your  guardian  genius." 

lY.  That  the  restoration  of  the  house  of  God  does  not  interfere  with 
the  necessary  maintenance  of  the  duly  appointed  servants  of  that  house 

(verse  1 6).  The  priests  had  surrendered  in  favour  of  the  restoration  fund  much 
of  what  they  had  been  accustomed  to  receive  (verse  8),  but  the  revenue  from 
the  trespass  offerings  and  sin  offerings  was  still  given  to  them.  This  belonged 
to  them  by  law  (Num.  v.  8-9,  Levit.  v.  16).  The  due  maintenance  of  the 
ministry  is  divinely  authorized.  The  necessities  of  one  branch  of  the  service  of 
God  ought  not  to  interfere  with  the  claims  of  another.  The  minister  of  God 
should  be  so  provided  for  as  to  raise  him  above  aU  anxieties  that  would  divert 
his  mind  from  complete  devotion  to  his  proper  work. 
638 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


CHAP  III. 


Lessons: — 1.  The  house  of  Ood  is  not  only  a  convenience  for  worshippers  ^  but 
also  a  public  witness  for  religion.  2.  The  building  of  a  house  of  God  calls  for 
the  liberality  and  united  zeal  of  His  people.  3.  Suggests  the  need  of  continued 
effort  in  building  up  the  spiritual  temple. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Verse  4.    The    responsibility    of 

wealth.  I.  Not  to  be  used  for  per- 
sonal aggrandisement  and  indulgence. 
II.  Is  most  nobly  employed  in  pro- 
moting the  worship  of  God.  III. 
Should  be  offered  to  God  with  a  liberal 
hand  and  a  cheerful  heart. 

Verse  5.    The     decay     of    God*s 
house  a  symptom  of  moral  decay. 

I.  Shows  the  prevalence  of  a  worldly 
and  selfish  spirit.  II.  Shows  an  in- 
difference to  the  highest  claims  of 
God  and  the  soul.  III.  An  evidence 
of  national  deterioration.  IV.  Calls 
for  repentance  and  reformation. 

—     When  the  building  in  which  a 
congregation  assembles  to  worship  God, 
to  hear  His  word,  and  to  receive  the 
means  of  grace,  is  left  ruinous,    God 
does  not  receive   the   honour   which 
belongs  to  Him.     Where  the  churches 
fall  to  ruin,  there  religion  and  pie.ty 
also  fall  into  decay  ;  but  where  there 
is  love  of  God  and  joy  in  His   word, 
there  no  ruinous  churches   are   seen. 
A  time  in  which  magnificent  palaces, 
theatres,  and  ball-rooms  are  repaired, 
or   built   at   great    expense,   but    in 
which  the  houses  of  God  are  left  small, 
wretched,  dirty,  and  ruinous,  is  a  time 
of  religious  decay,  and  resembles  the 
time    of    Athaliah    in    Judah.     The 
spiritual  temple  may  in  time  become 
ruinous  through  unbelief,  worldly  life 
and     behaviour,      and      immorality. 
Where  are  the  congregations  in  which 
there  is  nothing  ruinous   or  decayed, 
in  which  nothing  could  be  improved  ? 
How  many  are  in  ruins  and  ready  to 
fall  1 — Lange. 

Verses  7-15.  Thorough  organiza- 
tion an  aid  to  success.  1.  Emphasizes 
the  importance  of  the  work  to  be  done. 
II.  Interests  and  engages  all  classes  of 
the  community.  III.  Adopts  the 
best  methods  to  elicit  the  generosity  of 


the  people.  IV.  Creates  confidence 
as  to  the  just  administration  of  the 
funds.  V.  Reacts  upon  the  enthusi- 
asm and  fidelity  of  all  engaged  in  the 
work. 

Verse  7.  "  Why  repair  ye  not  the 
breaches  of  the  house  ?  "  A  search- 
ing question.  I.  Addressed  to  the 
wealthy.  II.  To  all  the  worshippers 
of  Jehovah.  III.  To  all  unfaithful 
ministers.    IV.  To  imperfect  believers. 

—  Works  which  are  pleasing  to 
God  cannot  be  accomplished  by  care- 
less hands.  They  are  only  accom- 
plished where  zeal  is  united  with 
perseverance,  patience,  and  fidelity. 
How  many  a  congregation  has  fallen 
into  decay  and  remained  so,  because 
those  who  were  appointed  to  be  the 
builders  of  it,  who  ought  to  have  re- 
paired and  built  it,  have  not  raised 
their  negligent  hands  (Heb.  xii.  12; 
Jerem.  xlviii.  10).  Although  no 
earthly  king  may  ever  call  them  to 
account,  yet  the  Heavenly  King,  before 
whose  judgment-seat  they  must  ap- 
pear to  give  an  account  of  their  office, 
will  ask — ''  Why  repair  ye  not  the 
breaches  of  the  house  .^" 

Verse  13.  The  necessary  precedes 
the  ornamental.  I.  It  is  so  in  the 
economy  of  nature.  II.  Should  be 
80  in  the  house  of  God.  III.  Should 
be  so  in  the  arrangements  of  social  life. 
IV.  The  ornamental  is  not  condemned 
in  itself — only  when  it  supersedes  and 
ignores  the  necessary  and  useful. 

—  The  utilitarian.  He  is  a 
slave  to  science.     He  would  pull — 

Great  heaven  to  pieces,  and  anatomize 
Each  fragment  of  its  crystal  battlements, 
Weigh  out  its  hymns,  divide  its  light,  and 

class 
The  radiant  feathers  of  archangels*  wings. 
Do  we  not  know — doth  he  not  know — that 

still 
Mysterious  wonder  aye  must  reign  above  us, 

539 


OHJLP.  XII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


Struggle  howe'er  we  may  t    Doth  he  not  Yerse  16.     Ministerial    mainteii' 

m,-^?*'^       .         J        .        i     ,M  ance.     I.  Authorized    by    the   Word 

That  adoration  and  great  wonder,  hke  £    n   a       rr      a       •     .l                             j. 

Good  deeds  which  bless  the  giver,  ever  lift  ?^,  ^^^^ ,  ^}'  t     i""!^  c  ^^•^^^8?,^^^*' 

The  soul  above  the  dust»  and  strengthen  us  f  1-lI-    JNot    to    be    intenered    With  by 

Cornwall,  other  claims. 


B0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  17—21. 

The  Unhappy  Fate  op  an  Unfaithful  "Kisot, 

After  the  death  of  Jehoiada  the  career  of  Joash  was  a  series  of  disasters.  He 
became  unfaithful  to  his  covenant  vows,  and  was  seduced  into  idolatry.  Having 
forsaken  Jehovah,  he  was  abandoned  to  his  courses,  and  soon  became  a  prey  to 
his  own  evil  passions  and  to  the  enemies  who  swooped  down  upon  him  with 
deadly  intent. 

I.  His  kingdom  is  harassed  with  war  and  rapine  (verse  17).  The 
Syrians  invaded  his  dominions,  and,  though  insignificant  in  number,  wrought 
much  slaughter,  and  bore  away  great  spoil.  Under  the  pious  rule  of  the  good 
Jehoiada  the  nation  was  in  peace,  and  grew  in  prosperity  and  riche?.  The  nation 
that  turns  its  back  on  Jehovah  will  not  go  unpunished.  It  is  no  wonder  if  it 
is  smitten  with  the  scourge  of  war  and  all  its  attendant  woes.  "  War,''  says 
Luther,  "is  one  of  the  greatest  plagues  that  can  afflict  humanity.  It  destroys 
religion,  it  destroys  states,  it  destroys  families.  Any  scourge,  in  fact,  is  prefer- 
able to  it.  Famine  and  pestilence  become  as  nothing  in  com;  arison  with  it. 
Pestilence  is  the  least  evil  of  the  three,  and  'twas  therefore  David  chose  it, 
willing  rather  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  God,  than  into  those  of  pitiless  man." 
War  is  the  sink  of  all  injustice. 

II.  He  is  demoralized  with  cowardice  and  fear  (verse  18).  Instead  of 
rallying  his  forces  and  meeting  the  enemy  with  a  brave,  determined  spirit, 
Joash  weakly  yielded,  and  even  despoiled  the  House  of  God  of  its  valuables, 
and  sacred  vessels  to  bribe  the  Syiian  king  to  withdraw.  Conscious  unfaith- 
fulness is  the  parent  of  craven  fear. 

Cowards  die  many  times  before  their  death  ; 
The  valiant  never  taste  of  death  but  once. 
Of  all  the  wonders  that  I  yet  have  heard, 
It  seems  to  me  most  strange  that  man  should  fear» 
Seeing  that  death,  a  necessary  end, 
Will  come  when  it  will  come. — Shakespeare, 

III.  His  life  is  hurried  to  an  untimely  and  ignominious  end  (verses  20-21). 
Joash  is  smitten  with  disease,  and  yet,  as  if  this  was  too  slow  a  process  to  end 
his  wretched  life,  a  conspiracy  was  formed,  and  he  was  quickly  despatched  with 
the  assassin's  sword.  His  murder  of  the  son  of  his  benefactor  met  with  a 
speedy  retribution.  His  ignominy  did  not  end  with  his  death.  To  show  the 
popular  execration  in  which  he  was  held,  his  body  was  refused  burial  in  the 
sepulchre  of  the  kings — a  terrible  warning  as  to  the  fate  of  all  apostates.  Another 
illustration  of  how  dark  and  dismal  a  night  may  settle  upon  a  life  that  opened 
with  so  fair  and  hopeful  a  morning. 

Lessons  : — \,^—lt  is  a  fatal  step  to  reject  the  pious  counsels  and  training  ofon^% 
youth,     2,  A  Jcing  cannot  go  wrong  without  involving  a  nation  in  suffering,     3. 
No  rank  in  life  can  screen  the  evil-doer  from  punishment, 
640 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  xni. 


gSRM  NOTES  ON  TSE  VERSES, 


Verses  17-21.  The  best  instruction 
cannot  preserve  against  a  fall  if  the 
heart  is  not  firm  and  strong.     Only  he 
who  endures  unto   the   end   shall  be 
saved.     The   noblest    commencement 
is  vain,  if  the  end   is   perverse   and 
wicked.     Joash     was     taught     what 
calamities  it  brings   to   abandon  the 
Lord  God   (Jer.   ii.    19).     The   Lord 
rewards   everyone    according    to    his 
works,  whether  in   this  or  the  next 
world.     What  a  man    soweth,    that 
shall  he  also  reap.     Joash    was  mar- 
vellously preserved   as  an  infant ;  he 
ends  his  life  wretchedly.     This  is  an 
example  how  near  the  ruin  of  a  man 
is   when  he   abandons    the   good   to 
which  he  was  educated  from  his  youth 
up,  nay,  even  is  glad  to  be  rid  of  those 
who  annoy  him  by  their  warnings.— 
Lange* 

Verse  18.  A  cowardly  spirit.  I. 
A  result  of  conscious  infidelity.  II. 
"Weakly  succumbs  even  to  an  inferior 
force.  III.  Has  no  scruples  as  to  how 
money  is  raised  wherewith  to  bribe  an 
enemy.  IV.  Is  despised  by  its 
oppressor.  V.  Encourages  a  renewal 
of  hostilities. 

Verses  20,  21.  All  the  people 
shouted  to  the  child- king,  "  Long  live 
the  king!"  and  rejoiced  and  blew 
trumpets.      Conspiracy   and   murder 


were    the   end    of    his  forty   yean' 
reign! 

Verse  20.  Assassination.  I.  A 
symptom  of  national  discontent.  II. 
A  dastardly  and  brutal  method  of 
revenge.  III.  Brings  no  advantage 
to  the  parties  concerned  in  it. 

Verse  21.  He  that  was  guilty  of 
abominable  idolatry,  yet,  as  if  God 
meant  to  waive  that  challenge,  is 
called  to  reckoning  for  his  cruel  un- 
thankf  ulness  to  Jehoiada.  This  crime 
shall  make  him  odious  alive,  and  shall 
abandon  him  dead  from  the  sepulchre 
of  his  fathers,  as  if  this  last  royalty 
were  too  good  for  him  who  had  for- 
gotten the  law  of  humanity.  Some 
vices  are  such  as  nature  smiles  upon, 
though  frowned  at  by  Divine  justice; 
others  are  such  as  even  nature  itself 
abhors.  Such  is  this  of  ingratitude, 
which  therefore  carries  so  much  more 
detestation  from  God,  as  it  is  more 
odious  even  to  them  who  have  blotted 
out  the  image  of  God. — Bp.  Eall. 

So  ended  the  last  remains  of  the 

great  struggle  of  the  house  of  Omri 
for  power.  So  was  preserved  the 
house  of  David  through  the  fiercest 
struggles,  inward  and  outward,  that 
it  witnessed  till  its  final  overthrow. 
So  was  confirmed  the  establishment  of 
the  priesthood  in  the  heart  of  the 
monarchy. — Stanley, 


CHAPTER  XTTI. 


THB    DEATH    OF    ELISHA. 

Obitical  and  Exflanatort  N0TE8.-Verse  1.  Jehoahaj,  the  son  of  Jehu,  began  to  reign 
ove?  Israel-Here  the  historian  turns  from  the  records  of  Judah  to  hose  of  /*;;«^J-  Jhe 
ZV.  "three  and  twentieth  year  "-does  not  accord  by  two  years  with  that  given  in  verse  10, 
as  ihTcoXondTnre^^^^^^^  Joash  [or  Jehoash],  king  of  Judah  ;  but  copyist's 

Wunders  i^KeTnumerals  occurred  so  easily.  ^  Verse  4.  The  Lord  saw  the  oppression  of 
llrael-He  aUowed  the  Syrians  to  become  Ui/scourge  for  Israel's  guilt  in  apostatizing  from 
hL  worsen  Verse  6.  The  Lord  gave  Israel  a  savionr-Not  a  *i.i?ern«^Mr«/  saviour-angcl 
fr  propheTi-bnt  ^bo^^^  the  kings  Joash  and  Jeroboam  He  gave  them  a  :i;>^1D,  "sayiour,^ 
from  the  Syrians,  for  the  former  recovered  f^  the  lost  cilie.  (ve^e  25)  and  ^^^f  «;.^^ 
•StU  «li  boundaries  of  Urmel  (xiv.  26).    Verse  6.  But  walked  therein-Who?^/^***am 


:xHI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS, 

or  Itrael  ?  IJ^H  nil--"  walked  he  **  (Jeroboam),  or  "  walked  it  **  (Israel).    There  remained 

the  grove— Cowj3.  1  Kings  xvi.  33.  Verse  14.  Elisha  was  fallen  sick— The  pro- 
phet's presence  was  felt  by  Joash  to  be  a  guarantee  of  the  safety  of  his  kingdom,  and  he 
dreaded  to  lose  him,  fearing  that  after  the  prophet's  death  he  must  again  confront  the  destruc- 
tive Syrians,  and  therefore  cries,  My  father  !  my  father  !  the  chariot  of  Israel  and  the  horse- 
men thereof !  It  implies  the  king's  conviction  that  this  man  of  (Jod  had  been,  by  his  counsels 
and  prayers,  the  secret  of  IsraeVt  valour  and  victories.  Verse  17.  The  arrow  of  the  Lord's 
deliverance,  &c. —  War  was  then  significantly  proclaimed  by  an  arrow  or  war-missel  being 
ihot  into  the  enemy's  country.  By  the  prophet's  putting  his  hands  upon  the  king's  hands 
(verse  16)  he  indicated  the  supernatural  power  which  would  go  with  the  king  in  his  invasion  of 
Syria.  The  S}  rians  had  established  themselves  in  the  East,  therefore  the  arrow  was  shot 
Eastward  (verse  17).  Verse  l8.  Smite  upon  the  ground — As  a  symbolic  act  of  subjugation. 
The  king  did  not  use  up  all  the  arrows  in  the  quiver.  Why  ?  Perhaps  because  he  obeyed  the 
theory  that  what  was  done  thrice  was  done  efficiently  and  absolutely  ;  or,  possibly,  because  he 
lacked  in  persistency.  The  latter ;  for  Elisha's  comtnand,  "  Take  the  arrows  ;  smite  !  "  im- 
plies with  all  the  arrows  ;  but  he  stopped  on  his  cwn  accord.  A  bad  omen.  Verse  19.  The 
man  of  God  was  wroth  with  him— For  the  king  thereby  predicted  his  incomplete  conquest. 
Verse  20.  Moabites  invaded  the  land  at  the  coming  in  of  the  year— H^Ii^  i^H — Ht.y  a  year 

T    T  T 

eame;  but  it  may  be  interpreted  as  the  Spring  season,  in  ancient  times  the  usual  period  for 
opening  campaigns  or  commencing  invasions.  Verse  21.  As  they  were  burying  a  man,  &c. — 
i.  e.y  a  corpse  of  some  unknown  person  about  to  be  interred  in  the  same  burial  place  in  which 
Elisha's  sepulchre  was  situate.  The  sudden  appearance  of  one  of  these  Moabite  hordns  urged 
them  to  cast  the  body  hastily  into  the  grave  of  Elisha,  which,  if  not  open,  was  quickly  arccs- 
sible  by  removing  the  stone  from  its  mouth.  Verse  25.  Three  times  did  Joash  heat  him — 
i.e.y  Benhadad,  the  son  of  Hazael ;  according  to  the  number  of  arrows  he  shot  (verse  19). — 
W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VFR8JB8  1-18. 
National  Deoat. 

In  this  paragraph  we  have  grouped  together  the  history  of  the  two  sister 
kiogdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel.  Their  condition  is  alike.  They  are  both  dragged 
down  to  the  same  level.  The  same  evil  that  has  been  so  fatal  to  Samaria  is 
now  prevalent  in  Jerusalem.  The  same  dark  record  is  true  of  both — a  record 
of  apostasy,  intensified  corruption,  and  rnpid  decay  of  national  prestige.  In 
the  case  of  Judah,  one  bright  ray  relieves  the  gloom ;  there  are  indications  of 
repentance  and  return ;  but  it  seems  more  a  desire  to  be  delivered  from 
calamities  that  have  become  intolerable,  than  a  genuine  effort  to  reform. 
Observe — 

I.  That  national  decay  is  the  inevitable  result  of  religious  apostasy 
(verses  2,  3).  Religion  exalts  a  nation  by  exalting  the  individual.  It  is 
equally  the  basis  of  private  virtue  and  public  faith ;  of  the  happiness  of  the 
individual  and  the  prosperity  of  the  nation.  When  God  is  honoured,  the 
nation  is  blessed  ;  but  when  He  is  forsaken  and  despised,  suffering  and  disaster 
follow-  ''True  religion,"  says  Burke,  **  is  the  foundation  of  society.  When 
that  is  once  shaken  by  contempt,  the  whole  fabric  cannot  be  stable  nor  lasting." 
How  strikingly  is  this  illustrated  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish  kingdom  ! 

II.  That  national  decay  is  hastened  by  the  devastations  of  continuous 
war  (verses  3-7).  War  exhausts  the  sources  of  a  nation's  strength,  and  destroys 
its  noblest  sons.  It  is  a  waste  of  blood  and  treasure.  If  it  does  not  utterly 
obliterate  the  nation,  it  puts  back  for  years  its  progress  and  advancement.  A 
strong  nation  may  recover  with  surprising  rapidity  the  damage  inflicted  by  a 
single  war ;  but  the  strongest  nation  cannot  long  survive  the  sufferings  of  un- 
interrupted warfare.     Nor    is    it    always  evident  which  suffem  most — the 

d42 


UOMILEIIG  COMMENTAMY:  KINGS.  ohaf.  xufc 


victorious  or  the  vanquished.     No  greater  calamity  can  happen  to  a  nation 
than  to  be  given  up  to  the  horrors  and  ravages  of  war. 

Oh  world  I 
Oh  men !  what  are  je,  and  our  best  designs, 
That  we  must  work  by  crime  to  punish  crime, 
And  slay,  as  if  death  had  but  this  one  gate  ? — Byron, 

III.  That  national  decay  may  be  arrested  for  a  time  by  humiliation  and 
prayer  (verses  4,  5).  We  may  here  trace  the  influence  ot  Elisha  upon  king 
Jehoahaz.  It  was  a  familiar  teaching  in  the  lips  of  the  prophet  that  the  nation's 
troubles  were  brought  about  by  forsaking  God,  and  the  only  way  of  deliverance 
was  to  be  foun  I  in  returning  to  Him  in  penitence  and  prayer.  *' Jehoahaz 
besought  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  hearkened  unto  him."  The  grip  of  the  Syrian 
was  relaxed,  the  terror  of  war  passed  away,  and  once  more  peace  and  security 
were  restored.  The  Lord  has  no  pleasure  in  sights  of  suffering,  even  where 
suffering  is  most  deserved.  His  compassion  is  touched  with  the  cry  of  the 
helpless,  and  He  is  swift  to  save. 

More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer 
Than  this  world  dreams  of. 
For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goats, 
That  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain, 
If,  knowing  God,  they  lift  not  hands  of  prayer, 
Both  for  themselves  and  those  who  call  them  friend  ? 
For  so  the  whole  round  world  is  every  way 
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God. — Tennyson, 

rV.  That  national  decay  cannot  be  prevented  while  temptations  to 
apostasy  are  allowed  to  exist.  **  There  remained  the  grove  also  in  Samaria 
(verse  6).  The  incompleteness  of  the  reforming  work  oi:  the  father  became  a 
snare  to  the  son  (chap.  x.  29).  The  seductions  of  idolatry  led  the  people 
away  from  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  from  the  path  of  virtue  and  upright- 
ness. No  nation  can  rise  to  its  true  purity  and  strenuth  until  every  public  entice- 
ment to  evil  is  abolished.     There  is  no  safety  with  idols,  but  in  their  destruction. 

Still  they  plead  and  still  they  promise  ;  wilt  thou  suffer  them  to  stand  t 
They  have  pleasures,  gifts,  and  treasures,  to  enrich  thee,  at  command. 
Heed  not  thou,  but  boldly  strike  them  ;  let  descend  the  faithful  blow. 
From  their  wreck  and  from  their  ruin  first  will  thy  true  riches  flow. —  Trench, 

Lessons: — 1.  The  hlessing  of  God  is   the  strength  and  glory  of  a  nation. 

2.  When  that  Messing  is  forfeited  hy  unfaithfulness  the  nation  sinhs  into  ruin. 

3.  Prayer  for  Divine  help  should  he  followed  hy  reformation  of  life. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verses  2,  3,  11.     A  bad  example.  V.  Cannot  be  followed  without  suffer- 

I.  Transmits  its  baneful  influence  to  ing  and  chastisement, 
succeeding    generations.      II.    Is   all 

the  more  potent  for  evil  when  found  Verse  4.     Adversity.     I.   A  sharp 

in    persons   in    the    highest    station,  spur  to  devotion.     II.  Appeals  to  the 

III,  Is  no  excuse  for  any  who  do  evil  Divine   compassion.     III.  Affords  an 

— does    not    absolve    from     personal  opportunity  for  the  gracious  exercise 

responsibility.     IV.  Rouses  the  anger  of  Divine  power. 

of    God  against   all   who  imitate  it.  —    The  house  of  correction  is  the 

643 


OHAP.  XIU. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY,:  KINGS. 


fittest  hospital  for  those  cripples  whose 
legs    are    lame  through    their    own 

laziness. — Fuller, 

God  alone 
Instructeth  how  to  mourn.    He  doth  not 

trust 
This  higher  lesson  to  a  voice  or  hand 
Subordinate.    Behold  I  He  cometh  forth  ! 
0  sweet  disciple  —  bow  thyself  to  learn 
The  alphabet  of  \ABx&.—Sigourney. 

Prayer — I.    An    evidence   of 

repentance.  II.  Should  be  addressed 
to  the  Being  whom  we  have  offended. 
III.  Secures  the  Divine  compassion 
and  help.  IV.  The  best  method  of 
obtaining  victory  over  our  enemies. 

—  Repentance  is  God's  choicest 
and  deepest  gift ;  repentance  for  our 
habitual  dreariness  and  coldness,  for 
that  shallowness  of  heart  which  over- 
takes us  when  we  are  surrounded 
with  the  tokens  of  His  presence,  when 
we  are  partakers  of  the  ordinances  of 
His  grace ;  which  those  very  privi- 
leges seem  to  produce  in  us ;  from 
which  troubles,  individual  or  national, 
cannot  of  themselves  deliver  us. 
Divines  may  have  infinite  refinements 
about  the  mode,  degrees,  and  effect  of 
repentance.  That  one  phrase  of  Scrip- 
ture, "turning  to  God,"  contains  all 
that  we  can  say  of  it.  Man,  thou  art 
living,  moving,  having  thy  being  in 
One  whom  thou  art  habitually  for- 
getting. That  forgetfulness  makes 
thee  forget  thy  brethren ;  yea,  and 
in  the  truest  sense  forget  thyself. 
Thou  dost  not  know  what  thou  art, 
whither  thou  art  tending.  All  the 
earth  is  a  riddle  to  thee.  Thy  fellow- 
men  are  hindrances  in  thy  way.  Thou 
art  thine  own  great  curse  and  teiTor. 
Recollect  from  whom  come  the 
thoughts  and  impulses  of  the   mind 


and  will  within  thee ;  who  can  make 
those  thoughts  and  impulses  an  order 
instead  of  a  chaos.  Turn  round  to 
the  light  which  is  ever  sending  flashes 
into  the  midst  of  thy  darkness.  Ask 
that  instead  of  such  momentary 
appearances,  from  which  thou  shrinkest 
as  from  a  guilty  thing  surprised,  it 
may  penetrate  thee  and  possess  thee, 
and  become  thy  constant  habitation. 
When  thou  yieldest  thyself  to  its 
transforming  energy,  thou  wilt  not 
bear  to  see  the  earth  lying  crushed 
under  the  weight  of  its  sins  and 
oppressions.  Thou  wilt  believe  in 
thy  heart  and  declare  with  thy  lips 
that  in  Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem, 
in  the  church  which  God  has  set  up, 
in  the  people  who  believe  in  His  love, 
there  is  a  prophecy  of  deliverance  for 
the  universe. — F.  D.  Maurice. 

"Verse  5.  The  Lord  gave  Israel  a 
temporal  saviour  in  its  hour  of  physical 
need ;  to  us  He  has  given  a  spiritual 
Saviour,  who  can  and  will  save  us  out 
of  the  hands  of  the  greatest  of  all  our 
enemies.  Many  a  one  prays,  like 
Jehoahaz,  in  his  time  of  distress  ;  and 
when  the  trouble  is  past,  the 
impulses  quickly  disappear. 


good 


Verse  7.  No  nation  is  so  great 
and  mighty  that  God  cannot  take  away 
its  might,  and  make  it  so  small  and 
slight  that  it  is  only  like  dust  which 
the  wind  scatters  (Ps.  xviii.  42). — 
Lange. 

Verse  12.  War-like  valour.  I. 
Not  the  highest  kind  of  valour.  II. 
Called  into  exercise  by  the  extremi- 
ties of  a  nation.  III.  Is  of  no  avail 
when  opposed  to  Divine  chastisements. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  14-19. 
Saltation  the  All-absokbing  Theme  op  a  True  Prophet. 

I.  It  is  a  theme  on  which  he  delights  to  dwell  in  his  dying  moments. 

The  ministry  of  Elisha  was  one  of  peace  and  good  will.  He  sought  to  build  up 
rather  than  to  destroy.  He  loved  to  speak  of  mercy  and  deliverance  rather  than 
of  wrath  and  destruction.  He  had  witnessed  the  sins  of  Israel,  and  had  faith- 
fully denounced  them.  He  saw  and  grieved  over  the  sufferings  that  had  come 
upon  the  nation.  And  now,  worn  down  with  age  and  disease,  and  rapidly 
544 


nO.VTLETTC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  CHAP.  xiii. 


approaching  the  end  of  his  career,  his  last  message  is  one  of  hope  and  salvation. 
'riie  theme  of  his  youth  had  lost  none  of  its  freshness  and  power  in  his  old  age. 
The  herald  of  salvation  cannot  close  his  career  more  grandly  than  in  proclaiming 
his  loved  message  with  his  dying  lips : 

**  Happy,  if  with  my  latest  breath 
I  may  but  gasp  His  name ; 
Preach  Him  to  all,  and  cry  in  death* 
Behold,  behold  the  Lamb  I  " 

II.  It  is  a  theme  which  raises  his  own  character  into  dignity  and  power. 

"The  chariot  of  Israel  and  the  horsemen  thereof."  This  seemed  to  mean 
that  Elisha  was  regarded  as  the  strength  and  protection  of  Israel.  "  What  use 
there  was  of  chariots  and  horsemen  in  those  wars  of  the  ancients  all  history 
tells  us.  All  the  strength  of  the  battle  stood  in  these  ;  there  could  be  neither 
defence  nor  offence  but  by  them.  Such  was  Elisha  unto  Israel.  The  greatest 
safeguard  to  any  nation  is  the  sanctity  and  faithfulness  of  their  prophets, 
without  which  the  church  and  state  lie  open  to  utter  desolation."  And  there 
is  that  in  the  truths  which  a  faithful  minister  declares  which  re-acts  upon  and 
elevates  his  own  character.  The  diligent  student  becomes  great  by  the  great- 
ness of  the  truths  he  studies.  He  becomes  familiar  with  great  ideas,  and  is 
purified  and  strengthened  by  the  Divine  spirit  that  lives  and  breathes  in  them. 
The  grand  elements  of  greatness  and  power  are  found  in  closest  communion 
with  God  and  truth. 

III.  It  is  a  theme  illustrated  by  suggestive  symbols.  (Verses  15-19). 
In  these  symbols  we  are  taught:  1.  That  salvation  is  from  the  Lord.  Elisha 
directed  Joash  to  take  bow  and  arrows  as  a  symbolical  act  designed  to  intimate 
more  fully  and  significantly  the  victories  promised  to  the  king  of  Israel  over 
the  Syrians.  His  laying  his  hands  upon  the  king's  hands  was  to  represent  the 
power  imparted  to  the  bow-shot  as  coming  from  the  Lord  through  the  medium 
of  the  prophet.  Salvation  is  not  by  armies,  or  by  the  subtlety  of  human 
diplomacy,  but  of  God,  who  can  save  by  many  or  by  few.  *'  Salvation  is  the 
confluence  of  every  attribute  in  Deity,  extinguishing  by  contrast  whatever  else 
was  splendid,  while  God  himself  effused  the  sparkles  of  heaven  upon  the 
question  of  despair,  and  dissolved  the  darkness  of  human  des'iny  in  a  flood  of 
everlasting  light !"  2.  That  the  measure  of  salvation  is  limited  hy  our  faith. 
Joash's  ehooting  the  other  arrows  into  the  ground  was  in  token  of  the  number 
of  victories  he  was  to  gain  ;  but  his  stopping  at  the  third  betrayed  the  weakness 
of  his  faith ;  for  as  the  discharged  arrow  signified  a  victory  over  the  Syrians,  it 
is  evident  that  the  more  arrows  he  shot,  the  more  victories  he  would  gain ;  and 
as  he  stopped  so  soon,  his  conquest  would  be  incomplete.  Eaith  in  God  is  the 
measure,  and  unbelief  the  limit,  of  His  blessings.  ''  According  to  your  faith  be 
it  unto  you." 

Lessons  : — 1.  The  chief  joy  of  a  true  prophet  is  to  proclaim  deliverance  to  the 
oppressed.  2.  That  a  true  prophet  is  ennobled  hy  the  spirit  of  his  message. 
3.  That  Jehovah  carries  on  His  work  of  salvation  hy  human  agencies, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verse  14.     A  toucMng  death-bed  eloquent  testimony  to  the  worth  and 

scene.     I.  A  young,  healthy,  vigorous  power   of  the   dying  prophet.      III. 

king  weeping  in  the  presence  of  an  Counsels    given   under    such  circum- 

aged,  venerable,  and  dying  saint.     II.  stances  carry  with  them  a  weight  and 

The     tears    of     the    monarch    bore  solemnity  that  cannot  be  forgotten. 

Ka  545 


CHAP.  xni. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


—  The  lonp^cst  day  must  have  its 
evening.  Good  Elisha,  who  had  lived 
some  ninety  years,  a  wonder  of  pro- 
phets, and  had  out-worn  many  suc- 
cessions in  the  thrones  of  Israel  and 
Judah,  is  now  cast  upon  the  bed  of  his 
sickness,  yea,  of  his  death.  That  very 
age  might  seem  a  disease,  which  yet  is 
seconded  with  a  languishing  distemper. 
It  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  holiness 
to  privilege  us  from  infirmity  of  body, 
from  final  dissolution.  He  saw  his 
master  Elijah  rapt  up  suddenly  from 
the  earth  and  fetched  by  a  fiery 
chariot  from  this  vale  of  mortality — 
himself  must  leisurely  wait  for  his  last 
pangs  in  a  lingering  passage  to  the 
same  glory.  There  is  not  one  way 
appointed  to  ns  by  the  Divine  Provi- 
dence unto  one  common  blessedness; 
one  hath  more  pain,  another  hath  more 
speed;  violence  snatcheth  away  one, 
another  by  an  insensible  pace  draws 
every  day  nearer  to  his  term.  The 
wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  magnifies 
itself  in  both.  Happy  is  he,  who, 
after  due  preparation,  is  passed  through 
the  gates  of  death  ere  he  be  aware ! 
Happy  is  he,  who,  by  the  holy  use  of 
long  sickness,  is  taught  to  see  the 
gates  of  death  afar  off  and  addressed 
for  a  resolute  passage.  The  one  dies 
like  Elijah,  the  other  like  Elisha — 
both  blessedly. — Bp.  Hall. 

—  0,  thou,  who  canst  do  more  by 
thy  prayers  than  all  the  soldiers  can 
with  their  weapons  of  war!  Elisha's 
piety  and  prayers  were  the  strength  of 
the  state,  as  this  wicked  king  could 
now  acknowledge  with  tears,  though 
before  he  had  slighted  him.  Staple- 
ton  says  that  he  called  Elisha  "  the 
horsemen"  of  Israel,  because  by  his 
holy  life  and  doctrine  he  led  all  Israel ; 
and  "the  chariot,"  because  by  his 
virtue  and  prayers  he  preserved  the 
people,  that  God  destroyed  them  not 
for  their  sins.  The  death  of  such  is 
very  ominous,  a  forerunner  of  great 
calamities. —  Trapp. 

—  The  death  of  godly  ministers 
a  subject  for  lamentation. — Death 
reduces  all  things  to  their  proper 
level.  Circumstances  and  characters 
never  find  their  just  estimate  until  the 
shadows  of  mortality  have  abated  the 

646 


glare  of  life,  and  its  chills  have 
tempered  the  fluctuating  state  of  life. 
On  this  occasion,  what  is  the  crown 
of  Israel  to  the  dying  prophet  ?  Death 
brought  the  purple  of  the  monarch 
into  contact  with  the  coarse  garment 
of  the  prophet.  The  prophet  under 
that  dispensation  was  what  the  minis- 
ter is  now  to  the  church.  There  is  a 
difference  in  some  respects ;  but  in 
origin  and  design  the  office  is  one. 
Times  and  modes  change;  but  prin- 
ciples are  eternal.  And  thus  we  may 
adopt  the  lamentation  of  Joash  over 
the  expiring  Elisha, — "  Oh  my  father, 
my  father,  &c."  We  may  be  in- 
structed by  it  in  the  following  par- 
ticulars. I.  The  importance  of  a 
faithful  minister  to  the  church  and 
the  world  in  his  life  and  in  his 
death.  1.  2'he  importance  of  his 
ministry.  What  is  there  in  the 
world  to  compete  with  it  ?  It  is  to 
show  the  ruins  of  the  fall  repaired  and 
paradise  restored.  It  is  to  save  souls 
from  death.  2.  The  importance  of 
fidelity  in  it.  Woe  unto  those  who 
conceal,  or  deny,  or  alter,  or  add  to 
the  truth.  3.  The  importance  of  the 
life  of  a  faithful  minister  to  the  church 
and  to  the  world.  The  life  will  preach 
when  the  tongue  is  silent.  Renders 
his  preaching  singularly  impressive. 
4.  The  importance  of  the  death  of  a 
faithful  minister.  Though  it  does  not 
determine  character,  what  consolation 
does  it  afford  to  the  survivors!  What 
a  savour  of  Christianity  does  it  leave 
behind.  The  faithful  minister  is  a 
strong  bulwark  to  those  around  him. 
II.  The  attention  awakened  by  his 
removal  and  the  respect  due  to  his 
memory.  1.  Israd's  chariot  and 
horsemen  are  departed.  They  are  im- 
mortal till  their  work  is  done.  Some 
fall  newly  green,  and  others  newly 
grey;  and  how  swiftly  are  they  re- 
moved. 2.  Attention  is  awakened  hy 
events  like  these.  An  attention  that 
too  often  sleeps  before.  We  do  not 
find  the  attention  of  Joash  awakened 
before.  0  !  if  we  were  aware  we  were 
hearing  the  last  sermon,  with  what 
attention  should  we  listen.  3.  There 
is  respect  due  to  the  memory  of  a  faithful 
minister.     This  is  claimed  on  every 


MOMILJSTIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


CHAP.  XIII. 


principle    of    reason    and   gratitude. 

III.  The  tender  recollections  of 
those  more  immediately  connected 
with  him,  and  the  speciil  duties 
devolving  upon  them.  The  king  wept. 
Such  intimacies  stand  connected  with 
every  man  and  with  every  minister. 
All  the  charities  of  human  nature  are 
connected  in  the  sacred  office,  and 
called  into  contact  with  all  its  parts. 

IV.  Anticipate  the  day  when  all  the 
ravages  of  death  shall  be  repaired 
and  all  the  fruits  of  ministerial 
usefulness  gathered.  1.  Such  a  day 
shall  come.  A  day  when  the  harvest 
shall  be  reaped.  2.  The  anticipation  of 
this  day  is  solemn^  delightful^  important. 
—The  Pulpit. 

—  It  is  rarely  recognised  how  great 
and  irreparable  is  the  loss  of  a  true 
man  of  God,  a  great  benefactor  and  a 
faithful  servant,  until  he  is  gone. 
King  Joash  was  not  ashamed  to  come 
to  the  dying  prophet,  and  to  confess 
with  tears  his  ^wn  helplessness ;  but 
how  many  shun  such  holy  men,  and 
are  glad  if  they  need  never  have  any- 
thing to  do  with  them. — Lange. 

Verse  15.  Here  we  see  Elisha's 
patriotism.  If  we  would  know  what 
true  love  of  one's  fatherland  is,  let  us 
ask  ^jhe  prophet.  In  his  case  it  re- 
ceived a  Divine  consecration.  It  is 
truly  touching  to  see  with  what  tender- 
ness the  prophets  enfold  in  their  hearts 
their  country  and  people,  even  when 
they  see  in  them  little  but  spiritual 
death,  decay,  and  corruption,  and  ex- 
perience from  their  fellow-countrymen 
little  but  bitterness,  hate,  and  persecu- 
tion. — Krummacher, 

Verse  17.  The  arrows  of  the 
Cord's  deliverance.  That  death-bed 
scene  speaks  volumes  for  the  power  of 
holiness.  Elisha  was  the  prophet  of 
God — a  man  of  no  honourable  station, 
except  that  he  is  always  honourable 
whom  God  calls  to  serve  him.  Joash, 
the  king  of  Israel,  who  has  often  re- 
jected Elisha's  admonitions,  and  con- 
tinued to  worship  in  the  groves  of 
Ba^,  though  Elisha  had  denounced 
them,  now  that  the  prophet  is  about 
to  die  at  the  good  old  age  of  ninety, 


comes  to  weep  at  his  bed-side.  It  was 
something  remarkable  for  the  king  to 
come  there  at  all.  Kings  do  not  often 
visit  death-bed  scenes,  especially  the 
death-beds  of  God's  servants.  But  it 
was  something  more  remarkable  for 
that  king  to  stand  and  look  upon  the 
decaying  form  of  the  aged  prophet, 
and  to  weep  over  his  face.  More 
notable  still  was  the  language  in  which 
the  king  expressed  his  sense  of  the 
value  of  the  prophet  to  the  state. 
**  0  my  father !  my  father  !  the  chariot 
of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof !  " 
He  felt  as  if  now  all  his  strength  was 
cut  off.  The  king  had  trusted  in  his 
cavalry,  though  he  had  but  a  slender 
force,  and  he  compares  the  prophet  to 
that  which  he  looked  upon  as  being 
the  strongest  arm  of  his  military 
service;  or  he  looks  upon  the  state 
now  as  being  a  chariot  with  wild 
horses,  and  no  stately  prophet  to  stand 
erect  and  hold  the  reins.  !N"ow  have 
the  reins  dropped,  and  whither  will 
the  chariot  go  ?  It  will  soon  be  over- 
turned, and  the  mad  coursers  will  drag 
it  hither  and  hither.  So  the  king,  out 
of  a  sort  of  selfish  respect  for  the 
prophet — for  it  was  respect,  and  yet 
it  was  selfishness — stands  and  weeps 
over  the  prophet's  dying  bed. 

I.  Let  us  consider  the  significant 
sign.  Israel  was  at  that  time  engaged 
in  warfare  against  Syria.  As  a  sign 
that  God  intended  to  give  victory  to 
his  people,  the  king  is  bidden  to  take 
the  bow  and  arrows  ;  Elisha,  as  God's 
representative,  puts  his  hand  upon  the 
king's  hands ;  forthwith  the  window  is 
opened,  and  the  arrow  is  shot.  As  it 
flies  through  the  air,  the  prophet  says 
that  that  arrow  is  the  arrow  of  the 
Lord's  deliverance  of  his  people  out 
of  the  hand  of  Syria.  The  interpreta- 
tion of  this  symbolical  act  is  simple 
enough.  God  will  save.  Deliverance 
is  of  the  Lord ;  but  it  must  be  accom- 
plished by  human  instrumentality. 
Joash  must  take  the  bow  and  arrows ; 
but  the  hands  of  Joash  cannot  make 
the  arrow  speed,  save  as  Elisha,  the 
representative  of  God,  puts  his  hands 
there.  So  the  man,  divinely  strength- 
ened bv  God,  shoots  the  arrow,  and 

647 


OHAP.  xm. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


the  deliverance  comes.  "We  grant  you 
that  God  can  work  without  means,  and 
even  when  he  uses  means,  he  still  takes 
the  glory  to  himself,  for  it  is  all  his 
own ;  yet  it  has  been  the  rule,  and 
will  be  the  rule  till  the  day  of  means 
shall  come  to  an  end,  that  just  as 
God  saved  man  by  taking  upon  him- 
self man's  flesh,  so  everywhere  in  the 
world  he  calls  men  by  speaking  to 
them  through  men  of  their  own  flesh 
and  blood.  We  are  not  to  let  the 
arrows  lie  still,  and  say,  **  God  will  do 
his  own  work,  Elisha  will  shoot  the 
arrows."  This  is  idleness  ;  we  have 
had  enough  of  this.  Look  at  those 
churches  which  say,  **  God  will  do  his 
own  work."  You  will  find  that  the 
more  these  people  talk  about  God's 
doing  his  own  work,  the  more  they 
sink  into  a  fatal  apathy.  And  when 
they  have  entangled  brethren  whose 
conversion  was  effected  under  other 
ministry  than  their  own,  they  talk  as 
if  they  had  been  re-converted,  and  did 
not  know  the  truth  till  they  had  heard 
the  particular,  excellent,  hot-pressed 
gospel  which  they  deliver.  On  the 
other  hand  it  is  an  equally  dangerous 
error  to  suppose  that  we  are  to  take 
the  arrows  and  shoot  without  God. 
This  is,  in  fact,  the  more  dangerous  of 
the  two ;  although,  if  I  have  to  com- 
pare two  devils  together,  I  know  not 
which  is  the  worst  of  these  evil  spirits 
— the  spirit  which  idly  says,  "Leave 
it  to  God,"  or  the  spirit  which  goes 
about  God's  work  without  dependence 
on  him. 

II.  Let  ns  censure  the  slack- 
handed  king.  The  prophet  gave  him 
the  bow  and  arrows,  and  bade  him 
shoot  down  upon  the  ground.  It  was 
left  to  him.  He  is  bidden  to  shoot, 
and  he  shoots  once ;  he  draws  his  bow 
and  he  shoots  again ;  a  third  time  he 
draws  the  bow,  and  then  throws  it 
down  slack  upon  the  ground.  The 
prophet  is  angry  with  him,  for  he  will 
only  have  three  victories.  If  he  had 
smitten  the  ground  six  times  he  would 
have  had  six  victories.  The  king  is 
to  be  censured,  and  censured  severely ; 
but  as  he  is  dead  and  gone,  and  our 
censure  cannot  affect  him,  let  us 
648 


censure  those  who  now  imitate  him. 
1 .  How  many  believers  have  hut  little 
faith,    and  seem  quite  content  to  have 
hut  that  little.     They  cannot  grasp  the 
promise  of  God  and  believingly  expect 
to  have  it  fulfilled.     They  cannot  take 
God  at  his  word,  and  therefore  their 
temporal  troubles  and  their  spiritual 
cares  press  very  heavily  upon  them. 
Oh,  that  they  had  grace  to  smite  the 
ground  six  times!  Oh,  that  they  knew 
how  to  cast  all  their  burden  on  Him 
who  careth  for  them !     2.  Then  you 
see  another  class  of  people  who  are 
just   the   same  as  to  their  knowledge. 
They   do    not    understand  the    deep 
things  of  God;   they  are  content  to 
know  that  which  saves  the  soul  from 
ruin,  and  the  remedy  which  is  provided 
by  Christ,  but  they  let  the  deep  things 
of  God  lie  still  for  strong  men,  but 
they  themselves    are  content  to  be 
babes.     3.   You  will  see  these  same 
people,  or  others  like  them,  who  are 
content    ahout    their    daily    walk  and 
conversation.   They  are  not  drunkards ; 
they  do  not  swear ;  they  are  scrupu- 
lously   truthful;     they     commit    no 
breach  of  the  Sabbath  day;  tut  when 
you   have   said  this,   you   hiive   said 
about  as  much  as  you  can  say  of  them. 
Their   religion   seems  to  have  made 
them  moral,  but  it  would  be  difficult 
to  perceive  that  it  has   made  them 
holy.     These  brethren  have,  in  fact, 
shot    three    times,     and     they   have 
smitten  the  ground  once  or  twice,  but 
they  have  not  made  a  clean  sweep  of 
their  besetting  sins  ;  they  still  tolerate 
some  of  them ;  they  have  not  reached 
to    a    high    point    of    holiness.      4. 
So,    too,   there  are   many  Christians 
who  do  not   shoot  more   than   three 
times,  inasmuch  0.%  they  are  content  with 
very   low  enjoyments.     Shame   on    us 
that  we  are  content  to  be  such  dwarfs, 
when  we  might  grow  into  giants ;  that 
we  are  here  frittering  away  our  time, 
when  we  might  immortalize  ourselves 
and   glorify  our  Lord.     How  is  it  we 
are  content  to  bring  forth  a  lean  ear, 
and  then   a  scanty  ear,   when   there 
should  be  seven  ears  upon  one  stalk, 
like  the  plenty  of   Egypt.     Consider 
some  of  the  reasons  why  the  king  did 
not  shoot  more.    (1).  Per  hap*  hi  felt 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   KJKQS, 


OHAP.  XIII. 


rather  tender  towards  the  Syrians.  It 
is  just  possible  that  he  felt  he  did  not 
want  to  hurt  them  too  much.  He  would 
he  victorious ;  he  would  get  his 
enemy  under  his  feet ;  but,  if  he  did 
more,  he  would  crush  him  outright, 
and  he  hardly  wanted  to  do  that.  So 
some  professors  do  not  want  to  be  too 
hard  upon  their  sins ;  they  have  a  sort 
of  hidden  tenderness  towards  their  own 
corruptions.  (2).  Again,  perhaps  the 
king  did  not  go  on  to  shoot  because 
he  thought  it  was  hardly  his  business  to 
he  employed  as  a  bowman.  **  Why 
should  I  stay  here  for  ever,"  saith  he, 
*  *  shooting  arrows  ?  I  did  not 
object  when  the  prophet's  hand  was 
upon  me,  to  shoot ;  but  to  stand  here 
and  keep  smiting  the  ground  is  hardly 
the  occupation  for  a  king."  (3).  And 
then  the  thought,  perhaps,  that  he 
should  have  three  victories^  and  that 
would  be  enough.  You  do  not  want  to 
be  made  good ;  you  do  not  want  to  be 
made  Christ-like  ;  you  do  not  want  to 
be  able  to  triumph  over  your  sins; 
you  mistake  your  high  calling ;  you 
think  you  are  called  to  be  a  slave, 
when  you  are  called  to  reign;  you 
fancy  you  are  called  to  wear  sack- 
cloth, when  you  are  bidden  to  put  on 
scarlet  and  fine  linen  ;  you  think  that 
God  has  called  you  to  a  dunghill, 
whereas  He  has  called  you  to  a  throne ; 
you  imagine  you  are  to  be  but  here 
and  there  the  skirmishers  in  the  battle, 
when  He  has  called  you  to  stand  in 
the  front  rank  and  to  fight  constantly 
for  his  cause.  (4).  The  king  may 
have  begun  to  doubt  whether  the  victories 
would  really  come.  He  knew  very 
well  that  he  had  not  many  soldiers, 
and  that  Syria  was  very  strong,  so  he 
thought:  **  Well,  it  takes  some  faith 
to  think  that  I  shall  beat  them  three 
times ;  but  it  is  not  likely  I  shall  do  it 
in  the  fourth."  He  doubted  the 
Divine  power  and  the  Divine  promise, 
because  of  his  own  weakness;  and 
many  Christians  do  that.  (5).  And 
it  is  very  likely  the  king  despised  the 
prophefs  plan.  Why,  he  seemed  to 
say,  this  was  absurd,  smiting  the 
ground  in  this  way !  If  there  were 
any  men  to  be  shot  at,  he  would  not 
spare  the  arrows;  but  to  smite  the 


ground  in  this  way — absurd!  ridicu- 
lous !  So,  too  often  we  miss  a  blessing 
because  we  do  not  like  God's  plans. 

III.  Let  ns  justify  the  righteous 
wrath  of  the  prophet.  We  do  not 
like  to  see  either  an  old  man  or  a 
dying  man  angry;  but  the  prophet 
here  did  well  to  be  angry,  even  though 
at  the  hour  of  death.  He  loved  the 
people,  and  wept  to  think  that  their 
king  was  standing  in  their  light,  and 
robbing  them  of  precious  privileges. 
1.  How  much  Israel  suffers  from  the 
slack-handedness  of  the  king.  Oh, 
Christians !  you  suffer  yourselves  ;  you 
miss  a  thousand  comforts.  What  you 
might  do  for  God  you  are  unable  to  do. 
What  you  might  sit  down  and  feed 
upon  yourselves,  you  utterly  miss,  be- 
cause you  will  not  go  on  farther,  an  I 
seek  higher  attainments :  and  all  your 
brethren  suffer  too.  2.  Sow  easy  the 
triumph  that  might  have  been  achieved  ! 
Why,  if  this  king  had  shot  more 
arrows,  Syria  would  have  been  quite 
overcome,  and  cut  in  pieces ;  but  be- 
cause he  was  slack  in  this,  Syi  ia  waves 
her  proud  banner  over  captive  maids 
and  sorrowing  widows  whose  husbands 
have  been  slain  in  battle,  and  weep  in 
the  streets  of  Samaria.  The  devil 
rejoices  when  he  sees  slumbering 
Christians.  The  world  laughs  in  its 
sleeve  at  professors  now-a-days. 
3.  Bow  JehovaJCs  name  was  dis- 
honoured! In  Assyria's  streets  they 
laughed  at  Jehovah;  they  said  that 
their  gods  were  greater  than  He.  Oh, 
what  a  shame  it  is  that  you  and  I 
should  ever  put  Christ  to  more  shame 
than  he  endured  for  our  sakes  !  Let 
us  bethink  ourselves  whether  we  have 
not  been  shooting  too  few  arrows ; 
whether  we  have  not  thought  too  much 
of  the  little  we  have  been  doing; 
whether  we  might  not  have  done  more. 
I  am  sure  there  is  room  for  great  im- 
provement in  the  best  of  us.  0  Lord, 
what  a  spark  is  my  love  to  thee  !  Oh, 
that  thou  wouldest  blow  it  into  a  flame 
till  it  were  as  coals  of  juniper ! — C.  H. 
Spurgeon. 

—  The  arrow  shot  towards  the 
enemy's  country  signifies  the  deliver- 
ance which  the  Lord  will  soon  grant 

549 


oBAp.  xm. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


Israel  from  the  Syrian  yoke.  The 
casting  of  a  spear,  or  shooting  of  an 
arrow  into  an  enemy's  country  was  a 
common  signal  for  the  heginning  of 
hostilities.  Thus  Alexander  the  Great 
is  said  to  have  hurled  a  dart  into  his 
enemy's  land  when  he  came  to  the 
holders  of  the  Persian  territory. — 
Whedon, 

—  After  the  Scythians  had  laid 
waste  their  country  hefore  the  legions 
of  Darius,  and  thus  reduced  the 
invading  army  to  the  greatest  distress 
for  want  of  provisions,  they  sent  an 
ambassador  to  the  Persian  king  to 
present  him  a  bird,  a  mouse,  a  frog,  and 
five  arrows.  The  ambassador  was 
asked  what  these  presents  meant.  He 
answers  that  he  had  nothing  else  in 
charge  but  to  deliver  them,  and 
return  with  all  speed;  but  that  the 
Persians,  if  they  were  ingenious, 
would  discover  what  interpretation 
to  put  upon  them.  Darius,  judging 
according  to  his  wishes,  gave  it  as 
his  opinion  that  they  were  tokens  of 
submission.  **The  mouse,"  said  he, 
"  being  bred  in  the  earth,  indicates 
that  they  yield  up  their  lands;  the 
frog,  living  in  water,  that  they  yield 
up  also  their  lakes,  rivers,  &c. ;  the 
bird,  represented  all  the  wild  and  tame 
fowl ;  and  the  delivering  up  the  five 
arrows  was  the  same  with  the 
Scythians  as  delivering  up  arms  is 
with  other  nations."  **Alas!"  said 
Gobryas,  one  of  the  seven  princes  who 
had  ejected  the  magi,  *4t  is  far  other- 
wise. For 0,  Persians!  unless  as  birds 
ye  fly  in  the  air,  or  as  mice  ye  retreat 
under  the  earth,  or  as  frogs  ye  swim 
in  the  water,  ye  shall  never  return 
whence  ye  came,  but  shall  perish  by 
these  arrows."  And  so  in  fact  it 
turned  out;  for  it  was  only  by  the 
merest  accident  that  Darius  and  the 
whole  of  the  army  were  not  cut  ofi"  by 
the  Scythians. — Percy  Anecdotes. 

—  How  readily  doth  Elisha  now 
make  good  the  words  of  Joash !  How 
truly  is  he  the  chariots  and  horsemen 
of  Israel !  Israel  had  not  fought 
without  him — much  less  had  been 
victorious.  If  theirs  be  the  endeavour, 
the  success  is  his.  Even  the  dying 
prophet  puts  life  and  speed  into  the 

660 


forces  of  Israel ;  and  while  he  is 
digging  his  own  grave,  is  raising 
trophies  to  God's  people. — Bp.  Hall. 

—  Many  an  **  arrow  of  the  Lord" 
is  shot  from  the  lips  or  looks  of 
a  dying  saint — e.g.^  a  mother's  last 
appeal,  a  father's  farewell  counsel, 
a  friend's  request. 

Yerses  18, 19.  Elisha's  reproof  to 
Joash.  Consider:  1 .  What  messages 
of  mercy  God  has  sent  to  ns.  1 .  By 
signijicant  emblems.  2.  By  express 
promises.  3.  By  the  declarations  and 
examples  of  dying  saints.  II.  Whence 
it  is  that  we  profit  so  little  by  them. 
The  fault  is  in  ourselves  alone,  just 
as  it  was  in  the  king  of  Israel.  1. 
Our  desires  are  faint.  2.  Our  expecta- 
tions  low.  3.  Our  exertions  languid. 
Conclusion:  1.  Improve  the  oppor- 
tunities God  affords  you  by  his  minis- 
ters. 2.  Trifle  not  with  the  im- 
pressions which  are  at  any  time  upon 
your  mind. — Simeon. 

—  Cease  not  to  shoot  arrows  of 
love  into  the  heart  of  God,  so  shall 
one  arrow  of  deliverance  after  another 
come  back  from  the  Lord,  and  be  given 
to  thee  in  the  word  of  truth.  So 
shalt  thou  smite  thy  spiritual  foes  and 
tread  them  under  foot,  even  more 
completely  than  Joash  did  the  Syrians. 
He  who  is  called  to  execute  work  for 
God  may  not  stop  and  desist  according 
to  his  own  good  judgment,  but  must 
go  on  in  it  tirelessly  and  faithfully  till 
the  Lord  commands  him  to  cease. 
Faith  must  hold  flrm  until  the  end. 
When  one  battle  is  won,  the  conflict 
is  not  over.  How  much  is  it  to  be 
regretted  when  one  only  half  believes 
— half  obeys;  or  when  one,  after  a  good 
beginning,  desists. — Lange. 

Verse  19.    The  conflict  with  eviL 

I.  Should  be  carried  on  under  the 
direction  of  those  competent  to  advise. 

II.  Complete  victory  can  be  achieved 
only  by  resolute  and  persevering  effort. 

III.  To  stop  short  of  complete  victory 
is  to  entail  greater  calamity  in  the 
future. 

—  The  prophet  himself  did  not  yet 
know  how  many  victories  Joash  should 
obtain  against  the  Syrians  ;  but  God 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xni. 


had  sl-nified  to  liim  that  he  should  further,     although    his   smiting    but 

learn  that  by  the  number  of  the  king's  thrice   might  proceed  eithei-  from  his 

strokes;   and  he  was  angry  with  him,  unbelief  or  nc^gligence.     For   by  the 

not    simply    because    he    smote   only  former  sign,    and  the  prophet  s  com- 

thrice,    but  because,  by  his  unbelief  ment  upon  it,  he  might  clearly  per- 

and  idolatry,  he  provoked  God  so  to  ceive  that  this  also  was  intended  as 

over-rule  his  heart  and  hand  that  he  a  sign  of  his  success,  and,  therefore, 

should  smite  but  thrice,   which  was  ho  ought  to  have  done  it  frequently 

a  token  that  God  would  assist  him  no  and  vehemently.— Poo/. 

EOMILETIGS  OF  VERSES  20,21. 

The  Influence  op  the   Gkeat  and  Good. 

I  Does  not  terminate  with  their  life.  "  And  Elisha  died,  and  they  buried 
him*-"  but  they  could  not  bury  his  influence  for  good;  that  is  one  thing  oyer 
which  death  has  no  power.  -  There  is  nothing,"  writes  Dickens  ''no,  nothing 
innocent  or  good,  that  dies  and  is  forgotten ;  let  us  hold  to  that  faith  or  none. 
An  infant,  a  prattling  child,  dying  in  its  cradle  will  live  again  in  the  better 
thoughts  of  those  who  loved  it,  and  play  its  part  through  them  m  the  redeem- 
inff  actions  of  the  world,  though  its  body  be  burnt  to  ashes  or  drowned  m  the 
deenest  sea  There  is  not  an  angel  added  to  the  host  of  heaven  but  does  its 
blessed  work  on  earth  in  those  that  loved  it  here.  Forgotten !  Oh,  if  the  good 
deeds  of  human  creatures  could  be  traced  to  their  source,  how  beautiful  would 
even  death  appear,  for  how  much  charity,  mercy,  and  punfied  affection  would 
he  seen  to  have  their  growth  in  dusty  graves."  The  life  of  Elisha  was  a 
preciDus  treasure  to  the  nation;  his  name  could  not  be  forgotten;  his  deeds 
shone  as  the  stars  of  heaven;  his  power  penetrated  aU  ranks,  from  king  to 
peasant. 

II  Keeps  alive  the  hope  of  deliverance  in  the  breasts  of  an  oppressed 
people  (verse  20).  The  Moabites  had  partially  recovered  from  the  reverses  they 
suffered  at  the  beginning  of  Elisha's  career  (ch.  iii.),  and  became  strong  enough 
to  make  an  annual  predatory  incursion.  Harassed  by  Syrian  and  Moabite,  the 
Israelites  might  have  yielded  to  despair;  but  the  spirit  of  the  dead  prophet 
sustained  them.  They  loved  his  memory  ;  they  revered  his  stainless  character ; 
they  believed  his  prophecies,  and  in  the  darkest  hour  of  oppression  and  suffering 
they  cherished  the  hope  of  deliverance.  The  influence  of  a  good  man  lives 
throuo-h  many  generations,  and  inspires  many  to  nobler  thoughts  and  more 


heroic  action. 


0 1  who  shall  lightly  say  that  fame 

Is  nothing  but  an  empty  name  ! 
Whilst  in  that  sound  there  is  a  charm 

The  nerves  to  brace,  the  heart  to  warm  ; 
As,  thinking  of  the  mighty  dead, 

The  young  from  slothful  couch  will  start, 
And  vow,  with  lifted  hands  outspread. 

Like  them  to  act  a  noble  part ! — Baillie, 


III.  Is  sometimes  vindicated  by  miraculous  occurrences  (verse  21). 
This  miracle  of  Elisha's,  after  his  death,  is  more  surprising  than  any  of  those 
which  he  performed  during  his  lifetime.  No  exact  parallel  offers  itself  m  the 
rest  of  Scripture.  Still  it  may  be  said  to  belong  to  a  class  where  the  miracle 
was  not  wrought  through  the  agency  of  a  living  miracle- worker,  but  by  a 
material  object  in  which,  by  God's  will,  virtue  for  the  time  being  resided. 
The  most  familiar  example  of  this  class  is  the  staunching  of  the  issue  of  blood, 

651 


CHAP.  xin.  HOMIIETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


by  tlie  toncli  of  the  hem  of  Christ's  garment;  but  the  cures  wrought  by 
handkerchiefs  and  aprons  brought  to  the  sick  from  the  body  of  St.  Paul 
(Acts  xix.  12)  are  still  more  nearly  parallel.  In  the  present  instance,  no  doubt 
the  primary  effect  was  greatly  to  increase  the  reverence  of  the  Israelites  for  the 
memory  of  Elisha,  to  lend  force  to  his  teaching,  and  especially  to  add  weight  to 
his  unfulfilled  prophecies,  as  to  that  concerning  the  coming  triumphs  of  Israel 
over  Syria.  In  the  extreme  state  of  depression  to  which  the  Israelites  were 
now  reduced,  a  very  signal  miracle  may  have  been  needed  to  encourage  and 
re-assure  them  {Speaker* 8  Comm.)  It  was  not  the  dead  body  of  Elisha,  but  the 
living  God,  that  gave  life  again  to  the  dead ;  and  Omnipotence  worked  by 
contact  with  the  dead  Elisha  to  show  that  the  Divine  efficiency  that  w  as  in  the 
prophet  had  not  disappeared  from  Israel  with  his  death.  The  future  fame  and 
influence  of  the  good  may  be  safely  left  in  the  hands  of  God. 

Lf.ssons: — ^A  good  man. — 1.  Is  the  fruit  of  divine  grace,     2.  /*  a  great  boon 
to  a  nation.     3.  la  imperishable  in  his  influence. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Verse  20.   The  death  of  the  good,  carried  on  by  far  inferior  instruments, 

I.  A  calamity  to  a  distracted  country,  but  on  a  far  wider  scale — and,  it  may 

II.  Suggests  that  the  most  con-  be,  in  a  far  higher  spirit.  The  life 
spicuous  piety  cannot  evade  the  of  an  Elijah  is  never  spent  in  vain, 
penalty  of  sin.  III.  The  cause  of  Even  his  death  has  not  taken  him 
wide-spread  and  genuine  sorrow,  from  us.  He  struggles,  single 
lY.  Leads  men  to  reflect  upon  the  handed  as  it  would  seem,  and  with- 
influence  and  power  of  the  life  just  out  effect;  and  in  the  very  crisis  of 
terminated.  the  nation's  history,  is  suddenly  and 

—  Such   was   Elisha,    greater  yet  mysteriously  removed.     But  his  work 

less,  less  yet  greater,  than  Elijah.    He  continues ;     his     mantle     falls  ;     his 

is    less.     For   character  is   the    real  teaching  spreads ;  his  enemies  perish. 

prophetic   gift.     The  man,   the  will,  The   prophet  preaches   and  teaches ; 

the  personal  grandeur  of  the  prophet  the  martyr  dies  and  passes  away  ;  but 

are    greater     than    any    amount     of  other  men  enter  into  his  labours.     By 

prophetic    acts,     or    any    extent    of  that   one  impulse   of    Elijah,   Elisha 

prophetic   success.     We   cannot    dis-  and  Elisha's  successors,  prophets,  and 

pense    with    the   mighty   past,    even  sons  of    prophets,   are  raised   up  by 

when  we   have   shot  far  beyond  it.  fifties  and  by  hundreds.     They  must 

Nations,    churches,   individuals   must  work  in  their  own  way.     They  must 

all  be   content   to  fare  as  dwarfs  in  not  try  to  retain  the  spirit  of  Elijah 

comparison   with   the   giants   of    old  by  repeating  his  words,  or  by  clothing 

time — with      the      Reformers,      the  themselves  in  his  rough  mantle,  or  by 

Martyrs — the   heroes   of   their   early  living  his  strange  life. 

youthful  reverence.     A  prophet  like         What  was  begun  in  fire  and  storm, 

Elijah    comes    once,    and    does    not  in  solitude  and  awful  visions,  must  be 

return.     Elisha,  both  to  his  country-  carried  on  through  winning  arts,  and 

men  and  to  us,  is  but  the  successor —  healing    acts,    and    gentle    words    of 

the  faint  reflection  of  his  predecessor,  peaceful  and  social  intercourse.     Not 

When  he  appeared  before  the  three  in  the  desert  of  Horeb,  or  on  the  top  of 

suppliant  kings,  his  chief  honour  was  Carmel,  but  in  the  crowded  thorough- 

that  he  was  Elisha,  the  son  of  Shaphat,  fares  of  Samaria,  in   the  gardens   of 

who  "  poured  water  on  the  hands  of  Damascus,  and  by  the  rushing  waters 

Elijah."  of   Jordan.      Elisha  himselt  may   be 

Less,  yet   greater.     For  the  work  as    nothing    compared   with    Elijah. 

of  the   great  ones  of  this  earth   is  His  wonders  may  be  forgotten.     He 

552 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARJ :   KlJSGiS. 


CnAP    XIIT, 


dies  by  the  long  decay  of  years ;  no 
chariots  of  fire  are  there  to  lighten  his 
last  moments,  or  bear  his  soul  to 
heaven.  Yet  he  knows  that,  though 
unseen,  they  are  always  around  him. 
Once  in  the  city  of  Dothan,  in  the 
ancient  pass,  where  the  caravans  of 
the  Midianites  and  the  troops  of  the 
Syrians  stream  through  into  Central 
Palestine — when  he  is  compassed 
about  with  chariots  and  horses  of  the 
hostile  armiss,  and  his  servant  cries 
out  for  fear,  Elisha  said,  "  Fear  not : 
for  they  that  be  with  us  are  more  than 
they  that  be  with  them.  And,  be- 
hold, the  mountain  was  full  of  horses 
and  chariots  of  fire  round  about 
Elisha."  It  is  a  vision  of  which  the 
meaning  acquires  double  force  from 
its  connection  with  the  actual  history ; 
as  if  to  show,  by  the  very  same  figure, 
that  the  hope  which  bore  Elijah  to 
his  triumphal  end,  was  equally  present 
with  Elisha.  Elijah,  and  those  who 
are  like  Elijah,  are  needed  in  critical 
and  momentous  occasions  to  *'  prepare 
the  way  for  the  Lord.'*  His  likeness 
is  John  the  Baptist :  and  of  those  that 
were  born  of  women  before  the  times 
of  Christendom,  none  were  greater 
than  they.  But  Elisha,  and  those 
who  are  like  Elisha,  have  a  humbler, 
and  yet  a  wider,  and  therefore  a  holier 
sphere ;  for  their  works  are  not  the 
works  of  the  Baptist,  but  are  the  deeds, 
if  not  of  Christ  Himself,  at  any  rate 
of  **  the  least  in  His  kingdom" — the 
gentle,  beneficent,  "holy  man  of 
God,  who  passetb  by  us  continually." 
— Stanley. 

Before  closing  this  account  of  Elisha, 
we  must  not  omit  to  notice  the 
parallel  which  Elisha  presents  to  our 
Lord — the  more  necessary  because, 
unlike  the  resemblance  between  Elijah 
and  John  the  Baptist,  no  attention  is 
called  to  it  in  the  New  Testament. 
Some  features  of  this  likeness  have 
already  been  spoken  of.  But  it  is  not 
merely  because  he  healed  a  leper, 
raised  a  dead  man,  or  increased  the 
loaves,  that  Elisha  resembled  Christ, 
but  rather  because  of  that  loving, 
gentle  temper,  and  kindness  of  dis- 
position— characteristic  of  him  above 
all  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament — 


ever  ready  to  soothe,  to  heal  and  to 
conciliate — which  attracted  to  him 
women  and  simple  people,  and  made 
him  the  universal  friend  and  '*  father," 
not  only  consulted  by  kings  and 
generals,  but  resorted  to  by  widows 
and  poor  prophets  in  their  little 
troubles  and  perplexities.  We  have 
spoken  above  of  the  fragmentary 
natuie  of  the  records  of  Elisha,  and 
of  the  partial  conception  of  his  work 
as  a  prophet  which  they  evince.  Be 
it  so.  For  that  very  reason  we  should 
the  more  gladly  welcome  those  en- 
gaging traits  of  personal  goodness 
which  are  so  often  to  be  found  even 
in  those  fragments,  and  which  give  us 
a  reflection — feeble,  it  is  true,  but  still 
a  reflection — in  the  midst  of  the  stern- 
ness of  the  Old  Dispensation,  of  the 
love  and  mercy  of  the  New, — Smith* 8 
Bible  Dictiona/ry. 

Yerse  21 .  The  virtue  of  a  corpse. 
The  chief  lesson  this  story  teaches  is 
the  mighty  influence  a  good  man  may 
exert  after  his  decease.  1 .  We  should 
he  ambitious  of  this  influence.  Our 
lives  at  the  longest  are  brief.  That 
portion  of  our  lives  devoted  to  holy 
aims  is  briefer  still.  How  consolatory 
and  inspiring  is  the  fact  that,  when 
our  brief  life  is  finished,  wc  can  still 
be  a  power  for  good!  Think  that, 
from  your  seat  in  glory,  you  may  see 
men  inspired  by  the  memory  of  your 
generosity,  zeal,  courage,  purity,  and 
prayerfulness.  Their  deeds  in  turn 
are  remembered,  and  inspire  others. 
Thus  you  will  have  a  share  in  blessing 
men  to  the  end  of  time.  2.  Let  me 
remind  you  how  much  we  owe  to  this 
influence.  Would  you  be  what  you 
are  were  it  not  for  the  memory  of  the 
dead  ?  3.  2he  best  methods  for  securing 
this  posthumous  influence  for  good.  1. 
By  publishing  through  the  press  our 
thoughts  and  opinions.  How  many 
a  book  is  like  the  body  of  Elisha — 
lifeless  itself,  yet  giving  life !  2.  By 
a  definite  and  public  profession  of 
religion.  3.  By  active  engagement  in 
Christian  work.  We  must  all  exert 
some  influence  after  death,  either  for 
weal  or  woe.  Let  us,  then,  be  jealous 
over  ourselves  with  a  godly  jealousy. 
—R.  A.  Oriffin. 

669 


OHAF.  xni,  MOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  KINOS, 


—  Were  not  the  men  of  Israel  gulf  between  Biblical  and  ecclesiastical 
more  dead  than  the  carcase  thus  miracles  almost  disappears.  In  this, 
buried,  how  could  they  choose  but  see  as  in  so  much  besides,  his  life  and 
in  this  revived  corpse  an  emblem  of  miracles  are  not  Jewish,  but  Christian." 
their  own  condition  ?  How  could  they  By  others  the  miracle  is  made  a  type 
choose  but  think,  if  we  adhere  to  the  of  Jesus*  power  to  raise  to  life  by  his 
God  of  Elisha,  He  shall  raise  our  own  death  and  burial  those  who  are 
decayed  estates,  and  restore  our  nation  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  ''So, 
to  its  former  glory. — Bp.  Hall.  too,'*  says  Wordsworth,  **  the  apostles 

—  The  miracle  of  Elisha's  bones  has  and  evangelists,  being  dead,  yet  speak 
been  the  subject  both  of  criticism  and  to  all  the  world  in  the  Gospels  and 
of  allegory.  Therationalist,  of  course,  Epistles,  and,  by  the  word  of  God  in 
admits  no  miracle.  In  his  view,  the  them,  they  raise  souls  to  life  eternal." 
deceased  was  only  apparently  dead,  — Whedon. 

fallen  into  a  trance,  perhaps,  but  sud-  —  Which  miracle  God  wrought, 
denly  brought  to  his  senses  again  by  partly  to  do  honour  to  that  great 
the  shock  of  being  roughly  cast  into  prophet,  and  that  by  this  seal  he  might 
Elisha's  tomb  ;  others  admit  a  real  confirm  his  doctrine,  and  thereby  con- 
miracle,  but  seem  to  look  upon  it  with  f  ute  the  false  doctrine  and  worship  of 
suspicion.  ''This,"  says  Clarke,  "is  the  Israelites ;  partly  to  strengthen  the 
the  first,  and,  I  believe,  the  last,  ac-  faith  of  Joash  and  the  Israelites  in  his 
count  of  a  true  miracle  performed  by  promise  of  their  success  against  the 
the  bones  of  a  dead  man,  and  yet  on  Syrians;  and  partly,  in  the  midst  of 
it,  and  such  like,  the  whole  system  of  all  their  calamities,  to  comfort  such 
miracle-working  relics  has  been  Israelites  as  were  Elisha's  followers 
founded  by  the  Popish  Church."  with  the  hopes  of  that  eternal  life 
"  Elisha's  works,"  says  Stanley,  whereof  this  was  a  manifest  pledge, 
*'  stand  alone  in  the  Bible  in  their  and  to  awaken  the  rest  of  that  people 
likeness  to  the  acts  of  mediaeval  saints,  to  a  due  care  and  preparation  for  it. — 
There  alone,  in  the  sacred  history,  the     Pool. 

H0MILETIG8  OF  VERSES  22-26. 
The  TJnchangeableness  of  the  Divine  Merct. 

I.  Seen  in  commiserating  the  sufferings  of  His  people. — "  Hazael  oppressed 
Israel ;  and  the  Lord  was  gracious  unto  them  and  had  compassion  "  (verses  22, 
23).  The  Divine  heart  is  moved  with  the  sight  of  suffering  and  woe.  It  is 
impossible  for  Him  to  be  callous  and  indifferent  to  the  afflictions  of  His  people ; 
the  more  they  suffer,  the  more  they  are  endeared  to  Him.  The  tenderness  of 
the  Divine  mercy  is  unspeakably  exquisite.  How  great  is  our  sin  to  treat  that 
mercy  with  coldness  and  persistent  unbelief!  Suffering  is  often  the  first  thing 
that  opens  our  eyes  to  the  enormity  of  our  sin  and  the  marvellous  condescension 
of  the  Divine  mercy. 

II.  Seen  in  His  reluctance  to  inflict  the  extreme  penalty  of  disobedience. 

— "The  Lord  would  not  destroy  them,  neither  cast  He  them  from  His  pre- 
sence as  yet "  (verse  23).  The  sins  of  the  Israelites  cried  for  chastisement. 
The  greatest  chastisement  would  be  to  be  abandoned  by  Jehovah  to  the  fury  of 
their  enemies,  as  was  ultimately  done  (ch.  xvii.  18,  20).  But,  though  their 
iniquities  deserved  it,  this  extreme  punishment  was  delayed  by  the  Divine 
mercy.  That  mercy  was  reinforced  by  the  Divine  faithfulness.  The  Lord  re- 
membered "  His  covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  The  exercise  of 
mercy  is  always  in  harmony  with  every  attribute  of  the  Divine  nature  If 
God  be  slow  to  punish  because  of  His  mercy,  His  justice  ensures  the  certainty 
of  punishment. 
654 


EOMILMTIO  COMMENTAMY:  XJNG8.  ohap.  xiv. 


in.  Seen  in  His  faithful  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  deliverance  (verse 

25).  The  dying  Elislia,  as  the  mouth-piece  of  Jehovah,  had  promised  Israel 
three  victories  over  Syria,  and  the  resuscitation  of  the  corpse  when  it  touched 
the  bones  of  the  buried  prophet  would  tend  to  strengthen  faith  in  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promise.  In  this  verse  the  fact  of  that  fulfilment  is  recorded — another 
indication  that  the  history  was  written,  not  to  set  forth  the  valour  and  prowess 
of  the  Hebrews,  and  the  external  glory  of  the  kingdom,  but  to  illustrate  the 
dealings  of  God  with  them,  and  trace  the  true  causes  of  their  decline  and  ex- 
tinction as  a  nation.  Every  page  of  the  history  bears  testimony  to  both  the 
n^ercy  and  faithfulness  of  God.  Mercy  rejoices  in  providing  means  of  deliver- 
ance, and  faithfulness  in  carrying  them  out. 

Lessons: — ^The  Divine  mercy. —  1.  Is  tender  and  long-suffering .     2.  Gives  no 
licence  to  wrong -doing.     3.  Provides  an  opportunity  for  repentance  and  reform, 

GEEM  NOTES  OA  THE  VEESES, 

Verses  22, 23. — National  suffering^.         Verse   25. — Property  wrongfully 

I.  A   chastisement  for  national   sin.      acquired.     I.  Has  no  security  in  its 

II.  Awakens  the  Divine  compassion,      possession.     II.  Acquired  by  violence, 

III.  Is  alleviated  by  the  Divine  may  be  restored  by  violence.  III.  Is 
mercy.  not  worth  the  trouble  it  costs  to  ac- 

Verse  23. — When  God  turns  Him-  quire  and  keep, 
self  from  us,  then  we  are  given  over 

to  wretchedness  :  when  he  turns  back  —  Tyrants  are  rods  by  means  of 

to  us  again,  then  we  find  salvation,  which  God  chastises  His  people ;  but 

Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  had  been  finally  the    tyrants    themselves    are 

dead  for  a  thousand  years,  and  yet  chastised  by  God  and  cast  into  the  fire, 
their  blessing  was   efficacious.      God 

does  not  take  pleasure  in  our  ruin,  —  These  cities  were  unjustly  ob- 
but  remembers,  even  in  the  midst  of  tained  and  quickly  lost.  Unrighteous 
His  anger,  His  promised  grace  and  the  wealth  rarely  comes  to  the  third  gene- 
covenant  He  has  made. — Lange,  ration. — Lange, 


CHAPTEE  XIV. 
AMAZIAH    IN    JUDAH    AND    JEROBOAM    II.    IN    ISRAEL. 

Ceitioal  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Amaziah,  king  of  Judah— Historian  re- 
tarns  to  the  records  concerning  Judah.  Verse  3.  Yet  not  like  David,  his  father — Chronicles 
Bayu,  ^^  Not  with  a  perfect  heartj"  acting  in  general  obedience  to  God's  law,  yet  lacking  in 
spiritual  loyalty  and  heartfelt  piety.  Verse  5.  Slew  his  servants  which  had  slain  his  father — 
It  was  a  Mosaic  law  that  a  son  should — as  both  an  act  of  justice  and  filial  piety — avenge  his 
father's  murder  ;  but  he  did  this  without  malice,  leaving  their  children  untouched,  contrary  to 
the  prevailing  custom  of  antiquity.  This  act  of  revenge  was  wisely  delayed  till  the  kinffdom 
was  confirmed  in  his  handy  thus  indicating  that  these  servants  were  men  of  state  influence  and 

eminence.    Verse  7.  Called  the  name  of  it  Jokkeel — Its  former  name,  ^7Dn,  tha  rock ; 

^  Ilerpa,  afterwards  Arabia  Petrcea^  situate  amid  steep  rocks.  This  ancient  Petra  is  still  a 
scene   of  splendid  ruins.     Its  new  name— 7>^np^— signifies  given^   or  conquered  by    God. 

Verse  8.  Come,  let  us  look  one  another  in  the  face — An  insolent  challenge  ;  perhaps  inspired 
by  desrre  to  avenge  the  massacre  of  his  ancestors  by  Jehu  (chapter  ix.),  more  probably  from 
elation  over  his  success  with  the  Edomites.  Verse  9 .  The  thistle  that  was  in,  Lebanon — A 
parable  coached  in  mast  contempt uoas  form.     Amaziah  a  mean  thistle ;  cedar  of  Lebanon 

656 


OHAP.ziT.  MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


being,  in  its  grand  contrast,  tbe  sovereign  of  Israel ;  tbe  loild  beast  being  the  desolating  army 
of  Israel.  But  thistle  should  be  briar  or  briar  bush.  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife — 
Only  a  snporior  could  assume  such  an  air  of  authority  and  make  such  a  demand.  Verse  19. 
Ibey  made  a  conspiracy  against  him — Maladministration  of  the  kingdom  foUovved  upon 
this  fatal  war,  and  was  accompanied  with  spiritual  apostasy  (2  Chron.  xxv.  27) ;  and  the  rum 
of  Jerusalem,  the  sack  of  the  temple,  with  the  captivity  of  the  children  carried  away  as 
hostages,  roused  Judah  to  conspire  and  overthrow  him.  Verse  20.  They  brought  him  on 
horses — D''D  IDH  ^^y  ue.yon  the  royal  equestrian  chariot.     Verse  21.  All  the  people  of 

Judah  took  Azariah-So  that  the  popular  hostility  was  not  against  Amaziah's  family,  but 
against  himself.  Verse  22.  He  built  Elath,  and  restored  it  to  Judah— Elath  was  the  Edomite 
seaport  (see  on  1  Kings  ix.  26).  Verse  23.  In  the  fifteenth  year,  &c.,  Jeroboam,  king  of 
Israel,  &C. — Israel's  history  resumed.  This  was  Jeroboam  II.  His  reign  was  marked  by 
idolatry,  yet  also  with  great  political  success  (verse  25).  Verse  25.  Spake  by  his  servant 
Jonah — Not  found  in  the  Book  of  Jonah  which  we  possess.  Verse  26.  There  was  not  any 
shut  up,  &c. — Comp.  Notes  on  Kings  xiv.  10.  Verse  27.  The  Lord  said  not  that  He  would 
blot  out  the  name  of  Israel — The  Divine  purposes  had  not  yet  announced  the  obliteration  of 
the  ten  tribes  of  the  house  of  IsraeL— W.  H.  J. 


SOMILETICS  OF  VEESES  l-SS. 

MiLITABT  AMBrnoN. 

Amaziah  was  a  warrior-king,  and  throughout  his  reign  we  hear  the  incessant 
clash  of  sabres  and  the  hurried  movements  of  the  military.  He  dragged  his 
country  down  to  disaster  and  defeat,  and  was  himself  a  victim  of  the  vicissi- 
tudes of  war.  He  forsook  the  Lord  and  became  infatuated  with  idolatry ;  and 
we  learn  once  more  how  certain  and  how  terrible  is  the  downfall  of  the  man 
who  abandons  Jehovah  (2  Chron.  xxv.  14-16).  His  career  illustrates  the 
different  phases  of  military  ambition. 

I.  Military  ambition  may  be  associated  with  a  defective  piety  (verses 
1-4).  He  did  what  was  right,  but  not  with  a  perfect  heart,  like  David. 
His  standard  of  right  was  too  low.  His  piety  was  not  vigorous  and  indepen- 
dent enough  to  lift  him  above  all  human  examples,  or  even  to  strive  to  imitate 
the  best.  He  chose  an  inferior  example  to  copy.  "He  did  according  to  all 
things  as  Joash  his  father  did."  There  was  a  remarkable  similarity  in  the 
lives  of  Joash  and  Amaziah.  Both  began  their  reigns,  professing  zeal  for  the 
worship  of  Jehovah,  and  afterwards  lapsed  into  idolatry :  both  ignored  the 
warnings  of  faithful  prophets ;  and  both,  having  forsaken  God,  perished  by  the 
hands  of  the  assassins.  War  and  religion,  though  representing  directly  oppo- 
site principles,  are  often  strangely  united  in  the  history  of  nations,  but  always 
to  the  damage  of  religion.  The  war-spirit  is  an  enemy  to  genuine  piety.  The 
love  of  military  glory  weakens  the  religious  conscience. 

II.  Military  ambition  delights  in  scenes  of  slaughter  and  bloodshed 
(verses  5-7).  It  is  mentioned  to  his  credit,  that  when  Amaziah  avenged  his 
father's  death  by  the  execution  of  his  murderers,  he  did  not  slay  the  children 
of  the  murderers,  according  to  the  usual  custom  in  the  East.  He  so  far 
respected  the  law  of  God  (verse  6).  But  we  soon  read  of  great  slaughter  in  his 
Idumean  wars,  and  of  the  wanton  destruction  of  10,000  prisoners,  who  were 
thrown  down  from  a  precipice  and  broken  to  pieces  (2  Chron.  xxv.  12). 
When  the  war-demon  is  once  let  loose,  it  riots  in  scenes  of  canage  and  cruelty. 
The  indulgence  of  military  ambition  begets  wn  indifferenee  and  recklessness  in 
the  treatment  of  human  l£pe. 

556 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  OHAF.  xlV. 


III.  Military  ambition  generates  a  boastful  spirit  and  an  insatiable  love 
of  conquest  (verses  8-10).  Amaziah's  victories  in  Edom  turned  hivshead.  He 
felt  equal  to  anything.  He  was  ambitious  to  reign  over  Israel.  He  challenged 
the  rival  kingdom  to  battle,  and  the  reply  of  Jehovah ,  in  the  form  of  a  sarcastic 
parable,  piqued  his  vanity  and  determined  him  to  risk  the  encounter.  There 
are  some  minds  to  whom  success  is  more  dangerous  than  failure. 

Qood  success 
Is  oft  more  fatal  far  than  bad,  one  winning  throWi 
Oast  from  a  dattering  die,  tempting  a  gamester 
To  hazard  his  whole  fortune.  Chapman, 

IV.  Military  ambition  is  often  humbled  by  ignominious  defeat  (verses 
11-14).  It  was  not  long  before  Amaziah  had  reason  to  regret  his  boastful 
challenge.  By  the  prompt  action  of  his  rival  hostilities  were  precipitated; 
Judah  was  utterly  defeated,  the  king  taken  prisoner,  the  wall  of  Jerusalem 
broken,  the  temple  stripped  of  its  treasures,  and  hostages  taken  to  prevent  any 
further  molestation.     Another  illustration  of  Prov.  xvi.  18. 

Ah,  curst  ambition  I  to  thy  lures  we  owe 

All  the  great  ilia  that  mortals  bear  below.  Tickell. 

Of  all  kinds  of  ambition,  military  ambition  is  most  disappointing,  and  sub- 
ject to  great  fluctuations  of  fortune.  History  teems  with  examples  of  how  the 
ambitious  warrior  is  at  length  defeated  with  the  same  weapons  and  by  the  same 
methods  with  which  he  sought  to  defeat  and  humble  others.  **  The  stone  falls 
back  upon  the  head  of  him  who  casts  it  into  the  air." 

V.  Military  ambition  is  detrimental  to  good  government. — 1.    It  is 

dangerous  to  the  ruler  himself  (verses  17-1^0).  The  disastrous  issue  of  the  war 
with  Israel  created  national  dissatisfaction.  The  nobles  were  scandalized  that 
their  children  were  draughted  away  as  hostages,  and  the  people  were  grievously 
annoyed  to  see  their  city  invaded  and  their  loved  temple  pillaged  by  a  despised 
rival.  The  disaffections  grew  into  serious  proportions.  A  conspiracy  was 
formed  to  assassinate  Amaziah,  as  the  cause  of  all  their  trouble.  The  fear  and 
anguish  of  that  period  would  be  the  bitterest  experience  of  his  life.  Of  what 
avail  now  were  his  military  powers  and  his  bannered  hosts  ?  The  interests  of 
his  own  people  had  been  sacrificed  to  his  ambitious  folly,  and  he  at  length 
becomes  the  victim  of  their  dipaffection  and  anger.  What  Hume  says  of 
Richard  Cceur  de  Lion  would  apply  with  equal  force  to  Amaziah:  *'He  was 
better  calculated  to  dazzle  men  by  the  splendour  of  his  enterprise  than  either 
to  promote  their  happiness  or  his  own  grandeur  by  a  sound  and  well-regulated 
policy."  2.  It  entails  troulle  to  his  successor  (versea  21,  22).  The  conquest  of 
Eflom  by  his  father  required  Azariah  to  capture  and  fortify  the  seaport  of 
Elath.  The  results  of  past  victories  can  be  retained  only  by  ceaseless  vigilance 
and  effort.  The  conquests  of  the  father  often  impose  serious  burdens  upon  the 
son. 

Lessons  : — The  love  of  military  glory  i$  the  bane  of  any  nation,  2.  The  throne 
that  is  won  by  war  is  lost  by  war.  3.  It  is  a  nobler  ambition  to  be  good  than  to  be 
great;  to  build  up  and  consolidate  rather  than  destroy. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Verse  1-4.  Imperfect  piety.  I.  sight  of  the  Lord."  II.  Is  lacking 
May  be  genuine  uj?  to  a  certain  point,  in  thorough  co?isecration.  "  Not  like 
**  He  did  that  which  was  right  in  the      David  his  father."  III.  IsUmited  by  the 


CHAP.  XIV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :   KINGS. 


example  it  imitates.  "He  did  accord- 
ing to  all  things  as  Joash  his  father  did. 

Verse  3.  In  cases  like  that  of 
Amaziah,  where  faith  is  not  com- 
pletely and  sincerely  an  affair  of  the 
heart,  it  has  no  firm  ioundation,  and 
is  quickly  overwhelmed,  either  by 
unbelief  or  by  superstition.  A  half- 
and-half  disposition  in  what  is  good  is 
a  bridge  that  leads  to  what  is  evil. 
In  sacred  and  spiritual  affairs  we  have 
not  to  ask.  How  did  our  fathers  do  ? 
but,  How  would  God  have  us  do  ? 
Because  Amaziah  only  did  as  his 
father  had  done,  he  finally  fared  as 
his  father  had  fared. — Lange, 

Yerses  5,  6.  A  revengeful  spirit.  I. 

Knows  how  to  wait  for  its  opportunity, 
II.  Carries  out  its  purpose  with  terrible 
exactness.  III.  7s  controlled  hy  respect 
for  the  Divine  law. 

—  It  is  as  much  a  sin  to  leave  the 
guilty  unpunished,  as  to  punish  the 
innocent.  Right  and  justice  are  dis- 
torted by  both  courses.  Where  regi- 
cides are  allowed  to  go  unpunished, 
out  of  pity  or  weakness,  there  all 
justice  ceases.  The  throne  and  the 
civil  authority  are  not  established  by 
weak  concessions,  but  by  righteous- 
ness.— Lange. 

Yerse  6.  **  But  the  children  of  the 
murderers  he  slew  not " — wherein  he 
showed  some  faith  and  courage  that 
he  would  obey  this  command  of  God, 
though  it  was  very  hazardous  to  him- 
self, such  persons  being  likely  to  seek 
revenge  for  their  father's  death. — 
Pool. 

Yerses  7-14.  The  intoxication  of 
success.  I.  Leads  to  indiscreet  and 
loastful  challenges  (v.  7,  8).  II.  In- 
dignantly repudiates  all  advice  and 
warning  (v.  911).  III.  Precipi- 
tates humiliating  defeat  and  widespread 
disaster  (v.  12-14). 

Yerses  7-14.  Extraordinary  suc- 
cess in  our  undertakings  is  a  great 
temptation  to  arrogance.  Those  must 
be  strong  legs  which  can  support  great 
good  fortune  and  prosperity.  God 
558 


blesses  our  undertakings  in  order  that 
we  may  become  not  haughty,  but 
humble  (Gen.  xxxii.  10,  11).  Every 
undue  self-exaltation  robs  us  of  the 
blessing  again. —  Wurt.  Summ. 

Yerse  8.  We  learn  from  Chronicles 
that  Amaziah  had  hired  a  large  body 
of  Israelite  soldiers  for  his  Idumaeau 
war,  but,  warned  by  a  prophet,  had  dis- 
missed them.  These  persons,  disgusted 
at  their  treatment,  ravaged  the  Jewish 
territory  on  their  way  back  to  Samaria 
(2  Chron.  xxv.  13),  thus  affording 
to  Amaziah  a  sufficient  ground  of 
quarrel.  This,  however,  was  the 
occasion  rather  than  the  cause  of  the 
war.  The  cause  was  Amaziah' s  pride 
and  ambition.  His  success  against 
Edom  had  so  elated  him  that  he 
thought  himself  more  than  a  match 
for  his  northern  neighbours  (comp. 
verse  10,  and  2  Chron.  xxv.  19). — 
Speaker^s  Comm. 

Yerse  9.  People  in  the  East  very 
often  express  their  sentiments  in 
a  parabolic  form,  especially  when  they 
intend  to  convey  unwelcome  truths, 
or  a  contemptuous  sneer.  This  was 
the  design  of  the  admonitory  fable 
related  by  Joash  in  his  reply.  The 
thistle,  a  low  shrub,  might  be  chosen 
to  represent  Amaziah,  a  petty  prince  ; 
the  cedar,  a  powerful  sovereign  of 
Israel ;  and  the  wild  beast  that  trode 
down  the  thistle,  the  overwhelming 
army  with  which  Israel  could  desolate 
Judah.  But,  perhaps,  without  making 
so  minute  an  application,  the  parable 
may  be  explained  generally  as 
describing  in  a  striking  manner  the 
effects  of  pride  and  ambition,  towering 
far  beyond  their  natural  sphere,  and 
sure  to  fall  with  a  sudden  and  ruinous 
crash.  The  moral  of  the  fable  is  con- 
tained in  verse  10. — Jamieson, 

—  The  destroyer  is  represented  as 
pasnng  by,  not  as  sent  out  by  the 
cedar.  So  Jehoash  might  wish  to 
suggest  to  Amaziah  that  in  case  he 
meddled  with  things  beyond  his 
province  he  would  be  suddenly  smitten 
by  some  judgment  of  the  Almighty. 
He  does  not  proudly  boast  and  pre- 
sume   to    tread  down  Amaziah  and 


E0M2LETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


ciiAr.  xrv. 


Jiidah  by  his  own  warriors  and  martial 

prowess. —  Whedon. 

Ver?e  10.  He  who  desires  to  correct 
another  for  his  arrogance  must  take 
good  care  not  to  fall  into  the  same 
fault  himself.  Blame  and  complaint 
for  the  pride  and  arrogance  of  others 
often  come  from  hearts  which  exalt 
themselves  too  much.  Do  not  parade 
your  wisdom  and  strength,  if  you 
really  possess  them.  The  Lord  breaks 
down  even  the  cedars  of  Lebanon 
(Ps.  xxix.  5 ;  Isa.  ii.  12,  13). — Lange. 

Verse  12.  The  author  of  Chronicles 
notes  that  Amaziah's  obstinacy,  and 
his  consequent  defeat  and  captivity, 
''came  of  God"  (2  Chron.  xxv.  20), 
were  judgments  upon  him  for  an 
idolatry  into  which  he  had  fallen  after 
his  conquest  of  Edom. — Speaher*9 
Comm. 

Oh,  the  depth  of  Divine  justice 
and  wisdom  in  these  outward  adminis- 
trations !  The  best  cause,  the  best 
man,  doth  not  ever  fare  best.  Ama- 
ziah  did  that  which  was  right  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord,  Joash  evil;  Ama- 
ziah  follows  David,  though  not  with 
equal  paces  ;  Joash  follows  Jeroboam  ; 
yet  is  Amaziah  shamefully  foiled  by 
Joash.  Whether  God  yet  meant  to 
visit  upon  this  king  of  Judah  the  still 
odious  unthankfulness  of  his  father 
Jehoiada,  or  to  plague  Judah  for  their 
share  in  the  blood  of  Zechariah  and 
their  late  revolt  to  idolatry ;  or  whether 
Amaziah's  too  much  confidence  in  his 


own  strength,  which  moved  his  bold 
challenge  to  Joash,  were  thought  fit 
to  be  thus  taken  down  ;  or  whatever 
other  secret  ground  of  God's  judgment 
there  might  be,  it  is  not  for  our 
presumption  to  inquire. — Bp,  Ball. 

Yerses  18-22.  The  vicissitudes 
of  a  monarch's  life.  1.  His  lame 
is  the  great  theme  of  the  historian 
(ver.  18).  II.  He  is  the  subject  of 
dark  and  dangerous  conspiracy  (ver. 
19).  III.  Notwithstanding  the  most 
anxious  precautions,  he  falls  a  victim 
to  the  assassin  (ver.  19).  IV.  His 
dead  body  may  be  more  reverenced 
than  his  character  (ver.  20).  V.  His 
successor  reaps  the  benefit  of  his 
successes  (ver.  21,  22). 

Verse  19.  His  turning  after  the 
gods  of  Edom  (2  Chron.  xxv.  27), 
his  defeat  by  Jehoash,  the  hostages 
taken  of  him,  and  the  spoliation  of 
the  temple,  all  served  to  make  the 
last  half  of  his  reign  unpopular.  The 
discontent  of  the  kingdom  culminated 
in  conspiracy.  So  he  perished  like 
his   father  (chap.  xii.  20). —  Whedon, 

Verse  20.  They  conveyed  his  body 
back  to  Jerusalem  in  the  royal  chariot 
and  with  the  horses  which  had  brought 
him  to  Lachish.  The  combination  of 
relentless  animosity  against  the  living 
prince  with  the  deepest  respect  for  his 
dead  remains  is  very  characteristic  of 
an  Oriental  people. — Speaker**  Comm. 


R0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  23—29. 


National  Prospeeitt — an  Oppoktunity  fob  National  Repoem. 

Jekoboam  reigned  longer  than  any  other  king  of  Israel,  and  soon  gave  evidence 
of  possessing  considerable  capacity  and  energy.  He  not  only  checked  the 
Syrian  inva>ion  and  regained  the  portions  of  his  kingdom  which  had  been 
seized  by  the  foe,  but  carried  the  war  into  Syria  and  overawed  Damascus  into 
subtnission.  Adversity  having  failed  to  bring  back  Israel  to  the  true  worship 
of  Jehovah,  a  period  of  proj^perity  is  granted,  with  no  better  result.  Instead 
of  tracing  the  goodness  of  God  in  their  national  blessings,  the  people  are  con- 
firmed in  their  calf- worship,  and  attribute  their  successes  to  the  influence  of 
Baal.  It  is  their  last  opportunity,  and  they  see  it  not.  Whom  the  gods  wish 
to  destroy,  they  first  madden.  The  subsequent  history  of  Israel  is  one  of 
decline  and  disaster,  until  as  a  nation  it  becomes  extinct.     The  long  and 

569 


CHAP.  xrr.  SOMILETIO  COMJfEKTAST:  KINGS, 


prosperous  reign  of  Jeroboam  11.  may  be  regarded  as  an  opportunity  for  national 
reform.     Observe — 

I.  That  the  misfortunes  of  a  nation  awaken  the  Divine  compassion. 

*'  For  the  Lord  saw  the  affliction  of  Israel  that  it  was  very  bitter  "  (ver.  26). 
The  Divine  compassion  seen — 1 .  In  promising  help  and  instruction  by  a  duly 
authorized  messenger,  *'  According  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel, 
which  He  spake  by  the  hand  of  His  servant  Jonah,  the  son  of  Amittai,  the 
prophet  "  (verse  26).  We  have  no  record  of  the  prophecy  uttered  by  Jonah  on 
this  occasion,  but  it  doubtless  had  reference  to  the  victories  over  the  Syrians 
that  would  be  granted  to  the  arms  of  Jeroboam,  and  be  accompanied  with 
warnings  and  instructions  to  recognise  the  authority  and  power  of  Jehovah. 
The  Lord  pitied  the  ignorance  and  infatuation  of  Israel,  and  the  misery  which 
their  own  sins  had  brought  upon  them,  and  He  once  more  sends  His  servant  to 
call  them  to  repentance  and  reformation.  A  faithful  and  earnest  ministry  is  a 
boon  to  any  people,  and  brings  with  it  a  solemn  responsibility  to  all  who  hear. 
2.  In  suspending  the  threat  of  extinction. — '*  And  the  Lord  said  not  that  He 
would  blot  out  the  name  of  Israel  from  under  heaven'*  (ver.  27).  The  idolatry 
and  corruption  of  Israel  merited  the  punishment  of  Jehovah,  but  in  mercy  He 
deferred  the  desolating  stroke  to  gi\e  them  space  for  repentance.  The  time 
came  when  the  Divine  compassion  ceased,  and  the  prophets  Husea,  Amos, 
Micah,  and  others  foretold  the  ruin  that  fell  on  Israel  with  such  terrible  force. 
Reprieves  are  not  pardons.  The  Lord  waits  to  be  gracious ;  but  where  impeni- 
tence continues,  the  threatened  vengeance  will  sUrely  fall.  3.  In  providing  a 
competent  deliverer. — **  He  saved  them  by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam  "  (ver.  27). 
Jeroboam  was  ''  a  man  of  might"  (ver.  28),  distinguished  by  personal  prowess 
and  military  m  nius,  and  by  those  qualities  that  make  the  successful  statesman 
and  ruler.  Though  himself  an  idolater,  he  is  used  as  an  instrument  to  deliver 
Israel  and  raise  the  nation  to  an  extraordinary  height  of  prosperity.  The 
Lord  has  His  agents  planted  in  unseen  and  unexpected  quarters.  They  may 
seem  the  most  unlikely  to  carry  out  His  purposes,  and  may  themselves  be 
unconscious  of  the  real  drift  of  the  work  they  are  permitted  and  aided  to 
accomplish. 

II.  That  national  prosperity  is  a  token  of  the  Divine  beneficence.    **He 

restored  the  coast,  recovered  Damascus  "  (comp.  ver.  25,  28).  The  dash  and 
enterprise  of  Jeroboam  roused  the  nation  into  new  life.  The  success  of  his 
arms  at  the  boundaries  of  his  kingdom  ensured  protection  and  peace  ;  and  the 
wheels  of  commerce,  once  more  set  in  motion,  carried  prosperity  into  every 
part  of  the  land.  Confucius  has  thus  portrayed  the  signs  of  national 
prosperity — 

Where  spades  grow  bright,  and  idle  words  grow  dull ; 
Where  jails  are  empty,  and  where  barns  are  full ; 
Where  Church  paths  are  with  frequent  feet  outwom  $ 
Law  court-yards  weedy,  silent,  and  forlorn  ; 
Where  doctors  foot  it,  and  where  farmers  ride ; 
Where  age  abounds  and  youth  is  multiplied— 
Where  those  signs  are,  they  clearly  indicate 
A  happy  people  and  well-governed  State. 

Prosperity,  like  every  other  blessing,  is  from  God ;  it  is  often  the  severest 
test  applied  to  the  conduct  of  individuals  and  of  nations.  The  glitter  and  glut 
of  prosperity  may  hide  the  hand  that  gives.  The  heart  that  adversity  could 
not  vitiate  has  been  seduced  by  the  subtle  smiles  of  inconstant  prosperity. 

III.  That  national  prosperity  is  abused  when  it  does  not  lead  to  national 
reform.     " He  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord;  he  departed 

660 


EOMJLBTJO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap  xrv. 


not  from  all  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  (ver.  24).  As  was  the  king,  so  were  the  poojile. 
The  sins  of  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  like  a  close-fitting  Nessus  garment, 
still  clung  to  his  idolatrous  descendants.  The  goodness  of  God,  that  was 
intended  to  lead  them  to  repentance,  was  misinterpreted  as  sanctioning  and 
even  rewarding  their  apostacy,  and  instead  of  weaning  them  from  their  idols, 
lulled  them  into  a  false  confidence  in  the  supremacy  of  Baal.  It  is  sad  to 
see  blessings  abused,  opportunities  neglected,  warnings  disregarded,  and  a 
whole  nation  sinking  into  the  gulf  of  ruin.  How  unspeakable  is  the  com- 
passion of  Him  who  observes  the  follies  and  sing  of  mankind,  and  yet  shows 
Himself  more  eager  to  restore  than  destroy ! 

Lessons: — 1.  That  prosperity  and  adversity  are  tests  of  fidelity  to  principle, 

2.  An  opportunity  for  reformation  comes  to  evei-y  indiridual  and  every  nation. 

3.  The  abuse  of  opportunity  intensifies  the  inveteracy  of  evil, 

eSRM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Verses  25-27.  I.  IsraeVsdeep  misery  the  Divine  love  to   all  mankind  found 

(Jer.   ii.    19).      II.  God's  great  pity  in    the   Old    Testament.      The   very 

(Ps.  ciii.  10;  Hos.  ix.  8). — Lange,  harshness  and  exclusive  narrowness  of 

—  Our  faithful  God  helps  us  out  of  the   prophet    himself    heightens    the 

trouble,  according  to  His  great  com-  charm  of  the  narrative.     God  has  pity 

passion,  even  when  we  have  not  de-  on  the  great  city,  although  idolatrous; 

served  it  of  Him ;  but  often  not  until  but  Jonah  is  unwilling  to  carry  a  mes- 

our  distress  has  reached  the  highest  sage  of  love  outside  his  own  nation, 

pitch,  and  no  help  is  to  be  expected  His  very  conceptions  of  the  Almighty 

from  any  other  quarter.  show  the  imperfect  ideas  of  his  time. 

He  thinks  to  escape  from  Him  by  leav- 

Yerse  25.    Jonah  must  have  been  ing  Palestine  for  a  region  beyond  the 

prominent  among  his  order  in  these  sea.     And  even  when  forced  on  his 

stormy  times,   for  we   find   him   the  journey,  his  Jewish  bigotry  shows  itself 

counsellor  of  Jeroboam  in  a  policy  of  in  his  anger  that  a  heathen  population 

vigour  against  Syria.   Enthusiastically  should    have   averted   its    threatened 

patriotic,    the    depression    of    Israel  doom  by  a  timely  repentance. — Geikie^8 

weighed  on  his  heart.      But  he  did  Hours  with  the  Bible, 
not  despair  of  his  country  even  in  its 

darkest  hour.     It  was  under  the  pro-  Verses  26,    27.      God's  unfailing 

tectionof  Jehovah,  and  must  rise  again,  interest  in   His  people. — I.    He  is 

if  it  repented  and  returned  to  its  in-  minutely  acquainted  with   their   abject 

visible  King.     With  keen  insight  into  affliction.     II.  He  delays  the  execution 

the  capacity  of  the  new  ruler  in  Sa-  of  the  judgment  their  sins  deserve.     III. 

maria,  he  recognised  him  as  the  de-  He  mercifully  delivers  them  from  their 

liverer  promised  by  God  to  save  His  distress. 
chosen  people,  and  animated  him  to 

take  the  field  against  the  long-dreaded  Verse  27.  The  reign  of  this  king, 
enemy,  by  the  inspired  assurance  that  which  was  distinguished  by  so  extra- 
he  would  be  victorious,  and  would  even  ordinary  a  flow  of  prosperity,  increased 
extend  the  narrow  limits  of  Israel  the  religious  apostacy,  and  by  conse- 
well-nigh  to  the  grandeur  of  David's  quence  the  moral  degeneracy,  of  Israel, 
empire — fromHamath,  in  the  northern  Under  him  the  corruption  of  manners 
valley  of  Lebanon,  on  the  Orontes,  to  became  extreme,  and  laid  the  founda- 
the  south  of  the  Dead  Sea.  That  tion  for  those  public  calamities  which 
Jonah  should  have  been  sent  on  an  befel  the  kingdom  soon  aftc  r  his  de- 
errand  of  mercy  to  a  great  heathen  mise,  and  quickly  accomplished  the 
city  (Nineveh)  is  specially  interesting,  destruction  of  the  nation.  Hengsten- 
as  the  first  prominent  expression  of  herg  observes :   "  The  prosperity  only 

0  0  461 


OiiAP.  XV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


confirmed  the  people  still  more  in  their  sufficiently  attest  the  faithful  execution 

temerity.     Instead  of   being    led    to  of  their  mission. — Jamieson, 
repentance  by  the  unmerited  mercy  of 

God,  they  considered  this  prosperity  as  Yerses  28,  29.  Jeroboam  had  striven 
a  reward  of  their  apostacy,  as  a  seal  for  the  external  prosperity  of  his 
by  which  Jehovah-Baal  confirmed  the  people,  and  when  he  died,  he  left  the 
rectitude  of  their  ways.  The  false  kingdom  in  a  more  flourishing  condi- 
prophets,  too,  did  what  was  in  their  tion  than  any  previous  king  of  Israel, 
power  to  strengthen  them  in  their  For  its  spiritual  welfare,  however,  he 
delusion,  whilst  the  true  prophets  had  done  nothing.  Calf-worship  and 
preached  to  deaf  ears."  Hengstenberg  other  service  of  false  gods  had  con- 
refers  in  this  last  sentence  to  the  em-  tinned,  and  a  moral  rottenness  had 
phatic  warnings  addressed  to  Jeroboam  found  entrance,  which  brought  the 
by  Hosea  and  Amos.  Although  his  kingdom  near  to  ruin.  So  has  many  a 
whole  reign  was  marked  by  signal  one  at  his  death  left  to  his  children 
successes,  notwithstanding  that  apos-  treasures  which  he  has  won  by  long 
tacy,  which  was  usually  punished  by  labour  and  care,  but  those  chihiren 
war  and  loss  of  national  independence,  have  not  been  bred  in  the  fear  and 
the  wrath  of  God  was  denounced  love  of  God,  and  have  not  been  taught 
against  Israel,  as  well  as  the  destruc-  that  "the  world  passeth  away,"  &c. 
tion  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam,  by  the  (1  John  ii.  17;  1  Peter  i.  24). — 
two  named  pruphetS;  whose  writings  Lang$, 


CHAPTER  XV. 


A2ARIAH    AND    JOTHAM    IN    JUDAH,    AND    THE    LAST    SIX 

KINGS    IN    ISRAEL. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1. — Azariah,  son  of  Amaziah,  king  of 
Judah — This  king  is  the  Uzziah  of  2 Chron,  xxvi.  See  there  the  more  extended  explanation 
of  his  leprosy.  His  act  was  the  assumption  of  sacerdotal  functions,  which  the  Lord  had  re- 
stricted to  the  Levitical  priesthood.  He  arrogated  the  office  of  Sovereign  Pontiff,  and  God 
rebuked  his  arrogance  and  impiety.  Sis  heart  ivas  lifted  up  to  his  destruction  (2  Chron.  xxvi. 
16).  Verse  5.  Leper  unto  the  day  of  his  death — In  his  pride  he  aspired  to  be  more  than 
king,  usurped  the  functions  of  God  s  consecrated  priests  ;  would  have  seized  "  the  holy  crown  " 
of  the  high  priesthood,  and  added  that  to  his  own  royal  crown.  Therefore  God  took  away 
what  was  rightly  his,  and  might  have  enjoyed  till  his  death,  debased  him  to  a  leper,  and  thus 
he  died.  So  covetousness  beggars,  not  ennobles  men,  and  profanity  ensures  overthrow  and 
contempt.      Dwelt  in  a  several   house— An  array  of  authorities  regard  /T''^3nn  il*'^ 

as  meaning  house  of  sickness^  a  hospital^  from  t^BH,  which  (without  any  Scriptural  analogy 

in  the  use  of  the  word)  they  render  to  be  prostrate,  weahy  or  sick.  The  natural  meaning  of 
the  verb  is  to  he  loosed,  set  free,  as  (in  Paal  form)  Le^ .  xix.  20,  the  release  of  a  slave.  A  sepa- 
rate  house,  therefore,  is  the  best  rendering,  and  fulfils  the  law  of  Levit.  xiii.  46,  that  lepers 
should  dwell  apart,  outside  the  camp  or  city.  He  was  thus  an  outcast  Even  in  burial 
(verse  7)  he  was  only  interred  in  the  '•'■  field  of  the  burial  "  of  the  kings  (2  Chron  xxvi.  23), 
not  in  the  royal  vaults,  as  being  a  leper.  As  the  record  stands,  it  marks  God's  displeasure 
against  presumption,  for  "the  Lord  smote  the  k%ng ;**  and  this  Divine  judgment  denotes  guilt. 
Even  though  his  rushing  to  the  altar  might  have  been  through  "too  much  zeal  rather  than 
too  little,"  as  is  suggested,  zeal  must  not  violate  law.  To  go  beyond  God's  direction  is  guilty 
as  to  fall  behind.  To  **addto*'  what  is  written  is  denouncf^d  equally  as  to  "take  from" 
(Rpv.  xxii.  18,  19).  Verse  10.  Assassination  of  Zachariah  by  the  conspirator  Shallum— 
The  compound  word  rendered  "  before  the  people,*^  would  seem  to  record  a  public  act  ot  regi- 
cide to  which  the  populace  offered  no  resistance.  But  Dr.  H.  Gratz  reads  it  as  ** in  Ibleam** 
(«.«.,  a  town  in  the  plains  of  Jezreel).    Tet  D3^  7^p  natarally  mean  what  the  text  records, 

662 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  CHAP.  IV. 


although  Gratz  notes  that  the  A.  V.  is  ungrammatical;  The  Sept.  translate  thns : — Koi  ^ndra^tv 
ojJt5i/  ev  KeffKahfx.  Verse  12.  This  was  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Jehu ;  so  it  came  to  pass — 
See  chap.  x.  30.  Thus  Jehu's  dvnastj  perished  isfnominionsly,  and  the  verity  of  God's  pledge 
was  vindicated  equally  with  the  severity  of  God's  judgments.  Verse  19.  King  of  Assyria 
came  against  the  land ;  and  Menahem  gave  talents  .  .  that  he  might  confirm  the 
kingdom  in  his  hand — This  was  the  ^rst  effort  by  a  king  of  Israel  to  ensure  his  own  throne 
by  purchase  of  protection  from  a  foreign  power.  Hosea  denounced  it  (Hosea  v.  13;  vii.  11 ; 
X.  6).  It  opened  the  pathway  which  led  onwards  to  Israel's  doom.  Protection  from  a  mighty 
nation  issues  in  oppression  by  them.  And  verse  19  leads  forward  inevitably  to  verse  29,  "  the 
king  of  Assyria  carried  them  captive  to  Assyria**  Verse  29.  Tiglath-pileser  king  of  Assyria 
— He  was  the  successor  of  Pul  (verse  19),  So'ith's  translation  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions 
gives  the  n^rae  as  Taklat-pel-ashir^  which  may  mean  "  Lord  of  the  Tigris ;"  but  this  is  uncer- 
tain. His  annals  and  the  records  of  his  expedition  into  Syria  have  been  found  at  Nimroud, 
but  his  genealogy  is  not  given  ;  and  as  this  is  the  only  instance  of  silence  concerning  a  king's 
pedigree  it  is  supposed  he  was  a  usurper.  Verse  37.  The  Lord  began  to  send  against  Judah, 
&c. — This  was  the  beginning  of  a  confederacy  by  the  Israelites  with  the  Syrians  against  Judahy 
an  alliance  which  shows,  for  the  fl;  st  time  in  the  history  of  the  divided  kingdoms,  that  hostility 
had  grown  so  intense  between  Israel  and  Judah  that  a  foreign  force  was  called  in  to  make 
violent  attack  upon  Judah's  borders.  So,  when  such  fellowship  and  affection  as  are  hallowed 
and  Divinely  sanctioned  are  violated,  evil  confederacies  are  sare  to  be  sought,  and  antagonism 
grows  rife  where  unity  and  love  should  have  ruled. — W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VBRSES  !•?  and  82-88. 

The  Biblical  Estimatb  of  National  Affaibs. 

The  reigns  of  Azariah  and  Jotham,  here  referred  to  with  such  marked  brevity, 
covered  a  most  eventful  period  in  the  history  of  Judah  and  Israel,  extending 
over  nearly  seventy  years.  The  prophets  Hosea,  Amos,  Joel,  Jonah,  and  the 
sublime  Isaiah,  flourished  during  the  period,  and  uttered  their  faithful  protest 
against  the  national  apostacy.  Under  the  vigorous  administration  of  Azariah 
and  Jotham  the  kingdom  of  Judah  was  placed  in  a  condition  of  great  strength 
and  prosperity.  The  success  of  Azariah  in  aU  departments  seemed  to  correspond 
to  his  double  name :  Azariah,  the  strength  of  Jehovah,  and  Uzziah,  the  help  of  Je- 
hovah. But  prosperity,  as  in  other  periods  and  nations,  was  not  without  its  baleful 
effects.  With  the  increase  of  wealth,  the  nobles  of  Judah  rose  into  importance, 
and  their  luxury,  indolence,  drunkenness,  and  oppressive  exactions,  were  in 
a  high  degree  scandalous:  **They  skinned  the  poor  to  the  very  quick,  they 
picked  their  bones  and  ground  them  to  powder."  The  haughty  ladies  of  Zion, 
decked  in  gayest  apparel  and  covered  with  tinkling  ornaments,  forgot  the 
modesty  of  their  sex  as  they  mincingly  tripped  along  the  streets.  The  licentious- 
ness and  irreligion  of  the  times  were  interrupted  and  perhaps  punished  by  two 
great  calamities — the  awful,  dearthful  visitation  of  locusts,  who  found  a  garden 
of  Eden,  and  left  it  an  empty,  desolate  wilderness ;  and  the  ever-memorable 
earthquake  which  shook  the  solid  building  of  the  Temple,  and  moved  through 
the  land  like  a  mighty  wave  of  the  sea  {vide  Joel  ii.  1-20 ;  Amos  iv.  6-9  ; 
Amos  i.  1,  2 ;  Zech.  xiv.  5).  The  paragraph  before  us  is  a  suggestive  illustration 
of  the  Biblical  estimate  of  national  affairs, 

I.  It  views  the  nation  in  its  relation  to  the  claims  of  Jehovah.  1.  Com- 
mands obedience  to  the  Divine  purpose  (ver.  iii.  34).  So  far  as  Azariah  and 
Jotham  imitated  the  theocratic  kings,  they  had  the  approbation  of  all  lovers  of 
Zion.  The  highest  exercise  of  kingly  power  is  to  use  it  in  furthering  the  ends 
of  Divine  government.  2.  Is  careful  to  record  the  monarcNs  interest  in  the 
Souse  of  God  (ver.  33  and  35).  The  history  emphasises  the  fact  that  the  name 
of  Jotham's  mother  was  **  Jerusha,  the  daughter  of  Zadok,"  who  was  probably 
a  priest,  and  would  thus  show  the  close  association  of  the  king  with  the 

663 


OHAF.  xr.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTAUI :  KINGS. 


religious  order.  Special  reference  is  also  made  to  his  building  "the  higher 
gate  of  the  House  of  the  Lord."  He  thu  sought  to  induce  the  worshippers  to 
bring  their  offerings  to  the  temple  of  the  true  Jehovah,  and  forsake  the  forbidden 
**high  places"  where  many  were  accustomed  to  sacrifice.  The  king  does  him- 
self honour  in  all  he  does  for  the  house  of  God.  3.  Exposes  the  defects  of 
religious  duty  (ver.  4  and  35).  Both  Azariah  and  Jotham  were  favourable  to 
the  worship  of  Jehovah,  but  they  showed  no  great  zeal  in  it.  Their  govern- 
ment was  not  remarkable  for  any  decided  religious  reform,  or  the  quickening 
of  new  religious  life.  The  false  worship  was  allowed  to  exist  side  by  side  with 
the  true.  The  word  of  God  notices  this,  and  while  it  commends  what  is  good, 
it  faithfully  denounces  the  evil. 

II.  It  takes  note  of  any  signal  instance  of  Divine  judgment.     *' And  the 

Lord  smote  the  king,  so  that  he  was  a  leper"  (ver.  5).  The  writer  of  Kings  is 
silent  as  to  the  circumstances  under  which  the  king  was  thus  afflicted.  He 
simply  records  the  fact,  and  regards  it  as  a  judgment  of  Jehovah.  (For 
particulars  read  2  Chron.  xxvi.  16-21).  The  Bible  abounds  in  examples  of 
Divine  judgments  on  nations  and  individuals  {e.g.y  Sodom  and  Gomorrha,  Gen. 
xix. ;  Egyptians,  Ex.  ix. ;  Amalek,  1  Sam.  xv. ;  Cain,  Gen.  iv. ;  Saul,  1  Sam. 
xxviii. ;  Jezebel,  2  Kings  ix. ;  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  Acts  v).  These 
examples  might  be  multiplied  indefinitely.  **  Every  story,"  says  Eeltham,  **  is 
a  chronicle  of  tbis  truth,  and  the  whole  world  but  the  practice.  We  live  not 
long  enough  to  observe  how  the  judgments  of  God  walk  their  rounds  in  striking. 
Neither  always  are  we  able.  Some  of  God's  corrections  are  in  the  night,  and 
closeted.    Every  offence  meets  not  with  a  market  lash." 

Accuse  not  heaven's  delay ;  if  loth  to  strike, 

Its  judgments,  like  the  thunder-gathered  storm. 

Are  but  the  greater.  Webster, 

III.  It  dismisses  with  briefest  notice  the  public  acts  of  a  great  and 
victorious  monarch  (ver.  6).  The  successful  wars  of  the  king,  his  elaborate 
defences,  his  public  buildings,  his  encouragement  of  agriculture  and  commerce- 
all  these  are  passed  over  with  the  brief  formula — **the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Azariah,  and  all  that  he  did."  The  sacred  writer  was  more  concerned  to  show 
how  the  king  served  God  and  exalted  His  worship  than  how  he  aggrandized 
himself  and  his  people.  External  prosperity  is  delusive  and  evanescent ;  growth 
in  piety  is  a  permanent  blessing  to  the  nation. 

IV.  It  reveals  the  combination  of  powers  by  which  Jehovah  would 
punish  the  nation  for  its  sins  (ver.  37).  When  the  Arctic  voyager  penetrates 
the  northern  seas,  the  first  indication  of  his  approach  to  the  great  ice  region  is 
a  white  streak  of  light  seen  in  the  stratum  of  air  nearest  the  horizon  called 
"the  ice-blink."  He  then  observes  loose  pieces  of  ice  floating  on  both  sides  of 
his  vessel — the  modest  vanguard  of  the  terrible  army  of  ice-giants  with  which 
the  stout-timbered  ship  has  to  do  battle,  and  by  which  it  is  ultimately  crushed 
and  vanquished.  So  this  alliance  of  Rezin  and  Pekah  was  the  beginning  of 
a  series  of  attacks  on  Judah  which  ended  in  its  utter  overthrow.  Thus  Jehovah 
punished  the  nation  for  its  iiolatry.  It  is  a  mercy  when  the  first  signs  of 
coming  calamity  are  noted,  and  its  severities  avoided  by  timely  repentance  and 
reform.  Jehovah  can  disconcert  and  scatter  the  most  potent  combinations  of 
men,  or  use  them  as  his  instruments  for  avenging  wrong. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Ilie  saered  writers  are  more  careful  to  depict  the  moral  condition 
than  the  external  magnificence  of  the  nation.  2.  We  learn  that  the  great  object 
of  revelation  is  to  give  prominence.,  not  to  merely  historical  details^  but  to  the 
development  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  redeeming  the  race.  3.  The  fidelity  and 
impartiality  of  the  sacred  writings  should  command  our  reverence  and  belief, 
564 


SOMILSTia  OOMMBNTAMY:  KINGS. 


OHAP.  xy. 


GESM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Verees  1-7,  and  82-38.  At  this 
time  the  people  turned  their  attention 
to  money- getting  not  so  much,  as  had 
formerly  heen  the  case,  in  particular 
provinces  and  districts,  hut  through- 
out the  country,  even  in  Judah ;  and 
not  so  much  because  a  single  king  like 
Solomon  favoured  commercial  under- 
takings, as  because  the  love  of  trade 
and  gain,  and  the  desire  for  the  easy 
enjoyment  of  the  greatest  possible 
amount  of  wealth,  had  taken  posses- 
sion of  all  classes.  All  the  scorn 
poured  out  by  the  prophets  upon  this 
haste  to  be  rich,  and  all  the  rebuke  of 
their  tendency  to  cheat,  which  was 
one  of  the  fruits  of  it,  no  longer 
availed  to  restore  the  ancient  simpli- 
city and  contentment  (Hosea  xii.  8; 
Isa.  ii.  7).  The  long  and  fortunate 
reign  of  Uzziah  in  Judah  was  very 
favourable  to  the  growth  of  this  love 
of  gain  and  enjoyment.  Many  were 
the  complaints  in  Judah  of  the  in- 
justice of  the  judges  and  of  the  op- 
pression of  the  helpless  (Amos  iii.  1 ; 
vi.  1 ;  Hosea  v.  10).  There  was  a 
perverse  and  mocking  disposition  pre- 
valent which  led  men  to  throw  doubt 
upon  everything,  and  to  raise  objec- 
tions to  everything  (Amos  vi.  3 ;  ix. 
10 ;  Hosea  iv.  4).  It  made  them  treat 
with  harsh  contempt  the  rebukes  and 
exhortations  of  the  best  prophets,  as 
we  feel  distinctly  from  the  tone  of  the 
writings  of  Amos,  Hosea,  and  Isaiah. 
It  led  them  to  desire  to  know  heathen 
religions  and  to  introduce  foreign 
divinities,  even  when  the  king  himself 
held  aloof  from  any  such  movement 
(Amos  ii.  4;  Hosea  iv.  15;  vi.  11; 
xii.  1 ;  Isa.  ii.  8). — Ewald. 

Verse  3.  Azariah  not  only  main- 
tained the  worship  of  Jehovah,  but 
was  a  good  and  religious  monarch  dur- 
ing the  greater  portions  of  his  reign. 
See  2  Chron.  xxvi.  4,  6.  Becoming 
puffed  up,  however,  with  his  military 
successes,  he  attempted  to  invade  the 
high  priest's  office,  and  forfeited  God's 
favour  for  this  sin. — Speaker^s  Comm. 

Ver.  6.    The  Judgment  of  God. — 


I.  Is  never  indicted  but  on  the  gross 
violation  of  His  law  (comp.  2  Chron. 
xxvi.  16-21).  II.  Knows  no  distinc- 
tion of  person  or  rank — **  The  Lord 
smote  the  king."  III.  Involves  ter- 
rible suffering — **  He  was  a  leper  unto 
the  day  of  his  death."  IV.  Isolates 
the  sufferer  from  all  he  loved  and 
prized — **He  dwelt  in  a  several 
house." 

—  The  only  incident  which  is  men- 
tioned during  the  long  reign  of  Uzziah 
is  that  God  touched  him,  and  that  he 
was  a  leper  until  his  death.  It  fol- 
lows that  this  fact  must  have  seemed 
to  the  author  to  be  important  before 
all  others.  Leprosy  is  not  for  him  an 
accidental  disease,  but  a  Divine  judg- 
ment for  guilt,  as  it  is  often  described 
(Num.  xii.  10;  Deut.  xxiv.  ^,  9; 
2  Sam.  iii.  29  ;  2  Kings  v.  27).  He 
does  not  tell  more  particularly  what 
the  sin  of  the  king  was ;  perhaps  it 
was  hateful  to  the  king  alone,  and 
personally,  and  not  to  the  whole 
people,  like  the  sin  of  Jeroboam. — 
Zanffe. 

—  We  should  not  be  over  bold  to 
undertake  duties  which  do  not  devolve 
upon  us.  He  who  covets  more  than 
he  has  any  right  to  have,  loses  even 
what  he  has.  We  cannot  break  over 
the  bounds  which  God  has  set,  without 
incurring  punishment.  Think  no  man 
blessed  until  thou  hast  seen  his  end. — 

Verse  6.  These  acts  were  recorded 
by  Isaiah,  and  have  come  down  to  us 
in  Chronicles.  They  comprised,  be- 
sides the  re-establishment  of  Elath — 
1.  Successful  wars  {a)  with  the  Philis- 
tines, which  resulted  in  the  capture 
and  dismantling  of  Gath,  Jabneh,  and 
Ashdod,  and  in  the  planting  of  a  num- 
ber of  Jewish  colonies  in  the  Philis- 
tine country ;  (b)  with  the  Arabians  of 
Gur-baal ;  and  {c)  with  the  Mehunim 
or  Maonites.  2.  Extension  of  the 
power  of  Judah  over  Ammon.  3. 
Fortification  of  Jerusalem.  4.  Exten- 
sion of  pasture  and  of  agriculture 
towards  the  East  and  South,  and  pro- 
tection of  the  agricultural  and  pastoral 

666 


CHAP.  XV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


population  by  means  of  towers.  5.  able  holiness  of  Jehovah,  "  And  one 
Eeorganisation  of  the  army.  And  6.  cried  unto  another  and  said,  Holy, 
Construction  of  numerous  engines  for  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
the  attack  and  defence  of  towns  (see  The  holiness  of  God  is  the  beauty  and 
2  Chron.  xxvi.  6-15).  Compare  for  glory  of  all  other  perfections.  If  it 
the  flourishing  condition  of  Judea  at  were  possible  for  one  attribute  to  have 
•this  time,  Isaiah  ii.  7-16. — Speaker' i  any  excellency  over  another,  that  pre- 
Comm,  eminency  must  be  given  to  His  holi- 
ness. Power  is  the  hand  or  arm  of  God, 
Verse  7  compared  with  Isa.  vi.  1-3.  Omniscience  His  eye,  Mercy  His  heart, 
Isaiah's  vision  of  the  majesty  and  Eternity  His  duration,  but  holiness  is 
glory  of  Jehovah.— Special  work  His  beauty.  He  is  called  "  the  Holy 
needs  special  training.  This  isaprin-  One,"  the  **  Holy  One  of  Israel,"  and 
ciple  recognized  in  all  God's  dealings,  is  said  to  be  **  glorious  in  holiness." 
He  prepares  His  servants  for  special  This  glimpse  of  the  surpassing  holi- 
work  by  a  special  course  of  training  ness  of  Jehovah  overwhelmed  the 
and  discipline,  and  by  special  and  prophet.  He  was  smitten  with  the 
striking  displays  of  His  glory.  As  sense  of  his  own  vileness,  and  cried, 
Moses  was  prepared  for  his  work  by  *'  Woe  is  me,  because  I  am  a  man  of 
his  Egyptian  experience  and  by  splen-  unclean  lips ! "  It  was  a  picture  of 
did  revelations  of  Jehovah;  as  the  conscious  sin,  cowed  and  shrinking 
disciples  were  prepared  for  their  mis-  before  the  presence  of  infinite  purity, 
sion  by  the  teachings  of  Christ  and  *Tis  ever  so.  Nothing  humbles  us 
the  extraordinary  endowments  of  the  more  than  the  contrast  of  our  own  in- 
spirit, so  Isaiah  was  qualified  for  his  significence  and  sin  with  the  majesty 
work  by  the  teachings  of  this  glorious  and  ineffable  perfections  of  God.  III. 
vision.  His  commission  as  a  prophet  This  vision  was  a  revelation  of  the  higher 
was  renewed,  his  faith  confirmed,  his  order  of  beings  engaged  in  the  service 
religious  fervour  intensified,  and  his  and  worship  of  Jehovah,  1.  Observe 
soul  braced  up  for  the  important  duties  their  exalted  station.  "Above,  or 
before  him.  I.  This  vision  was  a  reve-  around  the  throne  stood  the  seraphim." 
lation  of  the  universal  government  of  This  indicates  their  superiority  over 
Jehovah.  **  In  the  year  that  king  the  heavenly  hosts.  Jehovah  has 
Uzziah  died,  I  saw  also  the  Lord  sit-  legions  of  angels,  varying  in  ability 
ting  upon  a  throne."  The  throne  of  and  rank ;  highest  in  the  innumerable 
God  is  the  centre  and  source  of  uni-  grades  stand  the  seraphim.  2.  Ob- 
versal  government,  including  in  its  serve  their  extraordinary  endowments, 
conception  the  two  leading  ideas  of  "  Each  one  had  six  rings;  with  twain 
dominion  and  power.  1.  Dominion,  he  covered  his  face" — a  token  of  deep 
This  extends  over  the  whole  universe  reverence  and  adoring  awe,  as  though 
of  existing  things — great  and  small —  unable  to  bear  the  insufferable  blaze 
reaching  and  acting  upon  the  most  of  the  Divine  glory,  or  to  fathom  the 
distant  with  the  same  ease  and  com-  incomprehensible  mysteries  of  the 
prehensiveness  as  is  shown  in  the  Divine  nature.  "With  twain  he 
management  of  those  nearest  the  cen-  covered  his  feet " — a  token  of  profound 
tral  throne.  2.  Power,  It  is  by  the  respect  and  humility,  as  if  he  would 
exercise  of  this  attribute  that  Jehovah  fain  hide  the  humblest  instrumentali- 
makes  His  dominion  felt,  and  accom-  ties  by  which  he  might  accomplish  the 
plishes  His  gracious  and  righteous  Divine  purposes.  **  With  twain  he 
purposes.  That  power  is  infinite  and  did  fly" — an  emblem  of  the  willing- 
absolute,  but  its  exercise  is  ever  limited  ness  and  speed  with  which  he  would 
by  His  will,  and  controlled  and  regu-  execute  the  Divine  commands.  3. 
lated  by  His  wisdom :  it  is  constantly  Observe  their  delightful  employment, 
operating  for  our  good,  both  in  the  **  One  cried  unto  another  and  said, 
material  and  spiritual  realms.  II.  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  ot 
This  vision  was  a  revelation  of  the  odor-  hosts ;  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His 
566 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KlKOB. 


OttAP.  It. 


glory."  They  chant  in  responsive 
strains  the  praises  of  Jehovah.  What 
a  loity  example  of  worship  and  service 
have  we  here !  Burning  with  holy  and 
unquenchable  love,  we  may  well  strive 
to  emulate  the  adoration  of  the  glow- 
ing seraphim. 

The  church  of  to-day  has  special 
work  to  do,  and  to  do  it  sucoessfuUy 
needs  special  help  and  instruction. 
The  age  in  which  we  live  demands  the 
exercise  of  every  kind  of  power  the 
church  can  legitimately  wield.  To 
meet  the  multiform  aspects  of  the 
active  thought  of  our  time,  to  sympa- 
thise with  all  that  is  true,  and  denounce 
wisely  and  boldly  all  that  is  false  and 
misleading ;  to  soothe  the  world's  deep 
sorrow  and  lessen  its  distracting  woes; 
to  conduct  the  troubled  heart  of 
humanity  to  the  satisfying  rest  for 
which  it  daily  groans — this  is  a  work 
demanding  superhuman  aid.  "We 
never  feel  so  weak  as  when  we  come 
to  grapple  with  the  difficulties  of 
earnest  Christian  work.  It  is  then  we 
touch  the  furthermost  point  of  human 
limitation,  and,  conscious  of  our  power- 
lessness,  we  cry  out,  like  one  of  old — 
"  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  thy  glory." 
And  as  the  vision  dawns  and  pours  its 
splendours  on  our  stricken  spirits,  we 
feel  the  throb  of  a  new  ecstatic  life, 
and,  with  the  glow  of  an  intenser  love, 
and  sustained  by  an  invincible  resolu- 
tion, we  press  on  to  grander  achieve- 
ments ! 

—  We  have  been  hearing  of  a  vision. 
Does  that  word  sound  as  if  it  belonged 
to  times  which  we  have  left  far  behind, 
as  if  it  pointed  to  something  fantastical 
and  incredible  ?  Oh !  if  there  were  no 
such  visions,  what  an  utterly  dark  and 
weary  and  unintelligible  place  this 
world  would  be  !  How  completely  we 
should  be  given  up  to  the  emptiest  phan- 
toms, to  the  base  worship  of  phantoms  ! 
What  mere  shows  and  mockeries 
would  the  state  and  ceremonial  of 
kings,  the  debates  of  legislators,  the 
J  earnings  and  struggles  of  people 
5  ecome !  How  truly  would  the  earth 
be  what  it  seemed  to  the  worn-out 
misanthropical  libertine — **  A  stage, 
and  all  the  men  and  women  merely 
players."    A  thousand  times  we  have 


been  all  tempted  to  think  it  so.     The 
same  painted  scenery,  the  same  shift- 
ing pageants,  the  same  unreal  words 
spoken    through   different   masks   by 
counterfeit    voices,    the    same    plots 
which   seem  never  to  be  unravelled, 
what  does  it  all  mean  ?     How  do  men 
endure  the  ceaseless  change,  the  dull 
monotony?      Satirists   and   keen  ob- 
servers of  the  world's  follies  have  asked 
this   question  again  and  again.     The 
best   man   may  often  doubt  what  he 
should  reply.     But  he  hears  a  voice 
saying  to   him,   '*  Try  to  be  true  to 
thyself;  resist  the  powers  which  are 
tempting  thee  to  go  through  thy  acts, 
common   or   sacred,  as  if  thou   wert 
a  mere  machine ;  hold  fast  thy  faith 
that  God  is,  and  is  working  when  thou 
seest  least  of  His  working,  and  when 
the  world  seems  most  to  be  going  on 
without    Him ;    assure   thyself    that 
there  is  an  order  in  the  universe  when 
all  its  movements  seem  most  disorderly. 
So   will  the  things   around  thee  by 
degrees  acquire  a  meaning  and  a  pur- 
pose.    And    when   Divine    love    has 
kindled    thy   flagging  and   perishing 
thoughts    and    hopes,    thou    mayest 
leam  that  God  can  use  thee  to  bearing 
the  tidings  of  His  love  and  righteous- 
ness  to   a   sense-bound   land  that  is 
bowing  to  silver  and  gold,  to  horses 
and   chariots.     And   if  there   should 
come  a  convulsion  in  that  land,  such 
as  neither  thou  nor  thy  fathers  have 
known,    be  sure  that  it  signifies  the 
removal   of    such   things   as   can   be 
shaken,  that  those  things  which  cannot 
be  shaken  may  remain." — Maurice. 

Verse  34.  Josephus  gives  Jotham 
a  very  high  character,  that  he  was 
pious  towards  God,  just  towards  men, 
and  laid  himself  out  for  the  public 
good;  that  whatever  was  amiss  he 
took  care  to  have  it  rectified  ;  and,  in 
short,  wanted  no  virtue  that  became 
a  good  prince. 

Verse  35.  **He  built  the  higher 
gate  of  the  house  of  the  Lord."  The 
love  of  Divine  worship. — I.  Shown 
in  reverence  lor  God's  house.  II.  In 
cheerful  sacrifice  and  labour  for  the 
improvement  of  that  house.     III.  In 

§67 


<mAP.  XT.  nOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


making  the  house  and  worship  of  God  to  make  a  league  offensive   and  de- 

attractive  to  others.  fensive.     Into  this  league  they  were 

—  It  is  a  glorious  thing  for  a  prince,  anxious  that  Judea  should  enter ;  hut 

instead  of  beautifying  his  palaces  and  they   distrusted  the  house  of  David, 

building  ivory  houses  (Amos  iii.  15),  which  had  been  so  long  hostile  both 

to   restore   the  temple  gates,  and  so  to  Damascus  and  to  Samaria.     They 

say   to  his  people,    ''Enter  into   His  consequently    formed   the   design   of 

gates  with  thanksgiving,  and  into  His  transferring     the    Jewish    crown    to 

courts  with  praise."  a   certain   Ben-Tabeal   (Isa.    vii.    6), 

probably    a    Jewish    noble,    perhaps 

Verse  37.     It  appears  by  this  that  a  refugee  at  one  of  their  courts,  whom 

the  alliance  between  Pekah  and  Kezin  they  could  trust  to  join  heartily  in 

was  made  in  the  reign  of  Jotham.     It  their  schemes.     Hostilities  apparently 

had   for  its  object  in  all  probability  broke  out  before  the  death  of  Jotham; 

the  consolidation  of  a  power  in  Syria  but  nothing  of  importance  was  effected 

which    might   be   strong   enough   to  until   the  first  year  of   his  successor 

resist    the    further   progress   of    the  — Speaker's  Comm. 
Assyrian  arms.     The  recent  invasions         —    National    troubles — I.    Cast 

of  Pul  and  Ziglath-Pileser  had  effec-  their  shadows  before  as  a  warning  to 

tually    alarmed    the    two    northern  prepare.     II.  Are  sent  to  rectify  the 

monarchs,   and  had  induced  them  to  abuse  of  prosperity.     HI.  Are  aggra- 

put  aside  the   traditional    jealousies  vated    by    the   active   opposition   of 

which  naturally  kept  them  apart,  and  envious  neighbours. 

HOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  8-81 
The  Unmistakable  Signs  op  National  Decay  and  Ruin, 

I.  Seen  in  rapid  and  violent  dynastic  changes. — During  the  tranquil 
and  prosperous  reigns  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham  in  Judah,  the  kingdom  of  Israel 
was  plunged  into  anarchy  and  civil  war,  as  in  the  days  of  Omri ;  and  no  less 
than  six  different  monarchs  occupied  the  throne,  one  of  them  retaining  the 
throne  only  for  a  single  month.  01  the  five  kings  after  Jeroboam,  only  one 
died  upon  his  bed.  As  Kitto  puts  it,  the  history  sounds  much  like  this — B 
murdered  A  and  reigned  in  his  stead ;  G  murdered  B  and  reigned  in  his  stead  ; 
D  murdered  C  and  reigned  in  his  stead ;  E  murdered  D  and  reigned  in  his 

itead. 

Ay,  sir,  our  ancient  crown,  in  these  \(  ild  times 

Oft  stood  upon  a  cast— the  gamester's  ducat, 

So  often  staked  and  lost,  and  then  regained. 

Scarce  knew  so  many  hazards.  The  Spanish  Father, 

No  nation  can  be  permanent  where  the  governing  power  is  unstable,  com. 
merce  is  paralysed,  life  imperilled,  and  the  national  spirit  broken. 

II.  Seen  in  the  prevalence  of  tyranny  and  bloodshed  (verse  16-20). — 
Menahem  waded  to  the  throne  through  a  stream  of  blood.  One  district  refusino: 
to  recognize  him,  he  compelled  submission  by  the  perpetration  of  the  most 
horrible  cruelties.  To  buy  off  an  attack  from  the  Assyrians,  he  exacted  heavy 
sums  of  money  from  his  people.  When  a  nation  is  drained  of  its  lite-blood  by 
civil  discord,  and  of  its  wealth  by  a  foreign  power,  its  final  doom  is  not  very 
distant. 

III.  Seen  in  the  powerlessness  of  the  nation  to  repel  invasion  (verse 
19,  29).  It  is  at  this  point  of  the  history  we  first  come  in  sight  of  the  great 
Assyrian  power  that  is  to  play  so  important  a  part  in  the  future  destiny  of  the 

668 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xv. 


Jewisli  nation — a  presage  of  the  catastrophe  which  was  finished  fifty  years 
later.  Menahem,  though  a  bold  warrior,  knew  it  was  madness  to  cope  with  a 
power  so  formidable,  and  bribed  the  Assyrian  to  withdraw  by  offering  tribute. 
But  in  the  days  of  Pekah  the  Assyrian  was  not  so  easily  pacified.  He  ravaged 
the  kingdom  east  of  the  Jordan,  and  swept  away  the  tribes  of  that  region  into 
captivity ;  and,  such  was  the  enfeebled  condition  of  the  nation,  it  does  not 
appear  that  Pekah  made  the  least  resistance.  The  steps  of  the  process  now 
going  on  with  Israel  have  often  been  repeated  in  history.  The  first  danger  is 
averted  by  a  bribe,  which  only  serves  as  a  temptation  to  new  aggression.  Each 
new  attack  leaves  the  doomed  state  weaker  and  weaker,  till  it  is  reduced  to 
tribute;  and  at  last  a  despairing  effort  to  shake  off  the  yoke  brings  down 
destruction.  It  is  a  noble  sight  to  see  a  brave  nation  struggling  for  life  and 
independence  against  a  superior  force ;  but  Israel  had  become  so  demoralised 
that  the  spirit  of  resistance  was  crushed,  and,  for  the  most  part,  they  submitted 
to  their  fate  with  supine  indifference. 

Lkssons: — 1.  The  nations  that  abandon  God  will  he  abandoned  by  Him. 
2.  The  ruler  who  uses  his  power  for  his  own  aggrandisement  and  pleasure  lives  in 
constant  peril,  and  perishes  without  any  to  mourn  his  loss,  3.  The  sins  and  follies 
of  one  nation  are  punished  by  another, 

OEMM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Yerses  8-81.  The  five  kings  who  tyrants."  As  is  the  master,  so  is  the 
followed  Zechariah  persevered  in  the  servant ;  as  is  the  head,  so  are  the 
sins  of  Jeroboam,  which  was,  from  members.  A  succession  of  rulers, 
the  very  commencement  of  the  king-  who  attained  the  throne  by  con- 
dom, the  germ  of  its  ruin.  It  is  to  spiracy,  revolt,  perjury,  and  murder, 
them  that  the  prophet's  words  apply  is  the  surest  sign,  not  only  that  there 
— **  They  have  set  up  kings,  but  not  is  something  rotten  in  the  state,  but 
by  me;  they  have  made  princes,  and  also  that  there  is  nothing  sound  in  the 
I  knew  it  not "  (Hosea  viii.  4).  Only  nation.  The  corruption  in  Israel  ex- 
one  of  them  died  a  natural  death  and  tended,  in  the  first  place,  from  the 
left  the  succession  to  bis  son,  who,  in  head  downwards,  tferoboam  made 
his  turn,  could  only  retain  the  sceptre  Israel  to  sin.  Then  it  came  from 
for  a  short  time.  Of  the  others,  each  below  upwards.  The  rebels  and 
one  killed  his  predecessor  in  order  to  murderers  who  came  to  the  throne, 
gain  the  throne,  the  authority  of  came  from  the  people.  These  kings 
which  was,  in  the  meantime,  shattered  were  so  hostile  that  the  one  killed  the 
by  these  commotions.  One  of  the  other ;  but  they  were  of  one  accord  in 
most  important  factors  in  the  history  abandoning  Jehovah  and  persevering 
of  this  perit>d  is  the  conflict  with  the  in  the  sin  of  Jeroboam.  This  was  the 
rising  Assyrian  monarchy,  which  came  cause  of  their  ruin.  When  there  is  no 
to  assist  the  internal  dissension  in  fear  of  God  in  the  heart,  then  the 
hurrying  the  nation  to  its  downfall,  door  is  open  to  every  sin  and  vice. 
Assyria  was  destined,  in  the  purpose 

of  (iod,  to  be  the  instrument  for  in-  Verse  10.     The  public  assassina- 

fiicting  the  long- threatened  judgment,  tion  of   a  monarch — I.  Readily  ac- 

—  TFitsim.  complished  if    he  is  unpopular.     II. 

—   Euleis   who   seized   power   by  Reveals    the    demoralization   of    the 

force   and  violence   have  never  been  times.      III.    Increases    rather   than 

the  deliverers  and  protectors  of  their  diminishes  the  public  calamities.     IV. 

people,  but  rather  tyrants  who  led  it  Exposes  the  assassin  to  a  similar  fate 

to  its  ruin.     '*In   one  demagogue,"  (verse  14). 

says  Luther,  "there  are  hidden  ten  —  "  Smote  him  before  the  people " 

569 


ouAT.  xr. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


openly  and  impudently — whioh  he 
presumed  to  do,  either  because  he  re- 
membered that  the  prophecy  of  the 
kingdom  made  to  Jehu  was  confined 
to  the  fourth  generation  (chap.  x.  30), 
which  he  observed  to  be  now  expired, 
or  because  he  perceived  that  the  people 
were  generally  disaffected  to  their 
king  and  favourable  to  his  attempt. — 
Fool 

Terse  12.  The  inflexible  fidelity 
of  the  Divine  Word — I.  Is  based  on 
the  unchangeableness  of  the  Divine 
nature.  II.  Is  frequently  illustrated 
by  facts  of  history.  III.  Is  a  source 
of  strength  to  the  obedient,  and  of 
wholesome  fear  to  the  wicked. 

—  God  keepeth  promise  with  His 
foes :  shall  He  fail  with  His  friends  ? 
— Trapp. 

This  was  an  actual  confirmation  of 
the  declaration  in  the  fundamental 
law  of  Israel,  that  God  visits  the  sins 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children, 
unto  the  third  and  fourth  generations 
(Exod.  XX.  5 ;  xxiv.  7  ;  Deut.  v.  9) 
— that  is,  the  sin  against  the  first  and 
chief  commandment:  **  Thou  shalt 
have  none  other  gods  before  me." 
This  commandment  was  the  founda- 
tion of  the  covenant  with  Israel,  and 
the  centre  of  the  Israelitish  nation- 
ality. The  meaning  is,  that  the  sin 
of  Jeroboam  will  not  be  permitted  by 
God  to  run  on  beyond  the  third  or 
fourth  generation,  ^o  dynasty  in 
Israel  which  followed  the  sin  of  Jero- 
boam lasted  for  more  than  three  or 
four  generations.  The  house  of  Jero- 
boam, like  that  of  Baasha  and  Mena- 
hem,  perished  with  its  first  members ; 
the  house  of  Omri  with  its  third  ;  and 
the  house  of  Jehu  with  its  fourth. 
Zimri,  Shallum,  Pehah,  and  Hosea 
died  without  successors ;  while  the 
house  of  David  remained  without  long 
interruption  upon  the  throne.  Al- 
though single  kings  in  the  line  were 
guilty  of  apostacy,  yet  the  sin  was 
never  continued  until  the  second  gene- 
ration.— Lange, 

Verse    16.      The    barbarities  of 
revenge.     I.  Indicate  a  debased  and 
brutal  nature.     II.  May  terrify  into 
670 


submission,  but  cannot  command 
genuine  obedience.  III.  An  unstable 
foundation  on  which  to  build  a  throne 
(ver.  17).  IV.  Reveal  the  coward 
when  confronted  with  a  superior 
power  (verse  19). 

Verse  19.  The  instrument  of 
Divine  retribution.  I.  A  time  for 
solemn  reflection  when  its  shadow 
first  crosses  our  path.  II.  It  is  vain 
to  think  it  can  be  bribed  with  money. 
III.  Soon  demonstrates  the  pitiless- 
ness  of  its  power  (verse  29). 

—  The  tie  that  had  bound  Samaria 
to  Assyria  from  the  reign  of  Jehu  to 
that  of  Jeroboam  II.  had  ceased  to 
exist  during  a  period  of  Assyrian 
depression.  Menahem  now  renewed 
it,  undertaking  the  duties  of  a  tribu- 
tory,  and  expecting  the  support  and 
assistance  which  the  great  paramount 
state  of  Asia  was  accustomed  to  lend 
to  her  dependencies  in  their  struggles 
with  their  neighbours.  Hence  the 
reproaches  of  Hosea,  who  sees  in  the 
submission  of  Ephraim  an  unfaithful 
reliance  on  an  arm  of  flesh,  which  was 
at  once  foolish  and  wicked  (Hosea  v. 
13;  vii.  11;  viii.  9). — Speaker^  8 
Comm. 

—  Now  for  the  first  time  appeared 
on  the  Eastern  horizon  that  great 
power  which  for  a  hundred  years  was 
the  scourge  of  Asia.  The  ancient 
empire  of  Assyria,  possibly  repressed 
for  the  time  by  the  dominion  of  Solo- 
mon, rose  on  its  fall,  and  was  hence- 
forth intermingled  with  all  the  good 
and  evil  fortunes  of  the  kingdom  of 
Israel.  Already  in  the  reign  of  Jehu 
her  influence  began  to  be  felt.  His 
name  is  to  be  read  on  the  black  obelisk 
which  records  the  tributes  offered  to 
Shalmaneser  I.  in  the  form  of  gold  and 
silver  and  articles  manufactured  in 
gold.  The  destruction  of  Damascus 
by  Jeroboam  II.  brought  the  two 
powers  of  Israel  and  Assyria  into  close 
contact ;  there  was  now  no  intervening 
kingdom  to  act  as  a  breakwater.  Long 
before  its  actual  irruption  the  rise  of 
the  new  power  is  noted  by  theprophets. 
Jonah  had  already  traversed  the  desert 
and  seen  that  great  Nineveh.  Amos 
had  already,  though  without  naming 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS.  chap.  xvi. 


it,  foretold  that  a  people  should  arise  catches  the  sound  of  the  irresistihle 

which    should    crush    the    powerful  advance  of  the  Assrrian  armies  ;  their 

empire  of  Jeroboam  from  end  to  end,  savage  warfare,  their  strange  language, 

and  sees  the  nations  one  by  one  swept  the  speed  of  their  march,  their  inde- 

into  captivity.     Hosea  brings  out  the  fatigahle  energy,   their  arrows  sharp, 

danger    more     definitely,    sometimes  their   bows  bent,   their  horses'  hoofs 

naming  it,  sometimes  speaking  of  it  like     flint,    and    their   chariots    like 

only  under  the  form  of  the  contentious  a  whirlwind. — Stanley, 
king.     The^  wakeful    ear  of    Isaiah 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

THE    BEIGN    OF    AHAZ    IN    JUDAH. 

Cbitioal  and  Explanatobt  Notes — Verse  2.  Twenty  years  old  was  Ahab  when,  &c. 
—The  Sept.  MS.  of  the  Vatican,  and  other  MSS.,  give  *'  twenty-Jive  "  in  the  corresponding 
account  of  2  Chron.  xxviii.  1.  Adopting  this  alteration,  he  died  at  the  age  of  forty-one, 
having  reigned  sixteen  years.  He  could  only  have  reached  the  age  o  fifteen  when  his  son 
Hezekiah  was  bom,  for  the  son  was  twenty-five  at  his  father's  death  (chap,  xviii.  2).  Yet  a 
youth  of  fifteen  is  rot  unduly  young  for  such  a  relationship  in  the  East.  Verse  3.  Made  his 
son  to  pass  through  the  fire — This  is  the  first  record  of  human  sacrifice  among  the  Isr  lelites. 
The  force  of  evidence  is  against  the  lighter  interpretation  of  the  king's  act,  viz.,  that  this  was 
a  mere  fire-baptism,  an  act  of  lustration  and  purification — passing  his  son  through  the  heat 
or  flames.  The  phrase  "go  through  the  fire  "  is  shown  in  Numb.  xxxi.  23  to  mean  a  testing 
in  the  fire,  as  metal,  &c.  (verse  22),  so  that  what  could  be  consumed  by  the  fire  was  consumed ; 
and  2  Chion.  xxviii.  3  records  that  Ahab  "  burnt  his  children  in  the  fire."  It  was  the  immo- 
lation of  his  children  to  Moloch,  in  the  Valley  of  Hinnom.  Comp.  chap.  xvii.  31 ;  Jer.  xix.  5. 
Josephus  delares  it  to  have  been  a  holocaust :  koX  tdiov uAoKavTwae  valda.  There  remains,  how- 
ever, the  probability  that  the  children  were  "slain"  before  being  committed  to  the  fires  of 
Moloch  {cf.  Ezek.  xvi.  20,  and  Psa.  cvi.  37).  Verse  7.  Ahab  sent  messengers  to  Tiglath- 
pileser — Israel  had  asked  Assyrian  help  (chap.  xvi.  9) ;  now  Judah  throws  herself  upon  the 
protection  of  a  heathen  power.  Already  Jehovah  had  become  discarded  in  the  nation's 
worship  ;  how  could  any  trust  in  his  guardianship  continue  ?  Yet  he  sinned  against  most 
emphatic  expostulations  from  Isaiah,  and  assurances  sealed  by  supernatural  signs  (lea.  vii.  14  ; 
viii.  4).  Verse  9.  King  of  Assyria  took  Damascus,  and  carried  the  people  captive  to  Kir — 
The  aid  Ahaz  sought  was  purchased  with  the  treasures  of  the  palace  and  the  Temple  (verse  8). 
Tiglath  vanquished  the  confederate  kings — Rezin  of  Syria,  and  Fekah  of  Israel— and  seized 
Damascus.  This  occurred  b.o.  732.  A  year  later  he  held  a  court  of  his  vassals  there,  and 
twenty -three  abj'  ct  kings  there  did  him  obeisance,  among  them  being  mentioned  Pekah,  king 
of  Israel,  and  Ahaz,  king  of  Judah.  "Kir"  is  thought  to  have  been  Karine,  now  Karend,  in 
Media.  Verse  10.  Ahaz  saw  an  altar  that  was  at  Damascus — Charmed  with  it^  elegance 
and  novelty,  he  transmitted  a  sketch  of  it  to  Urijah  the  priest  at  Jerusalem,  and  ordered  that 
one  be  made  forthwith  to  supplant  the  altar  of  Jehovah  in  the  Temp'e.  Yet  that  old  altar 
was  designed  under  express  direction  and  authority  of  the  Lord  God !  It  is  called  "  the  great 
altar"  (verse  15),  doubtless  more  because  of  its  gorgeous  splendour.  The  priest  of  Jehovah 
raised  no  remonstrance,  so  perfidious  had  become  the  sacerdotal  spirit  (verse  16).  Veise  16. 
The  brazen  altar  shall  be  for  me  to  enquire  by— Jehovah's  sacrifices  were  transferred  to  a 
heathenish  altar.  There  were  as  yet  no  idolatrous  offerings  sacrificed  in  the  Temple  ;  no  dis- 
continuance of  outward  worship  to  the  God  of  Israel.  But  the  Divine  altar  was  removed 
from  its  position  in  the  Sanctuary,  and  left  neglected ;  its  destination  was  not  yet  clear  to 
Ahaz,  he  would  consider  about  it.  For  the  words,  "/or  me  to  enquire  by,'*  is  the  simple 
significance  of  the  phrase  "IM?  "^y  HTI^     Verse  17.  Ahaz  cut  off  the  borders   of  the 

bases,  &c. — Spoiling  the  adornments  to  gratify  his  capricious  fancies  in,  probably,  decorating 
his  own  palace.  Thus  men  debase  what  is  sacred  to  suit  their  own  purposes,  but  God  watches 
the  sacrilege,  and  He  will  requite  the  dishonour  done  to  Him.  Verse  18.  The  covert  for  the 
Sabbath — A  portico  used  by  the  priests.  Dr.  Abraham  Geiger  renders  these  words  ^'molten 
images  of  the  Shame"  (».  *.,  Baal),  following  2  Chron.  xxviii.  2  ;  but  ^D^D  ^^'^s,  says  Keil, 

'*  unquestionably  a  covered  place,  a  platform  or  hall^  in  the  forecourt  of  the  temple,  set  apart 

6/1 


OHAF.  XVI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


for  the  king  when  he  visited  the  temple  with  his  retinue  on  the  Sabbath  or  feast  days. "  So  went 
forward  the  abasement  of  Jadah  ;  the  Church  yielding  every  trust  for  the  sake  of  retaining 
State  favour  and  glory.  Jehovah  deposed  from  supremacy  in  tiis  own  i^emple,  that  a  corrupt 
Court  might  be  gratified,  and  the  smile  of  a  depraved  kmg  be  retained.  *'  If  any  man  deme 
the  temple  of  God^  him  shall  Qod  destroy  **  (1  Oor.  iii.  17). — W.  H.  J. 


B0MIIETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-20. 
Av  I00L1.TBOUS  BuLEB  A.  National  Sooubgb. 

Ahaz  inherited  the  wealth  and  magnificence  that  had  accumulated  under  the 
masterly  government  of  his  father,  Jotham,  and  his  grandfather,  Azariah,  but 
he  had  also  inherited  the  pernicious  effects  of  luxury  and  indulgence  that  ever 
follow  in  the  train  of  prosperity.  From  his  earliest  years  he  seems  to  have 
fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  court  party  who  championed  idolatry,  and  he  never 
acquired  strength  of  character  sufficient  to  shake  off  the  baleful  influence  of 
their  teaching  and  example.  He  was  fundamentally  weak.  He  cringed  before 
the  great  Assyrian  power  (ver.  7),  but,  like  all  other  cowards,  he  was  imperious 
and  exacting  towards  those  who  were  subject  to  him  (ver.  10-16).  Under 
his  feeble  and  idolatrous  administration,  Judah  sank  lower  and  lower,  till  it  was 
brought  to  the  verge  of  ruin.  There  was  nothing  to  mitigate  the  successive 
series  of  national  disasters :  his  influence  upon  the  nation  constantly  operated 
as  a  blighting,  withering  corse.     Observe — 

I.  That  idolatry  becomes  a  dangerous  power  in  a  nation  when  patronised 
and  encouraged  by  royalty  (ver.  2-4).  1.  The  religious  leanings  of  a  youthful 
prince  a/re  anxiously  scanned.  "  Twenty  years  old  was  Ahaz  when  he  began  to 
reign,  and  did  not  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  '*  (ver.  2). 
The  heathen  party  and  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah  were  on  the  outlook  as  to 
what  stand  the  young  king  would  make.  Would  he  set  his  face  against  the 
idolatrous  innovations  which  had  already  gone  too  far ;  and  would  he  show  more 
zeal  and  fidelity  than  his  immediate  predecessors  had  done  towards  the  ancient 
faith?  Neither  party  were  kept  long  in  suspense.  The  old  court  party 
triumphed ;  they  had  intrigued  and  flattered  to  some  purpose.  The  idolatrous 
tendencies  of  Ahaz  were  soon  detected ;  and  the  emphatic  condemnation  of  the 
sacred  writer  was  richly  merited — he  **did  not  that  which  was  right  in  the 
eight  of  the  Lord  his  God.**  It  is  a  sincere  grief  to  the  good  to  witness  a  reign 
begun  in  defiance  of  the  great  religious  principles  which  had  given  life  and 
prestige  to  the  nation.  The  fate  of  such  a  reign  it  is  not  difficult  to  predict. 
2.  Idolatrous  practices  rapidly  degenerate  to  the  level  of  the  most  atrocious  examples 
(ver.  3,  4).  Ahaz  excelled  his  idolatrous  predecessors  not  only  in  imbecility, 
but  also  in  cruelty.  He  descended  to  the  most  inhuman  practices  of  the 
heathen :  he  *'  made  his  children  to  pass  through  the  fire  " — an  abomination 
against  which  the  Israelites  were  solemnly  warned  (comp.  Lev.  xviii.  21  ;  xx. 
24  ;  Deut.  xviii.  10).  The  Jewish  rabbis  have  mildly  interpreted  this  passing 
through  the  fire  as  merely  passing  between  two  burning  pyres  as  a  purificatory 
rite;  but  the  truth  is,  the  victims  were  first  slain  and  then  burned  (vide 
2  Chron.  xxviii.  3,  compared  with  Pea.  cvi.  37, ;  8 ;  Jer.  vii.  31 ;  xix.  4,  5 ;  Ezek. 
xvi.  20,  21 ;  xxiii.  37).  The  brazen  image  of  the  idol  was  made  red-hot,  and 
the  victim  passed  within  its  glowing  arms.  Other  kings  of  Judah  had  allowed 
their  people  to  sacrifice  and  burn  incense  in  the  high  places  ;  but  Ahaz  was  the 
first,  80  far  as  we  know,  to  countenance  the  practice  by  his  own  example 
572 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS.  CHAP.  m. 


(verse  4).     Idolatry  debauches  the  moral  sense,  and  prepares  its  votaries  for  the 
worst  abominations. 

II.  That  an  idolatrous  ruler  wantonly  sacrifices  the  national  prestige 
and  independence  (ver.  5-9).  I.  Sis  ivenhiiess  exposes  the  nation  to  invasion 
and  loss  (ver.  5,  6).  The  kings  of  Syria  and  Israel,  who  had  been  held  in  check 
by  the  strong  hand  of  Azariah  and  Jotham,  despised  the  feebleness  of  Ahaz,  and 
harassed  his  kingdom  with  war  and  siege.  They  aimed  at  dethroning  Ahaz  and 
substituting  a  nominee  of  their  own,  whom  they  could  compel  to  unite  with 
them  in  resisting  the  encroachments  of  the  Assyrian  power.  Had  Ahaz  been 
decided  and  open  in  his  attachment  to  Jehovah,  they  would  not  have  insulted 
him  and  his  people  with  a  proposal  to  form  a  league  with  Judah,  nor  would 
they  have  dared  to  use  force.  IJut  the  idolatry  of  Ahaz  was  a  sufficient  plea 
for  them  to  take  liberties  :  he  was  now  so  much  like  themselves  that  they  might 
readily  conclude  he  would  be  willing  to  unite  with  them  in  any  enterprise. 
When  the  ruler  sinks  in  moral  reputation  and  force,  the  stringency  of  a  whole- 
some government  is  relaxed,  and  the  nation  suffers.  2.  Se  tamely  subjects  his 
people  to  the  oppression  of  a  foreign  power  (ver.  7).  Judah  had  injured  and 
oppressed  Israel,  and  could  not  therefore  hope  to  wean  her  from  her  compact 
with  Syria.  Israel  and  Syria  had  already  won  two  battles  against  Judah,  in 
which  the  flower  of  her  troops  had  been  destroyed.  Egypt  was  at  this  time  too 
weak  to  afford  any  assistance,  and  Ahaz  was  conscious  of  serious  disaffection 
spreading  among  his  own  people  (Isa.  vii.  13).  In  this  emergency  he  abjectly 
throws  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  Assyrian  monarch,  and  piteously  implores  his 
help.  It  might  be  that  this  was  Judah's  only  alternative  from  a  point  of  view  : 
but  what  a  faU  was  this  compared  with  the  days  of  Azariah  and  Jotham ! 
There  was  one  resource  yet  open  to  Ahaz :  he  might  have  fallen  back  on 
Jehovah.  But  his  apostacy  was  too  complete  and  his  idolatry  too  flagrant  to 
allow  such  a  thought  to  take  deep  root.  Blind  with  infatuation  he  runs  for 
refuge  into  the  embrace  of  a  power  that  erelong  uses  its  advantage  in  oppressing 
his  people.  3.  Ee  does  not  scruple  to  strip  the  temple  of  God  of  its  sacred 
treasures  to  purchase  an  idolatrous  alliance  "  And  Ahaz  took  the  silver  and  gold 
that  was  found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  aiivi  sent  it  for  a  present  to  the  king  of 
Assyria"  (ver.  8).  Here  begins  the  work  of  spoliation.  It  does  not  appear 
that  he  took  anything  from  the  shrines  of  the  idols  he  loved  so  much — that 
would  be  sacrilege  in  his  eyes — and  yet  without  compunction  or  misgiving  he 
desecrates  and  robs  the  temple  of  Jehovah.  In  this  we  have  another  proof  of 
the  debasing  influence  of  his  heathenism,  and  how  completely  he  had  severed 
himself  from  Jehovah  and  His  worship.  The  man  who  turns  his  back  on  God 
is  ready  for  any  deed  of  infamy. 

III.  That  an  idolatrous  ruler  is  reckless  in  the  introduction  of  innova- 
tions in  worship  which  are  an  insult  to  the  only  tiue  God  (ver.  10-18). 
1 .  Se  substitutes  a  heathen  altar  in  the  place  of  the  one  used  in  the  worship  of 
Jehovah  (ver.  10).  Carried  away  with  the  idolatrous  ritual  of  the  Assyrians, 
Ahaz,  captivated  with  the  pattern  of  a  certain  altar,  has  one  made  alter  the 
same  model  and  placed  in  the  inner  court  of  the  temple.  Human  fancies  and 
predelictions  are  indulged  in  defiance  of  Divine  authority  and  commandment. 
The  temple  altar  was  made  after  a  Divine  pattern  (Ex.  xxv.  40;  xxvi.  30; 
xxvii.  I);  and  the  introduction  of  the  Assyrian  specimen  was  an  insulting  and 
sinful  intrusion.  2.  He  finds  co-workers  in  those  whose  duty  is  to  resist  all 
heathenish  innovations  (ver.  11-16).  The  supine  conduct  of  Urijah  is  in  marked 
contrast  with  the  stout,  heroic  opposition  of  Azariah  and  his  priests  to  the  proud 
assumptions  of  TJzziah  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  16-18).  Ahaz  was  too  weak 
a  character  to  have  succeeded  in  winning  over  TJrijah  to  idolatry,  eitlier  by 
threats  or  cajolery,  unless  there  had  been  a  predisposition  onUrijah's  part.     He 

678 


CHAP.   XVI. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


was  infected  with  the  theological  laxity  of  the  period,  and  instead  of  boldly 
maintaining  the  absolute  supremacy  of  Jehovah,  he  was  beginning  to  recognize 
Him  as  but  one  among  the  many  deities  to  be  worshipped.  With  confused  ideas 
and  impaired  convictions,  Urijah  was  not  prepared  to  risk  the  loss  of  his  place 
and  income  by  opposing  the  wishes  of  the  capricious  monarch.  3.  Me  adopts 
methods  calculated  to  disparage  and  pour  contempt  on  the  worship  of  Jehovah 
(ver.  17,  18).  We  are  prepared  now  for  any  act  of  impiety  Ahaz  may  commit. 
His  reverence  for  God  is  gone,  and  with  it  his  reverence  for  the  sanctuary. 
The  sacred  vessels  are  mutilated,  the  treasures  and  costly  ornaments  appropriated 
to  political  exigencies,  and  the  royal  entrance  to  the  Temple  closed.  There 
was  no  distinction  now  between  Judah  and  the  most  idolatrous  nations.  The 
safeguard  of  Judah — the  love  and  worship  of  Jehovah — was  broken  down,  and 
the  nation  soon  became  a  prey  to  the  invader  and  involved  in  ruin. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Idolatry  delauches  the  moral  sense  ofMng  and poople.  2.  A  wiclced 
Icing  will  always  find  those  who  will  imitate  him  in  his  most  extravagant  follies  and 
vices.  3.  The  ruler  who  systematically  ignores  the  claims  of  God  inevitably  drags 
his  people  into  degradation  and  suffering, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Verse  1.  Under  this  mos^  wicked 
prince  prophesied  Isaiah,  Hosea,  Mi- 
cah,  and  Nahum,  but  with  little  good 
success,  so  incorrigibly  flagitious  were 
now  all  sorts  grown. — Trapp. 

Yerses  2-4.  An  idolatrous  en- 
thusiast— 1.  Eagerly  embraces  the 
advantage  gained  by  his  accession  to 
power  and  authority  in  propagating 
his  favourite  theories.  *'  Twenty  years 
old  was  Ahaz  when  he  began  to  reign, 
and  did  not  that  which  was  right " 
(verse  2).  2.  Is  ever  ready  to  quote 
and  imitate  the  examples  of  those 
whose  policy  favoured  his  own  views. 
"  He  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  kings 
of  Israel"  (verse  3).  3.  Soon  out- 
strips the  most  notorious  examples, 
and  sinks  to  the  abominations  of  the 
rudest  heathenism.  "  Yea,  and  made 
his  son  to  pass  through  the  fire " 
(verse  3).  4.  Spreads  the  blight  of 
his  pernicious  system  in  every  avail- 
able place.  **  He  sacrificed  in  the 
high  places,  on  the  hills,  and  under 
every  green  tree  "  (verse  4). 

Verse  2.  The  character  of  this 
king's  reign,  tlie  voluptuousness  and 
religious  degeneracy  of  all  classes  of 
the  people,  are  graphically  portrayed 
in  the  writings  of  Isaiah.  The  groat 
increase  of  worldly  wealth  and  luxury 
d74 


in  the  reigns  of  Azariah  and  Jotham 
had  introduced  a  host  of  corruptions 
which,  during  the  reign  and  by  the 
influence  of  Ahaz,  bore  fruit  in  the 
idolatrous  practices  of  every  kind 
which  prevailed  in  all  parts  of  the 
kingdom  (see  2  Chron.  xxviii.  24). — 
Jamieson, 

Verse  3.  A  man  that  is  once  fallen 
from  truth  knows  not  where  he  shalJ 
stay.  From  the  calves  of  Jeroboam 
is  Ahaz  drawn  to  the  gods  of  the 
heathen ;  yea,  now  bulls  and  goats  are 
too  little  for  those  new  deiti-es ;  his 
own  flesh  and  blood  is  but  dear  enough. 
Where  do  we  find  any  religious  Is- 
raelite thus  zealous  for  God !  Neither 
is  our  dull  and  niggardly  heart  ready 
to  gratify  Him  with  more  easy  obedi- 
ences. 0  God,  how  gladly  should  we 
offer  unto  thee  our  souls  and  bodies, 
which  we  may  enjoy  so  much  the 
more  when  they  are  thine,  since  zealous 
Pagans  stick  not  to  lose  their  own 
flesh  and  blood  in  an  idol's  fire  ! — Bp, 
Hall 

Verses  3,  4.  Men  are  so  blind  that 
they  think  they  serve  God  most  truly 
by  those  very  actions  by  which  they 
sin  most  grossly  against  Him,  The 
Moloch-sacriftce,  or  child-sacrifice,  is 
a  proof  of  the  extravagance  of  error 


EOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   KINGS, 


AP.  XTl» 


into  which  men  can  fall  when  they 
have  not  the  knowledge  of  the  living 
.God  and  His  revealed  blood,  or  when 
they  have  rejected  the  same  (Rom.  i. 
21,  22).  This  abomination,  which 
still  continues  among  heathen  nations, 
is  the  strongest  and  most  direct  call  to 
all  who  know  the  living  God  and  who 
possess  His  Word,  to  take  part  in  the 
work  of  missions,  and  to  help  to  bring 
it  about  that  light  may  come  to  those 
who  sit  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of 
death.  God  commands  us  to  give  our 
dearest  and  best  to  Him,  but  not  to 
Moloch.  There  are  no  longer  any 
sacrifices  to  Moloch  in  Christendom ; 
but  it  happens  often  enough,  even 
now,  that  parents  sacrifice  their  chil- 
dren to  the  idols  of  the  world  which 
consume  them,  so  that  they  are  lost 
eternally. — Lange, 

Yerse  4.  Wherever  God  has  a 
Church,  the  devil  builds  a  temple  by 
the  side  of  it. 

Verses  5-9.  The  disastrous  results 
of  national  apostasy. — 1.  The  enemy 
is  emboldened  to  make  combined  at- 
tacks upon  the  nation  (verse  5).  2. 
Involves  loss  of  prestige  and  of  terri- 
tory (verse  5).  3.  The  national  spirit 
is  demoralised  (verse  7).  4.  The 
nation  is  put  in  the  power  of  those 
who,  while  professing  to  help  and 
protect  it,  drain  its  resources  and  ulti- 
mately hasten  its  ruin  (yerses  7-9). 

Yerse  7.  The  more  plausible,  really 
the  more  insane,  desire  of  Ahaz  to 
secure  the  favour  of  an  empire  which 
was  the  common  enemy  of  all  nations, 
that  he  might  get  rid  of  the  two  that 
were  tormenting  him,  showed  that 
faith  had  departed  from  Judah  also. 
The  idols  of  silver  and  gold  had 
driven  God  out  of  its  heart,  and  made 
the  worship  of  Him  a  mockery. — 
Maurice, 

Yerse  10-18,  Innovations  in  Di- 
vine worship. — 1.  Are  not  to  be 
confounded  with  an  improved  fervour 
and  spirituality  of  service.  2.  Are 
evidences  of  religious  decline.  3. 
Are  an  insult  to  the  Divine  Being. 


4.  Should  be  firmly  resisted  by  the 
faithful  minister  of  God.  5.  May 
lead  to  the  most  reprehensible  acts  of 
contempt  and  sacrilege. 

—  See  in  this  a  clear  picture  of  the 
lack  of  Christian  spirit  in  the  two 
highest  ranks.  The  State  desires  to 
see  everything  arranged  according  to 
its  whims ;  the  Church  yields  for  the 
sake  of  the  temporal  advantage.  It 
is  the  fashion  of  depraved  rulers  th;it 
they  think  they  can  command  in  reli- 
gions as  well  as  in  similar  matters, 
and  can  control  everything  according 
to  their  own  good  pleasure. — Lange. 

—  A  spirit  of  innovation  is  gene- 
rally the  result  of  a  selfish  temper  and 
confined  views.  People  will  not  look 
forward  to  posterity  who  never  look 
backward  to  their  ancestors. — Burke. 

—  It  is  a  dangerous  presumption 
to  make  innovations  if  but  in  the  cir- 
cumstances of  God's  worship.  Those 
human  additions,  which  would  seem 
to  grace  the  institution  of  God,  de- 
prave it.  That  infinite  Wisdom  knows 
best  what  pleases  itself,  and  prescribes 
accordingly.  The  foolishness  of  God 
is  wiser  than  the  wisdom  of  men. 
Idolatry  and  falsehood  are  commonly 
more  gaudy  and  plausible  than  truth. 
That  heart  which  can,  for  the  outward 
homeliness,  despise  the  ordinances  of 
God,  is  already  alienated  from  true 
religion,  and  lies  open  to  the  grossest 
superstition. — Bp.  Hall, 

Yerse  10.  A  fit  helve  for  such  a 
hatchet.  Urijah  had  been  a  main- 
tainor of  God's  true  worship  in  the 
temple,  and  by  the  prophet  Isaiah 
counted  and  called  a  faithful  witness 
(Isa.  viii.  1,  2)  ;  but  now  he  becomoth 
an  apostate,  as  Damascen  turned  Ma- 
hommedan,  after  he  had  written 
against  that  execrable  impiety ;  and 
Ahaz  knew  him,  belike,  to  be  a  tempo- 
riser. — Traj^p. 

Yerse  13.  IJzziah,  for  so  doing, 
was  smitten  with  leprosy ;  but  Ahaz 
of  a  far  worse  disease,  an  incurable 
hardness  of  heart. — Trapp. 

—  For  the  heathens,  and  Ahaz's 
imitation  of  them,  offered  the  same 
sorts  of  offerings  to  their  false  gods 

676 


CHAT.  xvn. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAMT:  KJN98. 


which  the  Israelites  did  to  the  true, 
the  devil  being  noted  to  be  God's  ape 
in  his  worship. — Pool, 

Verse  16.  We  have  in  this  high 
priest  a  specimen  of  those  hypocrites 
and  belly-servants  who  say,  "Whose 
bread  I  eat,  his  song  I  sing;"  who 
veer  about  with  the  wind,  and  seek  to 
be  pleasant  to  all  men  ;  dumb  dogs 
who  cannot  bark  ;  who  wish  to  hurt 
no  one's  feelings,  but  teach  and  say 
just  what  any  one  wants  to  hear. 
But  God's  word  alone,  and  not  the 
favour  of  men,  nor  the  goods  and 
honours  of  the  world,  ought  to  be  the 
rule  from  which  we  ought  not  to  turn 
aside,  although  it  may  involve  risk 
of  life  or  limb  to  speak  the  truth. — 
Lange. 

Verses  19,  20.  The  reign  of  Ahas 
was  the  most  disastrous  of  any  through 
which  Judah  had  yet  passed.  The 
kingdom  sank  so  low,  both  internally 
and  externally,  religiously  and  politi- 
cally, that  it  was  on  the  verge  of  ruin. 
Such  an  incapable  ruler  had  nevoi 
before  ascended  the  throne.  The  pre- 
dominant feature  in  his  character  was 
weakness — weakness  of  spirit  and 
weakness  of  intellect.    History  records 


nothing  about  him  worthy  of  respect. 

—  Of  all  the  kings  of  Judah  hither- 
to, there  is  none  so  dreadful  an  ex- 
ample, either  of  sin  or  judgment,  as 
this  son  of  good  Jotham.  I  abhor  to 
think  that  such  a  monster  should 
descend  from  the  loins  of  David. 
\\  here  should  be  the  period  of  this 
wickedness  ?  He  began  with  the  high 
places;  thence  he  descended  to  the 
calves  of  Dan  and  Bethel ;  from  thence 
he  falls  to  a  Syrian  altar,  to  the  Syrian 
god ;  then  he  falls  to  an  utter  exclu- 
sion of  the  true  God  and  blocking  up 
His  temple ;  then  to  the  sacrifice  of  his 
own  son ;  and  at  last,  as  if  hell  were 
broken  loose  on  God's  inheritance, 
every  several  city,  every  high  place  of 
Judah,  has  a  new  God.  K'o  marvel  if 
ie  be  branded  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
—This  is  that  ''king  Ahaz  1"— ^;>. 
Ball. 

Verse  20.  His  subjects  complain 
that  he  died  so  late  ;  and,  as  repenting 
that  he  ever  was,  denying  him  a  room 
in  the  sepulchres  of  kings,  as  if  they 
had  said — "  The  common  earth  of 
Jerusalem  is  too  good  for  him  that 
degenerated  from  his  progenitors, 
spoiled  his  kingdom,  depraved  his 
people,  forsook  his  God. — Ihid, 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


THE    EXTINCTION    OF    THE    ISBAELITISH    KINGDOIKL 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  2.  Did  evil  .  .  but  not  as  the  kings  of 
Israel — Scripture  merely  records  the  fact,  does  not  explain  wherein  Hoshea  sinned  less.  But 
even  an  abstention  from  wrong,  which  others  wrought,  is  noticed  by  Jehovah,  and  kept  in 
eternal  memory.  Verse  3.  Came  up  Shalmaneser,  king  of  Assyria — Thirsting  for  conquest, 
he  subdued  the  king  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  made  him  tributary.  l^halInaneser's  reign  followed 
Tiglath-pileser's,  who  died  B.C.  727.  From  this  Assyrian  despot  Hoshea,  after  a  f.w  years, 
sought  relief  by  alliance  with  So,  king  of  Egypt  (verse  4).  This  name  -J^ID  — becomes  by 
punctuation  Sevehy  and  is  recognized  as  Shebek  of  the  25th  dynasty.  This  Ethiopian  monarch, 
lord  of  Upper  Egypt,  in  the  year  B.C.  725  invaded  Lower  Egypt,  and  proved  so  mighty  a 
conqueror  that  the  small  kingdoms  which  had  groaned  beneath  the  despotism  of  Assyria  turned 
to  him  for  dc^fence  and  security.  Verse  9.  Children  of  Israel  did  secretly  things  not  right 
against  the  Lord — The  word  i<^3n  has  been  rendered  variously,  as  secret  blasphemy,  acts  of 

treachery^  dissimulating  words;  but  its  meaning,  to  cover,  cloke^  when  taken  with  D^*^^T> 

•  T  : 
may  be  accepted  as  they  hid  or  concealed  Jehovah  from  attention  and  homage  by  idolatrous  in- 
trusions, so  that  He  was  ignored.  Verse  17.  Worshipped  all  the  hosts  of  heaven — The  idol 
Astarte  represented  the  moon,  and  Moloch  (or  Baal)  the  sun  ;  and  between  these  they  arrayed 
for  worship  "all  the  hosts  of  heaven."  This  was  an  addition  to  their  objects  of  idolatrous 
576 


BOMlLhllC  GOMMENTARY:  KINGS.  oh  a  p.  xvti. 


reverence,  and  appears  as  a  new  feature  of  Israelitish  worship.  This  astral  homage  came  in 
upon  Israel  through  the  Assyrian  alliances  by  Pekah  and  Ahaz,  for  star  worship  was  distinc- 
tively an  Assyrian  importation.  Verse  18.  Removed  Israel  out  of  His  sight— After  '256  yea:  g 
of  separate  existence  from  Judah,  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  thus  ignominiously  ended, 
its  nationality  perished.  On  this  kingdom  of  Israel  lay  the  twofold  sin :  first,  of  revoltmg 
from  loyal  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  thus  violating  the  unity  of  God's  chosen  nation  ; 
and,  next,  of  revolting  against  Jehovah  and  His  worship,  thus  debasing  the  sacred  distinction 
for  which  God  called  them  to  be  His  people ;  therefore  Israel  became  not  useless  only,  but  an 
affront  to  Jehovah,  and  was  consigned  to  just  retribution.  Verse  24.  King  of  Assyria  brought 
men  from  Babylon,  &c. — Had  the  land  been  depopulated  there  would  have  seemed  promise  ol 
the  exiles'  return  ;   but  under  the  royal  direction  Assyrian  subjects  came  in  and  possessed  th< 

sacred  soil,  making  it  the  home  of  foreigners.     This  king,  called  here  ").")lif»^  "]7.0  is  regarded 

by  many  expositors  as  Esarhaddon ;  but  a  do  ibt  naturally  springs  from  the  fact  that  Esarhaddon 
did  not  come  to  the  throne  for  some  twenty-six  years  after  Shalmanezer,  who  carried  Israel 
into  captivity.  From  Ez  a  iv.  2  we  gam  information  that  Esarhaddon  brought  these  colonists 
into  Samaria.  Verse  27.  Carry  thither  one  of  the  priests  -The  country  was  too  thinly 
populated  to  subdue  the  growth  of  those  beasts  of  prey  by  which  the  land  had  been  infested 
prior  to  its  occupancy  by  Israel  (Judges  xiv.  5  ;  I  Sam.  xvii.  34,  &c  ) ;  now  they  again  multi- 
plied and  ravaged  the  country.  Interpreting  this  as  a  judgment  from  God  for  the  neglect  of 
His  worship,  an  exiled  priest  was  sent  back  to  the  people  to  teach  them  Jehovah'ii  will.  And 
from  this  event  arose  that  mingled  religion  which  became  distinctive  of  the  Samaritans  ;  also 
the  Samaritan  version  of  the  Pentateuch,  which  acquired  such  historic  importance.  Verse  30. 
The  men  of  Babylon  made  Succoth-benoth — "  Booths  of  the  daughters."  i.  e.y  tents  of 
voluptuousness,  where  lust  was  sanctioned  as  a  religious  observance.  Nergal  —Identified  in 
the  British  Museum  inscriptions  as  Mars,  the  god  of  war.  Ashima — a  goat  idol.  Nibhaz — 
a  dog.  Tartak— an  ass,  or  planet  of  ill  omen.  Adrammelech— Either  Moloch  the  Assyrian 
sun-god  ;  or,  as  others  think,  a  mule  or  a  peacock.  Anammelech — An  idol  in  form  of  a  hare. 
Thus  the  Samaritans  became  a  people  of  varied  religious  forms  and  vagaries,  the  true  worship 
and  knowledge  of  God  being  perverted  by  the  rival  heathenish  fallacies  and  rites  which  the 
immigrants  of  Babylon  had  brought  into  the  land.  So  even  though  Jehovah  was  in  some  way 
"feared'*  (verse  32),  idolatry  was  fostered,  and  they  "served  their  graven  images'*  through 
generations  following  (verse  41), — W.  H.  J. 


EOMILETICS  OP  VERSES  1-8. 
Thb  Utter  Downfall  op  Israel. 

I.  Was  effected  notwithstanding  the  superior  capacity  and  modified 
idolatry  of  the  ruler. — Hoshea  "did  that  which  was  evil,  but  not  as  the 
kings  of  Israel  that  were  before  him"  (verse  2).  He  did  not  enforce  the 
edicts  of  Baal  with  such  determined  fanaticism  as  some  of  his  predecessors. 
He  allowed  more  liberty  in  religious  worship,  and  while  not  approaching  the 
true  worship  of  Jehovah,  he  did  not  descend  to  the  abominations  of  the  lowest 
heathenism.  Some  have  thought  that  the  last  king  of  Israel  was  the  worst ; 
but  the  history  does  not  favour  that  view.  He  was  a  man  of  considerable 
military  and  political  capacity.  It  is  true  he  reached  the  throne  by  violence 
and  bloodshed  (chap.  xv.  30) ;  but  the  people  were  weary  of  national  abuses 
and  of  the  imbecility  of  their  kings,  and  welcomed  the  advent  of  any  one  who 
had  the  courage  and  vigour  to  rectify  matters.  Hoshea  yearned  for  liberty, 
and  his  whole  reign  was  spent  in  repeated  efforts  to  cast  off  the  foreign  yoke, 
to  excite  a  more  enterprising  national  spirit,  and  to  arrest  the  downward  ten- 
dency of  the  kingdom.  But  no  human  power  could  now  save  Israel.  The 
ablest  generalship,  the  most  consummate  statesmanship,  the  cleverest  combina- 
tions, were  all  in  vain.  It  was  a  melancholy  sight  to  see  this  man  grappling 
with  a  falling  kingdom,  whose  ruin  he  was  powerless  to  prevent. 

II.  Was  accomplished  notwithstanding  the  most  brave  and  desperate 
struggles  for  continued  existence  (verses  4,   5). — Hoshea  saw  the   mistake 

pp  577 


CHAP.  xvu.  MOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KIN&S. 


that  Menahem  and  Pekah  had  made  in  calling  in  the  assistance  of  Assyria,  and 
what  had  been  the  sad  results  to  the  country.  He  made  a  bold  stand  for 
national  freedom.  He  refused  to  pay  tribute,  and  prepared  to  withstand  the 
fury  of  the  great  Assyrian  power.  It  is  a  tribute  to  the  superior  diplomacy  of 
Hosea  that  he  succeeded  in  persuading  So,  the  warrior  king  of  Egypt,  that  it 
was  their  mutual  safety  to  oppose  Assyria ;  and  though  So  was  but  a  fickle 
colleague,  he  must  have  rendered  considerable  assistance  until  he  was  obliged 
to  retire  within  his  own  kingdom  and  defend  himself  from  the  common  enemy. 
The  fact  that  Samaria  held  out  for  three  years  against  the  Assyrian  army,  with 
all  its  formidable  appliances  for  siege  and  assault,  indicates  the  obstinacy  and 
desperation  of  the  defence.     They  were  the  last  frantic  efi'orts  of  despair. 

**It  is  remarkable,"  says  Ewaht,  **ho\v  strong  a  resemblance  the  fall  of 
Samaria  bears  to  the  first  and  second  destructions  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  heroic 
resistance  of  its  inhabitants." 

III.  Was  associated  with  scenes  of  humiliation  and  suffering^  (verses  5,  6). 
Israel  was  afflicted  with  all  the  terrible  consequences  of  war — war  carried  on 
by  an  enemy  who  was  determined  to  win.  The  horrors  of  the  siege  of  Samaria 
may  be  inferred  from  Isaiah  xxviii.  1-4  ;  Hosea  x.  14  ;  xiii.  16  ;  Amos  vi.  9-14. 
Added  to  the  chagrin  of  defeat,  was  the  degradation  of  enforced  captivity  and 
estrangement — torn  from  the  midst  of  loved  and  familiar  scenes,  and  placed  in 
a  strange  and  distant  country,  subject  to  the  sarcasms  and,  it  may  be,  cruelty 
of  its  inhabitants.  The  people  who  had  been  delivered  from  Egyptian  slavery 
by  the  strong  arm  of  Jehovah  are  again  relegated  to  bondage,  because  they  had 
abandoned  their  Deliverer.  The  punishment  for  sin  is  ever  attended  with 
Buff'ering  and  shame. 

IV.  Was  inevitable,  as  tlie  opportunity  for  reformation  had  passed 
unimproved. — Instruction  had  b^en  despised,  reproof  unheeded,  the  best  of 
prophets  ignored,  prosperity  abused,  and  repeated  overtures  of  mercy  callously 
spurned.  The  time  for  compromise  was  passed,  the  opportunity  of  salvation 
was  sinned  away,  I^othing  remained  but  to  allow  the  national  infatuation  to 
run  its  course  and  produce  its  inevitable  results.  The  nation  must  reap  what 
it  had  sown  ;  it  had  sown  the  wind,  and  must  reap  the  whirlwind.  A  certain 
king  once  caused  a  lamp  to  be  lit  in  his  palace,  and  a  proclamation  made 
throughout  his  dominion  that  every  rebel  who  came  and  tendered  his  submis- 
sion before  the  light  burnt  out  should  be  forgiven,  whatever  the  nature  of  his 
ofi'ence ;  bnt  that  those  who  refused  to  obey  the  summons  within  the  required 
time  should  be  put  to  death.  The  lamp  of  Israel's  opportunity  had  long  been 
lit,  and  the  conditions  of  submission  made  sufficiently  public.  When  therefore 
the  light  became  extinct,  and  Israel  refused  to  return,  the  threatened  punish- 
ment must  inevitably  follow.  Shakespeare  says  truly  of  opportuity,  "  Who 
seeks,  and  will  not  take  when  once  'tis  offered,  shall  never  find  it  more." 

Lessons  : — 1.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  one  man  unaided  to  save  a  hingdom. 
2.  ]Sational  sins  involve  national  ruin.  3.  Every  nation^  as  every  individual,  has 
ample  opportunities  for  reformation. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Ver.    1-6.     A    doleful  picture  of  4).     3.  The  country  overrun  and  im- 

national    desolation.      1.   Fanatical  poverished  by  hosts  of  invading  foes 

persistence  m  the  evil  that  works  its  (ver.  5).     4.  Struggling  bravely,  but 

ruin  (ver.  2).     2.  Yainly  seeking  the  uselessly,    against   superior  numbers 

protection  of  foreign  powers  (ver.  3,  (ver.     5,     6).      5.     Draughted     un- 
578 


MOMJLETia  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CUAP.  XVII. 


resistmgly  into  stranger  and  distant 
lands  (ver.  16).  6.  An  imprisoned 
king  and  scattered  people. 

—  The  last  king  of  Israel.  I. 
He  did  that  which  was  evil,  hut  not  as 
the  kings  of  Israel  before  him.  Though 
he  did  not  go  so  far  in  wickedness  as 
the  eighteen  kings  who  preceded  him, 
nevertheless,  he  did  not  walk  in  the 
way  of  salvation.  Half-way  conver- 
sion is  no  conversion.  In  order  to 
bring  back  the  nation  from  its  wicked 
ways,  he  should  have  been  himself 
devoted  to  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart. 
When  people  are  not  fully  in  earnest 
in  their  conversion,  then  there  is  no 
cessation  of  corruption,  whether  it  be 
the  case  of  an  individual  or  a  state. 
II.  He  makes  a  covenant  with  the  Icing 
of  Egypt  (ver.  4).  By  this  he  showed 
that  his  heart  was  not  perfect  with 
God.  Egypt,  the  very  power  out  of 
whose  hand  God  had  wonderfully 
rescued  his  people,  was  to  help  him 
against  Assyria.  But  **  cursed  be  the 
man  that  trusteth  in  man  and  maketh 
flesh  his  arm  "  (Jer.  xvii.  5  ;  Hosea  vii. 
11-13).  III.  He  loses  his  land  and 
his  people ,  and  is  cast  into  prison. 
By  conspiracy  and  murder  he  had 
attained  to  the  throne  and  to  the 
highest  pitch  of  human  greatness,  but 
his  end  was  disgrace,  misery,  and  life- 
long imprisonment.  Upon  him  who 
will  not  be  humbled  by  small  evils 
God  sends  great  and  heavy  ones. — 
Lange, 

Ver.  2.  Wickedness — 1.  May  be 
modified  in  its  enormity.  2.  Every 
modification  observed  and  impartially 
recorded.  3.  Modification  does  not 
alter  its  nature,  or  escape  its  punish- 
ment. 

—  It  looks  like  the  bitter  irony  of 
fate  that  this  Hosea,  who  was  to  be 
the  last  king,  was  a  better  one  than 
any  of  his  predecessors.  The  words 
of  the  prophets  who  had  uttered  so 
many  and  such  important  truths  con- 
cerning this  kingdom  during  the  last 
fifty  years,  many  have  exercised 
a  powerful  influence  over  him  and 
instilled  into  him  better  principles. 
But  they  had  always  predicted  its 
fall  as  certain ;  and  now  the  irresistible 
force  of  history  was  to  prove  that  no 


single  man,  whatever  might  be  his 
position  and  superiority,  could  be 
strong  enough  to  delay  the  ruin  of 
the  whole  structure,  if  the  right 
moment  for  its  reformation  had  passed. 
— Ewald, 

Ver.  3.  Payment  of  tribute.  1, 
A  humiliating  evidence  of  subjection 
(ver.  3).  2.  Chafes  the  spirit  of 
a  liberty-loving  people  (ver.  4).  3. 
Brings  disaster  if  ineffectually  resisted 
(ver.  4). 

Ver.  5.  As  the  end  drew  near, 
they  gave  themselves  up  to  the  frantic 
re  veilings  of  despair.  At  last  the 
city  was  stormed.  With  the  ferocity 
common  to  all  the  warfare  of  those 
times,  the  infants  were  hurled  down 
the  rocky  sides  of  the  hill  on  wliich 
the  city  stood,  or  destroyed  in  their 
mothers'  bosoms >  Famine  and  pesti- 
lence completed  the  work  of  war. 
The  stones  of  the  ruined  city  were 
poured  down  into  the  rich  valley 
below,  and  the  foundations  were  laid 
bare.  Palace  and  hovel  alike  fell ; 
the  statues  were  broken  to  pieces ;  the 
crown  of  pride,  the  glory  of  Ephruim, 
was  trodden  under  foot. — Stanley. 

Ver.  6.  The  fall  of  Samaria  and 
Damascus  was,  according  to  the  pre- 
diction of  the  prophet,  synchronous 
(Isa.  vii.  7-9);  and  the  devastation 
both  of  Syria  and  Israel- was  foretold 
at  a  time  and  in  circumstances  when 
no  human  sagacity  could  have  antici- 
pated it  (Amos  i). — Jamieson. 

—  0  terrible  examples  of  vengeance 
upon  that  peculiar  people  whom  God 
had  chosen  for  Himself  out  of  all  the 
world  !  All  the  world  were  witnesses 
of  the  favours,  of  the  miraculous  de- 
liverances and  protections;  all  the 
world  shall  be  witnesses  of  their  just 
confusion.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of 
slight  errors  to  set  off  that  infinite 
mercy.  What  was  it,  0  God,  what 
was  it  that  caused  Thee  to  cast  off 
Thine  inheritance?  What  but  the 
same  that  made  Thee  cast  the  angels 
out  of  heaven — even  their  rebellious 
sins.  Those  sins  dared  to  emulate  the 
greatness  of  Thy  mercies,  no  less  than 
they  forced  the  severity  of  Thy 
judgments. — Bp.  Hall. 

bid 


OHAr.  xvn.  nOMILBTlC  COMMENTARY:  KIN08. 

E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  7-82 

Idolatry  the  Dfstructive  Eorce  in  National  Lifb. 

From  the 'lengthy  review  embraced  by  this  paragraph  we  again  obtain  a  glimpse 
into  the  moral  purpose  of  the  historian  of  kings.  In  the  writer's  estimation 
everything  is  to  be  subordinated  to  the  setting  forth  of  the  Divine  purpose  in 
raising  up  the  Hebrew  people,  and  the  miseries  that  came  upon  them  for  the 
violation  of  their  part  of  the  covenant.  The  rise  and  fall  of  dynasties,  the  conduct 
of  great  battles,  the  advance  of  the  nation  in  commercial  prosperity  and  civiliza- 
tion, the  notice  of  contemporary  nations,  are  all  dismissed  with  the  briefest 
reference ;  but  whatever  affects  the  theocratic  aspect  of  the  history  is  described 
with  significant  fullness  of  detail.  The  downfall  of  Israel  was  a  catastrophe  so 
momentous  that  the  historian  pauses  in  the  midst  of  his  narrative  to  enlarge 
upon  its  moral  aspects.  One  of  the  most  impressive  lessons  we  learn  in  this 
review  is  that  Idolatry  is  the  great  destructive  force  in  national  life.     Observe — 

I.  That  idolatry  demoralises  the  national  spirit.  1.  It  weakens  the  sense 
of  moral  ohligaiion  to  ohey  the  Divine  law  (ver.  12).  When  Israel  was  rescued 
out  of  Egyptian  bondage,  they  became  God's  covenant  people,  and  pledged  them- 
selves to  obey  Him.  The  fact  of  this  great  and  signal  deliverance  stands  at  the 
head  of  the  covenant  law  (Ex.  xx.  2),  and  is  always  cited  as  the  chief  and 
fundamental  act  of  the  Divine  favour  (Lev.  xi.  45;  Josh.  xxiv.  17;  1  Kings 
viii.  51 ;  Psa.  Ixxxi.  10 ;  Jer.  ii.  6).  The  discipline  of  the  wildnerness  and  the 
awful  displays  of  the  Divine  power  and  majesty,  were  intended  to  divest  them 
of  the  remnants  of  heathenism  that  still  clung  to  them,  and  to  instruct  them  in 
the  knowledge  and  worship  of  the  only  True  God.  Every  relapse  into  idolatry 
was  a  loss  of  moral  stamina,  weakened  the  bonds  of  obligation,  and  made 
obedience  more  difficult.  We  have  need  to  be  on  our  guard  every  moment 
against  the  seductive  lures  of  idolatry — all  the  more  dangerous  because  there  is 
so  much  in  us  ever  ready  to  respond  to  its  bewitching  overtures.  We  have  need, 
in  moments  of  temptation,  to  cultivate  towards  our  Heavenly  Father  the  artless 
simplicity  of  the  child  who,  in  a  state  of  alarm,  ran  to  his  parent,  and  cried, 
"  Mother,  my  goodness  grows  weak — ^help  me !"  2.  It  leads  its  votaries  into 
the  lowest  depths  of  wickedness  (ver.  7-11,  and  15 — 17).  In  these  verses  we 
have  the  genesis  and  career  of  the  idolater  graphically  portrayed.  Distaste  and 
neglect  of  the  Divine  statutes  and  commandments— a  preference  and  love  for 
other  gods — secret  indulgence,  unblushing  publicity — enforcing  by  statute  on 
others  what  he  had  at  first  but  timidly  practised  himself;  a  more  complete 
wrenching  away  from  his  allegiance  to  Jehovah ;  a  defiant,  menacing  attitude 
assumed  ;  utter  rejection  of  God ;  reckless  and  unreserved  abandonment  to  his 
self-chosen  deities;  ** selling  himself  to  do  evil*';  infatuated  devotion  to  the 
most  revolting  practices ;  the  end,  desolation  and  ruin. 

II.  That  idolatry  hardens  its  victims  ag^ainst  the  most  faithful  warnings 
and  appeals  (ver.  13,  14).  [srael  was  not  allowed  to  drift  to  her  fate  unchecked 
and  unwarned  ;  the  most  gifted  prophets  of  the  Hebrew  school  were  sent  to 
instruct  and  admonish  the  people.  Doubtless  some  gave  heed  to  their  teachers, 
and  mourned  over  the  infatuation  of  their  countrymen.  But  the  bulk  of  the 
nation,  following  the  lead  of  those  high  in  authority,  shut  their  ears  to 
instruction,  disdained  reproof,  and  persevered  in  their  sins.  It  is  illustrative  of 
the  subtle,  dangerous  power  of  idolatry,  that  it  renders  its  votaries  so  oblivious 
to  the  truth  and  so  impervious  to  its  strokes.  The  action  of  water,  which,  in 
an  early  stage,  will  soften  a  given  substance  when  continued  incessantly,  only 
petrifies  it  the  more  ;  so  is  it  with  the  moral  influence  of  truth  :  the  nature  that 
was  once  easily  melted  is  now  defiant  and  obdurate. 

680 


BOMILETIG  CO^^ME^TARY:  KINGS.  chap.  x?ir. 


III.  That  idolatry  involves  the  nation  in  decay  and  ruin  (ver.  18-23). 

In  these  verses  the  writer  takes  pains  to  show  that  their  idolatry  was  the  parent 
of  every  other  sin  that  weakened  and  degraded  the  national  character.  The 
heroism  and  compact  union  which  rendered  them  invincible  in  days  when 
Jehovah  was  honoured  and  worshipped  no  longer  existed,  and  they  became  an 
easy  prey  to  the  spoiler.  The  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Malta,  in  the  early 
period  of  the  ord(T,  were  remarkable  for  their  devout  Christian  spirit  as  well  aa 
for  bravery  and  prowess.  In  1565  they  defended  the  island  against  30,000 
Turks.  When,  after  incredible  acts  of  heroism  and  endurance  on  both  sides,  the 
fortress  of  St.  Elmo  fell,  the  Turkish  commander,  looking  from  its  ruined 
bastions  across  the  harbour  at  the  lofty  ramparts  of  St.  Angelo,  exclaimed, 
**  What  will  not  the  parent  cost  us  when  the  child  has  been  gained  at  so  fearful 
a  price!"  He  was  obliged  to  raise  the  seige,  and  of  the  30,000  Turks  scarcely 
10,000  found  their  way  back  to  Constantinople.  What  was  invincible  to  war- 
fare in  the  16th  century  yielded  too  easily  to  bribery  and  corruption  in  the 
18th.  The  gold  of  Napoleon  accomplished  what  the  combined  forces  of  Turkey 
had  failed  to  do ;  and  as  Napoleon  entered  the  gates  of  Malta,  General  Caffarelli 
remarked  to  him,  glancing  at  the  massive  defences,  *^  It  is  fortunate  we  have 
some  one  to  admit  us,  for  we  should  never  have  got  in  of  ourselves."  So 
greatly  had  the  knights  of  1798  degenerated  from  the  brave  defenders  of  St. 
Elmo  in  1565.  The  nation,  as  the  individual,  is  strong  only  as  it  is  genuinely 
religious:  decay  in  piety  means  decay  in  all  that  gives  greatness  and 
permanence  to  a  nation. 

Lessons  : —  1 .  Whatever  lowers  the  national  moral  tone  is  a  calamity.  2.  Idolatry 
is  an  audacious  attempt  to  live  without  God  in  everything.  3.  The  nation  that 
persistently  ignores  God  will  come  to  naught — it  produces  in  itself  the  elements 
that  shall  destroy  it, 

QERM  hOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yerses  7-23.  A  review  of  the  friends;  ambition,  honour's  over- 
moral  causes  of  national  decay. —  throw ;  distrust,  the  great  mind's  tor- 
1.  Civil  dissension  and  revolt  (verses  ment ;  and  foreign  aid,  the  empire's 
21-23).  2.  Flagrant  abandonment  of  unfaithful  porter,  opening  the  gate 
God  (verses  15,  16).  3.  Voluntary  even  to  the  enemy  himself. — Trapp. 
choice  and  practice  of  grossest  idolatry  —  Here  where  the  kingdom  of  the 
(verses  8- 1 2).  4.  Habitual  neglect  ten  tribes  comes  to  an  end  and  dis- 
of  prophetic  warning  and  instruction  appears  for  ever  from  history,  was  the 
(verses  13,  14).  place  for  casting  a  glance  back  upon 

—  Their  iniquity  was  their  ruin,  its  development  and  history.  This 
Out  of  Hosea  and  Amos  their  sins  the  writer  does  from  the  old  Testa- 
may  be  gathered ;  and  especially  their  ment  standpoint,  according  to  which 
abominable  idolatry,  contempt  of  God's  God  chose  the  people  of  Israel  to  be  His 
prophets,  and  abuse  of  His  benefits.  own  peculiar  people,  made  a  covenant 
Of  the  ruin  of  the  Greek  empire  the  with  it,  and  took  it  under  His  special 
historian  assigns  these  for  the  chief  guidance  and  direction  for  the  welfare 
causes:  Eirst,  the  innovation  and  and  salvation  of  all  nations.  The 
change  of  their  ancient  religion,  breach  of  the  covenant  by  the  Northern 
whereof  ensued  a  world  of  woes  ;  Kingdom  is  in  his  view  the  first,  the 
then  covetousness,  coloured  with  the  peculiar,  and  the  only  cause  of  its 
name  of  good  husbandry,  the  utter  final  fall,  and  this  fall  is  the  judgment 
destruction  of  the  chief  strength  of  of  the  holy  and  just  God.  If  he  had 
the  empire ;  next  envy,  the  ruin  of  not  known  that  this  covenant  law,  in 
the  great ;  false  suspect,  the  looser  of  the  form  in  which  he  was  familiar 

681 


GHAP.  XVII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAltY:   KINGS, 


with  it,  had  existed  long  before  the  cloaked  over  what  tliey  did;  hut  in 

division  of  the  kingdom,  he  could  not  vain;  for  God  is  all  eye,  and  to  Him 

have  declared   so   distinctly  and   de-  dark    things    appear,    dumb    things 

cidedly  that  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  answer,  silence  itself  maketh  confes- 

of  the  ten  tribes  was  a  Divine  judg-  sion. — Trapp. 

ment  upon  it  for  its  apostacy  from  that 

law. — Lange,  Verse   12.      But   they   did  it  the 

—   Would  that   men,   when   they  rather;  taking  occa^^ion  by  the  law, 

read  such  passages,  would   stop    and  that  their   sin  might    appear  to    be 

think,  and  would  enter  upon  a  com-  exceeding  sinful  (Rom.  vii.  13).  Such 

parison  between  the  peoples  of  God  at  is  the  canker  of  our  vile  natures,  that 

that  time  and  of  this,  and  would  thus  the   more   God  forbids  a  thing,  the 

make  application  of  the  lesson  of  his-  more  we  bid  for  it. — Ibid, 
tory.      The    people    of    Israel    were 

hardly  as  wicked  as  the  Christians  of  Verse  13.     The   obduracy   of  im- 

to-day.     The  responsibility  of  to-day  penitence. —  1.    Is  coldly  indifferent 

is  far  greater,  for  they  were  called  to  alike  to   warning  or  entreaty  (verse 

righteousness  under  the  old  law,  we  13).     2.    Is  intensified  by  persistent 

under  the  Gospel  of  free  grace.     The  unbelief  (verse  14).     3.  Is  confirmed 

people  of  the  Ten  Tribes  did  not  reject  in  its  defiant  attitude  by  the  character 

belief  in  God  at  first;  but,  contrary  to  of   its  daily  worship   (verse  15).     4. 

the  law  of  this  God,  they  made   to  Utterly  rejects  every  vestige  of  Divine 

themselves  an  image  of  Him.     This  authority  and  guidance  (verse  16).    5. 

was  the  beginning  of  their  downfall.  Voluntarily   abandons    itself    to    the 

the  germ  of  their  ruin.     This  led  from  most  debasing  practices   (verse   17). 

error  to  error.     They  commenced  with  6.  Inevitably  incurs  the  Divine  dis- 

an  image  of  Jehovah ;   they  finished  pleasure  (verse  18). 
with  the  frightful  sacrifices  of  Moloch. 

He  who  has  once  abandoned  the  centre  Verse  13.  Neither  were  these  slips 
of  revealed  truth,  sinks  inevitably  of  frailty,  or  ignorant  mistakings,  but 
deeper  and  deeper,  either  into  unbelief  wilful  crimes,  obstinate  impieties,  in 
or  into  superstition,  so  that  he  finally  spite  of  the  doctrines,  reproofs,  men- 
comes  to  consider  darkness  light,  and  aces,  and  miraculous  convictions  of 
folly  wisdom.  So  it  was  in  Israel,  so  the  holy  prophets.  Thy  destruction 
it  is  now  in  Christendom.  He  who  is  of  thyself,  0  Israel !  What  could 
abandons  the  central  truth  of  Christi-  the  just  hand  of  the  Almighty  do  less 
anity — Christ,  the  Son  of  God — is  in  than  consume  a  nation  so  incorrigibly 
the  way  of  losing  God.  A  nation  flagitious — a  nation  so  unthankful  for 
which  no  longer  respects  the  Word  of  mercies,  so  impatient  of  remedies,  so 
God,  but  makes  a  religion  for  itself,  incapable  of  repentance.  What  nation 
according  to  its  own  good  pleasure,  under  heaven  can  now  challenge  an 
will  sooner  or  later  come  to  ruin. —  indefeasible  interest  in  God,  when 
Ibid.  Israel   itself  is   cast   off  ?      He   that 

spared  not  the  natural  olive,  shall  He 

Verses  9-12.    The  progressive  de-  spare  the  wild? — Bp,  Hall. 
velopment   of   evil.— 1.    Begins    in 

secret.    2.  Gradually  gains  the  mastery  Verse   16.     "And   worshipped   all 

over  conscientious  scruples.     3.  Soon  the  host  of  heaven."     It  is  not  easy  to 

acquires    a   shameless    effrontery    in  determine  the  exact  form  which  the 

public.    4.  Becomes  universally  estab-  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies  took  in 

lished  by  popular  usage  and  example,  the  various  nations  of  Western  Asia. 

5.  Reckless  of  consequences,  to  either  The  purest  form  of  star  worship  was 

God  or  man,    cares  not  how  deeply  that  of  the  Assyrio-Persian  Magism; 

God  is  grieved  or  man  is  injured.  it  admitted  of  no  images  of  the  Deity, 

and  in  its  adoration  of  the  heavenly 

Verse  9.     They  hid,  or  covered,  or  bodies  it  drew  its  deepest  inspiration 
682 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  oai.P.  x\iu 


from  the  thought  of  their  perfect  ing,  to  he  brought  to  repentance.  Is  it 
beauty.  This  was  the  cultus  to  which  any  better  now-a-days? — Lange, 
Job  felt  himself  tempted  when  he  —  Speaking  humanly,  the  state  was 
"beheld  the  sun  when  it  shined,  or  past  redemption ;  the  utter  corruption 
the  moon  walking  in  brightness "  (tfob  and  impenitence  of  the  people  are 
xxxi.  26,  compared  with  Deut.  iv.  19).  attested  by  the  denunciations  of  Hosea, 
A  second  mode  of  regarding  the  stars  and  confirmed  by  their  scornful  rejec- 
was  that  of  the  Phoenicians,  by  whom  tion  of  Hezekiah^s  call  to  repentance 
they  were  looked  upon  as  the  origi-  and  union.  Even  the  king  was  only 
nators  of  the  growth  and  decay  of  some  shades  better  than  his  prede- 
nature — the  embodiment  of  the  ere-  cessors ;  and  it  was  no  partial  reform 
ative  and  regenerative  principle ;  and  that  could  save  and  renew  the  state. 
from  this  view  there  was  readily  de-  Viewing  the  case  from  the  higher 
veloped  a  further  symbolism,  which  ground  taken  throughout  the  Scripture 
led  ere  long  to  the  grossest  idolatries,  history — the  inseparable  connection 
The  third  great  system  of  astral  wor-  between  national  prosperity  or  ad- 
ship  was  that  whose  leading  tendency  versity,  and  religious  obedience  or 
was  to  dwell  rather  on  the  contempla-  rebellion — we  cannot  say  that  it  was 
tion  of  the  eternal  unchangeableness  too  late  for  Israel  to  be  saved ;  as 
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  as  contrasted  Sodom  would  have  been,  if  five  righte- 
with  the  chances  and  changes  of  this  ous  men  had  been  found  in  her ;  as 
transitory  life.  This  was  the  form  Mneveh  was,  when  her  people  re- 
most  common  among  the  Chaldeans,  pented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah, 
and  naturally  produced  the  astrology  They  had  only  forty  days  of  grace ; 
for  which  they  were  famous.  It  is  Hoshea  and  his  people  had  three  years, 
not  always  possible  to  determine  which  Had  the  king  of  Israel  made  common 
form  of  the  worship  of  the  host  of  cause  with  Hezekiah,  and  thrown  hi m- 
heaven  was  that  which  presented  itself  self  upon  the  protection  of  Jehovah, 
as  a  temptation  to  the  children  of  we  have  a  right  to  believe  that  the 
Israel.  On  the  whole,  we  may  assume  times  of  David  might  have  returned, 
it  to  have  been  the  second,  not  only  But  Hoshea  took  the  very  course  de- 
from  the  connection  in  which  it  is  nounced  by  the  law  of  Moses — reliance 
mentioned,  but  also  from  the  circum-  upon  Egypt.  His  sudden  destruction 
stances  of  the  case, —  Wilktna*  Phoenicia  is  compared  by  the  prophet  Hosea  to 
and  Israel,  the  disappearance  of  foam   upon  the 

water. — Dr.  Smith's  Student  Scripture 

Verse  17.     "And  they  sold  them-  History, 
selves  to  to  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 

Lord."  The  responsibility  of  the  Verses  20-23.  A  God-forsaken 
sinner.  1.  Is  grounded  in  his  free-  people.  1.  The  fruit  of  obstinate 
dom  of  volition.  2.  Is  abused  by  and  continued  disobedience  (verse  22). 
every  act  of  iniquity  he  voluntarily  2.  Become  a  prey  to  sufiteiing  and 
commits.  3.  Cannot  be  destroyed  by  spoliation  (verse  20).  3.  Cannot  but 
the  most  frantic  efforts  of  self-forget-  observe  the  contrast  between  the  good- 
fulness  and  sin.  4.  Will  one  day  ness  and  patience  of  God,  and  the 
make  him  terribly  conscious  how  cruelty  of  their  despotic  conquerors 
deeply  he  has  offended  God.  (verses  21,  23).     4.  May  be  restored, 

if    the   Divine   favour   be   sought  in 

Verse  18.     The  kingdom  of  Israel  penitence  and  humble  submission, 
had  nineteen  kings,  and  not  one  of 

them  was  truly  pious.     Wonder  not  Ver.  23.     The  ultimate  fate  of  the 

at  the  wrath,  but  at  the  patience  of  Ten  Tribes  of  Israel.     The  main  body 

God  in  that   He  endured  their   evil  of  the  inhabitants  were  transplanted 

ways  for  many  hundred  years,  and  at  to  the  remotest  provinces  of  the  As- 

their   ingratitnde  that  they  did   not  Syrian  empire.     After  this  it  is  diffi- 

allow  themselves,  by  His  long-suffer-  cult  to  discover  any  distinct  trace  of 

68a 


CHAP.  XVIL 


ROMlLMTlU  COMMMJS'TAtti:  KINGS. 


tlie  !N'orthern  tribes.  Some  returned 
with  their  countrymen  of  the  South- 
ern kingdom.  In  the  New  Testament 
there  is  special  mention  of  the  tribe 
of  Asher,  and  the  ten  tribes  generally 
are  on  three  emphatic  occasions  ranked 
with  others  (James  i.  1  ;  Acts  xxvi. 
7 ;  Kev.  vii.  5-8).  The  immense 
Jewish  population  which  made  Baby- 
lonia a  second  Palestine  was  in  part 
derived  from  them ;  and  the  Jewish 
customs  that  have  been  discovered  in 
the  Nestorian  Christians,  with  the 
traditions  of  the  sect  itself,  may  indi- 
cate at  any  rate  a  mixture  of  Jewish 
descent.  Thai  they  are  concealed  in 
some  unknown  region  of  the  earth  is 
a  fable  with  no  foundation  either  in 
history  or  prophecy. — istanley. 

—   There  has  been  a  wide-spread 
belief  among  modern  Christians  that 
the  Ten  Tribes,  having  never  returned 
to   their   native   country,    must   still 
exist  somewhere  in  a  collected  body. 
Travellers   have   thought  to  discover 
them    in    Malabar,    in   Kashmir,    in 
China,  in  Turkistan,  in  Afghanistan, 
in  the  Kurdish  mountains,  in  Arabia, 
in     Germany,     in     North     America. 
Books   have  been  written  advocating 
this   or   that  identification,    and  the 
notion    has   thus   obtained  extensive 
currency  that  somewhere  or  other  in 
the  world  the  descendants  of  the  Ten 
Tribes    must   exist,    and   that   when 
found  they   might  be  recognized   as 
such  by  careful  and  diligent  enquiry. 
It  seems  to  have  been  forgotten  that, 
in  the  first  place,  they  were  scattered 
over  a  wide  extent  of  country  (Harran, 
Chalcitis,    Gozan,    or   Mygdonia   and 
Media)   by   the   original  conquerors ; 
that,  secondly,  in  the  numerous  con- 
quests   and   changes   of    populations 
•which  are  known  to  have  taken  place 
in  these  regions  they  would  naturally 
become  more  scattered ;  that,  thirdly, 
a  considerable  number  of  them  proba- 
bly   returned   with   the   Jews  under 
Zerubbabel   and  Ezra  (Ezr.  vi.    17  ; 
viii,    35 ;     1     Chron.    ix.    3) ;   that, 
fourthly,  those  who  remained  behind 
would   naturally   either  mingle  with 
the  heathen  among  whom  they  lived, 
or  become  united  with  the  Jews  of  the 
dispersion ;  and  that,  fifthly,  if  there 
684 


had  been  anywhere  in  this  part  of 
Asia  at  the  time  of  Alexander's  con- 
quests, or  of  the  Komau  expeditions 
against   Parthia  and  Persia,   a  com- 
munity of  the  peculiar  character  sup- 
posed,  it  is  most  improbable  that  no 
Greek  or  Roman  historian  or  geogra- 
pher     should     have     mentioned    it. 
Against     these    arguments    there    is 
nothing  to  be  set  but  a  statement  of 
Josephus,  in  the  first  century  of  our 
era,  that  the  Ten  Tribes  still  existed 
beyond  the  Euphrates  in  his  day  (he 
does  not  say  in  a  collective  form) ;  and 
a  similar  declaration  of  Jerome  in  the 
fifth.     Neither  writer  has  any  personal 
acquaintance    with  the  countries,   or 
speaks     from    his    own    knowledge. 
Both    may  be   regarded   as   relating 
rather  what  they  supposed  must  bo, 
than   what  they  knew  actually   was 
the  case.     Again,  neither  may  mean 
more  than  that  among  the  Hebrews 
of  the  dispersion  (Acts  ii.  9)  in  Parthia, 
Media,   Elam,  and  Mesopotamia  were 
many     Israelites.       On    the    whole, 
therefore,  it  would  seem  probable  (1) 
That   the   Ten   Tribes  never  formed 
a  community  in  their  exile,  but  were 
scattered     from   the    first;    and    (2) 
That  their  descendants  either  blended 
with  the  heathen  and  were  absorbed, 
or  returned  to  Palestine  with  Zerub- 
babel and  E^ra,  or  became  inseparably 
united   with   the   dispersed  Jews  in 
Mesopotamia  and  the  adjacent  coun- 
tries.    No  discovery,  therefore,  of  the 
Ten  Tribes  is  to  be  expected,  nor  can 
any    works    written    to   prove  their 
identity   witli   any   existing  race   or 
body  of  persons  be  regarded  as  any- 
thing more  than  ingenious  exercita- 
tions. — Speaher^s  Cornm, 

—  Esdras  has  a  vision  of  the  Ten 
Tribes  separating  themselves  from  the 
heathen  and  migrating  to  a  distant 
land,  never  before  inhabited  by  men 
(2  Esdras  xiii.  40-47).  Perhaps  this 
vision  of  Esdras  was  the  starting  point 
of  all  the  speculations  about  the 
"  Lost  Tribes,"  for  they  have  been 
lost  and  found  in  nearly  every  part  of 
Asia,  Europe,  and  North  America. 
But  vague  traditional  tales  and  in- 
genious speculations  are  of  little 
weight  to  counter-balance  the  abund- 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS, 


CHIP.  xvn. 


ant  testimony  of  Scripture  on  the  sub- 
ject, which  may  be  stated  aa  follows : 
— 1.  A  considerable  portion  of  the 
Israelitish population  never  went  into  the 
Assyrian  exile.  The  first  deportations 
were  by  Pul  and  Tiglath-Pileser,  and 
in  all  probability  were  composed  of 
fewer  captives  than  Sargon  carried 
away  after  the  capture  of  Samaria  and 
the  fall  of  the  Northern  Kingdom. 
Sargon's  inscription,  which  would  not 
be  likelj  to  make  too  low  an  estimate, 
mentions  27,280  captives;  but  the 
Northern  Kingdom  must  surely  have 
had  a  population  far  exceeding  these 
numbers.  Multitudes  were  of  course 
slain  in  the  siege  of  Samaria  and  in 
previous  wars;  but  supposing  the 
captives  to  be  ten  times  the  number 
given,  what  became  of  all  the  rest  of 
Israel,  which  in  David's  time  num- 
bered 800,000  warriors,  which  implied 
a  population  of  many  millions  (2  Sam. 
xxiv.  9).  Only  the  cities  of  Samaria 
seem  to  have  been  depopulated,  so  that 
in  other  and  remoter  districts  of  the 
kingdom  a  larger  majority  of  the 
populaton  seem  to  have  been  left  to 
care  for  the  land.  Thus  the  Kingdom 
of  the  Ten  Tribes  ceased  to  exist ;  but 
numerically  the  mass  of  the  people  ?=^e?'e 
left  in  their  ancient  homes.  Certain 
it  is  that  they  were  not  all  carried  into 
exile.  2.  The  captives  were  not  allowed 
to  settle  in  one  district.  Perhaps  a  ma- 
jority were  placed  in  Halah  and  along 
the  Habor ;  but  others,  and  how  large 
a  proportion  does  not  appear,  were 
scattered  abroad  in  various  cities  of 
Media.  This  fact  of  their  being  scat- 
tered throughout  various  parts  of  the 
vast  Assyiian  empire  argues  against 
the  notion  of  their  continuing  their 
tribal  distinctions,  and  especially  of 
their  perpetuating  the  Ten  Tribes  as 
an  organized  community.  3.  There  is 
reason  to  believe  that  after  the  fall  of 
Samaria  the  old  enmit?/  between  Jndah 
and  Israel  began  to  cease.  In  the  reign 
of  Hezekiah  numbers  of  the  tribes  of 
Israel  accepted  the  public  invitation 
to  celebrate  the  Passover  at  Jerusalem 
(2  Chron.  xxx.) ;  and  at  the  close  of 
the  Passover  '*  all  Israel  that  were 
present  went  out "  and  destroyed  all 
the  signs  of  idolatry  **  out  of  all  Judah 


and   Benjamin,  in  Ephraim  also  and 
Manasseh "  {il.  xxxi.    1).     The  like 
thing  was  done  by  Josiah  (2    Kings 
xxiii.  19  ;  2  Chron.  xxxvii.  7;  xxxv. 
8).     Such  a  coming  together  in  their 
now    oppressed    land    would   rapidly 
efface   from  Judah   and   Israel   their 
ancient  bitterness  and  jealousy.     The 
better  portion  of  all  the  people  would 
see    and    obey  the   manifest   will   of 
Jehovah,    and    the    rest,    having    no 
bond  of  union,    would  gradually  die 
and  fade  away.     4.   The  prophets,  with 
one  voice,    represent  both    Judah   and 
Israel    returning    together  from   their 
exile.     More  than  a  century  after  the 
fall  of  Samaria,  Judah  also  was  led  into 
exile,  and  Jeremiah,  who  flourished  at 
that  time,  began  at  once  to   comfort 
them  with  prophecies  of  a  restoration. 
(Compare  Jer.  iii.  1 8  ;  xxx.  3  ;  xxxiii, 
7;  1.  4;  Ezek    xxxvii.  21,  22;   Isa. 
xi.    11-13;     xiv.    1;    Hosea    i.    11; 
Micah  ii.   12).     So  we   may  believe 
that  the  chastisement  of  the  exile  not 
only  cleansed  all  Israel  from  idolatry, 
but  also  utterly  crushed  out  the  tribal 
feuds  and  jealousies.     Some  of  these 
prophecies    are   doubtless    Messianic, 
but  all  have  more  or  less  to  show  that 
in  their  exile  Judah  and  Israel  became 
united  in  all  their  higher  sympathies 
and  hopes,  and  were   thus   prepared, 
whenever  opportunity  offered,  to  re- 
turn  together   to   the   land  of   their 
fathers.     5.  Finally :  All  we  know  of 
the  subsequent  history  of  Israel  tends  to 
show  that  in  the  lands  of  their  exile j  and 
elsewhere,    Judah    and   Israel  became 
largely  intermingled.     It  is  likely  many 
of  the  exiles  from  Judah  were  settled 
in  cities  and  di^^tricts  already  occupied 
by  descendants  of  those  Israelites  from 
the  cities  of  Samaria,  who  had  been 
carried  off  by  the  Assyrian  kings  more 
than  a  century  before.     Since  the  cap- 
tivity the  common  name  for  all  Israel- 
ites,   wherever    scattered   abroad,    is 
Jews.      With   the    fall    of    Samaria, 
**  the  kingdom  of  the  house  of  Israel " 
had  no  longer  an  existence,  but  was 
largely  absorbed  by  Judah ;  and  there- 
fore it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that 
no  express  mention  is  made  of  descend- 
ants of  the  Ten  Tribes  returning  along 
with   Judah   from   exile.     But  there 

685 


cfffAP.xm. 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS, 


were  vast  multitudes  of  Judah  and 
Israel  that  never  accepted  the  offer  to 
return  to  the  father-kind.  They  are 
spoken  of  as  **  scattered  ahroad  '*  in 
the  Persian  empire  (Esther  iii.  8). 
They  are  referred  to  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost  as  "out  of  every  nation 
under  heaven"  (Acts  ii.  5-10).)  Jo- 
sephus  speaks  of  the  great  numhers 
of  Jews  who,  in  his  time,  dwelt  in 
Bahylon,  Mesopotamia,  and  beyond 
the  Euphrates  (Antiq.  xv.  1^2  ;  iii.  1  ; 
xviii.  9,  1).  Paul  speaks  of  "our 
Twelve  Tribes"  Acts  xxvi.  7);  and 
James  addressed  his  Epistle  "to  the 
Twelve  Tribes  scattered  abroad." 
Erom  all  this  we  infer,  that  after  the 
Babylonish  exile,  the  old  dominion  of 
"  Judah  and  Israel "  became  lost — all 
the  scattered  tribes  became  intermixed, 
no  one  region  held  any  one  tribe,  or 
any  definite  number  of  tribes — the 
name  of  Jews  was  applied  to  them  all ; 
the  Ten  Tribes,  as  a  distinct  nation, 
had  long  ceased  to  exist,  and  the  whole 
body  of  Israelites  throughout  the 
world  became  amalgamated  into  one 
people,  recognizing  themselves  as  the 
descendants  and  representatives  of  the 
twelve  ancient  tribes. —  WTiedon. 

—  Respecting  the  fate  of  the  captives 
we  have  had  the  statement  of  their 
transplantation  to  certain  districts  of 
Assyria  and  Media,  where  we  almost 
lose  sight  of  them.  Nor  is  this  sur- 
prising. The  gradual  contraction  of 
the  limits  of  the  Samaritan  kingdom 
suggests,  what  the  inscription  of  Sar- 
gon  confi.rms,  that  the  numbers  carried 
captive  at  last  were  far  less  consider- 
able than  is  commonly  supposed. 
Their  absorption  in  the  surrounding 
population  would  be  aided  by  their 
long  addiction  to  the  practice?  of 
idolatry  ;  and  the  loss  of  reverence  for 
their  religion  involved  absence  of  care 
for  the  records  of  their  national 
existence.  As  they  furnished  no  con- 
fessors and  martyrs,  like  Daniel  and 
"the  three  children,"  so  neither  did 
they  preserve  the  genealogies  on  which 
Judah  based  the  order  of  the  restored 
commonwealth.  But  yet  their  traces 
are  not  utterly  lost.  The  fact  that 
a  priest  was  found  among  them,  to 
teach  the  Samaritans  to  fear  Jehovah, 
586 


proves  that  they  maintained  some  form 
of  worship  in  His  name.  The  Book 
of  Tobit  preserves  the  record  of  do- 
mestic piety  among  captives  of  the 
tribe  of  Naphthali.  After  the  great 
captivity  of  Judah,  it  is  most  interest- 
ing to  see  how  continually  Ezekiel 
addresses  tho  captives  by  the  name  of 
Israel.  The  prophetic  symbol  of  the 
rod  of  Judah  and  "  the  rod  of  the 
children  of  Israel  his  companions " 
being  joined  into  one,  in  order  to  their 
restoration  as  one  nation,  as  Isaiah 
also  had  predicted,  seems  to  imply 
that  all  that  was  worth  preserving  in 
Israel  became  amalgamated  with 
Judah,  and  either  shared  in  the  resto- 
ration, or  became  a  part  of  the  "dis- 
persion "  who  were  content  to  remain 
behind,  and  who  spread  the  knowledge 
of  the  true  God  throughout  the  East. 
The  edict  of  Cyrus,  addressed  to  the 
servants  of  Jehovah,  God  of  Israel, 
would  find  a  response  beyond  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  and  though  none  of 
the  Ten  Tribes  appear,  as  such,  among 
the  returned  exiles,  there  is  room  for 
many  of  their  families  in  the  number 
of  those  who  could  not  prove  their 
pedigrees.  As  for  the  rest,  according 
to  the  very  images  of  the  prophet. 

Like  the  dew  on  the  mountain, 
Like  the  f<5am  on  the  river. 

Like  the  bubble  on  the  fountain, 
They  are  gone,  and  for  eveb. 

The  very  wildness  of  the  speculations 
of  those  who  have  sought  them  at  the 
foot  of  the  Himalayas  and  on  the 
coast  of  Malabar,  among  the  Nestorians 
of  Abyssinia  and  the  Indians  of  North 
America,  proves  sufficiently  the  hope- 
lessness of  the  attempt.  Have,  then, 
the  promises  of  God  concerning  their 
restoration  failed  ?  No  !  They  wore 
represented,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the 
return  of  Judah ;  and  for  the  rest, 
though  they  are  lost  to  us,  "  the  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  His."  When 
God  shall  reveal  out  of  every  nation 
those  who  have  "feared  God  and 
wrought  righteousness,"  all  the  tribes 
of  believers  in  Israel  will  be  owned, 
in  some  special  manner,  as  His  peo- 
ple.    That   this  restoration  will  not 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   K1NG8.  CBkP.  xvii. 


be  temporal,  but  spiritual,  seems  to  N*ew  Testament  authority  on  the 
be  the  plain  teaching  of  St.  Paul  in  whole  subject  (Rom.  ix— xi). — Lr, 
the  passage  which  forms  the   great      Smith's  Student  Scripture  History. 

H0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  2441. 
Beligious  Compromise. 

I.  That  religious  compromise  is  the  offspnng  of  human  fear  (verse 
24-28),  The  incursion  and  ravages  of  the  lions  dud  wild  beasts  that  multiplied 
so  rapidly  in  the  Jordan  Valley  and  the  forests  oi  Samaria  filled  the  now 
scattered  inhabitants  with  dread.  Regarding  their  sufferings  as  an  indication 
of  the  anger  of  some  local  deity,  they  were  anxious  to  be  instructed  in  *'  the 
manner  of  the  god  of  the  land."  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  Jehovah  was  wor- 
shipped as  one  of  many  other  deities.  Fear — fear  of  consequences,  fear  of 
offending,  fear  of  suffering — leads  to  the  most  calamitous  compromises.  **  In 
morals,'^  says  a  certain  writer,  "  what  begins  in  fear  usually  ends  in  wicked- 
ness; in  religion,  what  begins  in  fear  usually  ends  in  fanaticism.  Fear,  either 
as  a  principle  or  a  motive,  is  the  beginning  of  all  evil/' 

II.  That  religious  compromise  is  ever  productive  of  error  and  confusion 

(verse  29-34).  What  a  curious  and  pitiable  jumble  of  creeds  and  deities  we 
have  here!  It  is  an  illustration  of  what  must  happen  when  man  is  left  to 
himself.  The  key-note  of  the  paragraph  is  verse  33 — '*  They  feared  the  Lord 
and  served  their  own  gods."  They  sought  to  accomplish  the  impossible — to 
blend  what  can  never  be  united,  as  there  are  certain  metals  that  can  never  weld 
together,  and  certain  fluids  that  can  never  coalesce.  One  part  of  the  day  the 
worshipper  enters  the  temple  of  .^ehovah,  and  at  another  part  the  temple  of 
Succoth-Benoth.  So  confused  and  mixed  a  cultus  could  not  but  produce  serious 
misconceptions  of  religion  in  the  minds  of  both  old  and  young.  The  haphazard 
mixture  of  glaring  colours  in  the  pattern  offends  the  eye  and  vitiates  the  taste. 

III.  That  religious  comt)romis3  cre^^tes  a  class  of  inferior  and  incompe- 
tent teachers.  *'They  made  unto  themselves  of  the  lowest  of  them  priests" 
(verse  32).  There  is  in  the  sinful  human  heart  that  which  responds  too  readily 
to  what  is  broad  and  vague  in  religious  thought.  Eccentricity  of  religious 
opinion  has  many  imitators.  It  is  an  easy  matter  to  procure  teachers — and 
sometimes  men  gifted  with  no  mean  intellectual  ability — who  are  willing  to 
teach  what  is  agreeable  to  believe  and  pleasant  to  practise.  A  false  system  of 
religion  never  lacks  advocates,  such  as  they  are. 

The  sweet  words 
Of  Christian  promise,  words  that  even  yet 
Might  stem  destruction,  were  they  wisely  preached, 
Are  muttered  o'er  by  men,  whose  tones  proclaim 
How  flat  and  wearisome  they  feel  their  trade  : 
Bank  scoffers  some,  but  most  too  indolent 
To  redeem  their  falsehoods,  or  to  know  their  truth. 

Coleridge, 

lY.  That  the  claims  of  true  religion  admit  of  no  compromise  (vera^j* 
35-41).  In  these  verses  the  writer  rehearses  the  terms  of  the  covenant  betwedtk 
Jehovah  and  His  people,  and  shows  that  nothing  short  of  full  submission  and 
obedience  could  he  acceptable  to  God.  Religion  is  a  necessity  of  the  soul. 
**The  ivy  cannot  grow  alone;  it  must  twine  around  some  support  or  other;  if 
not  the  goodly  oak,  then  the  ragged  thorn ;  round  any  dead  stick  whatever, 
rather  than  have  no  stay  or  support  at  all.     It  is  even  so  with  the  heart  and 

587 


CHAP.  xvir. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


affections  of  man ;  if  they  do  not  twine  around  God,  they  must  twine  around 
some  meaner  thing."  True  religion  demands  the  absolute  surrender  of  the 
whole  man  to  God.  When  he  begins  to  hesitate,  to  palter,  to  compromise,  he 
begins  to  drift  away  from  God.  The  Divine  claims  become  an  irksome  bondage. 
He  seeks  to  snap  one  fetter  of  obligation  after  another ;  but  when  he  has 
snapped  the  last  fetter,  as  he  thinks — a  belief  in  a  personal  God — he  hap  still 
himself  left.  Which  is  preferable — the  golden  fetters  of  a  righteous  and 
impartial  Ruler,  or  the  tyranny  of  a  Frankenstein  monster,  generated  from  the 
dreary  swamps  of  a  perverted  self  ?  It  is  dangerous  to  trifle  with  the  absolute 
claims  of  true  religion. 

Lkssons  : — 1.  Compromise  may  be  useful  in  settling  external  difficulties,  but  is 
inadmissible  when  it  touches  vital  principles.  2.  T/ie  man  who  compromises  reli- 
gious principle,  loses  caste  with  those  to  whom  he  yields,  and  loses  strength  in 
himself.  3.  The  claims  of  Jehovah  should  be  reverently  recognised  and  faithfully 
observed. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


Verses  24-28.  The  religion  of 
fear.  1.  To  be  carefully  distin- 
guished from  a  spirit  of  reverential 
awe.  2.  Is  based  on  a  natural  dread 
of  suffering  and  calamity  (verse  25). 
3.  Will  pay  court  to  any  deity  who 
promises  protection  and  safety  (verse 
26).  4.  Readily  listens  to  any  teacher 
who  professes  to  know  anything  about 
the  deity  who  is  dreaded  (verses 
27,  28). 

Terse  25.  Not  the  veriest  Pagan 
can  be  excused  for  his  ignorance  of 
God.  Even  the  most  depraved  nature 
might  teach  us  to  tremble  at  a  Deity. 
The  brute  creatures  are  sent  to  re- 
venge the  quarrel  of  their  Maker. 
Still  hath  God  left  himself  champzons 
in  Israel.  Lions  tear  the  Assyrians  in 
pieces,  and  put  them  in  mind  that, 
had  it  not  been  for  wickedness,  the 
land  needed  not  to  have  changed 
masters.  The  great  Lord  of  the  world 
cannot  want  means  to  plague  offenders. 
There  is  no  security  but  in  being  at 
peace  with  God. — Bp.  Ball. 

Verse  26.  These  blind  heathens 
that  think  every  land  hath  a  several 
god,  yet  hold  that  god  worthy  of  wor- 
ship ;  yet  hold  that  worship  must  be 
grounded  upon  knowledge,  the  want 
of  that  knowledge  punishable,  the 
punishment  of  that  want  just  and 
divine.  How  much  worse  than  As- 
588 


Syrians  are  they  who  are  ready  to 
ascribe  all  calamities  to  nature,  to 
chance  ! — who,  acknowledging  but  one 
God,  are  yet  careless  to  know  and  serve 
Him  I— ibid. 

Verse  29-33.  Polytheism.  1.  Be- 
wilders the  worshipper  by  the  multi- 
plicity of  gods  (verses  29-31).  2.  Is 
not  scrupulous  as  to  the  character  of 
its  priests  (verse  32).  3.  Makes  no 
distinction  between  the  only  true  God 
and  false  deities  (verse  33).  4.  Can 
never  meet  the  deepest  needs  of  man's 
nature. 

—  A  country  cannot  fall  lower  than 
it  does  when  each  man  makes  unto 
himself  his  own  god.  We  are  indeed 
beyond  the  danger  of  making  to  our- 
selves idols  of  wood  and  stone,  silver 
and  gold ;  but  we  are  none  the  less 
disposed  to  form  idols  for  ourselves 
out  of  our  own  imaginatons,  and  not 
to  fear  and  worship  the  one  true  God 
as  He  has  revealed  Himself  to  us. 
That  is  the  cultivated  heathenism  of 
the  present  day.  Some  make  to  them- 
selves a  god  who  dwells  above  the 
stars,  and  does  not  care  much  for  the 
omissions  or  commissions  of  men  upon 
earth.  Others,  one  who  can  do  any- 
thing but  chastise  and  punish,  or  one 
in  whose  sight  men  forgive  themselves 
their  own  sins ;  who  does  not  recom- 
pense each  according  to  his  works ; 
but  forgives  all  without  discrimina- 


nOMTLETiG  C0M3IENTARY :   KINGS. 


OHAF.  xvn. 


tion,  and  who  opens  heaven  to  all 
alike,  no  matter  how  they  have  lived 
upon  earth. — Lange. 

—  What  a  prodigious  mixture 
was  here  of  religions — true  with 
false,  Jewish  with  Pagan,  divine  with 
devilish!  Every  division  of  these  trans- 
planted Assyrians  had  their  several 
deities,  high  places,  sacrifices.  No 
beggar's  coat  is  more  pieced  than  the 
religion  of  these  inhabitants  of  Israel. 
I  know  not  how  their  bodies  sped  for 
the  lions ;  I  am  sure  their  souls  fared 
the  worse  for  this  medley.  Above  all 
things  God  hates  a  mongrel  devotion. 
If  we  be  not  all  Israel,  it  were  better 
to  be  all  Ashur.  It  cannot  so  much 
displease  God  to  be  unknown  or  ne- 
glected, as  to  be  consoited  with  idols. 

Yer.  84-41.  The  sin  of  dis- 
obedience. 1.  All  the  more  grievous 
when  it  is  the  violation  of  solemn 
covenant.  2.  "When  committed  against 
a  Being  who  has  wrought  out  great 
deliverances  and  bestowed  signal  bless- 
ing. 3.  When  it  is  a  breach  of  the 
plainest  and  oft-repeated  command- 
ments. 4.  When  it  is  perpetuated 
generation  after  generation.  5.  Is  an 
occasion  of  sorrowful  regret  to  every 
lover  of  the  Divine  law. 

Yer.  34.  Rightly  they  fear  him 
not,  because  neither  truly  nor  totally. 
Their  religion  was  galimfrey,  a  mix- 
ture of  true  and  false,  which  is  as 
good  as  none ;  for  God  will  not  part 
stakes  with  the  devil  at  any  hand. 
Such  a  religion  is  a  mere  irreligion, 
because — 1.  Contrary  to  God's  law 
which  rejects  heathen  rites  (ver.  34, 
36,  37,  38,  40).  2.  Contrary 
to  God's  covenant,  which  heathens 
have  nothing  to  do  with  (ver.  '3,  38). 
^Trapp. 

—  Decay  in  religious  matters,  lack 
of  unity  of  conviction  in  the  highest 
and  noblest  affairs,  prevents  a  nation 
from  ever  becoming  great  and  strong. 
It  is  a  sign  of  the  most  radical  corrup- 
tion Similarity  of  faith  and  com- 
munity of  worship  form  a  strong 
uniting  force,  and  are  the  conditions  of 
true  national  unity.    The  existence 


of  different  creeds  and  professions  by 
the  side  of  one  another  is  a  source  of 
national  weakness.  It  is  an  error  to 
try  to  produce  this  unity  by  force :  it 
is  a  blessing  only  when  it  proceeds 
from  a  free  conviction. — Lange, 

Yer.  41.  Mongrel  religion.    This 

base  union  of  fearing  God  and  serving 
other  gods  is  by  no  means  obsolete. 
From  generation  to  generation  there 
have  been  mongrel  religionists  who 
have  tried  to  please  both  God  and  the 
devil,  and  have  been  on  both  sides,  or  on 
either  side,  as  their  interest  led  them. 
Some  of  these  wretched  blunderers 
are  always  hovering  around  every 
congregation.  I.  The  nature  of  this 
mongrel  religion.  1.  These  people 
were  not  infidels.  Far  from  it.  *'  They 
feared  the  Lord."  They  did  not  deny 
the  existence,  or  the  power,  or  the 
rights  of  the  great  God  of  Israel, 
whose  name  is  Jehovah,  They  had 
faith,  though  only  enough  to  produce 
fear.  It  was  better  to  dread  God  than 
to  despise  Him;  better  slavishly  to 
fear  than  stupidly  to  forget.  2.  They 
were  willing  to  he  taught.  The  man 
sent  to  teach  them  was  a  Bethelite, 
one  who  worshipped  God  under  the 
symbol  of  an  ox,  which  the  Scripture 
calls  a  calf.  He  was  a  very  slight 
improvement  upon  a  heathen ;  but  we 
must  be  glad  even  of  small  mercies. 
3.  They  were  willing  to  learn,  yet 
they  stuch  to  their  old  gods.  Thus 
this  mingle-mangle  religion  left  the 
people  practically  where  they  were : 
whatever  their  fear  might  be,  their 
customs  and  practices  remained  the 
same.  Have  you  never  met  with 
persons  of  the  same  mongrel  kind  ? 
They  take  delight  in  divine  services, 
and  yet  are  much  at  home  with  the 
God  of  this  world.  Some  worship  a 
deity  as  horrible  as  Moloch,  whose 
name  in  the  olden  time  was  Bacchus — 
tJie  god  of  the  wine  cup  and  the  beer 
barrel.  There  are  others  who  adore 
the  goddess  Yenus,  the  queen  of  lust 
and  uncleanness.  Too  often  the  god 
is  Mammon,  who  is  as  degraded  a 
deity  as  any  of  them.  II.  The  man- 
ner of  the  growth  of  this  mongrel 
religion.     1.  These  people  came  to  live 

689 


CHAP.  XTU. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


where  llie  people  of  God  had  lived.     If 
the  Sepharvites  had  stopped  at  Sep- 
harvaim    they    would     never    have 
thought  of  fearing  Jehovah ;  if  the  men 
of  Babylon  had  continued  to  live  in 
Babylon  they  would  have  been  per- 
fectly satisfied  with  Bel,  or  Succoth- 
Benoth.     But  when  they  w ere  brought 
into     Canaan    they    came    under    a 
different  order  of  things.     God  would 
not  allow  them  to  go  the  whole  length 
of  idolatry  in  His  land.     It  sometimes 
happens  to  utter  worldlings  that  they 
are  dropped  into  the  midst  of  Christian 
people.     A  kind  of  fashion  is  set  by 
the  professors  among  whom  they  dwell, 
and  they  fall  into  it.     2.    The  Lord 
sent  lions  among  them.     Affliction  is  a 
wild  beast  by  which  God  teaches  men 
who  act  like  wild  beasts.     This  is  the 
growth  of  mongrelists.     First,   they 
are   among   godly  people,   and  they 
must,  therefore,  go  a  little  that  way  ; 
and  next,  they  are  afflicted,  and  they 
must    now    go    further  still.     They 
argue  that  if  the  ills  they  feel  do  not 
reform  them,  they  may  expect  worse. 
If  God  begins  with  lions,  what  will 
come  next  ?     3.  Notice  that  the  root  of 
this  religion  is  fear.     Their  hearts  go 
after  their  idols,  but  to  Jehovah  they 
yield  nothing  but  dread.     If  sin  were 
not  followed  with  inconvenient  con- 
sequences they   would  live  in  it  as 
their  element,  as  fishes  swim  in  the 
sea.     They  are  only  kept  under  by  the 
hangman's  whip  or  the  jailer's  keys. 
They  dread  God,  and  this  is  but  a 
gentler  form  of  hating  him.     4.  Theg 
had  a  trimming  teacher.     The  king  of 
Assyria  sent  them  a  priest :  he  could 
not  have  sent  them  a  prophet,  but  that 
was   what  they  really  wanted.     He 
sent  them  a  Bethelite,  not  a  genuine 
servant  of  Jehovah,  but  one  who  wor- 
ships God  by  means  of  symbols ;  and 
this  the  Lord  had  expressly  forbidden. 
I  know  of  no  surer  way  of  a  people's 
perishing  than  by  being  led  by  one 
who  does  not  speak  out  straight,  and 
honestly  denounce  evil.     If  the  prea- 
cher trims   and  twists  to  please  all 
parties,  can  you  expect  his  people  to 
be  honest?     Those  who  are  afraid  to 
rebuke  sin,  of  to  probe  the  conscience, 
will  have  much  to  answer  for. 
590 


III.     The  value  of  this  mongrel 
religion.      l.    It  must    evidently    he 
feeble  on  both  sides,  because  the  man 
who  serves  Succoth-Benoth  cannot  do 
it  thoroughly  if  all  the  while  he  fears 
Jehovah  ;  and  he  who  fears  Jehovah 
cannot  be  sincere  if  he  is  worshipping 
Moloch.     The  one  sucks  out  the  life 
of  the  other.     The  man  is  lame  on 
both  feet,  impotent  in  both  directions. 
He  is  like  the  salt  which  has  lost  its 
savour,   neither  fit  for  the  land,  nor 
yet  for  the  dunghill.       2.  It   looked 
like  an  improvement.      It  had  a  look  in 
the  right  direction.     They  feared  the 
Lord  only  in  a  certain  sense,  but  in- 
asmuch as  they  also  served  other  gods, 
it  came  to  this,    when   summed   up, 
that  they   did  not  fear  God   at  all. 
The   man   who  is  religious  and  also 
immoral,  to  put  it  short,  is  irreligious. 
The  value  of  this  mixture  is  less  than 
nothing.     It  is  sin  with  a  little  var- 
nish upon  it.      It  is  enmity  to  God 
with  a  brilliant  colouring  of  formality. 
3.    These   Samaritans  in    after  years 
became  the  bitterest  foes  of  God^s  peo- 
ple.    Read  the  Book  of  Nehemiah, 
and  you  will  see  that  the  most  bitter 
opponents  of   that  godly    man    were 
these  mongrels.     Their  fear  of  God 
was  such   that   they   wanted   to  join 
with  the  Jews  in  building  the  Tem- 
ple,  and   when  they   found  that  the 
Jews    would    not    have    them,    they 
became     their     fiercest     foes.        No 
people  do  so  much  hurt  as  those  who 
are  like  Jack-o'-both-sides.     The  mis- 
chief does  not  begin  with  the  people 
of  God,  but  with  those  who  are  with 
them,  but  not  of  them.      As  the  cling- 
ing ivy  will  eat  out  the  life  of  a  tree 
around   which  it  climbs,  so  will  these 
impostors  devour  the  church  if  they 
be  left  to  their  own  devices.      4.  How 
provoking    this    adulterated    religion 
must  he  to  God.      It  is  even  provoking 
to  God's  ministers  to  be  pestered  with 
men    whose    hypocrisies    weaken    the 
force  of  his  testimony.      How  provok- 
ing must  it  be  to  God  Himself  !  True 
religion  suffers  for  their  falsehood. 

IV.     The  continuance  of  this  evil. 

"  As  did  their  fathers,  so  do  they,  unto 


RUMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap,  xviii. 


this  day."  I  am  almost  obliged  to  and  introduce  ourselves  to  thee  by 
believe  in  the  final  perseverance  of  saying,  "  Futher,  we  have  sinned, 
hypocrites ;  for,  really,  when  a  man  and  have  come  home  to  be  forgiven," 
once  screws  himself  up  to  play  the  and  to  go  on  sinning?  It  were  in- 
double,  and  both  to  fear  God  and  serre  fernal ;  I  can  say  no  less.  Lastly, 
other  gods,  he  is  very  apt  to  stick  what  shall  I  say  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ? 
there.  On  the  anvil  of  a  false  pro-  If  He  does  not  dwell  in  our  hearts  we 
fession,  Satan  hammers  out  the  most  are  lost;  there  is  no  hope  for  us  unless 
hardened  of  hard  hearts.  He  rules  within  us.     None  can  hang 

between  spiritual  death  and  spiritual 

Y.   The  cure  of  this  dreadful  evil  life,   so  as  to  be  partly  in  one  and 

of  mongrelism.    He  who  in  any  way  partly  in  the  other.     Be  one  thing  or 

tries  to  serve  God  and  His  enemies,  is  the  other. — G,  H.  Spurgeon, 
a  traitor  to  God.     Suppose  God  were 

to  treat  us  after  the  same  double  —  In  time  the  idolatrous  dross  got 
fashion ;  suppose  he  smiled  to-day  and  purged  out,  and  eventually  the  Sa- 
cursed  to-morrow.  You  want  one  maritan  system  of  belief  and  practice 
course  of  conduct  from  God — mercy,  became  as  pure  as  that  of  the  Jews, 
tenderness,  gentleness,  forgiveness ;  though  less  exact  in  some  of  its  ob- 
but  if  you  play  fast  and  loose  with  servances.  In  some  respects  it  may 
Him,  what  is  this  but  mocking  Him  ?  have  been  purer,  as  the  Samaritans 
0  thou  great  Father  of  our  spirits,  if  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
we  poor  prodigals  return  to  thee,  shall  mass  of  oral  traditions  with  which, 
we  come  driving  all  the  swine  in  front  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  the  Jewish 
of  us,  and  bringing  all  the  harlots  and  system  became  disfigured  and  over- 
citizens  of  the  far  country  at  our  heels,  laden. — Kitto, 


CHAPTER  XVin. 
THE    BEIGN    OP    HEZEKIAH    THE    GOOD. 

OBmoAL  AND  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Hezekiah  the  sonof  Ahaz  began  to  reign 

See  Note  on  chap.  xvi.  2  as  to  the  age  of  Ahaz.     Verse  4.  He  removed  the  high  places, 

and  brake  the  images — His  sweeping  reformation,  by  which  the  land  was  purged  of  idols, 
and  the  true  religion  of  Jehovah  re-established,  is  more  fully  depicted  in  '2  Chron.  xxix.  The 
brazen  serpent  that  Moses  had  made  —  For  even  that  symbol  of  salvation  by  faith  had  become 
prostituted  to  idolatrous  purposes,  just  as  the  symbol  of  the  cross  of  Christ  has  become  abused 
in  degenerate  Christendom.  He  called  it  Nehushtan— ^  thing  of  brass,  or  '*  the  so-called 
brass  god  "  (Ewald).  Verse  7.  He  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Assyria — Emancipated  Judah 
from  the  hateful  yoke.  At  this  time  Shalmanezor  was  engaged  in  war  with  Tyre  ;  and  Hez3- 
kiah,  acting  out  his  noble  faith  m  Jehovah  as  his  nation's  Supreme  King,  threw  off  heathenish 
oppession,  and  placed  himself  and  people  under  the  Theocracy  again.  Verses  9-12.  Record 
of  Israel's  deportation  by  Shalmanezer— Interposed  in  the  story  to  mark  the  date  of  its 
occurrence  in  Hezekiah's  reign.  So  that  while  this  good  king  was  restoring  Judah  to  alliance 
with  Jehovah,  and  recovering  the  independency  of  the  kingdom,  the  debasing  kingdom  of 
Israel  was  falling  into  ruins.  Verse  13.  In  the  fourteenth  year  of  Hezekiah  did  Senna- 
cherib, (Sec. — (Jomp.  Isaiah  xxxvi.  This  mighty  Assyrian  was  with  his  vast  army  on  his  way 
to  war  with  his  hated  and  dreaded  rival,  Egypt.  Judah  lay  m  the  line  of  his  march,  and  its 
conquest  was  essential  to  his  safe  advance  to  Egypt.  Hezekiah  trembled  as  this  t  rrible  foe 
swept  down  upon  the  land  ;  and  being  without  support  from  Egypt,  he  purchased  temporary 
respite  by  a  heavy  tribute  valuing  £351,000,  to  raise  which  he  had  to  empty  the  palace,  and 
even  strip  the  gold  from  the  temple  (verse  16).  Verse  14.  The  king  of  Assyria  to  Lachish  — 
A  strongly  fortified  town  south-west  of  Jerusalem  on  the  way  to  Egypt.  One  of  the  Assyrian 
bas-reliefs  recently  discovered  represents  the  seige  of  a  town  ;  shows  the  figure  of  an  Assyrian 
king  conducting  it,  and  a  string  of  captives  whose  phy>iognomy  is  unmistakably  Jewish. 
Over  the  head  of  the  king  runs  this  inscription  :  "  Seniiacherib,  the  mighty  king,  king  of  tht 
tomUry  of  Atsyria^  tittiny  9H  th$  throne  of  judgment  before  the  city  of  Lachish  :  I  give  permis- 

^91 


CHAP.  xvin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAltT:  KINGS, 


tion  for  its  flaughter,**  Verse  17.  Tartan  and  Rabsaris  ,  ,  against  Jerusalem -Senna, 
cherib  himself  marched  forward  against.  Egypt,  where  he  fonnd  himself  engaged  ia  a  three 
years'  campaign,  ending  in  defeat.  Tartan  was  general ;  Rabsaris,  chief  of  the  eunuchs ; 
Rab-shakeh,  chief  cnp-bearer.  The  general's  insolent  message  to  Hezekiah  was  met  with  the 
silence  (verse  36)  which  the  king  had  imposed  on  his  delegates  (verse  18).  and  which  the 
people  also  maintained.  This  avoided  provocation  to  the  Assyrian  general.  The  ambassadors, 
grieved  at  the  menacing  and  insulting  language  to  their  king,  and  the  blasphemies  against 
Jehovah  to  which  they  had  listened,  returned  to  Hezekiah  coveret'  with  the  signs  of  hamilia- 
^on  and  mourning. — W,  H.  J, 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-18. 
A  Kesolute  Religious  Befobmeb* 

I.  Is  characterised  by  the  possession  of  a  profound  and  genuine  personal 
piety  (ver.  5,  6).  The  great  movements  that  have  blessed  the  world  sprung 
from  the  religious  spirit.  Hezekiah's  piety  was  the  actuating  force  in  his 
reforming  work.  **He  trusted  in,  he  clave  to,  the  Lord"  :  these  words  reveal 
the  secret  of  his  inspiration  and  power.  We  trace  the  beginning  of  his  religious 
life  to  a  similar  source  where  many  a  great  and  good  man  received  his  best  and 
most  lasting  impressions — ^the  potent  influence  of  a  mother's  teaching.  It  is 
suggestively  stated  in  the  text — **  His  mother's  name  also  was  Abi,  the  daughter 
of  Zachariah'*  (ver.  2):  on  which  Wordsworth  remarks — **  The  names  of  the 
mothers  of  all  the  later  kings  of  Judah  are  mentioned  in  holy  scripture, 
intimating  the  importance  of  a  mother's  influence,  especially  in  evil  days.  It 
needs  a  brave  heart  and  vigorous  hand  to  attack  and  reform  abuses  that  have 
become  chronic  and  popular,  and  only  the  man  who  is  sustained  by  the  most 
intense  religious  convictions  will  attempt  it. 

II.  Is  fearless  and  unhesitating  in  destroying  all  popular  symbols  of 
idolatry  (ver.  4).  As  soon  as  the  king  began  his  reforming  work  he  found 
there  was  plenty  to  do.  His  kingdom  was  studded  with  heathen  shrines  and 
idolatrous  images.  Among  the  rest  was  the  brazen  serpent  of  Moses,  which 
would  acquire  a  mysterious  sanctity  because  of  its  antiquity  and  associations, 
and  would  readily  be  made  an  object  of  worship  by  a  people  so  habituated  to 
idolatry.  To  the  practical  eyes  of  the  reformer  this  object  of  reverence  was  but 
a  piece  of  brass,  and  he  did  not  hesitate  to  snap  it  in  pieces.  It  might  seem 
sacrilege  to  break  up  such  a  relic,  but  it  was  idolatry  to  preserve  it ;  it  must 
share  the  same  fate  as  the  rest.  The  earnest  reformer  has  a  sharp  definition  in 
his  own  mind  of  what  is  essential  and  non-essential,  and  he  makes  a  clean  sweep 
of  whatever  balks  the  attainment  of  his  loved  object.  He  deals  in  what  to  him 
are  stern  realities.     He  cannot  tolerate  shams :  away  with  them ! 

III.  Secures  the  prospering  blessing  ef  Jehovah  (ver.  7,  8).  God  honours 
the  man  who  is  zealous  for  His  glory.  So  Hezekiah  soon  realized.  He  with- 
held tribute  from  Assyria,  and  asserted  the  freedom  and  independence  of  his 
kingdom.  He  crushed  the  Philistines  who,  encouraged  by  the  weakness  of 
preceding  rulers,  had  harassed  the  borders  of  Judah.  "  He  prospered  whither- 
soever he  went  forth."  His  kingdom  was  small ;  no  larger  than  the  triangle  in 
the  North  of  England  defined  by  the  towns  of  Stockton-on-Tees,  Whitehaven, 
and  Berwick-on-Tweed — rather  smaller  than  Yorkshire  ;  but  it  had  great  natural 
resources  for  maintaining  a  considerable  population.  (For  an  interesting 
description  of  "Judah  in  Hezekiah's  day,"  see  Geikle's  ''Hours  with  the 
Bible").  How  so  insignificaiit  a  territory  rose  to  such  importance  and  affluence 
under  Hezekiah  is  explained  by  the  recorded  fact — *'  The  Lord  was  with  him," 

592 


no  MIL  ETIC  COM^fENTA  R  t :  KINOS.  chap,  x  vitr. 


The  man  that  works  for  God  shall  not  go  unblessed;  and  the  most  enriching 
blessing  is  the  Divine  Presence.  It  gives  strength  to  weakness,  grandeur  to 
the  insignificant,  turns  defeat  into  victory,  and  suffering  into  joy. 

lY.  Is  stimulated  and  encouraged  in  his  reforming  work  by  witnessing 
the  disastrous  results  of  apostacy  (ver.  9-12).  The  destruction  of  the  king- 
dom of  Israel  was  regarded  as  an  event  of  such  significance  that  the  sacred 
writer  interrupts  his  narrative  once  more  to  refer  to  it,  and  to  reiterate  the  truth 
that  disobedience  was  the  cause  of  its  ruin.  With  the  example  of  the  fate  of 
the  neighbouring  kingdom  before  his  eyes,  Hezekiah  would  be  excited  to  fiesh 
zeal  in  carrying  out  his  reforming  work.  He  saw  unless  he  rooted  out  idolatry, 
it  would  root  him  out.  It  is  related  of  a  celebrated  British  ambassador  to  the 
Court  of  Berlin  that  at  one  time  he  possessed  a  huge  boa  constrictor,  and 
interested  himself  in  watching  its  habits.  One  day  the  monster  escaped  from 
the  box  where  he  supposed  it  was  asleep,  quietly  wound  itself  around  his 
body,  and  began  gradually  to  tighten  its  folds.  His  position  became  extremely 
perilous ;  but  the  consummate  coolness  and  self-possession  which  had  enabled 
him  to  win  many  a  diplomatic  triumph,  befriended  him  in  this  emergency. 
He  remembered  there  was  a  bone  in  the  throat  of  the  serpent  which,  if  he  could 
find  and  break,  he  would  save  himself.  He  was  aware  that  either  he  or  the 
snake  must  perish.  Not  a  moment  must  be  lost  in  hesitation.  He  deliberately 
seized  the  head  of  the  serpent,  thrust  his  hand  down  its  throat,  and  smashed 
the  vital  bone.  The  coils  were  relaxed,  the  victim  fell  at  his  feet,  and  he  was 
free !  So  Hezekiah  saw  his  kingdom  enswathed  in  the  deadly  coils  of  idolatry, 
aud  that  unless  he  acted  with  promptitude  and  vigour,  both  he  and  his  kingdom 
would  perish  as  Israel  had  done.  He  attacked  the  vulnerable  i)art  of  the  evil 
with  such  resolution  that  he  and,  for  a  time  his  people,  were  saved. 

Lessot^s  : — 1.  No  man  can  he  a  reformer  who  has  not  deep  religious  convictions. 
2.  It  is  an  important  advantage  'nhen  reform  is  championed  hy  royalty,  3.  Genuine 
reform  arrests  the  progress  of  decay  and  ruin, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  FEESE8. 

Yerses  1-3.     Israel  is  gone.    Judah  into  the  heartless  remnant   of  God's 

is  left  standing ;  or  rather,  some  few  people.     The  wisdom  of  our  good  God 

sprigs   of    those   two  tribes.     So  we  knows   when   His   aid  will   be   most 

have  seen,  in  the  shredding  of  some  seasonable,   most  welcome,  which   He 

large  timber  tree,  one  or  two  boughs  then  loves  to  give  when  He  finds  ue 

left  at  the  top  to   hold  up  the  sap.  left   of    our    hopes.      That    merciful 

Who   can   but   lament   the   poor   re-  hand  is  reserved  for  a  dead  lift ;  then 

mainders  of  that  languishing  kingdom  He  fails  us  not. — £p.  Ball, 
of  David  !     Yet,  even  now,  out  of  the 

gleeds  of  Judah,  doth  God  raise  up  a  Yerse  3.     The  conversion  of  Heze- 

glorious  lij^ht  to  His  forlorn  Church  ;  kiah  was  not  due  to  Isaiah,  but  to  a 

yea,  from  the  wretched    loins  of  Ahaz  less  famous  contemporary.     It  would 

doth  God  fetch  a  holy  Hezekiah.     It  seem  that  the  corrupt  state  of  morals 

had  been  hard  to  conceive  the  state  of  and  religion,  against  which  the  pro- 

Judah  worse  than  it  was ;  neither  was  phets  of  the  age  of  Uzziah  complained, 

it  more  miserable  than  sinful,  and,  in  continued  into  Hezekiah*s  reign.   Sud- 

regard  of  both,  desperate.     When  be-  denly,  in  the  m'dst  of  an  assembly,  in 

yond   hope,   God   revives   this   dying  which  the  king  himself  was  present, 

stock    of    David,    and,    out    of    very  there  appeared  the  startling  appari- 

ruins,  builds  up  His  own  house.    Good  tion,  in  the  simplicity  of  his   savage 

Hezekiah     makes    amends     for     his  nakedness,    of    the    prophet    Micah. 

father's  impiety,  and  puts  a  new  life  With  the  sharp,  abrupt,  piercing  cry 

<iQ  693 


Oiuf .  xviii. 


mMlLEflC  COMMENTAUY:  KlKGS. 


peculiar  to  his  manner,  he  commanded 
each  class  to  hear  him.     The  people 
listened  with  awe  to  the  bitter  satire 
with  which  the  nobles  were  described 
as  preparing  their  cannibal  feast  out 
of  the  flesh  and  bones  of  the  poor. 
They  heard  him  denounce  the  unholy 
compact,   then   first   begun,   between 
the  mercenary  priests  and  the  traitor 
prophets   (Micah  iii).     There  was   a 
pause  when  he  concluded.     It  would 
seem  as  if  for  a  moment  an  indignant 
king  and  people  would  rise  and  crush 
the  audacious  seer.     But  Hezekiah 
was  not  a  mere  tool  in  the  hands  of 
nobles,  or  priests,  or  prophets.     Micah 
was  left  unscathed.     And  even  in  the 
prophet's  own  life-time — it   may  be 
almost  immediately  after  his  warning 
— succeeded  the  promise   of   a  pros- 
perity   before   unknown ;    when   the 
nation   should  in   peace  be  like   the 
gentle  dew,   in  war  like  the  lion  in 
forest  and  fold,  or  like  a  fierce  bull 
treading  down   his   enemies    on    the 
threshing-floor,  with  horns  of  iron  and 
hoofs  of    brass.     The  wild   dirge   of 
Micah  had  been   aimed   against  the 
moral  evils   of    the  nation.     Of  any 
moral  reformation  the  chronicler  tells 
us  nothing.     But  the  outward  reforma- 
tion which  he  describes  was  doubtless 
the  expression  of  an  inward  change 
also. — Stanley, 

—  Hezekiah  and  Luther— a 
parallel,  l.  Both  had  a  personal 
realization  of  the  truth.  2.  They  had  a 
high  regard  and  love  for  the  Divine  Word. 
3.  They  were  distinguished  hy  strong 
faith.  ' '  Trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel."  4.  They  were  men  of  prayer. 
Chap.  xix.  15-19.  Isa.  xxxvii.  6-20. 
Luther  said  he  could  not  get  on  with- 
out spending  three  hours  a  day  in 
prayer.  5.  They  had  definite  beliefs 
and  convictions.  6.  They  had  the 
courage  of  their  convictions.  Seen  in 
definite  and  decisive  action.  Hezekiah 
attacked  the  idolatries  of  his  time,  and 
Luther  the  ecclesiastical  corruptions  of 
his  day.  7.  They  enjoyed  the  guardian 
providence  of  God.  How  marvellously 
did  God  interfere  in  both  histories. 
8.  Thby  witnessed  the  success  of  their 
efforts.  The  Lord  was  with  them  and 
prospered  them.  Which  of  these  traits 
594 


of  character   do   we   possess    in  our 
sphere  as  reformers  ? — J.  Holmes, 

—   Iconoclast.        The    first    and 
second   commandments    make   a  full 
sweep   of  idolatry.     We  are   not  to 
worship  any  other  god ;    we  are  not 
to  worship  the  true  God  by  the  use  of 
representative  symbols.    0  ur  reformers 
acted  well,  and  after  a  scriptural  model, 
when  they  poured  contempt  upon  the 
idols  of  Eome,  and  made  a  mockery  of 
her  saints,  relics,  images,  masses,  and 
priests.     There  was  a  deep  meaning 
in  their  breaking  of  crosses  and  the 
burning  of  holy  roods.     Whenever  we 
see  superstition  in  any  shape,  we  must 
not  flatter  the  folly ;  but,  according  to 
our   ability,  act  the  iconoclast's  part 
and  denounce  it.       First,    we    shall 
apportion  a  share  of  image-breaking 
work  to  hehevers ;  and  secondly,  pre- 
scribe another  form  of  this  same  work 
for  seeking  souls.    I.  We  have  much 
idol-breaking  work  for  Christians 
to  do.     1 .  There  is  much  idol-breaking 
to  be  done  in  the  church  of  God.     We 
are  all  too  apt  as  Christians  to  place 
some   degree   of  reliance    upon  men 
whom  God,  in  His  infinite  mercy,  raises 
up    to    be    leaders  in   the  Christian 
Church.     We  must  get  beyond  men, 
or  else  we  shall  be  very  babes  in  grace. 
We  are  not  to  exalt  the  pipes,  but  the 
fountain  head  ;  not  the  windows,  but 
the  sun  must  we  thank  for  light ;  not 
the  basket  which  holds  the  food,  or 
the  lad   who   brings  the  loaves  and 
fishes,  must  we   reverence,   but  the 
Divine  master  who  blesses  and  multi- 
plies the  bread,  and  feeds  the  multi- 
tude.    Love  the  ministers  of  Christ, 
but  fall  not  into  that  form  of  brazen 
serpent  worship  which  will  degrade 
you  into  the  servants  of  men.      There 
is  too  much  exaltation  of  talent  and 
dependence  upon  education,  especially 
in  reference  to  ministers.    On  the  slabs 
of  stone  which  mark  the  burial  places  of 
the  early  Christians  in  the  catacombs  of 
Home,  the  inscriptions   are  nearly  all 
ill-spelt,    grammar   is   forgotten,  and 
orthography  violated ;  a  proof  that  the 
early  Christians  who  thus  commemo- 
rated the  martyred  dead,  were  many  of 
them  uneducated  persons ;  but,  for  all 
that,  they  crushed  the  wisdom  of  the 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTA^r:  KINGS. 


OHxr.  xviii 


sages,  and  smote  the  gods  of  classic 
lands.      We   are  not    to  select    our 
pastors  simply  because  of  their  talents 
and  acquii-ements ;    we  must  regard 
their  unction,  we  must  look  at  their 
call,  and  see  whether  the  spirit  of  God 
is  with  them.     The  same  may  be  said 
of  human   eloquence.      Let  the  men 
speak  well — the   truth   ought  to  be 
delivered  in  the  best  of  sentences  ;  but 
the  noblest  language  ever  uttered  by 
man  never  convinced  a  soul  of  sin,  or 
bound  up  a  wounded  conscience,  or 
raised  a  sinner  fiom  his  death  in  sin, 
for  oratory  is  but  a  sounding  brass 
and  tinkling  cymbal  if  the  Holy  Ghost 
be  not  there.     2.  Much  superstition 
requires  to  be  broken  down  in  reference 
to  a  rigid  adhesion  to  certain  modes  of 
Christian  service.     There  is  a  class  of 
persons  who  object  to  every  holy  pro- 
ject for  evangelisation,  however  right 
and  judicious,  if  it  happens  to  be  novel ; 
and  they   will  continue  to  object  till 
the  work  has  been  long  in  action  and 
has  placed  itself  beyond  fear  of  their 
opposition  or  need  of  their  assistance. 
Tetters  are  none  the  less  burdensome 
for  being  antique.     Let   the   brazen 
serpent    be   broken    if   it   become   a 
barrier  to  the  onward  progress  of  the 
cross.     3.  Let  us  turn  to  the  temple  of 
our  own  hearts,  and  we  shall  find  much 
work  to  he  done  there.     Are  you  con- 
gratulating  yourself   upon   your  ad- 
vanced position?   Do  you  think  twenty 
years*    experience  has   changed  your 
corruptions,  that  your  tendencies  to  sin 
are  not  so  strong  as  they  were,  that  you 
have  less  need  to  watch,  less  need  to 
depend  simply  on  the  merit  of  Christ 
and  the  work  of  His  Spirit  ?     I  have 
heard   that  more   horses  fall   at  the 
bottom  of  the  hill  than  anywhere  else, 
and  I  know  that  more  professors  make 
shipwreck   towards  the  close  of  life 
than  at   any  other  time.      The  falls 
recorded  in  the  Old  and  JSTew  Testa- 
ments are  the  falls,  not  of  young  men 
in  the  heat  of  passion,   but  of  old  or 
middle-aged  men.     Lot   was  no  boy 
when  he   disgraced   himself.      David 
was  no  young  man  when   he  trans- 
gressed with  Bathsheba.    Peter  was  no 
child  when  he  denied  his  Lord.     An 
old  Puritan  quaintly  says,  suppose  a 


loving  husband  were  to  give  to  his  wife 
many  rings  and  jewels  out  of  love  to 
her,  and  she  should  come  to  think  so 
highly  of  the  love  tokens  that  she  sat 
and  admired  them  and  forgot  her  hus- 
band, would  he  not  be  rather  inclined  to 
take  these  things  away  to  turn  her  love 
once  again  to  himself  ?     So  with  our 
graces  and  enjoyments;    if  we  think 
too   much   of   them,    the  iconoclastic 
hammer  will  come  in,  and  those  things 
will   vanish  because  they  have   pro- 
voked the  Lord  to  jealousy.    II.  Those 
who  are  seekers  of  Jesus.      There  is 
some    idol-breaking   to    be   done    for 
them.     Many  think  they  ought  to  be 
much  better  than  they  are  ;  they  have 
faults  to   be  corrected;    their  minds 
are  in  a  wrong  condition,  they  must 
be  put  right,  and  they  are  trying  to  do 
this  with  the  intention,  when  they  feel 
better,  to   put   their  trust  in  Jesus. 
With  some,  the  Nehushtan  which  they 
set  up  is  their  sense  of  sin ;  either  they 
do  not  feel  the  need  of  Christ  as  they 
ought,  or  else  they  do  feel  their  need, 
and  therefore  think  they  are  in  a  fair 
condition.     Many  are  resting  in  their 
fear  of  self-deception.     Do  you  think 
that  your  being  afraid  of  presumption 
is  a  better  thing  than  believing  God's 
testimony  concerning  His  Son  ?   Many 
are  resting  in  sermon   hearing,  or  in 
reading   the    Bible  regularly;  others 
are  making  an  idol  of  brass  out  of 
their  prayers.     Seekers  of  Christ  con- 
tinually start  new  difficuUies.     Their 
doubts,  reasonings,  and  questions  are 
like  an  endless  chain  :  pull  up  one  link, 
and   it    brings    up   another.       Their 
suspicions  are  like  a  chain  of  dredging 
buckets  that  come  up  all  full  of  mire, 
and  over  they  go  and  empty  them- 
selves but  to  come  up  full  again.     If 
one-tenth  part  of  the  ingenuity  they 
use  in  rebelling  against  the  command 
of   God,    which    bids   them    believe, 
were    used   in    simply    investigating 
what     they     are    told     to     believe, 
they  would  come  to  faith  and  be  saved 
from  their  doubts.       Sinner,  let  thy 
artful  doubts  and  reasonings  be  nailed 
to  yonder  tree  :   crucify  them.     God 
grant  you  grace  to  break  up  these  idols 
of  yours,  and  ttike  your  Saviour  now.— 
C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

696 


OHA^.  xviii.  EOMJLETIC  COMMMMTARY :  KIMGS. 


Yerse  4.  The  preservation  of  this  great  characteristics.  1.  Strong  faith 
remarkable  relic  of  antiquity  (the  in  God.  2.  Generous  ideas.  3.  Great 
brazen  serpent)  might,  like  the  pot  zeal  in  carrying  out  great  movements. 
of  manna  and  Aaron's  rod,  have  re-  4.  Penitent  submission  under  affliction. 
mained  an  interesting  and  instructive  5.  Vanity  which  proved  fatal. — 
monument  of  the  Divine  goodness  and  S.  Kendall, 
mercy  to  the  Israelites  in  the  wilder- 
ness; and  it  must  have  required  the  Verses  5-8.  Religion,  the  strength 
exercise  of  no  small  courage  and  reso-  of  a  ruler.  1.  When  founded  in  a 
lution  to  destroy  it.  But  in  the  pro-  deep  and  firm  trust  in  God.  2.  Is 
gress  of  degeneracy  it  had  become  an  evidenced  by  practical  obedience.  3. 
object  of  idolatrous  worship ;  and  as  Ensures  the  mighty  help  of  Jehovah. 
the  interests  of  true  religion  rendered  4.  Enhances  the  prestige  and  autho- 
its  demolition  necessary,  Hezekiah,  rity  of  the  throne.  5.  Promotes 
by  taking  this  bold  step,  consulted  national  freedom  and  prosperity, 
both  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of 

his  country.  Amongst  the  numerous  Verses  5,  6.  True  piety.  1,  Con- 
hypotheses  advanced  to  account  for  sists  of  a  faith  which  is  at  once  trust 
the  origin  of  this  singular  reverence,  and  confidence  (Heb.  xi.  1).  2.  Cling- 
not  the  least  likely  is,  that  it  arose  ing  to  the  Lord  in  adversity  and  in 
from  vague  and  distorted  rumours  of  prosperity  without  departing  from  him 
the  miraculous  healing  of  the  Israelites  (Psalm  Ixxiii.  25).  3.  Keeping  the 
in  the  wilderness ;  and  the  image  of  a  commandments  of  God  (James  ii.  17  ; 
serpent  became  the  deified  symbol  of  1  John  v.  3). — Lange, 
something  good  and   beneficent.     The 

prevalence   of   ophiolatry   in   Egypt,  Verse  7.     Pursuing  the  policy  of  a 

Phoenicia,   Syria,  and  Assyria,   could  truly  theocratic    sovereign,    he   was, 

scarcely  fail  to   arrest  the   attention  through   the   Divine   blessing,  which 

and  impress  the  minds  of  the  Hebrew  rested  on  his  government,  raised  to  a 

people,  till  in  times  of  ignorance  and  position  of  great  public  and  national 

idolatry  they  adopted  the  same  super-  strength.     Besides  the  revived  activity 

stition ;  and,  although  the  brazen  ser-  and   moral   vigour   of   the  people   of 

pent  in  the  wilderness  had  no  symbolic  Judah,  connected  with  the   material 

import,  but  was  merely  an  external  prosperity   of   the   country,  and   the 

sign,  selected,  probably,  for  the  general  religious  reforms  carried  on  by  Heze- 

ground  of  removing  all  ideas  of  the  kiah,  and  which,  doubtless,  was  the 

natural  accomplishment  of  the  cure,  primary  motive  that  encouraged  him 

yet  the  tradition  concerning  the  animal,  to  shake  off  the  Assyrian  yoke,  it  is 

the  sight  of  which  had  restored  the  necessary   to   take  into   account    the 

wounded  Hebrews,  and  the  reverence  secret  influence  of   Egypt   upon  the 

felt  for  it  by  the  neighbouring  nations,  councils  of  the  king.     Again&t  this, 

naturally  produced  similar  sentiments  Isaiah  all  along  raised  a  decided  and 

in   the   minds   of   the  Israelites,  till  earnest  protest  (Isa.  xxx.  1-5;  xxxi. 

admiration   for   a  venerable   relic   of  1,    3).     In  counselling  Hezekiah,  he 

antiquity,    combined   with    the    con-  did  not  advocate  either  revolt  or  sub- 

tagion  of  contemporary  usages,  had,  mission;  he  proceeded  upon  a  principle 

in  the  degenerate  times  of  the  mon-  entirely  different  from  that  of  ordinary 

archy,  gradually  led  to  the  worship  of  politics — that  of  urging  an  unwaver- 

the  brazen  serpent. — Jamieson,  ing  faith   in   the  protection   of    the 

Divine  King  and  Head  of  the  nation. 

Verse  5.     The  character  and  life  by  an   immediate   and  universal   re- 

of    Hezekiah.      I.    His    public   life,  establishment  of  the  worship  and  law 

1.  The  spiritual  was  in  his  estimation  of   God.     This  step  he  recommended 
the     found  aticn     of     the     political,  to  the  king  as,  in  the  first  instance, 

2.  Was    indebted    for    his  religious  the  most  becoming  a  theocratic  ruler, 
draining  to  a  nious  mother.     II.  Ilis  and  the  most  certain  of  realizing  the 

596 


SOMILBTIG  COMMENTAUr:  Kims,  ortAt*.  jttiil. 


fulfilment  of   the  promises   made   to  ruin  of  one  nation  recorded  as  a  warn- 

his  people.     Acting  in  this  way,  the  ing  to  others.     3.  The  potent  cause  of 

prophet   assured  him  he   would  find  national  decayand  extinction  is  neglect 

that,  With  the   Divine  favour,    "one  of  God. 

would  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  put         —  Hoshea  and  Hezekiah.     The 

ten  thousand  to  flight:"  whereas,  with-  former  came   to   the   throne  by  con- 

out  help  from  above   all  his  military  spiracy  and  murder,  and  he  did  not  do 

preparations  and  strategic  manoeuvres  what  was  pleasing  to  the  Lord   there- 

would  not  secure  the  deliverance  of  fore  he  perished  with  his  people.     The 

his  ]Lm^^om.^Jamieson.  latter  trusted  in  the  Lord  and  clung 

TT  r^  ,^^      m,      «  ^^  Him,   and   therefore  he  came  out 

Verses  9-12     The  fate  of  nations,  with  his  people  victoriously  from  the 

1.  Is  m  the  hands  of  God.     2.  The  perU.— Zaw^J. 

B0MILBTIC8  OF  VESSES  13-87. 
A  BoASTint  AND  Areobant  Spibit. 

I.  Is  the  offspring  of  military  success  (verses  13.16).  The  Assyrian 
king  mvaded  Judah,  captured  the  fenced  cities,  compelled  Hezekiah  to  pay  a 
heavy  tnbute,  and  now  his  victonous  legions  surrounded  Jerusalem  and  threat- 
ened it  with  immediate  destruction.  Flushed  with  success  and  with  unlimited 
coufldence  in  the  power  of  their  arms,  the  captains  of  the  great  Idng  inl  'e 
in  a  spirit  of  proud  vaunting.  It  is  the  tendency  of  all  military  su^ess- 
especially  as  war  was  carried  on  in  those  days-to  inspire  an  ar  ogant  and  se^ 
confident  spmt.  Few  men  know  how  to  behave  themselves  in  the  moment  of 
victory.  Some  soldiers  are  so  elated  with  triumph,  that  their  bounce  and 
vamty  are  intolerable  It  is  forgotten  that,  iu  the  changing  fortunes  of  war. 
fare,  the  winners  of  the  fight  to-day  may  be  the  vanquished  of  to-mo^ow. 

II.  Is  plausible  in  speech  and  lavish  in  promises  (verses  17-32V     There 
IS  a  sort  of  cleverness  in  this  spee.h  of  Habshakeh'sJthe  cleverness  of  craft 
and  guile  and  flattery.     He  rallies  Hezekiah  on  his  trust  in  S  and  in 
Jehovah,  as  though  they  were  one  and  the  same  in  the  Assyrifn  estimation 
He  promises  2  000  horses  if  the  Jews  will  come  out  and  fight.Tougtby  the^ 
inability  to  find  a  sufficient  number  of  horsemen  he  thus  shows  off  the  superi- 
or tyot  his  attacking  torces.     He  claims  to  have  the  authority  of  Jehovah  for 
his  enterprise    and,  turning  to  the  people  who  crowded  the  city  waifs     he 
entices  them  to  submission  by  promises  of  peace  and  plenty.     1^03  and 
arrogant  spin   has  endless  inflexibility  ;  it  can  adapt  itself  to  anything  to  gain 
a  purpose.     It  can  hide  the  most  sinister  designs  under  r  m»<=v^*  v.^    ■.  f 
plausibility,  like  certain  birds  which  .mitate  iLILi^  att  tud^^the  fots  of  Se 
grasses  and  flowors  where  they  watch  for  their  prey. 

R  ^^\:  1  *[^'"*^'  ?°*  to  iiisil'  and  defy  the  only  trne  God  f verses  33-3  3> 

,^f  *f  H  ,         .\  °"-  °*  '^'  ^°^'  °''  *'^«  -«4-shed  nations  have  been 

able  to  deliver  then- worshippers  from  the  invincible  power  of  the  Assyrian 

canst  not  conceive  the  superlative  greatness  and  grandeur  of  Jehovah      Ere 

Snrof^^Ltoirgiot^.  ^'  p'™  -* »-'» iftheV^i; 

IT.    !■  belt  treated  with  dignified  silence  (verse  36).    Silence  is  what  • 

697 


duAi^.  xvui. 


MOMILETIG  COMMMirtARi  :  KINGS. 


proud  man  least  can  bear.  It  irritates  and  annoys  him.  He  does  not  know 
whether  you  are  laughing  at  him  or  are  afraid  of  him.  And  yet  what  better 
answer  than  silence  can  we  give  to  the  threats  and  coaxings  of  the  arrogant  ? 
Euripides  was  wont  to  say  silence  was  an  answer  to  a  wise  man ;  but  we  seem 
to  have  greater  occasion  for  it  in  our  dealing  with  fools  and  unreasonable 
persons ;  for  men  of  breeding  and  sense  will  be  satisfied  with  reason  and  fair 
words. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Few  men  can  hear  with  hecoming  modesty  and  dignity  the  power 
which  success  hrings.  2.  The  flatteries  and  promises  of  a  loastful  man  are  unworthy 
of  credence,  3.  Neither  threats  nor  flatteries  should  seduce  us  from  our  trust  in 
Jehovah, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yerses  13-16.  Submission.  1.  Dis- 
tasteful to  a  liberty-loving  king.  2. 
Inevitable  in  the  face  of  superior  force. 
3.  May  prevent  or  postpone  more 
serious  consequences.  4.  Often  a 
heavy  drain  on  national  resources. 

—  The  gold  of  faith  can  only  be 
made  to  appear  through  the  fires  of 
adversity.  If  thy  faith  is  not  a  mere 
notion,  or  opinion,  or  feeling,  or  sensa- 
tion, then  it  will  not  diminish  in  time 
of  trial,  but  grow  and  become  stronger 
and  purer.  Whence  should  we  have 
had  David's  Psalms,  if  he  had  not  been 
tried? 

Verses  14-16.  Hezekiah  held  it  good 
policy  to  make  his  enemy  a  golden 
bridge  to  go  over  :  bo  to  be  rid  of  him. 
If  Ahaz,  that  church-robber,  had  done 
this,  it  would  better  have  become  him. 
Hezekiah,  for  doing  it,  lost  his  cost 
(verse  17). — Trapp. 

Yerses  17-37.  Diplomatic  rhetoric. 
1.  Is  a  dangerous  weapon  in  the  hands 
of  an  unscrupulous  orator.  2.  Is 
often  a  specious  mixture  of  truth  and 
falsehood.  3.  Seeks  to  weaken  alle- 
giance by  flattering  promises.  4. 
Awakens  grave  anxiety  with  its  tone 
of  confidence  and  power.  5.  Some- 
times best  answered  with  dignified 
silence. 

Yerses  17-35.  Eabshakeh,  the  wolf 
in  sheep's  clothing^. — I.  He  appears 
to  warn  against  Egypt  as  a  power 
which  neither  can  nor  will  help,  just 
as  Isaiah  himself  does,  while  he  him- 
self comes  to  destroy  and  devour 
598 


(Matt.  vii.  15  ;  1  Jno.  iv.  1).     II.  He 

represents  what  had  been  ordained  by 
Hezekiah,  according  to  the  law  of  the 
Lord  and  for  His  honour,  as  a  sin  and 
a  breach  of  religion,  while  he  himself 
cared  nothing  whatever  for  the  law  of 
the  Lord  or  the  true  and  right  wor- 
ship. Beware  of  those  who  represent 
as  weakness  and  folly  that  which  is 
Divine  wisdom  and  strength.  Ill, 
He  claims  that  the  Lord  is  with  him , 
and  has  commanded  to  do  what  he  is 
doing,  whereas,  in  fact,  he  is  only  the 
rod  of  God's  wrath,  the  staff  of  His 
anger,  a  *  *  hired  razor  " ;  and  ambition, 
lust  for  gold  and  land,  desire  for  glory 
and  plunder,  are  his  only  motives 
(Matt.  vii.  22).  Be  not  deceived  by 
the  prosperity  and  the  victory  of  the 
godless.  They  are  like  chaff  which 
the  wind  scatters,  and  their  way  dis- 
appears.— Lange. 

Yerse  17.  0  lamentable  and  in  sight 
desperate  condition  of  distressed 
Jerusalem !  Wealth  it  had  none ; 
strength  it  had  but  a  little ;  all  the 
country  around  about  was  subdued  to 
the  Assyrian  ;  that  proud  victor  has 
begirt  the  walls  of  it  with  an  innumer- 
able army,  scorning  that  such  a  shovel- 
ful of  earth  should  stand  out  but  one 
day.  Poor  Jerusalem  stands  alone, 
blocked  up  with  a  world  of  enemies, 
helpless,  friendless,  comfortless,  look- 
ing for  the  worst  of  a  hostile  fury, 
when  Tartan  and  Rabsaris,  and  Rab- 
shakeh,  the  great  captains  of  the 
Assyrians,  call  to  a  parley.  Lord! 
what  insolent  blasphemies  does  that 
foul  mouth  of  Eabshakeh  belch  out 


EOMtLETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


ciiAr.  xi.v. 


against  the  living  God,  against  His 
anointed  servant ! — Bp.  Mall. 

—  We  can  never  rely  upon  the 
fidelity  of  a  man  who  is  simply  bought 
with  money.  Waat  of  courage  in 
one's  self  invites  an  enemy  to  arro- 
gance. The  more  humbly  one  ap- 
proaches an  enemy,  the  more  insolent 
he  becomes.  Peace  and  quiet  which 
are  bought  with  money  have  no  dura- 
tion.— Lange, 

Verse  21.  A  false  friend  compared 
to  the  reed  of  an  Egyptian  bulrush, 

1.  Because  though  it  appears  out- 
wardly strong,  it  is  brittle  and  hollow. 

2.  Because  it  fails  when  we  most 
depend  upon  it.  3.  Because  it  injures 
us  when  we  expected  it  would  help  us. 

Yerse  30.  ''The  Lord  will  deliver 
us."  I.  A  noble  saying  in  the  mouth 
of  a  king  speaking  to  his  people.  He 
thereby  admits  that  his  own  power  is 
insufficient  and  vain.  He  leads  his 
people  in  that  faith  which  is  a  confi- 
dence in  what  is  hoped  for,  and  which 
admits  no  doubt  of  what  is  not  seen. 
How  well  it  would  be  for  all  princes 
and  people  if  they  had  such  faith. 
II.  Li  this  saying,  all  the  hope  of  the 


Christian  life  is  expressed.  With 
God  we  overcome  the  world,  for  the 
Lord  will  at  length  deliver  us  from  all 
evil,  and  bring  us  to  His  heavenly 
kingdom.  The  blasphemer  and 
boaster  wanted  to  remove  these  words 
of  the  king  from  the  heart  of  the 
people,  because  he  knew  he  should  then 
have  won.  I^ow-a-days,  also,  these 
words  are  laughed  at  and  scorned.  Let 
them  not  be  torn  from  your  heart !  — 
Lange, 

Verse  36.  Silence.  1.  Is  the  wisest 
answer  to  provocation  and  threatening. 
2.  Increases  the  perplexity  of  a  proud 
and  cruel  aggressor.  3.  Implies  con- 
fidence in  the  help  which  has  been  so 
grossly  maligned. 

—  They  punished  him  with  silence, 
as  Isaac  did  Ishmael.  Silence  is  the 
best  answer  to  words  of  scorn  and 
petulency.  It  is  best  to  stop  an  open 
mouth  with  saying  nothing.  Princes 
used  to  punish  the  indecencies  of  am- 
bassadors by  denying  them  audience. 
B,abshakeh  could  not  be  more  spited 
than  with  no  answer.  This  sulphu- 
rous flask  therefore  died  in  his  own 
smoke,  only  leaving  a  hateful  stench 
behind  it. — Trapj^. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


JERirSALEM    SUPERNATURALLY    DELIVERED. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  2.  Sent  to  the  prophet  Isaiah— The  prophet, 
in  that  Jewish  age,  was  regarded  as  the  messenger  and  representative  of  Jehovah.  While  the 
king  was  entrusted  to  witness  of  the  Royalty  and  Majesty  of  God,  the  prophet  was  recog- 
nized as  the  oracle  of  Diviue  Wisdom  and  Truth.  Here  was  a  crisis  of  eminent  peril  to  the 
nation,  in  which  the  people  and  the  Name  of  Jehovah  were  alike  contemptuously  menaced. 
It  was  a  moment  for  the  Word  of  God  to  come  forth ;  so  Isaiah  was  sought  by  the  king. 
Verse  6.  And  Isaiah  said  unto  them,  Be  not  afraid — Terror  met  by  cheerfulness  ;  deliver- 
ance assured  to  Judah,  destruction  threatened  to  Assyria.  "The  servants  of  the  king  of 
Assyria"  are  called  contemptuously  'Tf'T'D  ^"^^^^   '"the  yotinq  men  of  the  king,"  i.  e.^  his 

boastful  and  blasphemous  generals.  The  literal  fulfilment  of  these  predictions  proves  so  keen 
a  difficulty  to  modem  naturalism  (as  opposed  to  the  supernatural)  that  critics  are  intent  on 
discrediting  these  verses  6  and  7  as  an  interpolation.  But  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for 
ever."  Verse  9.  He  heard  of  Tirhakah,  king  of  Ethiopia— This  was  the  •'  rumour  "  (verse  7). 
The  name  of  Tuhakah.  king  of  Upper  Egypt,  a  monarch  of  mighty  conquests,  lingers  still  in 
the  inscriptions  in  the  Egyptian  temple  of  Medinet  Abou.  Apprehending  the  arrival  of  this 
Egyptian  warrior,  the  Assyrian  king  sent  Hezekiah  a  terrifying  letter  urging  immediate  sur- 
render Verse  12.  The  children  of  Eden  in  Thelasar— Not  the  Eden  of  Amos  (i.  5),  situate 
amid  the  beauties  of  Lebanon,  but  the  Assyrian  Eden  mentioned  bj  Ezekiel  (xxvii.  33). 
Verse  14.  Hezekiah  spread  the  letter  before  the  Lord— This  act  has  been  charmingljr 

6y» 


mAf.tiX,  BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :   KINGS, 


described  by  Delitsch  as  **  a  prayer  without  words,  a  prayer  in  action,  which  then  passes  into 
a  spoken  prayer."  Verse  '20.  Then  Isaiah  sent  to  Hezekiah — While  the  king  prayed,  the 
prophet  was  receiving  the  answer.  The  simuUaneousness  of  prayer  and  answer  is  emphasized. 
The  message  from  God  through  Isaiah  is  a  rhetorical  outpouring  of  scorn  upon  the  Assyrian 
k'ng's  pretensions,  followed  bv  direct  and  withering  denunciations,  which  are  sealed  by  minute 
prophecies,  whose  fulfilment  should  indicate  to  Hezekiah  that  the  Lord  Himself  would  effect 
the  boastful  blasphemer's  overthrow.  "  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  do  this  "  (v.  31); 
Verse  29.  This  shall  be  a  sign  unto  thee— An  address  to  Hezekiah.  The  sign  was  that  for 
two  years  thn  peaceful  labours  of  husbandry  would  be  impracticable  in  consequence  of  the 
enemy's  presence  near  at  hand,  but  that  agriculture  would  proceed  in  quiet  in  the  third  year, 
labour  being  crowned  with  bounty.  Verse  32.  Nor  come  before  it  with  shield— Perhaps  an 
assault,  advancing  with  shield  held  in  front;  or,  more  probably,  Not  occupy  any  position  before 
the  city  defended  by  a  fence  or  breastworks.  None  of  the  processes  of  seige  or  war  should  be 
permitted  against  Jerusalem.  Rawlinson's  readings  of  the  Assyrian  slabs  discovers  extended 
and  minute  records  of  this  expedition  of  Sennacherib,  graphically  reproducing  the  Scripture 
story  of  events.  No  account  of  the  catastrophe  is  there  given ;  the  Assyrians  only  recounted 
their  victories.  Verse  35.  That  night  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  out,  &c. — Two  years 
interposed,  during  which  the  invasion  of  the  land  by  Sennacherib  \^cnt  forward.  *'  That 
«i^A<,"  therefore,  refers  to  the  ultimate  concentration  of  the  Assyrian  army  upon  Jerusalem, 
with  the  intention  of  commencing  the  seige  next  day.  **  The  angel  of  the  Lord"  even  as  "  the 
destroying  angel"  (Ex.  xiii.  23),  went  forth  against  the  first  born  of  Egypt  ;  and  185,000 
perished.  How  was  this  effected?  By  the  scorching  simoom,  which  still  destroys  entire 
caravans  ?  or,  as  Josephus  records  [Antiq.  x.  i.  5),  rod  dead  \oi/j.iKr]v  ivaKrj^avTos  avTov  to? 
arparc^  vSffov?  "God  had  sent  a  pestilential  distemper  upon  his  army."  Verse  37.  Senna- 
cherib slain — His  reverses  in  battle  rendered  hiir  furious  ;  his  rage  and  tyranny  grew  intoler- 
able. Judgment  fell  upon  him  from  the  hands  of  his  own  sons.  And  a  third  son,  Esarhaddon, 
came  to  the  Assyrian  throne.  Berosus  informs  us  that  this  Asordanut  was  first  viceroy  of 
Babylon,  and  afterwards  eight  years  king  of  Assyria. — W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-8T. 

The  Resources  of  the  Good  Man  in  Time  of  Teotjble, 

This  was  a  day  of  sore  trouble  to  Hezekiah.  The  veteran  hosts  of  Senna- 
cherib, flushed  with  victory,  invested  Jerusalem,  and  threatened  it  with  destruc- 
tion. The  expected  help  from  Egypt  was  not  forthcoming.  The  defensive 
resources  of  Hezekiah  were  circumscribed,  and  it  seemed  hopeless  to  offer  resist- 
ance. He  had  but  one  refuge — a  refuge  the  proud  Assyrian  despised :  but  it 
proved  all-sufficient  in  the  day  of  his  calamity.  The  whole  chapter  is  a 
striking  illustration  of  the  resources  of  the  good  man  in  time  of  trouble, 

I.  He  seeks  counsel  from  those  who  are  most  competent  to  advise  him. 
(ver.  1-7).  It  is  not  every  prince  who  has  an  Isaiah  at  his  elbow  to  advise  in 
difficulty  and  comfort  in  distress.  God's  way  of  helping  in  trouble  is  often  in 
directing  us  to  the  best  human  counsellors.  1.  The  good  man,  like  Hezekiahy 
recognizes  the  need  of  Divine  intervention  (ver.  1-5).  While  the  supercilious 
Assyrian  trusted  in  his  arms,  Hezekiah  trusted  in  his  God.  There  are  times 
when  we  are  reduced  to  such  straits  that  none  but  God  can  help  us.  No  one 
sees  these  times  with  a  keener  eye  than  the  good  man.  His  common  sense 
teaches  him  to  exhaust  all  natural,  human  means,  and  not  to  stand  wringing 
his  hands  in  despair,  or  folding  his  arms  in  indifference  ;  but  he  is  aware  a 
point  is  reached  where  all  he  can  do  is  to  trust :  God  must  do  the  rest.  It  is 
wise  to  recognize  this.  It  honours  God  ani  saves  us  from  presumption.  2. 
J  he  good  man,  like  Bezekiah,  recognizes  the  utility  and  power  of  prayer  by  a  true 
servant  of  Jehovah.  "  Wherefore  litt  up  thy  prayer,  &c."  (ver.  4).  The  herit- 
age of  God's  people  is  a  heritage  of  prayers.  It  is  a  strength  to  us  in  trouble 
to  know  that  our  own  prayers  are  reinforced  and  supplemented  by  the  prayers 
600 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xn. 


of  others.  Every  praying  agency  we  can  set  in  operation  is  a  positive  gain. 
Even  the  prayerless  are  benefited  by  the  supplications  of  praying  souls  on  their 
behalf.  We  may  be  receiving  blessings  to-day  in  answer  to  the  anxious 
prayers  of  parents  who  are  no  longer  with  us.  3.  The  good  man,  like  Uezekiah, 
is  encouraged  with  the  promise  of  Divine  help  (ver.  6,  7).  The  message  of  Isaiah 
must  have  convinced  the  king  of  the  wisdom  of  the  course  he  adopted  in  seek- 
ing the  advice  and  help  of  the  prophet.  Jehovah  will  punish  the  insolence  of 
the  blasphemous  Assyrian,  and  deliver  the  distressed  monarch  from  his  fangs. 
How  tenaciously  we  cling  to  the  most  indefinite  promise  of  help  when  we  are 
in  trouble  ;  it  is  the  silvery  rift  in  the  cloud,  the  distant  gleam  of  the  squad- 
rons rapidly  hurrying  to  our  relief.  But  with  what  calm  confidence  should  we 
rest  on  the  slightest  word  of  the  living  God  I 

IT.  He  is  reminded  of  the  nearness  and  reality  of  his  peril  (ver.  8-13). 

There  are  plenty  of  real  dangers  in  lite  without  unduly  harassing  ourselves 
with  imaginary  ones.  If  Hezekiah,  with  the  powerful  Assyrian  forces  en- 
circling his  only  stronghold,  had  been  tempted  to  regard  the  peril  as  but 
trifling,  he  would  be  undeceived  when  he  received  the  fierce,  war-breathing 
message  of  Sennacherib.  The  wildest  threats  of  Rabshakeh  were  reiterated, 
and  Jehovah  again  insulted  and  blasphemed.  Well  did  Hezekiah  know  the 
terrible  might  of  the  Assyrian  arms ;  and  yet,  while  he  trembled,  he  was  un- 
dismayed. It  is  fanaticism  to  treat  danger  with  indifference.  It  is  to  court 
defeat  and  ruin. 

III.  He  resorts  to  God  in  earnest  prayer  (ver.  14-19).  The  prayer  it 
short,  but  it  is  sublime  in  its  style  and  comprehensive  in  its  range,  and  burns 
throughout  with  incandescent  earnestness.  Its  salient  features  are  worthy  of 
study.  It  is  a  model  prayer  for  a  distressed  soul.  (1)  The  petitioner 
acknowledges  the  supreme  Kulership  of  Jehovah  (ver.  15).  (2)  He  traces  the 
ruin  of  nations  to  their  idolatry  (ver.  17,  18).  (3)  He  calls  upon  Jehovah  to 
vindicate  His  supreme  Lordship  by  delivering  him  from  the  threatened  peril 
(ver.  19).  Prayer  is  the  grand  refuge  of  the  distressed;  it  is  the  passionate 
outcry  of  conscious  need.  The  more  vividly  we  realise  our  peril,  the  more 
sincere  and  earnest  will  be  our  prayer.  In  prayer,  says  Bunyan,  it  is  better 
to  have  a  heart  without  words,  than  words  without  a  heart. 

IV.  He  is  assured  of  a  signal  answer  to  his  prayer  (ver.  20-34).  If  there 
were  no  answer,  it  would  still  be  our  duty  to  pray,  though  without  an  answer 
we  should  be  in  danger  of  becoming  simply  mechanical  in  our  prayers.  As  by 
a  letter  Hezekiah  was  plunged  into  deepest  grief,  so  by  a  letter  of  a  different 
import  shall  his  heart  be  made  glad.  This  letter  was  written  in  the  gorgeous 
imagery  familiar  to  the  gifted  Isaiah.  It  is  true  a  draught  of  water  is  as  sweet 
to  the  thirsty,  whether  drank  from  a  common  earthenware  vessel,  or  from  a 
richly  chased  goblet ;  still,  the  precious  fluid  may  be  found  in  the  one  vessel 
as  in  the  other.  In  this  Divinely  inspired  answer  Sennacherib  is  rebuked  for  his 
proud  boasting,  and  his  humiliation  and  retreat  predicted ;  a  pledge  is  given 
thf^t  Judah  shall  still  flourish  in  peace  and  prosperity ;  a  solemn  announcement 
is  made  that  Sennacherib  shall  utterly  fail  in  carrying  out  his  boasted  threats j 
and  Jehovah  promises  himself  to  defend  and  deliver  the  beleagured  city.  How 
great  is  the  condescension  of  our  God,  in  not  only  hearing  prayer,  but  in  assur- 
ing the  suppliant  of  an  answer — an  answer  adequate  to  meet  the  case,  turning 
fear  into  confidence,  humiliation  into  triumph,  sorrow  into  joy, 

V.  He  is  privileged  to  witness  a  great  and  miraculous  deliverance  (ver. 

35-.S7).  One  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  Assyrians  smitten  in  one  night, 
and   Sennacherib  murdered  by  his  own  sons!     Surely  Judah  is  sufficiently 

60i 


OHAP.  xa. 


EOMILETIC  GOMMENTART :   KIKG^. 


avenged,  its  insults  and  suffering  atoned,  and  the  word  of  the  blasphemed 
Jehovah  solemnly  vindicated.  It  is  probable  that  the  supernatural  agent  of 
Divine  vengeance  made  use  of  a  deadly  plague  or  pestilence  in  the  destruction 
of  the  Assyrian  soldiers.  Dr.  Kitto  contends  that  a  simoom,  or  hot  pestilential 
wind,  was  the  destroying  agent.  Whatever  the  means  used,  the  awful  fact 
that  80  many  perished  cannot  be  explained  away.  Herodotus  refers  to  it  in  his 
history,  though  in  a  legendary  form,  when  he  relates  : — "  As  the  two  armies 
(Egyptian  and  Assyrian)  lay  opposite  one  another,  there  came  in  the  night  a 
multitude  of  field  mice,  which  devoured  all  the  quivers  and  bowstrings  of  the 
Assyrians,  and  ate  the  thongs  by  which  they  managed  their  shields.  Next 
morning  they  commenced  their  flight,  and  great  multitudes  fell,  as  they  had 
no  arms  with  which  to  defend  themselves."  Jehovah  is  not  restricted  to  any 
one  method  in  punishing  his  enemies. 

Lessons: — 1.  Prayer  is  the  hest  refuse  of  the  distressed,  2.  National  calami- 
ties give  anxiety  to  the  true-hearted  monaroK  3.  Sincere  prayer  is  never  offered 
in  vain, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Verse  1.  0  the  noble  piety  of  Heze- 
kiah !  Notwithstanding  all  the  straits 
of  the  siege  and  the  danger  of  so 
powerful  an  enemy,  I  find  not  the 
garments  of  this  good  king  any  other- 
wise than  whole  and  unchanged  ;  but 
now,  so  soon  as  blasphemy  is  uttered 
against  the  majesty  of  his  God,  though 
by  a  pagan  dog,  his  clothes  are  torn 
and  turned  into  sackcloth.  There  can 
be  no  better  argument  of  an  upright 
heart  than  to  be  more  sensible  of  the 
indignities  offered  to  God  than  of  our 
own  dangers.  The  more  we  see  God's 
name  profaned,  the  more  shall  we,  if 
we  be  truly  religious,  love  and  honour 
it— JBp,  EalL 

Verses  2-7 :  20-34.  Isaiah  a 
sublime  example  of  a  great  prophet. 
1.  Was  himself  unmoved  and  confident 
while  king  and  court  were  perplexed 
and  distressed.  2.  His  influence  and 
power  were  fully  recognized  in  the 
depth  of  the  national  crisis.  3.  Was 
familiar  with  the  intentions  of  Jehovah, 
and  rejoiced  in  vindicating  His 
character.  4.  His  predictions  were 
couched  in  terms  of  inimitable  grace 
and  dignity. 

Verses  2-7.  A  sorrowful  embassy. 
1.  Its  external  appearance  was  sym- 
bolic of  the  desperate  straits  of  the 
nation  and  its  leaders.    2.  It  was  sent 
^02 


to  the  only  man  who  seemed  able  to 
advise  in  the  emergency.  3.  It  re- 
turned with  a  message  that  inspired 
confidence  and  hope. 

Verse  4.  Pray  to  thine  utmost, 
strive  and  strain,  tug  hard  and  bestir 
thee  all  that  may  be.  Prayer  is  a 
laborious  exercise ;  and  as  a  man  that 
would  be  good  at  lifting  must  set  his 
sides  and  shoulders  to  work,  he  must 
also  often  use  himself  to  lifting,  so 
here.  This  gets  a  dexterity,  a  handi- 
ness  to  the  work. — Trapp, 

Verses  8-13,  The  arrogance  of 
power.  1.  Is  fed  by  military  suc- 
cesses. 2.  Is  exasperated  by  resist- 
ance. 3.  Is  imperious  and  blustering 
in  its  demands.  4.  Eef  uses  to  acknow- 
ledge any  power  superior  to  itself. 

Verses  8-19.  The  two  contrasted 
kings:  Sennacherib  and  Hezekiah 
— the  godless  and  the  just.  I. 
Sennacherib,  who  sees  himself  in 
peril  and  obliged  to  retreat  by  the 
approach  of  Tirhakah,  does  not  on  that 
account  become  more  modest  and 
humble,  but  only  more  obstinate  and 
arrogant.  This  is  the  way  with  god- 
less and  depraved  men.  In  distress 
and  peril,  instead  of  bending  their  will 
and  yielding  to  the  will  of  God,  they 
only  become  more  stubborn,  insolent^ 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINQ8. 


OHir.  xrx. 


and  assuming.  Hezekiah,  on  the  con- 
trary, who  was  in  unprecedented 
trouble  and  peril,  was  thereby  drawn 
into  more  earnest  prayer.  He 
humbled  himself  under  the  hand  of 
God,  and  sought  refuge  in  the  Lord 
alone.  II.  Sennacherib  rejects  faith 
in  the  God  of  Israel  as  folly,  and  boasts 
that  all  the  gods  of  the  heathen  were 
powerless  before  him.  He  lives  with- 
out God  in  the  world,  and  knows  no 
God  but  himself .  He  asks,  "  Where  is 
the  God  of  Hamath  ?  "  &c.  But  where 
is  now  Sennacherib,  who  talked  so 
proudly  ?  He  is  gone  like  chaff  before 
the  wind,  for  the  way  of  the  godless 
shall  perish.  But  Hezekiah  will  not 
let  himself  be  drawn  away  from  his  God. 
His  faith  becomes  only  so  much  warmer 
and  deeper.  He  prays,  and  seeks  not 
his  own  honour,  but  that  of  the  Lord, 
in  whom  he  puts  his  confidence.  The 
greater  the  cross,  the  greater  the  faith. 
The  palm  grows  under  weight. 
Sweetness  flows  from  the  grape  when  it 
is  well  trodden. — Lange, 

Ver.  14.    A  king  in  trouble.    It 

is  evident  that  Sennacherib  did  not 
desire  to  make  peace  with  Hezekiah. 
The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  would 
have  been  of  great  advantage  to  the 
Assyrians ;  to  have  left  that  strong  city 
unsubdued  behind  them  as  they  ad- 
vanced towards  Egypt  would  have 
been  impolitic  and  unsafe.  So  Sen- 
nacherib determined  to  destroy  it, 
and  sent  a  letter  full  of  boastful 
arrogance,  threats,  blasphemy,  false 
insinuations,  and  insults  to  its  king. 

I.  Hezekiah's  trouble.  1.  Kings 
cannot  escape  the  scorching  sparks 
of  trouble  that  fly  in  all  directions 
from  the  burning  wheels  of  life. 
Palatial  walls  are  often  no  barrier,  and 
perfumed  chambers  are  no  relief. 
Trouble,  like  death,  enters  all  dwell- 
ings. The  higher  the  station,  the 
greater  the  liability  to  woe.  Storms 
howl  on  mountain  tops  when  sunshine 
gilds  the  plain.  "Uneasy  lies  the 
head  that  wears  a  crown."  **The 
lofty  pine  the  great  wind  often  rives." 
2.  Neither  does  piety  prevent  trouble. 
Hezekiah  had  manifested  the  most 
ardent  zeal  for  the  worship  of  JTebovah. 


He  walked  before  God  in  truth  and 
righteousness.  And  yet  this  trouble 
fell  upon  him.  Trouble  is  not  an 
absolute  evil.  If  it  were,  the  pious 
would  escape  it.  It  is  an  angel  in 
dishabille  stooping  to  serve  us.  *'  Ce- 
lestial benedictions  often  assume  dark 
disguises."  Trouble  is  a  divine  factor 
in  human  life.  **  Divine  diet,"  as  an 
old  writer  phrases  it,  is  as  necessary 
for  moral  growth  and  strength  as 
daily  food  is  for  our  physical  natures. 
Trouble  is  oftenaproof  of  God's  interest 
in  us.  The  best  need  discipline. 
The  pious  are  often  more  benefited  by 
trouble  than  by  joy.  3.  Trouble, 
too,  may  arise,  not  from  our  own 
wrong-doings,  but  from  the  wrong- 
doings of  others.  Sennacherib's  law- 
less ambitions  then  troubled  the  whole 
earth.  God  uses  evil  men  to  discipline 
his  saints.  Our  troubles  are  shaped 
by  God.  He  controls  them,  though 
they  appear  wild  and  formless.  Men 
rage  like  a  storm,  but  we  may  be 

"  Assured  that  He,  who  from  the  tempest's 

neck 
Hath  loosed  his  grasp,  still  holds  it  at  Hia 

beck  ; 
And  with  a  pulse  too  deep  for  mortal  sense, 
The  secret  pulse  of  His  omnipotence. 
That  beats  through  every  motion  of    tha 

storm, 
Can  check  destruction  in  its  wildest  form." 

The  hand  that  holds  these  sharp 
threshing  instruments,  these  pruning 
knives,  these  fashioning  chisels,  is 
a  firm  one,  and  guided  by  infinite 
wisdom.  God  knew  what  Hezekiah 
needed.  God  used  Sennacherib  to 
discipline  him.  4.  Great  troubles 
may  be  conveyed  to  us  by  insignificant 
means.  A  letter  only  was  received, 
and  yet  what  a  universe  of  woe  there 
was  in  it.  Onli/  a  letter  !  But  it  has 
crushed  a  noble  spirit,  broken  a 
mother's  heart,  cast  a  man  upon  the 
earth  writhing  in  unutterable  anguish, 
blotted  out  his  life's  sun,  and  driven 
him  forth  an  exile  to  wander  over 
a  dark  and  desolate  waste  for  ever. 
Only  a  letter  !  But  who  can  tell  what 
troubles  the  reception  of  a  letter  may 
convey  ?  Postmen  often  carry  social 
torpedoes  in  their  bags.  But,  further, 
what  was  the  trouble  which  now  di» 

603 


OHAP.  XIX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  KINGS. 


tressed  Hezekiah?  1.  The  threatened 
loss  of  his  kingdom.  Men  cling  to 
their  possessions.  They  have  an  in- 
stinct to  retain  as  well  as  gain.  Loss 
is  always  painful.  To  lose  his  king- 
dom was  to  lose  his  all.  2.  The 
threatened  loss  of  his  position,  None 
like  to  be  compelled  to  abdicate,  even 
if  his  throne  be  only  the  chief  seat  in 
the  synagogue,  the  vestry  hall,  the 
market-place,  or  the  workshop.  Men 
grip  high  places  tenaciously.  Dread 
of  social  humiliation  will  blacken 
life's  fairest  pictures.  Hezekiah  saw 
before  him  the  loss  of  all  his  greatness 
and  honour.  3.  Threatened  captivity 
or  death.  To  grace  a  conqueror's 
triumph,  to  pine  away  in  a  dungeon, 
or  to  endure  a  cruel  death,  would  most 
probably  be  his  lot  if  he  were  not 
delivered  from  his  powerful  foe.  Little 
mercy  was  shown  to  the  conquered  in 
those  days.  A  dark  doom  stared  him 
in  the  face.  That  which  men  hold 
most  dear — libeity  and  life — were 
imperilled.  4  Possible  demolition  of 
the  royal  city.  Imperial  cities  have 
ever  been  dear  to  monarchs.  The 
most  heartless  have  wept  over  their 
destruction.  Jerusalem  was  dear  to 
every  Jew.  It  was  especially  so  to 
its  kings.  Hezekiah  had  fortified  and 
beautified  it.  Its  threatened  destruc- 
tion would  fill  him  with  dismay.  5. 
The  ruin  and  exile  of  his  people. 
Hezekiah  felt  deeply  for  his  people's 
welfare.  Under  his  reign  they  had 
enjoyed  much  peace  and  prosperity. 
That  they  should  be  exposed  to  the 
brutalities  of  an  invading  host,  their 
houses  and  vineyards  destroyed,  and 
themselves  ultimately  carried  away 
captive  into  a  strange  land,  would 
overwhelm  him  with  grief.  Such  a 
calamity  seemed  nigh.  6.  The  dis- 
honour of  Jehovah.  Sennacherib  had 
insulted  God,  and  Hezekiah's  pious 
heart  burned  with  a  holy  indignation. 
If  Jerusalem  were  taken,  God's  holy 
and  beautiful  house  would  be  pro- 
faned, His  glory  tarnished,  and  His 
worship,  which  had  been  lately  re- 
stored, obliterated  from  the  earth. 
These  were  the  bitter  elements  thrown 
into  his  chalice  of  grief.  "With  a 
heavy  heart  he  wended  hii  way  to  the 
§04 


house  of  God,  taking  the  letter  with 
him. 

II.  Hezekiah's  refugee.— All  men 
have  not  a  Divine  refuge  in  trouble. 
The  irreligious  cannot  rush  into  the 
sheltering  arms  of  God.  If  earthly 
refuge  fails,  they  are  like  a  ship 
caught  in  the  tempest  without  anchor 
or  haven  ;  a  warrior  exposed  to  his 
enemies  without  shield  or  fortress ;  a 
traveller  under  the  pelting  storm  with- 
out covert  or  home.  Earthly  refuges 
are  insufficient  in  times  of  extreme 
peril.  Life's  insecurities  throw  us  on 
God.  The  pious  have  an  advantage 
over  the  godless  in  hours  of  trial : 
they  can  use  every  means  of  pro- 
tection and  help  which  the  irreligious 
have,  and  then  shelter  themselves  in 
God.  Hezekiah  had  availed  himself 
of  every  earthly  defence.  He  had 
done  all  that  a  wise  monarch  could  do 
to  defend  his  city,  and  after  this,  he 
committed  his  cause  to  God.  Fana- 
ticism despises  means,  but  true  faith 
uses  them,  and  then  soars  above  them 
to  rest  in  omnipotence.  1.  Hezekiah 
sought  God  in  his  refuge  in  the  Temple. 
He  went  there  because,  in  that  holy 
place,  God  more  particularly  mani- 
fested Himself.  Special  promises 
were  given  to  those  who  prayed 
within  its  sacred  precincts.  Hezekiah 
had  often  beheld  the  Divine  glory 
there.  It  was  his  accustomed  place 
of  worship.  His  trouble  had  not 
driven  him  there,  as  trouble  often 
drives  one  to  the  sanctuary.  He  went 
there  because  he  believed  that  he 
would  find  God  most  easily  in  that 
place.  Helpful  memories  often  crowd 
upon  us  in  places  where  we  have  often 
prayed,  and  bear  us  up,  as  upon 
eagles'  wings,  into  the  Divine  presence . 
Sacred  places  are  often  the  gale  of 
heaven  to  the  troubled  spirit.  Men, 
then,  strive  to  find  the  quickest  way 
to  the  sympathetic  heart  of  God.  2. 
Sezehiah  would  set  a  good  example  to 
the  nation.  He  would  lead  his  people 
to  seek  God  in  that  day  of  trouble. 
Kings  have  great  influence.  Many 
follow  them  either  to  the  temples  of 
vice,  or  to  the  temples  of  religion.  A 
king's  example  is  often  more  potent 
than    a    Divine    command.     3.   Si 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


CHAP.  XII, 


^oMpnUuly  manifest  hh  confidence  in  only  God-this  was  an  attitude  worthy 
ftl/'T  '^""^-'^  ^"^  '"''■  ^''  '"  1"^  «^^"°^ed  by  a  pious  theTcratio 
K^rao^Td"  ;r.:^r ir^     ^-"^  °^  ^'^^  choseJpeo''p,e.-^«.^r 

r ^try^"  !rd;spi:rorto"^^^^^^^  tacTr^iA-'^-  \pr^-«p- 

osteltioL  display  of  VoflTet^  Sn  in  d4  ~:  J  '4?"^2'1; 

but  from  the  promptings  of  a  sincere  hoyah  reminded  of  His  close  relftil 

rust  in  the  liv  ng  God,  that  Hezekiah  ship  to  His  covenant  pZe( vert    5^' 

''went  up  into  the  House  of  the  Lord."  3.  A  picture  of  the  havoc  wrought  in 

Hezekiah  .pread  the  letter  before  the  a  nation  by  its  idolatry  (verles  if  18? 

Lord.     This  was  a  most  significant  act  4.  A  touching  appeaf  to  Jehovah  to 

-'a  prayer  in  action."     It  probably  vindicate  His°chaSr  (verse  igf 
was   done   m   solemn   si  ence,   words         _  Distress  and  misfortune  are  the 

afte  wards    rising    to   his  lips.      He  school  in  which  a  m.n  lea™  to  nrav 

wou  d  not  reply  to  this  letter,  but  he  aright.      How   many   a   one   ren"^,  aTs 

would  leave  it  with  God  to  answer  it.  prayers  every  day,  a  Jd  yet  never  pravs 

Many  letters  might  better  be  left  with  aright.     Every  one   knCs  from   h^ 

«b„wh         "''^T?-,.   He  wished  to  own   experience   that   he   has  "ever 

tronh'e TJ^^'r  .^^Tr"'*^ ?'"•='  '"^^      '"^'^^'^  ="  'I'^^otly  with  God  as  in  the 
troub.e  before  God.     It  is  not  every     time  of  need.     Who  is  a  true  man? 

Tlhf     It  T  ^^  '^r^  ^"^^'^  ^°'^-  ^'  ^ho  can  pray,  and  who  trusr  in 

Troub  es  that  come  from  our  follies,  Qod.—Zmge                                        ° 
or  that  ai-e  the  sequences  of  our  sins, 

and  that  are  the  result  of  our  opposi-  Verse  15-19.     A  kin?  in  nraver 

soread     «\7"  "^ n"^'  TT^  ^''^"^'^     J^'-^^''-  tave    their   h  st^r  es. ^  Thefr 
spread     'he/ore    the     Lord."      Some     ancestry  is  trouble,  stru-de  with  cfi 
reserve  is  necessary,  and  this  is  often     cumstances,   and  helplefnesr   Thev 

t;  l  tIT'"  tu-""'!  "IPf'^"''-     ^'^^-  -"^^k  epochs  in  our  1  ves      f hev  are 

kiah  had  nothing  to  hide:  ho  placed  born  in  those  hours  which  leave  an 

himself  and   his   trouble   entirely  in  indeHble   impression   upon   us       The 

the   hands   of   God.      This    was    his  sublimest    strains   which   men    have 

l!  ;i^      V'  PT""""'  ^VT-       ""^^^'l   ^^-'   t««°   towardTood  In 
fi      )      tV      T    ^r.^  *"  "•'  ''"  ^""^     moments  of  agony.     A   jrreat   rnan'^ 

Zi:tti7'''Vt'\r'''fT%    r^^"   ^"   '""^  alguifh  o'r triaTTa; 
appointment.      i.    In   the  greatest  of     bare  the  inner  heart  of  humanity  and 

fr  iTf ''  """:  u  ^'''"'t  "^  ^''"^"^     «'>°"M  be  treasured  up  as  a  revelatiTn 
help,  but  to  expect  zt.     3.  To  be  pious     "  Misery  sees  miracles  "     PrLif- 

A,:.VaZlt    ^'^''"'''''■^'"'-     u;ter  our  distress  is  to  relieve  it.     To 

the-Jc^^  "r'  ?^'  "^.*'^  P-^-'     -oVet '^Sklh^^-uKiii^L" 
L^h:XtVy'Sis^K-e%?i?     ^^-'-^e  m  praye. 

r;,[its'^':bSrrero?rer t„r  n^ "^ ^'i-  /  ^-^^^  "-tt 

?;%:^rtt°Setrn^^       ve^rn-jrH^kiat^ei? 
Buppiicatoa  the  Divine  interposition,      for  the  remnant  that  was  left      Did 

HI  gni  mow  that  the  Lord  was  the     power  in  prayer  when  he  uttered  that 


OHAP.  XIX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


name  ?  or  of  God's  special  interest  in 
his  nation  ?  Perhaps  both.  What 
God  has  been  to  our  forefathers,  our 
churches,  our  nation  in  times  of 
trouble,  He  will  be  to  us  amid  the 
perils  of  our  day.  History  is  a  hand- 
maid in  the  service  of  faith.  2.  His 
nation  was  Jehovah's  peculiar  dwell- 
ing-place— '*  which  dwellest  between 
the  cherubims."  The  Shekinah — the 
holy  light — as  a  symbol  of  the  Divine 
presence,  ever  shone  forth  from  be- 
tween those  weird  and  colossal  figures 
which  Solomon  had  carved  and  placed 
on  either  side  of  the  mercy-seat. 
There  might  be  seen  a  constant  mani- 
festation of  the  presence  of  God.  But 
Hezekiah*s  reference  to  this  peculiar 
Divine  manifestation — using  words 
which  were  probably  common  among 
the  Jews — was  to  suggest  that  as  God 
dwelt  among  them  He  would  protect 
His  own  dwelling-place.  God  would 
surely  save  His  chosen  habitation. 
This  is  true,  God  will  protect  where  He 
dwells.  While  He  remains,  there  is 
perfect  safety.  When  He  departs 
there  is  ruin.  (1).  God  dwelling  in  a 
nation  saves  it.  God  now  manifests 
Himself,  not  by  a  material  brightness, 
but  by  righteousness,  purity,  and 
truth.  (2).  God  dwelling  in  a  man 
saves  him.  Every  Christian  is  a  temple 
of  God.  The  true  cherubim  and  she- 
kinah are  in  the  soul.  (3).  God  dwell' 
ing  in  a  chureh  saves  it.  No  enemies 
can  overthrow  a  church  that  has  the 
Divine  glory  shining  in  the  midst  of 
it.  (4).  We  can  appeal  to  the  mani- 
festations of  the  Divine  presence  to 
increase  our  confidence  in  God  in  times 
of  danger. 

II.  Hezekiah.-  recognizes,  in  his 
prayer,  the  sole  supremacy  of  Je- 
hovah. *'Thou  art  the  God,"  &c. 
1.  Hezekiah  asserted  that  Jehovah 
was  the  only  true  God.  Polytheism 
was  a  foolish  delusion.  It  probably 
arose  from  men's  innate  propensity  to 
materialize  spiritual  things,  from  the 
worship  of  natural  objects  as  the 
manifestation  of  the  Divine  power, 
from  the  sinful  and  insatiate  imagina- 
tion of  men's  hearts,  from  the  deifica- 
tion of  departed  heroes,  or  from  the 
606 


attempt  to  give  visible  shape  to  ap- 
plauded virtues.  But  there  can  be 
but  one  infinite  and  eternal  God.  He 
may  reveal  Himself  in  many  ways — 
in  flaming  fire,  in  human  forms,  in 
religious  truth,  in  nature,  in  Christ, 
in  the  Spirit — He  is  one  only — infinite, 
eternal,  and  incomprehensible — God 
alone.  None  can  be  associated  with 
Him.  None  can  be  placed  in  com- 
parison wiUi  Him.  All  other  gods 
are  **no  gods."  False  and  dead 
images,  they  cannot  save  themselves 
from  destruction.  But  Jehovah,  the 
true  and  living  God,  could  save.  2. 
That  He  exercised  supreme  control 
over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth. 
He  was  not  only  the  God  of  Israel, 
but  of  all  nations.  Where  His  power 
was  not  acknowledged  it  was  supreme. 
Where  He  was  not  worshipped  He 
reigned,  King  of  all  kings,  and  Lord 
of  all  Lords.  Hezekiah  rested  upon 
God's  sovereignty,  though  it  was  then 
obscured.  It  is  often  obscured.  Evil 
powers  seem  triumphant  Anarchy 
reigns.  **  High  uproar  lords  it  wide." 
But  God's  order  manifests  itself.  His 
purposes  unfold  themselves.  He  over- 
rules all  dynasties,  overthrowing  one 
kingdom  and  setting  up  another,  curb- 
ing the  restless  might  of  men,  not 
destroying  human  freedom,  but  con- 
trolling it.  Hezekiah's  faith  grasped 
the  truth  that  no  earthly  power  could 
exist  without  the  permission  or  sur- 
veillance of  God.  Assyria,  as  well  as 
Judah,  belonged  to  God. 

III.    He  appealed  to  Jehovah  as 
the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth. 

Heaven  and  earth  to  the  Jewish  mind 
included  all  things.  Here  was  an 
assertion  of  universal  creatorship.  In 
this  sublime  idea  of  God  is  involved  : 
— 1.  That  He  is  eternal.  He  existed  be- 
fore all  things ;  delighting  in  the 
glory  of  His  own  nature  before  the 
worlds  were  made,  no  material  form 
or  spiritual  existence  sharing  that 
eternity  with  Him.  2.  2 hat  He  is 
separate  from  His  works.  The  uni- 
verse is  not  He,  as  the  ancient  pan- 
theists taught,  and  as  some  teach  now. 
He  is  immanent  in  all  His  creatures, 
but  independent  of  them.     The  Maker 


EOMILETJG  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


CHAP.  XIX. 


18  not  His  work.     God  transcends  all 
beings   and   worlds.     3.     That  Ke  is 
omnipotent.     He   who   made  the  uni- 
verse must   be  almighty.     Its  great- 
ness is  inconceivable,  and  the  power 
that  produced  it  must  be  infinite.     4. 
That  He  has  an  absolute  right  to  control 
all  things.     The  Maker  has  indefeasi- 
ble rights  in  his  productions.     This  is 
admitted  of  men.     5.   That  He  has  all 
things   under   His  direct  control.     As 
He  has  created  all  forces,  all  laws,  all 
agencies,    all   worlds,    all   angels,  all 
men,    He   has   them    under   His  im- 
mediate direction,  and  can  turn  them 
whithersoever   He    will.      This   con- 
ception of  God  afforded  solid  ground 
for    Hezekiah's    faith.      Before    the 
greatness   of  Jehovah   the    might   of 
Hezekiah's  enemies  sank  into  nothing- 
ness.     Large  conceptions  of  God  will 
ever  give  large  expectations  in  prayer. 
The  more  we  widen  our  views  of  God, 
the  more  confidence  we  shall  have  in 
Him  in  trouble. 

IV.  Hezekiah  prayed  with  great 
earnestness.    ' '  Lord,  bo  w  do  wn  Thine 
ear,"  &c.     "  Now,  therefore,  0  Lord 
our  God,  I  beseech  Thee''    He  ardently 
craves  the  attention  of  God.     God's 
knowledge  is  always  perfect,  and  His 
interest  in  His  troubled  saints  always 
sure ;  but  it  sometimes  seems  as  if  He 
heeded  not.    Faith  needs  testing.    De- 
sire must  be  tried.    Hearing  and  seeing 
in  men  are  the  chief  means  of  obser- 
vation.    The  heart  in  its  agonies  ever 
feels   the   humanity   of  God.     Heart 
cries  to  heart,  deep  unto  deep,  soul  to 
soul.     Earnestness  is  the  living  spirit 
in    prayer.     Our   prayers   may   have 
order,    beauty,     and   eloquence,    but 
without    earnestness   they    are    vain. 
To  desire  fervently  will  lead  invariably 
to  ardent  expressions.     Cold  prayers 
are  no  prayers.     ''I  beseech  Thee" 
is  the  natural  cry  of  a  praying  heart. 
Earnestness  is  needed,  not  to  lead  God 
to  observe  our  conlition,  or  to  create 
a  disposition  in  Him  to  help  us,  but — 
1 .  That  the  strength  of  our  desires  mag 
be  revealed.     2.    'J hat  we  may  he  raised 
from  the  low  condition  of  formal  devo^ 
tton.^     3.    That  we  may  hane  all   the 
tpiritual  culture  which  the  outcries  of 


real  need  miy  impart.  4.  Tliat  we 
may  he  prepared  to  receive  Divine 
deliverance  thankfully.  Hezekiah  was 
stirred  with  the  most  powerful 
emotions  as  he  prayed.  His  trouble 
heated  his  soul  as  fire. 

V.      Hezekiah     recognized    the 
greatness  of  the  deliverance  which 
he  sought.     ''  Of  a  truth.  Lord,"  &c, 
Other  kingdoms  had  fallen,  why  not 
his  ?     Only  that  his  hope  was  in  God. 
iN'o^  human  ingenuity  or  might  could 
deliver  him.     JS'o  gods  could  protect  ; 
Jehovah  alone  must  save.     Men  must 
be  brought  to  see  that  deliverance  is 
God's  work.     The  soul  is  a  besieged 
city.     The    forces    of    Diabolus   are 
around  ^  Mansoul.       The   deliverance 
which   it   needs   is   great.     Its    Sen- 
nacherib is  mighty.     *' Of  a  truth.'* 
The   whole  race  has  come  under  his 
power.        We    cannot    estimate    the 
greatness    of    our    danger.     "When 
Kapoleon    Buonaparte,    watching  the 
fortunes  of  the  battle,  saw  the  charge 
of  our  Scots  Greys,  at  Waterloo,   as, 
launched  on  his  columns,  they  dashed 
like   a  thunderbolt  into  the  thick  of 
them,  crushing  and  bearing  down  all  be- 
fore them,  he  exclaimed,  *'  How  terrible 
are  these  Greys !"     But  what  mortal 
foe   so    terrible   as   him  we  have  to 
fight— so     relentless,     so    malignant, 
ever  walking  about  seeking  whom  he 
may  devour!    No  serpent  so  cunning, 
no  lion  so  savage  !     From  other  ene- 
mies escape  may  be  found  ;  from  him, 
none.     ISTeither   the   world,    nor   the 
Church  itself,  offers  any  asylum,  nor 
the  universe,   other  than  the  hollow 
of   God's   hand,   the   shadow   of  His 
wings"  {Guthrie).     To  recognize  the 
greatness  of  the  deliverance  we  need, 
will--L   Deepen  our  sense  of  helpless- 
ness in  ourselves.     2.  Stimulate  the  exer- 
cise  of  great  faith.     3.   Prepare  us  for 
the  manifestation  of  God's  great  deliver^ 
ing  hajid. 

VI.  Hezekiah  associates  the  glory 
of  Jehovah  with  the  deliverance 
which  he  sought.  1.  The  reproaches 
which  had  been  cast  upon  him  had 
been  cast  upon  God.  This  deliver- 
ance  would   be   one    of  those   great 

607 


OHAp.  zrx« 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


revelations  of  the  true  and  only 
God  wbich,  in  an  age  when  power  in 
the  Deity  would  be  more  influential 
than  righteousness  or  love  to  impress 
men,  would  exercise  a  most  potent 
influence  in  shaping  their  spiritual 
destinies,  and,  perhaps,  set  forces  at 
work  that  for  centuries  would  operate 
upon  men  in  giving  them  a  deeper 
reverence  for  the  unseen  God,  and 
thus  checking  their  vices  and  pre- 
paring the  way  for  more  exalted  un- 
foldings  of  His  character.  2.  Heze- 
kiah's  prayer  prevailed.  God's  might 
was  put  foi  th ;  whether,  as  Kingsley 
suggests,  "by  a  stream  of  poisonous 
vapour,  such  as  often  comes  forth  out 
of  the  ground  during  earthquakes  and 
eruptions  of  burning  mountains,  and 
kills  all  men  and  animals  that  breathe 
it,"  or  by  a  pestilence,  or  by  the 
simoora,  or  by  a  plague  of  mice — 
according  to  the  Egyptian  legend  of 
Heiodotus — we  cannot  tell.  But  it 
was  God's  delivering  arm  put  forth  in 
answer  to  Hezekiah's  faith  and  prayer 
— (1)  That  his  pe^'ple  might  learn  to 
put  their  trust  in  Sim  ;  and  (2)  that 
all  the  earth  might  know  that  none 
could  defy  Bis  power  and  prosper. — 
S^om.  Quarterly. 

Verses  20-84.  Jehovah,  the  de- 
fence of  His  people.  1.  fie  vindi- 
cates His  character  from  the  wicked 
aspersions  of  His  enemies.  2.  He 
pre-^erves  His  people  inviolate.  3. 
He  delivers  them  i'rom  distress,  and 
restores  to  them  prosperity  and  power. 
4.  He  is  unchanging  in  His  fidelity  to 
His  covenant. 

Verse  21.  There  is  no  more  fitting 
punishment  for  a  proud  and  arrogant 
man  than  to  be  laughed  at  and  derided, 
without  being  able  to  take  revenge. 
The  derision  of  the  daughter,  Zion,  at 
the  blasphemous  boaster,  Sennacherib, 
is  not  due  to  sinful  malice ;  it  is  rather 
a  joyful  recogniticm  and  a  praise  of 
the  power  and  faithfulness  of  God 
who  reigns  in  heaven  and  laughs  at 
those  who  scoff  at  Him  (Psalm  ii.  4 ; 
xxxvii.  12,  13). — Lange. 

Verse  32.     Impotent  men!     What 
608 


are  we  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty  ? 
We  purpose,  He  overrules ;  we  talk 
of  great  matters,  and  think  to  do 
wonders.  He  blows  upon  our  projects 
and  they  vanish  with  ourselves.  He 
that  hath  set  bounds  to  the  sea  hath 
appointed  limits  to  the  rage  of  the 
proudest  enemies ;  yea,  even  the  devils 
themselves  are  confined.  Why  boast 
ye  yourselves,  0  ye  tyrants,  that  ye 
can  do  mischief  ?  Ye  are  stinted,  and 
even  within  those  lists  is  confusion. — 
JBp.  Hall. 

Verses  32-3-1.  Jerusalem,  the 
earthly  city  of  God,  a  type  of  the 
eternal  city,  the  Church  of  Christ. 
If  God  protected  the  former,  so  that 
no  arrow  could  come  into  it,  how 
much  more  will  He  protect  the  latter, 
break  in  pieces  the  bows  of  His  ene- 
mies, and  burn  their  chariots  in  fire ! — 
Lange. 

Verses  35-37.  The  proud  boaster 
humbled.  I.  Ho  is  smitten  with  dis- 
may by  the  terrible  evidences  of  a 
Divine  avenging  power  (verse  35). 

Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  summer 

is  green, 
That  host  with  their  banners  at  sunset  were 

seen; 
Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  autumn 

hath  blown, 
That  host  on  the  morrow  lay  withered  and 
strown. 

For  the  Angel  of  Death  spread  his  wings  on 

the  blast, 
And  breathed  in  the  face  of  the  foe  as  he 

passed ; 
And  the  eyes  of  the  sleepers  waxed  deadly 

and  chill, 
And  their  hearts  but  once  heaved,  and  for 

ever  grew  still  I 

And  the  widows  of  Asshur  are  loud  in  their 

wail, 
And  the  idols  are  broke  in  the  temple  of 

B  lal  ; 
And  the  might  of  the  Gentile,  unsmote  by 

the  sword, 
Hath  melted  like  snow  in  the  glance  of  the 

Lord! 

II.  He  relinquishes  in  fear  and 
disgrace  his  proudly-cherished  enter- 
prise (verse  36).  III.  He  comes  to  an 
untimely  and  ignominious  end  (verse 
37). 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS. 


CHAP.  X1X« 


—  God's  judgments  are  often  de- 
layed for  a  long  time,  but  then  they 
come  all  the  more  suddenly  and 
mightily  (Psalm  Ixxiii.  19).  A  single 
night  may  change  the  whole  face  of 
the  matter.  AYhere  is  now  the  boaster? 
Where  is  the  multitude  of  his  chariots? 
Sennacherib's  calamity  and  his  retreat 
proclaim  to  all  the  world  that  God 
resisteth  the  proud  ;  and  they  are  a 
testin.ony  to  the  truth  of  1  Sam.  ii, 
ti-IO.  He  who  had  smitten  whole 
kingdoms  and  peoples,  fell  under  the 
blows  of  his  own  sons.  When  God 
has  sufficiently  chastised  His  church, 
He  throws  the  rod  of  His  wrath  into 
the  fire  (Isaiah  xxxiii.  1). — Lange. 

Yerse  37.  Sennacherib  was  the 
last  of  the  great  Assyrian  conquerors. 
ITo  Assyrian  host  again  ever  crossed 
the  Jordan.  Within  a  few  years  from 
that  time,  the  Assyrian  power  suddenly 
vanished  from  the  earth.  The  effect 
of  the  event  must  have  been  immense, 
in  propoi  tion  to  the  strain  of  expecta- 
tion and  apprehension  that  had  pre- 
ceded it.  Isaiah  staked  upon  his 
prophetic  word  the  existence  of  his 
country,  his  own  and  his  people's  faith 
in  God.  So  literally  had  that  word 
been  fulfilled  that  he  was  himself,  in 
after  times,  regarded  as  the  instru- 
ment of  the  deliverance.  There  is  no 
direct  <3xpression  of  his  triumph  at 
the  moment,  but  it  is  possible  we  have 
his  hymn  of  thanksgiving,  when  he 
afterwards  heard  of  the  world- re- 
nowned murder  which  struck  down 
the  mighty  king  in  the  temple  at 
Nineveh.  The  earth  again  breathes 
fr(  ely.  The  sacred  cedar- grove  feels 
itself  once  more  secure.  The  world 
of  shades,  the  sepulchre  of  kings,  pre- 
pares to  receive  its  new  inmate  (Isa. 
xiv.)  If  there  is  any  duubt  as  to  the 
prophet's  utterance,  there  is  none  as  to 
the  burst  of  national  thanksgiving,  as 
incorporated  in  the  Book  of  Psalms 
(Psalms  xlvi.  Ixxvi).  The  weapons  of 
the  great  array,  such  as  we  see  them 
in  the  Assyrian  monuments — the 
mighty  bow  and  its  lightning  arrows, 
the  serried  shields — were  shattered  to 
pieces.  The  long  array  of  dead  horses ; 
the  chariots,  now  useless,  left  to  be 


burnt ;  the  trophies  carried  off  from 
the  dead,  all  rise  to  view  in  the  recol- 
lection of  that  night.  The  proud 
have  slept  their  sleep,  and  the  mighty 
soldiers  fling  out  their  hands  in  vain. 
The  arms  have  fallen  from  their  grasp. 
The  neigh  of  the  charger,  the  rattle  of 
the  chariot,  are  alike  hushed  in  the 
sleep  of  death.  The  wild  uproar  is 
over,  the  whole  world  is  silent,  and  in 
that  awful  stillness  the  Israelites  de- 
scend from  the  heights  of  Jerusalem, 
like  their  ancestors  1o  the  shores  of 
the  Ked  Sea,  to  see  the  desolation  that 
had  been  wrought  on  the  earth.  As 
then,  they  carried  away  the  spoils  as 
trophies.  The  towers  of  Jerusalem 
were  brilliant  with  the  shields  of  the 
dead.  The  fame  of  the  fall  of  Sen- 
nacherib's host  struck  the  surrounding 
nations  with  terror  far  and  wide.  It 
was  like  the  knell  of  the  great  poten- 
tates of  the  world ;  and  in  their  fall 
the  God  of  Israel  seemed  to  rise  to  a 
higher  and  yet  higher  exaltation.  The 
importance  of  the  deliverance  was  not 
confined  to  the  country  or  the  times  of 
Hezekiah.  It  is  not  without  reason, 
that  in  the  churches  of  Moscow  the 
exultation  over  the  fall  of  Sennacherib 
is  still  read  on  the  anniversary  of  the 
retreat  of  the  French  from  Russia ;  or 
that  Arnold,  in  his  lectures  on  Modern 
History,  in  the  impressive  passage  in 
which  he  dwells  on  that  great  catas- 
trophe, declared  that  for  *'  the  memor- 
able night  of  frost,  in  which  20,000 
horses  perished,  and  the  strength  of 
the  French  army  was  utterly  broken, 
he  knew  of  no  language  so  well  fitted 
to  describe  it  as  the  words  in  which 
Isaiah  described  the  advance  and  de- 
struction of  the  host  of  Sennacherib." 
The  grandeur  of  the  deliverance  has 
passed  into  the  likeness  of  all  sudden 
national  escapes. — Stanley, 

—  Thou  art  avenged,  0  God,  Thou 
art  avenged  plentifully  of  thine  ene- 
mies !  Whoever  strives  with  thee,  is 
sure  to  gain  nothing  but  loss,  but 
shame,  but  death,  but  hell.  The  As- 
syrians are  slain ;  Sennacherib  is  re- 
warded for  his  blasphemy ;  Jerusalem 
is  rescued ;  Hezekiah  rejoices ;  the 
nations  wonder  and  tremble. — Bp, 
Hall, 

609 


OHAp.  XX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


CHAPTER  XX. 
HEZEKIAH'S    SICKNESS    AND    RECOVERY. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — ^Verse  1.  In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick — The 
Assyrian  invasion  occurred  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  his  reign  (xviii.  1 3),  and  now  fifteen 
more  years  are  to  be  added  (xx.  6),  making  twenty-nine  years,  the  total  length  of  his  reign 
(xviii.  2) ;  therefore  this  sickness  must  have  occurred  the  very  year  of  the  invasion — "  in  those 
days  " — at  which  time  he  was  thirty- nine  years  of  age.  Set  thine  house  in  order — Not  his 
domestic  affairs,  but  those  of  his  kingdom,  for  beiog  without  a  child,  his  successor  should  be 
selected.  Verse  8.  Hezekiah  wept  sore — So  painful  is  it  to  quit  life  in  the  very  prime  of 
years  ;  but  the  distress  was  to  him  greater  because  of  the  fierce  menaces  of  the  foe  at  the 
gates  of  his  kingdom ;  and  his  plans  for  the  religious  reformation  of  the  nation  were  yet 
incomplete.  Verse  4.  Before  Isaiah  was  gone  out  into  the  middle  court — i.  e.^  of  the  royal 
castle,  not  of  the  temple.  Verse  G  Add  to  thy  days  fifteen  years — Why  fifteen  ?  He  was 
now  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  his  reign  ;  God  would  add  an  equal  period  to  that  he  had  already 
enjoyed.  He  thus  stood  midway  between  the  beginning  and  end  of  his  reign.  Verse  7. 
Take  a  lump  of  figs — The  remedy  does  Hot  determine  the  precise  character  of  the  ailment, 
for  Orientalists  apply  a  poultice  of  figs  to  plague  boils,  and  inflammatory  ulcers,  and  carbuncles. 
But  it  was  so  located  as  certain  to  prove  fatal  but  for  miraculous  inteivenlion.  Verse  10.  Let 
the  shadow  return  backward  ten  degrees — This  miracle  has  created  antagonistic  criticism. 
Either  Isaiah,  kn  wing  that  there  would  be  a  partial  eclipse  of  the  sun  at  that  tim*',  shrewdly 
used  his  kno.\ ledge;  or  else  the  story  of  the  shadows  being  deflected  is  a  myth  !  But  the 
result  was  possible  without  any  violent  derangement  of  nature — *'  a  phenomenon  of  refrac- 
tion in  the  rays  of  light''  {Keil)  would  effect  the  sign  required.  Yet,  accepting  the  miracle 
in  its  most  supernatuial  form,  the  phenomenon  was  so  local  and  temporary  as  to  carry  with 
it  no  disturbance  of  universal  nature.  Verse  11.  The  dial  of  Ahaz — PtwV'O  may  be  inter- 
preted steps^  for  PI /^O  means  an  ascent,  or  that  which  ascends.    It  can  therefore  be  imagined 

that  some  contrivance  had  been  arranged  so  that  the  shadow  fell  on  a  succession  of  steps,  or 
slopes,  each  so  measured  as  to  mark  the  hour  of  the  day.  It  was  of  such  dimensions,  and  so 
conspicuous  an  object  in  the  court,  that  Isaiah  could  point  to  it,  and  Hezekiah  see  it  from  his 
sick  chamber.  Verse  12.  Merodach-baladan,  king  of  Babylon  —This  is  the  first  mention  of  a 
king  of  Babylon  in  Bible  history,  for  hitherto  Babylon  had  only  viceroys  sent  from  the 
Assyrian  court.  The  name  "  Merodach "  is  that  of  the  Babylonian  Mars.  He  has  been 
variously  identified  as  the  Mardo-Cempados  of  Ptol.  Canon,  and  the  Merudach  Baldanes  of 
Berosus.  Hezekiah's  imprudent  vanity  awakened  so  much  cupidity  in  these  ambassadors  as  to 
lead  to  prolonged  intrigu-  s  and  ultimate  conquest  by  this  very  power  he  tried  to  propitiate. 
And  God  was  angry  with  his  self-glorying  pride.  Verse  19.  Good  is  the  word  of  the  Lord 
— It  signifies,  I  bow  submissive  to  its  justice,  resign  myself  to  His  will.  For  the  vision  of 
coming  ill  is  softened  by  the  assurance  that  hi?'  own  *' days"  should  close  in  the  enjoyment  of 
•♦  peace  and  truth."  God  would  suspend  the  execution  of  His  judgment.  Verse  20.  Made  a 
pool  and  a  conduit — The  pond  was  formed  between  the  outer  and  inner  walls  surrounding  the 
city ;  and  the  aqueduct  conveyed  the  water  from  the  Upper  Gihon,  underground,  into  the  city 
itself,  where  it  flowed  into  the  pool  afterwards  called  Hezekiah's,  but  now  named  Bxrket  el 
Hamman, — W.  H.  J, 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-11. 

Life  Pkolonged  in  Answee  to  Pkatee. 

The  anxiety  of  the  people  was  now  transferred  from  the  nation,  so  miraculously 
delivered,  to  the  monaich.  Hezekiah  was  smitten  with  a  fatal  sickness — 
perhaps  he  had  been  suffering  for  some  time,  and  the  mental  anguish  through 
which  he  had  lately  passed  would  tend  to  exacerbate  the  disease.  He  is 
startled  to  be  informed  that  his  recovery  is  hopeless.  With  cries  and  tears  he 
pleads  for  life.  He  is  heard,  and  fifteen  more  years  are  added  to  his  career. 
A  miracle  is  wrought  in  confirmation  of  the  Divine  promise  of  recovery.  How 
highly  favoured  is  this  man  for  whom  Jehovah  so  freely  exercises  his  miraculous 
power  I  Observe — 
610 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS,  chap.  xx. 


I.  That  the  sudden  approach  of  death  fills  the  stoutest  heart  with  alarm 
and  sorrow.  Death  is  a  painful  shock  at  any  time  ;  but,  while  cherishing  the 
hope  of  recovery,  to  be  abruptly  assured  that  death  is  inevitable  and  at  hand, 
strikes  terror  into  the  bravest  heart.  Hezc^kiah  was  utterly  prostrate.  **  With 
that  plaintive  tenderness  of  character  which  he  seems  to  have  inherited  from  his 
great  ancestor,  he  could  not  bear  to  part  with  life.  He  turned  his  face  away 
from  the  light  of  day  to  the  blank  wall  of  his  chamber.  He  broke  into  a 
passionate  burst  of  tears.  The  darkness  of  the  grave  was  before  him,  with 
nothing  to  cheer  him.  His  tent  was  struck,  his  thread  of  life  severed.  The 
cry  of  a  dying  lion,  the  plaintive  murmur  of  a  wounded  dove,  were  the  only 
sounds  that  could  be  heard  from  the  sick  chamber.  There  seemed  no  hope  of 
recovery"  {^Stanley^s  Paraphrase  of  Isaiah  xxxviii.) 

Sooner  or  later  all  things  pass  away 

And  are  no  more.     The  beggar  and  the  king 

With  equal  steps  tread  forward  to  their  end.  Southerne. 

II.  That  there  are  circumstances  in  which  prayer  for  continued  life  is 
justifiable.  Hezekiah  was  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  with,  to  all  natural 
appearances,  years  of  useful  labour  before  him.  He  had  succeeded  to  the  throne 
in  a  time  of  national  decay,  and  his  spirited  reforms  had  done  much  to  restore 
the  national  prestige.  He  had  been  rescued  from  great  troubles,  and  was  now 
in  a  position  to  look  forward  hopefully  to  a  period  of  rest,  peace,  and  prosperity. 
He  was  eager  to  do  more  than  ever  he  had  done  for  his  beloved  country.  When, 
therefore,  he  is  brought  unexpectedly  face  to  face  with  death,  we  cannot  wonder; 
that  he  should  ask  for  life.  Life  is  swe^t ;  with  all  its  burdens  and  cares,  it  has 
its  enjoyments.  It  is  a  positive  luxury  to  live.  And  when  the  powers  of  life 
are  sacredly  devoted  to  promoting  the  good  of  others,  we  cannot  but  yearn  for 
the  opportunity  which  continued  life  affords.  But  when  wrongs  have  to  be 
righted  and  faults  rectified,  how  necessary  and  precious  does  life  then  become. 
Zimmerman  remarks,  **  There  appeais  to  exist  a  greater  desire  to  live  long  than 
to  live  well.  Measure  by  man's  desires,  he  cannot  live  long  enough  ;  measure 
by  his  good  deeds,  and  he  has  not  lived  long  enough  ;  measure  by  his  evil  deeds, 
and  he  has  lived  too  long." 

III.  That  life  and  death  are  absolutely  in  the  Divine  disposal.  1.  The 
best  natural  remedies  are  futile  without  the  Divine  hlessing.  The  poultice  of  figs 
would  have  had  no  efficacy  if  the  Lord  of  life  had  refused  to  interfere. 
Hezekiah  knew  this  well,  and  he  appeals  immediately  and  directly,  not  to  the 
physician,  but  to  God.  In  His  hands  are  the  issues  of  life,  and  on  Him  they 
depend  for  their  continuous  outflow.  "  Every  one,"  says  a  certain  writer,  '*  is 
willing  to  allow  that  he  received  his  life  originally  from  the  Almighty,  and  that 
the  Almighty  takes  it  away  from  him  when  He  pleases.  Pew,  however,  are 
willing  to  regard  themselves  as  existing  only  by  virtue  of  His  con  tant  influx, 
the  only  way  in  which  it  can  be  true  that  in  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have 
our  being."  It  is  our  duty  to  do  all  in  our  power  to  prolong  life  ;  but  our  best 
efforts  must  ever  be  in  subordination  to  the  will  of  God.  2.  The  Lord  con- 
descends to  confirm  the  faith  of  His  servants  hy  the  exercise  of  miraculous  power. 
The  transition  to  life  was  to  Hezekiah  as  sudden  and  unexpected  as  the  prospect 
of  death.  To  possess  what  a  few  moments  before  he  despaired  about,  seemed 
incredible  :  it  was  too  good  to  be  true.  His  faith  staggered,  and  he  asked  for 
a  sign.  The  shadow  of  the  dial,  visible  from  the  window  of  the  king's  palace, 
was  put  back  ten  degrees,  probably  by  refraction — none  the  less  a  Divine  act — 
and  Hezekiah  could  no  longer  doubt.  He  recovered  at  once,  and  in  three  days 
passed  up  the  steps  in  royal  procession  to  the  Temple  to  offer  thanks  and  praise 
to  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Life.  How  slow  we  are  to  believe,  and  how  pains- 
taking and  patient  is  our  gracious  Father  in  encouraging  us  to  trust  Him ! 

611 


CHAP.  XX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 


Lessoj.'S: — 1.  A  time  of  sickness  is  a  time  for  special  prayer.  2.  God  has 
a  profound  interest  in  the  sufferings  and  sorrows  of  His  people,  3.  Restored  health 
should  be  used  in  increased  devotion  to  the  service  of  God. 

GERM  NOTES  OIv  THE  VERSES. 


Yerse  1  and  verse  5.  **Thou  shalt 
die,  and  not  live."  "  I  will  heal  thee." 
The  two  messages.  1.  How  diffe- 
rent their  import — the  one  announcing 
death,  the  other  promising  life.  2, 
How  different  their  effects — the  one 
creating  sorrow,  the  other  joy.  3. 
Both  emanating  from  the  same  autho- 
rity. 4.  Both  demanding  undoubted 
faith. 

Verse  1.  As  it  is  wise,  in  time  of 
health  and  strength,  to  set  one's  house 
in  order  in  a  worldly  sense — i.e.f  to 
make  one's  will  and  arrange  one's 
affairs — so  is  it  still  more  wise  to  set 
one's  house  in  order  in  a  spiritual 
sense,  and  not  to  put  off  making  one's 
peace  with  God  until  one  stands  on 
the  brink  of  the  grave. — Lange. 

Verse  3.  Conspicuous  piety.  1. 
Gives  no  immunity  from  sickness  or 
death.  2.  Is  often  severely  tested. 
3.  Should  guard  against  self-righteous 
boasting.  4.  Leads  the  troubled  soul 
to  God. 

—  The  course  of  Hezekiah's 
thoughts  was  evidently  directed  to 
the  promise  made  to  David  and  his 
successors  on  the  throne  (1  Kings  viii. 
25).  He  had  kept  the  conditions  as 
faithfully  as  human  infirmity  admitted, 
and  as  he  had  been  all  along  free  from 
any  of  those  great  crimes  by  which, 
through  the  judgment  of  God,  human 
life  was  often  suddenly  cut  short,  his 
great  grief  might  arise  partly  from 
the  love  of  life  and  the  promise  of 
long  life  and  temporal  prosperity  made 
to  the  pious  and  godly,  which  would 
not  be  fulfilled  to  him  if  he  were  cut 
off  in  the  midst  of  his  days  ;  partly 
from  the  obscurity  of  the  Mosaic  dis- 
pensation, where  life  and  immortality 
had  not  been  fully  brought  to  light  ; 
and  partly  from  his  plans  for  the 
reformation  of  his  kingdom  being  frus- 
612 


trated  by  his  death,  and  from  his  hav- 
ing as  yet,  which  was  most  probably 
the  case,  no  son  whom  he  could  leave 
heir  to  his  work  and  his  throne.  He 
pleaded  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise. 
Jamieson. 

—  Death  is  dreadful  in  his  best 
looks,  as  is  the  lion,  though  his  teeth 
and  claws  be  beaten  out ;  or  as  a  hawk 
to  the  partridge ;  or  as  a  serpent's  skin, 
though  but  stuffed  with  straw.  But 
why  should  a  saint  be  fond  of  life  or 
afraid  of  death,  since  to  him  it  is  but 
as  his  Father's  horse  to  carry  him  to 
his  Father's  house,  or  as  Joseph's  cha- 
riot rattling  with  its  wheels  to  carry 
old  Jacob  to  his  son  Joseph,  so  him  to 
Christ  ? — Trapp. 

Verse  6.  A  fixed  time  to  live. 
1.  A  doubtful  advantage,  apt  to  keep 
the  shadow  of  the  grave  ever  in  view. 

3.  Should  be  a  constant  reminder  of 
the  circumstances  under  which  the 
period  was  fixed.  4.  Is  best  spent  in 
earnest,  religious  work. 

Verse    9.      Human    life    a   dial. 

1.  On  which  time  flings  its  shadow. 

2.  It    has   its    morning.      3.    JN'oon. 

4.  Evening.  5.  A  Divine  hand  regu- 
lates the  time-shadow. 

Verse  11.  Time,  and  how  to 
measure  it.  The  dial  was  made  to 
measure  time.  Every  line  has  a  mean- 
ing ;  minutes  and  hours  are  numbered, 
and  all  scientifically  combined,  so  as 
to  tell  the  time  of  day.  The  Bible  is 
God's  dial,  by  which  we  have  to  mea- 
sure life.  Every  page  has  a  meaning 
— a  purpose — and  its  lines  of  doctrine 
radiate  from  Christ  as  the  centre  thro  u  gh 
the  whole  circumference  and  circumflex 
of  every-day  life.  To  the  uninitiated 
eye  the  lines  on  the  dial  have  no 
meaning ;  to  the  mind  of  the  un- 
enlightened and  unbelieving  the  Bible 
has    no    spiritual    value,    for    "the 


HOMILETIC  COMMEJSTAUY:   KINGS. 


CHAP.  XX. 


natural  man  knowcth  not  the  things 
that  are  spiritual,  because  they  are 
spiritually  discerned."  Eut  the  dial 
may  help  us  to  understand  this  word, 
and  serve  as  a  foil  to  throw  up  in  re- 
lief, doctrine,  precept,  promise,  pro- 
spect. I.  The  dial  must  be  so  placed  as 
to  receive  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Every 
line  will  then  come  iuto  use.  The 
indicator  conrentrates  the  light;  the 
angle  of  incidence  falls  within  the 
shadow,  marking  off  the  numbers  as 
the  earth  travels  round  the  sun,  and 
tells  the  time.  The  Bible  is  a  system 
of  revealed  truth.  Outspread  before 
us  in  type  and  form,  it  invites  atten- 
tion. But  without  the  light  of  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  it  will  only  be 
as  a  sealed  book.  The  Holy  Spirit 
must  shine  on  its  pages  before  we  can 
read  it  so  as  to  measure  life.  Christ 
crucified,  Christ  our  righteousness,  and 
Christ  our  life,  are  set  forth  in  the 
Bible  so  as  to  "make  us  wise  unto 
salvation."  God  in  Providence,  and 
grace  in  the  heart,  are  also  in  this 
Book.  "  The  hairs  of  your  head  are 
all  numbered,"  said  Jesus.  A  sparrow 
cannot  fall  to  the  ground  without  His 
Father's  knowledge  and  permission, 
and  all  the  steps  of  a  good  man  are 
ordered  by  the  Lord.  But  the  Bible 
is  our  guide.  We  must  place  it  in 
the  sunlight  of  His  Spirit,  and  not  let 
it  lie  on  the  shelf  until  you  may  write 
'^Death,"  '^ Judgment,"  "Eternity,'' 
on  the  dust  of  its  boards.  II.  The 
dial  of  Ahaz  was  a  public  instrument 
intended  for  all  the  people  of  Jerusalem. 
Like  some  of  the  dials  in  Egypt  at  the 
present  day,  it  was  the  only  means 
whereby  the  common  people  could 
regulate  their  daily  duty.  All  would 
not  see  it  at  once,  but  those  who  con- 
sulted it  could  tell  others  the  hour  by 
number  and  by  voice.  In  that  land 
of  sunny  skies  the  dial  was  of  daily 
value  and  of  daily  use.  The  Bible  is 
for  all.  There  was  a  period  in  the 
history  of  England  when  it  was  a  rare 
and  costly  book,  and  a  time  when  the 
"  King's  Book"  and  "Bishop's  Book," 
as  it  was  called,  were  used  and  set  up 
on  the  churches,  but  not  allowed  to 
the  laity  and  the  common  people.  It 
was  even  chained  up  to  the  desk  in 


the  crypt  of  St.  Paul's.  But  after  the 
lleformation,  and  the  right  of  private 
judgment  was  affirmed,  it  became  pub- 
lic property,  and  is  now  the  cheapest 
book  in  the  land.  An  Eastern  princess 
once  sent  an  ambassador  to  the  English 
Court,  to  ask  of  our  Queen  whal  was 
the  secret  of  England's  pr'ufness. 
There  is  a  picture  lepresentiug  a  scene 
in  which  Queen  Victoria  is  seen  stand- 
ing by  the  side  of  the  late  Prince 
Consort,  and  surrounded  by  ministers 
of  State,  presenting  the  Ambassador 
with  an  elegantly  bound  Bible,  saying, 
Tell  your  royal  mistress  that  this  is  the 
secret  of  England's  greatness.  Let  us 
cling  to  this  Bible  as  our  birthright. 
Take  what  you  can  get  from  the  pul- 
pit, but  let  those  who  cannot  or  will 
not  come  to  hear,  have  the  "  Book  and 
its  story"  taken  to  them.  There  must 
be  some  knowledge  before  there  can  be 
any  faith.  The  Book  is  for  all;  see 
then  that,  like  the  Bereans,  you 
"search  the  Scriptures,"  for  because 
of  this  they  were  more  noble  than  the 
Christians  of  Thessalonica,  who  took 
for  granted  that  which  they  ought  to 
have  proved. 

III.  Clouds  would  sometimes  obscure 
the  sun,  and  then  the  dial  of  Ahaz  was 
in  shadow.  Time  could  not  then  be 
measured,  but  past  experience  on  judg- 
ing of  light  would  keep  faith  steady, 
and  work  would  still  be  done.  In 
this  cloudy  land  of  ours  the  dial  is 
often  in  the  shade,  but  the  sun  is 
always  in  its  place,  and  his  light  is 
precious.  Clouds  sometimes  come 
between  the  mind  and  God's  Book. 
But  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  never 
sets  ;  and  there  is  a  silver  lining  in  the 
darkest  cloud  of  the  Christian's  ex- 
perience. Some  time  since  Mr.  Glaisher 
went  up  in  his  balloon  to  measure  the 
atmosphere  and  analyze  it;  and  just  as 
he  was  looking  down  and  admiring 
the  glorious  landscape  outspread  be- 
low, a  cloud  overshadowed  him,  and 
all  was  dark  as  night.  But  rising 
higher  and  higher,  the  huge  machine 
got  into  sunshine  again,  iind  looking 
up,  the  big  sun  himself  was  seen  pour- 
ing down  his  golden  rays,  making  the 
dark  cloud  white  and  wavy,  like  a  sea 
of  fleecy  down.     He  was  in  a  new 

613 


OttAP.   XX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


world.     So  with  the  believer.     In  the 
darkest  hour  he  may  be  ri?ing  higher 
and  higher,  until  the  cloud  is  pierced, 
and  in  the  smile  of  his  Father's  love 
he  enjoys  his  lift'  again.     Clouds,  too, 
will  come  when  we   seek  to  solve  by 
reason  doubts  and  difficulties  that  can 
only  be  solved  by  faith.    Eut  the  sailor 
is  not  to  throw  his  lead  line  overboard 
because  it  will  not  fathom  the  depths 
of  the   Indian  Ocean,  nor  his    chart 
because  he  sees  no  lines  of  latitude 
and  longitude  on  the  sea.     If  the  line 
is  long  enough  to  enable  him  to  take 
such    soundings  as  will  show  where 
there  is  danger,  and  the  chart  such  as 
may  be  relied  upon  by  experience,  he 
needs  no  more  to  ensure  safe  naviga- 
tion.     Just    so   with    the    Christian 
mariner.     He  has  faculties,  but  they 
are  limited — they  cannot  fathom  the 
mind  of  God,  but  they  are  sufficient 
to  discover  danger,  while  the  Bible  is 
a  chart  by  which  he  nan  safely  work 
his  course,  and  in  d'le  time  reach  the 
desired  haven. 

IV.  The  sun  went  lackwurd,  and 
not  forward  on  the  dial  of  Ahaz,  as  a 
sign  to  King  H  ezekiah  that  he  would 
get  well  again.     This  was  simply  a 


miracle.  With  God  all  things  are 
possible,  and  there  we  must  leave  it. 
In  the  moral  world  the  law  of  progress 
appears  to  be  sometimes  in  abeyance, 
and  the  dial  plate  indicates  a  down- 
going  sun.  But  although  at  present 
there  are  signs  which  indicate  a  return 
to  the  days  of  darkness,  let  us  not  be 
alarmed,  for  God  hath  said,  '*  At  even- 
ing time  it  will  be  light."  Standing 
on  the  sea  shore,  you  have  seen  the 
lack-going  wave  running  out  and 
tearing  away  the  landmarks  of  its 
former  progress  ;  but  look  again,  it  is 
getting  strenp;th  as  it  rises,  and, 
gathering  itself  like  a  giant,  comes 
roaring  forward  to  make  a  higher  mar- 
gin than  it  left  before.  So  will  it  be 
with  our  tide  of  Chiistian  progress. 
It  is,  perhaps,  in  the  back-going  wave 
at  present,  but  when  the  Church,  like 
Hezekiah,  rises  from  the  bed  of  sick- 
ness, or  it  may  be  indifference,  the  Sun 
of  Righteousness  will  again  appear — 
the  tide  of  progress  will  flow  onwards, 
and  the  world  shall  yet  be  brought  to 
the  rule  of  Christ.— C.  W.  F. 

—  0  God,  thou  wilt  rather  alter  the 
course  of  heaven  and  earth,  than  the 
faith  of  thy  children  shall  sink  for 
want  of  support. —  £p.  Sail, 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  12-21. 
The  Peril  of  Riches. 


I.  That  the  possession  of  riches  is  a  grave  lesponsibility.  Some  writers 
suppose  this  Babylonian  embassy  visited  Jerusalem  before  the  second  invasion  of 
Sennacherib,  and  therefore  before  Hezekiah's  treasury  had  been  drained  by  the 
heavy  tribute  demanded  by  the  Assyrian.  Those  who  accept  the  order  of 
events  as  here  recorded,  argue  that  Hezekiah  had  much  private  treasure  left, 
that  he  was  enriched  by  the  magnificent  presents  brought  to  him  by  other 
nations  who  came  to  congratulate  him  on  his  recovery,  and  that  he  gathered 
great  spoils  from  the  smitten  Assyrian  army.  The  riches  were  there,  and  it 
remained  to  be  seen  how  Hezekiah  would  act  concerning  them.  Wealth  brings 
its  own  cares  and  anxieties.  It  puts  into  the  hands  of  its  owner  a  great  power 
which  may  be  weilded  for  good  or  evil.  The  rich  man  is  but  the  steward  of 
his  possessions,  and  is  accountable  to  the  Absolute  Proprietor  of  all  things. 

II.  That  riches  may  become  a  snare  to  the  truly  good.  It  seemed  un- 
likely that  the  man  who  had  just  been  snatched  from  the  jaws  of  death  should 
attach  any  importance  to  the  perishable  trifles  of  earth.  And  yet  the  glitter 
of  gold  has  debauched  the  holiest.  The  rich  are  apt  to  depend  more  upon 
their  riohes  than  upon  God.    It  is  no  sin  to  be  rich ;  but  we  must  be  prepared 

614 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAttY :   KIKOS,  oaAP.  xx. 


to  find  that  the  snares  of  life  are  increased  with  the  incn  ase  of  wealth.  Says 
old  Chaucer — '^  In  getting  and  using  riches  ye  should  always  have  three  things  in 
your  heart :  our  Lord  God,  conscience,  and  a  good  name."  The  most  w[ik(ful 
diligence  is  imperative  if  we  would  counteract  the  temptations  of  wealth. 
Riches  will  sometimes  work  great  mischief,  and  then  leave  us  helplessly 
struggling.  '*Eor  riches  certainly  make  themselves  wings;  they  fly  away  as 
an  eagle  towards  heaven." 

III.    That  the  ostentatious  display  of  riches  often  leads  to  disastrous 

results.  The  Babylonian  visitors,  who  came  professedly  to  congratulate  Heze- 
kiah  on  his  recovery,  to  inquire  into  the  extraordinary  astronomical  phenome- 
non of  the  sun  dial,  and  to  institute  an  alliance  with  Judah,  carefully  observed 
this  accumulation  of  treasure,  and  the  weak  point  of  the  king  in  his  vain  dis- 
play. This  would  be  reported  in  Babylon,  and  was  remembered  in  after  years 
to  tne  utter  ruin  of  Juuah.  This  ostentation  is  the  worst  we  can  read  about 
Hezekiah,  and  we  should  not  be  too  severe  in  judging  and  condemning  him 
alter  the  Christian  standard  of  the  19th  century.  The  simplicity  with  which 
he  answered  Isaiah  (verse  15)  reveals  an  openness  and  frankne-s  of  disposition 
we  cannot  but  admire.  There  are  men  to-day,  surrounded  with  Christian  light 
and  influence,  who  give  way  to  contemptible  varieties  of  display.  They  are 
not  unnoticed;  and  there  are  those  who  know  how  to  deal  with  such.  It  is 
said  that  when  the  upper  part  of  the  steeple  of  the  Church  of  St.  Bride,  Fleet 
Street,  built  by  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  was  rebuilt  in  1764,  it  was  discovered 
that  an  old  hawk  had  inhabited  the  two  upper  circles,  the  open  arcades  of 
which  were  filled  with  masses  of  birds'  bones,  chiefly  those  of  the  City  pigeons, 
upon  which  he  had  preyed.  And  there  are  wily  huwks  of  society  who  are 
ever  ready  to  prey  with  merciless  and  ingenious  greed  upon  the  simple  and  un- 
suspecting. The  discovery  of  such  is  all  the  more  difficult  when  they  make 
the  Church  of  Christ  their  hidiog- place  ;  and  the  clean- picked  relics  of  their 
victims  are  all  the  more  painful  to  contemplate  when  one  finds  the  work  of 
plunder  has  been  carried  on  under  the  sacred  garb  of  religion. 

Lessons: — 1.  Great  riches  are  liable  to  great  changes.  2.  Riches  are  not  to  he 
selfishly  hoarded,  or  vainly  displayed,  but  wisely  used.  3.  The  best  of  characters 
may  be  spoiled  by  riches. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yerses  12,  17,  18.     A  future  ene-  fact   that  Hezekiah  was  so  superla- 

my.     1 .    May  be  introduced   in   the  tively  a  holy  man  and  a  man  favoured 

guise   and   with    the   professions     of  of   God,    his    sin  showed   itself,   and 

friendship.     2.  Is  quick  to  detect  the  God  visited  it  at  once  with  chastise- 

vulnerable  point  of  attack.     3.  May  ment.     I.   To  bring  out  what  Heze- 

be  the  instrument  of    accomplishing  kiah's  offence  was,  it  will  be  best  to 

the  Divine  threatenings.  begin  by  describing  his  circumstances 

and  state  at  the  time  of  the  trans- 
Verses  12,  13.  Hezekiah  and  the  action.  1.  He  had  received  very 
ambassadors,  or  vainglory  rebuked,  singular  favours.  Sennacherib  had  in- 
A  man  with  a  worn  and  stained  gar-  vaded  the  land  with  a  host  reckoned 
ment  may  walk  without  spoiling  his  to  be  invincible ;  but  when  he  came 
robe,  where  another,  clothed  in  white,  near  Jerusalem,  he  was  not  able  even 
might  not  venture  ;  a  spot  might  not  so  much  as  to  cast  a  mound  against  it, 
show  upon  a  filthy  garment,  but  the  or  to  shoot  an  arrow  at  it,  for  God 
cleaner  the  robe  the  more  readily  is  singularly  interposed,  and  the  host  of 
the  spot  discovered;  and  from  the  very  Sennacherib,  smitten  by  the  sudden 

616 


OHAP.  XX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMEMARY:   KINGS. 


breath  of  pestilence,  or  by  the  deally 
air  of  the  simoon,  fell  dead  upon  the 
plain.  He  had  been  granted  a  singu- 
lar escape  from  the  gates  of  death  ; 
where  another  man  must  have  died, 
he  was  enabled  within  three  days  to 
go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
Added  to  all  this  in  connection  with 
his  recovery,  God  had  seen  fit  to  do 
for  him  what  He  had  only  done  for 
Joshua  before,  namely,  to  interrupt 
the  orders  of  the  heavens,  and  to 
make  the  sun  go  back  ten  degrees 
upon  the  dial  of  Ahaz  as  a  token  by 
which  the  servant's  faith  might  be 
comforted. 

In  addition  to  all  this,  the  Lord 
gave  Hezekiah  an  unusual  run  of 
prosperity.  Everything  prospered. 
Many  serpents  lurk  among  the  flowers 
of  prosperity ;  high  places  are 
dangerous  places;  it  was  not  easy  to 
carry  a  full  cup  with  a  steady  hand ; 
a  loaded  waggon  needs  a  strong  axle, 
and  a  well-fed  steed  requires  a  ti^ht 
rein.  2.  Hezekiah,  at  this  time,  had 
become  singularly  cons^pinious  The 
world's  mouth  was  full  of  Hezekiah. 
What  a  temptation  is  this !  When 
many  eyes  are  upon  one,  they  may, 
unless  grace  prevent,  act  like  the 
eyes  of  the  fabled  basilisk  which 
fascinated  their  prey.  A  full  sail 
needs  much  ballast,  or  the  vessel  will 
be  overturned.  Much  grace  was 
needed  in  the  case  before  us,  but  this 
the  king  did  not  seek  as  he  should 
have  done.  3.  Sezthiah  had  remark- 
able opportunities  for  usefulness.  Why, 
Hezekiah,  hadst  thou  been  in  thy 
right  senses,  and  had  grace  kept  thy 
wits  about  thee,  \a  hat  a  sermon  thou 
mightst  have  preached,  with  death 
beneath  thee  and  heaven  above  thee 
for  the  text,  and  the  eternal  power 
and  Godhead  for  the  theme!  He 
ought  to  have  made  the  courts  of 
princes  ring  with  the  name  of  Jehovah. 
He  should  have  placed  liimself  in  the 
rear  of  the  picture,  and  have  filled  the 
earth  with  his  testimony  to  the  glory 
of  his  God.  4.  He,  above  all  men, 
was  under  obligation  to  have  loved  his 
Gody  and  to  have  devoted  himself  wholly 
to  Rim,  Unto  God  be  the  glory  of 
our  life,  though  it  be  but  given  to  us 
616 


once ;  but  oh  !  with  what  emphasis 
should  God  have  all  the  glory  of  it  if 
it  be  given  to  us  twice  !  But  it  is 
written  of  him  in  the  Chronicles, 
"  that  he  rendered  not  as-ain  according: 
to  the  benefit  done  unto  him,  for  his 
heart  was  lifted  up.  He  enjoyed 
the  blessings,  but  bowed  not  before 
the  Giver ;  he  remembered  the  fruit, 
but  he  forgot  the  tree  ;  he  drank  of 
the  stream,  but  did  not  enough  regard 
the  fountain ;  his  fields  were  watert-d 
with  dew,  but  he  was  not  sufficiently 
grateful  to  the  heaven  from  which  the 
dew  distils.  He  stole  the  fuel  from 
the  altar  of  love,  and  burned  it  upon 
the  hearth  of  pride,  o.  It  appears 
that  at  this  time  God  left  his  servant, 
in  a  measure,  to  try  him.  "  Howbeit, 
in  the  business  of  the  ambassadors  of 
the  princes  of  Babylon,  who  sent  unto 
him  to  enquire  of  the  wonder  that  was 
in  the  land,  God  lelt  him,  to  try  him, 
that  he  might  know  all  that  was  in 
his  heart."  It  was  said  by  the  old 
masters  of  metaphors  that  in  the 
soundest  pomegranate  there  are  always 
some  rotten  seeds,  and  the  whitest 
swan  has  a  black  bill ;  to  which  we 
may  add,  there  are  worms  under  the 
greenest  turf,  and  dead  men's  carcases 
at  the  bottom  of  the  calmest  seas.  In 
the  best  Christian  there  is  enough  of 
sin  to  make  him  the  worst  of  trans- 
gressors if  God  should  leave  him. 

II.  We  must  now  consider  the 
occurrence  itself  and  the  sin  which 
arose  out  of  it.  1.  It  is  evident  from 
the  passage  in  Isaiah  xxxix.  that  he 
was  greatly  delighted  with  their  com- 
pany.  It  is  said,  "  Hezekiah  was 
glad  of  them.'*  In  this  chapter  it  is 
said,  "He  hearkened  unto  them." 
He  was  very  pleased  to  see  them.  It 
is  an  ill  sign  when  a  Christian  takes 
great  solace  in  the  company  of  the 
worldling,  more  especially  when  that 
worldling  is  profane.  Courtesy  is  due 
from  the  Christian  to  all  men,  but  the 
unholy  intimacy  which  allows  a  be- 
liever to  receive  an  unregenerate 
person  as  his  bosom  friend  is  a  sin. 
2.  The  next  sin  which  he  committed 
was  that  he  evidently  leaned  to  their 
alliance.  Now  Hezekiah  was  the  king 
of  a  little  territory,   almost  as  in- 


noyniETic  commentary :  kixgs. 


CHAP.  XX, 


significant  as  a  Gerrar.n  principality, 
and  his  true  -strength  would  have  been 
to  have  leaned  upon  his  God,  and  to 
'  have  made  no  show  whatever  of  mili- 
tary power.     It  was  by  God  that  he 
had    been  defended ;  why  should  not 
he  still  rest  upon  the  invisible  Jehovah  ? 
But  no,  he  thinks :  **  If  I  could  asso- 
ciate with  the  Babylonians,  they  are 
a   rising   people,  it  will  be  well  for 
me."     It  was  this  getting  away  from 
God,    this  ceasing  to  walk  by  faith, 
this    wanting  to  def)end  in   a  carnal 
manner   upon   the   king  of   Babylon, 
which    provoked  the  Lord  to   anger. 
3.  The  next  sin  was,  his  tm ho li/  silence 
concerni)}(/    his     God.     He    does    not 
appear  to  have  said  a  word  to  them 
about  Jehovah.     ^Yould  it  have  been 
polite  ?     Etiq'K^tte,  now-a-days,  often 
demands  of  aC  iristian  that  he  should 
not  intrude  his  religion  upon  company. 
Out    on    such   etiquette !     Some    one 
once  complained  of  Mr.  Howland  Hill 
that  he  was  too  earnest,  and  he  told 
them    in    reply   the  following    story. 
When     walking    at    Woolten-under- 
EJge,  he  saw  part  of  a  chalk-pit  fall 
in  upon  some  men.     **  So,"  said  he, 
"  1    ran    into    the    village,     crying, 
*  Help  !  help  !  help  !'  and  nobody  said, 
'Dear  me,  how  excited  the  old  gentle- 
man   is;    he   is    much   too    earnest.' 
Why,"    said   he,   "  and  when   I    see 
a    soul   perishing,    am  I  not   to    cry 
'help!'    and  be  in  earnest?     Surely, 
souls  are  yet  more  to  be  cared  for  than 
bodies."     4.    Meanwhile,    mark    that 
H(  zekiah  sadly  made  up  for  his  silence 
about  his  God  by  loudly  boasting  about 
himaelf.     If  he  had  little  to  say  of  his 
God,  he  had  much  to  say  of  his  spices, 
his  armour,   and  his  gold  and  silver ; 
and  I  daresay  he  took  them  to  see  the 
conduit  and  the  pool  which  he  had 
made,  and  the  various  other  wonders 
of  engineering  which  he  had  cnrried 
out.     6.   Surely,  also,  his  sin  lay  in 
his  put  fin  y  himself  on  a  level  with  these 
Babylonians.     Suppose    he    had   gone 
to    see   them.,   what   would  they   liave 
shown  him  ?     Why,  they  would  have 
shown      him      their     spict^ry,     their 
armoury,   their  gold  and  their  silver. 
IN'ow,  they  come  to  sec  him,  and  he  is 
a  worshipper  of  the  invisible  God,  and 


he  glories  in  just  the  same  treasures 
as  those  in  which  they  also  trusted. 
When  a  Christian  man  constantly  acta 
like  a  worldly  man,  can  it  be  possible 
that  he  is  acting  rightly?  If  they 
say,  "  Here  are  my  treasures."  let  us 
tell  them  about  the  city  which  hath 
foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker 
is  God,"  and  say,  **Our  treasure  is 
above."  Let  us  imitate  the  noble 
Koman  lady,  who,  when  her  friend 
showed  her  all  her  trinkets,  waited 
till  her  two  fair  boys  came  home  from 
school,  and  then  pointed  to  them,  and 
said,  "These  are  mv  jewels." 

III.  The  punishment  and  the 
pardon.  We  may  generally  find 
a  mau's  sin  written  in  his  puifishment. 
We  sow  the  thorns,  and  then  God 
flogs  us  with  them.  Moreover,  he 
threatened  to  make  the  same  persons 
the  means  of  his  punishment  who  had 
been  the  means  of  his  sin.  **  You 
were  so  pleased  while  you  showed 
these  Babylonians  your  treasures ; 
these  very  ones  shall  take  them  away." 
And  so  the  things  in  which  we  confide 
shall  be  our  disappointment;  if  we 
take  our  hearts  away  from  God  and 
give  them  to  any  earthly  thing,  that 
earthly  thing  will  be  a  curse  to  us. 
Our  sin?  are  the  mothers  of  our 
sorrows.  Judgments  being  therefore 
threatened,  H'r-zekiah  and  the  people 
humbled  themselves.  The  child  that 
bares  his  back  to  the  rod  shall  not  be 
very  hardly  smitten.  Submission 
more  easily  averts  blows  from  God's 
hand  than  anything  else. 

Yet  though  God  did  forget  the  sin 
and  promise  to  remove  the  punishment 
from  Hezekiah,  yet  He  did  not  avert 
the  consequences  from  another  gene- 
ration. So  with  us.  You  let  loose 
the  river,  and  it  will  flow  on  for  ever. 
The  action  of  to-day  will  afl'ect  all 
time ;  more  or  less  remotely  it  will 
affect  every  coming  age,  for  you  tell 
on  another  man,  and  that  other  man 
on  another,  and  even  eternity  itself 
shall  hear  the  echo  trembling  along 
its  halls  of  yon  momentary  action, 
which  you,  perhaps,  without  thought, 
committed  against  the  living  God. 

IV.  I  have  now  to  gather  up  the 
lessons   of  this  narrative.     1.   See, 

617 


OflAP.  XX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS. 


then,  what  is  in  every  marCs  heart. 
This  was  in  Hezekiah's  heart — he  was 
one  of  the  best  of  men  ;  the  same  is  in 
your  heart.  You  are  humble  to-day  ; 
you  will  be  proud  as  Satan  to-morrow 
if  left  by  God's  grace.  Perhaps  it  is 
not  possible  for  any  one  of  us  to  know 
our  full  capacity  for  guilt.  Only  let 
the  restraining  hand  of  providence 
and  grace  be  taken  away,  and  the 
wisest  of  us  might  become  a  very 
madman  with  the  rage  of  sin.  3. 
Tremhle  at  anything  that  is  hhely  to 
hring  out  this  evil  of  your  heart. 
Above  all,  be  afraid  of  prosperity  ;  be 
thankful,  but  do  not  be  over-enjoyed  ; 
walk  humbly  with  your  God.  A 
pirate  very  seldom  attacks  a  ship  that 
is  going  unloaded ;  it  is  the  vessel 
that  is  well  stored  that  the  buccaneer 
will  seek  to  gain,  and  so  with  you  : 
when  God  loads  you  with  mercy,  the 
devil  will  try  to  take  you  if  he  can. 
Riches  and  worldly  company  are  the 
two  cankers  that  eat  out  the  very  life 
of  godliness.  3.  We  should  be  taught 
to  cry  out  every  day  against  vainglory. 
Do  not  you  believe  there  may  be  as 
much  pride  in  rags  as  in  an  alderman's 
gown  ?  Is  it  not  just  possible  for 
a  man  to  be  proud  in  a  dustcart,  as  if 
he  rode  in  her  Majesty's  chariot?  A 
man  may  be  just  as  proud  with  half 
a  yard  of  ground,  as  Alexander  with 
all  his  kingdoms,  and  may  be  just  as 
lifted  up  with  a  few  pence  as  ('roesus 
with  all  his  treasure.  Pride  will 
grow  on  a  dunghill,  as  well  as  in  the 
king's  garden.  4.  And  then,  supposing 
that  you  should  have  given  way  to  it, 
see  the  sorrow  which  it  will  bring  you; 
and  if  you  would  escape  that  sorrow, 
imitate  BezeUah,  and  humhU  yourself. 
When  God  is  wrestling  with  man's 
pride,  let  the  man  struggle  as  he  will, 
he  will  throw  him  ;  but  when  the 
man  is  down,  God  lifts  him  up.  None 
so  ready  to  lift  up  a  fallen  Ice  as  our 
God.  5.  Lastly,  let  us  cry  to  God 
never  to  leave  us.  Lord,  keep  me  every- 
where. Keep  me  in  the  valley,  that 
I  murmur  not  of  my  low  estate ! 
Keep  me  on  the  mountain,  that  I  wax 
not  giddy  through  pride  at  my  being 
lifted  up  so  high  !  Keep  me  in  my 
youth,  when  rav  passions  are  strong  ! 
618 


Keep  me  in  my  old  age,  when  I  am 
conceited  of  my  wisdom,  and  may 
therefore  be  a  greater  fool  than  even 
the  young.  Keep  me  living,  keep  me 
dying,  keep  me  labouring,  keep  me 
suffering,  keep  me  fighting,  keep  me 
resting,  keep  me  everywhere,  for 
everywhere  I  need  Thee,  0  my  God. 
—  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

Yer.  13-18.  A  spirit  of  ostenta- 
tion. L  May  mar  a  character  other- 
wise commendable.  2.  Excites  the 
cupidity  of  the  designing.  3.  Should 
be  rebuked  by  the  faithful  minister. 
4.  Leads  to  ruinous  consequences. 

Yer.  13.  The  display  was  wrong 
as  making  a  vain  exhibition,  for  his 
own  aggrandisement,  of  what  had  been 
offered  him  from  reverence  and  respect 
to  his  God,  and  at  the  same  time 
presenting  a  bait  for  the  cupidity  of 
these  rapacious  foreigners  who,  at  no 
distant  period,  would  return  from  the 
same  city  of  Babylon  and  pillage  his 
country,  and  transfer  all  the  possessions 
he  ostentatiously  displayed,  to  Baby- 
lon, as  well  as  his  posterity,  to  be 
court  attendants  in  that  country. 
Besides,  it  was  wrong  in  a  higher 
point  of  view,  as  all  alliances  with 
foreign  or  heathen  states  were  at 
vaiiance  with  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciple of  the  theocratic  kingdom  of 
Judah.  This  passage  affords  a  strong 
argument  as  to  the  prophecy  respecting 
the  captivity  to  Babylon,  showing  that 
the  words  must  have  been  spoken  very 
long  before  the  event.  The  folly  of 
the  king  and  the  reproof  of  the  prophet 
must  stand  or  fall  together ;  the  one 
prompts  the  other ;  the  truth  of  the 
one  sustains  the  truth  of  the  other ;  the 
date  of  the  one  fixes  the  date  of  the  other. 
Thus  the  period  of  Hezekiah's  display  of 
his  finances  being  determined  to 
a  period  soon  after  the  downfall  of  the 
Assyrians,  this  rebuke  of  the  prophet, 
which  springs  out  of  it,  is  determined 
to  the  same.  Then  the  rebuke  was 
a  prophecy  ;  for  as  yet  it  remained  for 
Esarhaddun,  the  son  of  Sennacherib,  to 
annex  Babylon  to  Assyria  by  conquest; 
it  remained  for  the  two  kingdoms  to 
continue  united  for  two  generations 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EINOS, 


OHAP.  XZ« 


more;  it  reranined  for  Nabopolassar, 
the  satrap  of  Babylon,  to  revolt  from 
Assyria  nnd  set  up  that  kingdom  for 
itself  ;  and  it  remained  for  JS'ebuchad- 
nezzar  his  son  to  succeed  liim,  and,  by 
carrying  away  the  Jews  to  Babylon, 
accomplish  the  words  of  Isaiah.  But 
this  interval  occupied  a  hundred  years 
and  upwards ;  and  so  far,  therefore, 
must  the  spirit  of  prophecy  have  carried 
him  forward  into  futurity,  and  that, 
too,  contrary  to  all  present  appearances. 
Eor  Babylon  was  as  yet  but  a  name 
to  the  people  of  Jerusalem ;  it  was 
a  far  country,  and  was  to  be  swallowed 
up  in  the  great  Assyrian  Empire,  and 
recover  its  independence  once  more, 
before  it  could  be  brought  to  act 
against  Judah. — Jamieson. 

—  How  easily  have  we  seen  those 
holy  men  miscarried  by  prosperity, 
against  wliom  no  miseries  could  pre- 
vail. He  that  stood  out  stoutly 
against  all  the  Assyrian  onsets,  cling- 
ing the  faster  to  his  God,  by  how  much 
he  was  harder  assaulted  by  Sen- 
nacherib, melted  now  with  these 
Babylonian  favours,  and  runs  abroad 
into  offensive  weaknesses. — Bp.  Hall. 
Yer.  15.  0  Hezekiah  !  what  means 
this  impotent  ambition  ?  It  is  not 
long  since  thou  tearedst  off  the  very 
plates  of  the  Temple  doors,  to  give 
unto  Sennacherib ;  and  can  thy  trea- 
sures be  suddenly  so  multiplied,  that 
they  can  be  so  worthy  to  astonish 
foreign  beholders?  or,  if  thy  store- 
house were  as  rich  as  the  earth,  can 
thy  heart  be  so  vain  as  to  be  lifted  up 
with  these  heavy  metals  ?  Didst  thou 
not  see,  that  heaven  itself  was  at  tliy 
beck,  whilst  thou  Avert  humbled  ?  and 
shall  a  little  earthly  dross  have  power 
over  thy  soul?  Can  the  flattering 
applause  of  strangers  let  thee  loose 
into  a  proud  joy,  whom  the  late  mes- 
sage of  God's  prophet  resolved  into 
tears  ?  0  God !  if  thou  do  not  keep 
us,  as  well  in  our  sunshine  as  in  our 
storm,  we  are  sure  to  perish  ;  as  in  all 
time  of  our  tribulation,  so  in  all  time 
of  our  wealth,  good  Lord,  deliver  us ! 
—lUd. 

—  We  still  show  our  spiritual 
treasures  to  the  friends  from  Babylon, 
especially  when  we  admire  our  own 


gifts,  and  like  to  have  others  admire 
them.  As  soon  as  strangers  arrive  we 
hasten  to  show  our  gifts,  and  powers, 
and  accomplishments,  in  order  to  win 
respect.  This  is  just  the  way  to  lose 
all  those  things.  If  one  collects  trea- 
sures, let  him  store  them  up  in 
heaven,  where  no  spies  will  come  to 
see  them. — Lange. 

Yer.  19.  A  submissive  spirit. 
1.  Acknowledges  the  righteousness  of 
the  Divine  procedure.  2.  Is  thankful 
for  the  gracious  suspension  of  the 
Divine  judgment.  3.  Cannot  but 
regret  tiie  sufferings  that  must  fall 
upon  its  descendants. 

—  This  rod  was  smart,  yet  good 
Hezekiah  kisses  it :  his  heart  struck 
him  no  less,  than  the  mouth  of  the 
prophet ;  meekly,  therefore,  doth  he 
yield  to  this  Divine  correction.  "  Good 
is  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  thou 
hast  spoken.'*  I  have  deserved 
a  present  payment ;  0  God !  thou 
deferrest  it.  I  have  deserved  war 
and  tumult ;  thou  favourest  me  with 
peace.  I  have  deserved  to  be  over- 
run with  superstition  and  idolatry  ; 
thoublessest  me  with  truth.  Shouldst 
thou  continue  truth  unto  me,  though 
upon  the  most  unquiet  terms,  the 
blessing  were  too  good  for  me ;  but 
now  thou  hast  promis(^d,  and  wilt  not 
reverse  it,  that  both  truth  and  peace 
shall  be  in  my  days.  God's  children 
are  neither  waspish  nor  sullen  when 
they  are  chid  or  beaten,  but  patiently 
hold  their  backs  to  the  stripes  of 
a  displeased  mercy. — Bp,  Hall. 

—  The  hopes  of  Htzekiah,  as  we 
have  seen,  were  entirely  confined 
within  the  limits  of  this  life.  None 
of  the  Jewish  kings  had  a  keener 
sense  of  the  grandeur  of  his  mission ; 
but  to  none  was  it  so  closely  identified 
with  the  interests  of  the  present. 
The  fifteen  years  of  the  remainder  of 
his  life  seemed  to  be  so  much  rescued 
from  the  desolation  of  impending 
calamities.  When  his  end  at  last 
came,  his  funeral  was  marked  with 
unusual  honour.  The  whole  popula- 
tion of  the  city  and  of  the  royal  tribe 
of  Judah  were  present.  His  burial 
forms  a  marked  epoch  in  the  royal 

619 


CHAP.  XXI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :   KINGS. 


intermeuts.     It  may  be  that  David's  the  ancient  burial-place  of  his  family, 

catacomb    was   filled.       Hezekiah   is  and  from  this  time  no  prince  of  the 

the  first  king  who  was  buried  outside  royal  house  was  interred  within  the 

the   city   of   David.     Apparently  his  walls. — /Stanley. 
tomb  was  on  the  roud  approaching  to 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

MANASSEH:     THE    REIGN    OF    TERROR    IN    JERUSALEM. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  1.  Manasseh  was  twelve  years  old,  Ac- 
Born,  therefore,  three  years  after  his  father's  recovery.  His  reign  was  the  longest,  of  any  king 
in  either  kingdom.  Verse  2.  He  did  evil  .  .  after  the  abominations  of  the  heathen — 
His  minority  was  passed  under  (3ourt  influences  whoUy  alien  from  Hezekiah's  aspirations  ;  for 
there  was  a  powerful  party  in  the  realm  who  revolted  in  heart  from  all  the  religious  reforms  which 
king  Hezekiah  introduced  into  the  kingdom;  ^scornful  men,  who  ruled  the  people  in  Jerusa- 
lem "  (Isa.  xxviii.  14) ;  *'  rebellious  and  lying  children,  that  would  not  hear  the  word  of  the 
Lord"  (Isa.  XXX.  9-12).  Verse  3.  Altars  for  Baal,  and  made  a  grove — i.  ^.,  an  image  of 
Astarte.  Ahab  introduced  tht  se  idolatiies  into  Israel  {see  xvi.  3,  4).  And  worshipped  all  the 
hosts  of  heaven  {comp.  Notes  on  xvii.  16)  — From  this  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies— sun, 
moon,  planets,  zodiacal  constellations  [cap.  xxiii.  5) — arose  the  Chaldean  system  of  anrology  ; 
and  this  being  introduced  among  the  people,  led  to  the  multiplication  of  astrologers,  sooth- 
sayers, and  magicians  ;  and  these  became  the  nation's  oracle  in  place  of  Jehovah.  Verse  5. 
Altars  for  all  the  hosts  of  heaven  in  the  two  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord — This  was 
the  most  advanced  stage  of  profanation  which  had  yet  been  reached.  "Iniquity  added  unto 
iniquity  :  "  impiety  becomes  more  blasphemous  as  it  proceeds.  Verse  6.  Observed  times  ana 
used  enchantments— Impostors,  whose  trade  was  in  occult  arts,  poured  into  Israelfrom  Chaldea, 
and  Manasseh  became  treir  patron,  and  found  delight  in  becoming  himself  an  adept  in  the 
black  craft.     The  word  l^HJ  comes  from  I£^n^»  a  serpent,  and  means  omen  ex  serpentibus 

T  T 

petere,  and  passes  into  the  meaning  of  divination  in  general.  He  dealt  with  familiar  spirits, 
t.  «.,  either  trained i^uo-h  persons,  or  practised  with  them,  or  patronized  them  ;  but  the  result  was 
that  he  raised  them  into  an  official  status  in  the  realm.  Verse  7.  Set  up  a  graven  image 
,    .    in  the  house,  &c.— That  is,  n")l^J^,  Asherah  or  Astarte.     Clearly,  from  1  Kings  viii. 

T    ••  -: 

16;  ix.  3,  "the  house''  was  the  very  sanctuary  in  which  Jehovah  Him?elf  had  dwelt,  not 
merely  in  ^'' the  courts''  (verse  5).  Verses  8,  9.  The  terms  of  Israel's  stability— "  (^«/y  t/ 
they  observe  to  do"  (verse  8);  ^^ but  they  hearkened  not''  (verse  9).  From  their  first  being 
planted  in  Canaan  this  condition  was  affirmed  (2  Sam.  vii.  10),  but  they  so  completely  degene- 
rated from  the  covenant  as  to  do  more  impiously  than  the  very  Canaamtes  who  were  expelled 
from  the  land  that  Israel  might  inherit  it ;  for  the  Canaanites  were  faithful  to  their  deities, 
but  Is  ael  rejected  their  God,  and  worshipped  base  innovations.  Veise  10.  The  Lord  spake 
by  His  servants  the  prophets — These  were  Hoshea,  Joel,  Nahum,  Hanakkuk,  and  Isaiah. 
These  ''u-ords  of  the  seers''  were  kept  in  the  national  annals,  along  with  the  records  of 
Manasseh's  deeds  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  18).  Verse  13.  The  line  of  Samaria,  and  the  plummet 
of  the  house  of  Ahab — The  vanquished,  or  war  prisoners,  were  measured  off  with  the  line 
Op),  as  marked  or  separated  to  slaughter  (2  Sam.  viii.  2)  ;  the  use  of  the  plummet  implies  a 

levelled  and  cleared  space,  suggesting  the  complete  clearance  of  Ahab's  house.  Verse  16. 
Moreover,  Manasseh  shed  innocent  blood— Of  the  godly  people  who  would  not  concur  in 
his  impious  deeds,  and  protested  against  them.  A  Jewish  tradition  survived  even  to  the  time 
of  the  Chrivtian  fathers  that  Isaiah  was  Hraong  the  victims  of  Manasseh's  intolerant  persecu- 
tions ;  and  it  is  reported  that  he  was  sawn  in  two  while  fastentd  to  a  cedar  tree  in  which  he 
had  secreted  himself.  Verses  19-26.  Amon's  guilty  reign— Following  all  the  evils  of 
Manasseh,  bestirred  such  animosity  among  his  Court  attendants  ("  A?s  servants")  that  an 
intrigue  sprang  up  in  the  palace,  issuing  in  regicide.  •*  The  people  of  the  land  "  (verse  24j,  who 
avenged  the  king's  death  ;  suggesting  that  a  popular  outburst  of  iutiignation  ensued,  in  which 
the  conspirators  against  Anion  were  jiit  to  the  slaughter.  T  hese  conspiracies  may  suggest 
the  opposing  religious  or  irreligious  conflicts  which  were  struggling  for  ascendancy  ;  they  who 
Blew  Amon  may  have  regarded  themselves  as  doing  God's  service ;  the  Cromwellian  era  in 
Enghsh  history  harmonizing  therewith.  And  "  the  people "  who  took  vengeance  on  these 
«  servants  '*  were  probably  prompted  by  exasperated  attachment  to  Amon's  idolatry,  and 
620 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xxi. 

thought  to  re-mstate  Amon's  regime  when  placing  his  son  on  the  throne  ;  hut  they  knew  not 
what  would  he  the  policy  of  that  child's  life.  Who  can  predict  what  course  will  be  chosen  by 
%  child  as  yet  but  "  eight  years  old  "  f — W,  H.  J. 


SOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-18. 

Keliqious  Anabcht. 

The  reign  of  Manasseli  was  the  longest  and  darkest  in  the  history  of  Jndah. 
The  reformation  under  Hezekiah  was  superticial.  Idolatry  had  a  firm  hold 
upon  the  nation,  and  receiving  once  more  the  patronage  of  royalty,  rapidly 
became  the  predominating  power.  Being  intolerant  of  any  rival,  and  dreading 
another  reaction,  it  strove  to  secure  permanent  supremacy.  A  great  struggle 
ensued  between  the  lovers  of  Jehovah  and  the  zealots  for  heathenism.  As  in 
other  similar  conflicts  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  the  stronger  party  sought 
to  diive  the  weaker  into  submission  by  the  terrors  of  a  blood-thirsty  persecu- 
tion. The  most  faithful  and  gifted  of  God's  servants  were  victims ;  and 
according  to  tradition  Isaiah  was  sawn  asunder  by  the  savage  emissaries  of 
Manasseh.  This  paragraph  furnishes  a  gloomy  description  of  the  prevalence 
of  Religious  Anarchy, 

I.  Seen  in  the  reckless  reversal  of  the  policy  of  reformation  (verse  3). 
Manasseh  showed  little  respect  for  the  memory  and  life-work  of  his  father. 
He  puUed  down  what  his  father  had  painfully  toiled  for  years  to  build  up  :  it 
is  so  much  easier  to  destroy  than  to  construct.  It  is  also  a  revelation  of  the 
fickleness  of  the  people,  and  the  shallowness  of  the  reformation  under  Heze- 
kiah, that  they  so  readily  fell  in  with  the  idolatrous  policy  of  Manasseh. 
Alas  !  how  few  are  there  who  clearly  comprehend  and  earnestly  maintain  great, 
vital  reforming  principles!  It  takes  years  and  generations  to  thoroughly 
impregnate  the  bulk  of  the  people.  And  yet  truth  must  ultimately  triumph 
over  all  opposition.  Over  the  principal  gate  of  the  city  of  Konigratz  is  a  bas- 
relief  representation  of  John  Huss,  the  Bohemian  Reformer,  in  the  act  of 
kneeling,  before  his  martyrdom,  and  underneath  are  inscribed  the  words,  "  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  A  reaction 
set  in.  The  enemies  of  Huss  triumphed  for  a  time.  They  sought  to  destroy 
every  vestige  of  the  Reformer's  work ;  and,  as  one  means  of  obliterating  his 
memory,  they  plastered  over  this  public  memorial.  But  the  principles  of  the 
Reformation  were  again  in  the  ascendant,  and  time  crumbled  the  plaster  which 
had  hidden  the  monument,  leaving  distinct  once  more  this  public  reminder  of 
the  great  Reformer's  work  and  sufferings.  So  is  it  with  aU  honest  reforming 
work.  ^  It  may  be  obscured  for  years  ;  but  it  will  re-appear.  Work  done  for 
God  IS  immortal.     It  is  vain  to  struggle  against  it. 

II.  Seen  in  the  shameless  outrages  perpetrated  by  the  votaries  of  a 
false  religion  (4-9).  JS'ot  content  with  their  liberty  to  worship  idols  and  with 
the  restoration  of  the  high  places  and  the  erection  of  altars  to  Baal,  the  heathen 
party  desecrated  the  temple  of  Jehovah  by  placing  in  it  a  carved  figure  of 
Asherah.  This  is  regarded  by  the  historian  as  the  most  aggravated  outrage  of 
the  idolatrous  king.  The  worst  features  of  the  reigns  of  Athaliah  and  Ahaz 
are  outnvalled.  No  insult  offered  to  Jehovah  can  be  too  offensive ;  no  enormity 
the  ingenuity  of  the  heathen  priests  can  devise  is  too  low  for  the  tastes  and 
practices  of  the  debauched  king.    LitUe  do  we  know  the  depths  of  infamy  to 


CBAF,  XZI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


which  we  may  be  dragged  by  our  sins.     Manasseh,  beginning  life  amidst  the 
holiest  influences,  sank  down  till  he  became  the  execration  of  history. 

III.  Seen  in  the  outbreak  of  a  cruel  and  sang^uinary  persecution 
(verse  16).  The  heathen  party  began  to  feel  their  power;  and  they  used  it 
mercilessly.  Injury  is  added  to  insult.  When  they  had  once  tasted  blood 
they  were  insatiable.  Every  opponent,  every  ^Nonconformist,  shall  cease  to 
breathe.  The  attempts  of  any  future  reforming  kings  shall  be  made  impossible ; 
they  have  had  enough  of  that.  The  noblest  patriots  and  choicest  teachers  were 
victims;  among  them,  as  is  supposed,  the  venerable  Isaiah.  As  in  similar 
eruptions  of  fanatical  cruelty,  all  classes  suffered.  It  is  estimated  by  Prud- 
homme  that  the  victims  of  the  first  French  Revolution  numbered  1,022,351 ; 
and  in  the  dismal  catalogue  of  the  different  classes  of  society,  he  shows  that, 
while  the  flower  of  the  nobility  was  despatched,  the  humbler  orders  suffered 
the  most.  It  is  a  mad,  futile  policy  to  enforce  governmental  or  religious  prin- 
ciples by  terror  and  bloodshed.  It  only  provokes  reprisals  often  more  savage 
than  those  sought  to  be  avenged, 

IV.  Calls  forth  the  special  vengeance  of  heaven  (verses  10-15).  The 
wickedness  of  Manasseh  was  not  carried  on  without  protest  and  warning.  The 
voice  of  the  faithful  prophet  might  be  cruelly  hushed  in  death,  but  the  testi- 
mony was  delivered  and  heard.  Jehovah  was  not  an  indifferent  spectator  of 
the  agonies  of  His  martyred  servants ;  and  He  will  be  avenged  on  the  adver- 
sary. Before  He  strikes.  He  warns.  The  punishment  of  degenerate  Judah 
shall  terrify  all  who  hear  of  it.  The  kingdom  shall  be  shattered,  and  the 
people  who  are  not  exterminated  in  war  shall  be  driven  into  ignominious  cap- 
tivity.    **  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God." 

Lessons: — 1.  JReform,  to  he  permanent,  must  be  thorough.  2.  A  nation  may 
well  mourn  when  the  wicked  are  in  power.  3.  The  God  of  th^  martyrs  will  not 
fail  to  take  vengeance  on  Mis  enemies  and  theirs. 


QERM  ^OTES  ON  TEE  VERSES, 


Verses  1-9.  Manasseh  the  seduced 
and  the  seducer.  Even  God-fearing 
parents  often  have  perverse  children 
without  any  fault  of  their  own.  So 
much  greater  is  the  guilt  of  those  who 
lead  infant  children  astray  after  the 
death  of  their  parents,  instead  of  giv- 
ing them  care  and  good  training.  It 
is  especially  important  that  princes 
should  be  guided  in  their  youth  by 
good  counsellors  and  governors.  God 
is  not  confined  with  His  word  to  any 
land  or  people.  If  His  word  is  not 
received  with  love  and  gratitude,  and 
if  it  is  not  feared,  then  He  will  come 
soon  and  remove  the  candlestick  from 
its  place,  so  that  men  may  go  astray 
and  become  a  prey  to  terrible  errors. 
To  fall  is  easier  than  to  rise.  If  the 
infection  comes  from  above,  it  spreads 
with  greater  celerity. — Lange. 
622 


—  The  one  subject  of  the  only  col- 
lection of  Hebrew  books  we  possess  is 
— God.  How  different  with  the  lite- 
rature of  every  other  people  !  It  is 
necessary  to  remember  this  striking 
characteristic,  if  we  would  rightly 
estimate  the  religious  enthusiasm 
under  Hezekiah,  or  the  mortal  struggle 
against  heathenism  under  his  son  Ma- 
nasseh. The  national  party,  zealous 
for  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  their  fathers,  looked  back  to  a 
golden  age  under  David  ;  but  since  his 
day  had  seen  the  rise  and  occasional 
triumph  of  foreign  heathenism,  counte- 
nanced by  a  number  of  their  kings  and 
by  the  court  and  upper  classes.  But 
as  in  all  communities,  in  every  age,  it 
was  only  a  minority  who  cherished, 
with  a  full  and  intelligent  conviction, 
the  great  principles  which  thus  for  a 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS 


OHAP.  XXL 


time  were  triumphant.     The  mass  of 
the  people  now,  as  always,  passively- 
yielded  themselves  to  the  spirit  of  the 
day  ;  ready  to  follow  Hezekiah's  re- 
forms in  the  excitement  of  the  hour, 
but  no   less   so  to   pass   over   to  the 
heathen  party,  should  it  again  get  the 
ascendancy.      Two   forces    contended 
for  supremacy  ;  the  national  party,  or 
Jehovah- worshippers — under  the  pro- 
phets— and  the  patrician  party,   who 
sighed     for     the    glitter    of    foreign 
manners  and  the  fancied  security  of 
foreign  alliances,  and,  to  secure  both, 
were  eager  to  adopt  the  heathenism 
of    the    neighbouring    monarchies. — 
Geikie's  Hours  with  the  Bible. 

Verse  1.  Kingship.  1.  Involves 
great  cares  and  responsibilities.  2.  Is 
too  heavy  and  cumbrous  for  inex- 
perienced youth.  3.  Presents  an  op- 
portunity for  working  out  great  good 
or  great  evil. 

—  Manasseh's  minority,  spent  under 
the  influence  of  guardians  who  were 
hostile  to  the  religious  principles  and 
reforming  policy   of    his  father,   may 
account  in  part  for  the  anti-theocratic 
principles  of  his  reign.     The  work  of 
religious  reformation  which  Hezekiah 
had  zealously  carried  on  was  but  par- 
tially accomplished.     There  was  little 
appearance   of    its   influence   on    the 
heart  and  manners  of  the  people   at 
large.     On  the  contrary,  the  true  fear 
of  God  had  vanished  from  the  mass  of 
the   people,   corruption   and  vice   in- 
creased, and  were  openly  practised  by 
the   degenerate   leaders   who,  having 
got  the  young  prince  Manasseh  into 
their  power,  directed   his  education, 
trainid   him  up  in  their  views,  and 
seduced  him  into  the  open  patronage 
of  idolatry. — Janiieson. 

—  Manasseh  and  Josiah.  1 .  Both 
began  to  reign  in  early  life.  2.  Both 
were  powerfully  influenced  by  their 
mothers.  3.  Both  had  widely  diffe- 
rent careers— the  reign  of  Manasseh 
was  the  darkest,  and  of  Josiah  the 
bj  ightest  period  of  the  later  history  of 
Judah. 

Verses  2-9.  Unexampled  wicked- 
ness—Evidenced.     1.    In    the    con- 


temptuous manner  in  which  the  ex- 
ample of  a  good  father  is  regarded. 
2.  In  the  irreverent  and  insulting 
treatment  of  God's  own  house.  3.  In 
the  way  in  which  the  worst  abomina- 
tions of  the  heathen  are  outrivalled. 
4.  In  enforcing  idolatry  upon  the 
people,  and  utterly  ignoring  the  exist- 
ence of  Jehovah.  5.  The  more  repre- 
hensible in  those  who  have  been 
taught  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
God. 

Verse  6.  The  rule  of  superstition. 
1.  Depends  upon  the  extent  of  popu- 
lar^ ignorance.  2.  Maintained  by 
sleight  of  hand  and  a  parade  of  wis- 
dom. 3.  Is  dissipated  by  the  advance 
of  true  science. 

—  A  great  influx  of  these  impostors 
had,  at  various  times,  poured  from 
Chaldea  into  the  land  of  Israel  to 
pursue  their  gainful  occupations, 
especially  during  the  reigns  of  the 
latter  kings ;  and  Manasseh  was  not 
only  their  liberal  patron,  but  zealous 
to  appear  himself  an  adept  in  the 
arts.  He  raised  them  into  an  in- 
fluential class  at  his  court,  as  they 
were  in  that  of  Assyria  and  Babylon, 
where  nothing  was  done  till  they  had 
ascertained  the  lucky  hour  and 
promised  a  happy  issue. — Jamieson. 

Verses  7,  8.  Idolatrous  intrusion 
into  the  Temple,  i.  Outrages  the 
majesty  and  supremacy  of  Jehovah. 
2.  Insults  the  Divine  purity.  3.  In- 
dicates the  loss  of  all  respect  for  the 
Divine  commands  and  promises. 

Verse  9.  There  was  a  gradation 
in  the  apostacy  of  Judah  similar  to 
that  of  Israel.  Ahaz  abandoned  the 
worship  of  Jehovah,  but  did  not  seduce 
the  generality  of  his  subjects ;  whereas 
the  height  and  front  of  Manasseh's 
off'ending  was  that  his  pernicious  in- 
fluence can  ied  the  whole  nation  along 
with  him  into  idolatry. — Jamieson. 

—  What  havoc  does  this  wicked 
son  of  Hezekiah  make  in  the  church 
of  God.  As  if  he  had  been  bom  to 
ruin  religion  ;  as  if  his  only  felicity 
had  been  to  untwist  or  tear  in  one 
day  that  holy  web  which  his  father 

628 


CHAP.  XXI, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


had  been  weaving  nine  and  twenty 
years;  to  set  up  that  offensive  pile 
which  had  been  above  three  hundred 
years  in  pulling  down  :  so  long  had 
the  high  places  stood.  The  zeal  of 
Hezekiah  in  demolishing  them 
honoured  him  above  all  his  pre- 
decessors; and  now  the  first  act  of 
this  green  head  was  their  re-edifying. 
That  mischief  may  be  done  in  a  day, 
which  many  ages  cannot  redress. — 
£p,  Sail, 

"Verses  10-15.  Unexampled  punish- 
ment.  1 .  8hall  be  of  such  a  character 
as  to  appal  all  who  hear  of  it  (verse 
12).  2.  Shall  be  a  complete  and 
humiliating  national  overthrow  (verse 
13).  3.  Shall  abandon  the  victims  to 
the  cruel  ravages  of  the  enemy.  4. 
Merited  by  lengthened  provocation. 

Yerse  10.  This  doom  of  utter  and 
universal  extermination,  which  was 
threatened  against  Jadah,  was  averted 
by  repentance,  at  least  to  a  certain 
extent,  inasmuch  as  a  large  portion  of 
Judah  was  restored  from  the  Baby- 
lonish captivity.  But  it  was  executed 
on  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  which,  as 
the  sin  of  its  people  had  been  over 
a  longer  duration  and  of  a  more  ag<?ra- 
vated  character,  was  more  severely 
punished. — Jamieson, 

Yerse  12.  We  are  sensible  of  the 
least  touch  of  our  own  miseries; 
how  rarely  are  we  affected  with  other 
men's  calamities  !  Yet  this  evil  shall 
be  such  as  that  the  rumour  of  it  shall 
beat  no  ear  that  shall  not  glow  with 
an  astonishing  commiseration. — Bp. 
Hall, 

Yerse  13.  The  standard  of  Divine 
judgment.  1.  Is  based  on  unchanging 
principles  of  justice.  2.  Takes  into 
account  the  circumstances  under  which 
the  offence  is  committed.     3.  Necessi- 


tates the  most  thorough  punishment 
of  unrepented  wrong-doing. 

—  A  dish  is  turned  over  when  there 
is  nothing  more  in  it.  That  is  the 
hardest  punishment  which  God  can 
inflict  on  a  soul  which  turns  away 
from  Him.  There  is  then  no  longer 
a  drop  to  be  found  in  it  of  that  which 
was  in  it  before. 

Yerse  1 6.    The  persecuting  spirit. 

1.  Biots   in  cruelty  and  bloodshed. 

2.  Makes  no  distinction  between  the 
innocent  and  guilty.  3.  Is  most  vin- 
dictive towards  those  who  have  the 
courage  to  expose  its  wickedness.  4. 
Is  limited  only  by  its  power  and 
opportunities. 

—  Idolatry  and  tyranny  a^'e  closely 
allied.  Those  whom  Satan  has  in  his 
toils  he  leads  from  one  sin  to  another. 
Enmity  to  the  word  of  God  is  not 
merely  a  different  opinion  or  contra- 
diction in  rognrd  to  religious  matters, 
but  a  devilish  power  which  impels 
even  to  the  shedding  of  innocent  blood. 
It  is  possible  to  kill  the  preachers  of 
truth,  but  not  the  truth  itself.  He 
who  was  the  Truth  was  nailed  to  the 
Cross,  but  His  words  remain,  though 
heaven  and  earth  pass  away.  The 
blood  of  the  martyrs  only  fertilized 
the  soil  of  the  Church,  so  that  it  has 
borne  richer  and  more  abundant  fruit. 
All  innocent  blood  cries  to  heaven  as 
that  of  Abel  did. — Lange. 

Yerses  17,  18.  The  variations 
respecting  the  fate  of  Manasseh  are 
complicated.  In  the  Jewish  Church 
his  name  was  stamped  with  peculiar 
infamy.  If  a  noble  name  had  to  be 
replaced  by  an  odious  one,  that  of 
Manasseh  was  substituted.  His  life 
in  the  book  of  Kings  closes  without 
any  relieving  trait.  It  was  considered 
as  the  turning-point  of  Judah's  sins. 
The  doom  was  pronounced  irreversible 
by  any  subseq^uent  reforms. — Stanley, 


ROMILETICS  OF  VERSES  19-26. 
The  Ceime  op  Assassination. 

I.    Is  but  lightly  regarded  where  religious  principle  is  demoralized 
(verses  20-22).     When  the  bonds  of  religious  obligations  are  relaxed,  the  way 
624 


EOMILETIC  COMMJiNTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xxi. 


is  opened  for  the  commission  of  the  worst  crimes.  Every  sin  blunts  the  moral 
sense  and  makes  it  easier  to  sin  again,  until  the  lowest  grade  of  crime  is 
reached.  The  peace,  safety,  and  prosperity  of  a  nation  are  more  indebted  to 
the  prevalence  of  true  religion  than  the  majority  are  inclined  to  admit.  Ueli- 
gion  is  the  curb  that  holds  in  check  the  fierce  monster  of  crime,  that  would 
otherwise  stalk  through  the  land  and  work  irreparable  mischief. 

II.  Is  unjustifiable,  notwithstanding  the  wickedness  of  its  victim.     We 

stand  aghast  at  the  wickc  dness  of  those  in  power,  and  are  apt  to  think  any 
means  justifiable  that  will  put  an  end  to  it.  Even  the  unjust  detest  the  in- 
justice of  others.  A  hatred  of  evil  may  tempt  one  into  hasty  and  excessive 
punishment  of  wrong,  forgetting  that  "  when  our  hatred  is  violent  it  sinks  us 
even  b(meath  those  we  hate."  It  is  difficult  to  restrain  the  national  thirst  for 
revenge  when  in  the  mids'.  of  injustice  and  sujffering.  *'  If  the  wicked  flourish,*' 
says  Fuller,  '*  and  thou  suffer,  be  not  discouraged;  they  are  fatted  for  destruc- 
tion, thou  art  dietsd  for  health."  We  may  safely  leave  the  wicked  in  the 
hands  of  God.  We  may  create  greater  evils  by  the  way  in  which  we  strive  to 
redress  one  single  offence. 

III.  Is  aggravated  when  committed  by  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  guard 
and  protect  (verse  23).  Amon  was  slain  by  his  court  attendants,  who  took 
advantage  of  the  confidence  and  trust  reposed  in  them.  In  the  most  unguarded 
moment,  and  when  least  suspecting  treachery,  he  was  slain  in  the  privacy  of  his 
palac  3 ;  his  servants,  towards  whom  he  had  shown  kindness  and  honour,  became 
traito<?s  and  murderers. 

Is  there  a  crime 
Beneath  the  roof  of  heaven  that  staius  the  soul 
With  more  infernal  hue  than  damned 
Assassination  ?  Gibber, 

And  it  certainly  adds  to  the  heinousness  of  the  crime  when  the  fatal  blow  is 
prompted  by  a  false  heart. 

IV.  Sooner  or  later  meets  with  terrible  punishment  (verse  24).  The 
conspirators  and  assassins  met  with  a  similar  fate  to  their  victim.  Sin  carries 
within  it  its  own  punishment.  The  most  cleverly  devised  mischief  is  sure  to 
return  in  some  shape  or  other  to  plague  the  inventors. 


This  even-handed  justic 
Commends  the  ingredients  of  our  poisoned  chalice 


In  the  history  of  the  kings  we  are  now  studying,  there  is  nothing  more  fre- 
quently and  impressively  revealed  than  the  operation  of  the  inexorable  law  of 
retribution.  The  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  brief.  The  gains  of  sin  are  not 
worth  the  ingenuity  and  toil.     The  wages  of  sin  is  death. 

Lessons: — 1.  Assassination  is  not  only  a  savage^  hut  a  useless,  policy.  2.  A 
wrong  is  never  rectified  hy  inflicting  a  greater  wrong.  3.  True  religion  teaches  tho 
sacredness  of  human  life. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 

Verses    19-26.      How   wretchedly  officers ;  as  is  the  governor,  so  are  the 

a  king  appears  of  whom  history  has  citizens.     A  depraved  king  ruins  his 

nothing   more  to  record  than  his  god-  country.     Unfaithfulness  is  punished 

lessness!         Ab  ithe  king,  so  are  his  by   unfaithfulness.      Amon  was  not 

8t  626 


OHAP.  XXII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


faithful  to  God :  unfaithfulness  was  in  his  father's  steps,  and  served  and 
liis  punishment.  He  was  murdered  worshipped  the  idols  he  had  set  up, 
by  his  own  servants,  and  these  in  their  multiplying  his  trespasses,  and  show- 
turn  were  punished  by  their  own  sin  ing  some  of  the  penitent  humility  of 
— they  also  were  murdered  (Matt.  Mauasseh's  late  years.  It  may  be, 
xxvi.  52 ;  Luke  vi.  28).  Tumult  however,  that  signs  of  a  serious 
and  murder,  perpetrated  now  by  the  thoughtfulness,  not  as  yet  carried  into 
autborities,  now  by  the  people — those  outward  act,  alarmed  the  dominant 
are  the  natural  fruits  wbich  are  pro-  faction,  for  within  two  years  he  was 
duced  in  a  land  which  has  abandoned  cut  off  by  a  palace  conspiracy,  like 
God,  and  in  which  His  word  is  no  that  by  which  his  ancestor,  king 
Imger  respected. — Lange.  Joash,  perished. —  Geikie. 

Verses  20-24.    Amon  himself  seems  Yerses   23,    24.     Conspiracy   and 

to  have  been  popular ;  but,  from  what-  murder.     1.     Eeveal    a   melancholy 

ever  cause,   he  roused  the  enmity  of  picture    of    national    demoralization, 

the  court  party.     It  could  not  be  laid  2.  May  occasion  a  worse  state  of  mis- 

to  his  charge  that  he  refused  to  com-  rule  than  that  which  is  sought  to  be 

ply  with  the  established  heathenism,  removed.     3.  Recoil  in  terrible  ven- 

for  it  is  expressly  said  that  he  walked  geance  on  the  actors  themselves. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 
THE    LAST    EFFORT    OF    REFORMATION    UNDER    JOSIAH. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — Verse  2.  He  did  that  which  was  right — In  his 
minority  Josiah  was  guarded  and  directed  by  godly  teachers  and  counsellois.  Yet  training  is 
not  to  be  wholly  accredited  with  the  difference  between  Manasseh  and  Josiah,  who  both,  during 
their  minoiity,  must  have  been  under  tutors  and  governois.  The  natural  bent  of  disposition 
is  a  factor  in  reckoning;  and  yet  further,  the  sovereign  operation  of  God's  grace.  Verses  3-7. 
The  repair  of  the  temple — For  250  years,  since  the  reign  of  Jehoash  (xii.  5),  the  fabric  had 
been  allowed  to  decay.  Besides  "  Shaphan  the  scribe"  here  mentioned,  Chronicles  adds 
Maaseiah  the  city  governor,  and  Joah  the  chancellor  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  8)  ;  for  the  work  was  not 
to  be  a  private  undertaking  by  the  king  and  priests,  but  civic  and  national.  Verse  8.  Hilkiah 
the  high  priest  said  .  .  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  law— The  temple  roll  was  ordered 
to  be  kept  by  the  side  of  the  ark  (Deut  xxxi.  26),  but  during  the  idolatrous  profanations 
under  Ahaz,  Manasseh,  and  Amon,  the  very  ark  had  been  removed  (comp.  2  Chron.  xxxv.  3) 
from  the  house;  and  doubtless  in  this  way  the  "book  "  had  become  lost.  Dr.  Bahr  notes  that 
hi2i^  is  here  emphatic,  and  does  not  mean  to  fall  in  with  something  which  is  known  to  be 

T    T 

somewhere  at  hand^  but  to  discover  what  was  concealed.  It  would  seem  that  the  written  law  of 
God  had  passed  from  human  knowledge,  lost  in  the  haz'-  of  heathenism,  which  had  so  long 
enveloped  the  land.  Althoujrh  this  finding  of  "  the  book  of  the  law  "  does  not  imply  that 
the  nation  or  the  priests  had  no  other  copy,  yet  the  narrative  clearly  indicates  that  king  and 
people  were  strangers  to  its  contents.  Shaphan  the  scribe  '■'read  it  "  (verse  8)  as  if  it  were  a 
new  thing  come  to  hand.  He  moreover  *'  read  it  before  the  king  "  (verse  10)  as  being  an  un- 
known book  to  the  monarch,  and  deserving  his  attention  ;  whereas  the  effect  its  words  pro- 
duced upon  Josiah  plainly  show  that  he  heard  Ihem  then  for  the  first  time  (verse  11).  Con- 
troversy is  keen  as  to  what  this  *'  book  "  was  ;  whether  only  a  section  of  the  Pentateuch — i.  e.y 
the  book  of  Deuteronomy — of  the  complete  book  of  the  law  of  Moses.  Hilkiah  calls  it 
n*)iFirT  IDDi  '''the  book  of  the  law,"  the  technical  form  of  expression  distinctive  of  the 

T  "  V  •• 

entire  Penlateuch.  Shaphan,  however,  speaks  of  it  to  the  king  as  '*  a  book  "  (verse  10),  with- 
out describing  it  in  anyway  further.  Hilkiah's  emphatic  word,  "  M^  book,"  implies  that 
either  no  other  copy  had  been  known  to  exist ^  or  that  this  copy  was  different  from^  more  complete^ 
than  any  other  possessed.  And  the  latter  alternative  meaning  of  his  words  gives  opportunity 
for  the  theory  that  Deuteronomy  was  then  first  seen  by  them,  for  Deuteronomy  contains  just 
those  searching  words  which  would  lead  the  king  to  distress.  But  if  other  copies  existed,  and 
626 


B.OMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS.  chap,  xxil 


Deuteronomy  were  an  appendage,  comparison  would  soon  have  led  to  the  rejection  of  this 
spurious  addition  to  the  book  as  Moses  left  it.  The  natural  meaning  is  that  the  written  law 
had  been  lost,  its  substance  meanwhile  only  existing:  in  memory,  or  as  a  tradition  ;  but  that 
now  the  very  Word  of  God  was  found.  Verse  11.  When  the  king  had  heard  the  words— 
Shaphan  did  not  read  the  entire  book,  but  read  therein,  13  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  18) ;  and  if 
Deuteronomy  were  read  (see  chaps,  xxvii.,  xxviii.)  theie  would  be  found  sufficient  there  to 
account  for  Josiah's  alarm  {pomp.  v.  13).  Verse  14.  Huldah  the  prophetess  (now  she  dwelt 
in  Jerusalem) — This  fact  of  her  being  accessible  accounts  suflRciently  for  their  seeking  her. 
Jeremiahy  the  conspicuous  prophet  of  Josiah's  reign,  who  for  five  years  had  been  witnessing 
for  Jehovah  apainst  His  godless  nation  (for  he  began  his  work  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah's 
reign,  see  Jer.  i.  2,  while  this  finding  the  law  occurred  in  the  eighteenth  year)  lived  at  that 
time  in  Anathoth  in  Benjamin.  Ot  Huldah  we  know  nothing  beyond  what  this  incident 
reveals.  Her  husband  was  "  keeper  of  the  wardrobe,"'  more  probably  of  the  priests'  garments 
than  of  the  royal  wardrobe,  and  she  "  dwelt  in  the  college,"  rather,  "m  the  other  part,'^  or 
the  lower  city.  Verses  15-20.  God's  denunciations  should  have  absolute  fulfilment,  albeit 
Josiah  should  be  spared  seeing  them,  because  his  ^*  heart  wag  ^««(^gr,"  and  he  had  humbled 
himself  before  the  Lord. — W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  1-18. 

•        

The  Awakening  Powek  of  the  Divine  Word. 

I.  That  it  is  a  great  national  calamity  when  the  Divine  Word  is  neglected 
and  forgotten.  For  more  than  half  a  century  the  influence  of  idolatry,  in  its 
grossest  aspects,  reigned  supreme  in  Judah.  The  apostate  people  ignored  the 
Divine  law,  which  accused  them  too  faithfully  of  their  sins.  By  many  it  was 
forgotten,  and  treated  as  if  it  did  not  exist.  Only  a  few  of  the  faithful — the 
prophets  and  some  of  the  better  classes — would  possess  a  copy.  The  guiding 
star  of  the  nation  was  quenched ;  and  the  people  grovelled  in  ever  deepening 
darkness.  The  state,  like  a  rudderless  vessel,  drifted  into  anarchy  and  crime. 
The  Bible—  read,  studied,  loved — is  a  nation's  blessing,  and  its  absence  a  national 
calamity.  Napoleon,  with  true  insight,  placed  the  Bible  in  the  political  division 
of  his  library ;  and  he  who  faithfully  teaches  the  contents  of  that  book,  gives  to 
the  world  its  fairest,  happiest  shape. 

II.  That  the  most  striking  discoveries  of  the  Divine  Word  are  often  made 
in  connection  with  the  Temple.  No  repairs  of  any  moment  had  been  done  to 
the  Temple  since  the  days  of  Joash — more  than  two  hundred  years  before.  One 
of  the  first  acts  of  Josiah  was  to  restore  the  mutilated  building  and  purge  it  of 
its  idolatrous  abuses.  In  the  progress  of  this  laudable  work,  the  Divine  Law 
was  formed,  probably  in  the  hand- writing  of  Moses  ;  and  this  discovery  had  an 
important  influence  upon  the  succeeding  efforts  of  religious  reform.  And  is  it 
not  in  connection  with  the  work  of  the  Temple  that  we  have  first  sighted  our 
freshest,  most  awe-inspiring,  and  most  abiding  views  of  Divine  truth?  The 
Bible  has  become  another  book  to  us,  in  its  flashes  of  celestial  light  and  open- 
ings of  profound  depths,  as  we  have  **  enquired  in  the  Temple." 

III.  That  the  declarations  of  the  Divine  Word  awaken  the  deepest 
interest  and  concern  in  the  mind  of  the  sincere  seeker  after  truth  The 
Bible  has  an  interest  all  its  own  to  the  antiquarian,  the  historian,  and  the  philo- 
sophic critic  ;  but  it  comes  with  a  piercing  significance  and  manifold  suggestive- 
ness  to  the  man  who  is  in  quest  of  the  highest  truth.  Josiah  was  singularly 
prepared  for  the  revelation  vouchsafed  to  him.  His  mind  was  keenly  alert  in 
its  receptiveness ;  hence  the  profound,  alarming  impression  created  by  the 
Divine  record.  The  Bible  will  be  a  closed  or  open  book  to  us  according  to  the 
spirit  we  bring  to  its  study.    To  the  cold,  scoffing  sceptic  it  is  a  dumb  Sphinx, 

627 


OHAP.XXIU  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


refusing  to  utter  its  secrets ;  to  the  humble,  earnest  student,  it  sparkles  with  the 
radiance  of  a  palace  of  gems.  Its  threatenings  may  well  teriify,  for  they  are 
true  ;  and  its  promises  soothe  the  distress  its  denunciations  cause. 

IV.  That  a  mind  awakened  by  the  Divine  Word  is  emboldened  to  under- 
take the  most  difficult  work  of  reform.  Whatever  dim  visions  of  reform 
Josiah  may  have  cherished  before,  it  is  noticeable  that  from  the  moment  he  be- 
came acquainted  with  the  mind  of  God  as  contained  in  the  discovered  bo'»k,  his 
efforts  after  reformation  amouuted  to  a  passion.  He  saw  it  to  be  the  one  work 
of  his  life,  and  he  entered  into  it  with  a  zeal,  a  determination,  a  thoroughness 
that  might  be  accused  of  violence.  It  was  a  desperate  attempt  to  reverse,  if 
possible,  the  threatened  doom  of  Judah.  It  is  in  the  light  and  teaching  of  God's 
word  that  our  life-work  becomes  most  clearly  defined  to  us.  Here  we  learn  what 
sacrifices  must  be  made,  what  points  must  be  guarded,  what  work  is  worthy  of 
our  powers  and  possible  for  us  to  do,  and  where  to  find  the  source  of  inspiration 
and  strength  in  every  struggle. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  light  of  the  Divine  Word  cannot  he  permanently  obscured. 
2.  The  Divine  word  is  the  surest  guide  amid  national  defection  and  error.  3. 
The  Divine  word  supplies  the  most  potent  motives  in  all  aggressive  reforms, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Yerses  1,  2.  Josiah,  the  kingly  indulges  in  this  glowing  panegyric 
reformer:  an  example  of  youthful  (chap.  xlix.  1-4): — **The  remem- 
piety.  For  many  reasons,  Josiah  is  brance  of  Josias  is  like  the  composition 
one  of  the  most  interesting  characters  of  the  perfume  that  is  made  by  the 
in  Old  Testament  history.  The  son  art  of  the  apothecary ;  it  is  sweet  as 
and  successor  of  a  weak  and  worthless  honey  in  all  mouths,  and  as  music  at 
king,  he  was  a  mere  child  when  the  banquet  of  wine.  He  behaved 
called  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  the  himself  uprightly  in  the  conversion  of 
nation  to  the  throne.  He  is  remark-  the  people,  and  took  away  the  abomina- 
able  as  having  been  the  most  faultless  tion  of  iniquity.  He  directed  his 
of  ail  the  kings  of  Judah  or  Israel ;  heart  unto  the  Lord,  and  in  the  time 
and  his  reign  is  remarkable  for  the  of  the  ungodly  he  establi^^hed  the 
thorough  and  wide-spread  national  worship  of  God.  All,  except  David, 
reformation,  of  which  he  was  the  and  Hezekiah,  and  Josias,  were  defec- 
moving  cause.  His  premature  death,  five."  To  have  perpetuated  such 
at  the  age  of  thirty-nine,  may  be  said  tender  regards  in  the  hearts  of  the 
to  have  brought  to  a  close  the  pros-  Jewish  nation  for  so  long  a  period,  and 
perity  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  "The  to  be  spoken  of  to  this  day  as  the 
reign  of  this  prince  is  like  a  gleam  Timothy  of  the  Old  Testament,  the 
cast  from  a  lowering  sky  before  it  pattern  of  youthful  piety,  and  of 
bursts  with  the  tempest.  Under  his  reverence  for  God's  word — the  last 
government  Judah  rose  only  to  fall  good  king  of  Judah  must  have  beenno 
with  greater  violence  afterwards"  ordinary  man.  The  records  of  the 
{JEvans).  None  of  her  kings  had  been  first  half  of  his  comparatively  brief 
more  deservedly  beloved ;  none  was  life  are  very  scanty,  yet  they  contain 
more  tenderly  lamented.  The  prophet  some  points  worthy  of  note.  We  have 
Jeremiah,  who  flourished  during  the  here — 1.  A  child  king  ;  2.  A  boy- 
greater  part  of  his  reign,  composed  his  king  seeking  God;  3.  A  youthful 
funeral  elegy,  and  for  ages  afterwards  royal  reformer.  1.  B^e  was  the  good 
his  memory  was  cherished  with  the  son  of  a  wicked  father.  We  see  Heze- 
fondest  regret.  The  author  of  the  kiah,  a  most  pious  king,  succeeded  by 
apocryphal  book  of  "  Ecclesiasticus  "  Manasseh,  by  far  the  most  abandoned 
62tf 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xxii. 


prince  who  ever  sat  on  the  throne  of  in  spite  ofunjavouralle  surroundings. — 
David.  Biitin  Josiah  we  have  a ''root  **  The  people  were  surely  deteriorat- 
out  of  a  dry  ground,"  Young  persons  ing  ;  sinking  lower  and  lower  in  the 
who  are  seeking  to  live  a  godly  life  social  and  moral  degradations  inaepar- 
under  unfavourable  circumstances,  in  able  from  the  cruel  and  licentious 
an  irreligious  or  careless  family,  among  forms  of  worship  to  which  they  were 
ungodly  companions,  should  take  com-  so  fatally  addicted.  Idolatry  had 
fort  and  courage  from  the  case  of  eaten  into  the  heart  and  life  of  the 
Josiah,  whose  father'' s  influence  and  nation  (  Venah'es).  Yet  this  awful  con- 
exaraple,  in  so  far  as  they  could  be  dition  of  national  life  did  not  lead 
impressed  on  one  so  young,  were  Josiah  to  swim  with  the  current, 
wholly  evil.  2.  It  is  probable  that  Single  handed  he  resolved  to  stem  the 
the  bias  of  his  mind  towards  religion  tide  of  national  ungodliness.  Instead 
was  due  to  maternal  training.  The  of  becoming  the  creature  of  circiim- 
only  notice  of  his  mother  is  a  very  stances,  he  rose  to  the  occasion,  and 
brief  one,  and  nothing  definite  is  re-  became  their  master.  Personal  piety 
corded  as  to  her  influence  upon  his  was  followed  up  by  religious  zeal.  It 
earliest  years ;  but  considering  that  needed  courage  to  declare  himself  on 
even  though  a  king,  he  was  too  young  the  Lord's  side,  when  the  whole  current 
to  dispense  with  a  mother's  care  and  of  the  nation's  life  was  sweeping  on  in 
training,  and  that  twenty  years  of  his  an  entirely  opposite  direction.  This 
life  were  passed  in  comparative  privacy,  is  the  true  order.  Personal  piety 
may  we  not  reasonably  infer  that  the  Jlrst ;  zeal  for  the  religious  welfare  of 
seeds  of  religious  instruction  dropped  others  next.  Like  charity,  piety  must 
from  a  mother's  hand  into  his  young  "  begin  at  home,"  if  it  is  to  be  of  any 
mind,  bore  fruit  many  days  after  in  value  in  a  wider  sphere.  5.  He  begins 
personal  decision  for  God,  and  national  the  work  of  a  religious  reformer, 
reformation?  A  mother's  influence,  **  Acting  as  only  Eastern  monarcha 
in  a  religious  point  of  view,  cannot  be  can,  he  set  about  ridding  the  country 
over-estimated.  3.  We  see  this  early  of  every  trace  of  idolatry  "  (Geikie). 
training  bearing  fruit  in  due  season  in  He  had  now  the  authority  fairly  in 
what  would  have  been  spoken  of  as  his  own  hands,  and  displayed  indepen- 
his  conversion:  "While  he  was  yet  dence  of  action.  His  great  design  was 
young"  (viz.,  at  16  years  of  age),  to  extirpate  idolatry,  and  restore  the 
"He  began  to  seek  after  the  God  of  religion  of  Jehovah.  The  desperate 
David,  his  father."  Religion  became  case  of  the  nation  demanded  stringent 
to  him  what  it  must  become  to  all — a  measuns.  "The  pagan  worship  was 
matter  of  personal  concern.  His  uprooted  with  the  same  punctilious 
father's  wickedness  would  not  con-  care  as  that  which,  during  the  Paschal 
demn,  nor  his  mother's  piety  avail  to  season,  the  houses  of  Israelites  were  to 
save,  him.  Amos  saw  his  father  be  cleansed  from  every  morsel  of  leaven. 
Manasseh  penitent  and  forgiven  when  Every  instrument  or  image,  if  of 
he  was  old,  but  did  not  copy  his  ex-  wood,  was  burnt ;  if  of  metal  or  stone, 
ample.  Josiah  was  the  son  of  ungodly  was  shattered  to  pieces  and  ground  to 
Amon,  and  yet  he  became  a  godly  powder"  {Stanley.)  Notice,  as  to 
child.  Grace  is  not  hereditary  like  this  reformation — {a)  It  was  person- 
houses,  and  lands,  and  titles.  Piety  allg  super i7itendc'd.  He  made  a  tour 
does  not  run  in  the  blood.  Religion  is  throughout  his  kingdom,  and  even 
a  personal  matter.  "  Every  one  shall  beyond  it  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  6).  At 
give  account  of  himself  unto  God."  least  six  years  were  occupied  in  this 
"  The  salvation  of  a  father  does  not  work.  It  could  not  be  done  in  a 
bear  his  son  into  heaven  ;  the  loss  of  a  moment ;  it  would  not  have  been  done 
parent  in  his  own  sin  does  not  tear  thoroughly  had  he  not  been  present, 
away  his  converted  child  from  the  lending  th  weight  of  his  example  and 
love  of  God. — Arnot.  authority.  Work  for  God  is  best  done, 
(4)  I%epi4ty  of  Josiah  was  developed  as  a  rule,    when  done  in  person,     {b) 

629 


CHAP.  XXII. 


ROMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS. 


It  was  perseveringly  carried  on. 
Though  carried  out  with  zeal,  and  even 
severity,  the  work  could  not  be  accom- 
plished all  at  once.  * '  The  very  act  of 
destroying  every  idol,  and  extermina- 
ting the  idolatrous  priests,  which 
would  require  a  minute  search  into 
every  remote  dwelling,  would  neces- 
sarily occupy  much  time.  But  proba- 
bly, in  addition  to  this,  Josiah  had  to 
encounter  much  obstinacy.  All  who 
know  anything  of  human  nature  must 
be  aware  how  very  difficult  it  is  to 
cleanse  the  fountain  of  men's  minds, 
and  force  the  stream  from  a  defiled  to 
a  purer  channel "  (The  History  of 
Josiah — Anon — Lend.,  1842.)  In 
spite  of  the  unfriendly  spiiit  of  the 
bulk  of  the  nation,  cheered  only  per- 
haps by  a  single  prophet,  Josiah  per- 
severed in  his  arduous,  but  necessary, 
work  of  destruction.  There  is  need 
not  only  of  courage,  but  of  persever- 
ance in  the  Lord's  work  still,  {c)  It 
was  brought  to  a  successful  issue.  The 
six  years'  labour  were  not  in  vain. 
The  country  was,  for  the  time  being, 
effectually  cleansed,  leaving  Josiah 
free  to  turn  his  attention  to  the  con- 
dition of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem. 
Though  his  work  can  scarcely  find  its 
exact  parallel  in  modern  times,  and 
under  the  more  benignant  dispensa- 
tion of  Christ,  Josiah' s  spirit  of  per- 
severing zeal  against  all  evil  may  well 
be  copied  by  Christian  workers. 

Genekal  Lessons: — (1)  The  possi- 
bility and  the  beauty  of  early  pi<ty. 
Josiah,  'Joseph,  Samuel,  Obadiah, 
Timothy.  (2)  Seeking  and  finding 
God  early  saves  from  many  evils,  and 
ensures  many  hhssings.  3.  The  most 
useful  Christians  are  generally  those  who 
have  sought  the  Lord  in  their  early  days. 
Did  not  Josiah*s  early  piety  help  him 
to  the  formation  of  a  strong,  earnest, 
godly,  useful  manhood  ?  Oh  !  let  no 
young  life  be  tempted  to  say  : — 

"I  am  too  young— the    stirring    voice    of 

morning, 
Calls  me  to  wandei  gaily  while  I  may  ; 
My  heart  leaps  up,  restraint  and  task-work 

scorning : 
Not  now  the  hard  won  steep — the  narrow 

way. 

680 


When  time  shall  bring  my  treasure's  desola- 
tion. 
And  no  more  sweetness  in  life's  cup  shall 

be, 
The  bitter  dregs  will  do  for  a  libation 

To  Him  who  died  for  me.** 
Sam.  Quarterly. 

—  We  ought  not  to  despair  of  the 
children  of  the  godless,  and  to  give 
them  up  ;  they  may  become,  as  in  this 
case  Josiah  did,  the  most  pious, 
through  whom  God  accomplishes 
wonders.  Good  instruction  and  disci- 
pline may,  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
correct  much  evil  which  such  children 
have  inherited  or  learned  from  their 
parents. — Lange. 

Verse  2.  Josiah  an  example  for 
young  men.  I.  The  piety  of  Josiah 
as  illustrative  of  the  power  of  a  good 
example.  "He  walked  in  all  the 
ways  of  David  his  father."  Few  in- 
fluences are  more  powerful  than  that  of 
example.  The  child  imitates  his 
parent ;  the  school-boy  his  class-mate  ; 
the  youth  his  play-fellows  ;  and  so  on, 
through  every  stage  of  life.  Note  in 
what  recorded  actions  of  Josiah  there 
were  marks  of  an  imitation  of  David's 
example.  1.  The  first  of  these  in 
order  of  time  was  his  attachment  to 
God's  house  and  his  devotion  to  God's 
service.  When  he  had  purged  the  land 
of  idols,  he  gave  directions  for  the  re- 
pair of  the  Temple.  Eor  this  object 
the  people  contributed  liberally ; 
incited  thereto  by  the  example  of  their 
princes,  and  especially  of  their  young 
king.  Josiah's  acts  remind  us  of 
David's  preparation  for  the  building  of 
the  Temple.  2.  Bis  love  to  the  word 
of  God.  Turn  to  the  narrative  in 
2  Chron.  xxxiv.  14-21.  David  said  of 
the  man  who  is  blessed,  that  ^'his 
delight  is  in  the  law  of  God."  There 
is  no  book  more  valuable  to  the  young. 
**  Wherewithal  shall  a  young  man 
cleanse  his  way  ?  by  giving  heed  there- 
to according  to  thy  word."  What  boy 
is  not  delighted  with  stories  of  enter- 
prise and  adventure?  Where  can 
more  entrancing  ones  be  found  than 
which  tell  of  Israel's  war,  the  pro- 
phets' dangers,  and  Paul's  travels  ? 
What  youth  does  not  love  poetry  f 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


OHAP.  XXU. 


And  what  are  Milton  and  all  his  com- 
peers— what    their   writings — to    the 
poetry  of  the  H<brew  bards  ?     3.  His 
reverence  for   Godly  men.     See  Chap, 
xxiii.    15-18.      We    know   enough    of 
David's  life  to  recognize  in  this  respect 
for  a  man  of  God  an  imitation  of  his 
example.     The    servants     are   to   be 
revered  ;  to  be  ''  esteemed  very  highly 
for  their  work's  sake."     Goodness  is 
always  worthy  of  regard,  and  he  who 
does  not  respect  it  tells  us  that  he  has 
no  goodness  in  himself  to  be  respected. 
II.    The  piety  of  Josiah  as  illustra- 
tive of  the  strict  intregrity  of  god- 
liness.    "  Ho  turned  not  aside  to  the 
right   hand,   nor   to  the  left."     The 
man  of  the  world  mny  turn  his  creed, 
and  shape  his  coui  se  "'  according  to  the 
fashion  of  the  varying  hour ;  "  but  not 
the  Christian.     Be  must  bear  in  mind 
the   words    of   wisdom:   "Let   thine 
eyes  look  right  on,   and  let  thine  eye- 
lids look   straight    before    thee."      1. 
Josiah  was  not  influenced  by  the  force 
of  ancient  custom,    when  that   custom 
ran  counter  to  the  course  pointed  out 
by  conscience.     Amidst  all  the  idolatry 
already  referred  to,  the  Temple  service 
was  still  performed — but  slovenly,  dis- 
gracefully,   repulsively.     Josiah    said 
this  should  be  so  no  longer.     His  re- 
forms, depend  upon  it,  were  cried  out 
again^t  as  innovations.     The   service 
had  been  good  enough  for  his  seniors : 
why  were  they  not  good  enough  for 
him  ?     Because    they  were  not  good 
enough  for  his  God  ;    and,  heedless  of 
fault-finding,     and   complaining,    and 
backbiting,  and  all  the  usual  resources 
of  the  followers  of  '*  ancient  custom," 
he  bad  the  Temple  repaired,  and  the 
sacrifices  slain,   and  the  singers  and 
skilled  musicians    employed,   and  the 
porters  waiting  at  the  Temple    gi.te  ; 
and  all  was  done  ''according  to  that 
which  was  written   in  the  law  of  the 
Lord."     2.  He  was  not  irifluonced  by 
any  ferlimj  of  false  shame.      When  the 
book  of  the  law  was  found    and  read 
before  him,  he  rent  his  clothes,  feeling 
that  he   was   a  sinner.     Calling    his 
servants,  he  said  :   *'  Go  and  inquire  of 
the  Lord  for  me  and  for  them  that  are 
left,"    &c.     Many    are  turned  away 
from  the  way  of  God  for  fear  of  others. 


This    is    especially    the     danger    of 
young  people,  who  shrink  from   ridi- 
cule.    Eemember     that    those    who 
honour  God,   He    will    honour.     III. 
The  piety  of  Josiah  illustrates  the 
course  of  life  that  ensures   Divine 
approval.     ''  He  did  that  which  was 
right   in   the    sight   of  God."     It  is 
comparatively  easy  to  pursue  a  course 
that  seems  light  to  ourselves,   or  that 
may  secure  the  applause  of  the  world. 
It  is  a  widely-different  matter  so  to 
live  as  to   ensure  the    approval   and 
commendation  of  God.     1.  By  far  the 
greater  part  of  men  seem  to  live   for 
self.     They  have  no  care  or  considera- 
tion   for    others.     Selfishness    is  the 
vilest  principle  that  ever  spread  in  this 
world.     2.  Others  care  most  about  the 
approval    of   the    world.     These   are 
selfish,  too.     It   is  because  that  ap- 
plause  is    gratifying   to  their  selfish 
vanity.     The  man  who  would  lick  the 
dust  to  secure  the  favour  of  a  fellow 
mortal    would    sacrifice    his   deares! 
friend   for  gain.     8.  They   only    are 
God -like  who  do  and  love  that  which  is 
holy  and  true  ;  who  live  not  for  them- 
selves, but  for  others  and  for  God. 

Appltcation  : — 

Have  an  object  in  life  !  Live !  Do 
not  be  content  with  mere  existence. 
Eemember,  there  is  but  one  unfailing 
condition  of  true  greatness,  and  that 
is— goodness. 

"  Life's   more   than  breath  and  the  quick 

round  of  blood  : 
It  is  a  great  spirit,  and  a  busy  heart. 
*        *        *        He  most  lives 
Who  thinks  most — feels  the  noblest— acts  the 
best."  The  Study  and  Pulpit, 

Verses  3-8.  The  restoration  of 
God's  House. — 1.  Is  prompted  by  a 
devout  and  generous  love  for  the 
sanctuary.  2.  Is  carried  on  with  en- 
thusiasm and  fidelity  by  those  whose 
hearts  are  in  the  work.  3.  May  be  the 
occasion  of  making  important  discover- 
ies of  truth. 

—  How  well  doth  it  beseem  the 
care  of  a  religious  prince  to  set  the 
priests  and  scribes  in  hand  with  re- 
edifying  the  Temple !  The  command 
is  the  king's,  the  charge  is  the  high 

631 


CHAP.XXn. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


priest's,  the  execution  is  the  work- 
men's. When  the  labourers  are  faith- 
ful in  doing  the  work,  and  the  high 
priest  in  directing  it,  and  the  king  in 
enjoining  it,  God's  house  cannot  fail  of 
a  happy  perfection  ;  hut  when  any  of 
these  slackens,  the  business  must 
needs  languish. — Bp,  Hall, 

Verse  7.  Honesty. — 1.  A  strong 
recommendation  for  work  requiring 
trust  and  responsibility.  2.  Can 
afford  to  dispense  with  count  and 
reckoning.  3.  Should  not  be  less 
honest  by  keeping  strictest  count  and 
reckoning.  4.  Ought  not  to  be  un- 
necessarily tempted. 

Verse  8.  The  preservation  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures. — 1.  One  of  the  most 
marvellous  features  of  their  history. 
2.  Accomplished,  notwithstanding 
unfaithfulness  of  custodians,  jealousy 
of  sects,  and  fierce  attacks  of  numer- 
ous enemies.  3.  A  strong  collateral 
proof  of  their  Divine  character. 

—  The  whole  history  of  Israel 
bears  witness  to  the  guiding  and  con- 
trolling hand  of  God  ;  but  if  there  is 
any  one  event  in  which,  more  than  in 
any  other,  the  providence  of  God  is 
visible,  then  it  is  this  important  dis- 
covery. It  was  a  physical  proof  that 
God  watch(>s  over  this  document, 
which  is  the  testimonial  to  Israel  of 
its  election,  and  the  highest  Divine 
revelation,  that  He  preserves  from  the 
rage  of  idolaters,  and  that,  even  if  it 
lies  long  unnoticed  and  unknown  in 
the  night  of  apostasy,  he  will  bring  it 
again  to  light  and  make  it  to  show 
its  force  once  more.  The  discovery 
of  the  book  was  a  pledge  to  the  king 
and  people  of  the  indestructibility  of 
the  Divine  written  word. — Lange. 

—  It  is  hard  for  us  to  realize  the 
full  force  of  this  discovery.  We  can 
scarcely  conceive  of  a  state  of  things 
in  which,  during  centuries  of  the  nomi- 
nal establishment  of  Christianity,  the 
people  should  still  observe  solemn 
festivals  at  the  old  sites  of  Druidical 
worship,  the  altars  of  Thor  and  Woden 
and  Freya  should  smoke  with  sacri- 
fic^s  in  every  city,  town,  and  village ; 
their  statues  be  set  up  in  our  cathe- 

632 


drals,  and  the  heights  round  London 
should  be  crowned  with  the  temples 
of  Sivah  and  Juggernaut,  all  this 
lasting  for  centuries,  with  an  occa- 
sional and  partial  return  to  the  purer 
form  of  worship,  while  the  Bible, 
never  multiplied  by  printing,  and  only 
known  in  older  andpurer  timesthrough 
infrequent  readings  by  the  clergy, 
should  have  been  utterly  lost  and  for- 
gotten. Add  to  this  the  supposition 
that  the  lost  volume  contained,  not 
the  dark  symbols  of  the  apocalypse, 
but  the  clear  warning  of  national  de- 
struction and  captivity  to  befal  us 
because  of  these  idolatries,  and  then 
let  us  imagine  our  feelings  on  its 
sudden  discovery,  No  wonder  that 
Josiah  rent  his  clothes,  and  could  not 
rest  till  he  found  a  prophet  to  xpound 
these  terrible  denunciations!  —  Br. 
Smith's  Student  Scripture  History/, 

—  What  a  shame  is  it  that  Bibles, 
now  so  common,  are  so  little  set  by 
amongst  us,  when  our  devout  fore- 
fathers would  have  purchased  some 
few  chapters  at  a  great  rate !  It  is  a 
sad  complaint  that  Moulin  makes  of 
the  French  Protestants;  whilst  they 
burnt  us,  says  he,  for  reading  the  scrip- 
tures, we  burnt  with  zeal  to  be  read- 
ing them.  'Now  with  our  liberty  is 
bred  also  negligence  and  disesteem  of 
God's  word. — Trapp. 

Verse  11.  0  gracious  tenderness  of 
Josiah !  He  does  but  once  hear  the 
law  read,  and  is  thus  humbled; 
humbled  for  his  father's  sins,  for  the 
sins  of  his  people.  How  many  of  us, 
after  a  thousand  hammerings  of  the 
menaces  of  God's  law  upon  our  guilty 
souls,  continue  yet  insensible  of  our 
danger !  The  very  reading  of  this 
law  thus  affects  him,  the  preaching  of 
it  stirs  not  us ;  the  sins  of  others 
struck  thus  deep  with  him,  our  own 
are  slighted  by  us.  A  soft  heart  is 
the  best  tempered  for  God.  So  phy- 
sicians are  wonk  to  like  those  bodies 
best  which  are  easiest  to  work  upon 
0  God !  make  our  clay  wax,  and  our 
wax  pliable  to  thine  hand,  so  shall  we 
be  sure  to  be  free  either  from  sin,  or 
from  the  hurt  of  sin. — Bp,  lialL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    KINGS.  chap.  xxii. 

EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  14-20. 
The  Revelation  of  the  Divine  Purpose. 

I.  Is  clearly  interpreted  by  a  duly  authorised  messeng-er  (verse    14). 

Though  little  is  known  of  Huldah,  the  prophetess,  there  is  sufficient  to  indicate 
that  she  must  have  been  a  remarkably  gifted  woman.  Her  great  influence  in 
Jerusalem  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  high  priest  and  the  king's  most  trusted 
ministers  seek  light  from  her.  It  is  but  rare  that  the  prophetic  function  is 
bestowed  on  woman.  There  are  only  two  other  prophetesses  mentioned  in  the 
Old  Testament — Miriam  (Ex.  xv.  20),  and  Deborah  (Judges  ix.  4)  ;  but 
neither  of  these  seemed  to  touch  the  high  spiritual  elevation  reached  by  Huldah. 
In  the  spirit  of  ecstacy,  they  sang  sacred  songs  and  excite  d  the  enthusiasm  of 
the  people  after  signal  victories;  but  they  did  not  prophesy,  like  Huldah,  in 
that  higher  sphere  of  Divine  authority  which  warranted  the  use  of  the  phrase — 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord.'*  The  Divine  Spirit  is  no  nspecter  of  person  or  sex  in 
the  distribution  of  His  precious  gifts.  The  Divine  word  can  be  interpreted 
only  by  those  who  are  taught  by  the  Divine  spirit.  As  the  scientist  should  be 
most  competent  to  interpret  science,  so  the  spiritual  man  should  be  the  best 
authority  in  explaining  spiritual  things. 

II.  Furnishes  reasons  for  the  exercise  of  Divine  vengeance  (verses  1 5-17). 
God  never  strikes  without  sufficient  warning  and  remonstrance.  In  this  in- 
stance Huldah  announces  that  punishment  will  be  imposed  because  Judah  had 
abandoned  Jehovah,  and  rendered  homage  to  other  gods.  This  treachery  was 
so  bold,  so  persistent,  so  inveterate,  that  vengeance  was  inevitable.  Still  Jehovah 
pauses  to  reason,  to  explain,  to  make  it  clear  He  does  not  act  from  vindictive- 
ness  and  passion ;  the  offender  provokes  his  own  ruin.  Napoh^on  once  said, 
**  Vengeance  has  no  foresight;"  and  this  is  true  regaiding  human  vengeance. 
l^ot  so  with  God ;  the  reasons  for  the  Divine  procedure  are  so  far  revealed  as 
to  justify  God,  and  leave  man  without  excuse  or  cause  of  complaint. 

III.  Indicates  the  Divine  willingness  to  show  mercy  to  the  sincerely 
penitent  (verses  18-20.)     The  tears  and  pleadings  of  Josiah  touched  the  heart 
of  God,  and  he  was  spared  the  pain  of  witnessing  the  calamities  of  his  country. 
How  eager  is  our  God  to  show  mercy ;  how  slow  to  punish. 

Heaven  has  but 
Our  Borrow  for  our  sins,  and  then  delights 
To  pardon  erring  man.     Sweet  mercy  seemi 
Its  darling  attribute,  which  limits  justice, 
As  if  there  were  degrees  in  infinite  : 
An  infinite  would  rather  want  perfection, 
Than  punish  to  extent.  Dryden. 

Lessons: — 1.   The  Divine  purpose  may  he  deciphered  in  great  national  changes. 

2.  The    Divine   purpose    is  plainly   revealed    in    rewards    and  punishments. 

3.  The  Divine  wi  ath  may  be  averted  by  timely  repentance  and  reform. 

GERM  JSOTES  UN  TEE  VERSES. 

Verse  14.  The  dignity  of  woman,  ing  the  respect  and  homage  of  the 
1.  In  being  exalted  to  an  office  of  great.  4.  In  being  honoured  and  in- 
great  responsibility  and  power.  2.  In  spired  to  authoritatively  interpret  the 
being  highly  giited  with  intellectual      will  of  God. 

and  spiritual  insight,  a.  In  command-  —     The  grave  priest,  the  learned 

633 


oflAP.  zxn. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


scribe,  the  honourable  courtiers  do  not 
disdain  to  knock  at  the  door  of  a 
prophetess;  neither  do  any  of  them 
say,  it  were  hard  if  we  should  not 
have  as  much  acquaintance  with  God 
as  a  woman.  But,  in  humble  ac- 
knowledgment of  her  graces,  they 
come  to  learn  the  will  of  God  from  her 
mouth.  True  piety  is  modest,  and 
stands  not  upon  terms  of  reputation  in 
the  businesses  of  God,  but  willingly 
honours  his  gifts  in  any  subject,  least 
of  all  in  itself. — Bp.  Sail. 

Verses  16-19.  The  Divine  wrath. 
1.  Is  explicitly  declared  against  all 
workers  of  iniquity  (ver.  16).  2.  Is 
unalterable  in  its  attitude  towards 
obstinate  apostasy  (ver.  17).  3.  Is 
postponed  by  sincere  repentance  and 
self-humiliation  (verses  18,  19). 
4.  Will  inevitably  overtake  the  im- 
penitent wicked. 

19.  A  tender  heart.  1.  Is  keenly 
susceptible  to  good  influences.  2.  Is 
powerfully  affected  with  the  malignant 
nature  of  sin.  3.  Compassionates  the 
terrible  condition  of  the  victims  of  sin. 
4.  Finds  a  profound  and  immediate 
response  in  the  tender  mercy  of  God. 

—  How  happy  a  thing  it  is  to  be 
a  reed  unto  God's  judgments,  rather 
than  an  oak  !  The  meek  and  gentle 
reed  stoops,  and  therefore  stands  ;  the 
oak  stands  stiffly  out  against  the 
strongest  gust,  and  therefore  is  turned 
up  by  the  roots.  At  least,  let  us 
lament  those  sins  we  have  not  avoided; 
and  mourn  for  the  sins  of  others  while 
we  hate  our  own. — Bp    lall 

Verses  19, 20.  Josiah,  a  pattern  for 
the  ignorant.  Both  the  character  and 
the  fortunes  of  Josiah  are  described  in 
these  words:  his  character,  his  heart 
was  tender  and  he  feared  God  :  his 
fortunes,  an  untimely  death,  designed 
as  a  reward  for  his  obedience.  Josiah 
was  brought  up  among  very  wicked 
men,  in  a  corrupt  court,  after  an 
apostasy  of  more  than  half  a  century, 
far  Irom  God's  prophets  and  in  the 
midst  of  idols.  He  had  every  temp- 
tation to  go  wrong ;  and  had  he  done 
80,  we  might  have  made  allowances, 
634 


and  said  that  he  was  not  so  bad  as  the 
other  kings,  for  he  knew  no  better ;  he 
had  not  sinned  against  light.  Yes, 
he  would  have  sinned  against  light — 
the  event  shows  it ;  for  it  he  had  light 
enough  to  go  right  (which  he  had,  for 
he  did  go  right),  it  follows,  that  if  he 
had  gone  wrong,  it  would  have  been 
against  light.  Thisis  very  important. 
Everyone,  even  the  poorest  and  most 
ignorant,  has  knowledge  enough  to  be 
religious.  Education  does  not  make 
a  man  religious ;  nor  is  it  an  excuse 
for  a  man's  disobedience  that  he  has 
not  been  educated  in  his  duty.  Josiah 
had  that  which  all  men  have,  heathen 
as  well  as  Christian,  till  they  pervert 
or  blunt  it — a  natural  sense  of  right 
or  wrong ;  and  he  did  not  blunt 
it.  His  heart  was  tender  ;  he 
acknowledged  a  constraining  force  in 
the  Divine  voice  within  him ;  he  heard 
and  obeyed.  Though  all  the  world 
had  told  him  otherwise,  he  could  not 
believe  and  would  not,  that  he  might 
sin  without  offence,  with  impunity ; 
that  he  might  be  sensual,  or  cruel, 
after  the  manner  of  idolaters,  and 
nothing  would  come  of  it.  And 
further,  amid  all  the  various  worbhips 
offered  to  his  acceptance,  this  same 
inward  sense  of  his,  strengthened  by 
practice,  unhesitatingly  chose  out  the 
true  one,  the  worship  of  the  god  of 
Israel.  Such  was  the  beginning  of 
Josiah's  life.  At  sixteen  he  began  to 
seek  after  the  god  of  his  fathers ;  at 
twenty  he  commenced  his  reformation 
with  a  resolute  faith  and  true-hearted 
generous  devotion.  Erom  the  lan- 
guage of  Scripture,  it  would  seem,  he 
began  of  himself ;  thus  he  is  left  a 
pattern  to  all  ages  of  prompt  obedience 
for  conscience'  sake.  At  first  not 
having  the  book  of  the  law  to  guide 
him,  he  took  such  measures  as  natural 
conscience  suggested ;  he  put  away 
idolatry  generally.  Thus  he  set  out 
not  knowing  whither  he  went.  But 
it  is  the  rule  of  God's  providence  that 
those  who  act  up  to  their  light  shall 
be  rewarded  with  clearer  light.  Ac- 
cordingly, while  he  was  thus  engaged, 
atter  a  few  years,  he  found  the  book  of 
the  law  in  the  course  of  his  reforma- 
tions.    Josiah's  conduct  on  this  dis- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS,  chap,  xxiii. 


coYery  marks   his    character.     Many  command  to  do   it;  and  he  learned, 

men,  certainly  many  young  men,  who  moreover,    the     fearful     punishment 

had  been  so  zealous  as  he  had  already  which  was  hanging  over  them,  for  in 

shown  himself  for    six   years,  would  that  Book  of  the  Law  were  contained 

have  prided  themselves  on  what  they  the  threats  of  vengeance  to  be  fulfilled 

had    done,    and  though   they    began  in  case  of  transgression.     Obseive  in 

humbly,    by    this   time    would    have      what  Josiah's  chief  excellence  lay 

become  self-willed,  self-confident,  and  "  he  turned  not  aside  to  the  right  hand 
hard-hearted.  ^  Far  from  it ;  his  pecu-  or  to  the  leit"  (verse  2).     He  kept  the 
liar  praise  is  singleness  of  mind,  a  pure  narrow  middle  way.      JS'ow  what  is 
conscience.     His  was  not  that  stern  this  strict  virtue  called  ?     It  is  called 
enthusiasm  which  has  displayed  itself  faith.     It  is  no    matter  whether  we 
in  some  so-called  reformations,  fancy-  call  it  faith  or  conscientiousness,  they 
ing  itself  God's  peculiar  choice,  and  are  in    substance  one  and   the  same. 
despising  others.     Here  we  have  the  Where  there  is  faith  there  is  conscien- 
pattern    of   reformers,    singleness    of  tiousness,  where  there  is  conscientious- 
heart,   gentleness    of    temper,  in    the  ness  there  is  faith.     They  may  be  dis- 
midst  of  zeal,  resoluteness  and  deci-  tinguished  from  each  other  in  words, 
sion  in  action.     All  God's  saints  have  but  they  are  not  divided  in  fact.     They 
this  union  of  opposite  graces  :  Joseph,  belong  to  one,  and  but  one,  habit  of 
Moses,  Samuel,  David,  Nehemiah,  St.  mind— dutif uluess ;  they  show  them- 
Paul;  but  in  which  of  them  all  is  the  selves  in  obedience,    in  the    careful 
wonder-working  power  of  grace  shown  anxious  observance  of  God's  will,  how- 
more  attractively  than  in  Josiah  ?  Ob-  ever  we   learn  it.     And  this  is  called 
serve  his^  conduct  when  the  law  was  faith,  because  it  implies  a  reliance  on 
read  to  him—"  he  rent  his  clothes."  the  mere  word  of  the  unseen  God  over- 
He  thought  far  more  of   what  he  had  powering  the  temptations  of  sin.     May 
not  done,    than  of  what  he  had  done.  God  grant  that  we,   like  Josiah,  may 
He  felt  how  incomplete  his  reforma-  improve  our  gifts,  and  trade  and  make 
tion  had  been ;  and  he  felt  how  far  merchandise  with  them,  so  that  when 
more  guilty  his  whole   people    were  hecometh  to  reckon  with  us,  we  may 
than  he  had  supposed,  receiving,   as  be  accepted !— Condensed  fediin  ,/, //; 
they  had,    such  precise   guidance  in  Newman, 
Scripture  what  to  do,  and  such  solemn 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 
THE    DESTRUCTION    OF    IDOLATRY    BY    JOSIAH. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  NoxES^-Verse  1.  The  king  sent  and  gathered  all  the 
elders  of  Judah— Not  content  to  hide  from  coming  ill  nnder  God's  promise  of  immunity  to 
hims.  If  personally,  Josiah  s  patriotism  led  him  to  a  fervent  effort  to  recall  his  nation  to  the 
H^'Iv'  ^T  iT  ^''"^^  impending  doom.  Verse  6.  He  brought  out  the  grove  from  the  house 
of  the  Lord  see  on  xxi.  7).  Cast  the  powder  thereof  on  the  graves  of  the  children  of  the 
people-In  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  4  it  is  rendered,  "  upon  the  graves  of  them  that  ha^i  sacrijiced  unto 
them  thus  profaning  the  sepulchres  of  those  idolaters.  Verse  7.  He  brake  down  the  houses 
of  the  Sodomites— Concerning  these  "  Sodomites  "  sec  Notes  on  1  Kings  xiv  24  These 
booths  were  scenes  of  lustful  revelry  ;  these  "  women  who  wove  hangings  for  Asherah  "  beinff 
debased  creatures  who,  together  with  others  of  their  sex,  prostituted  themselves  in  homage 
of  this  goddess  All  this  -  ^^^  the  house  of  the  Lordr  Verse  9.  Did  eat  of  the  unleavenid 
bread- The  phrase  means  that  they  lived  upon  the  altar  offerings;  they  came  not  near  God's 
altar,  but  '^^yed  ft  ^  enjoying  the  fruit  of  their  profession  "among  their  brethieu  ' 

TT.^^m  He  defiled  Topheth- The  spot  in  the  valley  of  Hinnon  where  children  were  sacri- 
ficed to  Molech.  "Tophet"  is  variously  interpre'ed,  as  from  ^1;^,  to  spit  out,  detent,  an 
abomination  therefore;  or  from  C)i/i,  a  drnm^Wi^  dominating  interpretation  of  Jewish  writers 
Oeing  that  the  cries  of  the  penshu.g  children   were  drowned  by  that  instrument.     Verse  11. 

635 


CHAP.  xxni.  HOMILETIG  COMMENT  ART :   KINGS. 


Took  away  tlie  horses — Not  figures  of  horses,  but  living,  kept  for  drawing  the  sun-chariot 
in  the  idolatrous  processions.  Horses  were  also  sacrificed  m  the  worship  of  the  sun.  Verse  13. 
On  the  right  hand  of  the  mount  of  corruption — The  hilly  range  on  the  east  of  Jerusalem, 
called  the  Mount  of  Olives,  has  three  summits,  whose  central  or  sotithernmost  peak  is  named 
the  '*  Mount  of  Corruption."  from  the  idol  temples  there  reared  by  Solomon.  Verse  15.  Altar 
that  was  at  Bethel — In  Samaria;  so  that  he  traversed  the  land  to  sweep  away  every  vestige 
of  idolatry. 

Note— A.  literal  and  remarkable  fulfilment  of  prophecy  at  Bethel — Against  that  very 
altar  at  Bethel,  where  the  guilty  Jeroboam  burned  odious  idolatrous  incense,  a  man  of  God, 
326  years  before  Josiah's  birth,  came  forth  and  cried,  "0,  altar,  altar!  thus  saith  the  Lord, 
Behold  a  child  shall  be  born  unto  the  house  of  David,  Josiah  by  name,  and  upon  thee  shall 
he  offer  the  priests  of  the  high  places  that  burn  incense  upon  thee,  and  men's  bones  shall  be 
burnt  upon  thee  "  {see  the  narrative  1  Kings  xiii.  1-3).  No  more  emphatic  verification  of  pro- 
phecy is  contained  in  Scriptu'-e. 

Ver>es  21-23.  The  revival  of  the  passover  festival — Not  only  were  the  king's  own  sub- 
jects called  to  this  august  celebration  of  this  most  sacred  festival,  but  many  of  the  remnant  of 
Israel  also  came  to  the  solemnity  [see  2  Chron.  xxxv.  18)  ;  not  even  Hf^zekiah's  cehbration 
of  this  feast  was  so  complete  and  imposing  as  that  of  Josiah  Verse  26.  Notwithstanding  the 
Lord  turned  not — The  nation's  heart  was  not  changed  by  all  this  fervour  of  the  king  and  the 
reformation  of  external  worship.  Jeremiah's  mmistry  daring  Josiah's  reign  shows  the  gross 
moral  corruption  nnd  total  spiritual  falsity  of  this  hopelessly  apostate  people.  Verses  28-30. 
Josiah  slain  at  Megiddo-  Necho,  the  son  of  Psammeticus,  ascended  the  throne  of  Egypt  in 
the  twentieth  year  of  Josiah.  The  two  rival  monarchies  of  Egypt  and  Assyria  were  then 
still  struggling  for  at-cendancy.  Pahstine  was  a  coveted  frontier  territory.  From  Manas-eh's 
time  Judah  was  tributary  to  Assyria,  and  Josiah  felt  necessitate  1  to  rally  to  Assyria's  side 
against  Necho  of  Egypt.  On  the  Egyptian  monarch's  way  to  Charchemish,  by  the  Euphrates, 
Josiah  intercept'  d  his  line  of  advance  oy  meeting  hin  in  the  great  vale  of  Migeddo,  in  the  plain 
of  Esdraelon.  Although  Necho  remonstrated  (Chronicles  account),  yet  Josiah  opposed  him,  and 
was  slain.  Verses  31-34.  Jehoahaz — It  was  the  people's  act  to  raise  Shallum,  Josiah's  youngest 
son,  afterwards  named  Jehoahaz,  to  the  throne  in  preference  to  his  elder  brother  Eliakim. 
This  popular  choice  may  be  accounted  for  by  Shallum's  military  spirit  (Ez.  xix.  3),  and  bis 
resolute  opposition  to  the  Egyptian  monarchy  ;  for  there  w^ere  two  parties  in  the  Jewish  state, 
the  one  favouring  allegiance  with  Assyria,  the  other  wilh  Egypt.  He  was  quickly  deposed  by 
Necho.  Verses  34-37.  Eliakim,  named  Jehoiakim  by  Pharoah-Necho,  followed  an  evil 
course,  and  was  a  reckless  ruler.  Jeremiah  portrays  his  character  most  vividly  (ch.  xxii.  13-19). 
— W.  H.  J. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VEESES  1-24. 
Chaeacteeistics  of  a  Gekat  Eeligious  Refgem. 

I.  It  is  suggested  by  a  clearer  understanding  of  tke  Divine  Word 
(verse  1).  Josiah  had  bogun  his  reforming  woik  before  the  discovery  of  the 
law,  but  when  he  read  the  very  words  of  God  his  views  were  expanded,  and 
his  zeal  newly  inflamed  concerning  the  work  he  had  to  do.  The  eifect  on  the 
king  was  like  that  produced  on  Luther  by  his  finding  an  old  Latin  Bible  in  the 
library  of  the  Augustine  convent  at  Erfurt.  In  both  cases,  the  character  and 
life-work  of  the  reformers  were  irresistibly  influenced  by  what  they  read.  The 
best  and  loftiest  work  we  do,  is  that  which  is  inspired  and  sustained  by  our 
itudy  of  the  Divine  Word.     It  is  the  light  and  teacher  for  all  time. 

A  glory  gilds  the  sacred  page 
Majestic,  like  the  sun  ; 
It  gives  a  light  to  every  age  ; 
It  gives,  but  borrows  none. — Cowper, 

II.  It  seeks  to  interest  and,  by  solemn  covenant,  secure  the  co-operation 

of  all  classes  of  the  community  (verses  1,  2).  All  genuine  reform  must  be 
based  on  intelligence.  The  people  Josiah  sought  to  benefit  he  sought  first  to 
instruct.  Too  much  publicity  cannot  be  given  to  principles  which  threaten  to 
change  the  existing  order  of  things.  If  they  will  not  bear  the  light  of  day, 
636 


SOMILETIC  COMMEISTART:  KINGS.  chap,  xxiit. 


and  the  freest  public  cnticism,  they  are  unworthy  our  adherence.  Josiah  set 
the  example.  It  was  a  striking  scene— the  more  highly  dramatic  because  so 
utterly  unconscious— to  see  the  youthful  king  publicly  entering  into  solemn 
covenant  to  obey  the  Dmne  commands.  The  people  followed.  In  the  East, 
whatever  the  king  initiates  and  champions,  the  people  readily  accept.  The 
broader  and  more  searching  the  reform,  the  more  important  is  it  to  interest  all 
classes  and  engage  all  legitimate  agencies.  The  most  gigantic  efforts  of  the 
reformer  would  be  fruitless  if  unsupported  by  public  opinion.  He  is  shrewd 
enough  to  see  that  the  first  thing  he  has  to  do  is  to  mould  and  educate  public 
opinion  Hume  once  observed,  "AU  power,  even  the  most  despotic,  rests 
ultimately  on  opinion." 

III.  It  aims  at  the  utter  destruction  of  the  system,  with  aU  its  degradinff 

f^^^'^^T:  ^^f  u^^f  ^^\^^^  P^^P^^  ^^^^^y     (^^^-  4-20>  24).      Josiah  Attacked 
the  idolatry  of  his  kingdom  with  a  promptness,  zeal,  and  vigour  that  amounted 
almost  to  fierceness.     The  evil  must  be  torn  out,  root  and  branch.     The  high 
places,  the  images,  the  vessels,  were  not  only  broken  in  pieces,  but  defiled,  and 
their  ashes  scattered  on  the  stream  to  be  borne  away  for  ever.     The  reformer 
warmed  to  his  work,  and  grew  fiercer  stiU.     He  slew  the  idolatrous  priests. 
He  violated  the  graves  of  the  dead,  and  burnt  their  bones  on  the  altarf    The 
reformer  became  a  persecutor.     J  udging  Josiah  from  the  standard  of  his  times, 
much  might  be  said  m  palliation  of  this  violence.     Idolatry  was  the  oppressive 
curse  under  which  his  kingdom  lay  cruslied.     As  a  theocratic   king,  he  could 
admit  no  rival  to  Jehovah  ;  idolatry  must  be  utterly  stamped  out.     Much  may 
be  forgiven  a  man  for  the  excesses  into  which  he  may  be  betrayed  in  the  heat 
of  his  reforming  zeal.     But  no  reforming  work  can  be  permanently  advantaged 

endletTepris^^^^  ^^'"^^^  ^'^"^  '^'^  ^^^^^^^ '  '^  ^^^^  P^^^^^^^ 

i?J:-fl  ^  ^*  A  u^^'^'r^  °^  *^^  Passover  was  held  on  an  unexampled  scale  of 
m3  w  .\^  ^?.^  publicity  and  in  a  faithful  adhesion  to  the  minute  details  re- 
quired by  the  Divme  law  that  had  not  been  recognized  for  years.     The  icono- 

So'v?  m''  '^"/^  ^'  T'^""^  \'  ^'^'  ''"^'^^^^  ''  P^^  i^  Pl-^e  of  what  he 
kpS'.n^tf  ''^'  "^"^'.'^P.'  ^^^  r^'^  ^^""'^^y  ^^^"1^  ^^  afforded  him  in 
keeping  up  fellowship  with  the  Highest  and  HoUest,  else  he  will  seek  inferior 

fhp  r//'  /"^  ""Pr^'  ^^  "^"^^'P^  ^'  ^'^  ^^^  Hebrews.  We  must  not  mistake 
the  reverent  and  decorous  observance  of  an  elaborate  ritual  for  true  worship. 

tTr?t}H  Tf^P, "''''*  ^'  intelligent,  sincere,  and  spiritual.  -If  a  person 
Z'ln  ^""^.^^n^"^"^."^  "^  earthly  prince  every  court  day,  and  pay  his 
onSon?o^  '-"^   respectfully,  but  at  other  times  speak  and  Jet  in 

and  «n  pl  ^^^^']f^^  the  king  would  justly  deem  such  an  one  a  hypocrite 

in^hpT^n  ^V  a  "I  ^'^^  ^  '^^'°^^  "^^  «^^*^^  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace 
m  the  House  of  God  prove  us  to  be  God's  children  and  friends:^ Salter. 

«  '^l^Z^i  ;r'  ■  i  S'nuint  reformer  regulates  his  leal  hj  sound  discretion.  2.  It 
««(#<.««  to  avoid  excesses  tn  carrying  out  great  reforms.  3.  The  best  reforms 
«re  those  syested  and  carried  out  by  the  teachings  ind  spirit  of  the  Divine  PZ 

oJd'ui:Lrzt:l!^iziVpr''''''  '^' ""'"""'  '^^  """■-  •'^  "^  ^^ 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

of  ^God's  mrd  ^^A  ^?^''-  ^^^5'''^  '*'^"*^^  *^«  i^oT^ni,  and  being  a 
1a  ,'  Word.— 1  An  important  testimony  to  aU.  2.  A  serions  losi 
and    time-honoured    institution- in-      andinju^  toapeople  wLrnegkcte^^^ 

6d7 


OHAF.xzin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :   KINGS. 


3.  Worthy  of  the  most  careful  study  with  pride  the  moral  purity  of  their 

to  do  it   with  efficiency.     4.  Stimu-  religion  with   those   abominations  of 

lates  the  formation  of  the  best  resolves  heathenism  which  were  shocking  and 

towards  God  and  His  service.  abhorrent  to  the  simplest  instincts  of 

—     This  pious  and  patriotic  king,  human  nature,  to  repay  their  persecu- 

not  content   with  the  promise   of  his  tors  at  the  first  opportunity.     Where 

own  security,  felt,  after  Huldah's  re-  those   abominations    were    the    only 

sponse,   an  increased  desire  to  avert  religious  observances  taught,  educa- 

the   threatened    calamities   from   his  tion  might  avail  to  make  them  pass 

kingdom   and  people.     Knowing  the  without  protest ;  but  where  there  was 

richness  of  the  Divine  clemency  and  any,  even  a  slight,  knowledge   of  a 

grace  to  the  penitent,  he  convened  the  purer  religion  and  a  better  morality, 

elders  of  the  people,  and,  placing  him-  the  protest  could  never  entirely  die 

self  at  their  head,  accompanied  by  the  out.     The  Jehovah  religion   was,    as 

collective   body   of    the   inhabitants,  compared  with  heathen  things,  aus- 

went  in  solemn  procession  to  the  tem-  tere.      It   warred    against  the   base 

pie,  where  he  ordered  the  book  of  the  passions  of  men  and  the  vices  which 

law  to  be  read  to  the  assembled  audi-  they  produce.     Heathenism  therefore 

ence,  and  covenanted,  with  the  unani-  seemed  to  represent  enjoyment  of  life, 

mous  concurrence  of  his  subjects,  to  while  the  Jehovah  religion  seemed  to 

adhere  steadfastly  to  all  the  command-  repress   pleasure.     It  is    remarkable 

ments  of  the  Lord.     It  was  an  occa-  that  a  boy-king  should  have  chosen 

sion  of  solemn  interest,  closely  con-  the  latter.      Judaism   certainly   had 

nected   with  a  great   national  crisis,  intolerance  as  one  of  its  fundamental 

and  the  beautiful  example  of  piety  in  principles.     Violence  in   the  support 

the   highest  quarter   would   exert   a  of  the  Jehovah-religion  was  the  duty 

salutary  influence  over  all  classes  of  of  a  Jewish  king.     In  attempting  to 

the  people,  in  animating  their  devo-  account  for  and  understand  the  con- 

tions  and  encouraging  their  return  to  duct  of  Josiah,  it  would  be  senseless  to 

the  faith  of  their  idii^Qx^.—Jamieson,  expect  him  to  see  and  practise  tolera- 
tion, as  to  expect  him  to  use  fire-arms 

Verse  1.      Instructed  by  the   law  against  Necho.     We  can  never  carry 

and  by  the  prophetess,  the  king  does  back   modern  principles  into  ancient 

rest  in  security,  feeling  that  the  evil  times,  and  judge  men  by  the  standards 

will  not  come  in  his  day,   but  takes  of  to-day. — Lange, 
immediate   measures  to  instruct   the 

people  in  the  law,  and  to  destroy  idol-  Verse  4.     The  Kedron  winds  along 

atry  throughout  the  land.  the   east  and  south  of  the   city,  the 

channel   of  which   is,    throughout  a 

Verse  2.     Woe  be  to  them  that  hide  large  portion  of  the  year,    almost  or 

God's  book  from  the  people,  as  they  wholly  dry,  except  after  heavy  rains, 

would  do  ratsbane  from  the  eyes  of  when  it  suddenly  swells  and  overflo>ys. 

children !       Ignorant    souls     cannot  There  were  emptied  all  the  impurities 

perish  without  their  murder.    There  of  the  temple  (2  Chron.  xxix.  15,  16) 

is  no  fear  of  knowing  too  much ;  there  and  the  city.     His  reforming  prede- 

is   too  much   fear   of   practising   too  cessors  had  ordered  the  mutilated  relics 

little.— -Sj?.  Hall,  of  idolatry  to  be  thrown  into  that  place 

of    graves    and    receptacle    of    filth 

Verses  4-24.      A  violent   persecu-  (1  Kings  xv.  13;  2  Chron.  xv.   16, 

tion  like  that  of  Manasseh  must  have  xxx.     14);    but   Josiah,     while     he 

produced  terror,  bitterness,   stubborn  imitated  their  piety,   far  outstripped 

though  concealed  opposition,  and  a  re-  them  in  zeal,  for  he  caused  the  ashes 

lentless  purpose,  on  the  part  of  those  of  the  burnt  wood,  and  the  fragments 

who  had  all  the  law  and  traditions  of  of  the  broken  metal,  to  be  collected 

theirnation,  together  with  patriotism,  and    conveyed    to    Bethel,    in   order 

on  their  si<lo.  and  who  could  compare  thenceforth  to  associate  ideas  of  horror 
6^8 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS.  chap,  xxiii. 


and  aversion  with  that  place,  as  odious         Verse  15.     His  zeal  as  a  theocratic 
for  the  worst  pollutions.  sovereign  was  specially  directed  against 

v         'r      c-        t     TT       J     X,        «  "  the  high  places  "  reared  and  conse- 

^   Terse  7.     Sm—l.  Has   depths   of  crated  by  Israelitish  monarchs   in   all 

infamy    which    the   beginner    would  the  Samaritan  cities,  as  beinff  indica- 

shudder  to  contemplate.     2.  Finds  its  tions  of  the  same  spirit  of  disloyaltv  to 

readiest  and  most^  zealous  votaries  in  Jehovah  which  the  policy  of  Jeroboam 

Idolaters      3    Reigns    supreme  when  had  inaugurated  at  Bethel  and  at  Dan 

God  IS  abandoned.     4    Can  be  cured  But  the  altar  at  Bethel  which  had  been 

only  by  being  thoroughly  rooted  out.  sumptuously  and  elaborately  fitted  up 

VoronQ      urp.        .     ijT    V        .,  ^°  J^he  Egyptian  style  of  architecture, 

Terse  8.     *<  The  gate  of  Joshua,  the  and  at  which  the  worship  of  the  golden 

governor  of  he  city  "- A  great  man,  calf  was  performed  with  a  splendour 

but  none  of  the  best.^    He  had  a  good  that  rivalled  or   surpassed   the   pure 

name;  but  Josiah  might  have  said  to  ritual   celebrated  at  Jerusalem,    was 

him,   as  Alexander  did  to  a  soldier  of  thespecial  object  of  his  abhorrence  both 

his  own  name,  but  a  coward,  Either  on  account  of  its  vicinity  to  his   own 

change   thy  name,    or  put   on   more  kingdom,  and  the  outrage  which  its 

courage ;  so,  more  ^^let j.^ 2 rapp.  establishment,  on  a  spot  hallowed  by 

V.,.c«     11        uAA     V.        A     .^.  the  memory   of  the  patriarch  Jacob, 

Terse     11        '*And     burned     the  inflicted  on   the   feelings   of  all   the 

chariots  of  the    sun."  — Chrysostom  pious  in  Judsih.—Jamieson, 
saith   that   Peter,  for   his  zeal,    was 

Hke  a  man  made  all  of  fire  walking  Terse    16.     Intervention    of    time 

among  stubble      Josiah  was  surely  so.  breaks  no  square  in   the  Divine    de- 

Angelomussaith  that  herein  he  repre-  crees;  our  purblind  eyes  see  nothing 

sented  Chris     who,  by  the  fire  of  the  but  that  which  touches  their  lids  ;  thf 

last  day,  shall  destroy  aU impiety,  and  quick  sight  of  Uod\s   prescience   sees 

not  suffer  any  defiled  one  to  enter  into  that,  as  present,  which  is  a  world  off 

his  kingdom.— Ihd,  __^^,  ^^^ 

,vXT'®  ^\'  ^r'^'  .  ^^^™e.°t     of         Verse  17.     Compare  with   1  Kings 

Idolatry  m  his  dominions  was  m  like  xiii.     Lessons  from    an    old  tomb- 

mannerdestroyedandthe  places  where  stone.     As  we  stand  by  the  sepulchre 

they  stood  he  defiled  by  strewing  them  of  the  man  of  God,    many  admonitory 

Zhtf  ""'"''  ^'T'  7^  P''^««^««  lessons  press  them;elves  home  upon  us! 
of  a  dead  carcase  rendered  both  persons         I.  That  the  path  of  duty  is   the 

and  places  unclean  in  tbe  eyes  both  of  way  of  safety.     So  long  as  the  man 

Jews  and  heathens  ~J..e..o;^.  of  God  continued  in  tho^th  of  dut^^ 

^•;^f  1,       T  "■  w  ""^^  ^"^  "^^^^  ^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^«  ««fe.     The  anger  of  the  kin- 

W  Wh   hi;    ^^°^^3^g-e  peace  to  and  his   command  to%he  bystlndc^? 

buy  truth,  but  we  may  not  give  truth  could  not  harm  him  a  whit,     k  moral 

to  buy  peace.-rr^;,^;.  or  spiritual  danger  will  befall  us  if  we 

Tpr.P«    1^      IP      TT,^      «         •  continue  in  the  path  which  God  marks 

.^vTffn^l   ifl   if--  •  ^^®      Tinerring  out  for  us.     "They  that  b8  with   us 

certitude  of  the  Divine  word.-l .  Its  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them  - 

threats   and  promises   are   faithfully  II.  That  the  path  of  duty  is  the  path 

and  minutely  fulfilled.     2.  The  flux  of  power.     So  long  as  the  man  of^God 

of    time     strengthens    rather     than  was  faithful  in  the  discharge   of  his 

weakens  Its  authority-350  years  had  duty,  he  had  great  moral  Influence 

elapsed  since  the  prophecy  was  uttered.  When  King  Jeroboam's  hand  withered 

+>;.  ri  .'°'^^"^'^*   of  accomplishing  and  his  arm  became  rigid,  he  had  no 

the  Divine  word  may  himself  be  un-  faith  either  in  his  false  god,  or  in  the 

conscious  of  it-Josiah  was  more  in-  priests  who  were   sacrificing  to   him! 

f^^fiiT     ^^'^P^.'""^  '"^^l^ljy  t^an  in  -  Entreat  the  Lord  for  me,'' cried  the 

fulfilling  a  Divine  prediction.  frightened,  horror-stricken  king.     So 

639 


OHAP.  XXUL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


it  is  still.  The  good  man  may  be  per- 
secuted and  ridiculed,  but  often  it  is 
seen  that  the  devout  man,  who  con- 
tinues, despite  all  trials,  **  the  even 
tenor  of  his  way,"  is  requested  to 
intercede  with  God  on  behalf  of  those 
who  would  have  harmed  him.  But 
power  is  lost  the  moment  the  good 
man  departs  from  the  right  way.  III. 
The  danger  of  tarrying  upon  for- 
bidden ground.  The  command  to  the 
man  of  God  was  clear  and  decisive. 
He  must  so  appear  before  the  false 
priests  of  Jeroboam  and  deliver  his 
message,  and  leave  the  place,  that  his 
appearance  and  disappeiirance  may  be 
startling  in  their  suddenness.  He 
must  not  return  by  the  same  way  that 
he  went.  Eut  he  lingered  in  the  way 
not  far  from  Bethel.  He  was  upon 
dangerous  ground,  and  the  temptation 
presented  by  his  seducer  was  fitted  to 
his  physical  need  and  circumstances, 
as  all  strong  temptation  is.  He 
yielded,  and  we  know  his  fate. 
Banyan  very  quaintly  says,  after 
Christian  and  Hopeful  wandered  from 
the  right  path  and  found  themselves 
in  Doubting  Castle,  **  So  I  saw  it  was 
easier  going  out  of  the  way  when  in, 
than  going  in  when  out."  IV.  The 
fearful  crime  of  an  enlightened  man 
ruining  another.  The  old  prophet 
might  take  up  the  corpse  of  the  dis- 
obedient man  of  God  and  attend  to  its 
interment,  and  mourn  over  him,  say- 
ing, "Alas,  my  brother!"  but  he 
could  not  bring  back  again  the  lost 
life.  He  might  charge  his  sons  to 
bury  him  with  the  men  of  God,  adding 
that  the  prediction  which  had  been 
uttered  would  certainly  be  fulfilled  ; 
but  this  made  no  atonement,  no 
separation.  The  man  who  will  ruin 
another  is  a  baser  man  than  he  who 
will  ruin  himself.  And  be  it  that  this 
act  of  disobedience  on  the  part  of  the 
man  of  God  was  a  sin  unto  the  death 
of  the  body  only — as  perhaps  the  en- 
tire context  warrants — yet  little  did 
he  think,  when  he  journeyed  from 
Judah,  that  he  would  never  return 
again  ;  and  that  being  entrusted  with 
such  amessage,  and  charged  with  such 
responsibilities,  he  should  fail  in  part. 
Let  him,  therefore,  who  stands  by  his 
640 


sepulchre,  remember  the  judgment 
which  arrested  the  man  of  God,  and 
he  will  find  another  illustration  of  the 
need  of  heeding  the  warning,  **  Let 
him  that  assuredly  standeth,  take  heed 
lest  he  fall."— ^ow.  Quarterly. 

—  This  is  one  of  the  most  remark- 
able prophecies  contained  in  the  Bible. 
Had  the  prediction  referred  to  the 
entire  suppression  of  idolatry  through- 
out the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  its  re- 
union with  that  of  Judah  in  the  com- 
mon celebration  of  national  worship  at 
Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  patriotism 
would  assuredly  have  kept  alive  the 
remembrance  of  the  announcement 
both  in  the  court  and  throughout  the 
country,  making  a  consummation  so 
devoutly  to  be  wished  the  favourite 
and  distinguishing  policy  of  the  best 
kings.  But  the  demolition  of  the 
single  altar  at  Bethel  was  too  limited 
an  enterprise,  too  trivial  an  act,  to 
stimulate  the  ambition  of  a  Jewish 
king,  or  to  continue  a  subject  of 
interest  in  the  councils  of  his  cabinet ; 
and  hence  the  prophecy  seems  to  have 
fallen  into  comparative  neglect  or 
oblivion.  But  not  one  jot  nor  tittle  of 
the  Divine  word  ever  fails  to  be 
fulfilled.  God  chooses  his  own  time, 
as  well  as  his  own  accomplishments  of 
His  providential  purposes  ;  and 
although  no  king  of  Judah  before 
Manasseh  had  an  op,  ortunity  of  pass- 
ing the  confines  of  his  kingdom; 
although  Manasseh,  with  Amon,  had 
not,  probably,  the  slightest  knowledge 
of  the  prophecy,  and  was  influenced 
solely  by  motives  of  humble  penitence 
and  devout  gratitude  for  his  own 
temporal  and  spiritual  deliverance  in 
bestowing  the  name  of  Josiah  upon 
his  grandson ;  he  was  unconsciously, 
but  by  an  unseen  overruling  power, 
led  to  do  what  verified  the  word  of  the 
Lord  which  the  man  of  God  proclaimed 
to  Jeroboam,  regarding  the  overthrow 
of  the  altar  at  Bethel. — Jamieson, 

Verses  21-24.  The  building  up  of 
a  new  life  must  follow  upon  the 
eradication  of  sin.  The  Passover  can- 
not be  celebrated  until  all  the  old 
leaven  is  removed.  The  Passover  was 
the  feast  with  which  each  new   year 


EOMILETIC  COMMEyTART :   KINGS,  ohii-.  xiiii. 


begun ;  we  also   have  a  Passover  or  Verse  24.     The  Bible  and  reform. 

Easter  lamb  (1   Cor.  v.  7,   8).     The  1.  The  Bible  exposes  the  dangers  and 

festivals  and  fasts  are  the    framework  abuses  of  all  false  systems.     2.  Sup- 

of  the  common  life  of  the  congregation;  plies  clear  and  authoritative  ideas   of 

where  they  are  neglected  this  life   is  what  is  right,  and  the  most  powerful 

decaying.     If  Israel  had  kept  up  the  motives  to  act  up  to  those  ideas.     3. 

celebration  of  its  appointed    feast,   it  Demands  that   all    efforts    of  reform 

would  never  have   fallen  so  low. —  shall  be  thorough  and  complete. 
Lange. 

bOMJLETICS  OF    VERSES  25-37. 
Failure  in  the  Work  of  Reformation. 

I.  Tbat  tbe  work  of  Reformation  may  fail,  notwithstanding  the  ex- 
emplary character  of  the  principal  agent  (vorse  25).  High  praise  is  here 
accorded  to  Josiah.  It  is  usually  maintained  that  Hezekiah  equalled  or  sur- 
passed him  in  trusting  Jehovah  (xviii.  5),  but  that  he  excelled  Hezekiah  in  his 
scrupulous  adherence  to  the  minute  details  of  the  Mosaic  law.  It  is,  however, 
evident  from  this  verse  that  Josiah  was  also  conspicuous  for  his  trust  in 
Jehovah,  for  he  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart,  and  with  all  his  soul, 
and  with  all  his  might.  The  eulogy  of  Josiah,  as  of  Hezekiah,  may  be  regarded 
as  a  passage  worded  after  the  manner  of  oriental  hyperbole,  not  to  be  literally 
understood,  but  as  intended  to  distinguish  a  person  who  was  gifted  with  speci- 
ally great  qualities.  Josiah  was  the  best  character  that  age  could  produce,  and 
was  the  fittest  to  grapple  with  the  abuses  that  others  deplored,  but  were 
powerless  to  rectify.  With  all  the  high  personal  qualifications  and  supreme 
royal  influence  possessed  by  Josiah,  his  reforming  work  was  not  permanently 
successful.  He  was  not  the  first,  or  the  last,  great  man  who  has  attempted  a 
great  and  much-needed  reform,  and  failed. 

II.  That  the  work  of  Reformation  fails  when  it  does  not  prevent  the 
accomplishment  of  the  threatened  doom  (verses  26,  27). — Alter  all  the 
colossal  and  drastic  eff^orts  of  Josiah  to  remove  the  dark  curse  that  lowered  over 
his  kingdom  and  people,  we  learn  from  these  verses  the  fateful  sentence  is  still 
unrepealed.  The  evil  was  too  deep  and  inveterate  to  be  easily  eradicated.  By 
a  comparatively  early  death,  the  good  king  was  removed  from  the  evil  to  come. 
Scarcely  had  the  wail  of  lamentation  for  the  popular  monarch  died  away,  ere 
the  people  relapsed  into  their  former  sins.  The  nation  sank  into  deeper  gloom, 
and  the  vial  of  Divine  wrath,  so  long  and  patiently  restrained,  was  at  length 
poured  out.  The  position  of  Judah  at  this  time  was  similar  to  that  of  the 
Netherlands  when  William  the  Silent  retired  for  a  time  from  his  loved  Father- 
land, which  he  felt  himself  unable  to  save,  and  a  thunderbolt  burst  upon  the 
land  in  the  savage  onslaught  of  the  Duke  of  Alva  and  his  butchering  army — 
the  thunderbolt  that  ultimately  fell  on  Israel  being  Sennacherib  and  his  vic- 
torious legions. 

III.  That  the  work  of  Reformation  fails  when  it  does  not  raise  up  com- 
petent agents  to  perpetuate  its  policy  (verses  28-37). — Josiah  left  no  succes- 
sor, either  clerical  or  lay.  The  priests  whose  cause  he  had  so  bravely 
championed,  had  not  the  ability,  or  the  will,  to  press  forward  the  good  work ; 
and  his  two  sons — Jehoahaz  and  Jehoiakim — who  held  the  sceptre  but  as  vassals 
under  the  dominating  authority  of  the  Egyptian  monarch,  showed  their  dislike 
to  their  father's  reforming  work  by  throwing  in  their  lot  with  the  opposing 
party.  They  forsook  the  God  of  their  father,  and  became  idolaters.  A  great 
work  of  genuine  reform  usually  creates  its  own  agents,  who  perpetuate  and  con- 

TT  611 


OHAP.  xxm. 


HOMILETIC  COM  KENT  ART:  KJNQ8. 


solidate  the  work,  when  the  pioneer  advocate  is  no  more  ;  and  there  must  have 
been  something  defective  ahout  the  plans  and  methods  of  Hezekiah's  work  that 
failed  to  do  this.  **  Reformation/*  says  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  ''is  a  work  of 
time.  A  national  taste,  however  wrong  it  may  he,  cannot  he  totally  changed 
at  once ;  we  must  yield  a  little  to  the  prepossession  which  has  taken  hold  on 
the  mind,  and  we  may  then  hring  people  to  adopt  what  would  offend  them  if 
endeavoured  to  he  introduced  by  violence." 

I Y.  That  the  work  of  Reformation  fails  when  it  does  not  thoroughly  pene- 
trate the  heart  and  life  of  every  member  of  the  community. — Reform,  to  he 
real  and  abiding,  must  be  personal,  convincing  the  judgment,  biassing  the  will, 
changing  the  spirit.  **  Reform,  like  charity,  must  begin  at  home.  Once  well 
at  home,  how  will  it  radiate  outwards,  irrepressible,  into  all  that  we  touch  and 
handle,  speak  and  work ;  kindling  ever  new  light  by  incalculable  contagion, 
spreading  in  geometric  ratio,  far  and  wide,  doing  good  only  wherever  it  spreads, 
and  not  evil "  ( Carlyle).  National  evils  are  thoroughly  cured  only  so  far  as  the 
individual  is  morally  transformed  and  exalted. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  mightiest  efforts  of  reform  may  come  too  late.  2.  The  failure 
of  any  worthy  effort  is  an  occasion  of  sincere  sorrow  to  the  good,  3.  Failure 
thould  lead  to  self -examination  and  more  complete  trust  in  God, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yerses  25-28.  "We  cannot  doubt 
that  the  sanguinary  acts  of  Josiah,  no 
less  than  of  Elijah  and  Jehu,  are  con- 
demned by  Him  in  whom  was  fulfilled 
the  spirit  of  the  true  Deuteronomy, 
the  Revived  Law,  which  the  impetuous 
king  carried  out  only  in  its  external 
observances,  and  by  its  own  hard 
measures.  It  was  the  first  direct 
persecution  that  the  kingdom  of  Judah 
had  witnessed  on  behalf  of  the  True 
Religion.  Down  to  this  time  the 
mournful  distinction  had  been  reserved 
for  the  half-Pagan  king  Manasseh. 
But  cruelty  had  here,  as  in  all  like 
cases,  provoked  a  corresponding 
cruelty ;  and  the  reformation  of  Jo- 
siah, if  from  his  youth  and  zeal  it  has 
suggested  his  likeness  to  our  Edward 
YI.,  by  its  harsher  features  encouraged 
the  rough  acts  which  disfigured  so 
many  of  the  last  efforts  of  that  and 
other  like  movements  of  the  Christian 
Church.  But,  in  spite  of  all  this 
effort,  the  kingdom  of  Judah  was 
doomed.  Perhaps  the  very  vehemence 
of  the  attempt  carried  with  it  its  own 
inefficacy.  Even  the  traditions  which 
invested  Josiah  with  a  blaze  of  preter- 
natural glory,  maintained  that  in  his 
day  the  sacred  oil  was  for  ever  lost. 
Too  late  is  written  on  the  pages  even 
642 


which  described  his  momentary  re- 
vival. It  did  not  reach  the  deeply- 
seated,  wide-spread  corruption  which 
tainted  rich  and  poor  alike. —  Stanley. 

Yerses  26,  27.  The  downward 
course  of  sin.  1.  May  reach  a  depth 
from  which  recovery  is  hopeless.  2. 
The  best  considered  efforts  of  reform 
may  fail  to  arrest.  3.  Sinks  at  last 
to  its  inevitable  doom. 

Yerses  29,  30.  The  hope  of  Judah. 
1.  Rose  to  its  brightest  zenith  amid 
the  reforming  efforts  of  Josiah.  2. 
Was  quenched  in  that  monarch's 
death.  3.  Rose  no  more  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  kingdom.  4.  Will  revive 
and  burst  into  perfect  glory,  only 
under  the  sceptre  of  the  Messiah- 
Xing. 

—  The  early  death  of  the  king  was 
no  punishment  for  him,  for  he  was 
thus  gathered  in  peace  to  his  fathers ; 
but  it  was  a  chastisement  for  his  un- 
repentant people,  who  now  lamented 
him,  and  saw,  when  it  was  too  late, 
what  noble  purposes  he  had  had  in 
their  behalf. 

Yerse  30.  His  fall  caused  a  uni- 
versal mourning.    Jeremiah  wrote  a 


SOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   KINOa.  chip.  xxin. 


lamentation  for  him  (Lam.  iv.  20).  at    his   glory,    and   hy   this    sudden 

His  loss  formed  the  burden  of  regular  violence   will   deliver  him  from   the 

songs  even  after  the  captivity,  when  view  and  participation  of  the  miseries 

**  the  mourning  of  Hadad-rimmon  in  of  Judah.     0  the  wonderful  goodness 

the  valley  of  Megiddon  "  was  still  the  of  the  Almighty,  whose   very    judg- 

type  of  the  deepest  national  affliction  ments  are  merciful !     0  the  safe  con- 

(Zech.    xii.    11).      Well  might   such  dition  of  God's  children,  whom  very 

feelings   be  excited  by  the  battle   of  pain    easeth,    whom   death    revives, 

Megiddo.     That   great  valley  of  Es-  whom  dissolution  unites,  whom  their 

draelon,   the   lists   of   Palestine,  the  very  sin  and  temptation  glorifies ! — 

scene  of  the  great  victories  of  Barak  JBp.  Hall. 
and  of  Gideon,  was  now  stained  with 

a  second  defeat  more  disastrous  than  Verses  31-37.  Royal  automata. 
that  in  which  Saul  lost  his  life.  Then  1.  Divested  of  personal  freedom  and 
it  had  witnessed  the  fall  of  the  short-  power,  and  manipulated  by  a  grasping 
lived  dynasty  of  the  people's  choice,  and  imperious  will  (verses  33-35).  2. 
but  now  it  saw  the  virtual  end  of  the  Imitating  with  mechanical  helpless- 
earthly  monarchy  of  the  house  of  ness  and  precision  the  worst  features 
David.  Hence  may  be  traced  the  of  wicked  predecessors  (verses  32-37). 
mystic  significance  which  surrounds  3.  Maintained  by  the  privations  and 
the  name  of  this  battlefield.  The  sufferings  of  their  subjects  (verse  35). 
prophet  Zechariah  employs  the  mourn-  4.  Indicate  a  lowering  of  natural 
ing  of  Megiddo  as  a  type  of  the  more  spirit  and  prestige, 
wholesome  sorrow  of  Judah,  in  the 

day  when  God  shall  pour  out  upon  Verse  32.     The  reassertive  power 

them  the  spirit  of  grace  and  prayer,  of  sin.     1.  Repressed  for  a  time  by 

as  a  preparation  for  His  final  destruc-  the  influence  of   public   reformation, 

tion  of  all  the  nations  that  come  up  2.  Keady  to  take   advantage   of  the 

against  Jerusalem ;  and  his  imagery  is  slightest  relaxation  of  restraint.     3. 

adopted  in  the  visions  of  the  Apoca-  Defiantly     awaits     its      unavoidable 

lypse.     On  the  very  scene  of  the  two  punishment, 
most  signal    defeats    of    Israel    and 

Judah  by  their  most  inveterate  ene-  Verse  35.     **  He  exacted  the  silvep 

mies,  the  Philistines  and  Egypt,  the  and  the  gold  of  the  people."     Though 

seer  beholds  the   mystic  **  Battle  of  he  received  likely  from  the  subjects 

Armageddon,"  which  avenges  all  such  no  less  sums  of  curses  than  of  coin. — 

defeats  by  the  final  overthrow  of  the  Tra^p. 
kings  of  all  the  world  in  the  great 

day   of   God  Almighty"  (Zech.   xii.  Verse  37.  Jehoiakin  was  a  most  un- 

9-14;  Rev.  xvi.  14-16). — Br.  Smithes  principled     and     oppressive     tyrant. 

StudenVs  Scripture  History.  Jeremiah  sternly  rebukes  his  injustice 

—     What  eye  doth  not  now  pity  and  oppression,  his  cruelty  and  avarice, 

and  lament  the  untimely  end  of  Josiah?  and  his  reckless  luxury   in  building 

Whom  can  it  choose  but  affect  to  see  himself  a    magnificent     palace  ;  and 

a    religious,    just,    virtuous    prince,  contrasts   all    this   with   his  father's 

snatchedaway  in  the  vigour  of  his  age?  justice  to  the  poor  (Jer.  xxii   13-19). 

After  all  our  foolish  moan,  the  Pro-  In   the    Chronicles   his   name  is   dis- 

vidence  that  directed  that  shaft  to  his  missed  with  an  allusion  to    **  all  the 

lighting  place,  intends  that  wound  for  abominations  that  he  did."     To  all  his 

a  stroke  of  mercy.     The  God    whom  other  evils  he  added  this,  that  he  slew 

Josiah  serves,  looks  through  his  death  Urijah,  the  prophet  (Jer.  xxvi.  20, 23). 


CHAP.  xxiT.  BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  KINGS, 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

THE    FALL    OP    THE    KINGDOM    OP    JUDAH. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. — ^Verse  1.  In  his  days  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of 
Babylon— Nebuchadnezzar's  reign  commenced  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim's.  Hales 
("Sacred  Chron.")  shows  that  Jehoiakim  was  made  king  by  Pharaoh-Necho,  of  Egypt,  in 
July,  B.C.  607;  whereas  Nebuchadnezzar  mounted  the  throne  of  Babylon  January  21, 
B.C.  604.  The  Chaldean  cylinders  place  all  chronology  back  by  twenty-two  years,  so 
that  these  dates  become  b.c.  690  for  Jehoiakim's  accession,  and  b.c.  586  for  Nebuchadnezzar's. 
This  Nebuchadnezzar  was  son  of  Nabo-polassar,  and  founded  the  Chaldee  monarchy.  This 
invasion  of  Judea  occurred  in  Jehoiakim's  fourth  year,  therefore,  in  Nebuchadnezzar's  first 
year.  Verse  2.  Bands  of  the  Chaldees,  and  bands  of  the  Syrians,  &c. — Not  an  organized 
army,  but  a  congregate  host  from  various  nationalities.  These,  doubtless,  had  been  compelled 
to  own  Nebuchadnezzar's  supremacy,  and  now,  in  attacking  Judah,  both  gratified  their  own 
hostility  against  this  kingdom,  and  fulfilled  Nebuchadnezzar's  commands.  Joining  with  the 
Chaldean  tror.ps  that  were  left  on  the  borders,  they  attacked  Judah.  Verse  3.  Surely  at  the 
commandment  of  the  Lord  came  this  upon  Judah — The  judgments  long  threatened  by  God 
through  the  prophets  Micah,  Huldah,  Habakkuk,  and  Jeremiah,  now  began.  These  bands 
were  but  instruments  of  God,  unconsciously  working  out  His  behests.  Verse  6.  Jehoiakim 
slept  with  his  fathers— We  have  no  record  of  his  death ;  certainly  he  was  not  buried  in  his 
father's  sepulchre.  Jeremiah  records  the  reveise  of  that  {see  Jer.  xxii.  18,  19).  Probably  he 
died  soon  after  reaching  Babylon,  burdened  with  his  captive  chains ;  but  it  is  equally  probable 
that  he  was  slain  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  his  corpse  cast  aside  unburied.  Certainly  he 
perished  ignobly,  and  at  the  age  of  thirty -six.  Verse  8.  Jehoiachin  was  eighteen  years  old, 
&c. — His  reign  lasted  but  three  months  and  ten  days.  For  thirty-six  years  he  lingered  a 
captive  in  Babylon — i.  e.,  through  Nebuchadnezzar's  lifetime — but  was  elevated  into  some 
dignity  and  respect  by  Evil-merodach,  who  succeeded  Nebuchadnezzar  {comp.  chap.  xxv.  27-30 ; 
Jer.  lii.  31-34).  With  the  admonitory  example  and  warning  doom  of  his  father  before  him, 
this  wilful  and  impious  youth  defied  God  and  His  prophets,  and  reaped  disasters  which  over- 
whelmed the  entire  royal  household  and  the  nation.  Verse  12.  Jehoiachin,  king  of  Judah, 
went  out  to  the  king  of  Babylon— This  act,  ^2i^  describes  the  going  out  to  surrender.    Pos- 

TT 

sibly,  persuaded  thereto  by  Jeremiah,  but  improbably  so.  It  might  have  been  a  part  played 
in  the  hope  of  gaining  favour  with  the  enemy,  and  retaining  his  throne  as  vassal.  But  Nebu- 
chadnezzar was  in  no  mood  to  show  clemency  now.  Verses  13-16.  He  Carried  away  all 
Jerusalem  (verse  14)— In  all,  about  10,000  exiles.  Only  **  the  poorest  of  the  people"  (verse  1 5) 
were  left.  Every  article  of  worth  in  palace  and  temple  was  seized.  The  land  was  thus 
bereft  of  all  those  inhabitants  who  were  of  value  to  Jerusalem  or  useful  to  Babylon.  Jere- 
miah (xxix.  1)  records  that  priests  and  prophets  were  included;  and  Josephus  tells  that 
Ezekiel  was  ainoag  the  prophets  who  were  carried  away  with  these  exiles  [comp.  Ezek.  i.  1-8). 
The  numbers  were :  2,000,  consisting  of  the  royal  household,  princes,  state  officers,  priests,  and 
prophets;  1,000  craftsmen;  7,000  warriors.  Verses  17-20.  The  king  of  Babylon  made 
Mattaniah  king — An  act  of  grace  ;  instead  of  sending  a  foreign  viceroy.  He  was  Josiah's 
third  son  ( I  Chron.  iii.  1 5),  brother  of  Jehoahaz,  and  uncle  of  Jehoiakin.  Zedekiah  means 
"  the  righteousness  of  God,^'  and  as  a  Hebrew  name  it  intimates  that  he  was  allowed  himself 
to  choose  the  title  by  which  to  dignify  his  pitiably  poor  kingship.  A  false  name  in  its  descrip- 
tive import,  for  he  was  hardened  and  impions. — W.  H.  J. 


E0MILETIC8  OF  VERSES  I-IH, 

A  Nation  at  Bat. 

"With  the  death  of  Josiali  the  history  of  the  Judaic  Kingdom  virtually  closes. 
The  historian  treats  with  almost  contemptuous  brevity  the  reigns  of  the  last 
four  kings,  who  were  mere  puppets  of  Egypt  and  Babylon.  The  period  of  the 
remaining  twenty-three  years,  called  by  Ewald  "the  death-agony  of  the 
nation,"  is  occupied  by  successive  conquests  and  deportations.  The  nation  is 
picked  at  by  the  invading  vulture,  bit  by  bit,  till  it  is  picked  clean.  In  the 
graphic  simile  of  the  prophet,  the  dish  is  at  length  emptied  and  turned  upside 
down.     This  chapter  portrays  a  nation  at  hay. 

I.  A  pathetic  sight  when  we  consider  the  greatness  of  its  past  history.  No 
nation  under  the  sun  had  been  so  favoured  as  Israel.    It  was  called  out  of 
644 


BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  oflAP.  xxiv. 


obscurity  and  was  raised  into  a  great  nation.     From  its  cradle  and  throughout  its 
career  it  was  the  special  ward  of  heaven.    Its  pathway  was  strewn  with  flowers 
margined  with  mercies,  and  adorned  with  brilliant  miracles.     It  was  allowed  to 
reach  a  height  of  imperial  greatness  that  commanded  the  honour  and  astonish- 
ment of  the  mightiest  nations  in  its  day.     Its  soil,  its  wealth,  its  culture   its 
overflowing  peace  and  plenty  were  the  envy  of  all.     But  now,  see  to  what 
unfaithfulness  and  repeated  disobedience  has  reduced  it !     How  complete  a 
contrast   have   we   here   between   the   expansive   greatness   and   world-wide 
influence  of  Solomon,  and  the  lustreless  crown  and  limited  resources  of  Jehoi- 
kim  !     Israel  had  glittered  like  a  signet  ring  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Almighty 
but  it  was  now  plucked  off  and  cast  aside  (Jer.  xxii.  24-26).     And  yet,  in  its 
decay,  there  is  a  touch  of  the  old  brave  spirit  which  awakens  both  sympathv 
and  respect.  ^    r      j 

II.  A  pathetic  sight  when  we  observe  the  gigantic  forces  against  which 
It  struggles  (2-4:  10-16).  The  kinglets  and  small  dependencies  that  had 
been  accustomed  to  look  up  to  Judah  with  awe,  now  swarmed  around  her  in 
her  downfall,  and  took  a  savage  delight  in  inflicting  injury  and  indignity. 
They  pecked  at  her  like  a  speckled  bird,  and  ceased  not  while  there  was  a 
feather  left.  Behind  and  above  all  these  was  the  overshadowing  power  of  Baby- 
lon with  its  vast  and  invincible  army.  But  the  most  formidable  foe  of  all  was 
the  Priend  and  Patron  whom  they  had  offended  beyond  remedy  (verses  3,  20) 
Now  that  Jehovah  is  against  Judah,  all  her  struggles  are  in  vain.  And  yet, 
with  all  these  odds  against  her,  Judah  obstinately  resists.  Every  one  can  see 
the  inevitable  but  herself. 

III.  A  pathetic  sight  when  it  is  compelled  at  length  to  succumb 
(verse  12).  It  had  held  out  with  all  the  tenacitv  of  despair ;  to  have  persisted 
in  opposition  would  have  been  fanaticism— madness.  Grimly  it  yields  to  stern 
necessity.  The  sins  of  Manasseh  (verses  3,  4),  sins  which  the  people  had 
approved  and  practised,  had  stained  too  deeply  the  national  character,  and 
emasculated  the  national  life.  The  strength  of  true  bravery  is  conscious 
virtue  In  the  midst  of  that  beleagured  city  was  a  man  (Jeremiah)  whose 
counsels,  if  sooner  followed,  would  have  led  to  a  different  result ;  and  Jehoia- 
chin,  like  Hezekiah,  might  have  defied  the  investing  forces  to  do  their  worst. 
Even  the  victor  admires  the  brave  and  gallant  resistance  of  the  foe  who  is  now 
nis  captive. 

lY.  A  pathetic  sight  when  the  noblest  of  its  people  in  rank,  usefulness, 
and  moral  worth  are  dragged  into  ignominious  captivity  (verses  14-16). 
Ine  brain  and  smew  of  the  nation  were  now  to  be  employed  in  the  aggrandise- 
ment of  a  strange  land.  The  impoverishment  of  Judah  was  the  enrichment  of 
Mesopotamia--the  fall  of  Jerusalem  meant  the  glorifying  of  Babylon.  The 
tavourites  of  heaven  are  now  the  servants  of  Nebuchadnezzar;  the  rulers  are 
changed  by  the  fori;unes  of  war  into  slaves.  It  is  difficult  to  describe  the 
teelings  of  the  captive  emigrants  as  they  took  their  last  look  of  the  Holv 
City  on  their  march  to  Babylon.  They  were  leaving  behind  all  they  loved  and 
prized  most.  Jerusalem  was  never  so  dear  to  them  as  when  they  were  com- 
pellea  to  leave  it.  "^ 

Who  would  not  bleed  with  transports  for  his  country. 

Tear  every  tender  passion  from  his  heart 

And  greatly  die  to  make  a  people  happy  \— Thornton. 

X^ssoNs:--!.  A  hrave  nation  ia  alow  to  helieve  in  ita  poaaille  extinction. 
2.  Ihe  calamittea  of  a  nation  are  all  the  more  painful  when  conscious  they  were 
preventible.  3.  The  nation  that  discards  the  Divine  protectorate  ia  absolutely 
defenceleaa.  ' 

«46 


CHAP.  XXIT. 


HUJdlLBTlG  COMMENTARY  :  KINGS. 


GERM  NOTES  OIv  THE  VERSES. 


Verses  1-4.  The  begiiming  of  the 
national  catastrophe.  1.  A  despe- 
rate but  futile  attempt  to  recover  na- 
tional independence  (verse  1).  2.  The 
harrassiug  inroads  ot  combined  enemies 
(verse  2).  3.  The  forces  of  destruc- 
tion are  under  the  Divine  sanction 
(verse  3).  4.  The  national  iniquity- 
attains  a  malignity  and  turpitude  that 
utterly  forfeit  the  Divine  pardon  (v.  4). 

Verse  2.  This  passage  describes  the 
irruption  of  different  inorganic  bands 
of  freebooters.  The  time  of  it  may 
correspond  to  the  time  of  that  Scythian 
domination  of  which  Herodotus  speaks. 
In  such  an  anarchy,  waifs  and  relics 
of  the  different  nations,  which  had 
been  extinguished  by  the  Assyrian 
Empire,  would  be  gathered  together. 
What  the  Greek  historian  describes 
under  one  vague  general  name,  would 
present  itself  to  each  particular  land 
as  a  collection  of  different  neighbour- 
ing tribes,  one  more  conspicuous  and 
civilized  than  the  rest  as  its  leader. 
Nebuchadnezzar  now  presents  himself 
to  us  as  the  head  and  representative 
of  the  Chaldaean  race,  as  the  organiser 
of  these  loose  bands  into  a  new  em- 
pire, as  the  conqueror  of  Egypt,  as  the 
Babylonian  ruler  of  his  day. — Mawice. 

Verse  3.  The  judgment  came  not 
merely  for  the  actual  sins  of  that  one 
idolatrous  king,  but,  as  the  whole 
course  of  the  history  shows,  because 
the  nation  persisted  in  a  class  of  sins 
of  which  those  of  Manasseh  were  most 
conspicuous  representatives. —  Whedon 

Verse  6«  A  mystery  hangs  over 
his  death,  befitting  the  gloom  and 
mystery  of  the  times;  one  account 
speaking  of  him  as  having  fallen  in  a 
skirmish  with  a  band  of  raiders,  or  in 
a  battle  with  Nebuchadnezzar,  and 
being  left  unburied  ;  another  as  hav- 
ing been  murdered  in  Jerusalem,  and 
cast  out  on  the  streets;  a  third,  as 
having  been  enticed  to  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's camp,  and  there  put  to  death, 
and  left  without  burial.  But,  what- 
ever the  mode  of  his  death,  so  bitterly 
646 


was  he  hated  that  no  funeral  dirge 
was  raised  for  him,  though  he  was 
the  son  of  Josiah,  and  his  corpse  was 
left  thrown  out,  like  that  of  a  dead 
ass,  on  the  waste  land  outside  the 
gates  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  sun  by 
day,  and  the  frost  by  night.  Ulti- 
mately, indeed,  if  we  may  trust  the 
Septuagint,  his  dishonoured  body  was 
rescued  from  this  last  shame,  and 
interred  alongside  Josiah  and  Man- 
asseh, in  their  tomb  in  the  garden  of 
TJzzah,  which  was  connected,  appa- 
rently, with  the  royal  stronghold  on 
Aphel.  But  men  whispered  that  on 
the  dried  skin  of  the  corpse,  as  it  lay 
naked  before  all,  the  name  of  the  de- 
mon, Codonazer,  to  whom  he  had  sold 
himself,  appeared  stamped  in  clear 
Hebrew  letters. — Geikie. 

Verse  7.  The  fall  of  a  nation. 
1.  A  part  of  the  Divine  plan  in  the 
government  of  the  world.  2.  Re- 
moves a  prop  on  which  a  weaker 
nation  had  been  accustomed  to  lean. 
3.  Prepares  the  way  for  the  desolat' 
ing  march  of  Divine  vengeance. 

—  The  judgment  upon  Judea 
was  really  a  judgment  upon  all  na- 
tions. Egypt,  the  land  of  the  Philis- 
tines, the  kings  of  Tyrus,  the  king? 
of  Sidon,  the  kings  of  Arabia, 
the  kings  of  the  mingled  people 
that  dwelt  in  the  desert,  were  all 
forced  to  diink  of  a  wine  cup  of 
fury  which  had  been  mingled  for 
them.  It  was  a  time  of  far-reaching 
destruction  and  desolation.  The  great 
conqueror,  the  destroyer  of  boundaries, 
had  gone  forth ;  God  had  given  the 
inhabitants  of  earth  into  his  hands  for 
a  certain  season  ;  no  strength  or  policy 
would  avert  or  delay  the  sentence. — 
Maurice. 

—  Easy  won,  easy  lost.  This  has 
always  been  the  fortune  of  conquerors; 
what  one  has  won  by  robbery  and 
force,  another  mightier  takes  from 
him.  The  Lord  in  heaven  makes  the 
great  small,  and  the  rich  poor  (1  Sam. 
ii.  7  ;  Ps.  Ixxv.  7). 

Verses  8-17.    A  crown  lost.     I, 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:   KINGS. 


OHAP.  xxir. 


By  a  stubborn  persistence  in  sin  (verse 
9).  2.  In  sheer  inability  to  resist 
overwhelming  numbers  (verses  10-12). 
3.  Involves  all  its  former  supporters 
in  degradation  and  servitude  (verses 
14-16).  4.  Is  followed  by  the  total 
impoverishment  of  a  nation  (verse  13.) 

Yerse  8.  Though  his  reign  at 
Jerusalem  was  so  short  and  unfortu- 
nate, he  was  looked  upon  by  the  exiles 
as  the  last  lawful  successor  to  the 
throne  of  David ;  and  notwith- 
standing the  appointment  of  Zede- 
kiah,  Jehoiachin  remained  the  repre- 
sentative king  of  Judah,  and  in  the 
preservation  of  his  life  through  thirty- 
seven  years  of  imprisonment,  and  his 
elevation  to  kingly  honours  in  the 
court  of  Babylon,  the  theocratic  his- 
torian discerned  the  purpose  of  Je- 
hovah to  perpetuate  the  throne  of 
David. —  WTiedon, 

Yerse  12.  The  incident  wai  never 
forgotten.  "Writing  after  the  last  fall 
of  Jerusalem,  Josephus  tells  us  that 
as  long  as  the  city  stood  the  anniver- 
sary of  an  event  so  touching  was 
commemorated  in  the  services  of  the 
temple  as  a  signal  instance  of  self- 
sacrifice  for  the  public  good.  Jehoia- 
chin had  gone,  with  his  family,  men 
said,  into  voluntary  captivity,  to  save 
the  temple  from  being  destroyed,  and 
we  may,  also,  readily  believe,  to  save 
the  city  and  its  inhabitants* — Geikie. 

Yerses  14-16.  Liberty  lost.  1. 
When  the  king  is  dethroned  and  cap- 
tive. 2.  When  its  brave  defenders 
are  vanquished  and  demoralised.  3. 
When  the  Fatherland  is  in  the  piti- 
less grasp  of  a  victorious  foe. 

—  The  shock  of  such  a  calamity 
was  terrible.  Nearly  a  hundred-and- 
fifty  years  had  passed  since  the 
glades  beyond  the  Jordan  had  re- 
sounded with  the  lamentations  of 
the  captives  of  Gilead,  dragged  away 
to  Assyria  by  Tiglath  Piieser,  and 
it  was  over  a  hundred-and- twenty 
years  since  Sargon  had  marched  back 
to  Nineveh,  leading  the  people  of 
the    Western  half   of  the  kingdom 


of  the  Ten  Tribes  into  exile.  As- 
syria had  fallen  within  the  last  few 
years,  and  now  itself  lay  in  ruins  as 
desolate  as  those  of  the  Hebrew  cities 
it  had  turned  into  solitudes.  But 
another  power  had  risen  as  fierce  and 
ruthless,  and  Judah,  the  last  hope  of 
the  chosen  people,  saw  its  king  and 
its  leading  citizens  swept  off  in  chains 
to  the  Euphrates. —  Geikie. 

—  Notice  God's  mercy  and  long- 
suffering  even  in  His  judgments. 
He  still  allows  the  kingdom  to  stand, 
and  turns  the  heart  of  the  enemy  so 
that  he  does  not  yet  make  an  utter 
end  of  it  (Ezek.  xviii.  23,  32). 

Yerses  18-20.  The  infatuation  of 
rebellion.  1.  Notwithstanding  the 
hopelessness  of  success.  2.  An  evi- 
dence of  the  blinding  nature  of  in- 
corrigible sin.  3.  Invites  and  hastens 
the  approach  of  Divine  vengeance. 

—  The  reign  of  Zedekiah  presents 
us  with  the  most  vivid  picture  of  a 
king  and  people  sinking  deeper  and 
deeper  into  an  abyss,  ever  and  anon 
making  wild  and  frantic  efforts  to  rise 
out  of  it,  imputing  their  evil  to  every 
one  but  themselves — their  struggles 
for  a  nominal  freedom  always  proving 
them  to  be  both  slaves  and  tyrants  at 
heart. — Maurice. 

Yerse  20.  It  is  characteristic  of 
the  high  standard  of  prophetic  mo- 
rality that  the  violation  of  this  oath, 
though  made  to  a  heathen  sovereign, 
was  regarded  as  the  crowning  vice  of 
the  weak  king  of  Judah. — Stanley/. 

—  In  the  course  of  God's  righteous 
Providence,  his  policy  as  king  would 
prove  ruinous  to  his  country.  Insti- 
gated by  ambassadors  from  the  neigh- 
bouring states  who  came  to  congratu- 
late him  on  his  accession  to  the  throne 
(Jer.  xvii.  3,  with  xxviii.  1),  and  at 
the  same  time  get  him  to  join  them 
in  a  common  league  to  throw  off  the 
Assyrian  yoke,  Zedekiah  rebelled. 
Though  warned  by  Jeremiah  against 
this  step,  the  infatuated  and  perjured 
Zedekiah  (Ezek.  xvii.  13)  persisted 
in  his  revolt  by  forming  an  alliance 
with  Egypt. — Jamieson, 


047 


OMAp.  XXV,  SOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 

CHAPTER  XXV. 
THE    UTTER    DESOLATION    OF    JERUSALEM. 

Gbrioal  and  Explanatory  Notes — Verse  1.   In  the  ninth  year  of  his  reign — The 

TvvoU  of  Zedekiah  so  incensed  Neouchadnezzar  that  he  determined  on  the  final  act  of  the  utter 
spoliation  of  Judah.  With  an  immense  army,  which  he  conducted  in  person,  he  swept  down 
upon  the  northern  parts  of  the  country,  taking  almost  all  the  f^^'ied  cflies  (Jer.  xxxiv.  7),  and 
marched  direct  against  Jerusalem  to  besiege  it.  He  wa.»  Irgwa  aside  temporarily  from  the  siege 
to  oppose  the  coming  of  the  Egyptian  army  to  the  relief  of  the  Jews.  This  prolonged  the 
siege  to  a  year  and  a  half.  At  length  (<^ate  given  in  Jer.  xxix.  2),  at  midnight,  in  our  month 
of  July,  B.C.  587,  when  the  city  was  reduced  to  misery  and  starvation,  an  entrance  was  forced 
into  the  lower  city  on  the  north  side.  It  was  a  moment  for  fearful  slaughter  (2  Chron.  xxxvi. 
17  ;  Lam.  i.  15).  Zedekiah,  with  his  wives  and  children  and  guards,  fled  through  an  openitig 
made  in  the  wall  (Ezek.  xii.  12),  but  were  captured  in  the  plains  of  Jericho,  his  troops  .-cattered 
(Jer.  lii.  8),  he  and  his  family  manacled,  and  marched  to  Kiblah  to  confront  the  wrathful 
Nebuchadnezzar  (Jer.  xxxix.  6).  Doomed  for  his  violation  of  his  oath  of  allegiance  to  Baby- 
lon, Zedekiah  was  first  made  to  behold  the  slaughter  of  his  family  and  courtiers,  then  his  own 
eyes  were  put  out,  and  he  was  carried  in  chains  to  Babylon.  Verse  8.  Came  Nebuzar-adan, 
captain  of  the  guard — A  month  elapsed,  during  which  the  Chaldean  princes  had  probably 
gone  to  Riblah  to  consult  the  king  as  to  the  fate  of  the  city;  and  they  then  returned  with 
orders  to  destroy  Jerusalem  with  fire.  "While  fire  consumed  the  city,  foul  ravages  were  com- 
mitted upon  the  inhabitants  (Lam.  v.  11,  12),  and  desecration  heaped  upon  the  dead.  Verse  11. 
Did  Nehuzar-adan  carry  away — Among  these  captives  carried  ofif  to  hamah  (Jer.  xxxix.  9) 
was  Jeremiah  the  prophet  (xl.  1).  Pilgrims  from  around  afterwards  came  to  wonder  and 
bewail  over  the  ruined  city  (Jer.  xli.  5,  6).  Verse  21.  So  Judah  was  carried  away  out  of 
their  land — This  was  the  end  of  the  Israelitish  monarchy  ;  but  the  last  king  who  occupied 
the  throne  of  the  House  of  David,  and  called  himself  "  The  Righteousness  of  God,'* 
in''p"12i    {Tsidk>j/ahu)j    but    falsified    such    a    name,   left  the    throne    vacant   until   He 

should  come  who  was  truly  "  The  Righteousness  of  God,*'  and  the  Eternal  King,  predicted  by 
Jeremiah  as  IJpli:  niil^  {Jehovah  Isidkener),  *' THE  LORD  OUR  RIGHTEOUS iN ESS." 

Verses  22-26.  Gedaliah's  rule — This  Gedaliah  had  been  Jeremiah's  firm  and  trusted  friend 
through  the  period  of  the  prophets'  struggles  (eomp.  Jer.  xxvi.  24),  and  is  described  by  Stanley 
as  "a  man  of  a  generous,  genial  nature,  such  as  might  have  rallied  the  better  spirits  of  the  men 
around  him,  and  taken  the  place  of  the  fallen  dynasty."  Against  him  Ishmael  conspired. 
This  Ishmael  was  the  most  conspicuous  of  a  band  of  chiefs  who  fled  across  the  Jordan  during 
the  siege.  There  he  became  closely  leagued  with  Baalis,  king  of  Ammon  (Josephus,  Antiq. 
X.  9,  2) ;  and  prompted  by  him,  as  well  also  as  coveting  Gedaliah's  power,  he  plotted  his 
assassination  (Jerem.  xl.  1).  Then,  contrary  to  Jeremiah's  dissuasions,  the  whole  people 
turned  to  Egypt  for  protection  against  the  Chaldean  king.  Verse  27.  Evil-merodach  did 
lift  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin — It  was  on  the  occasion  of  his  accession  to  the  throne  of 
Babylon,  upon  Nebuchadnezzar's  death.  Spake  kindly  to  him,  &c.  (verse  2j5)~Gave  him 
liberty  upon  parole.  This  kindness  is  traced  to  a  record  that  Evil-mercdach  himself  was  a 
fellow -prisoner  with  Zedekiah,  in  consequence  of  some  antipathy  of  Nebuchadnezzar  towards 
him,  and  that  a  sympathetic  g(  odwill  towards  the  captive  king  was  engendered.  Yet  had  not 
God  declared  that  though,  for  their  apostasy  the  seed  of  David  should  be  severely  chastised, 
yet  they  should  not  be  utterly  abandoned  (2  Sam.  vii.  14,  16)  ?  And  to  the  captives  in  Baby. 
Ion  it  was  a  promise  of  good  things  to  come,  when  the  term  of  their  exiled  lot  should  close, 
anri  merciful  deliverance  should  reach  them  according  to  the  good  promises  of  the  Lord  God. — 
W.  H.  J. 


EOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  1-30. 

The  Last  Dismal  Scenes  in  a  Nation's  Overtheow. 

Nothing  of  interest  remains  to  be  recorded  of  king  or  people.  The  historian 
is  chiefly  concerned  in  this  chapter  in  relating  how  unmistakeabiy  the  Divine 
"Word  was  fulfilled  in  the  total  overthrow  of  Jerusalem.  The  city  was  sacked, 
its  palaces  and  public  buildings  demolished,  and  its  massive  walls  pulled  down. 
And  the  Temple — the  house  of  Jehovah,  the  pride  of  the  Hebrews,  the  pivot 
of  their  national  history,  the  lament  of  the  pious  to  this  day- was  pillaged, 
dismantled,  burnt  to  the  ground,  and  its  sacred  vessels  and  furniture  broken 
and  scattered. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap.  xxv. 


I.  Here  we  have  all  the  horrors  of  siege  and  famine  (ver.  1-3).  The 
Babylonish  hosts,  like  a  flock  of  vultures  with  outspread  wings,  closely  invested 
the  fated  Jerusalem  as  if  eager  to  devour  it.  The  hour  of  final  doom  rapidly 
approached.  A  sword  furbished,  sharpened,  and  glittering,  seemed  to  leap 
from  the  Divine  scabbard,  like  that  which,  in  the  siege  of  Titus,  was  believed 
to  flame  across  the  heavens.  The  blockade  was  so  complete  that  the  besieged 
were  reduced  to  great  extremities.  Hunger  fastened  upon  them  with  its  re- 
morseless grip,  and  under  its  maddening  torture  the  most  inhuman  atrocities 
were  committed.  The  fathers  ate  their  sons,  and  sons  their  fathers ;  and  the 
pestilence  consumed  what  hunger  spared  (Lam.  ii.  20,  22  ;  iv.  9,  10 ;  Ezek.  v. 
10).  In  all  this  we  see  the  dire  fulfilment  of  the  prophetic  denunciations 
hurled  against  an  apostate  people  (Lev.  xxvi.  29  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  53-57  ;  Jer.  xv. 
2;  xxvii.  13;  Ezek.  iv.  16). 

II.  Here  we  have  a  desperate  but  unavailing  efiEbrt  to  escape  (ver.  4-6). 

The  ponderous  enginery  of  the  Chaldees  battered  down  the  outer  wall,  and  ad- 
mitted a  stream  of  the  besieging  forces  into  the  northern  part  of  the  city. 
Seized  with  fear  and  weakened  with  famine,  the  king  and  his  brave  defenders 
made  a  night  sally  towards  the  Jordan  Valley,  with  the  hope  of  effecting  an 
escape.  But  too  many  Chaldean  eyes  were  awake,  the  retreat  was  cut  off,  and 
the  king  and  his  party  captured.  The  toils  of  the  Babylonian  net  were  too 
thickly  and  widely  spread  to  admit  of  successful  flight ;  and  the  military 
strategy  of  Nebuchadnezzar  was  favoured  by  the  avenging  power  of  heaven. 

III.  Here  we  have  a  king  cruelly  degraded  (ver  7).  Perfidious  and  re- 
bellious as  Zedekiah  undoubtedly  was,  his  punishment  was  a  horrible  example 
of  the  barbarity  of  the  times.  The  last  sight  on  which  he  gazed  was  the 
butchery  of  his  own  sons,  and  then  he  was  rendered  for  ever  incapable  of  ruling 
by  his  eyes  being  gouged;  that — as  Bishop  Hall  strongly  puts  it — **  his  sons 
might  be  ever  dying  before  him,  and  himself  in  their  death  ever  miserable." 
This  painful  incident  fulfilled  two  prophecies  that  were  apparently  contradic- 
tory of  each  other :  that  Zedekiah  should  come  to  Babylon,  but  should  not  see 
it  (Jer.  xxxii.  5  ;  xxxiv.  3;  Ezek.  xii.  13;  xvii.  16).  The  last  vassal  king 
of  Judah  perished  in  a  Babylonian  prison.  His  was  a  life  of  religious  vacilla- 
tion, of  stirring  incident,  of  frightful  carnage,  of  suffering  and  shame. 

IV.  Here  we  have  a  great  and  world-famed  city  utterly  demolished 
(ver.  8-12).  The  Babylonian  conqueror  was  not  satisfied  with  the  subjection 
of  the  Jewish  people  ;  his  rage  extended  to  the  buildings  in  which  they  lived 
and  worshipped.  The  celebrated  buildings  for  which  David  had  made  such 
elaborate  and  wealthy  preparations,  and  which  Solomon  had  erected  with  in- 
finite labour,  and  adorned  with  so  much  pomp  and  magnificence,  were  ruthlessly 
destroyed  with  fire  and  crowbar.  Jerusalem,  which  was  invincible,  and  had 
for  centuries  maintained  a  proud  pre-eminence,  while  Jehovah  was  ac- 
knowledged and  worshipped  within  its  walls,  was  no  sooner  forsaken  by  that 
guardian  Presence,  than  it  shared  the  fate  of  many  a  great  heathen  city,  and 
was  levelled  with  the  dust.  The  mightiest  city  cannot  long  survive  the  loss  of 
virtue  and  religion  ;  walls  and  bastions  are  no  protection  when  the  garrison  is 
demoralised, 

V.  Here  we  have  the  sacred  vesse*8  of  the  Temple  contemptuously  broken, 
and  the  chief  officers  of  religion  savagely  massacred  (verses  13-21).  Persons, 
places,  and  things  lose  the  sacredness  which,  like  the  delicate  bloom  of  fruit, 
was  their  adornment  and  glory,  when  they  are  Divinely  abandoned.  The 
blessing  changes  into  a  curse  that  blackens,  disfigures,  and  destroys.  Years 
before  Jeremiah  had  predicted  that  even  the  vessels  of  the  Temple  should  bo 

649 


OHAF.  XXV,  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


carried  away  to  Babylon  ;  but,  like  Cassandra,  though  he  spake  the  truth,  he 
was  fated  not  to  be  believed.  Little  did  the  sacrilegious  Babylon  care  for  the 
sacred  uses  and  hallowed  associations  of  the  Temple  furniture,  and  little  did  he 
understand  that  he  was,  after  all,  to  be  the  safe  custodian  of  those  relics  till 
better  days  should  dawn  for  Israel,  when  they  should  again  resume  their  place 
and  office  in  a  purified  temple  (Jer.  xxvii.  21,  22).  The  priests  and  other 
temple  officers  were  nothing?  in  the  eyes  of  the  exasperated  destructionists  but 
so  many  rebels  and  instigators  of  sedition ;  and  they  shared  the  same  fate  as 
the  shrine  they  had  disgraced. 

YI.  Here  we  have,  as  the  last  record  of  the  national  remnant,  a  scene 
of  conspiracy,  assassination,  and  flight  (verses  22-26).  The  sagacious 
Nebuchadnezzar  did  not  leave  the  country  without  some  form  of  governmeot, 
and  (Jedaliah  was.  perhaps,  the  best  adapted  for  the  post  of  governor  or  over- 
seer. He  saw  it  was  infatuation  to  contend  with  the  Chaldees,  and  was  dis- 
posed to  rule  the  land  in  submission  to  their  authority.  Eut  the  prospect  of 
rest  and  peace  was  dissipated  with  the  plottings  of  envy.  Once  more  the  land 
is  torn  with  faction  and  stained  with  bloodshed.  Stricken  with  fear  and  despair, 
the  feeble  remnant  fled  into  Egypt,  where  their  forefathers  had  been  enslaved, 
and  from  which  they  had  been  miraculously  delivered,  and  where  greater 
troubles  awaited  them  than  those  from  which  they  sought  to  escape.  Such  is 
the  grim  irony  of  history ;  the  people  who  had  sprung  from  poverty  and  serf- 
dom, after  a  brilliant  career  among  the  foremost  nations  of  the  earth,  sank 
again  into  poverty  and  serfdom  ! 

YII.  Here  we  have,  as  a  relief  to  the  dismal  series  of  panoramic 
pictures,  a  commendable  instance  of  royal  clemency  towards  a  captive 
prince  (verses  27-30).  It  could  not  but  add  bitternt  ss  to  the  grief  of  the 
exiles,  as  they  sat  by  the  waters  of  Babylon  and  wept,  to  know  that  two  of 
their  monarchs  were  miserable  tenants  in  prison  garments,  in  one  of  the 
dungeons  of  the  city — the  lamented  Jehoiachin  and  the  sightless  />edekiah. 
After  thirty-seven  years'  imprisonment,  on  the  death  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  his 
captor,  Jehoiachin  was  released,  and  treated  with  great  kindness  and  distinction 
by  the  successor  to  the  Chaldean  throne.  It  was  some  compensation  for  the 
dreary  years  of  humiliation  he  had  endured,  that  the  last  years  of  his  life  were 
spent  amid  brighter  surroundings.  Jehoiachin  represented  the  faded  glory  of 
Israel ;  and  the  last  reference  made  to  him  in  the  history  suggests  a  faint  hope 
of  the  future  restoration  and  elevation  of  his  unhappy  people.  "  Doubtless, 
the  improvement  in  Jehoiachin's  condition  is  to  be  traced  to  the  overruling 
providence  and  grace  of  Him  who  still  cherished  purposes  of  love  to  the  House 
of  David"  (2  Sam.  14,  15). — Jamieson.  The  longest,  weariest,  darkest  night 
comes  to  an  end,  and  the  long  looked  for  dawn  breaks  at  length,  bringing  rest, 
and  hope,  and  gladness  with  its  expanding  light. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  power  of  a  great  conqueror  is  sometimes  used  to  inflict 
Divine  punishment  for  sin.  2.  The  destruction  of  the  most  highly  favoured  nation 
does  not  frustrate  the  progress  and  triumph  of  the  Divine  purpose.  3.  In  national 
a»  in  individual  life,  the  greated  sufferings  are  not  unmixed  with  blessings, 

MOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  8-21. 
The  Fall  of  Jeeusalem. 

I.  Was  a  calamity  of  world-wide  significance.    It  was  the  grand  catas- 
trophe of  the  Jewish  nation.     The  other  cities  of  Palestine  were  insignificant: 
they  were  all  subsidiary  to,  and  received  the  law  from,  the  great  Metropolitan, 
Its  influence  dominated  and  governed  the  nation.    In  its  midst  the  TempU 
650 


SOMILETIG  GOMMENTART,  KIN08. 


Chap.  xxv. 


reared  i^  stately  pile,  the  political  and  reli^ous  centre  of  the  State,  the  basis 
and  bond  of  the  national  unity.  When  the  Temple  fell,  the  national  life  was 
smitten  the  national  hope  extinguished.  The  Jews  fought  with  unexampled 
desperation,  and  endured  incredible  sufferings  (ver.  3,  18-21)  in  defence  of  the 
holy  city  ;  and  to  the  last  clung  with  dogged  pertinacity  to  the  rery  ruins  of 
the  Temple  (ver.  18).  Other  great  cities  have  fallen;  but  their  loss  has  not 
been  mourned  with  a  pathos  and  a  grief  like  that  which  is  continued  bv  the 
wailmg  Israelites  to  this  day.  The  significance  of  such  a  downfall  dilates  itself 
moXm  tim  ^        ""^^^^  ^""^  ^^^""^^  ^^*  as  a  warning-beacon  to  the  great  cities  of 

T^h  T-^^  ^  pivinely-declared  punishment  for  persistent  disobedience. 

lUe  decline  and  fall  ot  great  cities  have  been  traced  to  the  inevitable  operation 
ot  natural  and  universal  forces.     Gibbon  attributes  the  ruin  of  Kome  to  the 
injuries  ottime  and  nature,  the  hostile  attacks  of  the  barbarians  and  Christians 
the  use  and  abuse  of  the  materials,  and  the  domestic  quarrels  of  the  Koraans 
and  thus  he  seeks  to  eliminate  the  operation  of  a  Divine  retributive  Providence 
^ut  the  movements  of  the  Divine  Hand  cannot  be  eliminated  from   the  fall  of 
Jerusalem    though  we  may  trace  the  action  of  similar  causes  to  those  which 
Til  "^^^.t       -^  ^^^tunes  of  other  great  cities.     "While  Israel  remained  true  to 
Z.l^^^At  ^^^  ^?^  .mvincible  and  impregnable;  and  it  was  only  after  un- 
paralleled  obstinacy  m  sm  that  Jerusalem  was  abandoned  to  its  fate  (Amos  iii.  2  • 

admitfpy hi  f>,    t""''-  ^??^:  i^-^^  ^  ^^''  ^^^'  8'  9)-     T^i«  mournful  truth  is 
admitted  by  the  Jews  with  sighs  and  tears. 

an^in^H^fa  ^  ^^l^^^  ^^^  impiessive  proof  to  all  ages  of  the  Divine  fidelity 

f«1fhh?lt  fifiii  ^^P^'Tir^''^^^^^  «fthe  Divine   Word  have  been 

of  f hi  tL  "^  Q^^^^^^  !?•  *^'  ^^^^^^  J^^*^^^  ^^%  vindicated.  -  In  the  history 
as  -  LhfZl  *^f.  ^r^^  ^''"^^^  ^'  ^^^^^1:^  ^^^  powerfully  impressed,  that, 

?Prnv^^-!  .?f '  ^T^^^^^  ^  °^^^°°'  ««  «i^  is  ^^^  ''^Proach  of  any  people  --1 
Provldpn^r  /  V^  lesson  which,  but  for  the  immediate  and  extraordinary 
forciblvTnJ^S^^^^^^  ""  this  awful  dispensation,  could  never  have  been  so 
w[f^.lL  f  ^  ^''^i  '?'  '°  '^'^^^y  understood  "-( Graves),  The  Jews  are  Hving 
witnesses  to-day  of  the  truth  and  faithfulness  of  God-  ^ 

Amazing  race  I  deprived  of  land  and  laws, 

A  general  language,  and  a  public  cause; 

With  a  religion  none  can  now  obey, 

With  a  reproach  that  none  can  take  away ; 

A  people  still,  whose  common  ties  are  gone  • 

Who,  mixed  with  every  race,  are  lost  in  none.— Cr^W*. 

Lessons:—!.  A  cttj  where  piety  predominates   is   a   great  power  for    God 
are  interred,     3.  The  holiest  and  most  renowned  city  is  degraded  and  ruined  by  sin. 

GERM  inOTES  UN  THE  VERSES 

an    aimea    lorce      2      fehows      how      massacre   of   his    own  sons      S    Thp 
rapidly   consumption  follows    in   the      mm    wl.n  oofl  fv,   T  •!  /'    .   . 

eve.siirlif      o    ft  „„  ij  •  \  '"^f^oyf         —     J.lie  eyes  of  whose  mind  had 
eye-sight.    2.  It  would  intensify  the     been  put  out  long  before,  else  he  might 


OHAP.  XXT. 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


have  foreseen  and  prevented  this  evil 
— as  prevision  is  the  best  means  of 
prevention— had  he  taken  warning  by 
what  was  foretold  (Jer.  xxxii.  4; 
xxxiv.  8  ;  Ezek.  xii.  13).  The  Dutch- 
men have  a  proverb :  When  God  in- 
tends to  destroy  a  man,  He  first  puts 
out  his  eyes. — Trapp. 

Verses  8-17.  Three  other  like 
events  of  parallel  magnitude  have  been 
witnessed :  the  fall  of  Babylon,  as  the 
close  of  the  primeval  monarchies  of 
the  ancient  world  ;  the  fall  of  Rome, 
as  the  close  of  the  classical  world ;  and, 
in  a  fainter  degree,  the  fall  of  Con- 
stantinople, as  the  close  of  the  first 
Christianized  empire.  But,  in  the 
case  of  Jerusalem,  both  its  first  and 
second  destruction  have  the  peculiar 
interest  of  involving  the  dissolution  of 
a  religious  dispensation,  combined  with 
the  agony  of  an  expiring  nation,  such 
as  no  other  people  or  city  has 
witnessed,  such  as  no  other  people 
have  survived,  and,  by  surviving, 
carried  on  the  living  recollection,  first 
of  one,  then  of  the  other,  for  centuries 
after  the  first  shock  was  over. — 
Stanley, 

Verse  9.  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem, 
the  wonder  of  all  times,  the  paragon 
of  nations,  the  glory  of  the  earth,  the 
favourite  of  heaven,  how  art  thou  now 
become  heaps  of  ashes,  hills  of  rubbish, 
a  spectacle  of  desolation,  a  monument 
of  ruin !  If  later,  yet  no  less  deep 
hast  thou  now  pledged  that  bitter  cup 
of  God's  vengeance  to  thy  sister 
Samaria  I  Four  hundred  and  thirty- 
six  years  had  that  temple  stood,  and 
beautified  the  earth,  and  honoured 
heaven ;  now,  it  is  turned  into  rude 
heaps.  There  is  no  prescription  to  be 
pleaded  for  the  favour  of  the  Almighty : 
only  that  temple  not  made  with  hands 
is  eternal  in  the  heavens.  Thither  he 
graciously  brings  us,  for  the  sake  of 
the  glorious  High  Priest,  that  hath 
once  for  all  entered  into  that  holy  of 
holies. — Bp.  Hall. 

—  Those  of  the  captivity  bewailed 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  an 
annual  fast  (Zech.  vii. ;  Ps.  cxxxvii.) 
The  Jews  at  this  day,  when  they 
build  a  house,  leave  one  part  of  it  un- 
662 


finished,  in  remembrance  that  Jerusa- 
lem and  the  Temple  lie  desolate.  At 
least  they  leave  about  a  yard  square  of 
the  house  unplastered,  on  which  they 
write  in  great  letters  :  "  If  1  forget 
thee,  0  Jerusalem,  &c. ;  *'  or  else  the 
words,  **The  memory  of  the  desola- 
tion."— Trapp. 

Verses  13-17.  The  changing: 
aspects  of  religious  work.  1.  That 
religious  work  is  carried  on  with  a 
great  variety  of  instrumentalities 
(verses  14,  15).  2.  That  the  value  of 
religious  work  depends  on  the  strength 
and  symmetry  of  moral  character 
(verses  13,  16,  17).  3.  That  there 
are  Chaldean  enemies  ever  ready  to 
destroy  character  and  depreciate 
religious  work  (verse  13). 

Verses  18-21.  Official  responsi- 
bility. 1.  Demands  that  the  post  of 
duty  should  be  the  more  tenaciously 
held  in  time  of  danger.  2.  Exposes 
to  the  first  and  fiercest  attacks  of  the 
enemy,  3,  Involves  great  suffering, 
and  even  death  itself  (verse  21),  in 
trying  times.  4.  Often  makes  one  long 
for  the  peace  and  secui  ity  of  the  poor 
and  obscure  (verse  12). 

Verse  18.  These  likely  were  fired 
out  of  those  secret  corners  of  the 
temple  where  they  lay  hid.  Our 
chroniclers  tell  us  that  William  the 
Conqueror,  firing  the  city  Mayence  in 
France,  consumed  a  church  there,  in 
the  walls  whereof  were  enclosed  an 
anchoret,  who  might  but  would  not 
escape,  holding  it  a  breach  of  his  reli- 
gious vow  to  forsake  his  cell  in  that 
distress.  At  the  last  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  certain  Jews  who  had 
taken  sanctuary  in  the  Temple  came 
forth  when  it  was  on  fire,  and  besought 
the  emperor  Titus  to  give  them  quarter 
for  their  lives ;  but  he  refused  so  to 
do,  giving  this  for  a  reason,  which, 
indeed,  was  no  reason — Ye  deserve 
not  to  live,  who  will  not  die  with  the 
downfall  of  your  Temple. — Trapp. 

Verse  21.  **  So  Judah  was  carried 
away  out  of  their  land."  The  curse 
and  the  blessing  of  the  exile.  I. 
The  curse  consisted  in  this,  that  the 
Lord  removed  the  people  from  before 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS.  chap,  xxr. 


his  face  (chap,  xxiii.  27 ;  xxiv.  8,  20) ;  cession  of  the  Divine  judgments  is 
that  is,  He  removed  them  from  the  most  remarkably  traced  out.  But  the 
land  of  promise,  in  which  he  gave  wisdom  of  God  is  also  seen  here.  He 
them  his  gracious  blessings,  and  placed  did  not  mean  utterly  to  cast  off  His 
them  in  a  distant  country,  where  people,  and  he  therefore  brought  them 
nothing  was  known  of  the  true  and  under  this  great  affliction,  because,  as 
living  God.  This  curse,  which  had  had  too  plainly  appeared,  nothing  less 
long  been  threatened  (Levit.  xxvi.  33 ;  would  suffice  to  purify  them,  and  turn 
Deut.  iv.  27  ;  xxviii.  26 ;  Dan.  ix.  11)  their  hearts  from  the  love  of  idols.  It 
is  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  words,  is  certain  that  after  this  captivity — 
"  Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not  mocked,  and  under  occasional  inducements,  as 
&c.'*  (Gal.  vi.  7).  God  still  does  strong  as  any  to  which  they  had  ever 
spiritually  to  individuals  and  to  nations  been  subjected  in  former  times— there 
what  he  did  to  Judah — He  removes  was  never  among  them  the  least  ten- 
them  from  before  His  face ;  He  re-  dency  to  idolatry,  but  the  most  intense 
moves  from  them  His  word  and  His  and  vehement  abhorrence  of  it,  as  the 
means  of  grace,  if  they  do  not  repent,  true  cause  of  all  their  ancient  miseries 
and  leaves  them  to  live  in  darkness,  —so  deep  and  salutary  was  the  impres- 
without  Him.  II.  The  curse  became  sion  made  upon  them  by  this  great  afflic- 
a  blessing  for  this  people.  It  humili-  tion,  and  so  effectual  the  cure. — Kitto. 
ated  itself  and  repented.  It  experi-  —  While  the  work  of  destruction 
enced  that  there  was  no  greater  curse  was  carried  on  by  the  Chaldean  army, 
than  to  live  far  from  its  gracious  God,  it  was  viewed  with  malignant  exulta- 
and  it  longed  for  the  land  of  promise,  tion  by  the  nations  which  had  so  long 
When  it  had  lost  its  earthly  kingdom  chafed  beneath  the  yoke  of  their  kins- 
and  its  earthly  king,  it  learned  to  look  man  Israel.  The  Ammonites  cried 
for  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  for  **  Aha  ! "  against  the  sanctuary,  when 
that  One  in  whom  all  God's  promises  it  was  profaned  ;  and  against  the  land 
to  man  are  fulfilled.  The  exile  of  Israel  when  it  was  desolate;  and 
became  a  blessing  for  the  whole  world,  against  the  house  of  Judah  when  they 
for  the  Jewish  nation  was  thereby  went  into  captivity.  Moab  and  Seir 
made  fit  to  fulfil  its  destiny  in  the  said,  *'  Behold  the  house  of  Judah  is 
redemptive  plan  of  God.  It  was  **  a  like  onto  all  the  heathen."  The  more 
great  opportunity,  by  which  the  name  active  enmity,  which  was  but  natural 
and  glory  of  Jehovah  were  spread  in  the  Philistines,  who  "tookvenge- 
abroad,  as  a  preparation  for  the  preach-  ance  with  a  despiteful  heart,  to  dos- 
ing of  the  gospel  of  Christ "  (Starke),  troy  it  for  the  old  hatred,"  was  emu- 
We  all  lay  under  the  curse  of  the  law,  lated  by  Edom,  the  nearest  kinsman 
but  Christ  has  redeemed  us  (Gal.  iii.  and  bitterest  rival  of  his  brother  Israel. 
13,  14). — Lange.  All  these  nations  soon  fell  victims  to 
—  The  mercy,  the  justice,  and  the  the  like  fate,  which  the  prophets  again 
wisdom  of  God  are  all  equally  dis-  and  again  denounce  upon  them. — Br, 
played  in  this  event.  His  mercy  SmiWs  Students  Scrip.  Bistory. 
appears  in  bringing  this  judgment  so  Yer.  22-26.  The  last  vestige  of 
gradually — from  less  to  greater,  dur-  government  in  Judah.  1.  Might 
ing  the  space  of  twenty-two  years — so  have  been  an  important  rallying  point 
that  most  ample  warning  was  given,  for  the  scattered  remnant.  2.  Was 
and  abundant  opportunity  of  repent-  destroyed  by  the  blind  infatuation  of 
auce  was  afforded.  That  it  was  a  most  envy.  3.  When  destroyed,  completed 
just  punishment  for  their  sins  no  one  the  desolation  of  the  country, 
ever  questioned,  and  the  Jews  them-  Verse  25.  We  see  by  the  example 
selves  have  constantly  admitted  it,  of  Israel,  how  envy  and  jealousy, 
even  with  tears.  It  was,  in  particu-  pride  in  high  descent,  and  destiny, 
lar,  a  most  righteous  punishment  of  and  love  of  power,  lead  to  the  most 
their  idolatry,  as  Moses  had  long  agD  utter  ruin.  Passion  makes  men  fools, 
foretold  in  Lev.  xxvi.,  where  the  sue-  Ishmael  could  not  hope  with  his  small 

663 


OHAP.  ZXT. 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  KINGS, 


company  to  resist  tlie  Chaldean  power. 
— Lange, 

—  Self-love  and  envy  teach  men 
to  turn  the  glass  to  see  themselves 
bigger  and  others  lesser  than  they  are. 

—  An  envious  spirit.  1.  Cannot 
brook  a  superior.  2.  Is  disquieted 
with  ambitious  and  wicked  designs. 

3.  Does  not  hesitate  to  commit  the 
worst    crimes     to    attain    its    ends. 

4.  Loses  the  prize  at  which  it  clutches. 
(Jer.  xli.  15). 

Verse  26.  When  the  godless  attempt 
to  flee  from  a  calamity  they  plunge 
themselves  into  it  (Isa.  xxiv.  17). — 
Starke, 

—  Jeremiah  lived  on  in  the  land  to 
see  the  misery  and  anarchy  which 
followed  the  murder  of  Gedaliah  ;  to 
tell  the  Jews  who  were  flying  to  Egypt 
that  if  they  stayed  in  the  land  they 
would  be  safe,  that  in  Egypt  they 
would  meet  with  destruction — ^for  that 
Egypt  had  been  given  up  to  the  king 
of  Babylon — finally  to  sing  the  future 
ruin  of  Babylon  itself ;  the  confusion 
and  breaking  in  pieces  of  her  idols, 
thfe  deliverance  of  those  in  whose  de- 
struction and  desolation  she  had  re- 
j  oiced . — Maurice. 

Yer.  27-30.  The  release  and  pre- 
ferment of  Jehoiachin  suggestive  of 
the  future  restoration  of  his  exiled 
people.  1.  Their  captivity,  like  his, 
might  be  painful  and  prolon  ged.  2 .  As 
in  his  case,  a  prince  might  arise  who 
would  have  compassion  on  their  suffer- 
ings. 3.  As  in  his  experience,  they 
might  be  restored  to  freedom  and  com- 
parative prosperity.  4.  The  darkest 
distress  is  not  without  some  ray  of  hope. 

—  The  new  king,  Evil  Merodach, 
having  no  such  personal  feeling  against 
Jehoiachin  as  had  swayed  his  father, 
strove  to  atone  for  the  long  sufferings 
of  the  unfortunate  exile  by  setting 
him  free,  and  entertaining  him  thence- 
forward at  the  royal  table  in  suitable 
splendour.  Legend  has  brightened 
the  story  of  his  last  days,  describing 
him  as  living  on  the  Euphrates,  in  a 
sumptuous  house,  surrounded  by  a 
spacious  paradise,  and  married  to  the 
fairest  woman  of  his  day,  the  chaste 
Susannah,  the  companion  of  the  king 
of  Babylon,  and  the  chief  personage  of 
and  high  judge  among  the  captives. 

(54 


It  is  added,  moreover,  that  amidst  all, 
he  was  still  mindful  of  his  native  land, 
listening,  with  his  brethren,  to  Baruch 
as  he  read  the  prophecies  before  them, 
and  amidst  weeping,  fasting,  and 
prayer,  sending  off  help  to  the  rem- 
nant of  his  people  in  Jerusalem.  But 
this  touching  picture  is  only  a  creation 
of  national  pride,  to  adorn  with  a 
fictitious  prosperity  the  closing  years 
of  the  last  direct  heir  to  the  Jewish 
crown.— (?tf»^«>. 

Verse  29.  The  like  whereto  befel 
Joseph,  whose  fetters  one  hour 
changed  into  a  chain  of  gold,  his  rags 
into  robes,  his  stocks  into  a  chariot, 
his  goal  into  a  palace.  So  God  turned 
again  the  captivity  of  Job,  as  the 
streams  in  the  South. — Trapp. 

Verse  30.  So  is,  or  might  be, 
every  true  believer* s  portion;  who 
should  therefore  "  eat  his  bread  with 
joy,  and  drink  his  wine  with 
cheerfulness  all  the  days  of  his  life," 
which  are  not  to  be  numbered  by  the 
hours,  but  measured  by  spiritual 
mirth ;  as  monies  are  not  by  tale,  but 
by  value. — Tbid, 

Great  principles  illustrated  in  the 
books  of  Kings. 

I.  That  the  Divine  purpose  in  raising 
up  the  Jewish  nation  as  a  means  of 
conveying  greater  blessing  to  the  world 
is  steadily  kept  in  view, 

II.  That  the  nation  is  prospered  and 
strengthened  in  proportion  to  its  fidelity 
to  the  Divine  purpose, 

III.  That  the  amhition  to  Jorm 
foreign  alliances  was  contrary  to  the  fun- 
damental law  of  the  theocracy ,  and  led  to 
the  introduction  of  the  idolatry  which 
ultimately  wrought  the  nation^ s  ruin. 

IV.  That  a  nation,  as  an  individual, 
cannot  be  purged  of  great  evils  without 
great  suffering, 

V.  That  God  is  slow  to  punish,  and 
delays  the  final  blow  till  all  possible 
means  of  reclamation  are  exhausted. 

VI.  That  great  emergencies  bring  to 
the  front  the  noblest  and  most  highly 
gifted  talent  of  the  nation, 

VII.  That  the  unfaithfulness  and  vic9 
of  the  Jewish  people  did  not  prevent  the 
carrying  out  of  the  Divine  purpose. 

VIII.  That  true  religion  can  alone 
give  greatness  and  permanence  U 
national  lift* 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


¥A9m 

Atmse  of  Prosperttj  khH  Its  Nemeris  ...  121 
AecesBion  of  Solomon,  typical  of  the 

Kingly  Character  of  Christ 16 

Accused,  The  Solemn  Appeal  of  the  ...  120 
Adonijah's  Attempt  to  Gain  the  Crown      6 

Adonijah,  The  Revolt  of  8 

„        Frustration  of  19 

Adonijah's  Attempt  to  Gain  the  Throne    35 

Adversity 643 

Affliction,  The  Disciplinary  Aspect  of...  125 

„        The  Teachings  of     260 

Age,  The  Sedate  Caution  of  •••  ...  202 
Aged  and  Infirm,  The  Isolation  of  ...  11 
Agents  of  Divine  Retribution,  The     ...  180 

„      of  the  World's  Reformation,  The  526 
Ahab,  The  King 262 

ff      and  Baal ?60 

„     the  Type  of  a  Weak  and  Wicked 

King 283 

,f     and  his  People     326 

„      and  Elijah  344 

AhaVs  Repentance        349 

„      Conduct  towards  the  Witness  of 

the  Truth        358 

Ahab.  The  Death  of      362 

„      The  Spirit  of  the  House  of        ...  485 

AUiance,  An  Unholy      264 

„        The  Woeful  Disasters  of  an 

Unholy 483 

„      The  Evil  Results  of  an  Unholy  177 

Alliances,  National        356 

Altar  the  Refuge  of  the  Guilty,  The  ...  22 
Ambassador,  The  Christian  Minister  an     86 

Ambition,  The  Lust  of 475 

„         Military        556 

Anarchy 258 

„        Religious  621 

Ancestral  Iniquity,  The  Curse  of        ...  366 

Anger,  The  Divine        177 

Answer  of  the  Lord  to  Elijah,  The      ...  817 

„       of  the  King  to  the  People,  The  203 

Anxious  Forebodings 232 

„        Enquirer,  The 164 

Appearances,  The  Danger  of  Trusting  to  403 
Approaching  Dissolution  of  the  Good, 

1  ne       ••■         .••         ...         ...         ...  oo7 

Architecture,  National  ...         ...         ...  144 

Arguments  in  Pleading  with  God  ...  125 
Ark  an  Emblem  of  the  Human  Heart, 

The       107 

Art,  Religion  and  94 

Arrows  of  the  Lord's  Deliverance,  The  647 
Assassination       ...         ...         ...         ...  541 

„  of  a  Monarch,  The  Public  569 

,,  The  Crime  of      624 

Associations^  The  Danger  of  Evil        ...  602 


Athallah  ..•••••mm*        •••  523 

Athaliah's  Fall •«        ...  631 

Audacity  of  a  L!ar,  The ...  450 

Augury  of  the  Future 370 

Authority  of  the  Divine  Word,  The   ...  205 

Automata,  Royal            643 

Avarice,  The  Temptations  of 46 

„       The  Curse  of 444 

Awakening  Power  of  the  Divine  Wordy 

The       627 

Axe,  The  Borrowed       ...         •••        •••  454 


Baal,  Ahaband    ... 
„     The  Glory  of 


•••         •••         •••  260 

•••         .••  616 
Barrel  of  Meal  and  Cruse  of  Oil  ...  276 

Bathsheba  before  the  King       ...         •••     11 

Bay,  A  Nation  at ••    644 

Benhadad,  The  Evil  Counsellors  of     ...  331 

„        upon  the  Sick  Bed 480 

Biblical  Estimate  of  National  Affairs  ...  663 

Bible  and  Reform,  The 641 

Blessings  of  Peace  67 

Blood,  The  Retribution  of        89 

Boastful  and  Arrogant  Spirit,  A  ...  597 

Boaster  Humbled,  The  Proud 608 

Borrowed  Axe,  The       ...         454 

Bravery    ...         ...        ...        ...         ...     15 

Building  of  the  Heavenly  Temple      ...    81 
„        „        Temple   Emblematic  of 

Christian  Character 89 

Business,  The  Danger  of  much  Worldly  385 

Calamities,  The  Greatest          •••        .m  861 
„        National        122 

Calf  Worship  Denounced         •••        ...  214 

Call  of  Elisha,  The         ...         - 321 

Call,  Obedience  to  the  Divine  »•         ...  322 

Captivity  and  Freedom 124 

Captive,  A  Suffering      652 

Certainty  of  the  Divine  Word 466 

Changing  Aspects  of  Religious  Work  ...  652 

Character,  A  Good         7 

„        The  Building  of  the  Temple 

Emblematic  of  89 

Influence  of  Circumstances  on  47(5 

The  Power  of  a  Holy 479 

„       Detected  and  Exposed  ...  480 

Characteristics  of  a  Great  Religious  Re- 
form    ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  636 

Challenge,  The 291 

Charms  of  Philosophy,  The      159 

Chastisement,  National  ..  ..  ...  270 

Cherubim  Emblematic  of  Forms  of  Life     84 

Child,  The  Death  of  a 421 

„    The  Power  of  a     ..,        •«•         ••.  431 
Children's  Service,  Th«  >.-        ^        -..  482 


»> 


9KNSRAL  INDEX. 


Christ,  David  a  Type  of.., 
„     Solomon  a  Type  of 


33 
70 


the  Head  and  King  of  the  Church  162 
Christian  Minister  an  Ambassador      ...     36 

„         Warrior,  Th*^ 327 

Ohnrch  of  God,  Solomon's  Temple  an 

Emblem  of      70 

„      the  Depository  of   the  Divine 

Word,  The      104 

„      The  Divine  Solicitude  for  the...  189 

„      The  Prosperity  of  the 453 

Clemency,  Royal 21 

Cloud  of  the  Lord,  The 108 

Commands  of  God,  The ...  285 

Commerce •••        •••  146 

fy        The  Risks  of ...        •••        •••  865 

Complicity  with  Idolatry  834 

Compromises  of  Life,  The        „,        „,  442 
Compromise,  Religious  ...         m«        •••  587 
Conditions  of  Victory,  The      •••        •••  382 

Confederates  in  a  False  Religion         •••  486 
Conflict,  Prayer  a  Preparation  for       •••   124 

Conscience,  The  Voice  of  280 

Consciousness  of  Right 287 

Conscious  Endowment  of  Divine  Power  890 

Conspiracy  251 

„        and  Murder 626 

Conspicuous  Piety         612 

Contentment,  A  Spirit  of         416 

Contrast — the  Worldly  and  the  Religi- 
ous Spirit        800 

Contrasts  in  the  same  Individual  Life      334 
Conversation  of  Elisha  with  Shunam- 
mite     ...         ...         ...         ...         •••  416 

„  A  Memorable 389 

Coronation  of  Solomon 14 

Corpse,  The  Virtue  of  a 653 

Counsel  of  the  Wise  and  Good 7 

„      of  a  Good  Man,  The      435 

„      Worth  of  Godly 636 

Courage  of  a  Divinely  Authorised  Mes- 
senger ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  213 

„    the  Fruit  of  Righteousness        ...  840 

„    Moral         460 

Covetous  Spirit,   The  Over-mastering 

Power  of  a       837 

Covetous  Spirit,  A         426 

Covetous    Men,    Defilement    of  God's 

Work  by  445 

Covenanting  with  God  ...         ...         ...  633 

Covenant  which  Jehoiada  Renewed,  The  633 
Cowardly  Spirit,  A        ...         ...         ••.  641 

Crime,  The  Sullen  Stubbornness  of    ...     42 
,,     of  Assassination,  The     ...         ...  624 

Crook  in  every  Lot,  A   ...         ,,,         ...  894 

Crowd,  The  Perils  of  a 471 

Crown,  Adonijah's  Attempt  to  gain  the  6 
„  The  Dangerous  Glitter  of  a  ...  183 
„     Lost,  A      ...         ...         ...         ...   647 

Cruelty  of  Heathenism 406 

Cruse,  The  Widow's        ..         412 

Cry  of  the  Oppressed,  The       201 

Cunning,  The  Mental  Toils  of  the       ...  209 
Curse,  The  Retribution  of  a      ...         •••     43 

Curse  of  Slavery,  The 144 

„    of  Avarice,  The     ...         ...         ...  444 

»,    One  Man's  Blessing  another  Man's  447 


^     of  the  Good,  The 
,,      of  a  Wicked  King 


Danger  of  Trusting  to  Appearances     ...  403 

„      of  much  Worldly  Business,  The  335 

„      In  the  Simplicity  of  God's  Ways  434 

„      of  Transitions  in  Life,  The       ...   137 

David's  Decision...  ,..  ...  ,.,     13 

David's  Dying  Charge  to  Solomon       ...     26 

David,  Death  and   Burial  of     83 

„       A  Type  of  Christ  ...         ...     33 

Day  of  Good  Things,  The         ..,        ...  470 

„    A  Memorable  298 

„    In  a  Mother's  Life,  A       419 

Death  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  602 

„      Stolen  from        624 

„      of  Great  Men,  The  186 

Death-Bed  Scene,  A  Memorable  ...  375 

„  A  Touching 645 

Death  of  a  Child  421 

of  Godly  Ministers         m.        ...  646 

•M         •••  662 

_  •••         ••.  868 

„      a  Journey  27 

Debt,  The  Griping  Tyranny  of  ...  418 

Decay,  Moral  Corruption  the  Cause  of  268 

„      of  God's  House 639 

„      National 642 

Decision  in  Religion,  The  Necessity  of    293 
Declaration  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  The  832 

Dedication  of  the  Temple         188 

Defeat  of  Rebellion        17 

Defective  Piety,  The  Paradoxes  of      ..>     47 
Defilement  of  God's  Work  by  Covetous 

Man      445 

Defence  of  a  Nation,  The  True  ...  160 

Delay,  The  Danger  of 224 

Deliverance,  The  Arrows  of  the  Lord's  647 
Demoralising  Influence  of  Idolatry  on 

National  Life  208 

Departure  of  Israel  from  the  House  of 

David 200 

Despair  267, 402 

Despondency      312 

„  Return  to  Duty  the  Cure  of  818 

Destiny  Decided  by  Moral  Character  ...     22 
Devotion,  The  Elevating  Power  of     ...  125 

Dignity  of  Woman,  The  633 

Diplomatic  Rhetoric      ...  698 

Disclosure  on  the  Mount,  The  ...         ...  376 

Disguise,  The  Vanity  of  861 

Disobedience,    The  Divine    Anger  and 

Human  177 

„  Temptations  to  ...  219 

yy  ...  ...  ...  ...     OdO 

„  The  Sin  of        689 

Display  of  Miraculous  Power  will  not 

avail  to  Change  the  Heart 219 

Disposition,  Impetuosity  of     601 

Dissolving  of  Doubts,  The       •—        ...  160 

Divine  Knowledge  of  Man        123 

„       Purpose,  The     204 

Purpose  Fulfilled,  The 129 

Purpose,  The  Revelation  of  the  683 

„      Manifestation  to  Man 186 

„       Solicitude  for  the  Church         ...  189 
^       Commands,  The  Reason  for  the  219 

,1       Judgments,  The  229 

,,      Vengeance  ...        •••        .••  262 

19      Strength ...        «m        •••        •••  801 


»» 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


Hi 


Dmne  Whisper,  The  Subduing  Power  of 

tlie       307 

,      Succour 313 

„  Actions,  Mysteriousness  of  the...  3!*2 
„  Grace,  The  Inexhaustibility  of  ...  40? 
„      Sympathy  for  Little  Sorrows     ...  452 

Division  of  the  Kingdom  210 

Dominion,  Power  and 157 

Doom  of  a  Treasonable  Spirit 33 

„      of  the  Usurper 263 

„      The  Messerger  of  Approaching...  342 

„     of  a  Wicked  Life ...  347 

„      of  the  Scoffer ...   395 

Dream  of  Wisdom  and  its  Reality      ...     53 

„       of  Solomon,  The 65 

Drivers,  Reckless  ...         ^,         ...  499 

Drunkenness       256 

„  The  Vice  of  323 

DupUcity 516 

Duty,  The  Divine  Call  to         319 

Dutiful  Son,  A 76 

Dynasty,  The  Night  of  an  Old 82 

Earthly  Greatness,  Uucertainty  of      ...     22 
Effort  after  High  Things  ..  ...       6 

Elevating    and    Satisfying     Power    of 

Devotion  , 125 

E  ah  King  ,         ^^^  255 

Elijah  at  Cherith  273 

Elijah's  Re- appearance 285 

Elijah  Praying 299 

Elijah  8  Despondency 304 

Elijah  under  the  Juniper  Tree  „.   310 

„      on  Mount  Horeb 313 

,,      at  Horeb 31 5 

Elijah's  Zeal  for  the  Lord        816 

Elijah,  Ahab  and  344 

M      The  Translation  of  377 

and  Elisha,  The  Parting  of         ...  379 
and     His     Work,     The    Divine 

Estimate  of 889 

The  Lord  God  of  39O 

Elisha,  The  Call  of        ..    321 

„      in  Comparison   with  the  Three 

Followers  of  Christ     321 

Elisha's  Love  to  his  Master  and  Lord*  389 
Elisha  and  the  Shunammite  „.  4 16 

_,  »»^    *°^  ^^^^ —        ...  489 

Ehsha  8  Reproof  to  Joash  550 

Embassy,  A  Sorrowful  ...         ^,        ..]  602 
Enemy,  A  Future  6I5 

Enquirer,  The  Anxious...         ^         ...   154 

Enthusiast,  An  Idolatrous        674 

Envious  Spirit,  An         ...         .,,         ...  654 

Equity  of  Punishment,  The      ...         \\\  335 
Ethical   Significauce  of    the  Palace  of 
Solomon  ...         ...  00 

iiiVil  Doers,  Remonstrance  with  ...       6 

„  Circumscribed,  The  Power  of  ...  46 
„  Results  of  an  Unholy  Alliance  ...  I77 
„  Counsellors  of  Benhadad,  The  ...  331 
„    The  Power  of,  to  Perpetuate  itself     365 

„    The  Conflict  with 55O 

„  The  Progressive  Development  of  ...  582 

Example,  The  Influence  of  a  Good      ...  242 

„       The  Influence  of  a  Bad      486,  543 

Bxile,  The  Curse  and  Blessing  of  the  ...  663 


M 
M 


ft 


Expostulation  of  a  Faithful  Minister  ...   ^11 
Extravagance,  Luxury  and       15 1 

Failure  in  the  Work  of  Reformation   ...  641 
Faith  of  the  Wicked  in  the  Prayers  of 

the  Good  ...         ...  ^    219 

„     Characteristics  of  a  Child-like    ...273 
t>     Tried  *  274 

„     ThePowerof  an  Intrepid  ...'277 

„     The  Sensitiveness  of        298 

„     of  the  Soul,  The  True      ...         !.*'  457 
Faithless  Friendship,  Retribution  of  ...     36 

Faithful  Seven  Thousand,  The 318 

„         Prophet,  The 351,  372 

Faithfulness,  The  Divine  ,..         ...  4s6 

Fall  of  Solomon  and  its  Lessons         ...  162 

„     Jerusalem,  The 651 

falsehood  ...         ..  ...         _^    224 

„        The  Delusion  of        ...  ...  366 

False  Friend  Comp  .red  to  a  Reed,  A  ...  599 

Famine     ..         286 

n       The  Horrors  of  461 

„        Lessons  Taught  by     ...         ...  474 

Family  Relationships,  The  Importance 

^    ,.      o^  485 

Tactions  Opposition       ...         ...         ...  249 

Fate  of  an  Unfaithful  King,  The        *!*.  640 
Fate  of  the  Ten  Tribes  of  Israel  ...  683 

Fatherland,  The  Love  of  183 

Fear,  The  Tyranny  of 311 

„     The  Religion  of     ...         ^         ...  538 
rickle  Humanity  ...  ...  ^^    135 

Fidelity,  Reward  of  a  Tried      ...  '',     42 

Fire,  The  Judgment  by ...  373 

Flood-tide  of  National  Pi  osperity,  TShe"!  154 

Fool,  The  Wise 174 

Forebodings,  Anxious    ...         J.*         [**  232 

Freedom,  Captivity  and  124 

Friendship,  True  .'.'.'  337 

Instability  of  Q 

Tested  in  Trouble,  The  Value 
of 0 


>f 


Gains,  Ill-gotten 342 

Generous  Spirit,  A         141 

Generosity,  Questionable  ^         ^.,  139 

Glad  Tidings       4^9 

God,  The  Greatness  and  Condescension 

"^ 118 

)i     The  Presence  of 129 

0     The  Public  Worship  of 145 

ft    The  Severity  and  Tenderness  of  ..    185 

„     The  Illimitable  Power  of 280 

f,     The  Commands  of  285 

9,     The  Superabundant  Goodness  of...  425 

God's  Hidden  Ones        131 

M      Ways,  The  Danger  and  Simplicity 

„  of     „ 434 

n      House,  The  Decay  of     639 

„      House,  The  Restoration  of         ...  631 
,)      Unfailiug  luterest  in  His  People  561 

Godlessness,  The  Folly  of         369 

Godly  Men,  The  Sins  of  ...  !'     29 

Gold,  The  Eloquence  of 249 

Good  Man,  The  Influence  of  a    ..  ...     75 

n        i»      in  Extremity,  The  Power  of 

•    • 400 


OSNBRAL  INDEX. 


Good  Man,  The  Counsel  of  a ,435 

„         „     The  Potent  Influence  of  a...  472 
„        „    in  Time  of  Trouble,  TheEe- 


PA«B 


source  of  the 
„     Way,  The 


60O 

...  122 

„     The  Heritage  of  the         ...         ...  134 

„    The  Solitariness  of  the    ...         ...  294 

ft    The  Noblest  Legacy  of  the  De- 
parted     381 

„    The  Approaching  Dissolution  of 

the  387 

„     Things,  The  Day  of         470 

„    The  Influence  of  the  Great  and  ..,  551 
Goodness,  Imperfect       ...         ...         ...  234 

„         Eminent         ...          ...          ...  425 

„        The  Unselfishness  of  ...  441 

Gospel,  The  Mission  of  the       ...         ...       9 

„       The  Healtd  Waters  a  Symbol  of 

the     393 

Government,  The  Ivory  Throne  a  Sym- 
bol of  Regal     166 

I,  The  Exigencies  of  ...  619 

^  in     Judah,     The      Last 

Vestige  of        654 

Gradual  Development  of  the  Greatest 

Good 300 

Gratitude,  Sacrifice  a  Test  of   ...         ...  131 

„         to  God  and  Earthly  Policy...  440 

Great  Work,  Preparations  for  a  ...     73 

„     Wickedness  and  Retribution      ...  348 

„      Trial  and  its  Joyous  Issue,  A     ...  417 

Greatest  Works  Proceed  in  Silence     ...     88 

Greatness,  The  Vanity  of  Human       •••  604 

Grief        226 

Haughty  Suppliant,  The  •  435 

Hazael  Discovered  ...         •••         ...  479 

Healing  Souls,  Divine  Method  of  ...  429 
Healed  Waters  a  Symbol  of  the  Gospel  393 
Heart-reading     ...         ...         ...         ...  4  81 

Heart,  The  Right  State  of  the 510 

Heathenism,  The  Inhuman  Cruelty  of...  406 

Heavenly  Temple,  The  Building  of  the    81 

„         Visions  ...         .••         ...  357 

Heavenward        ...         ...  385 

Heritage  of  the  Good,  The       ...         ...  134 

Hezekiah  and  Luther — a  Parallel         ...  6P4 
„        The  Character  and  Life  of  ...  596 
„         and  Sennacherib       ...         ...  602 

„        and  the  Ambassadors  •••  615 

Hiram,  The  Heathen  King       77 

„      and  Solomon     ...         ...         ...     77 

M      The   League  between  Solomon 

and       78 

„      The  Pillars  of,   Emblematic  of 

the  Church      101 

Holiness  the  Supreme  End  of  Life       ...  130 

Home,  A  Good •         •••         •••322 

Honesty     .  ...         ...         —        ...  632 

„        Genuine  ...        —        •«.  454 

Honour  with  Degradation        •••         •••  430 

Hope,  The  Verdict  of 421 

„      of  Judah,  The 
Horrible  in  Humanity,  The 
Hoshea  and  Hezekiah    ...         •••         ...  697 
House  of  God,  The  Restoration  of       ...  537 
How  a  Bright  Morning  became  a  Dark 
Night 630 


••• 


••.  642 
•••        ...  463 


Human  Heart,  The  Ark  an  Emblem  of  107 
Humanity,  The  Moral  Plagues  of  ...  122 
Human    Greatness,    The    Vanity    and 

Insincerity  of    ..         ...  173 

Hunger  ver»m  Suspicion  470 


...  594 
...  113 


n 
»> 
n 

M 

n 


405 
...  582 


Iconoclast...         • 

Ideal,  On  Maintaining  a  High  ... 

Ideals  Unrealized  not  Useless  ...         «..  113 

Idolatry,  The  Sin  of      179 

a  Sin    ...        ••.         ...        ••.  210 

...                 ...                  ...                 ...  JiidO 

as  a  Cause  of  National  Decay  238 

The  Emptiness  of      256 

The  Trial  and  Defeat  of       ...  289 

The  Infatuation  of 294 

Complicity  with         334 

The    Exposure    and    Punish- 
ment of        868 

The  Judgment  of       369 

Efiect  upon  the  Young          ...  396 
The  Vain  Pretences  of            ...402 

Its  Emasculating  Tendency  ...  508 

The  Punishment  of    ...         ...  613 

^        a  National  Curse        515 

„         The  Inveterate  Evils  of          ...  636 
Idolatry  the  Destructive  Force  in  Na- 
tional Life        ...         ...         ...         ...  580 

Idolatrous  Ruler  a  National  Scourge,  An  672 

„         Intrusion  into  the  Temple    ...  623 

Ignorant,  Josiah  a  Pattern  for  the       ...  634 

Ignorance  of  Simple  Things      ...         ,,,424 

„         and  Imbecility  of  Man         ...  435 

Ill-gotten  Gains ...  342 

Illusions,  Optical  ...         ...         ... 

Impenitence,  The  Obduracy  o£... 

Imperfect  Goodness        234 

„         Religious  Ideas         451 

Imperfections  of  a  Reforming  Work    ...  517 

Inconstancy  of  Wicked  Accomplices    ...  20 

Incredulity,  An  Obstinate          ...         ...  893 

Individual  Responsibility          20 

„         Responsibility     for     Wrong 

Doings        ...         ...         ...  347 

Individualism,  The  Power  of    ...         ...  139 

Industry,  The  Man  of 484 

Inevitable     Retribution    of      Parental 

Indulgence       ...         ...         ...         ...  6 

Infant  Life.  Perils  of      ...         62 

Infallibility  of  the  Divine  Word           ...  226 

Influence  of  a  Good  Man           •.•         76,  472 

„         of  Circumstances  on  Character  476 

„        of  the  Great  and  Good,  The...  551 

Iniquity,  The  Curse  of  Ancestral         ...  366 

Injuries,  Personal           ..          ...         ...  121 

Innovations  in  Divine  Worship...         ..  575 

Instability  of  Human  Friendship         ...  6 
Intellectual  Greatness,   The   Responsi- 
bility of...         ...         •••  71 

Intellectual  Endowments  Perilous       ...  166 

Interview,  A  Never-to-be-forgotten   ...  450 

Intrepidity  of  Truth      357 

Introduction         ...         ...         ...         ..•  1 

Is  there  not  Another  Way         ...         ...  437 

Isaiah  a  Sublime  Example  of  a  Prophet  602 

Isaiah's  Vision  of  the  Majesty  of  Jehovah  566 

Isolation  of  the  Aged  and  Infirm         ...  11 


GENERAL  INDEX, 


FAOX 

Israel,  The  Utter  Downfall  of 677 

„      The  Last  King  of 679 

„     The   Ultimate  Fate  of    the  Ten 

Tribes  of  583 

Ivory  Throne  a  Symbol  of  Regal  Govern- 
ment    ...         ...         ...         ...         •••  156 

Jealousy  a  Fruitful  Source  of  Mischief  241 
Jehoiachin,  The  Release  and  Preferment 
of  ..         ...         ...         ...         ...  654 

Jehonadab  and  Jehu      ...  512 

Jehovah  the  Deliverer  of  His  People  ...     14 
„        Vindicated,       The       Supreme 

Posverof         329 

„      Isaiah's  Vision  of  the  Majesty  of  566 

„       the  Defence  of  His  People       ...  608 

Jehu,  Elisha  and...  ...         ...  489 

Jeroboam,  The  Sin  of ,208 

„         in  Need  and  Distress  •••  231 

Jerusalem  a  Type  of  the  Church         ...  608 

The  Fall  of 651 

Jezebel,  The  Marriage  of  Ahab  and     ...  341 
„       the  Fall  of  Pride  and  Beauty  ...  503 

Joab,  The  Terrible  End  of         41 

Joash's  Elevation  to  the  Throne  ...  529 

Josiah  the  Kingly  Reformer     ...         ...  628 

„      a  Pattern  for  the  Ignorant         ...  634 

Journey,  The  Last  Dread  225 

Joy  of  Aged  and  Dying  Saints  ...         ...     19 

„    of  an  Accomplished  Purpose,  The...  110 

„  National        ...         ...         634 

Judah,  The  Deep  Fall  of  239 

„     The  Hope  of        642 

Judgment  of  God,  The 565 

„  „        The  Righteous        ...  610 

^        A  Terrible  Day  of     501 

„         of  Idolatry,  The         369 

„        by  Fire,  The  ..  373 

„        of  Solomon,  The       ...         ...     60 

Judgments,  Divine         229 

„           Zeal  in  Executing  Divine...  509 
Justice,    The    Strict     Impartiality     of 
Divine ...         619 

Kindness,  A  Spirit  of 81 

„  Never  Unrewarded    ...         ...  414 

King,  Ahab  the  Type  of  a  Weak  and 

Wicked 283 

„      The  Death  of  a  Wicked 358 

„      The    Praiseworthy   Efiforts   of  a 

Good     ...         ...         ...         ...  363 

The  True  Safeguard  of  a 


The  Fate  of  an  Unfaithful 


n 

i» 

„     of  Israel,  The  Last 
„     in  Troable,  A 


...  530 
...  540 
...  679 
...  603 
in  Prayer,  A  ...         ...         ...  605 

Kingdom,  The  Rending  of  the 196 

,,         of  Solomon  a  Type  of  Mes- 
siah's       ...         ...         ...     67 

Kingly  Wisdom  ...         ..  ...         ...     77 

„       Character  of    Christ,   The   Ac- 
cession of  Solomon  Typical  of     16 
Kingship  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  623 

Knowledge  of  the  Truth  •••         ...  280 


FA** 

Last  and  Best  Will  of  Father  to  Son  ...     2i 

Last  Dread  Journey,  The         221 

Law  to  the  Sinner,  The  Voice  of         ...     38 

„     of  Retribution,  The  Inexorable    ...  3G2 

League  between  Solomon  and  Hiram  ...     78 

Learning,  The  Fascination  of 72 

Legacy  of  the  Departed  Good 38  L 

Lepers,  Illustrative  of  Vary ing,  Phases  in 

Human  Experience 468 

Leprosy  of  Riches,  The  450 

Liar,  The  Audacity  of  a  ,.         ...  450 

Liberty  Lost  ...    647 

Lii«  X  Dial  612 

„     Prolonged  in  Answer  to  Prayer  ...  610 
„     The  Compromises  of  ...         ...  442 

„     Lights  and  Shadows  of     430 

p     An  Upright 365 

^     Contrasts  in  the  Same  Individual...  334 
y,    and  Lessons  of  the  Great  Hebrew 

Reformer...         ... 268 

„     The  Power  of  a  Wicked 258 

„     Winter  of      „,      3 

Lily  Work  96 

Literature,  A  Pure         71 

Live,  A  Fixed  Time  to 612 

London,  Moral  and  Spiritual  Claims  of  469 

Lord,  The  Cloud  of  the  108 

„     The  Man  who  Saw  the    ...         ...  353 

„    God  of  Elijah,  The  390 

Lost  Opportunities         335 

Love  of  Wisdom,  The   ...         •••         ...  147 
„     Wasted      175 

•  .  ...    Ibo 

..    161 


„     of  Fatherland,  The 
Luxury  and  Extravagance 


Labour,  The  Dignity  of 
Lady'*  ALud,  The  Little 


321 
433 


Majesty,  The  Declaration  of  the  Divine  332 
Man,  The  Divine  Knowledge  of  ...  123 

„    of  Industry,  The 184 

^    of  God  out  of  Judah,  The  ...216 

„     The  Weak  Moments  of  a  Great...  302 

„     Who  Saw  the  Lord,  The 353 

„     The  Ignorance  and  Imbecility  of  435 
Man-made  Religion       ...         ...         ...  206 

Manasseh,  The  Seduced  and  the  Seducer  622 

„        and  Josiah 623 

Marriage  ...         61 

„         of  Ahab  and  Jezebel  ...  341 

„         An  Indi.screet  ...         ...  485 

Martyrs,  The  Divine  Concern  for  the...  495 
Meeting,  A  Remarkable  ...         ...  288 

Men,  The  Death  of  Great         186 

Mental  Toils  of  the  Cunning,  The      ...   209 
Mercy,  The  Divine  Message  of  ...  495 

„    The     Unchangeableness    of    the 

Divine  ...         ...  ...         ...  664 

Messenger  a  Truthful    ...         ...         ...     19 

„        The  Invincible  Courage  of  a 

Divinely  Authorised      ...   213 

„         of  Approaching  Dcom         ...  342 

Message,  The  True  Prophet  and  His  ...  266 

Messages,  The  Two        ...         ...  ...  612 

Method  of  Healing  Sin-smitten  Souls...  429 
Micaiah's  Suffering  for  the  Truth         ...  858 
Military  Ambition  ...  ,,.  ...  656 

Minister,  Watchfulness  of   the  Faithful       9 
„         The  Expostulation  of  a  Faith- 
ful       II 


0BNERAL  INDEX. 


PAOB 

Minister  of  Divine  Vengeance,  The    ...  487 

Ministerial  Maintenance  540 

Ministry,  The  Authoritative  Source  of 

the   ...         •••        •••        •••  228 

„        of  Little  Voices        ...    ^    ...  431 
Miraculous  Supply  of  Oil  Symbolic  of 
the  Inexhaustibility  of  Grace  ...  407 

Mischief-Maker  The      ..    460 

Mission  of  the  Gospel     .  9 

Mixed      Marriages     Inexpedient  and 
Dangerous       ...         ...         ...         ...  264 

Monarch,  Grave  Responsibilities  of  the     11 

M        A  Heartless 286 

A  Desperate  ...         ..•        ...  464 

A  Demoralized        ...         ...  486 

^  The  Public  Assassination  of  a  569 
Monarch's  Life,  The  Vicissitudes  of  a  659 
Money,  the  Value  and  Worthlessness  of  463 

Mongrel  Religion  ...  589 

Moral  Character,  Destiny  Decided  by ...     22 
„       Character,    The   Strength    and 
^        Beauty  of  ...         ...         ...     90 

„      Plague  of  Humanity,  The         ...  122 
^     Corruption  the  Cause  of  Decay...  262 
I,      Reformation         ...         ...         ...  395 

„      and  Spiritual  Claims  of  London    469 
Mother,  Persuasive  Pleading  of  ...       9 

Mother's  Life,  A  Day  in  a        •••         ...  419 
Murder,  The  Crime  of   ...         —•        •••  256 

,,        Conspiracy  and  •••         ...  626 

Music,  The  Power  of     403 

Mysteriousuess  of  Divine  Actions        ...  892 

Naaman  the  Heathen  in  Search  of  Truth  427 
„       the  Leper  ...         ...         ...  429 


National  Alliances 
^     Apostasy 


The  Cure  of 


...  437 


I,       an  Example  of  Barriers  to  Reli- 
gious Decision     ...         ...  437 

,,       an  Example  of  Gratitude,  Gene- 
rosity, and  Superstition        ...         ...  441 

Naboth's  Vineyard         839 

,j  „     Voices  from 339 

Nathan,  the  Type  of  a  True  Prophet  ...       9 
Nation,  Religion  the  Mightiest  Force  in 

the       .         ♦..  107 

„      Religion  the  Glory  of  a 137 

„      The  True  Defence  of  a 160 

„      in  Mourning,  A...         •••         ..•  236 

,       at  Bay,  A  644 

„      The  Fall  of  a      646 

Nation's  Overthrow,  The  Last  Scenes  in 

a...         •••         ..•        •••        •*         •*•  ^49 
National  Decay  ...         ...         ...         ...  5i2 

„        Suffering  ...  665 

„       Prosperity  an  Opportunity  for 

Reform 559 

-      Affairs,  The  Biblical  Estimate 

of      563 

„      Troubles  ...         ...         ...  568 

^     Decay  and  Ruin,  The  Signs  of     568 
„      Scourge,  An  Idolatrous  Ruler  a  672 
^      Apostasy,  The   Disastrous   Re- 
sults of         576 

,  Desolation,  A  Doleful  Picture  of  578 
^  Decay,  The  Moral  Causes  of  ...  681 
^  Catastrophe,  The  Beginning  of  646 
a     Calamities,  Sin  the  Source  of...  266 


VAGI 

•••         •••         ...  356 

...         ...         ...  0^0 

,,     Apostasy  and  National  Chastise- 
ment  270 

,,     Architecture      ...  144 

f>     J^y        •••         ..•         ...         ...  534 

yy      Calamities  and  their  Lessons      122 
„      Crisis,  The  Value  of  a  Pause  in 

a       ...         ,        203 

„      Decay,  Idolatry  a  Cause  of     ...  238 
ff      Life,   The  Demoralizing  Influ- 
ence of  Idolatry  on...  208 

„      Trouble,  The  Source  of  ...288 

I,      Reformation      51 

^     Prosperity,  Prominent  Features 
of      ..*        ...        ...        ...        ...     64 

„      Peace 76 

Nations,  The  Fate  of     697 

Nature,  An  Undisciplined         340 

Night  of  an  Old  Dynasty  and  Morning 

of  New 82 

Necessary  Precedes    the    Ornamental, 
xne      ...  ...        ...        ...  oo«f 

New  Uses  for  Old  Trophies      629 

Obedience  the  Pathway  of  Blessing    ...  23 

„        to  God          277 

H        to  the  Divine  Call 822 

„        The  True  Spirit  of  .-        ...  476 

Obscurity ...  273 

Official  Responsibility    ...        m«        ••.  652 
OU,  The  Widow's  Pot  of...         ^        ...409 
Old  Age    ...        ...        ...        •••        ...  176 

„        Weakness  and  Infirmity  in     ...  6 

One  Man's  Blessing  another  Man's  Curse  447 

Opposition,  Factious     249 

Opportunity,  Piety  Limited  by            ...  60 
Opportunities,    The  Remorse   of  Neg- 
lected        ...         ...        ...         ...  832 

I,           Lost              ...         •••         ...  ooo 

Oppressed,  The  Cry  of  the       201 

Optical  Illusions ^     405 

Optimism,  The  Highest  Christian       ...  421 

Organization  an  Aid  to  Success            ...  639 
Ornamental,   The  Necessary   Precedes 

the        ...         ...         ...         •••         ...  639 

Ostentation,  A  Spirit  of 618 

Palace  of  Solomon,  The  Ethical  Signifi- 
cance of  the 92 

Paradoxes  of  a  Defective  Piety 47 

Parental  Indulgence,  Inevitable  Retri- 
bution of         ...         ...         ...         ...       6 

Partial  Reformation       398 

Parting  of  Elijah  and  Elisha     379 

Pause  in  the  Midst  of  a  National  Crisis  202 

Peace,  Blessings  of         •         ...     67 

,,       National ...     76 

Penitent,  A  Royal  349 

People,  Jehovah  the  Deliverer  of  His ...     14 
„        of  God,  The  Rest  of  the  ...  128 

,,        A  God-torsaken  ...         ...  683 

Penis  of  Infant  Life       62 

„      of  a  Crowd  ... 471 

„      of  a  Good  Movement      ••.         ...  5*26 
Personal  Injuries  ...         •••         .»,  V2,\ 

Persecuting  Spirit,  The...        •••        ••.  624 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


„    Imperfect  ... 
..    True 


PAOB 

Persuaaive    Pleading   of    an    Anxiou» 
Mother...         ...         >••        •••         •••       V 

Pertinacity  of  Revenge...  27 

Persuasion,  The  Art  of  ...         438 

Philosophy,  The  Exalted  Mission  of  a 

True  164 

^  The  Charms  of      159 

Piety  Limited  by  Opportunity 60 

,,     Eminent 286 

•M         ...  667 
•••         •••         •••  6vo 

,,    Conspicuous  612 

Plan  of  Salvation,  God's  488 

Pillars  of    Hiram  Emblematic  of  the 

Church 101 

Poison  of  Sin  and  its  Cure       423 

Polytheism  ...         ...         ...         ...  688 

Popularity  of  Religion  no  Proof  of  its 

Genuiaeoess ...         ...  616 

Possibilities  of  Human  Character,  The  480 

Poverty,  The  Pride  of 241 

Power  of  Evil  Circumstances 46 

„      of  Individualism...         ...         ...  J 39 

„      and  Dominion     ...         ...         ...  167 

„      of  the  Little  to  Annoy  the  Great  182 

„      of  a  Wicked  Life,  The 258 

M       The  Pride  and  Insolence  of      ...  324 
„      of  Jehovah  Vindicated  ...         ...  329 

„       of  an  Impious  Queen      ...         ...  341 

„      of  Evil  to  Perpetuate  itself      ...  365 
ff      The    Conscious    Endowment  of 

Divine 390 

„      of  a  Good  Man  in  Extremity     ...  400 

„      of  Music,  The      403 

"       of  a  Child,  The 431 

„       The  Arrogance  of  ..  ...  602 

Powerlessness  of  the  Terrible  in  Moral 

Teaching...  ...  814 

M  of    Religious    Acts     Ex- 

plained    ...         ...         ...  421 

Praiseworthy  Efiforts  of  a  Good  King  ...  363 

Prayer,  A  Model  Dedicatory    114 

„        of  Solomon,  The  ...        69,117 

and  Natural  Law  m*         ...  121 

The  Unifying  Power  of  ...  123 

A  Preparation  for  Conflict       ...  124 
The  Sublimity  and  Efficacy  of  294 

The  Power  of 422 

The  Triumphs  of         456 

^  ...  ...  ...  ...  •••    044 

„        Life  Prolonged  in  Answer  to  ...  610 
Prayers  of  the  Good,  The  Faith  of  the 

Wicked  in  the 219 

Praying  Spirit,  Suggestive  Phases  of  the  296 
Preparations  for  a  Great  Work  ...     73 

Preparatory  Work  403 

Presence  of  God,  The 129 

Preservation  of    the  Holy   Scriptures, 

Ine       ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  Doz 

Pride        436 

Principles  Illustrated  in  the  Books  of 

Kings 655 

Privilege  and  Responsibility  of  Divine 

Manifestation  to  Man...         ...         ...   135 

Property  Wrongfully  Acquired  ...  555 

Promptitude  in  Christian  Service        ...     14 
Prophet,  Nathan  the  Type  of  »  True  ...       9 


» 


f» 


»> 


Prophet,  The  Unfaithful 

„        A  True 

„        Disciple,  The  ... 
„         An  Unfaithful... 

Prophet's  Hour  of  Darkness 


N 

f» 

n 
n 


PAOI 

861,  372 
...  402 
...  494 

...  221 
...  811 

Prosperity,     Prominent     Features     of 

National  ...         ...     64 

Its  Abuse  and  its  Nemesis  121 
The  Flood-Tide  of  National  154 
Of  the  Church,  The        ...  453 
An   Opportunity   for  Re- 
form          669 

Providence,  Divine         274 

„  The  Grandeur  and  Minute- 

ness of      ...         ...   426 

Public  Worship,  The  Kestoration  of    ...  632 

„        Reading  of  the  Divine  Word    ...  637 

Punishment  of  Sin,  The  Certainty  of  ...   182 

...  •••  ...  ...   ^^4 

of  the  Wicked  by  the 

Wicked    260 

The  Equity  of      336 

Pure  Literature 71 

Purpose,  The  Joy  of  an  Accomplished...   110 

The  Divine      204 

Fulfilled,  The  Divine 129 


ft 
» 


Pursuit  of  Truth... 


...  4^4 


Queen  of  Sheba  a  Type  of  the  Heathen 

Seeking  after  Truth 148 

„  „         Comes  to  Solomon    ...  160 

I,  „        The     Interchange     of 

Gifts    between     Solo- 
mon and      ..         ...  153 
n  y        The  Generation  of  the 

present  day  in  com* 
parison  with  the   ...   154 
^      The  Terrible  Power  of  an  Im- 


pious   ...         ••« 
,,       Athaliah  ...         ... 

Question,  A  Searching  ... 
Questionable  Generosity 


...  841 

...  623 

...  639 

...  139 


Rabshekah,     the     Wolf     In     Sheep's 

Clothing  698 

Rain,  The  297 

Raising  the  Widow's  Son  279 

Rank,  The  Responsibilities  of 255 

Reasons  for  the  Divine  Commands     m.  292 

Rebellion,  Defeat  of       17 

ff  ...  ...  ...  ...   loo 

„         and  its  Lessons        199 

„         The  Sources  and  Causes  of...  200 
„         The  Infatuation  of  ... 
Reckless  Drivers...         ...         ...         ...  499 

Reform,  Characteristics  of  a  Great      ...  686 

„        The  Bible  and 641 

Reformation,  National 61 

True        247 

Moral        M.  396 

Partial      898 

^  Failure  in  the  Work  of  ...  64 i 

Reformer,    Life    and    Lessons    of    the 

Great  Hel  rew 261 

,,  A  Resolute  Religious  ...  592 

Reforming  Work,  Imperfections  of  a  ...  517 
liegal  Maguihceuue,  The  Kugencias  of  14'i 


»» 


fltt 


OBNERAL  JNDEJL 


9$ 
M 


Regal  Government,  The  Ivory  Throne  « 

Symbol  of        166 

Regicide,  The      ...         ...  482 

Rehoboam  Holds  a  Council      202 

Rejection  of  God  the  Acme  of  Wicked- 
ness       258 

Relief,  The  Divine  Method  of 467 

„       Methods  of  Divine        403 

Religion  and  Art  ...     94 

„        the    Mightiest    Force  in    the 

Nation  107 

^       the  Glory  of  a  Nation 137 

^        A  Man-made  ...         ...         ...  206 

^        The  Necessity  of  Decision  in  293 

„        of  Fear,  The 588 

„        Mongrel  ...  589 

„        the  Strength  of  a  Ruler        ...  596 
Religious  Life,  The  Heart  the  Central 

Force  of  the ,         ...  176 

M        Reform  ...         244 

Reaction,  The  Symptoms  of...  247 

Compromise   ...         587 

Anarchy  ...         621 

Remonstrance  with  Evil-doers  ..        fi 

Remorse  of  Neglected  Opportunities  ...  832 

Rending  of  the  Kingdom,  The 196 

Repentance         ...         465 

Rescue  in  Extremity     274 

Responsibility,  Individual        20 

„  of  Intellectual  Greatness    71 

„  for  Wrong  Doings        ...  347 

Responsibilities  of  the  Monarch  ...     11 

Rest  of  the  People  of  God,  The  ...  128 

Restoration,  Solomon's  ..  ...         ...  167 

n  of    Regal    and    National 

Rights     527 

u  of  Public  Worship  ...  532 

^  of  the  House  of  God       ...  537 

„  of  God's  House,  The       ...  631 

Retirement,  The  Uses  of  ...         ...  397 

Retribution  of  a  Faithless  Friendship...     36 

of  Blood     ...         39 

of  a  Curse 43 

The  Agents  of  Divine  ...  180 
Great  Wickedness  and  ...  340 
The  Inexorable  Law  of  ...  362 
The  Inflexible   Exactitude 

of  ...  602 

„  The  Instrument  of  Divine  670 

Revenge,  The  Terrible  Pertinacity  of...     27 

„        The  Secrecy  of  183 

„        The  Terrible  Work  of  ...  497 

„        The  Desperation  of  ...         ...  622 

„         The  Barbarities  of     ...         ...  570 

Revengeful  Spirit,  A      ...         ...         ...  558 

Revelation  of  the  Divine  Purpose,  The  633 
Revolt  of  Adonijah         ...         ...         ...       3 

„       Its  Cause  and  Consequence     ...  194 

Re  ware  of  a  Tried  Fidelity       42 

Riches,  "^he  Leprosy  of...         •••         •«.  460 

„        1  he  Peril  of       614 

Right,  Th    Standard  of 246 

Righteousn  ess,  True  Courage  the  Fruit 

of  ...         340 

Ritualism,  T  ':ie  Empty  Pretences  of   ...  210 

Royal  Clemen -ity  ...         „ 21 

M      Penitent  A  •••        m*         •••  340 


Boyal  Automata...        •m       m* 


641 


Sacrifice  the  Test  of  Gratitude 181 

I,       The    Essence    of     Acceptable 

Worship        133 

Safeguardof  a  King,TheTrue 530 

Salvation,  The  Theme  of  a  True  Prophet  544 

„       God's  Plan  of 438 

Scenes  in  a  Nation's  Overthrow  ...  649 

Scriptures,  The  Preservation  of  ...  632 

Scoffer,  The  Doom  of  a 395 

Secresy  of  the  Divine  Workings         ...  413 

„      of  Revenge,  The  ^,         „.  183 

Sennacherib  and  Hezekiah       •••         ...  602 

Sensual  Indulgence        ...         7 

Servant  of  God,  A  True  416 

Service  of  God  and  the  Young  ...  449 

„       Promptitude  in  Christian       ...     14 
y,      of  False  Gods,  The  Testimony 

against  216 

Shemaiah,  a  Type  of  the  Lord's  Servants  205 
Shunammite's  Son         ...         ...         ...  418 

Silence     ...  699 

„      the  Greatest  Works  Proceed  in 

Deep>est         88 

Sin  ...        ...        ...        ...         ...  639 

„     The  Downward  Course  of 642 

„    The  Reassertive  Power  of 643 

„     The  Fatal  Consequences  of  ...  2S6 

A  Revolt      •••        „,  205 

of  Jeroboam  ...        —        •••  208 

•a.  a..    179 

...  •••     4o 

„     Infallibly  Exposed ...         —         •..     62 

„    The  Terrible  Havoc  of       509 

„     The  Divine  Treatment  of  ... 


»• 

,,     Idolatry,  The  ,,, 

„    The  Way  of  Death  ... 


„     The  Deadly  Power  of 
,.     Its  Poison  and  Cure 


...  464 
...  424 
>  ...   4^tj 

„     The  Victims  of,  a  Warning  ...  265 

,y    The  Source  of  National  Calamities  256 

„     Morally  Blinding 252 

„     The  Enormity  of 239 

Sins  of  Godly  Men        ...         ...         ...     29 

Sinner,  The  Responsibility  of  the       „,  683 

„       An  Inveterate 227 

„      The  Voice  of  Law  to  the        ...     38 

Slaughter,  A  Thirst  for ...  610 

Slavery,  The  Curse  of 144 

Solitariness  of  the  Good  m.         ...  294 

Solitude,  The  Teachings  of      •••         ...  271 

Solomon,  The  Coronation  of 14 

„       Accession  of    ...         16 

„       David's  Dying  Charge  to      ...     26 
Solomon's  Sacrificial  Festivity  .. .         ...     52 

Solomon,  The  Dream  of  ...         ...     55 

Solomon's  Choice  of  Wisdom 59 

Solomon,  The  Judgment  of      ...         ...     60 

Solomon's   Kingdom,  A  Type  of    the 

Messiah's         67 

Solomon,  The  Unique  Wisdom  of       ...     68 

„         A  Type  of  Christ      70 

Solomon's  Purpose  to  Build  a  House  to 

the  Lord  76 

Solomon,    Second   Appearance  of    Je- 
hovah to ..  136 

M  and  Hiram 141 


OBNERAL  INDEX, 


>» 


9k»m 

Solomon    Beceiving     the    Queen    of 

Sheba— A  Type  of  Christ  160 

„  The  Glory  of  157 

Solomon's  Fall  and  its  Lessons 162 

„         Restoration    ...         ...  ...   167 

Solomon,  The  Example  given   by  the 

Bible  in  the  Case  of        ...  172 
,,         The    Punishment   that    fell 

upon  179 

Solomon*?  Enemies        ...   182 

Solomon,  A  Type  of  Christ       187 

^  Reflected  Rays  from  the  Best 
Literary  Lights  on  the  Cha- 
racter and  Career  of  ...  205 

Son,  a  Dutiful 76 

Sordid  Spirit,  A ••         ...  449 

Sorrow  for  the  Dead       ...         ...         ...  236 

Sorrows,  The  Divine  Sympathy  forLittle  452 
Soul  as  the  House  of  God,  The  ...     90 

Soul's  Desire  and  Submission,  The     •••  437 

Spectacle,  A  Pathetic    ... 605 

„         A  Sublime •        •••  133 

Spirit,  A  Generous        ...         •••         •••  141 

„      A  Boastful  and  Arrogant         •••  597 

A  Submissive      619 

of  Kindness         ...         ...         ...     31 

^      The  Over-mastering  Power  of  a 

Covetous         ...         ...         ...  337 

„      A  Vacillating     339 

„      A  Covetous         426 

Standard  of  Divine  Judgment,  The     .    624 
Strength  and    Beauty   of    Moral  Cha- 
racter  ,-     90 

„      Divine —         ...  301 

Stubbornness  of  Crime  ...         •••        ...     42 

Submission  —        ...  598 

„  Unconditional         •••         ...  608 

„  Abject  326 

Success,  Thorough  Organization  an  Aid 

to  539 

„      The  Intoxication  of     558 

„      The  Vanity  of  an  Ill-gotten  ...  257 

Succour,  Divine  ...         ...         313 

Suflering,  The  Subduing  Power  of      ...  480 

„        National         ...         555 

Supernatural,  The  Vision  of  the  •••  460 
Superstition,  The  Rule  of        ...         ...  623 

Suppliant,  The  Haughty  435 

Suspicion,  Hunger  versus         ...         ...  470 

Symbolic  Teaching  of  the  Temple  •••  98 
Symptoms  of  Religious  Reaction         ...  247 

Teacher,  A  Faithful       636 

Temple  cf  Solomon,  an  Emblem  of  the 

Church  of  God  78 

Temple,  The  Glory  and  Pomp  of  the...  87 
„        The  Symbolic  Teaching  of  the     98 

,,        Dedication       133 

Temptations  of  Avarice  •••         „,     46 

„  to  Disobedience   ...         ...  219 

Tender  Heart,  A 634 

Testimony     against    Service    of    False 

Gods 216 

Time,  and  How  to  Measure  it  .••  ...  616 
Tombstone,  Lessons  of  an  Old  ••.  639 
Trade,  How  to  be  a  Christian  in  ...  160 
Trading 160 


rxoR 
Transitions  In  Life,  the  Danger  of      •••  137 

Translation  of  Elijah,  The        877 

Treasonable  Spirit,  The  Doom  of  a    ...     33 

Trial  and  Defeat  of  Idolatry     289 

„        its  Joyous  Issue        •—        •••417 
Tribute,  Payment  of      ...         •••         ...  679 

Triumphs  o*  Prayer,  The         445 

Trophies,  New  Uses  for  Old     529 

Trouble,  The  Good  Man  in  Time  of    ...  600 

True  Prophet,  A ...  402 

„  and  His  Message,  The  ...  266 

„    Philosophy,  The  Mission  of  a      ...   154 
Truth,    The    Queen     of     Sheba,     the 

the  Heathen,  Seeking  after  ...   148 
fP        Real  Knowledge  of  the  ...  280 

ff        The  Intrepidity  of        .••         ...  357 
pp        The  Pursuit  of ...        •••        •••  424 


...  264 

...  294 


Unbelief,  The  Audacity  of        m* 
„        The  Sullenness  of      .«• 

„         The  Seductive  Power  of  ...  620 

,,             ...            •..            ...            ...  ...   9iL 

Uncertainty  of  Earthly  Greatness  ...     22 
Unchangeableness      of      the       Divine 

Mercy,  The 654 

Undisciplined  Nature,  An        m«  •.    340 

Unexampled  Wickedness           ,•  234,  623 

„          Punishment         •—  ...  6i4t 

Unfaithful  Prophet,  An            .„  —  221 

Unifying  Power  of  Prayer,  The  ...  123 

Unrealized  Ideals  Not  Useless  .••  ...   113 

Upright  Life,  An            ...         ...  •••365 

••  #••  ^o3 


Usurper,  The  Doom  of  the 
Utilitarian,  The 


..  639 


Vacillating  Spirit,  A  ...  .m  •..  899 
Vain  Pretences  of  Idolatry        —         ,••  402 

„     Glory  Rebuked      ...         ...         •..615 

Valour,  Warlike  ...  ..         ...         ...  644 

Value  of  Friendship  Tested  in  Trouble...  6 
Vanity  and  Insecurity  of  Greatness,  The  173 

),     of  Disguise,  The...         361 

,,     of  Human  Greatness      ...         ...  604 

Vengeance,  The  Ministers  of  Divine   ...  486 
„  Divine         ...         .••         ...  252 

Verdict,  A  Common      ...         ...         ...  300 

„        of  Hope,  The  ...         ...         ...  421 

Vessels  of  the  Temple,  Signification  of 

the        102 

Vicissitudes  of  a  Monarch's  Life  •••  559 
Victims  of  Sin — a  Warning  .••  .••  265 
Victory,  The  Conditions  of  .••  •••  332 
Vineyard,  Naboth's         ...  ••         ...  339 

Virtue  of  a  Corpse,  The...  •••  ...  553 
Visit  under  the  Juniper  Tree  •••  ...  312 
Vision  to  Elisha's  Servant         ...         ...  457 

„       of  the  Supernatural,  The  •••  460 

Visions,  Heavenly  ...         ...         ...  357 

Visitor,  An  Unwelcome  ...         ...         ...  34S 

Voices  from  Naboth's  Vineyard  —.  389 

„       The  Ministry  of  Little  ...         ...  431 

War,  The  Terrible  Havoc  of     .^        ...  405 

„     The  Scourge  of     121 

Warhke  Policy,  The  Symptoms  of       ...  331 
M       Valour ...  644 


BENSnAL  INDEX. 


rhmm 
Warnings,  The  Terribleness  of  Unim- 
proved   287 

Warrior,  The  Christian 327 

Wasted  Love       175 

Watchfulness  of  the  Faithful  Minister...       9 

Watchman,  The  Minister  a      499 

Way.  The  Good 122 

Weak  Moments  of  a  Great  Man,  The  ...  302 
Weakness  and  Infirmity  in  Old  Age    ...      6 

Wealth,  The  Kesponsibility  of 539 

),        and    Wisdom  Compared    and 

Contrasted 158 

What  wouldest  thou?     II 

Wicked  Accomplices,  Inconstancy  of  ...    20 

„      The  Devices  of  the       249 

„      The  Punishment  of  the  Wicked 

by  the  250 

„      Life,  The  Inevitable  Doom  of  a  847 

Wickedness         579 

Bejection  of  God  the  Acme 

of 258 

The  Progress  of    262 

579 

Unites  Strange  Elements...       6 

„  Unexampled         234 

Widow's  Pot  of  OQ,  The  409 

,,        Cruse,  The       ^  412 

Wife,  A  Prudent  ...        ^        ...  421 

Winter  of  Life,  The       3 

Wisdom,  The  Love  of 147 

,,      A  Dream  of,  and  its  Reality...     58 

„      Solomon's  Choice  of 69 

„      of  Solomon,  The  Unique      ..,    68 
fy  n  xne       ,,,        •«•    70 

„      Kingly 77 

„      God-given       ..  460 

Wise  and  Good,  The  Counsel  of  the    ...      7 

„     Fool,  The 174 

Woeful  Disasters  of  an  Unholy  Alliance  483 

Woman,  The  Dignity  of  633 

Word.  Infallibility  of  the  Divine     226, 604 


»» 


•» 
ft 


PASS 

Word,  The  Unfailing  Certainty  of  the 

Divme 466 

„      The    Inflexible   Fidelity  of    the 

Divine 670 

^     The  Awakening   Power  of    the 

Divine 627 

,,      The   Church  the   Depository  of 

the  Divine  ...         ...  104 

H      The  Authority  of  the  Divine    ...  205 
y,      of  the  Lord  to  the  King  and  the 

Host     ...  205 

^      The  Public  Reading  of  God's    ...  637 
„      The  Unerring   Certitude  of  the 

Divine 639 

Work,  Preparatory         403 

„      for  God 495 

Workmen  at  the  Temple  Building      ...     78 
World's  Reformation,  The  Agents  of  the  526 
Worldly  and  the  Religious  Spirit  a  Con- 
trast   300 

Worship,  A  False  264 

„        Sincerity  in 616 

„        Innovations  in  Divine           ...  675 
„        Sacrifice  the  Essence  of  Ac- 
ceptable        107 

„        The  Love  of  Divme 567 

Worth  of  Godly  Counsel,  The 635 

Wrath,  The  Divine        634 

Young,  The  Effects  of  Idolatry  upon 

the       396 

„        The  Service  of  God  and  the  ...  494 

„        A  Lesson  for  the        631 

Youth,  The  Reckless  Frivolity  of        ...  203 
Youthful  Piety,  Josiah  an  Example  of...  630 


Zeal  for  God        

„    in  Executing  Divine  Judgments 


613 
506 

„    Religions     496 

Zion,  Hints  of  the  Coarse  of  Things  in  460 


3  1197  00441  9385 


DATE  DUE 

MUN  ?  7  1^ 

JUN  2  ^     ^ 

1 

! 

1 

DE  '.1C  O    ,-iH-^  -^  ; 

