THE    LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  U    IV^RSITY 

PROVO,  UTAH 


> 


\ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet10newy 


THE  PREACHER'S  COMMENTARY 


ON    THE 


BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH. 


THE 


jpreacher's   CHomplck  ^)ointltttcal 

COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


OLD    TESTAMENT 

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN), 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS, 


XrtD  ¥orfe 

FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

i89« 


\//(0 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


BOOK    OF    NEHEMIAH 

(CHAPTERS   VII.  TO   XIII.) 


BY 


HEV.  W.   H.   BOOTH,  REV.  J.   H.   GOODMAN, 


AND 


REV.  S.  GREGORY. 


FUNK    ^    WAGNALLS    COMPANY  ) 
London  and  Toronto 
1S92 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY 


ON 


NEHEMIAH. 


CHAPTER  VIL 

Explanatory  Notes.]  "The  second  section  of  this  book  (chaps,  vii. — xii  43)  furnishes  a 
description  of  the  further  efforts  of  Neheraiah  to  increase  and  insure  the  prosperity  of  the  community 
in  Judah  and  Jerusalem :  first,  by  securing  Jerusalem  from  hostile  attacks ;  then,  by  seeking  to 
increase  the  population  of  the  city ;  and,  lastly,  by  endeavouring  to  bring  the  domestic  and  civil  life 
of  the  people  into  conformity  with  the  precepts  oi  the  law,  and  thus  to  furnish  the  necessary  moral 
and  religious  basis  for  the  due  development  of  the  covenant  people." — Keil.  It  is  generally  supposed 
that  Nehemiah's  return  to  Persia  must  be  inserted  after  xii.  43 ;  the  remainder  of  the  book  narrating 
his  later  reforms.  Bishop  Hervey,  however,  suggests  that  the  work  stopped  immediately  after  the 
events  narrated  in  vi.  16 — 19,  and  that  chapter  vii.  goes  on  to  relate  the  measures  adopted  by 
Nehemiah  upon  his  return  with  fresh  powers.  1 — 3.  The  watching  of  the  city  provided  for.  1. 
Porters  .  .  .  singers  .  .  .  Levites  were  appointed]  In  olden  time  each  had  a  separate  work.  The 
porters  guarded  the  gates  of  the  temple.  They  were  reckoned  by  genealogies,  and  separated  into  various 
divisions  (see  1  Chron.  ix.  17 — 27;  xxvi.  1 — 19).  The  singers  had  charge  of  the  service  of  song 
(1  Chron.  vi.  31),  and  **  their  brethren  the  Levites  were  appointed  unto  all  manner  of  service  of  the 
tabernacle  of  the  house  of  God  "  (1  Chron.  vi.  48).  **  Under  the  present  extraordinary  circumstances 
Nehemiah  committed  also  to  these  two  organized  corporations  the  task  of  keeping  watch  over  the 
walls  and  gates  of  the  city,  and  placed  them  under  the  command  of  his  brother  Hanani  and  of 
Hananiah,  tlie  ruler  of  the  citadel.  This  is  expressed  by  the  words  (ver.  2),  '  I  gave  Hanani  .  .  . 
and  Hananiah  .  .  .  charge  over  Jerusalem.*  " — Keil.  2.  The  ruler  of  the  palace]  The  marshal  or 
chamberlain  of  the  vice-regal  court  which  Nehemiah  had  maintained  in  Jerusalem. — Jamieson. 
8.  Let  not  the  gates  be  opened  until  the  sun  be  hot]  In  the  East  it  is  customary  to  open  the 
gates  of  a  city  at  sunrise,  and  to  bar  them  at  sunset— a  rule  which  is  very  rarely,  and  not  except  to 


174  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  vii. 

persons  of  authority,  infringed.  Nehemiah  recommended  that  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  should  not  be 
opened  until  broad  day.  An  earlier  opening  might  expose  the  city  to  a  sudden  surprise.  By  day 
the  special  guard  were  to  watch ;  by  night  the  inhabitnnts.  4.  The  city  was  large  and  great,  &c.] 
Broad  on  both  sides  regarded  from  the  centre.  After  the  fashion  of  Oriental  towns,  the  houses  standing 
apart,  with  gardens  and  orchards  intervening.  6 — 69.  Genealogy  of  those  who  came  at  the  first 
out  of  Babylon]  "  Nehemiah  discovered  a  register  of  the  first  detachment  who  had  come  under  the 
care  of  Zerubbabel.  It  is  transcribed  in  the  following  verses,  and  differs  in  some  few  particulars 
from  that  given  in  Ezra  ii. ;  but  the  discrepancy  is  sufficiently  accounted  for  from  the  different 
circumstances  in  which  the  two  registers  were  taken — that  of  Ezra  having  been  made  up  at  Babylop, 
while  that  of  Nehemiah  was  drawn  out  in  Judaea,  after  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  had  been  rebuilt. 
The  lapse  of  so  many  years  might  well  be  expected  to  make  a  difference  appear  in  the  catalogue, 
through  death  or  other  causes ;  in  particular,  one  person  being,  according  to  Jewish  custom,  called 
by  different  names.  Thus  Hariph  (ver.  24)  is  the  same  as  Jorah  (Kzra  ii.  18),  Sia  (ver.  47)  the  same 
as  Siaha  (Ezra  ii.  44),  &c.  Besides  other  purposes  to  which  this  genealogy  of  the  nobles,  rulers, 
and  people  was  subservient,  one  leading  object  contemplated  by  it  was  to  ascertain  with  accuracy 
tlie  parties  to  whom  the  duty  legally  belonged  of  ministering  at  the  altar,  and  conducting  the  various 
services  of  the  temple;  and  for  guiding  to  exact  information  in  this  important  point  of  inquiry  the 
possession  of  the  old  register  of  Zerubbabel  was  invaluable." — Jamieson.  39 — 42.  The  priests]  Only 
four  of  the  courses  returned  from  the  captivity.  43.  The  Levites]  "  Assistants  of  the  priests  in  Divine 
worship." — Keil.  44.  The  singers]  Only  sons  of  Asaph  returned.  45.  The  porters]  Door-keepers. — 
Keil.  46—56.  The  Nethinims]  See  on  chap.  iii.  26.  57—60.  Solomon's  servants]  "Doubtless 
those  whom  Solomon  enslaved  of  the  Canaanites  (see  1  Kings  ix.  20,  21).  Their  descendants  were 
probably  regarded  as  engrafted  into  Israel,  as  were  the  Gibeonites  " — Crosby.  70.]  "  With  verse  69 
the  register  ends,  and  the  thread  of  Nehemiah's  history  is  resumed.  He  was  the  Tirshatha  or 
governor,  and  the  liberality  displayed  by  him  ;ind  some  of  the  leading  men  for  the  suitable  equipment 
of  the  ministers  of  religion  forms  the  subject  of  the  remaining  portion  of  the  chapter.  Their 
donations  consisted  principally  in  garments.  In  the  East  a  present  of  garments,  or  of  any  article 
of  use,  is  conformable  to  the  prevailing  sentiments  and  customs  of  society."  Drams  of  gold]  i.  e. 
darics.  A  daric  was  a  gold  coin  of  ancient  Persia,  worth  £1  6s.  71.  Pound  of  silver]  i.  e.  mina 
(sixty  shekels,  or  £9).  73.  So  .  .  .  all  Israel  dwelt  in  their  cities]  "  The  utility  of  these  genealogical 
registers  was  thus  found  in  guiding  to  a  knowledge  of  the  cities  and  localities  in  each  tribe  to  which 
every  family  anciently  belonged." — Jamieson. 

HOMILETICAL  CONTEJS'TS  OF  CHAPTER  VII. 

Ver.  1—3.  Finished  Work.  I  \^er.            5.  Family  Traditions. 

„          2.  The  Best  Testimonial.  ,,     70—72.  The  Enthusiasm  of  Generosity, 

„           4.  The  Spaciousness  and  Emitiness  of       ,,             73.  Toilers  Resting, 

the  City  of  God.  I 

Finished  Work. 

vii.  1 — .^.  Now  it  came  to  pass^  when  the  wall  was  built,  and  I  had  set  up  the 
doors,  and  the  po7'ters  and  the  singers  and  the  Levites  were  appointed,  that  I  gave 
my  brother  Hanani,  and  Hananiah  the  ruler  of  the  palace,  charge  over 
Jerusalem  :  for  he  ivas  a  faithful  man,  mid  feared  God  above  mamj.  And  I  said 
unto  them.  Let  not  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  he  opened  until  the  sun  be  hot ;  and 
while  they  stand  by,  let  them  shut  the  do  >rs,  and  bar  them :  and  appoint  watches 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  every  one  in.  his  watch,  and  every  one  to  be  over 
against  his  house. 

The  narrative  has  traced  the  progress  of  the  work — its  inception,  its  difficulties, 
its  opponents ;  now  the  last  stone  has  been  lifted  into  its  place,  and  i?^ehemiah 
looks  upon  his  finished  luork.  This  is  fitting ;  it  is  beautiful,  but  withal  uncommon. 
*'God  saw  everything  that  he  had  made,  and  behold  it  was  very  good."  And  the 
evening  fell  upon  a  finished  world.  *•  Father,  the  hour  is  come.  I  have  glorified 
thee  on  the  earth  :  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do."  And 
when  the  darkness  at  the  crucifixion  rolled  away,  the  sun  looked  upon  a  finished 
redemption.  Of  John  the  Baptist  and  Paul  the  Apostle  it  is  written,  they  "  finished 
their  course,"  as  if  there  were  no  incompleteness  of  character  or  tasks  left  undone. 
Uncommon !  *.  *.v  -,    .    - 

I.  Every  man  has  some  work  td  do.'   It  is  well  surely,  it  is  needful  certainly, 


PROVO, 


W  k  A-k.}L  k 


CHAP.  VII.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEIIEMIAH.  175 


that  we  be  reminded  that  business  is  a  sacred  thing,  and  that  duty  is  a  bow  set  in 
the  firmament  that  is  above  every  one  of  us.  Right  and  wrong  are  not  theological 
terms  to  be  accurately  defined  in  Christian  pulpits,  and  spasmodically  sought  on 
holy  days.  The  word  work  lias  all  but  infinite  meanings.  It  was  fitting  that  the 
man  who  perhaps  more  than  any  other  in  our  country  has  taught  the  sacredness  of 
work  should  have  a  medal  struck  in  his  honour  when  he  reached  the  patriarchal 
age  of  eighty.  That  in  us  which  is  best  and  truest  says  that  the  man  whom  we 
delight  to  honour  is  he  who  can  widen  our  conception  of  duty,  who  can  cherish 
in  us  the  faith  that  this  is  God's  world,  not  the  devil's  world,  and  that  life  is  more 
important  than  death.  To  live  in  this  spirit  is  no  child's  play.  A  merchant  who 
strives  to  conduct  a  large  business  on  Christian  principles,  who  endeavours  to  divest 
himself  of  the  prejudices  of  habit  and  the  customs  of  those  around  him,  will  soon  dis- 
cover that  the  commonplace  "  honesty  is  the  best  policy  "  is  not  true  in  the  first 
and  most  obvious  interpretation  which  is  put  upon  it.  Let  any  one  of  us  try  to 
take  up  the  petty  details  of  each  day's  work  and  ennoble  them  by  the  spirit  in 
which  they  are  done,  and  it  shall  not  be  easy.  But  be  it  remembered  that,  after 
all,  the  formation  of  his  character  is  a  man's  true  work.  Every  work  should  bear 
relation  to  the  one  indispensable  thing,  "  meetness  to  be  partakers  of  the  inherit- 
ance of  the  saints  in  light." 

II.  Few  men  leave  their  tasks  complete.  Finished  work — that  suggests 
unfinished  work.  Nehemiah,  the  rebuilder  of  Jerusalem,  reminds  us  of  David,  the 
projector  of  Jerusalem.  There  is  much  of  human  feeling  in  those  words  of  David 
in  which  he  refers  to  his  unpermitted  purpose.  Shortly  before  his  death — at  that 
period  of  life  when  men  become  prophetic — he  assembled  the  chiefs  of  the  people, 
and  said,  "  I  had  in  mine  heart  to  build  a  house  of  rest  for  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord,  and  for  the  footstool  of  our  God,  and  had  made  ready  for  the 
building:  but  God  said  unto  me,  Thou  shalt  not  build  a  house  for  my  name. 
Solomon  thy  son,  he  shall  build  my  house  and  my  courts"  (1  Chron.  xxviii.). 
Much  work  is  planned  but  never  executed;  more  is  begun  which  is  not  completed. 
There  were  brave  men  before  Agamemnon,  only  no  poet  arose  to  sing  their  deeds. 
He  who,  sitting  in  the  hull  of  some  forest  tree,  first  struck  out  upon  the  sea  was 
one  of  the  bravest  men  who  ever  lived,  but  his  name  those  who  heard  it  have  not 
transmitted.  Yet  the  art  of  ship-building  had  its  birth  in  that  man's  brain.  There 
is  an  element  of  sadness  in  the  fact  that  David  only  gathered  the  materials  to 
build  the  temple.  The  idea  of  that  temple  floated  in  his  mind,  lay  concealed  there  ; 
grew  slowly,  as  all  great  things  grow.  Even  the  pattern  was  partly  conceived. 
Nothing  was  wanting  but  a  Divine  permission,  and  that  was  withheld.  David  was 
happy  in  that  the  work  was  entrusted  to  his  son  Solomon.  For  that  man  is  honoured 
who  conceives  a  noble  project,  and  sees  his  children  rise  up  to  carry  it  out. 
When  in  this  best  and  truest  sense  is  fulfilled  the  old  promise  that  after  the 
fathers  shall  come  up  the  children,  it  is  well.  Such  a  man  may  well  take  a  fare- 
well of  the  world,  and  say,  ''  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace." 
Perhaps  that  man  is  happier  who,  like  Nehemiah,  lives  to  complete  his  own  work. 
One  hardly  knows.  Of  one  thing  we  may  be  certain — this  is  the  exception,  the 
other  is  the  rule.  There  are  few  cemeteries  in  which  you  will  not  find  a  broken 
column;  broken  not  by  accident,  or  stress  of  weather,  but  by  the  sculptor's 
hammer,  to  indicate  that  the  life  of  him  who  sleeps  beneath  was  snapped  asunder, 
his  purposes  suddenly  hindered.  As,  however,  God  does  not  work  without  a  pur- 
pose and  a  plan,  there  must  be,  there  is,  a  meaning  in  this.  The  world  is  a  huge 
clock-work.  Each  man  is  a  part  of  and  necessary  to  the  whole.  The  individual 
is  insignificant.  His  work  is  partial.  Division  (^f  labour  is  necessary.  One  man's 
skiU  needful  to  all  men's  well-being.  One  country  has  what  another  lacks.  Life 
is  a  aeries  of  beginnings.  A  human  life  is  little  more  than  a  beginning.  Three- 
score years  and  ten  are  too  few  in  which  to  accomplish  much.  "  No  day  without 
a  line  "  was  a  motto  of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.     Most  men  might  imitate  a  famous 


176  nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  vit. 


carver,  who  wlien  he  exhibited  his  work  wrote  underneath,  "  Lysippus  has  some- 
thing more  to  add  to  this."  In  the  artist's  mind  the  picture  is  perfect,  on  his 
canvas  the  picture  is  incomplete.  It  is  only  in  a  relative  sense,  only  with  mental 
reserve  and  understood  apology,  that  any  man  can  say  of  himself,  "  I  have  finished 
the  work."  The  story  of  owe  joint  work  is  pictured  in  the  history  of  our  cathedrals. 
Norman  barons,  pious  queens,  monks  of  a  long-forgotten  age,  and  bishops  of 
to-day  have  prayed  and  begged,  toiled  and  given,  to  make  them  what  they  are. 
This  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  We  work  for  eternity.  We  are 
strangers  and  sojourners,  as  all  our  fathers  were. 

III.  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  ahideth  for  ever.  His  work  may  not 
abide.  Nehemiah's  did.  A  builder's  work  is  lasting.  All  necessary  work  is  not. 
The  eloquence  of  Chalmers  will  one  day  be  only  a  memory  ;  the  bridges  of  Brunei 
and  Stephenson  will  tell  their  tale  to  many  generations.  But  the  influence  of 
Chalmers  will  abide.  Your  task  may  not  be  permanent ;  it  has  in  it  some  per- 
manent element.  What  is  greater  than  the  work  1  The  man  who  does  it.  An 
invading  army  may  destroy  Nehemiah's  wall,  but  not  the  memory  of  Nehemiah's 
character.  The  temple  of  David  and  Solomon  is  destroyed,  but  the  Church  has 
preserved  their  songs  and  copied  their  example  in  building  a  house  for  the  Lord. 
They  abide  for  ever.  Let  us  do  our  work  reliant  on  Him  who  is  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever. 

Illustrative  Poem; — 

SOMETHING  LEFT  UNDONE. 

**  Labour  with  what  zeal  we  will, 
Something  still  remains  undonOi 
Something  uncompleted  still 
Waits  the  rising  of  the  sun. 

By  the  bedside,  on  the  stair, 

At  the  threshold,  near  the  gates, 
With  its  menace  or  its  prayer, 

Like  a  mendicant  it  waits  ; 

Waits,  and  will  not  go  away ; 

Waits,  and  will  not  be  gainsaid ; 
By  the  cares  of  yesterday 

Each  to-day  is  heavier  made  ; 

Till  at  length  the  burden  seems 

Greater  than  our  strength  can  bear, 
Heavy  as  the  weight  of  dreams, 

Pressing  on  us  everywhere. 

And  we  stand  from  day  to  day, 

Like  the  dwarfs  of  times  gone  by, 
Who,  as  Northern  legends  say, 

On  their  shoulders  held  the  sky." — Longfellow, 

The  Best  Testimonial. 

vii.  2.  I  gave  my  brother  Hanan%  and  Hananiah  the  ruler  of  the  palacey 
charge  over  Jerusalem :  for  he  was  a  faithful  maUy  and  feared  God  above 
many. 

The  obscure  men  and  women  of  the  Bible  furnish  a  study  as  interesting  as  it  is 
practically  inexhaustible.  Who  was  Hanani  1  A  brother  of  Nehemiah,  who  took 
a  journey  to  Susa  to  visit  his  brethren  (ch.  i.  2).  Who  was  Hananiah  1  Kuler  of 
the  palace  at  Jerusalem.  Ko  further  biographic  facts  are  discoverable.  *'  Apelles 
approved  in  Christ"  (Rom.  xvi.  10).  Approved  in  Christ;  what  character  lies 
behind  that  commendation  !     But  how  little  of  the  private  history  of  Apelles  can 


CHAP.  VII.]  liOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAIT.  177 

investigation  furnish.  So  with  Paul's  friends  in  general.  Nehcmiah  and  Hanani. 
Two  brothers  whose  paths  diverged.  Th(;y  started  in  life  together  :  one  scaled  the 
heights  until  he  stood  on  the  steps  to  the  throne  ;  the  other  moved  in  the  quiet 
vales  of  lowly  life.  Both  retained  allegiance  to  the  God  of  their  fathers  ;  both 
maintained  loyalty  to  cotiscienoe  ;  and  each  reverenced  the  other.  A  not  too 
common  thing — a  brother's  testimony  to  a  brother's  virtue.  Fox  though  the 
description  of  a  faithful  God-fearing  man  grammatically  applies  to  Hananiah,  it  is 
equally  applicable  in  fact  to  Hanani.  He  preferred  Jerusalem  above  his  chief  joy. 
A  prophet  is  often  without  honour  in  his  own  country.  "  A  man's  foes  shall  be 
they  of  his  own  household."  To  be  *'  sympathetic  with  the  loads  we  see  on  others, 
forgetful  of  our  own,"  argues  no  small  degree  of  saintliness.  Nehemiah  honoured 
himself  by  honouring  Hanani  and  Hananiah. 

I.  A  true  man's  relation  to  God.  "  Hananiah  feared  God  above  many." 
Religious  reverence,  a  fear  that  hath  not  torment,  was  the  basis  of  his  character. 
"  The  God  of  my  father,  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  fear  of  Isaac  "  was  Jacob's 
description  of  his  God.  01 1  Testament  "  fear  "  melts  into  New  Testament  "  faith 
and  love."  Patriarchs  and  propliets  lived  under  the  constraining  influence  of  "  the 
fear  of  God  ; "  apostles  and  martyrs  felt  the  sweet  reasonableness  of  "  the  love  of 
Christ."  The  phrase  is  changed,  but  not  the  substance.  Life  hath  its  centre  not 
in  self,  but  in  God.  Selfishness  is  the  most  ignoble  motive  of  action.  All  true 
life  begins  with  God.  The  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  ladder  between 
the  earth  on  which  we  stand  and  the  heaven  in  which  God  dwells.  Christ  came 
not  to  destroy.  He  expounded,  illumined,  fulfilled  the  descriptions  of  religious 
life  he  found  already.  Do  not  take  old-time  reverence  out  of  your  holy  fear  of 
God  whilst  you  infuse  into  it  more  of  the  warmth  of  love  and  trust.  Our  God  is 
more  fully  revealed  to  us  ;  but  their  God  is  our  God  for  ever.  "  Serve  the  Lord 
with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling,"  urges  the  Psalmist ;  **  Work  out  your  own 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  counsels  the  Apostle. 

II.  A  true  man's  relation  to  his  fellows.  *'  Hananiah,  a  faithful  man."  Firm, 
stable,  enduring ;  a  trustworthy  man.  In  a  judge  this  is  integrity ;  in  a  witness, 
truth.  "  Fear  "  and  *'  faithfulness  "  are  inseparable.  Our  modern  equivalents  are 
profession  and  practice,  creed  and  conduct  The  path  reveals  the  purpose,  the  life 
confirms  the  lip.  "Faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  dead,  being  alone."  Faulty 
conduct  does  not  adorn  a  faultless  creed.  Notable  devotion  in  church  must  be 
supported  by  noteworthy  uprightness  in  business.  If  the  temple  of  our  character 
rests  upon  pillars  of  dishonesty,  its  rottenness  and  instability  will  soon  appear.  If 
the  first  table  of  commandments  be  written  in  the  chancel,  the  second  table  must 
be  suspended  in  the  counting-house.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts." 
Only  thus  can  you  sanctify  him  in  your  lives.  A  Christian  man  ought  to  be  able 
to  show  a  bold  front  to  the  world.  Let  him  strive  ever  to  keep  a  conscience  void 
of  offence  toward  men  as  well  as  toward  God.  If  the  laws  of  trade  are  not  com- 
patible with  the  laws  of  God,  so  much  the  worse  for  the  laws  of  trade.  You  may 
bend  if  you  will,  but  alas  if  you  cringe  because  you  must !  You  must  forgive  your 
enemies,  you  must  not  fear  them.  Men  of  the  world  seal  the  lips  of  (so-called) 
Christian  men  when  these  show  inconsistencies  in  life.  Would  you  reprove  sin  ? 
Then  your  daily  life  must  rebuke  it.  Do  you  desire  to  maintain  the  character  of  a 
God-fearing  man  ?  The  penalty  you  must  pay  is  to  deserve  the  character  of  a 
faithful  man.  "  He  that  lovetli  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he 
love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ? " 

III.  A  true  man's  reward  in  this  world.  "  I  gave  Hananiah  charge  over 
Jerusalem."  Loyalty  and  royalty  are  not  far  apart.  Those  who  will  rule  must 
learn  to  obey.  Hananiah  had  been  ''  faithful  over  a  few  things,"  he  was  now  to 
be  made  "  ruler  over  many  things."  No  vote  of  thanks  for  what  he  had  done. 
No  testimonial  raised.  Simply  higher  work  and  more  of  it.  Capacity  creates 
responsibility.    Power  demands  performance.    '*  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given," 


I7S  HOMTLKTTC  rOMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  vn. 


Application.  1.  Graduate  in  the  school  of  Christ.  There  is  no  limit  to  your 
knowledi;^e  except  your  power  of  acquirement.  Do  not  be  content  with  con- 
ventional standards  of  devotion.  Obey  conscience,  worship  duty,  fear  God  above 
many.  Tims  did  Hananiah.  2.  Enter  the  sacred  hierarchy  of  those  who  look  not 
every  man  on  his  oton  things,  hut  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others.  Look  for 
virtues  in  your  brethren.  Be  not  like  those  who,  "  seeing  many  things,  observe 
not."  Some  flowers  grow  in  the  shade.  Many  men  like  Hanani  and  Hananiah 
ar.'.  hidden  until  some  I^Tehemiah  discover.-^  them.  Recognize  and  reverence  good- 
ness wherever  you  find  it.  Say  not,  ''  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of 
Nazareth  ? "  "  Are  not  his  mother  and  his  sisters  with  us  ? "  Thank  God  for 
wliat  the  man  is,  and  aid  the  purpose  of  God  by  placing  the  man  where  he  should 
he.     Thus  did  JSTehemiah. 

ILLUSTRATION 

"  *  He  was  a  faithful  man,  and  feared  God  above  mamj.'  It  is  said  of  Obadiab  that  he  feared 
the  Lord  greatly.  Every  saint  fears  the  Lord,  but  every  saint  does  not  greatly  fear  him.  Oh, 
there  are  but  few  Obadiahs  in  the  world,  I  mean  among  the  saints  on  earth.  As  Paul  said 
of  Timothy,  '  I  have  none  "like-minded,"  *  so  it  may  be  said  of  some  concerning  the  fear  of  the 
Ijord  ;  they  have  scarce  a  fellow,  Hananiah  had  got,  as  to  the  exercise  of  and  growth  in  this 
grace,  the  start  of  many  of  his  brethren  He  '  feared  God  above  many.'  Now,  then,  seeing  this 
grace  admits  of  degrees,  and  is  in  some  stronger,  and  in  some  weaker,  let  us  be  all  awakened,  as  to 
other  graces,  so  to  this  grace  also:  that  like  as  you  abound  iu  everything,  in  faith,  in  utterance,  in 
knowledge,  and  in  all  diligence,  and  in  your  love  to  us,  see  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace  also." — 
Banyan, 

The  Spaciousness  and  Emptiness  of  the  City  op  God. 

vii.  4.     Now  the  city  was  large  and  great :  but  the  people  were  few  therein,  and  the 

houses  ivere  not  builded. 

The  spaciousness  and  emptiness  of  the  city.     How  beautiful  the  orders,  laws, 

city  of  God!    This  phrase  suggests  God's  and  privileges  thereof!     God  her  king 

doincy  and  man's  misdoing.      ''  With  his  dwells  in  her ;  angels  and  ministers  are 

sword  and  with   his    bow  "  David    the  her  watchmen  and  guard  ;  believers  are 

warrior-king  captured  the  city ;  with  his  her  free  citizens,   entitled   to   all    the 

wealth  he  endowed  it ;  to  Solomon  his  fulness  of  God ;  his  salvation,  providen- 

son  he  committed  its  keeping.     Under  tial  preservation,  and  system  of  sacred 

tliH.  hand  of  Solomon  it  grew;  the  great  government  are  her  walls  (Isa.  Ixii.  12). 

of    other   nations    came   to   behold   its  She  is  called  a  great  city  because  of  her 

magnificence  ;  silver  was  as  plentiful  as  extent,    and   the   vast   number   of  her 

stone  and  cedar  trees  as    numerous   as  members  (^ev.  xxi.  10) ;  a  holy  city  be- 

sycamores :    it   was  "  the    city   of    the  cause  of  the  holiness  of  her  Founder, 

great  king."     When  Nehemiah  came  it  laws,  ordinances,  and  members,  and  end 

was  almost  a  silent  city,  as  a  city  of  the  of  erection  (Rev.  xi.  2)  ;  and  the  city  of 

dead.     "  The  entire  number  of  Jews  who  God  because  he  planned,  built,  peopled, 

returned  in  Gyrus'  day  to  Jerusalem  was  rules,  protects,  and  dwells  in  her  (Heb. 

small  —  about  50,000  out  of   millions,  xii.  22)."     "  Heaven  is  represented  as  a 

Piety,  patriotism,  and  desire  for  change  city,  a  city  with  twelve  foundations,  a 

were  three  motives  at  work  in  the  50,000.  holy  city.     What  giory,   order,   safety, 

But  what  a  vast  mass  were  unmoved  by  and  happiness  are  there  enjoyed  by  the 

any   of"  these    motives,  and  were    well  multitudes  of  saints  !  how  perfect  and 

satisfied  with  their  exile !     Some,  how-  durable  their  state  of  felicity!  and  all 

ever,  like  Daniel,  remained  from  high  of  it  founded  on  the  purchase  of  Christ ! 

and  holy  motives.     The  Jewish  people  None  but  holy  persons  do  ever  enter  it, 

is  a  remnant.^' — Crosby.  nor  is  aught  but  holiness  ever  practised 

I.  The  spaciousness  of  the  city  of  therein(Heb.  xi.  10, 16)." — Wood.    The 

God.    "  The  Church  on  earth  is  called  a  Church    was    made  for  man.     What 


CHAP.   YIl] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH, 


179 


pages  of  history  have  been  blurred  and 
blotted  in  tlie  strife  to  narrow  the  en- 
trance ;  to  make  the  Church  for  man  a 
Churcli  for  men.  Not  from  Rome  only, 
from  the  east  and  the  west,  from  the 
north  and  the  south  they  have  come 
who  would  limit  the  rights  of  men  and 
monopolize  the  city  of  God.  A  city; 
a  kingdom.  Whose  city]  who  is  the 
king  %  '^  All  the  ends  of  the  earth," 
"  all  nations,*'  '*  sinners,"  these  are  the 
catchwords  of  Old  and  IS'ew  Testament 
teaching.  The  works  of  men  are  con- 
tracted ;  the  creations  of  God  are  broad, 
limitless.  The  quiet  star-lit  sky,  how 
suggestive  of  boundless  space.  The  all- 
embracing  atmosphere,  how  emblematic 
of  an  all-seeing  and  all-interested  Pre- 
sence. Everywhere  is  the  only  limit 
that  can  be  assigned  to  God ;  to  every 
one  the  only  limit  to  the  offer  of  his 
great  gifts.  "  According  to  his  glorious 
riches  he  shall  supply  all  your  need." 
"  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but 
delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall 
he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things  1 "  This  city  is  destined  to  grow. 
The  Church  is  blessed  first  inwardly 
and  then  outwardly.  Eeligion  deepened 
within  her  pale,  then  extension.  In  the 
history  of  the  first  Church  there  are  the 
*' notes"  of  the  Church's  life  before  the 
announcement  of  the  Church's  increase 
(Acts  ii.  42—47).  The  Holy  Ghost  first 
fell  on  the  assembled  disciples,  then 
there  were  added  three  thousand  souls. 
The  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith 
dawns  upon  a  Luther,  and  a  Reformation 
follows.  The  brotherhood  of  man  arrests 
Wilberforce — "  bows  the  tall  soul  as  by 
wind  " — and  the  slave-trade  is  doomed  ; 
its  extinction  is  thenceforward  only  a 
question  of  time. 

"  The  golden  side  of  Heaven's  great  shield  is  faith, 
The  silver  reason." 

The  gospel  has  an  element  of  Divinity 
in  the  comprehensive  way  in  which  it 
claims  all  our  service  and  the  service  of 
all.  None  are  exempted.  None  are 
allowed  to  do  partial  fealty.  '*  Let  the 
people  praise  thee,  0  God;  let  all  the 
people  praise  thee." 

II.  The  emptiness  of  the  city  of  God, 
''Are  there  few  that  be  saved T'     Do 


you  waive  that  question  of  curiosity? 
**  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  : 
for  many  will  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall 
not  be  able."  Take  heed  to  thyself. 
"Look  to  yourselves,  that  we  lose  not 
those  things  which  we  have  wrought ; 
but  that  we  receive  a  full  reward." 
Leave  the  future,  busy  thyself  with  the 
practical,  pressing  present.  Now  at  any 
rate  "few"  enough  are  saved.  In  any 
civilized  Christian  city  the  population 
divides  into  two  classes — the  churchgoing 
and  non-churchgoing.  If  all  were  dis- 
posed to  attend  Church,  they  could  not. 
Christian  and  heathen  countries.  All 
are  not  "soldiers  of  Christ."  What 
then  1  Despair  1  Nay,  work,  pray,  wait. 
We  see  not  as  yet  all  things  put  under 
Christ.  But  "he  must  reign."  And 
we  understand  a  Divine  must. 

"  Let  the  echo  fly 
The  spacious  earth  around  " 

The  Church  has  done  much ;  the  world 
needs  her  to  do  more.  Success  has 
followed  missionary  effort  at  home  and 
abroad.  A  kneeling  Church  has  risen 
strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power 
of  his  might  to  lengthen  her  cords, 
strengthen  her  stakes,  and  multiply  her 
converts.  "As  Jerusalem,  in  Nehemiah's 
time,  extended  far  on  both  sides,  and 
was  scantily  populated,  so  also  the  city 
of  God  in  all  times  has  had  space  for 
new  additions  to  its  population.  For, 
in  truth,  the  rich  possessions  which  God 
has  prepared  in  his  Church  for  man- 
kind would  only  then  be  sufficiently 
turned  to  profit  when  every  one  called 
man  should  enjoy  them,  and  it  were 
itself  full  and  sufficiently  built  out  and 
all  had  entered  in.  For  that  God,  who 
has  made  all  things  for  himself,  and  for 
that  Lord  who  has  redeemed  all,  the 
totality  alone,  from  which  none  is  lost, 
forms  a  sufficiently  great  people."  — 
Schultz.  The  time  is  coming  when  the 
nations  shall  stretch  ©ut  their  hands 
unto  God,  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
sing  praises  unto  the  Lord.  Right  shaU 
be  predominant  when  at  his  name  every 
knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  confess 
that  he  is  Lord.  The  rest  is  vision. 
"I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  great  multitude, 
which   no   man   could   number,   of  all 


n2 


180 


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAE. 


[chap.  VII, 


nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  multitude,  and  as  the  voice   of   many- 
tongues,  stood   before  the  throne,  and  waters,    and   as   the   voice    of    mighty 
before   the   Lamb,  clothed    with  white  thunderings,  saying.  Alleluia :   for   the 
robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands."     "  I  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth." 
heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great 


Family  Traditions. 

vii.  5.  And  my  God  put  into  mine  heart  to  ^gather  together  the  nobles y  and  the 
rulers f  and  the  people^  that  they  might  he  reckoned  by  genealogy.  And  I  found 
a  register  of  the  genealogy  of  them  which  came  up  at  the  first. 


When,  in  Biblical  sense,  we  speak  of 
a  family,  we  may  mean  a  household,  a 
kindred,  a  division  of  a  tribe,  a  nation, 
or  the  whole  family  of  God  in  heaven 
and  on  earth.  "  The  genealogies  occupied 
an  important  place  in  Israel.  They  con- 
tained the  certificate  of  Church-mem- 
bership for  each  Israelite.  They  also 
contained  the  claims  to  official  dignity 
that  belonged  to  priest  and  Levite. 
The  family-idea  thus  received  a  marked 
emphasis  in  God's  redemptive  govern- 
ment— an  emphasis  which  is  echoed  by 
Malachi  (Mai.  iv.  6)  and  the  angel  that 
appeared  to  Zacharias  (Luke  i.  17). 
The  appearance  of  the  Nethinim  in  the 
genealogies  is  a  forcible  illustration  of 
the  impartial  grace  of  God.  That  grace 
which  would  bring  in  all  the  Gentiles 
as  children  was  foretokened  by  the 
brotherly  position  of  the  Nethinim  (of 
Gentile  blood)  among  the  people  of 
God — the  children  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob." — Crosby.  The  genealogy 
was  the  story  of  their  lives  from  year  to 
year. 

I.  The  family-idea.  The  corrective 
of  individualism.  A  natural  barrier 
against  selfishness.  Father,  mother, 
brother,  sister  suggest  unity  in  divers- 
ity. Differences  without  disagreement. 
''  There  are  the  two  opposite  poles  of 
masculine  and  feminine,  which  contain 
within  them  the  entire  of  our  humanity 
— which  together,  not  separately,  make 
up  the  whole  of  man.  Then  there  are 
the  diversities  in  the  degrees  and  kinds 
of  affection.  For  when  we  speak  of 
family  affection,  we  must  remember 
that  it  is  made  up  of  many  diversities. 
There  is  nothing  more  different  than 
the  love  which  the  sister  bears  towards 
the  brother,  compared  with  that  which 


the  brother  bears  towards  the  sister. 
The  affection  which  a  man  bears  towards 
his  father  is  quite  distinct  from  that 
which  he  feels  towards  his  mother;  it 
is  something  quite  different  towards  his 
sister;  totally  diverse,  again,  towards 
his  brother.  And  then  there  are  divers- 
ities of  character.  First  the  mature  wis- 
dom and  stern  integrity  of  the  father; 
then  the  exuberant  tenderness  of  the 
mother.  And  then  one  is  brave  and 
enthusiastic,  another  thoughtful,  and 
another  tender.  One  is  remarkable  for 
being  full  of  rich  humour;  another  is 
sad,  mournful,  even  melancholy.  Again, 
besides  these,  there  are  diversities  of 
condition  in  life.  First,  there  is  the 
heir,  sustaining  the  name  and  honour 
of  the  family ;  then,  perchance,  the 
soldier,  in  whose  career  all  the  anxiety 
and  solicitude  of  the  family  is  centred  ; 
then  the  man  of  business,  to  whom  they 
look  up,  trusting  his  advice,  expecting 
his  counsel ;  lastly,  perhaps,  there  is  the 
invalid,  from  the  very  cradle  trembling 
between  life  and  death,  drawing  out  all 
the  s^anpathies  and  anxieties  of  each 
member  of  the  family,  and  so  uniting 
them  all  more  closely  from  their  having 
one  common  point  of  sympathy  and 
solicitude."— i^.  W.  Robertson.  "Of 
all  the  mysteries  in  the  universe,  I 
hardly  know  of  any  which  is  more 
wonderful  than  the  kind  of  relationship 
existing  between  all  of  us  and  our 
parents.  The  universal  consent  of  man- 
kind sustains  the  authority  of  my  con- 
science, and  declares  that  I — I  alone — 
must  be  held  responsible  for  whatever 
evil  I  commit,  and  that  I  am  to  be 
praised  if  I  do  well.  And  yet  nothing 
can  be  plainer  than  that  it  is  easy  or 
difficult  for  me  to  do  well,  according  as 


CHAP.  VII.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


181 


my  father  and  my  mother,  my  grand- 
father and  my  grandmother,  and  I  know 
not  how  far  back  I  may  go,  were,  or 
were  not,  temperate,  virtuous,  upright, 
good  people.  As  there  is  this  singular 
and  most  mysterious  relationship  be- 
tween my  moral  life  and  the  moral  life 
of  my  parents,  there  is  a  relationship 
equally  intimate  between  my  physical 
and  intellectual  life  and  theirs.  My 
voice,  the  length  and  shape  of  my  limbs, 
my  height,  the  colour  of  my  hair,  the 
strength  and  clearness  of  my  sight,  the 
soundness  of  my  brain,  my  muscular 
vigour,  whatever  constitutes  my  weak- 
ness or  my  power,  was  largely  deter- 
mined for  me  by  what  my  parents 
were." — R.  W.  Dale,  The  mysteries 
of  life  are  not  so  much  abroad  as  at 
home.  The  miracle  is  not  in  some 
seldom,  far-off  event,  but  in  life's  daily 
scenes — noon  and  night,  birth  and  death, 
the  daily  bread,  the  nightly  guardianship. 
Home,  family,  a  sacred  centre,  a  heaven- 
made  bond. 

"Where'er  I  roam,  whatever  realms  to  see, 
My  heart,  untravelled,  fondly  turns  to  thee." 

II.  Family  history.  We  are  heirs 
of  all  the  yesterdays.  An  unpayable 
debt  owed  to  the  past.  The  poets  de- 
scribe virtues  more  to  be  valued  than 
"  Norman  blood."  Men  prize  "  Norman 
blood  "  notwithstanding.  The  Jew,  "  the 
pilgrim  of  commerce,"  turned  home- 
ward with  a  peculiar  ardour  of  affection. 
The  chosen  people.  All  others  Gentiles. 
Cosmopolitanism  a  modern  idea.  "  My 
name  and  the  name  of  my  fathers." 
Jacob.  "My  fathers'  God."  Moses. 
**I  am  not  better  than  my  fathers." 
Elijah.  "  I  am  a  sojourner  as  all  my 
fathers  were."  David.  "0  thou  God 
of  my  fathers."     Daniel.     "I  worship 


the  God  of  my  fathers."  Paul.  The 
thought  which  the  dying  Wesley  phrased 
ran  through  Hebrew  history  as  a  "family 
tradition"  — "  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is 
vrith  us."  Their  familiar  description  of 
God  was  "  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob."  The  "  family  tradition  " 
that  links  us  with  some  event  in  history 
is  good ;  the  "  family  tradition "  that 
tells  of  deeds  of  heroism  and  acts  of 
unselfishness  is  better.  Not  who  we 
are,  but  what  we  are,  the  pre-eminent 
consideration. 

"  My  boast  is  not  that  I  deduce  my  birth 
From  loins  enthroned,  and  rulers  of  the  earth ; 
But  higher  far  my  proud  pretensions  rise— 
The  son  of  parents  passed  into  the  skies,'* 

The  idea  of  the  family  is  unity;  the 
history  of  the  family  suggests  continu- 
ance. "No  separation  can  ever  break 
that  fellowship  of  common  love  which 
exists  in  a  home.  Its  members  may  be 
sundered  by  unknown  seas,  yet  the  bands 
of  a  common  affection  and  sympathy 
unite  them  still.  So  is  the  fellowship 
of  the  Christian  brotherhood  unbroken 
by  death.  It  extends  to  heaven,  and 
unites  it  with  earth — the  whole  family 
in  heaven  and  earth  named  in  Christ." — 
E.  L.  Hull.  There  is  no  past.  The  ages 
are  inseparably  linked  together.  "  One 
day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years, 
and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  So 
it  shall  be  with  us.  Christ  hath  brought 
life  and  immortality  to  light.  We  shall 
stand  in  the  presence  of  those  who  were 
dead,  but  are  alive  again  and  live  for 
evermore.  "  In  my  Father's  house  are 
many  mansions.  I  go  to  prepare  a  place 
for  you.  I  will  come  again,  and  receive 
you  imto  myself ;  that  where  I  am,  there 
ye  may  be  also."  The  dead  will  not 
return  to  us,  but  we  shall  go  to  them. 


The  Enthusiasm  op  Geneeositt. 

▼ii.  70 — 72.  And  some  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  unto  the  work.  The 
Tirshatha  gave  to  the  treasure  a  thousand  drams  of  gold,  fifty  basons,  five  hundred 
and  thirty  priests^  garments.  And  some  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  to  the 
treasure  of  the  work  twenty  thousand  drams  of  gold,  and  two  thousand  and  two 
hundred  pound  of  silver.  And  that  which  the  rest  of  the  people  gave  was  twenty 
thousand  drams  of  goldy  and  two  thousand  pound  of  gilver,  and  threescore  and 
seven  priests*  garments. 

This  scene  reminds  us  of  two  similar     his  death  David  the  king  gathered  the 
ones  in  Hebrew  history.    Shortly  before     people  together,  and  by  his  example  and 


182 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


[OHAP.  VIL 


entreaty  caused  the  princes  and  people 
to  offer  willingly  (1  Chron.  xxix.).  Even 
the  abundance  of  the  offerings  is  less 
marked  than  the  willing  spirit  of  the 
offerers.  "  I  know,  my  God,  that  thou 
triest  the  heart,  and  hast  pleasure  in 
uprightness.  As  for  me,  in  the  upright- 
ness of  mine  heart  I  have  willingly  offered 
all  these  things :  and  now  have  I  seen 
with  joy  thy  people,  which  are  present 
here,  to  offer  willingly  unto  thee.  0 
Lord  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  of 
Israel,  our  fathers,  keep  this  for  ever  in 
the  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  the 
heart  of  thy  people,  and  prepare  their 
heart  unto  thee."  Joash  gave  order  to 
repair  the  temple  with  "  all  the  money 
that  Cometh  into  any  man's  heart  to 
bring  into  the  house  of  the  Lord.'* 
"  And  all  the  princes  and  all  the  people 
rejoiced,  and  brought  in  and  cast  into 
the  chest,  until  they  had  made  an  end. 
And  they  gathered  money  in  abundance  " 
(2  Kings  xii. ;  2  Chron.  xxiv.).  The 
Jeio  and  the  Friend  have  received  hon- 
ourable mention  for  their  generosity  to 
the  poor  of  their  confraternity.  The 
Jew  has  distinguished  himself  in  his 
devotion  to  his  temple.  The  pilgrim  of 
commerce  has  cast  some  of  his  commer- 
cial gains  into  the  treasury  of  God. 

I.  Claimants.  The  cause  of  God  is 
the  cause  of  humanity.  The  Church  a 
republican  institution.  "The  rich  and 
poor  meet  together."  "The  poor  shall 
never  cease  out  of  the  land."  "The 
poor  ye  have  always  with  you."  Moses 
and  Jesus,  Old  Testament  and  New, 
recognize  what  they  do  not  explain — 
poverty.  The  Communion  Service 
takes  special  cognizance  of  the  poor. 
The  offertory  sentences  cite  the  golden 
rule,  the  laws  of  analogy,  the  behests 
of  God.  It  is  fitting,  it  is  beautiful  that 
at  the  feast  of  love,  love  should  take 
shape  and  colour,  that  a  body  should  be 
prepared  for  it.  "  All  ye  are  brethren." 
How  far-reaching  are  these  simple 
sayings  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  cause  of 
God — let  not  that  weU-known  phrase 
lose  its  sharpness  by  use  and  familiarity. 
The  cause  of  God  is  the  cause  of  right- 
eousness, the  cause  of  the  weak  and 
oppressed,  the  cause  of  the  widow  and 
orphan,    the   cause   of    the  slave   and 


aboriginal,  the  cause  of  those  who  in 
every  clime  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the 
shadow  of  death. 

II.  The  generous  spirit.  Motive 
decides  action.  "The  true  measure  of 
sacrifice  is  not  the  greatness  of  the 
outward  act,  but  the  perfectness  of  the 
inward  motive.  We  like  to  do  a  thing 
which  seems  to  be  a  great  dedication, 
and  which  flatters  our  self-love  by  its 
greatness,  partly  because  it  is  far  easier 
to  do  a  great  thing  which  does  not 
necessitate  self-surrender,  than  a  small 
thing  that  does.  It  is  the  all — the  very 
heart  of  the  man — that  God  asks  for ; 
the  outward  form  of  the  sacrifice  is  of 
little  worth.  It  is  not  the  great  out- 
ward act,  but  the  perfect  yielding  of 
the  soul,  which  constitutes  the  sacrifice 
which  God  will  not  despise." — E.  L. 
Hull,  "  The  motive  and  measure." 
How  much  shall  I  give  to  God"?  A 
tithe  1  "  Am  I  a  Jew  % "  Is  the  world 
stiU  in  its  cradle  1  Is  Christianity  a 
set  of  rules  or  a  great  principle  1  How 
much  owest  thou  unto  thy  Lord  ]  "Freely 
ye  have  received,  freely  give."  Do  not 
ask,  "  How  little  can  I  give  *? "  Inquire 
rather  how  much  thou  hast  received. 
"  In  the  light  of  the  judgment  day  "  it 
will  be  w^ell  to  be  "blameless  as  the 
steward  of  God."  When  the  omniscient 
Searcher  of  all  hearts  pronounces  his 
verdict,  blessed  will  be  the  man  whom 
he  describes  as  "  that  faithful  and  wise 
steward."  Hold  your  possessions  in 
trust.  When  need  arises  and  ability  be 
given,  cast  your  uncounted  coins  into 
the  treasury.  "  He  that  hath  pity  upon 
the  poor  lendeth  unto  the  Lord;  and 
look,  what  he  layeth  out,  it  shall  be 
paid  him  again."  "  There  is  that  scat- 
tereth  and  yet  increaseth ;  and  there  is 
that  withholdeth  more  than  is  meet, 
but  it  tendeth  to  poverty."  "Not 
getting,  but  giving,  is  the  way  to 
wealth." 

Illustrative  Poem: — 

"  Abon  Ben  Adhem — may  his  tribe  increase ! — 
Awoke  one  night  from  a  deep  dream  of  peace,  i 
And  saw  amid  the  moonlight  in  his  room, 
Making  it  rich,  and  like  a  lily  in  bloom, 
An  An^el  writing  in  a  book  of  gold : 
Exceeding  peace  had  made  Ben  Adhem  bold. 
And  to  the  vision  in.  the  room  he  said, 


CHAP.  VII.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH. 


183 


*  What  writest  thou  ? '  The  vision  raised  its  head, 
And  with  a  voice  made  of  all  sweet  accord, 
Replied,  '  The  names  of  thera  that  love  the 

Lord; 
*And  is  mine  one  ? '  said  Abon.    *  Nay,  not  so,' 
Replied  the  Angel.     Abon  spoke  more  low, 
But  cheerily  still,  and  said,  *  I  pray  thee,  then, 


"Write  me  as  one  who  loves  his  fellow-men.' 
The  Angel  wrote  and  vanished.  The  next  night 
He  came  again  with  a  great  wakening  light ; 
He  showed  the  names  whom  love  of  God  had 

blest, 
And,  lo,  Ben  Adhem's  name  led  all  the  rest." 

Leigh  Hunt. 


Toilers  Resting. 

vii.  73.  So  the  priests^  and  the  Levites,  and  the  porters^  and  the  singers,  and  some 
of  the  people,  and  the  Nethinims,  and  all  Israel,  dwelt  in  their  cities;  and  when 
the  seventh  month  came,  the  children  of  Israel  icere  in  their  cities. 


Wall  built.  Eeformations  about  to 
begin.     A  breathing-time. 

I.  Rest  after  labour.  The  great 
human  heart  of  Jesus  speaks  in  Mark 
vi.  31  :  "Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into 
a  desert  place,  and  rest  awhile."  More 
dramatic  when  we  see  him  weeping 
tears  of  friendship  by  the  grave  of 
Lazarus,  or  tears  of  regret  over  the  city 
of  Jerusalem.  But  not  more  human 
than  this  anxiety  for  his  disciples.  The 
people  needed  teaching  and  healing,  but 
the  disciples  needed  rest.  The  circum- 
stances were  these.  They  had  been 
through  the  cities  preaching  and  healing. 
Eeturning  to  their  Lord,  '*  they  told  him 
all  things,  both  what  they  had  done,  and 
what  they  had  taught."  He  orders 
them  to  cross  the  lake  and  be  beyond 
the  tide  of  human  population.  After 
the  miracle  of  feeding  he  himself  "  de- 
parted into  a  mountain  to  pray.  And 
when  even  was  come,  he  was  alone." 
Putting  side  by  side  his  precept  and 
example,  we  have  his  recorded  con- 
victions on  the  necessity  and  import- 
ance of  leisure  and  loneliness  —  the 
needs  -  be  for  rest.  Body  and  mind 
require  it.  Eest  and  sleep  are  Nature's 
great  restorers.  Never  more  than  in  this 
day.  "  One  great  danger  in  our  time 
is  that  every  man  is  so  active ;  every 
man  has  so  much  to  think  about  and  to 
do.  Nothing  moves  slowly.  If  we 
had  the  refashioning  of  the  year,  we 
would  make  it  twenty-four  months.  If 
Ave  had  the  refashioning  of  the  day,  we 
would  make  it  forty-eight  hours.  If 
we  had  our  own  refashioning,  we  would 
kindle  in  ourselves  a  fire  that  would 
burn  forty-eight  hours  without  replenish- 
ing.    Intensity   of    life,  over -wrought 


occupation  comes  from  the  very  social, 
political,  and  commercial  conditions  in 
which  we  live.  And,  as  if  this  were 
not  enough,  we  try,  by  strong  stimulus, 
to  wind  up  the  flagging  nerve,  worn  out 
by  too  much  excitement.  We  want,  in 
that  way,  to  make  twelve  hours  do  the 
work  of  twenty-four." — H.  W.  Beecher. 
One  of  the  penalties  we  pay  for  high 
civilization.  The  too  common  history 
of  men  in  relation  to  whom  work  has 
induced  insanity  and  insanity  suicide. 
Earlier  rest  would  have  ministered  to 
many  a  man's  mind  in  the  incipient 
stages  of  disease.  Moral  development 
retarded  by  the  whirl  of  business;  by 
the  incessant  anxiety  to  make  both  ends 
meet.  "  The  cares  of  this  world  "  and 
**the  deceitfulness  of  riches"  are  both 
harmful.  All  a  Christian's  time  must 
not  be  devoted  to  others.  The  sanctuary 
is  necessary.  Labour  is  commendable. 
But  leisure  is  invaluable.  Leisure  to 
remind  ourselves  that  we  are  immortal, 
that  there  is  a  God  for  us ;  leisure  for 
personal  examination,  contrite  confession, 
private  prayer,  inward  resolve ;  leisure 
for  physical  renewal,  mental  culture, 
spiritual  advancement.  "In  these  hours 
of  rest  and  retirement  many  gentle 
qualities  will  spring  up  which  find  no 
place  in  life ;  only  as  flowers  and  grass 
find  place  on  a  pavement,  growing  up 
between  the  stones.  There  is  many  a 
man  whose  ordinary  life  is  hard  as  a 
stone,  and  whose  taste  or  culture  shows 
itself  only  as  it  steals  out  through  the 
joints  where  stone  meets  stone.  It  is  a 
piteous  thing  that  men  should  be  so 
hard ;  and  the  habit  of  being  by  one's 
self,  the  habit  of  rest  and  inspection, 
gives  some  opportunity  for  the  develop- 


184 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAK 


LCHAP.   VII. 


ment  of  the  finer  traits  of  character, 
which,  after  all,  go  far  toward  making 
the  beauty  of  holiness  in  man  spring  up 
and  bear  appropriate  fruit." — H.  W. 
Beecher. 

II.  Rest  before  labour.  Rest  not 
an  end,  but  a  means  to  an  en<i.  The 
corrective  and  reward  of  toil.  The  true 
reward  of  anything  consists  in  having 
done  it  more  than  in  its  consequences 
or  in  men's  appreciation  of  it.  All  who 
labour  may  enjoy  the  earthly  paradise 
of  rest.  But  only  when  it  is  the  pre- 
paration for  renewed  toil.  The  life  of 
leisure  which  some  sigh  for  is  not 
desirable.  None  more  wretched  than 
those  who  have  nothing  to  do.  Work 
was  not  imposed  as  a  curse.  God  put 
the  first  man  into  paradise  **  to  dress  it 
and  to  keep  it."  It  is  expressly  noted 
that  "  there  was  not  a  man  to  till  the 
ground."  Work  is  as  old  as  the  creation. 
Noble  too.  God  imposed  it.  The  curse 
consisted  in  the  toil  and  its  fruitlessness. 
*'  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou 
eat  bread.  Thorns  also  and  thistles 
shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee."  The 
naturalness  of  work  is  seen  in  the 
recurrence  of  day  and  night.  AVeary  we 
lie  down  to  rest.  Sleep  recruits  the 
wasted  energies  of  body ;  the  mind 
recuperates  itself.  The  morning  calls 
us  forth  to  labour.  "  Man  goeth  forth 
unto  his  work  and  to  his  labour  until 
the  evening."  All  work  and  no  play  is 
a  curse  indeed.  All  play  and  no  work 
is  not  a  blessing.  **  I  must  work  the 
works  of  him  that  sent  me  while  it  is 
day."  So  Christ  spake.  And  he  gives 
three  reasons  for  this.  It  is  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  Father's  purpose.  "He 
sent  me."  It  is  in  imitation  of  his 
Father.  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto, 
and  I  work."  The  opportunity  for 
work  will  soon  be  past.  *'The  night 
Cometh,    when    no    man    can    work.'' 


Speaking  of  his  disciples  to  the  end  of 
time,  he  said,  "As  the  Father  sent  me 
into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  sent  them 
into  the  world."  "  Labourers  together 
with  God  '*  is  our  appellation.  Rest  is 
for  a  while ;  work  is  for  life.  We  find 
Christ  in  the  city,  in  the  temple,  in  all 
the  haunts  of  men.  But  he  soon  leaves. 
His  choice  seems  to  bo  where  Nature 
can  speak  to  him — on  the  mountain,  in 
the  desert,  by  the  sea.  He  is  grander 
there  than  when  compelled  to  battle 
with  prejudices.  He  drank  at  the  pure 
fount  of  Nature.  So  must  we.  Amongst 
men  we  get  dwarfed,  discontented,  dis- 
gusted. Meanness,  selfishness,  the 
grinding  of  the  weak  by  the  strong,  the 
lip  profession  belied  by  the  life — all 
this  shakes  our  faith  in  goodness.  No 
man  can  always  live  in  a  crowd.  We 
are  led  by  popular  opinion,  deceived 
by  glitter  and  show.  AVe  shall  be 
superficial  in  much  the  same  proportion 
as  we  neglect  solitary  converse  with 
ourselves.  Too  much  looking  within 
may  be  dangerous.  That  danger  is 
remote.  Our  danger  lies  in  being 
strangers  to  ourselves — looking  upward, 
outward,  and  onward,  but  not  inward. 
It  is  sometimes  good  for  a  man  to  be 
alone.  Some  experiences  only  come  to 
us  in  solitude.  We  shall  die  alone. 
Friends  may  smooth  our  pillow  and 
soothe  our  pain  by  their  tender  minis- 
tries of  affection ;  but  in  the  depths  of 
the  soul  we  shall  be  alone.  To  every 
one  death  is  an  undiscovered  land. 
Alone  in  death  we  must  be.  And  yet 
not  alone.  "  The  Father  is  with  me." 
Beyond,  the  labour  that  does  not  fatigue, 
the  service  that  is  perfect  freedom. 
"  They  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his 
temple."  "They  rest  not  day  and  night, 
saying.  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Al- 
mighty." "They rest  from  their  labours, 
and  their  works  do  follow  them." 


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  TEL 

Cities. 

The  classification  of  the  human  race     wanderers  (G^n.  iv.  20,  22)  seems  to 
into    dwellers  in    towns  and    nomade     be  intimated  by  the  etymological  sense 


CHAP.    VII.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH. 


185 


of  the  Hebrew  words  Ar  ox  Ir^  and 
Kirjath,  viz.,  as  places  of  security 
against  an  enemy,  distinguished  from 
the  unwalled  viUage  or  hamlet,  whose 
resistance  is  more  easily  overcome  by 
the  marauding  tribes  of  the  desert. 
This  distincti(ni  is  found  actually 
existing  in  countries,  as  Persia  and 
Arabia,  in  which  the  tent-dwellers  are 
found,  like  the  Rechabites,  almost  side 
by  side  with  the  dwellers  in  cities, 
Bometimee  even  sojourning  within  them, 
but  not  amalgamated  with  the  inhabit- 
ants, and  in  general  making  the  desert 
their  home,  and,  unlike  the  Rechabites, 
robbery  their  undissembled  occupation. 
The  earliest  notice  in  Scripture  of  city- 
building  is  of  Enoch  by  Cain,  in  the 
land  of  his  '*  exile"  (Gen.  iv.  17). 
After  the  confusion  of  tongues,  the 
descendants  of  Nimrod  founded  Babel, 
Erech,  Accad,  and  Calneh,  in  the  land 
of  Shinar  ;  and  Asshur,  a  branch  from 
the  same  stock,  built  Mneveh,  Rehoboth- 
by-the-river,  Calah,  and  Resen,  the  last 
being  "  a  great  city."  A  subsequent 
passage  mentions  Sidon,  Gaza,  Sodom, 
Gomorrah,  Admah,  Zeboim,  and  Lasha 
as  cities  of  the  Canaanites,  but  without 
implying  for  them  antiquity  equal  to 
that  of  Nineveh  and  the  rest  (Gen.  x. 
10—12,  19;  xi.  3,  9;  xxxvi.  37). 
Cities  existed  in  Syria  prior  to  the  time 
of  Abraham,  who  himself  came  from 
''  Ur,"  the  "  city  "  of  the  Chaldaeans. 
The  earliest  description  of  a  city,  pro- 
perly so  called,  is  that  of  Sodom  (Gen. 
xix.  1 — 22)  ;  but  it  is  certain  that  from 
very  early  times  cities  existed  on  the 
sites  of  Jerusalem,  Hebron,  and  Da- 
mascus. The  last,  said  to  be  the  oldest 
city  in  the  world,  must,  from  its  un- 
rivalled situation,  have  always  com- 
manded a  congregated  population. 
Hebron  is  said  to  have  been  built  seven 
years  before  Zoan  (Tanis)  in  Egypt,  and 
is  thus  the  only  Syrian  town  which 
presents  the  elements  of  a  date  for  its 
foundation.  Even  before  the  time  of 
Abraham  there  were  cities  in  Egypt 
(Gen.  xii.  14,  15  ;  Num.  xiii.  22).  the 
Israelites,  during  their  sojourn  there, 
were  employed  in  building  or  fortifying 
the  **  treasure  cities "  of  Pithom  and 
Kaamses;    but    their    pastoral    habits 


make  it  unlikely  that  they  should  build, 
still  less  fortify,  cities  of  their  own  in 
Goshen.  Meanwhile  the  settled  inha- 
bitants of  Syria  on  both  sides  of  the 
Jordan  had  grown  in  power  and  in 
number  oC  "  fenced  cities."  In  the  king- 
dom of  Sihon  are  many  names  of  cities 
preserved  to  the  present  day ;  and  in 
the  kingdom  of  Og,  in  Bashan,  were 
sixty  "great  cities"  with  walls  and 
brazen  bars,  besides  unwalled  villages  ; 
and  also  twenty-three  cities  in  Gilead, 
which  were  occupied  and  perhaps  partly 
rebuilt  or  fortified  by  the  tribes  on  the 
east  of  Jordan.  On  the  west  of  Jordan, 
whilst  thirty  one  *' royal"  cities  are 
enumerated  (Josh,  xii.)  in  the  district 
assigned  to  Judah,  one  hundred  and 
twenty-five  cities  with  villages  are  reck- 
oned. But  from  some  of  these  the 
possessors  were  not  expelled  till  a  late 
period,  and  Jerusalem  itself  was  not 
captured  till  the  time  of  David  (2  Sam. 
V.  6 — 9).  From  this  time  the  Hebrews 
became  a  city-dwelling  and  agricultural 
rather  than  a  pastoral  people.  David 
enlarged  Jerusalem,  and  Solomon,  besides 
embellishing  his  capital,  also  built  or 
rebuilt  Tadmor,  Palmyra,  Gezer,  Beth- 
horon,  Hazor,  and  Megiddo,  besides 
store-cities.  Collections  of  houses  in 
Syria  for  social  habitation  may  be  classed 
under  three  heads  :  (I)  cities,  (2)  towns 
with  citadels  or  towers  for  resort  and 
defence,  (3)  unwalled  villages.  The 
cities  may  be  assumed  to  have  been  in 
almost  aU  cases  ^'  fenced  cities,"  i.  e. 
possessing  a  wall  with  towers  and  gates ; 
and  that  as  a  mark  of  conquest  was  to 
break  down  a  portion,  at  least,  of  the 
city  wall  of  the  captured  place,  so  the 
first  care  of  the  defenders,  as  of  the  Jews 
after  their  return  from  captivity,  was  to 
rebuild  the  fortifications.  But  around 
the  city,  especially  in  peaceable  times, 
lay  undefended  suburbs,  to  which  the 
privileges  of  the  city  extended.  The 
city  thus  became  the  citadel,  while  the 
population  overflowed  into  the  suburbs. 
The  absence  of  walls,  as  indicating 
security  in  peaceable  times,  combined 
with  populousness,  as  was  the  case  in 
the  flourishing  period  of  Egypt,  is 
illustrated  by  the  prophet  Zechariah 
(11.  4).     According  to  Eastern  custom, 


186 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH, 


[chap.  VII. 


special  cities  were  appointed  to  furnish 
special  supplies  for  the  service  of  the 
state  :  cities  of  store,  for  chariots,  for 
horsemen,  for  building  purposes,  for 
provision  for  the  royal  table.  Special 
governors  for  these  and  their  surrounding 
districts  were  appointed  by  David  and 
by  Solomon.  To  this  practice  our  Lord 
alludes  in  his  parable  of  the  pounds, 
and  it  agrees  with  the  theory  of  Hindoo 
government,  which  was  to  be  conducted 
by  lords  of  single  townships,  of  10,  100, 
or  1000  towns.  To  the  Levites  cities 
were  assigned,  distributed  throughout 
the  country,  together  with  a  certain 
amount  of  suburban  ground,  and  out  of 
these  thirteen  were  specially  reserved 
for  the  family  of  Aaron.  The  internal 
government  of  Jewish  cities  was  vested 
before  the  captivity  in  a  council  of  elders 
with  judges,  who  were  required  to  be 
priests :  Josephus  says  seven  judges 
with  two  Levites  as  officers.  Under 
the  kings  a  president  or  governor 
appears  to  have  been  appointed,  and 
judges  were  sent  out  on  circuit,  who 
referred  matters  of  doubt  to  a  council 
composed  of  priests,  Levites,  and  elders 
at  Jerusalem.  After  the  captivity  Ezra 
made  similar  arrangements  for  the  ap- 
pointment of  judges.  In  the  time  of 
Josephus  there  appear  to  have  been 
councils  in  the  provincial  towns,  with 
presidents  in  each,  under  the  directions 
of  the  great  council  at  Jerusalem.  In 
many  Eastern  cities  much  space  is 
occupied  by  gardens,  and  thus  the  size 
of  the  city  is  much  increased.  The  vast 
extent  of  Mneveh  and  Babylon  may 
thus  be  in  part  accounted  for.  In  most 
Oriental  cities  the  streets  are  extremely 


narrow.      It  seems  likely  that  the  im- 
mense  concourse    which     resorted     to 
Jerusalem  at   the  feasts  would   induce 
wider    streets     than    in     other    cities. 
Herod  built  in  Antioch  a  wide   street 
paved  with  stone,  and  having  covered 
ways  on  each  side.     Agrippa  II.  paved 
Jerusalem     witii     white     stone.     Tlie 
straight    street    of    Damascus    is    still 
clearly   defined   and   recognizable.     We 
cannot  determine  whetlicr  tiie  internal 
commerce  of  Jewish  cities  was  cnnifi!  on 
as  now,  by  means  of  bazaars,  but  we  read 
of  the  bakers'  street  (Jer.  xxxvii.  21), 
and  Josephus  speaks  oi  the  wool  market, 
the  hardware  market,  a  place  of  black- 
smiths' shops,  and  the  clothes  marki-t  at 
Jerusalem.     The  open   spaces  near  the 
gates  of  towns  were  in  ancient  times,  as 
they  are  still,  used  as  places  of  assembly 
by  the  elders,  of  holding  courts  by  kings 
and  judges,   and   of   general  resort  by 
citizens.     They  were  also  used  as  places 
of  public  exposure  by  way  of  punish- 
ment.    Prisons  were  under  the  kingly 
government  within  the  royal  precinct. 
Great  pains  were  taken  to  supply  both 
Jerusalem  and  other  cities  with  water, 
both   by   tanks   and   cisterns  for   rain- 
water, and   by  reservoirs   supplied   by 
aqueducts  from  distant  springs.     Such 
was  the  fountain  of  Gihon,  the  aqueduct 
of  Hezekiah,  and  of  Solomon,  of  which 
last  water  is  still  conveyed  from  near 
Bethlehem  to  Jerusalem.     Josephus  also 
mentions  an  attempt  made  by  Pilate  to 
bring  water  to  Jerusalem.    Burial-places, 
except  in  special  cases,  were  outside  the 
city.— i^ez;.   H.    W.   Phillott,   M.A.,  in 
*  Smith's  Bible  Dictionary 


Genealogies. 


Genealogy,  literally  the  act  or  art  of 
the  y^vzakoyoQy  i.  e.  of  him  who  treats 
of  birth  and  family,  and  reckons  descents 
and  generations.  Hence  by  an  easy 
transition  it  is  often  (like  laropia)  used 
of  the  document  itself  in  which  such 
series  of  generations  is  set  down.  In 
Hebrew  the  term  for  a  genealogy  or 
pedigree  is  "the  book  of  the  genera- 
tions ;  "  and  because  the  oldest  histories 
were  usually  dra\^n  up  on  a  genealogical 


basis,  the  expression  often  extended  to 
the  whole  history,  as  is  the  case  with 
the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,  where  '*  the 
book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus  Christ  " 
includes  the  whole  history  contained  in 
that  Gospel.  So  Gen.  ii.  4,  "  These 
are  the  generations  of  the  heavens  and 
of  the  earth,"  seems  to  be  the  title  of 
the  history  which  follows.  Gen.  v.  1  : 
vi.  9  ;  X.  1  ;  xi.  10,  27 ;  xxv.  12,  19  , 
xxxvi.  1,  9  ;   xxxvii.  2,  are  other  ex- 


CHAP.  VIII.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    NEHEMIAH, 


187 


amples  of  the  same  usage,  and  these 
passages  seem  to  mark  the  existence  of 
separate  histories  from  which  the  book 
of  Genesis  was  compiled.  Nor  is  this 
genealogical  form  of  history  peculiar  to 
the  Hebrews,  or  the  Semitic  races.  The 
earliest  Greek  histories  were  also  genea- 
logies ....  The  frequent  use  of  the 
patronymic  in  Greek,  the  stories  of 
particular  races,  the  lists  of  priests,  and 
kings,  and  conquerors  at  the  games 
preserved  at  Sparta,  Olympia,  and  else- 
where ;  the  hereditary  monarchies  and 
priesthoods ;  the  division,  as  old  as 
Homer,  into  tribes,  fratrise,  and  yivri, 
and  the  existence  of  the  ^n6e,  the  gens^ 
and  the  familia  among  the  Eomans  ; 
the  Celtic  clans,  the  Saxon  families  using 
a  common  patronymic,  and  their  royal 
genealogies  running  back  to  the  Teutonic 
gods,  these  are  among  the  many  instances 
that  may  be  cited  to  prove  the  strong 
family  and  genealogical  instinct  of  the 
ancient  world.  Coming  nearer  to  the 
Israelites,  it  will  be  enough  to  allude  to 
the  hereditary  principle  and  the  vast 
genealogical  records  of  the  Egyptians  as 
regards  their  kings  and  priests,  and  to 
the  passion  for  genealogies  among  the 
Arabs,  mentioned  by  Layard  and  others, 
in  order  to  show  that  the  attention  })aid 
by  the  Jews  to  genealogies  is  in  entire 
accordance  with  the  manners  and  tend- 
encies of  their  contemporaries.  In 
their  case,  however,  it  was  heightened 
by  several  peculiar  circumstances.  The 
promise  of  the  land  of  Canaan  to  the 
seed  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  suc- 
cessively, and  the  separation  of  the 
Israelites  from  the  Gentile  world  ;  the 
expectation  of  Messiah  as  to  spring  from 
the  tribe  of  Judah ;  the  exclusively 
hereditary  priesthood  of  Aaron  with  its 
dignity  and  emoluments ;  the  long  suc- 
cession of  kiugs  in  the  line  of  David  ; 
and  the  whole  division  and  occupation 
of  the  land  upon  genealo.^ical  principles 
by  the  tribes,  families,  and  houses  of 
fathers,  gave  a  deeper  importance  to  the 
science  of  genealogy  among  the  Jews 
than  perhaps  any  other  nation.  We 
have  already  noted  the  evidence  of  the 
existence  of  family  memoirs  even  before 
the  Flood,  to  which  we  are  probably 
indebted  for  the  genealogies  in  Gen.  iv. 


5  ;  and  Gen.  x.,  xi.,  Szc.  indicate  the 
continuance  of  the  same  system  in  the 
times  between  the  Flood  and  Abraham. 
But  with  Jacob,  the  founder  of  the 
nation,  the  system  of  reckoning  by 
genealogies  was  much  further  developed. 
....  According  to  these  genealogical 
divisions  the  Israelites  pitched  their 
tents  and  marched,  and  offered  their 
gifts  and  offerings,  and  chose  the  spies. 
According  to  the  same  they  cast  the  lots 
by  which  the  troubler  of  Israel,  Achau, 
was  discovered,  as  later  those  by  which 
Saul  was  called  to  the  throne.  Above 
all,  according  to  these  divisions  the 
whole  land  of  Canaan  was  parcelled  out 
amongst  them.  But  n.>w  of  necessity 
that  took  place  which  always  has  taken 
place  with  res^^ect  to  such  genealogical 
arrangements,  viz.,  that  by  marriage,  or 
servitude,  or  incorporation  as  friends  and 
allies,  persons  not  strictly  belonging  by 
birth  to  such  or  such  a  family  or  tribe 
were  yet  reckoned  in  the  census  as 
belonging  to  them.  The  tribe  of  Levi 
was  probably  the  only  one  which  had 
no  admixture  of  foreign  blood.  In 
many  of  the  Scripture  genealogies,  as, 
e.^., those  of  Caleb,  Joab,  Segub,  and  the 
sons  of  Eephaiah,  &c-.,  in  1  Chron.  iii. 
21,  it  is  quite  clear  that  birth  was  not 
the  ground  of  their  incorporation  into 
their  respective  tribes.  However,  birth 
was,  and  continued  to  be  throughout 
their  whole  national  couise,  i\\Q  fouiida- 
Hon  of  all  the  Jewish  organization,  and 
the  reigns  of  the  more  active  kings  and 
rulers    were    marked    by   attention   to 

genealogical    operations But, 

however  tiadition  may  have  preserved 
for  a  while  true  genealogies,  or  imagina- 
tion and  pride  have  coined  fictitious 
ones,  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
it  may  be  safely  affirmed  that  the  Jewish 
genealogical  system  then  came  to  an 
end.  Just  notions  of  the  nature  of  the 
Jewisli  genealogical  records  are  of  great 
importance  with  a  view  to  the  right 
interpretation  of  Scripture.  Let  it  only 
be  remembered  that  these  records  have 
respect  to  political  and  territorial  di- 
visions, as  much  as  to  strictly  genea- 
logical descent,  and  it  will  at  once  be 
seen  how  erroneous  a  conclusion  it  may 
be  that  all  who   are  called  "  sons "  of 


188 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  vin. 


Buch  or  such  a  patriarch,  or  chief  father, 
must  necessarily  be  his  very  children.  . 
.  .  The  sequence  of  generations  may 
represent  the  succession  to  such  or  such 
an  inheritance  or  headship  of  tribe  or 
family,  rather  than  the  relationship  of 
father  and  son  ...  As  regards  the 
chronological  use  of  the  Scripture  gene- 
alogies, great  caution  is  necessary  in 
using  them  as  measures  of  time.  What 
seems  necessary  to  make  them  trust- 
worthy measures  of  time  is,  either  that 
they  should  have  special  internal  marks 
of  being  complete,  such  as  where  the 
mother  as  well  as  the  father  is  named, 
or  some  historical  circumstance  defines 
the  several  relationships,  or  that  there 
should  be  several  genealogies,  all  giving 
the  same  number  of  generations  within 
the  same  termini.  As  an  indication  of 
the  carefulness  with  which  the  Jews 
kept  their  pedigrees,  it  is  worth  while 
to  notice  the  recurrence  of  the  same 
name,  or  modifications  of  the  same  name, 


such  as  Tobias,  Tobit,  Nathan,  Mattatha, 
and  even  of  names  of  the  same  significa- 
tion, in  the  same  family.  The  Jewish 
genealogies  have  two  forms,  one  giving 
the  generations  in  a  descending,  the 
other  in  an  ascending  scale.  Females 
are  named  when  there  is  anything  re- 
markable about  them,  or  when  any  riglit 
or  property  is  transmitted  through  them. 
The  genealogical  lists  of  names  are 
peculiarly  liable  to  corruptions  of  the 
text.  The  Bible  genealogies  give  an 
unbroken  descent  of  the  house  of  David 
from  the  creation  to  the  time  of  Christ. 
The  resfisters  at  Jerusalem  must  have 
supplied  the  same  to  the  priestly  and 
many  other  families.  They  also  inform 
us  of  the  origin  of  most  of  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  and  carry  the  genealogy  of 
the  Edomitish  sovereigns  down  to  about 
the  time  of  Saul.  Viewed  as  a  whole, 
it  is  a  genealogical  collection  of  surpass- 
ing interest  and  accuracy. — Rev.  Lord  A. 
Hervey,  in  *  Smithes  Bible  Dictionary.^ 


Sentences  from  Old  Writers. 


I.    The  wall    completed  (ver.   1). 
"  Nehemiah  was  not  vain -glorious.     He 
was  humbly  lofty,  and  loftily  humble ; 
humble  in  heart,  and  yet  high  in  worth 
and  works."     "  Those  that  have  a  hand 
in  built! ing  the  spiritual  Jerusalem  shall 
be    surely    crowned    and    chronicled." 
*'  There  must  be  no  straining  courtesy 
who  shall  begin  to  build,  nor  must  men 
fear  for  their  forwardness  to  be  styled 
seraphical  and  singular."     "  Not  priests 
and  Levites  only,  but  the  great  men  in 
every    country,    yea,    and   the    country 
people  too,  must  work  at  God's  building. 
Every  one  must  be  active  in  his  own 
sphere ;  not  live  to  himself,  but  help  to 
bear  the  burdens  of  Church  and  com- 
monwealth."    "  All  God's  work  is  hon- 
ourable."    ''  Let  us  learn  at  these  good 
men's  examples  to  be  b@ld  and  constant 
in  well-doing,  and  not  to  fear  every  brag 
and  blast  of  wind.     Let  us  be  as  a  lusty 
horse,  that  goeth  through  the  street,  and 
careth  not  for  the  barking  of  every  cur 
that  leapeth  forth  as  though  he  would 
bite  him  ;  so  let  us  not  be  afraid  of  the 
barking  curs,  nor  look  backward,  but  go 


on  forth,  not  changing  with  every  tide  ; 
and  the  mighty  Lord  will  strengthen  our 
weakness  with  good  success  to  finish  his 
building ;  for  so  have  all  good  men  done 
from  the  beginning." 

II.  Hanani  and  Hananiah  (ver.  2). 
"  Hanani  was  a  gracious  man  according 
to  his  name,  and  zealous  for  his  country, 
which  indeed  is  a  man's  self."     "  An 
honest  man  of  good  credit,  and  more 
earnest  in  religion  and  love  to  his  country 
than  others,   because  his  name  is   put 
down  in  writing,  and   the    others   are 
not."     "  Hananiah  was  a  man  of  truth, 
faithfulness,  or  firmness ;  a   sure  man, 
and  such  as  one  might   safelj    confide 
in."     "  He    feared    God.     No  wonder, 
therefore,  that  he  was  faithful   to  men. 
God's   holy  fear  is  the  ground   of   all 
goodness    and  fidelity.     Hence  Jethro, 
in   his  well-qualified   ruler,   places   the 
fear  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the  other 
graces,  as  the   heart  in   the   body,  for 
conveying  life  to  all  the  parts,  or  as  a 
dram  of  musk,  perfuming  the  whole  box 
of  ointment  (Exod.  xviii.  21)."     ** No- 
thing maketh  a  man  so  good  a  patriot  as 


CHAP,  viii.]  HOMTLETIC  COMMENrARY:    NETIKMTAH. 


189 


the  true  fear  of  God."  "  Take  away 
piety,  and  fidelity  is  gone."  ''  He  can- 
not be  faithful  to  me  (said  a  king)  that 
is  unfaithful  to  God."  "  Eeligion  is  the 
foundation  of  all  true  fidelity  and  loyalty 
to  king  and  country.  Hence  that  close 
connection,  Fear  God,  honour  the  king 
(1  Pet.  ii.  17)."  "  Hananiah  feared 
God  above  many.  This  is  a  singular 
praise,  and  by  every  man  to  be  sought 
after,  to  be  eminent  and  exemplary, 
taller  than  the  rest  by  the  head  and 
shoulders,  full  of  all  goodness,  filled 
with  all  knowledge  (Rom.  kv.  14),  able 
and  active  in  every  good  word  and 
work."  "  That  is  a  low  and  unworthy 
strain  in  some,  to  labour  after  no  more 
grace  than  will  keep  life  and  soul 
together,  that  is,  soul  and  hell  asunder." 
"  God  would  have  his  people  to  be 
discontentedly  contented  with  the  mea- 


sures they  have  received,  and  to  be  still 
adding  (2  Pet.  i.  5)  and  advancing 
(Phil.  iii.  14),  aspiring  to  perfection, 
till  they  come  unto  the  measure  of  the 
stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ  (Eph. 
iv.  13)." 

III.  The  city  guard  (ver.  3).  "  Set 
thou  watches.  He  speak eth  to  the  two 
Hananis,  and  bids  each  of  them,  whose 
turn  it  was,  see  to  the  well-doing  of  it. 
Xenophon  saith  of  Cyrus,  that  when  he 
gave  anything  in  command  he  never 
said,  *  Let  some  one  do  this/  but,  *  Do 
thou  this.' " 

IV.  An  inspired  man  (ver.  5). 
"  No  man  ever  grew  to  be  greatly  good 
without  a  Divine  instinct."  "  Every 
good  motion  in  him,  and  whatever  he 
thought  of  that  was  conducive  to  the 
good  and  welfare  of  Jerusalem,  Nehemiah 
always  ascribed  it  to  God." 


CHAPTEE  VIII. 


Explanatory  Notes.]     1.  Street]  Rather  "square."     An  open  place  at  the  gate  of  Oriental 
cities  where  trials  were  held   and  wares  set  forth  for  sale. — Qesenius.     The  water  gate]  Sre 
a  Idenda  to  chap.  iii.     They  spake  unto  Ezra]  "  The  assembled  people.      This  reading,  then, 
wjjs  desired  by  the  assembly.     The  motive  for  this  request  is  to  be  found  in  the  desire  of  the  con- 
liTcgation  to  keep  the  new  moon  of  the  seventh  month  as  a  feast  of  thanksgiving  for  the  gracious 
assistance  they  had  received  from  the  Lord  during  the  building  of  the  wall,  and  through  which  it 
had  been  speedily  and  successfully  completed,  in  spite  of  the  attempts  of  their  enemies  to  obstruct 
the  work.     This  feeling  of  thankfulness  impelled  them  to  the  hearing  of  the  word  of  God  for  the 
purpose  of  making  his  law  the  rule  of  their  life." — Keil.     Ezra  the  scribe]  "  In  the  next  verse  it 
is  Ezra  the  priest.     This  is  the  first  mention  of  Ezra  in  the  book  of  Nehemiah.     He  had  come  to 
Jerusalem  thirteen  years  previously.    He  had  forced  the  Jews  to  separate  from  their  heathen  wives, 
and  had  then  probably  returned  to  Persia.    As  we  do  not  meet  with  his  name  in  Nehemiah  till  now, 
it  is  probable  he  followed  Nehemiah  to  Judaea  to  assist  him  in  another  movement  of  reform." — 
Crosb)/.    2.  All  that  could  hear  with  understanding]  Men,  women,  and  elder  children.    The  first 
day  of  the  seventh  month]  Distinguished  above  the  other  new  moon's  of  the  year  as  the  feast  of 
trunii)ets,  and  celebrated  as  a  specially  sacred  festival  (Lev.  xxiii.  23 — 25  ;  Num.  xxix.  1 — 6).     3. 
From  the  morning]  "  From  the  light  till  mid-day."     About  six  hours.     4.  Pulpit]  A  very  high 
platform.      Beside  him  stood  Mattithiah,  &c,]  Probably  priest.      "  Perhaps  Urijah  is  the  father 
of  the  Meremoth  of  iii,  4,  21 ;  Maaseiah,  the  father  of  the  Azariah  of  iii.  23  ;  Pedaiah,  the  indi- 
vidual muned  iii.  21  ;  the  Azariah  to  be  inserted,  according  to  1  Esdras,  the  same  named  iii.  23 ;  a 
iMeshuUam  occurs,  iii.  4,  6;  and  a  Malchiah,  iii.  11,  14,  31." — Bertheau.     6.  Ezra  blessed  the 
Lord]  Perhaps  with  a  sentence  of  thanksgiving,  as  David  did  (1  Chron.  xxix.  10).    7.  Also  Jeshua, 
&c.  caused  the  people  to  understand]  "  To  instruct  by  expounding." — Keil.     8.  So  they  read, 
&c.]  The  Rabbis  understand  it  to  be  a  paraphrase  in  the  Chaldee  language  for  those  who  were  not 
acquainted  with  the  ancient  Hebrew.      Others^  exposition  and  application.     "  Perhaps  Ezra  first 
read  a  section  of  the  law,  and  the  Levites  then  expounded  to  the  people  the  portion  just  read;  the 
only  point  still  doubtful  being  whether  the  Levites  expounded  in  succession,  or  whether  they  all 
did  this  at  the  same  time  to  difi'erent  groups  of  people." — Keil.     10.  Send  portions]  See  Deut. 
ivi.   11,  12;  Esther  ix.  19,  22.      14,  15.]  The  law  concerning  the  feast  of  the  tabernacles,   of 
which  the  essentials  are  here  communicated,  is  found  Ley.  xxiii.  39 — 43.     17.  Since  the  days  of 


190 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:   NEIIEMIAH, 


[CILLI.  VIII. 


Jeshna  ....  had  not  the  children  of  Israel  done  so]  The  emphasis  is  on  so.  The  feast  of 
tabernacles  had  often  been  observed,  but  not  in  such  a  way  as  on  this  occasion,  when  the  whole 
community  dwelt  in  booths,  18.  Also  day  by  day]  The  law  enjoined  such  a  public  reading  once  in 
seven  years  at  the  feast  of  tabernacles  (Deut.  xxxi.  10,  11). 


HOMILETICAL  COISTTENTS  OF  CHAPTER  VIIL 


Ver.  4 — 8.  The   Church's   Common    Service   a 
Primitive  and  Reasonable  Service. 
,,      6,  6.  Effect  of  Ezra's  Preaching. 
„  9.  Ezra  Reading  the  Law. 

„         10.  The  Christian  in  his  Spiritual  Joys. 


Ver.      10.  The  Joy  of  the  Lord. 
,,         10.  The  Joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  Strength. 
„         1 0.  On  Religious  Joy,  as  giving  Strength 

and  Support  to  Virtue. 
„         18.  Daily  Bible  Reading. 


The  Church's  Commom  Service  a  Primitive  and  Reasonable  Service. 

viii.  4 — 8.     And  Ezra  the  scribe  stood  upon  a  pulpit  of  wood,  &c. 

We  might  search  long  among  the  different  histories  of  the  world  before  we  should 
find  a  scene  more  impressive  and  affecting  than  that  which  is  here  represented.  A 
whole  people  recently  re-established  by  God's  mercy  in  their  own  country,  from 
which  for  their  sins  they  had  been  long  banished  ;  assembled  together  to  hear  the 
solemn  reading  and  exposition  of  their  Divinely-inspired  law,  now  about  to  be 
revived  amongst  them  ;  and  bowing  down  in  lowly  adoration  of  the  Lord,  the 
great  God,  from  whom  they  had  received  it.  So  arduous  and  laborious  an 
enterprise  as  the  resettling  of  a  people  in  full  possession  of  their  own  land,  and  in 
the  complete  enjoyment  of  their  several  religious,  social,  and  domestic  relations,  was 
necessarily  a  work  of  time.  Many  obstacles  were  raised  to  it  by  the  malicious 
opposition  of  enemies  from  without,  and  many  interruptions  occurred  from  a  want 
of  spirit  and  energy  within.  The  work  gradually  proceeded.  Under  the  directions 
of  Zerubbabel,  then  of  Ezra,  and  lastly  JS^ehemiah,  the  people  had  the  satisfaction 
of  contributing  to  the  restoration  of  their  dwellings,  of  their  altars,  of  their  temple, 
and  finally  of  the  gates  and  walls  of  their  city.  But  another  want  remained  to  be 
supplied.  The  knowledge  of  their  sacred  Scriptures  had  been  almost  totally  lost 
among  the  Jews.  Together,  therefore,  with  anxiety  and  diligence  in  restoring  their 
material  buildings,  Ezra,  who  is  recorded  to  have  been  *'  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law 
of  Moses,"  combined  an  equal  degree  of  care  and  industry  in  restoring  the  Holy 
Scriptures. 

I.  First,  then,  the  reading  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  thus  publicly  for  the 
instruction  cf  the  people  became,  from  the  time  of  Ezra,  a  constant  practice 
in  the  Jewish  synagogues.  The  practice  was  continued  in  our  Saviour's  days, 
and  those  of  his  apostles.  *'  Moses  of  old  time,"  &c.  (Acts  xv.  21).  And  together 
with  the  reading  of  Moses  was  united  that  of  the  prophets  (Acts  xiii.  15,  27). 
The  propriety  of  this  practice  might  be  inferred  from  our  Lord's  custom  (Luke  iv. 
16).  The  utility  of  the  practice  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact,  that  to  this  practice 
has  been  attributed  the  preservation  of  the  Jewish  people  from  the  idolatrous  usages 
of  the  neighbouring  nations.  The  practice  thus  observed  in  the  Jewish  Church  was 
continued  in  the  Early  Christian.  Apparently  recognized  by  St.  Paul  (1  Thess.  v. 
27  ;  Col.  iv.  16).  ''On  the  day"  (saith  Justin  Martyr)  "which  is  called  Sunday 
there  is  an  assembly  of  all  those  who  live  either  in  the  cities  or  in  the  country, 
and  those  things  which  are  written  of  or  by  the  apostles,  and  the  writings  of  the 
prophets,  are  read  as  long  as  time  will  permit."  Upon  this  primitive  practice  is 
founded  that  of  our  apostolical  Church.  To  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament 
are  added  those  of  the  New.  The  types  of  the  law  are  accompanied  with  the 
antitypes  of  the  gospel.  The  promises  of  the  prophets  are  combined  with  the 
historical  completion  of  them  recorded  by  the  apostles.  Thus  by  means  of  the 
lessons,  gospels,  and  epistles  which  are  read  in  our  churches  much  benefit  accrues 


uiiAP.  Yin]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAR.  191 

to  the  people.  Many  person^!  cannot  read  the  Scriptures  themselves.  Many  who 
can,  will  not  or  do  not  read  them.  But  no  small  number  of  these  persons  is 
drawn  together  to  attend  the  public  service  of  the  congregation.  And  although 
they  may  not  have  the  alacrity  of  the  people  spoken  of  here,  who  *'  gathered  them- 
selves together  as  one  man,"  and  '*  spake  unto  Ezra  the  scribe  to  bring  the  book  of 
the  law  of  Moses,"  yet,  when  the  book  of  God  is  brought,  they  can  hardly  fail  of 
hearing  some  portion  of  its  contents,  and  acquiring  some  knowledge  of  the  truths 
which  it  reveals  or  records,  and  the  duties  which  it  teaches  and  inculcates,  ^ot 
that  any  man  who  is  able  to  attain  more  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  ought  to  be 
contented  with  this.  He  ought  not  only  to  hear,  but  read,  search,  search  daily — 
so  to  study  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  to  know  them  (John  v.  39  ;  Acts  xvii.  11  ; 
2  Tim.  iii.  15). 

II.  The  reading  of  the  law  was  the  express  object  of  the  assembly.  The 
manner,  however,  in  which  this  business  was  undertaken  is  well  worthy  o 
our  regard.  "And  Ezra  opened,"  &c.  (vers.  5,  6).  Here  is  the  union  which 
subsists  between  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures  to  the  people  and  the  offering  of 
adoration  and  thanksgiving  to  Almighty  God.  All  public  service  implies  this. 
We  assemble  and  meet  together  to  render  thanks  to  God  for  the  great  benefits  that 
we  have  received  at  his  hands.  The  union  between  the  devotions  of  the  priest  and 
the  congregation.  "  Amen."  Liturgical  responses.  In  those  forms  of  prayer 
which  the  Church  hath  provided  we  inherit  the  most  valuable  examples  of  Christian 
piety  and  devotion,  a  rich  treasury  of  evangelical  doctrine,  and  perpetual 
monuments  and  memorials  of  practical  holiness. 

III.  Together  with  the  reading  of  the  law  and  the  accompanying  benedic- 
tions and  adoration,  a  third  service  was  combined,  namely,  that  of  expounding 
the  law  to  the  people.  "  So  they  read,"  &c.  (ver.  8).  One  cause  of  difficulty  may 
have  been  the  change  of  language  between  the  law  as  originally  written  by  Moses 
and  as  now  recited  by  Ezra.  A  thousand  years  had  elapsed.  Religious,  political, 
civil,  and  domestic  revolutions  had  occurred.  From  whatever  cause,  the  fact  is 
expressly  stated.  "  The  Levites  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  law,"  &c. 
Practice  continued  in  the  service  of  the  synagogue.  Sanctioned  by  the  presence 
and  practice  of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles.  "  When  the  reader  hath  done  " 
(continues  Justin  Martyr),  "  he  that  presides  in  the  assembly  admonishes  and 
exhorts  us  to  put  those  good  things  which  we  have  heard  in  practice.  And 
afterwards  we  rise  up  with  one  consent,  and  send  up  our  prayers  to  God."  The 
Sermon — the  expositicm  and  application  of  Scriptural  truth. 

Application.  1.  Give  a  reverential  attention  to  the  word  of  Ood,  as  read  in  the 
pnhlic  services  of  the  congregation.  Grateful  for  the  mercies  of  God,  and  sensible 
withal  of  their  own  manifold  infirmities  and  acts  of  disobedience,  these  Jews 
received  the  word  with  lowly  expressions  of  thankfulness,  and  tokens  of  humiliation 
and  repentance.  2.  With  reverential  attention  to  the  Holy  Scriptures  unite  a 
constant  and  serious  participation  in  the  devotions  of  the  Church.  "  All  the  people 
answered,  Amen,  and  worshipped."  If  you  would  derive  benefit  from  God's  word, 
yi)U  must  derive  it  through  the  medium  of  his  grace.  If  you  would  enjoy  his 
grace,  you  must  solicit  it  by  prayer.  3.  Give  attendance  to  those  who  are  over  you 
in  the  Lord,  and  who  watch  for  your  souls  as  they  that  must  give  account,  that  they 
may  do  it  with  joy.  It  is  no  abridgment  of  your  Christian  liberty  to  give  heed  to 
those  who  bear  God's  commission  to  instruct  you.  We  do  not  pretend  to  have 
dominion  over  your  faith,  but  we  would  gladly  be  helpers  of  your  joy.  Let  your 
feet  habitually  stand  within  the  gates  of  the  temple  of  God. — Bishop  Mant^ 
abridged. 


192 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  vrit. 


Effect  of  Ezra's  Preaching. 


viii.  5,  6.     And  Ezra  opened  the  hook  in  the  sight  of  all  ths  people,  &c. 


Though  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  it 
was  the  custom  to  read  the  law  of  God 
in  the  synagogues,  it  does  not  appear  to 
liave  heen  any  regular  part  of  the  priest's 
office  to  preach  unto  the  people.  On 
some  occasions  we  find  persons  sent 
through  the  land  of  Israel  to  make 
known  the  law ;  and  here  we  hehold 
Ezra  on  a  pulpit  of  wood  elevated  above 
the  people,  and  surrounded  by  an  im- 
mense congregation,  who  had  come 
together  on  purpose  to  hear  the  word  of 
God  expounded  to  them.  Since  the 
introduction  of  Christianity,  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  to  men  has  been  the 
particular  office  assigned  to  men  who 
are  set  apart  for  that  purpose ;  and 
though  we  must  chiefly  look  to  the 
apostles  as  our  examples,  and  to  the 
effects  of  their  ministrations  as  the 
})attern  of  what  we  may  expect  to  see 
amongst  our  auditors,  yet  may  we 
profitably  look  back  to  the  time  of  Ezra 
to  learn  from  him  and  his  ministry. 

I.  In  what  manner  the  word  of 
God  should  be  dispensed.  The  mode 
adopted  by  Ezra,  namely,  the  expounding 
of  Scripture,  we  conceive  to  be  peculiarly 
worthy  of  imitation.  It  is  indeed  but 
little  practised  at  the  present  day, 
though  at  the  time  of  the  Eeforraation 
it  generally  obtained  ;  and  it  has  very 
great  advantages  above  the  plan  which 
has  superseded  it.  1.  It  leads  the  peo- 
ple into  a  better  acquaintance  with  ths 
Scriptures.  The  Scriptures,  except  as  a 
book  for  children,  are  but  little  read ; 
persons  are  discouraged  from  perusing 
them  by  an  idea  that  they  are  unintelli- 
gible to  common  capacities.  But  a  very 
little  explanation  would  render  them, 
for  the  most  part,  easy  to  be  understood 
by  all.  And  what  an  advantage  would 
this  be  !  The  people  studying  the  word 
of  God  at  home  would  be  abundantly 
better  qualified  to  understand  it  when 
read  in  public  ;  and  the  explanations 
given  to  them  in  public  would  enable 
them  to  study  it  to  better  purpose  at 
home ;   whereas   the   present    plan    of 


taking  only  a  small  passage  for  a  motto, 
or  merely  as  a  groundwork   for   some 
general  observations,  leads  to  an  extreme 
neglect  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  to  a 
consequent  ignorance  of  them  among  all 
classes  of  the  community.     2.  It  brings 
every  part  of  the  sacred  records  into 
view.     There  are  some  who  bring  for- 
ward the    doctrinal   part    of  Scripture 
exclusively,  and  leave  the  practical  part 
entirely  out  of  sight;  there  are  others 
who  insist  only  on  the  practical  parts, 
and  leave  out  the  doctrinal.     There  are 
some  also  to  whom  many  of  the  doctrines 
contained   in    the   sacred    volume    are 
perfectly  hateful,  and  who  never  in  all 
their  lives  so  much  as  mentioned   the 
doctrines  of  predestination  and  election 
but  to  explain  them  away,  and  to  abuse 
the  persons  who  maintained  them.     But 
by  expounding  whole  books  of  Scripture 
every  doctrine  must  be  noticed  in  its 
turn,  and  the  connection  between  them 
and  our  practice  must  be  pointed  out. 
True  it  is  that  this  mode  of  preaching 
would     not    altogether    exclude     false 
doctrine  ;    but    it    would    render    the 
establishment  of  errors   more   difficult, 
because  the  hearers  would  be  able  to 
judge,  in  some  good  measure,  how  far 
the  true  and  legitimate  sense  of  Scrip- 
ture   was   given,    and   how  far  it  was 
perverted.    The  benefit  of  this,  therefore, 
cannot  be  too   highly  appreciated.     3. 
It  brings  home  truth  to  the  conscience 
with  more  authority.     The  word  of  man„ 
though  true,   has  little  weight  in  com- 
parison of  the  word  of  God  ;  "  that  is 
quick  and   powerful,  and  sharper  than 
a  two-edged   sword."     It    is  inconceiv- 
able   what    advantage    a    preacher   has 
when    he    can    say,    "  Thus    saith    the 
Lord  ;  "  then    every  doctrine  demands 
the   obedience  of  ftiith,  and  every  pre- 
cept   the    obedience    of    righteousness. 
When    told    that    the    word    which    is 
delivered  to  them  will  judge  them   at 
the  last  day,  the  people  will  not  dare  to 
trifle  with    it,  as    they    will    with    the 
declarations  of  fallible  men.     Weie  iliis 


cHAr.  Yin.]  nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NKJIEMTATT. 


193 


matter  more  attentively  considered,  we 
have  no  doubt  but  that  more  frequent 
appeals  would  be  made  to  Scripture  in 
our  public  harangues,  and  that  the 
obsolete  method  of  expounding  Scripture 
would  have  at  least  some  measure  of 
that  attention  which  it  deserves.  But, 
in  considering  the  word  of  God  as 
explained  to  the  people  of  Jerusalem,  we 
are  more  particularly  led  to  notice — 

II.  In  what  manner  it  should  be 
heard.  Truly  admirable  was  the  con- 
duct of  the  people  on  this  occasion. 
Observe — 1.  TheAr  reverential  awe.  When 
Ezra  opened  the  book  of  God,  all  the 
people,  in  token  of  their  reverence,  stood 
up  ;  and  when  he  blessed  God  forgiving 
them  so  ricli  a  treasure,  they  "  all  with 
uplifted  hands  cried.  Amen,  Amen  ; " 
yea,  they  bowed  their  heads  also,  "  and 
worshipped  the  Lord  with  their  faces  to 
the  ground."  This  was  a  deportment 
which  became  sinners  in  the  presence  of 
their  God ;  they  did  not  look  to  the 
creature,  but  to  God,  whose  voice  they 
heard,  and  whose  authority  they  acknow- 
ledg»^d,  in  every  word  that  was  spoken. 
What  a  contrast  does  this  form  with 
the  manner  in  which  the  word  of  God  is 
heard  amongst  us  !  How  rarely  do  we 
find  persons  duly  impressed  with  a  sense 
of  their  obligation  to  God  for  giving 
them  a  revelation  of  his  will !  How 
rarely  do  men  at  this  day  look  through 
the  preacher  unto  God,  and  hear  God 
speaking  to  them  by  the  voice  of  his 
servants  !  Even  religious  people  are  far 
from  attending  the  ministration  of  the 
word  in  the  spirit  and  temper  that  they 
ought ;  curiosity,  fondness  for  novelties, 
and  attachment  to  some  particular 
preacher  too  often  supply  the  place  of 
those  better  feelings  by  which  men 
ouglit  to  be  actuated  in  their  attendance 
on  the  preached  gospel.  To  "stand  in 
awe  of  God's  word,"  and  "  to  tremble  at 
it,"  are  far  more  suitable  emotions  than 
those  which  we  usually  see  around  us. 
The  Lord  grant  that  our  duty  in  this 
respect  may  be  more  justly  estimated, 
and  more  generally  performed.  2.  The'r 
devout  affections.  "  When  the  people 
heard  the  words  of  the  law,"  they  all 
wept,  as  feeling  that  they  had  sinned 
greatly  against  it  (ver.  9).     And  when 


they  were  reminded  that,  as  the  desi>;n 
of  the  [)resent  fea4  was  to  bring  to  their 
view  the  tender  mercies  of  their  God, 
and  to  encoui'iigo  them  to  expect  all 
manner  of  bhissings  at  his  hands,  they 
ought  rather  to  rejoice  (vers.  10,  11), 
they  did  rejoice,  insomuch  that  "  there 
was  very  great  gludn-'ss  "  amongst  them  ; 
and  they  rejoiced  especially  on  this 
account,  that  "  they  had  understood  the 
words  that  had  been  declared  unto 
them  "  (ver.  12).  Now  it  is  in  this  way 
that  we  should  hear  the  word  delivered 
to  us.  Wlien  it  shows  us  our  sins,  we 
should  weep,  as  it  were,  in  dust  and 
ashes  ;  and  when  it  sets  forth  the 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promises 
of  the  gospel,  we  should  rejoice,  yea, 
"  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable."  We 
should  have  our  hearts  rightly  attuned, 
so  that  we  should  never  want  a  string  to 
vibrate  to  every  touch  of  God's  blessed 
word.  But  may  it  not  be  said  to  the 
generality  in  the  present  day,  *'  We  have 
piped  unto  you,  and  ye  have  not  danced  ; 
we  have  mourned  unto  you,  and  ye  have 
not  lamented  "  %  Yes  ;  the  gospel  has 
little  more  power  over  the  affections  of 
men  than  if  it  were  "  a  cunningly  devised 
fable."  But  we  entreat  you  to  consider, 
that  if  the  law  when  expounded  was  so 
powerful,  much  more  should  the  gospel 
be,  since  *'  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation  to  every  one  that  belie veth." 
3.  Their  unreserved  obedience.  No 
sooner  was  it  discovered  that  an  ordin- 
ance appointed  by  Moses  had  been 
neglected,  than  they  hastened  to  observe 
it,  according  to  the  strict  letter  of  the 
law,  and  actuall}'^  did  observe  it  with 
greater  fidelity  than  it  had  ever  been 
observed  even  from  the  days  of  Joshua 
to  that  present  hour  (vers.  13 — 18). 
This  showed  that  the  impression  made 
on  their  affections  was  deep  and  spirit- 
ual. And  it  is  in  this  way  that  we 
also  must  improve  the  ministration  of 
the  word.  If  we  attend  to  the  gospel 
as  we  ought  to  do,  we  shall  find  out 
many  thin^^s  which  we  have  neglected, 
and  many  that  we  have  done  amiss  ; 
yea,  many  things  which  are  not  gener- 
ally noticed  even  among  the  godly  will 
occur  to  our  minds,  and  show  us  the 
defectiveness  not  of  our  obedience  only, 


194 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[cnAP.  vin. 


l)ur  of  the  obedience  of  the  best  of  men. 
Let  us  have  our  minds  then  open  to 
.conviction,  and  attentive  to  every  com- 
mandment of  our  God.  .ISTor  let  us  be 
satisfied  with  paying  only  customary 
attention  to  his  revealed  will,  but  let  us 


aspire  after  higher  degrees  of  purity,  and 
a  more  perfect  conformity  to  the  Divine 
image.  This  will  serve  as  the  best  test 
of  our  sincerity,  and  it  will  show  that 
neitlier  have  you  heard  in  vain  nor  we 
dispensed  his  word  in  vain. — Simeon. 


Ezra  Reading  the  Law. 

viii.  9.     And  Nehemiah,  wliicJi  is  the  Tirshatha,  and  Ezra  the  priest  the  scribe 
and  the  Levites  that  taiiffht  the  people,  said  unto  all  the  people,  This  day  is  holy 
unto  the  Lord  your  God ;  mourn  not,  nor  iveep.     For  all  the  peop)le  loept,  when 
they  heard  the  icords  of  the  law. 


Ezra  and  I^ehemiah  amoncjst  the 
neglected  books  of  the  Bible.  Contain 
no  specific  prophecies  of  our  Saviour's 
days  nor  of  the  nature  of  his  kingdom. 
They  do  not  immediately  connect  them- 
selves with  the  consideration  of  our 
Saviour's  ministry,  and  therefore  we 
are  tempted  to  pass  them  by.  Yet,  not- 
withstanding, they  form  part  of  ''  the 
whole  counsel  of  God."  Their  subject- 
matter.  The  character  of  Nehemiah 
shows  how  Divine  grace,  whilst  it  sus- 
tains the  lowly,  is  still  the  hest  safeguard 
to  protect  those  who  stand  in  the  high 
places  of  the  earth.  The  full  and  per- 
fect patriotism  of  Nehemiah's  character. 
Describe  the  bright  contrast  which  it 
presents  to  the  base  and  selfish  purposes 
which  are  so  often  sheltered  beneath 
that  honourable  name. 

The  people  of  Jerusalem  mourning 
when  they  heard  the  words  of  the  law. 
The  law  had  not  been  read  to  the  Jewish 
people  since  their  return  from  Babylon. 
A  large  stage  was  erected  in  the  most 
spacious  street  of  the  city,  near  to  the 
water-gate.  Ezra  ascended  to  it  with 
thirteen  others  of  the  principal  elders. 
Ezra  read  the  law  in  the  Hebrew  text, 
the  Levites  translated  it  into  Chaldee. 
'J'his  was  repeated  daily  during  the 
entire  festival,  till  they  had  gone 
through  the  whole  law. 

Observe  the  impression  made  upon 
the  people.  Their  eyes  were  opened  to 
the  clear  knowledge  of  those  things 
which  they  had  before  seen  only  through 
the  partial  instruction  of  teachers  in  the 
land  of  captivity.  Their  hearts  were 
touched  with  the  consciousness  of  the 
great  mercies  which  the  Lord  the.'r  God 


had  wrought  for  them,  and  upon  the 
sad  return  which  the  history  of  their 
own  sins  and  the  sins  of  their  fathers 
presented.  The}''  were  overwhelmed 
with  sorrow. 

The  reading  of  the  law  revealed  the 
spectacle  of  Jehovalt^s  creative  glory, 
Jehovah's  avenging  poiver,  Jehovah's 
redeeming  mercy.  Patriarch,  prophet, 
and  apostle  had  been  overwhelmed 
with  awe  at  this  spectacle.  [Story 
of  the  past  rehearsed  again.]  Is  not 
this  day  holy  unto  the  Lord  our  God  1 
Are  we  not  assembled  to  hear  the 
words  of  his  revealed  will?  And  do 
not  the  characters  of  man's  perverse- 
ness  and  rebellion  which  that  revelation 
depicts  stand  out  in  as  strong  and 
humiliating  contrast  with  the  mercy  of 
God  now,  as  they  did  in  the  day  of 
Jerusalem's  redemption  from  captivity  ] 
Can  w.e  listen  to  the  counsels  of  God's 
gracious  providence  unmoved'?  Our 
revelation  fuller.  Our  redemption  from 
a  mightier  oppressor.  We  are  no  longer 
under  the  law,  but  the  gospel.  Let  us 
take  heed,  however,  to  ourselves  that  in 
so  confessing  that  truth  of  Christ  which 
has  made  us  free  we  mar  not  the  con- 
fession by  abusing  the  freedom.  We 
are  freed  from  the  law  as  a  covenant ; 
but  we  are  not  freed  from  the  law  as  a 
rule.  In  preaching  the  law  let  us  not 
put  forth  its  terrors,  in  order  that  men 
may  be  affrighted  or  despair;  but  that 
they  may  be  startled  from  the  slumber 
of  a  false  security,  and  fly  for  refuge 
unto  Christ.  "  To  preach  the  law  alone  " 
(saith  Bishop  Eeynolds)  "  by  itself  we 
confess  is  to  pervert  the  use  of  it ; 
neither  have  we  any  power  or  commission 


CHAP.  VIII.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  195 


so  to  do,    for  we  have  our  power  for  lically,  and  it  must  be  so  preached.    We 

edification,  and  not  for  destruction.     It  have  comniission  to  preach  nothing  but 

was  published  as  an  appendant  to  the  Christ,  and  life  in  him  ;  and  therefore^ 

gospel,  and  so  must  it  be  preached ;  it  we    never    preach    the   law   but   with 

was  published  in  the  hand  of  a  Mediator,  reverence    and    manuduction    to    him." 

and  it  must  be  preached  in  the  hand  of  — Reo.    J.    S.    M.    Anderson,     M.A., 

a  Mediator;  it  was  published  evange-  abridged. 

The  Christian  in  his  Spiritual  Joys. 

viii.  10.  Then  he  said  unfo  them,  Go  your  way,  eat  the  fat,  and  drink  the  sweet, 
and  send  portions  unto  them  for  whom  notJiing  is  prepared :  for  this  day  is  holy 
unto  our  Lord :  neither  he  ye  sorry  ;  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength. 

A  sacred  festival.  "Go  yonr  way."  They  were  to  return  home  and  refresh 
themselves.  He  does  not  forbid  tlie  delicacies  which  they  had  provided.  Eat  the 
fat,  and  drink  the  sweet.  But  all  this  was  to  be  accompanied  with  two  things. 
First,  liberality  toioards  the  destitute.  "Send  portions  unto  them  for  whom 
nothing  is  prepared."  Law  of  Moses,  gospel  of  Jesus  inculcate  this.  Secondly, 
ivith  cheerfulness.  "  JSTeither  be  ye  sorry."  Joy  becomes  a  feast.  And  this  joy, 
says  Nehemiah,  is  as  important  as  it  is  becoming;  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
strength.  It  will  strengthen  your  bodily  frame,  and,  what  is  more,  it  will  renew 
the  strength  of  your  souls.  Let  us  contemplate  the  Christian — I.  In  tlie  Divinity, 
and,  II.  In  the  utility  of  his  joy. 

I.  The  Divinity  of  it.  It  is  i\\QJoy  of  the  Lord.  So  it  is  called  by  the  Judo(; 
of  all  in  his  address  at  the  last  day.  "Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant  ; 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  Now  this  joy  enters  the  Christian,  ami 
as  he  is  so  contracted  a  vessel,  he  cannot  contain  much  ;  but  then  he  will  enter 
the  joy,  and  he  will  find  it  a  boundless  ocean.  It  is  the  joy  of  the  Lord.  1.  His 
in  the  authority  that  binds  it  upon  us  as  a  duty.  "  Rejoice  evermore."  "  Rejf^ice 
in  the  Lord  always."  "Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  ye  righteous."  2.  His  in  th'^ 
assurance  which  holds  it  forth  as  a  privilege.  "  The  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall 
return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy."  "  Blessed  are  the 
people  that  know  the  joyful  sound ;  in  thy  name  shall  they  rejoice."  3.  His  in 
the  resemblance  it  bears  to  his  oiun.  Christians  are  "partakers  of  the  Divine 
nature."  Do  we  feel  the  joy  of  God's  salvation^  He  feels  it  too;  and  this 
salvation  is  called  "the  pleasure  of  the  Lord."  4.  His  in  the  subject.  The 
material  of  it,  so  to  speak,  is  found  in  him,  and  in  him  alone.  "  Return  unto  thy 
rest,  0  my  soul,  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifully  with  thee."  With  him  is 
the  fountain  of  life.  We  are  accepted  in  the  beloved,  "  I  will  go  in  the  strength 
of  the  Lord  God."  All  his  relations  are  mine.  He  is  my  Physician,  my  Friend, 
my  Shepherd,  my  Father.  All  his  perfections  are  mine — his  wisdom,  his  power, 
his  mercy,  and  his  truth.  All  ihe  dispensations  of  his  providence,  all  the  treasun-s 
of  his  word  are  mine.  All  his  grace,  all  his  glory  is  mine.  5.  His,  finally,  in 
the  production.  There  may  be  reasons  for  rejoicing  when  yet  no  jo\'  is  experienced ; 
for  the  mourner  may  be  unable  to  lay  hold  of  them,  and  appropriate  them  to  his 
own  use.  David  therefore  says,  "  Thou  shalt  make  them  drink  of  the  river  of 
thy  pleasures."  And  he  prays,  ''Rejoice  the  soul  of  thy  servant."  And  he 
acknowledges,  "  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart." 

II.  The  utility  of  this  joy.  It  is  efficacious  because  Divine.  To  know  the  force 
of  an  argument,  we  apply  it.  To  know  the  power  of  an  implement,  we  make  trial 
of  it.  To  ascertain  the  strength  of  a  man,  we  compare  him  with  others,  we  task 
him  with  some  exertion,  we  judge  by  the  difficulty  of  the  work  which  he  achieves, 
and  especially  by  the  might  of  opposition  which  he  overcomes.  Let  us  examine 
this  joy.     Let  us  bring  it  to  six  tests,  some  of  them  very  severe  ones.     1.   Let  us 

o  2 


196  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:    NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  viti. 

review  the  Christian  in  his  profession  of  religion.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  the  very 
strength  of  this  profession.  For  in  proportion  as  a  man  possesses  it,  he  feela 
satisfied  with  his  portion,  he  glories  in  his  choice,  he  is  ready  to  avow  it.  **  I  am 
not  ashamed ;  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  "  I  will  speak  of  thy  testimonies." 
Let  us  observe  tlie  Christian — 2.  In  his  concern  to  recommend  religion  to  others. 
Godliness  must  begin  at  home,  but  it  can  never  end  here.  "The  joy  of  the  Lord 
gives  us  confidence  in  our  addresses.  We  speak  not  from  conjecture,  or  opinion, 
but  experience.  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you."  This 
also  adds  conviction  and  force  to  our  testimony  and  commendation.  Men  see  what 
our  religion  has  done  for  us,  and  what  it  can  do  for  them  also.  Will  anything 
recommend  a  master  more  than  the  cheerfulness  of  his  servants  %  3.  Let  us  view 
the  Christian  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties.  These  are  numerous,  and  extensive, 
and  difficult.  Fear  chills,  despondency  unnerves,  sorrow  depresses.  But  hope 
is  encouragement :  joy  inspires,  excites,  elevates.  It  renders  our  work  our  privilege. 
We  not  only  have  life,  but  have  it  more  abundantly.  '^  I  will  run  in  the  way  of 
thy  commandments  when  thou  shalt  have  enlarged  my  heart."  4.  Let  us  view  the 
Christian  in  his  perils.  Perpetually  surrounded  with  temptations  in  the  world. 
These  flatter  him,  and  would  entice  him  away  from  God.  These  he  is  to  resist, 
steadfast  in  the  faith.  How  1  By  constraints  %  By  threatenings  1  These  may 
indeed  induce  him  actually  to  refuse  the  offers  and  allurements,  but  not  in  affection. 
The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  his  strength ;  and  without  this  a  man  will  only  leave  the 
world  as  Lot's  wife  left  Sodom — she  left  it,  but  her  heart  was  still  in  the  place. 
Prohibition,  so  far  from  killing  desire,  has  a  tendency  to  increase  it.  Having  found 
the  pure  spring,  the  Christian  no  longer  kneels  to  the  filthy  puddle.  Having  tasted 
tire  grapes  of  Eshcol,  he  longs  no  more  for  the  leeks,  and  garlic,  and  onions  of 
Egypt.  The  palace  makes  him  forget  the  dung-hill.  The  only  effectual  way  of 
separating  the  heart  from  the  world  is  to  subdue  the  sense  of  an  inferior  good  by 
t  he  enjoyment  of  a  greater.  5.  We  shall  see  that  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  his  strength 
if  we  view  the  Christian  in  his  sufferings.  Afflictions  try  religious  principle.  6. 
This  joy  of  the  Lord  is  the  Christian's  strength  in  death.  What  but  this  can  be 
Ills  support  then?  God's  comforts  delight  his  soul.  What  says  our  subject  in  a 
way  of  practical  improvement  1  1.  Inquire  what  your  joy  is.  2.  See  how  greatly 
religion  is  libelled.  3.  What  an  inducement  is  here  to  seek  the  Lord  and  his 
strength,  to  seek  his  face  evermore.  4.  Your  religion  is  to  be  suspected  if  you  are 
habitually  destitute  of  joy.  5.  Let  this  joy  be  a  peculiar  object  of  attention  to  every 
Christian.  Let  him  never  forget  that  it  is  his  strength.  6.  Some  know  the  worth 
of  this  joy  from  the  want  rather  than  from  the  experience.  Seek,  immediately  and 
earnestly,  an  increase  of  it. — Jay,  abridged. 

The  Joy  of  the  Lokd. 
viii.  10.    The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength. 

A  man  does  not  take  leave  of  happi-  ing,  but  a  spiritual  gift.     St.  Paul  enu- 

ness  by  knowing  Christ.     The  believer  merates  it    among  "  the    fruits    of  the 

has  a  sick-bed  joy,  a  death-bed  joy — a  Spirit,"    calls    it    ''  joy   of    the   Holy 

joy  that  shall  depart  with  him  out   of  Ghost"  (1  Thess.  i.  6).     2.   The  Lord  is 

this  world,  go  with    him  to  the  judg-  the   subject  of  this  joy.      His  people 

ment,  live  with  him  through  eternity.  not  only  rejoice  by  him,  but  they  rejoice 

I.  The  nature  of  the  true  believer's  in  him — they  ''joy  in  the  God  of  their 

joy.     "  The  joy  of   the    Lord " — a  de-  salvation.       His    grace,    his    gifts,    his 

scription.     1.    The  Lord  is  its  author,  glories,   his    perfections   constitute    the 

He  creates  it  and  establishes  it  in  the  subject-matter  of   their  joy."      In   his 

hearts  of  his  people.     The  joy  of  true  presence  is  "  their  fulness  of  joy."     He 

believers  is  no  mere   animal  sensation,  is  the   Sun  of  their  souls.     And  why? 

Not  **  good  spirits."     Not  a  natural  feel-  What  is  there  belonging  to  their  Lord 


CHAP. 


viTi.]  IIOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  NE  HE  MI  AH. 


197 


to  givo  occasion  for  this  joy?  (1)  The 
freeness  of  liis  great  salvation.  Here  is 
a  daily,  hourly  song  for  the  believer. 
(2)  'I'he  imputation  of  his  justifying 
righteousnsss.  (3)  The  Giver  of  their 
present  privileges,  and  tlie  Preparer  of 
their  future  glories. 


II.  The  effects  of  this  joy.  "  Your 
strength."  1.  Spiritual  joy  strength- 
ens a  man  for  duty.  2.  Spiritual  joy 
strengthens  a  man  for  suffering. 

Application.  1.  To  the  confident  pro- 
fessor. 2.  To  the  desponding  penitent. 
— Roberts's  Village  Sermons. 


Thp]    Joy    of   the    Lord    is    our    Strength. 
viii.  10.      The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength. 


The  pleaching  of  God's  word  is  a  very 
ancient  ordinance.  In  the  context  we 
have  a  description  of  the  manner  in 
which  Is^eheniiah  conducted  it.  These 
means  of  instruction  w.  re  useful  in  that 
day.  Nor  are  they  less  necessary  in  every 
place  and  age.  People  need  not  only 
reproof  for  what  is  wrong,  but  ilirection 
in  what  is  right.  The  Jews  wept  bit- 
terly at  the  hearing  of  the  law ;  but  Nehe- 
miah  corrected  their  sorrow  as  ill-timed, 
and  exhorted  them  to  rejoice  in  God, 
who  had  done  so  great  things  for  them. 

I.  What  reason  we  have  to  rejoice 
in  the  Lord.  God  is  often  said  to  re- 
joice over  his  people  (Zeph.  iii.  17).  But 
the  joy  here  spoken  of  must  be  under- 
stood rather  of  that  which  we  feel  in 
the  recollection  of  God's  goodness  to- 
wards us.  The  Jews  at  that  season  had 
special  cause  for  joy  in  God.  Delivered 
from  Babylon,  they  had  prospered  even 
to  a  miracle  in  their  endeavours.  Their 
sorrow,  however  just,  was  not  to  exckide 
this  joy.  Such  reason  also  have  all  the 
Lord's  people  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord. 
They  have  experienced  a  redemption 
from  sorer  captivity,  and  been  delivered 
by  more  stupendous  means.  Every  day's 
preservation  is,  as  it  were,  a  miracle.  The 
work  of  their  souls  is  carried  on  in  spite 
of  enemies ;  yea,  is  expedited  through 
the  means  used  to  defeat  it.  Surely, 
then,  they  should  say,  like  the  Church  of 
old,  "The  Lord  hath  done  great  tilings 
for  us"  (Ps.  cxxvi.  3).  These  mercies 
are  pledges  and  earnests  of  yet  richer 
blessings.  They  may  well  confide  in  so 
good  and  gracious  a  God.  They  liave 
indeed  still  great  cause  for  sorrow.  Yet 
it  is  their  duty  to  rejoice  always  in  the 
Lord.  To  promote  and  encourage  this 
we  proceed  to  show — 


II.  In  what  respects  this  joy  is  oui 

strength.  We  are  as  dependent  on  the 
frame  of  our  minds  as  on  the  state  of 
our  bodies.  Joy  in  God  produces  very  im- 
portant effects.  1.  It  disposes  for  action. 
Fear  and  sorrow  depress  and  overwhelm 
the  soul  (Isa.  Ivii.  16).  They  enervate 
and  bennmb  all  our  faculties.  They 
keep  us  from  attending  to  any  encour- 
aging considerations  (Exod.  vi.  9).  They 
disable  us  from  extending  any  relief  to 
others  (Job  ii.  13).  They  indispose  us 
for  the  most  necessary  duties  (Luke  xxii. 
45).  We  cannot  pray  or  speak  or  do  any- 
thing with  pleasure.  On  the  contrary, 
a  joyous  frame  exhilarates  the  soul  (Prov. 
xvii.  2).  David  well  knew  the  effect  it 
would  produce  (Ps.  li.  12,  13).  Every 
one  may  safely  adopt  his  resolution  (Ps. 
cxix.  32).  2.  It  qualifies  for  suffering. 
When  the  spirit  is  oppressed  the  smallest 
trial  is  a  burthen.  In  those  seasons  we 
are  apt  to  fret  and  murmur  both  against 
God  and  man.  We  consider  our  trials 
as  the  effects  of  Divine  wTath.  Or,  over- 
looking God,  we  vent  our  indignation 
against  the  instruments  he  uses.  But 
when  the  soul  is  joyous  afflictions  appear 
light  (Heb.  x.  34  ;  xii.  2).  How  little 
did  Paul  and  Silas  regard  their  imprison- 
ment (Acts  xvi.  25).  How  willing  was 
Paul  to  lay  down  his  very  life  for  Christ 
(Acts  XX.  24).  This  accords  Avith  the 
experience  of  every  true  Christian  (Rom. 
V.  2,  3;  2  Cor.  vi.  10). 

Application.  1.  Let  us  not  be  always 
brooding  over  our  corruptions.  Season- 
able sorrows  ought  not  to  be  discouraged. 
But  we  should  never  lose  sight  of  all  that 
God  has  done  for  us.  It  is  our  privilege 
to  walk  joyfully  before  the  L  »rd  (Ps. 
Ixxxix.  15,  16;  cxxxviii.  5;  cxUx.  5). 
If   we   abounded    more    in   praise,    we 


198  H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY:  NEIIEMIAH.  [criAr.  viir. 


should  more  frequently  be  crowned  witli  to    God   through    Christ.     If    even    \ve 

victory  (2  Chron.  xx.  21,  22).     2.  Let  rejoice  in  God  at  all  it  must  be  through 

Its  carefully  guard  tujainst  the  incursions  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Horn.  v.  11).     It 

of  sin.     It  is  sin  that  hides  the    Lord  is  through  Cluist   alone  that   our  past 

from  our  eyes   (Isa.  lix.  2).     Joy  will  violations  of   the   law  can  be   forgiven 

not  consist  with  indulged  sin  (Ps.  Ixvi.  (Col.  i.  20),     It  is  through  Christ  alone 

18).     Let  us  then  mortify  our  earthly  that  the  good  work  can  be  perfect(^d  in 

members  and  our  besetting  sins.     Let  our  hearts  (Heb.  xii.  2).     And  since  all 

us  be  girt  with  our  armour  while  w^e  things  are  through  him,  and   from  him, 

work  with  our  hands;  nor  ever  grieve  let  them  be  to  him  also  (Eom.  xi,  36). 

the  Spirit,  lest  we  provoke  him  to  de-  — Rev.  Charles  Simeon,  M.A. 
part  from  us.     3.  Let  us  he  daily  going 


On  Religious  Joy,  as  giving  Strength  and  Support  to  Virtue. 
viii.  10.      TJtejoy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength. 

On  hearing  the  words  of  the  book  of  the  law,  ail  the  people  wept.  ISTehemiah 
exhorts  them  to  prepare  themselves  for  serving  the  God  of  their  fathers  with  a 
cheerful  mind.  These  words  contain  this  important  truth,  that  to  the  nature  of 
true  religion  there  belongs  an  inward  joy  which  animates,  strengthens,  and  supports 
virtue, 

L  Joy  is  a  word  of  various  signification.  By  men  of  the  world  it  is  often  used 
to  express  those  flashes  of  mirth  which  arise  from  irregular  indulgences  of  social 
pleasure.  The  joy  here  mentioned  signifies  a  tranquil  and  placid  joy,  an  inward 
complacency  and  satisfaction,  accompanying  the  practice  of  virtue  and  the  discharge 
of  every  part  of  our  duty.  A  joy  of  this  kind  is  what  we  assert  to  belong  to  every 
part  of  religion  ;  to  characterize  religion  wherever  it  is  genuine,  and  to  be  essential 
to  its  nature.  In  order  to  ascertain  this,  let  us  consider — 1.  In  what  manner  religion 
requires  that  a  good  man  should  stand  affected  toivards  God.  Eatioiial,  enlightened 
}»iety  presents  God  not  as  an  awful,  unknown  Sovereign,  but  as  the  Father  of  the 
universe,  the  lover  and  protector  of  righteousness,  under  whose  government  all  the 
interests  of  the  virtuous  are  safe.  With  delight  the  good  man  traces  the  Creator 
tiiroughout  all  his  works,  and  beholds  them  everywhere  reflecting  some  image  of 
his  supreme  perfection.  In  the  morning  dawn,  the  noontide  glory,  and  the  evening 
shade  ;  in  the  fields,  the  mountains,  and  the  flood,  where  worldly  men  behold 
nothing  but  a  dead,  uninteresting  scene  ;  every  object  is  enlivened  and  animated 
to  him  by  the  presence  of  God.  Amidst  that  Divine  Presence  he  dwells  with 
reverence,  but  without  terror.  He  is  under  the  protection  of  an  invisible  guardian. 
He  receives  the  declarations  of  his  mercy. 

Objection.  Are  there  no  mortifications  and  griefs  that  particularly  belong  to 
piety — the  tear  of  repentance,  humiliation  of  confession,  and  remorse  1  Re2^ly. 
There  may  be  seasons  of  grief  and  dejection,  yet  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  the 
joy  of  the  Lord,  being,  on  the  whole,  the  predominant  character  of  a  good  man's 
state  ;  as  it  is  impossible  that  during  this  life  perpetual  brightness '  can  remain  in 
any  quarter  without  some  dark  cloud.  And  even  the  penitential  sorrows  and 
relentings  of  a  pious  heart  are  not  without  their  own  satisfactions.  It  is  no  unusual 
thing  for  pleasure  to  be  mixed  with  painful  feelings.  And  where  the  mind  is 
properly  instructed  in  religion,  it  will  not  long  be  left  in  a  state  of  overwhelming 
dejection,  but  will  return  to  tranquillity,  and  repossess  again  the  joy  of  the  Lord. 
2.  Consider  next  the  disposition  of  a  good  man  towards  Ids  felloio-creatures,  I'hat 
mild  and  benevolent  temper  to  which  he  is  formed  by  virtue  and  piety,  a  temper 
that  is  free  from  envious  and  malignant  passions,  is  a  constant  spring  of  cheerfulness 
and  serenity.  3.  With  respect  to  that  part  of  religion  which  consists  in  the  govern- 
ment of  a  man^s  own  mind,  of  his  passions  and  desires,  it  may  be  thought  that  much 


CHAP,  viii.]  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEIIEMIAIL  199 


joy  is  not  to  he  expected.  For  there  religion  appears  to  lay  on  a  severe  and  restrain- 
ing hand.  Strict  temperance  and  self-denial  are  often  requisite.  But  in  purity, 
temperance,  and  self-government  there  is  found  a  satisfaction.  A  man  is  conscious 
of  souTuhn'ss.      There  is  nothing  that  makes  him  ashamed  of  himself. 

II.  In  what  respects  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  justly  said  to  be  the  strength  of 
the  righteous.  1.  It  is  the  aniniating  principle  of  virtue;  it  supports  its  iiifluevre, 
and  assists  it  in  becoming  both  persevering^  and  progressive.  Few  undeitakings  are 
lasting  or  successful  ^vhich  are  accompanied  with  no  pleasure.  Not  until  a  man 
feels  somewhat  within  him  which  attracts  him  to  his  duty  can  he  be  expected  to  be 
constant  and  zealous  in  the  performance  of  it.  2.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  the  strength 
of  the  righteous,  as  it  is  their  great  support  under  the  discouragements  and  trials  of 
life.  A  good  man's  friends  may  forsake,  fortune  may  fail,  his  health  decay ;  calumny 
and  reproach  may  attack  his  character.  Then,  when  worldly  men  become  peevish, 
dispirited,  and  fretful,  he  can  possess  himself  calm  and  undisturbed.  He  has 
resources  within.  Much  is  against  us  in  our  endeavours  to  cultivate  this  disposition. 
We  must  study  to  correct  false  ideas ;  persuade  ourselves  that  there  are  other  things 
besides  riches,  honours,  and  sensual  pleasures  that  are  good  for  man  ;  that  there 
are  joys  of  a  spiritual  and  intellectual  nature  which  directly  affect  the  mind  and 
heart,  and  which  confer  a  satisfaction  both  more  refined  and  more  lasting  than  any 
worldly  circumstances  can  confer.  To  endeavours  of  our  own  for  rectifying  and 
improving  our  taste  of  pleasure  let  us  join  frequent  and  fervent  prayer  to  God, 
that  he  may  enlighten  and  reform  our  hearts,  and  by  his  Spirit  communicate  that 
joy  to  our  souls  which  descends  from  him,  and  which  he  has  annexed  to  every  part 
of  religion  and  virtue  as  the  strength  of  the  righteous. — Blair,  abridged. 

Same  Theme. 

Joyfulness  is  the  invigorating  tonic  of  the  Christian  character.  The  thing  that 
makes  you  a  strong  Christian  or  a  weak  one  is  your  possession  or  deprivation  of 
the  joy  of  the  Lord.  Religion  many-sided.  Faith,  hope,  joy.  Yet  many  whose 
religious  principle  is  strong  do  not  take  bright  views  of  Christian  service.  Some 
people  go  to  sea  because  the  blood  of  the  sailor  is  in  their  veins  ;  they  love  the 
sea ;  almost  regret  to  read  in  Revelation  that  in  the  new  heavens  and  earth  of  St. 
John  there  will  be  no  more  sea.  JN^ow  others  go  to  sea  because  duty  drives  them 
there.  If  they  could  go  over-land  they  w^ould  ;  but  there  is  neither  bridge  nor 
tunnel,  so  they  must  goto  sea,  and  with  much  fear  and  sickness  they  go.  It  is 
very  like  that  going  to  heaven.  Some  have  delight  at  every  step,  and  that  is  as 
it  ought  to  be ;  some  go  with  the  hard  constraint  of  duty  upon  them,  and  that  is 
as  it  should  not  be.  Take,  as  illustrative  of  the  latter  view,  two  types  of  religious 
character  that  have  played  an  important  part  in  the  past  of  this  country — Popery 
and  Puritanism.  Roman  Catholicism — full  of  austerities;  services  mournful; 
chan tings  ;  suffer  here  or  in  purgatory  ;  pictures  ;  biographies  of  the  ideal  saint ; 
dress  of  the  religious  orders ;  portraits  of  eminent  saints.  Whole  tone  a  strange 
contrast  to  the  '*  glad  tidings  of  great  joy."  Puritanism — grand  but  severe  men 
and  women ;  many  fasts,  but  few  festivals.  This  sentiment  of  the  text  about 
the  strengthening  power  of  joy  was  spoken  by  one  of  those  grand,  all-round 
honourable  men  who  come  as  ornaments  and  saviours  of  society — Nehemiah. 
His  people  had  been  captive,  and  were  restored,  and  wept  at  their  restoration,  and 
this  was  said  to  cheer  them.  Bring  the  thing  into  our  own  times.  English  captive 
among  heathen  holding  fast  to  Bible  and  Christian  faith.  Patriot  rising  —  a 
Nehemiah  or  Garibaldi — to  restore.  London  rebuilt — reading  of  law.  First  day 
of  national  religious  celebration  for  150  years.  JMemories  of  past  bringing  tears. 
But  sagacious  leader  says,  "  You  must  above  all  things  keep  up  your  hearts.  Weeping 
will  cleanse,  but  joy  is  the  strengthener."     Thankful  gladness.     Is  not  our  fathers' 


200  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  vill. 


God  our  God?  Eat  the  fat, and  send  portions  to  the  poor.  Weep  not,  for  the  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  your  strength.  They  were  Jews,  and  the  Jewish  religion  is  a 
religion  of  joy.  One  fast  and  many  feasts.  Sabbath  joyous.  "  0  be  joyful  in  the 
Lord."  Judaism  was,  in  spite  of  Sinai,  a  service  of  joy.  Much  more  is  the  gospel 
joyous.  "  Glad  tidings."  "The  joy  set  before  him."  "We  rejoice."  "Joy  in 
presence  of  the  angels."  Strange,  after  that,  that  anybody  should  have  brouo-ht 
gloom  into  rehgion.  If  God  did  not  make  his  creatures  to  be  happy,  why  did  be 
make  them  at  all  %  If  God  meant  us  to  have  no  joy  on  earth,  why  did  he  till  earth 
witb  beauty  and  with  gladness  *?  But  he  did,  for  God  is  love.  The  joy  of  the 
Lord  is  your  strength. 

Everybody  knows  ivhatjoy  is.  Joy  means  that  faculty  has  seized  what  it  wanted. 
Now  religion  aims  at  perfection ;  to  make  most  of  all  life.  Hence  its  attain- 
ment is  attainment  of  joy.  In  this  way  it  takes  possession  of  the  body.  "  Glorify 
God  in  your  body."  Use  it  for  what  God  has  made  it.  Look  at  a  macluMe. 
As  those  gloriously  artistic  ribbons  come  out  of  the  loom  you  are  glorifying, 
honouring  the  maker.  Sinful  gratification  is  against  the  laws  of  the  body  ;  for 
God's  laws  are  written  on  the  body  as  truly  as  on  the  Sinaitic  tables  of  stone. 
Religious  joy  is  harmony  with  natural  law.  Same  with  active  business.  Hand- 
craft and  head-craft  in  righteous  way.  And  the  righteous  way  means  the  right  way, 
and  the  right  way  means  the  true  way.  There  are  people  who  tell  you  that  business 
on  Christian  principles  means  bankruptcy.  There  are  proofs  that  godliness  will 
actually  pay.  Golden  rule.  There  is  a  divinity  in  business.  Paul  is  as  Christian 
and  as  holy  when  he  sits  at  Damascus  making  tents  as  when  he  stands  on  Mars' 
Hill  and  preaches  a  sermon.  To  a  Christian  man  all  life  is  holy,  all  life  is  joyous. 
The  same  is  true  of  intellectual  life.  Search  for  truth  is  pleasant.  The  tree  of 
knowledge  bears  good  fruits.  So  with  the  relative  and  social  aspect.  Laughter 
and  jest,  wit  and  humour,  are  Divine  ;  for  Divinity  stamped  them  into  us.  Tlie 
laughter  of  some  men  is  blighting  as  the  laughter  of  a  fiend,  and  you  shrink  f  i  om 
it  as  much ;  the  laughter  of  another  is  always  against  wrong,  and  on  the  side 
of  right,  and  is  healing  as  medicine. 

0/  course  we  must  wisely  distinguish  between  religion  and  the  Joy  of  religion. 
Let  not  a  man  suppose  he  is  necessarily  under  the  condemnation  of  God  because 
he  lacks  brightness  and  buoyancy.  Salvation  is  one  thing,  and  the  joys  of 
salvation  are  supplementary  things  : — these  we  may  do  without,  but  that  we 
should  not  be  without.  Joy  comes  out  of  a  steady  continuous  sense  of  acceptance 
with  God.  But  a  man  may  be  a  true  Christian  and  yet  often  fail  here.  For 
instance,  in  every-day  life  a  case  like  this  may  occur.  A  man  gets  for  a  little  while 
into  an  unaccountably  nervous  state.  He  fears  the  worst.  Friends  laugh ; 
doctor  examines  ;  the  man  is  assured.  Is  he  really  more  healthy  1  No  ;  but  still 
he  is  stronger.  Joy  is  his  strength.  A  great  many  Christians  act  that  out  in 
spiritual  things.  They  are  safe,  if  anybody  is  safe ;  but  oh  !  for  this  assurance 
of  safety.     If  they  could  believe  the  word  of  God  joy  would  come. 

Joy  then  is  the  jjroper  result  of  Christian  faith.  "  Believing,  we  rejoice."  Must 
not  forget  other  side.  "  Sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  Trivial  nature  that 
always  wants  the  countenance  wreathed  into  smiles.  Does  not  deep  joy  often 
fly  as  a  resource  to  tears  1  Jesus  Christ  anointed  with  oil  of  gladness,  and  yet 
acquainted  with  grief;  anointed  with  oil  of  gladness,  and  yet  crowned  with  thorns. 
So  deep  and  earnest  and  sympathetic  that  it  must  have  been  thus.  Sorrow  on 
surface,  and  joy  in  depths.  "  I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of."  "My 
joy."     "  My  peace."     That  joy  is  our  strength. 

Then  joy  is  a  thing  ice  are  exhorted  to.  Joy  is  in  our  power.  Not  that  joy 
must  express  itself  after  one  pattern.  Two  persons  watching  a  spectacle,  or  listening 
to  music — one  jubilant,  the  other  silent.  Prospect  in  nature— one  exclamatory, 
the  other  still.    Both  have  the  deep  joy  of  the  scene,  each  in  a  form  suited  to  him- 


CHAP.  VIII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEIIEMIAII.  20X 


self.    So  there  are  these  varying  forms  of  religions  experience — silent  and  speaking, 
calm  and  rapturous.     Imaged  in  Revelation — voice  of  many  waters,  silence  in 
heaven.    Exultation  when  we  say,  "  Come,  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song  ! " 
"  Speechless  awe  that  dares  not  move."     In  Book  of  Genesis  it  says  the  vegetables 
were  to  increase  after  their  kind,  and  animals  after  tlieir  kind  ;  and  so   we  must 
serve  God  and  enjoy  his  salvation  after  our  kind.     The  only  thing  is  this,  that  if 
we  are  not  enjoying  the  salvation  of  Christ  we  miss  the  mark  more  or  less.     We 
liave  not  as  much  as  God's  love  has  designed  for  us.     Joy  is  a  controllable  thing. 
We  can  put  ourselves  in  the  shade  or  in  the  sunshine.    We  can  be  for  ever  dissect- 
ing ourselves,   or  contemplating  Christ.    Lack  of  laith  brings  joylessness.     Xot 
enough    confidence  in  God.     A    sceptical  man  cannot  be  a  happy  man.     Giant 
Despair's  Castle  is  in  the  way  of  scepticism.     Sometimes  we  are  afraid  to  boldly 
claim  all  that  is  ours.     '*  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."     ''  JSTow  are  we  the 
sons  of  God."     Trust  Christ,  and  all  is  yours.     The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength. 
**  A  merry  heart  goes  all  the  day."     Band  at  head  of  regiment.     Do- a  task  you 
have  no  joy  in,  and  one  that  is  a  delight,  and  see  the  difference.     Take  salvation 
for  granted,  and  work  from  it,  not  for  it.     And,  my  brother,  yet  uncertain  as  to 
whether  you  ought  to  be  a  Christian  or  not,  don't  be  nervous.     Christ  invites  you 
to  joy.     A  man  who  has  less  joy  as  a  saint  than  as  a  sinner  is  a  very  poor  saint, 
that  is  all.     His  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness.     The  joys  of  forgiveness  are  the 
beginning  of  heaven.     Christian  joy  is  the  strength  and  manliness  of  all  true  human 
character.     And  when  a  man  enters  into  the  saved  state  it  is  as  when  he  enters 
heaven — he  enters  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord. 

Daily  Bible  Reading. 

viii.  18.     Also  day  hy  day,  from  the  first  day  unto  the  last  day,  he  read  in  the 

hook  of  the  law  of  God, 

Daily  reading  of  the  word  of  God. 

I.  Why?     1.  Bemuse  of  its  infinite  preciou^ness  and  value.     '*The  book  of 
the  law  of  God."     Not  a  hooh,  but  the  hook.     Value  it  as  the  gift  of  a  Father's 
love ;  as  the  legacy  of  the  Saviour's  grace ;  as  the  instrument  of  the  Spirit's  power. 
Dear  to  all  the  faithful,  because  they  feel  that  they  hang  upon  that  truth  all  that 
is  most  precious  for  time  and  eternity.     It  comes  clothed  with  the  authority  of 
infinite  truth,  and  crowned  with  the  attractions  of  infinite  love.     It  may  be  com- 
pared to  that  river  that  went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  garden,  dividing  itself 
into  four  heads  : — "  that  is  it  which  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Havilah,  where 
there  is  gold;"  and  it  is  most  significantly  added,  "and  the  gold  of  that  land  is  good. " 
*Tis  a  broad  land  of  wealth  unknown.     Study  it  every  day.     The  Scriptures  are 
styled  oracles — oracles  of  God  which  we  may  consult  for  our  guidance.     Not  like 
the  lying  oracles  of  the  heathen,  which  were  distinguished  for  their  ambiguity ; 
these  are  the  true  sayings  of  God.     It  is  like  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  the  holy 
oracle  of  the  Jews,  which  they  were  privileged  to  consult  for  guidance  and  direc- 
tion in  all  doubtful  cases.     It  is  given  to  be  a  lamp  to  our  feet.     '<  If  any  of  you 
lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God."     God  gave  these  oracles  to  convince  of  sin,  to 
convert  to  Christ,  to  confirm  in  grace,  and  to  direct  and  comfort  in  obedience. 
The  book  is  called  the  Testament.     The  Old  Testament— a  legacy  of  God  to  the 
Jewish  Church;   the  New— a  legacy  of  Christ  to  the  Christian  Church.      "All 
the  promises  are  in  him  yea"— the  promises  of  the  Old  and  the  promises  of  the 
New.     The  gospel  describes  the  legacy  of  blessing  Chiist  has  bequeathed  to  his 
redeemed  people,  a  legacy  for  both  states  of  being,  and  we  should  study  it  as  an 
heir  to  a  great  estate  does  title-deeds  and  documents.     If  a  man  does  not  study  it, 
it  is  a  sign  that  he  does  not  consider  there  is  any  legacy  left  to  him  in  it.     And 


202  IIOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH,  [OHAP.  vill. 


he  who  does  may  be  sure  to  find  his  name  in  some  codicil  or  other.  **  I  call  that 
legacy  my  own."  It  is  called  the  hook  of  the  law  of  God.  A  man  ought  to 
know  something  of  the  law  of  the  country  in  which  he  lives,  and  something  of 
the  character  of  the  country  to  which  he  goes.  It  is  at  once  the  statute  book  of 
the  King  of  kings  and  the  great  charter  of  his  people's  privileges.  The  law  of 
God's  government  and  the  law  of  God's  grace  *'  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in 
Christ  Jesus."  Study  it  every  day.  Eevelation,  like  the  sun,  must  be  seen  by  its 
own  light,  and  the  best  of  all  arguments  of  its  truth  are  those  derived  from  its  own 
pages.  Those  parts  of  the  word  are  most  precious  which  we  have  made  our  own  by 
personal  examination,  inquiry,  and  experience.  It  is  a  law  of  compensation 
which  obtains  in  Divine  things  as  well  as  human,  that  any  species  of  property 
obtained  by  our  own  effort  has  a  heightened  value  :  an  acre  of  ground  cultivated  by 
our  own  hand,  or  a  plant  or  flower  reared  and  tended  by  our  own  care,  exceeds  all 
that  we  obtain  or  inherit  by  the  labour  or  the  bounty  of  others.  So  one  promise 
examined,  prayed  over,  and  applied  is  more  useful  than  whole  books  read  in  a 
cursory  manner.  "  He  that  believeth  hath  the  witness  in  himself."  "  Now  we 
believe,  not  because  of  thy  saying  !  "  2.  Because  of  its  tendency  to  build  uj-)  the 
inner  and  spiritual  life — the  life  of  God  in  the  soul.  Hence  compared  to  manna, 
to  bread,  to  living  water.  The  life  of  the  natural  man  is  important ;  of  the  spiritual 
man  surely  not  less.  "  The  life  I  live  is  by  the  faith,"  and  the  life  of  faith  can  only 
be  supported  by  the  word  of  life.  "  Man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone."  All  life 
seeks  its  natural  food  and  aliment.  A  scientific  man  reads  works  of  science  ;  a  poet 
converses  in  spirit  with  Chaucer  and  Milton  ;  the  Christian,  the  Divine  word. 
"  The  words  that  I  speak,  they  are  spirit  and  they  are  life."  There  has  been  a  great 
education  of  our  race  going  on  from  the  morning  of  time,  by  which  the  souls  of  men 
have  been  trained  for  eternity,  by  these  Divine  words.  The  humblest  Christian, 
in  studying  the  word,  mingles  with  the  greatest  minds,  with  the  kingly  spirits  that 
have  enthroned  themselves  in  the  hearts  of  mighty  nations.  He  makes  himself  a 
fellow-student  with  Moses  on  the  mount ;  with  Elijah  at  the  cave  of  Horeb  ;  with 
Daniel  when  he  conversed  with  Gabriel ;  with  John  the  Baptist  in  the  wilderness  ; 
with  the  beloved  disciple  as  he  leaned  on  Jesus'  bosom;  nay,  with  Jesus  himself; 
and  he  says,  lifting  to  heaven  an  unpresumptuous  eye,  *'  Truly  our  fellowship  is 
with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  How  can  you  hope  for  spirit- 
uality without  retirement  for  these  purposes  ]  How  can  you  hope  for  peace  and 
joy  in  believing  if  the  closet  is  deserted  and  the  Bible  is  unread  1  Where  is  the 
wonder  you  complain,  *'  My  leanness,  my  leanness,"  Avhen  you  feed  only  on  the 
husks  of  worldly  opinion  and  worldly  writings,  and  neglect  to  sit  down  at  the 
banquet  of  truth?  Can  you  wonder  that  you  are  without  the  comforts  of  the 
Spirit  when  you  do  not  put  yourself  in  communion  Avith  the  Spirit  ?  3.  Because 
all  great  revivals  of  the  power  of  religion  have  been  associated  wtih  high  reverence 
for  the  written  word.  It  Avas  in  the  mount  that  Moses  received  the  tables  of  stone 
Avritten  by  God's  own  finger.  The  prophets  commenced  their  addresses  by  a  careful 
memorial  of  the  time  and  date  of  God's  manifestation  to  them  :  ''  The  word  of  the 
Lord  came  unto  me."  The  finding  of  the  book  of  the  law  was  the  commencement 
of  better  times  in  the  later  date  of  the  Jewish  monarchy.  And  it  Avas  when 
strengthened  by  these  reports  of  faith  that  the  ancient  Avorthies  wrought  righteous- 
ness, obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  out  of  weakness  were  made 
strong.  Our  Saxon  forefathers  valued  and  prized  the  word  of  God.  King  Alfred 
translated  the  Psalms  for  them,  and  the  Venerable  Bede  the  Gospel  of  John.  It 
Avas  a  little  leaven,  but  it  served  to  keep  a  better  faith  alive ;  a  little  salt,  but  it 
tended  to  purify  the  fountains  of  public  opinion.  Before  Luther  the  Waldenses 
held  the  faith  of  Christ  in  the  fastnesses  of  the  Alps  and  in  the  valleys  of  Piedmont. 
Our  OAvn  countryman  Wickliffe  gave  to  the  people  the  whole  jSToav  Testament  in  their 
mother  toiigue,  by  which  he  gave  a  resting-place  to  the  mind,  and  widely  soAved  the 


CHAP.  VIII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  203 


seed  of  the  kingdom.  So  much  so  that  a  contemporary  says,  "  You  could  not  ifieet 
two  people  by  the  way  but  one  of  them  was  a  disciple  of  Wickliffe,"   This  was  the 
crowning  work  of  Luther — the  unsealing  the  fountains  of  Divine  truth  to  the 
millions  in  Germany.     In  Italy  the  Eeformation  dawned  in  the  same  manner.     If 
ever  the  flame  of  holiness  and  devotion  burn  brightly  in  your  bosom,  it  must  be 
fed  by  the  word.     4.  Because  hy  this  loord  you  must  he  judged.     "  God  shall  judge 
men  by  my  Gospel."    "  The  words  I  speak,  the  same  shall  judge  you  at  the  last  day/' 
II.  How?     Different  minds  take  different  courses.     Some  a  chapter  of  Old 
Testament  in  the  morning,  and  i^ew  Testament  at  night;  some  Psalms;   some 
Gospels ;  some  histories ;   some  epistles.     Whate'er  is  best  administered  is  best. 
As  to  states  of  mind.     1.  With  reverence.     ''Take  off  thy  shoe  I"     There  should 
be  a  pause  of  solemn  seeking  and  solemn  waiting  for  a  spiritual  frame.     Who 
feels  the  sublime  dignity  of  a  saying  fresh  descended  from  the  porch  of  heaven  1 
Who  feels  the  awful  weight  of  one  of  the  words  of  the  living  God]     How  awe- 
struck were  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  Habakkuk.     On  the  frontispiece  of  some 
Bibles  is  written,  ''  How  awful  is  this  place  !  "   "  So  ought  we,''  as  Owen  says,  "  to 
look  upon  the  word  of  God  with  holy  awe  and  reverence  for  the  presence  of  God 
in  it."     2.  With  special  affection  and  yr ay er fulness.     Go  to  God  by  prayer  for  a 
key  to  unlock  the  mysteries  of  the  word.     St.  John  by  weeping  got  the  sealed 
book  open.     Daniel  by  prayer  drew  an  angel  down  from  heaven  to  give  him  more 
light.     Bow  your  knees  before  you  open  your  Bibles.     ''  Open  thou  mine  eyes 
that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law."     Honour  the  prophetical 
office  of  Christ.     It  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  to  open 
the  books  and  unloose  the  seals.     Honour  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     No  man 
can  say  that  Christ  is  Lord  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.     3.   Talce  time.     :^rot  time] 
You  have  time  to  sin— none  to  repent?   time  for  the  world— none  for  God] 
Could  God  find  time  to  write  this  book,  and  will  not  you  to  read  it]     Shall  the 
sick   man  find  no  time  to   read   his  Physician's  prescriptions]   the  condemned 
malefactor  find  no  time  to  read  his  Judge's  pardon  ]     Must  Joshua  in  the  midst 
of  war  and  cares  of  government  find  time  to  meditate  on  the  law;  and  shall  thy 
shop,  or  plough,  or  a  few  trivial  duties  discharge  you  ]     4.  Keep  the  end  in  view  -- 
Thodey. 


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  VIIL 

Festivals. 

The  religious  times  ordained  in  the  (c)   The   Feast   of    Tabernacles,    or    of 

Law  fall  under  three  heads  :— (1)  Those  ingathering. 

formaUy  connected  with  the  institution  On  each  of  these  occasions  every  male 

of  the  Sabbath;     2)  The  historical  or  Israelite    was    commanded    "to   appear 

great  festivals;  (3)  The  Day  of  Atone-  before  the  Lord,"  that  is,  to  attend  in 

^j         ,.  ,  ,                   ,     .  ,  ^1^«  court  of  the  tabernacle  or  the  temple, 

Immediately  connected  with  the  insti-  and  to  make  his  off-erino-  with  a  iovful 

tution  of    the  Sabbath  are  —  (a)   The  heart  (Deut.  xxvii  7-  Neh  viii  ^~U\ 

weekly  Sabbath  itself     (b)  The  seventh  The  attendance  of  wonien  was  voluntarv 

new  moon,  or  Feast  of  Trumpets,     (c)  but  the  zealous  often  went  up  to  the 

Ihe  Sabbatical  year,     (d)  Ihe  year  of  Passover.     Thus  Mary  attended  it  ^Luke 

Tl             w     .    /•     .1     m.       .  ii-41),andHannah(lSam.i.7;ii.  19). 

.^^^"  S'J^\^f^^<^-^(^^/h.^al"^^^>/->^'^-  As   might   be    supposed,    there    was    a 

ymnage  feasts)  are  -  (a)  Ihe  Passover,  stricter  obligation  regarding  the  Passover 

{h)  Ihe   Feast  of  Pentecost    of  weeks,  than  the  other  feasts,  and  hence  there 

of  wheat  harvest,  or  of  the  First-fruits,  was  an  express  provision  to  enable  those 


204 


HOMILETKJ  COMMENTARY:   NE 11  EMI  AH. 


[chap.  vui. 


who,   by  unavoidable  circumstances  or 
legal  impurity,  had  been  prevented  from 
attending  at  the  proper  time  to  observe 
tlie  feast  on  the  same  day  of  the   suc- 
ceeding month  (JSTum.  ix.  10,  11).     On 
all  the  days  of  Holy  Convocation  there 
was  to  be  an  entire  suspension  of  ordin- 
ary labour  of  all  kinds  (Exod.  xii.   16  ; 
Levit.  xvi.  29;  xxiii.  21,  24,  25,  35); 
but   on   the   intervening   days   of    the 
longer   festivals  work  might  be  carried 
on.     Besides  their  religious  purpose,  the 
great  festivals  must   have  had   an  im- 
portant bearing  on  the  maintenance  of  a 
feeling  of  national  unity.     This  may  be 
traced  in  the  apprehensions  of  Jeroboam 
(1   Kings  xii.   26,  27),  and  in  the  at- 
tempt  at  reformation   by  Hezekiah   (2 
Chron.  xxx.  1),  as  well  as  in  the  necessity 
which,   in  later  times,  was  felt   by  the 
Roman  government  of  mustering  a  con- 
siderable  military    force   at    Jerusalem 
during  the  festivals.     The  frequent  re- 
currence of  the  sabbatical  number  in  the 
organization    of  these    festivals   is   too 
remarkable  to  be  passed  over,  and  (as 
Ewald  has  observed)  seems,  when  viewed 
in  connection  with  the  sabbatical  sacred 
times,  to  furnish  a  strong  proof    that 
the  whole  system  of  the  festivals  of  the 
Jewish    law    was    the   product   of   one 
mind.     Pentecost    occurs    seven   weeks 
after   the  Passover ;    the  Passover  and 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  last  seven  days 
each;    the  days  of    Holy  Convocation 
are  seven  in  the  year — two  at  the  Pass- 
over, one  at  Pentecost,  one  at  the  Feast 
of  Trumpets,  one  on  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment, and  two  at  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles ;  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  as  well 
as  the  Day  of  Atonement,  falls  in  the 
seventh  montli  of  the  sacred  year ;  and, 
lastly,  the  cycle  of  annual  feasts  occupies 
seven  months — from  Nisan  to  Tisri. 

The   agricultural   significance   of  the 
three  great  festivals  is  clearly  set  forth 


in  the  account  of  the  Jewish  sacred 
year  contained  in  Levit.  xxiii.  The  pro- 
minence which,  not  only  in  that  chapter, 
but  elsewhere,  is  given  to  this  signifi- 
cance in  the  names  by  which  Pentecost 
and  Tabernacles  are  often  called,  and  also 
by  the  offering  of  "  the  first-fruits  of 
Avheat  harA^est"  at  Pentecost  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  22),  and  of  "  the  first  of  the  first- 
fruits  "  at  the  Passover  (Exod.  xxiii.  19  ; 
xxxiv.  26),  might  easily  suggest  that  the 
origin  of  the  feasts  was  patriarchal,  and 
that  the  historical  associations  with 
which  Moses  endowed  them  were  grafted 
upon  their  primitive  meaning.  It  is, 
perhaps,  however,  a  difficulty  in  the  way 
of  this  view  that  we  should  ratlier  look 
for  the  institution  of  agricultural  festi- 
vals amongst  an  agricultural  than  a  pas- 
toral people,  such  as  the  Israelites  and 
their  ancestors  were  before  the  settle- 
ment in  the  land  of  promise. 

The  times  of  the  festivals  were  evi- 
dently ordained  in  wisdom,  so  as  to 
interfere  as  little  as  possible  with  the 
industry  of  the  people.  The  Passover 
was  held  just  before  the  work  of  harvest 
commenced  ;  Pentecost  at  the  conclusion 
of  the  corn  harvest,  and  before  the  vint- 
age ;  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  after  all 
the  fruits  of  the  ground  were  gathered 
in.  In  winter,  when  travelling  was 
difficult,  there  were  no  festivals.  After 
the  Captivity  the  Feast  of  Purim  (Esther 
ix.  20)  and  that  of  the  Dedication  (1 
Mace.  iv.  56)  were  instituted  The 
festivals  of  wood-carrying,  as  they  were 
called,  are  mentioned  by  Josephus. 
What  appears  to  have  been  their  origin 
is  found  in  Keh.  x.  34.  The  term  "the 
Festival  of  the  Basket "  is  applied  by 
Philo  to  the  offering  of  the  first-fruits 
described  in  Deut.  xxvi.  1 — 11. — Eev. 
Samuel  Glarky  M.A.^  inSmiWs  *  Bible 
Dictionary.^ 


Sentences  prom  Old  Writers. 

I.  The  Reading  and  Exposition  of  the  all  good  ministers  are  theirs,  and  they 

Law.      They  spake  unto  Ezra  the  scribe,  may  call  for  them  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  22).  **  Ezra 

^'The    people  may,  if   need  be,  say  to  knew  that  the  best  need  hear  the  law, 

Archippus,  Look  to  thy  ministry  that  that    they  might    be   kept   within   the 

thou  fulfil  it.     The  gifts  and  abilities  of  bounds  of  obedience,     Not  the  unruly 


cnAr.  VIII.] 


HOMILKTIC  COMMENTARY :   NEIIEMIAU. 


205 


colt  only,  but  the  horse  that  is  broken, 
hath  a  bit  and  bridle  also."  "The 
coiinnandnient  was  a  lamp,  and  the  law 
a  light.  The  Greeks  call  the  law  the 
standing  mind  of  God.  And  if  Demos- 
thenes could  say  of  men's  laws,  that  they 
were  the  invention  of  God  ;  if  Xenophun 
could  say  of  the  Persian  laws,  that  tliey 
kept  the  people  even  from  coveting; 
any  wickedness ;  if  Cicero  durst  say  of 
the  Roman  laws,  that  they  far  exc«'lled 
and  exceeded  all  the  learned  libraries  of 
the  philosophers,  both  in  weight  and 
worth,  how  much  more  may  all  this 
and  more  bo  said  of  this  perfect  law  of 
God,  the  book  whereof  was  here  brought 
forth  by  Ezra,  and  read  and  expounded 
in  the  ears  of  all  the  people  1 "  Before 
Hie  congregation  hath  of  men  and  women. 
"  Souls  have  no  sexes.  In  Christ  there 
is  no  difference."  "  Little  pitchers  have 
ears,  and  little  children  will  understand 
much  if  well  principled."  "  As  a  scribe 
Ezra  wrote  the  law ;  and  as  a  priest  he 
read  and  expounded  it."  ''  Five  or  six 
hours  they  spent  in  holy  duties,  whereas 
the  most  amongst  us  think  long  of  an 
hour ;  they  sit,  as  it  were,  in  the  stocks 
whiles  they  are  hearing  the  word  read 
or  preached,  and  come  out  of  the  church, 
when  the  tedious  sermon  runneth  some- 
what beyond  the  glass,  like  prisoners 
out  of  a  gaol."  *'  St.  Paul  laid  one  text 
to  another,  as  artificers  do  the  several 
pieces  of  their  work,  that  they  may 
perfectly  agree  the  one  with  the  other." 
"The  prophets  give  us  Moses  unveiled." 
"Parallel  texts,  like  glasses,  set  one 
against  another,  do  cast  a  mutual  light ; 
like  the  sun,  the  Scriptures  show  other 
things,  and  themselves  too." 

II.  Religious  Joy.  "  The  joy  which 
has  the  Lord  for  its  object,  and  comes 
from  him,  is  the  cause  of  renewing 
spiritual  strength,  so  as  to  run  and  not 
be  weary,  walk  and  not  faint,  in  the 
ways  of  God."     "Thou   canst   not   be 


fully  comforted,  nor  have  perfect  refresh- 
ment, but  in  God."  "  It  is  no  hard 
matter  to  despise  human  comfort  when 
we  have  Divine."  This  day  is  holy  unto 
the  Lord  your  God.  "  Your  mourning, 
tiierefore,  now  is  as  much  out  of  season 
as  Samson's  wife's  weeping  was  at  her 
wedding."  "  One  being  asked  whether 
a  good  man  might  not  feed  upon  sweet 
and  delicate  meat ;  eat  the  fat  and  drink 
the  sweet,  even  the  choicest  wines  and 
chiefest  viands?  answered.  Yes ;  except 
God  made  bees  only  for  fools."  '* Spiritual 
joy  is  such  a  precious  commodity,  as 
that  no  good  can  match  it,  no  evil  over- 
match it."  "The  peace  of  a  man's 
conscience  will  appear  in  his  counten- 
ance, as  Stephen's  did."  "  To  the  truly 
joyous  the  cross  is  anointed."  And  all 
the  people  went  their  way  to  eat.  "To 
do  all  that  they  were  directed  to  do. 
They  had  been  in  the  furnace  of  morti- 
fication ;  and  now  they  were  willing  to 
be  cast  into  the  mould  of  God's  word 
and  to  be  whatsoever  the  Lord  would 
have  them  to  be.  They  were  only  his 
clay  and  wax,  a  willing  people,  waiting 
for  his  law."  And  to  make  great  mirth. 
"  All  kind  of  honest  jollity ;  for  the 
better  exciting  their  hearts  to  true 
thankfulness." 

III.  Sacred  service.  On  the  second 
day  they  were  gathered  together.  "  Divine 
knowledge  is  as  a  great  lady,  that  will 
not  easily  be  acquainted  with  us  but  upon 
further  suit."  "Popular  men  should 
esteem  knowledge  as  silver,  noblemen  aa 
gold,  princes  prize  it  as  pearls."  The 
priests  and  Levites.  "These  teachers  of 
others  took  no  scorn  to  learn  of  Ezra, 
that  perfect  scribe."  "  The  greatest  part 
of  those  things  which  we  know  is  the 
least  part  of  the  things  which  we  know 
not."  "  God  will  not  take  up  with  a 
careless  and  slubbered  service."  "  To 
do  nothing  for  God  more  than  needs 
must  account  too  little." 


206  HOMILETTC  COMMENTAUY:   NEUEMIAH.  [chap.  ix. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

P^XPLANATORY  NoTKs:.]  "The  coiifessioTi  recorded  in  this  chapter  uses  largely  the  language  of 
the  older  Scriptures.  For  ver.  6  see  Ps.  Ixxxvi.  10  ;  Ex.  xx.  11,  and  Deut.  x.  14.  For  ver.  9  see 
Ex.  iii.  7.  For  ver.  10  see  Jer.  xxxii.  20.  For  ver.  1 1  see  Ex.  xv.  5,  10.  For  ver.  12  see  Ex  xiii.  21. 
For  ver.  13  see  Ex,  xix.  20.  For  ver.  15  see  Ps,  cv.  40,  41.  For  ver.  16  see  2  Kings  xvii.  14.  For 
ver.  17  see  Ps.  Ixxviii,  11  ;  Ex.  xxxiv,  6.  For  ver.  25  see  Ocut.  vi.  10,  11.  For  ver.  27  see  Judges 
ii.  14,  18.  For  ver.  29  see  Eev.  xviii.  5.  For  ver.  33  see  Ps.  evi,  6.  For  ver.  35  and  ver.  36  see 
Deut.  xxviii.  47,  A^." -Crosby.  1,  The  twenty  and  fourth  day  of  this  month]  Two  days  after  the 
close  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  With  fasting  and  with  sackclothes  and  with  earth  upon 
them]  External  marks  of  internal  grief.  Sackclothes]  Kls^where  in  Kng.  version  sackcloth  for 
Ileb,  plural. — Crosby.  2.  Separated  themselves]  Foreigners,  *' a  mixed  multitude,"  had  become 
united  with  the  chosen  people  by  trade  and  marriage.  3,  Stood  and  confessed  and  worshipped] 
More  fully  shown  in  penitential  prayer  that  follows  after  verse  5.  They  read  in  the  book  of  the 
law]  Their  extraordinary  zeal  led  them  to  continue  this  as  before.  One  fourth  part  of  the  day] 
For  three  hours,  twelve  hours  being  the  acknowledged  length  of  the  Jewish  day  (John  xi.  9),  so 
that  this  solemn  diet  of  worship,  which  probably  commenced  at  the  morning  sacrifice,  was  con- 
tinued for  six  hours,  i.  e.  till  the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice. — Jtimicson.  "  The  general  form  and 
phraseology  of  this  prayer  place  it  among  the  liturgical  Psalms  of  the  Old  'J'estament,  and  show  it 
specially  suitable  to  be  used  by  the  whole  congregation.  6.  All  their  host]  (Cump.  Gen.  ii.  1).  The 
host  of  heaven  who  worshipped  God  are  the  angels  (Ps.  ciii.  21  ;  cxlviii.  2).  7.  Abram  .... 
Abraham]  (Gen.  xvii.  5).     XJr  of  the  Chaldees]  Topography  uncertain.     Mugheir  near  the  Persian 

Gulf  probable.    8.  Canaanites Girgashitesj  "  The  Hivites  are  left  out  of  this  enumeration, 

perhaps  to  please  their  descendants,  the  Nethinim  "  (see  Josh.  ix.  7). — Crosby.  15,  Thou  hadst 
sworn]  Margin — Lift  up  thine  hand.  Allusion  to  the  ceremony  of  raising  the  hand  in  taking  an  oath. 
17.  Appointed  a  captain]  In  Numbers  xiv.  4  it  is  only  said  that  they  proposed  to  ap])oint ;  probably 
they  actually  carried  out  their  intention,  so  far  as  to  nominate  a  leader.  22.  Divide  them  into 
corners]  "Thou  didst  divide  them  (the  kingdoms  and  nations,  i.e.  the  land  of  these  nations) 
according  to  sides  or  boundaries,  i.  e.  according  to  certain  definite  limits." — Bertheau.  The  land  of 
Sihon  and  the  land  of  the  king  of  Heshbon]  Sihon  is  the  king  of  Heshbon.  "  Heshb(-n  being  the 
capital  city,  the  passage  should  run  thus  : — the  land  of  Sihon,  or  the  land  of  the  king  of  Heshl)on." — 
Jamieson.  29.  Withdrew  the  shoulder]  Like  the  refractory  ox  that  rebels  against  the  yoke 
(Zech.  vii.  11  ;  Hos.  iv.  16).  32.  Let  not  all  the  trouble  seem  little  before  thee]  *'  What  seems 
little  is  ea.sily  disregarded.  The  sense  is,  Let  our  affliction  be  regarded  by  thee  as  great  and  heavy." — 
Keil.  38.  A  sure  covenant]  Such  solemn  signing  and  sealing  bespeaks  their  earnestness.  This 
verse  is  the  first  of  the  tenth  chapter  in  Hebrew. 

HOMILETICAL  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTEE  IX. 


Ver.    1 — 38.  Hebraic  Conceptions  of  God. 
„      1—38.  The   Story   of    God's   Providence 

Retold. 
„      1 — 38.  A  Nation's  Prayer. 
„  6,  The  World  preserved  by  Divine 

Providence, 


Ver.         17.   The  Mercy  of  God, 
„     18—21.    Promises  Kept. 
,,  21.  The  History  of  a  Generation. 

„      25,  26.   Secular    Prosperity     inimical     to 

Spiritual  Life. 
„  38.   Kesponsibiliiy  of  Honour. 


Hebraic  Conceptions  of  God. 

The  Bible  does  not  define  God.  The  nearest  approach  to  definitions  are  in  tliose 
two  remarkable  sentences  in  St.  John's  Epistle — "God  is  light;  "  '*God  is  love." 
Modern  philosophy  speaks  of  God  as  the  Unknowable.  One  of  the  oldest  books  in 
the  world — the  Book  of  Job — teaches  that  philosophy  with  a  difference.  "  Canst 
thou  by  searching  find  out  God  1  canst  thou  find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  ]  " 
God  may  be  known  :  cannot  be  comprehended.  The  secret  of  God  is  as  high  as 
heaven,  deeper  than  hell,  longer  than  the  earth,  broader  than  the  sea.  St.  Paul,  the 
mental  philosopher  among  the  twelve  apostles,  speaks  of  "  that  which  may  be  known 
of  God."  Bible  tells  us  what  God  does ;  not  what  God  is.  Nor  does  it  attempt  to 
prove  his  existence.  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is."  Sacred 
writers  assume  this.    With  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  many  of  the  books  open.  Every 


citAP.  IX.]  nOMlLKTW  COMME^TAnV:   NEHEMTATT.  207 


page  is  instinct  with  the  presence  of  Ood.  There  is  no  relation  to  human  life  in 
which  Eastern  poets  and  prophets  did  not  conceive  God.  He  was  in  the 
generation  of  the  righteous  ;  a  present  help  in  time  of  trouble.  He  was  a  King  to 
those  who  believed  ;  a  judge  of  those  who  rebelled  ;  the  helper  of  those  who  trusted. 
They  saw  God — 

I.  In  the  movements  of  history.  "  Who  can  utter  the  mighty  acts  of  the 
Lord?  Our  fathers  understood  not  thy  wonders  in  Egypt.  He  rebuked  the  Bed 
Sea.  He  did  great  things  in  Egypt,  and  wondrous  works  iu  the  land  of  Ham. 
Our  fathers  angered  God — not  Moses,  though  him  they  angered — they  angered 
God  at  the  waters  of  strife.  He  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  the  heathen,  and  they 
that  hated  them  ruled  over  tliem.  Many  times  did  he  deliver  them.  He  made 
them  to  be  pitied  of  all  those  that  carried  them  captive.  All  nations  are  before 
him.  Pharaoh's  heart  he  hardens,  and  Cyrus'  sword  lie  employs.  He  takes  hold 
of  the  ships  of  Tarshish.  The  worhi's  merchandise  and  hire  shall  be  holmess 
unto  the  Lord."  These  passages  are  quoted  at  random.  It  was  hardly  necessary 
to  quote  at  all.  The  pages  of  Moses,  the  songs  of  David,  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah, 
teem — literally  teem— with  references  to  the  presence  of  God  in  the  movements  of 
history.  God  in  history  !  the  seers  and  songsters  of  the  Scriptures  of  Truth  hardly 
condescend  to  say  that.  God  in  history?  History  is  God.  Men  read,  "Thou  art 
the  Lord  the  God,  who  didst  choose  Abram,  and  broughtest  him  forth  out  of  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees,  and  gavest  him  the  name  of  Abraham  ;  and  foundest  his  heart 
faithful  before  thee,  and  madest  a  covenant  with  him  to  give  the  land  of  the 
Canaanites,  the  Hittites,  the  Amorites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the  Jebusites,  and  the 
Girgashites,  to  give  it,  I  say,  to  his  seed,  and  hast  performed  thy  words  ;  for  thou  art 
righteous  "  (ver.  7,  8) ;  and  they  say,  We  can  see  the  hand  of  God  in  this.  Verily 
there  was  a  God.  Then  they  turn  over  the  pages  of  English  History  and  read  how 
we  emerged  out  of  barbarism  ;  how  a  fusion  of  race-stocks  has  made  us  what  we 
are — the  hardiest,  most  truth-loving,  uprightest  nation  under  the  blue  sky  ;  and  they 
say.  It  is  history  ;  but  they  do  not  say.  We  see  God.  Now  and  then  some  popular 
orator  turns  to  the  pages  of  the  old  Chroniclers  and  sees  how,  in  the  reign  of  James  L, 
a  poor  people  became  enlightened  by  the  word  of  God,  and  finding  no  such  phrase 
in  the  dictionary  as  *'  religious  toleration,"  sped  to  America  ;  and  he  adds,  I  see  a 
Divine  hand  in  this  emigration  movement.  Why  not  boldly  say,  '*  Thou  didst 
divide  the  sea  before  them,  so  that  they  went  through  the  midst  of  the  sea;  and 
iheir  persecutors  thou  overthrewest "  (ver.  11)?  That  is  the  Bible  language  for  the 
passage  of  the  Eed  Sea.  Surely  we,  casting  our  glances  towards  the  West,  and 
noting  the  magnificent  proportions  of  the  American  Eepublic,  can  see  that  the 
language  is  applicable  to  the  passage  of  the  Atlantic  ;  to  the  colonization  of  the 
New  World.  Says  Bancroft,  the  American  historian,  ''  The  pilgrims  were  English- 
men ;  exiles  for  religion  ;  men  disciplined  by  misfortune ;  cultivated  by  oppor- 
tunities of  extensive  observations ;  equal  in  rank  as  in  rights  ;  and  bound  by  no 
code  upon  earth  but  that  of  religion  or  the  public  will."  What  cast  Pharaoh  and 
his  hosts  into  the  sea?  Nothing— God.  Who  destroyed  the  Spanish  Armada? 
Nobody — the  storm.  Did  not,  then,  the  same  God  direct  both  storms?  What  says 
the  prophet,  "  Seeing  many  things,  but  thou  observest  not."  "  Seeing  ye  shall  see, 
and  shall  not  perceive ;  hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  understand,"  said 
Jesus  the  Revealer  of  truth. 

If  God  had  no  hand  in  the  Reformation,  Martin  Luther,  the  Mansfeld  miner's 
son,  the  Augustinian  monk,  the  darling  of  Wittenberg  University,  was  simply  an 
obstinate  revolter  against  authority  ;  whereas  he  was  accustomed  to  console  him- 
self with  the  thought  that  the  cause  was  not  his,  but  God's — that  God  "  who  stays 
the  waves  upon  the  sea-beach,  and  stays  them  with  sand."  "He  that  has  not  God, 
let  him  have  what  else  he  will,  is  miserable,"  was  his  deliberate  opinion.  "  God 
will  be  found  there  where  he  has  engaged  to  be,"  he  believed.     He  loved  the 


208  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEUEMIAE.  [chap.  ix. 

second  Psalm.  The  Psalm  that  tells  how  God  laughs  when  great  men  rage  he 
loved  with  all  his  heart,  "  because  it  strikes  and  flashes  valiantly."  The  Levites 
in  the  olden  time  sang,  "  Our  fathers  were  disobedient,  therefore  thou  deliveredst 
them  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies.  Nevertheless,  in  the  time  of  their  trouble, 
when  they  cried  unto  thee  thou  heardest  them  from  heaven,  and  according  to 
thy  manifold  mercies  thou  gavest  them  saviours."  And  shall  not  we  thank  God 
for  the  "saviours"  whom  he  has  raised  up  to  deliver  this  nation,  to  burst  the 
shackles  of  the  slave,  to  flood  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  with  light  1  Is  it 
nothing  that  good  Queen  Bess  and  brave.  God-fearing  Oliver  Cromwell  once 
governed  these  realms  %  Were  not  the  Puritans  ever  the  friends  of  popular  liberty  % 
Can  Scottish  Covenanters  be  forgotten,  or  the  Clapham  sect  become  despised  %  So 
long  as  Nonconformity  acts  upon  its  motto,  "  In  things  essential,  unity ;  in  things 
doubtful,  liberty ;  in  aU  things  charity,"  it  will  be  the  instrument  of  God  for 
good.  When  Methodism  loses  her  cunning  in  spreading  Scriptural  holiness 
throughout  the  land,  then — not  till  then — she  will  become  a  by-word  and  a  proverb 
of  reproach  among  the  religious  communities  of  Christendom.  On  the  bead-roll 
of  English  worthies  men  and  women  in  the  generations  following  wiU  look  for 
parson  Wycliffe,  tinker  Bunyan,  gentleman  Wilberforce,  sturdy  Howard,  and 
sweet-souled  Elizabeth  Fry.  These  were  the  angels  in  whose  presence  the  doors 
flew  open,  and  the  iron  gate  that  shut  in  imprisoned  men  opened  to  them  of  his 
own  accord.  Every  ray  of  light  that  falls  upon  the  darker  places  of  the  earth ; 
each  blow  that  is  struck  for  freedom  ;  every  the  painfulest  endeavour  of  weak  men 
and  timid  women  to  reach  truth  and  exhibit  the  beauty  of  holiness,  is  an  intimation 
of  a  higher  presence — a  voice  from  the  innermost  sanctuary,  crying,  *'  Surely  the 
Lord  is  in  this  place."  In  the  movements  of  history  the  Hebrews  saw  God  ;  and 
they  heard  God.     And 

II.  In  the  voices  of  Nature.  The  sun  was  a  globe  of  light,  and  more — the 
visible  symbol  of  the  invisible  God.  The  sun  brought  light  and  life,  and  growth 
and  joy,  and  hope  and  courage.  "  The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation  ;  whom 
should  I  fear]"  "  The  Lord  God  is  a  sun  ;  He  will  give  grace  and  glory."  The  sun 
rode  in  the  heavens  like  a  thing  of  might;  no  sign  of  weariness  appeared  in  him. 
''  Let  them  that  love  thee,  O  Lord,  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  might." 
The  rock  had  more  than  a  geological  message.  It  told  of  strata,  growth,  history 
of  long-since-buried  men ;  it  told  too  of  the  strength,  patience,  endurance  of  God 
— "  THE  ROCK  OP  AGES."  "  He  is  the  rock  ;  his  way  is  perfect."  *'  Lead  me  to  the 
rock  that  is  higher  than  I."  Clouds  did  not  merely  collect  the  waters  to  pour 
down  upon  the  earth :  they  were  the  treasure-houses  of  God.  As  the  sun  shone 
through  them  they  became  luminous  as  with  the  shining  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord. 
They  hid  the  face  of  the  scorching  sun  from  the  tired  and  thirsty  traveller.  "  He 
spread  a  cloud  for  a  covering."  "  His  favour  is  as  a  cloud  of  the  latter  rain."  God 
was  the  keeper  of  the  vineyard  of  the  house  of  Israel.     They  saw  God — 

III.  In  the  lives  of  men.  God  writes  his  will  in  falling  dynasties ;  in 
commercial  and  political  changes ;  in  solitary  experiences.  God  speaks  to  us, 
works  in  us,  expresses  his  will  through  us.  Reliant  weakness,  weariness  and 
worn-outness,  trusting  in  God,  have  around  them  an  omnipotent  arm  ;  they  rest  on 
the  immoveable  rock  on  which  the  world  reposes.  God  often  means  to  men  terror, 
fear,  law,  hatred,  hell ;  too  seldom  grace,  salvation,  light,  hope,  joy,  strength, 
inspiration,  courage,  help,  heaven.  "  The  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  is  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  taught  *'  our  Father,"  and  revealed  something  like  "  the 
motherhood  of  God."  A  great  God  we  knew  before.  Tenderness,  patience,  forbear- 
ance, forgivingness,  motherliness,  he  showed  us ;  restated,  illustrated  what  lay  in  Old 
Testament  less  distinctly.  Not  by  his  lip  only,  but  in  his  life.  Whom  did  he  seek 
but  the  sick  and  sad 'I     Who  sought  him  but  the  oppressed  and  outcast?     Whom 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NETTEMIAB,  209 

did  he  ever  send  away  empty  of  hope  ?   God  is  in  Nature ;  God  is  in  history ;  hut 
the  whole  of  God  is  in  Jesus  Christ.     Son  of  man  was  Son  of  God. 

Application.  1.  My  God — not  everybody's  God.  Oodhere — not  God  everywhere. 
2.  When  do  we  think  of  God?  After  wrong-doing?  First  thing  in  the  morning, 
last  thing  at  night,  there  should  come  to  us  a  word  of  joy,  providence,  help — this  is 
what  God  should  be.  Let  us  approach  God,  who  is  "  a  great  King,"  with  manly 
reverence  ;  let  us  approach  God,  who  is  '^  our  Father,"  with  a  child's  unfaltering 
trust.  "Let  us  draw  near  with  full  assurance,"  for  "our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  And  as  the  fellowship  grows  and  deepens 
there  will  be  revealed  to  us  what  is  revealable  of  the  infinite  secret  men  call  God. 

The  Story  of  God's  Providence  Retold. 

"The  invitation  to  praise  God  insensibly  passes  into  the  action  of  praising. 
*  Stand  up  and  bless  the  Lord  your  God.'  The  assembled  congregation  blessed 
God.  They  did  so  by  silently  and  heartily  praying  to  and  praising  God  with  the 
Levites,  who  were  reciting  aloud  the  confession  of  sin." — Keil.  Not  as  to  an 
unknown  God  did  they  cry  and  make  confession.  He  had  been  forgotten,  but  he 
was  still  familiar.     "  Our  God,"  the  keynote  of  Hebrew  prayer  and  psalmody. 

I.  A  choice  and  a  covenant.  "  Thou  art  Lord  alone."  "  Thou  art  the  God 
who  didst  choose  Abram."  "Thou  madest  a  covenant  with  him"  (ver.  6 — 8). 
Around  these  central  themes  are  grouped  illustrations.  The  independency  of  God  is 
marked  in  the  making  and  preserving  of  all  things,  in  confirmation  whereof  the 
host  of  Heaven  worship  him.  He  doeth  what  he  will.  When  he  chose  Abram 
he  gave  him  a  new  name.  ^'  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name ;  thou  art  mine." 
He  who  claimed  service  rendered  reward.  "Thou  foundest  his  heart  faithful 
before  thee,  and  madest  a  covenant  with  him  to  give  the  land  to  his  seed." 
"  Abram  believed  in  the  Lord  ;  and  he  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness  "  (Gen. 
XV.  6).  A  man  of  faith  will  be  a  faithful  man.  God's  covenants  are  conditioned. 
"The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."  "With  the  pure  thou  wilt  show  thyself 
pure;  and  with  the  froward  thou  wilt  show  thyself  froward."  "With  God 
word  and  deed  correspond  with  each  other."  "  Thou  hast  performed  thy  words  ; 
for  thou  art  righteous." 

II.  The  word  fulfilled.  "  Thou  sawest  the  affliction  of  our  fathers  in  Egypt, 
and  heardest  their  cry  by  the  Red  Sea  "  (ver.  9 — 1 1).  The  extremes  of  deliverance. 
God  saw  them  under  the  taskmaster's  lash ;  he  heard  when  they  fled.  The  Ever- 
present  coming  down^  the  Omniscient  looking — this  is  the  Biblical  anthropomor- 
phism. Admit  if  you  will  that  this  is  not  God ;  still  it  is  our  necessary  conception 
of  him.  He  is  always  nigh ;  but  we  do  not  always  realize  His  presence.  When  I 
weep  assure  me  that  God  pities ;  when  I  pray  tell  me  that  God  listens  ;  when  I  die 
whisper  in  my  ear  that  God  is  nigh.  If  it  be  not  exact  phraseology  it  is  full  of 
comfort,  aud  withal  of  truth.  ''  He  that  planted  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear'?  He 
that  formed  the  eye,  shall  He  not  see  % "  Those  who  are  held  in  the  bondage  of 
evil  habits,  those  who  are  striving  to  burst  the  bonds,  may  take  the  strength  and 
courage  implied  in  this.  The  Psalm-book  specially  exults  in  the  all-seeing  eye 
and  ever-listening  ear.  The  romance  of  reality  in  the  histories  of  apostles  and 
martyrs,  in  the  stories  of  saints  and  sufferers,  is  derived  from  the  realized  nearness 
of  God. 

But  deliverance  is  not  salvation.  The  first  step  of  the  journey  is  indispensable, 
but  insufficient.  A  first  implies  a  second  Possibility  is  a  pledge  of  performance. 
Freedom  is  faculty.  The  Red  Sea  opens  into  the  desert,  not  into  Uie  Promised 
Land. 

"  Guide  me,  0  Thou  great  Jehoyah," 


'2lO  PtOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEnEMlAH.  [chap.  ix. 


is  the  poetry  of  the  common-place  experience  of  life.  "  Thou  leddest  them  in  the 
day  by  a  cloudy  pillar ;  and  in  the  night  by  a  pillar  of  fire,  to  give  them  light  in 
the  way  wherein  they  should  go.  Thou  earnest  down  also  upon  Mount  Sinai,  and 
spakest  with  them  from  heaven,  and  gavest  them  laws"  (ver.  12 — 14).  Providence 
without,  conscience  within.  God  was  in  the  cloud  ;  duty  in  the  law.  "  And 
gavest  them  bread  from  heaven,  and  broughtest  forth  water  out  of  the  rock,  and 
promisedst  them  that  they  should  go  in  to  possess  the  land"  (ver.  15).  A  guiding 
cloud,  a  directing  law,  an  unfailing  supply,  an  assured  promise.  "  Thou  leddest 
Thy  people  like  a  flock." 

ill.  Divine  forbearance.  "Even  the  fathers  to  whom  God  had  shown  such 
favour,  repeatedly  departed  from  and  rebelled  against  him ;  but  God  of  his  great 
mercy  did  not  forsake  them,  but  brought  them  into  possession  of^  the  Promised 
Land"  (vers.  16 — 25).  "  Words  are  accumulated  to  describe  the  stiffnecked  resist- 
ance of  the  people.  They  hardened  their  necks ;  they  hardened  their  hearts.  They 
said  one  to  another,  Let  us  make  a  captain  and  return  to  Egypt.  In  spite,  however, 
of  their  stiffneckedness  God — a  God  of  pardons — did  not  forsake  them.  He  did 
not  withdraw  his  gracious  presence,  but  continued  to  lead  them  by  the  pillar  of 
cloud  and  fire.  The  words  (ver.  20),  *Thou  gavest  Thy  good  Spirit,'  &c.,  refer  to 
the  occurrence  (Num.  xi.  17,  25)  where  God  endowed  the  seventy  elders  with  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  for  the  confirmation  of  Moses'  authority.  The  definition 
'good  spirit '  recalls  Psalm  cxliii.  10.  The  Lord  also  fulfilled  His  promise  of 
giving  the  land  of  Canaan  to  the  Israelites,  notwithstanding  their  rebelliousness." 
— Keil.  They  were  a  community  of  slaves  in  process  of  formation  into  a  nation. 
God  dealt  with  them  as  with  children.  He  did  not  call  wrong  by  any  other 
name,  but  he  compassionated  ignorance  and  pitied  weakness.  "  The  mercy  of 
the  Lord  our  God  "  was  celebrated  in  later  times  by  prophet  and  priest,  seer  and 
scribe.  "About  the  time  of  forty  years  suff'ered  he  their  manners  in  the 
wilderness." 

IV.  Disobedience  chastised.  "  Unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall 
be  much  required."  In  the  wilderness  they  were  not  without  punishments ;  but 
there  mercy  rejoiced  against  judgment.  In  the  Promised  Land,  after  long  experi- 
ence of  the  goodness  and  graciousness  of  God,  their  rebellions  were  less  pardonable. 
So  God  gave  them  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  Still  for  his  great  mercies' 
sake  he  did  not  utterly  consume  them,  nor  forsake  them  (vers.  26 — 31).  They 
rejected  God*s  law ;  they  slew  God's  prophets.  Yet  when  they  cried  he  heard ; 
in  their  distress  he  sent  them  saviours.  The  majesty  and  mercy  of  God  !  "  It  is 
a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  "  Let  me  fall  into  the 
hand  of  the  Lord,  for  very  great  are  his  mercies  ;  but  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hands  of 
man."  *'  The  hand  of  God  was  very  heavy."  "  The  hand  of  our  God  is  upon  all 
them  for  good  that  seek  him."     "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."     *'  God  is  love." 

V.  The  past  the  prophet  of  the  present.  "  Now,  therefore,  our  God,  let  not  all 
the  trouble  seem  little  before  thee"  (vers.  32 — 37).  History  had  repeated  itself. 
The  disobedient,  God  had  rejected.  Weakened  by  oppressicui,  they  had  returned 
to  their  own  land.  In  their  present  distresses  they  pray  to  the  God  of  past 
deliverances — the  God  who  had  said  of  himself  that  he  was  unchangeable. 

Application.  The  story  of  Israel  has  been  always  regarded  as  a  parable  of  life. 
"  The  Lord  knoweth  thy  walking  through  this  great  wilderness." 

ILLUSTEATION. 

Egyptian  influence  on  Hebrew  character.  "  Before  God  gave  the  Commandments  to  the  Jewish 
people  he  wrought  a  magnificent  series  of  miracles  to  effect  their  emancipation  from  miserable 
slavery,  and  to  punish  their  oppressors.  He  first  made  them  free,  and  then  gave  them  the  law.  It 
might  not  have  been  absolutely  impossible  for  the  Jews  to  have  kept  these  commandments  even  in 
Egypt,  but  the  difficulties  would  have  been  almost  invincible.     The  people  were  in  no  condition  to 


CHAT.  IX.J 


IIOMILETIC  COMM]ENTAnY:   NEtlEMIAtL 


211 


receive  a  Divine  revelation.  Oppression  had  broken  their  spirit,  and  crushed  all  the  nobler  elements 
of  their  nature.  In  the  atmosphore  which  they  breathed  purity  and  virtue  could  hardly  live. 
They  had  been  degraded  by  the  heathenism  and"  by  the  vices,  as  well  as  by  the  severity  of  their 
masters.  It  was  impossible  for  such  a  race  as  the  Jews  seem  to  have  been  at  this  period  of  their 
history  to  have  any  vigorous  faith  in  the  greatness  of  the  God  who  had  revealed  himself  to  their 
fathers.  The  wealth,  the  greatness,  the  power  of  the  world  belonged  to  the  Egyptians;  contempt 
and  wretchedness  to  the  descendants  of  Abraham  and  tlie  heirs  of  the  promises.  The  God  of  their 
fathers  was  either  not  strong  enough  to  defend  them  from  intolerable  evils,  or  else  was  indifferent 
to  their  distresses.  God  did  not  begin  by  commanding  them  to  acknowledge  his  greatness  and 
authority,  and  to  show  fidelity  to  himself,  and  to  break  at  once  with  the  vices  to  which  their  externfil 
condition  almost  bound  them  as  with  fetters  of  iron.  He  began  by  manifesting  his  greatness  in 
acts  which  must  have  appealed  most  powerfully  to  their  imagination,  and  made  even  their  passions — 
which  seem  to  have  been  almost  the  only  elements  of  energy  left  in  them— take  the  side  of  faith  in 
himself.—ii:.  TF,  Dale,  M.A. 


A  Nation's  Prayer. 


The  three  annual  feasts  instituted  by 
the  Mosaic  Law  were  memorials  of  God's 
goodness  to  Israel.  His  works  shall  be 
kept  in  everlasting  remembrance.  At 
the  Feast  of  the  Passover  the  Jews  ce- 
lebrated their  deliverance  from  Egypt ; 
at  Pentecost  the  giving  of  the  Law 
from  Mount  Sinai ;  and  at  tli(3  Feast  of 
Tabernacles  the  mercies  of  God  during 
their  wilderness  journey  and  the  in- 
gathering of  the  harvest.  Never,  since 
the  days  of  Joshua,  had  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles  been  celebrated  with  such 
solemnity  as  under  the  teaching  of  Ezra 
and  the  government  of  Nehemiah.  The 
services  of  New  Year's  Day,  or  the  Feast 
of  Trumpets,  had  yielded  the  precious 
fruits  of  godly  sorrow  for  sin,  and  of 
holy,  charitable  joy  (chap.  viii.).  One 
sermon  may  bring  forth  great  results. 
The  Scripture  narrative  of  the  festival 
closes  by  informing  us  "that  day  by 
day,  from  the  first  day  unto  the  last 
day,  they  read  in  the  Book  of  the  Law 
of  God ;  and  they  kept  the  feast  seven 
days,  and  on  the  eighth  day  was  a 
solemn  assembly  according  unto  the 
manner."  God's  word  was  the  "joy  and 
rejoicing  of  their  hearts;"  God's  book, 
the  first  of  books  and  tlie  best  of  books. 
Here  we  have  consolation  in  sorrow, 
directions  in  duty,  and  armour  in  the 
day  of  battle ;  a  guide-book  for  every 
road,  and  a  chart  for  every  sea.  In  our 
Lord's  time  the  people  pressed  upon  him 
to  hear  the  word  of  God  ('  Paul's  Mis- 
sionary Journeys.'  '  Vaudois  Christians.' 
*  Wycliffites.'  *  Translation  and  Diffusion 
in  Modern  Times '). 

The  continued  and  protracted  services 


of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  the  Day  of 
Atonement,  and  the  Feast  of  Trumpets, 
produced  an  extraordinary  impression 
on  the  public  mind.  The  revival  of 
religion  was  not  merely  metropolitan, 
but  national.  The  deed  of  Jerusalem 
was  the  deed  of  the  whole  people;  the 
voice  of  Jerusalem  was  the  voice  of 
the  many  thousands  of  Israel.  Imme- 
diately upon  the  close  of  the  services  at 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  we  read  that 
"the  children  of  Israel  were  assembled 
with  fasting,"  &c.  (vers.  1 — 3). 

The  service  of  national  dedication 
probably  commenced  at  nine  o'clock  in 
the  morning  with  the  usual  sacrifices. 
The  reading  and  the  exposition  for  three 
hours  prepared  the  way  for  the  solemn 
supplications  of  the  people.  These  occu- 
pied three  hours  more,  and  were  closed 
by  the  offering  of  the  evening  sacrifice, 
and  by  the  public  signing  of  the  national 
covenant.  The  heads  of  this  form  of 
supplication  and  dedication  were  pro- 
bably drawn  up  by  Nehemiah,  who  was 
the  first  to  append  his  signature.  Copies 
were  probably  distributed  among  the 
Levites,  who  led  the  people  in  prayer. 
The  national  dedication  opens  with  solemn 
worship  of  God.  His  great  and  Infinite 
Majesty  is  adored.  "  Blessed  be  thy 
glorious  name."  Then  follows  a  retro- 
spect of  God's  mercies  to  Israel.  With 
this  review  of  mercies  was  interwoven 
penitential  confession  of  sin.  First  they 
acknowledged  the  sins  of  their  fathers 
(verse  16);  then  they  pass  on  to  tlie 
transgressions  of  their  fathers  under 
their  kings  (verse  26).  They  acknow- 
ledged  the  righteous  dealings  of  God, 


p  '1 


212 


nOMTLETTC  aOM^IENTAUY :   NETIEMTAII. 


[chap.  IX. 


and  their  own  disobedience  to  his  Word. 
Thou  hast  done  right,  but  we  have  done 
wickedly  ;  and  they  bring  before  God 
the  one  petition  in  this  pathetic  appeal : 
''  Now  therefore,  our  God,  the  great,  the 
mighty,  and  theteriible  God,  who  keepest 
covenant  and  mercy,  let  not  all  the 
trouble  seem  little  before  thee,  that  hath 
come  upon  us,  on  our  kings,  on  our 
princes,  and  on  our  priests,  and  on  our 
prophets,  and  on  our  fathers,  and  on  all 
thy  people."  They  implore  mercy,  they 
deprecate  judgment,  and  with  one  accord 
resolve  to  bind  themselves  unto  the 
service  of  God,  in  a  perpetual  covenant 
never  to  be  forgotten.  This  was  the 
conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  As  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and  men  of 
Judah,  they  make  a  solemn  promise  to 
(xod ;  and  that  it  might  be  sure  the 
covenant  is  written,  and  as  we  read  in 


the  thirty-eighth  verse,  "Our  princes, 
Levites,  and  priests  seal  unto  it."  We 
are  told  in  the  opening  of  the  tenth 
chapter,  that  at  the  top  ot  the  eighty-two 
representative  signatures  is  inscribed 
Nehemiah  the  Tirshatha,  the  son  op 
Hachaliah.  He  had  set  a  noble  ex- 
ample to  his  people,  and  now,  at  a  time 
of  intense  religious  feeling,  he  puts 
himself  in  the  fore-front  to  lead  them 
to  God.  ''  Happy  are  the  people  that 
are  in  such  a  case,  yea,  blessed  are 
the  people  who  have  the  Lord  for  their 
God." 

Have  we,  as  Englishmen,  no  retrospect 
to  make'?  Have  not  we  a  history  to 
review  with  thankfulness,  and  a  duty  to 
God  and  to  one  another  1  A  nation  is 
made  of  individuals.  A  national  dedica- 
tion implies  personal  dedication. — Rev, 
J.  M.  Randall ;  abridged. 


The  World  preserved  by  Divine  Providence. 
ix.  6.     Thou  preservest  them  all. 


The  providence  of  God  may  be  re- 
garded as  exercised  either  in  the  preserv- 
ation of  the  world  or  in  the  govern- 
ment of  it,  to  which  two  main  heads  all 
the  acts  of  Divine  Providence  are  re- 
ducible. 

God's  preservation  of  the  world.  In 
that  admirable  address  that  is  made  to 
God  in  the  name  of  the  Jewish  Church, 
after  celebrating  him  as  the  great  Creator 
of  the  universe,  are  those  noble  expres- 
sions— "Thou,  even  thou,  art  Lord  alone; 
thou  hast  made  heaven,  the  heaven  of 
heavens,  with  all  their  host,  the  earth, 
and  all  things  that  are  therein ; "  it 
is  added,  "and  thou  preservest  them 
all."  The  preserving  this  vast  frame  of 
nature,  and  all  things  that  are  therein,  is 
owing  to  the  same  omnipotent  being  that 
created  them.  We  must  not  imagine 
that  things,  when  once  put  into  being, 
continue  to  exist  independently  of  him 
that  first  created  them.  It  is  easily  con- 
ceivable that  the  self-existent  Jehovali, 
who  existed  necessarily  from  everlasting, 
must  certainly  exist  to  everlasting  by 
the  intrinsic  excellency  of  his  own 
most  perfect  nature.     But  the   case   is 


otherwise  as  to  contingent  beings,  who 
have  the  source  and  basis  of  their  exist- 
ence without  them.  The  works  of  men's 
hands  may  subsist  at  a  distance  from 
the  hands  which  fashioned  them  ;  but 
the  creatures  can  never  exist  in  an 
absolute  separation  from  God,  who  is 
always  most  intimately  and  essentially 
present  with  his  own  works.  Consider 
this  preservation  of  all  things,  which  is 
an  eminent  act  of- Divine  providence,  as 
extending  to  the  whole  inanimate  cre- 
ation, and  of  all  things  that  have  life  in 
their  different  degrees. 

1.  God,  by  his  constant  poioerfid  in- 
fluence, upholdeth  the  inanimate  creation, 
this  huge  material  system,  in  alt  its  parts. 
As  at  the  first  formation  of  it  he  put 
things  into  a  certain  order,  so  it  is  by 
his  power  and  wisdom  that  this  order 
and  constitution  of  things  is  maintained 
according  to  the  first  establishment. 
AH  things  in  the  material  world  proceed 
according  to  a  settled  rule  or  method. 
Sun,  moon,  and  stars ;  fertile  earth, 
minerals,  vegetables.  As  God  said  at 
the  first  creation,  "  Let  the  earth  bring 
forth,"  &c.  (Gen.  i.  11);  so  by  his  pro- 


CHAP.  IX.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  N EH  EMI  AH, 


213 


vidential  concourse,  and  according  to  his 
appointment,  the  plants,  the  herbs,  the 
trees,  the  flowers  in  all  their  tribes,  and 
the  various  kinds  of  grain,  spring  up 
from  their  several  kinds,  and  gradually 
grow  up  into  maturity.  The  species  of 
them  are  still  continued  and  kept  dis- 
tinct, and  they  uniformly  preserve  their 
several  virtues,  their  distinct  forms  and 
appearances^  and  bring  forth  their  several 
productions  in  the  appointed  seasons. 

2.  God  preserveth  the  beings  that  have 
life  and  sense,  loith  their  several  capaci- 
ties and  instincts.  ''  Thou  preservest 
them  all"  might  be  rendered,  "Thou 
quickenest  them  all,"  or  *'  maintainest 
them  all  in  life." 

God  preserveth  and  upholdeth  the 
inferior  brute  animals  in  their  several 
species,  which  by  a  wonderful  provision 
are  successively  propagated  according  to 
established  laws,  and  continue  to  be 
furnished  in  all  ages  with  the  same 
organs,  powers,  and  appetites,  and  the 
same  admirable  instincts. 

It  is  God  that  preserveth  the  angels 
in  their  several  degrees.  None  of  them 
have  an  independent  existence. 

In  him  we  exist,  or  have  our  being. 

As  he  gave  us  our  existence  at  first,  and 

made  us  of  such  a  particular  order  of 

beings,  so  by  him  we  are  continued  in 

existence,  and  in  that  kind  of  existence 

which   belongeth  to  us  as  creatures  of 

such  a  species.     In  God  we  not  only 

exist,  or  have  our  being,  but  in  him  we 

live.     As  it  was  he  that  first  established 

the  wonderful  vital  union  between  soul 

and  body  in  man,  so  it  is  by  his  care 

and  influence  that  it  subsisteth.    To  this 

it  is  owing  that  our  food  nourisheth  and 

strengtheneth  us,  that  the  vital  functions 

are  carried  on,  and  that  we  are  enabled 

to  exercise  our  several  sensations.    "  The 

God  of  my  life."     And  as  it  is  in  God 

that  Ave  exist  and  live,  so  it  is  in  or  by 

him  that  we  move.     He  originally  gave 

us   the    power    of   motion,  and    organs 

admirably  fitted  for  carrying  it  on,  and 

it  is  through  him  that  we  are  continued 

in  the  use  and  exercise  of  those  organs ; 

so  that  it  may  be  justly  said   that  we 

cannot  move  a  foot,  or  lift  up  a  hand, 


without  him.  And  this  holdeth  equally 
with  regard  to  the  operations  of  our 
souls  as  the  motions  of  our  bodies.  As 
he  hath  endued  our  souls  with  the 
admirable  faculties  of  understanding, 
with  memory,  free  agency,  and  hath 
implanted  in  us  affections  of  various 
kinds  ;  so  by  his  providential  concourse 
and  support  of  our  faculties  we  appre- 
hend, judge,  reason,  remember,  and  freely 
determine  our  own  actions.  It  is  he 
that  upholdeth  the  powers  which  he 
gave  us,  and  enableth  us  to  exert  those 
powers.  And  this  he  doeth  not  only 
when  we  do  good,  but  when  we  employ 
our  powers  in  acting  wickedly ;  and 
yet  this  doth  not  derive  the  least  stain 
of  guilt  upon  God,  or  make  him  the 
author  of  our  sins.  The  natural  active 
power  and  the  use  of  it,  which  is  in  it- 
self good,  is  from  God ;  the  abuse  of  it 
to  sinful  purposes  is  wholly  owing  to 
ourselves,  and  to  the  corruption  of  oui 
wills.  For  if  he  should  withdraw  his 
sustaining  influence  from  men,  the  mo- 
ment they  attempt  to  abuse  theirnatural 
powers,  this  would  be  absolutely  to  hin- 
der them  to  exercise  their  liberty ;  nor 
could  they  in  that  case  be  accounted  free 
agents  at  all.  As  the  God  of  nature  he 
ordinarily  upholdeth  or  sustaineth  them 
in  being  and  in  the  use  of  their  natural 
powers,  in  what  manner  soever  they  act ; 
and  then  afterwards,  as  the  moral  go- 
vernor, he  will  call  them  to  an  account 
for  their  actions,  and  will  reward  or 
punish  them  accordingly. 

Practical  Reflections.  1.  What  ad- 
miring thoughts  should  we  entertain  of 
God,  and  what  diminishing  thoughts  of 
ourselves  and  all  created  beings !  2. 
What  a  just  ])ropriety  and  dominion 
God  hath  on  and  over  us !  3.  He  is 
perfectly  acquainted  with  all  our  thoughts, 
words,  and  actions,  and  aU  the  events 
which  befall  us.  4.  How  strange  and 
inexcusable  will  our  conduct  be  if  we 
allow  ourselves  in  an  habitual  neglect 
and  forgetfulnes  of  the  Deity  !  5.  Since 
God  continually  preserveth  us  he  hath 
an  undoubted  right  to  govern  us. — John 
Lei  and,  D.D.,  176G,  abndged. 


214 


HOMILETW  CUMMENTAllY :   NEIIEMIAH, 


[OHAP.  IX. 


The  Mercy  op  God. 
ix.  17.     A  God  ready  to  pardon. 


The  mercy  of  God  the  most  delightful 
subject.  It  is  so  in  its  own  nature,  and 
relatively  to  us  who  have  so  great  need 
of  it,  who  have  so  much  depending  upon 
it,  who  must  perish  for  ever  without  it. 
The  thought  that  the  greatest  Being  in 
the  universe  is  the  most  compassionate 
is  itself  elevating.  Mournful  that  this 
subject  is  so  little  regarded,  awakens 
so  little  emotion ;  that  all  subjects  but 
tliose  immediately  relating  to  duty, 
affect  us.  Yet  how  delightful  is  it  to 
the  Christian  when  he  is  brought  to 
apprehend  the  truth  and  rest  upon  it ! 
That  God  is  ready  to  pardon,  that  he 
waits  to  be  gracious,  is  a  joyful  topic  to 
those  who  know  themselves,  who  have 
been  taught  to  estimate  the  value  of 
Divine  friendship. 

I.  A  doctrine  to  be  established. 
There  is  a  strange  tendency  to  doubt  it. 
We  speak  of  news  too  good  to  be  true ; 
and  under  humiliating  sense  of  our  own 
worthlessness  are  at  least  ready  to  make 
an  exception  in  our  own  case — "  If  the 
Lord  would  make  windows  in  heaven 
might  this  thing  be ! "  The  power  of 
unbelief  is  great,  the  resistance  offered 
by  conscience  is  great,  the  prevalence  ot 
fear  induced  by  guilt  is  great.  Exodus 
xxxiv.  6  contains  the  doctrine  and  gives 
mercy  pre-eminence.  1.  Tlie  direct  state- 
ments of  Scripture.  The  object  of  all 
revelation  is  to  establish  and  explain 
the  doctrine  of  God's  mercy.  Direct 
assertions,  gracious  promises,  inspired 
prophecy.  Twenty-nine  times  in  one 
Psalm  "  his  mercy  endureth  ! "  "  Who 
is  a  God  like  unto  Thee  % "  *'  The  Lord, 
the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious." 
''  As  the  heaven  is  high  above  the  earth, 
so  great  is  his  mercy  toward  them  that 
fear  him."  '<  Your  Father  in  heaven  is 
merciful. "  These  repetitions  show  the 
resistance  against  it  really,  the  difficulty 
of  believing  it,  the  necessity  of  being 
grounded  in  it.  No  worship  without  it, 
no  hope,  no  love,  no  joy,  no  obedi- 
ence. 2.  The  positive  facts  exhihited  in 
his  dispensation.     The  gift  of  his  Son. 


*'  Herein  is  love."  "  He  that  spared  not 
his  own  Son.  "  The  gift  of  his  Spirit : 
Divine  revelation,  ordinances,  heaven 
at  last.  Discovery  of  his  own  character  : 
harmony  of  attributes,  long-suiiering  to 
the  world  in  general.  Why  mitigations 
of  trial  1  excitements  of  hope  1 — prodi- 
gality of  good  gifts.  This  world  a 
great  volume  of  mercy  written  within 
and  without.  3.  Some  striJmig  instances 
of  his  7'eadiness  to  pardon.  Manasseh, 
Mary  Magdalene,  thief,  prodigal,  Paul. 
^' And  such  were  some  of  yon.''  Every 
sinner  deems  himself  chief  of  sinners, 
and  his  conversion  the  greatest  miracle, 
because  he  knows  most  of  himself. 

II.  A  doctrine  to  be  personally 
applied.  Not  a  doctrine  for  others 
merely,  but  for  ourselves.  Go  to  God 
for  it :  '*  Have  mercy  upon  me."  1.  To 
produce  an  Immediate  appeal  to  it.  We 
need  it  deeply.  Of  no  use  to  know  the 
fact — the  business  is  to  build  upon  it, 
and  say,  ^'  I  will  arise."  Approach  the 
mercy-seat  by  faith  in  Christ.  If  you 
doubt  it,  test  it.  "It  is  a  faithful  saying." 
2.  To  aivaken  cordial  admiration  of  the 
method  of  redemption.  3.  To  check  our 
tendency  to  distrust  and  despondency. 
Yery  prevalent  in  all  minds ;  specially 
those  newly  awakened.  They  do  not 
doubt  God's  ability,  but  willingness.  We 
have  all  a  great  tendency  to  indulge 
dishonourable  thoughts  of  God.  4.  To 
produce  affection,  contrition,  obedience. 

III.  A  doctrine  to  be  carefully 
guarded  from  abuse.  1.  The  loiterer  in 
religion.  To  be  had  at  any  time,  hence 
delay.  2.  The  self-sufficient  Pharisee. 
Only  through  the  cross.  To  the  truly 
contrite.  3.  The  man  who  sins  that 
grace  may  abound.  Always  in  con- 
nection with  sanctity.  4.  Those  who 
altogether  presume  upon  it.  God  is 
righteous.  There  is  a  judgment  of  God. 
—  Thodey. 

Illufiirations  : — "  It  is  harder  to  get  sin  felt  by 
the  creature  than  the  burden  when  felt  removed 
by  the  hand  of  a  forgiving  God.  Never  was 
tender-hearted  surgeon  more  willing  to  take  up 


OHAP.  IX.] 


HOMILETIG  GOMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH, 


215 


the  vein,  and  hind  up  the  wound  of  his  fainting 
patient  when  he  hath  bled  enough,  tlian  God  is 
by  his  pardoning  mercy  to  ease  the  troubled 
spirit  of  a  mourning  penitent." — Gurnall. 


"God  will  pardon  a  repentant  sinner  more 
quickly  than  a  mother  would  snatch  her  chihi 
out  of  the  fire.** — Vianney, 


Same  Theme. 


God  absolutely  incomprehensible :  the 
Highest  archangel  cannot  ''find  liim  out 
unto  perfection."  Yet  we  are  not  called 
to  worship  an  unknown  God.  All  his 
works  praise  him,  but  his  word  which 
he  hath  magnified  above  all  his  name 
peculiarly  reveals  him.  In  the  sacred 
volume  some  clouds  and  darkness  are 
round  about  him.  Subjects  are  occa- 
sionally intimated  which  lie  beyond  the 
reach  of  our  present  faculties,  concern- 
ing which  we  may  safely  follow  the 
advice  of  the  poet :  "  Wait  the  great 
teacher,  Death."  Scripture  renders  things 
plain  and  obvious  in  proportion  as  they 
are  important  and  necessary.  Some  truths 
are  written  as  with  a  sunbeam — such  are 
those  which  regard  our  state  as  sinners, 
and  are  calculated  to  draw  forth  our  faith 
and  hope  in  God.  For  we  are  saved 
through  faith;  we  are  saved  by  hope, 
^lan  fell  by  losing  his  confidence  in  God; 
and  he  is  only  to  be  recovered  by  regaining 
it.  For  which  purpose  we  read  not  only 
that  there  is  forgiveness  with  him,  but 
that  he  is  a  God  ready  to  pardon, 

I.  What  is  necessary  to  render  the 
subject  interesting?  Three  things.  1. 
A  conviction  of  guilt.  "They  that  are 
whole  need  not  the  physician,"  &c. 
"  The  full  soul  loathes  the  honeycomb," 
&c.  In  vain  we  present  alms  to  the 
aifhient,  or  offer  pardon  to  the  innocent. 
Have  you  ever  lived  a  day  as  you  ought  \ 
Have  you  not  at  least  been  chargeable 
with  sins  of  omission  ?  The  law  begins 
with  the  object  of  all  adoration,  and  re- 
quires that  we  serve  God  alone.  Have 
you  never  transferred  to  the  creature  that 
supreme  regard  due  to  the  Creator  'J  If 
you  have  daily  worshipped  the  Supreme, 
has  it  been  in  spirit  and  in  truth  1  never 
taken  his  name  in  vain,  "  mocked  him 
with  a  solemn  sound  upon  a  thoughtless 
tongue'?"  Have  you  not  squandered  many 
precious  Sabbath  hours'?  But  you  are 
sure  you  are  no  murderer !  Is  there,  then, 
no  one  dead  in  whose  removal  you  have 


rejoiced  %  Is  there  no  one  alive  at  whoso 
continuance  you  have  inwardly  repined  % 
Have  you  never  been  angry  with  your 
brother  without  a  cause  %  You  repel  with 
indignation  the  charge  of  theft  1  Is  it 
not  pride  rather  than  principle  that  has 
sometimes  restrained  you  ;  or  the  fear  of 
the  consequences  rather  than  a  sense  of 
the  sin  %  Are  you  a  stranger  to  all  unjust 
gain  %  Always  paid  fair  wages  %  never 
robbed  the  poor^  Have  you  done  unto 
others  as  you  would  they  should  do  unto 
you  %  2.  An  apprehension  of  our  danger 
as  transgressors.  The  present  effects  of 
trangression  !  These  only  the  beginning 
of  sorrow.  Can  you  flee  from  him  who 
is  everywhere ;  and  everywhere  the  sin- 
avenging  God  ]  There  is  only  one  way 
of  deliverance.  It  is  forgiveness.  3. 
A  discovery  of  the  privileges  of  a  par- 
doned state.  We  talk  of  happiness. 
Oh,  what  a  change  to  be  delivered  from 
the  wrath  to  come ;  to  know  that  God's 
anger  is  turned  away ;  that  from  an  enemy 
he  is  become  a  friend — a  friend  giving 
us  cordial  access  to  all  the  rights  of 
innocency,  and  entitling  us  to  a  felicity 
superior  to  the  happiness  of  Adam  in 
paradise,  and  even  of  an  angel  in  glory  ! 
"  Being  justified  by  faith,"  &c. 

II.  The  proofs  which  establish  the 
truth  of  the  doctrine.  1.  The  ptrovision 
lie  has  made  for  the  exercise  of  pardon. 
"It  became  him" — we  use  his  own 
languag^e — it  became  him  to  administer 
this  pardon  in  a  peculiar  way.  It  was 
necessary  that  sin  should  be  condemned 
in  the  flesh,  even  whUe  it  was  forgiven. 
It  was  necessary  that  God's  law  should 
not  appear  so  rigid  as  to  require  relaxation, 
or  so  changeable  and  weak  as  to  admit  of 
dispensation ;  but  be  magnified  and  made 
honourable.  It  was  necessary  that  God's 
truth  should  be  seen  as  well  as  his  grace  ; 
and  his  risjhteousness  as  well  as  his 
mercy.  Of  his  own  self-moved  compas- 
sion he  has  reconciled  us  unto  himself 
by  Jesus  Christ.     "  He  has  made  him  to 


216 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAIL 


[chap.  IX 


be  sin  for  ns/'  &c.    **  Herein  is  love,"  <fec. 

2.  The  promptitude  vnth  which  he  par- 
dons on  our  return.  "  Before  they  call 
I  will  answer,  and  while  thev  speak  I 
will  hear."  (*  Parable  of  Prodi'gal  Sou.') 

3.  His  earnestness  to  excite  us  to  seek 
after  the  blessing.     It  would  be  enough 
to  prove  that  a  man  was  ready  to  par- 
don if  he  yielded  immediately  upon  the 
offender's   submission  and   application ; 
but  God  not  only  waits  to  be  gracious, 
he  comes  forward,  he  beseeches,  he  urges  ; 
yes — by  the  uneasiness  of  conscience,  by 
the  afflictions  of  life,  by  the  importurdty 
of  friends,  by  the  addresses  of  ministers 
— it  is  as  the  Apostle  says,  *' Asthough  God 
did  beseech  you  to  be  reconciled  to  God," 
Seek  evidence — 4.   In  the  character  of 
those  who  have  received  pardon.     The 
chief  of  sinners — Manasseh,  the  dying 
thief,  the  murderers  of  Christ,  the  Cor- 
iuthian  converts.     Seek  evidence — 5.  In 
the  number  of  those  who  obtain  forgive- 
ness.    There  are  thousands  more  than 
we  are  aware  of,  even  when  we    send 
forth   Candour   to    reckon    them ;    and 
when  they  shall  be  all  gathered  together, 
out  of   every  kindred,  and  nation,  and 
tongue,  and  people,  they  will  be  found 
a  multitude  which  no  man  can  number. 

III.  The  way  in  which  this  subject 
may  be  abused,  and  the  manner  in 


which  it  ought  to  be  improved.     The 

subject  is  abused  when  it  leads  us  to 
deny  any  disposition  in  God  to  punish. 
God  is  not  ordy  to  be  viewed  as  a  tender 
father,  but  a  moral  governor. 

The    subject   is  abused  when  it   en- 
courages us  to  hope  for  pardon  in  ways 
not  warranted  by  the  word  of  God.    For 
instance — thus,  unwarranted  is  our  hope 
when  we  expect  it  without  a.  reference  to 
the  mediation  of  Christ;  when  we  expect 
pardon    wit] tout   repentance;    when  we 
expect  this  j^ardon  by  delaijing  an  appli- 
cation for  it  to  the  close  of  life  ;  when 
we  expect  to  find  this  pardon  in  another 
world  if  we  fail  to  obtain  it  in  this.    But 
what    is    the    proper    improvement   we 
shoul  i  make  of  this  delightful  subject  1 
It   should  yield  encouragement  to  the 
broken-hearted,  and  consolation  to  those 
who  have  believed.  It  demands  not  only 
our  admiration  and  praise  ;  it  calls  upon 
us  to  imitate  as  well  as  to  admire.     Is 
he  a  God  ready  to   pardon?     *' Be   ye 
followers  of  God,  as  dear  children.     Let 
all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  anger,  and 
clamour,  and  evil-speaking,  be  put  away 
from  you,  with  all  malice ;  and  be  ye 
kind    one    to    another,    tender-hearted, 
forgiving  one  another,  even  as  God  for 
Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you." — Jay^ 
abridged. 


Promises  Kept. 

ix.  18 — 21.  When  they  had  made  them  a  molten  calf,  and  said,  This  is  thy 
God  that  brought  thee  up  out  of  Egypt,  and  had  wrought  great  provocations  ; 
yet  thou  in  thy  manifold  mercies  for sooUest  them  not,  &c. 


The  Faithful  Promiser — is  not  this 
one  of  the  ^*  surnames  "  of  God  1 

I.  This  is  the  verdict  of  history. 
Nehemiah  and  his  Levites  knew  what 
they  said  and  whereof  they  affirmed.  Was 
it  not  written  in  the  book  of  Moses 
(Ex.  xiii.  21,  22;  Num.  xiv.  14),  that 
the  pillar  of  cloud  departed  not  from 
them  by  day,  neither  the  pillar  of  fire  by 
night]  Were  there  not  chronicles  that 
told  how  for  their  mouth  he  provided 
manna,  and  for  their  mind  instruction 
(ver.  20)  %  See  Num.  xL  17,  25  ;  Num. 
xi.  6—9  ;  XX.  2—8.  Nothing  awanting 
(ver.  21).     God  was  in  Hebrew  history  ; 


not  confined  to  Hebrew  history.  Eng- 
land's God.  America's  God.  Men  who 
planted  that  republic  had  Bible  on  their 
right  hand. 

II.  The  statements  of  Scripture. 
Psalms  in  especial  addressed  to  the  God 
of  the  promises.  The  psalmists  called ; 
he  answered.  This  they  make  their 
plea  when  next  they  cry — **Doth  his 
promise  f  aiH "  "He  remembered  his 
holy  promise."  "  Exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises."  "  Tlie  word  of  the 
Lord  is  tried."  Those  whom  the  book 
canonizes  have  set  to  their  seal  that  God 
is  true. 


CHAP.  LX.] 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  NEIIEMIAR, 


217 


III.  The  confirmations  of  experi- 
ence. "  God  punishes  the  persecutors 
of  his  people  energetically.  Our  pillar 
of  cloud,  which  shows  us  the  way  to  our 
everlasting  fatherland,  is  the  ministry  of 
the  Gospel,  in  which  God  is  truly  present 
and  powerful.  Although  God  does  not 
immediately  place  all  the  godly  in  fruit- 
ful and  pleasant  places,  nor  give  them 
bread  from  heaven,  nor  water  from  the 
rock ;   still  he  gives  them,  notwithstand- 


ing, necessary  nourishment  and  clothing 
wherewith  they  should  be  satisfied." — 
Starke.  In  despondency  trace  the  foot- 
prints of  God  in  the  past.  "  He  inclined 
unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry."  This  the 
strongest  confirmation ;  most  unassail- 
able reason. 

What  we  have  felt  aud  seen, 
With  confidence  we  tell ; 
And  publish  to  the  sons  of  men 
The  signs  infallible. 


The  History  op  a  Generation. 
ix.  21.    Forty  years  didst  thou  sustain  them  in  the  wilderness. 


This  is  the  bright  side  of  the  story  of 
his  people  Israel.  "The  penal  portion 
of  the  wanderings"  (Numbers  xiv.  1 — 
39  ;  Hebrews  iii.). 

I.  Every  generation  inherits  the 
past.  "Your  children,  which  in  that 
day"  (of  rebellion)  "had  no  knowledge 
between  good  and  evil,  they  shall  go  in 
thither,  and  unto  them  will  I  give  it, 
and  they  shall  possess  it  "  (Deut.  i.  39). 
The  fathers  sinned;  the  childreu  suffered. 
Hereditary  diseases.  Superstitions,  poli- 
tical com1)inations.  "  We  are  the  heirs 
of  all  the  yesterdays." 

II.  The  task  of  each  generation  in 
the  present.  We  receive  our  fathers' 
uncompleted  tasks.  Their  plans  indi- 
cate our  power  of  performance ;  their 
aims  an  index-finger.  But  new  times 
new  methods ;  a  fresh  age  fresh  needs. 
To-day  is  not  yesterday.  Victorian  age 
an  advance,  calling  for  all  energies. 
"  Forward,  forward,  let  us  range."  Patri- 
archal times,  prophetic  period,  apostolic 
age.  "  Little  children ;  young  men  ; 
fathers."   Parables  of  growth  in  Gospels 


of  Jesus.  "The  righteous  shall  hold 
on  his  way,  and  he  that  hath  clean 
hands  shall  be  stronger  and  stronger." 
"  Grow  ! "  Peter  is  here  not  a  whit  be- 
hind his  beloved  brother  Paul. 

III.  The  responsibility  of  the  pre- 
sent generation.  We  inherit  to  trans- 
mit ;  we  labour  to  secure  blessings  for 
coming  generations.  The  Hebrews  of 
Nehemiah's  day  found  consolation  in 
the  memory  of  God's  abounding  good- 
ness to  their  faithless  fathers.  We  have 
inherited  freedom ;  the  future  will  re- 
quire it  at  our  hands.  In  this  sense  is 
that  text  applicable — "  Hold  that  fast 
which  thou  hast."  Pass  on  the  torch  of 
truth  to  other  hands ;  quench  not  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Thy  memory  will  be 
invaluable ;  thy  work  faithfully  done 
a  treasure.  Let  not  the  chain  be  snap- 
ped—  past,  present,  future.  The  "con- 
tinuous purpose"  of  him  who  sees  the 
end  as  well  as  the  beginning !  The  hum- 
blest life  is  not  mean.  The  tiniest  task 
is  not  insignificant.  The  issues  of  to- 
day are  in  the  far-ott'  future. 


Secular  Prosperity  inimical  to  Spiritual  Life. 

IX.  25,  26.  They  took  strong  cities,  and  a  fat  land,  and  possessed  houses  full  of 
all  goods,  wells  digged,  vineyards,  and  oUoeyards,  and  fruit  trees  in  abundance: 
so  they  did  eat,  and  were  filled,  and  became  fat,  and  delighted  themselves  in  thy  great 
goodness.  Nevertheless  they  were  disobedient,  and  rebelled  against  thee,  and  cast 
thy  law  behind  their  backs,  and  slew  thy  prophets  which  testified  ugaind  them  to 
turn  them  to  thee,  and  they  wrought  great  provocations. 

Introduction. — Let    us    define    our     spiritual  are  here  contrasted.    Prosperity 
terms.      Prosperity — life.       Secular—     is  outside  us.     It  is  the  realization    of 


218 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEIIEMIAII. 


[chap.  IX. 


one's  hope.  The  prosperous  man  has 
his  wishes  gratified.  "  We  must  dis- 
tinguish between  felicity  and  prosperity; 
for  prosperity  leads  often  to  ambition, 
and  ambition  to  disappointment." — Lan- 
dor.  ''  A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in 
the  abundance  of  the  tilings  which  he 
possesseth."  Secular;  spiritual — a  dis- 
tinction and  a  difiference.  Often  falsely 
made.  All  things  pertaining  to  this 
present  world  are  not  secular.  "It  is 
not  the  work  that  makes  the  workman 
holy,  but  it  is  the  workman's  heart  that 
coiiseciates  the  toil." — Cumming. 

I.  The  value  of  prosperity.  '*  They 
took  strong  cities,"  and  thus  became  a 
strong  nation.  "  Be  fruitful  and  multi- 
ply, and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue 
it,  and  have  dominion  over  every  living 
thing."  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  but 
he  hath  given  it  to  the  children  of  men. 
''Money  answereth  all  things."  Art, 
science,  commerce,  civilization,  religion, 
are  aided  by  prosperity.  The  refine- 
ments of  life  are  foes  of  the  lower  pas- 
sions. The  devil  should  not  have  the 
best  music,  nor  the  best  pictures,  nor  the 
highest  knowledge.  Christians  !  Claim 
the  world  for  God.  It  is  his ;  he  made 
it,  he  upholds  it,  he  sustains  it,  he  re- 
deemed it,  he  is  restoring  it.  And  be- 
cause it  is  his  it  is  yours.  "  Ye  shall 
be  my  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the  Lord 
Almighty."  "  All  things  are  yours ; 
and  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  Gods." 

Illustration : — Riches  are  the  stairs  whereby 
men  climb  up  into  the  height  of  dignity,  the  for- 
tification that  defends  it,  the  food  it  lives  upon, 
tlie  oil  that  keeps  the  lamp  of  honour  from  going 
out.  Honour  is  a  bare  robe  if  riches  do  not  lace 
and  flourish  it,  and  riches  a  dull  lump  till  honcTUr 
give  a  soul  to  quicken  it. — Adams. 

II.  The  danger  of  prosperity.  "They 
became  fat,  and  delighted  themselves  in 
thy  great  goodness.  They  rebelled  against 
thee."  They  accepted  God's  gifts ;  they 
rejected  God.  "  The  ground  of  a  certain 
rich  man  brought  forth  plentifully :  and 
he  thought  within  himself,  saying,  What 
shall  I  do,  because  I  have  no  room  where 
to  bestow  my  fruits  1  And  he  said,  This 
will  I  do  :  I  will  pull  down  my  barns, 
and  build  greater;  and  there  will  I 
bestow  all  my  fruits  and  my  goods.    And 


I  Avill  say  to  my  soul,  Soul,  thou  hast 
much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years  ; 
take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry." 
My  fruits,  my  barns,  my  goods,  my 
soul.  Self  stood  where  God  should 
stand.  "Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?" 
Are  the  poor  my  poor  ?  ''  Every  man  for 
himself."  This  is  the  world's  policy  ;  the 
tone,  if  not  the  language,  of  unconsecrated 
prosperity.  Forget  God,  and  you  will 
neglect  man. 

Illustrations  : — Prosperity  is  no  friend  to  a 
sanctified  memory,  and  therefore  we  are  cautioned, 
when  we  are  full,  lest  we  forget  God.  Noah, 
who  had  seen  the  whole  world  drowned  in  water, 
was  no  sooner  safe  on  shore,  and  in  the  enjoyment 
of  plenty,  than  he  forgot  God,  and  drowned 
himself  in  wine. — Gurnall. 

Where  one  thousand  are  destroyed  by  the 
world's  frowns,  ten  thousand  are  destroyed  by  the 
world's  smiles.  The  world,  siren-like,  sings  us 
and  sinks  us ;  it  kisses  us  and  betrays  us,  like 
Judas;  it  kisses  us  and  smites  us  under  the  fifth 
rib,  like  5 o^ih.— Brooks. 

It  is  one  of  the  worst  effects  of  prosperity  to 
make  a  man  a  vortex  instead  of  a  fountain ;  so 
that,  instead  of  throwing  out,  he  learns  only  to 
draw  in. — Beecher. 

It  is  the  bright  day  that  brings  forth  the  adder, 
and  that  craves  wary  walking. — Shakespeare, 

Prosperity  most  usually  makes  us  proud,  inso- 
lent, forgettul  of  God,  and  of  all  duties  we  owe 
unto  him.  it  chokes  and  extinguishes,  or  at 
least  cools  and  abates,  the  heat  and  vigour  of 
all  virtue  in  us.  And  as  the  ivy  whilst  it 
embraces  the  oak  sucks  the  sap  from  the  root, 
and  in  time  makes  it  rot  and  perish ;  so  worldly 
prosperity  kills  us  with  kindness,  whilst  it  sucks 
troni  us  the  sap  of  God's  graces,  and  so  makes 
our  spiritual  growth  and  strength  to  decay  and 
languisii.  Neither  do  men  ever  almost  suffer  an 
eclipse  of  their  virtues  and  good  parts,  but  when 
they  are  in  the  full  of  worldly  prosperity, — 
Downame. 

Two  things  have  I  required  of  thee  ,  deny  me 
them  not  before  I  die  :  Remove  far  from  me 
vanity  and  lies  ;  give  me  neither  poverty  nor 
riches ;  feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me, 
lest  I  be  full,  and  deny  thee,  and  say.  Who  is 
the  Lord  ?  or  lest  I  be  poor,  and  steal,  and  take 
the  name  of  my  God  in  vain. — Agar. 

In  all  time  of  our  tribulation ;  in  all  time  oj 
our  wealth ;  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  in  the 
day  of  judgment.  Good  Lord,  deliver  us. — The 
Litany, 

III.  The   safeguard  of  prosperity. 

llememher  thy  stewardship.  ' '  What  hast 
thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive  %  Now 
if  thou  didst  receive  it,  why  dost  thou 
glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not  received  it  V 
"The  poor  ye  have  always  witli  you." 


OHAr.  IX.] 


HOMILKTIC  CUMMENTAEY :   NEHEMIAE, 


2V3 


**  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures 
upon  earth,"  dx.  Get  to  give ;  gather 
to  scatter.  And  as  the  husbandman 
sows  to  reap  so  shalt  thou.  "  The 
liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat  "  "  There 
is  that  scattereth  and  yet  increaseth." 
"  Whoso  hath  this  world's  good,  and 
seeth  his  brother  have  need,  and  shutteth 
up  his  bowels  of  compassion  from  him, 
how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him  1 " 
"  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God^  and  hateth 
his  brother,  he  is  a  liar  :  for  he  that 
loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath 
seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he 
hath  not  seen  %   And  this  commandment 


have  we  from  him,  That  he  who  loveth 
God  love  his  brother  also." 

Illustration: — In  everything  to  give  and 
receive  is  the  principle  of  numerous  blessings  : 
in  seeds,  in  scholars,  in  arts.  For  if  any  one 
desire  to  keep  his  art  to  himself,  he  subverts 
both  himself  and  the  whole  course  of  things. 
And  the  husbandman,  if  he  bury  and  keep  the 
seeds  in  his  house,  will  bring  about  a  grievous 
famine.  So  also  the  rich  man,  if  he  fails  thus 
in  regard  of  his  wealth,  will  destroy  himself 
before  the  poor,  heaping  up  the  fire  of  hell  more 
grievous  upon  his  own  head.  Therefore,  as 
teachers,  however  many  scholars  they  have,  im- 
part some  of  their  love  unto  each  ;  so  let  thy 
possession  be —many  to  whom  thou  hast  done 
good. — Chrysostom. 


Responsibility  of  Honour. 

ix.  38.     We  make  a  sure  covenant,  and  write  it ;  and  our  princes,  Levites,  and 

priests,  seal  unto  it. 


**Seekest  thou  great  things  for  thy- 
self "i  seek  them  not."  These  were  the 
words  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of 
Jeremiah  to  a  discouraged  man.  But 
because  they  are  the  words  of  a  true 
prophet  of  God  they  contain  a  philo- 
sophy. A  prophet  in  occasional  Old  Tes- 
tament language  is  a  seer — one  who  sees. 
Power  is  good  but  it  exacts  penalty. 

I.  In  office  and  position.  <*  Our 
princes, Levites,  and  priests,  seal  unto  it." 
And  the  first  name  was  that  of  Nehemiah 
THE  TiRSHATHA.  The  strongest  must 
carry  the  burdens ;  the  tallest  be  ex- 
posed to  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  States- 
men, reformers,  scientists,  preachers, 
teachers — the  best-hated  men. 

II.  In  intellectual  and  moral  eleva- 
tion. The  strong  must  lend  an  arm  to 
the  weak  ;  the  wise  pour  out  their  trea- 
sures to  enlighten  the  ignorant.  Those 
who  know  the  way  must  guide  those 
who  don't.  The  sun  lives  for  the  fields 
and  homes  of  men.  The  stars  enlighten 
other  worlds.      **  The   Lord  wUl  give 


grace  and  glory ;  no  good  thing  will  he 
ivithhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly." 
*'  The  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  minis- 
tered unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give 
his  life  a  ransom  for  many." 

III.  In  national  supremacy.  **A 
strong  nation."  "  A  great  people."  **  An 
increasing  territory."  **The  sun  never 
sets  on  the  Queen's  dominions,"  &c. 
Every  boast  implies  a  duty.  *' Italian 
unity;"  "German  Fatherland;"  ''Ameri- 
can Republic ;  "  **  England's  sway."  Be 
it  ever  remembered  that  with  honour 
comes  responsibility;  with  greatness 
claims.  What  then  1  Biblical  fear  not ! 
"  Thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  I  shall  send 
thee.  Be  not  afraid  of  their  faces  ;  for 
I  am  with  thee."  "  As  I  was  with 
Moses,  so  I  will  be  with  thee."  "  Fear 
not,  thou  worm  Jacob."  Strength  with- 
out God  is  weakness  ;  weakness  with 
God  is  strength.  **  AVhere  he  appoints 
I  go."  And  thus  directed,  when  I  am 
weak,  then  am  I  strong. 


220 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  NEUEMIAH. 


[OHAF.  IX. 


ADDENDA   TO   CHAPTER   IX. 
Sentences  from  Old  Writers. 


I.  From  feasting  to  fasting  (ver. 
1 — 3).  *' There  is  in  this  present  life  an 
interchange  of  all  things,  a  succession  of 
feasting  and  fasting.  Of  the  best  whilst 
here  it  may  be  said,  unhappy  you  cannot 
call  him,  happy  you  may  not.  One  com- 
paretli  him  to  the  Ark,  which  was  ever 
transportative,  till  settled  in  Solomon's 
Temple ;  another  to  quicksilver,  which 
hath  in  itself  a  principle  of  motion,  but 
not  of  rest."  "  Deadness  of  spirit  is  apt 
to  follow  our  liveliest  joys;  but  that 
must  be  looked  to,  and  security  pre- 
vented, which  is  wont  to  seize  upon  men 
after  holy  duties,  like  as  worms  and 
wasps  eat  the  sweetest  fruits."  "  It  was 
a  fast  that  men  appointed,  but  such  a  fast 
as  God  had  chosen.  They  were  re- 
strained from  weeping  (chap.  viii.  9),  but 
now  they  were  directed  to  weep.  The 
joy  of  our  holy  feasts  must  give  way  to 
the  sorrow  of  our  solemn  fasts  when 
they  come.  Everything  is  beautiful  in 
its  season."  "  Confession  is  the  way  to 
the  kingdom  ;  walk  in  it ;  only  it  must 
be  joined  with  confusion  of  sin,  as  here. 
They  separated  themselves  from  all 
strangers,  they  abandoned  their  darling 
sin,  they  kept  themselves  from  their 
iniquity."  "  They  that  intend  by  prayers 
and  covenants  to  join  themselves  to  God 
must  separate  themselves  from  sin  and 
sinners."  "  Fasting  without  prayer  is  a 
body  without  a  soul."  "  In  the  glass  of 
the  law  we  may  see  our  deformities  and 
defilements,  and  know  what  to  acknow- 
ledge and  what  to  amend."  *'The  Word 
will  direct  and  quicken  prayer." 

II.  A  story  of  Divine  guidance 
(ver.  4 — 38).  They  cried  with  a  loudvoice 
—  Utito  the  Lord  their  God.  ''  As  being 
in  covenant  with  them.  This  shows  their 
faith,  as  the  former  their  fervency. 
Eaith  is  the  foundation  of  prayer ;  and 
prayer  is  the  fervency  of  faith."  Then 
the  Levites  saidy  Stand  up.  "  Gird  your- 
selves and  serve  the  Lord.  Be  instant, 
or  stand  close  to  the  work  (2  Tim.  iv.  2) ; 
set  sides  and  shoulders  to  it ;  rouse  up 


yourselves  and  wrestle  with  God.  In 
the  primitive  times  the  ministers  pre- 
pared the  people  to  serve  God,  by  say- 
ing, Lift  up  your  hearts."  Stand  up. 
"  For  though  they  are  before  said  to  stand, 
yet,  through  shame  and  confusion  of  face, 
and  awe  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  might  be 
fallen  on  their  faces  to  the  ground." 
And  bless  the  Lord  your  God  for  ever. 
"If  we  should  do  nothing  else  all  our 
days,  yea,  as  long  as  the  days  of  heaven 
shall  last  (said  that  martyr),  but  kneel 
upon  our  knees  and  sing  over  David's 
psalms  to  God's  praise,  yet  should  we 
fall  short  of  what  we  owe  to  the  Lord, 
who  is  most  worthy  to  be  praised." 
And  blessed  be  thy  glorious  name,  which 
is  exalted  above  all  blessing  and  praise. 
"  These  holy  Levites,  having  called  upon 
the  people  to  bless  God,  break  forth  into 
the  performance  of  this  Divine  duty 
themselves.  So  St.  Paul  often,  exhort- 
ing the  saints  to  pray,  falls  a-praying 
for  them."  *'  When  we  have  done  our 
utmost  herein  we  can  never  overdo." 
"  As  oft  as  we  breathe  we  are  to  breathe 
out  the  praises  of  God,  and  to  make  our 
breath  like  the  perfumed  smoke  of  the 
Tabernacle."  Thou  art  Lord  alone; 
thou  hast  made  heaven,  &c.  *'  The  first 
article  of  our  Creed  is  fitly  made  the  first 
article  of  our  praises."  "God's  pro- 
vidence extends  itself  to  the  highest 
beings,  for  they  need  it ;  and  to  the 
meanest,  for  they  are  not  slighted  by  it." 
"  Jt'hovah  is  God's  incommunicable 
name  ;  that  holy  and  reverend  name  of 
his,  which  Jews  pronounce  not,  we  too 
oft  profane,  at  least  by  not  considering 
the  import  of  it,  which  is  enough  to 
answer  all  our  doubts  and  to  fill  us  with 
strong  consolation,  had  we  but  skill  to 
spell  all  the  letters  in  it."  "  With  great 
skill  and  artifice  God  has  made  heaven 
three  stories  high  "  (2  Cor.  xii.  2  ;  Heb. 
xi.  10).  "Of  the  heaven  of  heavens  no 
natural  knowledge  can  be  had,  nor  any 
help  by  human  arts ;  for  it  is  neither 
aspectable  nor  movable."   "  God  may  be 


OHAP.  IX.] 


HOMTLKTTC  COMMENTAnY :   NEITEMfATL 


221 


read  in  the  great  book  of  nature,  which 
hath  three  leaves — heaven,  earth,  and 
sea."  And  foundest  his  heart  faithful. 
'*  He  must  needs  find  it  so  who  hath 
made  it  so."  And  madest  a  covenant 
with  him.  "  Wherever  he  finds  a  faith- 
ful heart  he  will  be  found  a  faithful 
God."  And  heardest  their  cry.  *'  Though 
mixed  with  much  murmuring.  So  he 
lieard  that  pitiful  poor  prayer  of  David, 
*  I  said  in  mine  haste,  I  am  cut  off  from 
thine  eyes  :  nevertheless  thou  heardest 
the  voice  of  my  supplications,  when  I 
cried  unto  thee.'  God  heareth  the  young 
ravens,  though  they  have  but  a  hoarse 
and  harsh  note,  making  no  melody  to 
move  pity,  and  cry  but  by  implication 
only,  and  not  directly  unto  him.*'  And 
sh  otoedst  signs  and  wonders  upon  Pharaoh . 
"  That  sturdy  rebel  whom  neither  min- 
istry, nor  misery,  nor  miracle,  nor  mercy 
could  possibly  mollify."  And  gavest 
them  bread  from  heaven,  &c.  *'  God 
rained  down  angels'  food,  and  set  the  fluid 
abroach ;  and  this  he  did  for  their 
1  lunger,  for  their  thirst,  fitting  his  favours 
according  to  their  need  and  request. 
Besides  that,  their  bread  was  sacramental, 
whereof  they  communicated  every  day. 
Their  drink  also  was  sacramental,  that 
this  ancient  Church  might  give  no  war- 
rant of  a  dry  communion  :  for  they  did 
all  eat  of  the  same  spiritual  meat,  and  did 
all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink,  the 
same  that  we  do  at  the  Lord's  Supper." 
Hearkened  not  to  thy  commandments. 
*•  The  word  of  God  they  heard,  but  they 
did  not  hearken  to  God's  commandments ; 
and  the  works  of  God  they  saw,  but  they 
Avere  not  mindful  of  his  wonders."  A 
God  ready  to  pardon.  "  It  is  our  com- 
fort that  we  have  to  do  with  a  forgiving, 
sin-pardoning  God,  that  doth  it  naturally 
(Exod.  xxxiv.  6),  plentifully  (Isa.  Iv.  7), 
constantly  (Ps.  cxxx.  4).  This  should 
be  as  a  perpetual  picture  in  our  hearts." 
They  made  them  a  molten  calf  and  said, 
This  is  thy  God.  "These  be  thy  gods 
(Exod.  xxxii.  4).  It  was  the  serpent's 
grammar  that  first  taught  men  to  decline 
God  in  the  plural  number :  ye  shall  be 
as  gods  "  (Gen.  iii).  They  lacked  nothing. 
"  Nor  more  shall  they  that  seek  the  Lord 
lack  any  good  thing.  God  will  not  be 
a  wilderness  to  them^  or  a  land  of  dark- 


ness. A  sufficiency  they  shall  be  sure  of, 
if  not  a  superfluity ;  yea,  in  the  midst 
of  straits  they  shall  be  in  a  sufficiency  " 
(1  Tim.  vi.  6).  So  they  possessed  the 
land  of  Sihon.  "  God's  favours  must 
not  be  mentioned  in  the  lump  only,  and 
by  wholesale  ;  but  particularly  enumer- 
ated and  celebrated."  The  land  con- 
cerning which  thou  had  at  promised  to 
their  fathers.  "  And  they  disposed  of 
it  by  will  to  their  posterity,  as  if  they 
had  been  in  present  possession.  God's 
promises  are  good  surehold  :  the  patri- 
archs would  be  buried  there,  though  they 
died  in  Egypt,  and  keep  possession  as 
tliey  could  ;  for  tliey  knew  that  all  was 
their  own."  So  the  children  went  in.. 
"  After  that  tliey  had  been  held  a  long 
while  under  the  Egyptian  servitude. 
God  knows  how  to  command  his  favours 
to  us ;  which  lightly  come  by  are  lightly 
set  by."  And  deliglded  themselves  in 
thy  great  goodness.  *'  They  lived  in 
God's  good  land,  but  not  by  God^s  good 
laws."  They  wrought  great jjr avocations. 
Therefore  thou  deliveredst  them  into  the 
hand  of  their  enemies.  "  Sin  and  punish- 
ment are  tied  together  with  chains  of 
adamant."  "  They  that  would  not  serve 
God  in  their  own  land  were  made  to 
serve  their  enemies  in  a  strange  land." 
"  It  is  a  pity  good  land  should  have  bad 
inhabitants  ;  but  so  it  was  with  Sodom." 
*'  Fatness  and  fulness  often  make  men 
proud  and  sensual."  After  they  had 
rest  they  did  evil  again.  ''As  standing 
pools  breed  vermin ;  as  sedentary  lives 
are  subject  to  diseases.  If  men  be  not 
poured  out  from  vessel  to  vessel,  they 
will  soon  settle  upon  their  lees.  AVe 
are  commonly  best  when  worst."  And 
hardened  their  neck.  "  To  sinews  of  iron 
they  added  brows  of  brass."  Thou  art 
a  gracious  and  merciful  God.  "And 
this  is  most  seen  when  misery  weighs 
down,  and  nothing  but  mercy  turneth 
the  scale."  Behold,  we  are  servants 
this  day.  **  A  sad  change.  But  see 
what  work  sin  makes  !  "  We  make  a 
sm-e  covenant,  &c.  *'  He  that  bears  an 
honest  mind  will  not  startle  at  assur- 
ances ;  nor  will  those  that  know  the 
deceitfulness  of  their  own  hearts  think 
them  needless." 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [ohap.  x. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Explanatory  Notes.]  Vers.  1 — 27.]  "  First  came  the  name  of  the  governor,  the  Tirshatha;  next 
Zidkijahy  perhaps  the  secretary  to  the  governor.  Then  foUow  twenty-one  names  of  priests,  seven- 
teen Zevttes,  and  forty-four  of  the  chief  of  the  people.^'  Ver.  28.  The  rest  of  the  people]  Repre- 
sented by  the  heads  of  the  nations  who  had  sealed  the  covenant.  These  scaled;  those  swore.  All 
they  that  had  separated  themselves]  "The  descendants  of  those  Israelites  who  had  been  left  in 
the  land,  and  who  now  joined  the  new  community." — A'eiL  Ver.  30,  31.]  "Besides  the  general 
obligation  to  observe  all  the  commandments,  judgments,  and  statutes  ot  God,  two  points,  then  fre- 
quently transgressed,  are  specially  mentioned.  In  ver.  30,  that  we  would  not  give  our  daughters  to 
the  people  of  the  lands,  nor  take  their  daughters  for  our  son.s.  In  ver.  31,  that  if  the  people  of  the 
laud  brought  wares  or  any  victuals  on  the  Sabbath  day  to  sell,  we  would  not  buy  it  of  them  on  the 
Sabbath,  or  on  a  holy  day  ;  and  would  let  the  seventh  year  lie,  and  the  loan  of  every  hand.  To  the 
sanctification  of  the  Sabbath  pertained  the  celebration  of  the  Sabbatical  year  in  which  the  land  was 
to  lie  untilled  and  unsown"  (Ex.  xxiii.  10).— Keil.  Vers.  32 — 39.]  Having  agreed  to  keep  the  law  they 
then  resolved  to  maintain  the  Temple  service.  Ver.  32.  The  third  part  of  a  shekel]  The  law 
required  half  a  shekel ;  perhaps  reduced  to  one-third  in  consequence  of  the  people's  poverty.  Ver. 
34.  We  east  the  lots  for  the  wood  offering-]  "The  carrying  of  the  wood  had  formerly  been 
the  work  of  the  Nethinims.  But  few  of  them  having  returned,  the  duty  was  assigned  as  stated  in 
the  text.  The  practice  afterwards  rose  into  great  importance,  and  Josephus  speaks  of  the  Xylophoria, 
or  certain  stated  and  solemn  times,  at  which  the  people  brought  up  wood  to  the  Temple." — Jamieson. 
Ver  38.  The  priest  shall  be  with  the  Levi tes  when  they  take  tithes]  A  prudential  arrange- 
ment. The  presence  of  a  dignified  priest  would  prevent  the  people  deceiving  the  Levites,  or  the 
liCvites  defrauding  the  priests. — Jamieson.  The  tithe  of  the  tithes]  The  Levites,  having  received 
a  tenth  of  all  land  produce,  were  required  to  give  a  tenth  of  this  to  the  priests.  The  Levites  were 
charged  with  the  additional  obligation  to  carry  the  tithes  when  received,  and  deposit  them  in  the 
Temple  stores,  for  the  use  of  the  priests. — Jamieson.  Ver.  39.  We  will  not  forsake  the  house] 
The  people  swore  to  maintain,  the  priests  and  Levites  to  serve,  the  Temple. 

HOIMILETICAL  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTER  X. 

Zeal  for  the  Sanctuary. 
Zeal  for  God's   House   expressed  in 
a  holy  resolution  not  to  forsake  it. 

Unworldliness. 

X.  28 — 31.  And  the  rest  of  the  people,  the  priests^  the  Levites,  the  porters,  the  singers, 
the  Nethinims,  and  all  they  that  had  separated  themselves  from  the  people  of  tlie 
lands  unto  the  law  of  God,  their  ivives,  their  sous,  and  their  daughters,  every  oue 
having  knowledge,  and  having  uude7'standijig  ;  they  clave  to  their  brethren,  their 
nobles,  and  entered  into  a  curse,  and  into  an  oath,  to  walk  in  God's  laio,  which 
was  given  by  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  to  observe  and  do  all  the  command- 
ments of  the  Lord  our  Lord,  and  his  judgments  and  his  statutes ;  and  that  we 
uould  not  give  our  daughters  unto  the  people  (f  the  land,  nor  take  their  daughters 
for  our  sons :  and  if  the  peop)le  of  the  land  bring  ware  or  any  victuals  on  the 
sabbath  day  to  sell,  that  we  would  not  buy  it  of  them  on  the  sabbath,  or  on  the 
holy  day :  and  that  we  loovld  leave  the  seventh  yea?',  and  the  exaction  of  every 
debt. 

They  did  not  pray  to  be  taken  out  of  the  world ;  they  did  resolve  to  keep  them- 
selves from  its  evil.  Is  that  biblical  unworldliness]  St.  James  says,  ''The 
friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God  ;  whosoever  therefore  will  be  a  friend 
of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God."  Does  the  Apostle  stand  alone  in  this  1  Ls  he 
carried  away  by  the  vehemence  of  his  feelings  as  public  speakers  sometimes  are  1 
He  was  pre-eminently  a  calm  man.  He  weighed  his  words.  The  men  of  his  age 
styled  him  "  the  just."     He  was  a  man  of  weight.     And  the  key-note  of  his  epistle 


Ver.  28—31. 

Unworldliness. 

Ver.  39. 

29. 

Moses. 

„      39. 

„      32—39. 

Voluntary  Taxation. 

OHAP.  X.]  IIOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    NEUmilAH.  223 

is  struck  in  the  sermon  on  tlie  mount.  T.et  us  listen  to  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  so 
tranquil  in  its  tone  :  "No  man  can  serve  two  masters  :  for  either  he  will  hate  the 
one,  and  love  the  other ;  or  else  he  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other. 
Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  '*  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  upon 
earth ;  but  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven ;  for  where  your  treasure  is, 
there  will  your  heart  be  also."  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see 
your  good  works."  Unfortunately  use  has  dulled  the  edge  of  these  beautiful  words. 
Could  we  listen  to  them  as  they  deserve  to  be  heard  they  would  sound  strangely. 
They  distinguish  between  things  that  differ — the  world  and  God.  They  separate 
the  worshippers  of  the  world  from  the  worshippers  of  God.  They  tell  of  a  reciprocal 
influence.  If  we  turn  from  Christ  to  Paul  the  strain  is  the  same.  "  Be  not 
conformed  to  this  world,  that  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good,  and  acceptable,  and 
perfect  will  of  God."  "  TIib  time  is  short :  it  remaineth,  that  they  that  weep  be 
as  though  they  wept  not ;  and  they  that  rejoice,  as  though  they  rejoiced  not ;  and 
they  that  buy,  as  though  they  possessed  not ;  and  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not 
abusing  it :  for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."  Take  one  more  step — from 
Paul  to  John.  '*  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world.  If 
any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him.  For  all  that  is  in 
the  world  is  not  of  the  Father,  but  is  of  the  world." 

I.  What  is  the  forbidden  world  ?  1.  Not  the  material  world.  "  Every  creature 
of  God  is  good."  The  world  is  God's  :  he  made  it ;  he  gloried  in  it ;  he  upholds 
it.  It  is  a  mark  of  God's  likeness  to  enjoy  this  beautiful  world.  In  the  world 
God  is  mirrored.     When  night  draws  its  curtain  and  hangs  up  its  silvery  lamps, 

All  things  are  calm,  aud  fair,  and  passive.     Earth 
Looks  as  if  lulled  upon  an  angel's  lap 
Into  a  breathless  dewy  sleep  :  so  still 
That  we  can  only  say  of  things,  they  be  ! 

It  is  said  that  the  first  Napoleon  was  once  on  the  deck  of  a  vessel  surveying  such 
a  scene  when  he  overheard  two  of  his  officers  in  discussion,  and  one  denying  the 
existence  of  God.  Going  towards  them  he  said,  "  Gentlemen,  I  heard  one  of  you 
say  there  is  no  God;  then  pray  tell  me  who  made  all  this  V  pointing  as  he  spoke 
to  "the  beads  of  light  strung  o'er  night's  dark  brow."  Think  you  God  has  for- 
bidden us  to  love  this  beautiful  ^vorld  1  Why  has  he  hidden  it  from  us  ]  Why 
has  he  made  science,  art,  health,  life  itself,  dependent  on  the  study  of  it  1  Is  it 
not  that  he  would  have  us  cultivate  its  friendship  and  worm  oat  its  secret?  and 
whether  we  gaze  with  awe  on  the  worlds  upon  worlds  circling  in  distant  space,  or  the 
worlds  within  worlds  in  each  the  minutest  creation  of  God,  rise  from  our  daily 
contemplation,  as  he  rose  on  the  first  day  of  its  existence,  with  the  words  upon  our 
lips — "  It  is  very  good  ; "  "  He  hath  done  all  things  well."  2.  Not  the  men  who  are 
in  the  luorld.  If  the  world  is  dear  to  God  because  he  made  it  and  sustains  it,  how 
much  more  man,  whom  he  has  redeemed  with  his  Son's  most  precious  blood  %  We 
have  been  on  the  Mount  with  Christ.  Let  us  revisit  it.  He  shall  teach  us  our  rela- 
tions to  the  world  of  men.  "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth."  "  Ye  are  the  light  of 
the  world."  Did  Christ  scorn  men  1  He  scorned,  hated,  recoiled  from,  denounced 
sin  ;  but  the  sinner  he  sought,  soothed,  taught,  won,  and  rejoiced  over.  Christ  liad 
human  affections.  Broad  enough  to  embrace  a  world  was  the  love  of  Christ,  and 
yet  he  needed  human  love.  And  in  selected  homes  and  from  selected  hearts  he 
got  what  he  wanted.  God  has  not  outlawed  our  affections.  They  will  outlast 
death.  Love  is  of  God.  Love  is  eternal.  "  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hatetli 
his  brother,  he  is  a  lair  :  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  lie  hath  seen,  how 
can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen]  And  this  commandment  have  we  from 
him,  that  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother  also."  3.  Bat  the  spirit  of  the  world. 
Our  Lord  styled  it  "the  evil";    St.  John  phrases  it,  "the   lust  of  the  world." 


224  nOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:   NETIEMIAH.  [char  x. 

The  maxims,  the  tone,  the  tendency  of  a  life  that  shuts  out  God,  ignores  death,  buries 
the  thought  of  another  life,  the  godlessness  of  tlie  world — this  is  forbidden.  The 
World's  Final  Court  of  Appeal  is  Opinion  ;  the  Christian's  is  God's  Word.  The  one 
anxiously  asks,  "  What  will  society  say  1 "  Tlie  other  fearlessly  asks,  "  What  has  God 
said]"  "Will  it  be  discovered]  will  shame  follow?"  that  is  one  way  of  meeting 
a  temptation.      "  Is  it  lightj  "   that  is  the  other,  the  more  excellent,  way. 

II.  Importance  of  a  correct  answer  to  the  question,  What  is  the  forbidden 
world  ?  A  mistake  here  is  fatal.  1.  Some  ham  loolced  upon  this  world  as  accursed. 
They  have  betaken  themselves  to  monasteries  and  sisterhoods,  oblivious  of  the  fact 

that 

The  trivial  round,  the  common  task, 
"Would  furnish  all  we  ought  to  ask  : 
Room  to  deny  ourselves ;  a  road 
To  bring  us  daily  nearer  God. 

2.  Some  have  supposed  the  evil  to  be  in  our  business.  Here  temptation  arises ;  but 
the  place  where  the  fire  breaks  out  is  not  the  cause  of  the  fire.  To  be  unworldly 
does  not  mean  to  be  out  of  the  world.  "  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest  take  them 
out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil."  St.  Paul  did  not 
give  up  tent-making,  nor  St.  Peter  relinquish  fishing,  when  they  became  apostles. 
They  taught  their  converts  to  '*  abide  "  in  their  callings.  Business  is  not  outside 
religion ;  it  must  be  religiously  attended  to.  The  shop  should  be  as  sacred  as  a 
sanctuary.  Work  done  with  right  motives  and  aims  is  a  ceaseless  litany.  "  Whether 
therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God." 

Illustrations : — Let  us  use  worldly  things  as  wise  pilgrims  do  their  staves  and  other  necessariei 
convenient  for  their  journey.  So  long  as  they  help  us  forward  in  our  way,  let  us  make  use  of  them, 
and  accordingly  esteem  them.  But  if  they  become  troublesome  hindrances  and  cumbersome  burdens, 
let  us  leave  them  behind  us  or  cast  them  away. — Boivname. 

All  the  water  is  waste  that  runs  beside  the  mill ;  so  all  thy  thoughts  and  words  are  waste  which 
are  not  to  the  glory  of  God.  A  bee  will  not  sit  on  a  flower  where  no  honey  can  be  sucked  ;  neither 
should  the  Christian  engage  in  anything  but  for  his  soul's  good  and  God's  honour. — Gurnnll. 

Christianity  allows  us  to  use  the  world,  provided  we  do  not  abuse  it.  It  does  not  spread  before 
us  a  delicious  banquet,  and  then  come  with  a  "  Touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not." — Porteous. 

A  Christian  is  like  Jacob's  ladder :  while  his  body,  that  lower  part,  stands  on  the  ground,  the  top, 
his  higher  and  better  part,  is  in  heaven.  He  that  hath  the  living  waters  of  Jesus  flowing  in  his 
heart,  is  mad  if  he  stoop  to  the  puddles  of  vanity,  or  seek  content  in  the  world.  Yea,  such  a  one 
will  scarce  descend  to  lawful  pleasures,  but  for  God's  allowance  and  nature's  necessity  ;  and  then 
but  as  the  eagle,  who  lives  aloft,  and  stoops  not  but  for  her  prey. — Adams. 

Moses. 
X.  29.     Moses,  the  servant  of  God. 

Three  periods  of  forty  years  : — agree-  Moses  ivas  born.     Jewish  proverb  says, 

ing  with  his  life  in  Egypt,  Arabia,  and  *'  When   the  tale  of  bricks  is  doubled 

the  wilderness  of  the  wandering.  then  comes  Moses."     "  Man's  extremity 

I.   Birth   and   education.     Tyranny  is   God's   opportunity."     The   story   of 

and   cowardice    twin-sisters.       Pharaoh  the   child's  salvation.     His  mother  his 

enslaved  the  people.    Unrighteous  power  educator.     Mother's  influence.     Augus- 

is  uncertain  power.    Pharaoh  knew  this,  tine  and  Monica.     The  mother  of  the 

Dreading  the  increasing  numbers  of  the  Wesleys.     Cowper's  poem  on  seeing  his 

children  of   Israel,    he  issued  an  edict  mother's    picture.     Boyhood    of  Moses 

that   all  the   male   children  should  be  not  detailed.     Nor  childhood  of  Jesus, 

strangled   at   birth.      Fearing   political  Two   anecdotes    in    Stephen's    speech, 

intrigue,  he  placed  over  them  Egyptian  Flight  now  necessary. 

task-masters.     Anxious   to   crush   their  II.  Moses   kept  the   flock   in    the 

spirits,  he  increased  their  burdens.    Then  desert  near   Horeb.     Desert  voices — 


CHAP.     X] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  N EH  EMI  AH, 


225 


solitude  and  thought.  Burning  bush — 
a  lesson  to  the  eye ;  '^  IVIy  people  are  in 
the  fire ;  they  sliall  not  be  burned." 
Voice — a  command  and  a  commission. 
Eeluctance.  Moses  and  Aaron.  Our 
dependence  upon  each  other.  Goes  to 
Pharaoh. 

III.  His  work.  Eighty  years  of  pre- 
paration. How  God  can  wait !  Our 
impatience  if  harvest  ripens  slowly. 
Moses  became  deliverer.  Difficulties 
from  Pharaoh  ;  from  people's  accustom 
edness  to  bondage.  Human  sagacity 
and  Divine  help.  The  order  of  their 
march  he  indicated,  but  Hobab  a  guide. 
With  the  sagacity  of  a  leader  Moses 
united  the  courage  of  a  warrior.  He 
was  the  patriarch  and  judge.  Diffi- 
culties he  surmounted,  and  doubts  he 
resolved.  How  he  bore  with  them  the 
history  tells.  His  speech  sometimes 
song.  The  poet  of  the  nation.  Passage 
of  the  Red  Sea  (Psalm  xc).  Farewell 
(Deut.  xxxii.,  xxxiii.).  The  scenes  of 
this  history  have  passed  into  proverbs. 
Our  conceptions  of  the  journey  of  a 
human  soul  from  this  land  of  exile  to 
its  home  Avith  God  are  borrowed  from 
this  narrative.  Horeb,  Sinai,  and  Nebo 
speak  a  language  understood  by  thou- 
sands. The  Red  Sea,  the  city  of  palm 
trees,  and  the  cleft  rock  have  suggested 
thoughts  of  God  which  have  inspired 
untold  myriads  in  their  pilgrimage. 
Such  a  history  can  never  again  be 
written.  "  A  man  of  like  passions." 
Penalty  of  passion.     He  was  to  see,  but 


not  to  enter  the  land.  Forty  years  h« 
had  toiled  to  bring  them  there,  and  now 
he  must  die  outside.  How  many  coveted 
objects  get  just  within  our  reach,  and 
then  are  removed  as  by  invisible  hands. 
A  few  lines  sum  up  a  human  life. 
"  Moses,  the  servant  of  the  Lord."  Few 
words,  but  120  years  in  them — the  vic- 
tories and  defeats,  fears  and  hopes, 
temptations  and  resistances,  dangers  and 
deliverances  of  a  lifetime.  Moses  died  : 
God  buried  him.  The  people  wept : 
Joshua  arose.  Moses  died,  but  his  work 
remained — remains.  His  life  is  ours  to 
study.  His  laws  are  at  the  base  of 
English  and  American  jurisprudence; 
and  he  is  with  those  who  have  gotten 
the  victory,  who  stand  on  the  sea  of 
glass,  having  the  harps  of  God,  and  sing 
the  song  of  Moses ^  the  servant  of  God, 
and  the  song  of  the  Lamb. 

Illustrations : — "The  life  of  Moses  is  probably 
the  most  complete  of  any  man's,  either  in  the 
Old  Testament  or  the  JS^ew — a  great,  noble, 
growing  life  to  the  very  end,  and  most  clearly 
and  graphically  depicted  in  the  word  of  God. 
But  not  a  single  ray  of  light  falls  upon  his  death, 
and  no  man  attends  his  funeral.  We  only  know 
that  it  was  well  cared  for ;  "  the  Lord  buried 
him.  "—Ker. 

Moses,  pre-eminently  one  of  the  greatest  men 
of  all  time.  Coming  from  the  lowest  ranks  of 
life, — born  a  slave  under  the  iron  tyranny  of  an 
Eastern  despot, — he  rose  to  become  the  emanci- 
pator of  his  people  from  that  bondage,  and  the 
founder  of  a  nation  that  held  the  light  of  heaven 
through  the  darkness  of  ages ;  and  which,  of  all 
nations,  has  had  the  mightiest  influence  in 
advancing  the  true  progress  of  the  world. — 
JS.  L.  Hull, 


VOLUNTAKY    TAXATION. 

32—  39.     We  made  ordinances  for  us,  to  charge  ourselves  yearly  with  the 
third  part  of  a  shekel  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  our  Ood,  &c. 


The  old  law  required  the  offerings ; 
but  it  had  been  long  unread.  In  the 
enthusiasm  of  the  Reformation  under 
Nehemiah  they  accepted  the  neglected 
law,  and  adapted  it  to  their  new  condi- 
tions. Not  to  enter  upon  the  thorny  path 
of  endowed  or  voluntary  religion,  nor  to 
inquire  whether  tithes  are  coeval  with 
the  first  man,  and  binding  upon  the 
present  age,  let  us  maintain — 

I.  That  a  Church  supposes  an  edifice. 


"  No  particular  sort  of  building,  style  of 
architecture,  or  ceremony  of  preparation 
is  essential.  An  upper  room  in  Jerusalem, 
the  abode  of  the  eleven,  is  the  first- 
mentioned  place  of  Christian  consolation. 
The  place  of  pentecostal  concourse  is 
not  exactly  mentioned,  but  is  called  a 
house.  Afterwards  the  Christians  met 
in  the  temple,  probably  for  public  wor- 
ship ;  and  celebrated  the  eucharist  or 
broke  the  bread  in  the  house.     Perhaps 


226 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMTAH. 


[chap.   X. 


it  was  in  the  same  place  in  which  the 
eleven  abode  that  the  pentecostal  as- 
semblage was  held,  that  the  eucharistic 
bread  was  broken,  that  the  deaeons  were 
installed,  and  that  the  apostolic  council 
was  held,  and  which  was  *  shaken '  in 
answer  to  prayer." — Manly.  God  may 
be  worshipped  in  any  house.  Experi- 
ence has  taught  the  convenience  and 
value  of  a  house  of  God.  Tlie  edifice 
must  be  built  and  maintained. 

II.  That  a  Church  requires  a  min- 
ister. **  All  elders  are  worthy  of  honour, 
the  elders  that  rule  well  of  double  hon- 
our, the  elders  that  labour  in  the  word 
and  doctrine  of  special  honour.  The 
honour  consists  of  either  obedience,  or 
maintenance,  or  of  both  together.  The 
labourer  is  worthy  of  his  reward.  No 
man  can  rightly  labour  in  the  word  and 
doctrine  without  diligent  and  habitual 
biblical  study ;  no  man  can  conduct 
such  study  without  the  renunciation  of 
secular  pursuits ;  no  man  can  abandon 
such  pursuits  without  an  adequate  and 
guaranteed  salary  from  the  Church  in 
which  he  teaches  and  for  which  he 
labours;  and  accordingly  it  is  a  wise 
arrangement,  an  equitable  exchange,  a 
Divine  direction,  that  the  bishops  or 
ministers  of  the  churches  should  be 
adequately  sustained  and  paid.  An 
unpaid  ministry  must  always  be  an 
occasional  and  defective  ministry;  and 
a  Church  that  relies  on  it  will  droop  and 
decline.  It  is  simple  justice ;  and  it  is 
God's  law  that  he  who  is  taught  in  the 
word  should  communicate  to  him  that 


teacheth  in  all  good  things." — Manly. 
The  ministry  must  be  sustained. 

III.  That  u  Church  is  a  brotherhood. 

"  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together." 
**The  poor  ye  have  always  with  you." 
In  a  Church  sense,  "  if  any  provide  not 
for  his  own  house  he  hath  denied  the 
faith."     "  All  ye  are  brethren." 

IV.  That  a  Church  is  a  missionary 
organization.  It  has  duties  both  at 
home  and  abroad.  The  word  of  God 
must  be  translated,  the  masses  evan- 
gelized, society  leavened.  This  is  tlip 
only  *' needs-be"  for  a  Church.  It  gets 
to  give ;  exists  for  what  it  does.  A 
praying  Church  must  also  be  a  workiuL^ 
Church.  A  working  Church  must  ot 
necessity  be  a  generous  Church.  Jesii--^ 
stood  over  against  the  treasury  and  saw 
the  rich  men  casting  in  their  gifts.  And 
he  sail)  also  a  certain  widow  casting  ui 
the  two  mites.  ''  If  there  be  first  a  will- 
ing mind,  it  is  accepted  according  to 
that  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to 
that  he  hath  not."  *•  God  loveth  the 
cheerful  giver." 

Illustration : — Men  may  say  they  prefer  to 
give  their  missionary  money  nearer  home,  where 
they  see  what  becomes  of  it.  But  remember 
that  it  is  by  setting  up  standards  and  beacons, 
getting  hold  of  a  few  here  and  there  and  Chris- 
tianizing them,  even  when  results  look  small,  that 
a  great  testimony  to  Christ  is  finally  given.  Make 
the  gospel "  witness  to  all  nations,  before  the  end 
comes.  The  apostles  travelled  and  sailed,  casting 
their  bread  upon  the  waters,  not  too  anxious  to 
count  up  visible  results.  The  great  commission 
was,  "  Go,  preach  the  gospel  to  all  nations." 
There  is  no  knowing  where  the  fruit  will  spring. 
— Bishop  Huntington. 


Zeal  for  the  Sanctuary. 

X.  39.      We  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God, 

Israel  ordained  the  guardians  of  God's  spiritual  worship,  and  the  repositories  of 
his  lively  oracles.  So  long  as  they  kept  oracles  undefiled  and  maintained  worship 
undebased  God  was  with  them  ;  when  they  profaned  or  abandoned  the  place 
where  his  honour  dwelt — defiling  his  worship  with  superstition  and  idolatry — he 
turned  to  be  their  adversary.  He  gave  up  their  city  to  destruction,  and  their 
beautiful  house,  where  their  fathers  had  praised  him,  to  utter  desolation.  They  were 
carried  away  captive  into  Babylon.  After  seventy  years  of  tribulation,  God 
hearkened  to  their  cries.  He  caused  Cyrus  to  issue  a  decree  of  return.  Multitudes 
hastened  back.  Having  rebuilt  the  temple  they  kept  a  solemn  festival.  They 
made  confessions,  and  renewed  their  covenant  with  God.  They  bound  themselves 
to  restore  the  tithes  and  sacrifices  which  the  law  ordained.     Though  impoverished 


ciiAr.  X.]  nOMILETTC  COMMENTAHV :  NEUEMTAH.  227 

and  oppressed  tliey  undertook  to  give  such  things  as  were  needful  for  the  full 
service  of  the  temple.    The  whole  assembly,  in  unison  with  their  governor,  protested 
with  one  mind  and  one  mouth,  we  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God. 
AVhy  you  should  say  of  "  the  habitation  of  God's  house,"  we  will  not  forsake  it] 

1.  God  has  clearly  ordained  public  worship.  He  made  man  to  be  social — social 
in  virtue  of  his  sorrows,  his  joys,  his  wants,  his  all'ections,  his  relationships.  But 
if  he  formed  men  to  be  social  in  things  natural,  he  no  less  formed  them  to  be 
social  in  things  spiritual.  The  isolation  of  selfishness  is  of  sin ;  the  union  of  ]uv(d 
is  of  God.  But  union  is  cherished  by  communion,  and  communion  strengthened 
by  united  worship.  The  faithful  ought  therefore  to  assemble  tliemselves  together 
in  their  Master's  name.  Accordingly,  fellowship  in  worship  may  be  traced  from 
the  earliest  period.  It  seems  not  improbable  that,  as  our  great  poet  has  represented, 
even  in  paradise  the  primitive  pair  had  some  chosen  bower  whither  they  resorted 
to  offer  up  their  stated  homage  to  their  Maker.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  no  sooner 
do  we  find  men  calling  upon  the  Lord  after  the  fall,  than  we  find  them  calling  upon 
him  in  fellowship.  Where  the  patriarch  pitched  his  tent,  there  he  built  his  altar. 
As  soon  as  ever  God  had  singled  out  a  people  for  himself,  he  bade  them  raise  a 
tabernacle  of  witness  and  of  worship,  giving  the  minutest  instructions  for  its 
construction,  its  furniture,  and  its  ordinances.  He  added  this  memorable  promise, 
which  remains  in  all  its  force,"  Wherever  I  record  my  name  I  will  come  to  thee  and 
bless  thee."  And  gloriously  did  he  record  his  name — first  in  the  tabernacle,  and 
afterwards  more  gloriously  still  in  the  temple.  He  dwelt  between  the  cherubim, 
over  the  mercy-seat,  and  poured  his  blessing  on  all  who  truly  sought  liim  there. 
Jesus  honoured  the  temple.  He  loved  to  resort  to  his  Father's  house.  He  was 
very  jealous  of  its  desecration ;  the  zeal  of  it  ate  him  up.  There  he  was  wont  to 
teach  ;  there  he  wrought  mighty  miracles.  His  disciples  met  for  worship,  sometimes 
in  the  synacrogue,  sometimes  in  the  upper  chamber,  sometimes  at  the  river-side  :  and 
no  sooner  did  opportunity  serve  than  they  set  apart  holy  places  for  the  ordinances 
and  worship  of  God.  The  faithful  in  every  age  have  desired  to  dwell  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord.  If,  therefore,  any  man  have  the  mind  of  the  Spirit ;  if  he  love  the 
Saviour  and  those  whom  the  Saviour  loves — he  cannot  but  say  of  the  solemn 
assembly,  **  I  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  my  God." 

2.  The  sjjecial  manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence ^  vouchsafed  in  the  congre- 
gations of  the  saints,  ought  to  endear  to  us  such  privileged  scenes.  Never  has  the 
promise  failed,  "  Where  two  or  three  are  met  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the 
midst  of  them."  His  chosen  have  sought  and  seen  his  '*  power  and  glory  in  the 
sanctuary.*'  The  history  of  the  Church  in  all  ages  is  rich  in  the  illustration  of 
this  fact.  The  patriarchal  altar  was  many  a  time  illumined  from  on  high.  The  cloud 
of  glory  often  rested  on  the  tabernacle  of  witness.  The  mystic  splendour  which 
shone  between  the  wings  of  the  cherubim,  reflecting  a  radiance  on  the  mercy-seat 
— that  symbol  of  the  propitiation  of  Jesus — testified  that  "  God  dwelt  with  man 
on  the  earth," — that  "  his  dwelling-place  was  in  Zion.  There,  by  voices  and  by 
visions,  by  Urim  and  Thummim,"  and  by  secret  communications  of  his  grace, 
he  revealed  himself  to  his  people.  And  now — what  though  the  temple  with 
its  magnificent  ceremonial  and  impressive  ordinances  has  passed  away — what 
though  no  visible  Shekinah  irradiates  the  simple  house  of  prayer — have  we  no 
signs,  no  tokens  left?  Have  we  not  the  substance  instead  of  the  shadow?  the 
spirit  in  lieu  of  the  letter?  If  the  carnal  w^orshipper  sees  less — does  not  the  spiritual 
worshipper  see  more — abundant  glory  ?  "  If  the  ministration  of  condenmation 
be  glory,  much  more  doth  the  ministration  of  righteousness  exceed  in  glory." 
Are  there  not  still  memorials  of  a  present  Lord  amongst  us — memorials  sublimely 
simple,  exquisitely  expressive? — his  blessed  gospel — his  living  sacraments — the 
preaching  of  his  word  ?  IS^either  are  there  lacking  demonstrations  of  his  power  and 
love.     True  it  is  that  they  who  come  not  in  faith  lind  him  not  here  ;  but  those 

q2 


228  nOMTLETIC  OOMMEN'TAnY:  NEJTEMIAK.  [chap,  x 

who  come  helievingly  hear  a  voice  the  nnbelieving  do  not  hear — feel  a  presence  the 
unbelieving  <lo  not  feel — enjoy  a  blessing  tlie  unbelieving  cannot  receive.  If, 
then,  God  manifests  himself  surpassingly  in  the  sanctuary  ;  if  he  has  never  failed 
to  bestow  his  special  favour  towards  the  social  services  of  his  children,  it  follows 
that  they  who  love  the  Lord  and  love  to  meet  him  cannot  but  say,  "  We  will  n'»t 
forsake  the  house  of  our  God." 

3.  As  the  sanctuary  has  been  the  jjlace  of  the  LonVs  rest^  so  lias  it  been  ilie  scene 
where  he  has  imparted  the  richest  gifts  to  his  worshippers.  On  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
it  was  "  when  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  one  place,"  that  "  suddenly  there 
came  a  sound  from  heaven,  as  a  of  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  it  filled  all  the  house 
where  they  were  sitting.  And  there  appeared  unto  them  cloven  tongues  like  as 
of  fire,  and  it  sat  upon  each  of  them  :  and  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Examine  the  history  of  the  Church  ever  since,  and  you  will  find  that  of  the  multi- 
tudes of  the  believing,  the  largest  proportion  have  been  born  for  eternity  in  the 
house  of  God.  If  not  begotten  in  the  sanctuary,  the  saints  have  at  least  been  nursed 
and  nourished  there.  Many  a  time  has  the  devout  worshipper  entered  the  sanctuary 
in  darkness,  and  left  it  full  of  light ;  entered  sorely  beset  with  temptations,  returned 
from  it  with  the  snare  of  the  fowler  broken ;  come  perplexed,  departed  assured  ; 
come  burdened,  gone  back  enlarged ;  come  prostrate,  gone  back  exalted  ;  come 
mourning,  returned  rejoicing ;  come  cold,  gone  back  enkindled  ;  come  secularized, 
gone  back  spiritualized;  come  weary,  gone  back  revived;  come  earthly-minded, 
gone  back  heavenly-minded. 

4.  The  servant  of  God  idll  love  the  courts  of  the  Lord  and  not  forsake  them, 
because  in  them  he  tastes  most  of  heaven  below.  You  cannot  form  a  better  conception 
of  heaven  than  by  fixing  on  the  happiest  Sabbath,  and  the  happiest  hour  of  worship 
on  the  happiest  Sabbath,  you  ever  enjoyed  in  the  assembly  of  the  saints.  Then 
and  there,  withdrawn  from  the  world's  vanities  and  disquietudes ;  then  and  there, 
abstracted  from  things  seen  and  temporal,  and  absorbed  in  things  unseen  and 
eternal;  then  and  there,  Avhen  all  was  tranquillity  without,  and  all  was  calm 
within ;  then  and  there,  faith  almost  turned  into  sight  and  hope  into  fruition — all 
earthly  distinctions  forgotten,  the  poor  and  the  rich  blended  in  fellowship  and  love, 
the  whole  assembly  worshipping  in  unison,  like  many  instruments  all  true  to  one 
key-note ;  then  and  there,  you  had  a  miniature  of  heaven,  you  reached  the  very 
vestibule  of  that  temple  not  made  with  hands,  where  congregations  never  break  up, 
and  Sabbaths  never  end.  He  then  who  loves  not  such  scenes  on  earth — how  could 
he  love  the  heavenly  habitation  of  holiness  ]  He  who  has  no  taste  for  the  communion 
and  the  songs  of  the  saints  below,  how  would  he  weary  of  the  ceaseless  thanksgiving 
and  the  eternal  communion  of  the  glorified  in  immortality  !  Of  all  men,  the  busy, 
harassed,  weary  mercantile  man — forced  to  plunge  daily  into  the  dust  and  din  of 
the  world's  mart — is  the  very  man  who  most  requires  the  refreshment  and  savour 
of  the  sanctuary.  A  Sunday  passed  in  worship  has  an  influence  on  the  days  of  toil. 
Many  are  witnesses  that,  when  on  the  evening  of  the  stated  service  which  forms 
the  half-way  well  in  the  week,  they  have  gone  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  rich  has 
been  the  return  of  blessing  and  comfort.  These  services  interrupt  the  current  of 
earthly  care,  and  suspend  for  a  little  the  play  of  the  overwrought  machinery  of  the 
mind.  Alas  !  with  what  punctuality  do  many  frequent  the  counting-house  who 
are  seldom  seen  in  the  solemn  assembly  !  What  numbers  who  never  think  of 
'"'^ntenting  themselves  with  a  single  visit  to  the  warehouse  on  the  Monday,  yet 
content  themselves  with  a  solitary  attendance  at  church  on  the  Sunday.  What 
numbers  are  all  alive  and  alert  in  the  exchange,  who  are  sluggish  and  uninterested 
in  waiting  on  God — as  though  the  toys  and  shadows  of  time  and  earth  surpassed 
in  magnitude  and  moment  the  illimitable  realities  of  immortality. — Canon  Stowell , 
ahrid^ged. 


CHAP.  X.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


229 


Zeal  for  God's  House,  expressed  in  a  Holy  Resolution  not  to 

forsake  it. 

X.  39.     And  we  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God, 


Introduction.  Consider  these  words 
as  they  relate  to  the  Jews  at  that  time. 
The  house  of  God  was  once  the  taber- 
nacle, after  that  the  temple.  Tabernacle 
was  forsaken  :  temple  destroyed  :  wor- 
shippers carried  away  into  captivity. 

I.  A  resolution  well  becoming 
Christians  themselves.  "  We  will  not 
forsake  the  house  of  our  God."  The 
same  zeal  and  affection  which  this  peo- 
ple expressed  to  the  temple,  should  be 
manifested  by  us  to  the  Church  and 
ordinances  of  Christ.  The  material 
temple  was  the  centre  of  their  unity. 
Under  the  gospel  there  is  no  such  house, 
unto  which  all  are  obliged  to  repaii',  and 
any  parts  of  divine  worship  are  confined. 
Our  house  not  a  material  building  of 
wood  and  stones,  of  silver  and  gold,  and 
cedar  work ;  but  a  mystical  building,  a 
spiritual  house,  whose  maker  is  the  liv- 
ing God,  and  whose  materials  are  living 
stones  :  whose  house  are  we.  By  this 
house  I  mean  the  Church  of  God,  as  it 
is  composed  of  the  faithful  in  all  ages 
and  places  of  the  world  ;  comprehending 
his  worship  and  ordinances,  with  all  the 
concerns  of  his  kingdom,  and  interests 
among  men.  This  is  that  house  which 
we  should  resolve  never  to  forsake. 
There  is  doubtless  much  more  intended 
than  is  expressed  in  such  forms  of 
speech,  and  in  its  full  extent  this  reso- 
lution comprehends  the  three  following 
particulars : — 

1.  That  we  icill  never  cast  off  the  iwo- 
fession  of  our  faith,  nor  make  a  defection 
from  the  truths  and  ways  of  the  gospel, 
for  any  cause  nor  upon  any  account 
tch  at  soever.  It's  so  rare  a  thing  for  a 
nation  to  change  their  gods  (though 
really  no  gods)  that  the  prophet  chal- 
lenges his  people  to  produce  a  single 
instance  of  its  being  ever  done — Hath  a 
nation  changed  their  gods  ?  But  to  the 
everlasting  reproach  of  Israel,  they  had 
changed  their  glory  for  that  which  did  not 
profit.  They  that  were  the  only  people 
under   heaven    wlio    liad    no    cause    to 


change  their  God,  were  of  all  others  the 
people  that  had  done  it.  Now  it*s  this 
defection  from  the  true  God  and  his 
worship  which  this  people  covenanted 
against. 

2.  That  we  will  not  neglect  the 
ordinances  of  Divine  worshipy  nor  he 
wanting  in  our  attendance  on  them  when- 
ever we  are  called,  and  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  appearing  before  God  in  his 
house.  Thus  much  is  contained  in  this 
resolution  of  these  devout  and  reforming 
Jews.  And  the  same  should  be  our 
resolution  with  respect  to  the  house  and 
worship  of  God  under  the  gospel;  we 
certainly  are  under  no  less  obligations  to 
frequent  Christian  assemblies  and  keep 
up  public  worship  than  they  were ;  we 
stand  in  as  much  need  of  these  helps 
and  advantages  as  they  did.  Jesus 
Christ,  as  lord  of  his  own  house,  has 
appointed  divers  ordinances  to  he  ob- 
served. There  must  be  an  assembly  of 
people  meeting  together  for  the  public 
administration  of  these  holy  ordinances. 
There  mitst  be  some  proper  and  convenient 
places  appointed  and  agreed  upon  for 
such  religious  assemblies  where  they  can 
be  had.  Some  have  learned  to  condemn 
all  assemblies  but  their  own,  and  every 
way  of  worship  but  what  agrees  with 
theirs.  I  shall  leave  it  to  every  man's 
conscience  where  (according  to  the  best 
light  he  can  get)  he  thinks  himself 
obliged  ordinarily  to  worship  God. 
There  are  particular  times  and  seasons 
for  the  holding  these  religious  assemblies. 
Reason  tells  us,  if  God  is  to  be  wor- 
shipped there  must  be  a  set  time  for  it. 
Which  day  of  the  week  is  designed,  and 
ought  to  be  observed,  for  this  stated 
worship  is  not  agreed  among  all  those 
that  yet  are  heartily  affected  to  the 
worship  of  God  itself.  Seventh  day  ] 
First  day  1  There  are  certain  persons, 
ivhosp  work  and  duty  it  is  to  go  before 
others  in  these  holy  administrations. 
Who  they  are  that  have  this  authority 
I  list  uot  now  to  contend.     Some  have 


230 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  X. 


the  charity  as  well  as  modesty  to  nullify 
all  administrations  besides  their  own. 

3.  That  we  loill  j^romote  as  far  as  in  us 
lies  the  interests  of  religion,  and  spread 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  world. 
It's  not  the  good  of  this  or  that  particular 
Church  and  society  only,  but  the  whole 
interest  of  Christ  as  opposed  to  the 
devil's  kingdom  in  the  world,  whose 
welfare  and  prosperity  we  are  bound  to 
seek. 

II.  It  is  not  only  lawful,  but  may 
be  useful  and  expedient,  for  Christians 
in  societies  to  engage  themselves  to 
God,  and  the  duties  they  owe  to  him 
and  one  another.  This  people  agreed 
together  as  one  man,  and  bound  them- 
selves by  a  solemn  covenant,  which  was 
written  and  subscribed,  sealed  and  sworn 
to,  that  they  would  never  forsake  the 
house  of  the  Lord  their  God.  What  I 
would  gather  from  this  instance  is,  that 
as  this  people  did.  Christians  may  volun- 
tarily agree  together,  and  engage  them- 
selves in  particular  societies  to  carry  on 
a  work  for  God  in  such  a  way  as  is 
warranted  by  his  word,  and  judged  by 
themselves  most  likely  to  promote  some 
valuable  end.     I  shall, 

III.  Offer  reasons  both  for  making 
this  resolution  and  obliging  ourselves 
to  make  it  good.  1.  Because  it  is  God's 
house.  Everything  that  is  his  should 
be  sacred  and  dear  to  us.  It  is  his 
house  we  are  to  frequent ;  they  are  his 
ordinances  on  which  we  attend.  His 
word  is  preached  and  heard.  His  interest 
we  oblige  ourselves  to  support.  They 
carry  his  image  and  superscription  ;  this 
gives  them  their  worth  and  value.  (1) 
To  forsake  God's  house  would  be  to 
forsake  our  own  mercies,  and  deprive 
ourselves  of  the  most  valuable  blessing 
in  the  whole  world.  In  God's  house  ive 
are  sure  to  meet  with  the  truest  j^lacisure 
and  satisfaction.  Tliey  that  come  crowd- 
ing to  God's  house,  shall  be  sent  away 
rejoicing  to  their  own,  with  the  greatest 
benefit  and  advantage.  Here  we  may 
hope  to  have  our  doubts  resolved,  our 
darkness  scattered,  and  temptations  most 
effectually  vanquished.  With  that  wh  ich 
will  prove  the  firmest  and  rnost  effectual 
support  to  us  under  all  the  troubles  of 


life  and  at  the  near  approach  of  death. 
(2)  To  leave  this  house  is  to  forsake  the 
place  which  God  himself  hath  chosen, 
and  where  he  delights  to  dwell.  He 
loveth  the  gates  of  Zion.  Is  it  not 
good  for  us  to  be  near  to  God"^  Has  he 
said,  Here  will  I  dwell  *? — and  should  not 
we  for  that  reason  say,  Here  will  we 
dwein  (3)  To  forsake  this  house  is  to 
forsake  God  himself.  We  cannot  quit 
the  inheritance  of  the  Lord  but  in  effect 
we  go  and  serve  other  gods.  To  what 
houses  will  they  resort  that  have  once 
forsaken  God's  house?  With  what 
company  will  they  associate,  and  in 
what  assemblies  may  we  expect  to  find 
those  that  have  renounced  the  com- 
munion of  saints  ?  2.  Because  our  par- 
ticular good  is  lodged  in  the  public 
interest.  In  seeking  this  we  seek  our- 
selves. At  the  same  time  that  we  dis- 
charge our  duty  we  consult  our  interests. 
No  service  performed  to  Christ  shall  lose 
its  reward.  No  man  shall  kindle  a  fire 
on  God's  altar,  or  shut  a  door  in  his 
house,  for  nought.  It  is  then  likely  to 
go  well  with  our  own  houses  when  due 
care  is  taken  that  it  may  go  well  with 
God's  house.  3.  This  is  the  noblest  way 
of  imitating  the  great  God  himself  and 
conforming  to  the  example  of  our  blessed 
Saviour.  Thou  art  good,  0  Lord,  and 
thou  doest  good.  To  be  like  God  is  our 
truest  glory,  and  should  be  our  highest 
ambition.  Herein  also  we  imitate  the 
shining  example  of  Jesus  Christ.  **The 
zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up  " 
His  anger  at  the  profanation  of  the 
temple  ro-e  up  to  an  holy  indignation. 
4.  This  mciJces  men  real  blessings  to  the 
world.  However  they  may  be  esteemed 
by  others,  they  really  are  the  strength 
and  security  of  a  nation ;  the  stay  and 
support  of  tlie  public  interest :  thej''  bear 
up  the  pillars  of  the  earth,  and  keep  it 
from  being  quite  dissolved.  For  their 
sakes  God  sometimes  preserves  others 
from  those  judgments  which  their  crying 
sins  would  otheiwise  pull  down  upon 
their  guilty  heads.  Sodom  had  been 
preserved  for  the  sake  of  ten  righteous 
persons,  could  so  many  have  been  found 
in  the  place.  5.  This  will  he  our  rejoic- 
ing and  comfort  another  day.     Having 


CHAP.    X.] 


noMlLKTia  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


231 


muile  this  resolution  ive  must  ohlige  our- 
selves to  make  it  good.  Because  of  the 
iieceitfulness  and  inconstancy  of  our 
hearts.  Such  engagements  will  help  to 
fix  us  more  fi,rmly  in  the  interests  of 
religion,  and  make  us  more  sticcessful  in 
resisting   all   temptations   to    apostasy. 


Hereby  we  are  rendered  more  capable 
of  serving  the  interests  of  religion.  A 
force  when  united  becomes  the  stronger. 
The  joint  concurrence  of  many  give  a 
great  advantage  to  a  design,  and  a  better 
prospect  of  success. — Matthew  Clarke 
1715  ;  abridged. 


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  X. 
Tithes. 


Without  inquiring  into  the  reason  for 
which  the  number  ten  has  been  so  fre- 
quently preferred  as  a  number  of  selec- 
tion in  the  cases  of  tribute  oiferings, 
both  sacred  and  secular,  voluntary  and 
compulsory,  we  may  remark  that  nu- 
merous instances  of  its  use  are  found 
both  in  profane  and  also  in  Biblical 
history,  prior  to,  or  independently  of, 
the  appointment  of  the  Levitical  tithes 
under  the  law.  In  Biblical  history  the 
two  prominent  instances  are — 1.  Abram 
presenting  the  tenth  of  all  his  property, 
according  to  the  Syrian  and  Arabic  ver- 
sions of  Heb.  vii.,  but  as  the  passages 
themselves  appear  to  show,  of  the  spoils 
of  his  victory,  to  Melchizedek  (Gen.  xiv. 
20  ;  Heb.  vii.  2,  6).  2.  Jacob,  after  his 
vision  at  Luz,  devoting  a  tenth  of  all  his 
property  to  God  in  case  he  should  return 
home  in  safety  (Gen.  xxviii.  22).  These 
instances  bear  witness  to  the  antiquity 
of  tithes,  in  some  shape  or  other,  pre- 
vious to  the  Mosaic  tithe  system.  But 
numerous  instances  are  to  be  found  of 
the  practice  of  heathen  nations,  Greeks, 
Komans,  Carthaginians,  Arabians,  of 
applying  tenths  derived  from  property 
in  general,  from  spoil,  from  confiscated 
goods,  or  from  commercial  profits,  to 
sacred,  and  quasi-sacred,  and  also  to 
fiscal,  purposes,  viz.  as  consecrated  to  a 
deity,  presented  as  a  reward  to  a  suc- 
cessful general,  set  apart  as  a  tribute  to 
a  sovereign,  or  as  a  permanent  source  of 
revenue 

The  first  enactment  of  the  law  in  re- 
spect of  tithes  is  the  declaration  that  the 
tenth  of  all  produce,  as  well  as  of  flocks 
and  cattle,  belongs  to  Jehovah,  and  must 


be  offered  to  him.  2.  That  the  tithe 
was  to  be  paid  in  kind,  or,  if  redeemed, 
witli  an  addition  of  one-fifth  to  its  value 
(Lev.  xxvii.  30 — 33).  This  tenth  is 
ordered  to  be  assigned  to  the  Levites, 
as  the  reward  of  their  service,  and  it  is 
ordered  further,  that  they  are  themselves 
to  dedicate  to  the  Lord  a  tenth  of  these 
receipts,  which  is  to  be  devoted  to  the 
maintenance  of  the  high  priest  (Num. 
xviii.  21—28). 

This  legislation  is  modified  or  ex- 
tended in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy, 
i.e.  from  thirty-eight  to  forty  years  later. 
Commands  are  given  to  the  people  — 
1.  To  bring  their  tithes,  together  with 
their  votive  and  other  offerings  and 
first-fruits,  to  the  chosen  centre  of  wor- 
ship, the  metropolis,  there  to  be  eaten 
in  festive  celebration,  in  company  with 
their  children,  their  servants,  and  the 
Levites  (Deut.  xii.  5 — 18).  2.  After 
warnings  against  idolatrous,  or  virtually 
idolatrous,  practices,  and  the  definition 
of  clean  as  distins:fuished  from  unclean 
animals,  among  which  latter  class  the 
swine  is  of  obvious  importance  in  refer- 
ence to  the  subject  of  tithes,  the  legis- 
lator proceeds  to  direct  that  all  the 
produce  of  the  soil  shall  be  tithed  every 
year  (ver.  17  seems  to  show  that  corn, 
wine,  and  oil,  alone  are  intended),  and 
that  these  tithes,  with  the  firstlings  of 
the  flock  and  herd,  are  to  be  eaten  in  the 
metropolis.  3.  But  in  case  of  distance, 
permission  is  given  to  convert  the  pro- 
duce into  money,  which  is  to  be  taken 
to  the  appointed  place,  and  there  laid 
out  in  the  purchase  of  food  for  a  festal 
celebration,  in  which  the  Levite  is,  by 


232  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [OHAP.  x. 

special  command,  to  be  included  (Deut.  the  poor  appears  to  have  subsisted  even 
xiv.  22 — 27).  4.  Then  follows  the  direc-  in  Israel,  for  the  prophet  Amos  speaks 
tion,  that  at  the  end  of  three  years,  of  it,  though  in  an  ironical  tone,  as 
i.e.  in  the  course  of  the  third  and  sixth  existing  in  his  day  (Amos  iv.  4).  But 
yeai-s  of  the  Sabbatical  period,  all  the  as  any  degeneracy  in  the  national  faith 
tithe  of  that  year  is  to  be  gathered  and  would  be  likely  to  have  an  effect  on  the 
laid  up  **  within  the  gates,"  i.e.  probably  tithe-system,  we  find  complaint  of  neglect 
in  some  central  place  in  each  district,  in  this  respect  made  by  the  prophet 
not  at  the  metropolis  ;  and  that  a  festi-  Malachi  (iii.  8,  10.)  Yet,  notwithstand- 
val  is  to  be  held,  in  which  the  stranger,  ing  partial  evasion  or  omission,  the  system 
the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  together  itself  was  continued  to  a  late  period  in 
with  the  Levite,  are  to  partake.  5.  Jewish  history,  and  was  even  carried  to 
liastly,  it  is  ordered  that  after  taking  the  excess  by  those  who,  like  the  Pharisees, 
tithe  in  each  third  year,  "  which  is  the  affected  peculiar  exactness  in  observance 
year  of  tithing,"  an  exculpatory  declar-  of  the  law  (Heb.  vii.  5,  8 ;  Matt,  xxiii. 
ation  is  to  be  made  by  every  Israelite  23  ;  Luke  xviii.  12).  Among  details 
that  he  has  done  his  best  to  fulfil  the  relating  to  the  tithe  payments  men- 
Divine  command  (Deut.  xxvi.  12 — 14).  tioned  by  Eabbinical  writers  may  be 
From  all  this  we  gather — 1.  That  one-  noticed:  (l)That  in  reference  to  the  per- 
tenth  of  the  whole  produce  of  the  soil  mission  given  in  case  of  distance  (Deut. 
was  to  be  assigned  for  the  maintenance  xiv.  24),  Jews  dwelling  in  Babylonia, 
of  the  Levites.  2.  That  out  of  this  the  Ammon,  Moab,  and  Egypt,  were  con- 
Levites  were  to  dedicate  a  tenth  to  God,  sidered  as  subject  to  the  law  of  tithe  in 
for  the  use  of  the  high  priest.  3.  That  kind.  (2)  In  tithing  sheep  the  custom 
a  tithe,  in  all  probability  a  second  tithe,  was  to  enclose  them  in  a  pen,  and  as  the 
was  to  be  applied  to  festival  purposes,  sheep  went  out  at  the  opening,  every 
4.  That  in  every  third  year,  either  this  tenth  animal  was  marked  with  a  rod 
festival  tithe  or  a  third  tenth  was  to  be  dipped  in  vermilion.  This  was  "  the 
eaten  in  company  with  the  poor  and  passing  under  the  rod."  The  law  or- 
tlie  Levites.  .  .  .  dered  that  no  inquiry  should  be  made 
Ewald  thinks  that  under  the  kings  whether  the  animal  were  good  or  bad, 
the  ecclesiastical  tithe  system  reverted  and  that  if  the  owner  changed  it,  both 
to  what  he  supposes  to  have  been  its  ori-  the  original  and  the  changeling  were  to 
ginal  free-will  character.  It  is  plain  be  regarded  as  devoted  (Lev.  xxvii.  32, 
that  during  that  period  the  tithe  system  33;  Jer.  xxxiii.  13).  (3)  Cattle  were 
partook  of  the  general  neglect  into  which  tithed  in  and  after  August,  corn  in  and 
the  observance  of  the  law  declined,  and  after  September,  fruits  of  trees  in  and 
that  Hezekiah,  among  his  other  reforms,  after  January.  (4)  **  Corners  "  were  ex- 
took  effectual  means  to  revive  its  use  empt  from  tithe.  (5)  The  general  rule 
(2  Chron.  xxxi.  5,  12,  19).  Similar  mea-  was,  that  all  edible  articles  not  purchased 
sures  were  taken  after  the  Captivity  by  were  titheable,  but  that  products  not 
Nehemiah  (Neh.  xii.  44),  and  in  both  specified  in  Deut.  xiv.  23  were  regarded 
these  cases  special  officers  were  ap-  as  doubtful.  Tithe  of  them  was  not 
pointed  to  take  charge  of  the  stores  forbidden,  but  was  not  required. — Rev. 
and  store-houses  for  the  purpose.  The  H.  W.  Phillot,  M.A.,  in  Smithes  ^ Bible 
practice  of  tithing  especially  for  relief  of  Dlctionanj.^ 

Skntences  from  Old  Writers. 

Now  those  that  sealed  wet-e,  Nehemiah  prince   is   the  load-star  of  the  people, 

the  Tirshatha. — "  He  is  first  mentioned,  upon  which  most  men  fix  their  eyes  and 

not  as  a  priest,  but  as  a  provost ;   and  shape  their  courses.     Great  men  draw 

one  that  held  it  an  honour  to  be  first  many  by  their  examples;   they  are  as 

in  so  good  a  matter.     The  life  of  the  looking-glasses   by   which    others    dress 


CHAP.   XI.  J 


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NFUEMIAH. 


2^3 


themselves.    And  hence  Nehemiah's  for- 
wardness here  to  seal  first."     *' Those 
that   are    above  others   in  dignity  and 
power   should   go   before    them   in  the 
way   of   God."       21ie  priests. —  "  They 
that    lead   in    prayers   should    lead    in 
every  other  good  work."     Tlie  chief  of 
the  people. — "  Great  men  never  look  so 
great  as  when  they  encourage  religion." 
**They  that  have   interest  must   use  it 
for  God."     All  they  that  had  separated 
themselves. — "  In  St.  Paul's  sense  '  come 
out  from  among  them  ; '  from  such  stand 
off;  stand  up  from  the  dead ;  save  your- 
selves  from  this  untoward  generation ; 
shun  their  sins,  lest  ye  share  in  their 
plagues.     These  holy  separates,  or  prose- 
lytes, sealed  the  covenant,  and  became 
free  denizens  of  the  commonwealth    of 
Israel."     Entered  into  a  curse. — *'  The 
more  to  confirm  the  oath,  and  to  keep 
their    deceitful   hearts   close   to   God." 
*'  If    he    that    firmly   purposeth    often 
faileth,  what  shall  he  do  that  seldom 
purposeth  any  thing,  or  with  little  re- 
sol  vedness?"     To  walk  in   God's  law. 
— "  To  walk  accurately  and  exactly  by 
Hne  and  by  rule  in  all  the  command- 
ments so  far  as  God  should  assist  them. 
The  bowls  of  the  candlestick  have  no 
oil  but  what  droppeth  from  the  olive 
branches.     Condition  with  the  Lord  for 
his  strength  and  grace."    That  they  would 
not    intermarry. —  "  In    our   covenants 
with  God  we  should  engage  particularly 
against  those  sins  that   we  have  been 
most  frequently  overtaken  in  and  dam- 
aged by.     They  that  resolve  to  keep  the 
commandments  of  God  must  say  to  evil 
doers,  Depart."     "By  the  rib,  as  by  a 


ladder,   Satan  oft  climbs  to  the  heart 
and  corrupts  it."     **  Every  man  when 
he  marrieth,  brings  either  a  good  or  an 
evil  spirit  into  his  house,  and  so  make 
it  either  a  heaven  or  a  hell."     If  the 
people  of  the  land  bring  ware  on  the 
Sahhafh  day^  &c. — *' The  Sabbath  is  a 
market   day  for   our   souls."     And  the 
exaction  of  every  debt  we  would  leave. — 
"Those   are   stubborn   children  indeed 
that  will  not  mend  the  fault  which  they 
have    been   particularly   corrected   for.'' 
Also  we  made  ordinances  for  U8. — "  Hav- 
ing covenanted  against  the  sins  they  had 
been  guilty  of,  they  proceed  in  obliging 
themselves  to  revive  and   observe   the 
duties   they  had  neglected.     We  must 
not  only  cease  to  do  evil,  but  learn  to  do 
well."     The  temple  service. — **Let  not 
any  people  expect  the  blessing  of  God 
unless  they  make  conscience  of  observing 
his   ordinances."     The  third  part  of  a 
shekel.  —  "Thankfulness    is    measured, 
both  by  God  and  good  men,  not  by  the 
weight,  but  by  the  will,  of  the  retributor. 
God  doth  highly  accept  the  small  offerings 
of  his  weak  servants  when  he  seeth  them 
to  proceed  from  great  love."     The  wood 
offering. — "  They  provided  the  fire  and 
the  wood  as  well   as  the  lambs  for  a 
burnt-offering."    The  first-fruits. — '*  God 
required  to  be  honoured  with  the  first- 
lings of  all ;   to  show  how  he  sets  by 
our  young  services."     To  bring  to  the 
house  of  our  God  unto  the  priests. — "  No 
man  might  offer  his  own  sacrifice,  though 
it  were  never  so  good,  but  present  it  to 
the  priest,  who  was  to  offer  as  well  the 
poor  man's  lamb  as  the  rich  man's  ox." 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Explanatory  Notbs.]  "This  chapter  is  intimately  connected  with  chapter  vii.  4,  showing 
Nehemiah's  plan  of  increasing  the  population  of  the  city.  The  genealogies  and  then  the  confession 
and  covenant  come  in  parenthetically — the  former  as  part  of  the  process  in  the  plan,  and  the  latter  as 
chronologically  happening  while  Nehemiah  was  maturing  the  plan." — Crosby.  1.]  "The  first  sentence, 
Ter.  1,  'And  the  rulers  of  the  people  dwelt  at  Jerusalem,'  cannot  be  so  closely  connected  with  the 
next,  '  And  the  rest  of  the  people  cast  lots,'  &c  ,  as  to  place  the  rulers  in  direct  contrast  to  the  rest  of 
the  people,  but  must  be  understood  by  its  retrospect  to  vii.  4,  which  gives  the  following  contrast : 
The  rulers  of  the  people  dwelt  at  Jerusalem,  but  few  of  the  people  dwelt  there;  to  this  is  joined  the 


234  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    NEHEMIAH,  [chap.  XI 

next  sentence :  *  And  the  rest  of  the  people  cast  lots.'  The  'rest  of  the  people'  does  not  mean  the 
assembled  people  with  the  exception  of  the  rulers,  but  the  people  with  the  exception  of  the  few  who 
dwelt  at  Jerusalem.  These  cast  lots  to  bring  one  of  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem/' — Keil.  The  holy 
city]  "The  predicate,  the  holy  city,  occurs  here  and  ver.  18  for  the  first  time.  Jerusalem  is  so 
called,  on  the  ground  of  the  prophecies  (Joel  iii.  17  and  Isa.  xlviii.  2),  because  the  sanctuary  of  God, 
the  temple,  was  there." — Keil.  3.  The  chief  of  the  province]  i.  e.  Judea.  "  Nehemiah  speaks  of 
it  as  it  then  was,  a  small  appendix  of  the  present  empire" — Jamieson.  Israel]  "This  general  name, 
which  designated  the  descendants  of  Jacob,  before  tlie  unhappy  division  of  the  two  kingdoms  under 
Rehoboam,  was  restored  after  the  captivity,  the  Israelites  being  then  united  with  the  Jews,  and  all 
traces  of  their  former  separation  being  obliterated.  Although  the  majority  of  the  returned  exiles 
belonged  to  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  they  are  here  called  Israel ;  because  a  large  number 
out  of  all  the  tribes  were  now  intermingled,  and  these  were  principally  the  occupiers  of  the  rural 
villages,  while  none  but  those  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  resided  in  Jerusalem." — Jamieson.  11.  The 
ruler  of  the  house  of  God]  "  Assistant  of  the  high  priest  (Num.  iii.  32  ;  I  Chron.  ix.  11 ;  2  Chron. 
xix.  11)." — Jamieson.  16.  The  oversight  of  the  outward  business  of  the  house  of  God]  Building, 
furniture,  and  things  necessary  for  temple  worship.  17.  The  principal  to  begin  the  thanksgiving 
in  prayer]  The  precentor.  23.  It  was  the  king's  commandment]  The  king  is  not  David,  but 
the  Persian  king  Artaxerxes  (Ezra  vii.  12,  seq.).  24.  Pethahiah  .  .  .  was  at  the  king's  hand  in 
all  matters  concerning  the  people]  "Tliis  can  scarcely  be  understood  of  a  royal  commissioner  at 
Jerusalem,  but  certainly  designates  an  official  transacting  the  affairs  of  the  Jewish  community  at  the 
hand  of  the  king,  at  his  QowxV—^Keil.  25-36.]  "The  heads,  who  with  their  houses  inhabited 
country  districts,  are  here  no  longer  enumerated,  but  only  the  towns,  with  their  adjacent  neighbour- 
hoods, which  were  inhabited  by  Jews  and  Benjamites  ;  and  even  these  are  but  summarily  mentioned.** 
— Keil.  36.  Of  the  Levites,  &c.] — "Rather  for  the  Levites,  i.e.  those  who  were  not  resident  in 
Jerusalem  were  distributed  in  settlements  throughout  the  provinces  of  Judah  and  Benjamin." — 
Jamieson. 

HOMILETICAL  COJ^TENTS  OF  CHAPTEE  XL 


Ver.     1—19.     The  Holy  City  Replenished. 
„  1.     The  Holy  City. 

„  16.     The  Secular  in  Sacred  Service. 


Ver.     22,  23.     The  Service  of  Song  in  the  House 
of  the  Lord. 


The  Holy  City  Eeplenished. 

xi.   1 — 19.     And  the  rulers  of  the  people  dwelt  at  Jerusalem:   the  rest  of  the 
people  also  cast  lots,  to  bring  one  of  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem  the  holy  city,  &c. 

Jerusalem  is  called  here  the  holy  city,  because  there  the  temple  was,  and  that  v/as 
the  place  God  had  chosen  to  put  his  name  there.  Upon  this  account  one  would 
think  the  holy  seed  should  all  have  chosen  to  dwell  there.  They  declined,  however. 
Either — 1.  Because  a  greater  strictness  of  conversation  ivas  expected  from  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Jerusalem  than  from  others,  which  theyioere  not  willing  to  come  up  to.  Those 
who  care  not  for  being  holy  themselves  are  sliy  of  dwelling  in  a  holy  city.  They  would 
not  dwell  in  the  l^ew  Jerusalem  itself  for  that  reason,  but  would  wish  to  have  a 
continuing  city  here  on  earth.  Or — 2.  Because  Jerusalem,  of  cdl  places,  ivas  most 
hated  by  the  heathen,  their  neighbours,  and  against  it  their  malicious  designs  were 
levelled,  ivhich  made  that  the  post  of  danger,  as  the  post  of  honour  uses  to  be,  and 
therefore  they  were  'not  willing  to  expose  themselves  there.  Fear  of  persecution  and 
reproach,  and  running  themselves  into  trouble,  keeps  many  out  of  the  holy  city, 
and  makes  them  backward  to  appear  for  God  and  religion ;  not  considering  that  as 
Jerusalem  is  with  a  special  malice  threatened  and  insulted  by  its  enemies,  so  it  is 
with  special  care  protected  by  its  God,  and  made  a  quiet  habitation.  Or — 3.  Be- 
cause it  was  more  for  their  worldly  advantage  to  dwell  in  the  country.  Jerusalem 
was  no  trading  city,  and  therefore  there  was  no  money  to  be  got  there  by  merchan- 
dises, as  there  was  in  the  country  by  corn  and  cattle.  "  All  seek  their  own,  not  the 
things  that  are  Jesus  Christ's."  It  is  a  general  and  just  complaint,  that  most 
people  prefer  their  own  wealth,  credit,  pleasure,  ease,  and  safety  before  the  glory 
of  God  and  the  public  good.  People  being  thus  backward  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem 
now  it  was  poor,  we  are  here  told — 


CHAP.  XL]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  235 


I.  By  what  means  it  was  replenished.  1.  The  rulers  dwelt  there.  TJiat  was 
the  proper  place  for  them  to  reside  in,  because  there  were  set  the  thrones  of  judg- 
ment, and  thither  in  all  difficult  matters  the  people  resorted  with  their  last  appeals. 
And  if  it  were  an  instance  of  eminent  affection  to  the  house  of  God,  zeal  for  the 
public  good,  and  of  faith,  and  holy  courage,  and  self-denial,  to  dwell  there  at  this 
time,  the  rulers  would  be  examples  of  these  to  their  inferiors.  Their  dwelling 
there  would  invite  and  encourage  others  to  dwell  there  too  :  "  the  mighty  are 
magnetic."  When  great  men  would  choose  the  holy  city  for  their  habitation,  it 
brings  holiness  into  reputation,  and  their  zeal  will  provoke  very  many.  2.  There 
were  some  that  ^^ willingly  offered  themselves  to  dioell  at  Jerusalem^'  bravely  post- 
poning their  own  secular  interest  to  the  public  welfare.  It  is  upon  record,  to  their 
honour,  that  when  others  were  shy  of  venturing  upon  difficulty,  loss,  and  danger, 
they  sought  the  good  of  Jerusalem,  because  of  tlie  house  of  the  Lord  their  God  : 
they  shall  prosper  that  thus  love  Zion.  It  is  said  the  people  blessed  them.  They 
praised  them,  they  prayed  for  them,  they  praised  God  for  them.  Many  that  do 
not  appear  forward  themselves  for  the  public  good  will  yet  give  a  good  word  to 
those  that  do.  God  and  man  will  bless  those  that  are  public  blessings,  which 
should  encourage  us  to  be  zealous  in  doing  good.  3.  They,  finding  that  yet  there 
was  room,  concluded,  upon  a  revietv  of  their  whole  body,  to  bring  one  in  ten  to  dwell 
in  Jerusalem  ;  and  who  they  should  be  was  determined  by  lot,  the  disposal  whereof 
all  knew  was  of  the  Lord.  This  would  prevent  strife,  and  would  be  a  great 
satisfaction  to  those  on  whom  the  lot  fell  to  dwell  at  Jeiusalem,  that  they  plainly 
saw  God  appointing  the  bounds  of  their  habitations.  The  proportion  they  observed 
of  one  in  ten,  as  we  may  suppose  it  to  bring  the  balance  between  the  city  and 
country  to  a  just  and  equal  poise,  so  it  seems  to  refer  to  the  ancient  rule  of  giving 
tlie  tenth  to  God.     And  what  is  given  to  the  holy  city  he  reckons  given  to  himself. 

II.  By  what  persons  it  was  replenished.  A  general  account  is  here  given  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  because  the  governors  of  Judah  looked  upon  them 
as  their  strength  in  the  Lord  of  Hosts  their  God,  and  valued  them  accordingly 
(Zech.  xii.  5).  1.  Many  of  the  children  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  diuelt  there. 
Oiiginally  part  of  the  city  lay  in  the  lot  of  one  of  those  tribes  and  part  in  that  of 
the  other ;  but  the  greater  part  was  in  the  lot  of  Benjamin ;  hence  more  families  of 
that  tribe  abode  in  the  city.  Those  of  Judah  all  descended  from  Perez  or  Pharez, 
that  son  of  Judah  "  of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came."  The  men  of 
Judah  were  valiant  men,  fit  for  service,  and  able  to  defend  the  city  in  case  of  an 
attack.  Judah  has  not  lost  its  ancient  character  of  a  lion's  whelp — bold  and 
daring.  Of  the  Benjamites  that  dwell  in  Jerusalem  we  are  here  told  who  was 
overseer  and  who  his  second  (ver.  9)  ;  for  it  is  as  necessary  for  a  people  to  have 
good  order  kept  up  among  themselves  as  to  be  fortified  against  the  attacks  of  their 
enemies  from  abroad, — to  have  good  magistrates  as  to  have  good  soldiers.  2.  The 
priests  and  Levites  did  inany  of  them  settle  at  Jerusalem.  Where  else  should 
men  that  were  holy  to  God  dwell  but  in  the  holy  city"?  Most  of  the  priests  we 
may  suppose  dwelt  there ;  for  their  business  lay  where  the  temple  was.  It  is  well 
those  labourers  were  not  few  (vers.  12 — 14).  It  was  said  of  some  of  them  that 
they  were  mighty  men  of  valour  (ver.  14) ;  and  so  they  had  need,  for  the  priest- 
hood was  not  only  a  work  which  required  might,  but  a  warfare  which  required 
valour  especially  now.  Of  one  of  these  priests  it  is  said  he  was  "  the  son  of  one 
of  the  great  men,"  and  it  was  no  disparagement  to  the  greatest  man  they  had  to 
have  his  son  in  the  priesthood;  he  might  magnify  his  office,  for  his  office  did  not 
in  the  least  diminish  him.  Some  of  the  Levites  also  came  and  dwelt  at  Jerusalem  ; 
yet  but  few  in  comparison.  Much  of  their  work  was  to  teach  tlie  good  knowledge 
of  God  up  and  down  the  country,  for  which  purpose  they  were  to  be  scattered  in 
Israel.  As  many  as  there  was  occasion  for  attended  at  Jerusalem  ;  the  rest  were 
doing  good  elsewhere. — Matthew  Henry. 


236 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH, 


[chap.  XI. 


The  Holt  City. 
xi.  1.     Jerusalem  the  holy  city. 


A  sacred  temple  and  a  holy  city — aids 
to  faith  in  history  of  chosen  people. 
Consecrated  worshippers  befit  conse- 
crated place. 

I.  The  sacred  city.  Names. — Jeru- 
salem, "  the  foundation  of  peace  ;"  Ariel, 
"the  unconquerable;"  or,  as  others, 
"the  hearth  of  God,"  i.  e.  the  sacred 
hearth  on  which  the  unquenched  fire 
burnt.  "The  Holy  City."  As  here. 
In  later  Arabic  names.  In  Matthew's 
Gospel.  Central  position. — "  I  have  set 
Jerusalem  in  the  midst  of  the  nations 
and  countries  round  about  her"  (Ezek. 
V.  5).  In  Hereford  Cathedral  there  is 
a  map  of  the  world  with  Jerusalem  as 
literal  centre.  "  The  world  is  like  to 
an  eye ;  the  white  of  the  eye  is  the 
ocean  surrounding  the  world  ;  the  black 
is  the  world  itself;  the  pupil  is  Jeru- 
salem, and  the  image  in  the  pupil,  the 
temple."  —  Rahhins.  Central  to  the 
people  of  the  country.  The  mother-city. 
The  seat  of  government.  The  home  of 
the  priests.  "  Thither  the  tribes  go  up." 
Its  "  elevation"  says  Dean  Stanley,  "  is 
remarkable ;  occasioned  not  from  its 
being  on  the  summit  of  one  of  the 
numerous  hills  of  Judea,  like  most  of 
the  towns  and  villages,  but  because  it  is 
on  the  edge  of  one  of  the  highest  table 
lands  of  the  country.  To  the  traveller 
approaching  the  city  from  the  east  or 
west  it  must  always  have  presented  the 
appearance  beyond  any  other  capital  of 
the  then  known  wc>rld — we  may  say  be- 
yond any  important  city  that  has  ever 
existed  on  the  earth — of  a  mountain 
city  ;  breathing,  as  compared  with  the 
sultry  plains  of  Jordan,  a  mountain  air; 
enthroned,  as  compared  with  Jericho  or 
Damascus,  Gaza  or  Tyre,  on  a  moun- 
tain fastness."  An  impregnable  city. 
Ravines  and  mountains.  Natural  posi- 
tion accounts  for  compactness.  Hence 
Scripture  references  to  the  Mount  of 
God ;  the  kings  are  higher  than  the 
kings  of  the  earth  ;  the  mountains  are 
round  about  Jerusalem  ;  Zion  stands  for 
ever. 


Illustrations:  "  I  hare  set  Jerusalem  in  the 
midst  of  the  nations  and  countries  that  are  round 
about  her."  *'  In  later  times  this  passage  was 
taken  in  the  literal  sense  that  Palestine,  and 
Jerusalem  especially,  was  actually  the  centre  of 
the  earth  ;  a  belief  of  which  the  memorial  is  yet 
preserved  in  the  large  round  stones  still  kissed 
devoutly  by  Greek  pilgrims,  in  their  portion  of 
the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  It  is  one  of 
the  many  instances  in  which  the  innocent  fancy 
of  an  earlier  faith  has  been  set  aside  by  the  dis- 
coveries of  later  science.  In  the  East  probably 
there  are  still  many  points  of  this  kind  whicli 
have  been  long  surrendered  in  the  more  stirring 
West.  But  there  was  a  real  truth  in  it  at  the 
time  that  the  prophet  wrote,  which  the  subse- 
quent course  of  history  makes  it  now  difficult  for 
us  to  realize.  Palestine,  though  now  at  the 
very  outskirts  of  that  tide  of  civilization,  which 
has  swept  far  into  the  remotest  "West,  was  then 
the  vanguard  of  the  Eastern,  and  therefore,  of  the 
civilized  world ;  and,  moreover,  stood  midway 
between  the  two  great  seats  of  ancient  empire, 
Babylon  and  Egypt.  It  was  on  the  high  road 
from  one  to  the  other  of  these  mighty  powers, 
the  prize  for  which  they  contended,  the  battle- 
field on  which  they  fought,  the  lofty  bridge  over 
which  they  ascended  and  descended  respectively 
into  the  deep  basins  of  the  Nile  and  Euphrates." 
— Stanley. 

"  Upon  the  broad  and  elevated  promontory 
within  the  fork  of  the  valleys  of  Jehoshaphat  and 
HinnoTO,  lies  the  Holy  City.  All  around  are 
higher  hills  ;  on  the  east,  the  Mount  of  Olives  ; 
on  the  south,  the  Hill  of  Evil  Counsel,  so  called, 
rising  directly  from  the  vale  of  Hinnom  ;  on  the 
west,  the  ground  rises  gently,  to  the  borders  of  the 
(ireat  Wady  ;  while  on  the  north,  a  bend  of  the 
ridge  connected  with  the  Mount  of  Olives  bounds 
the  prospect  at  the  distance  of  more  than  a  mile. 
Towards  the  S.W.  the  view  is  somewhat  more 
open  ;  for  here  lies  the  plain  of  Rephaim,  com- 
mencing just  at  the  southern  brink  of  the  valley 
of  Hinnom,  and  stretching  off  S.W.,  where  it 
runs  to  the  western  sea.  In  the  N.W.  too  the 
eye  reaches  up  along  the  upper  part  of  the  valley 
of  Jehoshaphat,  and  from  many  points  can  dis- 
cern the  mosque  of  Neby  Samtvil,  situated  on 
a  lofty  ridge  beyond  the  great  Wady,  at  the 
distance  of  two  hours."— Hobinson. 

The  Mount  of  Olives  overtops  even  the  highest 
part  of  the  city  by  rather  more  than  100  feet, 
and  the  Temple  Hill  by  no  less  than  300.  Its 
northern  and  southern  outliers — the  Yiri  Galilaei, 
Scopus,  and  Mount  of  Offence  —  bend  round 
slightly  towards  the  City,  and  give  the  effect 
of  standing  round  about  Jerusalem.  Especially 
would  this  be  the  case  to  a  worshipper  in  the 
temple." — Grove. 

II.  The  sacred  city  a  sacred  symbol. 

"The  Holy  City."     "The  City  of  our 


CHAP.  XI.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


237 


God."  What  is  the  all-time  significance  ? 
A  consecrated  commonwealth.  City  and 
temple  sacred.  Festivals  and  fast-days, 
working-days  and  worshipping-days — all 
God's.  *'  Her  merchandise  shall  be  holi- 
ness to  the  Lord."  ''  There  shall  not  a 
hoof  be  left  behind."  On  all  things 
look  for  the  image  and  superscription  of 
God.  Will  the  City  of  Vision  descend  *? 
Or  shall  we  ascend  to  it  ?  The  city  lieth 
four  square.  Its  twelve  gates  are  open 
continually.  It  has  no  temple.  There 
is  no  sacred  spot  because  the  city  is  the 
Lord's ;  and  all  it  contains.  Bernard 
sings  of  "  Jerusalem  the  golden." 

Illustrations  :  "  Narrow  as  are  its  boundaries, 
we  have  all  a  share  in  the  possession.  "What 
a  church  is  to  a  city  "  Palestine  is  to  the  world." 
— '  Crescent  and  the  Cross. ' 

''  Not  only  has  the  long  course  of  ages  invested 
the  prospects  and  scenes  of  the  Holy  Land  with 


poetical  and  moral  associations,  but  these  scenes 
accommodate  themselves  to  such  parabolical 
adaptation  with  singular  facility  ....  The 
passage  of  the  Red  Sea  —  the  murmurings  at 
the  *  waters  of  strife  ' — the  '  wilderness  '  of  life 
— the  '  Rock  of  Ages,  Mount  Sinai  and  its 
terrors — the  view  from  Pisgah — the  passage  of 
the  Jordan — the  rock  of  Zion,  the  fountain  of 
Siloa,  and  the  shades  of  Gehenna— the  lake  of 
Gennesareth,  with  its  storms,  its  waves,  and  its 
fishermen — are  well-known  instances  in  which 
the  local  features  of  the  Holy  Lands  have  naturally 
become  the  household  imagery  of  Christendom." 
— Stanley, 

*'  The  Gospel  Church  is  called  Jerusalem :  in 
her  is  the  peculiar  presence  of  God ;  in  her  the 
tribes  of  holy  men  meet  and  serve  him.  0  how 
beautiful  and  compact  her  form  ! — how  firm  her 
foundation!  —  how  strongly  fortified  and  pro- 
tected, by  the  laws,  perfections,  and  providences 
of  God ! — how  rich,  wealthy,  and  free  her  true 
members ! — how  readily  they  welcome  others  to 
reside  with  them  !  The  heavenly  state  of  glory 
is  called  Jerusalem,  or  the  new  Jerusalem.*' — 
jrood. 


The  Secular  in  Sacred  Service. 
xi.  16.     The  outward  business  of  the  hcnise  of  God. 


Outward  and  inward — a  law  of  life  as 
of  temple  service.  In  the  temple  of  this 
world  some  of  us  must  have  the  over- 
si  cjht  of  the  outward  business  of  the 
house  of  God.  "  The  priests  were  chief 
managers  of  the  business  within  the 
temple  gates,  but  this  Levite  was  in- 
trusted with  the  secular  concerns  of 
God's  house,  that  were  '  subservient  to 
its  spiritual  concerns ; '  the  collecting 
of  the  contributions,  the  providing  of 
materials  for  the  temple  service,  and  the 
like,  whicli  it  was  necessary  to  oversee, 
else  the  inward  business  would  have 
been  starved  and  stood  still.  Those 
that  take  care  of  *  the  outward  concerns ' 
of  the  Church,  the  serving  of  its  tables, 
are  as  necessary  in  their  place  as  those 
that  take  care  of  *  its  inward  concerns,' 
who  give  themselves  to  the  word  and 
prayer." — Matthew  Henry. 

I.  It  is  possible  to  secularise  the 
sacred.  When  sacred  service  is  entered 
upon  from  secular  motives ;  when  it  is 
performed  in  a  perfunctory  manner; 
when  any  object  less  than  God  is  re- 
garded in  its  performance,  we  must 
needs  pray  for  the  forgiveness  of  the 
iniquity  of  our  holy  things.     Eli's  sons 


were  in  the  tabernacle.  Priests  of  all 
religions  have  worshipped  at  an  altar 
desecrated  by  their  presence.  An  un- 
hallowed hand  may  not  bear  up  an  ark. 
The  grimmest  pages  of  history  are  as- 
sociated with  holy  service  marred  by 
unholy  ambitions  —  by  envy,  hatred, 
malice,  and  all  uncharitableness.  A 
cowl  does  not  make  a  monk.  High 
office  cannot  elevate  a  base  man. 

"  The  churl  in  spirit  howe'er  he  veil 

His  want  in  forms  for  fashion's  sake, 
Will  let  his  coltish  nature  break 
At  seasons  through  the  gilded  pale : 
For  who  can  always  act  ?  but  he, 
To  whom  a  thousand  memories  call, 
Not  being  less  but  more  than  all 
The  gentleness  he  seemed  to  be." 

^*As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so 
is  he." 

II.  It  is  necessary  to  make  the 
secular  sacred.  "  He  can  who  thinks 
he  can."  Paul's  application  of  the  old 
fable  in  1  Cor.  xii.  U— 26,  **I  had 
rather  be  a  doorkeeper,"  &c.  The  Chris- 
tian members  of  one  of  our  religious 
communities  annually  covenant  with 
God  thus — "  Make  me  what  thou  wilt. 
Lord,  and  set  me  wliere  thou  wilt ;  let 


23S  nOMTlKTTC  COMMENTARY:    NKIIEMTAn,  [ohjlp.  Xi 


me  be  a  vessel  of  silver  or  gold,  or  a  know  hotli  how  to  be  abased,  and   I 

vessel  of  wood  or  stone,  so  1  be  a  vessel  know  how  to  abound,"  &c.    2.   llie  law 

of  honour ;  of  whatsoever  form  or  metal,  of  groivth.     Develope  thyself.    "  To  be," 

whether  higher  or  lower,  finer  or  coarser,  differs  from  "  to  have."    Be  thy  ambition 

I  am  content.     If  I  be  not  the  head,  or  to  become  pure  in  thought  and  feeling, 

the  eye,  or  the  ear,  one  of  the  nobler  strong   in   resolve   and    deed.       Serve, 

and  more  honourable  instruments  thou  Care  not  how,  mind  not  where.     "  Inas- 

wilt  employ  ;  let  me  be  the  hand  or  the  much  as  ye  have  done  unto  one  of  the 

foot,   one    of   the   most   laborious,   and  least  of  these,  my  brethren,'*  &c.     And 

lowest,  and   most   contemptible,  of   all  we  may  add — and  inasmuch  as  ye  have 

the  servants  of  my  Lord."    Application,  rendered  the  least  service  to  the  least  of 

1.    The   secret   of  contentment.     "  Self-  these,  my  brethren,  ye  have  rendered  it 

humiliation  is  full  of  truth  and  reality."  unto  me.     But,  like  the  angels,  let  us 

The  hidden   life  more  secure  than  the  serve  our    brethren  "  all   for  love,  and 

outer  life.     Circumstances  change,  cha-  nothing  for  reward." 
racter  is  permanent.     Look  within.     "  I 

The  Service  op  Song  in  the  House  op  the  Lord. 

xi.  22,  23.  Of  the  sons  of  Asaph,  the  singers  were  over  the  business  of  the  house  of 
God.  For  it  was  the  klng^s  commandment  concerning  them,  that  a  certain  por- 
tion should  he  for  the  singers,  due  for  every  day. 

Music  is  the  hand-maid  of  religion.  Were  we  treating  of  music  in  general,  and 
not  of  it  in  relation  to  religious  life,  we  must  treat  of  the  science  of  music  as 
developed  in  the  East  and  West,  as  it  has  been  affected  in  Catholic  countries,  and 
influenced  by  the  Reformation,  But  our  text-book  is  the  Bible.  The  theme  is  the 
service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Music  in  the  sanctuary  is  the  music  of 
the  Hebrews,  as  it  has  come  down  to,  and  been  developed  in,  the  Christian  Church. 

Those  who  have  deeply  studied  this  subject  inform  us  that  the  science  of  music 
amongst  the  Hebrews  is  only  conjectural.  But  the  practice  of  music  meets  us  on 
almost  every  page  of  Hebrew  history.  In  Gen.  iv.  we  have  an  account  of  the 
first  poet;  the  first  dweller  in  tents;  the  first  forger  of  metals;  and  the  first 
musician — all  descendants  of  Cain.  "  Jubal  was  the  father  of  all  such  as  handle  the 
harp  and  organ  " — the  harp  standing  as  the  representative  of  all  stringed,  and  the 
organ  of  all  wind,  instruments.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  explain  how  this 
discovery  of  Jubal's  was  handed  down  till  after  the  Flood.  But,  as  Mr.  Aldis  Wright, 
to  whose  article  on  music  in  Smith's  '  Bible  Dictionary,'  I  am  indebted  for  these 
historic  facts,  says,  "  Conjectures  are  worse  thaii  an  honest  confession  of  ignorance. 
The  Flood  did  not  wash  away  every  musical  instrument,  and  for  ever  deprive  the 
world  of  the  solace  which  music  gives.  The  shepherds  of  the  uplands  of  Syria 
knew  how  to  chase  away  care  with  songs,  and  thrill  the  emotions  with  tabret  and 
harp.  *  Wherefore  didst  thou  fly  away  secretly  1 '  said  Laban  to  Jacob,  *  and  didst 
not  tell  me,  that  I  might  have  sent  thee  away  with  mirth,  and  with  songs,  with 
tabret  and  harp.'  On  the  banks  of  the  Red  Sea,  Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel 
sang  their  song  of  triumphal  deliverance,  and  Miriam  led  a  procession  of  women 
chanting  in  chorus  :  '  Sing  ye  to  Jehovah,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously  ; 
the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the  sea.'  The  song  was  accompanied 
by  timbrels  and  dances  ;  probably  Miriam  sang  the  solos,  and  the  women  took  up 
the  chorus  ;  for  it  is  said,  '  Miriam  answered  them.'  " 

Music  was  early  employed  in  the  service  of  idolatry.  You  will  recall  the  mu- 
sical instruments  when  the  image  of  gold  was  set  up  in  the  plains  of  Dura.  An 
earlier  instance  is  in  connection  with  the  golden  calf  which  Aaron  made.  As 
Mcfies  and  Joshua  came  down  from  the  mountaiu  on  which  they  had  received  the 


mxT.  XL]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH.  239 

two  tables  of  the  law,  a  strange  sound  saluted  their  ears.  To  Joshua  it  seemed 
like  a  war-shout,  but  Moses  said,  *'  It  is  not  the  voice  of  them  that  shout  for  the 
mastery,  neither  is  it  the  voice  of  them  that  cry  being  overcome,  but  the  noise  of 
them  that  sing  do  I  hear."  Eude  and  uncultivated  must  such  music  have  been. 
Could  much  variation  have  been  played  on  those  silver  trumpets  which  were  used 
to  intimate  the  striking  of  the  tents  and  resuming  of  the  wilderness  journeys  1 
^^ould  those  rams'  horns  with  which  tlie  priests  brought  down  the  walls  of  Jericho, 
or  those  trumpets  which  Gideon's  three  hundred  men  blew,  have  been  like  the 
sound  of  one  that  had  a  pleasant  voice  and  could  play  well  on  an  instrument"?  The 
rfong  of  Deborah  and  Barak  is  metrical,  and  was  probably  intended  to  be  sung  with 
musical  accompaniment  as  one  of  the  people's  songs,  like  that  with  which  Jephthah's 
daughter  and  her  companions  met  Jephthah  on  his  victorious  return.  The  song 
with  which  the  women  of  Israel  hailed  David  after  the  slaughter  of  the  Philistine 
was  perhaps  struck  off  on  the  excitement  of  the  moment.  "  They  came  out  of  all 
cities  of  Israel,  singing  and  dancing,  to  meet  King  Saul  with  tabrets,  with  joy,  and 
instruments  of  music.  And  the  women  answered  one  another  as  they  played,  and 
said,  Saul  has  slain  his  thousands,  and  David  his  ten  thousands." 

So  far  there  appears,  to  have  been  no  systematic  cultivation  of  music.  When, 
however,  the  schools  of  the  prophets  were  instituted  music  was  taught.  Profes- 
sional musicians  were  attached  to  the  king's  person.  David  played  before  Saul. 
And  when  David  became  king  he  had  about  him  singing  men  and  singing  women. 
Solomon  says,  "  I  gat  me  men  singers  and  women  singers."  He  composed  songs. 
When  the  ark  was  brought  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom  there  must  have  been 
many  skilled  musicians  in  the  country.  With  Chenaniah,  the  master  of  the  song, 
at  their  head,  David  and  the  Levites  brought  up  the  ark  witli  shouting,  and  with 
sound  of  the  cornet,  and  with  trumpets,  and  with  cymbals,  making  a  noise  with 
psalteries  and  harps.  Probably  the  Levites  had  all  along  practised  music.  Living 
a  peaceful  life  they  would  be  attracted  to  this  peaceful  art.  It  is  likely  that  some 
SERVICE  OF  SONG  was  uscd  in  the  tabernacle.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  David  was  the 
patron,  and  the  temple  was  the  school,  of  music.  The  three  divisions  of  the  tribe 
of  Levi  had  a  representative  family  in  the  temple  choir.  David  composed  and 
taught  them  a  chant.  Por  ages  it  was  used  as  David's,  and  was  sung  on  three  great 
occasions — before  the  army  of  Jehoshaphat ;  on  laying  the  foundation  of  the  second 
temple  ;  and  by  the  army  of  the  Maccabees.  The  chant  is  Psalm  cxxxvi.  Women 
were  in  the  temple  choir.  We  read  of  Heman's  three  daughters.  Among  those  who 
returned  from  the  captivity  with  Zerubbabel  were  two  hundred  singing  men  and 
singing  women.  Amongst  the  instruments  played  before  the  ark  were  trumpets, 
which  appear  to  have  been  reserved  for  the  priests.  Being  also  employed  in  royal 
proclamations  they  set  forth  by  way  of  symbol,  the  royalty  of  Jehovah,  and  sounded 
the  alarm  against  his  enemies.  At  the  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple  one  hundred 
and  twenty  priests  blew  the  trumpets,  while  the  Levites  with  their  instruments 
made  one  sound  to  he  heard  in  2^raising  the  Lord.  And  in  the  restoration  of  wor- 
ship by  Hezekiah,  when  the  burnt  offering  began  the  song  of  Jehovah  began  also, 
with  the  trumpets,  and  with  the  instruments  of  David,  King  of  Israel.  And  all 
the  congregation  worshipped,  and  the  singers  sang,  and  the  trumpeters  sounded  all 
until  the  burnt  offering  was  finished.  The  altar  was,  in  Scripture  phraseology,  the 
table  of  Jehovah,  and  the  sacrifices  were  his  feasts.  And  as  at  kings'  tables  the 
musicians  play,  so  at  the  table  of  the  King  of  kings  was  this  service  rendered. 
The  temple  was  God's  palace,  and  as  the  Levite  sentries  guarded  the  gates  they 
sang,  "  Bless  ye  the  Lord,  all  ye  servants  of  the  Lord,  which  by  night  stand  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  Lift  up  your  hands  in  the  sanctuary,  and  bless  the  Lord." 
Many  of  the  psalms  we  know  were  temple-songs.  Of  David's  influence  on  Hebrew 
song  let  an  English  poet  speak — 


840  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [OHAP.  XI. 

**  The  harp  the  monarch -minstrel  swept, 
The  king  of  men,  the  loved  of  Heaven, 
"Which  music  hallowed  while  she  wept, 
O'er  tones  her  heart  of  hearts  had  given, 
Redoubled  be  her  tears,  its  chords  are  riven  I 

**  It  softened  men  of  iron  mould, 

It  gave  them  virtues  not  their  own  ; 
No  ear  so  dull,  no  soul  so  cold, 
That  felt  not,  fired  not  to  the  tone, 
Till  David's  lyre  grew  mightier  than  his  throntl 

•*  It  told  the  triumphs  of  our  king. 
It  wafted  glory  to  our  God ; 
It  made  our  gladdened  valleys  ring, 
The  cedars  bow,  the  mountains  nod ; 
Its  sound  aspired  to  heaven,  and  there  abode  I 

•*  Since  then,  though  heard  on  earth  no  more, 
Devotion,  and  her  daughter  Love, 
Still  bid  the  bursting  spirit  soar, 
To  sounds  that  seem  as  from  above, 
In  dreams  that  day's  broad  light  cannot  remove,* 

Solomon   provided  for   the   singers   with   the  same  munificence  with  which  he 
adorned  the  temple. 

But  although  music  was  consecrated  in  the  temple  it  was  not  confined  to  the 
temple.  Whatever  adorns  God's  service  reacts  on  the  homes  and  haunts  of  men. 
Music  was  enthroned  in  the  temple,  but  it  made  its  familiar  abode  in  the  homes  of 
tlie  Hebrew  people.  Kings  had  court  musicians.  And  in  the  degenerate  days  of 
the  later  monarchs,  the  prophet  tells  us  of  the  effeminate  gallants  of  Israel  stretched 
on  beds  of  ivory,  covered  with  perfumes ;  and  as  Nero  fiddled  whilst  Rome  was  in 
flames,  so  they  amid  their  nation's  wreck  chant  to  the  sound  of  the  viol,  and  invent 
to  themselves  instruments  of  music,  like  David.  But  because  music  may  minister 
to  vice  that  is  no  reason  for  deriding  it.  What  may  not  1  Many  a  Hebrew  home 
was  made  joyous  after  a  day  of  sultry  heat,  spent  among  the  vines  or  in  the  sheep- 
folds,  by  family  songs.  Only  when  national  sin  had  brought  God's  curse  upon  the 
land  could  it  be  said — "  All  the  merry-hearted  do  sigh.  The  mirth  of  tabrets  ceaseth, 
the  noise  of  them  that  rejoice  endeth,  the  joy  of  the  harp  ceaseth.  They  shall  not 
drink  wine  with  a  song."  It  was  when  heavy  hearts  sat  by  the  waters  of  Babylon 
that  joy-inspiring  harps  hung  on  the  willows,  and  cunning  hands  no  longer  dis- 
coursed sweet  music.  Their  bridal  processions  were  accompanied  with  music  and 
sonty.  Love  had  its  songs  to  embody  its  passion.  Sorrow  had  its  funereal  chants. 
The  grape-gatherers  sang  as  they  gathered  in  the  vintage,  and  the  wine-presses  were 
trodden  to  the  march  of  music.  Women  sang  as  they  toiled  at  the  mill.  And  as 
long  as  God  smiled  approval  on  the  land  of  the  Hebrew  people,  they  were  a  people 
of  song.     Their  land  was  a  field  which  the  Lord  had  blessed. 

Music  passed  into  the  early  Christian  Church.  Our  Lord  is  found  with  his 
disciples  singing  a  hymn.  The  Man  of  Sorrows  was  acquainted  with  song.  **  Singing 
and  making  melody  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord,"  is  the  burden  of  more  than  one 
New  Testament  passage.  Changes  it  has  undergone.  By  the  inroads  of  bar- 
barians ;  by  the  upgrowth  of  the  Reformation ;  by  modern  revolutions ;  by 
persecutions ;  aad  by  the  misguided  opposition  of  conscientious  men,  the  service 
of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  has  been  affected.  It  has  been  "  chastened,  but 
not  killed;"  "cast  down,  but  not  destroyed." 

Bring  song  into  the  sanctuary.  The  temple  choir  were  Levites.  The  priests 
were  of  the  same  tribe.  Pulpit  and  choir-gallery  both  have  place.  When  the 
preacher  fails  with  the  Bible,  the  choir  may  succeed  with  the  Hymn  Book. 

When  we  pass  through  the  gate  into  the  city  we  shall  sing  in.     John  looked, 


CHAP.  XL]  HOMILETW   COMMENTAllY:   NE II  KM/ A  If.  241 

and  lo  !  a  Lamb  stood  on  the  Mount  Zion,  and  with  him  an  hundred  and  forty  and 
four  thousand  redeemed  from  the  earth.  And  he  heard  a  voice  as  of  the  voice  of 
many  waters,  as  the  voice  of  a  great  thunder,  and  as  the  voice  of  harpers,  harping 
with  their  harps.  Let  us  honour  every  faculty.  Let  us  cultivate  and  consecrate 
our  gifts.  Let  us  all  use  the  service  of  song  to  praise  the  Lord,  whose  mercy — 
according  to  David's  chant — endureth  for  ever. 


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XI. 

Priests  and  the  Congregation. 

'*  It  is  very  worthy  of  notice  that  in  theless  nothing  at  all  if  they  had  not 

the   numbering   of   the   inhabitants   of  had    a   congregation   near  and   around 

Jerusalem,  not  the  priests  but  the  tribes  them,  and  if  they  had  not  succeeded  in 

of  Judah  and  Benjamin  take  the  lead,  obtaining   satisfactory   fruit    for    their 

and  only  then   follow  the  priests   and  activity,   namely,   a   genuine   and   true 

Levites ;   so  much  the  more  worthy  of  piety,  which  should  substantially  prove 

notice,  because  in  the  new  congregation,  they  were   not  there  in  vain.     Would 

following  the  captivity,  according  to  the  also    that    Christian    priests,    that    is, 

entire  direction  which  its  development  preachers  of  the  gospel,  might  preserve 

took,  and  according  to  everything  which  a   lively   consciousness   that   it   is   not 

was  considered  as  of  the  greatest   mo-  enough   for   them    to   have   fellowship 

inent,  the  high  priests,  and  the  priest-  with  their  brethren  in  office,  that  they 

liood  in  general,  had  a  particularly  high  are  nothing,  and  can  profit  and  signify 

significance.     It  is  as  if  the  conscious-  nothing,  if   not  some,  if   only  a  small 

ness  were  indicated,  that  the  priest  and  congregation   stand  by  them,  in  whom 

Levites,   in   spite   of  their  distinction,  the   seed  which   they  sow  springs   up, 

which  the  Lord  hath  appointed  to  them  grows,  and  bears  fruit." 
in  the  affairs  of  Israel,  had  been  never- 


HoLY  People  on  Sacred  Soil. 

"  When  one  looks  at  the  space  which  cant,  and  in  many  respects  miserable  race, 

the  Jewish  congregation  inhabited  round  which  cultivated  the  ground   there,  or 

Jerusalem,  how  very  small  was  the  terri-  raised  cattle  !     If  anywhere,  surely  here 

tory  occupied  by  the  people  of  God,  the  arises    a    testimony   for    Paul's    word, 

only  race  which  possessed  a  clear  know-  *  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of 

ledge  of  the  only  true  and  holy  God !  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which 

A  few  miles,  from  three  to  six,  north  are  mighty '  (1  Cor.  i.  27).    A  consoling 

and  south,  east  and  west,  comprised  the  promise  also  for  Christendom  in  those 

entire    district.      Compared    with    our  times,  in  which  it  appears  as  though  it 

countries ;  yes,  even  with  our  provinces ;  were  being  compressed  on  all  sides,  and 

this  district  appears  to  us  almost  as  a  when  it  is  in  truth  losing  position  after 

vanishing   nothing.     And   nevertheless  position.      Let  it   lose   in   length   and 

what    powers    for    the   subjugation    of  breadth  in  order  afterwards  to  gain  so 

entire  humanity,  for  the  transformation  much  the  more   in   height.     Even  the 

of  all  its  relations,  and  for  the  subduing  gates   of  hell   cannot   swallow  up   the 

of  all  circumstances,  has  God  the  Lord  Church  of  the  Lord." — Dr.  Schultz,  in 

been  able  to  put  in  the  people  of  this  Lange. 
oasis,  in  the,  at  the  same  time,  insignifi- 


'242 


HOMILETtC  COMMENTAIIY:  NEBEMIAB. 


[chat.  XJl 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Explanatory  Notes.]  "The  list  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  province  (chap,  xi.)  is  followed  bj 
lists  of  the  priests  and  Levites  (xii.  1 — 26).  These  different  lists  are,  in  fact,  all  connected  with  the 
genealogical  register  of  the  Israelite  population  of  the  whole  province,  taken  by  Nehemiah  (vii.  5) 
for  the  purpose  of  enlarging  the  population  of  Jerusalem  .  .  .  Vers.  1 — 9  contains  a  list  of  the  heads 
of  the  priests  and  Levites  who  returned  from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua.  The  high 
priests  during  five  generations  are  next  mentioned  byname  (vers.  10,  11).  Then  follow  the  names  of 
the  heads  of  the  priestly  houses,  in  the  days  of  Joiakim,  the  high  priest;  and  finally  (vers.  22 — 26), 
the  names  of  the  heads  of  the  Levites  at  the  same  period,  with  titles  and  subscriptions." — Keil. 
According  to  Keil^  "  the  difierence  between  the  names  in  the  two  lists  of  chapters  x.,  xii.,  is  to  be  ex- 
plained simply  by  the  fact  that  the  names  of  those  who  sealed  the  covenant  (chap  x.)  are  names 
neither  of  orders  nor  houses,  but  of  heads  of  houses  living  in  the  days  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  Of 
these  names  a  portion  coincides,  indeed,  with  the  names  of  the  orders  and  houses,  while  the  rest  are 
different.  The  sameness  of  names  does  not,  however,  prove  that  the  individuals  belonged  to  the 
house  whose  name  they  bore.  On  the  contrary,  it  appears  from  xii.  13,  16,  that  of  two  Meshullams, 
one  was  the  head  of  the  house  of  Ezra,  the  other  of  the  house  of  Ginnethon."  27.  Out  of  all 
their  places]  The  Levites  were  scattered  through  the  province.  30.  Purified  themselves 
.  .  .  people  .  .  .  gates  .  .  .  wall]  This  was  probably  done  by  the  sprinkling  of  water  (Num. 
xix.  18),  and  the  offering  of  sacrifices.  (Compare  2  Chron.  xxix.  21.)  "The  central  point  of  the 
solemnity  was  a  procession  of  two  bands  of  singers  upon  the  wall.  Nehemiah  brought  up  the  princes 
of  Judah  upon  the  wall,  and  appointed  two  great  companies  and  two  processions.     These  went  each 

upon  the  wall  all  in  different  directions,  and  stopped  opposite  each  other  at  the  house  of  God 

At  the  head  of  one  procession  went  Ezra,  the  scribe,  with  one-half  of  the  nobles  ;  at  the  head  of  the 
second,  Nehemiah  with  the  other  half." — Keil.  (See  topography  of  the  book  of  Nehemiah,  pages 
87 — 89.)  43.  Great  sacrifices]  i.  e,  "  thank  ofi'erings  which  were  eaten  by  the  off'erers  in  a 
happy  feast,  after  the  food  of  the  offering  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord  (Lev.  iii.)." — Crosby. 
With  xii.  44,  according  to  Keil,  Nehemiah's  Later  Reforms  begin,  "  at  that  time  being  used  in  a 
general  sense."  Crosby  difi'ers,  referring  the  phrase  to  the  time  of  the  dedication.  Others  postpone  the 
dedication,  making  it  one  of  the  Later  Reforms.  44.  Portions  of  the  law]  That  is,  portions  pre- 
scribed by  the  law  for  the  priests  and  Levites.  (See  Num.  xviii.  20—24 ;  Deut.  xviii.  1—8.)  That 
waited]  Literally,  the  ones  standing  ;  that  is,  standing  to  minister  before  the  Lord.  (Compare 
Deut.  X.  8.)  45.  Kept  the  ward]  Cared  for  all  that  concerned  the  temple  ;  did  their  duty  faith- 
fully. 47.  Sanctified  unto  the  Levites]  "  To  sanctify,  said  of  the  bringing  of  gifts  and  dues  to 
the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary"  (comp.  1  Chron.  xxvi.  27  ;  Lev.  xxvii.  14).  On  the  matter  itself, 
corap.  X.  38  seq.,  and  Num.  xviii.  26 — 29. — Keil, 

HOMILETICAL  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTER  XII. 


Ver.  27—43.  The  Dedication  of  the  Wall. 

„  23.  A  Book. 

„  24.  Posthumous  Influence. 

„  30.  Beginning  at  the  Right  Place. 


Ver.  43.  A  Great  Rejoicing, 

„  43.  True  Joy. 

„    44 — 47.  Thanksgiving  and  ThanksliTlllg, 

46.  The  Good  Old  Times. 


The  Dedication  of  the  Wall. 

xii.  27 — 43.    And  at  the  dedication  of  the  ivall  of  Jerusalem  they  sought  the  Lemtes 
out  of  all  their  places,  to  bring  them  to  Jerusalem,  to  keep  the  dedication,  ^c. 

We  have  read  of  the  building  of  tlie  wall  of  Jerusalem,  with  a  great  deal  of  fear  and 
trembling ;  we  have  here  an  account  of  the  dedicating  of  it,  with  a  great  deal  of  joy 
and  triumph.     They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  thus  reap. 

I.  We  must  inquire  what  was  the  meaning  of  this  dedication  of  the  wall. 
We  will  suppose  it  to  include  the  dedication  of  the  city  too — the  thing  containing 
for  the  thing  contained ;  and,  therefore,  it  was  not  done  till  the  city  was  pretty 
well  replenished. 

1.  It  was  a  solemn  thanksgiving  to  God,  for  his  great  mercy  to  them  in  the 
perfecting  of  this  undertaking,  which  they  were  the  more  sensihle  qf^  because  of  the 
difficulty  and  opposition  they  had  met  with  in  it. 


CHAl'.  XII.]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMTAH.  243 


2.  They  herehj  devoted  the  city  in  a  peculiar  manner  to  God,  and  to  his  honour, 
and  took  possession  of  it  for  him,  and  in  his  name.  All  our  cities,  all  our  houses, 
must  have  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  written  upon  them  ;  but  this  city  was  (so  as  never 
any  other  was)  a  holy  city,  the  city  of  tlie  Great  King.  It  had  been  so  ever  since 
God  chose  it  to  put  his  name  there,  and  as  such,  it  being  now  refitted,  it  was  afresh 
dedicated  to  God  by  the  builders  and  inhabitants,  in  token  of  their  acknowledg- 
ment that  they  were  tenants,  and  their  desire  tliat  it  might  still  be  his,  and  that 
the  property  of  it  might  never  be  altered.  Whatever  is  done  for  their  safety,  ease, 
and  comfort,  must  be  designed  for  God's  honour  and  glory. 

3.  They  hereby  put  the  city  and  its  walls  under  the  Divine  protection^  owning 
that,  unless  f^e  Lord  kept  the  city,  the  ivalls  were  built  in  vain.  When  this  city 
was  in  possession  of  the  Jebusites,  they  committed  the  guardianship  of  it  to  their 
gods,  though  they  were  blind  and  lame  ones.  With  much  more  reason  do  the 
people  of  God  commit  it  to  his  keeping  who  is  all- wise  and  almighty.  The  super- 
stitious founders  of  cities  had  an  eye  to  the  lucky  position  of  the  heavens,  but 
these  pious  founders  had  an  eye  to  God  only,  to  his  providence,  and  not  to  fortune. 

II.  We  must  observe  with  what  solemnity  it  was  performed,  under  the 
direction  of  Nehemiah. 

1.  The  Levites  from  all  parts  of  the  country  were  summoned  to  attend.  The 
city  must  be  dedicated  to  God ;  and  therefore  his  ministers  must  be  employed  in 
the  doing  of  it,  and  the  surrender  must  pass  through  their  hands.  When  those 
solemn  feasts  were  over  (chaps,  viii.,  ix.),  they  had  gone  home  to  their  respective 
posts  to  mind  their  cares  in  the  country ;  but  now  their  presence  and  assistance 
were  again  called  for. 

2.  Pursuant  to  this  summons  there  was  a  general  I'endezvous  of  all  the  Levites. 
Observe  in  what  method  they  proceed.  (1)  They  purified  themselves.  We  are 
concerned  to  cleanse  our  hands,  and  purify  our  hearts,  when  any  work  for  God  is 
to  pass  through  them.  Themselves  they  purified,  and  then  the  people.  They 
that  would  be  instrumental  to  sanctify  others,  must  sanctify  themselves,  and  set 
themselves  apart  for  God  with  purity  of  mind  and  sincerity  of  intention.  Then 
they  purified  the  gates  and  the  wall.  Then  may  we  expect  comfort  when  we  are 
prepared  to  receive  it.  '*To  the  pure  all  things  are  pure"  (Tit.  i.  15) ;  and  to  them 
w^ho  are  sanctified,  houses  and  tables,  and  .their  creature  comforts  and  enjoyments 
are  sanctified  (1  Tim.  iv.  4,  5).  This  purification  was  performed,  it  is  probable,  by 
sprinkhng  the  water  of  purifying  or  of  separation,  as  it  is  called  (Num.  xix.  9),  on 
themselves  and  the  people,  the  walls  and  the  gates ;  a  type  of  the  blood  of  Christ, 
with  which  our  consciences  being  purged  from  dead  works,  we  become  fit  to  serve 
the  living  God,  and  to  be  his  care.  (2)  The  princes,  priests,  and  Levites  walked 
round  upon  the  wall  in  two  companies,  to  signify  the  dedication  of  it  all  to  God, 
the  whole  circuit  of  it.  This  procession  is  here  largely  described ;  one  end  of  the 
ceremony  being  to  affect  them  with  the  mercy  they  were  giving  thanks  for,  and  to 
perpetuate  the  remembrance  of  it  among  them. 

3.  The  people  greatly  rejoiced.  While  the  princes,  priests,  and  Levites  testified 
their  joy  and  thankfulness,  by  great  sacrifices,  sound  of  trumpet,  musical  instru- 
ments, and  songs  of  praise,  the  common  people  testified  theirs  by  loud  shouts,  which 
were  heard  afar  off,  farther  than  the  more  harmonious  sound  of  their  songs  and 
music ;  and  these  shouts  coining  from  a  sincere  and  hearty  joy  are  here  taken 
notice  of :  for  God  overlooks  not,  but  graciously  accepts,  the  honest  zealous  services 
of  mean  people,  though  there  be  in  them  little  of  art,  and  they  are  far  from  being 
fine.  It  is  observed  that  the  women  and  children  rejoiced ;  and  their  harmonies 
were  not  despised  but  recorded  to  their  praise.  All  that  share  in  public  mercies 
ought  to  join  in  public  thanksgivings.  The  reason  given  is,  that  "  God  had  made 
them  rejoice  with  great  joy  ; "  he  had  given  them  both  matter  for  joy  and  hearts 
to  rejoice ;  his  providence  had  made  them  safe  and  easy,  and  then  his  grace  made 

R  2 


244 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH  [ohai    xii. 


them  cheerful  and  thankful.  The  baffled  opposition  of  their  enemies  no  doubt 
added  to  their  joy,  and  mixed  triumph  with  it.  Great  mercies  call  for  the  most 
solemn  return  of  praise,  "  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house,  in  the  midst  of  thee, 
O  Jerusalem  ! " — Matthew  Henry. 


A  Book. 

xiL  23.     The  chief  of  the  fathers  were  written  in  the  hook  oj  the  chronicles. 


The  book  of  the  chronicles. 

A  book  is  a  marvel — why  not  say  a 
standing  miracle  ? 

I.  A  book  unites  the  ages.  Brings 
the  past  into  the  present :  borrows  the 
future  to  give  the  present  significance. 
The  '*  sceptred  spirits  of  history "  rule 
us  still.  **  The  world's  grey  patriarchs  " 
thought  for  us.  With  books  the  poorest 
enters  the  highest  society:  the  loneliest 
need  not  he  solitary,  A  good  book  the 
truest  guide,  philosopher,  friend. 


II.  A  book  reveals  life's  importance. 

A  book  gives  permanence  to  thought, 
because  thoughts  sway  the  world  :  gives 
permanence  to  deeds,  because  if  good 
they  encourage,  if  bad  they  warn.  Life 
is  a  writing.  And  with  deeper  than 
Pilate's  meaning,  "  What  I  have  written, 
I  have  written." 

III.  A  book  silently  anticipates  the 
judgment.  It  is  written.  A  record  may 
be  appealed  to.  Is  this  thy  handwrit- 
ing %     God's  **  Book  of  Eemembrance." 


Posthumous  Influence. 

xii.  24.    The  chief  of  the  Levites  .  .  with  their  hrethren  over  against  theniy  to  praise 
and  to  give  thanks ^  according  to  the  commandment  of  David  the  man  of  God. 


A  man's  influence  after  he  is  dead. 
He  is  still  present  with  his  people. 

I.  By  his  will.  "  The  commandment 
of  David."  The  grip  of  the  dead  is  on 
our  fields  and  churches ;  schools  and 
hospitals. 

II.  By  his  writings.  Immortality  of 
genius.  David's  Psalms.  Solomon's 
proverbs.  And  outside  the  circle  of 
sacred  history,  Shakespeare  and  Milton, 


Bunyan,  and  a  thousand  others.     "  Being 
dead,  they  yet  speak." 

III.  By  his  example.  *' David  the 
man  of  God.''  Goodness  is  greatness. 
Kind  words;  good  deeds  never  die. 
"  Let  your  light  shine  before  men." 
Intentional  influence  may  fail :  uncon- 
scious influence  cannot.  For  good  or 
evil  a  man  lives.  For  good  or  evil  his 
deeds  will  live  after  him.  "The  me- 
mory of  the  just  is  blessed." 


Beginning  at  the  Right  Place. 

xii.  30.     And  the  priests  and  the  Levites  purified  themselves^  and  purified  die 
people,  and  the  gates,  and  the  ivall. 

I.  A  pure  Church  may  make  a  sound  commonwealth.  *'  They  purified  therrir 
shelves."  Like  priest,  like  people.  And  as  with  the  people  so  with  the  priest, 
(.leric  and  laic  act  and  react  on  each  other.  Pulpit  and  pew  not  two  but  one.  All 
history  testifies  that  an  impure  priesthood  means  an  impure  people.  *'  Be  ye  clean, 
that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord."  Eli's  sons.  Uzzah  may  not  sustain  the  ark. 
Jesus  swept  the  temple  of  the  traffickers. 

II.  To  a  pure  people  all  things  are  pure.  "  They  purified  the  people,  and  the 
gates,  and  the  wall."  Citizens  and  city :  sanctuary  and  house :  God's  work  and 
their  own, 

"  All  things  are  sacred. 
The  eye  of  God  is  on  them  all 
And  hallows  all." 


CHAP.  XII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  246 

Jesus  revealed  God  in  the  minutest.  Peter's  vision.  The  present  preparatory.  "  I 
think  our  fathers  had  a  better,  a  grander,  a  diviner  idea  even  of  common  life  than 
we  have,  when  they  spoke  about  the  tiades  and  professions  of  men  as  being  their 
calling.  We  sometimes  use  the  word  yet,  though  it  has  almost  passed  out  of  use. 
It  is  a  pity,  for  there  is  a  great  thought  in  it.  Why,  it  makes  all  the  men,  streets, 
shops,  and  warehouses  to  me,  as  I  walk  along,  Divine  objects.  I  feel  that  I  am  in  a 
Divine  place  when  I  think  of  the  men  about  me  as  following  their  calling.  I  feel 
that  there  is  a  God  above  men;  that  there  is  a  God  in  human  society;  a  God  in  the 
shops  and  counting-houses  of  London,  touching  and  teaching  every  human  being; 
and  that  every  man  is  occupying  the  place,  and  putting  his  hand  to  the  work,  to 
which  God  has  called  him.  Sometimes  you  may  see  a  man  at  a  certain  calling  which 
is  but  preparatory.  He  is  meant  for  something  else.  Providence  opens  the  way, 
and  he  goes  up  higher  and  does  another  thing.  God  has  given  us  a  spiritual 
vocation — a  Divine  calling  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  we  are  to  walk  worthy  of  that 
vocation,  here — doing  all  worldly  things  in  a  spiritual  manner,  preparatory  to  a 
higher  calling  which  shall  come  one  day,  when  we  shall  enter  upon  other  forms 
of  duty  and  service,  to  which  the  present  inferior  forms  of  duty  and  service 
faithfully  fulfilled  shall  gradually  prepare  and  fit  us." — Binney. 

A  Great  REjoiciNa. 

xiL  43.  That  day  they  offered  great  sacrifices,  and  rejoiced :  for  God  had  made 
them  rejoice  with  great  Joy :  the  wives  also  and  the  children  rejoiced :  so  that 
the  Joy  of  Jerusalem  was  heard  even  afar  off. 

A  great  rejoicing  as  it  should  be.  should  awaken  joy — a  joy  that  all  may 

I.  Associated  with  the  rites  of  re-  share.  ''  The  wives  also  and  the  chil- 
ligion.       "  Sacrifices."       Holy-day  and     dren  rejoiced." 

holiday  united.    Holy-days  joy-bringing  III.    The   preparation    for    strong 

times.     Holidays  not  to  be   dissevered  adhesion  to  the  sacred  cause.     "  The 

from    the  sacred  nature   of    those  who  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."    And 

share  them.  you  must  be  strong  to  labour.     Sacred 

II.  The  outcome  of  a  great  deliver-  festivals  not  an  end  but  a  means  to  an 
ance.  From  captivity  to  freedom  :  exile  end.  Get  to  give  ;  know  to  communi- 
to  home  :  heathen  surroundings  to  hea-  cate;  experience  to  declare;  rest  to  toil; 
V  en-chosen  city  and  divinely-built  temple,  share  to  serve — this  is  the  will  of  God 
The   memory  of  God's  great  goodness  concerning  us. 


True  Joy. 
xii.  43.     That  day  they  offered  great  sacrifices,  and  rejoiced, 

I.  Its  right.  The  God  who  has  given  elevated  our  lower  or  higher  life.  The 
us  life,  wishes  also  that  it  shall  move  chief  sites  in  Jerusalem  testified  to  this, 
joyfuUy ;  the  God  who  always  anew  and  in  the  Christian  Church ;  yes,  in- 
overwhelms  us  with  favours  wishes  that  deed,  in  our  lives,  all  the  heights  testify 
they  should  fulfil  their  mission ;  that  is,  thereof. 

make  us  happy,  in  the  end  holy.  III.  Its  kind.    It  raises  itself  to  God, 

II.  Its  occasion.  God's  grace,  which  is  a  joy  in  him,  that  is,  becomes  a  service 
has  strengthened,  protected,  assured  or  toGodandourneighbours. — Dr.Schultz. 


246 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


[oHAP.  xn. 


Thanksgiving  and  Thanksliving. 

xii.  44 — 47.  And  at  that  time  were  some  appointed  over  the  chambers  for  the 
treasures,  for  the  offerings,  for  the  first-fruits,  and  for  the  tithes^  to  gather  into 
them  out  of  the  fields  of  the  cities  the  portions  of  the  law  for  the  priests  and 
Levites :  for  Judah  rejoiced  for  the  priests  and  for  the  Levites  that  waited.  And 
both  the  singers  and  the  porters  kept  the  ward  of  their  God^  Sfc. 


We  have  here  an  account  of  the  re- 
maining good  effects  of  this  universal 
joy  that  was  at  the  dedication  of  tlie 
wall.  When  the  solemnities  of  a  thanks- 
giving-day leave  such  impressions  on 
ministers  and  people,  as  that  both  are 
more  careful  and  cheerful  in  doing  their 
duty  afterward,  then  are  they  indeed 
acceptable  to  God,  and  turn  to  a  good 
account.     So  it  was  here. 

I.  The  ministers  were  more  careful 
than  they  had  been  of  their  work. 
The  respect  the  people  paid  them  upon 
this  occasion  encouraged  them  to  dili- 
gence and  watchfulness  ;  "  the  singers 
kept  the  ward  of  their  God,"  attending 
in  due  time  to  the  duty  of  their  office ; 
the  porters  too  they  "  kept  the  ward  of 
the  purification,"  this  is,  they  took  care 
to  preserve  the  purity  of  the  temple,  by 
denying  admission  to  those  that  were 
ceremonially  unclean.  When  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  thus  engageth  us  to  our  duty, 
and  enlargeth  us  in  it,  it  is  then  an 
earnest  of  that  joy  which,  in  concurrence 
with  the  perfecting  of  holiness,  will  be 
our  everlasting  bliss. 

II.  The  people  were  more  careful 
than  they  had  been  of  the  maintenance 
of  their  ministers.  The  people,  at  the 
dedication  of  the  wall,  among  other . 
things  which  they  made  matter  of  their 
joy,  rejoiced  "for  the  priests  and  the 
Levites  that  waited."  They  had  a  great 
deal  of  comfort  in  their  ministers,  and 
were  glad  of  them  ;  when  they  observed 
how  diligently  they  waited,  and  what 
pains  they  took  in  their  work,  they  re- 
joiced in  them.  The  surest  way  for 
ministers  to  recommeDd  themselves  to 
their  people,  and  gain  an  interest  in  their 
affections,  is  to  wait  on  their  ministry, 
to  be  humble  and  industrious,  and  to 
mind  their  business  ;  when  these  did  so, 
the  people  thought  nothing  too  much 
for  them,  to  encourage  them.     The  law 


had  provided  them  their  portions ;  but 
what  the  better  were  they  for  that 
provision,  if  what  the  law  appointed 
them  either  was  not  duly  collected  or 
not  justly  paid  them  1 

1.  Care  is  here  taken  for  the  collecting 
of  their  dues.  They  were  modest,  and 
would  rather  lose  their  right  than  call 
for  it  themselves ;  the  people  were  many 
of  them  careless,  and  would  not  bring  it 
unless  they  were  called  upon ;  and  there- 
fore **  some  were  appointed  "  whose  office 
it  should  be  "to  gather"  in  to  the  trea- 
suries, "  out  of  the  fields  of  the  cities,  the 
portions  of  the  law  for  the  priests  and 
Levites,"  that  their  portion  might  not 
be  lost  for  want  of  being  demanded. 
This  is  a  piece  of  good  service  both  to 
ministers  and  people,  that  the  one  may 
not  come  short  of  their  maintenance,  nor 
the  other  of  their  duty. 

2.  Care  is  taken  that,  being  gathered 
in,  it  might  be  duly  paid  out.  They 
gave  the  singers  and  porters  their  daily 
portion,  over  and  above  what  was  due 
to  them  as  Levites  ;  for  we  may  suppose 
when  David  and  Solomon  appointed 
them  their  work,  above  what  was  re- 
quired from  them  as  Levites,  they  settled 
a  fund  for  their  further  encouragement. 
Let  those  that  labour  more  abundantly 
in  the  word  and  doctrine  be  counted 
worthy  of  this  double  honour.  As  for 
the  other  Levites,  the  tithes,  here  called 
the  holy  things,  were  duly  set  apart  for 
them,  oat  of  which  they  paid  the  priests 
their  tithe  according  to  the  law.  Both 
are  said  to  be  sanctified.  Wlien  what 
is  contributed,  either  voluntarily  or  by 
law,  for  the  support  of  religion,  and  the 
maintenance  of  the  ministry,  is  given 
with  an  eye  to  God  and  his  honour,  it  is 
sanctified,  and  shall  be  accepted  of  him 
accordingly;  audit  will  cause  the  bless- 
ing to  rest  on  the  house,  and  all  that  ifi 
in  it. — Matthew  Henry. 


OHAP.  xn.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH. 


247 


The  Good  Old  Times. 
xiL  46.  The  days  of  old. 


The  aged  regret,  the  young  despise, 
these  good  old  times.  The  old  feed  on 
memory,  the  young  on  hope.  These 
place  the  golden  age  in  the  future,  those 
in  the  past. 

I.  Nothings  is  necessarily  good  be- 
cause it  is  old.  "Hast  thou  marked 
the  old  way  which  wicked  men  have 
ti'oddenr'  Habit,  education,  tradition, 
prejudice  play  an  important  part  in  his- 
tory. 

IL  That  wMch  is  old  is  presump- 


tively valuable.      Good  lasts.    Truth 
is  as  old  as  the  hills. 

Application.  Prove  all  things.  Des- 
pise nothing.  Gather  treasures  wherever 
they  can  be  found.  Be  not  blinded  by 
passion.  There  is  a  soul  of  goodness  in 
things  that  at  first  sight  seem  only  evil. 
The  present  is  a  huge  borrower  from 
the  dead  past.  E-everence  the  true 
word,  the  saintly  deed  whenever  found. 
God  is  all,  and  in  all  things  bright  and 
good. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Explanatory  Notes.]  1.  On  that  day]  This  is  to  be  understood  in  the  same  sense  as  nf 
that  time,  in  chap.  xii.  44.  But  no  doubt  public  readings  of  the  law  took  place  frequently  duriiijJ!^ 
Nehemiah's  administration.  Found  written]  *'  The  part  of  the  law  which  forbade  mingling  with 
the  other  nations  was  specially  read  on  the  dedication-day,  Deut.  xxiii.  3  would  naturally  Ix- 
read,  as  also  Deut.  vii.  I — 6.  .  .  .  No  Moabite  or  Ammonite  family  could  be  admitted  to  the  privi- 
leges of  Jewry  until  in  the  tenth  generation  after  quitting  heathenism  and  formally  allying  itself 
with  Israel." — Crosby.  3.  They  separated  from  Israel  all  the  mixed  multitude]  Non-Israelitish 
people  who  followed  the  Israelites  at  their  departure  from  Egypt.  Here  transferred  to  strangers 
living  among  them.  4,  6.  Eliashib  .  .  .  Tobiah]  Nehemiah  left  for  Persia.  Irregularities  were 
permitted.  Amongst  them  this  desecration.  6.  In  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of  Artaxerxes, 
king  of  Babylon]  *'  Probably  the  '  time  set '  by  Nehemiah  and  approved  by  the  king  (chap.  ii. 
6),  was  twelve  years.  At  the  expiration  of  this  term  he  was  obliged  to  leave  the  superintendence 
of  affairs  at  Jerusalem  and  return  to  the  court.  Artaxerxes  is  called  'king  of  Babylon,'  instead  of 
*  king  of  Persia,'  probably  because  at  this  time  of  Nehemiali's  return  the  court  was  removed  to 
Babylon  for  some  special  state  reason." — Crosby.  After  certain  days]  No  definite  interval. 
Some  expositors  think  a  year.  No  proof.  8.  I  cast  forth  all  the  household  stuff  of  Tobiah] 
Nehemiah  a  man  of  decision.  10.  The  Levites  and  the  singers  .  .  were  fled]  Their  allowance 
had  been  withheld.  They  fled  to  their  own  fields  for  livelihood.  11.  Then  contended  I  with  the 
rulers]  They  had  soon  forgotten  their  vow  (chap.  x.  39).  I  gathered  them]  The  Levites.  13. 
I  made  treasurers]  Managers  of  the  stores.  Four  faithful  men  appointed.  14.  Wipe  not  out] 
('Onceives  of  his  deeds  as  written  in  a  book.  15.  In  those  days]  When  he  returned  to  Jerusalem. 
Sabbath  had  become  desecrated,  "Work  was  done  and  produce  brought  in.  17.  The  nobles] 
Nehemiah  reminded  them  of  the  unchanged  law  and  the  sufferings  its  visitation  had  brought  upon 
their  fathers  (Jer.  xvii.  20—27).  20.  Lodged  without]  The  traders  forbidden  to  enter  hoped 
the  pi'ople  would  come  out  to  buy.  22.  Cleanse  themselves  and  keep  the  gates]  Increasing  the 
sanctity  of  the  Sabbath  by  making  Levites  responsible.  23.  Jews  that  had  married]  Borderers 
who  by  living  near  the  heathen  nations  had  formed  alliances.  The  cliildren's  speech  was  affected. 
25]  The  action  of  a  governor  acting  officially.  28.  I  chased  him  from  me]  Forced  him  to  leave 
Jerusalem.  30.  Thus  cleansed  I  them  .  .  .  and  appointed  the  wards  of  the  priests  and  Levites] 
So  important  did  he  deem  the  temple.  81.  Remember  me]  A  repeated  supplication.  Nehemiah 
was  great  and  good. 


HOIVIILETICAL  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTER  XIII. 


Ver.      1 — 3.     Renewed  Purification, 
„         1,  2.     The  Irrevocableness   of   Wrong- 
doing. 
f,  2.     Good  out  of  Kvil. 

f*       4 — 8.     Reformation  a  Slow  Work. 


Ver. 

17, 

18. 

t» 

22. 

i> 

26. 

>» 

31. 

>7 

31. 

Profanation  of  the  Sabbath. 

Nehemiah. 

Solomon. 

Divine  Remembrance. 

A  Life's  Work  Reviewed. 


248 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  :  NEHEMIAE.        [ohap.  xm 


Renewed  Purification. 

3tiii.  1 — 3.  On  that  day  they  read  in  the  hook  of  Moses  in  the  audience  of  the  people  ; 
and  thei-ein  was  found  written,  that  the  Ammonite  and  the  Moahite  should  not 
come  into  the  congregation  of  God  for  ever ;  because  they  met  not  the  children 
of  Israel  with  bread  and  with  ivater,  but  hired  Balaam  agianst  them,  that  he 
should  curse  them :  howbeit  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing.  Now  it 
came  to  pass,  when  they  had  heard  the  laio,  that  they  separated  from  Israel  all 
the  mixed  multitude. 


The  duty  of  the  Church  to  purify 
itself  constantly  anew. 

I.  In  regard  to  those  with  whom 
they  assimilate  themselves.  In  the 
Old  Testament,  in  regard  to  the  Ammon- 
ites, &c.  In  the  Church,  in  regard  to 
those  who  not  only  go  astray,  but  also 
who  will  not  allow  themselves  to  be 
bettered,  and  who  thus  exclude  them- 
selves. 

II.  Whereon  it  grounds  itself.  Not 


only  on  the  right  of   self-preservation, 
but  also  upon  God's  word. 

III.  What  it  aims  at.  That  the 
Church  set  forth  more  and  more  what 
it  should  be  as  Christ's  spotless  bride. — 
Dr.  Schultz. 

Illustrations  :  The  true  and  grand  idea  of  a 
Church  is  a  society  for  the  purpose  of  making 
men  like  Christ — earth  like  heaven — the  king- 
doms of  the  world  the  kingdom  of  Christ. — 
Arnold. 


The  Irrevocableness  op  Wrong-doing. 

xiii.  1,  2.  On  that  day  they  read  in  the  book  of  Moses  in  the  audience  of  the  people  ; 
and  therein  was  found  written,  that  the  Ammonite  and  the  Moabite  should  not 
come  into  the  congregation  of  God  for  ever  ;  because  they  met  not  the  children  of 
Israel  with  bread  and  with  water,  but  hired  Balaam  against  them,  that  he  should 
curse  them. 


"  The  severe  exclusion  of  the  Moabite 
and  Ammonite  was  an  enacted  token 
against  sin.  Even  these  blood  relations 
of  Israel  were  to  be  kept  away  as  polluted, 
because  they  showed  no  sympathy  with 
Israel,  and  made  a  deliberate  and  vile 
attempt  to  plunge  Israel  into  sin.  A 
permanent  horror  was  to  be  erected 
between  Israel  and  these  monsters  of 
iniquity.  The  key  to  many  of  the  stern 
Mosaic  statutes  is  to  be  found  in  the 
necessity  of  holding  up  the  heinousness 
of  sin,  which  men  are  ever  ready  to 
make  light  of." — Crosby. 

The  immortality  of  evil. 

I.  It  is  done — cannot  be  undone. 
An  act  has  passed  into  the  irreparable 
past.  It  has  become  part  of  the  consti- 
tution of  things.  Man  may  forget  it, 
and  God  forgive  it — but  it  is  done. 
The  doer  may  plead  ignorance,  prejudice, 
habit,  custom — excuse  may  busy  itself, 
and  regret  plead  for  pity,  but  the  deed  is 
done.     Let  inexperience  remember  and 


hardness  ponder  this. 

II.  It  has  moulded  you — you  can 
never  again  be  the  same.  The  dyer's 
hand  is  subdued  to  what  it  works  in. 
A  man's  trade,  profession,  or  calling  is 
indicated  in  his  features.  Habit  is  a 
second  nature.  The  beauty  of  the  soul 
touches  the  form  and  face.  Yice  makes 
the  doer  unlovely ;  stamps  its  image  and 
superscription  upon  the  otherwise  divine 
form.  "  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is  not 
mocked,"  &c. 

III.  It  has  warped  others.  Their 
task  is  rendered  more  difficult.  Their 
steps  will  henceforth  be  more  faltering. 
An  Ammonite  may  thwart  Israel.  "  Ahab 
made  Israel  to  sin."  That  is  his  title  to 
remembrance — he  has  an  immortality. 
I  am  my  brother's  keeper.  His  path 
and  mine  meet.  I  cannot  throw  off  my 
responsibility.  Doing  wrong  is  ruinous. 
Sin  is  the  great  foe.  The  wages  of  sin 
are  duly  paid  even  to  the  uttermost 
farthing. 


OHAP.   XIII.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


249 


Good  out  of  Evil. 
xiii.  2.     Howheit  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing. 


Nevertheless  Balaam's  memory  is  in- 
famous. Evil  was  intended  though  God 
averted  it.     So  in  life. 

I.  Sin.  Sin  is  still  sin  albeit  the 
sinner  is  forgiven.  God  loves  not  sin. 
"  God  hath  turned  the  curse  of  sin  into  a 
blessing.  And  here  it  is  proper  to  reflect 
upon  the  profound  and  incomprehensible 
wisdom  of  God,  who  hath  made  an  ad- 
vantage to  us  even  of  our  sin  and  misery. 
It  was  truly  said  by  one  of  the  ancients, 
upon  this  account,  that  Job  was  a  hap- 
pier man  upon  the  dunghill  than  Adam 
was  in  paradise.  His  holiness  indeed 
was  perfect,  his  happiness  was  great ; 
but  neither  of  them  permanent  and  in- 
defeasible, as  our  happiness  by  the  Medi- 
ator is.  So  that  in  the  same  sense  we 
may  call  Adam's  fall  a  happy  fall,  because 
ordered  and  overruled  by  the  wisdom  of 
God  to  our  great  advantage.  And  to 
this  purpose  Austin  somewhere  sweetly 
speaks  :  *  0  how  happily  did  I  fall  in 
Adam,  who  rose  again  more  happily  in 
Christ ! '  Thus  did  the  Lord  turn  a 
poison  into  an  antidote;  thus  did  that 
dreadful  fall  make  way  for  a  more 
blessed  and  fixed  state.  Now  we  are 
so  confirmed  and  established  by  Christ 
in  the  favour  of  God,  that  there  can  be 
no  more  such  fatal  breaches  and  dread- 
ful jars  betwixt  God  and  his  reconciled 
ones  for  ever.  The  bone  that's  well  set 
is  stronger  where  'tis  knit,  than  it  was 
before.  Blessed  be  God  for  Jesus 
Christ !  "—Flavel 

II.  Sorrow.  "God  has  turned  the 
curse  of  sorrow  into  a  blessing.  Sweet 
are  the  uses  of  adversity !  In  God's 
hand  indeed  they  are  :  when  he  puts  his 
children  into  the  furnace  of  affliction,  it 
is  that  he  may  thoroughly  purge  away  all 
their  dross.  A  great  writer  has  spoken 
with  great  beauty  of  the  resources  which 
God  has  placed  within  us  for  bringing 
good  out  of  evil,  or,  at  least,  for  greatly 
alleviating  our  trials  in  the  cases  of  sick- 
ness and  misfortune.  *  The  cutting  and 
irritating  grain  of  sand,'  he  says,  *  which 
by  accident  or  incaution  has  got  within 


the  shell,  incites  the  living  inmate  to 
secrete  from  its  own  resources  the  means 
of  coating  the  intrusive  substance.  And 
is  it  not,  or  may  it  not  be,  even  so  with 
the  irregularities  and  unevenness  of 
health  and  fortune  in  our  own  case  ? ' 
We  too  may  turn  diseases  into  pearls. 
But  how  much  more  wonderful  are  the 
wisdom  and  mercy  of  God,  in  making 
the  spiritual  trials  and  distresses  of  his 
people  their  necessary  discipline  for  their 
highest  good,  the  means  for  the  greatest 
perfection  and  stability  of  their  charac- 
ters !  This  is  indeed  a  wonderful  trans- 
formation. 'God,'  says  holy  Leighton, 
*  hath  many  sharp  cutting  instruments, 
and  rough  files  for  the  polishing  of  his 
jewels  ;  and  those  he  especially  esteems 
and  means  to  make  the  most  resplen- 
dent, he  hath  oftenest  his  tools  upon.'" 
— Cheever. 

III.  Death.  "  God  hath  turned  the 
curse  of  death  into  a  blessing.  It  were 
a  waste  of  words  to  attempt  to  prove 
that  death  is  indeed  a  curse  :  it  was  the 
woe  specially  denounced  against  men  as 
the  result  of  transgression — the  ill  in- 
flicted on  the  workers  of  iniquity.  But, 
through  the  obedience  and  death  of 
Christ,  the  Redeemer,  the  sting  of  death 
has  been  destroyed,  the  uncertainty  of 
the  future  has  been  dissipated,  and,  by 
the  destruction  of  guilt,  separation  from 
the  world  has  been  revealed,  as  the  be- 
ginning of  a  perfected  happiness  and  an 
enlarged  blessedness  to  the  believer.  If 
it  is  indeed  a  blessed  thing  for  a  spirit, 
weighed  down  with  a  sinking  mortality, 
and  groaning  beneath  the  load  of  unnum- 
bered ills,  to  flee  away  from  its  troubles, 
and  soar  amid  the  cloudless  light  of 
immortal  day,  then  death  has  been 
turned  into  a  blessing,  since  it  merely 
cuts  asunder  the  chains  whereby  we 
are  bound  to  earth,  and  admits  the 
spirit  to  a  land  of  peace  and  joy.  If  it  is 
indeed  a  blessed  thing  for  a  being  long 
pent  up  amid  the  closeness  of  a  dungeon, 
to  exchange  its  pestilential  air  for  the 
fragrant  breath  of  paradise,  then  death 


250 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


[chap.  xm. 


has  been  turned  into  a  blessing,  since  it 
serves  to  dissociate  the  children  of  the 
covenant  from  the  pollution  of  this 
world,  and  advance  them  to  the  regions 
beyond  the  grave,  where  the  Lamb  shall 
feed  them  and  guide  them  to  fountains 
of  living  water,  and  God  shall  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes.  I  say, 
if  God  hath  made  death  the  very  instru- 
ment of  exchanging  earth  for  heaven,  of 


ending  the  warfare  and  strife  of  time, 
and  crowning  believers  with  the  un- 
speakably precious  reward,  then  un- 
doubtedly, while  they  exultingly  pro- 
claim, *  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ]  0 
grave,  where  is  thy  victory  %  * —  they 
must  not  cease  to  remember  that  death 
was  indeed  a  crying  evil,  a  bitter  curse, 
but  that  our  God  turned  the  curse  into 
a  blessing." — M^Naughton. 


Reformation  a  Slow  Woek. 
xiii  4 — 8.     And  before  this,  Eliashib  the  priest,  S^c, 


When  Nehemiah  returned  to  Persia  he 
left  the  people  penitent  and  devoted ; 
the  temple  restored ;  the  priests  and 
Levites  at  their  posts.  All  were  loyal 
to  conscience  and  God.  When  Nehemiah 
came  back  again  to  Jerusalem  he  found 
Tobiah  in  the  temple,  Levites  in  the 
fields,  tithes  in  the  people's  hands,  the 
house  of  God  forsaken,  and  the  Sabbath 
of  God  desecrated.  And  it  grieved  him 
sore.  He  had  to  build  again  from  the 
foundations. 

I.  Reformers  are  sanguine  men. 
They  see  the  evil,  and  the  needs-be  for 
its  removal.     Too   often  they  overlook 


the    herculean    task    that    lies    before 
them. 

II.  Reformation  meets  with  opposi- 
tion. The  reformers  propose  to  destroy. 
They  confront  the  selfishness  of  human 
nature,  and  war  against  the  passions  of 
men. 

III.  Reformation  must  build  up 
after  it  has  destroyed.  Building  up 
is  slower  than  pulling  down.  All  re- 
formers have  been  disappointed.  Those 
whom  they  have  striven  to  help  have 
been  their  most  determined  hinderers. 
Faith,  hope,  and  courage  are  indispens- 
able. 


Profanation  of  the  Sabbath. 

xiii.  17,  18.  Then  I  contended  with  the  nobles  of  Judah,  and  said  unto  them,  What 
evil  thing  is  this  that  ye  do,  and  prof ane  the  Sabbath  day?  Did  not  your  fathers 
thus,  and  did  not  our  God  bring  all  this  evil  upon  us,  and  upon  this  city  ?  yet 
ye  bring  more  wrath  upon  Israel  byprofaning  the  Sabbath. 

Introduction.  Historical.  Nehemiah  absent ;  disorder  ensued.  Among  other 
irregularities  profanation  of  the  Sabbath  became  frequent  and  flagrant.  It  moved 
the  spirit  of  Nehemiah  not  so  much  that  the  men  of  Tyre  sold  their  fish  and  wares 
on  the  Sabbath,  which  in  consideration  of  their  being  heathen  they  might  be  ex- 
pected to  do,  as  that  they  sold  them  to  "  the  men  of  Judah,"  the  visible  worshippers 
of  God,  and  ^*  in  Jerusalem,"  the  seat  of  his  worship ;  coming  up  to  the  very 
threshold  of  his  house  with  their  merchandise,  as  if  in  contempt  of  his  presence 
and  authority.  But  we  have  a  more  serious  concern  in  this  matter  than  merely  to 
vent  our  indignation  against  *'the  men  of  Tyre."  Our  first  and  main  concern  is 
to  see  that  our  own  garments  are  clean.  Nor  is  it  sufficient  that  our  own  habits 
in  respect  to  our  personal  observation  of  the  Sabbath  are  correct.  In  this  respect 
the  nobles  of  Judah,  for  aught  that  appears,  were  without  fault.  Yet  Nehemiah 
did  not  hesitate  to  charge  them  with  the  guilt  of  the  profanations  which  they 
witnessed.  "  What  evil  thing  is  this  that  ye  do,''  said  he,  "  and  profane  the  Sabbath 
day  \  "   He  said  this  on  the  assumption  that  they  had  the  power  to  prevent  the  sin, 


CHAP.  XIII.]  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  251 

and  were  answerable  for  the  consequences  of  their  neglect.  Hence  I  derive  the 
sentiment  that — 

Men  of  authority  and  influence  incur  great  quilt,  and  bring  wrath 
UPON  the  community,  by  conniving  at  profanations  of  the  Sabbath. 

Men  of  authority  and  influence,  because  in  all  countries  where  the  people  are  the 
source  of  power,  men  in  authority  can  do  but  little  unsupported  by  men  of  in- 
fluence. As  men  of  all  classes  have  their  share  of  influence  the  responsibility  rests 
in  a  measure  upon  all.  By  whatever  means  the  influence  of  individuals  is  in- 
creased, their  responsibility  also  is  enhanced. 

1.  Profanation  of  the  Sahhath  is  a  great  sin.  The  Sabbath  is  a  Divine  institu- 
tion. At  the  creation,  God  by  His  express  appointment  set  it  apart  from  a  common 
to  a  sacred  use.  This  appointment  He  confirmed  and  renewed  at  Mount  Sinai. 
Our  Saviour,  by  the  authority  vested  by  him  in  his  apostles,  added  his  sanction  to 
the  appointment  and  made  it  a  law  of  his  kingdom,  after  the  obligation  of  the 
Jewish  ritual  had  ceased,  with  only  the  circumstantial  change  of  the  first  instead  of 
the  seventh  in  the  series,  as  the  day  of  rest,  in  commemoration  of  his  resurrection. 
Consecrated  peculiarly  to  God's  service.  Wantonly  to  profane  the  Sabbath  is  open 
contempt  of  God.  This  is  not  a  sin  of  ignorance.  A  few  men  there  may  be  who 
seriously  disbelieve  in  the  moral  obligation  of  the  Sabbath,  and  others  are  blinded 
by  custom  in  regard  to  the  guilt  of  certain  common  violations  of  it,  but  the  great 
mass  know  what  they  do.  This  sin  is  an  outrage  on  the  rights  of  men.  It  opens 
the  door  to  universal  licentiousness ;  enfeebles  the  laws  of  society ;  tends  to  destroy 
our  best  blessings  and  blot  out  our  dearest  hopes.  The  Sabbath  is  necessary  to  the 
perpetuation  of  true  religion.  Some,  while  they  think  lightly  of  religion,  profess 
highly  to  value  free  institutions.  They  boast  of  liberty,  and  of  the  sciences,  the 
arts,  the  enterprise,  the  universal  education  of  the  people,  and  the  general  prosperity 
and  happiness  which  they  claim  to  be  its  fruits.  And  what  is  liberty  "i  The 
unrestricted  enjoyment  of  our  rights,  so  far  as  this  is  consistent  with  the  wellbeing 
of  society.  What  liberty  then  can  there  be  among  depraved  men,  without  law  to 
restrain  their  appetites  and  passions  1  or  what  efficacy  can  there  be  in  law,  without 
a  corresponding  moral  sentiment  in  the  community  to  sustain  it]  or  what  efficacious 
moral  sentiment  without  religion  1  or  what  religion  without  the  Sabbath  %  Turn 
your  eyes  on  those  regions  of  the  earth  where  the  Sabbath  is  unknown,  and  what 
do  you  find  the  moral,  social,  and  civil  condition  of  men  there  1  See  also  those 
portions  of  the  world  where  the  Sabbath  is  now  abandoned,  or  given  up  to 
pastime. 

2.  Civil  laws  to  protect  the  Sahhath  from  open  violation,  are  just  and  proper. 
In  Jewish  national  code  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  was  enforced  by  civil  penalties. 
On  this  ground  it  was  that  Nehemiah  went  to  the  magistrates  of  Jerusalem  and 
charged  them  with  guilt  in  forbearing  to  exercise  the  authority  which  God  had 
vested  in  them  to  restrain  profanations  of  the  day.  Equally  incumbent  is  it  on 
every  other  community,  which  has  authority  over  its  own  members,  whether  it  be 
a  family  or  an  empire,  to  protect  the  Sabbath  from  desecration.  Nor  is  there  any- 
thing in  this  unjust.  To  enforce  a  spiritual  observation  of  the  Sabbath  is  not 
indeed  the  province  of  civil  authority.  With  duties  appropriately  religious  it 
has  no  direct  concern.  These  it  must  leave  to  the  higher  authority  of  God,  and 
the  conscience  of  every  individual.  But  to  protect  those  who  are  disposed 
religiously  to  observe  the  Sabbath,  in  the  peaceful  enjoyment  of  the  privilege,  is 
no  less  just  and  proper,  than  it  is  to  protect  them  in  the  enjoyment  of  any  other 
right  or  privilege.  They  too  are  the  mass  of  the  community.  Ninety-nine  hundred 
probably  would  consider  a  general  disregard  of  the  Sabbath  destructive  to  their 
best  interests.  Such  being  the  fact,  to  require  that  no  laws  for  the  protection  of 
the  Sabbath  be  made,  or  that  having  been  made,  they  be  a  dead  letter ;  to  require 
that  the  mass  of  our  citizens  yield  to  the  few,  and  be  governed  by  their  wishes,  is 


252  HOMILETIC  COmiBNTARF:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  xiii. 

a  position  which,  on  any  other  suhject  of  legislation,  would  not  for  a  moment  he 
tolerated. 

3.  For  a  dite  execution  of  these  lawSy  men  clothed  with  the  authority  and  the  in- 
fluence to  do  this,  are  answerable  to  God,  and  incur  great  guilt  by  neglecting  it. 
They  are  ministers  of  God.  They  have  taken  official  oaths.  The  fact  of  their 
heing  clothed  with  office,  hinds  them  to  discharge  its  duties. 

Application.  1.  To  the  friends  of  Sahhath.  2.  To  fathers  and  mothers.  3. 
To  the  young. — Noah  Porter y  D.D. ;  abridged. 

Illustrations  : — *'  Each  should  do  what  his  talent  and  influence  in  society  enjoin  and  permit.  It  is 
the  principle  upon  which  I  insist.  If  we  cannot  absolutely  shut  the  gates  of  our  great  cities  to  the 
entrance  of  merchandise,  we  may  do  something  to  lessen  the  evil.  We  may  shut  the  door  of  our 
houses — we  may  prohibit  the  purchase  or  reception  of  articles  of  consumption  by  our  servants  and 
dependants — we  may  encourage  those  upon  whom  W9  have  any  influence,  to  observe  the  sacred  day. 
Let  only  the  zeal,  the  courage,  the  firmness,  the  disinterestedness  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiahbe  connected 
with  their  piety  and  love  to  the  house  of  their  God,  and  much  would  be  done." — Bishop  Wilson. 

"We  find  from  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  Church  that  all  days  were  not  alike  to  Christians, 
but  that  one  day,  the  first-day  of  the  week,  was  singled  out  and  separated  from  the  others  as  their 
day  of  worship.  The  end  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  was  accomplished  in  the  sacrifice  of  our  Lord ;  the 
end  of  the  one  Temple  has  been  accomplished  ;  but  the  end  of  the  Sabbath  has  not  been  accomplished, 
and  will  not  be  till  toil,  and  trouble,  and  sin,  and  sorrow  shall  cease.  Then  it  will  be  merged  in 
the  eternal  Sabbatism  which  remains  for  the  people  of  God.  Eut  till  then  the  solemn  words  of  our 
Lord  are  as  a  wall  of  fire  around  it,  to  protect  its  sacredness  and  integrity.  *  Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  nowise  pass  from  the  law,  till  all  be  ful- 
filled.* "—John  Kennedy,  D.D. 

**The  Sabbath  is  the  guardian  of  every  other  Divine  institution.  The  sin  of  profaning  the 
Sabbath  stamps  in  the  individual,  the  family,  or  the  nation,  which  is  guilty  of  it,  the  character  of 
irreligious,  and  speedily  ripens  them  for  the  judgments  of  God.  This  is  the  danger  of  being  any 
way  concerned  in  this  iniquity,  we  are  furthering  an  evil  which  would  ultimately  destroy  religion 
itself,  and  which  will  assuredly  prove  as  ruinous  to  the  temporal  renown,  as  the  spiritual  interests,  of 
our  country." — Eev.  J.  A.  Wylie. 

"  It  is  a  most  important  sentiment,  and  ought  to  be  kept  constantly  before  the  public  mind,  that 
religion  is  the  most  direct  and  powerful  cause  of  national  comfort,  prosperity,  and  security,  and  that 
in  its  absence  all  their  other  causes  must  be  limited  and  transient  in  their  eff'ects.  If  religion  were 
a  mere  abstraction  of  devotion,  confined  to  the  closet  and  the  sanctuary,  and  restricted  in  its  influence 
to  the  imagination  and  the  taste,  but  not  having  any  necessary  control  over  the  conscience,  the  heart, 
and  the  life,  and  not  intended  to  regulate  the  intercourse  of  society  ;  if  it  consisted  merely  in  attend- 
ance on  the  rites  and  forms  of  the  Church,  and  began  and  ended  upon  the  threshold  of  the  house 
of  God,  then  it  would  be  difficult  to  point  out  what  a  connection  such  a  religion  had  with  the  wel- 
fare of  a  country.  It  would,  in  that  case,  resemble  the  ivy,  which,  though  it  add  a  picturesque  efi'ect 
to  a  venerable  fabric,  imparts  neither  stability  to  its  walls,  nor  convenience  to  its  apartments.  But 
if  religion  be  indeed  a  principle  of  the  heart,  an  element  of  the  character,  the  habit  of  thinking,  feel- 
ing, and  acting  aright  in  all  our  social  relations,  the  basis  of  every  virtue,  and  the  main  prop  ot 
every  excellence ;  if  it  be  indeed  the  fear  of  the  Lord  by  which  men  depart  from  evil ;  if  it  be  faith 
working  by  love ;  if  it  be  such  a  belief  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  as  leads  to  a  conformity  to  his  example, 
religion  being  such  as  this  must  secure  the  welfare  of  any  country.  There  is  not  one  single  influ- 
ence, whether  of  law,  of  science,  of  art,  of  learning,  tending  to  the  well-being  of  society,  which  true 
religion  does  not  guard  and  strengthen,'' — James. 

The  Lord's  Day. —  Stations  on  the  line  of  your  journey  are  not  your  journey's  end,  but  each  one 
brings  you  nearer.  Such  are  our  Lord's  Days.  A  haven  is  not  home,  but  it  is  a  place  of  quiet  and  rest, 
where  the  rough  waves  are  stayed.  Such  is  the  "  Lord's  Day."  A  garden  is  a  piece  ot  common 
land,  and  yet  it  has  ceased  to  be  common  land.  It  is  an  eff"ort  to  regain  Paradise.  Such  is  "  The 
Lord's  Day."  A  bud  is  not  a  flower,  but  it  is  the  promise  of  a  flower.  Such  is  "  The  Lord's  Day." 
The  world's  week  tempts  you  to  sell  your  soul  to  the  flesh  and  the  world :  "  The  Lord's  Day  "  c  lis 
you  to  remembtance,  and  begs  you  rather  to  sacrifice  earth  to  heav^  and  time  to  eternity,  than 
heaven  to  eartli  and  eternity  to  time.  The  six  days  not  only  claim  you  as  captives  of  the  earth, 
but  do  their  best  to  keep  the  prison-doors  shut  that  you  may  forget  the  way  out.  "  The  Lord's 
Day"  sets  before  you  an  open  door.  Samson  has  carried  the  gates  away.  "The  Lord's  Day" 
summons  you  to  the  threshold  of  your  house  of  bondage,  to  look  forth  unto  immortality,  your  immor- 
tality. The  true  Lord's  Day  is  the  Eternal  life ;  but  a  type  of  it  is  given  to  you  on  earth,  that  you 
may  be  refreshed  with  the  anticipation  and  foretaste  of  your  rest. — John  Fulsford, 


CHAP.  XIII.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMUB.  263 


Nehemiah. 

xii.  22.     Remember  met  0  my  Gody  concerning  this  also,  and  spare  m$  according 

to  the  greatness  of  thy  mercy. 

Introduotiok.      Historical.      Every  in  the  text  is  made.     Modern  enmity. 

part  of  Nehemiah's  short  history  shows     Nehemiah  appeals,  thirdly 

that  the  fear  and  love  of  God  formed  3.  From  man's  ingratitude.     It  was 

the   principal   motive  with  Nehemiah.  here   that  this  zealous  servant  of  God 

Here  is,  first—                                    ^  found   his   greatest   trial.      He    might 

I.  An  appeal  to  God's  approbation,  easily  have  disregarded  man's  judgment ; 

"  Eemember  me,  0  my  God,  concerning  or   have   endured  man's  enmity.     But 

this  also."     Nehemiah  often  makes  ap-  how   painful,  when  the   very   persons 

peals   of  this  kind.      This  manner  of  whom   in   God's   name   he    sought    to 

speaking  was  an  appeal  to  God —  benefit,  were  cold,  reluctant,  unfeeling  1 

1.  From  man's  judgment.  His  dis-  Nehemiah's  was  no  solitary  case, 
tinguished  abilities  had  hitherto  recom-  Is  there  no  danger  lest  appeals  of 
mended  him  to  notice  in  the  royal  this  kind  should  lead  us  to  trust  in  our- 
palace,  notwithstanding  the  disgrace  of  selves  that  we  are  righteous,  and  despise 
his  Jewish  faith.  But  he  had  now  others  "i  Not  if  we  make  them  in  the 
engaged  in  an  undertaking  which  was  spirit   of   Nehemiah  :    for  you   find  in 

likely   enough   to    appear    enthusiastic     close  connection  with  this  appeal 

and  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  his  II.  A  contrite  prayer  for  God's  for- 
Persian  acquaintance.  But  what  then  *?  giveness.  «  Spare  me,  according  to  the 
It  was  for  God's  honour,  and  therefore  greatness  of  thy  mercy."  Every  real  be- 
he  despises  this  shame,  casting  himself  liever,  while  he  habitually  labours  to 
upon  the  approbation  of  God.  This  have  a  conscience  void  of  offence,  main- 
principle  it  was  that  influenced  Noah,  tains  at  the  same  time  a  deep  feelinf^  of 
Abraham,  Moses,  David,  Paul.  It  is  humility  and  of  his  need  of  unsparing 
the  principle  of  faith  rendering  an  un-  mercy.  Let  us  endeavour  to  trace  the 
seen  God  visible.     Such  men  look  for  a  course  of  this  feeling. 

future  "recompense    of    reward,"    pro-  1.  After  all  that  he  ha^  done  for  God's 

mised  by  Him  who  cannot  lie.     When  service,    Nehemiah    cannot  forget    that 

misunderstood,   and   undervalued,    and  there  is  a  load  of  original  and  actual  dn 

misrepresented  by  the  world,  they  can  recorded  against  him,  for  which  no  sulh 

appeal  to  God.     '*Let  them  curse,  but  sequent  obedience  can  make  satisfaction 

bless  thou."     Nehemiah  makes  his  ap-  2.  Nehemiah  finds  even  his  religious  ac- 

peal  to  God,  secondly—  tions  so  stained  with  sin,  that  though  he 

2.  From  man's  enmity.     While  one  may  appeal  from  man,  he  cannot  make 
party  satisfied  themselves  with  despising,  them,   a  plea  of  merit  before  God      3 
there  was  another   party  in  Jerusalem  He  casts  himself  with  a  steadfast  faith] 
Itself,  who  hated  and  opposed,  his  pro-  on  the  free  grace  and  covenanted  mercies 
ceedings.     These  were  they  who,  being  of  the  Lord. 

Jews,    had    connected    themselves    by  Application.   If  the  despised  believer 

imrriage  with  heathen  families— or  the  may  thus  appeal  from  man  to  God  what 

ofi-sprmg   of  such   marriages.     To  such  hope  can  there  be  for  those  who  compel 

persons,    the  revival   of    pure    Jewish  him  so  to  do  ? 

manne^  was  very  provoking.  Others  If  the  repenting  and  believing  sinner 
lound  that  their  worldly  interests  were  is  so  graciously  spared,  how  active  should 
interfered  with  by  Nehemiah's  strict  he  be  in  serving  the  Lord,  amid  a  gain- 
enforcing  of  the  Sabbath.  It  is  in  saying  and  perverse  generation  \—Rev. 
reterence  to  their  enmity  that  the  appeal  Joseph  Jowett,  M.A. ;  abridged. 


254  ffOMlLETiC  COMMBNTART:  NEHEMIAH.  [oSAp.  xiii. 


Solomon. 

adii  26.     Did  not  Solomon  king  of  Israel  sin  hy  these  things  ?  yet  among  many 
nations  was  there  no  king  like  him,  who  was  beloved  of  his  God, 

'*  It  may  appear  remarkable  that  one  who  fell  so  grievously  should  contribute  at  all 
to  the  Book  of  God,  nor  is  there  any  other  instance  of  the  kind  ;  but  his  sad  his- 
tory adds  a  peculiar  weight  of  warning  to  his  words ;  nor  are  there  any  books  more 
strongly  marked  by  the  finger  of  God." 

*'  Solomon  was  chosen  of  God,  and  afterwards  rejected  as  Saul  had  been ;  he  was 
full  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  and,  what  is  far  more,  of  holiness  and  goodness. 
There  is  perhaps  no  one  of  whom  the  early  promise  of  good  seemed  so  decisive." 

"  It  has  been  said,  as  by  St.  Augustine,  that  Solomon  was  more  injured  by  pros- 
perity than  profited  by  wisdom.  Yet  we  may  observe,  that  his  falling  away  is  not 
in  Scripture  attributed  to  his  wealth,  his  power  and  honour." 

"  We  cannot  conclude  that  Solomon  himself  did  not  at  last  repent ;  but  this  has 
always  been  considered  by  the  Church  as  very  doubtful,  to  say  the  least.  All  we 
know  is,  that  Scripture  has  fully  made  known  to  us  his  falling  away  from  God, 
but  has  said  nothing  of  his  repentance.     The  very  silence  is  awful  and  impressive." 

"  What  more  melancholy  than  the  fall  of  one  so  great — so  wise '{  What  words 
could  have  been  spoken  to  him  more  powerful  than  his  own  %  What  eloquence 
could  describe  his  fall  with  more  feeling  and  beauty  than  his  own  words'? 
What  could  more  powerfully  paint  the  loveliness  of  that  holiness  from  which  he 
feU"?  What  the  overpowering  sweetness  of  that  Divine  love  which  he  has  con- 
sented to  give  up  to  feed  on  ashes'?  Who  can  describe  the  temptations  to  those 
very  sins  by  which  he  was  ensnared  in  a  more  searching  manner  than  he  has  done  ? 
,  .  .  How  must  his  own  sweet  and  Divine  words  sound  to  him  like  music  of 
Paradise  to  the  lost  spirits ;  yea,  as  songs  of  heaven  would  come  back  to  fallen 
angels  in  sad  remembrance  "i  ....  It  is  very  awful  to  think  how  God  may  use 
men  as  instruments  of  good  that  his  Spirit  may  teach  them,  and  through  them  teach 
others,  and  guide  them  to  the  living  fountains  of  waters,  yet  they  themselves  at 
last  fail  of  the  prize  of  their  high  calling.  What  a  warning  for  fear.** — From  Rev, 
Isaac  Williams '  *  Characters  of  the  Old  Testament.^ 

Divine  Remembrance. 

xiii.  31.     Remember  me,  0  my  God,  for  good. 

Our  Protestant  forefathers  were  fond  of  the  maxim — "  They  who  observe  Provi- 
dences shall  never  want  Providences  to  observe."  The  truth  of  this  is  eminently 
seen  in  the  rescue  of  the  Church  from  the  Babylonish  Captivity ;  in  the  rebuild- 
ing of  the  temple  ;  and  in  the  restoration  of  the  people  to  the  Holy  Land.  High 
political  considerations  rather  than  religious  ones  no  doubt  actuated  Cyrus,  and 
Darius,  and  Artaxerxes,  but  "  the  hearts  of  kings  are  in  the  hand  of  God."  So  in 
the  Reformation  it  has  been  said  that  God  put  little  thoughts  into  Henry  VIII's 
mind  for  great  purposes,  just  as  the  preservation  of  the  Church  in  Esther's  time  was 
brought  about  by  a  single  sleepless  night  of  Ahasuerus  the  king.  *'This  also 
cometh  from  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in  counsel  and  excellent  in 
working."  The  Life  and  Times  of  Nehemiah  are  of  much  more  consequence  to 
the  history  of  the  Jewish  Church  than  ordinary  readers  suppose.  Great  men  are 
born  for  great  occasions,  and  eventful  times  form  the  training  school  for  public  men. 
Our  text  is  Nehemiah's  last  recorded  prayer,  showing  us  the  secret  of  his  strength. 
It  expresses  much,  but  it  implies  more. 


ottAP.  xni.J  BOMILETIC  COMMBNTARY:  KEHEMIAH,  2bb 

I.  Nehemiah's  delight  in  the  remembrance  of  God.  The  remembrance  of  God 
the  habit  of  his  life.  Note  the  instructive  occasions  on  which  the  prayer  was 
uttered.  I^ot  in  the  closet  for  private  devotion ;  not  in  the  family  for  domestic 
contemplation  ;  not  in  the  sanctuary  for  public  worship  ;  but  in  the  daily  walks 
of  life— amidst  the  toils  of  his  office,  amidst  the  reforms  he  was  carrying  on, 
amidst  the  hot  enmity  of  the  world,  amidst  the  plots  that  were  formed  against  liis 
life.  Again  and  again  he  prays,  "Remember  me,  0  God."  He  was  in  the  habit 
of  remembering  God,  or  such  a  prayer  would  not  have  risen  spontaneously  to  his  lips. 

1.  A  test  of  religious  character.  The  manner  and  degree  in  which  devout 
thoughts  mingle  with  daily  thoughts  and  incorporate  themselves  with  worldly 
employments  the  special  mark  of  a  child  of  God.  Neliemiah  specifies  this  as  the 
distinctive  mark  of  those  holy  ones  who  were  associated  with  him — "  thy  servants, 
who  desire  to  fear  thy  name."  And  Malachi  tells  us  that  **a  book  of  remembrance 
was  written  for  those  who  feared  the  Lord,  and  thought  upon  his  name ; "  and 
were  thus  the  patterns  of  distinguished  excellence  in  most  degenerate  times. 
Throughout  Scripture  the  remembrance  of  God  is  set  forth  as  the  active  principle 
of  all  vice.  "  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  nations  that  forget 
God." 

2.  A  voluntary  remembrance.  Not  enforced.  The  result  of  a  principle.  When 
Solomon  says,  **  Remember  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,"  he  appeals  to 
the  first  and  best  affections  of  the  human  heart,  under  the  impressions  of  early 
piety.  "  In  the  days  of  thy  youth "  some  render  "  in  the  days  of  thy  choice." 
Religion  is  choice.  **  Choose  ye  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve."  Not  an  appeal  to 
fear.  God  might  have  compelled  our  remembrance — by  awful  judgments  ;  by  out- 
ward demonstrations  of  his  power.  He  asks  where  he  might  command  ;  entreats 
when  he  might  enforce.  "  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart."  So  when  Jesus  says, 
"Do  this  in  remembrance  of  me,"  he  appeals  to  the  more  generous  emotion  of 
inward  piety  which  disposed  them  to  obey  at  a  touch,  and  yield  to  the  gentler 
insinuations  of  Divine  grace.  Nehemiah's  remembrance  of  God  was  spontaneous 
and  free  :  it  sprang  up  on  all  occasions ;  like  water  from  a  fountain,  or  music  from 
a  bird,  or  light  from  the  sun.  It  was  part  of  a  life — the  life  of  faith  and  devotion  ; 
a  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  In  your  best  moments  you  say,  "  The  love  of  Christ 
constraineth  us." 

3.  A  blessed,  though  difficulty  exercise.  It  is  difficult  amidst  the  active  duties  of 
life  to  keep  up  a  devout  remembrance  of  God ;  but  the  blessedness  more  than  com- 
pensates its  difficulty.  It  is  the  advantage  of  any  useful  habit  that  when  once 
formed  it  becomes  easy  and  spontaneous ;  and  would  require  an  effort  to  forego  or 
counteract  it.  "  Use  is  second  nature."  Same  law  holds  in  Christian  life.  That 
which  we  have  once  determined  upon  by  principle  and  by  choice  we  continue  to 
do  by  preference  and  by  affection.  Well  for  us  when  the  remembrance  of  God  is 
the  solace  and  delight  of  the  mind  in  active  and  in  solitary  hours.  "  Yea,  in  the 
way  of  thy  judgments,  0  Lord,  have  we  waited  for  thee  ;  the  desire  of  our  soul  is 
to  thy  name,  and  to  the  remembrance  of  thee." 

Not  an  easy  attainment.  All  good  men  are  painfully  conscious  how  great  an 
effort  it  requires,  whilst  sedulously  engaged  with  the  concerns  of  time,  to  give  their 
best  hopes  and  affections  to  heaven ;  to  carry  the  spirit  of  the  sanctuary  into  the 
cares  and  vexations  of  each  returning  day.  It  is  difficult  to  mind  the  business 
of  two  worlds  and  to  do  justice  to  both  :  to  be  in  the  fear  of  God  all  the  day  long. 

Difficult :  not  impossible.  God  enjoins  nothing  which  his  strengthening  aids 
will  not  enable  the  faithful  to  achieve.  "  With  men  this  is  impossilQle  ;  but  with 
God  all  things  are  possible."  The  history  of  the  long  cloud  of  witnesses  attests  the 
practicability  of  the  religious  life  amidst  all  the  agitation  of  this  world's  cares. 
Patriarchs,  prophets,  reformers,  and  martyrs  had  as  many  hindrances  in  their  way 
to  heaven  as  we  have  in  ours. 


'-*5f>  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  [chap.  xin. 

II.  Nehemiah's  devout  desire  for  God's  remembrance  of  Mm.     1.  He  set  a 

vary  high  value  upon  the  friendship  of  God.  JSTot  a  matter  of  indifference  to  him 
whether  he  possessed  it  or  not.  It  was  vital  to  his  enjoyment,  vital  to  his  pros- 
perity, vital  to  his  existence.  Like  a  crust  to  a  starving  man ;  like  a  plank  to  the 
shipwrecked  is  the  love  of  Christ  to  a  Christian.  "  Because  thy  lovingkindness  is 
better  than  life,  therefore  my  soul  seeketh  thee.**  The  Psalmist  prayed,  "  Eemember 
me,  0  Lord,  with  the  favour  that  thou  bearest  unto  thy  people :  0  visit  me  with 
thy  salvation.**  Luther  protested  that  he  would  not  be  put  off  with  common 
things.  Much  emphasis  is  in  the  words,  "  That  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen, 
and  rejoice  with  thine  inheritance  " — that  I  may  see  it,  and  partake  of  it ;  have 
the  vision  and  the  fruition  of  this  great  goodness. 

2.  He  had  nothing  to  claim  in  the  way  of  merit,  hut  everything  to  hope  for  in  the 
way  of  mercy.  "Not  a  touch  of  the  Pharisee  in  Kehemiah.  The  deepest  humili- 
ation characterized  his  first  prayer  and  his  last ;  a  spirit  of  self-renunciation  and 
dependence.  "  I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  the  great  and  terrible  God,  that  keepest 
covenant  and  mercy."  The  only  word  that  seems  to  look  the  other  way  is  xiii.  14, 
"  Eemember  me,  0  my  God,  for  good,  and  wipe  not  out  the  remembrance  of  my 
good  deeds  :  '*  but  this  was  only  an  earnest  appeal  to  God  for  his  integrity  in  resist- 
ing the  tyranny  of  the  nobles  of  Judah,  and  maintaining  the  cause  of  the  poorer 
among  the  Levites.  As  there  is  a  book  of  remembrance  written  before  God, 
Nehemiah  would  not  be  wiped  out  of  that  book.  He  only  says,  Remember  me — 
not  reward  it,  not  record  it — yet  he  was  remembered  and  rewarded  too,  and  his  good 
deeds  were  recorded  as  well  as  remembered.  As  says  Matthew  Henry,  "Deeds 
done  for  the  house  of  God  and  the  offices  of  it,  for  the  support  and  encouragement 
of  religion,  are  good  deeds  ;  there  is  both  righteousness  and  godliness  in  them ;  and 
God  will  certainly  remember  them,  and  not  wipe  them  out." 

3.  He  possessed  a  happy  consciousness  of  his  personal  interest  in  the  Divine 
regards.     Again  and  again  he  utters  the  words,  "  My  God." 

4.  He  attached  much  importance  to  the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  He  maintained 
altar  and  priest. 

Application.  How  to  attain  amidst  the  business  of  life  this  pervading  principle 
of  spiritual  piety.  No  fixed  and  invariable  rules.  Every  man  with  the  Bible 
before  him  must  in  some  respects  be  a  law  to  himself.  Generally — 1.  Stated 
seasons  of  retirement  ought  to  be  appointed.  2.  Occupy  the  thoughts  in  the 
morning  with  some  leading  truth  or  text  of  Scripture.  3.  Form  the  habit  of  ejacu- 
latory  prayer.     4.  Make  conscience  of  your  thoughts. — Thodey. 

A  Life's  Work  Reviewed. 
xiii.  31.  Remember  me,  0  my  God,  for  good. 

I.  The  review  is  coming.     All  days  point  on  to  the  day  of  judgment. 

IL  A  review  is  desirable.  It  elevates  a  man  to  take  a  retrospect  of  his  life, 
judge  his  motives,  broaden  his  field  of  vision.  To  realize  the  grace  of  God  within 
him,  to  mark  the  purpose  of  God  towards  bim,  and  note  the  Avork  God  has  given 
liimtodo;  all  this  is  well.  But  here  is  no  elation.  Rather  is  he /mm&Zec?.  God 
is  great,  and  we  know  him  not.  That  he  should  employ  me — such  a  man  may 
say — is  not  matter  for  pride  or  self-boasiing.  I  am  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  all 
the  mercies  which  he  has  shown  unto  his  servant.  And  so  he  prays  for  mercy 
and  grace  to  be  found  faithful.  Reverence  and  trust,  fear  and  hope,  are  in  the  man 
wlio  thus  pleads  with  God. — Enlarged  from  Dr.  Schultz. 


TH5    END. 


INDEX. 


Accusing  cry  of  humanity,  114 

Adversaries  of  the  Church,  craft  and 
cruelty  of,  101 

Anger,  96  et  seq.^  117 

Bad  men  praised,  170 

Beginning  again,  103 

Benevolence,  13,  40 

Bible — preciousness  of,  201  et  seq,  ;  how  to 
read  203  ;  read,  and  expounded,  204 

Boldness,  150 

Book,  the  marvel  of  a,  244 

Bribery,  161 

Brotherhood,  of  man,  182 

Certitude,  value  of,  152 

Christians  criticized  by  the  world,  123 

Church  —  common  service  of,  190;  an 
edifice,  225  ;  requires  a  ministry,  226 ; 
a  missionary  institution,  226 ;  a  bro- 
therhood, 226  ;  dwelling-place  of  God, 
227  ;  place  where  God  and  man  meet, 
228 

Church  revival,  prayer  for,  22 

Church,  enemies  of,  63 

Cities,  185 

City,  Holy,  replenished,  234  et  seq.  ;  sym- 
bolism of  the,  236 

City  of  God  — Christ  the  door  of,  79; 
spaciousness  of,  178  ;  emptiness  of,  179 

Classes,  fusion  of,  84 

Clergy,  origin  of  the  Christian,  76 

Conviction,  courage  from,  149 

Courage,  Christian,  92 

David,  the  Jewish  hero,  85 

Day-book,  the  workmen's,  87 

Debt,  116 

Derision,  60,  67 

Deserters,  169 

Detraction,  147  ;  sin  of,  148 

Devotion,  habit  of,  152 

P^lect — place  and  people,  30  ;  people,  38 

Equality  of  men  in  the  sight  of  God,  34 

Ezra's  preaching,  effect  of,  192 

Ezra  reading  the  Law,  194 

Eaithful  Promisor,  the,  216 

Family,  idea  of,  180 ;  family  history,  181 

Fasting,  the  duty  of,  18 

Fasting  and  Feasting,  220 

Faults,  139 

Fear  and  Faith,  150  et  eeq. 

Festivals,  203 

Foes— 140;  foiled,  173 

Forethought,  prudence  of^  48 


Genealogies,  186 

Generation,  a— history  of,  217 ;   taak  oi, 

217  ;  responsibility  of,  217 

Generosity,  enthusiasm  of,  181 

Gifts,  155 

God — majesty  and  mercy  of,  23  ;  inter- 
position of,  42 ;  the  hand  of,  49 ;  faith 
in,  a  condition  of  success,  62 ;  the  over- 
ruling, 165 ;  world's  acknowledgment 
of,  167 ;  Hebrew  conceptions  of,  206  ;  in 
history,  207 ;  in  nature,  208 ;  in  lives 
of  men,  208;  a  personal,  209;  mercy 
of,  214,  215 

Good  out  of  evil,  249 

Goodness,  modesty  of,  33,  40 

Greatness,  perilous,  135 

Greed  and  its  corrections,  108 

Handicraft,  honourable,  81 

Hananiah  and  Hanani,  177,  178,  188 

Hearers,  193 

Hebrew  character,  Egyptian  influence  on, 
210 

Hebrew  history,  God  in,  209  et  seq. 

Honour,  responsibility  of,  219 

Hostility  active,  frustrated,  93 

House  of  God — resolve  concerning  the, 
229 ;  importance  of  attending  the,  230 

Idleness,  a  life  of,  81 

Imprecations,  100 

Inconsistency,  121  et  seq. 

Influence,  baneful  effects  of,  167 

Injustice,  social,  114 

Integrity,  131 

James,  St.,  222 

Jealousy,  53 

Jerusalem,  modern,  89 

Joy— defined,  200  ;  Christian,  195  et  seq. ; 
strength  of  the  Christian,  197;  sup- 
porting virtue,  198,  199 ;  result  of 
faith,  200 ;  within  our  power,  201 ; 
God  its  object,  205  ;  true,  245 

Judah,  defection  of,  106 

Kingdoms  ruined  by  sin,  35 

Labour— division  of,  72,  74;  sacredness 
of,  73  ;  duty  of,  74  ;  rewarded,  75 

Language,  origin  of,  71 

Life — work  and  warfare  of,  103  et  seq. ; 
review  of,  133,  256 

Man,  a  true,  86,  177 

Memory— forgotten  sins  recalled  to  re- 
membrance, 26,  37,  of  God,  -.7,  'J2! ; 
work  and  anticipation,  82 


258 


INDEX. 


Moses,  224  et  seq. 

Nation's  prayer,  a,  211 

Names — significance  of,  69  ;  Hebrew,  70 ; 
marking  periods  in  Hebrew  History,  70 

Nebemiah  —  biograpbical  sketcb  of,  1 ; 
tbe  reformer,  5  et  seq. ;  unselfisb  sorrow 
of,  16  e<  seq. ;  bis  love  for  tbe  Cburcb, 
43  ;  bonouring  tbe  king,  44  ;  tbe  secret 
of  bis  presence  of  mind,  45 ;  retirement 
of,  64;  inspecting  tbe  decayed  walls, 
55 ;  appealing  for  belp,  57 ;  praying, 
106  ;  bis  watcbfulness,  106 ;  bis  policy 
and  appeal,  107;  bis  loyalty  to  con- 
science, 129,  130  ;  an  inspired  man, 
189  ;  a  general  view  of  bis  motives,  253 

Nebemiab,  Book  of,  2  et  seq. ;  topograpby 
of  tbe,  87 

Opponents,  171 

Opposition,  tbe  laws  of,  96 

Panic,  154 

Past,  tbe,  247 

Persistency,  137 

Piety  and  position,  9  et  seq. 

Poor,  tbe— tbe  work  of,  81 ;  claim  of,  182 

Possessions,  tbe  meaning  of,  113 

Postbumous  influence,  244 

Power,  tbe  passion  for,  113 

Prayer — ^intercessory,  20 ;  importunity  in, 
25  ;  wby  unanswered,  33 ;  submission 
in,  40 ;  ejaculatory,  46,  153 

Praying  and  working,  99 

Prescience,  buman,  160 

Priestbood,  ideal,  75,  77 

Propbets,  false,  172 

Prosperity,  217 

Providence,  world  preserved  by,  212 

Public  worsbip,  divine  ordination  of,  227 

Punisbment  and  penitence,  28 

Purification,  244,  248 

Reformation — tbe  difficulty  of  beginning 
a,  50 ;  slow  growtb  of,  250 

Rejoicing,  a  great,  245 

Remembrance,  Divine,  desired,  254 

Resolution,  clencbing  a  good,  125 

Responsibility,  157 

Rest,  183  et  seq. 

Retirement,  tbe  importance  of,  65 

Revivals,  biadrances  to,  142 

Bicb  and  poor,  81 

Eicb  man,  empire  of  tbe,  113 

Bigbts  and  duties,  128 


Bival  classes,  80 

Sabbatb,  250  et  seq. 

Sacred  and  secular,  237 

Sacred  service,  205 

Sainfs  support,  132 

Sanballat,  106,  173 

Sanctuary,  zeal  for,  226 

Satan,  subtlety  of,  102,  160 

Secrecy,  importance  of,  56 

Secular  power,  place  of  tbe,  52 

Self,  communion  witb,  119  c^  seq. 

Self,  respect  for,  159 

Sepulcbres,  86 

Service  of  song,  238  et  seq. 

Sbemaiab,  172 

Silence  and  speecb,  146 

Singularity,  129,  130 

Sin,  tbe  destructiveness  of,  16,  254 

Sinners,  an  assembly  convoked  against, 

120 
Slander,  143,  146 
Small  things,  day  of,  98 
Solitariness,  152 
Steadiness,  tbe  secret  of,  163 
Sundays — a  year  of,  162 ;  needed  by  busy 

men,  228 
Taxation,  voluntary,  225 
Testimonial,  tbe  best,  172,  176 
Tbanksgiving,  64 ;  tbanks-living  tbe  best, 

246 
Titbes,  231 
Tobiab,  106,  173 

Tongue,  tbe,  its  use  and  abuse,  146  et  seq. 
Union,  strengtb  of,  59 
Unknown  future,  working  for  tbe,  80 
Unrigbteousness,  doom  of,  106 
Unworldliness,  169,  223  et  seq. 
Vocation,  life  a,  77 

Wall — tbe  Cburcb  a  broad,  62;  comple- 
tion of  tbe,  188  ;  dedication  of  tbe,  242 
Warrior  builders,  94 
Wealtb,  110 

Women,  famous,  83  ;  influence  of,  83 
Work,  conditions  of  success  in,  78  e*  seq. ; 

tbe  great,  140  ;  Divinely  inspired,  163  ; 

finished,  174  ;  unfinisbed,  175  et  seq. 
Workers  Divinely  belped,  164 
Worsbip,  Cbristian,  75 
Wrong-doing,  inexcuseableness  of,  124  ; 

irrevocableness  of,  248 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON  THE  BOOK   OV 


ESTHER. 


BY 

THE   REV.  W.  BURROWS,  B.A. 


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1892 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION  AND  PREFACE 
NO  DIVINE  NAME 


PAoa 
1 
2 


THE  BOOK  CANONICAL 
AUTHORITIES  CONSULTED 


1 


CHAPTER  I. 

Critical  Notes         4 

Time's  Doings  with  Hainan  Greatness, 

verses  1,  2          ... 4 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1,  2          ...  6 
The  Contrast  between  the  Human  and  the 

Divine,  ver.  3 — 5          8 

A  Feast  for  all  People        .,,  9 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  3 — 5        ...  10 

Self-glorification,  ver.  4 — 6          11 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  4 — 6         ...  13 
Unwise  Liberality,  but  a  Wise  Regula- 
tion, ver.  7,  8     14 

The  Drunkard's  Excuses  and  Woe          ...  15 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  7,  8          ...  16 
Vashti,    the    Persian   Monarch's  Queen, 

ver.  9       ...         .,.         ...  20 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver,  9 21 

A  Catalogue  of  Names,  ver.  10  and  14  ...  22 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  10  and  14  23 
False    Merriment  and    its    Result,    ver. 

10—12      ...         24 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  10 — 12     ...  25 

Vashti's  Dilemma,  ver.  10 — 12 27 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  10 — 12     ...  29 

The  Seven  Wise  Men,  ver.  13,  14           ...  30 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  13,  14      ...  32 

A  King  in  Consultation,  ver.  15             ...  33 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  15            ...  34 
Courtiers  forsake  a  Failing  Cause,   ver. 

16-20     34 

The  Folly  of  Trusting  in  Man     35 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  16 — 20     ...  36 
Vashti  is  stripped  of  Queenly  Externals, 

ver.  21,  22          37 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  21,  22      ...  39 

Main  Homiletics  of  the  whole  Chapter  ...  40 

Illustrations  to  Chapter  I.            43 

CHAPTER  II. 

Critical  Notes         47 

Regrets — Natural,    Useless,    and  Whole- 
some, ver.  1        ...        48 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1 49 

The  Servility  of  the  King's  Servants,  ver. 

2 — 4         ...         ...         ...         ...          ^^  52 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  2 — 4        ...  52 

A  Truly  Royal  Character,  ver.  6—7       !!.  56 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  5—7        ...  58 


Esther's  Hopeful  Beginning,  ver.  8 — 10  62 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  8 — 10     ...  63 

Illustrations  to  Chapter  II 64 

Mordecai's  Loving  Solicitude,  ver.  11  ...  65 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  11           ...  Q7 

The  Vanity  of  Earthly  Hopes,  ver.  12—14  67 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  12 — 14  ...  69 

Esther's  Elevation,  ver.  15—20 69 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  15 — 20  ...  71 
The   Plotters  and    the   Counter-plotter, 

ver.  21-23       73 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  21 — 23  ...  75 

Illustrations  to  Chapter  II 77 

CHAPTER  III. 

Critical  Notes       79 

The  Prosperous  Wicked  Man,  ver.  1 — 6  80 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1 — 6       ...  81 

The  Blind  Method  of  Revenge,  ver.  7  ...  B>Q 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  7            ...  87 

A  False  Aspect  of  the  Truth,  ver.  8—11  88 

Haman's  Murderous  Proposal,  ver.  8    ...  90 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  8 — 11     ...  91 

Fruitless  Preparations,  ver.  12 — 14       ...  95 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  12 — 14  ...  97 
Irregularities  of  Human  Conditions,  ver. 

15           98 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  16           ...  102 

Illustrations  to  Chapter  III 104 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Critical  Notes       108 

Great  Sorrow,  ver.  1 — 4 109 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1 — 4  ...  112 
The    Action    of    Sympathy    Rejected, 

ver.  4     114 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  4            ...  116 

A  Ministerial  Appointment,  ver.  5,  6  ...  119 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  5,  6        ...  124 

A  Strange  Meeting,  ver.  6 — 9    127 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  6 — 9       ...  130 

Prudential  Considerations,  ver.  10—12  132 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  10 — 12  ...  134 
A  Human  Voice  speaks  Divine  Lessons 

for  Human  Lives,  ver.  13,  14  ...  135 
God's  Purpose  and  Man's  Opportunity, 

ver.  14 139 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  13,  14    ...  142 

A  Woman's  Heroism,  ver.  15,  16         ...  149 


CONTENTS. 


Pi.a]i 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  15,  16    ...  152 

A  Good  Man's  Characteristics,  ver.  17  .  158 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  17          ...  160 

Illustrations  to  Chapter  IV.       161 

CHAPTER  V. 

Critical  Notes       ...  165 

The  Royalty  of  Faith,  ver.  1,  2 166 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1,  2  ...  169 
Large  Offer  and  some  of  its  Consequences, 

ver.  3—5           176 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  3 — 5       ...  178 

Directions  for  Prayer,  ver.  6 — 8            ...  182 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  6 — 8       ...  184 

The  Superficial  Man,  ver.  9,  10 187 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  9,  10  ...  188 
The  Discontented  Man  as  a  Reckoner, 

ver.  11—13       194 

SuggestiveCommentsonver.il — 13  ...  197 

The  Speech  of  a  Foolish  Wife,  ver.  14  ...  203 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  14          ...  205 

Illustrations  to  Chapter  V 207 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Critical  Notes       214 

A  Humiliated  King,  ver.  1         215 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1            ...  217 
A  King's  Sorrow  for  an  unrewarded  Sub- 
ject, ver.  2,  3 220 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  2,  3  ...  222 
The    King's    Inquiry  and    Concession, 

ver.  4,  6             226 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  4,  5  ...  227 
Self-flattery  leading  to  Self-humiliation, 

ver.  6—11          228 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  6 — 11     ...  230 

A  Small  Man  in  Adversity,  ver.  12 — 14  235 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  12—14  ...  236 

Illustrations  to  Chapter  VI 241 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Critical  Notes       243 

A  Strange  Banquet,  ver.  1 — 4 244 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1 — 4       ...  245 

The  Doings  of  a  Wicked  Heart,  ver.  6,  6  248 


Suggestive  Comments  on  ver,  5,  6 

The  Fear,  the  Folly,  and  the  Doom  of  the 

Evil-Doer,  ver.  7—10 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  7 — 10     ... 
Illustrations  to  Chapter  VII 


249 

250 
252 
256 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Critical  Notes       257 

Sudden  but  Wise  Changes,  ver.  1,  2     ...  258 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1,  2        ...  260 

Sin  survives  the  Sinner,  ver.  3,  4         ...  262 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  3,  4        ...  264 

The  Pleadings  of  a  Great  Passion,  ver.  5,  6  266 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  5,  6        ...  268 

A  Monarch's  Imbecility,  ver.  7,  8        ...  271 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver,  7,  8        ...  273 

Evil  Counteracted,  ver.  9—14 275 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  9 — 14     ...  277 

Days  of  Rejoicing,  ver.  15 — 17 279 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  15 — 17  ...  280 

Illustrations  to  Chapter  VIII 282 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Critical  Notes       285 

Hope  and  Foreboding,  ver.  1     ...         ...  287 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1  ...  289 

Self-Help  brings  Help,  ver.  2,  3  ...  291 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  2,  3        ...  292 

The  Greatness  of  Goodness,  ver.  4         ...  295 

Suggtstive  Comments  on  ver.  4  ...  296 

The  Fate  of  Evil-Doers,  ver.  5—11       ...  298 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  5 — 11     ...  299 

The  Rigour  of  Justice,  ver.  12— 16        ...  303 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  12—16  ...  304 

A  National  Memorial,  ver.  17—28        ...  307 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  17 — 28  ...  309 

Important  Letters,  ver.  29—32 314 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  29 — 32  ...  315 

CHAPTER  X. 

Critical  Notes       317 

A  Good  Government,  ver.  1 — 3  ...  818 

Suggestive  Comments  on  ver.  1 — 3        ..  819 

Illustrations  to  Chapters  IX.  and  X.    ...  822 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY 


OK   THB 


BOOK  OF  ESTHER 


INTRODUCTION  AND  PREFACE. 

The  Book  is  Canonical. 

The  Book  of  Esther  has  been  said  to  be  not  canonical,  but  the  objectois  are  mainly 
found  in  later  periods  of  the  Church's  history.  For  the  Jews  have  ever  regarded 
this  Book  as  canonical,  and  placed  it  on  the  same  level  with  the  law  of  Moses. 
Neither  does  there  appear  to  be  any  foundation  for  the  observation  made  by 
Baxter,  in  his  *  Saint's  Rest/  that  the  Jews  were  accustomed  to  cast  this  Book  to  the 
ground,  because  the  name  of  God  was  not  in  it.  If,  indeed,  any  such  custom 
prevailed  among  the  Oriental  Jews,  it  must  have  been  simply  to  express  their 
hatred  of  Haman.  The  Jews  believed  that,  whatever  destruction  might  attend  the 
other  sacred  writings,  the  Pentateuch  and  the  Book  of  Esther  would  always  be 
preserved  by  a  special  providence.  This  latter  statement  was  the  prophetic  utter- 
ance of  Maimonides,  and  so  far  it  has  not  been  falsified.  This  is  a  fact  worthy 
of  being  carefully  considered,  that  while  many  other  writings  have  passed  into 
oblivion,  this  story  of  Esther  is  still  exerting  an  influence.  The  reasons,  also, 
which  may  account  for  the  preservation  of  other  writings  will  not  suffice  to  account 
for  the  continued  existence  of  Esther ;  for  it  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  standard 
work  on  history,  though  it  gives  a  most  faithful  account  of  Persian  customs. 
It  does  not  record  the  advance  of  either  science  or  philosophy,  and  on  its  pages 
are  not  impressed  the  glowing  images  of  the  poet's  mind.  We  may  conclude  that 
this  little  story  of  a  captive  Jewish  maiden  holds  its  place  in  the  sacred  writings 
because  there  is  a  Divine  purpose  in  its  preservation. 

While  its  preservation  may  be  due  to  Jewish  patriotism,  yet  great  deference  is 
due  to  Jewish  opinion  and  to  Jewish  custom ;  for  to  the  Jews  were  committed 
the  oracles  of  God.  They  are  surely  the  greatest  authorities  on  this  subject,  for 
they  lived  near  the  times  when  the  events  recorded  took  place.  If  then  the  Jews 
have  put  into  our  hands  the  Book  of  Esther  as  well  as  the  Books  of  Moses,  we 

i 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


must  not  let  go  our  hold  of  those  treasures  which  they  have  transmitted.  This 
Book  IS  canonical,  showing  the  vanity  and  instahUity  of  earthly  glory,  giving  a 
suhhme  example  of  self-sacrifice,  and  describing  for  our  instruction  a  daring  faith 
in  the  right  and  the  true,  as  well  as  a  wonderful  power  of  patient  endurance  under 
oppression. 

It  may,  however,  he  objected  that  the  revengeful  spirit  manifested  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  Book  is  not  an  example  for  our  imitation.  We  may  reply  that  it  is  no 
more  an  example  to  be  imitated  than  Persian  luxury  and  effeminacy  are  to  be 
commended,  and  no  more  than  the  vices  of  Old  Testament  saints  are  to  be 
regarded  with  favour.  While  we  do  not  lay  great  stress  on  the  fact  that  the 
Itala  or  ante-Hieronymian  version  omits  the  whole  of  the  nineteen  verses  of  the 
ninth  chapter,  we  may  fairly  inquire  were  they  originally  in  the  Book,  and  wish 
for  Esther's  sake  that  they  had  never  appeared.  But  this,  after  all,  is  characteristic 
of  Scriptural  writing.  The  strong  hand  of  the  analyst  is  present,  and  nowhere 
is  found  unsparing  eulogy.  The  vice  that  degrades  is  depicted,  though  never 
in  attractive  colours,  as  well  as  the  virtue  that  adorns  and  elevates.  The  story 
of  the  cruel  proceedings  in  the  ninth  chapter  is  no  commendation  of  them ;  it  is  a 
bare  recital  of  facts  to  make  us  shrink  from  even  the  semblance  of  evil 


No  Divine  Name. 

The  great  objection  to  the  Book  of  Esther  is  that  the  name  of  God  is  omitted. 
So  De  Wette,  who  objects  to  all  the  other  books  of  the  Old  Testament  because 
of  their  theocratico-mythological  spirit,  condemns  this  for  its  want  of  religion. 
There  may,  however,  be  some  force  in  Keil's  observation,  that  the  writer  neither 
wished  to  depict  the  persons  whose  acts  he  was  narrating  as  more  godly  than  they 
really  were,  nor  to  place  the  whole  occurrence  under  a  point  of  view  alien  to  the 
actors  and  the  event  itself.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  sacred  writers  never  exaggerate ; 
but  then  Keil's  statement  implies  a  studied  omission  of  the  Divine  name  on  the 
part  of  the  author.  We  do  not  enter  upon  the  discussion  of  the  authorship  of  this 
Book,  and  cannot  decide  as  to  the  relative  claims  of  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  or  Mordecai. 
If,  however,  the  last-named  be  the  author,  as  is  highly  probable,  we  cannot  suppose 
him  purposely  forbearing  to  mention  the  Divine  name  simply  for  fear  of  making 
the  characters  depicted  more  godly  than  they  really  were.  A  more  satisfactory 
reason  for  the  omission  is  that  it  is  a  translated  extract  from  the  memoirs  of  the 
Persian  king.  It  is  very  likely  that  Mordecai,  occupying  the  high  position  he 
did  in  the  Persian  court,  would  have  free  access  to  such  memoirs.  Then  the 
scene  of  the  Book  is  laid  in  Persian  dominions ;  we  are  surrounded  with  a  Persian 
atmosphere,  and  Persian  words  are  constantly  recurring.  This  instinctive  adoption 
of  the  fashion  of  the  Persian  court  may  be  the  reason  of  the  singular  omission. 
Perhaps  we  may  conclude  that  this  omission  arose  from  the  increasing  dread 
of  using  the  Divine  name  which  was  already  manifested  at  this  period  of  Jewish 
history. 

The  Almighty  has  no  need  to  write  his  name  in  order  to  let  us  know  that  his 
wisdom  and  power  have  been  controlling  the  march  of  human  events.     The  name 


INTRODUCTION  AND  PREFACE. 


3 


of  God  may  be  absent,  but  his  power  is  everywhere  visible.  Traces  of  this 
Divine  power  may  be  noticed  in  the  Book  of  Esther.  We  may  observe  Divine 
Omniscience  anticipating  threatened  evil ;  Omnipotence  thwarting  the  designs  of  a 
jealous  favourite,  defeating  and  overruling  the  plots  of  the  wicked.  We  may  see 
God's  special  ])rovidence  in  bringing  forth  his  chosen  instruments  to  high  places  in 
the  kingdoms  "for  such  a  time  as  that "  at  which  Esther  appeared. 

Authorities  consulted. 

In  commencing  the  study  of  Esther  it  might  be  felt  that  it  was  itself  barren  for 
homiletic  purposes,  and  that  little  help  was  to  be  expected  from  previous  labourers. 
But  there  is  more  help  than  might  be  expected.  Of  course  all  ihe  commentators 
have  handled  the  Book  with  more  or  less  of  skill,  and  in  more  modern  times 
Lange  and  Keil  have  brought  great  critical  acumen  to  the  study.  The  story  of 
Esther  has  been  "glorified  by  the  genius  of  Handel  and  sanctified  by  the  piety  of 
Kacine  ; "  vividly  but  cursorily  handled  by  the  descriptive  hand  of  Stanley  ;  applied 
to  moral  uses  by  Dr.  M'Crie  ;  referred  to  by  Heeren  as  giving  the  most  accurate 
picture  of  Persian  customs ;  and  expounded  more  at  large,  with  that  elaboratenesa 
which  is  characteristic  of  Scotch  divines,  in  discourses  by  the  Rev.  Geoi'ge  Lawson^ 
Dr.  Davidson,  and  others  whose  names  will  be  given  where  quoted.  We 
shall  make  use  of  all  previous  productions,  remembering  that  our  work  is  to 
be  the  homiletic  expositor  of  the  Book.  Its  study  is  interesting,  and  much 
useful  material  may  be  here  found  for  the  pulpit.  Pearls  lie  deep ;  and,  to  the 
faithful  and  diligent  seeker,  pearls  of  Divine  truth  will  be  discovered  in  every  part 
of  the  Divine  Word.  Eawlinson  tells  us  that  by  the  Jews  this  Book  is  called 
Meglllath  Esther,  "  the  roll  of  Esther,"  or,  more  shortly,  Megillah,  "the  roll,'* 
since  it  was  always  written  on  a  separate  roll,  which  was  read  through  at  the  feast 
of  Purim.  We  must  carefully  unwind  the  roll  and  attentively  lea^  1  th  •  inscriptioug 
in  order  that  we  may  find  that  this  Scripture  too  is  "  profitable  for  doctrine,  for 
reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in  righteousness  ;  that  the  man  of  God  may 
be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works."  And  this  we  shall  attain 
if  the  inspiring  Spirit  direct  in  our  reading,  as  he  directed  in  the  writing  of  the 
Book.  Come  then,  0  gracious  and  holy  Spirit,  bless  our  labours,  and  make  them 
productive  of  moral  enlargement. 


/ 


HOMLLETIG  COMMENT  AMY :  ESTHER,  Fchap.  l 


CHAPTER  L 


PERSIAN    SPLENDOUR. 


Critical  Notes.]  1.  Ahasuems]  Heb.  Ahashverosh.  Prince,  chief.  A  name  ^iven  in  Scrip- 
ture to  Cambyses,  the  son  of  Cyrus,  and  to  Astyages,  king  of  the  Medes  (Ezra  iv.  6  ;  Dan  ix.  I). 
India  to  Ethiopia]  describes  the  king's  dominion,  but  does  not  definitely  fix  thi^  date  of  his  rei^n. 
The  hundred  and  twenty-seven  provinces  indicate  the  aaTQairqiai.  2.  Shushan  the  palace^  The 
king's  favourite  winter  residence.  Shushan  the  lily,  the  rose,  the  joy.  3.  The  power  of  Persia]  The 
king's  body-guard.  The  princes,  the  pashas,  or  governors  of  those  provinces.  4.  An  hundred  and 
fourscore  days]  We  are  not  obliged  to  conclude  that  all  or  any  of  the  governors  were  present  during 
the  whole  period  of  festivity. — Rawlinson.  5.  Garden  of  the  king's  palace]  The  kinglv  palace,  or 
series  of  houses,  was  situated,  in  Oriental  manner,  as  is  customary  also  to-day,  in  a  large  pnvk. — 
Lange.  6.  White,  green,  and  blue  hangings]  Rather,  "where  was  an  awuing  of  fine  white 
CDtton  and  velvet."  White  and  blue,  or  violet,  were  the  royal  colours  of  Persia.  Beds  of  gold  and 
silver]  Couches  or  sofas  on  which  the  guests  reclined  at  meals.  The  cloths  were  woven  with  gold 
and  silver  threads.  7.  Royal  wine]  A  very  costly  wine,  called  the  Chalybonian  wine,  that  the 
Persian  kings  used  to  drink,  12.  Vashti  refused  to  come]  It  was  regarded  as  something  unheard 
of  if  the  queen  appeared  in  public  unveiled. — Lange.  Vashti  means  the  best.  13.  Which  knew 
the  times]  Astrologers  and  magicians ;  generally  to  be  learned.  14.  The  seven  princes]  refers  in 
the  present  case  to  the  seven  Arashaspands,  in  others  to  the  days  of  the  week,  or  the  seven  planets. 
22.  According  to  the  language  of  the  people]  Obscure.  The  native  tongue  of  the  head  of  the 
house  to  be  used  in  the  family. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  1,  2. 

Time's  Doings  with  Human  Greatness. 

Ahasuerus  is  gone,  liis  royal  city  has  perislied,  and  even  his  stately  palace 
has  left  behind  only  a  few  insignificant  traces.  But  the  simple  story  of  Esther 
survives.  Palaces  of  marble,  as  well  as  mansions  made  of  the  less  enduring 
brick,  strangely  vanish.  Strong  fortifications  disappear.  Wonderful  it  is  that 
material  structures  seem  less  enduring  than  insubstantial  thought  structures. 
Suggestive  it  is  tliat  the  man  Ahasuerus  moves  a  formless  shadow  across  the 
stage,   while   his  doings  and   external  greatness   are    vividly  represented. 

I.  This  monarch's  unknown  individuality.  The  proceedings  of  Ahasuerus 
are  only  such  as  might  be  expected  froui  any  Persian  monarch  of  that  period, 
possessing  irresponsible  power,  invested  with  all  the  signs  of  extended  dominion, 
surrounded  by  courtiers  who  rendered  indiscriminate  flattery,  steeped  in  luxury 
and  in  frivolity,  and  like  one  of  the  governors  in  India,  who  told  the  native 
princes  that  they  were  but  dust  beneath  his  feet.  The  record  of  the  doings  of 
Ahasuerus,  therefore,  cannot  give  positive  information  as  to  his  personality.  His 
position  in  the  Persian  dynasty  cannot  be  undoubtedly  ascertained  ;  but  his  place 
in  the  Divine  economy  is  certain.  The  very  weakness  of  his  character  was  a 
buttress  for  the  Jewish  nation.  His  love  of  luxury  turned  out  to  the  **  enlarge- 
ment "  of  the  Jewish  people.  His  immortality  is  that  of  those  who  are  saved 
from  oblivion  by  the  greatness  of  others.  Time  sooner  or  later  obscures  the 
epitaph.  The  name  written  may  be  Ahasuerus,  and  future  generations  will  fail 
to  discover  the  person  indicated.  The  advancing  time  will  weave  its  mists  about 
the  name,  and  the  individual  will  be  lost  in  darkness.  But  a  Divine  book  of 
remembrance   is   kept,   and  there   the   names   of  the    righteous    are  written   in 


CRAP.L,]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


characters  of  ever-enduring  ligld.  Their  names  shall  shine  in  the  all-revealing 
splendours.  Let  men  strive  to  work  in  harmony  with,  and  in  furtherance  of,  all 
Divine  purposes. 

II.  This  monarch's  individuality  is  only  declared  by  the  extent  of  his 
material  kingdom.  *'  This  is  Ahasuerus  which  reigned,"  &c.  His  kingdom  may 
he  measured  by  the  land  surveyor  and  described  by  tlie  historian.  It  extended 
from  India  to  Ethiopia.  He  embraced  in  his  rule  the  borders  of  India  on  the  one 
side,  and  Egypt  on  tlie  other — an  extent  of  country  about  two  thousand  five  hun- 
dred miles  in  Jength.  He  possessed  some  of  earth's  loveliest  lands.  The  fertilizing 
waters  of  the  Nile  left  rich  deposits  on  one  portion  of  his  territory,  and  another 
almost  readied  the  sources  of  the  sacred  Ganges,  while  the  Euphrates  washed  the 
walls  of  Babylon,  and  was  fed  by  streams  that  flowed  near  the  royal  city  of  Susa. 
The  Black  Sea,  famous  in  the  history  of  modern  conflicts,  and  the  Caspian,  were 
partly  included  in  the  territories  over  which  he  reigned.  Lands  and  cities  of  his- 
toric fame  were  compelled  to  pay  him  tribute,  and  some  of  the  noblest  races  on 
earth  obeyed  his  commands.  But  the  moral  king  is  nobler,  and  has  a  more  exten- 
sive and  a  more  permanent  kingdom.  Even  the  material  universe  is  the  believer's 
possession,  intended  for  his  spiritual  development.  Death  strips  the  earthly  king 
of  his  royal  robes,  and  leaves  him  unthroned  ;  but  death  lets  the  moral  king  into 
a  larger  sphere,  and  the  results  of  his  earthly  conquests  he  will  enjoy  in  heaven. 
The  kingliest  men  have  owned  only  a  few  feet  of  land,  and  sometimes  not  enough 
land  for  a  tomb,  according  to  short-sighted  views  of  ownership. 

III.  This  monarch's  greatness  consisted  in  external  display.  The  throne 
on  which  the  king  sat  was  a  chair  made  of  gold,  adorned  with  a  costly  carpet, 
upon  which  none  might  sit,  on  pain  of  death.  There  was  also  a  footstool  of  gold. 
The  king  held  a  golden  sceptre  in  his  right  hand.  Close  behind  stood  an 
eunuch  bearing  a  fan,  and  with  his  mouth  covered,  for  fear  his  breath  should  be 
off'ensive  to  the  mighty  monarch.  Such  are  the  pomp  and  circumstance  with 
which  Oriental  monarchs  endeavoured  to  separate  themselves  from,  and  raise 
themselves  above,  their  fellow-creatures.  This  is  greatness  in  the  estimation  of 
the  children  of  this  world.  But  true  greatness  is  superior  to  mere  gorgeous 
externals.  The  one  disappears  when  the  showy  livery  is  removed,  but  the  other 
abides  through  all  changes.  Lazarus  was  great  in  his  rags ;  Dives  was  mean  in 
his  purple  and  fine  linen.      A  great  soul  ennobles  the  meanest  surroundings. 

IV.  This  monarch's  proud  position  is  not  to  be  envied.  There  are  many 
who  would  regard  Ahasuerus  with  envy,  as,  amid  a  group  of  attendants,  he  paced 
those  terraced  heights  on  which  the  palace  of  Shushan  was  erected,  as  he  watched 
the  gentle  gliding  of  the  sweet  waters  of  the  Euloeus,  as  he  listened  to  the  music 
of  pipers  and  harpists,  as  he  pleased  himself  with  the  natural  and  artistic  beauties 
of  the  scene,  and  as  he  gazed  upon  the  flat  and  fertile  plains  that  stretched  at  the 
base  of  the  royal  palace.  The  riches  both  of  art  and  of  nature  seemed  to  combine 
in  order  to  make  existence  pleasant.  But  no  human  lot  is  without  its  admixture 
of  pain.  Erom  the  high  places  of  the  earth  we  catch  the  echo  of  those  wailing 
cries  that  mingle  with  the  mocking  sounds  of  revelry.  Kings  are  but  men,  and 
their  hearts  too  are  touched  by  the  painful  hand  of  sorrow.  The  inscription  over 
an  imaginative  palace  is,  "Here  is  the  abode  of  everlasting  pleasures  and  content." 
But  no  such  inscription  can  be  truthfully  placed  over  the  gates  of  any  earthly 
palace,  and  certainly  it  will  not  describe  Shushan  the  palace.  Happy  he  who 
wisely  keeps  the  palace  of  his  soul,  and  finds  there  the  elements  of  true 
gladness. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


[chap.  I. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  1,  2. 


Ver.  1.  Ahasuerus.  The  difficulty  of 
stating  positively  who  was  the  Ahasuerus 
spoken  of  in  this  passage  is  almost  in- 
superable. The  nearest  approach  to  a 
settlement  of  the  question  is  the  state- 
ment that  Ahasuerus  was  one  of  the 
Persian  monarchs  who  lived  about  the 
time  of  Darius,  Xerxes,  and  Artaxerxes, 
and  must  have  been  one  of  those  mon- 
archs ;  for  only  those  three  are  described 
by  Herodotus  as  possessing  the  extent 
of  territory  attributed  to  them  in  the 
Book  of  Esther.  Most  of  our  modern 
critics  decide  that  Ahasuerus  is  Xerxes, 
and  this  conclusion  is  said  to  be  forti- 
fied by  a  resemblance  of  character.  As 
Xerxes  scourged  the  sea,  and  put  to 
death  the  engineers  of  his  bridge  because 
their  work  was  injured  by  a  storm,  so 
Ahasuerus  repudiated  his  queen  Yashti 
because  she  would  not  violate  the 
decorum  of  her  sex,  and  ordered  the 
massacre  of  the  whole  Jewish  people  to 
gratify  the  malice  of  Haman.  JS^ow 
Herodotus  is  evidently  the  father  of 
fables  as  well  as  the  father  of  history. 
In  the  book  Polyhymnia,  from  which  the 
above  instance  of  foolish  conduct  is 
quoted,  Herodotus  tells  us  of  some 
prodigies  which  fairly  lead  us  to  doubt 
his  trustworthiness.  And  we  may  well 
agree  with  Mitford  when  he  affirms 
that  some  of  the  anecdotes  related  by 
Herodotus  "  are  utterly  inconsistent 
with  the  characters  to  whom  they  refer. 
Among  the  latter  I  should  reckon  the 
ridiculous  punishment  of  the  Hellespont 
by  stripes  and  chains,  together  with 
executions  equally  impolitic  as  inhuman, 
and  repugnant  to  what  we  learn  on  best 
authority  of  the  manners  of  the  Per- 
sians." The  assembly  spoken  of  by 
Herodotus  as  called  by  Xerxes  in  order 
to  deliberate  concerning  the  Grecian 
war  does  not  resemble  that  great  feast 
and  assembly  which  vvas  held  by 
Ahasuerus  in  Shushan  the  palace,  and 
which  lasted  an  hundred  and  fourscore 
days.  Those  frightful  dreams  which 
Xerxes  is  said  to  have  had  at  this 
period  do  not  speak  to  us  at  least  of  the 
merriment  of  Ahasuerus  in  Shushan. 
This  luxxiry  and  splendour  only  seem  to 


point  to  the  Persian  greatness  which 
culminated  about  this  period.  The  two 
narrations — the  one  given  by  Herodotus 
as  to  Xerxes,  and  the  other  in  the  Book 
of  Esther  as  to  Ahasuerus — may  appear 
to  agree  in  point  of  time,  but  do  not 
necessarily  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
events  recorded.  There  is  surely  an  a 
priori  argument  in  favour  of  those  his- 
torians who  lived  near  the  time  when 
the  events  took  place  which  they  record, 
and  who  had  better  means  of  knowiui' 
the  characters  and  events  whom  and 
which  they  describe  than  later  authors. 
It  is  a  fact  to  be  considered  that 
throughout  the  Book  of  Esther  in  the 
LXX.  Artaxerxes  is  written  for  Ahas- 
uerus, and  that  the  apocryphal  additions 
of  the  Book  of  Esther  give  this  name. 
Josephus,  also,  being  such  a  painstak- 
ing historian,  did  not  write  Artaxerxes 
for  Ahasuerus  without  good  reason. 
The  name  Ahasuerus  sets  forth  the 
dignity  of  the  man  rather  than  dis- 
tinguishes him  from  others.  It  is  a 
general  title  of  the  Persian  kings,  as 
Pharaoh,  Ptolemy,  and  Caesar  were 
general  names  for  rulers  of  other  coun- 
tries. Why  should  we  institute  a  pain- 
ful comparison  between  the  believer  who 
is  said  not  to  own  a  foot  of  land,  and 
the  licentious  monarch  who  reigns  over 
one  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty 
provinces?  Eor,  it  is  truly  observed, 
some  of  the  vilest  men  possessed  all  the 
great  and  large  domiidons  of  the  Persian 
empire.  But  if  God  has  bestowed  true 
faith,  unfeigned  love,  and  unaffected 
humility,  he  has  bestowed  treasures  of 
inestimably  greater  value  than  all  the 
possessions  of  Xerxes  or  of  Nero.  A 
man  may  rule  over  an  extensive  king- 
dom, and  yet  be  a  slave  ;  for  lusts  are 
tyrannical  masters.  A  man  may  be  a 
slave  in  outward  condition,  and  yet  be 
the  noblest  freeman,  the  grandest  king 
of  all.  He  is  royal  who  is  a  member  of 
that  kingdom  wliich  is  to  extend  from 
sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  which  in  fact  is  to 
include  all  nations.  Other  kingdoms 
shall  fail,  but  Christ's  kingdom  of  love 
shall  ever  endure. 


CHAP.  I.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


Monarchs  Tvill  be  still  adding,  and 
although  a  man  were  monarch  of  the 
whole  world,  yea,  and  had  command  of 
the  moon  and  the  stars,  yet  would  he 
still  be  peeping  beyond  them  for  more, 
more. — Trapp. 

An  overgrown  kingdom  which  in  time 
would  sink  with  its  own  weight,  and,  as 
usual,  would  lose  its  provinces  as  fast  as 
it  gained  them.  If  such  a  vast  power 
be  put  into  bad  hands  it  is  able  to  do  so 
much  the  more  mischief. — M.  Henry. 

Ver.  2.  Sitting  is  a  posture  common  to 
judges  and  kings,  but  more  particularly 
characteristic  of  the  kings  of  Persia. 
The  Persian  kings  are  always  painted 
as  sitting  on  a  throne  under  a  lofty 
canopy.  This  is  true  of  them  even  in 
the  time  of  war,  and  in  their  journeys. 
Xerxes,  indeed,  was  present  in  the 
battles  sitting ;  thus  it  was  at  Ther- 
mopylae, according  to  Herodotus,  and  at 
Salamis,  according  to  Plutarch. — Lange. 

This  monarch's  2ialatial  residence. 
Shushan  is  mentioned  in  three  of  the 
sacred  books — Nehemiah,  Esther,  and 
Daniel — as  well  as  by  profane  writers. 
Originally  it  was  tl)e  capital  of  the 
province  sailed  in  Scripture  Elam,  and 
by  the  classical  writers  sometimes  Cissian, 
and  sometimes  Susis,  or  Susiana ;  and 
was  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Eulai,  or  Euloeus. .  Daniel  refers  to  it 
in  the  account  of  his  vision  as  forming 
part  of  the  Babylonish  empire.  Its 
foundations  are  said  to  have  been  laid 
even  before  the  time  of  Chedorlaomf^r. 
Tlie  remains  found  on  the  supposed  site 
point  to  a  very  remote  past.  It  was 
comprehended  in  the  Persian  empire  in 
tlie  time  of  Cyrus  or  Darius,  and  to 
tlie  latter  is  generally  given  the  credit 
of  being  the  founder  or  builder  of  the 
great  palace  described  in  the  Book  of 
Esther.  It  was  chosen  by  the  Persian 
monarch  as  the  capital  of  his  empire  on 
account  of  its  vicinity  to  Persia,  its 
climatic  advantages,  and  the  great  ex- 
cellence of  its  water.  The  circumference 
of  Shushan,  exclusive  of  some  outlying 
mounds,  was  about  three  miles  ;  but 
little  more  than  the  name  of  the  city 
remains.  The  bases  of  a  few  columns, 
having  upon  them  inscriptions  which 
are   deciphered  with  difficulty,  are   all 


that  is  now  left  of  this  proud  city. 
Shushan  means  the  lily,  the  rose,  the 
joy — a  name  given  on  account  of  the 
fertility  of  the  country,  and  the  abund- 
ance of  lilies  that  flourished  in  the  dis- 
trict. This  lily  no  longer  flourishes, 
this  Narcissus  no  more  emits  its  frag- 
rance ;  the  joy  and  pride  of  the  nations 
has  fallen  from  its  eminence.  Thus  the 
flowers  of  earth  perish,  but  the  celestial 
flowers  bloom  for  evermore.  (3ur  Be- 
loved is  as  the  lily  of  the  valley  and 
the  rose  of  Sharon,  and  he  shall  ever- 
more unfold  his  loveliness  and  emit  his 
Divine  fragrance. 

The  palace  of  Shushan  was  one  of 
the  architectural  wonders  of  its  day, 
and  its  size  and  its  magniflcence  would 
have  attracted  considerable  attention  in 
modern  times.  In  visiting  tbe  ruins  of 
our  ancient  abbeys  we  are  astonished 
at  the  evidences  of  minuteness  and  of 
massiveness  which  still  survive  in  those 
gigantic  and  yet  graceful  structures. 
But  more  profound  emotions  of  sublimity 
are  produced  by  visiting  the  ruins  of 
Persepolis,  which  corresponded  to  the 
palace  of  Shushan  in  great  measure, 
and  from  which  at  least  we  must  gather 
our  conception  of  what  the  Shushan 
palace  w^as  like,  for  nearly  all  the  ruins 
of  the  latter  have  disappeared.  In 
speaking  of  Persepolis,  Porter  observes, 
"  Nothing  can  be  more  striking  than 
the  view  of  its  ruins ;  so  vast  and  so 
magnificent,  so  fallen,  mutilated,  and 
silent ;  the  court  of  Cyrus,  and  the 
scene  of  his  bounties ;  the  pavilion  of 
Alexander's  triumph,  and  the  awful 
memorial  of  the  witness  of  his  power." 
The  first  object  which  presented  itself 
was  a  columned  hall  of  the  largest  size, 
which  has  not  been  rivalled  in  space  or 
in  beauty  by  any  building  either  ancient 
or  modern,  not  even  by  Egyptian  Carnac 
or  Cologne  Cathedral.  On  three  sides 
of  the  hall  were  vast  i)orclies,  supported 
by  twelve  columns,  while  the  great 
central  hall  had  thirty-six,  which  were 
a  little  over  sixty  feet  high.  These 
columns  were  all  fluted,  and  surmounted 
by  capitals  formed  into  the  shape  of  the 
heads  of  bulls,  or  horses,  or  wild  asses, 
Heeren  supposes  these  piUars  to  have 
supported   a   roof   of   cedar,  but  some 


8                                 HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  i. 

authorities    doubt    whether    this    large  in  Sliushau,  which  was  a  favourite  spring 

hall   could    have  had  a   roof.      In  the  residence. — Lange. 

grounds  we   see  on  one   side  what    is  In  this  city  was  the  famous  palace  of 

called   the    queen's    house,  and  on  tlie  Cyrus,  which  was  adorned  with  marble 

other  the  king's  house.     In  looking  at  walls,  golden  pillars,  and  great  store  of 

the  whole   group   we    may  see    terrace  precious    stones,    shining    as    so    many 

rising  above  terrace,  and  building  above  stars  from  the  roof  and  sides  of  it,  to 

building,  to  the  height  of  two  hundred  the  dazzling  of  the  eyes  of  the  beholders, 

feet  above  the  level  of  the  plain.    Fa-  — Trapp. 

bulous  creatures  in  stone  frowning  like  Time  sadly  overcometh  all  things,  and 
mighty  sentinels ;  the  terraces  graced  is  now  dominant,  and  sitteth  upon  a 
with  trees,  shrubs,  and  flowers  of  rich  sphinx,  and  looketh  unto  Memphis  and 
luxuriance,  indicating  the  fertility  of  old  Thebes;  while  his  sister  Oblivion 
the  country  as  well  as  the  skill  of  the  reclineth  semi-somnous  on  a  pyramid, 
cultivators.  Evidences  there  were  on  gloriously  triumphing,  making  puzzles 
all  sides  that  the  wealth,  genius,  and  of  Titanian  inscriptions,  and  turning  old 
productive  power  of  that  vast  empire  glories  into  dreams.  History  sinketh 
had  been  collected  and  concentrated  to  beneath  her  cloud.  The  traveller,  as 
the  erection  and  adornment  of  the  stately  he  paceth  amazedly  through  those  de- 
pile  of  buildings.  serts,  asketh  of  her  who  builded  them, 
Shushan  the  palace.  The  king  had  and  she  mumbleth  something,  but  what 
a  royal  establishment  in  several  cities,  it  is  he  heareth  not. — Anonymous. 
but  at  the  time  here  referred  to  it  was 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE  PARAGKAPH.     Vbrsbs  3—5. 

The  Contrast  between  the  Human  and  the  Divine. 

Such  immense  assemblages,  and  feasts  for  such  a  lengthened  period,  were  not 
uncommon  to  Oriental  monarchs.  A  similar  feast  was  given  by  the  Emperor  of 
China  to  the  whole  population  of  the  province. 

I  Human  preferences.  We  have  not  the  means  of  positively  declaring  why 
Ahisuerus  gave  this  great  feast.  The  story  of  Esther  simply  records  the  giving  of 
the  feast  in  order  to  impart  unity  to  the  account,  and  as  being  necessary  to  the 
explanation  of  after  events.  But  there  is  good  in  all ;  and  if  there  was  generosity 
in  this  vain  and  ambitious  monarch,  it  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  he  included  the  low- 
est as  well  as  the  highest  in  his  festive  arrangements.  But  greater  still  is  the 
Divine  benevolence ;  for  Ahasuerus  first  entertained  the  magnates,  and  then  con- 
descended to  the  lowest,  while  to  the  poor  is  the  gospel  preached.  Moral  reforms 
seem  first  to  touch  the  "  small,"  and  then  to  affect  the  "great."  In  primitive 
times  the  poor  welcomed  the  gospel,  and  gladly  sat  down  at  the  feast  of  Divine 
love.  What  a  pity  that  in  these  days  the  poor,  to  a  very  large  extent,  appear  to 
shut  themselves  out  from  the  gospel  feast !  The  problem  now  to  solve  is  how  to 
extend  the  beneficent  influences  of  Christianity  beyond  the  circle  of  the  respect- 
able classes.  Ahasuerus  surrounded  himself  with  his  body-guard —a  large  and 
imposing  retinue — and  with  the  pachas  or  governors  of  the  provinces.  These  were 
accounted  great ;  but  God  finds  the  Divinely  groat  amongst  the  humanly  small. 
Human  distinctions  are  reversed  in  Divine  estimation.  The  preferences  of  earth 
are  not  the  preferences  of  heaven.  The  great  of  this  planet  will  look  small,  and 
the  small  of  human  reckoning  appear  great,  when  placed  beneath  the  truer  light  of 
a  sublimer  sphere. 

II.  Human  limitation.  Ahasuerus  gave  a  feast  which  lasted  one  hundred  and 
eighty  days  at  the  most ;  and,  according  to  some  authorities,  for  only  seven  days. 
It  is  highly  probable  that  the  samQ  guests  did  not  continue  for  the  whole  period  of 


CHAP.  I.J  HOMTLF.TTn  COMMENTAUY:    Er^THKU.  9 

the  feast.  Each  day  there  would  he  fresli  arrivals.  When  one  company  was 
feasted,  another  took  up  the  vacated  couches  in  tbe  festive  hall.  However  pro- 
longed the  earthly  feast,  it  must  at  last  terminate.  The  resources  of  the  hosts  are 
exhausted  ;  the  capacities  of  the  guests  fail ;  the  viands  become  corrupt ;  the  ban- 
queting-hall  crumbles  to  ruins ;  the  festivities  are  rudely  interrupted  ;  the  songs 
of  gladness  give  place  to  cries  of  sadness.  But  the  feast  of  Divine  love  is  for  all 
time  and  for  all  eternity.  The  resources  of  the  Omnipotent  cannot  be  exhausted. 
The  word  limitation  can  find  no  place  in  the  celestial  vocabulary. 

III.  Human  infelicity.  Earthly  feasts  too  prolonged  bring  damage  to  the 
body,  sadness  and  distress  to  the  spirit.  The  soul  of  man  canuot  find  in  sensual 
pleasures  its  true  good.  In  this  book  we  find  that  merriment  was  the  direct  cause 
of  melancholy.  Our  greatest  earthly  joys  are  too  often  the  sources  of  our  deepest 
sorrows.  Pleasure  and  pain  are  closely  related,  and  the  one  is  the  parent  of  the 
other.  The  harp  hangs  upon  the  willows,  and  though  no  hand  touch  the  strings, 
it  gives  forth  a  mournful  strain.  But  Divine  joys  do  not  end  in  tears.  The  plea- 
sures of  heaven  are  free  from  all  attendant  pains.  The  golden  harps  give  forth  no 
wailing  sounds.  The  feasts  of  the  true  Paradise  are  satisfying ;  and  the  deeper  we 
drink  of  the  Divine  springs,  the  more  satisfaction  do  we  experience.  Therefore 
saith  Divine  love,  "  Feast,  0  friends  ;  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved." 

IV.  Human  incompleteness.  The  feast  was  given  in  the  court  of  the  garden 
of  the  king's  palace.  A  very  beautiful  place,  no  doubt.  We  can  picture  its  splen- 
dours, both  natural  and  artificial.  Its  fruits  luscious,  its  flowers  beautiful  in  form 
and  in  colour,  its  aromas  sweetly  fragrant,  and  the  whole  aspect  of  the  scene 
enchanting;  but  our  best  earthly  gardens  are  incomplete.  Man  makes  a  beautiful 
garden,  and  is  said  to  have  made  the  wilderness  smile ;  but  the  smile  only  conceals 
the  silent  sigh.  There  is  a  gloomy  grotto  in  every  earthly  garden.  The  lilies  fade, 
the  oaks  and  lindens  and  acacias  are  blasted  ;  the  very  fragrance  becomes  offen- 
sive. In  God's  garden  the  trail  of  the  serpent  is  not  visible,  the  reproving  question 
is  not  heard,  the  marks  of  defect  are  nowhere  seen.  It  is  perfect  and  complete  j 
the  result  of  unerring  wisdom,  the  expression  of  boundless  resources. 

Here  learn — (a)  Immoderate  pleasure  causes  sorrow.  Jesus  was  present  at  a 
marriage-feast,  and  not  as  a  reproving  spirit.  The  Divine  love  spreads  a  table  in 
the  wilderness  covered  with  sweetest  viands,  while  his  songsters  raise  their  joyful 
notes  at  the  feast.  But  in  the  bitterness  of  the  recoil  from  excessive  pleasure,  we 
say  of  laughter,  It  is  madness,  and  of  mirth,  What  doeth  it  1  (6)  *'  He  that  is  of  a 
merry  (or  cheerful)  heart  hath  a  continual  feast."  The  appetite  for  more  develops 
with  the  increase  of  the  supply.  Nature  requires  little,  and  grace  less.  Oh  that 
we  could  reach  the  Apostle's  sublime  altitude — "  I  have  learned  in  whatsoever 
state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content." 

A  Feast  for  all  People. 

This  was  a  glorious  feast.  But  in  Isa.  xxv.  6,  7  we  have  a  description  of 
one  which  far  surpasses  it.  It  is  the  promise  of  a  feast  made  by  God,  furnished 
with  the  very  best  provision,  for  all  people,  and,  therefore,  a  feast  in  which  we 
have  an  undoubted  interest.  That  we  may  see  how  much  better  the  Lord's  feast 
is  than  Ahasuerus's  feast,  let  us  consider  the  Lord's  feast,  and  the  benefits  which 
resuln  from  attending  it. 

I.  The  Lord's  feast  described.  In  connection  v/ith  the  feast  we  notice — 1.  The 
place  where  it  is  made.  Ahasuerus  made  his  in  the  palace  garden  ;  God  makes 
his  in  a  mountain  (Isa.  xxv.  6).  That  means  the  Church  of  God  on  earth, 
composed  of  his  penitent,  believing,  grateful,  and  obedient  subjects.  This  col- 
lective body,  or  community  of  God's  people,  is  called  by  Moses  "  the  mount  of  the 
Lord"  (Numb.  x.  33).  (1)  The  Church  of  God  on  earth,  like  a  mountain, 
is  generally  conspicuous.     It  cannot  "^  hid.     It  is  seen  by  God  with  gracious 


10  HOMILETW   COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  [chap.  i. 

complacency  ;  it  is  seen  by  angels  with  joy,  and  affectionate  care  ;  it  vs  s^en  by  men 
with  avowed  contempt ;  it  is  seen  by  devils  with  envy  and  malice.  They  envy 
the  honours  of  this  mountain  ;  they  hate  its  sovereign,  and  are  mdnifestly  opposed 
to  its  government.  (2)  Hence ^  like  a  mountain^  it  is  peculiarly  exposed  to  storms 
— storms  of  persecution,  temptation,  opposition.  (3)  But  n^jiwifJistanding  those 
hostile  assaults,  like  a  mountain,  it  remains  immovably  secure.  God  has  promised 
to  watch,  to  be  present  with,  and  to  keep  it.  (4)  Like  a  monntain,  it  is  extensively 
beneficial.  A  mountain  is  a  shelter  from  storms  ;  so  is  tho  Church.  Do  the 
treasures  of  heaven  drop  on  the  mountains,  and  break  forth  in  springs  for  the 
benefit  of  man  *?  So  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him.  But  let 
us  observe — 2.  The  feast  itself.  This  is  undoubtedly  the  gospel  feast.  It  is  some- 
times called  a  marriage  feast,  a  great  supper,  &c.  This  leads  us  to  observe — 3. 
The  provision  with  which  the  feast  is  furnished.  "  Fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of 
wine  on  the  lees  well  refined,"  The  provisions  thus  described  are  such  as  must 
be — (1)  Carefully  selected.  (2)  Dearly  purchased.  (3)  Supremely  excellent  and 
highly  gratifying.  4.  The  guests  for  whom  this  feast  is  promised.  *'  For  all  peo- 
ple." (1)  This  implies  that  all  mankind  need  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  (2) 
That  those  blessings  are  obtainable  by  all  those  who  come  for  them. 

II.  The  benefits  which  result  from  attendance  at  this  feast.  These  we  find 
are  great  and  various.  As — 1.  The  removal  of  darkness.  2.  Deliverance  from 
sorrow.  The  Lord  will  wipe  away  all  tears ;  all  tears  of  guilty  distress,  of  suffer- 
ing mortality.     3.  Exemption  from  eternal  death. 

Application  : — 1.  On  coming  to  this  feast,  as  Christ  commands,  confidently 
expect  what  he  promises.  2.  When  received  at  this  feast,  let  your  whole  deport- 
ment be  answerable  to  your  entertainment.  Be  humble,  thankful,  charitable. — 
Sketches  of  Sermons.     1838. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  3 — 5. 

Ver.  3.  Banquets  on  so  grand  a  scale,  set  on  as    if   it   should  have  been  the 

and   extending  over  so  great  a  period,  last ;  yet  all  this  long  feast  hath  an  end, 

have  not  been  unfrequently  provided  by  and  all  this  glory  is  shut  up  in  forget- 

the  luxurious  monarchs  of  Eastern  coun-  fulness. — Bishop  Hall. 

tries,  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times.  Epicurus  himself,  who  placed  happi- 

The  early  portion  of  this  festive  season,  ness  in  pleasure,  enjoined  temperance  as 

however,  seems  to  have  been  dedicated  a  necessary  means  of  this  pleasure.     An 

to  amusement,  particularly  an  exhibition  author   of  our   nation  justly  observes, 

of  the  magnificence  and  treasures  of  the  that  when  a  great  multitude  of  alluring 

court. — Port.  Commentary.  dishes  are  set  upon  a  table,  a  wise  man 

The  description   of    this  feast  corre-  may  see  palsies,  apoi)lexies,  and  other 

sponds  to  the  statement  of  ancient  Per-  grievous  or   mortal  distempers  lurking 

sian  luxury  and  magnificence  which  the  amongst  them. — Bev.  Geo.  Lawson. 

Greek  authors  have  sent  down  to  us.  It  is  said  of  the  father  of  Louis  XV., 

The  vast  numbers  entertained  at  their  king  of  France,  tliat  when  his  preceptor 

feasts,  as  well  as  the  long  continuance  one  day  was  speaking  of  this  feast  of 

of  these  feasts,   are   points  noticed  by  Ahasuerus,    and    wondered     how    the 

ancient  writers.— J5^^<^o.  Prince  of  Persia  could  find  patience  for 

Such  a  feast,  as  that  all  other  feasts  such  a  long  feast,  he  replied,  "  That  his 

were  but  hunger  to  it,  whether  we  re-  wonder  was  how  he  could  defray  the 

gard    the   number    of   the   guests,    the  expense  of  it."     He  was  afraid  that  the 

largeness  of  the  preparation,  or  the  con-  provinces  would  be  compelled  to  observe 

tinuance  of  time ;  yet  it  had  an  end.  a  fast  for  it.     On  another  occasion  the 

But  so  hath    not   the  feast  of   a  good  same  prince  said,  that  he  did  not  under- 

conscience. — Trapp.  stand  how  a  king  should  taste  unmingled 

A  world  of  meat ;  every  meal  was  so  joy  at  a  feast,  unless  he  could  invite  all 


cnAP.  I,] 


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


li 


his  subjects  to  partake ;  or  unless  he 
could  be  assured,  at  least,  that  none  of 
them  would  go  supperless  to  bed. 

Great  pleasure  is  often  followed  by 
equally  great  displeasure.  Occasions  of 
joyous  feasting  commonly  end  in  sorrow. 
— Starke. 

Better  is  a  dinner  of  herbs  with  quiet- 
ness, and  the  enjoyment  of  one's  self  and 
a  friend,  than  the  banquet  of  wine  with 
all  the  noise  and  tuunilt  that  needs 
attend  it. — Matthew  Henri/. 

Ver.  5.  As  the  king  could  not  furnish 
a  house  for  so  many  guests  as  were  in- 
vited to  his  entertainment,  pavilions 
were  prepared  for  them  in  the  palace 
garden. 

Lest  the  glory  of  this  great  king 
might  seem  like  some  coarse  picture, 
only  fair  afar  off,  after  the  princes  and 
nobles  of  the  remote  provinces,  all  the 
people  of  Shushan  are  entertained  for 
seven  days,  with  equal  pomp  and  state. 
The  spacious  court  of  the  palace  is 
turned  into  a  royal  hall,  the  walls  are 
of  rich  hangings,  the  pillars  of  marble, 
the  beds  of  silver  »nd  gold  ;  the  wine 
and  vessels  strive  whether  should  be 
richer ;  no  man  drank  in  worse  than 
gold.  The  attendance  was  answerable 
to  the  cheer,  and  the  freedom  matched 
both .  — Bif<h  op  Ha  U. 

This  feast  was  held,  not  in  the  out- 
lying grounds,  but  in  the  centre  of  the 
group  of  buildings.  And  the  curtains 
around  this  central  group  of  buildings 
would  admit  tlie  light  and  secure  warmth, 
— an  arrangement  most  desirable  for  a 
spring  residence. 

Garden.  The  world  has  had  a 
great  many  beautiful  gardens;  but  not 
any  of  them  can  be  compared  to  the 
garden  which  Christ  has  in  his  Church. 
The   Church    may   be   compared   to   a 


garden,  because,  1 .  It  is  a  place  of  the 
choicest  flowers.  There  are  sunflowers, 
snowdrops,  lilies,  2.  It  is  a  place  of 
the  m  )St  select  fruits.  There  are  the 
fruits  of  patience,  charity,  integrity. — 
Rev.  a  Leach,  F.G.S. 

The  king  made  a  feast  unto  all  the 
jyeople.  This  was  not  amiss,  so  that 
care  was  taken  that  no  irregulars  were 
found  amongst  them  ;  for  kings  should 
carry  themselves  towards  their  people 
as  kindly  as  parents  do  toward  their 
children,  and  shepherds  toward  their 
sheep.  Are  they  not,  therefore,  patres 
patrice,  fathers  of  their  country  and 
shepherds  of  their  people  ? 

Both  unto  great  and  small.  PeU- 
mell,  one  with  another,  to  show  his 
liberality ;  which  he  might  better  have 
bestowed  in  another  way  than  belly 
cheer,  and  such  open-house  keeping  to 
all  comers  without  difference. — Trapp. 

Seven  days.  Too  long  together  to 
be  a  feasting,  sith  at  such  times  men 
are  apt  to  exceed  and  outlash ;  eating 
that  on  earth  that  they  must  digest  in 
hell,  and  drowning  both  bodies  and 
souls  in  wine  and  strong  drink,  as 
Eichard  III.  did  his  brother  Clarence 
in  a  butt  of  Malmsey. — Ti-app. 

1.  The  power  of  a  nation  is  not  its 
wealth.  As  individuals,  so  nations 
have  been  ruined  by  growing  too  rich. 
2.  The  powder  of  a  nation  is  not  iis 
fortifications.  Babylon  had  high  walls 
and  good  defences,  but  was  overthrown 
by  the  Persians.  The  power  of  a  nation 
is  its  virtuous  people.  Thus — 4.  The 
security  and  peace  of  nations  consist  not 
in  magnificent  feasts,  but  in  the  good 
government  of  its  people,  the  happiness 
of  its  people,  the  education  and  en- 
lightenment of  its  people.  —  Rev,  C. 
Leach,  F.G.S. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PAEAGRAPH.    Verses  4,  6. 

Self- Glorification. 

We  speak  of  Oriental  magnificence  and  Oriental  love  of  display,  and  do  not 
safficiently  remember  that  there  is  an  English  love  of  display.  During  the  last 
few  years  wealth  has  increased  in  England ;  and  with  the  increase  of  wealth  tliere 
has  grown  an  increase  of  ease,  of  luxury,  and  of  display.  Class  has  vied  with 
class.     The  order  of  the  day  has  been  ruinous  extravagance.     The  consequence 


12  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  i. 

has  been  disaster  and  infamy.  Pride  must  have  a  fall,  and  the  English  nation 
must  experience  yet  further  troubles  if  it  does  not  seek  a  true  reformation  of 
manners. 

I.  This  monarch  was  able  to  make  a  proud  display,  and  to  gratify  the 
Oriental  taste  for  magnificence.  The  wealth  possessed  by  the  Persian  monarchs 
at  this  period  must  have  been  vast,  for  at  the  commencement  of  every  year  the 
princes  came  with  their  costly  presents  from  the  difterent  provinces  of  the  extensive 

-empire.  The  satrapy  of  Ciiicia  furnished  a  goodly  number  of  horses  as  its  yearly 
tribute.  From  another  part  came  a  long  train  of  large  trays  placed  on  men's  heads, 
on  which  were  shells,  stuffs  of  all  sorts,  and  pearls ;  then  many  trays  filled  with 
sugar  and  sweetmeats  ;  and  after  that  many  mules  laden  with  fruits.  A  third  sent 
a  string  of  one  hundred  camels,  and  as  many  mules,  together  with  weapons  of  war. 
And  so  from  all  the  widely  extended  provinces  the  gifts  came.  And  even  India 
furnished  a  tribute,  consisting  of  vessels  filled  with  gold,  and  of  ornaments,  and  of 
wild  asses  which  were  prized  for  the  purpose  of  stocking  the  royal  parks.  It  is 
not,  therefore,  astonishing  that  Ahasuerus  was  able  to  give  the  numerous  guests 
"  drink  in  vessels  of  gold  (the  vessels  being  diverse  one  from  another),  and  royal 
wine  in  abundance."  The  vastness  of  his  resources  may  also  be  still  more  clearly 
apprehended  from  a  consideration  of  the  fittings  and  furniture  as  thus  described  : — 
**  White  stuff  variegated  with  purple  hangings,  fastened  with  cords  of  byssus  and 
purple  to  silver  rings  and  marble  pillars;  couches  of  silver  and  gold  upon  a  pave- 
ment of  malachite  and  marble,  and  mother-of-pearl,  and  tortoise-shell."  The 
couches  prepared  for  the  guests  were  covered  with  cloth  woven  of  gold  and  silver 
thread,  and  were  placed  upon  a  tesselated,  mosaic-like  floor.  These  imposing 
white  marble  pillars  were  stationary,  and  formed  a  permanent  part  of  the  palatial 
residence.  How  magnificent !  Shall  we  not  condone  his  vanity  as  he  showed  the 
riches  of  his  glorious  kingdom,  and  the  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty  ?  No 
wonder  that  he  was  exalted  with  pride.  How  much  to  feed  the  spirit  of  self- 
glorification  ! 

II.  But  this  proud  display  was  a  contemptible  exhibition.  For  it  showed 
(a)  The  materialism  of  his  nature.  No  mention  here  of  moral  riches.  He  showed 
the  riches  of  his  kingdom,  but  never  spoke  of  the  virtue  of  his  people.  The 
external  was  magnified ;  the  internal  was  dwarfed.  It  might  be,  so  far,  refined 
materialism ;  but  in  any  shape  materialism  is  degrading,  {h)  The  narrowness  of 
his  view.  Great  as  was  the  magnificence  of  this  monarch,  greater  still,  by  far,  is 
the  Creator's  magnificence  as  seen  even  in  this  material  universe ;  and  this  world 
is  but  a  small  part  of  his  empire.  Bring  together  the  treasures  and  glories  of  all 
the  palaces  and  mansions  of  earth ;  and,  being  only  a  small  selection,  they  but 
tend  to  show  to  the  reflective  mind  the  vastness  of  nature's  resources.  But  all 
this  the  monarch's  mind  did  not  perceive.  Self  bounded  the  range  of  his  vision. 
He  was  contracted  in  his  views,  (c)  The  childishness  of  his  spirit.  'I'he  beautiful 
simplicity  of  the  child  is  seen  in  its  display  of  its  possessions ;  but  the  ignoble 
childishness  of  the  monarch  is  seen  in  the  display  of  his  material  riches.  The 
Almighty  does  not  make  a  parade  of  the  riches  of  his  glorious  kingdom;  but  per- 
mits them  to  speak  for  themselves.  Yea,  he  seems  to  conceal  his  treasures ;  and 
all  goodly  pearls  reveal  themselves  only  to  diligent  seekers. 

III.  This  proud  display  has  a  sorrowful  aspect.  He  showed  his  riches  ... 
many  days.  The  display  only  lasted  for  days  after  all.  This  sorrowful  word  is 
written  on  all  our  earthly  possessions.  Days  mark  the  period  of  our  stewardship ; 
for  all  are  stewards.  The  end  of  the  days,  though  many,  even  an  hundred  and 
fourscore,  will  come  at  last.  And  then  whose  shall  these  things  be  %  Then  what 
account  will  the  poor,  elated,  flattered  monarchs  be  able  to  give  of  their  steward- 
ship 1  Let  us  then  (a)  follow  the  example  of  the  Divine  King  and  not  of  the 
human.  Let  not  vain  breath  be  spent  in  blowing  the  glorifying  trumpet.  Pearls 
will  be  found.     Let  our  wealth — material,  intellectual,  or  morad — speak  for  itself. 


CHAP.  I.] 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


13 


Let  tlie  light  of  goodness  shine  out  clearly,  and  then  we  shall  not  need  to  say, 
See  how  hrhilitly  we  illuminate  the  universe,  (b)  Let  us  see  the  warning  word 
"days"  inscribed  on  all  our  possessions,  on  our  golden  thrones,  on  our  palaces, of 
marble,  and  over  our  gardens  of  delight.  This  will  abate  our  pride ;  this  will 
remove  the  spirit  of  self-glorification.  He  that  possesses  spiritual  riches,  the  gift 
of  Christ  Jesus,  will  find  his  "  days "  merge  into  the  bright,  unending  day  of 
heaven. 


StJGGESTivE  Comments  on  Yerses  4,  6. 


Ver.  4.  What  is  greatness  if  it  be 
not  showed  1  And  wherein  can  greatness 
be  better  shown  than  in  the  achieve- 
ments cf  war  and  the  entertainments  of 
peace  1 — Bishop  Hall. 

This  is  instanced  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
to  set  forth  the  pride  and  vanity  of  this 
great  monarch,  abusing  God's  gifts  to 
his  own  ambition,  and  priding  himself 
in  that  wealth  which  had  been  gotten 
by  the  hard  labour  of  his  poor  subjects. 
—  Trapp. 

This  was  vainglory,  an  affectation  of 
pomp  to  no  purpose  at  all ;  for  none 
questioned  the  riches  of  his  kingdom, 
nor  offered  to  vie  with  him  for  honour. 
If  he  had  showed  the  riches  of  his 
kingdom,  and  the  honour  of  his  majesty, 
as  some  of  his  successors  did,  in  contri- 
buting largely  towards  the  building  of 
the  temple,  and  the  maintaining  of  the 
temple  -  service,  it  w^ould  have  turned 
to  a  much  better  account.  —  Matthew 
Henry. 

Poor  man !  he  little  knew  wherein 
true  riches,  glory,  and  royalty  consisted. 

The  princes  feasted ;  the  provinces 
would  have  to  fast. 

Upon  a  pavement  of  red  and  blue. 
These  are  those  things  that  make  us 
desirous  to  live  long  here.  Will  these 
save  a  man  from  sickness]  Do  not 
these  outward  gauds  and  gaieties  carry 
away  the  heart  from  the  love  of  better 
things  'i — Tra/jp. 

Wealth,  honour,  and  draperies  are 
poor  things  to  put  a  dying  head  upon. 

If  the  feast  of  an  earthly  monarch  be 
so  magnificent,  what  will  be  the  feast  of 
the  King  of  kings  in  heaven'?  There 
will  be  unfading  splendour,  and  plea- 
sures without  exhaustion  or  satiety.  All 
things  are  ready  for  this  feast ;  we  are 
all  invited.  May  we  accept  the  gracious 
invit'xtion,  seek  and  find  the  wedding 


garment,  and  sit  down  at  the  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb. — Henry  and  Scott. 

1.  The  folly  of  buihiing  upon  "  riches  " 
and  ''^honour.'"  It  is  idolatrous  in  prin- 
ciple. It  puts  the  creature  in  the  place 
of  the  Creator.  It  looks  no  higher  than 
this  life.  God,  heaven,  eternity,  are  all 
sacrificed  for  pleasure.  It  is  destructive 
in  its  issues.  "  A  house  on  the  sand." 
**  A  broken  cistern."  *'  A  lifeless  tree." 
2.  The  wisdom  of  building  upon  the 
true  riches.  It  is  pious  in  its  principle. 
It  refers  all  to  God.  Exalts  him  in  the 
soul,  and  renders  to  him  his  just  honour. 
It  is  elevated  in  its  aim.  Heaven — 
eternity.  Mean  is  the  ambition  of  the 
man  who  aims  at  universal  empire  when 
compared  with  the  Christian's  aim.  He 
aims  at  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of 
Qo&.—Rev.  a  Leach,  F.G.S. 

An  ancient  father,  when  he  first  set 
his  foot  in  Rome,  at  that  time  the  mis- 
tress and  wonder  of  the  world,  made 
this  pious  observation  :  "If  an  earthly 
kingdom  is  so  glorious,  how  glorious 
must  the  new  Jerusalem  be  !  "  If  you 
account  those  men  happy  who  were 
feasted  in  the  royal  gardens  of  Shushan, 
how  blessed  must  those  men  be  who 
are  admitted  to  an  eternal  feast  in 
Christ's  Father's  House  1  Gold  and 
silver  and  pearls  are  but  poor  emblems 
of  its  celestial  splendour.  —  Rev.  G. 
Lawson. 

The  owner  of  this  must  have  been 
very  much  prospered.  1.  Prosperity 
should  lead  to  praise.  2.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  prosperity  is  often  hostile  to  the 
spiritual  life.  3.  To  permit  the  plea- 
sures of  life  to  absorb  our  attention  is 
degrading  to  the  nature  entrusted  to  us 
by  God.  4.  It  is  destructive  to  the 
happiness  which  thus  is  mistakenly- 
sought.  Application :  1.  To  the  rich 
and  prosperous  :   be  on  your  guard.    To 


14  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  [ohap.  i. 

the  poor :  murmur  not  that  prosperity  were  better,  wisdom  or  riches,  answered, 

has    been    denied   you ;    wealth    is  the  Eiches :  "for   I  have  often,"  said   he, 

eternal  ruin  of  many. — B.  Thompson.  "  seen    poor   wise    men   at    rich   fools* 

It  is  not  your  riches  of  this  world,  doors,  but  never  rich  fools  at  poor  wise 

but  your  riches  of  grace,  that  shall  do  men's    doors ; "    yet    wealth    may    be 

your  souls  good.     "  Not  my  wealth,  nor  joined    with    wisdom,    goodness    with 

my  blood,  but  my  Christianity  makes  greatness.     Mary  and  Martha  may   be 

me   noble,"    quoth   that    noble   martyr  sisters  ;    righteousness   and   riches  may 

Eonianus.     And  though  the  philosopher  dwell  together. — Adanis. 
merrily,   when   he  was   asked  whether 

MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  7,  8. 

Unwise  Liberality,  but  a  Wise  Regulation. 

Here  is  liberality  shown  not  merely  by  a  warmth  of  feeling,  or  by  a  flow  of  well- 
expressed  sentiments,  but  by  the  extent  of  its  bestowals.  No  one  could  justly 
complain  that  Ahasuerus  was  of  a  niggardly  turn  of  mind  on  this  occasion.  All 
was  done  on  a  large  and  generous  scale,  "according  to  the  state  of  a  king."  Costly 
vessels  adorned  the  festive  board,  the  rich  Chalybonian  wine  foamed  and  sparkled 
in  the  golden  tankards.  There  was  no  stint  at  this  royal  entertainment.  The 
generous  man  commands  our  admiration,  if  not  our  esteem.  And  while  we  seek 
to  show  the  unwisdom  of  this  king's  course  of  proceeding,  we  do  not  refuse  our 
meed  of  praise  for  the  generous  spirit  which  he  displayed. 

I.  This  monarch's  liberality  was  unwise,  for  it  was  an  encouragement  to 
drunkenness.  According  to  Grecian  information,  an  exceedingly  large  quantity 
of  wine  was  drunk  at  Persian  feasts.  Now,  if  the  king's  provision  and  the  king's 
decree  were  intended,  or  were  calculated,  to  promote  extensive  drinking,  and  weie 
a  permission  to  each  guest  not  to  stint  himself  as  to  the  amount  of  wine  he 
drank,  then  it  was  not  wise ;  for  moderation  is  desirable,  as  all  allow.  Even 
strong  drinkers  admit  the  advantages  of  temperance.  A  certain  king  asked  a 
philosopher  how  he  was  to  behave  himself,  and  the  philosopher  replied,  *'  Remem- 
ber always  that  you  are  a  king."  This  the  inebriate  cannot  do,  for  alcohol,  though 
it  may  quicken  the  imagination,  enfeebles  both  the  will,  the  memory,  and  the 
judgment.  The  drunkard  is  a  slave,  and  not  a  king,  though  he  sit  on  a  Persian 
throne.  No  drunkard  can  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  rich  wines  of 
earth  spoil  the  taste,  so  that  the  spirit  cannot  appreciate  the  richer  wines  of  heaven. 

II.  This  monarch's  liberality  was  unwise,  even  if  it  were  not  an  encourage- 
ment to  drunkenness.  Alcohol  is  useless  as  an  article  of  diet,  and  wines  are 
drunk  for  the  sake  of  the  alcohol  which  they  contain.  Alcohol  is  treated  as  an 
alien  in  all  its  travels  through  the  body,  and  no  part  welcomes  it  as  a  friend,  or 
provides  for  it  a  home.  If  alcohol  impairs  the  power  of  the  physical  system,  if, 
further,  it  blunts  the  reason,  prevents  the  critical  faculty  from  exercising  irs  fine 
power  of  drawing  the  line  between  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  lessens  the  authority 
of  moral  control,  then  surely  it  should  not  be  received  by  him  who  is  a  self-deny- 
ing practiser  of  that  which  is  morally  good ;  then  surely  the  sincere  follower  of 
Christ  should  abstain. 

III.  This  monarch's  liberality  was  unwise,  even  if  it  were  an  encouragement 
to  merriment.  The  respectable  drinker  professes  to  take  alcohol,  not  through  the 
promptings  of  animalism,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  genial  excitement  and  the  feeling 
of  good  fellowship  it  promotes.  The  feast  is  dull  when  alcohol  does  not  furnish  its 
exhilarating  influence.  It  excites  the  intellect,  promotes  conversation,  and  gives  a 
charm  to  existence,  its  advocates  seem  to  declare.  But  the  laughter  engendered  by 
alcohol  is  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot.  Yea,  it  is  worse.  The  thorns 
crackle    and    expire    without    any    unpleasant   consequences,    but  this    laughter 


OHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ESTHER.  16 

crackles  with  a  noise  that  is  ominous  of  coming  troubles.  An  even  flow  of  plea- 
sure, the  product  of  the  harmonious  and  healthy  working  of  all  the  parts  of  a  man's 
nature,  is  more  to  be  preferred  than  that  undue  excitement  which  produces  a  fear- 
ful relapse  and  a  painful  recoil. 

IV.  This  monarch's  unwise  liberality  was  in  some  measure  atoned  for  by 
the  wisdom  of  his  regulation.  The  spirit  of  the  regulation  made  by  this  Persiau 
monarch  may  be  brought  out  by  the  stateuient  that  every  man  was  allowed  to 
please  himself.  And  this,  so  far,  is  wise.  Let  there  be  no  forced  drinking  at  the 
feast.  We  may  go  further,  and  say,  Let  the  man  be  a  teetotaller  without  asking 
unpleasant  questions,  and  letting  him  feel  that  his  course  requires  an  apology.  The 
social  tyranny  of  the  past  has  received  a  blow  through  the  advance  of  temperance 
principles  from  which  it  will  not  recover ;  but  we  still  feel  too  much  of  its  power 
at  our  public  feasts.  Surely  a  man  ought  to  be  allowed  to  refuse  wine  in  the  same 
way  as  he  would  refuse  any  other  article  at  the  table. 

Let  wise  men  learn  to  abstain.  Hooker  says  that  "  a  greater  good  is  to  be 
chosen  before  a  less."  Some  men  declare  that  it  is  good  to  take  alcoholic  beverages, 
but  it  is  plainly  proved  that  it  is  a  greater  good  not  to  take ;  therefore  let  the  not- 
taking  be  tlie  purpose  of  every  well-instructed  nature.  If  we  seek  the  preservation 
of  bodily  health  we  must  not  take.  If  reason  is  to  rule,  if  the  balance  of  th©  moral 
nature  is  to  be  preserved,  if  body,  soul,  and  spirit  are  to  be  presented  an  acceptable 
and  holy  and  living  sacritice  to  God  by  Christ  Jesus,  we  must  beware  of  alcoholic 
drinks ;  we  must  exercise  wise  and  joyful  restraints  at  all  festive  gatherings ;  we 
must  recognize  the  truth  that  we  are  greater,  and  bow  to  greater  things  than  that 
of  allowing  the  soul  to  be  slave  of  the  body,  the  moral  nature  to  be  moulded  by 
fashion,  and  the  reason  to  be  tyrannized  over  by  foolish  customs. 

I.  The  drunkard's  excuses,  by  which  he  endeavours  to  defend  or  palliate  his 
crime.  1.  Good  fellowship.  But  can  friendship  be  founded  on  vice ;  especially 
on  a  vice  which  notoriously  impairs  the  memory  and  the  sense  of  obligation,  leads 
to  the  betrayal  of  secrets,  and  stirs  up  strife  and  contention  ?  Instead  of  promoting 
conversation,  it  destroys  it  by  destroying  the  very  ca}>acity  of  communicating 
rational  and  agreeable  thought.  The  drunkard  may  make  his  company  merry,  but 
they  laugh  at,  not  with  him,  and  merely  because  they  are  delighted  with  the  sight 
of  one  sillier  than  themselves.  2.  It  drowns  care.  But  the  drunkard's  care  must 
arise  either  from  the  ill  state  of  his  health,  the  unfortunate  position  of  his  worldly 
affairs,  or  the  stings  of  his  guilty  conscience ;  and,  in  either  case,  his  temporary 
oblivion  is  purcliased  at  the  cost  of  an  aggravation  of  the  evils  which  cause  him  to 
desire  it.  To  drink  to  drown  remorse  is  especially  absurd,  for  all  that  the  drunk- 
ard can  expect  from  this  course  is  the  benefit  of  travelling  some  part  of  the  road  to 
eternal  misery  with  his  eyes  covered.  3.  The  drunkard  has  other  excuses.  He 
says  that  he  is  so  exposed  to  care  and  business  that  he  cannot  avoid  drinkincf  to 
excess,  or  that  he  is  of  so  easy  and  flexible  a  temper  that  he  cannot  resist  the 
importunities  of  his  friends,  as  he  calls  them.  Thus  he  is  for  softening  his  vice 
into  a  sort  of  virtue,  and  calling  that  good  nature  which  his  creditor  calls  villany, 
and  his  family  cruelty. 

II.  The  drunkard's  woe.  This  is  made  up  of  the  miserable  efl'ects,  as  well 
temporal  as  spiritual,  of  his  favourite  vice.  1.  Poverty.  2.  Contempt.  3.  Ill 
health.  4.  An  untimely  death.  Consider,  too,  the  s[)iritual  evils  that  spring  from 
and  punish  the  vice  of  drunkenness.  1.  The  understanding  is  depraved  and  dark- 
ened. 2.  The  will  is  enfeebled  and  dethroned.  The  passions  are  inflamed  and 
rendered  ungovernable.  3.  Regard  for  men,  reverence  for  God,  are  destroyed. 
Drunkenness  travels  with  a  v/hole  train  of  other  vices,  and  requires  the  whole 
width  of  the  broad  way  to  give  it  room. — ClapharrCa  Selected  Sermons, 


16 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


[chap,  l 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  7,  8. 


Here  was  no  compulsion,  either  as  to 
the  measure  or  the  quality  of  the  draught : 
every  man's  rule  was  his  own  choice. 
Who  can  but  blush  to  see  forced  healths 
in  Christian  banquet'^,  when  the  civility 
of  many  pagans  commands  liberty ! — 
BisJwp  Hall. 

The  bounties  of  Providence  are  con- 
tinual evidence  of  God's  tender  care 
towards  us,  his  undeserving  creatures, 
and  are  to  be  thankfully  and  humbly 
received,  and  used  piously  and  in  moder- 
ation. They  are  given  for  the  support 
of  our  nature,  to  enable  us  to  glorify  God 
in  our  bodies  and  our  spirits ;  \nt  us  not 
then  render  ourselves  incapa1)le  of  doing 
so  by  drowning  our  rational  powers  in 
intoxicating  liquors,  and  throwing  our 
bodies  out  of  health  and  comfort  by  a 
worse  than  beastly  use  of  God's  mercies. 
— Hughes. 

Be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is 
excess ;  but  be  filled  with  the  Spirit, 
speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and 
hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  making 
melody  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord. — 
Paul,  the  Apostle. 

There  was  no  forcing  of  healths  or 
urging  of  them ;  every  man  drank  as 
he  pleased ;  so  that  if  there  were  any 
that  drank  to  excess,  it  was  their  own 
fault.  This  caution  of  a  heathen  prince, 
even  then  when  he  would  show  his 
generosity,  may  shame  many  that  are 
called  Christians,  that  think  they  do 
not  sufficiently  show  their  good  house- 
keeping nor  bid  their  friends  welcome 
unless  they  make  them  drunk,  and, 
under  pretence  of  sending  the  health 
round,  send  the  sin  round  and  death 
with  it.  There  is  a  woe  to  them  that 
do  so ;  let  them  read  it  and  tremble 
(Hab.  ii.  15,  16).  It  is  robbing  men  of 
their  reason,  their  richest  jewel,  and 
making  them  fools,  the  greatest  wrong 
that  can  be. — Matthew  Henry. 

"  The  man  who  would  compel  his 
fellows  to  wound  their  own  souls,  by 
sinning  against  God,  must  be  viewed  in 
no  l)etter  light  than  a  barbarian  who 
puts  a  sword  into  their  hands,  and  re- 
quires them  to  sheathe  it  in  their  own 
bowels." 


We  are  not  told  in  the  present  passage 
that  the  king  on  this  occasion  exception- 
ally permitted  moderation,  especially  to 
such  of  his  guests  as  were,  according  to 
their  ancestral  customs,  addicted  to 
moderation,  and  who  would  else  have 
been  compelled  to  drink  moderately ; 
for  the  words  with  which  this  verse 
concludes,  while  they  iinply  also  a  per- 
mission to  each  to  drink  as  little  as  he 
chooses,  are  specially  intondod  to  allow 
every  one  to  take  much. — Berthau. 

Yer.  8.  I.  This  shows  the  common 
sense  of  the  king.  He  behaved  much 
better  in  this  matter  than  many  who 
are  known  as  gentlemen.  Many  are 
lost  through  being  importuned  to  drink 
against  their  wish. 

II.  This  ivould  test  the  moral  strength 
of  the  guests.  Wise  men  will  not  eat 
and  drink  more  than  the  laws  of  temper- 
ance allow.  If  any  drank  too  much,  it 
was  his  own  fault ;  there  was  no  com- 
pulsion. He  could  blame  neither  the 
king  nor  the  law. 

III.  The  tenth  verse  shows,  however, 
that  wine  mastered  the  king.  He  would 
suffer  no  man  to  be  compelled  to  drink 
to  excess,  yet  set  the  example  of  exces- 
sive drinking.  The  law  provided  for 
moderation,  but  the  king  went  beyond 
all  that.  In  eating,  drinking,  and  every- 
thing we  do,  let  us  remember  the  chief 
end  of  man. — Rev.  G.  Leach,  F.G.S. 

Drunkenness.  Drunkenness  is  an 
abomination  to  God  and  a  degradation 
to  man.  By  this  sin  the  creature  which 
is  inferior  only  to  the  angels  makes 
himself  lower  tlian  the  brute. 

I.  See  the  peril  of  moderate  drinking. 
It  creates  the  appetite  for  drink.  We 
have  no  natural  taste  for  it ;  it  increases 
as  well  as  creates  the  appetite.  Supply 
creates  demand ;  it  grows  with  what  it 
feeds  on.  It  gives  the  appetite  entire 
control.  The  man  becomes  first  a  slave, 
then  a  victim. 

II.  See  the  madness  of  drunkenness. 
It  beclouds  the  intellect,  destroys  the 
personality,  and  debases  the  image  of 
God. 

III.  See  the  woes  of  drunkenness. 
There  is  the  woe  of   physical  couse- 


CirAP.  1.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMES^TAUY:   Ef^TIIER 


11 


qilences ;  there  is  the  woe  of  a  dis- 
tracted mind  ;  there  is  the  woe  of  per- 
verted powers ;  there  is  the  woe  of 
moral  defects ;  and  there  is  the  woe  of 
God's  malediction.  This  is  written  in 
both  volumes  of  the  Scripture.  — Rev.  G. 
Leach,  F.G.S, 

There  is  no  homogeneity  between 
alcohol  and  any  part  of  man's  physical 
system.  Tissue  does  not  assimilate  it ; 
the  blood  cells  are  distorted  in  shape 
and  imperfect  in  action  through  its  per- 
nicious influence ;  the  nervous  system 
is  deranged,  and  the  nerve  centres  are 
quickened  to  undue  action,  by  its  irritat- 
ing power ;  the  digestive  processes  are 
arrested  by  its  precipitating  properties  ; 
the  liquor  sanguinis  flows  with  greater 
ease  and  purity  when  not  impregnated 
Avith  its  subtle  poison  ;  animal  heat  is 
promoted  by  oleaginous  substances,  but 
ultimately  lowered  by  the  injurious  ac- 
tion of  alcohol ;  and  the  cerebrum  can 
dt  cide  difficult  questions  with  greater 
clearness,  and  tlie  cerebellum  can  hold 
the  reins  of  government  with  more  per- 
fect mastery,  when  alcohol  does  not  dis- 
turb. Alcoholic  drinks  are  injurious,  for 
they  impair  the  body's  power  of  resisting 
both  the  approaches  of  pestilence  and  the 
changes  of  climate.  Life  in  God's  world 
must  be  preserved  on  God's  conditions 
of  truth,  sobriety,  and  industry.  The 
man  who  takes  alcoholic  drinks  in  moder- 
ation may  suppose  that  he  will  escape 
damage,  but  it  is  a  delusion,  for  the  man 
who  drinks  his  daily  drams  will  not 
only  gradually  but  surely  impair  the 
physical  nature,  but  have  a  blunted  con- 
science, and  a  solution  of  continuity  in 
the  powers  of  ratiocination  and  memory. 
AYe  cannot  be  unacquainted  with  their 
properties  of  producing  a  pharisaic  self- 
complacency  in  certain  classes. 

According  to  the  state  of  the  hing. 
For  whom  it  was  not  unlawful  to  feast, 
so  to  show  his  liberality  towards  his 
peers  and  courtesy  to  his  people.  But 
that  which  was  blameworthy  in  him 
was — 1.  His  vain-glory.  2.  His  prodi- 
gality. 3.  His  misspending  of  time, 
4.  His  neglect  of  business.  5.  His  con- 
tempt of  the  true  God,  not  once  ac- 
knowledged by  him  or  his  guests. 
Lastly,  their  profane  mirth  and  jollity, 


without  the  least  note  of  sanctity  or 
respect  to  God's  glory. — Trapp. 

In  abundance,  according  to  the  state 
of  the  king,  according  to  the  hand  =^ 
power  of  the  king,  means  that  the  great 
quantity  did  honour  to  the  power  of 
the  king,  or  that  it  corresponded  to  the 
ability  and  riches  of  the  king. — Lange. 

The  kingly  character.  The  true  king 
is  the  able  man.  Able  he  should  be 
not  only  from  the  abundance  of  his 
material  resources,  and  the  advantages 
of  his  situation,  but  from  the  greatness 
of  his  moral  nature.  Every  man  who 
is  morally  able  is  a  king.  But  this  true 
kingship  is  only  possible  by  virtue  of 
spiritual  alliance  with  the  King  Christ 
Jesus.  He  was  the  gloriously  able  Man. 
He  has  such  a  store  of  ability  that  he 
can  make  all  his  followers  able. 

I.  It  was  not  according  to  the  state  of 
a  king  {\)  to  make  a  vain  parade.  The 
man  conscious  of  his  strength  or  of  his 
wisdom  need  never  and  will  never  boast 
his  powers.  There  will  be  fit  occasion 
when  he  speaks  of  his  ability.  The  sun 
shines  without  directing  attention  to  his 
rays.  (2)  To  place  temptation  in  the 
way  of  his  subjects.  Heaven's  King 
tempteth  no  man  to  evil ;  he  seeketh 
to  make  all  kingly.  There  is  a  royal 
benevolence  in  his  nature  and  royal  bene- 
ficence in  his  proceedings.  The  kingly 
are  those  who  imitate  this  ble^ssed  pattern. 
This  unkingly  earth  needs  more  kingly 
men  of  this  true  type.  (3)  To  be  toeak 
and  capricious.  Poor  Ahasuerus  was  not 
an  able  man.  He  was  like  a  poor  reed 
tossed  by  the  gusts  of  passion  and  the 
whirlwinds  of  caprice.  He  sat  on  a 
throne,  but  did  not  wield  the  sceptre  of 
a  firm  will.     He  was  himself  governed 

II.  It  was  according  to  the  state  of  a 
king  (1)  to  be  munificent.  The  hand  of 
some  kings  is  grasping.  But  the  true 
conception  of  the  kingly  hand  is  to  be 
open  in  order  to  spread  blessings.  The 
more  munificent  and  the  more  kingly. 
Let  there  be  large  and  unostentatious 
bestowals  of  material,  intellectual,  and 
moral  wealth,  and  thus  we  shall  be 
kingly.  (2)  To  work  for  moral  eleva- 
tion. Oh  that  kings  would  work  for 
the  moral  as  well  as  the  material  pro- 
gress of  the  nations  I     Some  do  neither. 


o 


18 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


[chap.  I. 


They  pauperize  the  nations  in  order  to 
enrich  themselves,  and  see  not  that  the 
wealth  of  the  people  is  the  wealth  of  the 
people's  sovereign.  The  kings  are  few. 
We  want  an  increase  of  moral  kings  who 
shall  be  king-creators.  We  need  a  larger 
royal  race  to  throw  broad-cast  royal  seed 
from  which  shall  spring  a  goodly  harvest 
of  kingly  men.  (3)  To  embody  and 
manifest  moral  strength.  That  king  will 
not  do  much  in  the  way  of  moral  eleva- 
tion who  is  himself  an  example  of  im- 
moral degradation.  In  order  to  lift 
others  we  must  ourselves  be  lifted.  In 
order  to  make  others  able  we  must  our- 
selves be  able.  Strength  imparted  is 
strength  increased.  The  greater  number 
of  kings  we  create  and  the  more  kingly 
we  become.  The  more  we  enthrone 
others  and  the  more  splendid  does  our 
throne  appear. 

The  common  people  are  like  tempered 
wax,  whereon  the  vicious  seal  of  great- 
ness makes  easy  impression.  It  was  a 
custom  for  young  gentlemen  in  Athens 
to  play  on  recorders ;  at  length  Alci bl- 
ades, seeing  his  blown  cheeks  in  a  glass, 
threw  away  his  pipe,  and  they  all  fol- 
lowed him.  Our  gallants,  instead  of 
recorders,  embrace  scorching  lust,  star- 
ing pride,  staggering  drunkenness,  till 
their  souls  are  more  blown  than  those 
Athenians'  cheeks.  I  would  some  Alci- 
biades  would  begin  to  throw  away  these 
vanities,  and  all  the  rest  would  follow 
him.  Thus  spreads  example,  like  a 
stone  thrown  into  a  pond,  that  makes 
circle  to  beget  circle,  till  it  spread  to  the 
banks.  Judas's  train  soon  took  fire  in 
the  suspectless  disciples ;  and  Satan's 
infections  shoot  through  some  great  star 
the  influence  of  damnation  into  the  ear 
of  the  commonalty.  Let  the  experience 
hereof  make  us  fearful  of  examples. — 
AdaTns. 

The  drinking  was  according  to  the 
]aio  i  none  did  compel.  The  king  had 
expressly  appointed  "  that  they  should 
do  according  to  every  man's  pleasure." 
Of  course  there  is  the  question  whether, 
if  some  man's  "  pleasure "  should  take 
him  beyond  the  bounds  of  temperance 
and  propriety,  any  restraint  would  be 
put  upon  him ']  It  seems  as  if  there 
would  be.    The  enforcement  of  that  part 


of  the  rule,  if  it  existed,  was  probably 
left  with  the  ''officers  of  the  house." 
The  dangerous  time  was  at  the  end  of  a 
feast,  as  we  shall  see.  Meantime,  it  is 
enough  to  observe  that  there  is  to  be  no 
compulsion ;  the  inebriating  cup  is  not 
to  be  pressed  on  the  unwilling  guest. 
That  custom  apparently  had  been  bnt 
too  common  among  the  Persians  and 
their  imitators.  It  is  not  entirely,  how- 
ever, in  moral  recoil  that  sanction  is 
thus  given  in  law  to  the  better  practice. 
There  is  a  touch  of  political  prudence  in 
it.  For  here  at  the  feast  are  princes 
from  all  parts,  with  their  retainers  and 
tribes.  There  are  men  here  from  the 
mountains  who  are  famous  for  their 
temperance  and  for  the  strictness  and 
simplicity  of  their  manners.  Such  men 
would  not  be  won,  but  disgusted  rather 
and  alienated  from  the  royal  cause,  by 
anything  like  Bacchanalian  excess.  In 
prudence,  therefore,  as  well  as  from, 
possibly,  higher  motive,  the  principle  of 
temperance  must  have  the  reinforcement 
of  public  law. 

It  is  humiliating  to  remember  that  no 
long  time  has  elapsed  in  this  country 
since  the  very  same  objectionable  and 
repulsive  habit  against  which  this  public 
law  of  the  Persians  was  directed,  pre- 
vailed in  some  of  the  social  circles  of 
this  country.  It  was  a  point  of  hospi- 
tality to  press  the  bottle  even  on  the 
unwilling  guest.  The  generous  host 
hardly  felt  that  he  had  done  his  duty 
until  his  guests  were  reeling,  and  it 
some  of  them  were  under  the  table  the 
triumph  of  his  beneficence  was  complete. 
You  might  easily  cull  from  the  poets  of 
the  last  century,  both  of  England  and 
Scotland,  descriptions  and  allusions 
pointing  to  a  state  of  things  which, 
happily,  has  now  passed  away.  This, 
indeed,  is  our  reason  for  dwelling  on 
such  a  subject  —  repulsive  enough  in 
itself — for  even  a  few  moments.  It  is 
always  helpful  to  observe  any  signs  of  a 
real  progress,  and,  undoubtedly,  in  the 
course  of  a  generation  or  two,  we  have 
in  this  particular  made  very  great  pro- 
gress. Within  the  whole  sphere  of  what 
is  called  society,  anything  approaching 
compulsion  would  not  be  tolerated,  and 
in  fact  is  never  attempted. 


CHAP.  1.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTEEM. 


19 


Whether  we  do  not,  on  a  wi(]er  scale, 
as  a  people  in  fact,  and  with  tlie  force 
of  law,  practise  compulsion  still,  and 
that  on  the  weakest  and  most  helpless 
part  of  our  people,  is  a  very  serious 
question,  and  one  which,  to  say  the 
least,  we  cannot  answer  with  the  same 
confidence.  If  places  where  drink  is 
sold  to  the  common  people  are  multi- 
plied much  beyond  the  reasonable  needs 
of  the  community;  if  exceptional  privi- 
leges are  given  to  the  sellers;  if  their 
houses,  with  many  exits  and  entrances, 
are  planted  in  the  most  conspicuous 
spots ;  if  they  burn  the  brightest  lights 
in  the  streets,  and  are  allowed  to  keep 
open  long  after  other  trades  and  indus- 
tries are  closed  and  silent,  does  not  all 
this  and  more  of  the  same  kind  amount 
to  a  sort  of  compulsion  to  working- 
people,  and  trades-people,  and  thought- 
less young  people  of  both  sexes  ?  If  the 
spirit  of  that  old  Persian  law  were  ex- 
pressed in  our  own  legislation  about 
drink,  it  would,  as  we  cannot  help  feel- 
ing, be  all  the  better  for  the  morals  and 
manners  of  our  time,  for  the  sobriety  of 
the  working-classes,  and  for  the  safety 
of  the  young.  "  Men  are  not  made 
virtuous  by  Act  of  Parliament"  has 
grown  to  be  a  kind  of  axiom  on  this 
and  some  other  subjects ;  and  many  a 
one  rides  off  on  it,  easily  and  gaily,  as 
though  he  had  performed  some  feat  in 
logic.  But  the  axiom  is  one  which 
ought  to  be  disputed.  It  is  not  broadly 
and  roundly  true.  Indeed  a  part  of  it 
is  untrue ;  for  Acts  of  Parliament,  when 
they  are  wise  and  suitable  to  the  people 
for  whom  they  are  framed,  do  help,  in- 
strumentally,  to  make  men  virtuous. 
So  Acts  of  Parliament,  when  they  are 
unwise  and  evil,  help,  instrumentally, 
to  make  men  vicious.  When  tempta- 
tions and  inducements  to  excess  are 
made  too  strong  for  the  feeble  resistance 
they  meet  with,  and  made  so  partly  by 
legislation,  is  it  not  clear  that  the  State 
herself  becomes  a  temptress,  and  to  that 
extent  does  ''  compel "  1  She  makes  the 
law  under  which — in  whatever  way  the 
responsibility  may  be  shared — there  are 
so  many  victims.  She  gathers  the  tax 
which  intemperance  pays  to  sustain  her 


magnificence  and  power.  She  must 
therefore  have  some  corresponding  abil- 
ity to  promote  goodness  and  morality  in 
their  exterior  forms.  She  can  refuse  to 
tempt,  or  to  sanction  temptation.  She 
can  keep  the  path  of  virtue  and  obedi- 
ence, as  far  as  it  is  in  her  care,  open.  In 
one  word,  as  we  have  it  on  the  highest 
authority,  she  can  be  "  the  minister  of 
God  "  to  men  "  for  good." 

So  much  we  have  thought  it  right  to 
say  in  contravention  of  the  dictum  of 
the  let-alone  philosophy  which  is  so 
much  applied  to  this  and  some  kindred 
subjects.  But  we  cordially  assent  to 
the  view  that  virtue  and  goodness  in 
the  deeper  sense  are  first  of  all  from 
above — from  the  Father  of  lights,  from 
the  untempted,  untempting  God,  all- 
generous,  ever-merciful — and  then  that 
in  earthly  form  they  are  the  result  and 
product  of  the  free  action  and  mutual 
intercourse  of  human  minds.  Let  the 
moral  and  intellectual  power  of  the 
community,  in  its  full  force,  come  to 
the  rescue.  Direct  conflict  with  evil 
can  only  take  us  a  certain  length  even 
if  it  be  successful.  The  inculcation  and 
the  production  of  goodness  among  our 
fellow-men  will  take  us  at  once  into 
illimitable  fields,  and  set  us  on  a  path- 
way of  progress  unending.  When  we 
have  large  increase  of  knowledge  among 
the  people,  some  corresponding  elevation 
of  social  sentiment,  and  some  refinement 
of  taste,  and  some  improvement  in  the 
structure  of  houses,  and  amusements 
which  are  not  corrupting  and  yet  are 
really  amusing — we  may  hope  confi- 
dently to  see  the  same  process  taking 
place  among  the  masses  of  the  people, 
in  relation  to  temperance,  which  has 
been  accomplished  so  largely  among  the 
higher  classes.  It  is  a  vast  and  various 
problem.  It  is  a  long  question.  We 
can  only  do  our  own  part  by  adopting 
sound  principles,  and,  still  more,  by  the 
uniform  practice  of  moderation  in  all 
things,  because  we  are  of  those  who 
believe  that  "  the  Lord  is  at  hand." 
Whether  we  eat,  therefore,  or  drink,  or 
whatsoever  we  do,  let  us  do  all  to  his 
glory.  — Raleigh, 


o2 


20  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [CHAP.  I 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Vbrsb  9. 
Vashti,  the  Persian  Monarch's  Qqeen. 

I.  Her  significant  name.  Those  critics  who  determine  the  personality  of 
Ahasuerus  do  not  speak  so  positively  about  the  personality  of  Vashti.  We  read 
her  name,  but  cannot  tell  either  her  ancestors  or  the  place  of  her  birth.  It  may  be 
supposed  that  she  came  from  Yezd,  for  the  women  of  this  province  were  esteemed 
the  most  beautiful  in  Persia.  The  proverb  is,  that  to  live  happy  a  man  must  have 
a  wife  of  Yezd,  eat  the  bread  of  Yezdecas,  and  drink  the  wine  of  Shiraz.  However, 
she  stands  before  us  in  a  great  measure  unknown.  She  plays  her  part  in  the 
drama,  and  then  disappears  from  the  stage,  but  does  not  pass  away  without 
imparting  useful  lessons.  Her  very  name  is  significant,  and  means  in  old  Persian 
'^  the  best."  She  was  good  of  countenance,  and  doubtless  possessed  "  the  light  of 
that  dark  eye  "  which  made  the  power  of  Eastern  women,  *'  wondrous  strong,  yet 
lovely  in  their  strength."  There  was  a  charming  grace  in  her  motion,  and  a 
pleasant  witchery  in  her  voice.  Her  "long  locks  foiled  the  painter's  power." 
Slie  was  so  lovely,  that  after  the  assembled  magnates  had  been  satiated  with 
])eautiful  sights,  she  must  be  brought  forth  to  minister  to  the  pleasure  of  natures 
cloyed  with  the  very  excess  of  beauty  and  the  brilliance  of  regal  splendours.  The 
wise  man  says  that  "favour  is  deceitful,  and  beauty  is  vain:  but  a  woman  that 
feareth  the  Lord,  she  shall  be  praised."  Physical  beauty  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  by 
no  means  to  be  despised ;  but  that  beauty  is  vain  which  is  the  only  means 
employed  to  procure  favour,  and  which  conceals  internal  unloveliness.  But  surely 
there  may  be  the  combination  of  physical  beauty  and  moral  loveliness.  If  we 
cannot  find  in  nature  either  the  flow^er  well  shaped  and  beautifully  tinted  that 
gives  forth  sweet  fragrance,  or  the  bird  of  beautiful  plumage  that  can  send  out  rich 
music,  yet  surely  the  beautiful  woman  may  by  Divine  grace  give  forth  the  sweet 
fragrance  of  godliness,  and  her  deeds  become  so  many  glad  songs  in  this  weeping 
world.  And  much  may  be  done  for  religion  by  strong-minded  and  spiritually- 
gifted  Yashtis.  Even  many  professing  Christian  women  may  learn  useful  moral 
lessons  from  one  whose  religious  tenets  they  might  reject.  Whatever  view  may  be 
taken  of  her  conduct,  this  is  plain,  that  she  was  not  a  mere  plaything  for  man,  that 
she  was  not  ready  to  sacrifice  the  moral  sense  in  order  to  feed  her  own  vanity  by 
ministering  to  the  bacchanalian  caprice  of  a  despot.  Many  names  are  given  at 
random,  and  do  not  set  forth  the  attributes  of  the  persons  to  whom  they  are  applied. 
A  woman  may  be  called  Yashti,  and  yet  not  be  the  best  either  physically,  or 
intellectually,  or  morally.  Certain  it  is  that  many  bear  the  better  name  of  Christian 
who  are  not  Christlike.  The  outward  beauty  is  not  increased  by  the  outshining  of 
inward  loveliness  ;  the  "  marred  "  countenance  is  not  rendered  attractive  by  the 
pervasive  and  far-gleaming  influence  of  a  soul  "  full  of  grace  and  truth."  The 
Christian  should  be  the  best,  if  not  in  phj^sical  beauty,  if  not  in  intellectual  grace 
and  power,  yet  in  that  spiritual  loveliness  which  can  make  all  attractive.  Better 
than  the  name  that  proclaims  either  physical  beauty  or  glorious  ancestry,  better 
than  the  boasted  titles  of  earth,  is  that  name  which  tells  of  Divine  grace  in  the 
soul,  which  links  us  on  to  the  sublime  ancestry  of  God's  true  heroes,  and  betokens 
our  Divine  royalty. 

II.  Vashti  the  queen  also  gives  a  feast.  It  is  asserted  that  Vashti  was  one 
of  the  king's  inferior  wives,  dignified  with  the  title  of  queen.  And  this  statement 
is  supported  by  a  reference  to  Herodotus.  Now  in  the  book  to  which  the  refer- 
ence is  here  made  we  find  that  the  great  historian  relates  that  the  Persians  made 
this  statement  to  King  Amyntas — that  it  is  a  custom  with  us  Persians,  when  we 
have  given  a  great  feast,  to  introduce  our  concubines  and  lawful  wives  to  sit  by  our 
side.      But  the  statement  was  evidently  made  for  an  illegitimate  and  licentious 


CHAP.  I.]  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  21 


purpose,  and  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  received  as  a  correct  representation  of  Persian 
customs.  And  if  it  were,  the  appeal  proves  too  much,  for  it  shows  that  Vashti  was 
neither  a  lawful  wife  nor  a  concubine,  for  both  are  said  to  be  introduced  to  the 
feasts.  The  separation  of  men  and  women  is  in  accordance  with  existing  Oriental 
customs,  which  oblige  women  to  feast  separately  from  the  men,  even  on  the  same 
occasions  of  rejoicing.  And  this  was  plainly  the  custom  in  the  time  of  Ahasuerus. 
Certainly  it  was  a  special  favour  «hown  unlo  Esther  Avhen  the  king  and  Haman 
attended  the  banquet  she  had  prepared.  If  Yashti  were  a  mere  concubine  she 
would  not  have  been  sent  for  with  such  courteous  formality,  and  she  would  not 
have  ventured  to  refuse  to  comply  with  the  despot's  command.  The  feast  is  said 
to  be  in  the  palace,  as  if  to  mark  the  separation  more  distinctly.  And  she  gave  the 
feast  to  the  ladies  either  in  her  own  apartments,  or  in  some  portion  of  the  royal 
dwelling  placed  at  her  disposal.  According  to  this  custom  men  must  feast  together, 
and  women  must  be  excluded.  But  the  Divine  word  teaches  the  better  rule,  that 
men  should  never  so  conduct  themselves  as  to  make  it  expedient  to  exclude  the 
society  of  virtuous  women.  For  the  woman  is  the  complement  of  the  man.  Each 
from  each,  each  to  each,  should  both  receive  and  give.  Perfect  manhood  cannot 
be  attained  except  there  be  the  refining  touch  of  a  woman's  gentle  hand.  And 
perfect  womanhood  cannot  be  reached  unless  a  man's  influence  is  at  work  imparting 
strength.  But  this  above  all — no  man  should  go  where  a  virtuous  and  high-souled 
woman  cannot  enter.  Christianity  has  still  a  great  work  to  do  in  teaching  men 
that  all  pleasures  should  be  forbidden  in  which  wives  and  children  cannot  partici- 
pate. The  feasting  is  injurious  where  pure  and  sensitive  spirits  are  not  regarded  as 
welcome  guests. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verse  9. 

It  is  remarkable  in  this  third  feast —  wantonness,  without  that  wild  scurrility 

I.  That  the  women  feasted  within  which  useth  to  haunt  promiscuous  meet- 
doors.  Not  in  the  open  court,  as  their  ings.  Oh  shameful  unchastity  of  those 
husbands  did.  loose  Christians,  who   must  feed  their 

II.  That  they  feasted  apart  from  the  lust  while  they  fill  their  bellies,  and 
men.  Which,  whether  it  were  of  pride,  think  the  feast  imperfect  where  they 
because  Yashti  would  keep  state  by  may  not  satiate  their  eye  no  less  than 
herself,  or  of  necessity,  because  either  their  palate. — Bislwp  Hall. 

the  custom  of  the  country  or  the  king's  While  the  king  showed  the  honour 

jealousy  would  not  allow  her  presence  of  his  majesty,  the  queen  and  her  ladies 

among  so  many  of  the  opposite  sex,  yet  showed  the  honour  of  their  modesty, 

surely  this  may  condemn  our  most  las-  which  is  truly  the  majesty  of  the  fair 

civious  mingling  of  both  sexes  together  sex. — M.  Henry. 

in  dancing  and  such  like  meetings,  where  The  king  did  not  grudge  to  his  queen 
nothing  is  more  usual  than  lustful  looks,  and  the  women  of  Shushan  the  pleasures 
Lot,  feasting  and  drinking  wine  with  which  he  allowed  himself  and  his  male 
his  own  daughters  fell  into  sin.  The  subjects,  so  far  as  they  could  be  enjoyed 
Israelites  doing  the  like  with  the  daugh-  without  indecency, 
ters  of  Moab  were  ensnared  and  sub-  It  would  have  been  dangerous  to 
verted.  The  dancing  damsel  so  inflamed  morals  and  inconsistent  with  received 
that  old  goat  Herod,  that,  like  a  madman,  usages  for  the  queen  and  ladies  of  Shu- 
he  sweareth  to  give  her  her  desire  to  the  shan  to  have  associated  with  the  other 
half  of  his  kingdom. — Trapp.  sex  in  their  banquet ;  but  they  had  a 
I  cannot  but  envy  the  modesty  of  feast  by  themselves,  in  which,  doubtless, 
heathen  dames.  Vashti  the  queen  and  they  respected  the  laws  of  decorum  and 
her  ladies,  with  all  the  several  ranks  of  temperance. 

the  sex,  feast  apart,  entertaining  each         Let  not  women   be  locked  in  their 

other  with  a  bashful  courtesy,  without  chambers  as  if  they  were  criminals  that 


22 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap,  l 


must  be  locked  under  close  restraint ; 
but  let  them  not  use  their  liberty  for  an 
occasion  to  the  gratitication  of  idleness, 
or  a  spirit  of  dissipation.  Let  them 
beware  of  that  society  that  would  cor- 
rupt their  morals  or  stain  their  character. 
— Rev.  George  Lawson. 

The  name  Vashti  has  probably  a  con- 
nection with  the  old  Persian  vahisti 
(the  best),  or  with  the  related  behisht. 
In  modern  Persian  Vashti  signifies  a 
beautiful  woman.  Vashti  gave  the  feast 
to  the  ladies  in  the  king's  palace,  i.  e. 
either  in  her  own  apartments,  which 
also  were  in  the  royal  residence,  or  in 
some  other  dwellings  there  which  were 
placed  at  her  disposal  for  this  festive 
occasion.  — Lange. 

The  condition  of  woman  in  antiquity 
was  little  better  than  that  of  a  slave. 
She  was  the  property  of  her  husband, 
if  married  ;  if  unmarried,  she  was  the 
plaything  or  slave  of  man,  never  his 
equal.  The  morality  of  married  life, 
which  is  the  strength  and  glory  of  any 
people,  was  hardly  known.  Pompey 
and  Germanicus  were  singular  in  the 
fidelity  that  marked  their  marriage  rela- 
tions on  both  sides,  and  were  famous 
through  the  singularity.     The  utter  im- 


purity of  the  men  reacted  in  a  similar 
self-degradation  of  the  other  sex.      In 
Pome  marriages  became,  as  a  rule,  mere 
temporary    connections.       In    order    to 
escape    the    punishments    inflicted    on 
adultery  in  the  time  of  Tiberius,  mar- 
ried women,  including  even  women  of 
illustrious  families,  enrolled  themselves 
on  the  official  lists  as  public  prostitutes. 
St.  Paul  only  spoke  the  language  which 
every  one  who  knows  the  state  of  morals 
of  those  days  must  use,  when  he  wrote 
the  well-known  verses  in  the  opening  of 
his  Epistle  to  the  Romans.     The  bar- 
barians of  the  German  forests,  alone  of 
the  heathen  world,   retained  a  worthy 
sense  of   the  true   dignity  of   woman, 
there  laughs   at  vice,"  says 
is  to  seduce  and  to   be 
seduced  called  the  fashion."     "  Happy 
indeed,"  continues  the  Roman,  thinking 
of  the  state  of  things  around  him,  "those 
states  in  which  only  virgins  marry,  and 
where  the  vows  and  heart  of  the  bride 
go    together.      Infidelity    is   very   rare 
among  them."    The  traditions  of  a  purer 
time  still  lingered  beyond  the  Alps  ;  the 
after-glow   of   light  that    had   set  else- 
where.—  Geikie. 


*'No    one 
Tacitus,  "  nor 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  10  and  14, 

A  Catalogue  op  Names. 

Names  are  applied  to  persons  and  things  to  set  forth  their  distinguishing  charac- 
teristics, and  to  separate  one  from  the  other.  The  name  of  the  person  should  repre- 
sent and  bring  before  us  the  person  so  designated.  But  the  names  of  these  seven 
eunuchs  and  seven  princes  do  not  give  us  any  indication  of  their  peculiar  proper- 
ties.    These  names  are  names  only.    The  persons  named  are  lost  in  the  oblivion  of 

I.  Human  names  are  needful  to  the  perfec::ion  of  tae  historic  record.  This 
Book  of  Esther  is  a  history  as  well  as  a  drama.  For  the  consistency  of  the  drama, 
and  to  the  perfection  of  the  historic  record,  there  must  be  the  record  of  names.  We 
may  wish  to  know  something  about  the  persons  named,  but  the  historian  cannot 
always  check  his  narration  to  describe  every  person  to  whom  allusion  must  be  made. 
All  he  has  to  do  is  to  give  a   faithful   and  general   account   of  the  transactions 

T'poorded 

II  Human  names  are  useful  as  being  incidental  testimonies  to  the  veracity 
of  the  history.  A  long  list  of  names  is  dry  reading,  it  sometimes  makes  an 
unpleasant  break  in  the  even  flow  of  the  narrative,  but  it  gives  an  air  of  truthful- 
ness to  the  record.  It  shows  that  the  writer  either  has  much  skUl,  or  is  speaking 
about  real  transactions  with  which  he  is  familiar.  We  have  no  just  reason  to  sup- 
pose that  these  sacred  writers  were  endowed  with  the  worldly  cunning  which  led 


CHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHEli  23 

them  to  conjure  and  insert  names  for  the  purpose  of  making  their  mytlis  appear 
something  more  than  mytliical  compositions.  There  is  the  evident  absence  of  all 
deep  art  in  their  compositions.     There  is  a  simplicity  which  speaks  of  veracity. 

III.  Human  names  are  recognized  by  the  Divine  mind.  Language  itself 
must  be  of  Divine  origin.  We  cannot  conceive  human  language  having  come  into 
existence  in  any  other  way.  Names,  then,  are  part  of  the  Divine  plan.  The  God 
of  order  must  approve  of  those  n;imes  which  are  needful  to  the  orderly  movements 
of  society.  They  are  plentifully  employed  in  the  Divine  book.  There  are  distinc- 
tions on  earth,  and  names  are  needful  to  preserve  those  distinctions.  There  are 
distinctions  in  heaven,  and  perhaps  names  will  continue  in  that  sublimer  sphere. 

IV.  Human  names  may  be  entered  on  the  historic  page  and  the  owners  sink 
away  into  obscurity.  These  seven  eunuchs  and  seven  princes  have  for  us  no  deep 
interest ;  their  glory  is  gone,  their  names  only  abide.  How  touching  it  is  to 
reflect  that  the  greater  part  by  far  of  the  race  become  only  meaningless  names  ! 
We  have  even  no  certain  data  for  the  interpretation  of  i/Uese  names.  They  have 
generally  but  little  resemblance  to  known  Persian  names.  But  we  may  go  further. 
The  best  known  names  of  the  present  will  be  crowded  out  of  prominence  by  the 
names  of  coming  celebrities.  There  are  vast  multitudes  in  tliis  country  who  do  not 
know  the  names,  and  still  fewer  who  are  acquainted  with  the  characters,  of  those 
great  men  who  have  fashioned  our  country's  history.  So  passes  speedily  away  all 
human  glory.     The  name  of  Christian  will  ever  abide. 

V.  Human  names  may  be  entered  on  the  historic  page  without  any  merit  on 
the  part  of  the  owners.  If  historic  scrolls  contained  only  the  names  of  the  merit- 
oiious,  if  even  of  the  meritorious  from  a  human  standpoint,  how  short  would  be 
the  list !  The  work  of  the  historian  would  be  very  considerablv  abridged.  These 
names  Mre  inserted  on  account  of  their  connection  with  the  sacred  story. 

VI.  Human  names  may  be  recorded  in  a  sacred  list  and  yet  the  owners  not 
themselves  be  sacred.  This  number  seven  was  peculiarly  sacred  to  the  Persians. 
If  these  eunuchs  and  princes  had  been  of  sacred  character,  if  they  had  been  known 
for  deeds  of  goodness,  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that  the  Divine  penman  would 
have  paused  in  order  to  testify  of  their  noble  characters.  This  course  is  from  time 
to  time  pursued  in  the  Bible.  Many  that  are  unsacred  have  their  names  written 
on  the  sacred  lists  of  earth.  It  is  difficult,  yea  impossible,  to  keep  our  sacred  lists 
perfect.  The  names  of  the  unworthy  and  the  impure  will  get  inserted.  The  sacred 
list  of  heaven  alone  is  perfect.  Characters,  not  reputations,  are  considered  in 
Divine  judgments.  Not  the  skilful  utterers,  but  the  consistent  doers  of  Divine 
words  will  be  written  on  Divine  lists. 

VII.  Better  than  the  celebrity  of  human  names  is  tha  immortality  of  noble 
deeds.  The  most  celebrated  of  human  names  will  vanish.  Noble  deeds  alone  are 
immortal.  When  the  names  now  blazoned  forth  on  the  pages  of  history,  or  trum- 
peted in  the  ears  of  the  world,  are  known  no  more,  then  will  be  remembered  the 
names  of  God's  faithful  ones.  For  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  their  works 
and  their  labours  of  love. 

"  Be  good,  ray  child,  and  let  who  wUl  be  clever — 
Do  noble  deeds,  not  dream  them  all  day  long  ; 
And  so  make  life,  death,  and  that  vast  forever 

One  grand,  deep  song."* — Charles  KingsUy, 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  13,  14. 

It  is  to   be   added,  also,   that   mere  some  presumption  of  veracity ;  and  all 

genealogies,  bare  narratives  of  the  num-  unadorned  narratives,    which  have    no- 

ber  of  years  which  persons,  called  by  thing  to  surprise,  may  be   thought   to 

such    and    such    names,    lived,    do    not  carry  somewhat  of  the  like  pres'imption 

carry  the  air  of  fiction  ;  perhaps  do  carry  too. — Butler's  Analogy. 


84  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [cHiJ».  i. 

Every  human  name  more  or  less  his-  But  whole  pages  together  of  nothing  hut 

toric.      Some  persons   exercise   a  direct  names  are  so  preposterously  heyond  all 

historic  influence  ;  others  are  hut  inci-  ima^inahle  necessities  of  allusion,  and  so 

dentally  associated  with  the  great  facts  destructive  of  all  interest  in  the  reader, 

of  time. — Dr.  Parker.  that  we  may  safely  infer  that  the  intro- 

Tn  a  similar  way,  many  of  the  driest  duction  of  such  matter,  to  the  extent  we 

portions    of    the    historic    books  —  the  find  it  in  the  Bible,  will  admit  of  no 

genealogies,   for    example — minister    to  such  solution.     As  little  will  it  admit  of 

the  same  end.     The  mere  frequency  and  a    mythical  origin;   for  though    myths 

copiousness  of  such  matter,  untinctured  may  be  a  gradual  and  insensible  growth 

with  the  smallest  trace  of  mythological  of  the  popular  imagination,  they  are  yet 

influences,  and  attended,  as  it  often  is,  true  to  the    principles    on  which    they 

with    a   break    in    the    continuity    and  have  been  constructed  and  embellished, 

interest  in  the  narrative,  is,  pro  tanto,  a  to  amuse  or  instruct ;  and  neither  the 

voucher  that  the  writings  in  which  they  one  purpose  nor  the  other  can   be  an- 

occur  are  neither  fiction  nor  myth.   .  .   .  swered  by  whole  chapters  containing  no- 

We  can  understand  the  moderate   use  thing  but  long  catalogues  of  names. — The 

which  Homer  or  De  Foe  may  have  made  Super! luraan    Origin   of  the   Bihle^  by 

of  such  matter ;  that  is,  just  so  far  as  to  Henry  Rogers, 
impart  a  general  air  of  verisimilitude. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGEAPH.     Verses  10—12. 

False  Merriment  and  its  Result. 

"  When  the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry  with  wine  "  he  sent  the  seven  eunuchs 
— which  refers  in  the  present  case  to  the  seven  Amshaspands,  in  others  the  number 
refers  to  the  days  of  the  week,  or  the  seven  planets — "to  bring  Yasliti  the  queen 
before  the  king  with  the  crown  royal,  to  show  the  people  and  the  princes  her 
beauty.  But  the  queen  Vashti  refused  to  come  at  the  king's  commandment : 
therefore  was  the  king  very  wroth,  and  his  anger  burned  in  him." 

I.  Here  is  false  merriment.  There  is  a  merriment  which  is  w^holesome,  and 
there  is  a  merriment  which  is  injurious.  That  merriment  which  is  the  outcome  of 
a  nature  working  harmoniously  will  do  good,  and  will  leave  pleasant  reflections; 
but  that  merriment  which  is  the  outcome  of  a  nature  where  alcohol  has  sunk  into 
temporary  oblivion  all  unpleasant  views,  and  has  unduly  excited  into  delirious  joy, 
will  work  damage,  and  when  it  has  gone  a  bitter  memory  will  remain.  The  last 
state  of  the  man's  heart  made  merry  with  wine  is  always  worse  than  the  state 
before  the  heart  was  reached  by  the  delusive  liquor.  The  false,  both  in  nature 
and  in  morals,  cannot  be  without  either  attendant  or  consequent  evils.  Better  no 
merriment  than  that  which  is  purchased  at  the  expense  of  future  repose.  Let  the 
heart  of  man  be  merry  with  the  new  wine  of  heaven 

II.  Here  false  merriment  leads  to  a  foolish  command.  When  the  heart  is 
thus  merry  with  wine  the  head  gets  wrong.  The  directing  portion  of  the  brain  is 
disordered  and  weakened  by  alcohol.  Strange  freaks  are  performed,  and  the  merry 
heart  too  often  becomes  a  broken  heart.  Very  suggestive  is  the  statement  "when 
the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry  with  wine."  Nothing  is  said  about  the  head.  The 
stomach  is  too  often  the  strongest  force  in  a  drunkard's  frame.  Ahasuerus,  in  his 
maudlin  state,  did  not  dream  that  his  beloved  and  beautiful  queen  would  dare  to 
be  disobedient.  He  gave  a  foolish  command.  His  folly  brought  its  bitter  fiuit. 
He  sowed  the  wind  and  reaped  the  whirlwind.  Let  us  be  careful  how  and  whom 
we  command. 

III.  A  foolish  command  leads  to  a  humiliating  refusal.  It  never  occurred  to 
this  proud  and  merry-making  monarch  that  a  woman  would  venture  to  refuse,  when 


CHAP.  I.]  JIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  2« 

courtiers  fawned  and  flattered,  and  when  princes  rendered  obeisance.  In  tlie  very 
climax  of  his  glory  and  his  merriment  he  received  a  blow  which  was  more  hurnili- 
ating  than  defeat  on  the  battle-field.  What  a  consternation  when  Yashti  refused 
to  come  !  If  there  was  one  thing  more  than  another  calculated  to  make  this  kino^ 
sober,  it  was  the  tidings  that  Vashti  refused  to  come.  Our  troubles  come  fiom 
quarters  wliere  we  least  expect  llieni. 

IV.  This  humiliating^  refusal  leads  to  a  still  more  humiliating  display. 
Sometimes  fools  are  so  silly  as  not  to  see  that  they  have  been  humiliated.  But 
Ahasuerus  had  not  been  rendered  senseless  by  the  copious  draughts  of  rich  wine  ; 
he  had  just  enough  sense  left  to  see  that  he  had  received  a  great  affront ;  **  there- 
fore was  the  king  very  wroth,  and  his  anger  burned  in  him."  A  king  in  a  childish 
passion.  How  unkingly  I  This  royal  child  asked  for  his  queen  to  be  brought,  as 
an  over-spoilt  child  asks  for  a  fresh  toy  to  gratify  a  surfeited  nature,  and  then  begins 
to  cry  and  make  a  farcical  scene  because  the  request  is  refused.  If  there  was  one 
manly  spirit  present  at  the  scene,  he  must  have  blushed  for  his  country  to  see  it 
governed  by  such  a  pitiful  specimen  of  manhood.  Here  learn — 1.  That  human 
greatness  reveals  human  weakness.  Earthly  kings  are  not  omnipotent.  Only  God 
is  all-{)Owerful ;  and  oftentimes  with  the  small  hand  of  his  weakest  creatures  he 
touches  the  strong  man  and  makes  him  tremble.  In  the  day  of  proudest  successes 
we  receive  the  most  humiliating  strokes.  2.  An  uncnrhed  will  must  meet  with 
strange  rebuffs.  A  Persian  monarch's  command  was  not  to  be  disputed,  and  thus 
he  did  not  learn  to  respect  the  rights  of  others.  While  we  uphold  our  own  rights, 
and  maintain  a  proper  dignity,  we  must  remember  that  others  have  rights. 
Spoiled  children  must  come  to  grief.  3.  That  at  Divine  feasts  alone  do  we  find 
the  best  at  the  last.  Where  Ahasuerus  and  his  like  preside  the  best  wine  is  drunk 
first,  and  at  the  conclusion  the  guests  are  only  too  glad  to  escape  without  personal 
harm.  Where  Christ  presides  the  joyful  guests  exclaim,  Thou  hast  kept  the  good 
wine  till  now. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Ybrses  10 — 12. 

1.  It  was  certainly  the  king's  weak-  wroth,  and  his  anger   burned  in   him. 

ness  to  send   for  the   queen   into    his  Anger.    I.  The  deformity  of  anger. 

presence  when  drunk.     (1)  He  dishon-  What  an  ugly  thing  is  anger,  dispossess- 

oured  himself  as  a  husband.     He  ought  ing  a  man  of  his  soul  (which  is  possessed 

to  have  protected,  and  not  exposed,  his  by  patience),  and  disfiguring  his  body 

wife.     (2)  He  diminished  himself  as  a  with  fieriness  of  eyes,  furiousness  of  the 

king  in  commanding  that  from  his  wife  looks,  distortion  of  the  face,  inflamma- 

which  she  might  refuse,  much  to  the  tion  of  the  nostrils.     The  Hebrews  call 

honour  of  her  virtue.    2.  Perhaps  it  was  anger   Aph,   because   therein    the   nose 

not  her  wisdom  to  deny  him.     (1)  She  riseth,  the  colour  changeth,  the  tongue 

refused,  though  he  sent  his  command  by  stammereth,  the  teeth  gnash,  the  hands 

seven  honourable  messengers.    (2)  Had  clasp,  the  feet  stamp,  the  pulse  beats, 

she  come,  while  she  did  it  in  pure  obe-  the  heart  pants,  the  whole  man  swells 

dience,  it  had   been  no  refiection  upon  like  a  toad,  glows  like  a  devil,  tormenting 

her  modesty. — M.  Henry.  himself  before  his  time  ;  whence  many 

1.  Great   pleasure   is  often   followed  heathens  have  advised  the  angry  man  to 

by  equally  great  displeasure.     2.   Occa-  look  at  his  face  in  a  glass,  and  so  grow 

sions  of  joyous  feasting  commonly  end  ashamed  of  his  distemper. 
in   sorrow.     3.  Although   beauty   is   a         II.  The  disgrace  op  anger.      The 

gift  of  God,  still  one  should  not  make  Holy  Ghost  hath  stigmatized  the  angry 

a  boast  of  it,  nor  yet  be  proud  of  it.     4.  person  for  a  fool  in  grain,  such  an   one 

Pride  occasions  much  sorrow,  and  often  as  exalts  folly,  sets  it  upon  high  to  be 

plunges  into  destruction.  seen   of   all,   and    proclaims    himself   a 

Ver.  12.   There/ore  was  the  king  very  fo  )1;  yea,  the  worst  of  fools;  for  *' proud, 


26 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


[chap.  I. 


haughty  scorner  is  his  name  that  deal- 
eth  in  proud  wrath  ; "  that  is  his  title. 
Thus  God  loads  such  a  man  with  dis- 
grace. And  whereas  he  thinks  by  his 
big  looks  and  high  terms  to  carry  it 
among  men  (as  Lamech  did),  when  ho 
hath  gotten  revenge  especially ;  the 
Apostle  purposely  disgraceth  revenge  of 
injury  by  a  word  signifying  disgrace, 
loss  of  victory,  or  impoteney  of  mind. 
And,  indeed,  it  is  un  manliness  of  spirit, 
and  little  wit  in  the  head,  that  causeth 
a  great  deal  of  passion  in  tlie  heart, 
as  we  see  in  infants  and  sick  people. 
Thunder,  hail,  tempest,  neither  trouble 
nor  hurt  the  celestial  bodies  ;  no  more 
doth  anger  great  minds.  The  tops  of 
some  mountains  are  said  to  be  so  high 
above  the  middle  region  of  air,  that  not 
so  much  as  the  dust  of  them  is  moved 
out  of  the  place  from  year's  end  to  year's 
end  :  so  is  it  here.  Great  spirits  and 
men  of  understanding  are,  like  the  upper 
region,  in  a  perpetual  serenity ;  or,  at 
least,  like  the  highest  planets,  that  of 
all  the  rest  are  thought  to  be  lowest  in 
course,  or  like  a  diamond  that  is  neither 
bruised  nor  cut. 

in.  The  danger  op  anger.  It 
consumes  the  body  ;  it  confounds  the 
soul.  Fevers,  colics,  palsies,  pleurisies, 
apoplexies,  inflammation,  consumption, 
are  caused  by  it,  while  it  dries  up  the 
radical  moisture  (that  balsam  of  the 
body),  boils  the  heart  into  brine,  and, 
viper-like,  makes  an  end  of  the  owner; 
who,  as  he  lived  undesired,  so  he  dies 
unlamented,  as  ISTerva,  Yalentinian,  and 
other  choleric  kings  and  persons  of  great 
note,  who  hereby  have  wrought  their 
own  ruth  and  ruin.  And  for  the  poor 
soul  it  is  indisposed,  by  unadvised  anger, 
for  prayer  or  any  other  duty  to  God 
or  man.  He  is  laid  open,  like  an  un- 
walled  city,  to  many  sins,  mischiefs, 
and  miseries  ;  temporal,  spiritual,  and 
eternal.  He  that  lives  and  dies  in  this 
fury  becomes  a  prey  to  the  furies  of 
hell. — Trapp. 

Vers.  10, 12.— What  has  thus  degraded 
the  king  1  Wine.  The  king  was  happy 
in  the  obedience  of  princes,  but  unhappy 
in  the  disobedience  of  his  wife.  What 
a  disappointment  1  He  showed  the  glory 
of  his  kingdom,  and  the  honour  of  his 


excellent  majesty  many  days ;  but  he 
also  showed  that,  with  all  his  glory,  he 
could  not  command  a  woman.  Disputes 
between  husbands  and  wives  are  bad  at 
any  time,  but  much  worse  in  the  pres- 
ence of  company.  Though  a  mighty 
king,  he  was  also  a  poor  slave.  He 
drank  wine  to  excess.  He  issued  an 
unrighteous  command.  He  was  carried 
away  by  anger.  Eich  man  !  Yet  how 
poor,  with  all  thy  wealth.  A  sober  slave 
is  more  respected,  and  more  to  be  re- 
spected, than  a  drunken  king.  *'  I  will 
not  come,"  said  Vashti ;  and  all  the 
persuasion  of  the  great  men  could  not 
persuade  her.  When  asked  to  violate 
our  conscience,  let  us  dare  to  say,  No. 
If  husbands  expect  obedience  from  their 
wives,  let  them  be  reasonable  in  their 
commands.  The  guilt  of  disobedience 
sometimes  rests  upon  him  who  issues 
the  command.  **  Husbands,  provoke 
not  your  wives  to  anger."  They  have 
given  themselves  to  and  for  you.  Wives, 
do  not  dishonour  those  husbands  who 
have  chosen  you  before  all  others.  Per- 
haps Yashti  thought.  What  means  this 
uncouth  motion?  More  than  six  months 
hath  this  feast  C(mtinued,  and  all  this 
while  we  have  enjoyed  the  wanton  lib- 
erty of  our  sex.  Were  the  king  him- 
self this  command  could  not  be  sent.  It 
is  the  wine,  and  not  he,  that  is  guilty 
of  this  errand  :  is  it  for  me  to  humour 
him  in  so  vain  a  desire  %  Will  it  agree 
with  our  modest  reservedness  to  offer 
ourselves  to  be  gazed  at  by  millions  of 
eyesi  Who  knows  what  wanton  at- 
tempt may  follow  upon  this  ungoverned 
excess]  This  very  message  argues  that 
wit  and  reason  hath  yielded  their  place 
to  that  besotting  liquor.  Yashti  refuseth 
to  come.  .  .  .  The  blood  that  is  once 
inflamed  with  wine  is  apt  to  boil  with 
rage.  It  vexes  him  to  think  that  those 
nobles  whom  he  meant  to  send  away 
astonished  with  the  demonstration  of 
his  power  and  majesty  should  now  say, 
**  What  boots  it  Ahasuerus  to  rule  afar 
off  when  he  cannot  command  at  homel 
In  vain  doth  he  boast  to  govern  kings, 
while  he  is  checked  by  a  woman." — 
Bishop  Hall. 

And  Ms  anger  burned  within  him ;  as 
Nebuchadnezzar's  also  did  upon  a  like 


CfHAP.  I.] 


HOMILETtC  COMMENTAM :  ESTHER. 


^ 


occasion,  hotter  than  his  seven  times' 
heated  oven,  or  than  the  mountain 
Etna  doth.  Moses'  anger  waxed  hot  in 
him,  so  that  he  knew  not  well  what  he 
did  in  it,  it  raised  such  a  smoke.  Jonah 
was  ready  to  burst  with  anger;  his  blood 
boiled  at  his  heart  as  brimstone  doth  at 
the  match.  Therefore  is  the  heart  set 
so  near  the  lungs,  that  when  it  is  heated 
with  anger  it  may  be  allayed  and  cooled 
by  the  blast  and  moisture  thereof.  Jo- 
sephus  saith  that  he  brake  off  the  feast 
upon  this  occasion. — Trapp. 

We  see  that  God  reserves  the  best  for 
the  last.  God's  last  works  are  his  best 
works.  The  new  heaven  and  the  new 
earth  are  the  best ;  the  second  wine 
that  Christ  created  himself  was  the  best; 
spiritual  things  are  better  than  natural. 
A  Christian's  last  is  his  best.  God  will 
have  it  so  for  the  comfort  of  Christians, 
that  every  day  they  live  they  may  think, 
my  best  is  behind,  my  best  is  to  come ; 
that  every  day  they  rise  they  may  think, 
I  am  nearer  heaven  one  day  than  I  was 
before,  I  am  nearer  death,  and  therefore 
nearer  Christ.  What  a  solace  is  this 
to  a  gracious  heart !  A  Christian  is  a 
happy  man  in  his  life,  but  happier  in  his 
death,  because  then  he  goes  to  Christ ; 


but  happiest  of  all  in  heaven,  for  then 
he  is  with  Christ.  How  contrary  to  a 
carnal  man,  that  lives  according  to  the 
sway  of  his  own  base  lusts  !  He  is 
miserable  in  his  life,  most  miserable  in 
his  death,  but  most  miserable  of  all  after 
death.  I  beseech  you  lay  this  to  heart. 
Methinks,  considering  that  death  is  but 
a  way  for  us  to  be  with  Christ,  which 
is  far  better,  this  should  sweeten  the 
thinking  of  death  to  us,  and  we  should 
comfort  ourselves  daily  that  we  are  nearer 
happiness.  — Sihhes. 

Ahasuerns  went  from  bad  to  worse, 
as  we  all  do  whenever  we  fail  to  practise 
the  self-denial  of  obedience  to  God. 
Pride,  luxury,  excess  in  wine,  mad  up- 
setting of  the  first  laws  of  nature,  these 
came  first ;  then  followed  in  its  order 
furious  anger,  which  may  do  anything. 
He  was  stung  in  the  apple  of  his  eye. 
When  I  am  bringing  to  so  triumphant  a 
finish  the  pageant  planned  since  I  came 
to  the  throne,  when  everybody  is  think- 
ing how  supremely  grand  I  am  above 
all  men,  to  be  thus  humiliated  by  a 
woman  !  Ah,  sire  !  had  you  respected 
yourself  you  would  have  been  spared  all 
the  humiliation. — Symington. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PAKAGEAPH.     Verses  10—12. 


Vashti's  Dilemma. 

There  are  great  crises  in  the  history  of  individuals  as  well  as  of  nations.  An 
arrestive  hand  checks  our  progress.  We  are  compelled  to  pause  and  deliberate. 
Such  a  crisis  had  now  arrived  in  the  history  of  Yashti.  The  great  turning-point  of 
her  life  now  appears.  The  question  is,  Shall  I  be  unqueenly,  and  thus  remain  a 
queen  1  or  shall  I  be  queenly,  and  become  unqueened  'i  Summon  up  thy  heroism, 
Vashti ;  all  thy  fortitude  will  now  be  required. 

I.  She  receives  an  unkingly  message.  Doubtless  the  seven  chamberlains 
would  give  the  king's  message  in  true  courtly  style ;  but  even  courtly  words  may 
indicate  unkingly  intentions.  It  was  so  in  this  case.  Vashti  was  to  leave  the 
company  of  her  guests,  and  put  on  the  crown  royal,  which  was  a  high-pointed 
turban ;  and  consequently  she  was  to  appear  in  entire  royal  apparel.  We  may  sup- 
pose that  her  person  was  to  be  graced  with  costly  robes  of  splendid  colours  from 
the  province  of  Cashmir,  and  with  garments  made  of  the  finely- wrought  and  richly- 
variegated  silks  of  the  Medians.  Pearls  from  the  Persian  Gulf  would  flash  their 
varied  and  chastened  colours.  Rich  jewels  would  not  be  wanting  to  increase  the 
splendour.  And  gold  from  the  distant  parts  of  the  empire  would  manifest  the 
vastness  of  the  king's  resources,  and  tend  to  set  forth  the  charms  of  the  queen's 
person.  Being  purified  with  oil  of  myrrh  and  sweet  odours,  she  would  emit  a 
pleasant  fragrance  by  her  every  motion,  as  well  as  display  her  beauty  in  new  and 
atti  active  aspects  to  the  beholders.     No  purpose  was  to  be  served  beyond  that 


28  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER,  [ohap.  l 

of  showing  the  people  and  the  princes  her  beauty.  She  was  to  throw  aside  her 
self-respect,  to  divest  herself  of  true  queenly  attributes,  and  appear  with  her  face 
unveiled,  in  order  that  the  courtly  revellers  might  feast  upon  her  countenance  ;  and 
thus  she  was  to  do  that  which  was  abhorrent  to  an  Eastern  woman's  sense  of  pro- 
priety, ^o  wonder  if  her  spirit  rebelled  against  such  unkingly  purposes.  The 
kings  of  time  are  cruel  to  their  favourites.  At  first  they  may  be  loaded  with 
lionours ;  but  afterwards,  if  any  offence  is  given,  the  honours  are  taken  away,  and 
the  favourites  made  to  feel  that  it  would  have  been  better  for  them  to  have 
remained  in  obscurity.  A  despot's  guests  are  not  to  be  envied,  for  the  arbitrary 
and  unreasonable  nature  of  his  commands  may  turn  their  laughter  into  weeping. 
But  in  the  long  run  despots  are  cruel  to  themselves.  ''  The  merciful  man  doeth 
good  to  his  own  soul ;  but  he  that  is  cruel  troubleth  his  own  flesh."  However, 
let  us  remember  that  the  King  of  heaven  is  no  unreasoning  despot.  His  command- 
ments are  not  grievous,  and  are  for  the  highest  good  of  those  to  whom  they  are 
given.  The  guests  at  Divine  feasts  need  never  fear  that  he  will  send  unkingly 
messages.  And  should  they  disobey  there  will  be  given  opportunity  for  confession 
and  time  for  amendment.  This  merciful  king  bears  long  and  compassionately  even 
with  hardened  offenders.  Blessed  indeed  are  those  who  serve  the  King  of  heaven, 
and  sit  down  at  Divine  feasts  ! 

II.  She  displays  a  queenly  spirit.  If  Vashti  were  simply  a  vain  woman, — 
proud  of  her  mere  physical  beauty, — it  may  be  fairly  conjectured  that  the  desire  to 
display  her  charms  would  overpower  the  spirit  of  self-assertion,  which  some  suppose 
to  be  the  explanation  of  her  conduct.  This  was  undoubtedly  the  one  opportunity 
of  her  life  for  reaching  the  climax  of  earthly  glory.  It  was  indeed  a  great  occasion 
when  womanly  vanity  would  induce  compliance ;  but  Vashti  rose  superior  to  the 
seductive  prospect.  Many  of  our  nudern  Vashtis  would  have  rushed  to  the  ban- 
queting-hall,  and  the  spirit  of  self-assertion  would  not  have  been  allowed  to  over- 
master the  spirit  of  vanity.  IsTot  only  women,  but  many  men  have  sacrificed  far 
more  than  Vashti  was  called  upon  to  sacrifice  in  order  to  obtain  a  portion  even  of 
that  applause  which  would  have  greeted  the  queenly  beauty  had  she,  with  winning 
smiles  and  graceful  movements,  presented  herself  at  the  king's  command.  But  she 
refused  to  go,  and  nobly  braved  the  worst  consequences  rather  than  violate  her 
modesty,  and  appear  in  public  unveiled.  For  anything  we  know  to  the  con- 
trary, she  may  have  tried  reasonable  methods  in  order  to  extricate  herself  from 
the  difficult  position.  But  who  can  reason  with  a  despot  who  has  been  made 
unreasonable  by  wine,  and  whose  smallest  caprice  must  not  be  thwarted?  The 
narrative  simply  states  the  result,  that  she  refused  to  go  at  the  command  of  the 
monarch.  However,  if  Vashti's  assailants  still  persist  that  she  was  an  arrogant  and 
supercilious  beauty,  —  that  she  was  intoxicated  with  admiration  and  with  her 
exalted  position, — there  is  something  to  admire  in  that  daring  spirit  which  was 
ready  to  brave  death  rather  than  obey  a  command  which  appeared  to  her  un- 
reasonable :  for  she  would  know  that  a  Persian  monarch's  rage  might  mean 
death  to  the  offender.  Certainly  obedience  is  due  to  those  in  authority  ;  but 
the  command  of  conscience  is  superior  to  the  commands  of  husbands,  or  of  kings. 
The  commands  of  conscience  should  be  supreme ;  but  there  is  a  danger  lest  the 
voice  of  mere  caprice  be  confounded  with  the  voice  of  conscience.  The  com- 
mands must  be  prayerfully  and  carefully  examined.  The  voices  must  be  tried. 
Have  they  a  Divine  sound]  Then  all  must  follow  the  directions  of  the  all- 
imperative  voice,  though  it  leads  to  banishment,  to  spoliation,  and  even  to  death. 

III.  Her  queenly  spirit  was  not  appreciated.  It  provoked  the  wrath  of  the 
king,  and  his  anger  burned  in  him.  And  the  courtiers  and  great  ladies  did  not 
appear  to  her  defence.  There  is  ever  a  natural  tendency  for  the  strong  to  oppress 
the  weak.  Throughout  all  ages  women  have  found  it  difficult  to  get  their  due 
froDi  men.  Christianity  has  been  w^oman's  great  elevator  and  benefactor ;  and 
she  has  been,  as  is  most  fitting,  its  most  faithful  adherent  and  propagator.     But 


CHAP.  I.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER, 


still  woman's  weakness  is  too  often  trespassed  upon  by  manly  strength.  To  be  on 
the  side  of  right,  if  supported  by  might,  excites  little  or  no  opposition  ;  but  to  be 
on  the  side  of  right  wlien  it  is  the  side  of  weakness  is  to  be  guilty  of  folly  and  of 
rebellion  against  constituted  authority.  Even  to  this  day  the  inebriated  Ahasuerus 
has  his  apologists,  though  they  may  not  mean  it ;  and  the  unqneened  Vashti  is 
followed  in  her  retirement  with  the  pitying  sneer  of  those  who  assert  that  she  failed 
because  she  was  not  a  sagacious  woman.  The  banislied  Vashtis  ought  to  receive 
full  credit  for  the  heroism  of  their  conduct.  Shameful  it  is  that  those  who  profess 
to  believe  in  persecuted  apostles,  in  slain  reformers,  and  in  a  crucified  Jesus,  should 
always  be  carefully  looking  about  for  some  error  in  conduct,  for  some  failure  in 
policy,  in  order  to  account  for  the  non-success  of  those  whom  society  has  banished 
from  its  palaces.  Not  only  ancient,  but  modern  critics  would  account  for  the 
beheading  of  John  by  the  statement  that  he  made  a  rude  and  personal  attack  ;  for 
the  stoning  of  Stephen,  by  the  suggestion  that  he  spoke  truth  in  an  unpalatable 
form  ;  for  the  unpopularity  of  Paul,  that  his  bodily  presence  was  weak ;  and  for 
the  banishment  of  Yashti,  by  the  supposition  that  she  was  arrogant  and  unwise  in 
her  method  of  refusal.  The  Vashtis  must  be  prepared  for  some  depreciation  if 
they  resolutely  adhere  to,  and  firmly  follow,  that  which  they  believe  to  be  true,  and 
noble,  and  virtuous.  But  this  may  be  their  consolation,  that  time  is  on  their  side, 
and  that  the  Great  Supreme  accepts  sincerity  of  motive  ;  yes,  though  the  con- 
sequent action  be  not  the  wisest.  For  he  is  not  a  hard  task-master.  Let  the 
true-hearted  Vashtis  rejoice,  for  their  judgment  is  with  God. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  10 — 12. 


"  Wine  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  is 
raging  ;  and  whosoever  is  deceived  there- 
by is  not  wise."  Ahasuerus  formerly 
behaved  like  a  king.  His  wine,  and 
the  vessels  in  which  it  was  drunk, 
were  royal,  according  to  the  state  of  the 
king ;  but  now  his  behaviour  is  like 
one  of  the  vain  fellows.  He  boasts 
of  the  extraordinary  beauty  of  his 
wife.  In  defiance  of  the  manners  of  the 
Persians,  and  of  the  laws  of  decency, 
he  will  now  have  her  brought  into  a 
drunken  assembly  of  princes  and  peasants 
for  a  public  show.  What  is  it  that  has 
thus  degraded  the  great  king  %  An 
honest  peasant  that  knows  how  to  guide 
his  affairs,  and  to  govern  his  family  with 
discretion,  is  more  truly  royal  than  Aha- 
suerus, exposing  his  shame  before  his 
people.  Wine  has  transformed  him 
from  a  king  to  a  clown,  or  something 
below  a  clown.  It  is  said,  that  the 
Spartans  used  to  compel  their  slaves  to 
intoxicate  themselves,  that  they  might 
show  them  in  their  cups  to  their  children, 
and  thus  produce  in  their  minds  a  per- 
petual detestation  of  this  worse  than 
beastly  vice.  You  have  no  occasion  to 
bring  drunken  men  into  the  presence  of 


your  children.  Scripture  gives  you 
pictures  of  this  vice  sufficient  for  youF 
admonition  and  theirs.  It  is  plain  from 
the  instance  before  us,  that  a  sober  slave 
is  more  respectable  than  a  drunken 
king. 

She  was  fair  to  look  wpon^  and  all 
the  princes  and  people  must,  for  once,  be 
gratified  with  a  sight  of  her  shining 
countenance,  that  they  might  admire  the 
king's  happiness  in  the  possession  of 
such  unrivalled  beauty.  Vain  man ! 
Did  he  not  know  that  the  most  glorious 
beauty  of  the  human  f^ce  as  of  the 
visible  creation,  is  but  a  fading  flower  1 
Still  less  did  he  know,  that  this  beauty, 
in  a  day's  time,  would  be  no  longer  his 
property,  and  that  he  would  lose  the 
possession  of  it  by  his  own  folly.  Let 
those  who  have  wives,  however  beauti- 
ful, be  as  though  they  had  them  not; 
for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth 
away. 

Vashti  had  good  reason  to  beg  to  be 
excused  from  appearing  in  a  company 
where  too  many  were  merry  with  wine. 
She  is  too  often  imitated  by  women  who 
have  promised  obedience  to  their  hus- 
bands.    They  will  allege,  that  the  mean- 


80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  I. 


ing  of  their  promise  was  that  they  were 
to  obey  their  husbands  in  all  reasonable 
things.  If  by  reasonable  things  they 
meant  things  in  which  they  could  give 
obedience  with  a  good  conscience,  the 
limitation  would  be  very  proper.  But  a 
more  frequent  meaning  which  they  have 
for  the  expression  is,  things  which  please 
their  own  humours.  If  these  only  are 
the  matters  in  which  they  are  disposed 
to  yield  obedience,  the  promise  ought 
never  to  have  been  made ;  for  whenever 
they  conform  themselves  to  their  own 
humours,  rather  than  to  the  known  will 
of  their  husbands,  they  break  a  solemn 
promise. 

If  husbands  expect  due  obedience 
from  their  wives,  let  them  be  always 
reasonable  in  their  commands.  You  see, 
that  all  the  authority  of  the  greatest 
king  in  the  world  could  not  make  Yashti 
obedient  to  a  foolish  command.  She 
will  rather  encounter  the  king's  wrath  ; 
and  *'  the  wrath  of  a  king  is  like  mes- 
sengers of  death." 

Therefore  was  the  king  very  wrothf 
and  his  anger  burned  in  him.  He  was 
confounded  and  shocked  at  the  unex- 
pected disappointment.  He  hoped  to 
show  to  all  his  people  and  princes  in 
Shushan  how  happy  he  was,  and  only 
showed  them  his  misery.  —Rev.  G. 
Lawson. 

Then  took  place  the  succession  of 
violent  scenes,  so  thoroughly  character- 
istic of  Oriental  despotism,  but  which  to 
the  Hebrew  historian  was  so  familiarized, 
that  they  appear  to  fill  him  rather  with 


admiration  than  astonishment  and  horror 
— the  order  for  the  queen  to  unveil  her- 
self— contrary  to  the  immemorial  usage 
of  Persia,  and  therefore  the  sure  sign 
of  the  king's  omnipotence — before  the 
assembled  court,  the  rage  of  the  king 
at  her  refusal,  and  her  instantaneous 
divorce.  In  the  annual  Persian  repre- 
sentation of  the  tragedy  of  the  sons  of 
Ali,  an  English  ambassador  is  brought  as 
begging  their  lives ;  and  to  mark  his 
nationality  a  boy  dressed  up  as  an  un- 
veiled woman  accompanies  him  as  the 
ambassadress. — Stanley's  Jeioish  Church 
and  Note. 

The  queen  refused  to  appear  at  the 
king's  command  as  delivered  by  the 
eunuchs,  because  she  did  not  choose  to 
stake  her  dignity  as  a  queen  and  a  wife 
before  his  inebriated  guests.  The 
audacity  of  Persians  in  such  a  condition 
is  evident  from  history. — Keil. 

While  Ahasuerus  was  intent  to  show 
how  far  the  limits  of  his  empire  ex- 
tended, by  calling  to  his  court  the 
governors  of  the  most  distant  provinces, 
he  found  in  close  proximity,  yea,  in  his 
very  house,  insubordination  to  his  will. 
Though  he  knew  how  to  punish  it,  yet 
he  could  not  conquer  it,  nor  turn  it  in- 
to obedience  to  his  wishes.  There  is, 
therefore,  a  power  higher  than  that  of 
man,  were  he  even  the  mightiest  ruler 
of  earth.  To  disobey  human  commands 
may  be  dangerous,  may  bring  temporal 
disadvantage,  but  to  despise  God's  laws 
is  degrading,  and  will  bring  eternal 
ruin. —  Lange. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGEAPH.     Verses  13,  U. 

The  Seven  Wise  Men. 

"  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found,  and  where  is  the  place  of  understanding  % " 
At  first  sight  we  may  naturally  look  for  it  in  the  palaces  of  kings,  for  they  have  the 
opportunity  of  gathering  round  them  the  choicest  spirits  in  the  realm.  They  have 
money  at  their  command  ;  and  money  answereth  all  things.  The  wise  man's  wisdom 
is  too  often  a  mere  article  of  barter,  and  is  sold  to  the  highest  bidder.  The  prospect 
of  money  sometimes  causes  the  wise  man  to  prostitute  his  wisdom  to  foolish  purposes. 
But  the  wisdom  of  courtiers  is  not  always  directed  by  highest  moral  motives.  The 
wisdom  may  be  great,  but  the  moral  power  weak.  True  wisdom  is  oftener  found 
in  lowly  hearts  and  true.  A  poor  wise  man  may  by  his  wisdom  deliver  the  city ; 
and  yet  no  man  remember  that  same  poor  man.  Poverty  has  its  drawbacks. 
Little  wisdom  counts  for  much  where  there  is  much  wealth,  sounding  titles,  and  an 
©x^H^fl  position. 


OHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER,  81 

I.  The  character  of  these  wise  men.  In  general  we  may  say  that  they  were 
men  of  learning  and  men  of  business.  Observation  was  joined  with  meditation  to 
the  extension  of  their  knowledge.  They  were  not  mere  bookworms,  but  studied 
men  and  things.  They  might  judge  the  times  by  heavenly  phenomena  as  astrolo- 
gers ;  but,  like  the  princes  of  Issachar,  they  also  may  have  been  "  men  who  knew 
the  times,  what  Israel  ought  to  do."  The  perfectly  wise  man  must  study  men 
as  well  as  books.  It  is  well  to  know  human  law  and  judgment;  it  is  better 
to  know  Divine  law.  "  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul." 
This  defines  the  nature  of  true  wisdom.  "  Behold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is 
wisdom  ;  and  to  depart  from  evil,  that  is  understanding." 

II.  The  favour  granted  to  these  wise  men.  Ancient  kings  preserved  their 
dignity  by  exclusiveness.  Only  a  few  were  admitted  to  familiar  intercourse. 
These  wise  men  saw  the  king's  face.  This  earth's  grandest  King  frequented  the 
thronged  highwa;ys.  He  was  the  guest  of  publicans  and  of  sinners.  His  greatness 
was  not  dependent  upon  the  pomp  of  circumstances.  His  royalty  could  stand  the 
rude  stare  of  the  multitude.  The  eye  of  faith,  though  possessed  by  the  lowliest, 
may  still  see  the  face  of  heaven's  King.  "  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see,  and  do  see, 
God." 

III.  The  exalted  position  occupied  by  these  wise  men.  They  sat  the  first  in 
the  kingdom.  Many  would  regard  them  with  envy.  But  highest  seats  are  not  always 
the  most  pleasant.  Golden  chairs  may  be  uneasy  ;  silken  couches  may  have  their 
pricking  thorns.  A  wise  man  may  sit  the  first  in  the  kingdom  to-day,  and  to- 
morrow he  may  be  elevated  to  the  gallows  on  which  Haman  was  hung.  Lofty 
seats  are  dizzy  and  dangerous  places.  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom  affords  safe  and 
pleasant  seats  for  all  its  subjects. 

IV.  The  noble  qualities  of  these  wise  men  were  ignobly  used.  They  knew 
the  times,  so  as  to  trim  their  sails  to  the  best  advantage  for  themselves.  Their 
wisdom  was  a  mere  marketable  commodity.  It  was  ready  to  be  used  anyhow  for 
the  procuring  of  either  wealth,  or  place,  or  power.  They  knew  law  and  judgment, 
but  they  knew  that  what  was  law  for  the  despot  was  not  law  for  the  oppressed 
subject.  Prudence  is  a  virtue;  but  prudence  may  be  degraded  into  mere  time- 
serving policy.  There  is  a  wisdom  which  dares  to  do  right,  and  brave  all  conse- 
quences. 

V.  The  vision  with  which  these  men  were  favoured  had  no  transforming 
power.  They  saw  the  king's  face,  but  did  not  catch  the  inspiriting  influence  of  a 
mighty  soul.  There  must  have  been  in  that  wide  realm  faces  better  worth  seeing 
than  that  of  the  weak-minded  despot.  We  cannot  gather  from  this  account  that 
these  wise  men  were  any  nobler  for  this  favoured  vision.  The  face  of  heaven's 
King  has  transforming  power.  Its  light  dispels  the  darkness  of  humanity ;  iis 
Divine  influences  rain  down  and  change  the  very  faces  of  beholders.  "  But  we 
know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he 
is."  The  likeness  is  being  now  and  here  fashioned.  Each  Christian's  fare 
should  bear  the  impress  of  royalty.  Christians  too  should  emit  transforming 
and  purifying  influences. 

VI.  The  exalted  position  occupied  by  these  wise  men  was  not  employed  for 
the  advantage  of  the  oppressed.  Where  is  the  use  of  being  great  if  we  cannot 
use  our  greatness  to  help  the  little^  High  seats  should  be  occupied  not  for  slH- 
gloriti cation,  but  to  lift  up  our  follows  out  of  the  pits  of  wretchedness.  We  do 
not  read  that  these  men  bent  from  their  proud  positions  to  rescue  a  condemned 
woman — condemned  before  she  had  been  heard,  and  banished  without  an  oppor- 
tunity of  saying  a  word  in  justification  of  her  conduct.  Surely  it  is  better  to  err 
on  the  side  of  mercy.  Let  those  in  high  places  consider  the  weaknesses  and  the 
awful  temptations  of  those  in  low  places. 


32 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


[chap.  i. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  13,  14. 


Where  should  the  perfection  of  wisdom 
be,  if  not  in  the  courts  of  great  princes  *? 
or  what  can  the  treasuries  of  monarchs 
purchase  more  valuably  precious  than 
learned  and  judicious  attendance'?  or 
what  can  be  so  fit  for  honour  as  the 
wisest]  These  were  his  oiacles  in  all 
his  doubts ;  these  are  now  consulted  in 
this  difficulty.  Neither  must  their  advice 
be  secretly  whispered  in  the  king's  ear, 
but  publicly  delivered  in  the  audience  of 
all  tlie  princes.  It  is  a  perilous  way 
that  these  sages  are  called  to  go,  betwixt 
a  husband  and  wife,  especially  of  such 
power  and  eminency. — Bishop  Hall. 

As  he  had  seven  chamberlains  to 
execute  his  orders,  so  he  had  seven 
counsellors  to  direct  his  orders.  The 
greater  power  a  man  hath,  the  greater 
need  he  hath  for  advice,  that  he  may 
not  abuse  his  power. — M.  Henry. 

Of  these  Persian  privy  counsellors  it 
is  said — 1.  That  they  were  wise  men. 
2.  They  were  skilful  in  the  times,  that 
is,  well  versed  in  histories,  and  well 
furnished  with  experiences.  3.  That 
they  knew  the  laws,  which  they  had 
ready,  and  at  their  fingers'  ends,  as  we 
say.  4.  They  also  knew  judgment,  that 
is,  equity  and  moderation,  without  which 
utmost  right  might  be  utmost  wrong,  as, 
indeed,  it  proved  in  the  case  in  hand. — 
Trapp. 

Which  knew  the  times.  The  good 
man  can  say,  like  the  psalmist,  ''My 
times  are  in  thy  hand."  "  The  sove- 
reign Arbiter  of  destiny  holds  in  his  own 
power  all  the  issues  of  our  life ;  we  are 
not  waifs  and  strays  upon  the  ocean  of 
fate,  but  are  steered  by  infinite  wisdom 
toward  our  desired  haven.  Providence 
is  a  soft  pillow  for  anxious  heads,  an 
anodyne  for  care,  a  grave  for  despair." 

Ver.  14.  The  kings  of  Persia  did  not 
suffer  themselves  to  be  seen  by  all  persons 
on  all  occasions.  These  were  a  favoured 
few.  But  all  that  love  the  Lord  shall 
see  the  *'  King's  face  "  in  heaven.  That 
will  be  a  happy  sight.  The  sorrows  of 
life  will  then  be  past ;  death  will  then 
be  destroyed ;  heaven  and  all  its  joys 
will  be  ours  for  ever. 

Which  sat  the  first  in  the  kingdom. 


A  great  privilege  which  depended  upon 
wealth,  and  upon  the  favour  of  the 
king.  They  who  sit  with  Christ  in  his 
kingdom  will  have  no  title  because  of 
earthly  position.  It  will  be  because  of 
goodness,  and  the  grace  and  mercy  which 
saves  us. — Rev.  G.  Leach,  F.G.S. 

He  that  would  mount  cares  not  what 
attendance  he  dances  at  all  hours,  upon 
whose  stairs  he  sits  waiting,  what  enor- 
mities he  soothes,  what  deformities  he 
imitates,  what  base  offices  he  does  pros- 
trate himself  to,  so  he  may  rise.  The 
poor  man  envies  the  great  for  his  honour  ; 
the  great  perhaps  envies  the  poor  more 
for  his  peace,  for  as  he  lives  obscurely, 
so  securely.  He  that  rightly  knows  the 
many  public  and  more  secret  vexations 
incident  to  honour  would  not,  as  that 
king  said  of  his  crown,  stoop  to  take  it 
up,  thouj^h  it  lay  at  his  feet  before  him. 
When  the  Lord  hath  set  thee  up  as 
high  as  Haman  in  the  court  of  Ahasuerus, 
or  promoted  thee  to  ride  with  Joseph  in 
the  second  chariot  of  Egypt ;  were  thy 
stock  of  cattle  exceeding  Job's ;  did  thy 
wardrobe  put  down  Solomon's,  and  thy 
cupboard  of  plate  Belshazzar's  when  the 
vessels  of  God's  temple  were  the  ornature ; 
yet  all  these  are  but  the  gifts  of  Wisdom's 
left  hand,  and  the  possessors  may  be 
under  the  malediction  of  God. 

How  many  rich  merchants  have  sud- 
denly lost  all !  how  many  noblemen 
sold  all !  how  many  wealthy  heirs  spent 
all !  Few  Sundays  pass  over  our  heads 
without  collections  for  shipwrecks,  fires, 
and  other  casualties ;  demonstrative 
proofs  that  prosperity  is  inconstant, 
riches  casual.  And  f  >r  honour,  we  read 
that  Belisarius,  an  honourable  peer  of 
the  empire,  was  forced  in  his  old  age  to 
beg  from  door  to  door.  Frederic,  a  great 
emperor,  was  so  low  brought  that  he 
sued  to  be  made  but  the  sexton  of  a 
church. — Adams. 

"  A  great  English  writer  has  pictured 
an  imaginary  character  as  having  a  sweet 
look  of  goodness,  which  drew  out  all 
that  was  good  in  others.  There  must 
have  been  some  such  Divine  attraction 
to  the  poor  and  outcast  in  the  looks  and 
whole  person  of  our   Lord."  —  Geikie. 


CHAP.  I]  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHEli.  33 


This  King's  face  has  not  only  a  sweet  expelled,  and  fresh  goodness  imparted, 

look    of   goodness,  but   a   transforming  By  the  process  of  devoutly  and  lovingly 

power  of  goodness.     To  see  aright  tli is  gazing  we  are  experiencing  the  process  of 

King's  face  is  not  only  to  have  our  good-  being   changed   into    the   same   Divine 

ness  drawn  out,  but  to  have  the  badness  image. 

MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PAEAGRAPH.      Verse   15. 

A  King  in  Consultation. 

Most  men  have  not  the  opportunity  of  being  present  when  a  king  holds  a  con- 
sultation. Such  an  opportunity  is  now  presented.  Enter  tlie  banqueting- hall. 
Let  silence  be  kept,  for  the  king  is  about  to  speak.  But  we  shall  find  here  only 
that  which  is  to  be  avoided,  and  nothing  to  imitate. 

I.  The  king^  ignores  the  folly  of  his  own  conduct.  There  is  not  here  the 
slightest  hint  that  his  request  was  unreasonable.  The  demand  made  that  Vashti 
should  be  brought  into  the  court  of  revellers  unveiled  is  spoken  of  in  solemn  phrase 
as  a  commandment,  as  a  proceeding  the  carrying  out  of  which  was  needful  to  the 
welfare  of  the  state.  Men  by  a  change  of  words,  by  cunning  phrases,  try  to  change 
the  nature  of  their  crimes.  It  is  hard  to  bring  ourselves  faithfully  to  task.  We 
rea< lily  ignore  the  folly  of  our  own  conduct  when  we  are  bitterly  smarting  under  its 
results. 

II.  The  king  tries  to  shift  the  blame  on  to  others.  In  this  the  king  shows 
himself  the  son  of  that  first  parent  who  blamed  his  wife  and  tried  to  exculpate 
himself.  Adam  blames  Eve.  Ahasuerus  is  wroth  with  Vashti.  Ahab  calls  Elijah 
Israel's  troubler,  Herod  beheads  John  the  Baptist.  A  man  blames  his  fellows; 
a  man  finds  fault  with  his  circumstances;  a  man  quarrels  with  his  organization. 
But  the  last  person  a  man  blames  is  himself.  When  he  has  come  to  do  this 
thoroughly,  his  reformation  is  more  than  half  completed. 

III.  The  king  tries  to  get  away  from  the  whispers  of  conscience.  If  guilty 
men  were  fully  satisfied  with  their  reasonings  about  the  force  of  circumstances  and 
their  defective  organizations,  they  would  not  show  themselves  so  uneasy.  The 
reasoning,  if  conclusive,  would  be  condoning  and  pacifying.  Vashti's  crime  was 
only  small,  if  crime  it  was ;  why,  then,  should  the  king  make  so  great  a  commotion 
over  so  small  a  matter]  Why,  because  the  voice  of  conscience  was  not  altogether 
stifled,  and  it  spoke  so  as  to  fill  him  with  trouble.  The  king's  dignity  might  be 
touched  by  the  unhappy  queen's  refusal ;  but  his  conscience  was  touched  much 
more.  Men  are  always  most  angry  with,  and  most  severe  upon,  others  when  their 
own  consciences  are  troubled.  And  when  a  guilty  conscience  sits  upon  the  seat  of 
judgment,  the  poor  prisoner  may  not  expect  mercy;  for  then  the  severest  decrees 
will  be  pronounced.  A  guilty  conscience  is  a  great  legalist.  It  says  what  shall 
be  done  "  according  to  laws  ; "  it  searches  out  for  precedents  and  examples ;  it  is 
very  strict  in  its  requirements ;  it  does  not  temper  justice  with  mercy ;  it  keeps 
all  mercy  for  itself,  and  justice,  which  thus  becomes  injustice,  for  those  brought  to 
its  bar.  This  king  had  no  right  to  sit  in  judgment,  for  he  himself  was  the 
originator  of  the  supposed  misdemeanour. 

IV.  This  king  makes  others  partners  of  his  guilt.  Humanity  hedges  about  a 
king,  whether  divinity  does  so  or  not.  Men  flock  around  a  royal  standard.  That 
which  is  a  crime  in  a  subject  becomes  only  a  folly  in  a  king.  And  so  Ahasuerus 
had  no  difficulty  in  gathering  around  him  the  wise  men  to  consult  about  the  crime 
of  a  poor  woman,  and  condemn  her  to  banishment.  It  would  have  required  the 
spirit  of  a  martyr  to  utter  any  remonstrances  in  the  presence  of  this  mighty  despot, 
and  a  martyr  spirit  is  not  often  found  in  king's  palaces.  It  requires  ruder  fare  for 
its  development  than  the  sumptuous  feasts  of  royal  tables ;  it  needs  coarser  cloth- 
ing than  purple  and  fine  linen.     The  world's  great  prophets  are  not  clothed  in  soft 

D 


34                              HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  i. 

raiment.  They  move  in  the  wilderness.  And  so  it  is  all  the  more  praiseworthy 
when  those  wearing  soft  clothing  have  spirits  strong  and  bold.  Courtly  martyrs 
are  few,  but  when  found  are  most  noble. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Yerse  15. 

Instead  of  at  once  following  out  what  The  combined  wisdom  of  all,  it  seems^ 

his  anger  suggests,  Ahasuerus  submits  was  enlisted  to  consult  with  the  king 

his  case  to  the  law  and  custom.    This  in  what  course  should   be  taken  after  so 

itself  is  great  and  beautiful ;  this  is  the  unprecedented  an  occurrence  as  Yasliti's 

victory  of  culture  over  crudeness  and  disobedience  of  the  royal  summons.     It 

passion.     But  in  the  manner  in  which  is  scarcely  possible  for  us  to  imagine  the 

this  is  done  here  it  amounts  to  nothing  astonishment  produced  by  such  a  refusal 

after  all.     We  seem  to  feel  in  advance  in  a  country  and  court  where  the  will  of 

that  nothing  good  will   come  of  it. —  the  sovereign  was  absolute.     The  assem- 

Lange.  bled  grandees  were  petrified  with  horror 

Because  she  hath  not  performed  the  at  the  daring  affront.     Alarm   for  the 

commandment,   &c.     This  was  a  fault,  consequences  that  might  ensue  to  each 

no  doubt,   but  not  so  heinous  as   was  of   them  in   his    own   household   next 

made  of  it.     The  faults  of  his   wife  a  seized  on  their  minds,  and  the  sounds 

man    must    either    toUere   or    tolerare,  of    bacchanalian    revelry    were    hushed 

cover  or  cure,  and  go  about  to  kill  a  fly  into    deep  and   anxious  consultation — 

upon  her  forehead  with  a  bottle,  as  they  what  punishment  to  inflict  on  therefrac- 

eay.    But  God  hath  a  providential  hand  tory  queen. — Port.  Commentary. 
in  it  for  the  good  of  his  Church. — Trapp. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  16—20 

Courtiers  Forsake  a  Failing  Cause. 

It  is  not  here  asserted  that  this  is  a  characteristic  of  courtiers,  which  may  not  bo 
observed  in  other  men  ;  for  it  is  a  too  general  custom  to  push  a  man  or  woman 
down  when  tokens  of  falling  are  visible.  But  the  courtly  style  is  to  flatter  the 
powerful,  and  to  speak  no  helpful  words  on  behalf  of  the  weak.  In  the  multitude 
of  counsellors  there  is  safety,  if  there  be  no  personal  interests  at  stake ;  but  these 
courtiers  were  time-serving  counsellors.  They  knew  the  danger  of  opposing  the 
arbitrary  commands  of  a  Persian  monarch,  and  therefore  they  do  not  try  to  palliate 
Vashti's  conduct,  but  condemned  her  completely. 

I.  The  courtly  orator.  Memucan  was  evidently  a  true  courtly  orator,  and  he 
was  put  forth  as  the  spokesman  of  the  rest.  He  plainly  knew  that  it  would  not  be 
prudent  to  offer  any  opposition  to  the  monarch's  wild  caprice.  Memucan  by  artful 
insinuation  justifies  the  extravagant  whim  of  this  Eastern  despot.  The  orator  can 
do  much  either  for  good  or  for  evil.  How  awful  when  his  great  power  is  directed 
by  selfishness  ! 

II.  His  cunning  flattery.  His  flattery  was  insinuating  and  captivating.  He 
artfully  alludes  to  the  extent  of  the  monarch's  dominions,  to  the  resistless  nature 
of  his  decree,  and  to  the  vastness  of  his  influence.  He  flatters  by  declaring  that  a 
wrong  done  to  the  king  is  a  wrong  done  to  all  his  subjects.  But  he  flatters  most 
by  assuming  that  the  king's  command  was  altogether  legitimate,  and  in  no  wise  to 
be  disputed.  "  The  king  Ahasuerus  commanded  Yashti  the  queen  to  be  brought 
in  before  him,  but  she  came  not."  Thus  it  shall  be  reported,  so  says  the  courtly 
orator  ;  but  what  says  the  uncourtly  and  intelligent  observer  1  Even  if  he  blames 
Yashti  he  will  not  condone  the  fault  of  Ahasuerus  as  was  done  by  Memucan.  Truly 
a  flattering  mouth  worketh  ruin. 


CTTAP.  r.]  nOMILETW   COMMENTARY:   ESTBEB.  35 


III.  His  vicious  reasoning^.  Memucan  understood  how  to  make  the  worse 
appear  the  better  reason  ;  how  cunningly  to  mingle  truth  with  falsehood  ;  how  art- 
fully to  fan  the  king's  wrath  into  a  consuming  flame  ;  and  how,  by  plausible  utter- 
ances, to  sliow  that  the  gratification  of  the  king's  unr^^asonable  desire  was  for  the 
welfare  of  every  household  in  the  vast  empire.  A  vicious  logical  process  may  be 
carried  out  through  ignorance,  but  too  often  it  is  indicative  of  the  working  of  a 
vicious  nature.  The  heart  must  be  right  as  well  as  the  head  if  logical  rules  are  not 
to  be  violated.  The  simple  heart  will  come  straight  to  a  correct  conclusion  where 
the  twisted  but  cultivated  nature  will  falter. 

IV.  His  time-serving^  policy.  Memucan  had  regard  to  the  welfare  of  himself 
and  his  compeers  more  than  that  justice  should  be  done  to  Yashti.  Thus  all  are 
prepared  for  the  sharp  verdict  that  Vashti  must  be  unqueened  ;  that  she  must  have 
no  further  intercourse  with  the  monarch  ;  and  that  another,  better  than  she,  was 
to  possess  her  royal  estate.  But  he  carefully  refrains  from  adding,  And  thus  she 
will  have  no  future  opportunity  of  bringing  time-serving  courtiers  to  judgment. 
These  courtiers,  in  order  to  save  themselves,  and  prevent  Vashti  from  retaliating, 
strove,  by  placing  her  conduct  in  the  worst  light,  by  showing  how  injurious  would 
be  the  influence  of  one  in  the  highest  position  throughout  the  whole  realm  if  she 
were  left  unpunished,  and  by  the  advocacy  of  stringent  measures,  to  divest  her  of 
all  power  to  do  them  harm  in  the  future. 

V.  His  unfeeling  nature.  The  true  orator  should  be  a  man  of  feeling.  His 
sympathies  should  go  out  towards  the  weak  and  the  oppressed.  But  Memucan 
was  not  a  true  orator.  Certainly  he  was  not  a  son  of  consolation.  He  had  power, 
but  it  was  not  power  directed  by  goodness.  His  gift  of  speech  was  ready  for  the 
use  of  the  highest  bidder.  His  heart  was  made  of  stone.  He  had  a  position  to 
maintain,  and  he  would  maintain  it  at  whatever  cost.  The  better  feelings  must  be 
stifled ;  the  voice  of  conscience  must  be  hushed ;  a  weak  woman  must  be  tram- 
pled out  of  existence.  Ah,  poor  Vashti  found  by  bitter  experience  that  an  arm  of 
flesh  is  but  a  broken  reed  on  which  to  lean  in  the  day  of  adversity.  Vain  is  the 
help  of  man  in  the  time  of  trouble.  Who  shall  rise  up  for  her  against  the  courtly 
speakers  and  evil  plotters]  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord,  than  to  put  confidence 
in  courtiers,  in  nobles,  or  in  princes. 


The  Folly  op  Trusting  in  Man. 

*'  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man  ;  that  maketh  flesh  his  arm."  To  make 
flesh  our  arm  is  to  confide  in  human  wisdom,  power,  riches,  &c.  for  protection  from 
evil,  or  for  the  attainment  of  any  personal  advantage.  This  practice  spreads 
through  all  grades  of  society.  The  king  Ahasuerus  was  guilty  of  it.  But  let  us 
remark  that  this  practice — 

I.  Is  idolatrous  in  its  principles.  Whatever  a  man  confides  in  for  protection 
and  happiness  is  unquestionably  his  god.  Let  all  coveioiis,  ambitious,  and  licentious 
persons  consider  this, — they  all  "  make  flesh  their  arm,"  and  their  hearts  depart 
from  the  Lord ! 

II.  It  is  grovelling  in  its  aim.  It  looks  no  higher  than  present  good,  and 
things  altogether  unworthy  of  an  immortal  spirit.  God,  the  proper  and  adequate 
good  of  the  soul — the  noblest  object  to  which  it  can  aspire — is  neglected  and 
shunned;  the  sinner's  heart  departs  from  him,  to  pursue  wind,  and  chaff,  and 
vanity. 

III.  It  IS  unreasonable  in  its  foundation.  It  is  built  upon  an  extravagant 
supposition,  viz.,  that  the  creature  can  supply  the  place  of  the  Creator ;  indeed,  it 
supposes  that  man  can  do  what  God  cannot. 

IV.  It  is  destructive  in  its  issue.  "  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth,"  &c. 
The  man  that  trusteth  in  his  fellows  shall  be  like  the  heath  in  the  desert — worth- 
less, sapless,  fruitless ;  *'  he  shall  not  see  good  when  good  conieth,"  shall  not  enjoy 

d2 


S6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  I 


it — "  but  he  shall  inhabit  the  parched  places,"  &c.  He  shall  prosper  in  nothing. 
His  soul  shall  be  disconsolate,  like  a  man  banished  to  some  desolate  spot,  amidst 
burning  sands  and  trackless  wilds,  where  all  is  melancholy,  dreary,  and  waste,  and 
where  he  at  length  expires  through  famine.  The  cisterns  he  has  hewn  out  are 
broken. 

Learn — 1.  There  is  no  safety  in  man.     2.  To  put  your  trust  in  the  Lord. — 
Sketches  of  Sermons,  1838. 


SuGQESTiVB  Comments  on  Verses  16 — 20. 


Yer.  16.  What  is  the  influence  our 
conduct  is  likely  to  have  upon  others  1 
Will  many  follow  our  example  %  Then 
if  we  go  wrong,  we  must  share  the  guilt 
of  those  who  follow  us.  Offences  must 
needs  come,  but  woe  to  that  man  by 
whom  the  offence  cometh.  Yashti's  of- 
fence, it  was  said,  was  likely  to  be  hurtful 
to  all  the  princes  and  people  in  all  the 
dominions  of  Ahasuerus.  The  great  are 
under  strong  obligations  to  act  aright. 
The  greater  our  position,  the  greater  our 
influence  for  good  or  for  evil.  Those  in 
the  humblest  walks  of  life  have  an  in- 
fluence. It  is  true  all  round  that  "  no 
man  liveth  unto  himself,  no  man  dieth 
unto  himself." 

A  bold  man  he  was,  surely,  that  durst 
deliver  his  mind  so  freely  of  such  a  busi- 
ness, and  in  such  a  presence.  What  if 
the  king  and  queen  should  grow  friends 
again — where  had  Memucan  been  1  If 
his  cause  and  his  conscience  had  been  as 
good  as  his  courage  was  great,  all  had 
been  as  it  ought  to  be.  .  .  .  Here  they 
condemn  the  queen  unheard  and  uncon- 
victed, which  is  against  all  law,  Divine 
and  human.  Was  the  king's  bare  word 
a  law  or  rule  of  right*?  and  is  not  a 
wife,  in  case  of  sin  commanded  by  her 
husband,  rather  to  obey  God  than  man  ] 
Here  you  may  see  when  flattery  and 
malice  give  information,  shadows  are 
made  substance,  and  improbabilities  ne- 
cessities, so  deceitful  is  malice,  flattery 
so  unreasonable. — Trapp. 

Yer.  17.  It  has  been  said  that  the 
nation  regulates  itself  by  the  example 
of  the  king.  It  is  to  be  feared  there  is 
far  too  much  truth  in  the  saying.  Even 
Christians  conform  to  this  world  too 
readily,  and  think  themselves  excusable 
if  they  are  but  following  the  example  of 
the  great.  It  was  argued  that  if  Yashti 
refused  obedience  to  her  husband,  the 


ladies  of  Persia  and  Media  might  follow 
her  example.  If  the  queen  and  inferior 
ladies  refused  submission,  might  not  all 
women  in  the  kingdom  do  the  same? 
Can  any  husband  in  the  king's  domin- 
ions expect  greater  submission  from  his 
wife  than  the  king  himself? 

Public  persons  are  by  Plutarch  com- 
pared to  looking-glasses,  according  to 
which  others  dress  themselves ;  to  pic- 
tures in  a  glass  window,  wherein  every 
blemish  is  soon  seen ;  to  common  wells, 
which  if  they  be  poisoned,  many  aie 
destroyed.  The  common  people  com- 
monly are  like  a  flock  of  cranes ;  as  the 
first  flies  all  follow. — Trapp. 

Yer.  1 8.  The  king's  nobles  and  princes 
trembled  for  their  own  authority  and 
dignity.  They  were  afraid  to  trust  the 
good  sense  of  their  wives.  No  doubt 
their  fears  were  just.  What  could  be 
expected  of  women  held  in  the  bonds  of 
ignorance  and  slavery,  as  the  wives  of 
the  East  generally  were,  but  that  they 
would  attempt  to  snap  their  fetters'? 
With  the  women  of  our  land  it  is  very 
different.  They  are  greatly  favoured, 
they  ought  therefore  to  prize  their  privi- 
leges. Wives,  be  obedient  to  your  hus- 
bands. Contention  and  wrath  in  fami- 
lies is  an  evil  of  such  magnitude,  that 
the  Persian  princes  thought  it  necessary 
to  use  the  most  vigorous  and  severe 
measures  to  prevent  it. 

Likewise  shall  the  ladies  .  .  .  say. 
Say  what  ?  We  will  not  do  as  our 
lords  command  us.  Like  enough  all 
this,  for  their  tongues  were  their  own, 
and  their  wills  no  less.  That  free  will, 
about  which  there  is  so  much  ado  made, 
when  once  lost,  the  women  caught  it 
up  ;  and  hence  they  are  so  wedded  to 
their  own  will,  saith  one  merrily. — 
Trapp. 

Contempt  and  wrath.     Contempt  on 


oaAp.  I.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


37 


the  wives'  part,  and  wrath  on  the  hus- 
bands' ;  wives  shall  sliglit  their  hus- 
bands, and  they  again  shall  fall  foul 
upon  their  wives;  and  the  house  they 
dwell  together  in  shall  be  no  better 
than  a  fencing-school,  wherein  the  two 
sexes  seem  to  have  met  together  for 
nothing  but  to  play  their  prizes,  and  to 
try  masteries. —  Trapp. 

Ver.  19.  If  it  please  the  king.  Cour- 
tier-like, lest  he  should  seem  to  prescribe 
to  the  king,  or  to  prejudice  the  rest  of 
the  royal  counsellors,  he  thus  modestly 
prefaceth  to  his  ensuing  harsh  and  hard 
sentence.  He  knew  well  enousfh  it 
would  please  the  king  at  present,  in  tlie 
mind  he  was  now  in ;  and  to  prevent 
any  alteration,  he  moves  to  have  it 
made  sure  by  an  irrevocable  law,  that  he 
might  not  hereafter  be  censured  for  this 
his  immoderate  and  unmerciful  censure, 
but  to  be  sure  to  save  one  howsoever. — 
Trajjp. 

Ver.  20.  This  decree  would  probably 
inspire  wives  with  fear,  but  would  it  not 
tend  to  make  husbands  greater  tyrants  ? 
The  wives  will  cringe  and  obey  like 
schoolboys  when  their  masters  are  pre- 
sent, but  will  they  promote  their  hus- 
bands' interests  and  comforts  1  Let  your 
wives  share  your  happiness  if  you  wish 
them  to  contribute  to  it ;  treat  them 
with  tenderness  if  you  wish  them  to 
sympathize  with  you  in  times  of  dis- 
tress. Let  not  their  faults  be  blamed  and 
punished  until  you  can  say  that  your 
behaviour  has  not  tempted  them  to  do 


wrong. 


And  when  the  king's  decree  shall  he 
published.  But  why  should  any  such 
thing  be  published  at  all,  unless  the 
king  be  ambitious  of  his  own  utter 
dishonour?  Is  there  none  wiser  than 
another,  but  that  the  king  must  bewray 
his  own  nest,  tell  all  the  empire  that  he 
was  drunk,  or  little  better,  and  did  in 
his  drink  determine  that  against  his  fair 
queen  that  he  so  soon  after  repented? 


He  should  have  done  in  this  case  as  a 
man  doth  that,  having  a  secret  sore, 
clappeth  on  a  plaister,  and  then  covereth 
it  with  his  hand,  that  it  may  stick  the 
faster,  work  the  better. — Trapp. 

Persian  law  and  gospel  law.  1.  Per- 
sian law  was  arbitrary,  chiefly  according 
to  the  caprice  of  the  king  ;  and  it  was 
cruel.  This  is  seen  in  the  case  of  Yashti. 
2.  Gospel  law  is  righteons  ;  it  is  founded 
upon  God's  justice  and  righteousness. 
Persian  laws,  being  dictated  by  whim 
and  caprice,  were  often  degrading  in 
their  effects.  But  God's  laws  are  always 
ennobling  and  exalting.  God  is  ever 
ready  to  forgive.  If  we  confess  our  sins, 
he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our 
sins.  Merciful  is  the  gospel.  "  How 
often  shall  I  forgive?"  inquired  Peter; 
"until  seven  times?"  "Yea,  until 
seventy  times  seven,"  said  the  King 
of  heaven. 

Envy.  Envy  intrudes  itself  into  all 
positions.  It  affects  princes  and  cour- 
tiers. It  is  cruel  in  its  nature  and 
design,  and  seeks  always  to  bring  down. 
It  is  subtle  in  its  movements,  and  dis- 
astrous in  its  results. 

Wicked  counsel.  The  counsel  of  the 
wicked  is — 1.  Natural  to  a  depraved 
heart.  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  a- 
gainst  God.  To  follow  the  counsel  of 
the  wicked  is  to  sMdm  with  the  stream. 
2.  Popular — the  way  of  the  multitude. 
To  put  it  far  away  is  to  be  singular.  It 
is  not  always  easy  to  come  out  and  be 
separate  ;  yet  we  must.  3.  Pleasing 
to  the  flesh.  Sin  wears  a  serpent's  skin, 
and  carries  a  serpent's  sting.  The  for- 
bidden fruit  is  pleasing  to  the  eye  and 
sweet  to  the  taste.  But  true  counsel- 
lors will  set  aside  all  respect  for  private 
interests ;  will  keep  their  eyes  fixed 
upon  the  public  good ;  and  will  seek 
to  avoid  injustice,  though  thereby  their 
own  interests  be  endangered. — Rev.  G. 
Leach,  F.G.S, 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PAEAGRAPH.     Verses   21,  22. 

Yashti  is  stripped  of  Queenly  Externals. 

Popular  oratory  is  very  frequently  only  the  art  of  articulating  the  wishes  and 
desires  of  the  multitude.     Skill  is  required  at  once  to  comprehend,  as  if  by  intuition. 


38  nOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  [oHAP.  I. 

those  desires ;  to  put  them  in  attractive  form,  and  to  speak  them  forth  as  if  they 
were  novel  ideas  ;  hut  the  man  is  untrue  to  himself  who  is  determined  tluit 
his  sayings  shall  ])lease  the  kings  and  the  princes  who  hold  in  their  hands  his 
reputation  for  oi'atory.  And  Memucan  had  caught  the  trick  of  popular  oratory. 
His  words  were  the  expression  of  the  king's  then  present  feeling,  and  the  interpret- 
ation of  the  desires  and  fears  of  the  listening  and  applauding  courtiers.  And  we 
are  not  surprised  to  read  that  the  saying  pleased  the  king  and  the  princes,  and  the 
king  did  according  to  the  word  of  Memucan.  All  was  put  in  motion.  The  post- 
horses  galloped  from  stage  to  stage.  It  is  the  proverbial  and  figurative  statement 
that  they  flew  swifter  than  the  cranes.  The  postmasters  took  from  the  couriers  the 
king's  letters  which  proclaimed  the  queen's  degradation;  which,  to  those  who 
looked  beneath  the  surface,  set  forth  the  king's  rage  more  than  his  desire  that 
every  man  should  bear  rule  in  his  own  house.  And  soon  throughout  the  whole 
realm  the  story  of  Yashti's  fall  was  heard.  It  was  widely  known  that  her  crown 
was  taken  away,  and  that  she  was  lowered  from  her  high  estate.  And  doubtless 
none  were  found  brave  enough  to  speak  in  her  defence.  It  would  be  then,  as  it  is 
too  often  now,  that  all  forsook  in  the  dark  day  of  her  disaster.  Those  who 
flattered  her  beauty  when  she  was  queen  would  depreciate  it  when  she  was 
unqueened.  Those  who  fawned  in  the  day  of  prosperity  would  either  "  damn  with 
faint  praise  "  her  daring  spirit,  or  bluster  about  her  disgusting  arrogance,  in  the  day 
of  adversity.  We  do  not  hear  of  any  consoling  or  defending  voice  being  lifted 
up  for  her  help  when  she  had  incurred  the  king's  wrath.  Let  us  hope  that  she 
was  not  quite  friendless  and  forsaken.  But  so  far  as  the  narrative  is  concerned  we 
do  not  hear  of  any  such  voice,  or  of  any  faithful  adherents.  Undefended  she  fell. 
Grasping  tenaciously  the  banner  of  right  she  was  slain.  A  lonely  wanderer  she 
went  forth  from  the  palace  gates.  Or  if  she  still  remained  an  inhabitant  of  the 
king's  harem,  the  lowest  menials  might  scout  her  presence.  Her  tears  migtit  be 
her  meat  day  and  night  for  a  season;  but  though  no  human  hand  wij)ed  away 
those  tears,  yet  an  approving  conscience  might  bring  untold  consolation  in  the 
hours  of  distress,  and  she  that  sowed  in  tears  might  afterwards  reap  in  joy.  A 
victim  she  to  a  mistaken  sense  of  what  was  right,  as  some  would  declare.  But  oh, 
it  is  noble  thus  to  fall.  Better  and  more  glorious  is  it  thus  to  suff'er,  through  even 
a  mistaken  sense  of  duty,  than  to  let  moralities  and  scruples  take  care  of  them- 
selves for  fear  they  should  stand  in  the  way  of  advancement,  or  help  on  the 
spoliation  of  worldly  wealth  and  honours. 

Here  learn — 1.  That  virtue  is  not  always  successful  in  this  world.  It  is  only  a 
supposition  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  a  foregone  conclusion  that  Vashti  was 
reinstated.  Our  narrative  does  not  state  anything  of  the  kind,  and  this  is  the 
only  authentic  history  of  Yashti's  career.  Now  it  has  been  said  that  God  makes 
innocence  of  soul  ever  prosper.  This  is  true  spiritually,  but  is  not  always  true  as 
the  world  accounts  prosperity.  J^ovelists,  in  making  virtue  triumphant  and  vice 
finally  a  failure  in  this  world,  simply  set  forth  that  which  is  in  harmony  with  our 
conceptions  of  lohat  ought  to  be;  but  then  it  is  plain  enough  that  all  things  are 
not  as  they  ought  to  be  in  this  disordered  universe.  The  Yashtis  are  not 
reinstated  ;  the  Josephs  are  not  always  taken  out  of  prison  and  placed  on  thrones  ; 
the  Jobs  do  not  invariably  find  that  the  last  earthly  state  is  better  than  the  first. 
Johns  are  sometimes  beheaded  in  prison,  and  Peters  are  crucified.  It  would  take 
great  skill  to  show  that  Paul  had  made  "  the  best  of  this  world."  He  did  not  seem 
to  think  so  himself,  and  he  ought  to  have  been  a  good  judge.  Certainly  it  was 
not  ''a  best"  that  would  be  chosen  by  those  who  advocate  the  possibility  of 
making  the  best  of  both  worlds.  Apostles  and  reformers  have  endured  poverty, 
persecution,  and  martyrdom.  Genius  has  pined  away  in  garrets ;  greatness  has 
been  trampled  upon  by  littleness ;  shrewd  business  men  have  ground  down  their 
superiors ;  virtue  has  been  hidden  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth ;  truth,  with 
sad  heart,  has  wandered  about  in  sheep  skins  and  goat  skins.     And  the  world's 


CHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  39 

greatest  heroes  have  not  infrequently  been  tlie  world's  greatest  sufferers.  2.  Tliat 
virtue  uncroicned  is  better  than  vice  crowned.  This  may  do  in  theory,  but  will  not 
be  accepted  in  practice  by  the  vast  majority.  In  our  eagerness  to  catch  or  to 
preserve  the  perishable  crowns  of  earth  we  let  our  principles  go  to  the  winds. 
Still  wrong-doers  even  applaud  right  doing.  And  however  that  may  be,  an  approv- 
ing conscience  will  sustain,  though  time-sei-ving  courtiers  and  angry  monar-ihs 
oppress,  and  ])ass  their  stringent  measures  of  banisliment,  of  confiscation,  and  even 
of  death.  Virtue  is  nobler  in  a  miserable  hut  than  vice  in  a  splendid  palace. 
Lazarus  was  more  royal  in  his  rags  than  Dives  in  his  purple  and  fine  linen.  A 
true-hearted  Vashti  is  richer  in  her  very  degradation  than  the  enthroned  and 
worshipped  Ahasuerus.  Behind  the  outward  glitter  was  the  inward  gnawing'  of 
a  reproachful  memory.  But  behind  the  cloud  of  Vashti's  shame  might  be  the 
cheering  light  of  conscious  integrity.  And  in  this  sense  the  good  man  may  make 
the  best  of  both  worlds.  Earthly  crowns  may  be  taken  away,  but  the  crown  of 
Divine  approval  cannot  be  removed  by  any  external  force.  3.  That  the  path  of 
duty  is  the  ivay  to  lasti7ig  glory.  If  Yashti  had  possessed  a  prudential  regard  to 
her  own  safety,  her  name  might  not  have  been  heard  of  outside  the  palace.  But  now 
multitudes  have  heard  her  name,  and  wherever  this  book  travels  a  memorial  will 
be  raised  to  tell  of  her  womanly  modesty  and  her  heroic  dignity.  And  no  deed 
done  in  a  right  spirit  shall  perish  ;  for  nothing  is  lost  in  the  material  universe, 
and  much  less  can  there  be  loss  in  the  moral  universe.  Those  who  fisjht  in 
Virtue's  cause  may  fall  on  the  battle-field,  but  they  conquer  by  their  seeming 
defeats,  and  their  wounds,  by  Divine  grace,  through  the  atoning  merits  of  the 
Saviour,  will  be  productive  of  immortal  honours.  We  cannot  follow  Vashti  in  her 
journeyings  and  watch  her  entering  the  palace  beautiful.  But  this  is  certain — those 
who  love  and  serve  the  better  King,  Jesus  Christ ;  those  who  come  to  him  in  true 
penitence  and  childlike  faith,  will  never  be  cast  out  because  they  have  done 
wrong  even,  if  the  wrong-doing  was  unintentional;  and  his  followers  will  not  do 
wrong  designedly  and  with  the  full  consent  of  their  renewed  natures.  The 
Divine  Bridegroom  asks  not  that  the  bride  be  perfect  in  knowledge,  not  that  she 
be  free  from  error  in  judgment,  but  that  she  be  perfect  in  love. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  21,  22. 

Yer.   21.     We   do  not  wonder   that  man  should  bear  rule  in  his  own  house, 

the  king  was  pleased  with  a  proposal  This  is  the  law  of  God. 
that    gratified    his    pride    and    anger.  The  safety  and  honour  of  a  prince  is 

The  princes,  too,  were    pleased  with  a  in  virtue,  not  unrighteous  laws, 
law   which   flattered   their  vanity   and         Whether  it  was  the   passion  or  the 

sanctioned  their  domestic  tyranny.  policy  of  the  king  that  was  served  by 

And   the    saying  pleased    the    king,  this  edict,  God's  providence  served  its 

Pity    but    itching    ears    should    have  own  purpose  by  it,  which  was  to  make 

clawing    counsellors.     Memucan  was   a  way  for   Esther   the   queen. — Matthew 

fit    helve   for  such  a    hatchet,   and  his  Henry. 

advice  fit  lettuce  for  such  lips.     What         The   king   and  the   princes    approve 

marvel  that    such  a  counsellor  pleased  this    heavy  judgment    of    Memucan's. 

the  king,  when  as  he  had  before  given  No    doubt   many    messages    passed    ere 

place    to   two    such    bad    counsellors —  the   rigour   of    this    execution.      That 

wine  and  anger?     How  rare  a  jewel  in  great  heart  knows  not  to  relent,  but  will 

a  prince's  ear  is  a  faithful  counsellor,  rather  break  than  yield  to  an  humble 

that  will  deliver  himself  fully,  not  to  deprecation.     When  the  stone  and  the 

please  but  to  profit. — Trapp.  steel  meet  fire  is  stricken  :  it  is  a  soft 

Ver.  22.     The  king  not  only  divorces  answer   that  appeaseth  wrath.     Vashti 

his     queen,    but     publishes     a     decree  is  cast  off. — Bishop  Hall. 
throuf^h  all  his  dominions,  that  every         It  was  unanimously  resolved,  with  ^ 


40  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  [ohap.  I. 

wise  regard  to  the  public  interests   of  the  other  princes  of  the  land  to  expect 

the    nation,   that    the   punishment    of  in  their  own  families  from  the  example 

Yashti  could  be  nothing  less  than  de-  if  this  high  crime  were  not  condignly 

gradation  from  her  royal  dignity.     The  punished  1     But  one  is  amazed  at   the 

doom  was  accordingly  pronounced  and  infantine    simplicity    of    these    famous 

made  known  in  all  parts  of  the  empire,  sages  in  recommending  the  issue   of  a 

— Port.  Commentary.  royal   decree   in   all   the    languages   of 

We  do  not   ourselves  wonder,  that,  this   great   empire — *'  that   every   man 

when  the  king's  high  council — his  wise  should   bear  rule   in   his   own   house." 

men  —  came    to    consider   the   matter.  This  is,  undoubtedly,  one  of  the  most 

they   decided    that   Yashti    must   have  amusing   things   in   all   history.       One 

her  diadem  taken  from  her.     They  saw,  cannot    but  imagine    the    inextinguish- 

also,  that  the  question  was  one  of  near  able   burst  of  shrill   merriment  which 

interest  to  themselves ;   for  if  it  went  rung    through    every   one   of    the   one 

abroad,  as  it  was  sure  to  do,  that  the  hundred    and   twenty -seven    provinces 

queen  had  flatly  refused  to  obey  even  of  the  Persian  empire  when  this  sage 

the  king  of  kings,  what  had  they  and  decree  was  promulgated. — Dr.  Kitto. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE  WHOLE   CHAPTER. 

This  book  presents  us  with  impressive  views  of  man  with  and  without  grace ; 
of  the  great  instability  of  human  affairs;  of  the  sovereign  power,  justice,  and 
faithfulness  of  the  Supreme  Being.  We  now  call  your  attention  to  the  first 
chapter. 

I.  The  king^  of  Persia  at  this  time  was  Ahasuerus.  Commentators  ditiVr 
about  him.  He  was  a  heathen  —  a  stranger  to  God  —  possessing  extensive 
dominions.  His  was  the  second  of  the  four  great  empires.  These  empires 
have  come  to  nought;  but,  brethren,  there  is  a  kingdom  which  passeth  not 
away.  Its  King  will  remain  in  heaven  for  ever.  Let  us  be  numbered  among  its 
subjects. 

II.  This  mighty  potentate,  Ahasuerus,  wished  to  make  a  display  of  his 
greatness :  made  a  feast — the  power  of  Media  and  Persia  present — he  exhibited 
his  riches,  and  honour,  and  glory.  Notice  his  pride.  Beware  of  pride.  Pray  that 
you  may  habitually  remember  what  you  are — poor,  fallen  sinners. 

III.  At  this  feast,  though  a  heathen  one,  moderation  was  observed.  "  And 
the  drinking  was  according  to  law :  none  did  compel."  Intemperance  is  an 
abomination  and  a  degradation ;  hence  we  should  flee  from  it. 

IV.  But  though  the  feast  of  Ahasuerus  was  free  from  the  disgrace  of 
compelling  the  guests  to  proceed  to  drunkenness,  yet  did  very  evil  consequences 
result  from  it.  It  is  but  seldom  that  such  meetings  are  free  from  such  conse- 
quences. We  read  of  Belshazzar's  feast ;  we  read  of  Herod's  feast.  In  such 
entertainments  God  is  liable  to  be  forgotten.  Solomon,  who  with  extraordinary 
diligence,  and  unparalleled  success,  had  examined  and  tried  the  sources  of  all 
earthly  gratification,  tells  us,  in  language  which  ought  never  to  be  out  of  remem- 
brance, that  ''it  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning  than  the  house  of 
feasting." 

V.  Let  us  consider  the  evil  which  was  occasioned  by  the  feast. — The  king 
ordered  the  queen  to  be  brought.  She  refused  to  come.  The  wrath  of  the  king 
was  kindled.  The  result  was  a  council,  then  the  divorcement  of  the  queen. 
Quarrels,  animosities,  and  heart-burnings  are  so  contrary  to  that  religion  of  love 
which  a  received  gospel  generates,  that  we  ought  to  strive  to  the  utmost  for  the 
preservation  of  the  opposite  virtues.  Christ  is  the  Prince  of  Peace ;  let  us  not 
only  trust  in  his  death  for  salvation,  but  imitate  his  meekness  and  lowliness  or 
heart, 


CHAP.  I.]  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  41 


Two  short  remarks  shall  close  this  discourse  : — 1.  It  behoveth  us  to  lead  excellent 
lives,  and  the  higher  we  are  placed  in  the  community  the  more  ought  this  to  be 
the  object  of  our  ambition.  Let  our  lives  be  continual  sermons  to  those  amont^ 
whom  we  live.  2.  It  behoveth  us  to  regard  the  duties  which  appertain  to  the 
relations  of  life  in  which  we  are  placed.  "  Brethren,  let  every  man  wherein  he  is 
called,  therein  abide  with  God." — Hughes. 

I.  The  vast  extent  of  the  Persian  empire.  It  comprehended  all  the  countries 
from  the  river  Indus  on  the  east  to  the  Mediterranean  on  the  west ;  and  from  the 
Black  Sea  arul  Caspian  in  the  north  to  the  extreme  south  of  Arabia  then  called 
Ethiopia.  Tliis  gigantic  dominion  was  divided  into  127  provinces  or  governments 
each  of  which  was  placed  under  a  satrap,  or,  in  modern  language,  a  pasha,  who 
managed  its  affairs,  and  annually  transmit;ted  a  certain  sum  as  revenue  to  the  king. 
The  8eat  oi  government  was  variable,  according  to  the  season  of  the  year,  the 
summer  months  being  spent  by  the  court  at  Ecbatana,  and  the  winter  months  at 
Susa,  or,  as  it  is  called  in  this  chapter,  Shushan,  the  palace.  The/orm  of  govern- 
ment in  the  East  has  from  the  earliest  times  been  despotic,  one  man  swayinfj-  the 
destinies  of  millions,  and  having  under  him  a  crowd  of  smaller  despots,  each  in  his 
more  limited  sphere  oppressing  the  people  subjected  to  his  rule.  1.  Despotism  has 
its  occasional  fits  of  generosity  and  kindness.  It  is  as  kind-hearted  that  Ahasuerus 
is  brought  before  you  in  tlie  early  part  of  this  chapter.  He  was  spendint^  the 
winter  months  at  Susa.  Tlie  retinue  of  the  monarch  was  vast,  and  the  fountains 
and  gardens  were  on  a  scale  of  grandeur  which  we  cannot  well  conceive.  There 
then,  the  king,  but  little  concerned  about  the  welfare  of  his  subjects,  was  spending 
his  time,  chiefly  in  selfish  ease  and  unbounded  revelry.  To  him  it  was  of  no 
moment  how  his  people  were  oppressed  by  those  whom  he  set  over  them ;  his  sole 
concern  was  to  enjoy  his  pleasures.  2.  With  all  the  luxury  and  temptation  to 
self-indulgence,  there  was  no  compulsion  employed  to  draw  any  one  beyond  the 
bounds  of  temperance.  The  law  was  good,  but  the  king  himself  had  too  largely 
used  the  liberty,  and  hence  his  loss  of  self-control  and  all  sense  of  propriety. 
When  heated  with  wine  he  sent  for  Yashti,  &c.  Lessons  suggested  are — (1)  Extra- 
vagancies and  follies  into  which  men  are  betrayed  by  intemperance.  (2)  That 
which  dethrones  reason  and  destroys  intellect  should  surely  be  avoided.  (3)  All  the 
consequences  which  affect  the  man  individually,  and  others  also,  rest  upon  the  head 
of  the  transgressor.  (4)  Intemperance  (a)  blots  out  distinction  between  right  and 
wrong;  (h)  foments  all  the  evil  passions  of  the  natural  heart;  (c)  destroys  the 
proper  exercise  of  the  power  of  the  will ;  {d)  and  often  inflicts  grievous  wounds  upon 
the  innocent,  as  the  case  of  Vashti  here  already  demonstrates.  (5)  The  necessity 
of  guarding  against  these  evils. 

II.  The  evils  which  arose  from  the  peculiar  family  arrangements  of  those 
countries.  We  take  occasion  here  to  observe  two  great  evils  : — 1.  The  condition 
of  the  female  sex  was  that  of  degradation.  The  married  woman  was  not  really 
what  the  Divine  institution  intended  her  to  be,  the  true  companion  and  friend 
of  her  husband.  She  was  kept  in  a  state  of  seclusion,  real  freedom  she  knew 
not;  she  was,  in  truth,  only  a  slave,  having  power  to  command  some  other 
slaves.  She  w^as  without  education,  and  generally  unintelligent,  frivolous,  and 
heartless.  She  was  guarded  with  zealous  care,  as  if  she  had  been  very  precious, 
but  at  the  same  time  she  was  wholly  dependent  upon  the  caprices  of  her  lord. 
2.  Yet,  strangely  enough,  in  the  second  place,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that,  as  if 
to  afford  evidence  that  the  law  of  nature  cannot  be  trampled  upon  with  im- 
punity, it  very  frequently  happened  that  the  female  influence  was  felt  by  ihe 
despotic  husband,  so  as  to  make  him  in  reality  the  slave.  Not  conscious  of  it, 
but  imagining  that  he  held  the  place  of  absolute  authority,  he  was  himself 
governed ;  yet  not  through  the  power  of  real  aflection,  but  through  the  imbecile 
doting  which  constituted  all  that  he  knew  of  real  aflection.     Common   history 


42  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  [cuap.  i. 

abounds  with  illustrations  of  this  fact,  and  in  the  sacred  history  we  have 
examples  of  the  sanje  kind  ;  David,  Solomon,  and  Ahab  are  instances.  There 
is  never  a  violation  of  God's  righteous  appointments,  but  it  is  followed  by  some 
penalty.  From  this  Book  of  Esther,  it  appears  very  obviously  that  Ahasuerus, 
with  all  his  caprices  and  his  stern,  imperious  self-will,  was  at  first  completely 
dnder  the  influence  of  Vashti,  as  he  afterAvards  came  to  be  under  that  of 
Esther.  The  whole  domestic  system  being  unnaturally  constructed,  there  was, 
of  necessity,  derangements  in  the  conducting  of  it.  The  despot  might  be  one 
day  all  tenderness  and  submission,  and  the  next  day  he  might,  to  gratify  his 
humour,  exact  from  his  slaves  what,  a  short  time  afterwards,  he  would  have 
counted  it  absolutely  wrong  in  himself  to  command,  and  punishable  in  them 
to  do. 

III.  The  degradation  of  Vashti.  We  have  to  look  at  the  circumstances 
which  are  brought  before  us  in  the  narrative.  At  a  season  when  sound  counsel 
could  scarcely  have  been  expected,  and  when  he  who  sought  it  was  not  in  a  lit  con- 
dition to  profit  by  it,  the  serious  question  was  proposed  by  the  king,  "What  shall 
be  done  to  Vashti?"  &c.  To  defer  the  consideration  of  so  grave  a  subject  to  a 
more  fitting  season  would  have  been  so  clearly  the  path  which  a  wise  counsellor 
would  have  recommended,  that  we  feel  astonished  that  it  was  not  at  once 
suggested.  But  the  wrath  of  the  king  was  so  strongly  exhibited  that  his  com- 
pliant advisers  did  not  venture  to  contradict  him.  "  Memucan  answered,"  &c. 
Now,  with  respect  to  this  opinion  of  the  chief  counsellor,  it  may  be  observed  that 
it  was  based  upon  a  principle  which  in  itself  is  unquestionably  right,  althoug'i 
there  was  a  wrong  ap]dication  made  of  it.  Eank  and  station,  while  they  comman  I 
a  certain  measure  of  respect,  involve  very  deep  responsibility.  Fashions  and 
maxims  usually  go  downward  from  one  class  of  society  to  another.  Customs,  adopted 
by  the  higher  orders  as  their  rule,  gradually  make  their  way  until  at  length  they 
pervade  all  ranks.  Thus  far  Memucan  spoke  wisely,  when  he  pointed  to  the 
example  of  the  queen  as  that  which  would  certainly  have  an  influence,  wherever  it 
came  to  be  known,  throughout  the  empire.  But  the  principle,  in  the  present 
instance,  was  wrongly  applied  when  it  was  made  the  ground  of  condemning  the 
conduct  of  Yashti.  The  design  was  to  make  her  appear  guilty  of  an  act  of  insub- 
ordination, which  it  was  necessary  for  the  king  to  punish,  if  he  would  promote 
the  good  of  his  subjects,  whereas,  in  reality,  she  had  upon  her  side  all  the  au- 
thority of  law  and  custom,  and  was  to  be  made  the  victim  both  of  the  ungovern- 
able wrath  of  the  king,  who  was  beside  himself  with  wine,  and  also  of  flatterers 
who,  to  gratify  him,  would  do  wrong  to  the  innocent.  See  here  the  danger  of 
flattery. 

Let  us  extract  some  practical  lessons  from  our  subject.  1.  The  inadequacy 
of  all  earthly  good  to  make  man  truly  happy.  Surveying  the  whole  scene 
portrayed  in  the  early  verses  of  this  chapter,  we  might  imagine  that  the  sovereign 
who  ruled  over  this  empire,  upon  whose  nod  the  interests  of  so  many  millions 
depended,  and  for  whose  pleasure  the  product  of  so  many  various  climes  could  be 
gathered  together,  had  surely  all  the  elements  of  enjoyment  at  his  command.  .  . 
And  yet  Ave  must  say  that  the  mightiest  sovereign  of  his  time,  with  127  provinces 
subject  to  him,  with  princes  servijig  him,  and  slaves  kissing  the  dust  at  his  feet, 
was  not  half  so  happy  as  the  humblest  individual  here,  who  knows  what  is  meant 
by  the  comforts  of  home,  where  lie  is  in  the  midst  of  those  who  love  him.  2.  A 
few  remaiks  may  be  ofiered  upon  the  domestic  question  here  settled  by  the  king 
and  his  couut-ellors,  as  to  the  supremacy  of  man  in  his  own  house.  How  could 
they  pronounce  a  sound  judgment  upon  a  question  uhich  their  customs  prevented 
them  fiom  rightly  knowing]  3.  We  have  in  the  text  a  law  spoken  of  whicii 
changeth  not.  And,  my  friends,  there  is  such  a  law,  but  it  is  not  the  law  of  the 
Medes  and  Persians,  it  is  the  law  of  the  Eternal.  Jehovah's  law  changeth  not. 
Ami  what  does  it  say  %     "  This  do  and  live."     "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 


CHAP. 


!•] 


HUM  1  LET W  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


43 


not  in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  That  seals  us  all  up 
under  wrath.  But  we  turn  the  page,  and  we  read  and  see  that  "  Christ  is  the  end 
of  the  law  for  righteousness."  And  is  not  iliis  our  conclusion,  tlien — "  I  will  flee 
from  the  curse  of  the  immutable  law,  and  shelter  myself  under  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  which  is  also  perfect  and  immutable,  that  through  him  and  from  him  I 
may  have  mercy  and  eternal  life  "  % — Dr.  Davidson. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I. 


Power.  Pompey  boasted,  that,  with  one  stamp 
of  his  foot,  he  could  rouse  all  Italy  to  arms  ; 
with  one  scratch  of  his  pen,  Ahasuerus  could  call 
to  his  assistance  the  forces  of  127  provinces  ;  but 
God,  by  one  word  of  his  mouth,  one  movement 
of  his  will,  can  summon  the  inhabitants  of  hea- 
ven, earth,  and  the  undiscovered  worlds  to  his 
aid,  or  bring  new  creatures  into  being  to  do  his 
will. 

Dignity.  A  French  doctor  once  taunted 
Flechier,  Bishop  of  Nismes,  who  had  been  a 
tallow-chandler  in  his  youth,  with  the  meanness 
of  his  origin  ;  to  which  he  replied,  "  If  you  had 
been  born  in  the  same  condition  that  1  was,  you 
would  still  have  been  but  a  maker  of  candles." 

Great  men.  Columbus  was  the  son  of  a 
weaver,  and  a  weaver  himself.  Cervantes  was 
a  common  soldier.  Homer  was  the  son  of  a 
small  farmer.  Demosthenes  was  the  son  of  a 
cutler.  Terence  was  a  slave.  Oliver  Cromwell 
was  the  son  of  a  London  brewer.  Howard  was 
an  apprentice  to  a  grocer.  Franklin  was  a 
journeyman  printer,  and  son  of  a  tallow-chandler 
and  soap-boiler.  Dr.  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Wor- 
cester, was  the  son  of  a  linen-draper.  Daniel 
Defoe  was  a  hostler,  and  son  of  a  butcher. 
"Whitfield  was  the  son  of  an  innkeeper  at  Glou- 
cester. Virgil  was  the  son  of  a  porter.  Horace 
was  the  son  of  a  shopkeeper.  Shakespeare  was 
the  son  of  a  woolstapler.  Milton  was  the  son 
of  a  money  scrivener.  Robert  Burns  was  a 
ploughman  in  Ayrshire.  Yet  all  these  rose  to 
eminence. 

How  to  make  a  feast.  "  Lord  Chief  Justice 
Hall  frequently  invited  his  poor  neighbours  to 
dinner,  and  made  them  sit  at  t^le  with  himself. 
If  any  of  them  were  sick,  so  that  they  could  not 
come,  he  would  send  provisions  to  them  warm 
from  his  table." 

Favour  of  God.  It  was  the  saying  of  a  wise 
Roman,  '*  1  had  rather  have  the  esteem  of  the 
Emperor  Augustus  than  his  gifts ;  "  fur  he  was 
an  honourable,  understanding  prince,  and  his 
favour  very  honourable.  When  Cyrus  gave  one 
of  his  friends  a  kiss,  and  another  a  wedge  of 
gold,  he  that  had  the  gold  envied  him  that  had 
the  kiss  as  a  greater  expression  of  his  favour. 
So  the  true  Christian  prefers  the  privilege  of 
acceptance  with  God  to  the  possession  of  any 
earthly  comfort,  for  in  the  light  of  his  counten- 
ance is  life,  and  his  favour  is  as  the  cloud  of  the 
latter  rain. — Butler. 

Fride  of  wealth.      Alcibiades   was   one   day 


boasting  of  his  wealth  and  great  estate,  when 
Socrates  placed  a  map  before  him,  and  asked  him 
to  find  Attica.  It  was  insignificant  on  the  map; 
but  he  found  it.  "  Now,"  said  the  philosopher, 
"  point  out  your  own  estate."  "  It  is  too  small 
to  be  distinguished  in  so  little  a  space,"  was  the 
answer.  "See,  then!"  said  Socrates,  "how 
much  you  are  aflfected  about  an  imperceptible 
point  of  land." 

Your  b;igs  of  gold  should  be  ballast  in  your 
vessel  to  keep  her  always  steady,  instead  of  being 
topsails  to  your  masts  to  make  your  vessel  giddy. 
Give  me  that  distinguished  person,  who  is  rather 
pressed  down  under  the  weight  of  all  his  honours, 
than  pufi'ed  up  with  the  blast  thereof.  It  has 
been  observed  by  those  who  are  experienced  in 
the  sport  of  angling,  that  the  smallest  fishes  bite 
the  fastest.  Ob,  how  few  great  m.en  do  we 
find  so  much  as  nibbling  at  the  gospel  liook. — 
Seeker. 

Abuse  of  wealth.  I  am  no  advocate  for  mean- 
ness of  private  habitation.  I  would  fain  intro- 
duce into  it  all  magnificence,  care,  and  beauty, 
when  they  are  possible ;  but  I  would  not  have 
that  useless  expense  in  unnoticed  fineries  or 
formalities — cornicing  of  ceilings,  and  graining 
of  doors,  and  fringing  of  curtains,  and  thousands 
of  such  things— which  have  become  foolishly  and 
apathetically  habitual.  ...  I  speak  from  experi- 
ence :  1  know  what  it  is  to  live  in  a  cottage  with 
a  deal  floor  and  roof,  and  a  hearth  of  mica  slate  ; 
I  know  it  to  be  in  many  respects  healthier  and 
happier  than  living  between  a  Turkey  carpet  and 
a  gilded  ceiling,  beside  a  steel  grate  and  polished 
fender.  I  do  not  say  that  such  things  have  not 
their  place  and  propriety  ;  but  I  say  this  empha- 
tically, that  a  tentli  part  of  the  expense  which  is 
sacrificed  in  domestic  vanities,  if  not  absolutely 
and  meaningles.sly  lost  in  domestic  comforts  and 
encumbrances,  would,  if  collectively  afl^orded  and 
wisely  employed,  build  a  marble  church  for  every 
town  in  England. — liuskin. 

Danger.  "  A  boy  climbing  among  the  Alps 
saw  some  flowers  on  the  verge  of  a  precipice,  and 
sprang  forward  to  get  them.  The  guide  shouted 
his  warnings ;  but  the  heedless  boy  grasped  the 
flowers,  and  fell  a  thousand  feet  upon  the  rocks 
below  with  them  in  his  hand.  It  was  a  dear 
price  for  such  frail  things,  but  be  is  not  the  only- 
victim  of  such  folly." 

Danger  of  prosperity.  When  Crates  threw 
his  gold  into  the  sea,  he  cried  out.  Ego perdam  te, 
ne  tu  perdas  me^  that  is,  "  I  will  destroy  you,  lest 


44 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EBTEEB. 


[OHAP.  I. 


you  should  destroy  me."  Thus,  if  the  world  be 
not  put  to  death  here,  it  will  put  us  to  death 
hereafter.  Then  we  shall  say,  as  Cardinal 
Wolsey,  when  discarded  by  his  prince  and  aban- 
doned to  the  fury  of  his  enemies  :  "  If  I  had 
served  my  God  as  faithfully  as  ray  king,  be 
would  not  have  thus  forsaken  me."  Poor  man  ! 
all  the  perfumes  on  earth  are  unable  to  prevail 
over  the  stench  of  hell. — Seeker. 

In  a  long  sunshine  of  outward  prosperity,  the 
dust  of  our  inward  corruptions  is  apt  to  fly  about 
and  lift  itself  up.  Sanctified  afiliction,  like  sea- 
sonable rain,  lays  the  dust,  and  softens  the  soul. 
— Salter. 

When  fire  is  put  to  green  wood  there  comes 
out  abundance  of  watery  stuff  that  before  ap- 
peared not ;  when  the  pond  is  empty,  the  mud, 
the  filth,  and  toads  come  to  light.  The  snow 
covers  many  a  dunghill,  so  doth  prosperity  many 
a  rotten  heart.  It  is  easy  to  wade  in  a  warm 
bath,  and  every  bird  can  sing  in  a  sunshiny  day. 
Hard  weather  tries  what  health  we  have ;  afflic- 
tions try  what  sap  we  have,  what  grace  we  have. 
Withered  leaves  soon  full  off  in  windy  weather, 
rotten  boughs  quickly  break  with  heavy  weights, 
&,(i.— Brooks. 

Some  of  you  glory  in  your  shame,  that  you 
have  drunk  down  your  companions,  and  carried 
it  away — the  honour  of  a  sponge  or  a  tub,  which 
can  drink  up  or  hold  liquor  as  well  as  you. — 
Baxter. 

We  commend  wine  for  the  excellency  of  it ; 
but  if  it  could  speak,  as  it  can  take  away  speech, 
it  would  complain  that,  by  our  abuse,  both  the 
excellencies  are  lost ;  for  the  excellent  man  doth 
so  spoil  the  excellent  wine,  until  the  excellent 
wine  hath  spoiled  the  excellent  man.  Oh,  that 
a  man  should  take  pleasure  in  that  which  makes 
him  no  man  ;  that  he  should  let  a  thief  in  at  his 
mouth  to  steal,  away  bis  wit;  that  for  a  little 
throat  indulgence  he  should  kill  in  himself  both 
the  first  Adam — his  reason,  and  even  the  second 
Adam  —  his  regeneration,  and  so  commit  two 
murders  at  once. — Adams. 

An  earnest  young  minister  was  in  the  house 
of  a  rich  friend.  He  was  pressed  to  take  wine, 
but  refused.  It  was  again  pressed  upon  him. 
At  length  he  yielded  to  their  importunities,  and 
drank  a  little.  Gradually  he  formed  a  liking  for 
wine,  and  at  length  began  taking  far  too  much. 
By  degrees,  and  almost  before  he  was  aware  of 
it,  he  became  a  drunkard.  He  was  degraded 
from  his  office  of  the  ministry,  and  sank  lower 
and  lower.  Yeats  after  he  had  been  pressed  to 
drink  by  his  rich  friend,  he  came  again  to  his 
door ;  this  time  to  beg  for  a  little  food,  and  was 
ordered  away  as  a  drunken  vagabond. 

Joseph  lialston,  of  Philipsburg,  Penn.,  met 
with  a  horrible  death  by  freezing.  He  had  been 
drinking  freely,  and  had,  while  drunk,  to  wade 
the  Moshandoo  Creek;  but,  ere  he  proceeded 
two- thirds  of  the  way,  his  limbs  refused  to  per- 
form their  office.  He  grasped  a  bough  of  an 
overhanging  tree,  unable  to  advance  farther ; 
and  soon  the  fast-congealing  water  cemented 
close  about  him — a  tomb  of  ice  whicih  stretched 
from  shore  to  shore.  Two  days  after  he  was 
found  there  rigid  as  an  icicle,  his  knees  embedded 
in  a  sheet  of  the  frozen  element  seven  inches 


thick,  his  body  inclined  a  little  forwards,  his 
hands  clutching  the  boughs,  eyes  astare,  and 
despair  pictured  on  his  features. — Bittsburgh 
Despatch. 

God  trieth  men's  love  to  him  by  their  keeping 
his  commandments.  It  was  the  aggravation  of 
the  first  sin  that  they  would  not  deny  so  small 
a  thing  as  the  forbidden  fruit,  in  obedience  to 
God  !  And  so  it  is  of  thine,  that  will  not  leave 
a  forbidden  cup  for  him.  0  miserable  wretch  ! 
dost  thou  not  know  thou  canst  not  be  Christ's 
disciple  if  thou  forsake  not  all  for  him,  and  hate 
not  even  tiiy  life  in  comparison  of  him,  and 
wouldst  die  rather  than  forsake  him  ?  And  thou 
like  to  lay  down  thy  life  for  him,  who  wilt  not 
leave  a  cup  of  drink  for  him  ?  Canst  thou  burn 
at  a  stake  for  him,  that  canst  not  leave  an  ale- 
house, or  vain  company,  or  excess,  for  him  ? 
What  a  sentence  of  condemnation  dost  thou  pass 
upon  thyself  \~  Baxter. 

Not  in  the  day  of  thy  drunkenness  only  dost 
thou  undergo  the  harm  of  drunkenness,  but  also 
after  that  day.  And  as  when  a  fever  is  passed 
by,  the  mischievous  consequences  of  tlje  fever 
remain,  so  also  when  drunkenness  is  passed,  the 
disturbance  of  intoxication  is  whirling  round 
both  body  and  soul.  And  while  the  wretched 
body  lies  paralyzed,  like  the  hull  of  a  vessel  after 
a  shipwreck,  the  soul,  yet  more  miserable  than 
it,  even  when  this  is  ended,  stirs  up  the  storm 
and  kindles  desire  ;  and  when  one  seems  to  be 
sober,  then  most  of  all  is  he  mad,  imagining  to 
himself  wine  and  casks,  cups  and  goblets. — 
Chrysostom . 

'*  If  you  have  glutted  yourselves  with  worldly 
pleasures,  it  is  no  wonder  that  you  should  find 
an  unsavoury  taste  in  spiritual  delights.  Doves 
that  are  already  filled  find  cherries  bitter." — 
/.  Lyth,  D.D. 

Bountiful  King.  The  Lord,  like  a  most 
bountiful  king,  will  be  angry  if  any  man  will  ask 
a  small  thing  at  his  hands  ;  because  he  had 
rather  give  things  of  great  worth  than  of  small 
value.     His  goodness  is  infinite. — Bowell. 

Fulness  of  CJirist.  I  have  found  it  an  inter- 
esting thing  to  stand  at  the  edge  of  a  noble 
rolling  river,  and  to  think,  that  although  it  has 
been  flowing  on  for  6000  years,  watering  the 
fields,  and  slaking  the  thirst  of  a  hundred  genera- 
tions, it  shows  no  sign  of  waste  or  want.  And 
when  I  have  watched  the  rise  of  the  sun  as 
he  shot  above  the  crest  of  the  mountain,  or,  in  a 
sky  draped  with  golden  curtains,  sprung  up  from 
his  ocean  bed,  I  have  wondered  to  think  that  he 
has  melted  the  snows  of  so  many  winters,  and 
renewed  the  verdure  of  so  many  springs,  and 
planted  the  flowers  of  so  many  summers,  and 
ripened  the  golden  harvest  of  so  many  autumns, 
and  yet  shines  as  brilliantly  as  ever  ;  his  eye  not 
dim,  nor  his  natural  strength  abated,  nor  his 
floods  of  liglitness  fail,  for  centuries  of  boundless 
profusion.  Yet  what  are  these  but  images  of  the 
fulness  that  is  in  Christ !  Let  that  feed  your 
hopes,  and  clieer  your  hearts,  and  brighten  your 
faith,  and  send  yon  away  this  day  happy  and 
rejoicing!  For  when  judgment  flames  have 
licked  up  that  flowing  stream,  and  the  light  of 
that  glorious  sun  shall  be  quenched  in  darkness, 
or  veiled  in  the  smoke  of  a  burning  world,  the 


CHAP.  I.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


4d 


fulness  of  Christ  shall  flow  on  through  eternity 
in  the  bliss  of  the  redeemed.  Blessed  Saviour ! 
Image  of  God!  Divine  Redeemer!  In  thy 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy  ;  at  thy  right  hand 
there  are  pleasures  for  evermore.  What  thou 
hast  gone  to  heaven  to  prepare,  may  we  be 
called  up  at  death  to  enjoy ! — Dr.  Guthrie. 

Wife.  "  And  now  let  us  see  whether  the 
word  '  wife '  has  not  a  lesson.  It  literally  means 
a  weaver.  The  wife  is  the  person  who  weaves. 
Before  our  great  cotton  and  cloth  factories  arose, 
one  of  the  principal  employments  in  every  house 
was  the  fabrication  of  clothing :  every  family 
made  its  own.  The  wool  was  spun  into  threads 
by  the  girls,  who  were  therefore  called  spinsters , 
the  thread  was  woven  into  cloth  by  their 
mother,  who,  accordingly,  was  called  the  weaver, 
or  the  wife ;  and  another  remnant  of  this  old 
truth  we  discover  in  the  word  '  heirloom,'  applied 
to  any  old  piece  of  furniture  which  has  come 
down  to  us  from  our  ancestors,  and  which, 
though  it  may  be  a  chair  or  bed,  shows  that  a 
loom  was  an  important  article  in  every  house. 
Thus  the  word  *  wife '  means  weaver  ;  and,  as 
Trench  well  remarks,  'in  the  word  itself  is 
wrapped  up  a  hint  of  earnest,  indoor,  stay-at- 
home  occupation,  as  being  fitted  for  her  who 
bears  the  name.'" 

Fleasures.  The  pleasures  of  the  world  surfeit 
with  satisfying,  while  heavenly  pleasures  satisfy 
without  surfeiting.  The  surfeited  nature  of  the 
sensualist  requires  a  constantly  increasing  stim- 
ulus to  rouse  his  used-up  powers,  but  with  each 
advance  in  Christian  enjoyment  there  is  an 
increased  power  to  appreciate  heavenly  joys. 
The  pleasures  of  the  world  are  like  the  kiss  of 
Judas,  given  but  to  betray  ;  the  pleasures  of 
heaven  make  the  soul  bright  and  beautiful,  as 
when  the  face  of  Moses  was  transformed  by  the 
vision  of  God. — J.  G.  Filkington. 

Pleasures.  Pleasures,  like  the  rose,  are 
sweet,  but  prickly  ;  the  honey  doth  not  counter- 
vail the  sting ;  all  the  world's  delights  are  vanity, 
and  end  in  vexation  ;  like  Judas,  while  they 
kiss,  they  betray.  I  would  neither  be  a  stone 
nor  an  epicure  ;  allow  of  no  pleasure,  nor  give 
way  to  all ;  they  are  good  sauce,  but  naught  to 
make  a  meal  of.  I  may  use  them  sometimes  for 
digestion,  never  for  food. — Henshaw. 

Price  of  pleasure.  Goethe,  in  his  "  Faust," 
introduces  for  his  hero  a  student  longing  for  the 
pleasures  of  knowledge.  The  devil  appears,  to 
seduce  him  from  bis  pursuit;  Faust  is  to  have 
all  possible  sensual  enjoyment  in  lite,  but  is  to 
pay  for  it  by  yielding  his  soul  to  the  devil  at 
last.  At  the  end,  Mephistopheles,  jealous  of  his 
claim,  appears  and  carries  off  his  victim,  the 
student's  lost  soul. 

Anger.  I  am  naturally  as  irritable  as  any ; 
but  when  I  find  anger,  or  passion,  or  any  other 
evil  temper,  arise  in  my  mind,  immediately  I  go 
to  my  Redeemer,  and,  confessing  my  sins,  I  give 
myself  up  to  be  managed  by  him. — Clarke. 

Anger  subdued.  Two  good  men  on  some 
occasion  had  a  warm  dispute  ;  and  remembering 
the  exhortation  of  the  Apostie,  "  Let  not  the  sun 
go  down  upon  your  wratli,"  just  before  sunset 
one  of  them  went  to  tlie  other,  and  knocking  at 
the  door,  bis  oifended  friend  came  and  opened  it, 


and  seeing  who  it  was,  started  back  in  astonish- 
ment and  surprise  ;  the  other,  at  the  same  time, 
cried  out,  "The  sun  is  almost  down."  This 
unexpected  salutation  softened  the  heart  of  his 
friend  into  affection,  and  he  returned  for  answer, 
"  Come  in,  brother,  come  in."  "What  a  happy 
nietliod  of  conciliating  matters,  of  redressing 
grievances,  and  of  reconciling  brethren  I  — 
Arvine. 

Hypocrisy.  A  very  capital  painter  in  London 
exhibited  a  piece  representing  a  friar  habited  in 
his  canonicals.  View  the  painting  at  a  distance, 
and  you  would  think  the  friar  to  be  in  a  praying 
attitude  :  his  hands  are  clasped  together  and  held 
horizontally  to  his  breast,  his  eyes  meekly 
demissed  like  those  of  the  publican  in  the  gospel : 
and  the  good  man  appears  to  be  quite  absorbed 
in  humble  adoration  and  devout  recollection. 
But  take  a  nearer  survey,  and  the  deception  van- 
ishes; the  book  which  seemed  to  be  before  him 
is  discovered  to  be  a  punch-bowl,  into  which  the 
wretch  is  all  the  while  in  reality  only  squeezing 
a  lemon.  How  lively  a  representation  of  a 
hypocrite ! — Salter. 

Idols.  A  man's  idol  is  not  necessarily  an 
image  of  gold ;  it  may  be  a  child  of  clay,  the 
fruit  of  his  own  loins,  or  the  wife  of  his  bosom ; 
it  may  be  wealth,  fame,  position,  success,  or 
business — anything  which  absorbs  unduly  the 
affections  and  attention.  Against  all  such  the 
Almighty  pronounces  the  decree  :  "Thou  shalt 
have  no  other  gods  before  me,"  and  hurls  his 
resistless  missiles  of  destruction.  Either  our- 
selves or  our  idols  must  be  destroyed. 

Idolatry  !  You  cannot  find  any  more  gross, 
any  more  cruel,  on  the  broad  earth,  than  within 
the  area  of  a  mile  around  this  pulpit.  Dark 
minds,  from  which  God  is  obscured ;  deluded 
souls,  whose  fetish  is  the  dice-box  or  the  bottle  ; 
apathetic  spirits,  steeped  in  sensual  abomination, 
unmoved  by  a  moral  ripple,  soaking  in  the 
sw^amp  of  animal  vitality ;  false  gods,  more 
hideous,  more  awful  than  Moloch  or  Baal,  wor- 
shipped with  shrieks,  worshipped  with  curses, 
with  the  hearthstone  for  the  bloody  altar,  and  the 
drunken  husband  for  the  immolating  priest,  and 
women  and  children  for  the  victims. — Pr. 
Chap  in. 

Loss  of  time.  We  are  doomed  to  suffer  a 
bitter  pang  as  often  as  the  irrevocable  flight  of 
our  time  is  brought  home  with  keenness  to  our 
hearts.  The  spectacle  of  the  lady  floating  over 
the  sea  in  a  boat,  and  waking  suddenly  from 
sleep  to  find  her  magnificent  ropes  of  pearl  neck- 
lace by  some  accident  detached  from  its  fastening 
at  one  end,  the  loose  string  hanging  down  into 
the  water,  and  pearl  after  pearl  slipping  off  for 
ever  into  the  abyss,  brings  before  ns  the  sadness 
of  the  case.  That  particular  pearl  which  at  the 
very  moment  is  rolling  ofi"  into  the  unsearchable 
deep,  carries  its  own  separate  reproach  to  the 
lady's  heart,  but  is  more  deeply  reproachful  as 
the  representative  of  so  many  other  uncounted 
pearls  that  have  already  been  swallowed  up  irre- 
coverably while  yet  she  was  sleeping,  of  many, 
besides,  that  must  follow  before  any  remedy  can 
be  applied  to  what  we  may  call  this  jewelly 
hemorrhage. 

The  intrepid  judge.     One  of  the  favourites  of 


46 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :   ESTHJ^R. 


[CHAP.  I. 


Henry  V.,  when  Prince  of  "Wales,  having  been 
indicted  for  some  misdemeanour,  was  condemned, 
notwithstanding  all  the  interest  he  could  make  in 
his  favour,  and  the  prince  was  so  incensed  at  the 
issue  of  the  trial  that  he  struck  the  judge  on  the 
bench.  The  magistrate,  whose  name  was  Sir 
Williura  Gascoigne,  acted  with  a  spirit  becoming 
his  character.  He  instantly  ordered  the  prince 
to  be  committed  to  prison,  and  young  Henry, 
sensible  by  this  time  of  the  insult  he  had  offered 
to  the  laws  of  his  country,  suffered  himself  to  be 
quietly  conducted  to  jail  by  the  officers  of  justice. 
The  king,  Henry  IV.,  who  was  an  excellent 
judge  of  mankind,  was  no  sooner  informed  of  this 
transaction,  than  he  cried  out  in  a  transport  of 
joy,  "  Happy  is  the  king  who  has  a  magistrate 
pc^ssessed  of  courage  to  execute  the  laws,  and 
still  more  happy  in  having  a  son  who  will  submit 
to  such  chastisement." — Arvine. 

Flattery.  The  coin  most  current  among  man- 
kiad  is  flattery :  the  only  benefit  of  which  is, 
that,  by  hearing  what  we  are  not,  we  may  learn 
what  we  ought  to  be. 

Whitfield,  when  flattered,  said,  "  Take  care  of 
fire  :  I  carry  powder  about  me." 

A  flattering  priest  told  Constantine  the  Great 
that  his  virt  les  deserved  the  empire  of  the  world 
here,  and  to  reign  with  the  Son  of  God  here- 
after. The  emperor  cried,  "  Fie,  fie,  for  shame; 
let  me  hear  no  more  such  unseemly  speeches ; 
but,  rather,  suppliantly  pray  to  my  Almighty 
Maker,  that,  in  this  life  and  the  life  to  come,  I 
may  be  reckoned  worthy  to  be  his  servant." 

Excuses.  He  that  does  amiss  never  lacks 
excuse.  Any  excuse  will  serve  when  one  has  not 
a  mind  to  do  a  thing.  The  archer  that  shoots 
ill  has  a  lie  ready.  He  that  excuses  himself 
accuses  himself.  A  bad  workman  always  com- 
plains of  his  tools. 

Wicked  counsel.  A  young  man  devoted  him- 
self to  a  religious  life.  His  ungodly  parents  sent 
nim  many  letters  to  dissuade  him.  Being  fully 
decided  to  go  on  in  his  chosen  course,  when  any 
letters  came  addressed  to  him  he  threw  them  into 
the  fire  at  once,  without  opening  them.  When 
friends  and  kindred  stand  between  us  and  Christ, 
they  must  be  disregarded. 

Sin.  Sin  is  like  the  little  serpent  aspis^  which 
stings  men,  whereby  they  fall  into  a  pleasant 
sleep,  and  in  that  sleep  die. — Swinnock. 

Envy.  We  shall  find  it  in  Cain,  the  proto- 
murderer,  who  slew  his  brother  at  the  instigation 
of  envy.  We  shall  find  in  the  dark,  and  gloomy, 
and  revengeful  spirit  of  Saul,  who,  under  the 
influence  of  envy,  plotted  for  years  the  slaughter 
of  David.  We  shall  find  it  in  the  king  of  Israel, 
when  he  pined  for  the  vineyard  of  Naboth,  and 
shed  his  blood  to  gain  it.  Yea ;  it  was  envy 
that  perpetrated  that  most  atrocious  crime  ever 
planned  in  hell  or  executed  on  earth,  on  which 
the  sun  refused  to  look,  and  at  which  nature 
gave  signs  of  abhorrence  by  the  rending  of  the 
rocks — I  mean  the  crucifixion  of  Christ,  for  the 
evangelist  tells  us  that  for  envy  the  Jews  de- 
livered our  Lord. — /.  A.  James. 

The  poets  imagined  that  envy  dwelt  in  a  dark 
cave;  being  pale  and  lean -looking  as  guilt, 
abounding  with  gall,  her  teeth  black,  never  re- 
joicing^ but  in  the  misfortunes  of  others;  ever 


unquiet  and  careful,  and  continually  tormenting 
herself.  — ?r«V. 

Friendship.  True  friendship  can  only  be 
made  between  true  men.  Htjarts  are  the  soul  of 
honour.  There  can  be  no  lasting  friendship 
between  bad  men.  Bad  men  may  pretend  to 
love  each  other;  but  their  friendship  is  a  rope  of 
sand,  which  shall  be  broken  at  any  convenient 
season.  But  if  a  man  have  a  sincere  heart  within 
him,  and  be  true  and  noble,  then  we  may  confide 
in  \i\m. —Spurgeon. 

Ingratitude.  A  petted  soldier  of  the  Mace- 
donian army  was  shipwrecked,  and  cast  upon  the 
shore  apparently  lifeless.  A  hospitable  Mace- 
donian discovered  him,  revived  him,  took  him  to 
his  home,  and  treated  him  in  a  princely  manner, 
and,  when  he  departed,  gave  him  money  for  his 
journey.  The  rescued  soldier  expressed  warm 
thanks,  and  promised  royal  bounty  to  his  bene 
factor.  Instead,  when  he  came  before  Philip, 
he  related  his  own  misfortunes,  and  asked  to  be 
rewarded  by  the  lands  and  house  of  his  rescuer. 
His  request  was  granted,  and  he  returned,  and 
drove  out  his  former  host.  The  latter  hastened 
to  lay  the  true  state  before  the  king;  when  he 
restored  the  land,  and  caused  the  soldier  to  be 
branded  in  the  forehead,  "  The  Ungrateful 
Guest,"  as  the  reward  of  his  baseness. 

Conscience  wakeful.  Though  in  many  men 
conscience  sleeps  in  regard  to  motion,  yet  it 
never  sleeps  in  regard  to  observation  and  notice. 
It  may  be  hard  and  seared,  it  can  never  be  blind. 
Like  letters  written  with  the  juice  of  lemon,  that 
which  is  written  upon  it,  though  seemingly 
invisible  and  illegible,  when  brought  before  the 
fire  of  God's  judgment,  shall  come  forth  clear  and 
expressive. — M'  Cosh. 

Guilty  conscience.  It  gives  a  terrible  form 
and  a  horrible  voice  to  everything  beautiful  and 
musical  without.  Let  Byron  describe  its  anguish, 
for  who  felt  it  more  than  he  } — • 

"  The  mind  that  broods  o'er  guilty  woes 
Is  like  the  scorpion  girt  by  fire  ; 
In  circle  narrowing  as  it  glows. 
The  flames  arouud  their  captive  close. 
Till  inly  searched  by  thousand  throes, 
And  maddening  in  her  ire, 
One  sad  and  sole  relief  she  knows — 
The  sting  she  nourished  for  her  foes  ; 
Whose  venom  never  yet  was  vain, 
Gives  but  one  pang,  and  cures  all  pain, 
And  darts  into  her  desperate  brain ; 
So  do  the  dark  in  soul  expire, 
Or  live  like  scorpion  girt  with  fire. 
So  writhes  the  mind  remorse  has  riven, 
Unfit  for  earth,  undooraed  for  heaven, 
Darkness  above,  despair  beneath. 
Around  it  flame,  within  it  death." 

Forgiveness.  As  the  prince  or  ruler  only  has 
power  to  forgive  treason  in  his  subjects,  so  God 
only  has  power  to  forgive  sin.  As  no  man  can 
forgive  a  debt  only  the  creditor  to  whom  the  debt 
is  due,  so  God  only  can  forgive  us  our  debts, 
whose  debtors  we  are  to  an  incalculable  amount. 
But  we  know  that  he  is  always  ready  to  forgive. 
*'  He  keeps  mercy  for  thousands,  and  pardons 
iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin." 

Porgivene*$.     In  a  school  in  Ireland,  one  bo^ 


OttAt.  ttl  fTOMTLnTTC  COMME^TAlil\   ESTHEtt.  47 

struck  another,  and  when  he  was  ahout  to  be  trious  Plantagcnets  so  completely  waned,  that 

punished,  the  injured  boy  begged  for  his  pardon.  the  direct  representative  of  Margaret  Plantagenet, 

The  master  asked.  "  Why  do  you  wish   to  keep  daughter  and  heiress  of  George,  Duke  of  Clarence, 

him  from  being  flogged  ?  "    The  boy  replied,  "  I  followed    the   trade  of   a  cobbler  in   Newport, 

have  read  in  the  New  Testament  that  our  Lord  Shropshire,  in  1637.    Among  the  lineal  descend- 

Jesus  Christ  said  that  we  should  forgive  our  ants  of  Edmund   of  Woodstock,  sixth   son  of 

enemies  ;  and,  therefore,  I  forgive  him,  and  beg  Edward    I.,  and  entitled   to  quarter  the  royal 

he  may  not  be  punished  for  my  sake."  arms,  were  a  village  butcher  and  a  keeper  of  a 

At  the  present  day  the  green  turbeii  which  turnpike  gate ;    and  among  the  descendants  of 

marks  descent  from  Mahomet  is  often  worn  in  Thomas  Plantagenet,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  fifth 

the  East  by  the  very  poor,  and  even  by  beggars.  son  of  Edward  III.,  was  included  the  late  sexton 

In  our  own  history  the  glory  of  the  once  illus-  of  a  London  church. — Gei/cie, 


CHAPTER  IL 

Cbitioal  Notes.]  1.  After  these  things]  How  long  after  the  divorce  of  Vashti  is  uncertain.  It 
may  have  been  only  a  few  months,  or  it  may  have  been  a  year  or  more  after.  He  remembered  Vashti] 
And  along  with  the  remembrance  came  a  desire  to  have  her  restored  to  favour  again,  and  probably, 
also,  a  feeling  that  she  had  been  too  severely  dealt  with.  2.]  The  youths,  or  male  domestics,  without 
regard  to  age,  that  served  before  the  king,  sought  to  avert  the  danger  that  threatened.  Th^^y  advised 
that  maidens,  virgins,  be  brought  to  the  king,  and  that  these  should  be  beautiful  to  look  upon.  3.  The 
house  of  the  women]  The  harem  was  always  an  essential  part  of  an  Oriental  palace.  In  the  Persian 
palaces  it  was  very  extensive,  since  the  Persian  monarchs  maintaine4,  besides  their  legitimate  wives, 
as  many  as  three  hundred  or  four  hundred  concubines.  Hege,  stricAy  speaking,  seems  to  have  beeu 
"keeper  of  the  virgins"  only,  since  the  concubines  were  under  the  care  of  Shaashgaz,— 7^/m;/wa-ci?. 
Things  of  purificatio»]  Cleansing  and  anointing  with  precious  oils.  5.]  Jair,  Shimei,  and  Kish 
can  hardly  mean  the  father,  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather  of  Mordecai,  On  the  contrary,  if  Jair 
were  perhaps  his  father,  Shimei  and  Kish  may  have  been  the  names  of  renowned  ancestors..  Shimei 
was  probably  the  son  of  Gera,  and  Kish  the  father  of  Saul;  for  in  genealogical  series  only  a  few 
noted  names  are  generally  given.  Upon  the  ground  of  this  explanation,  Josephiis  makes  Esther  of 
rojal  descent,  viz.,  the  line  of  Saul,  king  of  Israel;  and  the  Targum  regards  Shimei  as  the  Benja- 
mite  who  cursed  David.  It  is  more  in  accordance  with  the  Hebrew  narrative  style  to  refer  the 
relative  to  the  chief  person  of  the  sentence  preceding  it,  viz.,  Mordecai,  wlio  also  continues  to  be 
spoken  of  in  ver.  7.  Hence  we  prefer  this  reference,  without,  however,  attributing  to  Mordecai  more 
than  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  of  age.  For  the  relative  clause,  who  had  beeu  carried  away, 
need  not  be  so  strictly  understood  as  to  assert  that  Mordecai  himself  was  carried  away ;  but  the  object 
being  lo  give  merely  his  origin  and  lineage,  and  not  his  history,  it  involves  only  the  notion  that  he 
belonged  to  those  Jews  who  were  carried  to  Babylon  by  Nebuchadnezzar  with  Jecrmiah,  so  that  he, 
though  born  in  captivity,  was  carried  to  Babylon  in  the  persons  of  his  forefathers.— JTceY.  7.  Ha- 
dassah,  that  is,  Esther]  Tyrwhitt  regards  Hadassah  as  the  court  name,  by  which  she  was  known 
among  the  Persians,  and  Esther  as  her  Jewish  maiden  name,  by  which  she  was  known  to  her  own 
people.  But  to  this  it  may  be  fairly  replied  that  she  would  be  more  likely  to  be  known  to  her  own 
people  as  well  as  to  the  Persians  by  her  royal  name;  and  most  interpreters  have  naturally  understood 
from  the  expression,  he  brought  up  Hadassah,  which  is  Esther,  that  Hadassah  was  her  early  maiden 
name,  and  that  she  took  the  name  of  Esther  when  she  became  queen.  Moreover,  Hadassah  is  of 
Semitic  origin,  and  signifies  myrtle;  while  Esther  is  the  Persian  word  for  star.  The  fair  and 
beautiful  maiden  was  known  as  myrtle;  the  brilliant  and  fascinating  queen  w;is  called  star.  The 
name  Hadassah  is,  indeed,  substantially  identical  with  Atossa,  mentioned  by  the  Greek  writers  as  the 
wife  of  Darius  Hystaspes,  and  daughter  of  Cyrus,  but  the  identity  in  name  is  insufficient  to  identity 
the  Jewish  virgin  with  one  who  is  so  clearly  represented  by  Herodotus  as  both  daughter  of  Cyrus 
and  widow  of  ^amhpQs.  —  Whedon's  Com,  His  uncle's  daughter]  This  uncle's  name  was  Abihail 
(ver.  15).  Mordecai  and  Esther  were  cousins,  but  Mordecai  must  have  been  the  elder.  9.  Seven 
maidens]  Probably  each  of  the  virgins  had  the  same  number  of  maids  to  attend  her;  but  Esther's 
lUiiids  were  chosen  with  special  care.  It  seems  also  that  both  Esther  and  lier  maids  were  favoured 
with  the  choicest  apartments  in  the  harem.  10.  Not  showed  her  people]  This  was  a  piece  of  wise 
policy  on  the  part  of  her  foster-father.  He  knew  well  that  the  Jews  were  not  too  popular,  and  had 
she  beforehand  declared  that  she  belonged  to  the  captive  nation,  her  cause  would  have  been  next  to 
hopeless.  11.  Mordecai  ....  before  the  court  of  the  women's  house]  This  leads  us  to  suppose 
that  he  was  an  eunuch.  It  is  not  probable  that  he  would,  otherwise,  have  such  access  to  the  house 
of  the  women  as  it  appears  he  had.     It  is  the  opinion  of  many  that  he  was  a  royal  porter  having 


48  HOMILETIC  OOMME^TABT:  ESTHER.  [csap.  n. 


charge  of  one  of  tlie  principal  gates.  13.  Whatsoever  she  desired]  In  the  way  of  jewels,  orna- 
ments, or  dress.  "No  doubt,"  says  Rawlinson,  "  the  virgins  generally  took  the  opportunity — one 
that  would  occur  but  once  in  their  lives — to  load  themselves  with  precious  ornaments  of  various 
kinds— necklaces,  bracelets,  earrings,  anklets,  and  the  like."  15.  She  required  nothing]  She  made 
no  effort  to  adorn  her  person  with  jewellery  or  dress  to  please  her  own  fancy,  but  left  the  matter 
entirely^  to  Hegai,  who  would  be  likely  to  know  best  what  would  please  the  king.  16.  Tebeth 
(answering  to  part  of  our  December  and  January),  in  the  seventh  year  of  his  reign]  Vashti  was 
cast  off  in  the  third  year  of  his  reign  (ver.  3);  so  that  four  years  passed  before  another  queen,  or  ;it 
least  before  Esther,  was  crowned  in  her  stead.  18.  Made  a  release  to  the  provinces]  Usually 
understood  as  a  release  from  tribute.  The  Persian  kings  were  wont  to  remit  the  arrears  of  tribute 
due  at  the  time  of  their  accession;  and  Xerxes  may  have  thought  it  wise  to  make  such  a  release  just 
after  the  disastrous  Grecian  wars.  The  feast,  release,  and  gifts  were,  doubtless,  in  keeping  with 
kingliness.  19.  When  the  virgins,  &c.]  Rather,  "  When  virgins."  These  words  sliould  begin  a 
new  paragraph.  They  stand  in  contrast  with  those  of  verse  8,  and  serve  in  the  mind  of  the  writer 
to  date  the  new  event  here  narrated,  viz.,  the  discovery,  by  Mordecai,  of  the  plot  against  the  life  of 
the  king. — Speaker's  Com.  It  ap[)ears  that  tli'^re  was  a  second  collection  of  virgins  at  Shushan, 
probably  made  some  years  after  the  first.  After  his  unsuccessful  wars  Xerxes  wholly  abandoned 
himself  to  the  pleasures  of  the  court.  We  may  thus  understand  his  second  gathering  of  virgins. 
20.^  Esther  had  not  yet  showed,  &c.]  This  verse  should  be  regarded  as  a  parentliesis,  and  is 
designed  as  a  circunistantial  clause,  to  show  that  Esther  was  obedient  to  Mordecai  as  much  after  she 
became  queen  as  before.  It  also  shows  that  this  second  collection  sprang  from  no  prejudice  against 
Esther  as  a  Jewess.  21.  Bigthan]  Probably  the  same  as  Bigtha  (ch.  i.  10).  Called  Bigthana 
in  ch.  vi.  2.  Which  kept  the  door]  Lit.,  guards  of  the  threshold.  Being  doorkeepers,  like  Mor- 
decai, the  latter  was  able  the  more  readily  to  learn  of  their  conspiracy.  Such  conspiracies  among 
the  officers  of  the  court  were  common  in  the  East,  and  many  a  monarch  (and  subsequently  even 
Xerxes  himself)  fell  by  the  hand  of  assassins.  23.  Hanged  on  a  tree]  This  punishment  was  per- 
formed by  the  Persians  by  crucifying  or  impaling.  Grecian  writings  and  the  Behistun  inscription 
frequently  mention  this  kind  of  execution.  The  criminal  was  sometimes  first  slain,  but  generally 
impaled  alive.  The  book  of  the  chronicles]  Official  records,  made  and  kept  by  the  royal  scribes,  and 
constituting  a  body  of  state  papers  or  annals.  See  note  on  Ezra  iv.  15;  2  Sam.  viii.  17;  and 
Introduction  to  Kings,  on  the  sources. —  fFhedon's  Com. 


UAIN  K0M.ILET1GS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.    Verse  1. 

Regrets — Natural,  Useless,  and  Wholesome. 

Vasliti  was  banished,  but  she  was  still  a  queen,  for  she  reigned  in  the  halls  of 
the  monarch's  sad  memory.  The  jewelled  turban  may  be  placed  on  the  head  of 
another,  but  a  royal  soul  cannot  be  stripped  of  queenly  prerogatives  by  a  monarch's 
power.  The  king  bowed  to  her  greatness,  and  practically  confessed  her  royalty, 
though  kingly  pride  and  Persian  law  might  prevent  a  revocation  of  the  edict. 
He  remembered  Vashti  in  fond  but  sad  regrets. 

I.  Regrets  are  natural.  The  sweet  vision  of  Vashti's  grace  and  beauty 
pleased  the  fancy  of  Ahasuerus  while  it  troubled  his  soul.  Her  refusal  to  violate 
her  modesty  unconsciously  called  forth  bis  admiration.  And  if  he  had  any  nobility 
in  his  nature,  her  marvellous  daring  must  have  commanded  his  esteem.  How  sad 
the  reflection  that  in  an  evil  and  thoughtless  moment  of  undue  merriment  and 
boasting  he  had  been  the  cause  of  her  fall  and  her  banishment !  Thus  there  would 
be  a  mixture  of  gloom  and  of  light,  of  joy  and  of  sorrow,  of  fond  regrets  and  of 
painful  upbraidings,  as  he  remembered  Vashti.  It  is  natural  for  us  to  look  back 
to  the  past,  and  indulge  in  grief  over  our  losses  and  our  follies.  IVEan  is  a  creature 
looking  both  before  and  behind.  One  sign  of  his  greatness.  He  recalls  the  past, 
and  he  tries  to  picture  the  future.  It  was,  then,  natural  for  Ahasuerus,  when  his 
wrath  was  appeased,  to  remember  Vashti,  and  what  was  decreed  against  her. 
Natural  for  all  to  regret  their  losses,  and  especially  those  that  have  been  the  result 
of  their  own  folly. 

II.  Regrets  and  nothing  more  are  useless.  Tears  will  flow,  but  tears  cannot 
save.  They  may  excite  pity,  but  cannot  work  out  deliverance,  nor  undo  the  past. 
Regrets  cannot  suck  up  the  water  that  has  been  spilt  upon  the  ground.  In  this 
instance  regrets  cannot  restore  the  deposed  Vashti.     If  she  knew  of  the  monarch's 


CHAP,  iij  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  40 

remembrance  it  might  afford  her  some  gratification,  but  this  was  all  the  good  it 
would  do  her.  Regrets  cannot  bring  to  life  the  dead  which  the  past  has  entombed. 
Let  us  then  so  strive  to  live,  to  control  our  passions,  that  the  remembrance  of  the 
past  may  not  haunt  us  with  reproaching  misdeeds. 

III.  Regrets  and  something  more  may  be  wholesome.  Regrets  that  issue  in 
repentance  are  wholesome.  It  is  well  to  remember  tlie  past  when  by  it  we  are 
brought  to  true  repentance.  It  would  have  been  pleasant  if  we  had  been  per- 
mitted to  read  that  Ahasuerus  repented  as  he  remembered  his  folly.  Regrets  that 
lead  to  honest  effort  are  wholesome.  Wise  is  the  man  who,  as  he  regrets  the  past, 
seeks  to  put  forth  every  effort  to  repair  the  wrongs  of  the  past,  and  be  himself  a 
better  man  for  the  future.  Surely  Ahasuerus  might  have  done  something  more 
to  repair  the  wrong  done  to  Vashti  in  spite  of  the  rigour  of  Persian  law.  Regrets 
that  prompt  the  desire  for  forgiveness  are  wholesome.  If  it  were  not  seemly  for 
Ahasuerus  to  seek  forgiveness  from  Yashti,  yet  he  ought  to  have  sought  forgive- 
ness from  God.  Have  we  no  wrongs  that  need  to  be  righted]  Have  we  no 
sins  that  require  forgiveness  1  We  regret  our  sins  when  they  expose  us  to 
temporal  evils.  Let  us  regret  our  sins  as  committed  against  God.  Let  us  pray 
God  for  Christ's  sake  to  be  merciful  unto  us.  He  is  ready  to  forgive.  Let 
us  learn  that  self-pleasing  is  the  highway  to  self-loathing.  Our  greatest  sorrows 
are  often  the  harvest  of  the  seed  our  own  hands  have  scattered.  Remorse  is 
a  bitter  cup  to  drink,  and  we  prepare  the  repellent  ingredients.  Memory  can 
be  a  great  tormentor,  and  the  sinner  makes  the  lash  with  which  memory  inflicts  its 
painful  strokes.  And  those  who  injure  the  just  will  find  that  they  injure  them- 
selves much  more.  The  just  may  perish,  but  their  memory  is  ever  blessed.  The 
fragrance  of  correct  thinking,  of  truthful  speaking,  and  of  right  doing  comes  from 
the  tombs  of  the  martyrs,  and  blesses  the  world.  Oh,  whatever  may  come  of 
worldly  honours,  let  men  and  women  be  true  to  principle,  and  so  live  that  truth- 
loving  men  will  pleasantly  remember  their  names,  and,  in  a  not  distant  future, 
even  persecutors  will  assist  in  decorating  their  tombs ! 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Yerse  1. 

All  that  he  could  do  was  to  indulge  the    less   who    have   been   carried   into 
in  vain  regrets  ;  mingled,  perhaps,  with  these  outward  acts   of   personal  injury 
self-upbraidings.    It  is  the  usual  penalty  and   brutality,  but  that  we  should   be 
of  rashness,  especially  the  rashness  of  incited  the  uK^re  to  guard  our  own  hearts, 
temporarily  inflamed  passion.     To  bring  For   whether    the    injustice   and   cruel 
down  the  things  of  court  and  fashion  to  wrong  be  done  by  kings  surrounded  by 
every-day  life,  how  many  of  our  police  their  councillors,  and  defended  by  their 
reports,    attended   with   fines    and   im-  rank   from   civil    penalties,    or   by    the 
prisonments,  are  to  be  attributed  to  the  meanest  subjects  who  are  lodged  in  our 
very  same  causes  as  led  to  the  deposition  jails,  the  Judge  of  all  the   earth  deals 
of  V"ashti,  and  the  subsequent  regrets  of  equitably,  and   in   his  final   allotments 
the  king.     When  passion  is  allowed  to  will  show  that   he   is   no   respecter   of 
get  the  reins  of  reason,  violence  is  almost  persons.     He   brings    our   feelings   and 
sure   to   follow,   and   after-reflection   to  motives  and  secret  passions  to  the  same 
administer  the  lash  of  self-censure  and  tribunal  as  actions,  and  pronounces  sen- 
remorse.     The   seat   of   those  domestic  tence   accordingly.     With    the    fear   of 
feuds  and  dastard  assaults  on  the  weak  God  upon  us,  let  us  be  jealous  of  un- 
and    defenceless  which  are  brought   to  bridled  passion,  and  stamp  out  wraih, 
light  in  our  criminal  courts,  and  excite  and  we  shall  be  saved  from  many  of 
our  indignation  and  horror,  is  just  the  those  remembrances  and  regrets  which 
anger,  malice,  and  reckless  speech  with  rob  life  of  much  happiness.     "Keep  thy 
which  we  may  be  ourselves  chargeable,  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it  are 
It  is  not  that  we  should  censure  them  the  issues  of  life." 


dO 


HUM  I LE  TIC   COMMENTARY :  ESTHER, 


[GB.AV,  n. 


0  memory  !  thou  art  a  bitter  avenger. 
Vashti  might  weep,  but  Artaxerxes  had 
to  repent.  In  the  heat  of  passion,  the 
one  small  offence,  which  had  not  been  of 
her  own  making,  had  bulked  so  largely 
in  his  eyes  as  to  shut  out  her  many 
excellencies,  kindnesses,  and  devotion  ; 
but  when  passion  had  subsided,  these 
came  prominently  into  view,  and  made 
that  one  offence  seem  as  a  very  mote  on 
a  ground  which  was  generally  good  and 
praiseworthy.  But  he  could  now  do 
nothing  to  remedy  the  evil  which  had 
been  done.  In  this  view  there  is  some- 
thing terrible  in  the  two  words  which 
Abraham  is  represented  as  addressing 
to  the  rich  man  in  the  New  Testament 
historical  parable,  "  Son,  remember  !  " 
Recall  the  past !  Think  on  the  former 
unrequited,  unacknowledged,  and  abused 
goodness  of  Ood !  Think  of  how  thou 
didst  despise  the  poor,  ulcerated,  dog- 
licked  beggar  at  thy  gate  !  Ah  !  these 
bitter  memories  of  earth  will  be  in- 
gredients in  the  future  cup  of  the  penal 
suffering  of  the  lost !  May  God  in  his 
mercy  deliver  us  from  them  all,  and 
give  us  in  their  stead  the  blessed  memory 
of  an  accepted  Saviour,  and  "a  life  of 
faith  on  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  us, 
and  gave  himself  for  us  !  " — McEwen. 

I.  Sin  and  punishment  are  insepar- 
able companions.  They  go  together 
with  chains  of  adamant.  Like  indivi- 
dual twins,  they  are  born  together,  live 
together,  are  attended  the  one  by  the 
other,  as  the  body  by  the  shadow. 

II.  When  sin  is  in  the  saddle  then 
punishment  is  on  the  crupper.  Isidore, 
the  monk,  was  one  that  vaunted  he  had 
felt  in  himself  no  motive  to  sin  for  forty 
years  together.  The  Hebrews  have  but 
one  and  the  same  word  for  both ;  and 
blind  nature  prompted  those  mariners  to 
demand  of  the  obnoxious  prophet  Jonah, 
What  evil  hast  thou  done  (Jonah  i.  7), 
that  the  hand  of  thy  God  doth  follow 
thee  so  close?  and  those  barbarians  to 
censure  St.  Paul  for  some  murder,  whom, 
though  he  had  escaped  the  sea,  yet 
vengeance  suffered  not  to  live  (Acts 
xxviii.  4). — Trapp. 

1.  He  thought  upon  the  happy  days 
he  had  spent  in  her  society. 

2.  He  remembered  the  proofs  of 
affection  she  had  formerly  given. 


3.  He  remembered  her  punishment. 
How  sad  and  heavy  !  Now  that  his 
wrath  is  appeased,  and  his  judgment 
again  balanced,  he  can  see  his  weakness. 
The  wrong  which  he  thinks  he  has  ex- 
perienced from  her  he  now  sees  to  be  of 
a  very  doubtful  kind.  "He  must  even 
confess  to  himself  that,  though  he  had 
con-tulted  his  counsellors,  he  still  had 
acted  in  a  passionate  manner,  and  given 
too  free  a  rein  to  his  wrath."  This 
should  have  taught  him  to  control  his 
passions. 

4.  He  remembered  Vashti,  but  she 
was  now  lost  to  him.  Lost  for  ever  as 
his  queen.  Lost  by  his  own  act.  The 
result  of  his  own  passion  and  wrath. 
And  now  the  folly  of  his  own  act,  like  a 
serpent,  stings  him.  Ahasuerus,  amid 
all  his  wealth  and  splendour,  now  feels 
an  oppressive  want.  He  suffered  a  loss 
which  could  not  be  made  good  by  any 
other  possession,  however  precious.  He 
may  have  more  wives,  and  many  of  them, 
but  they  are  not  Vashti.  David  may  have 
another  son,  but  not  a  fair  Absalom. 

In  speaking  of  the  king's  sorrow,  it 
should  be  distinguished  from  repentance, 
or  godly  sorrow.  From  what  we  know 
of  the  character  of  Ahasuerus,  we  may 
safely  conclude  that  the  remorse  he  felt 
would  be  of  a  selfish  character.  He  was 
no  doubt  troubled,  but  was  it — 

1.  Because  of  the  injustice  he  had 
done  to  a  virtuous,  yet  helpless  woman  ? 
or  2.  Because  he  felt  that  he  had  sinned 
against  the  law  of  right "?  or  3.  Because 
he  had  lost  his  beautiful  queen  1  Doubt- 
less the  latter  chiefly,  if  not  entirely.  It 
was,  therefore,  only  selfish  sorrow.  The 
kind  of  repentance  or  sorrow  which  a 
thief  has  when  he  finds  himself  in  prison, 
deprived  of  liberty.  He  grieves,  not  be- 
cause he  is  a  thief,  and  wrongs  his  fel- 
lows, but  because  he  has  lost  the  chance 
to  steal.  Had  Ahasuerus  not  lost  Vashti, 
he  would  probably  have  never  felt  a 
pang.  This  feeling  is  as  different  as 
possible  from  repentance.  Real  repent- 
ance begins  in  humiliation  of  heart,  and 
ends  in  reformation  of  life ;  it  consists 
in  the  heart  being  broken  for  sin,  and  hy 
sin.  If  we  ever  enjoy  that  peace  which 
comes  from  God,  our  repentance  must  be 
that  which  is  not  to  be  repented  of. 

The  nature  of  true  repentance  is  well 


OHAP.  It. J 


HOMTLKTTO  COMMEKTARY :   ESTHER. 


51 


set  forth  in  the  following  outline,  by  a 
wise  old  writer  : — 

There  seems  to  be  an  hysteresis  in  the 
words,  "  Repent  thee  of  thy  remissness, 
laziness,  lukewarmness,  and  learn  by  that 
tliousufferest  to  bezealousof  good  works," 
"  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord."  Be 
zealous  and  repent ;  that  is,  be  in  earnest 
and  thorough  in  thy  repentance,  and  each 
part  thereof,  contrition,  or  humiliation, 
and  conversion,  or  reformation. 

1.  Know  that  (Jod  will  never  leave 
pursuing  thee  until  the  traitor's  head  be 
thrown  over  the  wall,  till  thou  humble 
thyself,  and  walk  with  God.  As  one 
cloud  follows  another,  until  the  sun  con- 
sumes them,  so  one  judgment  after  an- 
other, till  godly  sorrow  dispels  them. 
Let  the  glory  be  to  him,  taking  the 
shame  and  blame  of  it  ourselves,  sub- 
mitting to  anything  that  he  shall  see 
good  to  inflict.  Say,  Here  I  am,  let  him 
do  to  me  as  seemeth  him  best.  If  God 
will  have  my  life,  here  it  is ;  if  my 
goods,  here  they  are ;  if  my  children  or 
any  other  dear  pledge  of  his  former 
favour,  I  resign  them  freely  into  his 
hands.  Cleanse  your*hands,  ye  sinners  ; 
not  your  hands  only,  with  Pilate,  but 
your  hearts  also,  with  David  (Ps.  li.). 
Make  use  of  all  means,  improve  all  occa- 
sions, turn  all  the  streams  into  this  one 
channel,  for  the  drivintJ-  of  that  mill 
may  grind  the  heart. 

2.  Our  sorrow  must  be  unto  a  trans- 
mutation, or  inward  change.  Our  con- 
trition must  be  joined  with  conversion, 
else  all  is  lost;  for  this  latter  is  the  con- 
summation of  the  former,  and  the  seal 
of  its  sincerity.  Here,  then,  you  must 
set  to  work  again,  and  be  zealous  in  it. 
Let  your  crosses  teach  you  to  cast  a^vay 
all  your  transgressions,  to  turn  from  all 
your  wickedness,  repent  of  all  your  dead 
works,  and  put  off  all  the  fruits  of  the 
flesh.  Spare  no  sin,  but  least  of  all  thy 
beloved  sin — thy  familiar  devil ;  pitch 
thy  hatred  chiefly  upon  that,  fight  nei- 
ther against  small  nor  great  in  com- 
parison of  that ;  say  of  it,  as  Haman  of 
Mordecai,  What  avails  me  anything  so 
long  as  that  liveth  %  But  that  once  dead, 
the  rest  will  soon  follow,  as  all  the  serv- 
ant^j  attend  the  master's  funeral. — Trapp. 

When  the  wrath  of  Ahasueius  was 
cooled,    did   he   not,   think    you,    envy 


persons  of  a  less  powerful  position  than 
himself? 

Remorse  now  punished  the  king  almost 
as  severely  as  his  imperious  and  unjust 
decTee  had  punished  the  unhappy  queen. 

Man  is  not  so  wise  that  his  decrees 
are  perfect,  and  his  enactments  incapable 
of  improvement. 

He  ought  to  have  felt  grief  and  .shame, 
that,  in  his  wine  and  rage,  he  had  so 
severely  punished,  and  in  such  an  irre- 
vocable m .'inner  rejected,  so  fair  and 
desirable  a  woman. 

Time  assuageth  the  heat  of  anger,  but 
time  does  not  always  fill  up  the  gaps 
which  human  Avratli  makes. 

Man  has  wants  which  no  wealth  can 
meet.  There  is  a  want  which  the  best 
social  arrangements  cannot  supply. 

There  is  a  craving  in  the  human  heart 
which  no  eartldy  power  can  satisfy. 

Guilty  man  needs  to  be  placed  in  a 
riojht  relation  towards  God. 

"  Ahasuerus  was  as  poor  as  the  hum- 
blest slave  in  his  dominions  in  this 
respect,  and  far  poorer  than  the  poorest 
of  the  children  of  Judah,  dispersed 
through  his  empire  as  exiles,  but  know- 
ing Jehovah."  When  the  soul  can  rest 
on  God,  as  the  God  of  redemption,  when 
it  can  claim  Jesus  Christ  as  its  portion, 
then  all  outward  inequalities  of  rank 
and  fortune  become  subordinate ;  the 
Christian  possessor  of  a  large  inherit- 
ance feels  that  his  chief  good  is  in  Christ, 
the  poor  believer  feels  that  he  has  a 
share  of  the  same  exhaustless  fulness. 
There  is  nothing  that  a  m-an  is  more 
ready  to  keep  than  his  wrath.  But 
Ahasuerus's  against  Vashti  was  after  a 
time  assuaged.  He  remembered  Yashti 
not  without  some  remorse,  but  without 
all  true  repentance.  He  forsook  not  his 
rash  anger  as  a  sin,  but  regretted  it  for 
a  time,  and  laid  it  asleep,  to  be  raked 
up  again  on  as  slight  an  occasion.  In 
graceless  persons  vices  may  be  barbed  or 
benumbed,  not  mastered  and  mortified. 
A  merchant  may  part  with  his  goods, 
and  yet  not  hate  them.  A  man  may 
part  with  his  sins  for  self-respects,  and 
yet  retain  his  afl'ection  for  them ;  he 
may  remember  his  Vashti,  his  bosom 
sins,  from  which  he  seemeth  divorced, 
and,  by  such  a  sinful  remembering  of 
them,  recommit  them. — Trapp. 


b2 


52  IIOMILKTIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  [chap.  n. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGKAPH.     Verse?   )  -4. 

The  Servility  op  the  King's  Servants 

rt  is  to  be  expected  that  servants  should  obey,  and  should  seek  to  study  the 
desires  and  wishes  of  tliose  whom  they  serve.  But  even  servants  should  exercise 
discretion,  and  not  saciitice  principle  at  the  shrine  of  policy.  It  does  not  appear 
that  tliese  servants  set  themselves  to  consider  the  claims  of  principle.  Policy  was 
their  rule.      By  policy  were  they  governed,  and  by  policy  were  they  at  last 

undone. 

I.  These  servants  studied  the  king's  waakn^ss.  But  this  did  not  require 
much  study.  It  was  patent  to  the  dullest  observer.  Those  who  are  constantly 
about  a  man  may  understand  the  man  belter  than  he  understands  himself.  Thes3 
servants  evidently  understood  the  monarch's  weakness.  Ultimately  safe  is  it  for 
the  man  to  be  surrounded  by  those  who  can  be,  and  will  be,  faithful.  We  may 
not  like  faithful  men,  but  at  the  last  we  shall  tind  them  to  serve  our  highest 
welfare. 

II.  These  servants  pandered  to  the  king's  weakness.  Base  pandering  to 
the  sinful  weaknesses  of  men  and  women  has  becm  the  bane  of  every  age.  It  is 
at  work  in  this  enlightened  age.  While  we  rightly  consider  the  corruption  of  a 
Persian  court  let  us  seek  to  have  our  eyes  open  to  the  corruptions  of  English 
society  ;  and  faithfully  endeavour  to  stem  the  torrent  of  iniquity.  Are  we  still  to 
pursue  the  system  of  pandering  to  the  worst  passions  of  our  fellows  1  Are  there 
no  faithful  ones  to  be  found  in  modern  society  ] 

III.  These  servants  unscrupulously  provided  for  the  king's  weakness. 
The  barbarous  nature  of  their  proposition  could  not  be  so  evident  to  them  as  it  is 
to  us  who  live  in  these  more  blessed  days.  But  surely  even  to  them  a  passing 
thought  might  come  as  to  the  cruel  nature  of  their  proposition.  Did  they  never 
and  for  one  moment  think  of  the  cruelty  of  the  proceeding  by  which  the  fairest 
flowers  were  to  be  plucked  with  ruthless  hand  from  the  ch(ucest  home-gardens  of 
the  land]  Did  they  not  consider  the  woes  and  tears  of  mothers  and  fathers 
weeping  for  the  loss  of  the  fair  young  virgins  taken  to  be  imprisoned  in  the  king's 
harem]  But  self-interest  blinds  our  eyes  to  the  inter.^sts  of  others,  and  to  the 
claims  of  truth  and  of  duty.  It  would  be  so  then,  as  it  is  now  on  too  large  a 
scale.  Men  are  still  unscrupulous.  We  bow  at  the  shrines  of  fashion,  of  custom, 
and  of  wealth.  Oh,  in  these  days  Mammon  is  the  great  monarch,  at  whose  behests 
fair  young  virgins  are  deflowered  and  strong  young  men  are  slaughtered.  Mammon 
is  exalted.  Humanity  is  trampled  beneath  the  feet.  Mammon  is  the  modern 
Ahasuerus,  at  whose  commands  homes  must  be  decimated  and  true  nobility  thrown 
to  the  winds. 

IV.  These  servants  were  for  the  present  successful.  Their  proposition 
pleased  the  king,  and  measures  were  carried  out  for  its  accomplishment.  Yet  the 
success  was  not  according  to  their  wish.  True,  Vashti  was  banished  and  the 
measures  were  carried  out  to  prevent  her  recall ;  yet  those  measures  tended  to  the 
promotion  of  Esther,  who  was  God's  instrument  for  the  salvation  of  her  people, 
and  the  destruction  of  the  Lord's  enemies.  The  benefits,  then,  of  a  time-serving 
policy  are  not  of  the  most  lasting  nature.  If  w^e  would  reap  permanent  good  we 
must  sow  Divine  seed.  If  we  would  build  permanent  structures  of  glory  we 
must  use  Divine  materials. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  2 — 4 

It  is  said  the  king's  servants  suggest-  another  queen-royal  had  the  approbation 

ed  this    to   him.     But   kings'   servants  of  the  wise  men,  else  it  could  not  have 

know  pretty  well  what  to  suggest.      No  bv^en  carried  out  successfully. 
doubt,  however,  the  policy  of   having         And  then  began  the  preparation,  the 


CHAP.  II.] 


HOMILETIO  OOMMENTART:  ESTHER. 


53 


narrative  of  which  needs  no  illustration 
of  ours.     It  is  perfectly  plain  :  and  it  is 
not  edifying.     And  yet  it  is.     Eightly 
read  —  under  due  emotions  and  reflec- 
tions, it  is  edifying  (and   especially  to 
the  female  part  of   the  world),  in  the 
highest  degree.     That  owjht  to  he  edi- 
fying which  shows  much  cause  for  grati- 
tude.    Now  just  look  at  that  picture  of 
Persian  fetnale  life  of  the  highest  kind. 
Persia — the   mistress    of  civilization   at 
the  time  :  the  seat  of  wealth  and  splen- 
dour :    the  land  of  the  brave  and  the 
wise.     And   this    is    how  it    treats   its 
noblest  women  !     Could  female  degrad- 
ation be  more  complete  %     All  the  more 
complete    that   none    wondered :     none 
protested  :    none   resisted  —  unless    we 
may  take  Vashti's  rebellion  as  a  kiml 
of  moral  insurrection  against  the  wliole 
treatment  and   state  of  woman.      If    it 
was  so,  it  spent  itself.      For  here  they 
come    from    far  and   near — the  young, 
the   fair,   the  nobly-born  —  as   well    as 
those    of    humbler    condition    in    their 
miserable    darkness,    thinking    that    an 
honour   (without    a    thought    of  wrong 
about  it),  which  would  now  be  esteemed, 
in    any  Christian   country,   the   deepest 
disgrace.       To   use    thu   words    of    an 
English  bishop  on  this  chapter,  ''  It  i^," 
he  says,  "  of  priceless  worth,  as  showing 
the  need  under  which  the  human  race 
then  lay,  of  that  deliverance  which  has 
been  wrought  by  the  incarnation  of  the 
Son  of  God,  the  seed  of  the  womm, 
who  raised  womanhood  to  a  high  and 
holy    dignity,    and    by    that    spirituil 
e.-^pousal  of  a  Church  universal,  by  which 
he  had  sanctified  marriage,  and  made  it 
a  great  mysteiy.     And  it  may  remind 
the  world  of  the  inestimable  benetits  it 
owes  to  Christianity."     Also,  one  ought 
to  say,  ih  it  the  narrative  of  this  chapter, 
although  we  pass  it  over  lightly,  is  quite 
purely  written.     Xow  this  matter  ought 
to    be    faced,    plainly.       Sceptics    and 
enemies  of  the  faith  are  in  the  habit  of 
alleging  or    insinuating  that    there  are 
not  a  few  passages  in  Holy  Writ  not  ht 
to  be  read  in  families  and  congregations 
— hardly    in    closets,       A   considerable 
number  of    passages    certainly   are   not 
suitable  for  public  reading  or  exposition. 
Therefore  they  are  not  read ;  and  they 
are   not  expounded,   except    for  some 


special  ends.  But  impure  passages,  in- 
delicate corrupting  passages  ]  Not  one. 
The  breath  of  God  has  passed  through 
this  chapter,  and  it  is  clear  and  clean, 
so  that  no  one  of  simple  mind  will  get 
harm  by  reading  it.  Would  any  one 
say  the  same  regarding  some  of  our 
fashionable  novels  and  tales  ? — many  of 
them,  softly  be  it  spoken,  and  sorrow- 
fully, and  with  shame,  written  by  wo- 
men ! ! — by  women  calling  themselves 
Christians,  who,  at  any  rate,  have  re- 
ceived the  benefit  of  the  Christian  civil- 
ization so  far,  who  therefore  have  been 
elevated — away  beyond  heathen  female 
life.  And  this  is  the  way  they  behave 
themselves,  and  show  their  gratitude. 
They  spend  their  energy  and  their 
genius,  such  as  it  is,  in  corrupting  their 
fellow-creatures,  filling  the  minds  of  the 
young  with  evil  suggestions,  which  either 
distress  them,  or  pollute  and  deprave 
them  :  working  U[)  disgusting  situations, 
and  horrible  scnes  ;  makin<^  litrht  of 
the  holiest  ties  of  human  life,  and  a[)0- 
logizing  for  some  of  its  deepest  evils  and 
crimes. 

I  am  not  speaking  at  random,  al- 
though [  do  not  profess  to  be  speaking 
from  any  extensive  personal  know- 
ledge ;  but  on  reliable  authority,  by 
consensus  of  judgment  of  the  most  im- 
partial description,  I  believe  this  mat- 
ter needs  the  attention  of  good  people 
far  more  urgently  than  some  other 
things  which  secure  that  attention.  At 
any  rate,  I  feel  quite  sure  that  I  am 
but  doing  my  duty  in  thus  testifying 
and  warning.  One  thing  we  can  all  do, 
we  can  r.-fuse  to  read.  Happily  there 
is  enough  fjood  literature  of  every  kind 
— not  heavy,  dull,  solenm,  but  fresh, 
bright,  humorous,  pathetic,  comic, 
tragic — all  kinds  of  the  really  good,  by 
writers  both  alive  and  dead.  So  that 
there  is  no  excuse  for  going  down  into 
the  slough.  *'  Keep  thyself  pure." — 
Rahujli. 

Verses  3,  4. — This  was  an  extravagant 
course.  1.  All  the  provinces  of  the 
kingdom  must  be  searched  for  fair 
young  virgins.  2.  Officers  were  ap- 
pointed to  choose  them.  3.  A  house  was 
2Jrepared  for  them,  and  a  person  ap- 
pointed to  have  charge  of  them,  to  see 
that  they  were  well  provided  for.     4, 


64 


nOMILKTW  COMMENTARY:    ESTHEH. 


[cirAt*.  ti. 


No  less  than  twelve  months  was  allowed 
them  for  their  purification,  some  of  them 
at  least,  who  were  brought  out  of  the 
country,  that  tliey  mi^ht  be  very  clean 
and  purified.  Even  those  who  were  the 
masterpieces  of  nature  must  yet  have  all 
this  help  from  art  to  recommend  them 
to  a  vain  and  carnal  mind.  5.  After 
the  king  had  once  taken  them  to  his 
bed,  they  were  made  recluses  ever  after, 
except  the  king  pleased  at  any  time  to 
send  for  tliem  ;  they  were  looked  upon 
as  secondary  wives,  Avere  maintained  by 
the  king  accordingly,  and  might  not 
marry. — Matthew  Henry. 

A  true  representation  of  what  we 
should  be  without  the  Gospel. 

Without  Divine  revelation  man  sinks 
very  low. 

Learn  how  much  we  are  indebted  to 
the  Bible  for  present  as  well  as  for 
future  happiness. 

We  enjoy  the  inestimable  advantage 
of  knowing  the  Lord's  will.  We  are 
unworthy  of  it  if  we  follow  the  prompt- 
ings and  suggestions  of  our  own  hearts 
in  order  to  please  ourselves. 

The  first  question  with  us  should  be. 
How  are  we  to  walk  so  as  to  please  God^ 

Nothing  is  a  surer  sign  of  our  de- 
pravity than  to  prefer  the  pleasing  of 
our  flesh  to  the  pleasing  of  him  who 
made  us,  of  him  by  whom  we  must  be 
judged  at  the  last  day. 

If  we  make  it  our  grand  business  to 
fulfil  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the 
mind,  we  walk  according  to  the  course 
of  this  world,  according  to  the  prince  of 
the  power  of  the  air. — Dr.  Law  son. 

It  is  not  possible  that  great  princes 
should  want  sootliing  up  in  all  their 
inclinations — in  all  their  actions.  No- 
thing could  sound  more  pleasing  to  a 
carnal  ear,  than  that  all  the  fair  young 
virgins,  throughout  all  his  dominions, 
should  be  gathered  into  his  palace  at 
Shushan  for  his  assay  and  choice.  The 
decree  is  soon  published ;  the  charge  is 
committed  to  Hegai,  the  king's  chamber- 
lain, both  of  their  purification  and  orna- 
ments.— Bishop  Hall. 

The  marriages  of  princes  are  com- 
monly made  by  policy  and  interest,  for 
the  enlarging  of  their  dominions  and 
the  strengthening  of  their  alliances ; 
but  this  must  be  made  partly  by  the 


agreeableness  of  the  person  to  the  king's 
fancy,  whether  she  be  rich  or  poor, 
noble  or  ignoble. 

What  ado  was  made  here  to  humour 
the  king ;  as  if  his  power  and  wealth 
were  given  him  for  no  otlier  end  but 
that  he  might  have  all  the  delights  of 
sense  wound  up  to  the  height  of  plea- 
sureableness  and  exquisitely  refined, 
though  at  the  best  they  are  but  dross 
and  dregs  in  comparison  with  Divine 
and  spiritual  pleasure. 

The  higher  men  are  advanced  in 
authority,  the  lower  they  sink  in  slavery 
to  their  sensual  appetites.  How  low  is 
humanity  sunk  when  such  as  these  are 
the  leading  pursuits  and  highest  happi- 
ness of  men  !  when  every  consideration 
of  decency,  equity,  and  conscience,  even 
health,  life,  and  the  immortal  soul  itself, 
are  sacrificed  ;  disappointment  and  vex- 
ation must  ensue ;  and  he  most  wisely 
consults  his  enjoyment,  even  in  this 
present  life,  who  most  exactly  obeys 
the  precept  of  the  Divine  law. — Scott. 

Verse  2.  They  knew  him  to  be  a 
sensualist  and  eifeminate  j  they  there- 
fore agree  to  feed  his  humour,  to  drown 
him  again  in  pleasure,  so  to  drive 
away  his  melancholy.  Such  miserable 
comforters  are  carnal  physicians ;  so 
wretched  is  our  nature,  to  endure  no 
other  physic  ;  so  justly  doth  God  fit  the 
physician  to  the  patient,  the  helve  to 
the  hatchet ;  so  do  the  wicked  help 
each  other  forward  to  their  deserved 
destruction.  Ahasuerus'  counsellors  be- 
came brokers  to  his  lust,  neither  is  this 
anything  unusual  with  such. — Trapp. 

The  whole  passage  afi'ords  us  displays 
of  human  character,  the  contemplation 
of  which  is  highly  useful ;  but  the  chief 
thing  which  it  is  intended  to  exhibit  to 
us  is  the  wonderful  working  of  God 
for  the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes, 
especially  in  relation  to  his  Church  and 
his  people.  The  divorce  of  Vashti  was 
intended  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
exaltation  of  Esther,  and  she  was  raised 
to  the  kingdom  that,  by  her  influence 
with  the  king,  she  might  prevent  a  plot 
for  the  extermination  of  the  Jewish  race. 
And  how  wonderfully  was  this  brought 
about.  None  of  the  agents  dreamed  of 
such  a  thing.  It  was  brought  about  by 
means  of  heathens. — Dr.  M^Crie, 


OHAP.  n.]                HOMILtyrW  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  55 

In  this  second   chapter  Ave   are   pev-  wliat  she  had  done,  and  what  had  been 

mitted  to  see  the  consequences  which  decreed  against  her,"  that  when  he  was 

resulted  from  the  banquet  described  in  able  to  reflect  calndy  upon  the  decree 

the  first  chapter.     In  the  present  lecture  which  had  been  issued  for  the  degrada- 

we  shall  state  and  enforce  one  or  two  tion   of  Vashti,   he   was  conscious  that 

general  principles.    "  After  these  things,"  she  had  been  faithful  to  her  place  and 

etc.  (vers.  1 — 4).  character,  while  he  himself  had  forgotten 

I.  We  have  here  to  notice  the  regret  what  was  due  to  both.  All  the  past  he 
of  the  king"  for  his  rash  and  unwar-  would  gladly  have  cancelled,  but  it  was 
rantable  act.  It  is  very  obvious  from  beyond  his  power.  His  will  could  work 
the  narrative,  that  when  he  came  to  evil,  but  it  could  not  undo  the  evil 
himself,  and  had  time  to  reflect  on  all  which  had  been  wrought.  2.  It  forms 
that  had  taken  place,  he  was  sensible  no  excuse  for  sin  committed,  that  the 
that  he  had  committed  injury  ;  and  that  transgressor  had  reduced  himself  to  a 
he  had  not  only  wronged  Vashti,  but  condition  in  which  he  ceased  to  retain 
also  made  himself  a  sufferer.  (1)  He  his  full  consciousness  of  the  distinction 
co^ild  not  devise  a  remedy.  There  are  between  right  and  wrong.  It  is  with  his 
wishes  which  even  the  most  powerful  own  consent  that  he  passes  the  bound- 
despots  cannot  get  gratified,  and  limits  ary  line  between  reason  and  folly ;  and 
to  their  will  which  even  they  cannot  although,  in  one  aspect  of  the  case,  he 
pass  over.  It  seemed  to  be  by  a  simple  may  not  be  precisely  answerable  for  all 
exercise  of  supreme  authority  that  Ahas-  his  acts  when  the  power  of  self-go vern- 
uerus  triumphed  over  the  helpless,  and  ment  is  gone,  yet  obviously  he  is  to  be 
had  his  desire  carried  into  efl'ect.  But  called  to  account  for  reducing  himself  to 
when  he  would  have  retraced  his  steps,  that  state.  Let  us  take  an  illustration 
he  could  not.  (2)  The  law  of  the  Medes  from  the  history  of  Saul.  Furnished 
and  Persians  must  stand.  Yet  the  enact-  with  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  counselled 
ment  which  did  wrong  to  the  innocent  by  Samuel,  he  might  have  been  a  model 
queen,  at  the  same  time  recoiled  upon  to  the  sovereigns  who  were  to  come  after 
the  head  of  the  king  himself.  him.     He  failed  to  improve  his  privi- 

II.  But  again  we  have  to  notice  the  leges,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed, 
expedient  which  his  counsellors  sug-  and  the  evil  spirit  took  possession  of 
gested  to  free  him  from  his  difficulty,  him — slew  prophets,  etc.  He  was  held 
Probably  he  would  be  moody  and  harsh  responsible,  although  the  evil  spirit 
toward  them,  when  he  saw  to  what  issue  prompted  him,  because  he  had  laid  his 
their  advice  had  brought  him.  Despot-  heart  open  for  the  reception  of  the  evil 
ism,  like  spoilt  children,  must  be  soothed  spirit.  Just  so  in  all  cases.  When  a 
and  flattered.  He  had  degraded  his  man  has  perpetrated  a  criminal  act, 
queen ;  but  another  might  be  found  to  having  'wtlfally  deprived  himself  of  the 
occupy  the  place  from  which  she  had  power  that  would  have  restrained  him 
been  removed.  The  humour  of  the  king  from  it,  he  has  no  right  to  claim  im- 
fell  in  with  the  suggestion.  He  con-  munity  from  the  consequences  of  his 
sentedj  it  led  to  the  promotion  of  Esther,  miserable  self-will,  or  to  complain  that 
a  Jewess,  to  the  hign  dignity  of  being  he  is  unrighteously  dealt  with  when  he 
Queen  of  Persia.  Tiiese  things  are  wor-  is  visited  with  punishment.  3.  But 
thy  of  our  attention  in  the.  way  of  prac-  there  is  another  general  application 
tical  application.  They  suggest  several  which  may  be  legitimately  made  of  this 
lessons.  1.  In  the  first  place  we  may  part  of  our  subject,  viz.,  that  repentance 
draw  frtun  them  the  lesson,  that  when  may  come  too  late.  There  is  many  a 
men  sufler  themselves  to  be  caiiied  cry  for  mercy  raised  when  the  time  for 
away  by  the  impulse  of  any  violent  pas-  the  exercise  of  mercy  has  passed  away, 
sions,  they  may  commit  acts  which  can-  By  the  law  of  the  Medes  and  Persians 
not  afterwards  be  remedied,  and  which  the  king  found  himself  in  a  condition 
they  themselves  may  have  especially  to  from  which  he  would  gladly  have  been 
lament.  We  think  it  is  plain  from  the  extricated,  but  could  not  devise  the 
words,  '*  the  king  remembered  Vashti,  means.  By  the  unalUjrabio  law  of  hcavtta 


56  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  [chap.  n. 


it  is  ordained  that  except  we  repent  we  ment.  In  all  this  we  have  a  special 
must  perish.  And  by  the  same  law  it  Providence,  overruling  the  sins  of  men 
is  required  that  repentance  be  immediate,  for  the  promotion  of  the  interests  of  the 
"  Wherefore,  my  brethren,  take  heed  lest  people  of  God.  2.  We  see  a  specimen 
there  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart  of  of  the  absolute  and  unrestrained  will  of 
unbelief,  in  departing  from  the  living  man  put  forth  to  accomplish  ends  which 
God."  But  notice —  had  no  apparent  connection  whatever 
III.  The  whole  case  furnishes  such  with  the  will  of  God,  or  with  what 
evidence  of  the  power  of  an  overruling  would  be  pleasing  to  him.  When  the 
Providence,  that  I  would  take  this  curtain  which  conceals  the  movements  of 
opportunity  of  referring  to  the  sub-  Providence  is  withdrawn,  we  can  mani- 
ject.  The  lesson  which  the  text  teaches  festly  trace  the  connection  between  the 
is,  in  one  sentence,  this — that,  amid  all  follies  and  passions  of  men  and  the  pro- 
the  ivorldngs  of  human  j)assion  and  folly ,  duction  of  important  results  which  they 
there  is  a  power  exercised  which  brings  could  not  have  dreamt  of.  We  can  per- 
order  out  of  confusion,  and  good  out  of  ceive  the  hand  of  the  Lord  working 
evil.  1.  We  present  the  case  briefly  as  where  we  would  not  have  looked  for  it, 
the  text  brings  it  before  us.  Revelry  and  understand  how  the  very  wrath  of 
had  produced  disorder.  It  had  led  to  men  is  made  to  praise  him.  But  ob- 
most  unjust  measures  towards  the  queen,  serve,  the  sin  of  the  monarch  was  not 
The  advisers  of  these  measures,  finding  one  whit  diminished  because  it  was  over- 
it  necessary  to  soothe  the  feelings  of  ruled  for  good ;  but  neither  is  the  good 
their  despotic  sovereign,  recommended  to  be  regarded  as  evil  because  it  was 
to  him  a  certain  mode  of  procedure,  the  undesigned  fruit  of  man's  unholy 
The  result  of  this  was  Esther's  advance-  passions. — Dr.  Davidson. 


MAIN"   HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.     Verses  5— 7. 

A  Truly  Royal  Character. 

The  leading  part  of  this  history  is  prophetic.  While  it  records  the  past  it 
depicts  the  future.  It  shows  how  two  of  the  Jewish  nation  rose,  through  the 
providence  of  God,  to  occupy  the  foremost  positions  in  the  Persian  kingdom. 
Mordecai  the  Jew  and  Esther  his  foster-cliild — two  captives — became  next  in 
authority  and  in  power  to  king  Ahasuerus.  They  were  great  both  among  the  Jews 
and  among  the  Persians  :  for  the  one  was  queen,  and  the  other  was  prime  minister. 
The  story  of  their  humiliation  and  after- exaltation  is  only  equalled  by  the  charming 
narrative  of  Joseph.  And  both  surpass  in  interest  the  inventions  of  skilful  novelists. 
History  and  biography  repeat  themselves.  The  Hamans  have  persecuted  and 
planned  the  destruction  of  tlie  INIordecais ;  but  the  irrepressible  genius  of  the 
Jewish  nation  has  ever  asserted  its  sovereignty.  It  is  surprising  how  the  Jew  from 
time  to  time  battles  successfully  against  adversity,  and  makes  it  minister  to  pros- 
perity. The  Jews  have  accumulated  wealth, — though  every  barrier  has  been  raised 
against  their  success, — and  their  property  has  been  again  and  again  confiscated  by 
greedy  rulers.  Tlie  Jews  have  risen  to  power  in  spite  of  restrictive  enactments. 
Their  influence  is  felt  to-day  to  a  large  extent.  The  noblest  part  of  our  literature 
is  based  on  Jewish  records.  They  have  given  to  the  world  its  best  system  of 
morals.  Surely  this  wondrous  people  have  still  a  most  important  part  to  play  in 
this  world's  great  transactions  ;  and  the  study  of  the  most  obscure  among  this 
people  cannot  be  devoid  of  interest  to  every  intelligent  being. 

I.  Mordecai's  royal  ancestry.  Great  importance  was  attached  to  genealogical 
tables  by  ancient  nations.  They  did  not  smile  at  the  claims  of  long  descent. 
Certainly  intellectual  and  moral,  as  well  as  physical,  qualities  are  capable  of  trans- 
mission. It  is  indeed  true  that  some  boast  of  their  ancestry  who  have  little  else 
to  boast.     The  Jews  were  especially  particular  in  their  records  of  genealogy  for 


CHAP,  n.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER,  57 

territorial,  political,  an«I  religious  reasons.  Thus  in  the  Targura  of  Esther  we 
have  Haman's  pedigree  traced  through  twenty-one  generations  to  the  "  impious 
Esau ; "  and  Mordecai's  through  forty  two  generations  to  Ahraham.  In  tliis 
canonical  account  Mordecai's  pedigree  is  traced  to  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  'I'his 
was  one  of  the  smallest  tribes,  but  three  names  make  it  prominent.  From  it 
sprang  Saul,  the  first  king  of  the  Jewish  nation  ;  Mordecai,  the  noble  deliverer  of 
his  people  ;  and  Paul,  the  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  On  the  one  hand 
Mordecai  was  connected  with  Saul,  wlio  was  royal  by  virtue  of  his  office  ;  and  on 
the  other  hand  he  was  connected  with  Paul,  who  was  royal  by  virtue  of  the 
nobility  of  his  character.  Mordecai  himself  was  of  royal  ancestry,  of  royal  char- 
acter, exercising  regal  functions,  ''  seeking  the  wealth  of  his  people,  and  speaking 
peace  to  all  his  seed."  He  was  a  man  to  do  honour  to  any  tribe.  It  is  no  wonder 
that  he  stands  high  in  Rabbinical  estimation,  and  that  mythical  stories  gatlier 
around  his  person.  He  is  spoken  of  as  being  acquainted  with  seventy  languages, 
and  as  having  lived  four  hundred  years.  He  is  invested  with  splendid  robes, 
adorned  with  costly  jewels,  and  placed  on  the  pinnacle  of  earthly  greatness.  The 
courtly  heralds  with  their  trumpets  proclaim  his  glory.  He  was  nobler  than  all. 
There  dwelt  within  him  a  patriotic  spirit  that  made  him  sublime.  There  was  in 
him  a  heroic  assertion  of  manhood,  which  lifted  him  high  above  the  common  people. 
There  was  also  a  wonderful  tenderness,  which  made  him  the  adored  of  his  own 
nation.  He  was  one  of  those  men  that  only  appear  at  intervals,  that  dignify  the 
race,  and  seem  to  make  sacred  tlte  soil  on  which  they  tread. 

II.  Mordecai's  unattractive  name.  Proper  names  are  words  which  serve  for 
marks  separating  one  individual  from  another.  The  name  Mordecai  brings  before 
us  the  individual  and  separates  him  from  the  person  named  Haman.  The  name 
Mordecai,  when  viewed  as  to  its  meaning,  does  not  raise  in  our  mind  the  correct. 
thought  as  to  his  character.  We  may  consider  Mordecai  as  a  word  of  Chaldaean  or 
Persian  origin,  and  as  meaning  the  worshipper  of  Merodach,  the  war-god  of  Babyhjn. 
But  he  was  no  foolish  idolater.  If  he  had  been  there  was  no  justification  for  his 
refusal  to  bow  down  before  Haman.  If  he  had  been  he  would  not  have  so  resolutely 
adhered  to  the  purpose  of  delivering  the  Jews,  the  worshippers  of  the  true  God. 
He  was  by  moral  lineage  connected  with  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faithful,  the 
friend  of  God.  The  name  may  be  but  the  reputation,  which  may  be  true  or  false. 
Character  is  what  the  man  is.  To  be  noble  is  better  than  to  be  accounted  noble. 
Let  men  rise  superior  to  names.  The  word  Mordecai  has  been  made  to  mean  the 
little  man.  He  may  have  been  little  physically ;  and  thus  the  two  Benjamites 
stood  in  striking  contrast.  Saul  was  head  and  shoulders  above  his  fellows ;  and 
Mordecai  was  perhaps  below  the  average  standard.  Saul  was,  however,  selfish  and 
mean-spirited  ;  while  Mordecai  was  benevolent  and  noble-spirited.  Saul  was  craven 
and  cowed  before  a  woman  ;  but  Mordecai  was  bold  and  daring  before  the  great 
Haman.  Saul  abjectly  prayed  to  be  honoured-^efore  the  elders  of  his  people,  and 
before  Israel ;  but  Mordecai  cared  not  for  his  own  honour  so  long  as  Israel  was 
saved  and  glorified.  If  the  man  is  not  the  mere  flesh  and  bones  that  constitute 
the  external  framework,  then  Saul  was  the  little  man  and  Mordecai  the  great  man. 
Manhood  is  not  to  be  gauged  by  inches  or  by  ounces  ;  but  by  thoughts,  feelings, 
and  actions.  Brutes  may  be  measured  and  weighed  by  material  appliances ;  but 
men  should  be  measured  and  weighed  by  moral  appliances.  The  balances  of  the 
infinite  purities  are  the  tests  by  which  men  should  be  tried.  And-  then  what  a 
reversal  of  estimates.  The  little  becomes  great,  and  the  so-called  great  dwindle 
down  to  their  true  proportions.  The  Sauls  are  rejected,  as  Saul  was  at  last. 
The  Mordecais  are  honoured,  for  the  man  Mordecai  waxed  greater  and  greater. 
In  the  Targum  of  Esther  he  is  said  to  be  called  Mordecai,  because  he  was  like 
the  pure  myrrh.  Its  taste  is  bitter  and  acid,  and  its  smell  strong.  The  taste  of 
this  myrrh  was  bitter  and  acid  to  the  enemies  of  God  and  of  goodness ;  but  its 
snii'll  was  sweet  to  the  delivered  Jews,  As  the  myrrh  is  pressed  to  bring  out  its 
fragrance;     so  the  essential  sweetness  of   Mordecai's  character  was  brought  out 


68  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  [chap.  n. 


more  fully  by  the  afflictions  to  which  he  was  subjected.  He  was  crushed  not  to 
death,  but  into  a  more  perfect  life  and  a  Diviner  fragrance.  He  was  one  of  those 
world's  great  solitary  heroes  that  conquered  by  his  defeats.  Ever  thus  is  noble 
manhood  developed.  Rough  is  the  school  where  genius  is  trained.  Sharp  is  the 
stroke  which  touches  the  soul  into  Diviner  aspects.  Keen  is  the  instrument  which 
shapes  the  spirit  into  perfect  forms  of  moral  beauty.  Rude  and  steep  is  the  path- 
way along  which  the  traveller  struggles  up  to  the  heiglits  where  the  celestial 
sunlight  quivers,  and  where  the  s  ml  linds  a  si)here  adequate  for  its  expansion. 

III.  Mordecai's  attractive  deed.  Mordecai  is  greatest  when  he  saw  his  little 
cousin  left  a  poor  orphan,  and  took  her  to  his  house  and  to  his  heart,  and  became 
to  her  a  second  father,  so  gentle  and  loving  that  she  no  longer  mourned  the  loss 
of  her  first  father.  She  delighted  to  render  to  Mordecai  the  allegiance  of  a  true 
loving  daughter.  We  too  often  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  life's  little  things  are 
really  life's  great  things.  We  begin  with  the  little  and  go  up  to  the  great.  But 
we  do  not  measure  correctly.  Our  terms  are  untrue.  The  great  deed  was  when 
Mordecai  took  and  brought  up  Hadassah.  The  little  deed  was  when  he  reaped  the 
results  of  his  goodness.  For  sowing  is  greater  than  reaping ;  but  the  sowing  is 
done  in  tears,  and  the  harvest  is  gathered  amid  a  flourish  of  trumpets.  Men  are 
greatest  in  their  little  things.  The  chariot  of  Ahasuerus  was  not  checked  in  its 
course,  the  attendant  courtiers  never  condescended  to  notice,  when  Mordecai  guided 
to  his  home  the  orphaned  girl.  But  he  was  sowing  seed  which  produced  strange 
and  yet  glorious  fruit.  The  deed  was  most  attractive.  He  was  true  to  the  claims 
of  relationship  and  to  the  dictates  of  humanity.  Without  thought  of  reward, 
without  a  knowledge  of  her  future  glory,  he  adopted  the  child.  The  orphan's 
tears  touched  his  heart  and  evoked  his  sympathies.  How  sweetly  pathetic  the 
short  account,  "  Whom  Mordecai,  when  her  father  and  mother  Avere  dead,  took  for 
his  own  daughter."  Christianity  is  better  than  Judaism.  Let  it  be  ever  seen  that 
the  Christian  religion  makes  its  adherents  human,  tender,  considerate.  Let  us  not 
say,  A  father  to  the  fatherless  is  God  in  his  holy  habitation,  and  leave  the  father- 
less to  starvation  and  beggary.  Christianity  has  done  much  in  this  direction. 
Orphan  homes  are  the  trophies  of  the  humanizing  tendencies.  But  adoption  of 
the  orphan  is  better  than  crowding  a  lot  of  poor  orphans  together  to  be  drilled  and 
marched  out  like  young  soldiers.  Esthers  grow  best  when  the  Mordecais  become 
their  fathers.     Christianity  has  still  much  work  to  do. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Yerses  5 — 7. 

It  is   singular   that   it   should   have  Esther,  or   Hadassah    (which   was   her 

ever   been   imagined,    although   it    has  Jewish  name),  had  been  left  an  orphan, 

been  by  some,  that  it  was  Mordecai  who  Whether  Mordecai   had  any  family  of 

had    been    carried    from    Jerusalem    to  his    own    we    are    not    informed ;    but, 

Babylon,  at    the    time  when  Jeconiah,  moved  with  compassion  for  her  in  her 

also  called  Jehoiachim,  was  dethroned,  desolate  and  unprotected  state,  he  took 

and    led    into    captivity   by  Nebuchad-  her  to  his  house,  and  brought  her  up  as 

nezzar.     In  that  case,  he  must  at  this  his    own    daughter.      The    maiden    was 

time  have  been  considerably  more  than  fair  and  beautiful,  it  is  said — the  expres- 

a  hundred  years  old,  which  is  altogether  sions  mean  that  she  was  of  graceful  form 

inconsistent  with  the  part  he  is  repre-  and    beautiful    countenance — and    from 

sented  as  performing  in  this  book.     It  what  is  brought  out  in  the  history,  the 

is  evidently  Kish,  his  great-grandfather,  endowments  of  her  mind  were  in  har- 

who  lived  in  Jeconiah's  time,  and  who  mony  with  the    graces   of   her   person. 

was  carried  to  Babylon,  on  which  sup-  Sad,  however,  might  the  destiny  of  the 

j)osition  Mordecai  would  be  a  man  prob-  lovely  orplian  have  been,  but   for  the 

ably  \\\   the  prime  of  life  at  the  peri o  1  kind   and  tender-hearted  Mordecai.      1£ 

leiei'icd   to  in  thd  tdxt.     His  cousin  she  iiad  been  cast  upon  the  world  with- 


CHAP.  II.J 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


69 


out  friends  and  without  a  home,  the 
very  beauty  and  accomplishments  with 
which  she  was  so  highly  gifted  might 
have  rendered  her  only  a  prey  to  some 
of  those  designing  and  selfish  wretches 
whose  chief  object  it  is  to  seduce  and 
ruin  those  who  are  fair  and  beautiful  as 
she  was.  But  the  eye  of  the  Lord  was 
upon  the  helpless  maiden,  to  protect  and 
guide  her;  and  Mordecai  had  her  brought 
to  his  house  as  her  home.  No  doubt 
he  felt  that  he  was  sufficiently  rewarded 
for  liis  benevolence,  in  watching  over  a 
creature  so  interesting  as  Esther  must 
have  been — in  marking  her  progress, 
and  receiving  the  tokens  of  her  con- 
fidence and  affection.  But  there  were 
other  rewards  in  store  for  him,  which  he 
dreamt  not  of,  to  recompense  his  work 
of  faith  and  labour  of  love.  In  taking 
her  into  his  house,  and  charging  himself 
with  the  expense  of  her  education  and 
maintenance,  he  may  have  been  regarded 
by  some  of  his  covetous  neighbours, 
especially  if  he  had  a  family  of  his  own, 
as  laying  himself  under  a  burden  which 
a  prudent  man  would  have  rather  en- 
deavoured to  avoid.  But  he  thought 
not  of  this.  He  acted  according  to  the 
spirit  of  the  Divine  law,  and  the  impulses 
of  his  own  generous  heart ;  and  that 
from  which  seltishness  would  have  turned 
away  as  a  burden,  he  found  eventually 
to  be  in  every  respect  a  precious  trea- 
sure. A  blessing  followed  him  because 
he  had  pity  upon  the  orphan. 

Now,  there  are  some  remarks  very 
obviously  suggested  by  this  part  of  the 
narrative.  I  should  say  that  here  we 
have  a  tine  example  of  the  practical 
power  of  true  religion,  in  leading  to  a 
benevolent  regard  for  the  comfort  and 
well-being  of  the  unprotected.  It  can- 
not be  denied  indeed,  that  specimens  of 
the  same  kind  of  benevolence  are  to  be 
found  among  the  heathen.  The  ties  of 
kindred  have  been  felt  and  acknowledged 
where  the  light  of  Divine  truth  was 
never  enjoyed ;  and  there  are  on  record 
acts  of  generosity  and  self-denial  per- 
formed by  men  ignorant  of  the  Bible, 
which  put  to  shame  the  selfishness  of 
many  who  live  under  the  teaching  of 
the  Word  of  God.  But  there  is  this 
difference  ;  that  Mordecai,  in  what  he 
did  for  Ksther,  acted  only  in  accordance 


with  the  maxims  and  spirit  of  the  law 
which    came   from    heaven  —  only   did 
what  the  law  positively  enjoined,  and 
what,  as  professing  to  be  subject  to  it, 
it   became   him   to  do.     One   manifest 
purpose  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation  was, 
while  it  separated  the  seed  of  Abraham 
from  all  other  nations,  to   unite   them 
closely  among   themselves  as  brethren. 
And  this  purpose  it  effected  to  a  wonder- 
ful extent,  notwithstanding  the  opposi- 
tion which  it  had  to  encounter  from  the 
corrupt  heart  and  grovelling  propensities 
of  the  people  among  whom  it  was  set 
up.       It    is    peculiarly    interesting    to 
notice,  that  it  was  during  the  captivity, 
when    the  Jews  were  scattered    hither 
and    thither    throughout    the    Persian 
dominions,  and  when  every  man  might 
have  been  supposed  to  have  enough  to 
do  in  attending  to  his  own  interests,  and 
providing    for    his    own    family,    that 
Mordecai    took    charge   of    his   uncle's 
orphan  daughter,  and  gave  her  a  refuge 
in  his  own  house.     Whatever  care  and 
difficulty  he  had  to  undergo  in  support- 
ing  himself   in   the    land  of  exile,  he 
remembered  the  injunction  of  the  law, — 
"  Ye    shall    not   afflict   any   widow    or 
fatherless  child  ;  if  thou  afflict  them  in 
any  wise,  and  they  cry  unto  me,  I  will 
surely  hear  their  cry ; "  and  the  prophet's 
commentary  upon  it, — "  Is  not  this  the 
fast  that  I  have  chosen,  that  thou  deal 
thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  that  thou 
bring  the  poor  that  are  cast  out  to  thy 
house?     When  thou  seest   the   naked, 
that  thou    cover   him ;    and   that   thou 
hide  not  thyself  from  thine  own  flesh?" 
Now,  while  it  is  impossible  for  us  to 
read  what  Mordecai  did  without  feeling 
that  his  memory  deserves  to  be  had  in 
respect,  as  a  man  who  had  imbibed  the 
spirit  of  the  law,  and  who,  amid  many 
temptations  to  set  its  injunctions  aside, 
endeavoured  to  regulate  his  conduct  by 
its  requirements ;  while  we  see  in  him 
an  exeniplitication  of  that  i^rinciple  of 
brotherly  love,  wdiich  the  law  so  earnestly 
inculcates ;    let    us  not   forget  that   the 
gospel  of  Christ  is  designed  at  once  to 
deepen  the  feeling  of  brotherly  affection, 
and    to    give    it    a  far  wider   range    of 
operation.     If  the  poor  exiled  Jew  had 
comjjjission  on    his    or[)han   niece,   and 
brought  her  up  as  hia  own   daughter, 


60 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  II. 


how  sacred  should  the  claims  of  orphan- 
age be  in  the  view  of  those  who  profess 
to  follow  him  who  said,  ''Blessed  are 
the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain 
mercy ; "  and,  "  By  this  shall  all  m^n 
know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye 
love  one  another.  A  new  commandment 
give  I  unto  you,  that  ye  love  one  an- 
other ;  as  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  also 
love  each  other."  The  charities  of  the 
Jews  were  confined  almost  exclusively 
to  those  of  their  own  nation.  This  was 
indeed  a  natural  consequence  of  their 
being  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the 
world ;  a  result  of  the  particular  light 
in  which  they  were  taught  to  regard  the 
heathen,  and  in  which  the  heathen  in 
turn  regarded  them.  But  "in  Ciirist 
Jesus  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew, 
Barbarian  nor  Scythian,  bond  nor  free ; 
but  all  are  one  in  him."  Not  that  the 
ties  of  ordinary  relationship  are  weakened 
by  the  gospel,  and  that  we  are  to  over- 
look the  special  claims  of  kindred  in  the 
enlarged  field  which  it  opens  up  for  the 
exercise  of  our  benevolent  affections. 
By  no  means.  But  we  are  to  act  toward 
all  men  as  if  they  were  our  neighbours, 
and  toward  all  who  are  of  the  household 
of  faith  as  brethren.  This  is  the  lesson 
which  we  learn  from  our  Lord's  teach- 
ing, and  more  emphatically  still  from 
his  example.  And  it  must  be  confessed, 
to  the  honour  of  Christianity,  that  one 
circumstance  which  distinguishes  the 
countries  which  have  been  even  only  in 
name  brought  under  its  influence,  is  the 
provision  that  has  been  made  in  various 
forms  for  the  distresses  of  suffering 
humanity.  The  institutions  for  the 
relief  of  the  diseased,  of  the  destitute, 
of  the  fatherless  and  the  orphan,  and  of 
the  erring  who  would  fain  return  into 
the  paths  of  rectitude,  are  to  be  regarded 
as  so  many  evidences  of  what  the  gospel 
has  effected  for  the  removal  of  the 
temporal  evils  under  which  society 
groans.  Different  opinions  there  may 
well  be  as  to  the  wisdom  of  the  rules  by 
which  some  of  these  institutions  are 
governed,  and  of  the  means  by  which 
they  seek  the  attainment  of  their  objects ; 
but  there  can  be  no  dispute  as  to  their 
benevolent  design,  or  as  to  the  point, 
that  their  origin  is  to  bo  traced  up  to 
the  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the 


Word  of  God.  At  the  same  time,  my 
friends,  I  cannot  help  remarking,  that 
there  is  something  in  the  conduct  of 
Mordecai,  as  recorded  in  the  text,  and 
of  those  who,  like  him,  exercise  their 
benevolence  personally  in  assisting  and 
protecting  the  helpless,  and  endeavour- 
ing to  ameliorate  their  condition — some- 
thing that  raises  it  far  above  that  of  the 
people  who  contribute,  however  largely 
and  willingly,  toward  the  support  of 
public  institutions  for  the  relief  of  the 
distressed.  It  is  an  easy  matter  for  the 
wealthy  to  be  charitable,  when  their 
gifts,  administered  by  others,  involve  no 
sacrifice  of  time  or  labour,  and  no  care 
and  anxiety  to  themselves.  But  the 
noblest  exercise  of  charity  is  exhibited 
when  we  take  an  interest  personally  in 
the  well-being  of  the  unprotected,  and 
when  they  can  look  to  us  as  their  friends 
and  counsellors,  to  whom  they  can  have 
recourse  in  their  sorrows,  and  troubles, 
and  difficulties.  It  may  not  be  that  we 
have  opportunity  to  act  literally  as 
Mordecai  did,  and  to  give  shelter  to  the 
orphan  in  our  own  homes ;  but  we 
only  act  in  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  when,  according  to  our  means, 
we  make  some  of  the  helpless  the  objects 
of  our  special  care,  and  regard  them  as 
a  trust  committed  to  us  by  our  heavenly 
Father.  The  exercise  of  the  kindly 
affections  toward  any  such  carries  in  it 
its  own  reward,  and  with  these  labours 
of  love  on  the  part  of  his  people  God  is 
well  pleased. — Davidson. 

Mordecai  is  a  lowly  descendant  of  a 
formerly  distinguished,  indeed  royal, 
family.  He  belongs  to  the  scattered 
foreigners  fallen  under  contempt,  who 
were  carried  away  captives  from  Jerusa- 
lem. He  is  in  a  strange  land.  He  has, 
it  appears,  neither  father  nor  mother, 
neither  wife  nor  child.  Even  his  rela- 
tives, his  uncle  and  his  aunt,  are  dead 
But  the  latter  left  an  orphan  ;  he  is  to 
her  a  father,  she  to  him  a  daughter, 
indeed  a  precious  treasure.  Doubtless 
he  is  aware  how  great  a  trust  was  left  to 
him  in  her  and  with  her;  how  God  is 
justly  called  the  Father  of  orphans,  and 
that  He  especially  blesses  those  who 
pity  and  minister  to  them.  He  knows 
his  duty  ioAvard  hor,  and  its  fulfilment 
brings  to  him  satisfaction,  makes  him 


CHAP,  n.j 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


61 


happy.  God  has  blessed  her  witli 
beauty ;  but  what  is  more,  he  lias  be- 
stowed oil  her  an  obedient,  humble,  and 
unassuring  spirit,  as  is  afterwards  fully 
shown  by  her  conduct  in  the  royal  house 
of  the  women,  and  as  had  doubtless  been 
often  manifested  before.  She  loves  her 
people,  and  surely  also  its  customs,  laws, 
and  religion.  Thus  she  is  to  him  indeed 
a  Hadassah,  a  myrtle,  in  the  true  sense 
of  the  word,  an  unpromising  and  yet 
promising  bud.  Indeed,  to  him  she  was 
developed  into  a  lovely  flower  of  hope  ; 
and  though  it  happen  that  she  is  taken 
into  the  royal  house  of  the  women,  she 
will  still  be  to  him  a  lovely  flower, 
whose  presence  he  seeks,  whose  pros- 
perity lies  at  his  heart  day  by  day, 
whose  development  will  cause  him  to 
rejoice.  Again,  she  will  more  and  more 
become  to  him  a  brilliant  star,  an 
Esther,  in  whose  light  he  views  his  own 
and  his  people's  future.  In  this  manner 
his  life  is  not  poor,  though  he  appear  in- 
significant and  obscure,  though  it  be  filled 
with  painful  reminiscences  and  great 
perplexities,  which  he  must  combat  daily 
in  his  heathen  surroundings.  On  the 
contrary,  he  is  rich  in  light  and  hope; 
and  even  if  he  had  realized  the  latter  in 
a  less  degree  than  he  eventually  did, 
still  his  existence  would  not  have  been 
in  vain. — Lange. 

Ver.  5.  Mordecai  was  one  of  those 
characters  which  clearly  reveal  the  hand 
of  Providence. 

The  light  we  have  of  his  early  life  is 
little  better  than  darkness.  But  when 
he  appears  at  Shushanit  becomes  lustrous 
as  the  noontide  sun. 

He  possessed  the  qualification  which 
fitted  him  for  swaying  a  sceptre. 

Mordecai's  ancestors  were  dead  and 
buried,  but  family  greatness  lived  with 
him. 

Some  men's  noble  deeds  and  heroism 
exist  only  in  name,  are  hung  in  picture- 
galleries,  and  recorded  in  the  chronicles 
of  their  family. 

A  great  name  is  often  carried  by  a 
very  little  man.  Greatness  does  not 
always  pass  on. 

In  the  person  of  Richard  Cromwell 
we  have  not  an  Oliver  Cromwell 

Ver.  6.  Carried  aivay.  Every 
cUiid  oi  Gud  is  wlieie  God  has  placed 


him  for  some  purpose.  You  have  been 
wishing  for  another  position  where  you 
could  do  something  for  Jesus :  do  not 
wish  anything  of  the  kind,  but  serve 
him  where  you  are.  If  you  are  sitting 
at  the  kini^'s  gate  there  is  something  for 
you  to  do  there,  and  if  you  were  on  the 
queen's  throne,  there  would  be  some- 
thing for  you  to  do  there :  do  not  ask 
either  to  be  gatekeeper  or  queen,  but 
whichever  you  are  serve  God  therein. 
Moidecai  did  well  because  he  acted  as 
Mordecai  shouLi.  —  G.  H.  Spurgeon. 

The  best  may  have  their  share  in  a 
common  calamity ;  but  God  will  not 
fail  even  then  to  set  his  eyes  upon  them 
for  good.  The  husbandman  cutteth  his 
corn  and  weed  together,  hut  for  different 
purpose.  One  and  the  same  common 
calamity  proveth,  melteth,  purifieth  the 
good,  damneth,  wasteth,  destroyeth  the 
evil. — Trapp. 

It  was  a  good  thing  for  Esther  when 
left  an  orphan,  in  a  strange  land,  that 
Mordecai  would  become  her  foster-fathtir. 

It  was  a  good  thing  for  Mordecai  that 
he  took  Esther  home  and  brought  her  up. 

Whilst  giving  he  received.  "  There 
is  that  scattereth  and  yet  increaseth." 
This  Mordecai  experienced. 

Be  careful  whom  you  turn  from  your 
door  ;  an  angel,  in  rags,  may  come  there 
some  day. 

The  adopted  child,  or  even  the  captive 
slave,  may  be  God's  ministering  angel. 

That  passage,  "  The  Lord  blessed  Ike 
Egyptian's  house  for  Joseph's  sake  J'  is 
very  suggestive. 

The  little  maid  in  Naaman's  house 
became  an  untold  blessing  to  her  master. 

Mordecai  took  Esther,  and  was  well 
rewarded.  1.  By  Esther's  goodness 
when  with  him.  2.  By  her  obedience 
to  him  after  she  had  left  him. 

Mordecai  brought  up  Hadassah,  and 
Esther  afterwards  brought  up  Mordecai. 

She  was  a  poor  orphan,  but  Christ 
left  her  not  comfortless.  He  had  pro- 
vided and  enabled  Mordecai  to  feed  her, 
to  train  lier  up  in  the  fear  of  God,  and 
to  defend  her  chastity  from  the  fear  of 
lust ;  beside  that,  her  head  was  by  Him 
destined  to  a  diadem.  Esther  the  cap- 
tive shall  be  Esther  the  queen ;  Esther 
the  motherless  and  fatherless  shall  1)' 
a  nursing  mother  to  the  Church,  and^ 


62 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[chap,  il 


meanwhile,  iiioet  with  a  merciful  guard- 
ian —  Mordecai.  Why,  then,  should 
not  we  trust  God  with  ourselves  and 
our  children  ?—  Trapp. 

Took  for  his  oivn  daughter.  He 
hid  not  his  eyes  from  his  own  flesh,  as 
some  unnatural  ostri(;h  or  sea-monster ; 
he  made  not,  as  many  do,  tuition  a 
broker  for  private  gain ;  he  made  not, 
instead  of  a  daughter,  a  shive  or  sponge 
of  his  pupil ;  he  devoured  her  not  under 
pretence  of  devotion,  but  freely  took 
her  for  his  child,  and  bred  her  in  the 
best  manner. — Trapp. 

There  is  a  resemblance  between  Esther 
and  Moses. 

1.  The  one  was  raised  up  to  emanci- 
pate Israel  from  cruel  bondage,  the 
other  to  preserve  them  from  a  plot 
which  had  for  its  object  their  extermi- 
nation. 

2.  Moses  was  taken  out  of  the  river, 
and  adopted  by  Pharaoh's  daughter. 
Esther  was  raised  to  the  bed  of  Ahasu- 
erus  and  the  crown  royal. 


3.  After  mentioning  the  barbarous 
edict  for  destroying  all  their  children, 
Stephen  says :  "  In  which  time  Moses 
was  born,  and  was  exceeding  fair" — ■ 
*'  fair  to  God,"  as  it  is  in  the  original, 
according  to  the  Hebrew  idiom.  It  was 
the  beauty  of  the  babe,  shining  through 
its  tears,  that  excited  the  compassion  of 
the  Egyptian  princess ;  and  it  was 
Esther's  beauty  which  first  won  the 
Persian  monarch. 

4.  But  the  Apostle,  referring  to  the 
faith  of  Moses,  lets  us  further  into  the 
mystery  of  Providence :  "  By  faith 
Moses  was  hid  three  months  of  his 
parents,  because  they  saw  he  was  a 
proper  child."  Mordecai  was  to  Esther 
father  and  mother;  and  what  hinders 
us  to  think  that  he  participated  in  the 
feelings  of  the  parents  of  Moses,  and 
that  when  he  first  looked  on  the  beauty 
of  the  infant  orphan,  faith  combined 
with  natural  affection  and  benevolence 
in  inducing  him  to  take  her  for  his  own 
dau  gh  ter. — Dr.  M'  Orie. 


MAIN  HOMILETrCS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  8—10. 

Esther's  Hopeful  Beginning. 

A  good  beginning  often  ensures  a  good  ending.  Often,  but  not  always.  Buds 
of  promise  in  this  world  are  sadly  and  frequently  nipped  by  the  untimely  blast, 
or  the  searching  frost.  Purposes  are  broken.  Glorious  plans  are  thwarted.  Well- 
conceived  structures  do  not  reach  completion.  However.  Esther  began  well  and 
ended  well.  She  was  one  of  those  wondrous  beings  that  make  an  impression  upon 
all.  She  carried  sunshine  everywhere,  and  all  were  attracted  by  the  sweet  light  of 
her  presence. 

I.  Esther  was  brought  to  the  king's  house  along  with  other  maidens.  This 
was  not  much  to  the  other  maidens.  To  some  a  gloomy  prospect.  But  to  Esther 
it  was  one  of  the  steps  to  a  future  high  position. 

II.  She  impressed  the  keeper  of  the  women.  The  maiden  pleased  him,  and 
she  obtained  kindness  of  him.  On  her  entrance  into  what  we  may  call  public  life 
she  made  an  imi)ression.  She  moved  along,  exerting  a  charm  upon  all.  Monarch 
and  subject  confessed  her  power,  and  yielded  to  her  benign  sway.  All  are  not 
alike  gifted  with  this  power  of  pleasing,  but  all  should  strive  to  please  others  for 
their  good  to  edification.  The  more  unselfish  we  become,  the  more  are  we  likely 
to  please  others  and  to  receive  kindness. 

III.  She  was  advanced  to  the  best  place.  Hegai  preferred  her  to  the  best 
place  of  the  house  of  the  women.  Ahasuerus  advanced  her  to  the  best  place  in  the 
kingdom.  She  receives  a  good  place  in  the  pages  of  sacred  histoi-y.  Let  not  our 
strife  be  for  the  best  of  earthly  places.  That  is  the  best  place  where  the  good  Lord 
shows  his  glory.  Let  us  dwell  in  the  presence  of  Jesus  Christ.  Where  he  dwells 
is  heaven. 

The  fact  that  Esther  was  of  Jewish  extraction  might  have  militated  against  her 
elevation,  therefore  she  preserved  a  wise  reticence.  Time  is  on  the  side  of  him  who 
knows  how  to  wait.     Mordecai  does  not  enforce  either  falsehood  or  deceitfulnessc 


OHAR  n.]  nOMTLKTtC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  C,? 


l)ut  simply  patience  for  the  period  to  arrive  when  truth  may  he  revealed  Avitli 
advantage.  An  untruth  must  be  scorned ;  but  the  man  who  tells  the  truth  at 
unseasonable  periods,  or  in  a  wrong  spirit,  may  do  more  harm  than  good.  **  Give  not 
that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine,  lest  they 
trample  them  under  their  feet,  and  turn  again  and  rend  you."  The  prudent  man 
foreseeth  the  evil  and  taketh  all  lawful  methods  for  its  prevention.  Christianity 
teaches  foresight.  Prudence  is  commended  both  by  nature  and  by  revelation.  But 
it  must  not  degenerate  into  cunning.  Mordecai  was  prudent  in  the  management  of 
his  household.  He  tiained  Esther  well,  for  she  did  the  commandment  of  Mordecai 
like  as  when  she  was  brought  up  with  him.  Good  training,  as  a  general  rule, 
makes  good  children.  "  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  in  which  he  should  go,  and 
when  he  is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it."  The  well-trained  child  will  not  be 
likely  to  forget  its  duty  even  in  the  palace.  Parents  often  blame  their  children  for 
following  evil  courses  ;  but  if  such  parents  closely  examined  they  might  find  reason 
to  blame  themselves.  In  this  age  children  forget  the  commandment  of  their 
parents  long  before  the  palace  is  reached. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  8 — 10. 

Ver.  9.     Esther  was  hrouglit.     Poor  cuted  their  office  without  respect  to  the 

Esther,  who  had  been  so  kindly  cherished  feelings  of  the  parties  interested.     Esther 

by  Mordecai,  was  now  led  away  from  his  was  taken,  therefore,  without  there  being 

house  to   be  the  slave   or  the  beloved  any  choice  left,  either  to  her  or  Mordecai, 

wife  of  the  great  king,  as  his  caprice  in  the  matter, 
should  determine.  3.   Others  that,  as  the  whole  was  so 

1.  Her  consent  was  not  asked.  manifestly  providential,  Mordecai   may 

2.  The  consent  of  Mordecai,  her  have  received  special  intimation  from 
adopted  father,  was  not  asked.  heaven  to  bring  his  orphan  cousin  under 

3.  They  were  both  slaves  to  a  despotic  the  notice  of  the  king's  officers.  There 
master,  and  had,  therefore,  no  choice,  is  nothing  in  the  history  to  warrant  this 
Blame  not  Esther,  therefore,  but  pity  opinion ;  therefore  we  embrace  the  first 
her,  when  ye  hear  that,  like  so  many  supposition  as  the  most  probable  account 
other  maidens,  she  was  led  away  to  the  of  the  affair. 

house  of  the  king's  women.     She  was  4.   But  whatever  may  have  been  the 

not  an  actor,  but  a  sufferer.     Had  she  feelings  of  Mordecai  and  Esther,  we  see 

been  left  to  her  choice  it  is  probable  she  the  special  workings  of  Providence   in 

would  have  chosen  the  poorest  Jew  that  her  behalf.     She  obtained  favour  of  the 

was  faithful  to  his  religion  for  her  hus-  chief  of  the  eunuchs  above  all  the  other 

band,  in  preference  to  the  great  king. —  maidens   who    had   been   committed  to 

Dr.  Lawson.  his  care,  so  that,  without  solicitation  on 

There  is,  unquestionably,  a  difficulty  her  part,  not  only  was  there  more  than 

connected  with  this  8th  verse.  ordinary  indulgence  toward  her,  but  she 

1.  If  Mordecai,  of  his  own  accord,  was  even  treated  with  a  degree  of  respect 
presented  Esther  as  a  candidate  for  the  that  seemed,  as  it  were,  the  prelude  to 
royal  favour,  then  he  acted  in  opposition  yet  higher  advancement.  The  com- 
to  the  law  of  Moses,  which  forbade  that  mencement  of  Esther's  life  in  the  palace 
the  daughters  of  Israel  should  be  given  gave  promise  of  a  prosperous  issue. — 
to  the  heathen.     It  would  be  no  apology  Dr.  Davidson. 

for   his    conduct    that  he   designed    by 

what  he  did  to  advance  the  interests  of  Ver.  9.    Esther's  Preferment.    Who 

his  nation.     What  is  forbidden  by  the  wi)uld  have  thouglit  (a)  a  Jew,  (h)  a 

law  must  not  be  done  that  good  may  captive,  (c)  an  orpiian,  was  born  to  be  a 

come  ot  it.  queen,  an  empress  !     So  it  proved.     PrO' 

2.  Many  interpreters  suppose  that  vidence  sometimes  raiseth  up  the  poor 
those  who  were  commissioned  to  select  out  of  the  dust  to  set  them  among 
the  virgins  for  the  king's  seraglio  exe-  princes. 


64 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[OHAJ.  n 


ILLUSTEATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  H. 


Discipline  of  the  passions.  The  passions  may 
be  humoured  until  they  become  our  master,  as  a 
horse  may  be  pampered  till  he  gets  the  better  of 
his  rider ;  but  early  discipline  will  prevent  mutiny, 
and  keep  the  helm  in  the  hands  of  reason. 
Properly  controlled,  the  passions  may,  like  a  horse 
with  the  bit  in  his  mouth,  or  a  ship  with  the  helm 
in  the  hand  of  a  skilful  mariner,  be  managed  and 
made  useful. 

A  rich  landlord  once  cruelly  oppressed  a  poor 
widow.  Her  son,  a  little  boy  of  eij^ht  years,  saw 
it.  He  afterwards  became  a  painter,  and  painted 
a  life  likeness  of  the  dark  scene.  Years  after- 
wards, he  placed  it  where  the  man  saw  it.  He 
turned  pale,  trembled  in  every  joint,  and  offered 
any  sum  to  purchase  it,  that  he  might  put  it  out 
of  sight.  Thus  there  is  an  invisible  painter 
drawing  on  the  canvas  of  the  soul  a  life  likeness, 
reflecting  correctly  all  the  passions  and  actions 
of  our  spiritual  history  on  earth,  Is^ow  and 
again  we  should  be  compelled  to  look  at  them, 
and  the  folly  of  our  acts  will  sting  us,  as  it  did 
the  landlord,  and  also  Ahasuerus. 

Control  of  anger.  Socrates,  finding  himself 
in  emotion  against  a  slave,  said  :  "  I  would  beat 
you  if  I  were  not  angry."  Having  received  a 
box  on  the  ears,  he  contented  himself  by  only 
saying,  with  a  smile,  "It  is  a  pity  we  do  not 
know  when  to  put  on  the  helmet."  Socrates, 
meeting  a  gentleman  of  rank  in  the  strfiets, 
saluted  him  ;  but  the  gentleman  took  no  notice 
of  it.  His  friends  in  company,  observing  what 
passed,  told  the  philosopher  "  That  they  were  so 
exasperated  at  the  man's  incivility,  that  they  had 
a  good  mind  to  resent  it."  He  very  calmly 
replied,  '*  If  you  met  any  person  in  the  road  in  a 
worse  habit  of  body  than  yourself,  would  you 
think  you  had  reason  to  be  enraged  with  him  on 
that  account .''  Pray,  then,  what  greater  reason 
can  you  have  for  being  incensed  at  a  man  for  a 
worse  habit  of  mind  than  any  of  yourselves  .f" " 
That  was  a  brave,  strong  man. 

Impressions  of  sin.  The  great  stone  book  of 
nature  reveals  many  records  of  the  past.  In  the 
red  sandstone  there  are  found,  in  some  places, 
marks  which  are  clearly  the  impression  of  sljowers 
of  rain,  and  these  are  so  perfect  that  it  can  even 
be  detected  in  which  direction  the  shower  in- 
clined, and  from  what  quarter  it  proceeded — and 
this  ages  ago.  Even  so  sin  leaves  its  track 
behind  it,  and  God  keeps  a  faithful  record  of  all 
our  sins. — Biblical  Treasury. 

"  If  you  cut  a  gash  in  a  man's  head,  you  may 
heal  it ;  but  you  can  never  rub  out,  nor  wash 
out,  nor  cut  out  the  scar.  It  may  be  a  witness 
against  you  in  his  corpse ;  still  it  may  be 
covered  by  the  coffin,  or  hidden  in  the  grave  ; 
but  then  it  is  not  till  decomposition  shall  take 
place,  that  it  shall  entirely  disappear.  But,  if 
you  smite  your  soul  by  sin,  you  make  a  scar  that 
will  remain  ;  no  coflin  or  grave  shall  hide  it ;  no 
fire,  not  even  the  eternal  flames,  shall  burn  out 
Bin's  stains." 

Counterfeit  repentance.  Beware  that  you 
make  no  mistake  about  the  nature  of  true  repent- 


ance. The  devil  knows  too  well  the  value  of  the 
precious  grace  not  to  dress  up  spurious  imitations 
of  it.  Wherever  there  is  good  coin  there  will 
always  be  bad  money. —  'Ryle. 

Repentance  before  pardon.  1  he  first  physic  to 
recover  our  souls  is  not  cordials,  but  corrosives ; 
not  an  immediate  stepping  into  heaven  by  a 
present  assurance,  but  mourning,  and  lamenta- 
tions, and  a  little  bewailing  of  our  former  trans- 
gressions. With  Mary  Magdalene  we  must  wash 
Christ's  feet  with  our  tears  of  sorrow,  before  we 
may  anoint  his  head  with  *' the  oil  of  gladness." 
— Browning. 

In  all  parts  of  the  East,  women  are  spoken  of 
as  being  much  inferior  to  men  in  wisdom ;  and 
nearly  all  their  sages  have  proudly  descanted  on 
the  ignorance  of  women.  In  the  Hindoo  book 
called  the  '  Kurral,'  it  is  declared,  "All  women 
are  ignorant."  In  other  works  similar  remarks 
are  found  :  "  Ignorance  is  a  woman's  jewel.  The 
feminine  qualities  are  four  —  ignorance,  fear, 
shame,  and  impurity.  To  a  woman  disclose  not 
a  secret.  Talk  not  to  me  in  that  way ;  it  is  all 
female  wisdom." — Roberts. 

Degradation  of  woman.  The  farmers  of  the 
upper  Alps,  though  by  no  means  wealthy,  live 
like  lords  in  their  houses,  while  the  heaviest 
portion  of  agricultural  labour  devolves  on  the 
wife.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  see  a  woman 
yoked  to  the  plough  along  with  an  ass,  while  the 
husband  guides  it.  A  farmer  of  the  upper  Alps 
accounts  it  an  act  of  politeness  to  lend  his  wife 
to  a  neighbour  who  is  too  much  oppressed  with 
work ;  and  the  neighbour,  in  his  turn,  lends  his 
wife  for  a  few  day's  work,  whenever  the  favour 
is  requested. — Percy. 

Radical  reform.  A  small  bite  from  a  serpent 
will  affect  the  whole  body.  There  is  no  way  to 
calm  the  sea  but  by  excommunicating  Jonah 
from  the  ship.  If  the  root  be  killed,  the 
branches  will  soon  be  withered.  If  the  sprini,^ 
be  diminished,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  streams 
will  soon  fail.  When  the  fuel  of  corruption  is 
removed,  then  the  fire  of  affliction  is  extinguished, 
— Seeker. 

Individual  responsibility.  Daniel  Webster 
was  once  asked,  "  What  is  the  most  important 
thought  you  ever  entertained?"  He  replied, 
after  a  moment's  reflection,  "  the  most  important 
thought  I  ever  had  was  my  individual  responsi- 
bility to  God."  There  is  no  royal  road,  either 
to  wealth  or  learning.  Princes  and  kings,  poor 
men,  peasants,  all  alike  must  attend  to  the  wants 
of  their  own  bodies,  and  their  own  minds.  No 
man  can  eat,  drink,  or  sleep  by  proxy.  No  man 
can  get  the  alphabet  learned  for  him  by  another. 
All  these  are  things  which  everybody  must  do 
for  himself,  or  they  will  not  be  done  at  all.  Just 
as  it  is  with  the  mind  and  body,  so  it  is  with  the 
soul.  There  are  certain  things  absolutely  needful 
to  the  soul's  health  and  well-being.  Each  must 
repent  for  himself.  Each  must  apply  to  Christ 
for  himself.  And  for  himself  each  must  speak  to 
God  and  pray. — Eyle, 


CHAP,  il]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARy :  ESTHER  66 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAEAGRAPH.     Verse  11. 
MoRDECAi's   Loving   Solicitude. 

The  histories  of  Mordecai  and  Esther  are  very  closely  interblended.  They  run 
side  by  side,  like  the  two  differently-coloured  rivers — the  Arve  and  the  Rhone. 
But  the  course  of  one  is  from  time  to  time  being  crossed  and  coloured  by  the  course 
of  the  other.  Esther  played  a  leading  part  in  the  deliverance  of  the  Jewish  nation 
from  threatened  destruction,  but  she  owed  very  much  to  the  teaching,  the  influence, 
and  the  wise  directions  of  Mordecai.  To  Esther  belonged  the  glory  of  pleading 
with  King  Ahasuerus,  and  securing  the  rights  of  the  oppressed;  but  to  Mordecai 
belonged  the  glory  of  directing  her  movements.  She  was  the  seen,  and  he  the 
unseen  worker.  And  these  latter  often  do  the  most  important  work,  though  they 
are  sometimes  left  to  pine  away  in  obscurity.  The  skilful  workman  invents  and 
gains  little  advantage ;  while  the  cunning  capitalist  uses  the  invention  and  flourishes. 
The  poor  wise  man  saves  the  city,  but  his  services  are  not  requited.  The  thinker 
creates  in  secret,  and  receives  small  rewards ;  while  the  talker  uses  the  thinker's 
materials,  and  reaps  a  harvest  of  applause  and  material  benefits.  However,  Mordecai 
was  not  unrewarded,  for  Esther  was  neither  ungrateful  nor  unmindful  of  her 
obligations.  These  two  work  and  reap  together.  They  sow  in  tears,  in  fasting, 
and  in  prayers;  but  they  reap  in  victory,  in  light,  in  gladness,  and  in  honour. 
Let  us  believe  this  for  our  consolation,  that  work  done  for  God  cannot  die. 
Workers  in  the  dark  and  workers  in  the  light  will  meet  together  in  the  rewarding 
presence  of  infinite  mercy. 

I.  Mordecai' s  loving  solicitude.  The  title  by  which  Mordecai  was  designated 
was  "the  Just."  This  is  a  better  title  than  that  of  earl  or  noble,  of  king  or  prince. 
What  a  blessing  to  a  nation  when  men  that  are  just  in  the  broadest  sense  of  that 
word  direct  its  affairs,  or  even  dwell  near  its  palace  gates  !  Just  men  are  required 
to  save  nations  from  decline  and  from  final  overthrow.  Mordecai,  however,  was  no 
stern  embodiment  of  justice.  In  him  it  was  tempered  by  mercy.  Kindness  was 
also  his  characteristic.  There  was  in  him  a  wonderful  tenderness  which  made  him 
adored  of  his  own  people.  He  was  true  to  the  claims  of  relationship,  and  he 
adopted  Esther  as  his  own  child.  The  orphan's  helpless  state  appealed  to  his  man- 
hood, and  he  practically  said,  I  will  be  thy  protector.  In  protecting  her  he  benefited 
both  himself  and  his  whole  nation.  There  is  beautiful  humanness  in  the  record — 
"He  brought  up  Hadassah."  Mordecai  loved  the  child,  and  his  affection  grew  as 
he  watched  her  developing  loveliness.  And  when  she  was  parted  from  him  he 
followed  her  with  loving  solicitude.  Space  separated,  but  love  united.  Mordecai 
showed  the  loving  anxiety  of  a  true  father  for  an  absent  child. 

II.  This  loving  solicitude  was  of  Divine  origin.  It  is  true  indeed  that  all  our 
good  is  Divine.  "  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh 
down  from  the  Father  of  lights."  But  we  may  here  note  a  special  endowment.  God 
intervenes  in  human  affairs.  He  makes  use  of  human  passions  for  the  promotion 
of  his  merciful  purposes.  And  this  was  part  of  the  Divine  plan  that  Mordecai  ajod. 
Esther  should  be  closely  knitted  together ;  for  both  had  important  work  to  do,  and 
for  both  a  great  destiny  was  assigned.  Human  reasons  may  be  given  to  account  for 
Mordecai's  love  for  Esther,  but  there  were  also  Divine  reasons.  The  Divine  is  ever 
working  in  and  by  the  human.  One  man  is  attracted  to  another  by  an  unknown 
force.  That  attraction  is  heaven-implanted  :  God's  agents  are  not  as  solitary  as  they 
seem.  The  reformer  is  the  outcome  of  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  his  time,  working 
it  may  be  in  secret.  Mordecai  is  essential  to  Esther.  His  loving  solicitude  was  a 
vital  force  in  her  N\ondrous  career. 

r 


66  BOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  [crrAr.  t\. 

III.  This  loving  solicitude  quickened  Mordecai's  discernment.  True  love  is 
not  blind,  as  sometimes  it  is  represented.  It  is  a  qnickener  of  the  discerning  faculty. 
It  is  sharp  to  apprehend  danger.  Tiie  mother's  ear  is  quick  and  her  eye  is  keen 
to  detect  the  approach  of  evil  to  her  offspring,  Mordecai  at  once  perceived  tlie 
danger  to  which  Esther  was  exposed  by  the  new  f)Ositioii  to  wliich  she  had  been 
taken.  We  have  good  reason  for  anxiety  when  our  children  are  lifted  to  the  heights 
of  prosperity.  Many  sons  and  daughters  have  been  ruined  in  palaces  who,  humanly 
speaking,  would  have  remained  virtuous  in  cottages. 

IV.  This  loving  solicitude  taught  Mordecai  a  true  creed.  Love  is  light.  He 
that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  a  clear  apprehension  of  Divine  truth  and  of  Divine 
methods.  The  heart  and  the  head  must  be  clarified  by  love's  indwelling,  as  well 
as  enlightened  by  knowledge,  if  there  is  to  be  the  possession  of  sound  doctrine. 
Mordecai  might  believe  in  predestination.  He  might  feel  assured  that  liis  niece  or 
cousin  was  God's  *'  chosen  vessel."  But  love  taught  him  better  than  to  let  the 
mysteries  of  Divine  decrees  interfere  with  the  practical  duties  of  life.  ^'  Although 
he  trusted  God  with  his  niece,  yet  he  knew  that  an  honest  care  of  her  might  well 
stand  with  faith  in  God's  providence.  God  must  be  trusted,  but  not  tempted  by 
the  neolect  of  careful  means." — Trapp. 

V.  Thus  Mordecai's  love  made  him  watchful.  How  Mordecai  came  to  possess 
the  privilege  of  walking  every  day  befoie  the  court  of  the  women's  house — whether 
he  was  one  of  the  king's  eunuchs,  or  whether  he  secured  the  privilege  by  purchase 
— we  cannot  tell.  But  there  he  wa?!,  Avatching  with  intense  interest  the  maiden's 
career.  The  sentinel  at  his  post.  The  sailor  at  the  helm.  So  Mordecai  walked 
every  day  before  the  court  of  the  women's  house.  His  love  grew  by  the  withdrawal 
of  its  object.  His  anxiety  increased  as  the  danger  enlarged.  We  should  be  watchful 
for  the  welfare  of  others.  Mordecai  symbolizes  the  love  of  the  eternal  Father.  God 
watches  to  know  how  his  people  do.  Esther  could  not  see  Mordecai  in  his  daily 
walks,  but  he  was  watching.  We  cannot  see  God,  but  he  too  is  watching.  We 
cannot  feel  God,  but  he  is  protecting.  Our  vision  is  not  as  the  Divine  vision. 
Ours  cannot  pierce  the  clouds  and  the  darkness  which  shroud  and  conceal  the 
infinite.  But  the  Divine  vision  knows  no  obstruction.  God  knows  all,  and  ever 
watches.  Trust  ever  in  the  abiding  love  and  continued  watchfulness  of  an  unchanging 
God. 

VI.  Mordecai's  love  rendered  him  self-forgetful.  He  did  not  stop  to  think 
that  his  conduct  might  appear  unseemly  as  he  walked  everyday  before  the  court  of 
the  women's  house.  Love  is  unconscious  of  self.  It  goes  out  in  supreme  regard 
towards  the  object  of  attachment.  We  fancy  Mordecai  faithful  at  his  post  in  spite 
of  the  frowns  of  stately  courtiers  or  the  ridicule  of  fawning  menials.  This  speaks 
of  the  nobler  self-forgetfulness  of  a  mightier  love.  Even  Jesus  pleased  not  himself. 
He  walked  every  day  before  the  courts  of  men's  and  women's  hearts,  though  they 
rejected  his  love  and  despised  his  beneficent  ministry.  He  still  walks.  Behold, 
I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock.     At  the  door  of  many  hearts  he  is  knocking  now. 

VII.  Mordecai's  love  concerned  itself  about  Esther's  highest  welfare.  It  is 
a  suggestive  expression — To  know  the  peace  of  Esther.  True  peace  is  not  possible 
where  the  soul  is  not  in  a  right  condition.  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked.  That 
love  is  poor  which  does  not  seek  the  welfare  of  the  whole  nature.  How  many 
fathers  would  feel  that  their  children  were  all  right  if  they  saw  them  only  in  the 
outer  courts  of  a  palace  !  But  oh,  there  was  danger  in  the  palace  of  Ahasuerus. 
And  there  is  danger  in  the  palace  even  of  our  gracious  queen.  Right  parental  love 
asks  how  the  child  is  doing  both  temporally  and  spiritually,  and  what  is  to  become 
of  him  or  her  both  in  time  and  in  eternity.  How  are  you  doing  %  Are  you  on  the 
way  to  the  palace  of  heaven  1 


CHAr.   II.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


G7 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verse  11. 


1 .  Mordecai  was  so  deeply  interested 
in  the  fate  of  Esther,  that  day  after  day 
he  was  found  watching  any  opportunity 
that  might  occur  to  learn  from  some 
eunuclis  passing  in  or  out  how  Esther 
fared,  and  what  her  prospects  were. 
Perhaps  there  may  have  been  others 
in  similar  circumstances  with  himself, 
solicitous  about  their  daughters  or 
friends  ;  and  if  so,  his  conduct  would 
attract  the  less  notice.  But  what  we 
have  principally  to  remark  is  the  paternal 
interest  which  all  along  he  took  in  the 
orphan  whom  he  had  reared.  She  was 
evidently  his  chief  earthly  care ;  and 
now,  when  she  was,  as  it  were,  taken 
out  of  his  hand,  and  no  longer  dependent 
upon  his  bounty  and  his  kindness,  he 
was  as  much  concerned  about  her  as 
when  in  her  childhood  she  had  sat  upon 
his  knee  and  returned  his  affectionate 
embrace.  And  so  parental  love  is  always 
exhibited.  Although  the  grown-up 
youth  is  treated  differently  from  the 
mere  child,  and  there  may  be  fewer  of 
tlie  words  and  outward  tokens  of  endear- 
ment than  there  were,  the  heart  of  the 
parent  has  not  become  colder  ;  but  there 
are  now  deep  anxieties  connected  with 
the  progress  of  the  youth,  with  his 
settlement  in  life,  and  his  whole  future 
career,  which  were  not  felt  before ;  and 
though  it  may  not  outwardly  appear, 
the  most  solicitous  and  intense  affection 
is  experienced  by  the  parent  at  the  time 
when  the  objects  of  it  are  beginning 
to  feel  that  they  can  do  something  for 
themselves  in  the  world. — Davidson. 

2.  Parents  and  guardians  might  take 
an  example  from  Mordecai.  There  was 
danger  in  the  palace  of  a  heathen  king, 
but  there  is  danger  also  in  a  great  city. 
Let  there  be  solicitude  for  those  who  are 
exposed  to  its  temptations — the  solici- 
tude which  leads  to  watchfulness,  and 
finds  its  expression  in  prayer.     If  there 


is  the  oppression  of  conscious  weakness 
and  separation,  the  more  reason  for  laying 
the  case  before  him  who  can  keep  '^  the 
feet  from  falling,  the  eyes  from  tears, 
and  the  soid  from  death." — McEwan. 

3.  Mordecai  had  taken  Esther  for  his 
child,  and  was  curious  of  her  welfare, 
though  she  was  now  grown  up,  and  pre- 
ferred at  court.  The  court,  he  knew, 
was  an  ill  air  for  godliness  to  breathe  in. 
His  care  was,  therefore,  that  she  might 
have  Gaius's  prosperity,  even  mentem 
sanam  in  corpore  sano,  a  sound  mind 
in  a  sound  body.  The  Turks  wonder 
to  see  a  man  walk  to  and  fro,  and  use 
to  ask  such  an  one  what  he  meanethi 
and  whether  he  be  out  of  his  way,  or 
out  of  his  wits  1 — Trapp. 

Mordecai  was  so  much  older  than 
Esther  as  to  make  it  natural  for  him  to 
assume  toward  her  the  position  of  a 
father.  What  he  was  in  the  matter 
of  occupation  we  can  only  guess,  when 
we  see  him  take  easily  to  the  place  of  a 
porter  at  the  palace  gate,  and  when  we 
find  him  turn  as  easily  to  the  business 
of  a  scribe.  But  there  is  no  guess-work 
as  to  what  Mordecai  was  in  the  matter 
of  character.  He  showed  "  piety  at 
home."  When  his  uncle  died,  leaving 
on  the  world  a  fair  girl,  who,  it  would 
seem,  had  never  known  a  mother's  care, 
he  took  his  cousin  for  his  own  daughter, 
and  brought  her  up.  How  wisely  and 
piously  he  did  so  Esther's  conduct  will 
prove.  We  shall  presently  see  how  he 
proved  himself  a  faithful,  sharp-eyed 
servant,  and  fearless  in  the  right;  and 
the  issue  of  the  story  will  reveal  his 
heroic  public  spirit.  This  Mordecai  is 
altogether  an  admirable  man  ;  of  good 
natural  powers,  enlarged  and  applied  by 
religion  ;  Avise,  sterling,  a  man  who  can 
afford  to  wait ;  worth  a  thousand 
Ahasueruses. — A.  M.  Symington^  B.A. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PAKAGRAPH.     Verses   12—14. 
The  Vanity  op  Earthly  Hopes. 

Here  is  a  vivid  description  of  the  means  taken  to  minister  to  and  to  gratify 
the  carnal  pleasures  of  a  depot.  Sensuality  is  permitted  without  stint.  Manhood 
ifl  lowered.     The  animal  is  made  supreme.     Ahasuerus  the  king  is  turned  into 

f2 


68  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  [cHAr.  ii. 


Aliasiierus  the  slave — the  slave  of  degrading  lusts.  Men  have  not  the  same  oppor- 
tunities of  self-degradation  as  were  provided  for  this  Eastern  monarch.  But  still 
men  may  give  way  to  the  sensual.  Let  them  avoid  the  earthly  and  the  sensual, 
for  their  climax  is  the  devilish.  Now  consider  the  unhappy  case  of  these  poor 
virgins. 

i.  The  great  preparation.  For  twelve  months  these  unhappy  victims  were 
being  prepared  for  the  great  occasion  that  would  most  likely  occur  only  once  in 
their  lives.  Oil  of  myrrh  and  sweet  odours  were  at  their  disposal  in  abundance. 
The  choicest  garments  and  rarest  jewels  were  in  readiness.  Female  vanity  could  for 
once  gratify  its  propensity  for  outward  adornments.  Through  all  time  men  and 
women  will  make  great  preparation  to  render  the  external  attractive,  while  the 
internal  is  neglected.  Even  now  women  will  dress  and  trick  themselves  up  for 
a  state  reception  of  a  few  moments*  duration.  Very  few  make  earnest  preparation 
to  dress  the  soul,  and  to  be  ready  for  heavenly  reception. 

II.  The  flattering  hopes.  Each  virgin  would  doubtless  entertain  the  hope  of 
becoming  queen  in  place  of  the  deposed  Yashti.  What  a  delightful  prospect  ! 
How  flattering  the  hopes  that  would  flutter  in  each  virgin's  mind  !  \¥e  please  our- 
selves thus  witli  fond  delusive  hopes.  Well  is  it  for  us  that  hope  is  so  buoyant 
in  tliis  dark  world.  After  all,  these  flattering  hopes  are  of  great  service  to  us  in 
our  chequered  career. 

III.  Great  preparations  wasted.  These  virgins  derived  little  earthly  profit 
from  all  their  planning  and  arranging.  What  a  picture  this  of  the  wasted  prepar- 
ations in  the  lives  of  most  !  Much  money  is  spent  on  the  boy's  education,  and  just 
as  he  reaches  manhood  death  comes  and  seizes  tlie  prey.  The  lovely  maiden  droops 
and  dies  ere  the  flower  of  her  beauty  is  fully  blown.  The  prince  is  killed  by 
the  weapons  of  savages  before  he  has  had  time  to  achieve  a  name  and  to  lay  claim 
to  imperial  dignity.  The  pen  falls  from  the  writer's  hand  just  as  he  is  beginning 
to  give  permanence  to  the  laboured  and  matured  thoughts  of  his  mind.  The 
world  is  full  of  ruins.      Wasted  preparations  strew  the  ground. 

IV.  Flattering  hopes  destroyed.  These  virgins  were  sent  back  into  the 
chambers  of  the  concubines — "  the  prison  of  sad  and  withered  hearts."  There  are 
many  prisons  that  we  do  not  see.  Imprisoned  souls  endure  the  saddest  punish- 
ment. Withered  hearts !  who  shall  count  them  1  Flattering  hopes  destroyed ! 
who  shall  tell  their  appalling  number  %  Every  life  has  its  own  long,  dreary  list 
of  blasted  hopes. 

Learn — (a)  ih.^i preparation  for  heavenly  service  is  never  wasted.  Perhaps  life  is 
not  so  full  of  waste  as  we  have  supposed.  The  Divine  Builder  can  turn  our  very 
ruins  to  useful  purposes.  The  preparation  that  was  wasted  in  one  man's  life  may 
be  of  service  to  another.  However,  the  true  way  to  avoid  possible  waste  is  to  make 
this  earthly  life  a  preparation  for  the  heavenly.  We  prepare  to  enter  the  court 
of  earthly  kings,  and  are  never  summoned  to  the  royal  presence  ;  but  those  who 
prepare  in  the  right  spirit  and  according  to  the  gospel  method  to  enter  the  court  of 
the  King  eternal  will  most  assuredly  be  summoned  to  stand  in  that  Presence  where 
there  is  fulness  of  joy.  (b)  That  the  hopes  suggested  by  the  gospel  cannot  he 
destroyed.  The  hopes  of  the  worldling  are  too  often  delusive.  The  hopes  of  the 
hypocrite  shall  perish.  But  the  hope  of  the  righteous  is  gladness.  To  the  man 
who  builds  by  faith  on  the  gospel  of  God's  dear  Son  there  is  gladness  in  anticipa- 
tion and  gladness  in  fruition.  Those  who,  justified  by  faith  in  Christ,  and  sanctified 
by  the  Divine  Spirit,  entertain  the  hope  of  being  for  ever  in  heaven,  will  never 
be  sent  back  to  the  prison  of  sad  and  withered  hearts,  (c)  If  the  children  of  this 
Avorld  make  such  great  preparations  for  positions  they  may  never  be  called  to  occupy, 
irhat  preparations  shotdd  the  children  of  light  make  to  occupy  aright  the  high 
position  to  which  they  will  be  most  certainly  called.  "Wherefore  the  rather, 
brethren,  give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure." 


CHAP.    II.] 


IWMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER 


69 


ScroGESTiVE  Comments  on  Verses  12 — 14 


emulation    was 
Persian    damsels 


or  thought  themselves 


What  strife,  what 
now  amongst  all  the 
that  either  were 
fair  !  Every  one  hopes  to  be  a  queen, 
and  sees  lio  reason  why  any  other  should 
be  thought  more  excellent.  How  happy 
were  we  if  we  could  be  so  ambitious  of 
our  espousals  to  the  King  of  heaven  ! 
Every  virgin  must  be  six  months  purified 
with  the  oil  of  myrrh,  and  six  other 
months  perfumed  with  sweet  odours, 
besides  those  special  receipts  that  were 
allowed  to  each  upon  their  own  election. 
O  God,  what  care,  what  cost  is  requisite 
to  that  soul  which  should  be  addressed 
a  fit  bride  for  thine  holy  and  glorious 
majesty  1  When  we  have  scoured  our- 
selves with  the  most  cleansing  oil  of  our 
repentance,  and  have  perfumed  ourselves 
Avitli  thy  best  graces,  and  our  perfectest 
obedience,  it  is  the  only  praise  of  thy 
mercy  that  we  may  be  accepted. — 
Bishop  Hall. 

No  doubt  the  virgins  generally  took 
the  opportunity — one  that  would  occur 
but  once  in  their  lives — to  load  them- 


selves with  precious  ornaments  of  various 
kinds  —  necklaces,  bracelets,  earrings, 
anklets,  and  the  like. — Rawlinson. 

What  care  and  cost  is  required  for  the 
decoration  of  the  soul  when  it  would 
prepare  as  an  acceptable  bride  for  Jesus. 
— Starke. 

Because  God  desires  more  and  more 
to  have  delight  in  us,  and  to  draw  nigh 
to  us,  and  therefore  he  more  and  more 
goes  on  to  purge  us.  For  though  he 
loves  us  at  first,  when  full  of  corruptions, 
yet  he  cannot  so  much  delight  in  us  as 
he  would,  nor  have  that  communion 
with  us,  no  more  than  a  husband  can 
with  a  wife  who  hath  an  unsavoury 
breath  or  a  loathsome  disease.  They 
must  therefore  be  purified  for  his  bed, 
as  Esther  was  for  Ahasuerus.  "  Draw 
nigh  to  God,"  says  James,  "and  he  will 
draw  nigh  to  you ;  "  but  then  you  must 
"  cleanse  your  hands,  and  purify  your 
hearts,"  as  it  follows  there ;  God  else 
hath  no  delight  to  draw  nigh  to  you. — 
Goodtoin. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  15,  20. 

Esther's  Elevation. 


God  in  the  mysterious  nature  of  his  operations  puts  down  the  mighty  from  their 
seats,  and  exalts  them  of  low  degree.  In  all  the  changes  of  life,  in  the  rise  and 
fall  both  of  nations  and  of  individuals,  we  shall  only  be  able  to  walk  with  calmness 
as  we  see  the  ruling  purpose  of  the  Supreme  moving  on  to  its  accomi)lisliment. 
Let  the  history  of  God's  movements  in  the  past  be  the  interpreter  of  the  present, 
and  impart  settled  faith  in  the  unerring  wisdom  of  the  Infinite.  The  Vashtis  may 
fall,  but  their  fall  is  the  Divine  stepping-stone  by  which  the  orphaned  Esthers  rise 
to  greatness  in  order  to  be  of  service  to  humanity.  Written  history  reveals  the 
working  of  God  ;  and  when  the  history  of  the  present  is  written  it  will  declare  that 
God  is  still  working.  Let  us  now  read  the  history  of  Esther's  elevation  so  as  to 
teach  in  the  present. 

I.  God's  servants  patiently  wait  his  time.  That  Esther  was  the  servant  of 
God  is  plain  from  the  whole  of  this  history.  She  was  his  chosen  vessel.  Here 
she  waits  the  Loid's  time.  She  is  in  no  hurry;  she  manifests  the  calm  of  conscious 
greatness.  True  greatness  has  nothing  to  lo>e  by  patience.  It  may  be  objected 
that  she  was  compelled  to  wait  her  turn.  It  may,  however,  be  replied  that  many 
are  unwise  enough  to  try  and  fight  a,L(ainst  the  force  of  Providence,  and  seek  to 
hurry  on  Divine  movements.  Esther  did  not  take  tins  courses  because  she  had 
been  taught  Divine  lessons.  She  coidd  wait.  Bles^^ed  are  they  who  know  how  to 
wait  when  waiting  is  the  Divine  appointment.     Blessed  are  they  also  that  know 


70  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  [ohap.  ii. 


how  to  move  when  the  turn  has  come  to  go  in  unto  the  king.    Ready  to  serve  both 
by  waiting  and  by  moving  is  the  characteristic  of  God's  servants. 

II.  God's  servants  have  sustaining  confidence.  Esther  required  nothing  but 
what  the  king's  chamberlain  appointed.  As  a  wise  woman,  she  would  take  what 
was  seemly  and  necessary  for  her  adornment,  but,  as  one  conscious  of  being  sent  on 
a  Divine  mission,  she  was  not  bent  upon  decking  herself  with  gaudy  jewels.  She 
let  her  beauty  tell  its  own  thrilling  story,  and  work  in  its  own  magical  way.  The 
goodness  of  her  soul  shone  right  through  her  physical  form,  and  rendered  her  more 
attractive  than  if  she  had  worn  the  most  costly  garments.  She  had  a  sustaining 
confidence  which  made  her  not  over-anxious  and  exacting  in  her  requirements.  A 
sincere  effort  to  serve  God  will  deliver  from  the  evils  of  over-anxiety.  Nature 
requires  little,  and  grace  less.  She  required  nothing  but  what  was  appointed.  Oh 
for  grace  to  lessen  the  number  of  our  requirements,  to  learn  the  difficult  lesson,  in 
whatsoever  state  we  are  therewith  to  be  content. 

III.  God's  servants  find  favour  in  unexpected  quarters.  From  a  human  point 
of  view  it  was  a  surprising  thing  that  the  king  should  so  suddenly  find  his  Jove 
drawn  out  towards  this  captive  and  orphaned  Jewess.  But  more  surprising  still  is 
the  fact  that  Esther  obtained  favour  in  the  sight  of  all  them  that  looked  upon  her. 
Was  green-eyed  Jealousy  on  that  occasion  conquered  1  Did  none  of  the  on-looking 
virgins  attempt  to  depreciate  her  beauty?  Did  none  object  to  the  shape  of  her 
nose,  the  colour  of  her  hair,  or  the  tone  of  her  complexion  %  Was  no  whisper  heard 
against  this  lovely  maiden  *?  Women  are  sharp  to  find  out  each  other's  defects,  and 
yet  Esther  escaped  because  she  was  Divinely  fashioned  and  Divinely  guided.  She 
was  admired  by  all  because  she  was  God's  servant.  Hatred  is  sometimes  the 
penalty  of  faithfulness  in  God's  service  ;  but  if  persecuted  for  Christ's  sake  we  shall 
receive  the  favour  of  heaven,  which  is  better  than  the  favour  of  earth.  However, 
we  may  find  this,  that  God  raises  up  for  his  servants  friends  in  unexpected  quarters. 
Joseph  found  friends  and  helpers  in  the  prison.  Daniel  had  lions  for  his  friends 
and  a  king  for  his  comforter.     Bunyan  was  trusted  by  his  jailor. 

IV.  God's  servants  are  royal.  The  king  set  the  royal  crown  upon  Esther's 
head,  and  made  her  queen  instead  of  Vashti.  But  Esther  needed  no  earthly 
insignia  to  set  forth  her  royalty.  She  was  God's  servant,  and  all  his  servants  are 
royal.  A  kingly  seed,  a  royal  race  are  the  children  of  God.  Slie  was  a  queen  by 
virtue  of  a  Divine  creation.  She  was  royal  by  reason  of  the  queenly  magnificence 
of  her  character.  Her  virtues  were  her  crown.  They  shone  with  brilliancy  far 
surpassing  the  virtue  of  pearls  or  rubies.  The  crown  which  Ahasuerus  placed  on 
her  head  will  crumble  to  dust,  but  the  crown  of  her  virtues  will  never  suffer  any 
tarnishing  of  its  lustre.  What  ambition  there  is  to  receive  royal  crowns  from 
earthly  kings  !  What  commotion  in  the  seraglio  when  the  whisper  went  forth, 
Esther  has  received  the  crown  royal !  How  soldiers  will  fight,  and  what  hardships 
officers  will  endure  in  ordc  r  to  receive  the  decorating  ribbon  or  medal  from  an 
earthly  sovereign  !  But  this  is  as  nothing  to  the  position  of  tliose  who  are  to 
receive  the  heavenly  crown  from  the  hand  of  the  King  eternal.  Happy  day  when 
Jesus  shall  set  the  royal  crown  of  his  approval  upon  the  heads  of  his  favourites. 

V.  God's  servants  are  instruments  of  good.  We  are  not  now  about  to  refer 
to  Esther's  great  life-work  in  the  deliverance  of  her  people  from  a  great  danger,  but 
to  the  facts  here  stated.  In  order  to  celebrate  Esther's  elevation  to  the  crown,  the 
king  made  a  great  feast,  called  Esther's  feast,  to  all  his  princes  and  servants,  and 
granted  release  to  the  provinces.  This  release  may  be  understood  either  of  a  remis- 
sion of  labour  or  a  remission  of  taxes.  It  is  highly  probable  that  it  refers  to  the 
appointment  of  a  holiday,  on  which  there  would  be  a  resting  from  labour.  Finally, 
the  king  gave  gifts  with  royal  munificence. — Keil.  When  the  righteous  are  exalted 
the  nation  has  reason  to  rejoice.  Even  material  benefits  result  fiuni  their  elevation. 
The  country  owes  more  to  the  presence  in  it  of  the  righteous  than  it  either  under- 
stands or  is  prepared  to  admit.     The  king's  former  feast  ended  disastrously,  but  we 


CHAP.  II.]  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :    ESTHER.  71 

do  not  read  of  any  evil  resulting  from  the  joyful  festivities  on  this  occasion.  May 
Ave  suj)])ose  that  Esther's  presence  exerted  a  salutary  and  restraining  influence  1 
The  righteous  should  be  saving  forces. 

VI.  God's  servants  are  fitted  for  the  positions  to  which  they  are  raised. 
l\stlier  was  gifted  with  the  power  of  silence,  and  this  is  a  rare'  gift.  She  did  not 
sliow  her  kindred  nor  her  people,  for  the  set  tiiue  h;id  not  yet  arrived  for  tlie 
announcement.  Intoxicated  with  her  success,  slui  might  have  made  an  untimely 
boast  of  the  lowness  of  her  origin.  But  she  did  not,  for  she  was  Divinely  fitted. 
She  knew  both  when  to  speak  and  when  to  kenp  silence.  God  fashions  and 
educates  his  servants  for  the  particular  spheres  they  are  designed  to  till,  and  for 
the  special  duties  they  are  intended  to  discharge. 

VII.  God's  servants  in  highest  positions  do  not  overlook  the  minor  morali- 
ties. It  would,  we  may  suppose,  have  been  called  a  minor  immorality  had  Esther 
neglected  the  commandment  of  Mordecai.  She  was  now  a  queen,  and  was  she  to 
be  in  subjection  to  her  uncle  1  There  may  be  minor  and  major  in  moralities,  but 
unfaithfulness  in  the  least  leads  to  unfaithfulness  in  the  greatest.  Esther  was 
convinced  of  Mordecai's  wisdom  and  impressed  with  a  sense  of  his  kindness,  and 
therefore  felt  that  his  commandment  was  binding.  We  cannot  afford,  even  in 
highest  positions,  to  be  deaf  to  the  voice  of  wisdom.  The  commandments  of  wise 
old  men  have  in  them  a  Divine  force.  Those  Esthers  are  Divinely  wise  who  pay 
respectful  attention  to  the  weighty  words  of  the  aged  Mordecais. 

Observe  that  all  Chiistians  are  the  servants  of  God,  whetlier  the  earthly  position 
be  high  or  low.  They  are  royal,  whether  dwelling  in  a  cottage  or  reigning  in  a 
palace.  They  should  not  be  over-anxious  about  the  good  or  great  things  of  this 
life.  Esther  required  nothing.  They  should  move  with  quiet  faith  and  restful 
confidence  in  their  God.  They  should  seek,  above  all,  to  fit  themselves  to  be 
instruments  of  good  to  their  kind. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verse  15. 

Now  when  the  turn  of  Esther^  &c. —  queen  above  all  the  wives  of  the  king, 

Then,  and  not  till  then.    So  when  Joseph  her  heart  still  clung,  not  only  with  grati- 

was  sufficiently  humbled,  the  king  sent  tude,  but  with   childlike   obedience,  to 

and  loosed  him ;  the  ruler  of  the  people  her  pious  uncle  and  foster-father,  as  in 

let  him  go  free.     When  David  was  be-  the  time  when  he  trained  her  as  a  little 

come  weaned  from  the  world,  when  his  girl. — Stolherg. 

heart  was   not   haughty,  nor   his   eyes         Let  then  both  men  and  women  learn 

lofty,  then  was  he  advanced  to  the  king-  by  this  case  so  to  direct  all  their  aims 

dom.      He  that  believeth   maketh   not  and  desires   as  to  please  God  alone  by 

haste.     God's  time  is  best ;  and  as  he  the  ornament  of  a  good  conscience,  and 

seldom  cometh  at  our  time,  so  he  never  by  the  forms  of  minds  well  adjusted ; 

faileth  at  his  own. — Ti'app.  but  to  despise  the  adventitious  bodily 

She  required  nothing. — As  other  maids  ornaments  of  this  world  as  vain  in  his 

had  done  to  set  out  their  beauty,  but  sight,  and  by  this  piety  gain  the  surer 

contenting  herself  with  her  native  come-  rewards  of   heaven.     For  this  alone  is 

liness,  and  that  wisdom  that  made  her  the  true  beauty,  which  is  precious  in 

face  to  shine,  she  humbly  taketh  what  God's  view,  and  which  causes  us  to  be 

Hegai  directed  her  to,  and  wholly  resteth  approved   by  the  King  of    kings,  and 

upon  the  Divine  providence. — Trapp.  joined  to  him  in  spiritual  matrimony. 

Undazzled  by  splendour  and  royalty,  ....   Surprising  that  even  tlie  heathen 

the  tender  virgin  rejected  all  these  things,  saw  and  taught  this,  for  Crates  says: 

With  noble  simplicity  she  took  the  orna-  That  is  ornament  which  adorns,  but  that 

ments,  neither  selecting  nor  demanding  adorns  which  makes  a  woman  more  ad- 

any thing,  which  the  chief  chamberlain  justed  and  more  modest.     For  this  end 

brought  to  h«r.     Even  aft«r  8h«  became  neither  gold,  nor  gems,  nor  purple  avails, 


72 


HOMILETIC  COMMETTTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.   II. 


but  whatever  lias  the  import  of  gravity, 
modesty,  an<l  chastity. — Fefiardent. 

That  iniiul  is  truly  great  and  noble 
that  is  not  changed  with  the  highest 
prosperity.  Queen  Esther  cannot  forget 
lier  cousin  Mordecai ;  no  pomp  can  make 
her  slight  the  charge  of  so  dear  a  kins- 
man ;  in  all  her  royalty  she  casts  her 
eye  upon  him  amongst  the  throng  of 
beholders  ;  but  she  must  not  know  him  ; 
her  obedience  keeps  her  in  awe,  and  will 
not  suffer  her  to  draw  him  up  with  her 
to  the  participation  of  her  honour.  It 
troubles  her  not  a  little  to  forbear  this 
duty,  but  slie  must ;  it  is  enough  that 
Mordecai  hath  commanded  her  not  to 
be  known  who  or  whose  she  was. — Hall. 

Nor  was  Esther  behind  with  her  grate- 
ful returns.  Too  many  when  suddenly 
exalted  forget  their  former  friends,  or, 
what  is  as  bad,  forget  themselves,  become 
vain  and  arrogant,  and  so  impatient  of 
admonition  and  good  advice.  Children, 
when  they  grow  up,  are  apt  to  think 
that  they  are  released  from  all  obligation 
even  to  their  natural  parents ;  they  be- 
come wise  in  their  own  conceits,  and 
spurn  advice  as  if  it  were  an  undue 
assumption  of  authority.  But  **  Esther 
did  the  commandment  of  Mordecai,  like 
as  when  she  was  brought  up  with  him." 
The  least  signification  of  his  will  was  a 
law  to  her ;  for  she  knew  that  he  would 
require  nothing  of  her  inconsistent  with 
her  duty  to  God  and  her  husband.  He 
had  enjoined  her  not  to  make  known  her 
kindred  or  her  people ;  and  this  she  re- 
ligiously abstained  from,  not  only  when 
she  was  under  the  conduct  of  Hegai,  but 
after  she  was  seated  in  the  affections  of 
Ahasuerus,  and  had  come  to  the  king- 
dom. "  Esther  had  not  yet  showed  her 
kindred  nor  her  people;  as  Mordecai 
had  charged  her."  She,  no  doubt,  felt 
a  strong  desire  to  make  the  avowal,  and 
to  use  her  interest  with  the  king  for  the 
advancement  of  her  kind  benefactor. 
But  even  this  generous  feeling  she  re- 
pressed, because  it  would  have  led  to  a 
transgression  of  his  command.  To  testify 
her  gratitude  she  would  not  disobey  him, 
nor  run  the  risk  of  displeasing  him.  And 
she  acted  thus,  though  it  does  not  appear 
that  he  acquainted  her  with  his  reasons 
for   concealment.      We   may   be   sure 


however,  that  Mordecai  did  not  impose 
this  silence  arbitrarily  ;  and  his  caution 
contirms  the  remark  already  made,  that 
he  looked  forward  to  something  more  im- 
})ortant  that  was  to  be  accomplished  by 
the  elevation  of  his  daughter,  and  waited 
for  the  opportune  occasion  when  the  dis- 
closure of  her  people  and  relationship 
to  him  would  be  the  means  of  advancing 
it.  ''Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works 
from  the  beginning,"  and  ''  the  secret  of 
Jehovah  is  with  them  that  fear  him." — 
McGrie. 

There  is  everything  about  Esther  to 
engage  our  interest  and  sympathy.  It 
is  sad  enough  to  find  ourselves,  even  in 
adult  years,  suddeidy  in  the  front  rank 
through  the  falling  of  those  who  stood 
in  nature  before  us  ;  but  "  she  had  neither 
father  nor  mother  "  while  still  a  child, 
needing  all  care.  And  there  were  serious 
aggravations  of  her  orphanhood — her  sex, 
her  belonging  to  the  race  of  exiles,  her 
beauty.  But  the  Lover  of  little  children, 
the  Father  of  the  fatherless,  who  had 
said  to  these  captives,  "  Leave  thy  father- 
less children,  1  will  preserve  them  alive," 
had  provided  for  Esther  one  who  proved 
to  her  both  father  and  mother.  And 
there  are  early  indications  that  the  orphan 
girl  was  a  daughter  of  the  Lord  Almighty ; 
she  obeyed  Mordecai,  even  when  beyond 
his  control ;  and  she  was  modestly  free 
from  love  of  display,  a  feature  scarcely 
to  be  expected  in  a  favoured  beauty  un- 
less she  had  also  grace.  At  length  she 
became  queen  consort,  and  Mordecai's 
faith  had  its  reward.  For  we  are  disposed 
to  think  it  must  have  been  in  faith  that 
he  had  committed  her  to  the  various 
perils  of  these  twelve  months.  The 
parallel  between  Esther  and  the  child 
Moses  is  striking  (as  McCrie  shows  in 
his  lectures)  :  each  exceeding  fair ;  each 
raised  from  lowly  station  to  a  place 
beside  the  throne ;  each  a  deliverer  of 
Israel ;  each  cast  upon  the  waters  for  a 
time,  although  the  waters  on  which 
Esther  was  cast  were  far  more  perilous 
than  the  N'ile,  and  the  royal  home  than 
the  ark  of  bulrushes ;  so  that  we  may 
credit  Mordecai  with  faith  like  that  of 
Am  ram  and  Jochebed.  At  least  it  is 
certain  that  Esther's  advancement,  while 
it  came  through  the  beauty  w  hicli  gave 


CHAP,  n.]  HOMILETia  OOMMENTARY:  ESTHEB.  73 

lier  her  name,  did  not  come  through  that  that    "  discretion  "   without  which    her 

alone  or  chiefly.     God  gave  '*  her  favour  comeliness    would    have    been    in    his 

in  the  sight  of  all  them  that  looked  on  judgment    "as    a  jewel   of    gold    in  a 

her;"  her  Father  sent  her  to  her  hus-  swine's  snout." — A.  M.  Symiiiyton^BA. 
band,  a  poor  orphan  indeed,  but  with 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAEAGRAPH.     Verses  21,  23. 
The  Plotters  and  the  Counterplotter. 

In  this  passage  we  have  a  striking  illustration,  even  in  a  temporal  point  of  view,  of 
James's  statement,  "Then  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin;  and  sin 
when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  Here  in  these  two  plotters — Bigthan  and 
Teresh — are  depraved  affections  and  desires  bringing  forth  sinfulness  of  purpo-^e  ;  it 
was  not  their  fault  that  the  sinful  purpose  did  not  culminate  in  the  sinful  deed,  and 
they  were  guilty.  The  sinful  purpose  unchecked  on  our  part  renders  us  criminal 
in  the  sight  of  God,  though  not  always  in  the  sight  of  man.  This  sinful  purpose 
brought  upon  them  temporal  death.  "  They  were  both  hanged  on  a  tree."  Tem- 
poral death  is  not  always  the  result  of  sinful  purposes.  If  it  were,  what  a  valley  of 
death  this  world  would  be.  But  oh,  if  we  do  not  repent  of  sinful  purposes,  and 
fly  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  sinner's  refuge,  spiritual  death  will  be  the  inevitable  result. 
The  plotters  are  Bigthan  and  Teresh.  Their  design  was  dark  and  dastardly,  and 
not  to  be  condoned,  because  such  plots  were  too  common  in  those  days.  The 
counterplotter  was  Mordecai,  who  sat  at  the  king's  gate. 

I.  Notice,  Their  discontentment  and  his  contentment.  Profane  history  throws 
no  light  on  their  circumstances.  We  cannot  tell  whether  or  not  they  had  a  true 
cause  for  anger.  We  must  simply  abide  by  the  statement — two  of  the  king's 
chamberlains  were  wroth.  Anger  may  arise  from  either  real  or  ideal  causes.  Cer- 
tainly discontentment  is  a  fruitful  source  of  anger.  The  discontented  man  soon 
finds  out  reasons  why  he  should  be  angry.  A  fancied  giicA'^ance  is  quite  enough  to 
stir  up  the  nature  and  rouse  the  angry  passions.  If  the  truth  Avere  known,  these 
men  had  very  likely  more  reason  to  be  pleased  with  the  monarch  for  their  advan- 
tages than  to  be  angry  on  account  of  some  grievance.  Mordecai  had  not  much 
outward  reason  for  satisfaction.  He  might  have  reasonably  expecteil  more  in  conse- 
quence of  Esther's  elevation.  But  he  sat  with  contented  heart  at  the  king's  gate. 
He  did  not  complain  because  he  had  not  been  raised  to  some  high  position  at  the 
court.  He  sat  not  as  a  cringing  captive,  not  with  the  frown  of  discontent  on  his 
brows ;  but  rejoicing,  we  may  believe,  in  the  elevation  of  her  he  loved,  sweetly 
dreaming  of  her  glory,  and  trying  to  picture  to  himself  the  salutary  effect  of  her 
moral  influence  in  that  heathenish  palace. 

II.  Their  discontentment  culminates  in  a  murderous  purpose.  They  sought 
to  lay  hands  on  the  King  Ahasuerus.  He  that  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer. 
Anger  is  a  murderer,  though  the  victim  escapes  with  his  life.  Society  cannot  punish 
for  unenacted  murder.  Human  governments  can  only  take  cognizance  in  this  re?pect 
of  deeds.  The  Divine  government  exercises  control  in  the  immaterial  world  of 
thought.  Thoughts  are  powers.  Unexpressed  anger  is  sinful  if  encouraged,  (jod 
will  try  our  thoughts.     Who  then  shall  stand  1 

III.  This  contentment  expressed  itself  in  a  faithful  discharge  of  duty. 
Mordecai  did  not  say,  Why  should  I  meddle  1  what  matters  it  to  me  what  becomes 
of  this  heathen  despot  ]  But  he  practically  said.  Here  is  a  great  wrong  being  planned  ; 
it  is  my  duty  to  make  known  the  conspiracy  and  bring  the  plotters  to  judgment. 
It  is  required  not  only  of  those  in  high  positions,  but  of  those  in  low  positions,  that 
they  be  found  faithful.  The  men  sitting  at  the  king's  gate  can  often  do  more  service 
to  the  nation  than  those  sitting  in  the  king's  presence.     Useluint-ss  is  requu-ed  oi 


74  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  it. 


all,  wherever  found.  And  oh,  the  men  at  the  gate  of  heaven's  King  should  he 
faithful.  Let  us  cultivate  contented  and  grateful  hearts  with  and  for  the  dis- 
pensations of  Divine  providence,  and  thus  we  shall  the  more  likely  be  faithful 
servants. 

IV.  Their  folly  and  his  wisdom.  Wickedness  is  always  a  folly,  and  goodness 
is  always  wisdom.  But  this  must  especially  strike  the  observant  mind,  that  the 
wicked  very  often  bring  themselves  to  punishment  by  some  egregious  act  of  folly 
on  their  own  part.  The  murderer  in  aiming  at  concealment  pursues  the  very 
course  which  makes  his  detection  easy.  And  these  men  plotted ;  but  lo,  by  their 
folly  the  plot  is  discovered.  And  the  thing  was  known  to  Mordecai.  He  took  a 
wise  course  for  the  successful  defeating  of  their  murderous  design.  If  they  plotted 
cunningly,  he  counterplotted  more  skilfully.  He  did  not  demand  an  audience  of 
Ahasuerus.  That  might  have  aroused  the  suspicions  of  these  murderous  chamber- 
lains. But  he  could  trust  Esther.  So  he  told  it  unto  her,  and  she  certified  it  unto 
the  king  in  Mordecai's  name.  In  dealing  with  the  wicked  we  must  be  careful 
In  passing  through  this  world  we  must  be  wise  as  serpents. 

V.  Their  doom  and  his  reward.  The  matter  was  investigated  by  the  king,  and 
found  out  as  Mordecai  had  testified.  The  two  criminals  were  hanged  on  a  tree,  i.  e. 
impaled  on  a  stake,  a  sort  of  crucifixion. — Keil.  A  speedy  end  was  put  to  their 
plotting.  Those  who  plot  against  earthly  kings  are  sometimes  apparently  successful ; 
but  those  who  plot  against  the  King  of  kings  shall  not  always  triumph.  Their 
overthrow  will  be  accomplished,  and  their  punishment  is  ultimately  certain.  The 
circumstance  was  entered  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles,  before  the  king,  immediately 
after  sentence  had  been  passed  by  a  court  over  which  the  monarch  presided.  And 
that  was  all  faithful  Mordecai  appeared  likely  to  get.  No  money  was  given  him 
from  the  royal  purse.  ISTo  medal  was  struck  in  commemoration  of  his  faithfulness. 
He  was  not  advanced  to  some  post  of  trust  and  of  influence.  His  present  reward 
was  found  in  the  consciousness  of  having  done  his  duty.  But  other  rewards 
followed  through  the  guidance  of  him  who  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget.  God 
never  forgets.  Words  spoken  to  help  the  weak,  to  cheer  the  disconsolate,  and  to 
guide  the  perplexed  will  be  remembered.  The  very  tears  shed  over  human  woe 
and  sin  will  have  their  place  in  the  final  adjustment.  When  the  mighty  transac- 
tions of  kings  and  of  warriors  have  passed  into  obscurity,  when  the  researches  of 
philosophers  and  of  scientific  men  have  lost  their  attraction,  when  the  poet's  flights 
have  ceased  to  exert  their  wizardry,  and  the  musician's  strains  to  thrill,  and  the 
painter's  canvas  is  perished  like  the  shrivelled  parchment  scroll,  then  will  shine 
forth  in  heavenly  colours,  stamped  with  Divine  approval,  those  works  of  faith  and 
those  words  and  deeds  of  love  which  may  now  escape  the  notice  of  the  children  of 
this  world. 

Learn — (a)  That  no  position  of  life  is  free  from  danger.  The  one  event  of 
death  must  come  sooner  or  later,  both  to  king  and  to  subject.  (5)  That  faitliful 
subjects  are  a  monarch's  true  protection.  Let  monarchs  rely  not  on  decrees,  not 
on  severity,  not  on  soldiers,  but  on  that  love  which  they  have  kindled  in  the 
breasts  of  their  subjects,  (c)  That  faithful  subjects  are  God-fearing  subjects. 
id)  That  kings  should  seek  to  surround  themselves  with  God-fearing  ministers, 
and  should  as  certainly  and  as  speedily  reward  those  who  do  well  as  tliey  punish 
the  evil-doers,  (e)  But  that  well-doing  is  required  in  all,  whether  the  world  forgets 
or  the  world  remembers  and  rewards. 


OHAP.  II.]  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  21,  23. 

If  the  necessity  or  convenience  of  his  selves  quite  secure.     So  far  as  they  knew, 

occasions  called  him  to  serve,  his  piety  the  dark  plot  was  confined  to  their  own 

and  religion  called  him  to  faithfulness  breasts,  and  as  they  were  both  implicated, 

in  his  service.     Two  of  the  king's  cham-  it  was  not  likely  tbat   either  of  them 

berlains,  Bigthan  and  Teresh,  conspire  would  divulge  their  secret.     They  would 

against  the  life  of  their  sovereign.     No  continue  their  duties,  and  assume  an  air 

greatness  can  secure  from  treachery  or  of  indifference.     One  little  circumstance, 

violence ;  he  that  ruled  over  millions  of  and  another  inadvertent  speech,  and  a 

men,  through  a  hundred  and  seven  and  weapon  thrust  away  into  a  corner  to  be 

twenty  provinces,  cannot  assure  himself  ready  for  use,  and  a  number  of  small 

from  the  hand  of  a  villain  ;  he  that  had  things  may  have  been  brought  to  the 

the  power   of  other  men's  lives  is  in  surface,  and  from  these  a  web  is  woven 

danger  of  his  own.     Happy  is  that  man  around  the   designing  conspirators  out 

that  is  once  possessed  of  a  crown  incor-  of  which  it  was  impossible  to  disentangle 

ruptible,  unfadeable,  reserved  for  him  in  themselves      **  It   was    found    out " — 

heaven ;  no  force,  no  treason  can  reach  words  which  remind  us  of  the  final  dis- 

thither ;  there  can  be  no  peril  of  either  closure  of  human  hearts.     How  much 

violence  or  forfeiture  there.     The  like-  has  escaped  detection  by  men !     How 

liest  defence  of  the  person  of  any  prince  much  have  they  been  misled  by  the  mere 

is  the  fidelity  of  his  attendants.  outward    appearances  !     Thoughts    and 

Worthy  dispositions  labour  only  to  feelings,  intentions  and  deeds  have  been 

deserve  well,  leaving  the  care  of  their  shut  in  to  some  chamber  of  the  heart  into 

remuneration  to  them  whom  it  concerns  ;  which  the  light  has  never  been  allowed 

it  is  fit  that  God's  leisure  should  be  to  shine.     The  subjects  of  them  have 

attended  in  all  his  designments. — Bishop  never  reflected  upon  them  themselves, 

HaU.  and  have  guarded  them  from  the  view 

Nothing  justifies  us  in  assuming  that  of  others.  They  may  even  have  passed 
Mordecai  reported  those  conspirators  through  life  with  an  unchallenged  and 
because  of  selfish  reasons,  or  in  order  to  apparently  saintly  character.  It  is  only 
gain  distinction  and  merit,  or  because  for  a  little  while.  The  inquisition  of 
Ahasuerus  as  the  husband  of  Esther  was  men  may  be  faulty  and  fail,  but  the 
nearly  related  to  himself.  Besides  being  inquisition  of  God  is  perfect  and  un- 
an  indication,  it  may  be  an  expression  qualified.  When  he  makes  inquisition 
of  shrewdness,  of  his  sense  of  duty,  for  sin  there  shall  be  nothing  either 
Althougli  the  Jew  as  such  did  not  have  conceived  or  executed  that  will  not  be 
a  very  warm  feeling  of  attachment  to  "found  out."  In  prospect  of  that 
the  Persian  king,  still,  in  so  far  as  he  future  revealing  of  the  secrets  of  our 
lived  according  to  the  Divine  word,  he  hearts — that  unveiling  of  ourselves  to 
sought  to  perform  his  obligations  also  ourselves,  and  before  all  men — it  is  our 
toward  the  heathen  governmental  autho-  best  policy,  as  well  as  essential  for  our 
rity.  Thereby  he  also  becomes  a  practical  highest  peace,  that  we  should  now  deal 
illustration  of  the  fact  that  the  piety  honestly,  candidly,  almost  severely,  with 
which  is  nurtured  by  God's  word  is  also  ourselves,  walking  humbly  and  without 
of  benefit  to  the  heathen  state  and  to  dissimulation  before  all  men,  and  ear- 
heathen  rulers.  The  governments  of  nestly  pleading  for  God's  mercy  in  Christ 
modern  times,  which  treat  religion  not  to  cover  the  multitude  of  our  sins, 
only  wit^  toleration,  but  also  with  in-  **  There  is  nothing  covered  that  shall 
difierence,  should  remember  that  godly  not  be  revealed ;  and  hid,  that  shall  not 
fear,  as  it  is  useful  for  all  things,  is  also  be  known." 

the  most  substantial   bulwark  for   the  What  reward  was  given  to  Mordecai 

continuance  of  the  state. — Lange.  by  the  king  for  his  prevention  of  the 

At  the  time  that  inquisition  was  mad©,  •vU  which  menaced  him  I     Some  com- 

Bigthan  and  Teresh  might  think  them-  niMitttors  hare  drawn  a  lesson  against 


:6 


BoMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


[chap.  n. 


ingratitude,  from  the  circumstance  that 
nothing  is  reported  as  having  been  done 
for  Mordecai.  If  nothing  was  done, 
however,  it  can  hardly  be  said  that 
nothing  was  intended.  The  whole  affair 
was  "  written  in  the  book  of  the  chron- 
icles before  the  king" — accurately  set 
down  by  the  scribes  who  were  continually 
with  the  king  to  record  all  remarkable 
things  which  happened  in  the  court,  and 
kept  by  him  for  future  reference.  By 
and  by  we  shall  find  that  this  register 
was  produced,  and  the  events  now 
narrated  were  recalled  to  the  memory  of 
Ahasuerus,  and  led  to  the  elevation  of 
Mordecai.  The  reward  tarried,  but  still 
it  came.  Men  may  be  unmindful,  but 
God  never.  And  the  manner  in  which 
this  pious  Jew  was  ultimately  rewarded 
ought  rather  to  incite  us  to  look  away 
from  the  human  to  the  Divine,  and  put 
greater  trust  in  the  leading  and  recom- 
pense of  God. — McEwan. 

The  narrative  before  us  teaches,  that 
whatever  station  in  providence  men  are 
called  to  fill,  they  may  be  instrumental 
in  conferring  important  benefits  on 
others.  Mordecai,  a  man  of  humble 
rank,  exercising  compassion  and  benevo- 
lence, trained  up  the  orphan  girl  who 
became  queen  of  Persia,  and  through 
whose  instrumentality  vast  benefits  were 
conferred  on  the  Jews.  Mordecai,  who 
sat  in  the  king's  gate,  saved  the  life  of 
the  king.  And  many  incidents  there 
are,  recorded  both  in  ancient  and  modern 
history,  which  illustrate  the  truth  that 
in  human  society  the  several  classes  are 
so  dependent  on  one  another,  that  the 
highest  may  be  made  debtor  to  the 
lowest,  and  that  the  humblest  may 
render  services  to  those  above  them 
which  cannot  be  adequately  repaid.  Such 
fidelity  as  Mordecai  exhibited  has  often 
been  exemplified. — Davidson. 

For  Esther  did  the  commandment  of 
Mordecai. — Her  honours  had  not  altered 
her  manners ;  she  was  as  observant  of 
Mordecai  still  as  ever.  So  was  Joseph, 
David,  Solomon,  Epaminondas,  and 
others  of  their  old  and  poorer  parents. 
Pope  Benedict,  a  Lombard,  a  shepherd's 
son,  would  not  acknowledge  his  poor 
mother  when  she  came  to  him  lady-like, 
but  caused  her  to  put  on  her  shepherdess 


apparel,  and  then  did  her  all  the  honour 
that  might  be.  Sir  Thomas  More  wouLl 
in  Westminster  Hall  beg  his  father's 
blessing  on  his  knees.  Mordecai  was 
Esther's  foster-father,  and  had  given  her, 
though  not  her  being,  yet  her  well-being  ; 
and  hence  she  so  respects  him,  and  is  so 
ruled  by  him.  She  had  gotten  from  him 
that  nurture  and  admonition  in  the 
Lord  that  was  better  to  her  than  the 
crown  of  the  kingdom  ;  for  what  is  un- 
sanctified  greatness  but  eminent  dis- 
honour 1  If  any  parents  find  disobedient 
children,  let  them  consider  Avhether, 
Eli-like,  they  have  not  honoured  (I  mean 
cockered)  their  sons  too  much,  which  is 
the  reason  they  honour  them  so  little 
now. 

In  those  days. — While  this  voluptuous 
prince  was  in  the  glut  of  carnal  de- 
lights his  life  is  sought  for;  so  slippery 
places  are  great  ones  set  in  ;  so  doth  the 
Lord  sauce  their  greatest  prosperity  with 
sudden  and  unexpected  dangers.  Thus 
Attilas,  king  of  the  Huns,  was  hanged 
up  in  gibbets,  as  it  were,  by  God's  own 
hands  in  the  midst  of  his  nuptials. 

Some  great  princes  have  wislied 
never  to  have  meddled  with  government ; 
as  Augustus,  Adrian,  Pertinax,  who  used 
to  say  that  he  never  in  all  his  life 
committed  the  like  fault  as  vvlien  he 
accepted  the  empire  ;  and  many  times 
he  motioned  to  leave  the  same,  and  to 
return  unto  his  house.  Dioclesian  and 
Maximian  did  so ;  for  they  found  that 
quot  servij  tot  hostes ;  quot  custodes,  tot 
carnifices ;  they  could  not  be  safe  from 
their  own  servants  ;  but,  Damocles-like, 
they  sat  at  meat  with  a  drawn  sword 
hanging  by  a  twined  thread  over  their 
necks.  Hence  Dionysius  durst  not  trust 
his  own  daughter  to  barb  him.  And 
Massinissa,  king  of  Numidia,  committed 
his  safe- keeping  to  a  guard  of  dog-^ ;  for 
men  he  durst  not  trust. 

And  the  thing  was  known  to  Mordecai. 
— How  he  came  to  know  it  is  uncertain. 
Josephus  saith  that  it  was  revealed  to 
him  by  one  Barnabazus,  a  Jew,  who  was 
servant  to  one  of  the  conspirators.  ^. 
Solomon  saith  that  the  eunuchs  talked 
of  the  plot  before  Mordecai  in  the 
language  of  Tarsus,  supposing  that  he 
had    not   understood    them,    and  so   it 


CllAr.    IT.] 


nOMlLETia  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


77 


came  forth.  Others  conceive  that  they 
solicited  liiii),  being  one  of  the  keepers 
of  the  king's  door,  also  to  join  with 
them.  Howsoever  it  was  that  he  got 
inkling  and  intelligence  of  their  bloody 
l)urpose,  God  was  in  it,  and  good 
men  aie  of  his  privy  council.  "  The 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear 
him." — Trapp. 

Besides  flatterers,  despots  are  apt  to 
have  traitors  and  assassins  about  them, 
such  as  Bigthan  and  Teresh.  Mordecai 
detected  their  villany,  and  no  doubt 
ran  considerable  risk  in  exposing  it. 
But  he  was  not  one  of  those  who  are 
honest  only  when  honesty  appears  to 
them  to  be  the  best  policy  ;  he  did  the 
right  because  it  was  the  right,  faithfully 
and  fearlessly.  Therefore  he  would  not 
be  disappointed  when  weeks  and  months 
went  by  without  the  selfish  king  taking 


notice  of  the  im])ortant  service  he  had 
rendered  him.  He  probably  did  not 
know  that  it  ''  was  written  in  the  book 
of  the  chronicles  before  the  king,"  for  it 
was  Esther  who  saw  to  that.  There  was 
another  book  of  remembrance,  "  by 
seraphs  writ,"  before  One  who  may 
*'  hide  himself,"  but  who  never  forgets. 
"  The  Lord  hearkened,  and  heard  it, 
and  a  book  of  remembrance  was  written 
before  him  for  tliem  that  feared  the 
Lord,  and  that  thought  upon  his  name. 
And  they  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  in  that  day  when  I  make  up 
my  jewels ;  and  I  will  spare  them,  as  a 
man  spareth  his  own  son  that  serveth 
him."  Soon,  following  this  story,  we 
shall  "return,  and  discern  between  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked,  between  him 
that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serveth 
him  not." — A.  M.  Symington^  B.A. 


ILLUSTRATIONa 


Ver.  11.  Go(Vs  kindness.  No  doubt,  said  the 
Rev.  John  Brown  of  Haddington,  I  have  met 
with  trials  as  well  as  others,  yet  so  kind  has  God 
been  to  me,  that  I  think,  if  he  were  to  give  me 
as  many  years  as  I  have  already  lived  in  the  world, 
I  should  not  desire  one  single  circumstance  in 
my  lot  changed,  except  that  I  wish  I  had  less 
sin.  As  Mordecai  watched  over  Esther,  so  God 
watches  to  know  how  his  people  do.  The  mean- 
ing of  all  God's  dispensations,  the  extent  of  his 
kindness,  and  the  unwearied  nature  of  his  watch- 
ing we  shall  not  know  till  we  stand  in  the 
revealing  light  of  eternity.  Oh,  to  believe  that 
God's  ways  are  best— that  the  storm  as  well  as 
the  calm,  the  rough  as  well  as  the  smooth,  the 
painful  as  well  as  the  pleasant  are  indications  of 
(Jod's  kindness. 

Ver.  11.  A  mother^ s  glory.  A  boy,  hearing  a 
visitor  of  his  father  make  use  of  the  familiar 
saying  that  "  an  honest  man  is  the  noblest  work 
of  God,"  made  this  innocent  annotation  upon  it: 
"  No,  sir,  my  mamma  is  the  noblest  work  of  God." 
Let  parents  be  as  lovingly  anxious  for  the  wel- 
fare of  their  children  as  Mordecai  was  for  Esther's ; 
let  them  by  judicious  treatment,  by  wise  and 
loving  example,  and  by  constant  prayer  lead  them 
up  into  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  thus  their 
memories  will  be  blessed,  and  their  names  held 
in  affectionate  esteem.  Some  parents  complain 
of  a  want  of  obedience  and  of  reverence  on  the 
part  of  their  children,  who  might  with  more 
reason  complain  of  their  own  folly  in  not  insist- 
ing upon  obedience  from  the  very  first,  and  in 
not  conducting  themselves  so  as  to  comUiand 
reverence  and  affection. 

Ver.  16.      Virtues  the  true  adorning.    Plutarch 
speaks  of  a  Spartan  woman,  that  when  her  neigh- 


bours were  showing  their  apparel  and  jewels,  she 
brought  out  her  children,  virtuous  and  well  taught, 
saying,  These  are  my  ornaments  and  accoutre- 
ments. Esther  did  the  like  with  her  virtues, 
which  drew  all  hearts  unto  her  ;  like  as  fair 
flowers  in  the  spring  do  the  passenger's  eyes.  She 
had  decked  herself  with  the  >Vhite  of  simplicity, 
with  the  red  of  modesty,  with  the  silk  of  piety, 
with  the  satin  of  sanctity,  and  with  the  purple 
of  chastity ;  and  being  thus  adorned  and  beautified, 
women  shall  have  God  himself  to  be  their  suitor, 
and  all  godly  men  their  admirers.  —  Trapp. 

Ver.  15.  Dress.  A  woman's  dress  should 
always  be  modest,  never  arrest  attention,  or 
suggest  the  unchaste.  **  Madam,"  says  old  John 
Newton,  "  so  dress  and  so  conduct  yourself  that 
persons  who  have  been  in  your  company  shall 
not  recollect  what  you  had  on."  A  fashionably- 
dressed  lady  once  asked  a  clergyman  if  there  was 
any  harm  in  wearing  feathers  and  ornaments. 
He  answered,  *'  If  you  have  the  ridiculous 
vanity  in  your  heart  to  wish  to  be  thought  pretty 
and  fine,  you  may  as  well  hang  out  the  sign." 
Dress  should  be  not  only  modest,  but  becoming — 
becoming  to  the  stature,  gait,  complexion,  and 
station  of  the  wearer. — ^T/ie  Practical  Fhilosopher, 

Ver.  15.  Silken  garments  fresh.  Troya  relates 
that  Francesca  and  her  paramour  Paolo  were 
buried  together  after  their  slaughter  by  Fran- 
cesca's  enraged  husband  ;  and  that  three  centuries 
after  the  bodies  were  found  at  Rimini,  whither 
they  had  been  removed  from  Pesaro,  with  the 
silken  garments  yet  fresh.  lUit  even  such  gar- 
ments as  those  shall  decay.  They  cannot  resist 
the  withering  hand  of  old  Time.  All  that  is 
material  must  perish.  But  the  silken  garment 
of  virtue  shall  be  ever  fresh.     It  will  last  not 


UOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER, 


[chap.   II. 


merely  for  three  centuries,  but  for  the  cycles  of 
eternity.  Fresh  and  beautiful  for  ever  is  this 
glorious  garment. 

Ver.  15.  Clay  made  fragrant  by  the  rose.  A 
traveller  in  passing-  through  the  country  in 
Persia  chanced  to  take  into  his  hand  a  piece  of 
clay  which  lay  by  the  wayside,  and  to  his 
surprise  he  found  it  to  exhale  a  most  delightful 
fragrance.  Thou  art  but  a  poor  piece  of  clay, 
said  he  ;  an  unsightly,  unattractive,  poor  piece  of 
clay  1  How  fragrant  thou  art !  I  admire  thee,  I 
love  thee  ;  thou  shalt  be  my  companion  ;  I  will 
carry  thee  in  my  bosom.  But  whence  hast  thou 
this  fragrance }  The  clay  replied,  I  have  been 
dwelling  with  the  rose.  Esther  was  not  an 
unsightly,  unattractive  piece  of  clay;  but  her 
fragrance  came  not  from  her  physical  beauty,  but 
from  the  fact  that  in  her  dwelt  the  rose  of  good- 
ness. The  clay  of  a  well- shaped  physical  form 
has  a  certain  attractiveness,  but  it  is  only  ren- 
dered perfect  as  it  enshrines  and  is  beautified  by 
the  sweet  flower  of  virtue.  The  fragrance  of  a 
holy  life  is  far-reaching,  ever  attractive,  and  ever 
enduring. 

Ver.  20.  Silence  a  virtue.  Taciturnity  is 
sometimes  a  virtue,  and  Tacitus  the  best  his- 
torian. Queen  Elizabeth's  motto  was,  Video, 
taceo — I  see,  and  say  nothing.  Sophocles  saith, 
nothing  better  becometh  a  woman  than  silence. 
Euripides  also  saith  that  silence,  and  modesty, 
and  keeping  at  home  are  the  greatest  commend- 
ation to  a  woman  that  can  be.  Curtius  tells  us 
that  the  Persians  never  trust  one  whom  they  find 
to  be  talkative.  Some  know  when  to  speak  and 
when  to  keep  silent,  but  do  not  act  up  to  their 
knowledge.  Esther  had  the  knowledge  and  the 
grace  to  conduct  herself  according  to  the  require- 
ments of  her  condition. 

*'  Give  every  man  thine  ear,  but  few  thy  voice  ; 
Take  each  man's  censure,  but  reserve  thy  judg- 
ment."— Polonius. 

Ver.  23.  Duty  its  own  reward.  On  the 
coast  of  Wales  a  vessel  was  being  wrecked,  and 
the  life-boat  men  pushed  out  to  the  rescue. 
Again  and  again  they  braved  the  storm,  and 
drove  on  through  the  surging  billows,  in  order  to 
save  human  life.  When  the  work  was  com- 
pleted, and  the  last  man  brought  on  shore,  they 
were  asked  what  reward  could  be  given.  And 
their  noble  reply  was,  that  they  wanted  no  pay- 
ment, their  reward  was  that  they  had  succeeded 
in  saving  the  shipwrecked  from  a  watery  grave. 
Mordecai  found  his  reward  in  the  consciousness 
of  having  done  his  duty.  An  approving  con- 
science is  better  than  the  wealth  of  monarchs. 
Earthly  books  of  chronicles  may  bury  while  they 
record  our  good  deeds,  but  the  noble  worker 
looks  abore  and  beyond  the  plaudits  of  time. 


Ver.  23.  Earth's  heroes  unknown.  Before 
men  went  out  to  the  last  American  war,  the 
orators  told  them  that  they  would  all  be  remem- 
bered by  their  country,  and  their  names  be  com- 
memorated in  poetry  and  in  song;  but  go  to  the 
graveyard  in  Richmond,  and  you  will  find  there 
six  thousand  graves,  over  each  one  of  which  is 
the  inscription  ''Unknown."  The  world  docs 
not  remember  its  heroes ;  but  there  will  be  no 
unrecognized  Christian  worker  in  heaven.  Each 
one  known  by  all,  grandly  known,  known  by 
acclamation  ;  all  the  past  story  of  work  for  God 
gleaming  in  cheek,  and  brow,  and  foot,  and 
palm.  They  shall  shine  as  distinct  stars  for 
ever  and  ever. — Talmage. 

Ver.  10.  True  greatness.  Augustine  says 
"  that  God  is  great  in  great  things,  but  greatest 
in  little  things."  And  if  we  would  form  a  true 
estimate  of  men,  we  must  measure  them  not  by 
their  great  things,  but  by  their  little  things. 
Mordecai  was  greatest  not  when  he  was  great  in 
the  king's  house,  but  when  he  adopted  his  little 
cousin,  and  was  faithful  when  sitting  at  the 
king's  gate.  A  new  arithmetic  is  required  in 
social  computations.  Life's  littles  are  really  and 
often  life's  greats.  Men  are  greatest  in  their 
little  things.  We  do  not  need  martyr  stakes,  nor 
battle-fields,  nor  any  public  scenery  to  show  us 
the  good  and  true  man.  His  little  acts,  his 
daily  conduct  will  furnish  tests.  One  flash 
reveals  the  diamond. 

Ver.  23.  Latimer  and  Bonner.  Bishop 
Latimer,  when  examined  before  Bonner,  at  first 
answered  without  much  thought  and  care.  But 
presently  a  startling  sound  falls  on  his  ear.  It  is 
only  the  scratching  of  a  pen  on  paper  behind  the 
curtain.  Why  should  the  bishop  stop  ?  Why 
should  his  face  grow  pale  and  his  frame 
tremble  ?  By  means  of  that  pen  his  words  were 
being  taken  down  to  be  used  against  him. 
"  Suppose  you  knew  that  a  register  was  kept  by 
son)e  invisible  scribe  of  all  that  you  think,  or 
speak,  or  act  ;  what  manner  of  persons  would  you 
endeavour  to  be  in  the  exercise  of  every  virtue  } 
Know,  then,  that  none  of  your  actions  ever  can 
be  forgotten,  that  even  your  most  secret  thoughts 
are  written  in  durable  registers.  The  Lord 
hearkens  and  hears  all  that  is  spoken  by  us.  He 
observes  all  that  we  think  or  do,  and  a  book  of 
remembrance  is  written  before  him,  which  will 
one  day  be  opened,  to  the  praise  of  them  that  do 
well,  and  to  the  confusion  of  the  wicked.  Mor- 
decai was  not  presently  rewarded  by  the  king  for 
the  eminent  service  which  he  had  done  him.  No 
matter ;  it  was  marked  down  in  the  king's 
register.  If  he  had  never  been  rewarded  by  the 
king,  the  testimony  of  his  conscience  and  the 
assurance  of  Divine  approbation  were  more  to  him 
than  all  that  the  king  could  bestow." — Lawson. 


CHAP.  III. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EiSTHEJL  79 


CHAPTEE  III. 

Critical  Notes.]     1.   After  these  things]   After  the  events  related  in  the  former  chapter. 
The  twelfth  year  of  the  reign  of  Ahasuerus,  five  yi  ;irs  after  eh.  ii.  16,  but  here  somewhat  sooner. 
"  The  name  Saman  is  probably  the  same  which  is  found  in  the  classical  writers  under  the  form  of 
Onianes,  and  which  in  ancient  Persian  would  have  been  Uniana  or  Umanish,  an  exact  equivalent  of 
the  Greek  Eumenes      Ilammedatha  is  perhaps  the  same  as  Maduta  or  Mahedata  (Madates  of  Q,. 
Curtius),  an  old  Persian  name  signifying  '*  given  by  (or  to)  the  moon." — Rawlinson.    The  term  Agag 
means  "  the  fiery,"  and  may  have  been  applied  to  persons  without  any  reference  to  nationality.    It  was 
employed  as  a  general  name  of  dignity  by  the  kings  of  Amalek.     Impossible  to  determine  Haman's 
nationality.     We  may  perliaps  conclude  that  the  epithet  "  Agagite  "  is  here  used  symbolically  of  a 
heathen  enemy    of  the  Jews.     2.  Bowed]   A   simple  inclination   of   the  body    as  to  an  equal  in 
courtesy ;  but  reverenced]  a  complete  prostration  in  Oriental  style  of  homage  to  a  superior.     A 
kind  of  nligious  homage.     Mordecai's  confession  that  he  whs  a  Jew  appears  to  imply  that  the  rules  of 
his  religion  would  not  allow  him  to  offer  the  semblance  of  Divine  honours  to  a  mortal.     Mordecai  is 
represented  in  the  apocryphal  Esther  as  praying:  '*  Thou  knowest.  Lord,  that  it  was  neither  in 
contempt  nor  pride  that  I  did  not  bow  to  Haman  ;  for  I  would  have  been  glad  for  the  salvation  of 
Israel  to  kiss  the  soles  of  his  feet.     But  I  did  this  that  I  might  not  glorify  man  more  than  God  ; 
neither  would  I  worship  any,  0  God,  but  thee."     4.  Whether  Mordecai's  matters  would  stand] 
"Whether  the  religious  scruples  of  a  Jew  would  be  tolerated  in  opposition   to   Persian  laws  and 
customs.     6.  He  thought  scorn]  Literally,  it  was  contemptible  in  his  eyes.     7.]  The  first  month 
Xisan   corresponds   nearly    with   our   April.      The   twelfth   month    Adar   with  our   March.      An 
interval  of  eleven  months,   'ns^g  is  an  old  Persian  word  meaning  lot  {aors).   The  words  "from  day  to 
day,  from  month  to  the  twelfth  month,"  must  not  be  understood  to  say  that  lots  were  cast  day  by 
day,  and  month  by  month  till  the  twelfth  ;  but  that  in  the  first  month  lots  were  at  once  cast,  one 
after  the  other,  for  all  the  days  and  months  of  the  year,  that  a  favourable  day  might  be  obtained. 
We  do  not  know  the  manner  in  which  this  was  done,  *'  the  way  of  casting  lots  being  unknown  to 
us."  —  Keil.      But  Rawlinson  says  Pur  is  supposed  to  be  an  old  Persian  word  etymologically 
connected  with  the  Latin  pars^  and  signifying  part  or  lot.     In  modern  Persian  parch  has  that 
meaning.    The  recovered  fragments  of  the  old  language  have  not,  however,  yielded  any  similar  root. 
Wrr  mav  be  reganlecl  as  an  impersonal  verb,  and  refers  to  some  one  whose  office  it  was  to  cast  lots. 
8.]  The  Jews  were  at  this  time  a  people  scattered  abroad.     From  the  fall  of  Samaria  the  tribes  of 
Israel  had  become  more  and  more  dispersed  among  the  people  in  all  the  provinces  of  the  East,  until 
their  tribe  divisions  could  be  now  but  faintly  recognized.     Seneca  says,  "  Such  power  have  the 
customs  of  this  detestable  people  already  gained,  that  they  are  introduced  into  all  lands  ;  they  the 
conquered  have  given  laws  to  their  conquerors."     9.]  Ten  thousand  talents  of  silver,  reckoned 
according  to  the  Mosaic  shekel,  are  £3,750,000  ;  according  to  the  civil  shekel,  £1,875,000. — Keil. 
10.]  The  signets  of  Persian  monarchs  were  sometimes  rings,  sometimes  cylinders,  the  latter  probably 
suspended  by  a  string  round  the  wrist.     The  expression  here  used  might  apply  to  either  kind  of 
signet. — Rawlinson.     The  signet  cylinder  of  Darius  Hystaspes  bears  a  trilingual  inscription  which 
reads,  "  Darius  the  great  king,"  and  also  a  picture  of  the  king  hunting  lions  in  a  palm  grove.     11.] 
Some  understand  this  to  mean  that  Ahasuerus  refused  the  silver  which  Haman  had  oflfered  to  him  ; 
but  the  passage  is  better  explained  as  a  grant  to  him  of  all  the  property  of  such  Jews  as  should  be 
executed.     In  the  East  confiscation  follows  necessarily  upon  public  execution,  the  goods  of  criminals 
escheating  to  the  crown,  which  does  with  them  as  it  chooses. — Rawlinson.     12.]  The  scribes  of 
Xerxes  are  mentioned  more  than  once  by  Herodotus.     They  appear  to  have  been  in  constant 
attendance  on  the  monarch,  ready  to  indite  his  edicts,  or  to  note  down  any  occurrences  which  he 
desired  to  have  recorded. — Rawlinson.    a"'3|-i/i'rris  and  n'lng  are  here  placed  together,  the  satraps  of 
the  larger  provinces  and  the  rulers  among  the  separate  peoples  of  the  provinces.     The  n-^n-a  are  the 
native  so-called  born  princes  of  the  different  people.     13.]  By  the  runners,  by  whom  they  were  sent, 
are  meant  the  posts,  the  angari  or  pressmen,  who  were  posted  on  the  main  roads  of  the  empire  at 
definite  distances  from  each  other,  from  four  to  seven  parasangs,  and  who  rapidly  expedited  the  royal 
(mails)  letters  or  commands.     The  three  verbs— to  destroy,  to  kill,  and  cause  to  perish— are  combined 
to  give  strength  to  the  expression.     D^'f  is  their  property,  which  is  called  spoil  because  it  was 
delivered  up  to  plunder.  14.]  By  the  issue  of  the  decree  at  this  time  (the  first  month)  the  Jews  through- 
out the  empire  had  from  nine  to  eleven  months'  warning  of  the  peril  which  threatened  them.    So  long 
a  notice  is  thought  to  be  "incredible,"  and  the  question  is  asked,  Why  did  they  not  then  quit  the 
kingdom  ?     In  reply  we  may  say,  (1)  That  many  of  them  may  have  quitted  the  kingdom  ;  and,  (2) 
That  those  who  remained  may  have  believed,  with  Mordecai,  that  enlargement  and  deliverance  would 
arise  from  some  quarter  or  other.     As  to  its  being  improbable  that  Haman  should  give  such  long 
notice,  w©  may  remark  that  Hamau  only  wished  to  be  quit  of  Mordecai,  and  that  the  flight  of  the 


80  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  [chap.  tti. 

Jews  would  have  served  his  purpose  quite  as  well  as  their  massacre. — JRawlinson.  15.]  rts'oj  primarily 
does  not  mean  that  it  was  distrefised  by  terror  or  sorrow,  but  that  it  was  perplexed y  aid  not  know 
what  to  think  of  such  a  terrible  command.  The  remark  that  "  Shushan  was  perplexed"  has  been 
attributed  to  Jewish  conceit,  but  without  reason.  Susa  was  now  the  capital  of  Persia,  and  the  main 
residence  of  Persians  of  hi«^h  rank.  These,  being  attached  to  the  religion  of  Zoroaster,  would 
naturally  sympathize  with  the  Jews,  and  be  disturbed  at  their  threatened  destruction.  Nay,  even 
apart  from  this  bond  of  union,  the  decree  was  sufficiently  strange  and  ominous  to  *'  perplex  " 
thoughtful  citizens. — Rawlinson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  1,  6. 

The  Prosperous  Wicked  Man. 

Matthew  Henry  says,  **I  wonder  what  the  king  saw  in  Hainan  that  wa4 
commendable  or  meritorious ;  it  is  plain  that  he  was  not  a  man  of  honour  or  justice, 
of  any  true  courage  or  steady  conduct,  but  proud,  and  passionate,  and  revengeful  ; 
yet  was  he  promoted  and  caressed,  and  there  was  none  so  great  as  he.  Princes' 
darlings  are  not  always  worthies." 

I.  The  wicked  man  in  great  proreri  7  History,  both  of  nations  and  of 
individuals,  repeats  itself.  Both  in  ancient  and  in  modern  times  we  may  see  the 
wicked  in  great  prosperity.  Haman  is  typical.  The  race  is  prolific.  Hamau  is 
the  progenitor  of  a  long  line  that  by  skilful  plotting  rise  above  the  heads  of  superior 
men.  If  earthly  greatness  be  a  reward,  the  good  are  not  always  rewarded  in  time. 
In  this  world  rewards  are  not  rightly  administered.  Push  and  tact  get  the  prize. 
Modest  talent  may  be  commended  in  the  song  or  in  the  oration,  but  may  be  thank- 
ful if  it  does  not  find  itself  compelled  to  enter  the  workhouse.  Goodness  in  purple 
and  fine  linen  is  commended ;  but  goodness  personified  in  a  certain  beggar  named 
Lazarus  is  not  an  article  of  modern  creeds.  We  are  still  too  prone  to  believe  that 
Virtue  fares  sumptuously  every  day,  and  that  only  Vice  is  fed  with  crumbs  and  has 
its  sores  licked  by  the  dogs. 

II.  The  prosperous  wicked  man  is  surrounded  by  fawning  sycophants. 
"All  the  king's  servants,  that  were  in  the  king's  gate,  bowed,  and  reverenced  Haman : 
for  the  king  had  so  commanded  concerning  him."  But  a  king's  commandment  is 
not  required  to  secure  outward  homage  towards  those  in  high  places.  There  is 
always  a  sycophantic  crew  ready  to  worship  earthly  greatness.  Clothe  a  man  with 
the  outward  marks  of  royal  favour,  and  many  are  at  once  prepared  to  become 
his  blind  adulators.  Christian  England  has  not  improved  very  much  on  heathenish 
Persia.  Outward  show  attracts  more  admirers  than  inward  worth.  Imperialism 
is  glorified  in  political,  literary,  and  ecclesiastical  spheres.  Greatness,  not  goodness, 
is  still  a  leading  virtue  in  ethical  systems.  Prowess  in  arms,  push  in  business, 
skill  in  politics,  success  in  literature,  and  parade  in  religion  are  the  articles  of  the 
creed  in  which  modern  society  devoutly  believes.  The  wicked  Haman  so  long  as 
he  is  prime  minister  must  be  reverenced. 

III.  The  prosperous  wicked  man  is  surrounded  by  meddling  sycophants. 
Even  admirers  may  be  too  officious.  If  Haman  had  known  and  seen  all  he  might 
ha\e  prayed,  Save  me  from  my  friends.  The  king's  servants  told  Haman  that  there 
was  a  Jew  who  would  not  reverence  enthroned  and  bedazzled  wickedness.  No, 
they  would  have  told  him  this  had  they  told  him  the  truth ;  they  might  have  told 
him  this  had  they  seen  Mcrdecai's  nobility.  However,  their  selfish  zeal  carried 
them  too  far.  They  were  undermining  Haman's  grand  position,  and  frustrating 
their  own  purposes  of  aggrandisement.  How  often  it  is  that  in  trying  to  grasp 
too  much  we  lose  all  ! 

IV.  The  prosperous  wicked  man  finds  that  false  greatness  >- rings  trouble. 
That  greatness  is  false  which  is  not  the  outcome  of  goodness.  The  course  of  wicked 
prosperity  cannot  run  smooth.     Haman  meets  with  the  checking  and  detectinir 


OHAP.  m.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  81 


Mordecai.  Ahab  is  troubled  by  Elijah.  Nathan  said  unto  David,  Thou  art  tho 
man.  Herod  beheads  John  the  Baptist,  but  still  he  is  not  free  from  a  reproving 
spirit.  When  Mordecai  refuses  to  bow  let  Haman  tremble.  We  do  not  attempt 
to  prosecute  the  difficult  inquiry  what  it  was  which  led  Mordecai  to  refuse  to  bow 
to  Haman.  Much  has  been  said  and  written,  but  no  satisfactory  conclusion  has 
been  reached.  All  that  we  can  say  is,  that  there  must  have  been  a  strong  religious 
motive  working  in  the  mind  of  Mordecai  which  induced  him  to  pursue  a  course 
Avhich  exposed  him  to  the  wrath  of  an  Eastern  despot.  The  nobility,  the  heroism 
of  Mordecai  must  be  admired  as  he  thus  braved  death  itself,  and  refused  to  follow 
the  multitude  in  doing  evil.  Oh,  for  more  Mordecais ;  for  those  who  shall  dare  to 
be  singular ;  for  those  who  will  stand  by  their  convictions.  Let  great  men  watch 
how  men  of  strong  convictions  deport  themselves.  There  is  more  wholesome 
teaching  in  the  silent  mood  of  the  strong-minded  than  in  the  honeyed  words  of 
shallow  sycophants. 

V.  The  prosperous  wicked  man  may  learn  that  an  unrestrained  nature 
brings  trouble.  Haman  was  intoxicated  with  his  greatness,  and  could  not  brook 
it  that  one  poor  Jew  refused  an  outward  act  of  homage.  Haman  was  full  of  wrath, 
and  consequently  was  full  of  trouble.  Wrath  is  cruel,  both  to  the  subject  and  the 
object.  A  dark  cloud  gathers  on  Haman's  countenance,  for  wrath  drives  away  the 
cheering  sunlight,  and  brings  darkness  over  the  whole  man.  One  whispi'red  hiss 
reaching  the  great  man's  ear  is  sufficient  to  drown  the  hosannas  of  the  multitude. 

VI.  The  prosperous  wicked  man  unwittingly  plots  his  own  downfall. 
Haman's  wrath  led  him  to  dangerous  extremes.  He  vainly  fancied  that  nothing  could 
withstand  his  greatness  ;  so  he  determines  to  take  signal  vengeance  on  Mordecai 
by  making  his  whole  nation  suffer.  It  was  not  sufficient  for  this  great  man  to 
touch  Mordecai  only.  He  would  not  demean  himself  by  laying  hands  on  that  one 
dog  of  a  Jew.  He  must  have  wholesale  slaughter.  Wherefore  Haman  sought  to 
destroy  all  the  Jews  that  were  throughout  the  whole  kingdom  of  Ahasuerus.  Poor 
Haman  !  Already  we  see  thee  treading  on  a  volcano.  Thy  hands  are  digging 
the  pit  into  which  thou  shalt  fall.  Thy  minions  are  already  preparing  the  gallows 
on  which  thou  thyself  shalt  be  hung. 

(a)  Prosperity  has  its  drawbacks.  This  is  true  of  all  prosperity,  but  more 
especially  of  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  The  triumphing  of  the  wicked  shall 
be  short.  Greatness  purchased  by  the  sacrifice  of  goodness  must  bring  trouble  to 
its  possessor  sooner  or  later,  (h)  "  Better  it  is  to  be  of  an  humble  spirit  with  the 
lowly,  than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  proud.  "  Haman  and  his  flatterers  were 
dividing  the  spoil,  but  they  were  not  happy.  Mordecai  was  of  a  humble  spirit, 
and  enjoyed  peace  of  mind,  (c)  That  our  greatest  troubles  often  spring  from  our 
own  depraved  natures.    Haman's  depravity  worked  him  misery  and  ruin  in  the  end. 

"  Heaven  is  most  just,  and  of  our  pleasant  vices 
Makes  instruments  to  scourge  us." 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Yerses  1,  6. 

We  have  the  picture  given   us,  and  vain,  false,  selfish,  and  not  merely  cruel 

are  called  to  study  it,  of  a  thoroughly  in  the  thoughtless  way  that  all  selfish 

bad  man,  one  of  his  seed  who  was  a  liar  persons   are    cruel,   but   vindictive  and 

and  a  murderer  from  the  beginning.*  black-hearted.     All  was  going  well  with 

The  greater  number  of  bad  men  have  this  man.     His  rivals  had  been  crushed, 

some  redeeming  feature  in  their  charac-  his  seat  had  been  set  above  the  seats  ol 

ters  to  which  we  are  glad  to  turn  for  all  the  noblemen  at  court,  tlie  king  had 

relief  ;   but  you  look  in  vain   for  any  made  him  his  boon  com})anion,  and  had 

redeeming  feature  in  Haman.      He  was  issued    orders  that  the  })alace  servants 

*  John  Tiii.  44,  should   bow   before   him   and   do   him 

a 


82 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OHAP.    Ill 


reverence.     He  was  as  nearly  happy  as 
a  man  can  be  whose  ruling  passion  is 
vanity  ;  but  such  men  hold  their  happi- 
ness by  a  very  frail  tenure.       It  does 
not  look  altogether  well  that  Ahasuerus 
should  have  needed  to  give  special  orders 
about  his  servants  bowing  to  Haman. 
Darius  had  not  needed  to  do  this  in  the 
case  of  Daniel.     Had  the  favourite  been 
respected  and  liked,  men  would  have 
given  him  all  seemly  honour  unbidden. 
But    this    was    a   very   different   case. 
Daniel  carried  that  within  himself  which 
secured  his  peace,  even  when  suddenly 
flung  down    from  lofty  station    to  the 
lions'  den ;  but  this  little-great  man  was 
made  miserable  by  discovering  that  there 
was  a  single  porter  who  did  not  prostrate 
himself  before   him.      ''  But   Mordecai 
bowed  not,  nor  did  him  reverence."     It 
does  seem  a  very  small  matter,  but  when 
such  a  man  as  Mordecai  attached  import- 
ance to  it,  we  must  pause  and  consider 
whether  the  matter  was  really  so  small 
as  it  seemed.    For  it  is  an  unsafe  way  of 
reasoning  to  say  about  anything,  It  is 
only  one  little  act ;  why  scruple  over  it^ 
If  it  does  no  good,  it  can  do  no  harm  ; 
and  so  forth.     By  such  reasoning  habits 
of  untruth  and  intemperance  have  many 
a  time  been  formed,  and  what  was  per- 
haps little  in  itself,  if  it  had  been  possible 
to  separate   it  from  all  else,  has  been 
found  to  be  anything  but  little  in  its 
results.    The  truth  is,  we  cannot  separate 
any  single  action  from  the  rest  of  our 
lives,  so  that  the  importance  of  an  action 
depends  not  on  its  greatness  or  its  little- 
ness, but  on  many  other  circumstances, 
such  as,  how  often  we  do  it,  the  effect  it 
has  on  others,  particularly  its  influence 
on  our  own  consciences.     In  this  case  it 
so  happened  that  what  Mordecai  did — 
rather  what  he  determined  not  to  do — 
proved  to  be  of  very  great  importance  to 
the  whole  Persian  empire ;  but  he  could 
not  know  that.    What  he  did  know  was, 
that  if  he  had  once  bowed  to  Haman 
his  conscience  would  have  been  defiled, 
as  surely  as  Daniel's  would  have  been  if 
he  had  eaten  the  king's  meat;  and  a 
polluted  conscience  is  no  trifle.     A  man 
has  to  carry  it  about  with  him  all  day, 
to  go  to  sleep  with  it  if  he  can,  to  en- 
counter it  again  when  he  awakes,  until 


God   purges   out    the   stain.  —  A.    M. 
Symington,  B.A. 

True  religion  does  not  interfere  with 
the  ordinary  courtesies  of  life,  nor  does 
it  forbid  our  rendering  that  honour  to 
rank  and  station  which  is  their  due.  But 
when  vice  and  real  infamy  are  shrouded 
under  high  rank,  the  Christian  must 
beware  of  acting  so  as  to  make  it  sup- 
posed that  the  rank  forms  an  apology 
for  the  vice  and  infamy,  or  renders  them 
less  hateful  than  they  really  are. 

It  is   to   be  regarded   as  a  kind   of 
retribution,  in  the  case  of  ungodly  and 
Avicked  men,  that  the  very  irregularity 
and  violence  of  their  passions  contains 
in  itself  what  is  sufiicient  to  embitter 
the  whole  cup  of  their  enjoyment.    This 
is  matter  of  universal  experience.     In 
the  instance  before  us,  it  is  very  plain 
that  Mordecai's  unbending  and  contempt- 
•uous  attitude  rendered  Haman  altogether 
indifferent   to  the   homage  which   was 
rendered  to  him  by   others.     Formerly 
he  had  retired  from  his  attendance  upon 
the  king,  through  the  crowd  of  obsequi- 
ous and  prostrate  slaves,  with  the  highest 
desires  of  his  heart  gratified.    His  great- 
ness was  acknowledged.     His  will  was 
law.    There  was  no  man  in  the  kingdom, 
next  to  the  sovereign  himself,  to  whom 
such  incense  was  offered  by  all.    He  had 
reached    a    higher   elevation   than    tlie 
greatest  nobles  of  the  kingdom  occupied. 
Unbounded    power   and    wealth    were 
within  his  grasp,  and  what  more  could 
he  wish  for"?     But  now   one   incident, 
in  itself  so  trifling  that  we  wonder  it 
could   have  even  occasioned  him   pain 
for  a  moment,  strips  his  grandeur  and 
power  of  all  their  charms.      Mordecai 
will  not  bow  to  him,  nor  do  him  rever- 
ence.    The  slavish  homage  of  thousands 
ceases  to  gratify  him  because  this  one 
man  —  a  Jew  —  will  not  recognize  his 
greatness,  nor  honour  him.     His  feeling 
is  brought  out  afterwards  very  graphic- 
ally in  the  history  when,  after  recount- 
ing to  his   family  and  friends  all  the 
dignities  and  advantages  which,  through 
the  favour  of  the  king,  he  enjoyed,  he 
says,  "  All  this  availeth  me  nothing,  so 
long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew   sitting 
at  the  king's  gate." 

The  wicked   alwavs  receive   part  of 


CHAP,  in.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


83 


their  punishment  in  the  violence  of  some 
unhallowed  passion  which  blinds  them 
to  all  the  real  benefits  of  their  lot.  Is 
there  not  a  gnawing  disease  in  the  heart 
of  the  covetous  man,  for  example,  which 
prevents  him  from  enjoying  the  good 
things  which  are  placed  within  his 
reach,  just  because  he  has  not  yet 
acquired  all  that  he  wishes  to  possess*? 
And  still,  as  he  gets  more  and  more,  is 
he  not  as  far  as  ever  from  being  satisfied, 
since  he  has  not  yet  reached  the  point  at 
which  he  aims  ?  Or,  again,  look  to  the 
man  who  is  the  slave  of  envy,  and  mark 
how  miserable  this  base  passion  makes 
him.  He  has  ample  means  of  enjoyment 
which  he  can  call  his  own,  but  his 
neighbour  has  something  which  pleases 
him  better,  and  just  because  that  one 
thing  is  awanting  to  himself,  he  can  find 
no  satisfaction  in  the  varied  blessings 
which  a  kind  Providence  has  showered 
upon  him.  His  neighbour's  good  is  to 
him  what  Mordecai  at  the  king's  gate 
was  to  Haman.  In  like  manner,  I  might 
advert  to  the  working  of  the  more  violent 
passions  of  anger  and  revenge,  as  a  cause 
of  intense  torment  to  those  who  cherish 
them,  and  as  altogether  preventing  them 
from  taking  advantage  of  many  sources 
of  happiness  which  lie  open  to  them  on 
every  side.  I  might  also  allude  to  the 
misery  which  wounded  vanity  and 
aflPronted  pride  often  bring  to  those  who 
have  high  notions  of  their  own  import- 
ance, as  when  a  trifling  word  or  action 
will  discompose  them  for  many  days 
together,  and  deprive  them  of  their  relish 
for  the  things  that  formerly  pleased  and 
made  them  happy.  But  enough  has 
been  said  to  show  how  by  a  just  retri- 
bution the  ungodly,  following  out  their 
natural  tendencies  and  passions,  work 
out  their  own  punishment.  How  difi'er- 
ent  is  the  picture  presented  to  us  where 
grace  reigns  in  the  heart.  Although 
corruption  is  not  altogether  eradicated 
from  the  spiritual  man,  yet  its  power  is 
subdued  ;  the  fierce  passions  are  tamed  ] 
love  takes  the  place  of  envy,  malignity, 
and  wrath ;  and  the  believer,  seeking 
and  finding  his  chief  enjoyment  in  God, 
remains  comparatively  unrutiled  by  those 
incidents  which  breed  so  much  vexation 
and   disquietude   in    the   breast  of    the 


o2 


ungodly.  The  wise  man  says  that  "he 
who  is  of  a  merry  heart  hath  a  continual 
feast ; "  and  emphatically  it  may  be  said 
that  the  heart  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
dwells  is  a  peaceful  sanctuary — the  seat 
of  pure  enjoyment. 

Satan  is  always  ready  to  take  advan- 
tage of  the  season  when  the  mind  is 
perturbed  by  any  strong  passion,  in  order 
to  hurry  his  victims  onvvard  to  some  act 
of  violence  from  which  in  other  circum- 
stances they  would  have  shrunk.  Haman 
at  this  time  was  precisely  in  such  a  mood 
as  made  him  an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy. 
His  self-importance,  his  worldly  gran- 
deur, the  king's  favour,  all  set  at  nought 
by  Mordecai,  aggravated  his  deadly  re- 
sentment, and  made  him  seek  the  de- 
struction of  the  whole  Jewish  race.  It 
could  not  have  been  but  by  Satanic 
influence  that  a  scheme  of  such  vast  and 
daring  atrocity  was  devised.  Thci'e  is 
nothing  said  in  the  history  to  show  that 
the  disposition  of  Haman  was  habitually 
cruel,  that  he  was  one  who  would  have 
taken  pleasure  in  inflicting  pain  for  no 
reason  but  to  gratify  a  propensity  of  his 
nature.  From  the  brief  glances  we 
obtain  of  his  domestic  life,  he  seems  to 
have  enjoyed  the  onfidence  and  affection 
of  his  family,  as  far  as  was  compatible 
with  the  usages  of  the  age  and  country; 
a  circumstance  which  certainly  seems  to 
warrant  the  conclusion  that  he  was  not 
of  a  temper  unmixedly  cruel  and  tyran- 
nical. But  when  the  master  passion  of 
revenge  took  possession  of  him,  then  by 
working  upon  it  Satan  transformed  him 
into  a  very  fiend.  And  it  has  always 
been  one  of  the  devices  of  the  enemy  to 
drive  men  into  criminal  excesses  to  their 
own  ruin  through  the  instrumentality  of 
some  favourite  lust  or  appetite.  It  was 
the  covetous  spirit  of  Judas  that  opened 
a  way  to  the  tempter  to  hurry  him  to 
betray  the  Saviour.  It  was  an  unmanly 
fear  on  the  part  of  Pilate,  lest  he  should 
be  misrepresented  to  the  Eoman  emperor, 
that  the  tempter  took  occasion  of  to  lead 
him,  in  opposition  to  all  his  convictions, 
to  deliver  up  Jesus  to  be  crucified.  All 
need  to  be  upon  their  guard,  then, 
against  the  wiles  of  the  crafty  adversary, 
and  to  strive  to  have  their  desires  and 
feelings  so  kept  under  the  control  of  the 


84 


IIOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


[chap.  III. 


Divine  law  that  he  may  not  through 
their  own  sinful  inadvertence  obtain  the 
mastery  over  them,  and  lead  them  cap- 
tive at  his  will. — Davidson. 

How  insatiable  is  revenge,  especially 
Avhen  it  is  associated  with  national  and 
religious  rancour  !  Haman  learned  that 
Mordecai  was  a  Jew,  and  he  resolves  at 
once  on  the  total  extermination  of  that 
people.  Nero  wished  that  the  Eomans 
had  but  one  neck,  that  he  might  despatch 
them  at  once ;  Haman  resolves  by  one 
decree  to  sweep  off  "  all  the  Jews  which 
were  in  all  the  kingdom  of  Ahasuerus." 
That  the  quarrel  was  not  merely  personal, 
but  was  inflamed  by  national  hatred,  is 
evident  from  the  designation,  *'  the 
Jews'  enemy,"  repeatedly  given  to  Haman 
in  this  book.  The  discovery  that  Mor- 
decai was  of  Jewish  extraction,  while  it 
gave  a  keenness  to  his  insult,  added  a 
sweetness  to  Haman's  meditated  revenge. 
— McCrie. 

For  the  king  had  so  commanded  con- 
cerning him. — And  if  the  king  had  com- 
manded these  servile  souls  to  worship  a 
dog  or  a  cat,  as  the  Egyptians  did ;  a 
golden  image,  as  Nebuchadnezzar's  sub- 
jects did;  to  turn  the  glory  of  the  incor- 
ruptible God  into  the  similitude  of  a 
corruptible  man,  of  four-footed  beasts 
or  creeping  things,  they  would  have 
done  it.  Most  people  are  of  King 
Henry's  religion,  as  the  proverb  is,  re- 
solving to  do  as  the  most  do,  though 
thereby  they  be  undone  for  ever. 

But  Mordecai  bowed  not,  nor  did 
him  reverence. — He  did  not,  he  durst 
not,  though  pressed  to  it  with  greatest 
importunity.  And  why  1  Not  because 
Haman  wore  a  picture  openly  in  his 
bosom,  as  the  Chaldee  paraphrast  and 
Aben-Ezra  give  the  reason  ;  not  merely 
because  he  was  a  cursed  Amalekite  ;  but 
because  the  Persian  kings  required  that 
themselves  and  their  chief  favourites 
(such  as  proud  Haman  was)  should  be 
reverenced  with  a  kind  of  divine  honour, 
more  than  was  due  to  any  man.  This 
the  Jews  by  their  law  were  lb rbidden  to 
do.  It  was  not,  therefore,  pride  or  self- 
willedness  that  made  Mordecai  so  stiff 
in  the  hams  that  he  would  not  bend  to 
Haman,  but  fear  of  sin,  and  conscience 
of  duty.     He  knew  that  he  had  better 


offend  all  the  world  than  God  and  his 
own  conscience. 

That  they  told  Haman. — Purposely  to 
pick  a  thank  and  curry  favour.  And 
although  it  was  truth  they  told  Haman, 
yet  because  they  did  it  not  for  any 
love  to  the  truth,  nor  for  respect  to 
justice,  nor  for  the  bettering  of  either 
party,  but  only  to  undo  the  one  and  to 
incense  the  other,  they  were  no  better 
than  slanderers. 

And  he  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands  on 
Mordecai.  —  He  thought  it  a  small 
matter,  saith  Josephus,  a  thing  below 
him,  too  little  for  his  revenge,  which, 
like  fire,  burnetii  all  it  can  lay  hold 
upon,  especially  when,  as  here,  it  ariseth 
from  ambition.  Haman  thoudit  scorn 
to  foul  his  fingers  with  Mordecai  alone  ; 
the  whole  nation  must  perish,  and  all  the 
children  of  God  that  were  scattered 
abroad. — Trapp. 

**  Why  transgressest  thou  the  king's 
commands  1 "  The  servants  of  the  king 
said  to  Mordecai,  *'  Why  wilt  thou  re- 
fuse to  bow  before  Haman,  transgressing 
thus  the  wishes  of  the  king  ?  Do  we 
not  bow  before  him  1 "  "  Ye  are  fool- 
ish," answered  Mordecai ;  "  ay,  wanting 
in  reason.  Listen  to  me.  Shall  a  mortal 
who  must  return  to  the  dust  be  glorified  % 
Shall  I  bow  down  before  one  born  of 
woman,  whose  days  are  short  %  When 
he  is  small  he  cries  and  weeps  as  a  child  ; 
when  he  grows  older  sorrow  and  sighing 
are  his  portion  ;  his  days  are  full  of 
wrath  and  anger,  and  at  the  end  he 
returns  to  dust.  Shall  I  bow  to  one  like 
him  1  No,  I  prostrate  myself  before  the 
eternal  God,  who  lives  for  ever.  He 
who  dwells  in  heaven  and  bears  the 
world  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.  His 
word  changes  sunlight  to  darkness,  his 
command  illumines  the  deepest  gloom. 
His  wisdom  made  the  world  ;  He  placed 
the  boundaries  of  the  mighty  sea.  The 
waters  are  his,  the  sweet  and  the  salt. 
To  the  struggling  waves  he  says,  *  Be  still ; 
thus  far  shalt  thou  come,  no  further,  that 
the  earth  may  remain  dry  for  my  people.' 
To  him,  the  great  Creator  and  Ruler  of 
the  universe,  and  to  no  other,  will  I 
bow."  Haman  was  wroth  against  Mor- 
decai, and  said  to  him,  ''  Wliy  art  thou 
so  stiff-necked  %     Did  not  thy  forefather 


CHAP.  III.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


85 


bow  down  to  mine  % "  "  How  1 "  replied 
Mordecai ;  "  which  of  my  ancestors 
bowed  before  forefather  of  thine  1 "  Then 
Ilaman  answered,  **  Jacob  thy  fore- 
father bowed  down  to  Esau,  his  brother, 
who  was  my  forefather."  "  Not  so," 
answered  Mordecai,  "  for  I  am  descended 
from  Benjamin,  and  when  Jacob  bowed 
to  Esau,  Benjamin  was  not  yet  born. 
Benjamin  never  bowed  until  his  descend- 
ants prostrated  themselves  in  the  holy 
temple,  when  the  divinity  of  God  rested 
within  its  sacred  portals,  and  all  Israel 
united  with  him.  I  will  not  bow  before 
the  wicked  Haman." — Talmud. 

He  hearkened  not  unto  them. — He 
would  not  be  persuaded  from  his  purpose 
to  remain  true  to  the  principles  of  his 
religion.  His  course  was  dictated  not 
by  obstinacy,  but  by  firmness  of  religious 
principle.  H^.rodotus  relates  the  case  of 
certain  Spartans  who  visited  Shushan 
in  the  time  of  Xorxes,  and,  when  ushered 
into  the  royal  presence,  refused  to  pros- 
trate themselves  and  worship  before  the 
king,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  contrary 
to  their  customs  to  worship  a  man. 

They  told  Haman. — Until  they  told 
him,  Haman  seems  not  to  have  noticed 
that  Mordecai  did  not  bow  down  to  him. 
— American  Commentary. 

Haman  strove  to  destroy  all  the  Jews 
in  the  whole  realm  of  Ahasuerus,  as  being 
of  the  same  mind  with  Mordecai.  In 
the  West  such  an  idea  as  this  would 
never  have  occurred  to  a  revengeful 
man;  but  in  the  East  it  is  different. 
The  massacres  of  a  people,  a  race,  a  class, 
have  at  all  times  been  among  the  inci- 
dents of  history,  and  would  naturally 
present  themselves  to  the  mind  of  a 
statesman.  The  Magophonia,  or  a  great 
massacre  of  the  Magi  at  the  accession  of 
Darius  Hystaspis,  was  an  event  not  fifty 
years  old  in  the  twelfth  year  of  Xerxes, 
and  was  commemorated  annually.  A 
massacre  of  the  Scythians  had  occurred 
about  a  century  previously. — Rawlinson. 

God  is  so  great,  so  sovereign,  that  if 
thou  pleasest  him  not  he  accounts  thee 
an  enemy ;  if  thou  beest  not  subject  to 
him  thou  art  a  rebel.  As  kings,  yea, 
favourites,  thinking  themselves  so  great, 
that  if  any  be  not  wholly  theirs,  if  any 
man  veils  not,  stoops  not,  their  spirits  rise 


against  them  as  enemies,  as  Haman's 
did  against  Mordecai ;  and  so,  in  like 
manner.  Art  thou  not  king]  says 
Jezebel  to  Ahab ;  and  therefore  judged 
it  an  affront  to  him  to  be  denied  any- 
thing. In  like  manner.  Am  I  not  God  1 
says  the  Lord.  If  there  be  any  perverse- 
ness  of  spirit  shown  to  kings,  it  is 
interpreted  enmity,  because  their  great- 
ness expects  all  should  serve  and  be 
subject  to  them.  Now  the  greatness  of 
God  is  such  as  it  necessarily  and  justly 
draws  this  on  with  it.  Hence  the  carnal 
mind  is  said  to  be  enmity  against  God. 
— Goodwin. 

The  persons  with  whom  Mordecai 
had  to  do  at  the  king's  gate  were,  as  has 
been  said,  probably  more  curious  than 
malicious  in  the  first  instance;  but  a 
man  is  none  the  better  liked  for  takini^' 
up  higher  ground  than  that  occupied 
by  those  about  him.  The  busy-bodies 
wished  to  "  see  whether  Mordecai's 
matters  would  stand,"  whether  the 
supreme  power  would  recognize  a  Jew's 
conscience,  and,  if  not,  what  a  Jew  would 
then  do  with  his  conscience ;  so  they 
informed  Haman.  And  they  did  see, 
plentifully.  The  first  effect  was  to  reveal 
the  paltriness  of  Haman.  He  was  full 
of  rage  where  a  man  of  any  greatness  of 
soul  would  have  been  only  amused. 
"  Who  would  be  angry  with  a  Quaker 
for  not  taking  off  his  hat  when  he  comes 
into  a  room  1 "  But  Haman  was  one  of 
those  whom  if  you  strip,  seeking  to  find 
the  greatness  beneath  their  fine  clothes, 
lo  !  there  is  nothing  !  That  is,  nothing 
great  or  good.  For  there  is  something 
bad  and  ugly — black  revenge.  Justice 
is  said  to  blindfold  herself  tliat  she  may 
hold  the  scales  evenly,  not  knowing 
what  has  been  put  into  each ;  but 
revenge  shuts  both  eyes  that  it  may  see 
no  scales  at  all.  What  monstrous  dis- 
proportion between  the  offence  and  the 
penalty,  to  avenge  a  small  personal 
affront  received  from  one  Jew  by 
"  causing  to  perish  in  one  day  all  Jews, 
old  and  young."  To  account  for  this 
we  must  keep  in  mind  the  ancient 
national  feud  already  explained ;  and 
we  shall  do  well  to  remember  that 
instances  are  nut  wanting  of  the  same 
deadly  hatied  against  the  seed  of  the 


86  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  [chap.  ui. 


woman.      To  say  nothing  of   Nero  or  thousand  Protestants  on  the  eve  of  St. 

Domitian,  nor  of  Radama  in  Madagascar  Bartholomew's  day  in  France. — A.  M. 

quite  recently,  let  us  recaU   the  well-  Symingtony  B.A. 
known  case  of  the  massacre  of  fifty-six 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verse  7. 

The  Blind  Method  op  Revenge. 

This  is  curious,  that  there  should  he  method  in  madness.  Insanity  is  the  result 
of  mere  mental  confusion  or  distraction.  Sometimes  it  arises  from  the  preponderance 
of  one  idea,  and  that  idea  is  pursued  with  marvellous  persistence.  It  has  its  method, 
but  by  being  narrow  in  its  vision  it  becomes  blind  in  its  pursuit.  Revenge  when 
it  becomes  a  master  passion  is  the  worst  madness.  It  has  its  method,  but  no  wonder 
that  it  is  blind.  It  is  persistent  in  seeking  to  carry  out  its  revengeful  project.  It 
is  patient  until  the  time  has  arrived  to  strike  the  deadly  blow. 

I.  Revenge  is  blind  in  its  method.  Let  the  conduct  of  Haman,  as  the  embodi- 
ment of  revenge,  be  our  illustration.  He  caused  the  lot  to  be  cast  in  order  to  find 
out  the  favourable  day  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  fiendish  purpose.  We  are 
astonished  to  find  method  in  him  who  was  ''  full  of  wrath ; "  but  we  are  not 
astonished  to  find  that  he  was  blind  in  his  proceeding,  {a)  He  was  blind  to  the 
fact  that  there  is  no  chance.  His  course  was  self-contradictory.  He  consulted 
chance  in  order  to  make  a  definite  arrangement.  A  kind  of  blindness  men  often 
display,  (h)  He  was  blind  to  the  fact  that  so-called  chance  might  as  easily  be 
against  him  as  for  him.  He  evidently  thought  himself  all-important,  and  that  the 
paper  drawn  out  of  the  pitcher  would  most  certainly  have  written  on  it  the  lucky 
day.  Men  that  trust  to  chance  will  in  the  long  run  find  that  they  have  been  fools 
for  their  pains,  (c)  He  was  blind  to  the  fact  that  "  the  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap  ;  but 
the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord."  It  was  so  here.  The  lot  was  disposed 
to  the  complete  discomfiture  and  overthrow  of  revengeful  Haman,  and  to  the 
salvation  of  Horde  cai  and  his  people. 

II.  Revenge  is  injurious  in  its  persistence.  Haman  persisted  in  his  revengeful 
purpose.  The  pertinacity  of  the  mar  is  marvellous.  What  a  glorious  revolution 
would  soon  take  place  if  the  good  were  as  persistent  in  the  pursuit  of  merciful 
purposes  as  the  bad  are  in  revengeful  projects.  Every  bad  passion  is  injurious  in 
its  permanence.  More  injurious  to  its  subject  than  to  its  object.  Haman  was  doing 
himself  more  injury  and  rendering  himself  more  miserable  than  he  could  have  done 
or  rendered  Mordecai  even  if  all  his  purpose  had  been  accomplished.  "  Let  not  the 
sun  go  down  on  your  wrath  "  is  a  wise  lesson.  The  wise  will  let  their  anger  cool, 
but  in  the  bosom  of  a  fool  it  burns  till  morning  light. 

III.  Revenge  is  destructive  in  its  patience.  Haman  was  willing  to  wait 
twelve  months  in  order  that  his  revenge  might  be  the  more  signally  marked,  and 
his  triumph  the  greater.  But  his  very  patience  worked  his  ruin.  We  sometimes 
say  time  is  on  the  side  of  him  who  will  but  wait.  But  time  asks  what  is  the 
character  of  the  waiter,  and  what  is  the  purpose  he  has  in  view.  Time  is  not  on 
the  side  of  revengeful  waiters.  Time  holds  in  its  hands  no  rewards  to  be  presented 
in  the  distant  future  to  the  wicked.  Every  man  must  suffer  either  here  or  hereafter 
who  pursues  a  course  of  seeking  to  avenge  his  wrongs. 

Let  Haman's  followers  ponder  the  telling  proverbs — "  Curses,  like  chickens,  always 
come  home  to  roost;"  they  return,  that  is,  to  those  froui  whom  they  went  forth. 
"  Ashes  always  fly  back  in  the  face  of  him  that  throws  them."  "  Harm  watch,  harm 
catch."  '*  Who  sows  thorns,  let  him  not  walk  barefoot."  Hear  the  instructive 
voice  of  Paul — "Dearly  beloved,  avenge  not  yourselves,  but  rather  give  place  unto 
wrath  ;  for  it  is  written,  Vengeance  is  mine  ;  1  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord.     Therefore 


CHAP.    III.] 


nOMILETIC  GOMMENTARr:  ESTHER. 


87 


if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him  ;  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink  :  for  in  so  doing  thoii 
shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head.     Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil 


with  good." 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verse  7. 


In  the  twelfth  yearofMng  Ahasuerus. — 
When  Esther  had  now  been  queen  above 
four  years,  and,  being  greatly  beloved, 
was  in  a  capacity  to  do  her  people  good. 
This  was  a  sweet  providence  ;  the  remedy 
was  ready  before  the  disease  broke  out. 
No  country  hath  more  venomous  creatures 
than  Egypt,  none  more  antidotes.  So 
godliness  hath  many  troubles,  and  so 
many  helps  against  trouble. — Trapp. 

They  cast  PuVy  that  is,  the  lot. — The 
Septuagint  preserves  a  clause  of  this  verse 
which  assists  to  explain  its  meaning.  It 
thus  reads,  "  They  cast  Pur,  that  is,  the 
lot,  before  Haman,  from  day  to  day,  and 
from  month  to  month  (that  he  might 
destroy  in  one  day  the  race  of  Mordecai, 
and  the  lot  fell  for  the  fourteenth)  of  the 
twelfth  month,  that  is,  the  month  Adar." 
From  this  it  appears  that  the  lots  were 
cast  in  order  to  determine  the  month  and 
the  day  of  the  month  which  might  be 
most  propitious  for  this  barbarous  under- 
taking,  or  most  calamitous  for  the  Jews. 
— Illustrated  Commentary. 

The  method  of  procedure  seems  to 
have  been  this,  that  at  the  beginning 
of  the  first  month  Haman  caused  the 
diviners  whom  he  kept  about  him  to  cast 
the  lot  to  determine  what  day  of  the 
month,  and  what  month  of  the  year, 
would  bring  his  design  to  a  successful 
termination.  In  this  manner  he  learnt 
that  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  twelfth 
month  would  be  the  propitious  day. 
The  interval  was  long,  nearly  a  whole 
year ;  but  this  was  brought  about  by  a 
special  providence,  in  order  that  the 
scheme  might  be  defeated,  and  the  pro- 
jector of  it  visited  with  the  punishment 
he  merited.  Under  all  systems  of  false 
religion,  divination,  or  the  attempt  to 
pry  into  futurity  so  as  to  get  light  cast 
upon  contingent  affairs,  has  been  largely 
practised.  We  find  reference  made  to 
it  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  as  an  Egyptian 
custom,  when  the  cup  which  was  put 
into  Benjamin's  sack  is  called  that  by 
which  Joseph  divined.    The  Babylonians 


or  Chaldseans,  however,  seem  to  have 
been  addicted  to  divination  beyond  all 
other  nations,  and  were  indeed  proverbial 
for  the  use  of  it.  There  are  several  re- 
ferences made  to  this  in  the  prophetic 
books.  The  Persians  also  w^ere  addicted 
to  the  same  practices  ;  and  it  is  said  that 
among  that  people  even  at  the  present 
day,  no  one  commences  a  journey,  or 
almost  any  work  the  most  trifling,  without 
consulting  an  almanac,  or  an  astrologer, 
for  a  fortunate  moment.  It  would  seem, 
indeed,  as  if  there  were  a  natural  tendency 
in  the  human  mind  to  read  futurity  by 
certain  devices  of  its  own.  We  hear 
sometimes  of  individuals  in  our  own  day 
who  are  so  weak  as  to  suffer  themselves 
to  become  the  dupes  of  designing  knaves, 
who  for  money  pretend  by  certain  signs 
and  omens  to  foretell  what  will  be  the 
result  of  matters  in  which  they  are  in- 
terested. One  could  afford  to  smile  at 
the  absurd  credulity  which  thus  aUows 
itself  to  be  imposed  upon,  if  it  were  not 
that  the  cherishing  the  desire  to  know 
the  future,  and  having  recourse  to  any 
such  means  to  have  it  gratified,  is  de- 
nounced in  the  Scripture  as  impiety. 
The  Jewish  people  were  solemnly  warned 
against  such  procedure,  that  they  might 
not  by  means  of  it  degrade  and  pollute 
themselves  as  the  heathen  did.  No 
rational  man  will  suppose  that  by  casting 
lots,  or  by  observing  the  flight  of  birds, 
or  by  inspecting  the  entrails  of  an  animal 
slain  in  sacrifice,  or  by  astrology,  or  by 
any  of  the  other  methods  which  were 
employed  to  discover  what  day  or  hour 
would  be  suitable  for  an  undertaking,  or 
what  would  be  the  issue  of  it,  a  true 
result  could  be  obtained.  Yet,  as  all 
these  things  formed  part  of  the  instru- 
mentality by  which  Satan  kept  up  his 
dominion  over  the  minds  of  men,  we  can 
conceive  that  sometimes  in  the  Divine 
providence  they  might  be  permitted  to 
take  effect,  to  punish  those  who  were 
given  over  to  a  blind  and  reprobate  mind, 
and  that,  as  in  the  case  of  Ham  an 's  lots, 


88 


nOMlLETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  III. 


there  might  be  an  overmling  of  human 
sin  and  folly  to  work  out  the  purposes 
of  the  Divine  government. 

It  is  natural  for  us  to  desire  to  lift  up 
the  veil ;  and  sometimes,  in  pressing 
emergencies,  we  would  give  much  to  be 
enabled  to  do  this.  But  since  the  word 
of  God  tells  us  that  all  events  are  under 
liis  control,  and  that  his  eye  is  ever  on 
his  people,  and  all  that  concerns  them, 
lor  their  good,  we  may  well  wait  patiently 
for  the  evolution  of  his  purposes. — 
Davidson. 

Superstition  and  imposture  have  al- 
ways been  ready  to  lend  their  aid  to 
the  worst  and  most  diabolical  deeds.  It 
was  customary  among  the  ancients  to 
divide  their  days  into  lucky  and  unlucky, 
and  they  were  anxious  to  undertake  any 
great  work  on  a  propitious  day.  Among 
the  various  ways  to  which  they  had 
recourse  for  ascertaining  this  was  the 
lot,  which  was  used  on  this  occasion  by 
Haman.  It  is  of  little  importance  to 
ascertain  the  particular  mode  of  casting 
the  lot,  whether  it  was  by  means  of  dice, 
or  other  instruments  cast  into  the  urn, 
or  by  throwing  arrows  or  other  missiles, 
accompanied  with  certain  magical  actions. 

Observe  the  overruling  providence  of 
God.  During  an  interval  of  eleven 
months,  Mordecai  and  Esther  had  time 
to  use  means  for  defeating  the  design, 
and  if  they  proved  unsuccessful,  the 
Jews  had  time  to  shift  for  their  lives. 
The  hearts  of  all  men  are  in  the  hand  of 
the  Lord,  who  can  turn  them  as  he 
pleaseth.     Haman  was  the  slave  of  super- 


stition, which  controlled  his  most  violent 
passions,  and  by  means  of  it  his  wrath 
was  restrained,  and  its  intentions  brought 
to  nought.  "  The  Lord  is  known  by  the 
judgment  which  he  executeth ;  the 
wicked  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his  own 
hands."  "  Haman  has  appealed  to  tho 
lot,  and  to  the  lot  he  shall  go,  which, 
by  adjourning  the  execution,  gives  judg- 
ment against  him,  and  breaks  the  neck 
of  the  plot." — McGrie. 

There  is  a  proverb  to  the  effect  that 
the  devil  limps,  and  any  who  look 
thoughtfully  into  history  or  more  private 
affairs  will  find  it  confirmed.  That  is 
to  say,  the  god  of  this  world  betrays 
himself,  and  cannot  help  betraying  him- 
self, by  leaving  some  point  unguarded, 
by  doing  something  unwise,,  even  when 
much  power  nml  cunning  have  been 
brought  into  p].i.\ .  Or,  to  put  the  same 
truth  in  another  aspect,  when  the  enemies 
of  God  and  man  are  most  busy,  and 
seem  to  be  most  successful,  '^  he  that 
sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh ;  the 
Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision." 
There  were  blunders  in  Haman's  plot 
against  the  people  of  God  which  secured 
its  failure.  Why  did  he  offer  two 
millions  sterling  as  compensation  for  the 
loss  of  revenue,  at  the  same  time  that  he 
was  telling  Ahasuerus  it  was  "not  for 
the  king's  profit  to  suffer  "  the  Jews  to 
live]  If  the  king  had  taken  time  to 
think,  he  would  have  detected  a  selfish 
motive  under  the  inconsistent  ofter.  It 
did  not  escape  Esther  when  her  time 
came  to  speak. — A.  M.  Symington,  B.A. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PAEAGRAPH.     Verses  8—1 L 


A  False  Aspect  of  the  Truth. 

Success  begets  confidence.  It  was  so  in  this  case.  Haman  had  been  successful, 
and  consequently  became  confident.  He  knew  his  present  power  with  the  king, 
and  therefore  takes  his  steps  accordingly.  He  lays  his  plans  before  he  makes  his 
wicked  request  unto  the  monarch.  But  a  man  may  be  blindly  confident,  and  his 
over-confidence  may  lead  to  his  destruction,  as  it  did  in  the  case  of  Haman.  There 
may  be  too  much  caution.  A  man  may  be  afraid  to  take  a  bold  step  when  bold- 
ness is  required  and  is  safety.  But  there  may  be  too  little  caution.  A  man,  for 
the  want  of  caution,  may  take  a  leap  in  the  dark,  and  plunge  into  the  abyss  of  ruin. 
Here  Haman  displayed  a  want  of  wise  caution.  He  is  now  taking  the  dangerous 
leap.     Soon  we  shall  see  him  plunging  in  the  abyss. 

I.  A  true  description.     Haman  had  accurately  studied  the  condition  of  the 


OHAP.  HI.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER,  89 

Jewish  people,  and  was  acquainted  with  their  internal  regulations,  and  he  descrihes 
them  correctly.  Oui'  enemies  tell  us  the  truth.  In  one  aspect  Haman  was  a  truth- 
ful delineator.  Josephus  himself  could  not  have  done  better  than  Haman.  He 
describes  them — [a)  As  a  scattered  people.  Throughout  the  extensive  kingdom  of 
Ahasuerus  these  Jews  were  scattered,  mixing  with  the  people  and  yet  distinct. 
Wherever  they  were  they  preserved  their  nationality.  Wonderful  race  these  Jews  ! 
Wonderful  in  Haman's  time,  wonderful  still  in  Disraeli's  time.  A  people  scatterexl 
and  peeled  through  all  time,  but  a  people  never  stripped  of  that  marvellous  quality 
by  which  they  are  unique,  {h)  As  a  peculiar  people.  They  had  laws  diverse  from 
all  people.  These  laws  were  God-given.  These  laws  were  the  fountain  from  which 
has  flowed  the  best  judicial  streams  this  world  has  seen.  The  ancient  Jewish 
legislator,  in  the  very  childhood  of  the  world's  history,  promulgated  a  legal  code 
which  nineteenth  century  legislators  may  still  study  with  profit.  J^o  wonder  that 
these  laws  were  diverse  from  all  people.  These  laws  were  Divine  ;  other  laws  are 
human.  These  laws,  in  their  leading  principles,  were  cosmopolitan ;  other  laws  are 
local.  These  laws  were  intended  for  the  formation  of  a  glorious  Divine  society. 
Other  laws  are  for  the  formation  of  human  societies.  These  laws  are  eternal ;  but 
other  laws,  in  so  far  as  they  are  divergent,  are  temporary.  Haman  was  right,  and 
yet  Haman  was  wrong. 

II.  A  false  implication  and  declaration.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  the  tailor 
makes  the  man,  and  so  we  may  say  that  tlie  speaker  makes  or  unmakes  the  truth. 
Truth  may  be  so  dressed  as  to  look  like  and  to  do  the  work  of  falsehood.  Haman 
makes  two  false  implications,  and  one  false  declaration,  [a)  A  scattered  people, 
and  therefore  influential  for  evil.  These  Jews  are  amongst  all  the  people  in  the 
provinces  of  thy  kingdom,  and  therefore  consider  how  much  evil  they  may  do. 
What  power  for  sowing  in  all  directions  the  seeds  of  rebellion !  (^)  A  peculiar 
people,  and  therefore  dangerous.  They  have  laws  and  opinions  of  their  own.  They 
are  likely  to  think  for  themselves.  A  race  of  thinkers  is  not  promising  soil  for 
despots.  These  Jews  were  not  molluscous  animals.  Despotism  cannot  long  flourish 
where  backboned  and  strong-muscled  men  are  permitted.  Haman  was  nearer  the 
truth  than  he  imagined.  Here  is  a  false  declaration — "  neither  keep  they  the  king's 
laws."  The  laws  of  God  are  never  opposed  to  any  laws  that  are  for  the  welfare  of 
a  nation.  These  Jews,  in  so  far  as  they  were  God-fearing  people,  would  not  refuse 
to  keep  any  law  that  was  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom  of  Ahasuerus.  Mordecai 
was  a  better  keeper  of  the  law  than  Haman. 

III.  An  unjust  inference.  ''  Therefore  it  is  not  for  the  king's  profit  to  suffer 
them."  Haman's  logic  would  not  meet  with  the  approval  of  Aristotle.  His  pre- 
mises did  not  warrant  his  conclusion.  Defective  logic  more  often  arises  from  bad- 
ness of  heart  than  from  weakness  of  intellect.  The  pure  in  heart  will  come  to  right 
conclusions,  though  they  may  not  have  the  power  of  putting  their  reasoning  into 
syllogistic  form.  Oh,  if  the  king  had  only  then  turned  to  the  book  of  the  chron- 
icles, and  read  the  record  of  Mordecai's  faithfulness,  he  would  have  seen  that  it  was 
for  his  profit  to  suffer  this  despised  race. 

IV.  An  artful  petition.  Haman  artfully  keeps  his  wily  and  wicked  project  in 
the  background.  Here  is — (a)  Lying  obsequiousness.  '*If  it  please  the  king." 
Haman  is  seeking  to  please  himself.  Little  he  cares  about  the  king's  pleasure,  so 
that  his  own  revenge  is  satisfied.  (&)  Feigned  liberality.  How  wonderfully 
generous  malice  can  be  !  A  little  forgiveness  to  Mordecai,  even  if  Mordecai  had 
sinned,  would  have  been  truer  liberality  than  this  magnificent  offer  of  wealth  to  be 
poured  into  the  king's  treasury,  (c)  Ostentatious  zeal.  How  zealous  people  are 
when  there  is  a  wicked  motive  working.  Haman  pretends  a  great  deal  of  zeal  for 
the  king,  but  he  has  zeal  for  himself.  Oh,  how  often  self  creeps  in  when  we  pre- 
tend to  be  zealous  for  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Yes,  when  we  have  no  pretence,  when  we 
are  trying  to  be  sincere,  how  much  of  self  in  our  best  works. 

V.  A  weak  compliance.     The  king  at  once,  without  inquiry,  without  exercising 


90  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  ni. 


his  intelligence,  gave  the  needful  power  into  the  han^s  of  this  wicked  Haman. 
Weak  and  self-indulgent  people  do  great  harm  because  they  will  not  be  at  the 
trouble  to  think.  The  ring  of  royal  authority  was  given  to  the  revengeful  favourite. 
The  king  was  undermining  his  own  power.  The  nation  has  indeed  reason  to  mourn 
when  wicked  men  are  exalted.  What  a  satire  is  the  king's  declaration  to  Haman 
— unconscious  it  may  be,  but  none  the  less  biting  when  observed — "  The  silver  is 
given  unto  thee,  the  people  also,  to  do  with  them  as  it  seemeth  good  to  thee." 
Little  good  would  Haman  do  unto  the  people. 

In  our  utterances  let  us  put  the  truth  in  its  proper  relations,  so  that  a  correct 
impression  may  be  produced,  and  that  no  misrepresentation  may  be  the  consequence 
of  our  declarations.  In  our  hearing  of  statements  let  us  have  no  ear  for  the  mere 
slanderer,  let  us  properly  weigh  and  measure  the  charges  brought  forward.  Let  us 
see  to  it  that  our  motives  are  pure,  and  then  our  vision  will  be  clear,  our  reasoning 
valid,  and  our  actions  honourable. 

*•  A  lie  which  is  half  a  truth  is  ever  the  blackest  of  lies  ; 
For  a  lie  which  is  all  a  lie  may  be  met  and  fought  with  outright, 
But  a  lie  which  is  part  a  truth  is  a  harder  matter  to  fight. " 

Haman's  Murderous  Proposal  (verse  8). 

Eevenge  is  cruel,  but  never  more  cruel  than  when  it  has  its  foundation  in 
mortified  pride.  In  the  passage  before  us  it  is  carried  to  an  almost  incredible 
extent.  Haman  occupied  the  highest  post  of  honour,  next  to  the  royal  family,  in 
the  Persian  empire.  All  the  subjects  in  the  kingdom  bowed  down  to  him.  But 
there  was  a  poor  man,  one  Mordecai,  who  sat  at  the  king's  gate,  and  consequently 
was  often  passed  by  Haman,  who  refused  to  pay  him  this  homage.  At  this  neglect 
Haman  was  grievously  offended.  He  deemed  it  an  insufferable  insult,  which  could 
be  expiated  only  by  the  death  of  the  offender.  On  inquiring  into  Mordecai's  habits 
and  connections,  Haman  found  that  he  was  a  Jew ;  and  conceiving  probably  that 
this  contemptuous  spirit  pervaded  that  whole  nation,  and  accounting  it  a  small 
matter  to  sacrifice  the  life  of  one  single  individual,  he  determined  if  possible  to 
destroy  the  whole  nation  at  once  ;  and  accordingly  he  made  this  proposal  to  King 
Ahasuerus,  engaging  from  his  own  resources  to  make  up  to  the  king's  treasury 
whatever  loss  might  arise  to  the  revenue  from  the  proposed  measure.  Now  this 
proposal  appearing  at  first  sight  so  very  extraordinary,  I  will  endeavour  to  set 
before  you — 

I.  The  commonness  of  it.  In  every  age  of  the  world  have  God's  people  been 
hated,  for  the  very  reasons  that  are  here  assigned — "  Their  laws  are  diverse  from 
those  of  all  other  people,  neither  keep  they  the  laws  of  the  kingdoms  where  they 
dwell."  They  worship  the  one  true  and  living  God.  Of  course,  whatever  laws 
are  inconsistent  with  the  laws  of  God  they  disobey.  On  this  account  they  are 
hated,  reviled,  and  persecuted.  David  tells  us  of  confederacies  formed  to  "  cut  off 
the  Jews  from  being  a  nation."  So,  in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity,  there  were 
not  less  than  ten  strenuous  efforts  made  to  attain  this  object.  And  at  different 
periods  since  that  time  has  persecution  raged  to  the  utmost  extent  to  destroy,  if 
possible,  all  real  piety  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  But  we  need  not  go  back  to 
former  ages  for  an  elucidation  of  this  truth.  True,  the  cruelties  of  martyrdom  are 
stayed ;  but  private  animosity  is  indulged  as  far  as  the  laws  of  the  land  wherein 
we  live  will  admit,  and  every  person  who  thoroughly  devotes  himself  to  God  is 
made  to  feel  its  baneful  influence.  "All  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall 
suffer  persecution."  Passing  over  the  inhumanity  of  this  proposal,  a§  being  too 
obvious  to  be  insisted  on,  I  proceed  to  notice — 

II.  The  impiety  of  it.  The  very  accusation  brought  against  the  Jews  by  Haman 
shows  what  is  the  real  ground  of  enmity  against  the  Lord's  people  ;  it  is  that  they 


CHAr.  III.]  nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  91 

serve  God,  Avhilst  the  rest  of  the  world  bow  down  to  idols  ;  and  that  in  this  deter- 
mination of  theirs  they  inflexibly  adhere  to  the  dictates  of  their  own  conscience. 
This  is  universal  amongst  all  the  people  of  the  Lord.  But  this  preference  of  God 
to  man  is  the  very  thing  which  gives  offence.  Look  at  the  prophets  and  apostles, 
and  see  what  was  the  ground  of  the  world's  opposition  to  them.  And  this  leads 
me  to  show — 

III.  The  folly  of  it.  Can  it  be  thought  that  such  feeble  worms  as  we  should 
be  able  to  prevail  against  Almighty  God  %  Haman,  with  all  his  power,  could  not 
prevail  against  the  Jews,  who  yet,  in  appearance,  were  altogether  in  his  hands. 
The  whole  power  of  the  Eoman  empire,  by  whomsoever  wielded,  could  not  root 
out  the  disciples  of  the  Christian  Church,  "  nor  shall  the  gates  of  hell  ever  prevail " 
against  the  weakest  of  God's  faithful  people. 

Address — (a)  Those  who  are  the  objects  of  the  world's  hatred.  Realize  the 
promises  which  God  has  given,  and  then  say.  Shall  I  be  afraid  of  a  man  that  shall 
die,  and  of  the  son  of  man  that  shall  be  as  grass,  and  forget  the  Lord  my  maker  1 
(h)  Those  who  are  unhappily  prejudiced  against  the  Lord's  people.  If  you  cannot 
see  with  their  eyes,  do  not  endeavour  to  make  them  see  with  yours,  unless  in  a 
way  of  sober  argumentation  and  of  candid  reference  to  the  word  of  God.  To  have 
recourse  to  derision  or  persecution  of  any  kind  will  only  involve  your  own  souls 
in  yet  deeper  guilt  than  you  already  lie  under  for  rejecting  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
Beware  how  you  imitate  the  unbelievers  of  former  ages  in  opposing  the  work  of 
God  in  others  ;  for  if  you  do  not  succeed  you  only  fight  against  God  for  nought ; 
and  if  you  do  succeed  you  will  perish  under  the  accumulated  guilt  of  destroying  the 
souls  of  others,  for  assuredly  *'  their  blood  will  be  required,  at  your  hands." — 
Abridged  from  Simeon* s  *  Horce  Homileticce.' 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  8 — 11. 

Therefore  it  is  not  for  the  king's  profit,  them. — Worldly  hearts  are  not  led  by 
— See  how  this  sycophant  fills  his  mouth  good  or  evil,  but  by  profit  or  loss  ;  neither 
with  arguments,  the  better  to  achieve  .  have  they  grace  to  know  that  nothing 
his  desire.  An  elaborate  set  speech  he  is  profitable  but  what  is  honest,  nothing 
maketh,  neither  is  there  a  word  in  it  so  desperately  incommodious  as  wicked- 
but  what  might  seem  to  have  weight,  ness ;  they  must  needs  offend  by  rule, 
He  pretends  the  king's  profit  and  the  that  measure  all  things  by  profit,  and 
public  good,  concealing  and  dissembling  measure  profit  by  their  imagination, 
his  ambition,  avarice,  envy,  malignity,  How  easy  is  it  to  suggest  strange  untruths 
that  set  him  a-work.  Politicians  when  when  there  is  nobody  to  make  answer ! 
they  soar  highest  are  like  the  eagle,  False  Haman !  how  is  it  not  for  the 
which,  whiles  aloft,  hath  her  eye  still  king's  profit  to  suffer  the  Jews'?  If  thou 
upon  the  prey,  which  by  this  means  she  construe  this  profit  for  honour,  the  king's 
spies  sooner,  and  seizes  upon  better,  honour  is  in  the  multitude  of  subjects ; 
Haman  holds  it  not  fit  there  should  be  and  what  people  more  numerous  than 
more  religions  than  one  in  a  kingdom,  they  ]  if  for  gain,  the  king's  profit  is  in 
for  preventing  of  troubles.  Nebuchad-  the  largeness  of  his  tributes ;  and  what 
nezzar  was  of  the  same  mind  when  he  people  are  more  deep  in  their  payments'? 
commanded  all  men  to  worship  his  if  for  service,  what  people  are  more 
golden  image.  But  must  all,  therefore,  officious'?  How  can  it  stand  with  the 
die  that  will  not  do  it  ]  and  is  it  for  the  king's  profit  to  bereave  himself  of  sub- 
king's  profit  that  the  righteous  be  rooted  jects,  his  subjects  of  their  lives,  his 
out  1  Is  not  the  holy  seed  the  stay  of  exchequer  of  their  tributes,  his  state  of 
the  state,  the  beauty  and  bulwark  of  the  their  defence  1  He  is  a  weak  politician 
nation  1 — Trapp.  that  knows  not  to  gild  over  the  worst 

It  is  not  f 07'  the  Icing's  profit  to  suffer  project  with  a  pretence  of  public  utility. 


92                               IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  [chap.  ill. 

No  name  under  heaven  liath  made  so  of  the  ancient  Persian  empire.  In  the 
many  fools,  so  many  villains,  as  this  of  reign  of  Xerxes  a  noble  Lydian  named 
profit. — Bishop  Hall.  Pythius  entertained  the  whole  Persian 
Along  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  army — the  largest  ever  assembled — on 
Tigris,  already  renowned  for  their  schools  its  march  towards  Greece ;  and  then 
of  learning ;  high  up  in  the  mountains  freely  offered  to  contribute  all  his  pro- 
of Kurdistan,  where  perchance  their  perty  in  gold  and  silver  to  the  support 
descendants  linger  still ;  all  the  dis-  of  the  war.  It  amounted  altogether  to 
persed  settlers  were  included  in  those  2000  talents  of  silver  and  four  millions 
words,  which  might  stand  as  the  motto  (wanting  7000)  of  gold  darics  —  more 
of  the  larger  part  of  the  Jewish  race  ever  than  four  millions  of  our  money;  be- 
since — which  might  have  been  said  of  sides  which  he  had,  as  he  said,  estates 
them  by  Tacitus  in  the  Roman  empire,  and  slaves  which  would  still  afford  him 
or  by  the  Arabian  or  English  chroniclers  a  suitable  maintenance.  This  noble  offer 
of  the  middle  ages.  "  The  line  of  beacon-  was  declined  by  the  king,  as  that  of 
lights  kindled  from  hill  to  hill  along  the  Hainan  was  by  Ahasuerus. 
whole  route  from  Jerusalem  to  Babylon,  Sealed  with  the  king's  ring. — In  the 
from  Olivet  to  Sartaba,  from  Sartaba  to  British  museum  are  preserved  specimens 
Grophniah,  from  Grophniah  to  Have-  of  Egyptian  seals  of  the  ring  class, 
ran,  from  Haveran  to  Beth-Baltin,  —  Some  of  them  are  finger-seal  rings  ;  but 
waving  the  torches  upwards  and  down-  the  larger  are  scarabaeus  or  beetle  seals, 
wards,  till  the  whole  country  of  the  These  are  all  mounted  in  handles,  or 
captivity  appeared  a  blazing  fire," — was  rings  of  metal,  in  which  they  revolve  on 
an  apt  emblem  of  the  sympathetic  links  pivots.  This  was  doubtless  to  render 
which  bound  all  these  settlements  to-  them  more  portable,  while  it  enabled  the 
gether.  Of  this  vast  race,  for  whom  so  face  to  be  turned  out  ward,  so  as  to  increase 
great  a  des^iiny  was  reserved,  the  Book  their  effect  as  ornaments,  and  to  enable 
of  Esther  recognized  as  by  a  prophetic  them  to  be  worn  with  more  convenience 
instinct  the  future  importance. — Stanley.  — attached,  as  they  probably  were,  to 
/  loill  pay  ten  thousand  talents  of  some  part  of  the  person. — Illustrated 
silver. — This  was  above  two  millions  of  Family  Bible. 

our  money,  which  Haman  offered  to  pay  So   do  injured   pride,  envy,    malice, 

into  the  treasury  to  indemnify  the  king  *  hatred  still  seek  to  blast  the  fairest  re- 

for  the  loss  of  revenue  which  he  would  putation  by  baseless  calumny.    The  word 

sustain  by  the  destruction  of  the  Jews,  of  a  friend  is  trusted,  and  the  slander 

That  a  foreigner,  and  probably  a  captive,  is  believed  and  repeated,  and  acquires 

was  enabled   at   the   Persian    court   to  strength  from  its  currency.     If  we  blame 

acquire  such  wealth  as  the  offer  of  so  Ahasuerus  for  too  readily  listening  to  the 

enormous  a  sum  implies,  makes  it  less  invective  of  Haman,  and  condemning  the 

wonderful  that  Nehemiah  was  in  a  con-  Jews  unheard  and  untried,  we  should  be 

dition   to   sustain   the    charges    of    his  on    our   guard   against   committing  the 

government  from  his  own  resources.     It  same  sin,  by  giving  heed  to  scandal  in 

will  be  recollected  that  Haman  appears  regard  to  others  without  careful  personal 

to  have  been  the  chief  minister  of  the  inquiry  and  observation,  lest  we  should 

king,  and  that  functionary  enjoys  pecu-  be  only  crediting  the  creations  of   the 

liar  opportunities  for  the  acquisition  of  worst   passions  and    distempers  of   our 

wealth.     On  Kew  Year's  Day  the  king  fallen  natures.     The  Saviour  was  calum- 

receives  the  offerings  of  his  princes  and  niated   by   his   adversaries    because   he 

nobles.     On   one   such   occasion,  when  spake  the  truth.     They  hated  him,  and 

Mr.  Morier  was  present,  the  offering  of  therefore  spake  against  him.     And  the 

the  person  holding  this  office  surpassed  whole  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ 

every  other  in  value,  amounting  to  about  upon  earth  bears  evidence  that  the  policy 

£30,000  in  gold  coin.    Other  statements  of  our  great  adversary  is  to  traduce  and 

are  extant  concerning  the  extraordinary  vUify  those  whom  he  desires  to  ruin. 

wealth  possessed  by  some  of  the  subjects  By  this    means   he  would   break   theii 


CHAP.    III.] 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


93 


influence  and  tare-sow  all  their  good. 
Let  us  be  oti  our  guard  against  aiding 
and  abetting  liiiu  in  this  matter. 

Another  artifice  of  the  enemy,  which 
was  also  illustrated  by  Haman,  is  to 
assume  the  air  and  attitude  of  apparent 
disinterestedness.  Judas  concealed  liis 
real  feelings  and  motives  when  betraying 
our  Lord  under  the  symbol  of  aftection. 
And  Haman  sought  to  insinuate  his  love 
of  the  empire  and  the  stability  of  the 
throne  as  his  only  motives  for  the 
destruction  of  several  millions  of  un- 
offending persons,  by  offering  to  pay 
down  ten  thousand  talents  of  silver. 
It  reminds  one  of  the  many  specious 
schemes  which  are  constantly  being 
thrust  before  the  public  by  designing 
worldlings  —  who  offer  large  bonuses 
with  nothing  to  sustain  their  magnificent 
prospects.  The  projectors  of  these 
schemes  affect  only  the  public  good — 
the  rapid  and  certain  enrichment  of 
those  who  will  give  them  their  con- 
fidence and  their  money ;  and  not  until 
the  bubble  bursts  do  the  poor  victims  of 
their  deceit  apprehend  the  real  motives 
by  which  they  were  influenced.  In  like 
manner  do  early  temptations  to  evil  all 
hold  out  the  promise  of  present  good. 
Some  pleasure  to  be  attained,  or  ad- 
vancement reached,  or  laurel  wreath 
worn.  What  a  piece  of  disguised 
disinterestedness  was  it  on  the  part  of 
Satan  when  he  proposed  to  give  to 
Christ  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world, 
and  the  glory  of  them !  Men  are  not 
so  wise  and  quick  as  was  our  Lord  in 
discovering  the  real  motive  of  the 
tempter,  and  resisting  him  by  a  reference 
to  the  word  of  God.  They  are  captiv- 
ated by  the  show  of  disinterestedness, 
and  only  come  to  a  knowledge  of  their 
mistake  in  the  reaping  of  its  fruits. 
Meanwhile,  it  serves  the  purpose  of  the 
enemy  by  inciting  trust,  and  preventing 
religious  reflection  and  inquiry,  just  as 
Hanian's  silver  talents  blinded  Ahasu- 
erus  to  the  dark-hearted  malignity  of 
their  promiser.  Let  us  bring  every 
temptation  to  the  test  of  an  enlightened 
conscience,  and  the  penetrating,  exposing 
power  of  God's  word ;  and  under  the 
mask  of  disinterestedness  we  shall  dis- 
cover the  poisoned  sting  secreted  in  the 


suggested  sin.  *'Do  as  I  bid  thee,  () 
king ;  and  thou  shalt  rid  tlie  empire  of 
a  mighty  burden,  and  secure  greater 
stability  and  peace  tor  thy  tlirone  and 
government."  No ;  the  policy  of  the 
arch-fiend,  through  his  agents,  is  not 
clianfjed  from  that  which  he  followed  in 
the  ^-arden  of  Eden.  "  Am  not  I  your 
disinterested  benefactor V  "Ye  shall 
not  surely  die  :  for  God  doth  know  that 
in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  then  your  eyes 
shall  be  opened,  and  ye  shall  be  as  gods, 
knowing  good  and  evil." — McEwan. 

There  is  a  false  halo  of  grandeur  shed 
around  the  path  of  the  conqueror,  and 
there  is  not  so  palpable  a  connection 
between  his  exploits  and  absolute  revolt- 
ing feK)city,  as  there  is  between  the 
decree  of  Artaxerxes  and  Haman,  and 
the  execution  of  it.  But  looking  from 
the  cruelty  which  is  glossed  over  by  the 
name  of  military  glory,  we  even  find 
cool,  unmitigated  atrocities  in  the  records 
of  civilized  nations^  which  are  as  dis- 
graceful to  humanity  as  Haman's — yea, 
which  surpass  them.  Haman  was  a 
heathen,  a  stranger,  therefore,  to  the 
softening  power  of  religion,  and  we  see 
in  him  only  an  illustration  of  what 
human  nature  is  when  left  to  itself, 
without  the  control  of  any  pure  and 
heavenly  influence.  But  Avhat  shall  we 
say  of  the  indiscriminate  massacre  of 
the  Protestants  (1572)  in  Paris,  and 
other  parts  of  Prance,  wherein  at  least 
70,000  persons  in  brief  space  fell  victims 
to  the  bigotry  and  cruelty  of  the  king 
and  his  advisers?  That  was  a  tragedy 
contrived  in  cold  blood,  and  advised  by 
favourites,  to  glut  the  revenge  of  Papal 
Rome.  Day  and  hour  were  fixed  here, 
as  they  were  by  Han, an.  But,  unhappily, 
day  and  hour  were  kept,  and  the  true 
worshippers  of  God,  the  lovers  of  his 
truth,  the  best  friends  of  religion  and 
morality,  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  were 
massacred  because  they  would  i)ay 
homage  to  Christ  himself,  and  not  to  the 
Roman  Antichrist.  And  what  shall  we 
say  of  the  cruelties,  — that  is  too  tame  a 
word, — what  shall  we  say  of  the  horrible 
barbarities  which,  by  the  command  of 
the  Romish  tyrant,  whose  hands  are  red 
with  the  blood  of  the  saints,  were  perpe- 
trated in   the  valleys  of  the  Waldenses, 


94 


nOMTLKTIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  HI. 


wlipn  not  only  men,  but  feeble  women 
and  lielpless  children,  were  savagely 
tortured  and  slain  by  a  brutal  soldiery 
for  no  other  reavson  than  that  they  would 
worship  God  as  his  word  commands  ] 
And  are  not  scenes  of  equal  atrocity  set 
before  us  in  the  history  of  our  own 
country,  when  wholesale  murder  was 
authorized  by  royal  edict  because  our 
forefathers  would  not  take  their  religion 
and  forms  of  worship  from  the  enact- 
ments of  the  civil  powers,  but  would 
serve  God  as  they  believed  the  Bible 
required,  and  as  their  consciences  ap- 
proved"? Haman's  character  is  one  of 
the  blackest  in  history.  But  on  a  calm 
review,  and  with  full  allowance  for  the 
time  and  circumstances  in  which  he 
lived,  he  is  pure  as  compared  with  the 
infamous  King  of  France,  who  looked 
from  his  palace  window  and  enjoyed  the 
scene  of  slaughter  in  his  capital ;  with 
the  savages  who  shed  the  blood  of  the 
noble  martyrs  in  the  valleys  of  the  Alps; 
and  with  the  last  monarchs  of  the 
Stuart  line  and  their  wretched  accom- 
plices, who  persecuted  to  the  death  the 
lesolute  defenders  of  civil  and  religious 
freedom.  But  will  not  God  visit  for 
these  things  1  Nay,  should  we  not  rather 
say.  Hath  he  not  visited  already  %  The 
visitation  of  Haman  we  shall  soon  have 
before  us.  Deeply  has  France  already 
paid  for  the  innocent  blood  which  her 
rulers  shed  long  ago,  and  her  soil,  it  is 
to  be  feared,  is  not  yet  cleansed  from 
the  pollution.  Other  persecutors  have 
had  their  award  also.  And  the  great 
central  persecuting  power,  Rome  herself, 
will  in  due  time  have  her  foretold  destiny 
fully  accomplished.  As  she  hath  done 
it  Avill  be  done  to  her.  Even  if  the 
word  of  God  were  silent  on  the  subject, 
we  could  not  but  anticipate  that  that 
anti-Christian  power,  to  whose  direct 
inlluence  may  be  traced  persecution  and 
bloodshed  such  as  heathenism  never 
was  stained  with,  will  have  the  measure 
meted  to  her  which  she  has  meted  out 
to  others.  But  we  need  not  speak 
doubtfully  here.  The  Divine  word  has 
fixed  the  doom  of  Papal  Rome.  And 
if  she  seems  to  be  raising  herself  in  our 
day,  it  is  assuredly  only  to  give  the 
greater  impulse  to  her  final  ruin,  that 


she  may  fall  from  the  greater  height, 
when,  like  the  great  millstone  cast  by 
the  angel  into  the  sea,  she  shall  be 
engulfed  in  the  abyss  of  the  wrath  of 
God. — Davidson. 

That  believers  obey  not  the  laws  of 
the  king  has  always  been  the  chief 
complaint  among  the  anti  -  Christian 
rabble,  of  which  Haman  furnishes  a  copy. 
The  children  of  God,  in  their  eyes,  must 
ever  be  insurrectionists,  disturbers  of 
the  peace,  persons  subject  to  no  law  or 
order,  and  by  whom  the  public  weal  is 
endangered. — Berlenhurg  Bihle. 

Satan,  as  Christ  says,  is  a  liar  and  a 
murderer.  Hence  he  is  ever  busy  in 
persecuting  the  Church  with  his  lying 
and  murderous  designs.  You  have 
heard  before  his  lie  :  The  people  are 
using  new  laws  and  ceremonies,  and  they 
de-^pise  the  edicts  of  the  king.  Now 
hear  his  murderous  words  :  If  it  please 
thee,  decree  that  this  people  be  destroyed. 
— Brenz. 

A  man  resigned  to  the  will  of  God 
will  disregard  the  laws  of  man  when- 
ever these  stand  opposed  to  the  will  and 
laws  of  God,  however  much  he  may 
suffer  thereby.  When  men  disobey  the 
laws  of  man  and  violate  them,  it  is  very 
soon  taken  notice  of ;  but  if  they  violate 
the  law  of  God,  then  no  one  seems  to 
observe  the  fact.  We  should  not  make 
man  our  idol,  nor  make  flesh  our  arm. 
Immoderate  ambition  generally  breaks 
out  into  cruelty.  The  anger  of  great 
men  is  fierce  ;  hence  one  should  have  a 
care  not  to  arouse  the  same  against  one's 
self. — Starke. 

When  wicked  men  cannot  otherwise 
persecute  the  righteous,  then  his  religion 
and  laws  must  furnish  them  with  a 
cause  and  a  covering  for  their  evil  inten- 
tions. In  important  matters  it  is  not 
good  to  render  a  hasty  judgment,  it  is 
better  to  reflect.  God  permits  the  wicked 
to  have  success  beyond  their  own  expect- 
ation at  times,  but  afterward  destruction 
will  come  all  the  more  unexpectedly. — 
IStarke. 

The  sorrowful  condition  of  the  Jews 
becomes  very  apparent  and  plain  as  here 
revealed;  likewise  the  just  judgment  of 
God  is  here  fulfilled.  He  says.  They 
would  not  obey  God  in  their  own  land, 


OHAP.  III.]  nOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  95 


where  they  enjoyed  such  great  freedom  ;  the  sacred  groves,  and  idols,  and  super- 

but  now  they  groan  under  the   severe  stitions  of  the  heathen.     Now  they  are 

service  that  presses  upon  them,  and  they  placed  and   scattered   under    the   most 

are  brought  into  the  risk  of  life  itself,  tyrannical  form  of  government,     'rhey 

They  refused  to  assemble  in  the  sanctu-  neither  can  nor  dare  congregate  to  oiler 

aries  of    Jerusalem    under    their   own  a  service  of  praise  to  God. — Feuardent. 
kings ;  they  ran  after  the  golden  calves, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  12— U. 

Fruitless  Preparations. 

Haman  had  no  regard  to  the  contingency  of  human  affairs.  He  was  blind  to 
the  fact  that  it  is  not  in  man's  power  to  control  events,  and  arrange  for  the  future. 
He  had  not  learnt  the  wise  man's  lesson — "  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow ;  for  thou 
knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth."  To-morrow  is  a  humiliating  term  often 
to  those  who  have  far-reaching  designs.  To-morrow  never  comes  when  we  work 
under  the  guidance  of  human  arrogance.  It  never  comes  exactly  as  we  purposed. 
The  seed  may  flourish  to-morrow,  but  the  sower  has  perished ;  or  the  seed  which 
he  has  sown  flourishes  to  his  destruction.  Enjoy  thyself,  Haman,  to-day,  call  forth 
thy  scribes,  send  forth  thy  bloody  edicts,  for  to-morrow  is  coming  with  crushing 
doom  !  We  all  need  to  look  into  the  future  in  order  to  read  the  lesson  of  our 
weakness. 

I.  Here  is  unseemly  haste.  No  sooner  had  Haman  received  the  king's 
permission  than  he  goes  forth  to  his  work  of  revenge.  He  is  in  a  hurry  to  set  in 
operation  the  plans  which  should  work  to  the  destruction  of  the  despised  race. 
There  would  have  been  propriety  in  Haman  pausing  and  considering  well  before 
sending  forth  the  orders  which  were  intended  to  work  such  vast  mischief.  Better 
still  if  Haman  had  said,  "  This  scheme  is  an  unworthy  one.  I  am  compromising 
my  dignity  and  my  manhood.  I  will  go  back  to  the  king,  and  undo  the  evil  I 
have  sought  to  accomplish."  Better  think  twice  before  committing  ourselves  to  an 
unworthy  action. 

II.  Here  are  inconsistent  precursory  measures.  The  bad  are  always  incon- 
sistent. Their  lives  are  not  harmonious.  Wickedness  renders  a  man  inconsistent. 
The  good  in  man,  or  at  least  the  voice  of  conscience,  works  against  or  speaks  against 
the  evil.  There  would  be  times  when  Haman  would  feel  the  dreadful  nature  of 
the  enterprise  upon  which  he  had  set  his  heart.  Revenge  impelled  to  action,  but 
conscience  still  spoke  in  reproving  tones.  We  have  pictured  Haman  as  the 
revengeful  man,  being  willing  to  wait  in  order  that  there  might  be  the  more  signal 
display  of  his  malicious  power  ;  but  here  we  find  him  proceeding  in  regular  method, 
as  if  to  justify  his  deeds.  It  may  be,  however,  that  Haman  was  afraid  of  his  own 
position  If  we  have  given  him  credit  for  too  much  conscientiousness,  we  cannot 
easily  charge  him  with  too  much  selfishness.  All  must  be  done  according  to  law, 
that  Haman' s  enemies  may  not  in  the  future  have  the  power  of  charging  him 
with  o[)en-handed  crime.  Obedience  to  the  eternal  law  of  right  is  the  only  method 
by  which  human  lives  can  be  rendered  consistent  and  harmonious. 

III.  Here  is  a  low  estimate  of  human  life.  This  is  one  of  the  strange 
anomalies,  that  great  men,  as  the  worM  accounts  greatness,  think  so  little  of 
human  life.  Is  ambition  to  be  fed  ] — human  lives  must  be  slaughtered.  Is 
revenge  to  have  its  way  1 — human  lives  must  be  sacrificed.  Kings,  conquerors, 
and  statesmen  have  regarded  no  life  as  precious  which  stood  in  the  way  of  their 
ambitious  schemes.  Haman  was  bad,  but  there  are  more  Hamans  than  we  think 
of  in  the  historical  records.  The  low  estimate  of  life  is  here  shown — (a)  In  the 
unmet] lodical  iiatare  of  the  slaughter  designed.     The  three  terms — to  destroy,  to 


96  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  [chaf.  hi. 


kill,  and  to  cause  to  perish — may  be  employed  to  give  intensity  to  the  harharons 
decree.  But  they  also  set  forth  the  dreadful  fact  that  the  poor  people  were  to  be 
killed  anyhow.  Let  the  seivants  of  revenge  do  their  work  after  any  fashion,  so  that 
it  is  done  effectually,  aiul  tlie  hated  race  are  removed  from  the  face  of  the  earth. 
{b)  In  the  indiscriminate  nature  of  the  slaughter  designed.  "  All  Jews,  both  young 
and  old,  little  children  and  women."  Eevenge  would  glut  itself.  The  young  and 
the  fair,  the  beautiful  and  the  innocent,  the  wise  and  the  virtuous,  must  be  slain. 
These  bleating  lambs,  what  have  they  done  that  the  light  of  life  must  be  quenched 
in  its  very  dawn  ?  (r)  In  the  rapacity  after  property.  The  spoil  of  the  slaughtered 
IS  to  be  taken  for  a  prey.  Life  versus  property.  This  decree  is  one  of  the 
unwritten  decrees  of  modern  civilization.  Let  the  spoil  of  the  slaughtered  be  taken 
for  a  prey.  Men  and  women,  fair  maids,  and  even  little  children  are  slaughtered 
in  order  to  increase  property. 

IV.  Here  is  wickedness  bolstered  up  by  human  authority.  "  The  copy  of  the 
writing  for  a  commandment  to  be  given  in  every  province  was  published  unto  all 
people,  that  they  should  be  ready  against  that  day."  Wickedness  wears  a  mask  ; 
it  shrinks  from  the  exposure  of  its  own  deformity.  State  policy  requires  the 
enormous  sacrifice.  Capital  must  have  its  due  return.  Business  is  business.  The 
law  of  supply  and  demand  must  have  its  way,  though  that  may  be  through  human 
blood.  These  are  some  of  the  flimsy  and  false  excuses  with  which  sin  dresses  up 
itself  in  order  to  make  a  respectable  appearance. 

Great  men  should  try  to  get  a  true  idea  of  the  importance  of  life.  Such  an  idea 
might  save  them  from  mad  and  wicked  enterprises.  God  has  crowned  life  with  an 
excellent  glory.  To  preserve  life  nature  yields  her  million  products,  and  pours  into 
the  lap  of  man  her  myriad  fruits  ) — to  promote  its  welfare  the  sun  bathes  the  world 
with  his  influences,  and  the  component  parts  of  the  atmosphere  are  blended  together 
in  relative  proportions ; — and  to  increase  its  pleasures  the  flowers  give  forth  their 
fragrance  and  show  their  beauty,  hills  and  mountains  rise  in  grandeur,  sweet  dales 
rest  in  their  encircling  embrace ;  the  birds  make  the  air  vocal  with  their  songs  of 
praise ;  and  the  stars  gem  the  midnight  sky,  forming  a  glorious  can  py  for  man. 
For  the  development  of  man's  whole  life  time  is  not  adequate,  ami  eternity  is  the 
sphere  in  which  an  ever-expanding  life  shall  work  on  to  unknown  heights  of  blessed 
perfection.  Life  is  great,  and  high  estimates  ought  to  be  formed  of  its  worth. 
Statesmen  should  remember  that  the  true  wealth  of  a  community  is  its  men. 

**  111  fares  the  land,  to  hast'ning  ills  a  prey, 
"Where  wealth  accumulates,  and  men  decay. 
Princes  and  lords  may  flourish,  or  may  fade; 
A  breath  can  make  them,  as  a  breath  has  made ; 
But  a  bold  peasantry,  their  country's  pride. 
When  once  destroyed,  can  never  be  supplied." 

All  ought  to  remember  that  life  is  ignoble  when  passion  is  allowed  to  rule.  How 
many  lives  are  thus  rendered  inglorious  !  Lives  with  fair  opportunities  for  develop- 
ment are  blasted  by  an  overmastering  passion.  Lives  with  extensive  prospects  for 
usefulness  are  crushed  by  the  influence  of  ignoble  motives.  What  a  position  was 
that  to  which  Haman  was  raised  !  How  many  might  have  blessed  his  memory  ! 
His  name  might  have  been  lauded  by  the  national  orators,  and  sung  by  the  national 
poets.  But  his  name  is  scouted,  and  his  memory  is  covered  with  opprobrium.  The 
name  of  the  wickei  shall  rot.  The  memory  of  the  just  only  is  blessed.  Let 
passion  then  be  subordinated  to  principle.  Let  the  ambition  be  to  be  good  and  to 
do  good.  Let  the  honour  that  cometh  from  God  be  the  supreme  concern.  And 
then,  whether  men  bow  or  refuse  to  bow,  the  soul  will  be  unruffled. 


CHAF.  III.] 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


97 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  12 — 14. 


The  very  circumstance  which  is  urged 
as  an  objection  to  the  truth  of  the  nar- 
rative is  rather  to  be  regarded  as  an 
evidence  of  its  trustworthiness.  The 
Book  of  Esther  does  not  contain  any 
record  of  miraculous  events.  There  are 
no  wonders  and  prodigies  in  it,  at  which 
infi(ielity  might  carp,  and  with  reference 
to  which  it  might  say  that  the  writer 
must  have  drawn  so  largely  upon  his 
fancy  in  some  places  as  to  render  sus- 
picious what  appears  to  be  the  record  of 
simple  matters  of  fact.  The  whole  tenor 
and  style  of  the  book  indicate  that  the 
writer  of  it  acted  the  part  of  a  historian 
who  was  concerned  only  to  relate  what 
actually  took  place ;  and  if  he  had  been 
a  deceiver  he  certainly  would  not  have 
laid  himself  open  to  an  objection  so  very 
palpable  as  that  under  review,  when  it 
was  in  his  power,  by  the  mere  alterations 
of  dates,  to  make  the  whole  narrative  so 
plausible  that  not  a  flaw  could  be  found 
in  it.  In  a  word,  I  consider  the  difficulty 
before  us  as  an  argument  for  the  truth 
of  the  history.  But  further,  it  must  be 
kept  in  mind  that  though  the  king's 
scribes  were  called  on  the  thirteenth  day 
of  the  month  to  write  the  decree,  it  does 
not  follow  that  the  work  was  finished  in 
a  day.  King  Artaxerxes  reigned  over 
one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  provinces, 
as  we  read  in  the  first  chapter.  Diverse 
languages  and  dialects  were  spoken  in 
many  of  these  provinces.  The  edict  was 
given  forth,  we  are  told,  ''to  the  rulers 
of  every  people  of  every  province,  accord- 
ing to  the  writing  thereof,  and  to  every 
people  after  their  language."  The  docu- 
ment had  to  be  translated,  then,  into 
different  languages,  and  a  translation 
sent  witli  the  Persic  original ;  and  be- 
sides, there  would,  no  doubt,  be  private 
communications  dictated  by  Haman  to 
the  governors  of  the  different  provinces, 
containing  directions  as  to  the  manner 
in  which  the  bloody  work  was  to  be 
executed,  and  the  spoils  of  the  Jews  dis- 
posed of;  so  tiiat  some  considerable  time 
would  elapse  before  the  royal  decree  could 
be  sent  out  to  the  provinces.  We  learn, 
indeed,  fiom  the  eighth  chapter  that  it 


was  the  twentieth  day  of  the  third  montli 
before  Mordecai  obtained  permission  to 
counteract  the  design  of  Haman ;  and, 
making  allowance  for  distance  and  modes 
of  travelling,  we  may  suppose  that  the 
sentence  against  the  Jews  had  not  even 
reached  the  more  remote  parts  of  the 
empire  when  the  remission  of  it  was 
resolved  upon.  But  again,  and  more 
particularly,  it  is  very  obvious  that  we 
have  to  regard  the  whole  transaction 
here  as  overruled  in  the  providence  of 
God  for  the  good  of  his  people  and  the 
confusion  of  their  enemies.  It  is  easy 
to  say  that  there  is  an  air  of  improba- 
bility in  the  whole  story,  because,  even 
with  a  few  months'  warning,  the  Jews 
would  have  had  time  to  remove  from 
the  places  where  they  were  doomed  to 
perish.  But  whither  could  they  have 
gone?  is  one  question.  The  Persian 
empire  was  so  extensive  that  it  would 
liave  been  difficult  for  them  to  escape 
beyond  its  bounds  and  find  a  refuge 
elsewhere.  Besides,  how  could  tliey 
have  fled,  when  no  doubt  there  were 
orders  issued  to  prevent  their  flight  1 
We  know  that  in  persecuting  times  in 
France,  and  in  our  own  country  also, 
while  the  victims  of  persecution  were 
warned  that  within  a  certain  period  no 
mercy  would  be  shown  to  them,  there 
were  steps  taken  to  prevent  their  escape  ; 
and  even  the  attempt  to  escape  was  de- 
nounced as  criminal.  In  the  case  which 
we  have  before  us  in  the  text  the  whole 
matter  turns  upon  this  point  —  that 
Haman  got  what  he  considered  the 
favourable  day  for  his  enterprise  fixed 
by  a  superstitious  practice  which  he 
revered  and  believed  to  be  infallible. 
Then,  after  this,  he  felt  as  if  all  were 
secure ;  and  with  a  recklessness — or,  as 
we  might  call  it,  an  infatuation — such 
as  there  are  many  examples  of  in  the 
perpetrators  of  heinous  crimes,  he  prcj- 
ceeds  to  accomplish  his  purpose  in  a 
way  which  one  would  say  was  calculated 
to  render  it  abortive,  and  to  ruin  him- 
self.— Davidson. 

Multitudes  may  have  been  in  such  a 
state  of  bondage  as  to  make  it  impossible 


H 


98 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OHAP.   III. 


for  any  great  number  of  them  to  escape ; 
and  as  for  others,  it  may  have  been 
expected  and  desired  that  some  of  them 
would  leave  the  kingdom.  But  such 
as  Mordecai,  whom  Haman  especially 
wished  to  destroy,  could  not  leave  the 
kingdom,  any  more  than  Nehemiah, 
without  permission  from  the  king.  It 
was  also  in  keeping  with  Haman's  cha- 
racter to  cause  all  the  anguish  and  horror 
possible  to  the  Jews  in  anticipation  of 
the  dreadful  slaughter.  Then  we  must 
remember  that  a  wise  Providence  so 
overruled  this  whole  procedure  as  to 
bring  to  nought  the  plans  of  the  Jews' 
enemy,  and  make  his  malignant  hatred 
of  the  Jews  the  occasion  of  his  ruin. — 
Whedon's  Cmnmentary. 

If  the  chronicles  of  Persia  thus  record 
an  intended  massacre  of  the  Jews  which 
appals  us  in  its  extent  and  atrocity,  the 
chronicles  of  Spain,  Italy,  and  France 
contain  records  of  massacres  of  Protest- 
ants which  equal  it  in  unmitigated  bar- 
barity. Let  us  thank  God  that  our  lot 
has  been  cast  in  times  of  comparative 
quiet,  when  the  spirit  of  persecution  and 
bloodshed  is  afraid  to  manifest  itself; 
and  when  th'^  exhortation  of  the  apostle 
is  not  rendered  hard  by  a  "reign  of 
terror  " — "  Fear  God,  honour  the  king." 
— McEwan. 

"  Where,"  one  is  ready  to  ask,  "  will 
rulers  find  persons  willing  to  execute  such 
unreasonable  and  barbarous  orders  ? " 
Executioners  have  seldom  been  wanting. 
Many  are  accustomed  to  do  blindly 
whatever  their  superiors  require,  with- 
out inquiring  whether  it  be  right  or 
wrong.  Others  act  under  the  influence 
of  fear;  while  a  thousand  passions — 
selfishness,  avarice,  malice,  envy,  strife, 


hatred  to  godliness,  and  the  innate  love 
of  cruelty  —  take  the  opportunity  of 
gratifying  themselves  under  the  covert 
of  authority,  and  the  pretext  of  executing 
its  mandates. — McCrie. 

Yer.  13.  The  malice  of  Haman  could 
no  more  frustrate  the  ancient  oracles 
relating  to  the  Jews  than  it  could  pull 
the  sun  out  of  the  firmament,  and  de- 
prive the  world  of  the  light  of  day. 
**The  sceptre  was  not  to  depart  from 
Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his 
feet,  till  Shiloh  should  come."  The 
Shiloh  was  not  yet  come.  Judah  must, 
therefore,  continue  a  distinct  nation, 
under  governors  that  proceeded  from 
himself.  Haman's  malice  will  be  so  far 
from  finding  the  means  of  extirpating 
Judah,  that  the  glory  of  that  people, 
though  eclipsed,  must  again  shine  forth 
as  the  morning. 

Ver.  14.  Haman  caused  the  edict 
against  the  Jews  to  be  published  in  the 
language  of  every  people,  that  they 
might  all  be  prepared  to  bear  their  part 
in  the  destruction  of  the  Jews.  But 
the  enemies  of  Israel  had  one  thing  in 
view,  and  the  God  of  Israel  quite  another. 
Haman  intended  to  make  the  destruction 
of  Judah  as  sure  as  possible,  but  God 
intended  to  make  all  nations  attentive 
witnesses  of  his  power  and  wisdom  dis- 
played in  counteracting  the  designs  of 
their  enemies,  and  accomplishing  their 
salvation.  The  effect  of  such  an  edict 
would  be  the  fixing  of  all  men's  attention 
on  the  event;  and  the  event  was  to 
make  it  evident  that  there  was  no  God 
like  the  God  of  Israel,  nor  any  people 
on  the  earth  so  much  the  care  of  heaveu 
as  that  nation  which  was  held  in  abhor- 
rence by  Haman. — Lawson. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGEAPH.     Vbrsb  15. 

The  Ibregulaeities  of  Human  Conditions. 

Swiftly  the  grim  messengers  of  intended  death  fly  throughout  the  land.  It  is 
the  proverbial  and  figurative  statement  that  these  posts  flew  faster  than  the  cranes. 
We  may  picture  the  post-horses  galloping  from  stage  to  stage.  The  post-masters 
took  from  the  couriers  the  king's  letters  which  proclaimed  death  and  spoliation  to 
all  of  Jewish  nationality.  And  very  soon  throughout  the  land  the  sad  story  of  thid 
strange  and  murderous  edict  was  known.  It  was  known  not  only  in  the  sorrow- 
darkened  homes  of  the  Jews,  but  also  in  the  homes  of  those  who  were  for  the 


3HAP.  III.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER,  99 

present  free  from  the  fear  caused  bj  such  a  murderous  design.  And  we  may  well 
suppose  that  there  were  perplexity  and  insecurity  everywhere.  The  Jews  were 
sadly  troubled.  The  rest  of  the  people  were  perplexed  and  insecure ;  for  if  theie 
was  no  safety  for  these  inoffensive  Jews,  if  for  them  this  wholesale  and  unrighteous 
slaughter,  what  security  is  there  for  any  other  portion  of  his  Majesty's  subjects  *? 
Yes,  and  there  was  perplexity  in  the  breast  of  Haman,  and  in  the  heart  of  Ahasuerus 
the  king.  For  evil  doers  are  always  evil  thinkers.  Those  who  purpose  trouble  for 
others  will  be  troubled  themselves.  Haman  and  the  king  might  sit  down  to  drink, 
and  try  to  drown  and  to  forget  their  perplexity ;  but  the  dark  shadow  of  wrong- 
doing would  dog  their  seeps,  and  render  them  uncomfortable.  Happy  is  it  for  us 
that  we  live  in  such  a  country,  and  under  such  a  wise  government.  It  has  its 
faults,  but  they  are  mere  trifles  when  we  consider  the  faults  of  Eastern  despotism. 
Let  us  wisely  use  our  privileges. 

I.  The  inequalities  of  human  conditions.  The  most  striking  instance  of 
inequality  is  that  which  is  illustrated  between  the  condition  of  the  oppressor  and 
the  oppressed.  We  do  not  believe  in  the  Divine  right  of  kings  as  advocated  and 
upheld  by  some  in  the  past,  but  there  is  a  broad  and  true  sense  in  which  govern- 
ments are  Divine.  Fear  God.  Honour  the  king.  These  are  two  injunctions 
binding  upon  men.  Wise  government  tends  to  the  consolidation  of  human  society. 
It  is  for  the  general  good  that  some  should  rule,  and  that  others — the  large  majority 
— should  be  ruled.  There  is  law  in  the  material  world.  There  are  higher  and 
lower  in  the  intellectual  world.  There  is  law — the  law  of  love — even  in  heaven. 
There  must  be  law  on  earth.  Where  there  is  no  law,  where  there  is  no  rule,  there 
is  no  liberty  worthy  of  the  name.  But  every  blessing,  every  right  and  even  Divine 
organization,  is  capable  of  being  subverted.  That  which,  rightly  managed,  is  for 
the  general  good  may  be  rendered  productive  of  manifold  evils.  A  true  king 
should  be  the  father  of  his  people,  and  the  type  of  God.  A  despot  is  the  oppressor 
of  the  people,  the  slave-driver  of  the  people,  the  robber  of  the  people,  the  scourge 
of  the  race,  and  the  type  of  the  devil.  A  king  may  be  an  oppressor  without  being 
a  hard-hearted  monster.  He  may  be  weak,  effeminate,  given  up  to  luxury,  and 
influenced  by  others  more  cruel  than  himself.  Such  an  oppressor  was  Ahasuerus. 
Haman  was  his  evil  genius.  Haman  was  the  vile  master  spirit  in  the  palace  plot- 
ting tremendous  wrongs.  Haman  was  the  cruel  serpent  fascinating  and  deluding 
the  weak-minded  monarch,  and  spitting  venom  upon  all  the  Jews.  Here  are  the 
oppressors  in  Shushan  the  palace,  dictating  their  murderous  edicts,  and  yonder, 
scattered  abroad  and  dispersed  among  the  people,  are  the  oppressed.  Already  we 
seem  to  hear  the  cries  and  to  behold  the  fast-falling  tears  of  such  as  are  oppressed, 
and  they  appear  to  have  no  comforter.  And  on  the  side  of  the  oppressors  there  is 
power.  Power  in  Shushan  the  palace.  Weakness  among  the  scattered  Jews. 
Royal  despotism  has  well-nigh  been  swept  away  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  but 
still  may  we  see,  if  we  rightly  use  our  eyes,  this  inequality  of  human  conditions — 
the  oppressors  and  the  oppressed.  The  defeat  of  the  South  by  the  North  in 
America  has  not  abolished  all  slave-driving  In  this  free  and  liberty- worshipping 
country  there  is  still  oppression.  Oh,  the  tears  of  such  as  are  oppressed  !  How 
fist  they  still  fall.  What  an  ocean  they  make  !  If  these  tears  are  kept  in  Divine 
bottles,  how  large  and  how  many  the  bottles  !  If  these  bottled  tears  are  to  confront 
the  oppressors,  they  may  well  pray  for  the  rocks  and  mountains  to  fall  upon  and 
hide  them  from  the  consequences  of  their  evil  doings.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  do 
the  things  that  are  just  and  equal.  The  inequality  of  human  conditions  is  further 
illustrated  by  the  contrast  between  the  jollity  of  the  palace  and  the  perplexity  of  the 
city.  How  beautifully  simple  and  yet  how  suggestive  the  statement  :  "  The  king 
and  Hiiman  sat  down  to  drink  ;  but  the  city  Shushan  was  perplexed."  Revelry  in 
the  palac<^  INIisery  in  the  cottage.  The  wine  of  mii-th,  and  jollity,  and  forgetful 
ness  for  the  king.  Tlie  wine  of  bitterness  for  his  subjects.  The  music  of  pipers 
and  harpists,  of  singing  men  and  singing  women,  for  the  court.    The  sad,  discordant 

H  2 


100  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap,  m 


notes  of  wailing  for  a  large  portion  of  the  population.  The  city  Shuslian  wag 
perplexed,  and  well  it  might  be.  Tlie  indifference  of  one  class  of  the  community 
towards  another  and  seemingly  less-favoured  class  is  brought  to  view  in  thU  passage. 
Is  a  Persian  state  the  only  one  where  this  state  of  things  may  be  witnessed  *?  Are 
heathen  countries  the  only  lands  where  we  may  behold  this  heartless  indifference  ? 
No  •  even  in  Christian  states  class  distinctions  are  far  from  being  abolished.  At 
this'  day,  and  in  this  country,  there  are  revelry  in  high  places,  and  want  and 
wretchedness  in  low  places.  In  this  time  of  commercial  depression,  the  well-to-do 
classes  should  ask,  Are  we  only  enjoying  ourselves  while  many  of  our  countrymen 
are  in  a  state  of  distress?  This  indifference  has  its  root  in  and  is  the  outcome  of 
selfishness.  What  did  the  king  care  for  the  misery  of  others  so  long  as  his  own 
pleasures  were  not  interrupted  1  It  is  a  relief  for  us  to  suppose  that  the  king  was 
not  all  taken  up  with  self.  The  after  history  shows  that  selfishness  had  not 
destroyed  all  traces  of  true  feeling.  But  we  find  very  few  traces  of  good  in  poor 
Haman.  Especially  at  this  time,  what  did  he  care  so  long  as  revenge  was  glutted] 
All  that  he  appeared  to  mind  was  his  own  personal  aggrandizement.  His  revenge 
would  revel  in  human  blood.  His  avarice  would  gladly  feed  upon  the  spoil  of  the 
slaughtered.  His  ambition  would  gloat  over  this  dreadful  display  of  his  power. 
Oh,  this  hateful  selfishness !  What  beauty  it  spoils  !  What  life  it  wastes  !  What 
goodness  it  destroys  !  It  is  an  insatiate  deity  that  requires  holocausts  to  be  offered 
at  its  shrine,  and  never  cries.  It  is  enough. 

II.  The  mysteries  of  human  conditions.  The  air  is  thick  with  mysteries.  We 
move  in  a  maze.  We  are  lost  in  bewilderment.  And  this  is  one  of  the  mysteries 
—the  king  and  Haman  are  enjoying  themselves,  while  there  is  perplexity  in  the 
city  of  Shushan.  One  man  seems  to  pass  his  life  in  joy,  and  another  in  sorrow. 
Success  appears  to  attend  every  step  which  is  taken  by  one  man,  but  defeat  and 
disaster  are  the  portion  of  another.  He  is  ever  struggling  against  adverse  forces, 
and  never  appears  able  to  come  off  conqueror  in  the  contest.  This  is  one  of  the 
mysteries  that  King  David  sought  to  know  by  intense  thought.  This,  too,  was  a 
difficulty  that  beset  the  Psalmist— the  existence  of  triumphant  evil.  It  was  that 
which  vexed  him,  and  he  could  not  put  it  together.  There  are  swindles  that  are 
sovereign,  and  sovereigns  that  are  swindlers.  Base  men  in  the  high  places  of  the 
earth.  Haman  feasting  with  the  king.  Mordecai  mourning  at  the  king's  gate.  ''  I 
was  envious  at  the  foolish,  when  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked."  Did  poor 
Mordecai  feel  envious  1  We  cannot  be  hard  upon  him  if  he  did.  Were  the 
thoughts  of  Mordecai  turned  in  this  direction  ?  Did  he,  too,  try  to  solve  the  mys- 
tery, and  give  it  up  as  a  hopeless  task  1  Did  it  tend  to  deepen  his  grief  and  darken 
his  hours  of  sorrow  I  And  all  men  and  women  in  suffering  must  have  felt  it  more 
or  less.  The  mystery  is  there  ;  but  why  let  it  be  a  trouble  %  The  mystery  is  there , 
but  why  not  try  to  leave  it  and  get  into  serener  heights  1 

III.  The  compensating  forces  of  human  conditions.  The  law  of  compensation 
has  more  extensive  ramifications  than  is  dreamt  of  in  the  philosophy  of  narrow 
thinkers.  If  there  be  such  a  principle  in  the  material  world,  why  not  in  the  moriil 
world,  since  both  are  fashioned  and  governed  by  the  same  Author  ?  We  know  not 
how  far  those  are  correct  who  tell  us  that  happiness  and  misery  are  pretty  equiiUy 
distributed.  This,  however,  is  a  very  comfortable  doctrine  for  tliose  who  have 
happiness  enough  themselves,  and  do  not  care  to  give  themselves  the  trouble  of 
looking  after  the  welfare  of  the  less  fortunate.  But  there  are  compensations.  The 
joys  of  the  rich  have  their  drawbacks.  The  sorrows  of  the  poor  are  not  without, 
their  alleviations.  The  pleasure  of  Ahasuerus  was  not  a  permanent  stream.  The 
glory  of  Haman  was  soon  tarnished.  The  sorrow  of  Mordecai  was  turned  into 
laughter.  There  may  be  hunger  in  the  wilderness,  but  there  is  manna  from 
heaven.  There  may  be  thirst,  l)ut  there  is  water  from  the  smitten  rock.  The 
waters  of  Marah  may  be  bitter,  but  there  is  close  by  a  God-given  tree  to  sweeten. 


OHAP.  m.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  101 


In  the  journey  there  is  a  Marah,  but  there  is  further  on  an  Elim,  with  its  twelve 
wells  of  water,  and  threescore  and  ten  palm  trees. 

IV.  The  sympathetic  element  in  human  conditions.  The  city  Shushan  was 
|)erplexed.  The  Jews,  we  may  well  imagine,  had  many  sympathizers.  Sorrow 
draws  men  and  women  more  closely  together  than  joy.  It  is  easier  to  weep  with 
tliose  that  weep  than  to  rejoice  with  those  that  rejoice.  Self-regarding  consider- 
ations might  cause  the  citizens  of  Shushan  to  be  perplexed,  and  lead  the  well-dis- 
posed of  the  Persians  to  sympathize  with  the  Jews.  Perhaps  even  poor  Ahasuerus 
was  trying  to  get  away  from  the  working  of  a  sympathetic  nature  as  he  sat  down 
to  drink.  This  is  a  compensating  force  when  sorrow  elicits  sympathy.  Seek  to 
feel  with  and  for  others'  woes.  When  one  part  of  a  city  suffers,  the  whole  of  the 
city  should  be  perplexed. 

V.  The  harmonizing  principle  for  human  conditions.  What  principle  is  there 
that  is  to  adjust  in  fit  proportions  the  various  parts  and  members  of  human  society  1 
What  power  must  be  brought  to  bear  so  that  men  and  women  may  neither  hurt 
nor  destroy  one  another?  Are  communistic  doctrines  to  be  promulgated  and 
received  ?  Is  there  to  be  a  great  levelling  process  in  society  ?  Is  Ham  an  to  be 
hanged  on  the  gallows  ]  Must  Mordecai  be  made  prime  minister  in  his  stead  ?  Is 
Ahasuerus  to  be  dethroned  %  Or  is  he  to  be  made  merely  the  mouthpiece  and 
executor  of  a  number  of  men  who  shall  be  supposed  to  be  voted  for  by  the  nation 
in  popular  assemblies?  Something  may  be  done  by  wise  methods  of  government. 
Something  may  be  done  by  placing  noble-minded  men  in  high  offices  of  the  state. 
Something  may  be  done  by  the  rich  being  rich  in  good  works,  and  being  ready  to 
distribute,  and  by  the  poor  being  frugal,  contented,  and  industrious.  But  the  only 
(.'tfective  harmonizing  principle  is  the  gospel  rightly  understood,  broadly  interpreted, 
Mild  fully  received.  That  gospel  which  dethrones  selfishness,  and  teaches  the  true 
Itiotherhood  of  humanity.  That  gospel  which  teaches  to  fear  God,  to  honour  the 
king,  and  all  men  to  love  one  another.  That  gospel  which  preaches  peace  to  all, 
both  to  those  that  are  far  off  as  well  as  to  those  that  are  near. 

VI.  The  true  sustaining  power  for  all  human  conditions.  "  This  is  the  victory 
that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  Let  the  "  perplexed  "  of  every  city  and 
of  every  nation  endure  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible.  The  true  help  in  life's 
difficulties  is  to  go  into  the  sanctuary  of  God.  Wherever  there  is  a  believing  soul, 
there  God  makes  a  little  sanctuary  of  glorious  manifestations.  By  faith  and  prayer 
Mordecai,  Esther,  and  the  Jews  were  saved  and  delivered  out  of  their  perplexities. 
By  faith  and  prayer  the  world's  true  heroes  have  ever  conquered.  And  by  the 
same  means  must  men  and  women  still  prevail.  Here  learn — {a)  To  keep  away  from 
sensuality y  wJiich  hardens  the  nature.  Haman  would  keep  the  king  drinking,  so 
that  he  might  be  kept  callous  and  indifferent.  Strong  drink  blunts  the  fine  edge 
of  reason,  darkens  the  understanding,  and  hardens  the  nature,  (h)  To  cultivate 
sympathy,  tvhich  ennobles  the  nature.  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil 
the  law  of  Christ.  The  law  of  Christ  is  the  law  of  love.  The  fulfilment  of  that 
law  is  man's  noblest  work.  The  greatness  of  Jesus  is  the  greatness  of  his  loving 
sympathy,  (c)  To  foster  firm  faith  in  an  over-ruling  power,  luhich  brighte?is  life. 
Not  faith  in  the  overthrow  of  the  Hamans  of  time,  not  faith  in  the  theory  that 
kings  will  see  their  folly,  but  faith  in  the  power  of  One  who  is  all-wise  and  all-good. 
(d)  To  have  respect  unto  the  harmonies  of  heaven  amid,  the  discoi^ds  of  earth.  We 
may  not  live  to  see  the  day  when  the  perplexity  of  Shushan  will  be  turned  into 
gladness,  but  every  true  soul  will  be  ushered  into  and  enjoy  the  harmonies  of  that 
city  where  the  inhabitants  are  never  perplexed. 


102 


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


[OHAP.  m. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Yerse  15. 


It  is  a  woeful  thing  to  see  great  ones 
quaff  the  tears  of  the  oppressed,  and  to 
hear  them  make  music  of  shrieks. — 
Bishop  Hall. 

A  prince  and  an  officer  who,  at  the 
time  wlien  the  inhabitants  of  their  chief 
city  are  in  the  greatest  consternation, 
when  above  all  an  entire  people  is 
thrown  into  mortal  fear  of  their  life, 
can  sit  down  to  eat  and  drink,  mani- 
fest either  an  inhumanity  which  would 
easily  arouse  a  general  revolt,  or  an  evil 
conscience  which  already  foretells  the 
failure  of  their  plans.— La?2^e. 

So  to  drown  the  noise  of  conscience, 
and  so  to  nourish  their  hearts  as  in  a  day 
of  slaughter.  Thus  Joseph's  brethren, 
when  they  had  cast  him  into  the  pit,  sat 
down  to  eat  bread,  when  it  had  been 
fitter  for  them  to  have  wept  for  their 
wickedness.  So  did  the  Israelites,  when 
they  had  made  them  a  golden  calf. 
Herod  feasteth  when  he  had  cast  the 
Baptist  into  prison.  The  anti-Christian 
rout  revel  and  riot  when  they  had 
slain  the  two  witnesses.  The  Pope  pro- 
claimed a  jubilee  upon  the  Parisian  mas- 
sacre. The  King  of  France  said  that  he 
never  smelled  anything  more  !<wcet  than 
the  admiral's  carcase,  when  it  stank  with 
long  lying.  Better  is  the  perplexity  of 
liim  that  sufiereth  evil  than  the  jollity 
of  him  that  doeth  evil. — Trapp. 

It  is  an  absurd  and  impious  thing  to 
indulge  ourselves  in  mirth  and  pleasure 
when  the  Church  is  in  distress  and  the 
public  are  perplexed. — Matthew  Henry. 
The  cruel  measure  could  not  but  till 
all  peace-loving  citizens  with  horror  and 
anxiety. — Keil. 

Haman  gives  up  himself  to  pleasure 
and  jollity,  in  which  he  had  the  honour 
to  be  companion  to  the  king.  He  will 
soon  find  that  the  end  of  this  mirth 
is  heaviness.  The  city  Shushan  was 
perplexed  when  the  king  and  Haman 
were  enjoying  this  merriment.  What 
heart  could  be  free  from  perplexity  on 
such  an  occasion  %  The  Jews  were 
known  to  be  as  innocent  as  their  neigh- 
bours. Many  of  them  resided  in  the 
city  of  Shushan.     The  prospect  of  their 


miserable  and  unmerited  fate  was  ter- 
rible. Who  could  tell  where  such  mis- 
chiefs were  to  end  ?  Haman  might  next 
day  petition  his  deluded  master  to  com- 
pliment him  with  a  like  sacrifice  of 
other  lives.  The  people  of  Shushan  at 
this  time  would  be  in  much  the  same 
state  of  mind  as  a  Persian  minister  of 
state  in  later  times,  who  said  that  he 
never  left  the  king's  presence  without 
putting  his  hand  to  his  head,  that  he 
might  feel  whether  it  was  still  standing 
on  his  shoulders. — Lawson. 

But  what  must  the   Jews   scattered 
throughout  the  provinces  of  the  empire 
have    thought   of  this  strange  decree  1 
They  were  not  in  the  secret  of  the  plot. 
They  knew  nothing  of  Haman's  injured 
pride,  and  Mordecai's  religious  opposi- 
tion to  the  king's  commandment.     They 
would  regard  it  purely  as  an  event  in 
the  providence  of  God.     And  how  inex- 
plicably mysterious  must  it  have  seemed 
to  them  !     In  their  exile  they  had  been 
faithful  to  his  word,  keeping  themselves 
from  the  sins  of  surrounding  heathenism, 
and  so  preserving  themselves  in  his  fear 
that   even    Haman    the    Agagite    had 
nothing  of  which  to  accuse  them  save 
respect  to  the  laws  of  their  God.  Where- 
fore,  then,  had  he  permitted  this  tre- 
mendous calamity  to  overshadow  them  1 
Might  they  not  have  doubted  his  provi- 
dence 1     Certainly,  as  the  Jews  were  at 
this  time  circumstanced,  their  faith  in 
God  was  put  to  a  severe  test,  and   we 
may  readily  conclude    that    the    ordeal 
through  which  they  were  now  passing 
would  either  find  them  better  or  worse — 
more  or  less  trustful  in  him  who  maketh 
the  wrath  of  men  to  praise  him.     The 
common   experience    of    God's     people 
bears  witness  to  similar  mysterious  over- 
shado wings.     They  cannot  account  for 
them.     When  they  were  most  devoted 
to  his  service,  and  most  anxiously  seek- 
ing his   favour;  when  they  were  most 
strenuously  battling  against  the  world, 
and  endeavouring  to  bring  honour  to  his 
name ;  when  they  were  expecting   his 
blessing,  and  looking  for  good  from  his 
sovereign  hand,  it  has  often  been  even 


CHAP.  rii.J  nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  103 


then  that  there  have  come  events  which  but  they  could  sit  down  as  boon  corn- 
it  was  natural  to  interpret  as  signs  of  panions  to  enjoy  themselves  over  their 
his  displeasure,  tokens  of  his  wrath,  wine,  and  could  contrive  to  drown  any 
But  we  are  wrong  interpreters  of  his  remonstrances  of  conscience  with  the 
providence  beforehand,  and  even  after-  flowing  goblet.  Could  there  be  a  more 
wards.  The  sufferer  cannot  understand  thorough  personification  of  evil  in  one 
his  long  illness,  nor  the  prosperous  man  of  its  most  revolting  forms  than  we  have 
his  sudden  fall  into  poverty  and  re-  here?  And  yet,  my  friends,  it  finds  its 
proach,  nor  the  parent  the  anguish  of  counterpart,  although  on  a  smaller  scale, 
repeated  strokes  of  bereavement,  nor  the  in  the  procedure  of  multitudes  who  live 
widow  the  wisdom  and  benevolence  of  under  the  light  of  the  gospel !  Is  that 
her  desolation  and  loneliness.  All  is  individual  one  whit  better  than  the  in- 
dark  and  mysterious  to  them,  and  they  famous  pair  referred  to  in  the  text  who, 
may  be  sorely  tempted  to  discredit  the  forgetting  the  claims  of  home,  and  his 
mercifulness  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  responsibilities  as  a  father  and  a  husband. 
Providence.  Of  such  ordeals,  too,  we  spends  his  earnings  in  debauchery,  and 
can  confidently  affirm  that  after  having  thus  reduces  what  might  be  a  happy 
passed  through  them  they  will  either  family  to  wretchedness  and  poverty? 
leave  us  better  or  worse.  From  the  While  he  is  enjoying  himself  with  his 
history  of  God's  afflictive  dealings  in  companions,  all  reckless  of  his  obligation 
the  past  we  may  clearly  gather  one  grand  to  protect  and  provide  for  his  wife  and 
lesson — never  to  doubt  his  word,  and  children,  they  are  sitting  in  absolute 
always  to  have  faith  in  his  love.  Job,  want,  with  no  prospect  for  the  morrow 
Jacob,  Daniel,  David,  and  the  Jews  in  but  what  is  still  more  gloomy  than  the 
Persia  all  teach  us  this  lesson.  At  such  experience  of  to-day.  Then,  if  there  are 
times  it  is  most  glorifying  to  him,  as  any  here  to  whom  these  remarks  are  in 
well  as  comforting  to  ourselves,  to  trust  any  respects  applicable,  let  them  bethink 
in  him  explicitly  and  fully. — McEwan.  themselves  of  their  sin  and  folly  ;  let 
Self-indulgence  renders  men  callous  them  judge  themselves  by  the  same  rule 
to  the  distresses  and  sufferings  of  their  whereby  they  would  judge  the  king  and 
fellow-men.  '*  The  king  and  Haman  sat  Haman.  Then  they  will  acknowledge 
down  to  drink;  but  the  city  Shushan  that  they  have  been  unfaithful  to  a  sacred 
was  perplexed."  Give  the  votary  of  trust  committed  to  them,  and  they  will 
sensuality  or  intemperance  the  oppor-  endeavour  by  the  help  of  the  grace  of 
tunity  of  gratifying  his  craving,  and  he  God  to  be  no  longer  the  destroyers,  but 
cares  not  what  misery  he  may  occasion  the  protectors  of  those  whom  they  have 
to  those  in  whose  well-being  he  is  bound  solemnly  vowed  to  protect.  And  let 
to  take  the  deepest  interest.  Let  the  me  conclude  my  remarks  upon  this  part 
sensualist  have  his  will,  and  it  costs  him  of  the  subject  by  again  saying,  that  the 
not  a  thought  that  he  may  be  destroying  excessive  indulgence  of  any  forbidden 
the  happiness  of  families,  and  ruining  appetite  makes  men  selfish,  and  regard- 
for  time  and  eternity  the  victims  of  his  less  of  the  rights  of  others.  So  that,  as 
ungodly  lust.  Strong  carnal  appetite,  the  followers  of  Christ,  we  should  all 
when  it  is  excited,  sets  at  defiance  the  strive  to  keep  the  desires  of  our  animal 
law  of  nature  as  well  as  the  law  of  God.  natures  in  subjection,  else  we  forfeit  all 
One  can  scarcely  think  without  shudder-  claim  to  belong  to  him  with  whom  the 
ing  of  the  conduct  of  the  two  men  re-  willof  his  heavenly  Father  was  paramount 
f erred  to  in  the  text.  They  had  resolved  in  everything. — Davidson, 
to  shed  innocent  blood  without  measure ; 


104 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


[chap.  Ill 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTEB  KL 


Ver.  I.  Look  to  the  end.  Thus  oft  empt)-  vessels 
swim  aloft ;  rotten  posts  are  gilt  with  adulterate 
gold ;  the  worst  weeds  spring  up  bravest ;  and 
when  the  twins  strive  in  Rebekah's  womb,  pro- 
fane Esau  conies  forth  first,  and  hath  the  primo- 
geniture. But  whiles  they  seek  the  greatest  dig- 
nities, they  mostly  meet  with  the  greatest  shame ; 
like  apes,  while  they  be  climbing  they  the  more 
show  their  deformities.  They  are  lifted  up  also 
that  they  may  come  down  again  with  the  greater 
poise.  It  was,  therefore,  well  and  wisely  spoken 
by  Alvarez  de  Luna,  when  he  told  them  who 
admired  his  fortune  and  favour  with  the  King  of 
Castile,  You  do  wrong  to  commend  the  building 
before  it  be  finished,  and  until  you  see  how  it 
will  stand.  Princes'  favourites  should  consider 
with  themselves  that  honour  is  but  a  blast,  a 
magnum  nihil,  a  glorious  fancy,  a  rattle  to  still 
men's  ambition  ;  and  that  as  the  passenger  look- 
ethno  longer  upon  the  dial  than  the  sun  shineth 
upon  it,  so  it  is  here. — Trapp. 

Ver.  1.  The  sympathetic  traveller.  Here  is  some- 
thing that  happened  on  a  railway  train  somewhere 
in  New  England  last  summer.  A  woman  clad  in 
deep  mourning  entered  the  cars  at  a  railway  sta- 
tion. She  took  a  seat  just  in  front  of  an  inquisi- 
tive-looking, sharp-faced  female.  The  woman  in 
black  had  not  been  seated  long  before  she  felt  a 
slight  tap  on  the  shoulder,  and  heard  her  neigh- 
bour ask,  in  a  low,  sympathetic  tone,  "  Lost 
anybody?"  A  silent  nod  was  the  response.  A 
slight  pause,  and  then  a  second  question:  "Child  ? " 
A  low  shake  of  the  head  in  the  negative.  "  Pa- 
rent "i  "  A  similar  reply.  "  Husband  ?  "  This 
time  the  slight  nod  again.  "  Life  insured  ?  "  A 
nod.  "  Experienced  religion  .!*  "  A  nod.  Then  : 
"  Well,  well,  cheer  up  !  Life  insured  and  experi- 
enced religion  ;  you're  all  right,  and  so's  he  !  " 
Haman's  life  was  not  insured,  as  the  sequel  of  the 
history  shows.  He  did  not  experience  the  saving 
power  of  religion,  and  therefore  a  small  matter 
disturbs  his  happiness.  Mordecai's  life  was  in- 
sured in  the  best  sense.  No  weapon  formed  against 
the  Lord's  anointed  can  prosper  until  the  Lord's 
time.  Those  are  safely  kept  who  are  kept  by 
God. 

Ver.  2.  Good  principles.  A  young  man  was  in  a 
position  where  his  employers  required  him  to  make 
a  false  statement,  by  which  several  hundred  pounds 
would  come  into  their  hands  which  did  not  belong 
to  them.  All  depended  upon  this  clerk's  serving 
their  purpose.  To  their  great  vexation,  he  utterly 
refused  to  do  so.  He  could  not  be  induced  to  sell 
his  conscience  for  any  one's  favour.  As  the  result, 
he  was  discharged  from  the  place.  Not  long 
after,  he  applied  for  a  vacant  situation,  and  the 
gentleman,  being  pleased  with  his  address,  asked 
him  for  any  good  reference  he  might  have.  The 
young  man  felt  that  his  character  was  unsullied, 
and  so  fearlessly  referred  him  to  his  last  employer. 
"  I  have  just  been  dismissed  from  his  employ,  and 
you  can  inquire  of  him  about  me."  It  was  a  new 
fashion  of  getting  a  young  man's  recommendation ; 
but  the  gentleman  called  on  the  firm,  and  foiind 


that  he  was  **  too  conscientious  about  trifles." 
The  gentleman  had  not  been  troubled  by  too  con- 
scientious employees,  and  preferred  that  those 
intrusted  with  his  money  should  have  a  fine  sense 
of  truth  and  honesty,  so  he  engaged  the  young 
man,  who  rose  fast  in  favour,  and  became  at 
length  a  partner.  '*  A  good  name  is  rather  to  be 
chosen  than  great  riches.''  Even  unscrupulous 
men  know  the  worth  of  good  principles  that  can- 
not be  moved.  The  Emperor  Constantius,  father 
to  Constantine  the  Great,  once  commanded  all  his 
Christian  servants  to  offer  sacrifices  to  the  gods 
of  Rome.  If  they  refused  to  obey  his  command 
they  were  to  be  dismissed  from  his  service.  Many 
of  them  obeyed  ;  others  did  not,  and  accordingly 
were  dismissed.  But  in  a  day  or  two  he  turned 
out  all  those  who  complied  with  his  orders,  and 
recalled  all  those  whom  he  had  expelled,  saying 
that  those  would  be  most  faithful  to  their  prince 
who  were  most  faithful  to  their  God,  and  that 
he  would  not  trust  men  who  were  false  to  their 
religion.  Mordecai  was  conscientious  about  trifles, 
and  true  to  his  religion.  This  he  was  whether 
he  found  favour  with  man  or  not.  He  looked  for 
the  favour  of  God.  This  must  be  the  inspiring 
motive,  for  conscientious  men  do  not  always  suc- 
ceed, as  the  world  reckons  success.  The  advice 
of  Mr.  Carter — a  Puritan  preacher — to  one  of  his 
congregation,  '*  You  must  work  hard,  and  fare 
hard,  and  pray  hard,"  was  good ;  but  we  cannot 
feel  sure  about  his  conclusion — **And  then  you 
will  be  sure  to  thrive."  In  these  modern  times 
we  have  certainly  known  some  who  have  worked 
hard,  and  fared  hard,  and  prayed  hard  all  their 
lives,  and  at  their  death  have  not  been  able  to 
bequeath  a  shilling. 

Ver.  7.  Lot  casting.  The  old  interpreter 
addeth  in  urnam,  into  the  pitcher.  And  the  new 
annotations  tell  us  that,  about  casting  lots,  there 
was  a  pitcher  into  which  papers,  with  names  of 
the  several  months  written  on  them,  and  rolled 
up,  were  cast  ;  yea,  also  papers  with  the  name  of 
every  day  and  of  every  month  were  cast  in  ;  then 
one,  blindfolded,  put  in  his  hand,  and  pulled  out  a 
paper,  and  according  to  the  marks  which  they  had 
set  down,  such  a  month  proved  lucky,  and  such 
a  day  in  the  month ;  and,  by  God's  providence, 
it  so  fell  out  that  their  supposed  lucky  day  was 
on  the  twelfth  month,  whereby  it  came  to  p;iss 
that  their  plot  was  defeated  before  the  time  of 
accomplishing  thereof. — Trapp. 

Ver.  7.  Bedding  by  lot.  In  nearly  all  cases 
where  reason  cannot  decide,  or  where  the  right 
of  several  claimants  to  one  article  has  to  be  settled, 
recourse  is  had  to  the  lot,  which  **  causeth  con- 
tentions to  cease."  In  the  East  a  young  man  is 
either  so  accomplished,  or  so  rich,  or  so  respect- 
able, that  many  fathers  aspire  to  the  honour  of 
calling  him  son-in-law.  Their  daughters  are  said 
to  be  beautiful,  wealthy,  and  of  a  good  family ; 
what  is  he  to  do  ?  The  name  of  each  young  lady 
is  written  on  a  separate  piece  of  olah,  and  then 
all  are  mixed  together.  The  youth  and  his 
friends  then  go  to  the  front  of  the  temple ;  and 


OHAP.  HL] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


105 


being"  seated,  a  person  who  is  passing  by  at  the 
time  is  called,  and  requested  to  take  one  of  the 
pieces  of  olah,  on  which  a  lady's  name  is  inscribed, 
and  place  it  near  the  anxious  candidate.  This 
being  done,  it  is  opened,  and  she  whose  name  is 
written  there  becomes  his  wife. —  Oriental  Illns- 
trafions. 

Ver.  7.  The  leech  and  surgeon.  "When  a  sur- 
geon puts  a  leech  upon  a  patient,  his  intention  is 
to  heal ;  the  leech  follows  the  instincts  of  its  na- 
ture, and  the  two  work  tojjether  to  produce  the 
desired  result.  When  Joseph's  brethren  sold  him 
into  Kgypt,  their  intention  was  to  humiliate  him 
and  to  be  rid  of  him  ;  but  it  was  made  to  serve 
God's  intention,  which  was  to  exalt  him.  So 
Haman  planned  for  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish 
people,  and  delayed  his  purpose ;  but  it  was 
God  8  purpose  to  save.  Haman's  delay  hastened 
the  purpose  of  God,  Should  we  not  rather  say 
that  God  made  use  of  Haman's  delay  to  bring 
about  his  gracious  purpose  of  deliverance  to  Israel 
and  destruction  to  their  enemies  ? 

Ver.  5.  Trouble  in  every  house.  Talmage 
says,  *'I  passed  down  a  street  of  a  city  with 
a  merchant.  He  knew  all  the  finest  houses 
on  the  street.  He  said,  There  is  something  the 
matter  in  all  these  houses.  In  that  one  it  is 
conjugal  infelicity.  In  that  one,  a  dissipated  son. 
In  that,  a  dissolute  father.  In  that,  an  idiot 
child.  In  that,  the  prospect  of  bankruptcy."  In 
Haman's  house  there  was  trouble.  Mordecai 
troubled  Haman.  The  good  must  ever  be  trou- 
blers  to  the  wicked. 

Ver.  5.  Revenge.  The  Highland  chief  lay 
a-dying  in  his  mountain  home,  and  in  his  dying 
heart  were  hard  revengeful  thoughts  towards  an 
opposing  clan,  A  minister  waited  at  his  bedside, 
and  exhorted  him  to  forgive,  assuring  him  of  the 
fact  that  God  will  not  forgive  if  we  do  not.  And, 
said  the  chief,  I  will  forgive  them ;  but  in  almost 
the  same  breath  he  said  to  his  son,  that  he  left 
him  a  father's  curse  if  he  forgave  them.  Louis 
XI 1,  said  that  nothing  smells  so  sweet  as  the  dead 
body  of  an  enemy.  The  Christian's  code  is  one 
of  forgiveness — that  nothing  smells  so  sweet  as 
the  rescued  body  of  an  enemy.  Well  would  it 
have  been  for  Haman — well  both  temporally  and 
spiritually — had  he  really  forgiven  the  supposed 
slight  of  Mordecai. 

Ver.  8.  The  laws  of  the  Jews.  Prosper's  con- 
ceit was,  that  they  were  called  Judaei  because 
they  received  their  laws  from  God,  And,  there- 
fore, if  Demosthenes  could  say  of  laws  in  general 
that  they  were  the  invention  of  Almighty  God  ; 
and  if  Cicero  could  say  of  the  laws  of  the  twelve 
tables  in  Rome  that  they  far  exceeded  and  ex- 
celled all  the  libraries  of  all  the  philosophers,  how 
much  more  true  was  all  this  of  the  laws  of  the 
Jews,  given  by  God,  and  ordained  by  angels  in 
the  hand  of  a  mediator,  Moses  !  Seneca,  though 
he  jeered  the  Jews  for  their  weekly  Sabbath  as 
those  that  lost  the  seventh  part  of  their  time,  yet 
he  could  not  but  say  that,  being  the  basest  people, 
they  had  the  best  laws,  and  gave  laws  unto  all 
the  world.  Those  holy  Levites  acknowledge, 
with  all  thankfulness,  that  God  had  given  them 
right  judf^ments,  true  laws,  good  statutes  and 
commandments,  whereby  he  severed  them  from 
all  other  people,  as  his  own  peculiar ;  and  this 


was  their  glory  wherever  they  came,  though  the 
sycophant  Haman  turneth  their  glory  into  shame, 
as  one  that  loveth  vanity,  and  sought  after  leas- 
ing.—  Trapp. 

Ver.  9.  Rage.  Rage  is  essentially  vulgar,  and 
never  vnlgarer  than  when  it  proceeds  from  morti- 
fied pride,  disappointed  ambition,  or  thwarted 
wilfulness,  A  baffled  despot  is  the  vulgarest  of 
dirty  wretches,  no  matter  whether  he  be  the 
despot  of  a  nation  vindicating  its  rights,  or 
of  a  donkey  sinking  under  its  load. — Hartley 
Coleridge. 

Ver.  9.  Wrath  cured.  A  valiant  knight, 
named  Hildebrand,  had  been  injured  and  oflfended 
by  another  knight,  named  Bruno.  Anger  burned 
in  his  heart,  and  he  could  hardly  wait  for  the  day 
to  take  bloody  revenge  on  his  enemy.  He  passed 
a  sleepless  night,  and  at  dawn  of  day  he  girded 
on  his  sword,  and  sallied  forth  to  meet  his  an- 
tagonist. But  as  it  was  early  he  entered  a  chapel 
by  the  wayside,  and  sat  down  and  looked  on  the 
pictures  which  were  on  the  walls,  lit  up  by  the  rays 
of  the  morning  sun.  There  were  three  pictures. 
The  first  represented  our  Saviour  in  a  purple  robe 
of  scorn  before  Pilate  and  Herod,  and  bore  the 
inscription,  "  When  he  was  reviled,  he  reviled  not 
again,"  The  second  picture  showed  the  scourging 
of  Jesus,  and  under  it  was  written  —  *'  Who 
threatened  not,  when  he  suffered."  And  the 
third  was  the  crucifixion,  with  these  words — 
"  Father,  forgive  them."  When  the  knight 
had  seen  these  words  he  knelt  down  and  prayed. 
Then  the  light  of  evening  was  more  lovely  to  the 
returning  knight  than  the  light  of  morning  had 
been. 

Ver.  9.      The  negro  and  his  enemy.     A  slave 
who  had  by  the  force  of  his  sterling  worth  risen 
high  in  the  confidence  of  his  master,  saw  one  day, 
trembling  in  the  slave-market,  a  negro,   whose 
grey  head  and  bent  form  showed  him  to  be  in 
the  last  weakness  of  old  age.     He  implored  his 
master  to  purchase  him.     He  expressed  his  sur- 
prise, but  gave  his  consent.     The  old  man  was 
bought  and  conveyed  to  the  estate.     When  there, 
he  who  had  pleaded  for  him  took  him  to  his  own 
cabin,  placed  him  on  his  own  bed,  fed  him  at 
his  own  board,  gave  him  water  from  his  own  cup ; 
when  he  shivered,  he  carried  him  into  the  sun- 
shine ;  when  he  drooped  in  the  heat,  bore  him 
safely  to  the  shade.     What  is  the  meaning  of  all 
this,?  asked  a  witness.     Is  he  your  father  .!>     No, 
Is  he  your  brother .''     No.     Is  he  your  friend  ? 
No.     He  is  mine  enemy.     Years  ago  he  stole 
me  from  my  native  village,  and  sold  me  for  a 
slave ;  and  the  good  Lord  has  said,  "  If  thine 
enemy  hunger,  feed  him  ;  if  he  thirst,  give  him 
drink  ;  for  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of 
fire  on  his  head. "   When  put  to  the  test  of  practice 
it  will  be  found  that  very  few  Christians  believe 
in  inspiration.     Where  is  the  professed  follower 
of   Christ  in   these   days   who  would  think  of 
following  the  negro's  simple  acceptance  of  an 
inspired  injunction. 

Ver.  9.  The  man  who  killed  his  neighbours. 
The  Americans  have  a  tract  on  this  subject.  It 
contains,  in  the  form  of  a  narrative,  many  useful 
practical  suggestions  on  the  art  of  overcoming 
evil  with  good.  It  is  with  kindness — modest, 
thoughtful,    generous,    persevering,    unwearied 


106 


HOMILKTIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER, 


[OHAP.  III. 


kindness — that  the  benevolent  countryman  kills 
his  churlish  neighbonr ;  and  it  is  only  the  old 
evil  man  that  he  kills,  leaving  the  new  man  to 
lead  a  very  different  life  in  the  same  village  after 
the  dross  has  been  purged  away.  If  any  one 
(icsirps  to  try  this  work,  he  must  bring  to  it 
at  least  these  two  qualifications — modesty  and 
patience.  If  he  proceed  ostentatiously,  with  an 
fiir  of  superiority,  and  a  consciousness  of  his  own 
virtue,  he  will  never  make  one  step  of  progress. 
But  even  though  the  successive  acts  of  kindness 
should  be  genuine,  the  operator  must  lay  his 
account  with  a  tedious  process  and  many  disap- 
pointments. Many  instances  of  good  rendered 
for  evil  may  seem  to  have  been  thrown  away,  and 
no  symptom  of  penitence  appear  in  the  counten- 
ance or  conduct  of  the  evil-doer;  but  be  not 
weary  in  this  well-doing,  for  in  due  season  you 
shall  reap  if  you  faint  not.  Although  your 
enemy  has  resisted  your  deeds  of  kindness  even 
unto  seventy  times  seven,  it  does  not  follow  that 
all  or  that  any  one  of  these  has  been  lost. — Arnoi. 

Ver.  9.  Clive  and  his  moderation.  When  our 
great  Eastern  conqueror,  Clive,  was  accused  in 
Parliament  of  having  amassed  too  much  during 
the  period  of  his  conquests,  he  boldly  said,  '*  Why, 
when  I  think  of  that  treasure,  and  see  the  hills 
of  gold  and  silver  here,  and  the  jewels  there,  I 
declare  I  am  astonished  at  my  own  moderation." 
Hanian  offered  a  large  sum  of  money  to  Ahasu- 
erus — a  large  sum,  whether  the  10,000  talents 
be  reckoned  according  to  the  Mosaic  shekel, 
£3,750,000,  or  according  to  the  civil  shekel, 
£1,875,000.  But  the  wealth  of  the  prime  minister 
of  that  vast  country  must  have  been  great. 
Doubtless  the  Jews  then,  as  now,  would  be  a 
people  given  to  the  accumulation  of  wealth  and 
property,  and  he  would  see  that  he  would  be  no 
loser  by  the  bargain.  He  would  confiscate  the 
property  of  the  slaughtered  Jews,  and  thus  enrich 
himself  by  the  transaction.  It  seemed  an  oppor- 
tunity most  favourable  for  wreaking  his  revenge 
and  enriching  himself  and  the  state.  Haman's 
large  offer  is  moderation  itself  when  we  think 
of  all  the  consequences  of  his  proposal.  The 
destruction  of  a  whole  people,  much  trouble  in 
the  kingdom,  and  the  confiscation  of  vast  wealth. 

Ver.  13.  The  deliverance  of  Htibert  de  Burgo. 
We  read  in  our  Chronicles,  that  when  King 
Henry  III.  had  given  commandment  for  the 
apprehending  of  Hubert  de  Burgo,  earl  of  Kent, 
he  fled  into  a  church  in  Essex.  They  to  whom 
the  business  was  committed,  finding  him  upon 
his  knees  before  the  high  altar,  with  the  sacra- 
ment in  one  hand,  and  a  cross  in  the  other, 
carried  him  away,  nevertheless,  unto  the  Tower 
of  London.  The  bishop,  taking  this  to  be  a 
great  violence  and  wrong  to  the  Church,  would 
never  leave  the  king  until  he  had  caused  the  earl 
to  be  carried  back  to  the  place  whence  he  was 
fetched.  This  was  done  ;  and  although  order 
was  taken  he  should  not  escape  thence,  yet  it 
gave  the  king's  wrath  a  time  to  cool,  and  him- 
self leisure  to  make  proof  of  his  innocency ;  by 
reason  whereof  he  was  afterwards  restored  to  the 
king's  favour,  and  former  places  of  honour.  And 
the  like  befell  these  Jews  ere  the  thirteenth  of 


Adar;    but   Haman,   blinded  with    pride   and 
superstition,  could  not  foresee  it. — Trapp. 

Ver.  13.  Soldiers,  not  butchers.  At  the  famous 
Bartholomew's  massacre,  when  the  King  of 
France  sent  his  orders  to  the  commanders  in  the 
different  provinces  to  massacre  the  Huguenots, 
one  of  them  returned  him  this  answer  :  "  In  my 
district  your  Majesty  has  many  brave  soldiers, 
but  no  butchers."  That  virtuous  governor  never 
felt  any  effects  of  the  royal  resentment.  It  is  to 
be  feared  that  few  of  the  Persian  governors  would 
have  given  such  proofs  of  virtuous  courage  if  the 
king's  edict  had  not  been  reversed.  We  find 
none  of  all  the  governors  of  the  provinces  of  the 
Babylonian  empire  that  refused  to  bow  their 
knees  to  the  graven  image  which  Nebuchadnezzar 
the  king  set  up.  The  subjects  of  princes  who  rule 
with  unlimited  dominion  are  for  the  most  part 
slaves  both  in  body  and  in  soul.  They  are  taught 
from  their  earliest  days,  by  the  examples  which 
they  see  around  them,  to  consider  their  princes  as 
gods  on  earth,  whose  will  must  not  be  disputed. 
— Lawson. 

Ver.  14.  Executioners.  There  is  abundance 
of  evidence  that,  in  the  middle  ages,  the  ofiice  of 
public  executioner  was  esteemed  highly  honour- 
able all  over  Germany.  It  still  is,  in  such  parts 
of  that  country  as  retain  the  old  custom  of  execu- 
tion by  stroke  of  sword,  very  far  from  being  held 
discreditable  to  the  extent  to  which  we  carry  our 
feelings  on  the  subject,  and  which  exposed  the 
magistrates  of  a  Scotch  town, — I  rather  think 
no  less  a  one  than  Glasgow, — to  a  good  deal  of 
ridicule,  when  they  advertised,  some  few  years 
ago,  on  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  their  hang- 
man, that  "none  but  persons  of  respectable  cha- 
racter" need  apply  for  the  vacant  situation.  At 
this  day,  in  China,  in  Persia,  and  probably  in 
other  Oriental  kingdoms,  the  Chief  Executioner 
is  one  of  the  great  officers  of  state,  and  is  as 
proud  of  the  emblem  of  his  fatal  duty  as  any 
European  Lord  Chamberlain  of  his  golden  key. 
— Note  to  Anne  of  Geierstein, 

No  doubt  very  many  of  the  subjects  of 
Ahasuerus  would  be  willing  to  become  execu- 
tioners, in  order  to  secure  the  favour  of  the 
monarch,  and  to  get  a  share  of  the  spoil.  They 
would  get  themselves  ready  against  that  day  of 
intended  slaughter. 

Ver.  15.  A  love  of  books  and  want.  In  one 
of  our  large  manufacturing  centres  a  working 
man,  with  a  love  of  books,  had  managed  with 
great  economy  to  collect  together  so  many  as 
150  volumes  ;  and  all  these  had  to  be  sold  to 
meet  the  necessities  of  nature.  One  volume  was 
highly  valued.  When  he  did  not  want  the  money 
he  could  have  sold  the  book  for  a  sovereign,  but 
when  starvation  came  the  precious  treasure  had 
to  be  sold  for  one  shilling.  That  one  book  tells 
a  sad  tale  of  suffering  to  those  who  can  catch  its 
silent  message.  In  contrast,  we  may  read  of  the 
eleventh  edition  of  a  modern  book  published  at 
thirty  shillings.  And  what  is  even  this  to  the 
large  sums  spent  in  splendidly  bound  and  illus- 
trated copies  of  poets  and  artists  ?  And  what  is 
even  this  when  we  hear  of  a  lady  of  high  rank 
selling  a  marriage  present — consisting  of  a  mag- 


CHAP,  iir.] 


HOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


107 


nificent  tiara  of  diamonds,  which  cost  £13,000 — 
ill  order  to  defray  the  cost  of  sinful  extravagance, 
while  many  of  our  countrymen  are  in  starvation? 
''The  king  and  Haman  sat  down  to  drink;  hut 
the  city  Shushan  was  perplexed."  "We  are  thank- 
ful for  the  displays  of  liberality  in  our  country ; 
l)ut  still  too  many  in  this  land  sit  down  to  drink 
while  a  vast  multitude  are  perplexed. 

Ver.  15.  The  surgical  operation.  In  one  of 
our  London  hospitals  a  poor  man  was  about  to 
undergo  a  surgical  operation.  The  anaesthetic 
was  administered,  but  while  it  rendered  him  in- 
sensible to  pain,  it  did  not  lessen  his  power  of 
hearing  and  observing.  Around  him  were  as- 
sembled a  number  of  young  medical  men.  One 
half  were  opposed  to  the  operation,  and  said,  The 
man  will  die  in  our  hands  ;  but  the  other  said, 
What  a  stroke  of  business  it  will  be  if  the  opera- 
tion is  successfully  performed ;  it  will  make  our 
fortunes  !  Selfishness  ruled  ;  the  operation  was 
performed.  The  poor  man  heard  the  pleading 
of  selfishness,  and  said,  It  ought  not  to  have 
been  done ;  I  shall  never  get  better ;  and  in  a 
few  days  he  expired.  It  is  most  likely  the  dis- 
ease would  have  killed  him,  but  is  that  any 
excuse  for  this  stroke  of  selfish  policy  ?  We 
give  all  praise  to  the  members  of  the  medical 
profession,  but  we  must  not  ignore  its  defects. 
But  oh,  this  selfishness  is  common  to  all.  What 
waste  of  precious  life  has  selfishness  incurred! 
Hainan  is  not  the  only  one  who  drinks  at  the 
expense  of  the  sufi'ering  of  others. 

Ver.  15.  The  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  Would 
it  not  be  accounted  folly  in  a  man  that  is  heir  to 
many  thousands  per  annum  that  he  should  envy 
a  stage-player  clothed  in  the  habit  of  a  king, 
and  yet  not  heir  to  one  foot  of  land  ?  who, 
though  he  have  the  form,  respect,  and  apparel 
of  a  king  or  nobleman,  yet  is  at  the  same  time  a 
very  beggar,  and  worth  nothing.  Thus  wicked 
men,  though  they  are  arrayed  gorgeously,  and 
fare  deliciously,  wanting  nothing,  and  having 
more  than  heart  can  wish,  yet  they  are  but  only 
possessors ;  the  godly  Christian  is  the  heir. 
What  good  doth  all  their  prosperity  do  them  ? 
It  doth  but  hasten  their  ruin,  not  their  reward. 
The  labouring  ox  is  longer  lived  than  the  ox  that 
is  put  into  the  pasture — the  very  putting  of  him 
there  doth  but  hasten  his  slaughter ;  and  when 
God  puts  wicked  men  into  fat  pastures,  into 
places  of  honour  and  power,  it  is  but  to  hasten 
their  ruin.  Let  no  man,  therefore,  fret  himself 
because  of  evil-doers,  nor  be  envious  at  the  pros- 
perity of  the  wicked;  for  the  candle  of  the 
wicked  shall  be  put  out  into  everlasting  darkness , 
they  shall  soon  be  cut  off,  and  wither  as  a  green 
herb. — Spencer. 

Parable  of  the  hog  and  the  horse.  "After 
these  events."  What  events.?  After  God  had 
created  the  remedy  before  the  infliction  of  the 
wound ;  after  Mordecai  had  saved  the  king's  life 
before  the  orders  for  the  destruction  of  his  people 
were  promulgated.    After  these  erenta  the  kiug 


advanced  Haman,  the  son  of  Hammedatha  the 
Agagite,  to  an  illustrious  position  in  the  king- 
dom. He  was  raised,  however,  but  to  be  de- 
stroyed. His  destiny  was  like  to  that  of  the  hog 
in  the  parable  of  the  horse,  the  colt,  and  the 
hog.  A  certain  man  possessed  a  horse,  a  colt, 
and  a  hog.  For  the  two  former  he  measured 
out  daily  a  certain  amount  of  food — so  much 
was  their  allowance,  no  more,  no  less ;  the  hog, 
however,  was  allowed  to  eat  according  to  his 
own  pleasure.  Said  the  colt  to  the  horse, 
"How  is  this.?  Is  it  just?  We  work  for  our 
food,  while  the  hog  is  a  useless  animal ;  surely 
we  should  have  as  much  to  eat  as  is  given  to 
him."  "  Wait,"  answered  the  horse,  "  and  you 
will  soon  see,  in  the  downfall  of  the  hog,  the 
reason."  With  the  coming  of  the  autumn  the 
hog  was  killed.  "  See,"  said  the  horse,  *'  they 
did  not  give  the  hog  so  much  to  eat  for  his  own 
benefit,  but  in  order  to  fatten  him  for  the 
killing."— ra/wM<f. 

Ver.  15,  Different  disposal  of  blessings. 
When  a  prince  bids  his  servants  carry  such  a 
man  down  into  the  cellar,  and  let  him  drink  of 
the  beer  and  wine,  this  is  a  kindness  from  so 
great  a  personage  to  be  valued  highly ;  but  for 
the  prince  to  set  him  at  his  own  table,  and  let 
him  drink  of  his  own  wine,  this,  no  doubt,  is  far 
more.  Thus  it  is  that  God  gives  unto  some  men 
great  estates,  abundance  of  corn,  and  wine,  and 
oil ;  yet,  in  so  doing,  he  entertains  them  but  in 
the  common  cellar.  But  for  his  people  they  have 
his  right-hand  blessings ;  he  bestows  his  graces 
on  them,  beautifies  them  with  holiness,  makes 
them  to  drink  of  the  rivers  of  his  pleasures,  and 
means  to  set  them  by  him  at  his  own  table  with 
himself  in  heavenly  glory. — Spencer. 

Ver.  15.  Ulysses  and  the  Syrens.  We  may 
read  that  Ulysses,  when  he  was  to  pass  the  coast 
of  the  Syrens,  caused  his  men  to  stop  their  ears, 
that  they  might  not  be  enchanted  by  their  music 
to  destroy  themselves ;  but  for  himself  he  would 
only  be  bound  to  the  mast,  that  though  he  should 
hear,  yet  their  musical  sounds  might  not  be  so 
strong  as  to  allure  him  to  overthrow  himself  by 
leaping  into  the  sea.  Thus  there  are  some  of 
God's  people  that  are  weak  in  faith,  so  that  when 
they  see  God's  outward  proceedings  of  pro- 
vidence seemingly  contrary  to  his  promises,  they 
are  apt  to  be  charmed  from  their  own  steadfast- 
ness. It  were  therefore  good  for  them  to  stop 
their  ears,  and  to  shut  their  eyes  to  the  works, 
and  look  altogether  to  the  word  of  God.  But 
for  those  that  are  strong,  in  whom  the  pulse  of 
faith  beats  more  vigorously,  they  may  look  upon 
the  outward  proceedings  of  God ;  yet  let  them 
be  sure  to  bind  themselves  fast  to  the  mast — the 
word  of  God — lest  when  they  see  the  seeming 
contrariety  of  his  proceedings  to  the  promise, 
they  be  charmed  from  their  own  steadfastness, 
to  the  wounding  of  their  own  most  precious  souls, 
and  weakening  the  assurance  of  their  eternal 
salyation. — Spmctr, 


108  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [ohap.  iv. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Critical  Notes.]  1.  Perceived  all  that  was  done]  Evident  that  Mordecai  knew  not  only 
the  terms  of  the  public  proclamation,  but  the  particulars  of  the  private  arrangement  between  Haraan 
and  the  king.  For  in  ver.  7  it  is  said,  "  And  Mordecai  told  him  of  all  that  had  happened  unto  him, 
and  of  the  sum  of  the  money  that  Haman  had  promised  to  pay  to  the  king's  treasuries  for  the  Jews, 
to  destroy  them."  Put  on  sackcloth  with  ashes]  An  abbreviated  combination,  meaning  that  he  put 
on  a  hairy  garment  and  spread  ashes  upon  his  head  in  sign  of  deep  grief.  To  rend  one's  clothes  in 
grief  was  as  much  a  Persian  as  a  Jewish  practice.  When  tidings  of  Xerxes'  defeat  at  Salamis 
reached  Shushan,  all  the  people  "  rent  their  garments  and  uttered  unbounded  shouts  and  lamenta- 
tions."— Herod,  viii.  99.  pyt  an  intensified  form  of  expression,  similar  to  the  Latin  conquestus^ 
violent  complaint,  earnest  and  vociferous  demonstration.  2.  ]  The  king's  gate  was  the  free  place 
before  the  entrance  to  the  royal  palace.  Further  he  could  not  go,  for  it  was  not  permitted  to  bear 
the  semblance  of  an  evil  omen  before  the  king.  3.]  The  sorrow  was  general.  All  the  Jews  broke 
out  into  mourning,  weeping,  and  lamentation,  while  many  manifested  their  grief  in  the  manner 
described.  4,  6,]  The  matter  was  made  known  to  Esther  by  her  maids  and  eunuchs  ;  and  she  fell 
into  convulsive  grief.  The  verb  here  used  is  a  passive  intensive — to  be  affected  with  grief  as  one 
seized  with  the  pains  of  delivery.  She  sent  clothes  to  her  guardian,  that  he  might  put  them  on, 
doubtless,  that  thereby  he  might  again  stand  in  the  gate  of  the  king,  and  so  relate  to  her  the  cause 
of  his  grief.  But  he  refused  them,  not  only  because  he  would  wear  no  other  than  garments  of 
mourning,  but  because  he  desired  a  private  opportunity  to  communicate  with  her.  Mordecai 
accomplished  his  object,  and  Hatach  the  eunuch  was  sent  to  him  to  obtain  particulars. — Lange. 
What  it  was,  and  why  it  was]  lit.  what  this,  and  why  this?  She  had  not  been  informed  of 
this  terrible  decree.  6.  The  street  of  the  city]  The  broad  open  place  before  the  palace. —  Whedon's 
Commentary.  7.  The  sum  of  the  money]  Rather  a  statement  of  the  silver.  The  word  here 
rendered  sum  means  a  distinct  or  accurate  statement.  Mordecai  told  Hatach  what  had  befallen  him, 
and  gave  him  also  a  statement  of  the  silver  Haman  had  promised  to  bring  into  the  king's  treasury. 
"  This  promise  of  Haman  is  here  emphatically  mentioned  as  the  chief  point  not  so  much  for  the 
purpose  of  raising  the  indignation  of  Esther  to  the  highest  pitch  {Bertheau),  as  to  show  the  resent- 
ment and  eagerness  with  which  Haman  had  urged  the  extermination  of  the  Jews." — Keil.  8.  The 
copy  of  the  writing  of  the  decree]  may  very  probably  refer  to  the  contents  of  the  writing  of  the 
decree ;  possibly  Mordecai  had  noted  down  the  substance  of  that  decree.  To  make  supplication 
unto  him,  and  to  make  request  before  him  for  her  people]  To  entreat,  supplicate  for  something 
diligently.  She  should  petition  relief  for  her  people.  *'  A  perilous  undertaking  to  urge  upon  her. 
But  Mordecai's  faith  already  began  to  discern  a  Divine  reason  for  her  elevation  in  the  kingdom  at  that 
time  (see  ver.  14). —  Whedon's  Commentary.  11.  The  inner  court]  The  court  that  faced  the 
principal  audience  hall — the  throne  chamber — where  alone  it  would  be  practicable  for  Esther  to  see 
the  king  on  such  business.  In  the  time  of  Deioceses  the  Mede,  approach  to  the  king  was  already 
very  difficult ;  and  among  the  Persians,  with  very  few  exceptions,  no  one  was  permitted  to  approach 
the  king  without  a  notice.  As  to  the  golden  sceptre,  Rawlinson  observes — "  A  modern  critic  asks, 
'  Is  it  likely  that  a  Persian  king  would  always  have  a  golden  sceptre  by  him  to  stretch  out  towards 
intruders  on  his  privacy?'  It  seems  enough  to  reply  that  in  all  the  numerous  representations  of 
Persian  kings  at  Persepolis,  there  is  not  one  in  which  the  monarch  does  not  hold  a  long  tapering  staff 
(which  is  probably  the  sceptre  of  Esther)  in  his  right  hand."  Esther's  difficulty  arose  from  the  fact 
that  she  had  not  been  called  to  come  in  unto  the  king  for  thirty  days.  She  did  not  feel  quite  sure 
of  her  position.  To  venture  unsummoned  might  be  to  prejudice  the  cause.  13.]  Mordecai  does  not 
reproach  Esther  with  being  indifferent  to  the  fate  of  her  fellow-countrymen,  but  rather  calls  her 
attention  to  the  fact  that  her  own  life  is  in  danger.  14.]  Who  knows,  if  thou  hadst  not  attained  to 
royalty  at  or  for  such  a  time  ?  may  be  taken  as  the  translation  of  the  latter  part  of  this  verse.  The 
other  place  may  refer  to  another  agent  of  God  in  contrast  with  Esther  ;  but  thus  it  refers  ultimately 
to  Divine  interposition.  And  although  neither  God  nor  God's  assurances  are  here  mentioned,  still, 
as  is  justly  remarked  by  Brenz,  "  We  have  this  noble  and  clearly  heroic  faith  of  Mordecai,  whicli 
sees  the  future  deliverance,  even  amidst  the  most  immediate  and  imminent  danger."  15,  16.]  Esther 
resolves  to  go  to  the  king  unsummoned  and  begs  a  three  days'  fast.  "  Though  God  and  prayer  are  not 
here  mentioned,  it  is  yet  obviously  assumed  that  it  was  before  God  that  the  .Tews  were  to  humble 
themselves,  to  seek  his  help,  and  to  induce  him  to  grant  it." — Bei'theau.  The  three  days,  night  and 
day]  are  not  to  be  reckoned  as  three  times  twenty-four  hours,  but  to  be  understood  of  a  fast  which 
lasts  till  the  third  day  after  that  on  which  it  begins  ;  for,  according  to  ver.  1,  Esther  goes  to  the 
king  on  the  third  day.  The  last  words,  If  I  perish,  I  perish,  &c.]  are  the  expression  not  of 
despair,  but  of  resignation,  or  perfect  submission  to  the  providence  of  God.  17.  And  Mordecai 
went  his  way]  i.  e.  from  the  place  before  the  court  of  the  king,  to  do  what  the  queen  had 
commanded  him  to  do. — Keil, 


I 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  109 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.    Vbbsbs  1—4. 

Great  Sorrow. 

A  TRAGIC  interest  attaches  to  the  man  who  is  the  subject  of  great  sorrow.  We  are 
drawn  towards  him  by  the  power  of  sympathy.  He  is  lifted  out  of  the  common  herd, 
and  his  individuality  becomes  at  once  more  apparent  and  more  prominent.  Job  is 
one  of  those  characters  that  stand  out  most  conspicuously  in  ancient  story.  His 
name  is  the  most  frequently  mentioned,  and  the  most  widely  known.  Job  is  a 
very  byword,  and  is  as  familiar  in  our  mouths  as  household  words,  yea,  it  is  a 
household  word  itself.  And  why  is  this  %  It  is,  we  presume,  not  merely  on  account 
of  his  great  patience  under  suffering,  but  on  account  of  those  varied  and  dark 
sorrows  through  which  he  passed.  The  patriarch  Jacob  is  to  us  more  luminous, 
more  human,  more  fragrant,  and  more  attractive,  when  tempest-tossed  by  trouble, 
when  crushed  \>y  sorrow,  than  when  luxuriating  in  the  land  of  Goshen.  The 
centre  point  of  interest  in  the  history  of  Abraham  is  when  he  is  called  upon  to 
offer  up  his  son  Isaac.  David  is  never  sublimer  than  when  in  the  intensity  of  his 
anguish  he  mourns  the  slaughter  of  his  wayward  son  Absalom.  And  Mordecai  is 
to  us  grander  and  more  endearing  when  clothed  in  his  hairy  garment  and  with 
ashes  on  his  head,  indicative  of  his  grief,  than  when  he  was  arrayed  in  royal  ap- 
parel, and  the  crown  royal  was  placed  on  his  head,  and  he  rode  forth  on  the  king's 
own  horse.  Mordecai's  loud  and  bitter  cry  of  sorrow  touches  humanity  more 
deeply  than  the  proclamation  of  Haman,  ''  Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  whom 
the  king  delighteth  to  honour. "  But  if  such  interest  attaches  to  the  individual  in 
sorrow,  what  shall  be  said  of  a  nation  in  mourning  ?  A  whole  nation  weeping  and 
wailing.  Throughout  that  vast  empire,  in  all  its  towns  and  villages,  might  be  seen 
Jews  clothed  with  sackcloth  and  sitting  in  ashes.  National  joy  is  attractive,  but 
national  sorrow  has  a  more  solemn  interest.  Sublimely  and  solemnly  grand  is  the 
aspect  of  Nineveh  mourning  and  fasting,  as  one  man,  for  its  sins.  But  these  poor 
Jews  were  weeping  and  wailing  on  account  of  a  threatened  slaughter  which  was 
undeserved.  Let  us  come  near  to  the  man  and  the  nation  thus  under  the  dark 
shadow  of  threatened  evil. 

I.  Sorrow  cannot  be  prevented.  Sibbes  says,  *'  None  ever  hath  been  so  good 
or  so  great  as  could  raise  themselves  so  high  as  to  be  above  the  reach  of  troubles." 
And  Watson  observes  in  the  same  strain,  "  The  present  state  of  life  is  subject  to 
afflictions,  as  a  seaman's  life  is  subject  to  storms.  *  Man  is  born  to  trouble  ; '  he  is 
heir-apparent  to  it ;  he  comes  into  the  world  with  a  cry,  and  goes  out  with  a  groan." 
This  paragraph  is  a  forcible  illustration  of  these  truths.  Goodness  is  personified 
in  Mordecai.  Goodness  combined  with  greatness  are  personified  in  Esther  the 
queen.  Earthly  greatness  is  personified  in  the  king.  He  was  so  great  that  the 
emblems  of  sorrow  are  not  permitted  to  come  nearer  than  the  king's  gate.  And 
there  were  varying  degrees  of  goodness  and  of  greatness  among  the  Jewish  people, 
and  yet  all  were  subject  to  sorrow.  The  very  goodness  of  Mordecai  was  the  cause 
of  his  trouble.  The  tender,  gentle  goodness  of  Esther  the  queen  was  the  reason 
why  she  was  *'  intensely  grieved."  The  king's  gate  might  be  closed  against  the 
entrance  of  those  wearing  the  garb  of  sorrow.  But  sorrow  itself  can  overleap  the 
loftiest  barriers,  and  find  a  way  through  the  strongest  bulwarks.  Sorrow  darkens 
the  cottage  and  the  palace.  The  merry  laugh  and  prattle  of  childhood  in  sweet 
country  homes  are  hushed  in  the  presence  of  this  great  on-coming  calamity.  Lovers 
forget  their  new-found  joy  as  they  think  of  the  national  trouble.  The  harps  are 
hung  on  the  willows,  and  the  children  of  Zion  weep  as  they  feel  that  the  hands  of 
the  persecutors  are  strong.     Mordecai's  loud  and  bitter  cry  ia  heard  in  the  palace, 


110  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  it. 

and  mingles  itself  with  the  music  of  pipers  and  harpists.     The  bright  and  cheery 
countenance  of  Esther  wears  an  unwonted  gloom. 

II.  Sorrow  cannot  be  explained.  Of  course  we  may  give  the  explanation 
tluit  sin  is  the  cause  of  sorrow  in  its  general  and  broad  aspect.  But  when  we  come 
to  pavticuhirize  we  find  ourselves  at  fault.  Easy  it  is  for  us  now  to  see  the  mis- 
takes made  by  Job's  friends  in  trying  to  account  for  his  great  troubles  ;  but  if 
Job's  friends  had  kept  silent  and  lived  till  the  present  time  they  would  most  likely 
be  found  to  be  as  wise  as  their  critics.  It  is  not  so  very  difficult  to  be  wise  after  tlie 
event.  But  sorrows  even  after  they  have  passed  and  have  done  their  blessed  work 
cannot  always  be  explained.  Eternity  is  the  only  true  and  complete  interpreter  of 
time.  Heavenly  joys  only  can  make  plain  the  meaning  of  eaithly  sorrows.  Why 
should  Mordecai  suffer  1  What  is  the  purpose  of  his  present  distress  1  Why 
should  intense  grief  shake  and  toss  the  fair  nature  of  the  virtuous  Esther  ?  Why 
should  many  hearts  be  troubled  that  are  the  shrines  of  truth,  of  beauty,  and  of 
goodness  ?  In  the  light  of  history  and  of  God's  providential  dealings  we  may  now 
offer  an  explanation ;  but  while  the  facts  of  history  are  being  enacted,  while  God's 
providential  dealings  are  in  operation,  the  troubled  hearts  are  sorely  perplexed. 
Mordecai's  cry  was  the  cry  of  grief,  but  was  it  not  also  the  cry  of  baffled  endeavour 
to  understand  the  mystery  1  Our  particular  sorrows  cannot  at  present  receive 
definite  explanation.  The  seed  can  only  be  properly  explained  by  the  harvest. 
The  seed  of  our  present  sorrows  can  only  be  properly  explained  by  the  consequent 
harvest  of  eternal  joys. 

III.  Sorrow  cannot  be  hidden.  It  does  not  appear  that  Mordecai  strove  to 
hide  his  sorrow.  Some  assert  that  he  gave  vent  to  his  sorrow  in  order  to  attract 
notice,  and  to  get  an  audience  with  Esther.  Difficult  to  say  how  far  this  suggestion 
is  correct.  Certainly  Mordecai's  patriotism  and  goodness  would  lead  him  to  feel 
ileeply  the  present  position  of  his  people.  He  could  not  help  the  manifestation  of 
his  grief.  Stoics  might  say,  Keep  your  sorrows  to  yourself  ;  do  not  parade  your 
griefs  ;  do  not  be  ever  showing  the  bleeding  sores  of  your  wounded  heart.  But 
poor  Mordecai  could  not  carry  out  the  stony  lessons  of  these  stern  teachers.  Emo- 
tion is  as  much  a  part  of  our  God-given  nature  as  intellect.  The  man  who  does  not 
feel  is  a  man  with  the  better  part  of  manhood  destroyed.  And  feeling  must  sooner 
or  later  find  an  expression.  These  people  were  demonstrative.  The  English  are 
not  demonstrative.  They  are  said  to  take  their  very  pleasures  sadly.  They  are 
comparatively  silent  about  their  sorrows.  But  it  can  even  be  found  out  when  an 
Englishman  is  in  trouble.  The  cry  of  wounded  hearts  may  be  silent,  but  it  is  pene- 
trating. The  fragrance  of  crushed  spirits  is  pungent  and  powerful.  It  is  better 
not  to  hide  our  sorrows.  Trouble  concealed  is  trouble  increased.  Sorrow  caged 
up  and  confined  is  the  breeder  of  much  mischief.  If  earth  closes  her  kingly  gates 
against  the  cry  of  our  sorrows,  heaven  opens  wide  its  pearly  gates,  and  as  soon  as 
ever  the  cry  passes  inside  those  gates  it  is  changed  into  laughter. 

IV.  Sorrow  cannot  be  confined.  It  passes  from  nature  to  nature.  It  travels 
fi'om  home  to  home.  Even  when  men  and  women  are  not  personally  affected  by 
tint  which  is  the  cause  of  the  sorrow,  yet  they  feel  its  influence,  and  are  sad.  Gro 
into  the  house  where  death  has  entered  ;  see  all  the  family  in  tears,  and  your  nature 
is  at  once  softened  and  subdued.  It  was  natural  to  expect  that  all  the  Jews  should 
be  affected  with  sorrow  for  a  common  calamity  threatened.  But  the  maids  and  tlie 
eunuchs  participated  in  the  grief.  And  Esther,  though  ignorant  of  the  reason  for 
the  sorrow,  was  intensely  grieved.  This  community  of  feeling,  this  wonderful 
susceptibility  to  sorrow,  speaks  to  us  of  our  brotherhood.  We  are  members  one  of 
another. 

V.  But  sorrow  can  be  mitigated.  It  may  not  be  in  our  power  to  remove 
sorrow,  but  it  may  be  so  mitigated  as  not  to  crush  and  destroy.  It  may  be  miti- 
gated, yea,  removed — (a)  By  believing  that  the  threatened  trouble  may  never  come. 
The  trouble  which  Mordecai  and  these  Jews  feared  never  came.     They  had  good 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER  111 

reason  for  fear  and  for  sorrow.  Many  of  our  fears  are  without  foundation.  Many 
of  the  troubles  we  fear  may  never  come.  Why  weep  over  ideal  troubles  ]  Let  us 
keep  our  tears  till  the  sorrow  is  present.  Do  not  let  us  go  out  to  meet  the  enemy 
in  our  present  weakness,  (h)  By  believing  that  God  knows  how  to  effect  a  deliver- 
ance. Mordecai's  trouble  was  not  the  mere  fancy  of  a  disordered  brain.  The 
trouble  was  there.  The  edict  had  gone  forth.  The  death-warrant  was  signed  and 
sealed.  To  all  human  appearance  Mordecai  was  as  much  a  doomed  man  as  the 
criminal  fettered  in  his  cell  and  waiting  the  hour  of  his  execution.  But  God 
worked  out  for  him  and  all  the  Jews  a  wonderful  deliverance.  Mordecai's  God  still 
reigns,  and  can  still  work  for  the  deliverance  of  the  oppressed,  (c)  By  believing 
that  sorrow  may  he  rend&red  pi'oductive.  In  this  case  the  sorrow  was  the  means  of 
bringing  about  deliverance.  The  sorrow  of  Mordecai  and  of  these  Jews  was  one  of 
the  methods  employed  by  God  to  work  out  the  deliverance  of  his  chosen  people. 
Your  sorrows  may  work  out  your  deliverance.  The  sorrows  of  an  Egyptian  bondage 
may  lead  you  to  desire  and  to  attain  to  the  joys  of  the  promised  land.  *'  Godly 
sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  salvation  not  to  be  repented  of."  Salvation  here 
mentioned  is  the  highest  and  most  complete  deliverance.  Sorrow  may  be  the  means 
of  bringing  about  enlargement.  Not  enlargement  merely  in  the  sense  of  respiration, 
as  the  word  is  employed  in  this  chapter  as  a  translation  of  Mordecai's  declaration, 
but  enlargement  in  the  sense  of  development.  Sorrow  is  a  great  developing  agency 
when  rightly  received,  and  when  blessed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Mordecai's 
sorrow  developed  his  nature,  enlarged  his  sympatliies,  and  increased  his  power  of 
vision.  Sorrow  sometimes  makes  people  selfish.  They  nurse  their  sorrows  like 
mothers  fondle  their  sickly  babies.  They  think  of  nothing  but  of  themselves  and 
their  troubles.  This,  however,  is  not  the  proper  effect,  is  not  the  designed  purpose  of 
sorrow.  It  should  open  up  the  whole  nature.  It  should  expand  all  the  powers,  both 
intellectual  and  moral,  of  a  man's  being.  As  the  waters  of  the  Nile  overflow  the 
surrounding  country,  and  open  up  the  soil,  and  prepare  it  for  the  reception  of  the  rice 
seed  ;  so  the  waters  of  our  sorrows  should  overflow  and  open  up  the  otherwise  barren 
soil  of  our  natures,  and  prepare  it  for  the  reception  of  the  seed  of  all  truth  in  its  mani- 
fold bearings.  Let  sorrow  do  its  perfect  work  of  developing.  Sorrow  seems  to  say 
in  mournful  measures  to  all  its  children,  "  Be  ye  also  enlarged."  It  touches  to  finer 
and  broader  issues.  It  should  bring  out  the  latent  powers  and  forces  of  suffering 
humanity.  It  should  develop  into  strength  and  Christlike  nobility  and  manliness. 
The  developing  power  of  sorrow  is  brouglit  out  by  the  apostle  when  he  tells  us 
that  '^  tribulation  worketh  patience ;  and  patience,  experience  ;  and  experience, 
hope."  See  to  it  that  such  is  the  blessed  fruit  of  sorrow's  operation.  Sorrow  should 
be  productive  in  another  sense.  It  should  intensify  the  appreciative  faculty,  and 
set  our  souls  longing  for  the  pure  realms  where  sorrows  will  be  all  unknown  because 
they  will  be  no  longer  required.  Hunger  is  the  best  sauce.  The  sorrows  of  time 
prepare  us  to  receive  the  joys  of  heaven.  When  there  is  intense  thirst  there  can  be 
nothing  more  refreshing  than  a  drink  of  clear,  sparkling  spring  water.  The  sorrows 
of  our  pilgrimage  intensify  the  soul's  thirst  for  the  consolations  of  the  gospel  and 
of  God's  promises,  and  for  the  abiding  comforts  of  the  celestial  home.  The  hart 
pants  for  the  water-brooks.  The  poor  soul  hunted  and  harried  by  the  fierce  dogs  of 
trouble  pants  for  the  earthly  sanctuary,  and  much  more  for  the  heavenly  sanctuary. 
Mordecai  in  his  trouble  looked  to  Esther,  and  looked  still  higher,  for  he  expected 
enlargement  and  deliverance  from  another  place.  We  may  look  to  earth.  We  must 
make  use  of  all  legitimate  earthly  means.  But  we  must  look  for  true  enlargement 
and  deliverance  from  another  place.  What  place  is  that  but  the  throne  of  God, 
the  mercy-seat,  the  Father's  house.  In  that  house  sorrow  will  be  turned  into  joy, 
weeping  into  laughter,  crying  into  songs  of  gladness,  and  pain  into  perpetual  and 
unsullied  pleasure. 


112 


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[chap.  rv. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  1 — 4. 


2.  For  none  might  enter  into  the  king's 
gate  clothed  with  sacJccloth. — Behold, 
they  that  wear  softs  are  in  kings'  houses, 
and  those  that  are  altogether  set  upon 
the  merry  pin.  Jannes  and  Jambres, 
those  jugglers,  are  gracious  with  Pharaoh, 
when  Moses  and  Aaron  are  frowned  upon. 
Baal's  prophets  are  fed  at  Jezebel's  table, 
when  Elias  is  almost  pined  in  the  desert. 
The  dancing  damsel  trippeth  on  the  toe, 
and  triumpheth  in  Herod's  hall,  when 
the  rough-coated  Baptist  lieth  in  cold 
irons ;  and  Christ's  company  there  is 
neither  cared  for  nor  called  for,  unless 
it  be  to  show  tricks  and  do  miracles  for 
a  pastime.  The  kings  and  courtiers  of 
Persia  must  see  no  sad  sight,  lest  their 
mirth  should  be  marred,  and  themselves 
surprised  with  heaviness  and  horror. 
But  if  mourners  might  not  be  suffered 
to  come  to  court,  why  did  those  proud 
princes  so  sty  up  themselves,  and  not 
appear  abroad  for  the  relief  of  the  poor 
oppressed . — Trapp. 

In  the  case  of  Mordecai,  the  first  effect 
of  the  proclamation  was  bitter  anguish, 
for  his  conduct  had  been  the  flint  out  of 
which  the  spark  leaped  to  kindle  this 
portentous  conflagration.  I^Tot  for  a 
moment  would  we  doubt  the  rightness 
of  that  conduct,  for  his  way  had  been 
hedged  in  by  the  providence  of  God  on 
the  one  side,  and  the  precept  of  God  on 
the  other;  but  this,  while  it  eased  his 
conscience,  would  only  drive  the  sword 
deeper  into  his  heart.  He  "  rent  his 
clothes,  and  put  on  sackcloth  with  ashes, 
and  went  out  into  the  midst  of  the  city, 
and  cried  with  a  loud  and  a  bitter  cry  ; 
and  came  even  before  the  king's  gate." 
i)Ut  Mordecai's  grief  did  not  upset  his 
judgment.  The  genuine  sorrow  of  an 
honest  soul  very  seldom  has  that  effect ; 
and  this  man's  greatness  comes  out  in 
his  deliberateness.  To  see  him  rushing 
out  into  the  streets  and  up  to  the  palace 
gate  clothed  in  sackcloth,  and  filling  the 
air  with  shrieks  and  groans,  you  might 
fancy  that  his  reason  had  been  thrown 
off  its  balance  ;  but  Mordecai  knew  very 
well  where  he  was  running  to,  and  how 


far  he  must  make  his  cry  reach.  It  soon 
appeared  that  he  had  made  a  copy  of  the 
edict  and  brought  it  with  him,  that  he 
had  informed  himself  as  to  the  details 
of  the  blood-money,  and  that  he  had 
thought  out  and  fixed  in  his  own  mind 
what  must  be  done.  Faith  too,  as  well 
as  sound  judgment,  may  be  discerned 
under  this  good  man's  grief.  Certainly 
the  cloud  was  very  black,  but  he  had 
found  out  a  thinner  place,  if  not  a  rift,  in 
it.  "In  the  way  of  obeying  God  I  have 
exposed  my  people  to  this  fearful  peril ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  God  has  these 
four  years  and  more  established  my 
foster  child  next  to  the  throne.  Putting 
these  two  things  together,  I  am  surely 
not  wrong  in  judging  that  they  point  to 
the  place  where  the  cloud  will  yet  part 
and  greater  light  come  through  it."  It 
was  precisely  the  latent  force  of  piety 
that  gave  Mordecai  courage  enough  to 
set  aside  every  thought  of  his  own  safety, 
to  make  the  most  public  exhibition  of 
his  grief,  to  go  straight  towards  the 
supreme  earthly  power.  No  doubt  he 
had  already  gone  to  the  supreme  power 
in  heaven ;  but  those  who  have  done 
that  are  not  found  folding  their  hands 
in  the  time  of  trouble.  Moses  erred 
when  he  said  to  the  people,  "  Stand 
still,"  in  front  of  the  Eed  Sea:  God 
told  him  that  up  to  even  such  a  barrier 
and  through  it  his  people  must  march. 
"  Wherefore  criest  thou  unto  me  ?  Speak 
unto  the  children  of  Israel  that  they  go 
forward."  Mordecai  had  learned  this 
lesson,  and  now  taught  it  to  Esther. — 
A.  M.  Symington. 

Andioeeping  and  wailing. — This  was 
the  way  to  get  in  with  God,  though  they 
might  not  come  crying  to  the  court.  Oh, 
the  Divine  rhetoric  and  omnipotent 
efficacy  of  penitent  tears  !  Weeping  hath 
a  voice.  Christ  turned  to  the  weeping 
women  when  going  to  his  cross  and  com- 
forted them.  He  showed  great  respects  to 
Mary  Magdalene,  that  weeping  vine ;  she 
had  the  first  sight  of  the  revived  phoenix 
(though  so  bleared  that  she  could  scarce 
discern  him),  and  held  him  fast  by  those 


CHAP.    IV.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


113 


feet  which  she  had  once  washed  with 
her  tears,  and  wherewith  he  had  lately 
trod  upon  the  lion  and  adder. — Trapp, 

In  sad  thoughts  did  Mordecai  spend 
his  heart,  while  he  walked  mournfully 
iu  sackcloth  before  that  gate  wherein  he 
was  wont  to  sit ;  now  his  habit  bars  his 
approach;  no  sackcloth  might  come 
within  the  court.  Lo  !  that  which  is 
welcomest  in  the  court  of  heaven  is  here 
excluded  from  the  presence  of  this  earthly 
royalty  :  "  A  broken  and  a  contrite  heart, 
0  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise." — Bishop 
Hall. 

It  is  well  remarked  by  Henry,  in  his 
commentary  upon  this  passage,  that 
"although  nothing  but  what  was  gay 
a>id  pleasant  must  appear  at  court,  and 
everything  that  was  melancholy  must  be 
banished  thence,  yet  it  was  vain  thus  to 
keep  out  the  badges  of  sorrow  unless 
they  could  withal  have  kept  out  the 
causes  of  sorrow,  and  to  forbid  sackcloth 
to  enter  unless  they  could  have  for- 
bidden sickness  and  trouble  and  death 
to  enter."  We  are  reminded  by  these 
vvords  of  the  well-known  saying  of  John 
Knox  to  the  ladies  of  Queen  Mary's 
court,  when  he  had  been  dismissed  from 
her  presence  with  marks  of  high  dis- 
pleasure, and  was  waiting  to  hear  the 
result  of  his  interview  with  her  :  "  0, 
fair  ladies,  how  pleasing  were  this  life 
of  yours  if  it  should  ever  abide,  and 
then  in  the  end  that  we  may  pass  to 
heaven  with  all  this  gay  gear.  But  fie 
upon  that  knave,  death,  that  will  come 
whether  we  will  or  not."  But  it  is  not 
to  those  only  who  dwell  in  palaces  that 
our  application  of  the  text  may  be  made. 
People  in  exalted  stations  among  our- 
selves, people  who  might  be  expected  to 
act  more  rationally  than  heathen  poten- 
tates and  nobles  were  accustomed  to  do, 
often  exhibit  the  same  desire  to  have  re- 
moved out  of  their  sight  everything  that 
would  remind  them  of  their  frailty  and 
mortality,  as  if  in  this  way  they  could  put 
trouble  and  mortality  away  from  them. 
But  this  is  unavailing.  The  unwelcome 
heralds  of  death,  in  the  varied  forms  of 
disease,  will  find  their  way  into  the 
mansions  of  the  great  as  well  as  into 
the  humble  dwellings  of  the  poor  ;  and 
ftt  length  the  enemy  himself  will  appear 


all  unceremoniously  to  drag  away  from 
their  luxuries  and  their  selfish  enjoy- 
ments those  who  have  no  portion  but  in 
the  present  life.  What  I  would  say  liere 
then  is,  would  it  not  be  the  best  course 
for  all  to  have  their  minds  directed 
towards  the  reality  which  must  overtake 
them  whether  they  will  or  not ;  and  to 
avail  themselves  of  the  means  which 
God  has  provided  in  the  gospel  to  strip 
death  of  its  terrors  1 — Davidson. 

Could  Mordecai  have  been  permitted 
to  redeem  his  countrymen  from  the 
avenging  sword,  he  would  have  rejoiced 
in  "offering  himself  upon  the  sacrifice 
of  their  faith,"  and  have  gone  to  the 
scafibld,  or  the  furnace,  or  the  lions'  den, 
clothed  in  white,  with  garlands  bound 
round  his  temples,  and  with  the  song  of 
triumph  in  his  mouth.  But  he  knew 
that  his  enemy  would  have  refused  this 
as  a  "  kindness  and  a  precious  oil," 
which,  instead  of  breaking  his  head, 
would  have  refreshed  and  exhilarated 
his  wounded  spirit.  His  grief  was  that 
not  only  he,  but  his  people  were  sold 
"to  be  destroyed,  to  be  slain,  and  to 
perish."  But,  besides,  Mordecai  had  to 
reflect  that  he  had  been  instrumental  in 
bringing  this  calamity  upon  his  people 
by  refusing  the  honours  claimed  by 
Haman.  This  could  not  fail  to  give  him 
pain,  and  to  agy;ravate  the  evil  which  he 
deplored.  Not  that  he  repented  o^" 
what  he  had  done,  for  we  find  him 
afterwards  persisting  in  the  same  line  of 
conduct,  and  refusing  to  propitiate  the 
haughty  favourite  by  giving  him  the 
marks  of  reverence.  We  may  inno- 
cently, or  in  the  discharge  of  what  we 
owe  to  God,  do  what  may  be  the  means 
of  injuring  both  ourselves  and  others 
whom  we  love.  It  does  not  follow  from 
this  that  we  ought  to  have  acted  other- 
wise. But  still  it  is  a  painful  reflection. 
And  it  was  a  great  addition  to  the  af- 
fliction of  Mordecai  that  the  Jews  were 
to  be  saciificcd  in  consequence  of  his 
having  incurred  the  hatred  of  a  wicked 
but  powerful  individual.  This  also 
accounts  for  his  grief  being  more  poign- 
ant than  that  of  Esther. — McOrte. 

Poor  Mordecai  had  it  not  in  his  power 
to  confine  his  anguish  to  his  own  bosom, 
or  to  his  own  house.     He  published  it 


114                            UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER,  [chap.  iv. 

through  all  the  city  of  Shushan.  You  Shushan.  There  might  be  some  corn- 
need  not  ask  for  what  reasons  persons  passionate  hearts  amongst  the  people  that 
overwhelmed  with  grief  do  not  inquire  would  he  interested  by  such  a  dire 
what  purpose  the  publication  of  their  calamity  ;  and  though  the  people  had 
grief  may  serve.  The  strong  impulse  of  no  direct  access  to  the  king,  yet  they 
sorrow  often  makes  them  publish  their  could  present  their  supplications  to  the 
complaints  to  the  winds  or  the  trees.  Yet  counsellors  who  saw  his  face;  or  if 
who  knows  what  good  end  it  might  serve  nothing  could  be  gained,  nothing  could 
to  announce  the  unmerited  calamity  of  be  lost  by  men  already  doomed  to  death, 
the  Jews   through   the    whole   city  of  — Lawson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.    Vbrsb  4. 

The  Action  of  Sympathy  rejected. 

Change  of  place  is  not  necessarily  change  of  state.  Wherever  we  travel  we  remain 
essentially  the  same.  We  cannot  lose  our  identity.  Foreign  travel,  change  of 
scene,  alteration  of  position,  may  do  much  to  benefit  the  man  or  the  woman  both 
physically,  intellectually,  and  morally.  But  these  changes  cannot  radically  change 
the  nature.  The  benefit  is  often  only  temporary,  and  we  soon  relapse  into  our  old 
condition.  Esther  the  orphan  had  her  troubles,  but  she  did  not  become  superior 
to  trouble  when  she  became  Esther  the  queen.  The  royal  Esther  had  troubles 
which  were  not  possible  to  the  uncrowned  Esther.  Let  us  seek,  not  to  be  free 
from  trouble  by  change  of  place,  or  by  alteration  of  outward  condition,  but  to  be 
fortified  in  the  inward  condition  so  that  we  may  bear  trouble  in  Christlike  fashion. 

I.  Bad  news.  "  So  Esther's  maids  and  her  chamberlains  came  and  told  it  her." 
Bad  news  travels  fast  and  far.  Esther  was  soon  told  of  Mordecai's  great  trouble. 
The  bearers  of  evil  tidings  cannot  be  welcome  messengers.  Some  gladly  carry  evil 
tidings  through  the  promptings  of  a  depraved  nature.  Such  ought  not  to  be  received. 
Their  mouths  ought  to  be  shut  by  tokens  of  disapproval.  The  listeners  to  evil 
stories  are  almost  as  much  to  blame  as  the  tellers.  In  this  case,  however,  we  have 
no  just  reason  to  suppose  that  there  was  any  evil  design ;  yea,  we  may  rather  and 
legitimately  suppose  a  good  purpose.  Esther's  maids  must  have  known  of  the 
relationship  that  existed  between  her  and  Mordecai ;  and  we  may  well  imagine  that 
they  carried  the  evil  tidings  to  see  if  anything  could  be  done  to  alleviate  Mordecai's 
distress.  Let  us  be  slow  to  be  the  bearers  of  bad  news.  See  to  it  that  our  inform- 
ation is  correct.  Examine  our  purpose  in  telling  the  dismal  tale.  And  then,  when 
we  see  that  the  tale  must  be  told,  pray  for  grace  and  wisdom  that  it  may  be  told 
in  the  best  possible  manner. 

II.  Consequent  grief.  "  Then  was  the  queen  exceedingly  grieved."  The  poet 
tells  us,  "  And  he  who  meditates  on  others'  woes  shall  in  that  meditation  lose  his 
own."  He  may  lose  his  own,  but  he  gets  fresh  trouble  by  entering  sympathetically 
into  the  woes  of  the  other.  We  can  only  bear  another's  burdens  of  trouble  by 
becoming  troubled  ourselves.  How  can  we  weep  with  those  that  weep  unless  we 
share  their  sorrows^  To  attend  to  the  troubles  of  others  is  both  to  lessen  and  to 
increase  our  own  troubles.  Shall  we  then  shut  our  ears  to  the  cries  of  sorrow  %  No  ; 
for  the  consideration  of  the  troubles  of  others  may  reconcile  us  to  the  pains  of  our 
own  condition.  There  is  to  the  true  heart  a  sweet  luxury  in  tasting  the  bitter  cup  of 
other  people's  sorrows.  And  benevolence,  not  inordinate  self-love,  should  be  the 
rule  of  life.  The  outward  and  the  inward  are  closely  and  marvellously  connected. 
Place  together  the  words  "  told  it  her,"  "  exceedingly  grieved."  The  words  of  the 
maids  acted  powerfully  on  Esther's  sensitive  and  loving  nature.  So  it  was  with 
Job.  After  the  messengers  had  told  him  of  the  slaughter  of  his  cattle,  his  servants, 
and  his  children,  then  he  rent  hia  mantle,  and  shaved  his  head,  and  fell  down  upon 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  115 


the  ground,  and  worshipped.  Esther,  however,  did  not  know  that  Mordecai's  calamity 
was  her  own,  and  yet  she  was  exceedingly  grieved.  Oh,  these  words  !  One  is 
ready  to  say,  Would  that  I  had  not  been  endowed  with  the  power  of  speech  !  These 
words  carry  untold  joy  on  their  wings.  What  treasures  they  embody  !  But  oli, 
what  sorrows  they  produce  !  A  word  may  change  a  destiny.  Guilty  or  not  guilty 
may  mean  life  or  death.  These  maids  were  no  eloquent  orators.  They  told  a 
simple  tale,  and  the  queen  was  exceedingly  grieved.  They  might  well  recoil  from 
the  effects  of  their  own  speech.  It  was  not  the  style  of  the  composition,  but  the 
subject  matter  of  the  discourse  that  produced  the  effect.  Let  preachers  and  speakers 
look  to  the  matter  as  well  as  the  manner.  There  was  preparedness  on  the  part  of 
Esther.  She  loved  Mordecai,  and  so  was  exceedingly  grieved  when  the  maids 
told  her  the  story.  Preparedness  on  the  part  of  the  hearer  tends  to  make  the 
speaker  eloquent  and  successful.  A  Demosthenes  could  not  have  made  Haman  feel 
for  Mordecai's  great  trouble.  A  simple  maid  can  send  Esther  into  paroxysms  of 
convulsive  grief. 

III.  The  resulting:  sympathetic  action.     "  She  sent  raiment  to  clothe  Mordecai, 
and  to  take  away  his  sackcloth  from  him."     Eoyalty  weeps ;  that  is  interesting 
and  commendable.     Eoyalty  weeps  on  hearing  the  account  of  the  sorrows  of  one 
of  the  subjects  ;  that  is  still  more  commendable.     Eoyalty  bends  itself  to  try  and 
remove  the  trouble,  and  that  is  most  commendable.     A  queen  should  be  the  mother 
of  her  people.     Esther  was  a  motherly  queen,  and  sought  by  gentle  nursing  to 
remove  the  pains  of  the  sick  and  troubled  Mordecai.     Sympathy  should  he  practical. 
Tears  are  good,  but  tears  that  do  not  flow  to  water  and  nourish  noble  purposes,  and 
practical  efforts  for  the  good  of  others,  will  be  like  the  streams  that  flow  to  deaden  life, 
and  to  produce  miserable  petrifactions.     These  maids  were  successful  preachers. 
The  bearers  went  forth  to  do  good.     Many  preachers  preach  for  years  and  not  one 
Esther  is  found  to  go  forth  and  remove  the  sackcloth  from  the  Mordecais.     Practical- 
ness IS  the  want  of  the  age.     A  little  more  of  wise  utilitarianism  is  needed  in  the 
present  day.     Preachers  to  tell  the  story  simply  of  the  world's  troubles ;  Esthers 
to  hear  the  story  sympathetically,  and  then  not  to  go  home  to  their  play,  their 
luxuries,  and  their  pleasures,  but  to  visit  the  Mordecais,  and  if  this  be  not  possible, 
to  send  goodly  raiment  to  those  clothed  in  sackcloth.     Sympathy  should  he  guided 
by  wise  discretion.     Esther  did  not  understand  all  the  case,  and  she  committed  an 
error.     But  while  we  condemn,  let  us  remember  that  she  did  what  she  could.     And 
even  mistaken  workers  will  not  lose  their  reward  if  the  work  is  done  from  a  right 
motive.     A  new  raiment  cannot  remove  sorrow.     The  tailor  cannot  minister  to  a 
mind  diseased.     The  dressmaker  cannot  root  out  the  deep-seated  sorrow  of  the 
bram,  that  is,  not  as  a  mere  dressmaker.     Harm  may  then  be  done  by  actinrr 
according  to  mere  sympathetic  impulses.    In  benevolent  enterprises  there  must  be 
the  exercise  of  the  judgment.     A  new  raiment  may  be  a  disastrous  gift  as  well  as 
useless.     And  the  receiver  of  the  gift  may  not  be  as  wise  as  Mordecai.     The  latter 
rejected  the  offer,  but  the  former  may  clutch  at  the  present  to  his  own  damage. 

IV.  The  Strange  but  wise  rejection.  ''But  he  received  it  not."  There 
are  circumstances  under  which  gifts  may  be  wisely  refused,  and  this  was  one  of 
those  occasions.  Strange  at  first  sight  that  Mordecai  should  refuse  Esther's  lovin- 
otter  ot  help.  If  he  felt  that  sorrow  was  better  than  laughter,  he  might  have  takeS 
the  raiment  of  joy  to  show  his  grateful  appreciation  of  Esther's  consideration. 
W  hat  an  ungrateful  and  unseemly  course  of  conduct !  would  Haniaa  have  exclaimed 
had  he  heard  of  the  case.  Just  like  that  surly  dog  Mordecai,  who  would  not  bow 
to  me  as  I  parsed.  But  Mordecai  had  a  wise  reason  for  his  course  He  had  a 
purpose  in  view.  The  true  cause  of  his  sorrow  must  be  made  known  to  Esther.  He 
was  gratefu  to  Esther,  but  he  must  still  be  stern  in  order  to  bring  her  up  to  the 
m.  \  .of  ''^^-^r^fif  ,  ^^f  h^^?^<^  daring.     Self-interest  and  the  feeling  of  affection 

^v!/-^!*^     ifT'"^  ^"^  '^^"^  '^  *^''  ^'^^  ^^  d"*^-     ^«  ^a^«  seen  that  Mordecai 
loved  Esther,  but  we  now  see  that  he  would  forego  her  love  and  even  treat  her 

l2 


116  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  [chap.  iy. 


rudely  at  the  call  of  patriotism.     Love  of  kindred  must  be  subordinated  to  the 
love  of  duty. 

SuaoBSTivB  Comments  on  Yerse  4. 

The  perpetual  intelligences  that  were  had  not  made  her  forget  the  friend  of 
closely  held  betwixt   Esther  and  Mor-  her  childhood.      His  grief  touched  her 
decai  could  not  suffer  his  public  sorrows  heart,  and   she  would  have  him  know 
to  be  long  concealed  from  her.      The  this.      But  his  sorrow  was  too  deeply- 
news  of  his  sackcloth  afflicts   her  ere  seated  to  be  assuaged  even  by  her  kind- 
she  can  suspect  the  cause ;   her  crown  ness.      Mordecai   refused    the    raiment 
doth  but  clog  her  head  while  she  hears  which  she  sent,  and  persisted  in  wear- 
of  his  ashes.     True  friendship  transforms  ing  his  sackcloth.     The  rejection  of  such 
us  into  the  condition  of  those  we  love ;  a   present  would   have  been  accounted 
and,   if   we  cannot   raise  them  to   our  highly   offensive    in    ordinary    circum- 
cheerfulness,  draws   us   down  to  their  stances,  but  it  only  made  Esther  appre- 
dejection.     Fain  would  she  uncase  her  hend  that   Mordecai's  trouble  must  be 
foster  father  of  these  mournful  weeds,  of  no  usual  kind. — Davidson. 
and   change   his    sackcloth   for   tissue ;  Esther,  in  her  elevation,  and  in  separ- 
that  yet,  at  least,  his  clothes  might  not  ation   from   her  friends,  was    far  from 
hinder  his  access  to  her  presence  for  the  forgetting  them.  She  was  deeply  afflicted 
free  opening  of  his  griefs.     It  is  but  a  when  she  heard  of  the  mourning  habit 
slight  sorrow  that  abides  to  take  in  out-  and   sore  affliction  of   Mordecai.      She 
ward  comforts ;    Mordecai  refuses  that  was  vexed  that  he  should  appear  at  the 
kind  offer,  and  would  have  Esther  see  king's  gate  in  a  dress  in  which  he  could 
that  his  affliction  was  such  as  that  he  not  enter  it,  and  therefore  sent  to  him  a 
might  well  resolve  to  put  off  his  sack-  change  of  raiment.     But  she  knew  not 
cloth  and  his  skin  at  once ;  that  he  must  the  sources  of  his   distress.      Grief  so 
mourn  to  death,  rather  than  see  her  face  firmly  rooted  and  so  well  founded  could 
to  live. — Bishop  Hall.  not  be  removed  without  a  removal  of  its 
Ignorant  as  yet  of  the  evil  that  was  cause.     To  send  him  change  of  raiment 
purposed  against  her  nation,  and   sup-  was  like  singing  songs  to  a  heavy  heart, 
posing  that  it  was  some  private  sorrow  ]\Iordecai   was   doubtless    pleased   with 
that  pressed  upon  the  spirit  of  her  friend,  her  kind  attention ;    but   she  must  do 
Esther  sent  a  change  of  raiment  to  him,  something  of  a  very  different  nature  to 
thus  expressing  her  desire  that,  what-  banish  his  sorrows. — Lawson. 
ever  the  cause  of  his  trouble  was,  she  The   character   of    Esther  is  greatly 
was  anxious  that  he  should  be  comforted,  enhanced  in  our  view  from  this  little 
This  was  one  of  the  ways  in  which,  in  incidental  circumstance.     It  shows  that 
those  times  and  countries,  sympathy  and  her  feelings   had  not  been  blunted  by 
affection  were  manifested.     And  so  we  her   exaltation   and    the    influences    of 
learn  that  when  the  prodigal  returned,  the  court   life   of    Shushan  ;   that   she 
the  father  said  to  his  servants,  "  Bring  was  not    self-contained,    but    had    an 
forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him,  admirable  tenderness  and  consideration 
and  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  for  others,  and  that  she  was  willing  t'> 
on  his  feet."     And  it  is  in  allusion  to  relieve  their  burdens  by  becoming  her- 
the  same  custom  that  the  Saviour  says,  self  a  sharer  in  and  a  mutual  bearor  of 
'•  The  Lord  hath   sent   me  to  appoint  them.     Never  does  woman  appear  riore 
unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion ;   to  give  noble,  and  we  might  almost  say  resplen- 
unto  them  beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  dent   in  moral  beauty,  than    when  be- 
joy  for  mourning,  and  the  garment  of  coming  a  true  "  Sister  of  Meicy  "  to  our 
praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness."      It  fallen  humanity.     The  New  T'estanient 
is  a  very  pleasing  trait  in  the  character  Scriptures  sparkle  and  glitter  with  such 
of  Esther,  that  her  advancement,  and  characters  as  this.      Mary  anointing  the 
the  grandeur  and  luxury  of  the  palace,  feet   of  Jesus  with   pure  spikenard   of 


OHAP.  IV. J 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER, 


117 


great  price,  and  wiping  them  with  the 
hairs  of  lier  head,  as  if  she  could  not 
find  a  token  sufficiently  tender  of  her 
respect  and  love.     Martha  actively  en- 
gaged in  benefitting  a  beloved  brother, 
and  unweariedly   serving  in  every-day 
life    the    Saviour    whom    she   adored. 
Dorcas  *'  full  of  good  works  and  alms- 
deeds,"  seeking  to   help  the  poor  and 
comfort  the  widows  at  Joppa,  and  leav- 
ing behind  a  blank  when  she  died,  the 
greatness  of  which  was  evinced  by  the 
tears  of  a  bereaved  multitude.     Phoebe, 
the  deaconess  of  Cenchrea,  a  **  succourer 
of  many."      Priscilla,  the  true  helpmate 
of  her  devoted  husband  in  the  work  of 
the    Lord.     Lydia,    and    Joanna,    and 
Susanna,   and    Syntyche,  and    Salome, 
and  Tryphena,  and  Tryphosa,  and  many 
others,  whose  names  are  in  the  book  of 
life.     The  ministry  of  woman  may  be 
silent  and  noiseless  as  the  light  which 
shines   into  the  chamber  in  the  morn- 
ing without  breaking  the  repose  of  the 
sleeper ;  but  as  the  light,  too,  it  is  mighty 
ill    diffusing    around    cheerfulness  and 
blessing.     And  never  does  she  appear 
more  laudably  than  in  the  homes  of  the 
suffering,  like  the  angel  who  strengthened 
our  Lord  in  his  agony.    So  do  we  honour 
Esther  the  more    because  of  this  side- 
light thrown  on  her  character.     Though 
it  was  only  a  sorrowful  kinsman  wailing 
at  the  gate,  yet  was  there  on  this  ac- 
count one  queenly  heart  in  the  palace 
which   was   ''exceedingly   grieved."  — 
McEwan. 

So  Esther^s  maids  came  and  told  it 
her. — She  herself  (say  interpreters)  was 
kept  in  a  closer  place  than  they,  not 
having  the  liberty  of  going  abroad,  as 
others  had,  because  the  Persians  that 
were  of  highest  quality  used  so  to  keep 
in  their  wives  ;  and  if  they  went  forth 
M  t  any  time,  they  were  carried  in  a  close 
chariot,  so  as  that  none  could  see  them. 

Then  was  the  queen  exceedingly 
grieved. — Dolens  exhorruit.  So  Tre- 
mellius.  The  Hebrew  is,  she  grieved 
herself,  scil.y  for  Mordecai's  heaviness ; 
as  our  Saviour,  when  he  heard  of  the 
death  of  his  friend  Lazarus,  groaned  in 
spirit  and  troubled  himself.  And  here 
we  see  that  of  Plautus  disproved — No 
woman  can  grieve  heartily  for  anything. 


Holy  Esther  is  here  sick  at  heart  of  grief, 
as  the  word  importeth  ;  and  yet  (as  one 
saith  of  the  Lady  Jane  Grey)  she  made 
grief  itself  amiable — her  night-clothes  be- 
comiLg  her  as  well  as  her  day-dressings, 
by  reason  of  her  gracious  deportment. 

And  she  sent  raiment  to  clothe  Mor- 
decai. — That  he  might  be  fit  to  come 
unto  her,  and  make  known  the  cause  of 
his  grief,  for  she  yet  knew  nothing  of 
the  public  calamity.  And  although  slie 
was  so  highly  advanced  above  Mordecai, 
yet  she  condoleth  with  him,  and  hon- 
oureth  him  as  much  as  ever.  This  was 
true  friendship.  Ego  aliter  amare  non 
didici,  said  Basil  to  one  that  disliked 
him  for  stooping  so  low  to  an  old  friend. 

But  he  received  it  not. — Such  was 
the  greatness  of  his  grief  which  he  could 
not  dissemble,  such  was  his  care  of  the 
community,  that  he  could  not  mind  his 
own  private  concernments  while  it  went 
ill  with  the  public.  Such  also  was  his 
patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  that 
he  would  not  give  over  asking  of  God 
till  he  had  received,  seeking  till  he  had 
found,  knocking  till  the  gate  of  grace 
was  open.  His  clothes  were  good  enough, 
unless  his  condition  were  more  comfort- 
able.— Trapp. 

Temporal  fortunes  and  successes  are 
never  so  great  as  not  to  be  subject  to 
sorrow,  terror,  and  fear.  God  permits 
his  Church  to  be  plunged  into  sorrow 
at  times ;  he  leads  her  even  into  hell ; 
but  he  also  takes  her  out  again.  Though 
the  Lord  elevate  us  to  high  honours,  we 
should  never  be  ashamed  of  our  poor 
relatives,  but  rather  relieve  their  needs. 
We  should  never  reject  proper  and  suit- 
able means  to  escape  a  danger,  but 
promptly  use  them. — Starke. 

At  first  the  lazy  (i.  e.  Jews)  do  not 
snore.  For  the  Holy  Spirit  exhorts  us 
in  all  adversities  to  confide  in  the  Lord  ; 
he  does  not  exhort  us  to  be  indolent, 
indifferent,  and  sleepy.  For  our  con- 
fidence in  the  Lord  is  a  powerful  and 
efficacious  means  of  stimulating  in  his 
service  all  strength  and  limbs.  Fur- 
ther, the  Jews,  though  in  the  greatest 
peril,  do  not  utter  virulent  words  against 
the  king,  nor  do  they  fly  to  arms.  Mor- 
decai and  the  other  Jews  rend  their  gar- 
ments, put  on   sackcloth,   strew   ashes 


118 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


[chap,  it, 


upon  their  heads,  wail,  weep,  and  fast. 
These  manifestations  signify  not  that 
the  Jews  in  Persia  were  turbulent,  but 
that  they  take  refuge  in  God  ;  since  help 
could  not  be  discovered  upon  earth,  they 
seek  it  from  heaven.  "  The  sacrifices  of 
God  are  a  broken  spirit :  a  broken  and 
a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not 
despise."  By  this  example  we  too  are 
taught,  that  when  afflictions  are  sent 
upon  us  Ave  should  reflect  that  God  sets 
before  us  the  fat  oxen  and  calves  which 
we  may  offer  to  bim.  In  this  may  we 
offer  to  God  in  our  prayers  the  afflictions 
which  we  sustain,  and  call  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord  that  he  may  help  us. 
Behold,  however,  the  reverse  of  this 
order  of  things.  The  palaces  of  princes 
are  Divinely  instituted  to  be  the  places 
of  refuge  for  the  miserable.  On  the 
contrary,  in  the  palaces  of  Persia  nothing 
is  regarded  as  more  odious  and  abomin- 
able than  men  with  the  signs  of  afflic- 
tion. Heaven  is  ever  open  to  the  cries 
of  mourners,  and  God  is  never  unap- 
proachable to  those  calling  on  his  name 
by  faith. — Brenz. 

Vers.  1,  6.  1.  Mordecai  rends  his 
clothing,  and  puts  on  sackcloth  and 
ashes.  He  enters  the  city  thus,  and 
raises  a  great  and  bitter  lamentation. 
So  also  the  Church  of  God,  in  its  de- 
velopment as  regards  the  history  of 
humanity,  should  again  and  ever  anew 
put  on  the  habiliments  of  mourning. 
"  The  world  shall  rejoice  :  and  ye  shall 
be  sorrowful."  The  then  existing  nation 
of  Jews  could  not  manifest  its  loyalty  to 
law  without  coming  into  conflict  with 
heathendom.  Nor  can  the  Church 
bring  to  development  its  inherent  spirit- 
ual powers  without  challenging  all  the 
Hanians  and  their  opposition  in  the 
world.  Even  this  present  period  is  an 
instance  in  proof.  Following  upon  the 
j^jreat  progress  of  the  things  of  the  king- 
dom of  God  since  the  time  of  wars  for 
freedom,  we  must  naturally  expect  re- 
actions, such  as  have  been  manifest  in 
the  sphere  of  science  and  other  relations. 
Indeed,  we  must  constantly  look  for 
increasing  opposition  on  the  part  of  the 
world.  But  when  the  Church  shall 
have  fully  developed  the  gifts  of  grace 
granted  to  it,  then  conflict  and  sorrow 


will  have  reached  its  highest  point  at 
the  end  of  the  days.  The  real  cause  of 
sorrow  on  the  part  of  the  true  members 
of  God's  Church  will  not  be,  as  was  ilie 
case  with  Mordecai,  their  own  distress, 
but  that  of  the  world.  It  will  consist 
in  the  fact  that  the  world  is  still  devoid 
of  the  blessed  society  of  the  true  God  ; 
that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  still  rejected 
and  even  persecuted.  What  joy  it 
would  give  if,  instead  of  enmity,  recog- 
nition and  submission,  and,  instead  of 
disdain,  a  participation  in  the  gifts  and 
grace  of  our  Lord,  were  to  become  the 
universal  experience. 

2.  The  more  difficult  the  position  of 
the  Church  as  in  contrast  with  the  world, 
the  more  favourable  is  her  position  for 
bringing  to  view  her  glory.  Her  glory 
is  that  of  her  Head.  If  in  the  Old 
Testament  times,  and  in  the  "  disper- 
sion "  itself,  there  existed  a  Mordecai, 
who  for  love  of  his  people  manifested 
his  firmness  and  strength  in  the  hour  of 
tribulation  ;  and  if  there  was  found  an 
Esther,  who,  when  called  upon,  will- 
ingly came  forward  to  bring  about  the 
salvation  of  her  countrymen  ;  how  much 
more  in  New  Testament  times  and  in 
the  modern  Church  will  there  arise  in- 
dividuals who,  in  following  the  Lord, 
especially  in  evil  days,  will  manifest  a 
watchful  care  for  others  and  a  self-sacii- 
ficing  spirit  for  them ;  who  will  show 
forth  patience  and  meekness  as  well  as 
energy,  fidelity,  and  tenacity,  a  spirit  of 
giving  and  an  ability  to  make  sacrifices  ; 
and  withal  will  carry  in  their  hearts  joy 
and  peace  as  the  seal  of  their  kinship 
with  God.  All  these  graces  may  be  so 
many  illuminating  rays  of  the  glorious 
life  of  their  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  who  more  and  more  attains  in 
them  a  full  stature.  May  all  seize  the 
special  opportunity,  recognize  the  pai- 
ticular  duty,  and  know  when  to  perform 
it,  which  the  times  of  distress  of  tii*^ 
Church  place  in  the  hand,  of  showing 
forth  the  power  that  dwells  in  them  by 
their  life  and  work  ! 

3.  Mordecai  took  an  especially  great 
part  in  the  universal  grief  that  overcame 
the  Jews  when  the  edict  of  their  annihil- 
ation was  issued  and  promulgated.  It 
was  not  his  personal  danger  that  alarmed 


r.n.w.  TV.] 


ROM  I  LET  W  COMMENTARY:  ESTffEJt 


in 


him,  but,  as  may  be  expected  of  such  a 
faithful  follower  of  Judaism,  it  was  the 
calamity  threatening  the  whole  Jewish 
people.  While,  however,  thought  and 
feeling  were  centred  upon  the  event,  he 
was  free  from  despair.  With  hira  it  was  a 
settled  conviction  that  the  people  of  God, 
as  a  whole,  could  not  be  destroyed,  and 
that  deliverance  must  come  from  some 
source.  Instead  of  giving  way  to  de- 
spondency, he  turned  his  distress  into  a 
power  that  urged  him  to  still  greater 
endeavours.  There  was  no  more  a  fear  of 
appearing  as  a  Jew,  nor  did  he  hesitate 
because  his  loud  lamentations  would 
attract  general  attention,  and  thereby 
expose  him  to  the  derision  and  disdain 
of  many.  However  reluctant  he  might 
liave  been  to  expose  his  beloved  Esther, 
whose  welfare  had  ever  been  a  matter  of 
great  concern  to  him,  to  extreme  danger, 
still  he  persisted  with  the  greatest  deter- 
mination that  she  should  run  the  whole 
risk,  and  only  rested  when  she  gave  her 
assent.  It  is  barely  possible  that  he 
attributed  some  blame  to  himself  because 
of  his  firmness  against  Haman,  or  thought 
that  on  that  account  he  more  than  any 
other  was  under  obligation  to  remove  the 
threatened  danger.  The  sole  moving 
impulse  was  doubtless  his  love  for  his 
people.  But  this  should  not  be  less  in 
any  member  of  the  Church.  It  should 
rather,  in  proportion  as  there  are  more 
members  in  the  body  of  Christ,  be 
stronger  than  it  was  in  him.  Would  that 
no  one  among  us  were  behind  him  as 
regards  energy,  self-denial,  and  a  willing- 
ness to  make  sacrifice  !  There  are  doubt- 
less many  who  are  able  to  endure  all 
this  in  their  own  person.  But — if  no 
lighter  consideration — the  thought  that 
their  relatives,  yea,  even  wife  and  chil- 
dren, may  suffer  on  account  of  their 
confession   bows   them  down.     Would, 


if  necessary,  that  we  too  may  stand  equal 
to  Mordecai  in  willingness  to  surrender 
our  dearest  kin ! 

4.  Mordecai  manifests  a  remarkal)le 
tenacity  as  opposed  to  Esther.  He 
keeps  his  position  at  the  gate  of  the 
king  until  she  sends  him  not  only  her 
maids  with  garments,  but  also  Hatach 
to  transmit  his  message.  He  departs 
not  thence  until  she  has  resolved  to 
stand  before  Ahasuerus  as  a  Jew  plead- 
ing for  the  Jews.  Under  other  circum- 
stances he  might  have  been  thought  to 
be  tiresome  by  his  persistency  and 
demands ;  but  his  relation  to  her  now 
justified  it.  When  he  had  been  accus- 
tomed to  inquire  concerning  her  health 
and  well-being,  to  give  her  counsel,  to 
care  for  her,  he  had  shown  no  less  per- 
sistency ;  and  his  demand  that  now  she 
should  reveal  her  Jewish  descent,  and 
as  such  should  venture  all,  was  equally 
in  keeping  with  his  character.  So  long 
as  no  danger  threatened  he  counselled 
her  to  keep  silence  respecting  her  Jewish 
parentage ;  but  now  he  had  himself 
taken  the  lead  in  an  open  confession  of 
the  fact.  Although  it  had  bef :>re  been 
difficult  for  him  to  approach  Esther  as 
the  queen,  or  request  any  favour  at  her 
hand  now  he  hesitated  no  longer  to  im- 
plore her  help,  not  so  much  for  himself, 
as  for  the  whole  people.  There  was  no 
motive  for  him  to  be  selfish,  or  to  con- 
duct himself  in  a  heartless  or  severe 
manner  towards  her.  Hence  there  was 
no  question  but  that  his  undertaking 
would  succeed,  that  Rather  would  be 
willing  to  comply  with  his  request.  It 
is  eminently  desirable  that  those  who, 
like  him,  must  move  and  induce  others 
to  make  sacrifices  of  self  and  possessions 
in  the  service  of  the  kingdom  of  God, 
should  stand  on  a  level  with  him  in 
this  respect. — Lange. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  5,  6. 

A  Ministerial  Appointment. 

"  Hatach,  one  of  the  eunuchs  in  the  court  of  Ahasuerus,  in  immediate  attendance 
on  Esther."  This  is  the  short  and  simple  biography  of  Hatach  given  in  the  secular 
chronicles,  and  the  account  given  in  the  sacred  chronicle  is  not  much  longer.  How- 
ever, the  best  men  have  not  the  longest  biographies.     Indeed,  it  may  be  safely 


120  HOMTLETTC  COMMENT  ART:   ESTHER.  [chap.  TV. 


asserted  that  some  of  earth's  noblest  sons  have  not  had  their  virtues  either  recorded 
by  the  historian  or  celebrated  by  the  poet.     Modest  goodness  blooms  in  the  shade, 
and  passes  away  without  a  grand  funeral  oration.     Not  the  merely  useful,  but  the 
brilliant  life  is  that  which  commands  attention  and  receives  applause.     Hatach's 
life  does  not  seem  to  have  been  of  the  Drilliant  character.     His  position  precbided 
the  possibility  of  startling  adventure.     He  moved  along  in  a  quiet  sphere ;  but  he 
is  commended  now  as  being  a  pleasing  contrast  to  the  character  given  of  othei 
eunuchs.     Fryer  and  Chardin  describe  the  eunuchs  as  being  the  base  and  ready 
tools!  of  li(;onti(>iisness,  as  tyrannical  in  humour,  and  pertinacious  in  the  authority 
which  they  exercise ;  as  eluded  and  ridiculed  by  those  whom  it  is  their  office  to 
guard.     Hatach  evidently  did  not  take  a  mean  advantage  arising  from  his  position. 
Instead  of  being  tyrannical  in  humour,  and  pertinacious  in  authority,  he  appears 
to  have  been  amenable  to  the  authority  of  Esther,  and  to  have  done  her  bidding 
most  readily.     It  may  be  that  Hatach  felt  the  salutary  influence  of  Esther's  loveli- 
ness and  Esther's  virtuous  nature.      As  she  exercised  a  wise  influence  over  her 
maids,  so  she  may  have  exercised  a  similar  influence  over  Hatach.     A  good  life  is 
not  without  its  influential  power.    A  good  woman's  influence  is  especially  radiating 
and  subduing  and  elevating.     This  eunuch  must  have  received  moral  as  well  as 
material  advantages  from  this  ministerial  appointment.     In  serving  Ahasuerus  he 
served  one  of  the  mightiest  of  earthly  kings  at  that  period ;  but  in  serving  Esther 
he  was  waiting  upon  one  who  was  the  servant  of  the  King  of  all  worlds.     God  can 
so  order  it  that  the  servants  of  kings  shall  be  the  servants  of  his  chosen ;  so  that 
earthly  kings  become  indirectly,  and  sometimes  directly,  the  servants  of  heaven's 
royal  children.     Earthly  ambition  is  to  minister  to  the  royalties  of  earth;  but  the 
noblest  ambition  is  to  minister  to  the  royalties  of  heaven.     This  ministry  is  satis- 
factory, and  is  sure  to  meet  with  its  appropriate  reward.     And  if  Hatach  served 
with  a  view  to  this  higher  ministry,  he  may  claim  a  distant  kinship  with  that  other 
eunuch,  who  served  Candace,  queen  of  the  Ethiopians,  and  who  said,  "1  believe  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God."    Why  may  not  Esther  have  her  converted  eunuch 
as  well  as  Philip  1     Heaven  is  larger  than  we  think.     Time  is  peopling  eternity. 
Heaven's  children  may  come  from  heathen  palaces  as  well  as  from  Christian  homes. 
But  we  may  safely  leave  Hatach  and  his  kind  to  the  mercy  of  that  God  who  is 
larger  than  the  dogmatists. 

I.  A  ministerial  appointment  suggested  by  self-love.     Hatach  was  appointed 

by  King  Ahasuerus  to  attend  upon  Esther.     And  it  must  be  plain  that  Ahasuerus 

made  this  appointment  not  to  subserve  the  interests  of  his  subjects,  not  to  consolidate 

his  kingdom,  not  to  make  his  people  virtuous  and  happy,  but  to  minister  either  to 

his  own  vanity  or  to  his  love  of  pleasure.     Such  an  appointment  finds  its  counter- 

])art  in  other  times  and  in  far  different  states  of  society.    How  many  appointments 

all  through  life  are  made  in  consequence  of  the  working  of  self-love  J     We  have 

often  heard  the  phrase  court  favourites.     The  minions  of  the  court  are  found  not 

only  in  the  palace,  but  in  the  house  of  legislature,  on  the  seat  of  justice,  and  at 

the  head  of  the  army.     The  ablest  men  are  not  always  selected,  but  the  men  who 

can  bring  the  most  influence  to  bear.     The  men  who  can  successfully  appeal  to  the 

selfishness  of  the  ruling  powers  will  rise  above  the  heads  of  those  superior  men  who 

either  cannot  or  will  not  use  such  base  means  for  elevation.     It  is  a  happy  thing 

in  our  times  that  commoners — men  not  noble  by  birth,  but  noble  by  sterling  worth 

and  by  brilliant  characters — are  taking  their  place  in  the  front  ranks.     But  still 

the  men  who  can  fawn  and  cringe  and  not  be  true  to  principle  are  in  high  places. 

In  the  ecclesiastical  kingdom  too  ministerial  appointments  are  made  through  the 

working  of  this  low  principle  of  self-love.     Sometimes  unconscious,  it  may  be,  but 

nevertheless  operative.     There  is  nepotism  in  the  Church.     The  son  or  the  nephew 

gets  the  good  living,  while  the  superior  man  remains  a  curate  still.     The  man,  in 

other  Churches,  of  showy  qualities  secures  the  votes  of  the  congregation,  while  the 

man  of  more  solid  but  less  brilliant  character  is  left  in  obscurity.     It  is  what  wd 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  Til 


may  call  a  happy  chance  when  the  working  of  self-love  brings  the  best  man  to  the 
front.  We  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  appointment  of  Hatach  was  not  a 
good  one. 

II.  A  ministerial  appointment  suggested  by  unselfish  love.  Abasuerus 
made  a  ministerial  appointment,  and  Esther  also  made  a  ministerial  appointment. 
Ahasuerus  appointed  Hatach  to  attend  upon  Esther,  and  Esther  gave  Hatach  a 
commandment  to  Mordecai.  The  latter  appointment  arose  out  of  the  working  of 
unselfish  love.  Esther's  afi'ection  for  her  ibster  father  would  not  let  her  rest,  and 
she  sent  the  chamberlain  to  minister  to  Mordecai  in  his  distress.  The  best  appoint- 
ments are  those  which  are  made  through  the  working  of  unselfish  love.  S<^lfishness 
blinds  the  mind  and  dwarfs  the  judgment.  Benevolence  is  a  truer  guide  in  affairs 
than  great  intellect  if  perverted  by  the  working  of  selfishness.  The  king  who 
through  true  love  to  his  subjects  seeks  their  highest  Avelfare  will  make  the  best 
appointments  in  his  kingdom.  The  Church  that  has  a  true  love  for  humanity,  that 
is  most  desirous  of  blessing  the  race,  of  instructing  the  ignorant,  of  raising  the  fallen, 
and  of  giving  the  oil  of  joy  to  the  mourners,  will  secure  the  services  of  the  truest 
servants  in  her  courts.  Shall  we  not  here  think  of  the  highest  ministerial  appoint- 
ment made  at  the  suggestion  of  infinite  love'^  "God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he 
gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  life."  ^'  The  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to 
minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many." 

III.  A  ministerial  appointment  to  the  young  and  the  joyful.  We  can  well 
imagine  that  there  was  great  gladness  to  Hatach  when  he  *'  received  a  call "  to  serve 
in  the  palace  of  Ahasuerus,  and  had  to  "attend  upon"  the  young,  the  beautiful,  and 
the  joyful  Esther.  In  one  sense  it  would  be  a  pleasant  life,  and  comparatively  free 
from  irksome  duties.  To  wait  upon  other  court  beauties  might  be  painful,  for  the 
mere  beauty  is  often  exacting  and  difficult  to  please.  The  more  her  demands  are 
met,  and  the  more  numerous  do  they  become.  The  very  monotony  of  her  life  may 
render  it  difficult  to  soothe  her  ill  humours,  and  to  fiiid  the  means  of  relieving  the 
dulness  of  her  existence.  But  this  difficulty  would  not  obtain  in  the  case  of  Esther, 
for  she  had  beauty  of  mind  as  well  as  beauty  of  person.  She  would  be  able  to  fall 
back  upon  herself.  As  the  good  man  is  satisfied  from  himself,  so  Esther  the  go>d 
woman  would  be  satisfied  from  herself.  It  is  well  said  that  she  required  nothing. 
The  smallness  of  her  requirements  rendered  it  an  easy  task  for  Hatach  to  perform 
the  duties  of  his  post.  How  delightful  to  wait  upon  this  young  and  joyful  maiden  ! 
Instead  of  Hatach  being  required  to  charm  away  her  griefs,  we  may  easily  and 
reasonably  suppose  that  she  would  be  a  wise  charmer  to  Hatach.  His  sorrows 
would  be  forgotten  in  her  presence,  and  his  joys  would  be  increased  by  the  influ- 
ence of  her  joyful  nature.  Happy  the  man  who  has  to  wait  upon  the  young  and 
the  joyful  !  As  w^e  think  of  the  condition,  we  shrink  from  acknowdedging  the  truth 
of  the  wise  man's  statement.  Sorrow  is  better  than  laughter.  Men  long  for 
appointments  where  life  is  rendered  pleasant.  To  serve  in  the  palace  is  more  an 
object  of  ambition  than  to  serve  in  the  abodes  of  misery.  The  house  of  feasting  is 
desired  rather  than  the  house  of  mourning.  To  preach  in  the  well-arranged  and 
tastefully -built  and  decorated  place  of  worship  to  a  crowded  and  fashionable  audience 
is  the  fond  desire  of  the  large  majority. 

IV.  A  ministerial  appointment  to  the  old  and  the  mournful.  Hatach,  we 
find,  was  willing  to  go  to  Mordecai,  the  pool  Jew,  clothed  in  his  hairy  garment  and 
having  ashes  on  his  head.  He  passes  from  Esther  to  Mordecai  with  no  signs  of 
unwillingness.  He  would  willingly  find  out  the  means  of  lessening  the  anxiety  of 
Esther,  \vhile  at  the  same  time  he  seeks  to  lessen  the  grief  of  Mordecai.  This  is  the 
true  ministry,  to  seek  to  comfort  the  aged,  and  to  console  the  mourners.  The  highest 
Minister  .set  himself  to  this  glorious  work.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me, 
because  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor ;  he  hath  sent  me  to 
heal  the  broken-hearted,  to  preach  deliveiance  to  the  captives,  and  recovo-ing  of 


IJJ  TTOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [ciiAr.  iv. 

siolit  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised,  to  preach  the  acceptable 
}'ear  of  the  Lord."  How  slow  most  men  are  to  follow  this  sublime  example  !  This 
world  is  full  of  mourners ;  but  the  cries  of  the  mourners  would  be  hushed  in  greater 
measure  if  there  were  men  with  s}  mpathetic  and  benevolent  natures  going  forth  with 
words  of  gospel  sweetness  in  their  hearts,  and  the  oil  of  gospel  consolations  in  their 
hands. 

V.  An  undesigned  connection  arising  from  this  ministerial  appointment. 
Here  there  is  a  wonderful  chain  of  unexpected  links.  Ahasuerus,  the  mighty  monarch, 
ruling  over  the  largest  empire  of  the  world,  at  one  end  of  the  chain  ;  and  Mordecai, 
the  despised  and  captive  Jew,  at  the  other  end  of  the  chain — the  joining  links  being 
Esther  the  queen  and  Hatach  the  king's  chamberlain.  From  a  human  point  of  view, 
how  mysterious  are  the  ways  by  which  men  are  linked  together.  The  monarch  is 
bound  to  the  captive  by  an  invisible  bond,  and  is  nearer  than  he  thinks.  We  are 
indeed  members  one  of  another.  There  is  a  communistic  principle  working  in 
societies.  But  let  there  not  be  communistic  violence.  Let  not  Ahasuerus  foro^et 
the  just  claims  of  Mordecai.  Let  the  monarch  remember  that  manhood  has  its 
rights.  And  let  not  the  Mordecais  seek  their  rights  by  violence,  but  betake  them- 
selves to  fasting  and  prayer,  as  did  this  Mordecai,  and  deliverance  must  come  sooner 
or  later.  But  these  undesigned  connections  of  earth  are  the  designed  connections 
of  heaven.  It  was  evidently  so  in  this  case,  and  it  is  so  in  a  greater  number  of 
cases  than  we  suppose.  A  greater  number  of  cases  !  If  we  believe  in  a  great  supreme 
Power  ruling  over  all,  must  we  not  behold  his  guiding  and  selecting  power  and 
wisdom  in  all  cases,  or  at  least  making  use  of  earth's  selections  for  the  advancement 
of  his  beneficent  and  all-wise  purposes  %  And  God's  direct  ministerial  appointments 
do  establish  an  extended  connection.  "Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth 
to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation !  "  The  angels  form  a  blessed 
connection  between  the  poor  souls,  enslaved  by  sin,  but  enfranchised  by  Divine 
grace,  and  the  eternal  God.  Wonderful  the  connection  between  Mordecai  and 
Ahasuerus,  but  surely  more  wonderful  still  the  connection  between  the  sinful  but 
redeemed  creature  and  the  glorious  Creator.  The  gospel  ministry  speaks  to  us  in 
visible  fashion  of  this  connection.  Redeemed  men  speak  to  men  still  in  their  sins. 
Christ's  true  ambassadors  stand  between  and  join  together  the  Saviour  and  the 
believing  sinner.  The  undesigned  coincidences  and  connections  of  life  are  coincidences 
and  connections  because  God  is  working.  The  undesigned  may  be  the  product  of 
Divine  purpose.  The  human  has  its  undesigned  movements,  the  Divine  has  no 
l)urposeless  motions.  All  is  harmonious.  The  very  discords  of  earth  shall  work  to 
the  production  of  final  and  eternal  concords.  Chaos  itself  will  give  birth  to  Divine 
order.  Confusion  is  working  to  the  evolution  of  method.  There  are  links  of 
connection  binding  all  things  together,  both  in  the  material  and  in  the  moral  world. 

VI.  The  unintentional  benefit  conferred  by  this  ministerial  appointment. 
.Vhasuerus  had  not  the  slightest  idea  of  helping  those  Jews  against  whom  he  had 
issued  the  murderous  edict  at  the  instigation  of  Harnan.  Bat  here  he  is.  Strange  to 
himself  would  his  conduct  have  appeared  if  he  had  known  all.  At  one  time  he  is 
working  for  the  destruction  of  the  Jews,  and  at  another  working  for  their  deliverance. 
Working  for  their  deliverance  not  only  in  his  selection  of  Estlier  to  be  queen,  but 
in  the  appointment  of  Hatach  to  be  her  minister.  Esther  herself  could  not  hold 
conference  with  Mordecai,  and  so  Hatach  the  king's  chamberlain  becomes  the 
medium  of  communication.  The  very  vices  of  kings  have  tended  to  the  welfare  of 
tht'ir  subjects  ;  but  no  excuse  this  for  the  vices.  The  blunders  of  sovereigns  have 
woiked  out  to  the  vindication  of  the  truth  ;  but  this  does  not  condone  tiie  blunders. 
Kings  by  their  weakness,  by  their  love  of  display,  by  their  fondness  for  pleasure 
have  unintentionally  conferred  benefits  upon  their  people.  They  have  sometimes 
made  wise  appointments,  and  the  nation  has  rejoiced  because  the  righteous  are  in 
.luthority.  By  way  of  pleasant  contrast,  notice  that  the  benefits  conferred  by 
heaven's  ministerial  appointments  are  intentional.     God's  material  ministers  move 


CHAP.  iv.J  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  123 

and  work  for  the  "bestowal  of  benefits  in  answer  to  his  merciful  intention.  God's 
intellectual  and  moral  ministers  think,  and  speak,  and  write,  and  act  for  the 
bestowal  of  benefits,  for  they  have  been  raised  up  for  this  very  purpose  by  his 
))enevolence.  God's  benevolence  is  not  the  working  of  a  kind  feeling  only,  but  is 
the  expression  of  his  infinite  mind  designing  the  welfare  of  his  creatures.  What- 
ever benefits  we  receive  from  the  ministry  of  others,  while  we  practically  show  our 
appreciation  of  such  a  beneficial  ministry,  let  us  above  all  manifest  our  sense  of 
indebtedness  to  God,  from  whom  and  by  whom  all  true  ministerial  appointments 
proceed  and  are  made. 

Notice  that — (a)  A  true  ministry  is  tioo-sided.    It  is  quite  true  that  a  ministry  of 
any  importance  must  be  many-sided.     In  these  modern  times  the  ministry  as  that 
word  has  come  to  be  used  in  an  ecclesiastical  sense,  has  upon  it  many  claims.     The 
modern  minister,  if  he  is  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  time,  if  he  is  to  reach,  half 
way  even,  the  standard  set  up  by  lecturers  on  preaching  and  preachers,  must  be 
more  than  human  ;  he  should  indeed  have  eyes  behind  and  before.    But  the  ministi  y 
of  which  we  now  speak  is  one  not  treated  of  in  books  on  homiletics.     Hatacli  is 
not  considered  in  the  "  letters  ad  clerum.''^     There  is  a  ministry  Avhere  no  eloquence 
of  tongue  is  required.     The  eloquence  of  the  life  is  that  which  is  required  in  every 
ministry.     Thus  the  true  ministry  is  two-sided.     It  looks  to  heaven  and  it  looks  to 
earth.     It  waits  upon   the  joyful   and    goes   with    messages    of  comfort   to    the 
mourners.     Hatach   waited    in    the   palace   and   then  went  to  the   palace  gates. 
Let  us  use  the  case  as  a  figurative  teaching.     Wait  in  the  palace  of  heaven,  by 
prayer  and  meditation,  that  we  may  minister  to  those  standing  without,     {b)  The 
highest   ministry  is   impelled   by   unselfish   love.     We  are   not   in  a  position  to 
declare  the  motives  which  operated  in  the  mind  of  Hatach  ;  but  this  we  know, 
that  the  pure  womanly  love  of  Esther  impelled  Hatach  to  go  and  speak  to  the 
ihourrdng  Mordecai.     Hatach  may  after  ail  have  been  a  mere  servile  menial  in  the 
hands  of  Esther;  still  his  ministry  was  the   result  of  love  in  Esther,  and  was 
therefore  of  the  highest  order.     A  base  minister  may  perform  the  useful  and 
beneficial  acts  of  the  ministry  of  love.     But  where  love  operates  in  the  mind,  love 
from  without  and  from  above  co-operating  with  love  from  within,  and  moving  to 
noblest  action,   theie  must  be   the  highest  ministry,     (c)   The  noblest  minisfry 
is   that    which   seels   loivly   spheres.       "  Hatach    went   forth    to    Mordecai   unto 
the   street   of    the  city,   which  was  before  the  king's   gate."     Hatach    may    not 
have   relished    the    errand  on  which    he  was  sent,   but   still   he   went.     Esther 
commanded,  and  Hatach  obeyed.     Lowly  spheres  may  not  always  be   desire«l ; 
but  if  the  command  is  given,  the  command  ought  to  be  obeyed.     The  streets  of 
modern  cities  are  in  a  neglected  condition.     The  mourners  tread  the  pavements  with 
lieavy  hearts,  and  no  Hatach  asks  what  is  the  cause  of  the  sorrow,  no  Hatach  comes 
from  royal  abodes  to  inquire  if  nothing  can  be  done  to  remove  the  burden  of  grief. 
Divine  love  gives  a  commandment  for  the  poor  outcasts — "  Go  into  the  highways 
and  hedges,"  but  few  are  found  ready  to  obey.     Those  who  do  go  are  not  always 
judicious.     They  have  not  heart  sympathy  with  the  distressed.     They  raise  dismal 
noises,  and  become  a  nuisance  ;   instead  of  quietly  and  lovingly  asking  "  what  it 
Mas,  and  why  it  was,"  as  did  Hatach.     {d)  The  tests  for  all  mimstnes.    Is  it  uniting 
earth  and  heaven  1     Is  it  bringing  together  all  classes]     Every  life  ought  to  be  a 
ministry,  and  every  life  should  be  tested  by  these  questions.     Is  it  conferring  both 
material  and  moral  benefits  1      There  should  be  no  unproductive  classes.     Every 
life  should  be  a  ministry  of  good.    Is  it  a  ministry  for  the  instruction  of  the  ignorant, 
for  the  restoration  of  the  fallen,  and  for  the  consolation  of  the  mourners'?     Hap^)/ 
the  nation  where  the  inmates  of  the  palace  consider  and  seek  to  promote  the  W(dlare 
and  happiness  of  those   in  the  streets  of  the  cities  and  outside  the  i)alace  gates. 
There  are  still  Hamans  about  our  palaces.     There  will  be  Mordecais  with  bleeding 
hearts.    And  the  Esthers  and  the  Hatachs  have  still  plenty  of  room  to  work. 


124 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAHT:  ESTHER. 


[CHAP.  IV. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Yerses  5,  6. 


If  we  weep  in  sincerity  with  those 
who  weep,  it  will  be  our  desire,  if  pos- 
sible, to  remove  their  sorrows.  But  to 
this  end  it  is  necessary  to  know  their 
cause.  Physicians  cannot  administer 
proper  medicines  to  their  patients  unless 
they  know  the  cause  of  their  diseases. 
They  may  palliate  the  symptoms,  but 
the  root  of  the  distemper  remains  if  the 
cause  is  not  removed.  So  we  may 
soothe  the  minds  of  persons  labouring 
under  grief;  but  if  they  are  rooted  in 
the  mind,  they  will  soon  recover  their 
force,  and  hold  the  soul  in  misery,  unless 
the  causes  are  removed ;  and  these  can- 
not be  removed  but  by  a  change  in  those 
outward  circumstances  which  occasioned 
them,  or  by  a  change  in  the  state  of  the 
mind,  when  it  is  convinced  that  the 
supposed  causes  do  not  exist,  or  that 
they  are  not  sufficient  grounds  for  the 
sorrows  they  occasioned,  or  that  relief  or 
consolation  may  be  found  of  virtue  suffi- 
cient to  counteract  their  force.  Esther 
could  not  now  visit  Mordecai,  or  call 
him  to  her  palace,  and  therefore,  con- 
versing with  him  by  means  of  a  third 
person,  inquires  into  the  causes  of  his 
distress,  with  a  sincere  intention  to  do 
everything  in  her  power  to  set  his  heart 
at  ease. — Lawson. 

The  good  queen  is  astonished  with 
this  constant  humiliation  of  so  dear  a 
friend,  and  now  sends  Hatach,  a  trusty 
though  a  pagan  attendant,  to  inquire 
into  the  occasion  of  this  so  irremediable 
heaviness.  It  should  seem  Esther  in- 
quired not  greatly  into  matters  of  state  ; 
that  which  perplexed  all  Shushan  was 
not  yet  known  to  her ;  her  followers,  not 
knowing  her  to  be  a  Jewess,  conceived 
not  how  the  news  might  concern  her, 
and  therefore  had  forborne  the  relation. 
Mordecai  first  informs  her,  by  her  mes- 
senger, of  the  decree  that  was  gone  out 
against  all  her  nation,  of  the  day  wherein 
they  must  all  prepare  to  bleed,  of  the 
sum  which  Haman  had  proffered  for 
their  heads,  and  delivers  the  copy  of 
that  bloody  edict,  charging  her  now,  if 
ever,  to  bestir  herself,  and  to  improve 
all  her  love,  all  her  power,  with  Kin.: 


Ahasuerus,  in  a  speedy  and  humble  sup- 
plication for  the  saving  of  the  life  not 
of  himself  so  much  as  of  her  people. — 
Bishop  Hall. 

The  lesson  which  I  would  give  you  is 
founded  on  Mordecai's  grief  and  Esther's 
sympathy.  Gladly  would  she  have  re- 
moved the  sorrow  of  her  friend,  and 
willingly  would  she  liave  mingled  her 
tears  with  his,  had  it  been  permitted. 
Her  sympathy  he  could  not  doubt ;  but 
there  are  griefs  deeper  than  human 
sympathy  can  reach,  and  Mordecai's 
were  beyond  Esther's  power  to  assuage. 
She  could  only  be  helpful  by  speaking 
to  the  king.  It  was  the  king  alone  that 
could  change  the  sorrow  into  joy.  The 
mourners  in  Zion  have  the  sympathy  of 
their  brethren,  and  that  sympathy  is 
sweet.  But  still  it  cannot  heal  the 
Avounds  of  a  spirit  that  is  troubled  by 
the  sense  of  sin,  nor  of  a  heart  that  is 
sore  pierced  by  God's  afflictive  dispensa- 
tion. But  the  King  of  Zion  can  heal 
these  wounds  ;  and  he  is  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  his  people's  infirmities — he 
breaketh  not  the  bruised  reed ;  he  will 
heal  them.  Cast  yourselves  upon  Jesus, 
ye  mourners,  with  simple-hearted  faith, 
and  ask  of  him  the  comfort  which  ye 
need,  and  you  will  receive  the  oil  of  joy 
for  mourning,  and  the  garment  of  praise 
for  the  spirit  of  heaviness. — Davidson. 

So  strictly  did  the  laws  of  Persia 
confine  wives,  especially  the  king's  wives, 
that  it  was  not  possible  for  Mordecai  to 
have  a  conference  with  Esther  about  this 
important  affair ;  but  divers  messages  are 
here  carried  between  them  by  Hatach, 
whom  the  king  had  appointed  to  attend 
her,  and  it  seems  he  was  one  she  could 
confide  in.  She  sent  to  Mordecai  to 
know  more  particularly  and  fully  what  the 
trouble  was  which  he  was  now  lament- 
ing, and  why  it  was  that  he  would  not 
put  off  his  sackcloth.  To  inquire  thus 
after  news,  that  we  may  know  the 
better  how  to  direct  our  griefs  and  joys, 
our  prayers  and  praises,  well  becomes  all 
those  that  love  Zion.  If  we  must  weep 
with  those  that  weep,  we  must  know 
why  they  weep. — Matthew  Henry, 


OHAP.   IV.] 


HOMILETW  COMMENT  A  RY:  ESTHER. 


125 


Then  called  Esther  for  ffatach.—She 
snuffetli  not  at  Mordecai's  refusal  of  her 
courtesy.  She  saith  not,  Let  him  choose ; 
the  next  offer  shall  be  worse.  Solomon 
reckoneth  among  those  four  things  that 
the  earth  cannot  bear,  a  handmaid  ad- 
vanced to  the  place  and  state  of  a  mis- 
tress. But  Esther  was  none  such.  In 
her  you  might  have  seen  singular  humility 
in  height  of  honours.  She  calletli  there 
for  Hatach,  a  faithful  servant,  and  per- 
liaps  a  Jew,  a  Jew  inwardly.  Honesty 
flows  from  piety. 

Whom  he  had  appointed  to  attend 
upon  her.  —  Heb.,  whom  he  had  set 
before  her,  to  be  at  her  beck  and  obedi- 
ence. Probably  he  was  happy  in  such  a 
service,  for  goodness  is  communicative, 
and  of  a  spreading  nature.  Plutarch 
saith  of  the  neighbour  villages  of  Eome 
in  Numa's  time,  that,  sucking  in  the  air 
of  that  city,  they  breathed  righteousness 
and  devotion.  So  it  might  very  well  be 
here.  It  was  so  with  Abraham's  ser- 
vants, and  Solomon's,  and  Cornelius's. 
Nero  complained  (and  no  wonder)  that 
lie  could  never  find  a  faithful  servant. 
What  could  they  learn  from  him  but 
villany  and  cruelty  1 

And  gave  him  a  commandment  to 
Moi'decai,  i.  e.  she  commanded  him  to 
deliver  her  mind  to  Mordecai.  A  ser- 
vant is  not  to  be  inquisitive  (John  xv. 
15 — he  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth), 
but  executive,  ready  to  do  what  is 
required  of  him.  He  is  the  master's 
instrument,  and  wholly  his,  oXwc  ekeii'ov, 
saith  Aristotle.  The  hands  must  take 
counsel  of  the  head,  and  bestir  them. 

To  knoiv  what  it  was,  and  why  it  was. 
— Some  great  matter  she  well  knew  it 
must  needs  be  that  put  him  to  these 
loud  laments.  Wise  men  cry  not  till 
they  are  sorely  hurt.  Job's  stroke  was 
heavier  than  liis  groaning.  He  was  not 
of  those  tliat  are  ever  whining ;  like 
some  men's  flesh,  if  their  skin  be  but 
razed  with  a  i)in,  it  presently  rankleth 
and  festereth  ;  or,  like  rotten  boughs,  if 
a  light  weight  be  but  hung  on  them, 
they  presently  creak  and  break.  Mor- 
decai she  knew  was  none  such.  She 
therefore  sendeth  to  see  what  was  the 
matter,  that  she  might  help  him,  if 
possible.     The  tears  and  moans  of  men 


in  misery  are  not  to  be  slighted,  as  if 
they  were  nothing  to  us.  Who  is  af- 
flicted, and  I  burn  not  1  saith  Paul. 
Weep  with  those  that  weep,  else  you 
add  to  their  miser}^  as  the  priest  and 
Levite  did  by  passing  by  the  wounded 
man.  Is  it  nothing  to  you,  0  ye  that 
pass  by  the  way  1  Are  ye  not  also  in 
the  body,  tliat  is,  in  the  body  of  flesh  and 
frailty,  subject  to  like  afflictions  1  And 
may  not  your  sins  procure  their  suff'er- 
ings,  as  a  vein  is  opened  in  the  arm  to 
ease  the  pain  of  the  head. — Trapp, 

A  Christian  is  no  libertine,  no  man  of 
freedom.  He  is  a  servant.  Indeed,  we 
have  changed  our  master.  We  are  set 
at  liberty  from  the  slavery  of  sin  and 
Satan ;  but  it  is  not  that  we  should  do 
nothing,  to  be  Belials  without  yoke ; 
but  it  is  to  serve  God.  We  are  taken 
from  the  service  of  Satan  to  be  the 
Lord's  freemen  ;  and  indeed  it  is  to  that 
end.  We  are  delivered  that  we  might 
serve  God.  Therefore  all  the  actions  of 
our  life  should  be  a  "  service  "  to  God. 
The  beasts  and  other  creatures  and  we 
have  common  actions,  such  as  we  do  in 
common,  as  to  eat,  and  to  drink,  and  to 
move.  The  beast  doth  this,  and  man 
doth  it.  When  a  man  doth  them  they 
are  reasonable  actions,  because  they  are 
guided  by  reason,  and  moderated  by 
reason ;  but  when  the  beast  doth  them 
they  are  the  actions  of  a  beast,  because 
he  hath  no  better  faculty  to  guide  him. 
So  common  actions,  they  are  not  a  ser- 
vice of  God  as  they  come  from  common 
men,  that  have  not  grace  and  the  Spirit 
of  God  in  their  hearts  ;  they  are  mere 
buying  and  selling,  and  going  about  the 
actions  of  their  callings,  as  the  actions  of 
a  beast  are  the  actions  of  a  beast.  But 
let  a  Christian  come  to  do  them,  he  hath 
a  higher  life  and  a  higher  spirit  that 
makes  them  spiritual  actions  that  are 
common  in  themselves.  He  raiseth  them 
to  a  higher  order  and  rank.  Tlierefoie  a 
Christian  "serveth"  God.  In  all  that 
he  doth  he  hath  an  eye  to  God ;  that 
which  another  man  doth  with  no  eye  to 
God,  but  merely  in  civil  re.-^pects.  The 
knowledge  of  a  commonwealth,  it  is  a 
building  knowledge,  a  commanding  know- 
ledge ;  for  though  a  statesman  doth  not 
hnild,  lie   doth   not    buy   and    sell   and 


126 


HOMILETIV  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER, 


fCHAP.   IV, 


commerce,  but  he  iiseth  all  other  trades 
I'or  the  good  of  the  state.  It  is  a  know- 
ledge commanding  all  other  inferior  arts 
and  trades  in  a  commonwealth  to  the 
last  end.  They  should  all  be  serviceable 
t,o  the  commonwealth;  and  if  they  be 
not  away  with  them.  So  religion,  and 
the  knowledge  of  Divine  things,  it  is  a 
commanding  knowledge;  it  commands 
all  other  services  in  our  callings,  &c.  It 
doth  not  teach  a  man  what  he  shall  do 
in  particular  in  bis  calling ;  but  it 
teacheth  him  how  to  direct  that  calling 
to  serve  God,  to  be  advantageous  and 
helpful  to  his  general  calling  ;  to  further 
him  to  heaven,  to  make  everything 
reductive  to  his  last  end,  which  he  sets 
before  him  ;  that  is,  to  honour  and  serve 
God  in  all  things,  to  whom  he  desires  to 
approve  himself  in  life  and  death.  He 
liath  a  principle,  the  Holy  Ghost  in  him, 
and  he  labours  to  reduce  everything  to 
the  main  end.  Oh  that  we  were  in  this 
t«Mnper  ! 

God  will  have  his  children  serve  out 
tin^'r  generation,  to  try  the  truth  of 
our  graces  before  we  come  to  heaven. 
And  he  will  have  us  perfect  before  we 
come  to  so  holy  a  place.  He  will  have 
us  "grow  in  grace,"  as  Ahasuerus  his 
wives  were  to  be  perfumed  and  prepared 
biifore  they  came  to  him.  It  is  a  holy 
place  that  we  hope  for,  a  holy  condition  ; 
therefore  he  will  have  us  by  little  and 
little  be  fitted  by  tlie  Spirit  of  God. 

The  Scripture  values  men  by  that  that 
God  values  them,  and  not  as  men  do,  by 
their  life,  and  reign,  and  flourishing  in 
the  world,  and  their  esteem  with  men, 
but  as  his  carriage  hath  been  to  God. 
David  "  served  the  will  of  God  "  in  his 
generation. 

Concerning  the  relation  of  servants,  in 
a  word,  some  are  so  by  office,  as  magis- 
trates and  ministers,  but  all  are  servants 
as  Christians.  It  was  the  best  flower  in 
David's  garland  to  be  a  servant  to  the 
Lord  ;  and  it  is  so  for  every  one,  be  they 
never  so  great  in  dignity,  to  serve  God  ; 
for  to  serve  him  is  to  run  into  the  most 
noble  service  of  all,  for  all  God's  servants 
shall  be  kings,  nay,  they  are  kings.  And 
then  it  is  a  rich  and  most  beneficial 
service  ;  for  we  serve  a  Lord  that  will 
reward  to  a  cup  of  lold  water.     It  is  not 


such  a  service  as  Pharaoh's  was,  to 
gather  stubble  ourselves ;  but  he  will 
enable  us  to  do,  and  where  we  fail  he 
will  pardon,  and  when  we  do  anything 
he  will  reward,  and  when  our  enemies 
oppress  us  he  will  take  our  parts. 

A  child  of  God  is  the  greatest  free- 
man, and  the  best  servant,  even  as 
Christ  was  the  best  servant,  yet  none  so 
free ;  and  the  greater  portion  any  man 
hath  of  his  Spirit,  the  freer  disposition  he 
hath  to  serve  every  one  in  love.  Even 
the  basest  works  are  a  service  of  God 
when  they  are  done  in  obedience  to 
God.  The  poor  servant  "serves  the 
Lord  Christ."  When  a  poor  servant  is 
at  his  work,  employed  in  the  business  of 
man,  poor,  common  things,  yet  he  serves 
the  Lord  all  the  while.  He  serves  those 
that  are  his  governors,  with  an  eye  to 
the  great  Governor  and  Master  that  is 
above  all,  that  will  reward  them  for  their 
poor  service,  however  their  master  re- 
ward them. — Slbbes. 

Every  man  may  be  considered  under 
a  double  capacity  or  relation.  As  he  is 
a  part  or  member  of  the  body  politic, 
and  so  is  not  his  own,  but  stands  in- 
cluded in  and  possessed  by  the  com- 
munity. In  which  capacity  he  is  obliged 
to  contribute  his  proportion  of  help  to 
the  public,  as  sharing  from  thence  with 
others  the  benefits  of  society,  and  so 
being  accountable  to  make  it  some  retri- 
bution in  his  particular  station  and  con- 
dition. A  man  may  be  considered  as 
he  is  a  member  and  subject  of  a  spirit- 
ual and  higher  kingdom.  And  in  this 
capacity  he  is  to  pursue  the  personal 
yet  great  interest  of  his  own  salvation. 
He  is  sent  into  this  world  to  make  sure 
of  a  better;  to  glorify  his  Maker  by 
studying  to  save  himself ;  and,  in  a 
word,  to  aim  at  enjoyments  Divine  and 
supernatural,  and  higher  than  this  animal 
life  can  aspire  unto.  Every  man  then 
sustains  a  double  capacity,  according  to 
which  he  has  a  double  work  or  calling. 
A  temporal  one,  by  which  he  is  to  fill 
up  some  place  in  the  commonwealth  by 
the  exercise  of  soms  useful  profession, 
whether  as  a  divine,  lawyer,  or  phy- 
sician ;  a  merchant,  soldier,  mariner,  or 
any  inferior  handicraft ;  by  all  which,  a-j 
by  GO  many  greater  and  less  wheels,  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  127 

business  of  tlie  vast  body  of  the  public  enjoyment  this  side  heaven  ;  and  he  that 

is  carried  on,  its  necessities  served,  and  invades  the  possession  of  anything,  but 

its  state  upheld.     And    Ood,  who   has  upon  this  claim,  is  an  intruder   and   a 

ordained  both  society  and  I  irder,  accounts  usurper.     I  have  given  order,  says  the 

himself  so  much  served  by  oach  man's  Apostle,  "  that  if  any  refuse  to  labom-, 

diligent  pursuit,  though  of  the  meanest  neither  should  he  eat."     It  is  the  active 

trade,  that  his  stepping  out  of  the  bounds  arm  and  the  busy  hand  that  must  both 

of  it  to  some  other  work   (as  he  pre-  purvey  for  the  mouth  and,  withal,  give  it 

sumes)  more  excellent  is  but  a  bold  and  a  right  to  every  morsel  that  is  put  into 

thankless    presumption,    by   which   the  it.     Correspondent  to  a  Christian's  other, 

man  puts  himself  out  of  the  common  that  is,  his    spiritual   capacity,   he  has 

way  and  guard  of  Providence.     For  God  also   a  spiritual   calling  or  profession  ; 

requires  no  man  to  be  praying  or  reading  and  the  work  that  this  engages  him  to 

when  the  exigence  of  his  profession  calls  is  that  grand  one  of  working  out  his 

him  to  his  hammer  or  his  needle ;  nor  salvation  ;  a   work   that   a   life   is   too 

commands  any  one  from  his  shop  to  go  little  for,  had  a  man  anything  more  than 

hear  sermon  in  the  church,  much  less  to  a   life  to  bestow  upon  it ;  a  work  that 

preach  one  in  the  pulpit.     God,  as  the  runs  out  into  eternity,  and  upon  which 

Lord  and  great  Master  of  the  family  of  depends  the  woe  or  welfare  of  an  im- 

the  universe,  is  still  calling  upon  all  his  mortal  soul.     Now  this  work  is  threefold 

servants  to  work  and  labour.    A  thing  so  — to  make  our  peace  with  God  ;  to  get 

much  disdained  by  the  gallant  and  the  our  sins  mortified ;   to   get   our  hearts 

epicure  is  yet  that  general  standing  price  purified   with    the    contrary    graces. — 

that  God  and  nature  has  set  upon  every  South, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGEAPH.    Verses  6— 9. 

A  Strange  Meeting. 

The  onlookers  might  very  reasonably  ask,  Who  are  those  two  men  standing 
together,  in  close  conference,  in  the  street  of  the  city  before  the  king's  gate,  and 
what  is  the  meaning  of  their  confidential  interview  1  For  it  must  have  been  an 
unusual  thing  for  the  king's  chamberlain  to  be  seen  talking  to  a  despised  Jew.  The 
wicked,  those  who  took  part  with  revengeful  Haman,  might  well  consider  the 
meeting  with  alarm.  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth ;  but  here  is  a  man 
pursuing — a  man  armed  with  Divine  powers,  as  is  evident  from  his  history — a  man 
of  strong  purpose,  of  upright  intentions,  and  of  sagacious  spirit — and  the  wicked 
had  every  reason  for  alarm  had  they  only  known  the  situation.  But  those  who 
were  not  condemned  in  their  own  consciences  might  calmly  pass  these  two  men  by, 
and  pursue  without  fear  their  appointed  way.  It  is  well  so  to  conduct  our  lives 
that  we  need  not  be  suspicious  of  evil  when  we  see  others  holding  private  interviews. 
Whispers  can  only  disturb  guilty  consciences.  Some  might  fancy  that  these  two  men 
thus  strangely  meeting  together  were  plotting  mischief  against  the  monarch.  For 
men  are  ever  too  prone  to  think  evil.  But  we  know  better.  Let  us  consider  tlie 
nature  of  this  strange  meeting. 

I.  An  important  interview.  The  importance  of  a  conference  is  not  always  to 
be  measured  by  the  number  of  persons  gathered  together.  The  meeting  of  two 
people  may  be  fraught  with  more  important  results  than  the  meeting  of  two  thousand. 
Indeed,  as  too  many  cooks  spoil  tlie  broth,  so  it  often  is  that  too  many  people  at  a 
conference  bring  about  confusion,  and  no  practical  results  are  produced.  And,  after 
all,  at  large  conferences  the  manipulation  of  measures  is  in  the  hands  of  a  few,  either 
of  the  wisest  or  of  the  most  pushing.  The  meeting  of  Hatach  and  of  Mordecai  was 
one  of  the  most  important  at  that  period  in  the  dominion  of  Ahasuerus.  The 
importance  of  a  conference  is  not  to  be  measured  by  the  magnificence  of  the  place 


128  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  [chap.  iv. 

oi  meeting.  In  the  present  day  if  any  great  philanthropic,  political,  or  religious 
measure  is  to  be  discussed,  a  large  gathering  must  be  summoned  in  the  splendid 
hall,  in  the  gilded  saloon,  or  in  the  stately  ecclesiastical  edifice.  There  was  once  a 
small  gathering  in  an  insignificant  upper  room  which  was  productive  of  greater 
results  than  any  assembly  since  that  time.  Hatach  and  Mordecai  met  in  the  street, 
hut  they  did  more  important  work  than  the  grandees  meeting  in  Shushan  the  palace. 
The  importance  of  a  conference  is  not  always  to  be  measured  by  the  worldly  position 
— by  the  names  of  the  men  who  meet  together  as  renowned  for  rank,  for  prowess  in 
arms,  for  skill  in  strategy,  for  genius  in  oratory,  or  for  excellence  in  debate — of 
those  who  are  assembled.  Though  this  is  the  modern  fashion,  a  fashion  which  has 
been  repeating  itself  through  all  time.  The  Times,  the  Daily  Telegraphy  and  the 
Daily  News  would  have  given  as  many  lines  to  record  the  insignificant  fact  that 
Ahasuerus  had  taken  a  walk,  as  they  would  to  record  the  important  interview 
between  Hatach  and  Mordecai  in  the  streets  of  the  city.  But  mighty  issues  were 
depending  upon  this  interview.  That  which  is  little  noticed  is  often  of  most 
importance.  That  which  the  superficial  do  not  observe  may  be  transcendently 
significant.  The  meeting  of  two  poor  men  may  either  destroy  or  save  the  city,  but 
it  is  unnoticed  in  earthly  chronicles ;  while  the  meetings  of  the  rich  and  of  the 
great  are  described  in  glowing  phrases,  though  their  meetings  may  be  of  no  conse- 
quence to  the  world  at  large,  beneficially  considered.  Notice  the  wisdom  of  the 
sacred  chronicles.  They  describe  the  meetings,  whether  of  rich  or  of  poor,  whether 
of  kings  or  of  subjects,  whether  of  noble  or  of  ignoble,  that  have  far-reaching  results. 
These  chronicles  take  no  superficial  views.  They  record  for  all  time.  The  meeting 
of  Saul  the  persecutor  and  Christ  the  Saviour  was  not  recorded  by  the  scribes,  but 
it  was  the  most  important  meeting  of  all  time. 

II.  A  full  disclosure.  "And  Mordecai  told  him  of  all  that  had  happened."  A 
sorrowful  tale  was  that  which  Mordecai  had  to  tell,  and  no  doubt  very  painful  to 
him  would  be  the  relation.  But  he  did  not  shrink  from  the  painful  task,  for 
patriotism  laid  upon  him  a  stern  necessity.  Sometimes  it  is  a  mitigation  of  our 
sorrows  to  unburden  our  minds  fully,  and  to  tell  all  the  tale  of  the  causes  of  our 
grief  to  a  friend ;  at  others,  silence,  or  comparative  reserve,  is  our  safety.  We  may 
well  suppose,  that  here,  in  one  aspect,  Mordecai  would  not  wish  to  tell  all  to  this 
eunuch.  Still  it  must  be  told,  and  sternly  he  opens  up  his  sores  to  one  of  a  foreign 
nation.  Sometimes  sin  presses  heavily  upon  the  mind  of  the  convinced  sinner.  But 
he  shrinks  from  a  candid  inspection  of  his  sinfulness,  and  from  full  confession  even 
to  that  God  who  knows  all.  The  sensitive  mind  naturally  recoils  from  full  confes- 
sion of  sinfulness  to  a  fellow-creature ;  and  yet,  why  should  we  shrink  from  full 
confession  to  God  ^  The  truest  wisdom  is  to  make  a  full  disclosure.  "  If  we  confess 
our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all 
unrighteousness."  Mordecai  made  a  full  disclosure  of  the  intensity  of  HamarCs 
purpose.  Money  power  was  evidently  as  omnipotent  in  Persia  as  it  is  in  England. 
Haman  was  so  intent  upon  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose  that  he  promised  to 
pay  a  large  sum  of  money  into  the  king's  treasuries.  This  is  still  a  good  test  by 
which  to  get  to  know  whether  or  not  a  man  is  intense  in  his  purpose.  When  a 
man  expresses  an  earnest  desire  to  have  some  scheme  carried  out,  just  ask  him  how 
much  he  is  willing  to  give  for  its  accomplishment  1  Money  may  be  given  with  the 
sincere  desire  of  doing  good.  This  is  the  noblest  method  of  disposing  of  wealth. 
In  fact,  the  only  true  method.  In  this  way  there  is  that  scattereth  earthly  treasure 
and  yet  increaseth ;  sometimes  earthly  treasure,  but  at  all  times  heavenly  treasure. 
We  must  see  to  it  that  our  motive  is  pure  in  giving.  Money  may  be  given  for  the 
purpose  of  making  a  name.  Too  many  give  at  the  dictate  of  an  ostentatious  spirit. 
The  printing  of  subscription-lists  is  a  device  of  the  wisdom  of  this  world.  Divine 
wisdom  says.  Let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy  right  hand  doeth.  Money  may 
be  promised  and  given  in  order  to  promote  an  evil  purpose.  It  was  so  in  the  case 
of  Haman.     He  knew  it  would  help  on  his  evil  design.     He  probably  knew  that 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  129 

he  would  gain  by  the  transaction  if  it  were  successful.  Too  many  give  even  to  a 
f^ood  cause  with  the  hope  of  getting  their  money  back  with  a  large  percentage  for 
the  loan.  For  it  is  little  more  than  a  loan.  It  is  a  kind  of  speculative  transaction. 
Mordecai  made  a  full  disclosure  of  the  malignity  of  Haman's  purpose.  Haman's 
dark  design  was  to  destroy  all  the  Jews.  It  is  highly  probable  that  Haman  had 
hatred  for  all  the  Jews,  and  that  the  offence  of  Mordecai  was  but  the  means  of 
calling  out  that  hatred  into  active  play.  Haman  might  blame  Mordecai,  but  he 
had  much  more  reason  to  blame  his  own  ill-regulated  nature.  How  often  we  blame 
others,  when  we  ought  to  blame  ourselves  !  The  fancied,  or  even  real,  wrong-doings 
of  others  can  be  no  justification  for  wrong  on  our  part.  Even  if  Mordecai  were 
wrong  in  refusing  to  bow,  Haman  was  not  right  in  seeking  revenge.  Let  us  seek 
the  subjugation  of  inward  evil,  and  then  outward  evil  will  not  act  upon  us  injuri- 
ously, for  it  will  find  no  kindred  element  on  which  to  work.  Mordecai  would  not 
make  a  full  disclosure  unless  he  spoke  of  his  own  concern  for  the  safety  and  tvelfare 
of  his  people.  He  told  of  all  that  happened  to  him,  and  what  happened  to  the  Jews 
was  a  sorrow  to  the  patriotic  Mordecai.  He  would  not  in  unseemly  boastfulness 
extol  his  patriotism.  Yet  he  must  show  that  he  was  most  deeply  interested  in  the 
fate  of  his  countrymen.  For  himself,  he  was  ready  to  die  if  his  death  would  secure 
the  deliverance  of  his  people.  But  his  heart  was  bleeding  at  the  thought  that  all 
his  people  were  exposed  to  death.  We  want  this  spirit,  to  lose  our  own  personal 
sorrows  in  the  sorrows  of  our  people. 

III.  Witnessing  credentials.  The  tale  which  Hatach  had  to  tell  to  Esther 
was  one  of  a  most  marvellous  character.  It  is  an  illustration  of  the  statement  that 
fact  is  stranger  than  fiction.  Esther  might  very  well  doubt  the  truth  of  this  dark 
design.  But  there  could  be  no  escape  from  the  fact  when  Hatach  placed  in  her 
hands  the  copy  of  the  writing  of  the  decree  that  was  given  at  Shushan.  This 
writing  might  be  given  to  Esther  not  only  to  witness  to  the  truth  of  Hatach's 
narration,  but  that  she  might  more  fully  understand  all  the  bearings  of  the  case. 
When  we  have  a  tale  to  tell  detrimental  to  the  character  of  another  let  us  be  sure 
that  we  are  correct.  Let  us  look  out  for  the  copy  of  the  writing  of  the  decree. 
Some  people  in  telling  an  evil  tale  about  another  think  it  is  quite  sufficient  to  say 
he  has  a  bad  character.  Haman  was  a  bad  character.  Esther  must  have  read  his 
nature.  But  Mordecai  does  not  say  Haman's  character  is  enough  to  make  Esther 
believe  the  story,  but  he  sends  along  with  the  story  a  copy  of  the  writing  of  the 
decree.  We  must  not  condemn  a  man  on  mere  hearsay.  And  again,  some  people 
in  telling  an  evil  tale  profess  to  be  indignant  if  they  are  not  at  once  believed. 
Mordecai  did  not  say,  If  Esther  does  not  believe  my  story  the  matter  must  drop ;  I 
shall  say  no  more  ;  she  has  no  right  to  suppose  that  I  should  fabricate  an  evil  story. 
But,  like  a  wise  man,  he  backs  up  the  story  with  a  copy  of  the  writing  of  the 
decree.  It  might  be  a  more  unjust  thing  for  me  to  believe  a  man  capable  of  some 
great  crime  than  for  me  to  doubt  the  man  who  speaks  of  such  capability.  There 
should  be  credentials  to  every  tale.  If  every  evil  accusation  were  to  be  believed 
and  acted  upon,  our  prisons  would  have  to  be  very  considerably  enlarged. 

IV.  A  solemn  charge.  Esther  was  charged  by  Mordecai  to  go  in  unto  the 
king.  The  Persian  queen  was  not  as  the  English  queen.  The  former  was  subject. 
8he  had  not  the  rights  of  an  ordinary  English  wife.  She  could  not  go  in  and  out 
as  she  pleased.  It  was  therefore  a  solemn  charge  which  Mordecai  now  gave  to 
Esther.  He  knew  the  gravity  of  the  work,  and  already  his  faith  had  fixed  upon 
Esther  as  God's  chosen  instrument.  Esther  was  now  charged  to  go  on  a  perilous 
errand.  She  was  to  go  alone.  It  is  easier  to  go  with  the  multitirde  to  face  danger 
than  to  go  alone.  Many  a  man  who  would  be  bold  in  the  company  of  a  multitude, 
would  be  a  coward  when  standing  alone.  From  time  to  time  we  receive  solemn 
charges  to  go  alone,  or  to  stand  alone.  Let  us  be  faithful  to  the  call  and  the  post 
of  duty.  This  is  our  great  encouragement;  there  is  never  any  danger  in  going 
alone,  in  a  right  spirit,  unto  the  King  Eternal.     The  danger  is  in  not  going  alone 

K 


/30  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  tv. 

Bufficiently  often.     How  often  conscience  charges  us  to  go  in  unto  the  King,  and 
how  often  we  disobey !     The  neglect  of  private  prayer  is  ruinous  to  the  soul. 

V.  An  honourable  office.  The  office  to  which  Esther  was  now  appointed  was 
that  of  intercessor.  How  noble  and  glorious  the  work  to  intercede  on  behalf  of 
the  people  !  How  noble  the  conduct  of  Bunyan's  wife  pleading  with  the  judge  for 
her  husband's  liberty  !  How  noble  the  conduct  of  Queen  Philippa  pleading  with 
Edward  for  the  pardon  of  the  six  burgesses  of  Calais  !  But  nobler  still  was  that 
office  to  which  Esther  was  appointed  to  plead  with  the  king  for  the  salvation  of  her 
people.  There  was  neither  selfishness  prompting  to,  nor  applause  to  be  secured,  by 
Esther's  course  of  conduct,  so  far  as  she  then  knew.  The  work  of  an  intercessor  is 
ever  glorious.  What  glory  attaches  to  him  who  is  the  great  High  Priest  of  the 
Christian  religion  !  That  he  might  be  a  successful  pleader  he  not  merely  exposed 
himself  to  danger,  but  passed  through  suffering.  Esther  might  be  a  successful 
pleader  without  herself  suffering.  We  know  that  she  was.  The  very  success  of  her 
intercessions  contributed  to  her  greatness  and  her  glory.  But  Jesus  could  only  be 
a  successful  intercessor  as  he  endured  suffering.  He  was  made  perfect  through 
suffering,  that  he  might  be  a  faithful  High  Priest.  Let  us  confess  our  indebted- 
ness to  this  glorious  Intercessor.  Let  us  not  stint  our  meed  of  praise.  Let  us  con- 
secrate ourselves  to  his  holy  and  ennobling  service. 

VI.  A  faithful  messenger.  It  very  often  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the 
message  as  to  whether  or  not  we  like  faithfulness  in  the  messenger.  However, 
the  rule  should  be  not  what  is  liked,  but  what  is  right  to  be  done.  It  was  right 
for  Hatach  to  tell  a  true  tale  to  Esther,  though  it  might  sorely  grieve  her  heart. 
Some  messengers  would  have  told  Esther  only  half  a  tale,  and  have  made 
Mordecai's  story  amount  to  nothing.  Some  doctors  never  give  a  true  statement  of 
the  case  to  their  patients,  and  thus  sometimes  do  great  harnL  It  perhaps  would 
not  be  wise  always  to  tell  all  the  truth.  But  it  is  never  wise  to  tell  an  untruth,  or  to 
bring  a  false  report.  "  As  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  time  of  harvest,  so  is  a  faithful 
messenger  to  them  that  send  him;  for  he  refresheth  the  soul  of  his  masters." 
Let  us  be  faithful  messengers.  Speak  the  truth  in  love.  Be  refreshing  powers  in 
this  land  of  drought. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  6 — 9. 

And  Mordecai  told  him  all  that  had  she  must  bestir  herself  for  the  labouring 

happened  unto  him. — Not  by  fate  or  blind  Church. 

fortune,  but  by  the  providence  of  God,  That  ivas  given  at  Shitshan. — Which 

which  hath  a  hand  in  ordering  the  most  if  ever  it  were  full   of  judgment,  and 

casual  and  fortuitous  events,  to  the  exe-  white  as  a  lily  (according  to  the  name), 

cution  of  his  righteous  counsels ;  neither  is  now  stained  with  blood  of  innocents  ; 

18  there  a  Providence  but  we  shall  once  if  ever  righteousness  did  lodge  in  it,  yet 

see  a  wonder  or  a  mercy  wrapt  up  in  it.  now  murderers. 

And  of  the  sum  of  money.  —  Money         To  show  it  unto  Esther. — That  her 

is  the  monarch  of  this  present  world,  eye  might  affect  her  heart,  and  her  heart 

Money  is   to    many   dearer   than   their  set  all  awork  for  her  people;    that  is, 

heart's  blood,  yet,  to  gratify  their  lusts,  herself,   according   to  that,  "  Physician, 

they  lavish  silver  out  of   the  bag,  and  heal  thyself ; "  that  is,  thine  own  coun- 

care  not  to  purchase  revenge  or  sensual  trymen. 

delights  with  misery,  beggary,  discredit.         And  to  declare  it  unto  her. — In  the 

damnation.  cause,  viz.  his  refusing  to  bow  to  Haman 

Also  he  gave  him  the  copy  of  the  writ-  against   his   conscience   (whereof   it  no 

ing. — That  she  might   see  it,  and  rest  whit  repented  him) ;   and  in  the  several 

assured  that  it  was  even  so,  and  no  other-  circumstances,  laid  forth  in  the  liveliest 

wise ;  and  that  therefore  now  or  never  colours,  for  her  thorough  information. 


CHAP.   IV.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


131 


And  to  charge  her  that  she  should  go 
in  unto  the  Mug. — This  Mordecai  knew 
would  hardly  be  done ;  he,  therefore, 
makes  use  of  his  ancient  authority,  and 
sets  it  on  with  greatest  earnestness.  So 
St.  Paul,  ''  I  charge  you  by  the  Lord  ;  " 
and  again,  "  I  charge  thee  before  God, 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  It  is  a 
weakness  to  be  hot  in  a  cold  matter,  but 
it  is  wickedness  to  be  cold  in  a  hot  mat- 
ter. He  that  is  earnest  in  good,  though 
he  may  carry  some  things  indiscreetly, 
yet  is  he  far  better  than  a  time-server 
and  a  cold  friend  to  the  truth ;  like  as 
in  falling  forward  is  nothing  so  much 
danger  as  in  falling  backward.  Eli  was 
to  blame  with  his.  Do  no  more  so,  my 
sons.  And  so  was  Jehoshaphat  with 
his.  Let  not  the  king  say  so.  And  the 
people  in  Ahab's  time,  who,  when  they 
were  pressed  to  express  whom  they  were 
for,  God  or  Baal,  they  answered  not  a 
word.  And  yet  how  many  such  cold 
friends  hath  the  truth  now -a- days! — 
lukewarm  Laodiceans;  neuter,  passive 
Christians,  &c.  When  Callidus  once 
declared  against  Gallus  with  a  faint  and 
languishing  voice,  Oh,  saith  Tully,  In 
nisi  figeres,  sic  ageres  1  Wouldest  thou 
plead  in  that  manner  if  thou  wert  in 
good  earnest  1  Men's  faint  appearing 
for  God's  cause  shows  they  do  but  feign ; 
their  coldness  probably  concludeth  they 
do  but  counterfeit.  Mordecai  plays  the 
man,  and  chargeth  Esther  to  improve 
her  interest  in  the  king,  her  husband,  for 
the  Church's  deliverance.  See  here  how 
he  turneth  every  stone,  tradeth  every 
talent,  leaveth  no  means  unused,  no 
course  unattempted,  for  the  saints'  safety. 
And  this  the  Spirit  of  God  hath  pur- 
posely recorded,  that  all  may  learn  to 
lay  out  themselves  to  the  utmost  for  the 
puVjlic  ;  to  be  most  zealous  for  the  con- 
servation and  defence  of  the  Church, 
when  it  is  afflicted  and  opposed  by 
persecutors ;  seeing  they  cannot  be 
saved  unless  she  is  in  safety,  neither 
can  they  have  God  for  their  Father  un- 
less they  love  and  observe  this  their  dear 
mother.  Oh  that  these  things  were  duly 
considered  by  all  sorts  now-a-days  ! 

And  Hatach  came  and  told  Esther. — 
He  acted  the  part  of  a  faithful  messen- 
ger :    80  must  ministers,  those  servants 


of  the  Churches,  declare  unto  the  people 
all  the  mind  of  God,  and  not  steal  God's 
word  every  one  from  his  neighbour ;  not 
deal  deceitfully  with  it ;  but  as  of  sin- 
cerity, but  as  of  God,  in  the  sight  of 
God,  let  them  speak  in  Christ ;  and  let 
them  speak  out  not  fearing  any  colours. 
He  that  hath  my  word,  let  him  speak 
my  word  faithfully,  saith  God.  Aaron's 
bells  were  all  of  gold  ;  the  trumpets  of 
the  sanctuary  were  of  pure  silver ;  they 
did  not  sound  a  retreat  when  they  should 
have  sounded  an  alarm ;  no  more  must 
God's  messengers.  Whatsoever  the  Loi< I 
saith  unto  me,  that  will  I  speak,  sai  h 
Micaiah.  Paul,  as  he  received  what  he 
delivered,  so  he  delivered  whatsoever  he 
received.  Moses  was  faithful  in  all 
God's  house. — Trapp. 

It  is  unpleasant  to  be  the  messenger 
of  bad  tidings.  It  is,  however,  often 
useful.  If  a  physician  saw  you  labouring 
under  a  mortal  distemper,  and  insensibL^. 
to  your  danger,  he  is  the  preserver  of 
your  life,  when,  by  warning  you  of  the 
peril  of  your  condition,  he  rouses  your 
diligence  to  apply  the  proper  remedy. 
Esther  must  have  been  shocked  beyond 
measure  at  hearing  of  a  sentence  of  death 
pronounced  against  her  dearest  friends, 
against  her  whole  people,  against  herself, 
by  the  man  who  had  laised  her  to  a 
share  in  his  bed,  and  in  his  throne, 
without  a  crime  proved  against  any  one 
of  them.  But  it  was  better  to  hear  of  it 
at  present,  than  ten  or  eleven  months 
afterwards,  when  it  would  be  too  late  to 
provide  a  remedy 

There  are  some  who  cannot  bear  to 
hear  of  any  bad  tidings,  however  true, 
and  think  those  men  their  enemies  who 
tell  them  the  truth.  They  consider 
those  friends  or  preachers  as  their  ene- 
mies who  speak  to  them  of  their  sins, 
and  of  the  judgments  of  God  denounced 
against  them.  But  was  not  E^^ther  under 
deep  obligations  to  Mordecai  for  inform- 
ing her  of  the  danger  of  her  people,  and 
urging  her  to  exert  her  influence  for 
preserving  them?  Whether  was  Ahab 
most  indebted  to  those  prophets  who 
told  him  that  the  Lord  was  with  him, 
and  would  give  him  victory  at  Ramoth- 
Gilead,  or  to  him  who  told  him  that  he 
would  fall  in  the  battle  %     By  following 


132 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IV. 


the  counsel  of  the  former,  he  lost  his 
life.  He  might  have  preserved  it,  if  he 
had  believed  the  latter. 

It  is  indeed  cruel  to  distress  men  by 
false  or  doubtful  intelligence  of  calamities 
that  have  not  happened,  or,  if  they  have 
happened,  cannot  be  remedied.  Mordecai 
was  far  from  wishing  to  disquiet  the 
mind  of  his  royal  friend  by  uncertain 
rumours.  But  he  had  too  good  intelli- 
gence to  be  mistaken,  and  puts  into  her 
hands  decisive  proofs  of  the  danger  of 
her  people,  and  of  Haman's  activity  in 
procuring  their  ruin.  Nor  did  he  give 
her  this  intelligence  to  torment  her  before 
the  time.  If  nothing  could  have  been 
done  to  avert  the  danger,  he  might  have 
permitted  her  to  enjoy  tranquillity  till  it 
could  be  concealed  no  longer.  But  who 
could  tell  what  might  be  the  result  of 
supplication  to  the  king,  especially  from 
a  queen  who  was  understood  to  be  the 
object  of  his  warmest  love  !  He  there- 
fore desires,  or  rather  requires,  her  to  go 
in  and  make  intercession  to  the  king  for 
the  people,  and  for  her  own  life. 

Mordecai  uses  authority  in  his  language 
to  the  queen,  and  does  her  great  honour 
by  using  such  language.  He  durst  not 
have  charged  her  to  do  her  duty,  if  he 
had  not  known  her  humbleness  of  mind 
in  her  greatness.  She  was  as  much  dis- 
posed as  in  her  youngest  days  to  give 


him  the  authority  of  a  father  ;  and  this 
he  knew  so  well  that  he  uses  it  without 
scruple  or  apology.  Happy  are  the  men 
on  whom  prosperity  makes  no  change 
but  for  the  better  ! 

He  charges  her  to  make  intercession 
to  the  king.  The  knowledge  of  that 
dreadful  situation  in  which  the  Jews 
were  placed,  was  to  be  improved  by  all 
the  Jews  as  a  call  to  fa^sting  and  inter- 
cession with  the  God  of  heaven,  on 
whom  their  hope  was  to  rest.  But  it 
was  to  be  improved  by  the  queen  in 
particular,  as  a  motive  to  the  exertion  of 
all  her  influence  with  the  king.  All, 
according  to  their  places  and  stations, 
are  bound  to  do  what  they  can  to  avert 
threatened  miseries  from  their  nation. 
But  some  are  bound  to  do  much  more 
than  others,  because  tht^y  have  peculiar 
opportunities,  which,  if  they  are  not 
improved,  must  render  them  in  some 
degree  accountable  for  the  mischiefs  con- 
sequent on  their  neglect.  Those  who 
can  do  nothing  by  their  own  power,  may 
do  much  by  their  influence  with  others. 
In  the  reign  of  the  bloody  Jehoiakim, 
the  princes  of  Judah  saved  Jeremiah 
from  his  hands.  If  these  princes  had 
not  used  their  influence  for  this  purpose, 
they  must  have  shared  in  the  guilt  of 
his  blood  — Lawson. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.     Verses  10—12. 


Prudential  Considerations. 

Objections  may  be  raised  against  any  enterprise  simply  by  way  of  shielding  the 
unwillingness  of  the  objectors.  They  object  merely  for  the  sake  of  objecting.  They 
are  unwilling  to  come  out  boldly  and  say  that  they  do  not  intend  to  take  any  part 
in  the  scheme.  They  hide  themselves  behind  the  false  plea  of  the  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  bringing  the  scheme  to  a  successful  issue.  They  may  see  both  the 
necessity  and  the  propriety  of  the  work  being  done,  and  are  too  cowardly  to 
profess  themselves  unwilling  to  do  their  duty.  They  would  show  themselves  as 
w^illing  to  do  the  work,  and  yet  keep  affirming  that  the  work  cannot  be  done.  Now 
the  after  conduct  of  Esther  cannot  justify  us  in  supposing  that  she  raised  objections 
on  this  principle.  She  is  not  here  to  be  hastily  condemm^d.  Again,  some  raise 
objections  through  the  working  of  a  prudential  spirit.  They  eiv  estly  desire  to 
further  the  enterprise,  but  are  appalled  by  the  presence  of  real  difficulties.  Such 
deserve  our  sympathy.  Surely  Esther  in  this  trying  period  of  her  history  will 
command  om*  sympathy.  The  objections  she  here  raises  are  of  no  fictitious 
character.  They  were  real.  They  were  well  known  to  Mordecai,  and  to  all  those 
acquainted  with  the  customs  of  a  Persian  court.  Poor  Esther  !— how  well  thou  dost 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  133 


deserve  our  sympathy  !  A  beautiful  queen  loved  by  all,  and  till  very  lately  adored 
by  the  monarch,  thou  dost  now  stand  alone  and  apparently  forsaken  of  all.  Yet 
not  alone,  for  thy  God  is  with  thee,  and  will  appear  to  thy  glory.  Even  when  we 
seem  to  be  most  forsaken,  then  it  may  be  that  the  good  Lord  is  most  near.  His  h«»lp 
is  sure  to  be  near  when  most  we  need  his  helping  hand. 

The  first  objection  raised  by  Esther  referred  to  a  state  arrangement  of  the 
Persian  court.  None  could  unbidden  approach  the  monarch  unless  by  incurring 
the  penalty  of  death.  Even  the  loved  wife  was  not  excluded  from  this  barbarous 
arrangement.  What,  then,  was  Esther  to  do  under  the  circumstances  1  How  was 
it  likely  that  she  could  become  a  successful  pleader !  Here  there  was  the  prospect 
of  death.  Who  likes  to  rush  on  death,  especially  when  life  is  openiug  out  new 
attractions  !  Esther  was  not  now  a  disappointed  jade ;  her  heart  was  not  yet 
broken.  The  little  neglect  she  now  experienced  would  soon  pass  away.  It  could 
not  have  been  an  unknown  event  in  such  a  state  of  things  as  prevailed  in  a  Persian 
court.  She  had  then  still  bright  prospects,  and  was  she  by  mere  rashness  to 
imperil  her  position,  and  to  imperil  that  position  for  no  good  purpose  ?  Death  can 
only  be  welcomed  by  those  whose  life  is  but  a  living  death.  To  most  death  is  feared. 
To  the  young  and  the  beautiful  death  is  a  fearsome  enemy.  Well  may  Esther  be 
appalled  by  the  difficulty  of  that  enterprise  to  which  Mordecai  would  summon  her 
in  the  intense  ardour  of  his  patriotism. 

The  second  objection  raised  by  Esther  referred  to  a  fact  of  a  domestic 
character.  She  had  not  been  called  to  go  in  unto  the  king  for  thirty  days.  Here 
is  a  strange  anomaly — strange  if  received  in  the  light  of  Christian  teaching  and  the 
customs  of  modern  life.  But  not  very  peculiar  if  viewed  in  connection  with  the 
customs  of  those  barbaric  days.  The  ardour  of  this  fickle  monarch  had  for  the  time 
cooled.  The  beauty  of  the  toy  pleased  him  for  a  while,  and  now  he  flung  it  from 
him,  and  suffered  it  to  lie  neglected  A  poor  soul  was  Ahasueriis  to  prefer  the 
company  of  the  wicked  Haman  before  the  company  of  the  beautiful  and  virtuous 
Esther.  However,  this  fact  made  a  greater  difficulty  in  the  way  of  Esther's  success. 
It  presented  the  prospect  not  only  of  death  but  of  failure.  If  she  had  lost  her 
influence  with  the  monarch  for  herself,  how  could  she  hope  to  influence  him  for  the 
salvation  of  a  despised  race "?  We  cannot  wonder  that  Esther  shrank  from  obeying 
the  summons  of  Mordecai.  Our  wonder  is  that  she  was  ever  able  to  nerve  herself 
up  to  go  in  unto  the  king.  The  greatness  of  her  heroism  comes  out  in  this  fact, 
that  she  fuUy  saw  all  the  difficulty  of  her  position,  all  the  hazard  of  the  enterprise, 
and  yet  she  ventured.  She  calmly  estimated  the  danger,  and  bravely  made  the 
venture. 

Here  learn  (1)  That  it  is  well  to  look  before  we-  leap.  "For  which  of  you, 
intending  to  build  a  tower,  sitteth  not  down  first,  and  counteth  the  cost,  whether 
he  have  sufficient  to  finish  it  ?  Lest  haply,  after  he  hath  laid  the  foundation,  and 
is  not  able  to  finish  it,  all  that  behold  it  begin  to  mock  him,  saying.  This  man  began 
to  build,  and  was  not  able  to  finish.  Or  what  king,  going  to  make  war  against 
another  king,  sitteth  not  down  first,  and  consul  teth  whether  he  be  able  with  ten 
thousand  to  meet  him  that  cometh  against  him  with  twenty  thousand  1  Or  else, 
while  the  other  is  yet  a  great  way  off,  he  sendeth  an  ambassage,  and  desireth 
ccmditions  of  peace."  2.  TJiat  he  who  looks  well  may  he  expected  to  leap  well.  To 
look  well  is  not  to  look  so  as  to  render  the  nature  powerless  by  reason  of  the 
hazard.  To  look  well  is  to  estimate  the  difficulties  at  their  true  measure,  and  to 
understand  the  nature  of  the  leap  which  is  required,  and  to  gather  up  all  strength — 
strength  from  every  quarter — strength  from  earth  and  strength  from  heaven — in 
order  to  make  a  successful  leap.  Esther  looked  well  and  then  leaped  well.  The 
world's  heroes  have  been  men  of  true  vision.  They  have  seen  all.  They  have  looked 
at  all  sides.  They  have  considered  the  for  and  the  against.  3.  That  the  difficult 
leap  may  be  the  Divine  pathway.  Human  pathways  are  not  as  the  Divine.  God's 
pathways  are  not  all  well  paved — smooth  and  level.     We  can  only  travel  along 


134 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IV. 


them  by  leaps  ;  yea,  the  very  leap  itself  is  the  Divine  way.  Eough  was  Esther's 
path  just  now,  but  it  was  her  Divinely-appointed  way.  4.  That  those  loho  take  the 
difficult  leap  at  the  call  of  duty  may  expect  Divine  support.  This  is  what  Mordecai 
implies  in  his  reply  to  Esther's  objections,  and  this  is  what  we  shall  find  that  she 
afterwards  experienced.  Divine  support  is  given  to  every  faithful  worker.  Divine 
support  is  the  guarantee  of  ultimate  success.  In  our  goings  we  may  get  battered 
and  bruised ;  but  a  Divine  hand  can  heal  the  bruises,  and  restore  the  battered  part 
to  soundness.  Our  very  bruises  may  be  our  salvation,  and  contribute  to  the  success 
of  our  cause.  The  cause  may  rise  by  and  upon  the  fall  of  its  supporters.  It  is 
not  every  worker  who  has  the  good  fortune  of  Esther.  She  contributed  both  to 
the  success  of  her  cause,  and  worked  out  greater  glory  for  herself.  However,  tliat 
servant  is  glorious  who  triumphs  in  his  fall  if  it  secures  the  success  of  his  cause. 
Jesus  died,  that  by  his  death  men  might  have  life.  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is 
the  seed  of  the  Church. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  "Verses  10 — 12. 


There  are  two  kinds  of  courage — the 
mere  animal  courage,  which  results  from 
well-strung  nerves,  and   is  exerted  by 
impulse  rather  than  by  reflection;  and 
the   moral   courage,  which,  on  a  calm 
calculation    of   difficulties,    and   of   the 
path  of  duty,   will  face  the  difficulties 
and  prosecute  the  path  of  duty  at  any 
hazard,  even  at  the  risk  of  life  itself. 
It    will   often   be   found  that  men  are 
deficient  in  the  latter  of  these  qualities, 
while  they  are  remarkable  for  the  for- 
mer.     It  will   be  found,  for  example, 
that   soldiers  who  will   rush   fearlessly 
upon  an  enemy,  braving  death  without 
one  symptom  of  alarm,  are  incapable  of 
submitting   to   the   calm   endurance   of 
trouble,    and    are    like   others   alarmed 
when  they  have  to  meet  death  quietly 
after  lingering  illness.     It  is  courage  of 
the  highest  and  noblest  order,  then,  we 
say,   which   braves   danger    and   death 
upon    cool   reflection.       Such   was   the 
courage  of  the  martyrs,  and    such  was 
the    courage   of    Esther.       As   a   timid 
female,  she  drew  back  at  first  from  the 
hazardous  enterprise  to  which  Mordecai 
called    her ;    but    when    she   had    fully 
weighed  the  matter,  and  perceived  the 
real  path  of  duty,  although  the  danger 
was  not  in  the  least  degree  diminished, 
she  resolved,  in  the  strength  of  God,  to 
encounter  it. — Davidson. 

But  why  was  Esther  so  afraid  of  her 
life  if  she  should  make  intercession  to 
the  king  for  the  life  of  her  people  1 
Was  it  80  criminal  in  the  court  of  Persia 
to  present  a  supplication  to  the  king? 


Or,  if  it  was  a  crime  in  others,  was  it  a 
crime  even  in  the  queen  %     Yes  ;  it  was 
universally    known,    says    Esther,   and 
Mordecai  could  not  well  be  ignorant  of 
it,  that  if  any  person  should   venture, 
uncalled,   to   approach  the  king  in  the 
inner  court  of  his  palace,  he  must   be 
put  to  death,  unless  the  king  was  pleased 
graciously  to  pardon  him ;  nor  was  the 
queen  herself  excepted  from  the  penalties 
of  this  law.     The  laws  of  the  Persians 
were   strange   indeed !       No    man    was 
allowed   in  a   mourning -habit  to  enter 
into  the  king's  gate ;  and  no  man  in  any 
apparel  was   allowed  to  come  near  the 
king   in   the   inner   court.      Did   these 
kings  ever  consider  for  what  end  they 
were  elevated  above  their  fellow  -  men  1 
Was  it  not  to  defend  the  poor  and  the 
afflicted,  and  to  do  judgment  and  justice 
to  all  their  people  ?     How  could  they  do 
the  duties  of  princes,  if  they  were  inac- 
cessible to  their  people]     But  if  it  was 
a  crime  to  intrude  into  the  private  apart- 
ments   of    the    palace,   and    to    disturb 
the  privacy  of  the  prince,  was  it  one  of 
those  atrocious  crimes  that  can  be  justly 
punished  with  death  1     Could  no  easier 
punishment    assuage    the    wrath    of    a 
proud    mortal,    who    wished    to    make 
himself  invisible  like  his  Maker?  Surely 
it  may  be  said  of  a  law  that  punished 
an  offence  like  this  with  death,  that  it 
was  written  in  blood  ;  and  of  a  govern- 
ment which  would  establish  such  laws, 
that   Daniel   had    too   good    reason   to 
represent  it  by  the  emblem  of  a  bear.* 
*  Dan.  vii.  5. 


CHAP.  IV.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


13 


Blessed  be  God,  the  laws  of  heaven 
are  not  like  those  of  the  Persians  !  Our 
King  who  dwells  on  high  is  at  all  times 
accessible  to  the  afflicted  mourner.  The 
poor  and  the  afflicted  had  ready  access 
to  Jesus  while  he  was  upon  the  earth ; 
nor  is  he  less  accessible  in  his  state  of 
glory.  At  all  times  we  may  come  near 
to  God,  even  to  his  throne  of  grace,  that 
we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to 
help  in  time  of  need. 

Esther  was  believed  by  Mordecai  to 
be  a  great  favourite  with  the  king ;  and 
doubtless  there  was  a  time  when  she 
was  very  dear  to  him.  But  Esther  was 
afraid  that  this  time  Avas  past,  and 
questioned  whether  Mordecai  would 
insist  upon  the  charge  he  had  given  her, 
when  he  was  informed,  that  for  thirty 
days  past  she  had  not  been  called  to  go 
in  unto  the  king.  This  she  considered 
as  a  sign  that  his  affection  was  alienated, 
and  that  it  was  questionable  whether 
the  golden  sceptre  would  be  held  out  to 
her,  if  she  should  presume  to  enter  the 
king's  apartment.  What  reason  the 
king  had  for  this  coldness  to  his  virtuous 


queen,  we  know  not.  This  is  plain,  that 
it  was  a  providential  trial  appointed  for 
Esther,  by  which  it  would  be  known 
whethi^.r  she  had  the  courage  to  serve 
her  people  and  her  God  at  the  risk  of 
her  life.  It  was  a  severe  trial  of  her 
faith  and  charity.  She  felt  the  force  of 
the  discouragement,  an<l  expressed  her 
sense  of  it  to  Mordecai,  that  she  might 
receive  further  directions  from  him. 

To  whatever  difficult  duty  we  are 
called,  we  may  lay  our  account  with 
trials.  If  thou  desirest  to  serve  the 
Loi'd,  look  for  temptation.  But  remem- 
ber, that  "  the  man  is  blessed  who  en- 
dureth  temptation  ;  for  when  he  is  tried, 
he  shall  receive  of  the  Lord  the  crown 
of  life  which  he  hath  promised  to  them 
that  love  him."  Those  who  hav^e  held 
on  in  the  path  of  duty,  under  sore 
temptation,  shall  at  last  "  stand  before 
the  throne  of  God  with  white  robes,  and 
palms  in  their  hands."  "  But  the  fear- 
ful and  unbelieving  shall  have  their 
portion  in  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with 
brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death." 
— Lawson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  13,  14. 

A  Human  Yoice  speaks  Divine  Lessons  for  Human  Lives. 

God  has  not  left  himself  without  witness  in  the  material  creation.     Through  all 
time  he  has  been,  and   is  still,  speaking  to  the  children  of  men  by  the  visible 
things  of  the  lower  world,  which  he  hath  made.     On  all  hands  we  may  find  testi- 
monies to  his  power,  his  Avisdom,  and  even  in  some  measure  to  his  goodness.     A 
clearer  witness  he  gives  of  himself  in  revelation.     By  its  aid  we  learn  to  read 
aright  the  lessons  of  nature.     By  its  teachings  we  are  taught  truths  nature  could 
not  teach.     There  the  voices  of  patriarch,  of  prophet,  of  apostle,  and  of  the  Great 
Teacher,  speak  to  us  Divine  lessons.     But  there  we  find  other  voices  speaking  in 
an  undertone,  but  none  the  less  inculcating  Divine  lessons,  and  laying  down  the 
true  rules  for  noble  living.     Mordecai  is  not  to  be  numbered  amongst  either  the 
patriarchs,  the   prophets,   or  the   apostles,   still    his    voice  is   morally  significant. 
Esther,  on  the  first  hearing  of  Mordecai's  answer,  might  only  hear  the  voice  of  a  man  ; 
but  afterwards  she  evidently  heard  in  that  voice  a  Divine  tone.     Whatever  she 
did  or  did  not  discern  in  the  voice  of  Mordecai  it  is  for  us  to  hear  it  speaking  to 
us  Divine  lessons.     If  we  rightly  judge  that  Mordecai  was  a  Divine  agent,  then  we 
shall  rightly  conclude  that  an  important  utterance  like  the  one  contained  in  this 
solemn  declaration  is  not  to  be  allowed  to  fall  to  the  ground  as  meaningless.     And 
perhaps  it  may  be  well  to  observe,  that  if  we  were  in  a  proper  frame  of  mind,  if  we 
were  more  receptive  of  Divine  impressions,  many  voices  that  are  now  allowed  to 
pass  away  as  unimportant  would  become  to  us  as  true  Divine  utterances.     What 
are  the  Divine  lessons  which  this  human  voice  speaks,  not  only  to  Esther  but  to 
every  true  soul? 

I.  That  great  advantages  are  conferred  for  a  Divine  purpose.     By  far  too 


136  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  [chap.  tv. 

large  a  majority  of  men  and  of  women  receive  the  advantages  of  talents,  of  position, 
of  influence,  and  of  wealth,  with  unreflecting  minds  as  well  as  unthankful  hearts. 
Like  the  lower  animals,  they  receive  blessings  without  thinking  that  they  ought  to 
be  turned  to  good  account.  They  forget  that  privilege  implies  responsibility  ;  that 
talents  are  given  that  they  may  be  put  to  Divine  uses.  That  receiving  is  in  order 
to  giving.  This  is  the  law  of  nature.  This  is  the  law  of  morals.  This  is  the  law 
for  individuals,  for  communities,  for  nations,  and  for  Churches.  Esther  had  con- 
ferred upon  her  the  great  worldly  advantage  of  being  made  queen  in  the  mightiest 
empire  of  the  then  known  world  ;  and  Mordecai  would  show  her  that  such  an 
advantage  was  not  without  its  Divine  purpose.  She  had  come  to  the  kingdom  f<»r 
such  a  time  as  that — a  time  of  trouble  and  perplexity  to  her  people,  a  time  when 
she  might  use  the  advantages  of  her  position  for  the  people's  deliverance.  And 
have  we  not  all  conferred  upon  us  great  advantages'?  Some  are  blessed  with 
advantages  of  an  earthly  nature.  Most  are  blessed  with  the  advantage  of  hearing 
the  sweet  sound  of  the  gospel.  Many  are  blessed  with  the  advantage  of  being 
members  of  the  Church  which  is  the  bride  of  Heaven's  Eternal  King.  Here  is  an 
advantage,  if  we  could  only  rightly  see  it,  before  which  the  advantage  of  Esther  in 
being  made  the  queen  of  Ahasuerus  pales  its  splendours.  If  Mordecai  could  see 
that  Esther's  advantages  were  conferred  for  a  Divine  purpose,  what  would  he  say, 
what  shall  we  conclude,  with  reference  to  our  advantages  1  Now  these  advantages 
are  only  rightly  considered  as  they  are  viewed  in  the  light  of  Divine  purposes. 
What  shall  I  say  of  my  money]  Is  it  given  merely  for  the  purpose  of  self- 
aggrandisement  1  Shall  I  not  use  it  as  the  wise  steward,  feeling  that  it  is  the 
Lord's  property  1  What  shall  I  say  of  my  talents?  Are  they  given  merely  that  I 
may  become  famous  amongst  men  1  Shall  I  not  feel  that  they  are  to  be  employed 
for  the  good  of  men  and  for  the  glory  of  God  %  What  shall  I  say  of  the  gospel  by 
which  I  am  saved  1  Am  I  merely  to  try  and  keep  it  to  myself]  Am  I  not  saved 
myself  that  I  may  help  to  save  others  %  Thus  to  look  at  all  our  blessings  in  the 
light  of  a  Divine  benevolent  purpose,  is  the  way  to  bring  about  a  more  intense 
appreciation  of  those  blessings,  as  well  as  to  ennoble  and  glorify  our  lives.  This 
is  the  true  light  which  can  enlighten  the  murky  days  of  our  earthly  existence. 
The  most  brilliant — most  brilliant  from  an  earthly  point  of  view — of  earthly  lives 
can  be  made  more  brilliant  by  causing  them  consciously  and  intentionally  to  sub- 
serve and  to  promote  Divine  purposes.  And  the  poorest  of  earthly  lives  may  be 
lifted  out  of  the  darkness  of  their  poverty  by  being  consecrated  to  the  great  end  of 
glorifying  God  our  Maker.  This  is  the  light  which  cheered  the  patrikrchs  in  their 
long  pilgrimages,  which  sustained  the  prophets  in  their  trying  careers,  which  sup- 
ported the  apostles  in  their  self-denying  labours,  and  which  made  radiant  the  dark 
pathway  of  the  martyrs.  And  this  is  a  light  which,  by  Divine  grace,  can  turn  for 
every  man  the  gloom  of  earth  into  the  glad  lightsomeness  of  heaven. 

II.  That  God  requires  that  such  advantages  should  be  faithfully  used  for 
the  promotion  of  his  purposes.  Mordecai's  voice  to  Esther  was  a  Divine  sum- 
mons. It  was  God's  call,  telling  her  to  make  use  of  the  advantages  of  her  position 
for  the  deliverance  of  the  oppressed.  It  seemed  to  say.  Thou  hast  been  raised  to  a 
high  position  for  the  good  of  others.  This  is  a  great  crisis  in  the  history  of  pro- 
vidential movements,  and  thou  hast  come  to  the  kingdom  by  Divine  appointment. 
And  here  learn  one  of  the  lessons  of  God's  providential  dealings  for  the  support  of 
our  faith — that  in  times  of  great  trial  God  has  his  delivering  agents  in  prepared 
readiness.  Esther  was  ready  when  Haman's  plot  was  culminating.  David  was 
ready  when  Goliath  threatened  the  armies  of  Israel.  Elijah  was  ready  when  the 
prophets  of  Baal  were  triiAnphing.  The  true  prophets  were  ready  when  the  need 
was  great.  Jesus  was  ready  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come.  Stephen 
was  ready  when  a  martyr  was  required,  and  Saul  was  to  be  converted.  Peter  was 
ready  when  the  gospel  was  to  be  given  to  the  Gentiles.  Paul  was  ready  when 
argumentative  skill  was  demanded.     Luther  was  ready  when  Romanism  was  life 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  137 

■   ■ ■ ■        ■  ■  ■    * 

with  darkest  heresy.  The  2000  confcs-ors  were  ready  when  a  protesting  testimony 
was  to  be  delivered.  Whitefield  and  Wesley  were  ready  when  religion  in  this 
land  was  declining.  And  we  may  still  believe  that  God  has  his  agents  ready. 
This  is  our  consolation,  and  this  is  also  to  stimulate  to  greater  energy.  Advan- 
tages are  to  be  faithfully  used  for  the  promotion  of  Divine  purposes.  Is  it 
objected  that  we  do  not  know  what  are  the  purposes  of  God  %  It  may  be  replied 
that  we  shall  not  fail  in  serving  Divine  purposes  if  we  sincerely  seek  to  promote 
his  glory.  Our  efforts  may  be  blundering  and  imperfect,  yet  if  sincere  our 
imperfect  doings  will  be  wrought  into,  and  made  to  form  an  important  part  of,  the 
great  Divine  plan.  Upward,  then,  0  Church  of  the  living  God,  to  a  faithful  dis- 
charge of  thy  duties  !  Let  all  talents,  all  advantages,  all  opportunities,  and  all 
seasonable  occasions  be  quickly  seized  and  ardently  employed  in  the  noblest 
cause.  Let  the  Mordecais  at  the  gates  and  the  Esthers  in  the  palaces  co-operate, 
for  a  great  crisis  has  been  reached.  And  who  knows  but  that  a  great  crisis  has 
been  reached  in  our  own  country's  history  1  Are  we  readj^  ?  Whether  that  be  so 
or  not,  in  this  world  of  sin  there  is  always  much  work  to  do.  It  may  be  again 
objected  that  we  have  no  great  advantages, — no  specialty  either  of  talents  or  of 
position.  Mordecai  had  no  position,  but  he  was  a  most  important  instrument  in 
Divine  providence,  because  he  was  faithful.  Esther  at  first  seemed  to  plead  that 
she  could  do  nothing.  It  may  be,  that,  like  Esther,  we  can  do  a  great  deal  more 
than  we  at  first  imagine.  Yea,  like  Esther,  we  may  be  able  to  do  that  very  thing 
which  God  requires  to  be  done.  And  this  should  be  our  great  encouragement  to 
still  more  faithful  and  ardent  endeavour — that  God  does  not  demand  from  any  that 
which  they  are  not  able  to  give.  God  condemns,  not  because  there  is  only  one 
talent — for  that  might  be  to  condemn  his  own  appointment — but  because  the  one 
talent  has  not  produced  any  interest.  He  does  not  require  the  impossible.  A 
Samson's  strength  is  not  expected  from  an  infant's  weakness.  The  hesitating  Isaac 
asks,  ''  Where  is  the  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering  'J  "  The  child's  question  was  natural 
and  innocent.  It  required  Abraham's  faith  to  say  :  "  My  son,  God  will  provide  him- 
self a  lamb  for  the  burnt-offering."  God  deals  with  the  child  Isaac  according  to  one 
method,  and  with  the  patriarch  Abraham  according  to  another.  Divine  methods 
are  methods  of  justice  guided  by  wisdom,  and  tempered  by  mercy.  There  is  one 
power  of  the  sun,  and  another  very  feeble  of  the  glow-worm.  There  is  the 
majesty  of  the  cedar-trees,  and  the  weakness  of  the  grass-blade.  One  star 
differeth  from  another  star  in  glory.  And  one  man  differeth  from  another  in 
talents,  in  organization,  in  wealth,  in  favourable  circumstances  and  surroundings. 
There  are  differences  of  administration ;  but  the  same  spirit  worketh  all  and  in  all. 
The  Infinite  Ruler  only  requires  that  we  reach  out  and  up  to  the  measure  of  our 
ability.  To  Hatach  is  one  service  appointed ;  to  Mordecai  another ;  and  to 
Esther  another.  The  voice  of  exhortation  is  :  Art  thou  but  a  bruised  reed  1 — put  on 
thy  strength.  Art  thou  but  as  a  smoking  taper? — shine  as  brightly  as  thou  canst, 
and  the  little  spark  will  grow  into  a  goodly  flame,  and  send  out  its  light  far  and 
wide.  Hast  thou  but  one  talent  ? — put  it  out  to  usury,  and  at  the  Lord's  coming  he 
shall  receive  his  own  with  interest.  Hast  thou  but  two  mites  ? — cast  them  both  into 
the  treasury  of  the  Lord,  and  thou  shalt  enrich  the  ages. 

III.  That  such  Divine  purposes  cannot  be  frustrated.  Human  purposes  can 
be  thwarted,  as  we  know  very  well.  Man  cannot  foresee  all  the  contingent  circum- 
stances which  may  form  a  barrier  through  which  his  purposes  cannot  pass,  or  which 
they  cannot  overleap,  and  move  onward  to  accomplishment.  Man  cannot  always 
watch  over  his  purposes  from  their  inception  to  a  triumphant  conclusion.  Man  is 
not  only  short-sighted  but  short-lived.  This  is  one  sign  of  man's  greatness  and 
man's  littleness — that  he  can  project  purposes  that  may  flourish  over  his  tomb. 
With  God,  however,  purpose  and  fultilment  are  closely  connected.  The  latter  is 
bound  up  in  the  former.  Our  finite  minds  cannot  understand  what  is  meant  by 
the  purpose  of  God.     There  is  a  future  to  man.  but  what  future  can  there  be  to 


1S8  IIOMir.ETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  [chap.  ir. 


the  Omnipresent  1  Man  looks  forward  to  an  object  to  be  accomplished,  but  does 
tlie  Infinite  One  look  either  before  or  after?  Certainly  not,  in  one  sense.  This, 
however,  we  may  most  surely  learn — that  there  is  not  purpose  with  God  in  a  merely 
human  sense ;  there  can  be  to  him  no  contingent  futiore  ;  the  march  of  human  events 
must  be  harmonious  with  Divine  movements,  whatever  they  may  be.  If  then  one 
agent,  through  that  wonderful  gift  of  moral  power,  refuses  to  be  God's  instrument, 
he  can  purpose  another.  If  Esther  determines  to  hold  her  peace,  then  shall  there 
deliverance  arise  from  another  place — by  another  agent.  Notice  the  wonderful 
manner  of  Divine  operations.  If  the  agent  is  at  first  unwilling,  then  God  comes 
forth  and  makes  such  agent  willing  for  the  day  of  his  Divine  power.  Esther  at 
first  unwilling,  through  the  natural  timidity  of  her  sex,  through  the  sense  of  her 
incompetency  to  do  any  good,  becomes  in  God's  hand  sweetly  moulded  and  fitted 
for  the  task,  so  that  she  becomes  heroical  in  her  complete  self-abandonment  to  the 
promotion  of  the  Divine  design.  Moses  at  first  says  :  "  Who  am  I,  that  I  should  go 
unto  Pharaoh  % "  But  Moses  afterwards  appears  a  God  to  Pharaoh  ;  and  Aaron  his 
prophet.  If  we  be  the  Lord's  chosen  he  will  prepare  us  to  do  his  work.  And  yet 
further — and  sadly  to  be  considered  if  not  instructively — if  we  remain  obdurate,  if 
we  do  not  try  to  read  aright  Divine  purposes,  and  the  meaning  of  our  present 
position,  God  can  use  us  against  our  will.  He  can  force  us  to  take  part  in  the 
promotion  of  the  benevolent  scheme.  He  could  make  an  unwilling  Esther  bring 
enlargement  and  deliverance  to  the  Jews.  How  humiliating  !  To  be  the  bond- 
slave of  Divine  purposes.  To  be  like  a  galley-slave  compelled  to  work  the  oars  of 
the  vessel  that  is  to  enrich  the  one  we  oppose.  How  glorious,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  be  a  willing  servant — a  slave,  yet  free,  because  the  slave  of  love.  Esther's 
jiraises  are  now  sung  not  because  she  was  the  queen  of  Ahasuerus,  but  because  she 
was  the  delivering  queen  of  her  people,  the  royal  agent  to  bring  about  Divine  pur- 
poses. God's  purposes  then  must  be  accomplished,  either  by  us,  or  by  some 
others  ;  either  by  us  willingly,  or  by  us  unwillingly ;  and  we  have  in  some  measure 
this  awful  power  of  choice.  Which  way  do  we  decide  ?  Let  the  response  be, 
"  Here  am  I,  0  Lord,  but  a  broken  vessel ;  yet  mend  and  prepare,  so  that  I  may 
be  a  chosen  vessel  to  bear  abroad  the  sweet  fragrance  of  the  Saviour's  name." 

IV.  Those  who  seek  to  frustrate  Divine  purposes  shall  be  injured.  Mordecai 
by  the  greatness  of  his  faith  becomes  at  once  both  heroic  and  prophetic.  He  is  a 
teaching  prophet.  He  expounds  the  general  principles  of  Divine  operations.  His 
faith  is  both  a  production  and  a  producer.  It  is  the  product  of  far-reaching  views 
of  the  purposes  of  God.  And  it  begets  in  his  soul  still  more  extended  views.  It 
lifts  him  to  the  heights  of  inspiration.  He  speaks  like  one  inspired.  He  speaks 
as  one  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Strong  faith  is  an  inspiration.  It  enables  a 
man  to  do  great  things,  and  to  speak  noble  truths.  How  strangely  marvellous  and 
profound  the  utterance ;  "Think  not  with  thyself  that  thou  shalt  escape  in  the  king's 
house,  more  than  all  the  Jews.  If  thou  altogether  boldest  thy  peace  .  .  thou  and 
thy  father's  house  shall  be  destroyed."  Think  not  that  thou  canst  fight  against  the 
purposes  of  God  and  remain  uninjured.  The  king's  palace  cannot  protect  those 
who  wage  war  with  the  King  of  heaven.  These  may  seem  hard  things  to  utter. 
Mordecai  may  be  pronounced  an  unfeeling  man.  The  doctor  is  not  necessarily  an 
unfeeling  man  when  he  probes  the  wound  in  order  to  promote  liealth.  The  speaker 
is  not  necessarily  an  unfeeling  man  when  he  utters  hard  things  in  order  to  prevent 
injury,  and  to  rouse  to  healthy  action.  Mordecai  is  not  unfeeling,  for  there  was  a 
needs  be  that  the  whole  truth  should  be  spoken.  And  these  things  are  largely  and 
broadly  true.  The  purposes  of  God  are  as  the  thick  bosses  of  his  bucklers,  and 
those  who  rush  against  those  thick  bosses  will  do  so  to  their  own  damage.  Those 
who  go  contrary  to  the  unwritten  purposes  of  God  in  nature  will  do  so  to  their  own 
injury.  The  laws  of  nature  are  the  expressions  of  Divine  purposes.  These  laws 
must  be  obeyed.  All  men  who  are  reasonable  acknowledge  this.  They  seek  to  find 
out  these  laws,  and  work  in  harmony  with  nature's  teachings.     Break  the  natural 


CHAP.  IV.]  nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  13S 

law,  and  it  will  be  avenged.  Frustrate  the  purpose  of  the  Creator,  and  damage  and 
suffering  must  ensue  sooner  or  later.  There  is  a  puri)ose  in  providential  movements. 
We  may  not  always  be  able  to  see  clearly  that  purpose,  but  if  we  desire  to  be  faith- 
ful God  will  reveal  so  much  of  that  purpose  as  is  needful  for  our  guidance.  Woe 
be  to  the  man  who  opposes  the  purposes  of  God  in  providence.  There  is  a  gracious 
purpose  in  the  gospel.  Resist  that  purpose,  and  destruction  follows.  **  And  who- 
soever shall  fall  on  this  stone  shall  be  broken;  but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it 
will  grind  him  to  powder." 

Finally,  Learn  that  a  faithful  discharge  of  duty  must  bring  rich  results.  It 
was  so  in  Esthers  case,  as  we  shall  more  fully  see  hereafter.  She  followed  Mordecai's 
leading,  and  was  both  blessed  and  the  instrument  of  blessing.  It  will  be  so  more 
or  less  in  all  cases.  The  results  of  a  faithful  discharge  of  duty  are  far-reaching. 
They  stretch  themselves  through  all  time.  They  are  fraught  with  eternal  issues. 
They  act  and  react.  Mercy  blesses  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes.  And  so  a 
faithful  discharge  of  duty  blesses  giver  and  receiver  alike.  Beware  of  the  folly  of 
waiting  for  rare  opportunities,  for  glorious  openings,  for  great  crises  in  human  history. 
Do  not  wait  till  a  nation  is  threatened  with  destruction,  and  thou  art  raised  to  some 
high  position  which  will  enable  thee  to  deliver  on  a  grand  scale,  and  reap  a  harvest 
of  applause.  All  cannot  be  queens  in  the  palace  of  Ahasuerus.  Some  must  be  as 
Mordecai  at  the  gate.  The  man  who  waits  in  idleness  for  some  great  work  to  do 
will  not  be  ready  when  the  opportunity  is  presented,  will  most  likely  live  a  barreti 
life,  and  will  leave  behind  no  fragrant  memories.  There  are  rich  rewards  to  faith- 
ful workers.  Rich  rewards  on  earth  and  rich  rewards  in  heaven.  Crowns  of  glory 
that  fade  not  away.  Our  small  doings  will  be  wonderfully  enlarged  and  glorified 
by  Divine  grace.  He  that  soweth  to  the  glory  of  God  on  this  earth  shall  reap  a 
golden  harvest  of  Divine  benedictions  on  the  plains  of  the  upper  paradise. 

God's  Purpose  and  Man's  Opportunity.     Verse  14. 

Great  honours  if  suddenly  achieved  are  often  connected  with  great  perils ;  and 
our  text  has  reference  to  a  peril  of  no  common  magnitude.  The  fate  of  a  whole 
people  was,  through  the  success  of  a  wicked  plot,  trembling  in  the  balance. 
Humanly  speaking,  that  fate  would  be  settled  this  way  or  that  according  to  the 
impression  which  Mordecai  might  make  upon  Esther's  mind.  We  know  that  tiie 
right  impression  was  made,  and  that  the  right  end  ivas  attained — the  preservation 
of  the  Jews,  and  the  destruction  of  the  remorseless  man  who  had  plotted  theirs. 

Now,  without  putting  any  pressure  on  this  passage,  it  is  thought  that  we  may  find 
certain  principles  of  Divine  administration  which  are  capable  of  easy  and  profitable 
application  to  our  present  circumstances.  I  draw  from  the  text  the  following 
general  truths  : — 

That  running  through  the  providence  of  this  world,  there  is  a  gracious  Divine 
purpose  for  its  ultimate  salvation. 

That  rich  and  rare  opportunities  occur  in  the  progress  of  things,  by  which 
believing  men  are  allowed  to  come  effectually  "  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the 
mighty." 

That  the  neglect  of  such  providential  calls  has  a  tendency  to  bring  destruction. 

That  obedience  will  bring  elevation  and  blessing. 

I.  Divine  purpose.  It  is  very  clear  that  Mordecai  rested  his  faith  on  some 
fundamental  and  changeless  purpose  of  God,  in  reference  to  the  Jewish  people. 
In  fact,  he  believed  in  the  indestructibility  of  the  Jews  ;  and  this  with  him  was 
evidently  a  religious  faith.  He  believed  this,  because  he  believed  in  God  and  in 
his  revealed  will.  There  was  no  natural  ground  for  supposing  that  they  would  not 
perish,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  bloody  edict  which  had  gone  forth.  They  were 
a  captive,  a  scattered,  a  feeble  people,  without  mutual  concert,  without  leaders, 
without  power  of  resistance.    The  fatal  counsel  had  taken  effect  on  the  roya^  mind. 


140  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  [ciiAr.  iv. 

The  ring  had  passed  from  the  king's  hand  ;  the  death-letters  had  been  written ;  the 
royal  seal  impressed  on  each ;  the  posts  hastened  out  of  the  city  away  to  the 
different  provinces,  and  the  whole  land  was  struck  with  fear  and  perplexity  by  the 
suddenness  and  terriKc  character  of  the  decree.  Yet  here  is  a  man  of  the  doomed 
race  whose  faith  lifts  him  above  his  fear ! — a  man  who,  by  simply  grasping  one 
great  truth,  can  smile  serenely  at  the  portents  and  terrors  of  the  time.  "  My  people 
cannot  perish  ! "  That  is  his  unwavering  faith.  ISTow,  that  faith  must  have  been 
founded  on  one  or  more  of  the  express  promises  of  God.  Thus  the  purpose  of  the 
preservation  of  the  Jews  is  but  a  branch  and  a  sign  of  another  and  a  grander 
purpose — a  purpose  to  gather  and  to  save  the  whole  world.  Always  to  our  severer 
thought,  and  in  our  more  perfect  frames,  this  end  has  arisen  to  our  view,  like  the 
shining  summits  of  inaccessible  mountains  which  the  traveller  can  never  reach, 
but  by  which  he  guides  his  way  ;  and  we  have  seen  and  felt  that  it  is  wisest,  holiest, 
best,  that  neither  man  nor  universe  can  ever  come  into  the  place  of  God;  that 
neither  human  happiness,  nor  the  universal  harmony  of  things,  can  ever  reach  so 
high,  or  shine  so  bright,  as  the  glory  of  the  all-perfect  One.  In  the  contemplation 
of  this  end,  our  thought  returns  unto  its  rest  in  the  stillness  of  truth  ;  our  affections 
are  imbued  most  deeply  with  the  harmonies  of  the  everlasting  love,  and  the  forces 
of  our  life  spring  up  with  most  gigantic  energy.  Then  we  live  indeed,  for  God 
liveth  in  us  that  we  may  will  and  do  of  his  good  pleasure.  The  light  of  the  glory 
of  God  shines  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  this  is  the  "  glory  of  the  Lord, 
which  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  The  purpose  of  God  to 
achieve  this  grand  result  is  clearly  recorded  in  many  parts  of  his  revealed  will. 
Expressed  or  implied,  we  find  it  in  every  book  :  it  types  itself  in  the  kingly  history ; 
it  gleams  in  the  prophet's  vision  ;  it  breathes  in  the  holy  psalm ;  speaks  out  in  the 
Acis  of  the  Apostles ;  runs  through  all  the  Epistles,  and  sighs  up  to  heaven  in  that 
last  apocalyptic  cry,  "  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus." 

II.  Human    opportunity.     We   pass   now   from   Divine    purpose    to   human 
opportunity.     There  is  no  need  to  expound  the  general  doctrine  of  opportunity. 
"Our  time  is  al way  ready."     "We  are  workers  together  with  God."     We  must 
spend  the  gospel,  or  lose  it.     But  while,  in  a  general  sense,  there  is  always  oppor- 
tunity to  every  one,  God's  providence  is  so  cast  that  now  and  again  opportunities 
of  a  richer  and  rarer  kind  occur.     We  have  a  striking  instance  of  this  in  the  text. 
No  queen  in  the  world  but  Esther  had  any  chance  of  doing  wiiat  Mordecai  asks  at 
her  hand;  only  once  in  her  life  was  such  a  grand  possibility  and  such  a  dread 
alternative  placed  before  her.    A  few  moments,  probably,  settled  all.     In  her  quick 
and  grand  resolve  she  made  herself  a  queen  indeed  !  the  heroine  of  a  wondrous 
story !  a  fountain  of  salvation  to  a  whole  people !  mistress  and  monarch,  for  the 
time,  of  all  the  earth  !     And  such,  often-times,  in  character  and  quickness,  is  our 
opportunity  too.       Our  moral  opportunities,  our  seasonable  times  for  action  and 
usefulness,  are  very  precious,  are  very  brief,  and  when  they  are  gone  they  cannot 
be  renewed.     God's  great  purpose  will  travel  on,  but  our  co-operation  there  is 
impossible  for  ever.     So,  too,  it  is  at  times  with  Churches,  with  societies,  and  with 
nations.     A  Church  grows  and  prospers  for  a  while,  and  then  comes  to  a  point  of 
spiritual  potentiality  where  her  state  is  tested  and  her  history  determined.     She 
must  at  that  point  either  become  the  city  on  the  hill,  or  sink  back  into  the  shades 
of  obscurity.     A  nation  suffers,  and  struggles,  and  grows,  and  then  comes  a  time — 
it  may  be  a  time  of  war,  or  a  time  of  peace,  but  it  is  a  crucial  time  to  her — and  in 
a  few  years,  perhaps,  the  scale  of  the  great  balance  in  which  she  is  being  held  and 
weighed,  rises y  and  she  is  too  light  to  be  further  used  for  God's  purposes ;  or  falls^ 
and  she  is  settled  in  her  place  as  one  of  his  great  kingdoms  on  the  earth. 

III.  The  law  of  destruction.  "  Then  Mordecai  commanded  to  answer  Esther, 
Think  not  with  thyself  that  thou  shalt  escape  in  the  king's  house,  more  than  all 
the  Jews.  For  if  thou  altogether  boldest  thy  peace  at  this  time,  then  shall  there 
enlargement  and  deliverance  arise  to  the  Jews  from  another  place  ;  but  thou  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMKNTAIIY:  Kf^TTIER.  141 

thy  father's  house  shall  be  destroyed."  "  The  Jews  " — God's  people — are  not  depend- 
ent, as  they  seem  to  be,  for  their  preservation,  upon  you ;  there  are  "  other  places  " 
from  which  the  deliverance  so  much  needed  will  immediately  spring  if  you  are 
unfaithful,  or  unequal  in  any  way  to  the  great  occasion.  But  you  are  dependent 
for  your  preservation  on  your  loyalty  and  fealty  to  them.  "  Thou  and  thy  father's 
house  shall  be  destroyed."  We  are  not  sure  whether  Mordecai  himself  knew  in 
what  manner  his  prediction  would  be  accomplished.  It  is  probable  that  it  stood 
out  in  his  view,  and  in  the  view  of  Esther,  not  so  much  in  the  light  of  a  personal 
and  particular  penalty  which  w^ould  overtake  her  and  her  father's  house  by  what 
we  call  a  special  providence,  as  in  the  light  of  a  general  principle  of  retribution, 
acting  at  all  times,  but  sure  to  act  swiftly  and  terribly  in  a  case  like  this.  That 
this  priDciple  of  retribution  is  still  in  force  cannot  f«>r  a  moment  be  doubted.  It 
has  all  the  force  and  fixedness  of  law.  It  has  its  fullest  application  to  the  ungodly. 
The  way,  the  hope,  the  expectation,  the  works,  the  memory,  and,  saddest  of  all, 
the  soul  of  the  wricked,  shall  all  perish.  But  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  and 
neither  are  his  laws.  Let  a  Christian  man  neglect  opportunities,  and  hold  truth  in 
unrighteousness,  and  bind  down  his  soul  to  commonness,  and  what  will  happen  to 
him  ■?  Can  that  man  be  going  on  to  joyous  harvest-time  as  a  Christian  should  ! 
It  is  impossible.  In  fact,  he  is  perishing  as  to  the  real  power  of  his  life.  In  the 
main  he  is  living  so  that  this  great  law  of  destruction  is  fastening  upon  his  whole 
exterior  life.  More  completely  still  does  the  principle  apply  to  churches,  and 
societies,  and  nations.  All  associations  of  men,  civil  and  sacred,  Church  and  State 
alike,  are  judged  by  the  king  now.  No  Church,  society,  or  nation  can  live^  except 
as  they  continue  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  purpose  and  the  providence  of  God. 
The  one  Church  cannot  perish ;  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  it,  but  they 
do  prevail  against  every  particular  Church  that  is  unfaithful.  Where  are  the  seven 
Churches  in  Asia  1  All  darkened  and  dead.  The  "  lamps  "  have  long  since  gone 
out,  and  can  never  be  relumed.  It  would  be  a  waste  of  time  to  remind  you  at 
length  how  this  principle  of  judgment  and  destruction  has  been  applied  to  nations. 
The  whole  history  of  this  world,  rightly  read,  is  but  a  commentary  and  a  confirm- 
ation of  the  doctrine  of  destruction  which  the  text  contains,  No  doubt  this 
principle  is  applied  in  this  our  native  land.  If  we  are  ''righteous"  we  shall  be 
exalted;  if  we  are  sinful  we  shall  be  disgraced.  If  we  serve  God  in  the  line  of  his 
purpose  for  the  world's  salvation,  we  shall  flourish  ;  if  we  do  not,  we  and  our 
father's  house  shall  be  destroyed. 

IV.  The  law  of  life.  There  is  a  law  of  life  in  God's  gracious  providence  as 
well  as  a  law  of  destruction,  and  following  the  beautiful  turn  given  to  the  sentiment 
of  the  text,  we  say  now,  "  Who  knoweth  whether  we  are  come  to  the  kingdom  for 
such  a  time  as  this  1 "  It  is  possible,  even  very  probable.  God  does  not  play 
capriciously  with  signs  and  scenes  of  Providence.  As  Englishmen,  we  have  come  to 
a  kingdom  such  as  never  before  was  seen  among  men.  The  very  thought  of  it  is 
almost  overwhelming.  To  circumscribe  the  bounds  of  our  empire  we  must  traverse 
every  continent,  and  sail  over  every  sea.  The  great  Roman  empire  in  its  palmi«-st 
days  was  nothing  like  it.  The  whole  world  waits  for  us — watches  what  we  do, 
listens  to  what  we  say.  What  a  gigantic  kingdom  !  "  Who  knoweth  whether  we 
are  come  to  it  for  such  a  time  as  thisT'  But  as  Christians  we  have  come  to  a 
greater  kingdom  still,  ruled  by  the  "  King  of  kings."  Although  not  of  this  world, 
this  Kingdom  is  intensely  and  unconquerably  in  it.  Its  principles  are  rooted 
beneath  the  uttermost  foundations  of  society.  Opportunity  is  so  quick,  possibilities 
are  so  great,  forces  are  so  strong,  and  the  prospects  of  the  opening  future  are  so 
enrapturing,  but  yet  so  dependent  on  faithfulness  in  the  present  hour,  that  we  must 
be  "  ready  for  every  good  work,"  or  lose  our  function  and  our  peculiar  place  in  the 
great  time  on  which  we  have  fallen.  It  is  a  great,  a  glorious  time — "  such  a  time 
as  this  !  "  The  gates  are  lifting  up  their  heads.  The  everlasting  doors  are  opening. 
The  King  himself  w  coming  soon.     He  gives  us  new  commission  to  herald  his 


142  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  [ottap   iv 

advent,  and  prepare  his  way  in  every  land.  And  looking  up  to  his  eternal  purpose 
of  love  and  mercy,  observing  these  rich  and  high  opportunities,  t'ea»ing  the  sweep 
of  that  law  of  destruction  which  carries  the  wicked  and  the  slothful  away  ;  but 
strong,  through  grace  in  the  law  of  life,  we  venture  now  to  say,  not  *'  who  knoweth  ]  " 
but,  Lord,  Thou  knowest, — Thou  who  knowest  all  things ;  and  we,  by  the  humble 
yet  resolute  purpose,  which  we  renew  before  thy  face,  and  in  thy  strength  to-day. 
Thou  knowest,  and  we  know,  that  we  are  '^  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time 
as  this  ! "  Amen.  —  Dr.  Raleigh's  Sermon  for  the  London  Missionarij  Society. 
Abridged. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  13,  14 

Eeceiving  is  in  order  to  giving.  This  displays  of  loveliness,  is  God's  gift  to 
is  the  law  of  nature.  The  clouds  receive  man.  Life,  with  all  its  rare  privileges, 
from  the  sea,  and  give  back  fertilizing  and  wonderful  opportunities,  and  glori- 
showers  to  the  earth.  The  soil  receives  ous  possibilities,  has  been  given  by  the 
from  the  clouds,  and  responds  to  the  re-  Creator.  Jesus  Christ,  the  brightness  of 
freshing  baptism  by  waving  harvests  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image 
golden  beauty.  We  are  told  that  nature  of  his  person,  the  noblest  ideal  of  our 
never  disappoints,  and  that  nothing  pays  manhood,  the  Redeemer  of  mankind,  is 
so  well  as  the  soil.  In  some  of  her  the  gift  of  God's  unspeakable  love, 
aspects  nature  appears  to  be  hard  and  Mercy  to  pardon,  grace  to  help,  and  love 
unyielding,  but  in  other  aspects  she  to  cheer,  come  to  us  from  the  loving 
shows  herself  grateful  for  all  kind  atten-  Father.  Much  has  been  received,  and  it 
tions.  This  is  the  law  of  nations,  and  is  rightly  expected  that  much  shall  be 
in  so  far  as  they  answer  to  this  law  returned.  "  Freely  ye  have  received, 
is  their  continued  prosperity  secured,  freely  give."  What  return  shall  be  made 
When  a  nation  fails  to  give  out  noble  for  love  so  vast  1  Adequate  return  can- 
exertions  for  the  consolidation  of  vir  not  be  made ;  but  oh  !  that  return  were 
tuous  manhood,  for  the  suppression  of  made  equal  to  the  ability  of  each  reci- 
vice,  and  for  the  spread  of  right  prin-  pient.  Oh !  what  shall  be  the  grateful 
ciples,  then  it  begins  to  decline.  The  response  to  beneficence  so  unspeakably 
youth   of   a   nation  is   often   the  most  glorious'? 

glorious.  Then  it  produces  the  greatest  That  Divine  Providence  had  an  eye 
number  of  stalwart  heroes.  Then  are  to  this  in  bringing  her  to  be  queen, 
found  those  who  are  willing  to  sacrifice  "  Who  knows  whether  thou  hast  come 
themselves  for  the  good  of  the  State,  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  ^" 
Even  then  are  found  the  brightest  orna-  and  therefore,  "  Thou  art  bound  in  grati- 
ments  in  literature.  The  nation  is  giving,  tude  to  do  this  service  for  God  and  his 
The  decline  of  a  nation  is  marked  by  Church,  else  thou  dost  not  answer  the 
this  fact,  that  it  is  an  absorbing  power,  end  of  thy  elevation."  "Thou  needest 
It  rests  idly  upon  former  achievements,  not  fear  miscarrying  in  the  enterprise ; 
and  does  not  seek  to  prosecute  further  if  God  designed  thee  for  it,  he  will  beai 
enterprises.  Wealth  is  in  abundance,  thee  out  and  give  thee  success."  Now, 
The  people  absorb,  and  thus  become  it  appeared,  by  the  event,  that  she  did 
enervated.  This  is  the  law  of  individ-  come  to  the  kingdom  that  she  miglit  be 
uals,  and  in  so  far  as  they  obey  this  law  an  instrument  of  the  Jews'  deliverance, 
can  they  hope  to  reach  the  true  per-  so  that  Mordecai  was  right  in  the  con- 
fection of  which  they  are  capable.  God  jecture.  Because  the  Lord  loved  his 
gives  in  order  that  man  may  give,  and  people,  therefore  he  made  Esther  queen. 
man  grows  rich  by  giving.  Much  has  There  is  a  wise  counsel  and  design  in  all 
been  received.  The  world  it.^elf,  with  the  providences  of  God',  which  is  un- 
all  its  exquisite  contrivances  of  infinite  known  to  us  till  it  is  accomplished,  but 
wisdom,  with  all  its  manifestations  of  it  will  prove  in  the  issue  that  they  are 
Divine  power,  and  with  all  its  charming  all  intended  for,  and  centre  in,  the  good 


CHAP,  rv.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


143 


of  the  Church.  The  probability  of  this 
was  a  good  reason  wliy  she  should  bestir 
herself,  and  do  her  utmost  for  her  people. 
We  should  every  one  of  us  consider  for 
what  end  God  has  put  us  in  the  place 
where  we  are,  and  study  to  answer  that 
end ;  and  when  any  particular  oppor- 
tunity of  serving  God  and  our  generation 
offers  itself,  we  must  take  care  that  we 
do  not  let  it  slip ;  for  we  were  entrusted 
with  it  that  we  might  improve  it. — 
Matthew  Henry. 

We  are  apt  to  mistake  our  vocation  by 
looking  out  of  the  way  for  occasions  to 
exercise  great  and  rare  virtues,  and  by 
stepping  over  the  ordinary  ones  that  lie 
directly  in  the  road  before  us. — Hannah 
More. 

There  are  not  good  things  enough  in 
life  to  indemnify  us  for  the  neglect  of  a 
single  duty. — Mad.  Sivetchine. 

But  if  thou  altogether  holdest  thy 
l^eace.  In  a  storm  at  sea  it  is  a  shame 
to  sit  still,  or  to  be  asleep,  with  Jonah, 
in  the  sides  of  the  ship  when  it  is  in 
danger  of  drowning.  Every  man  cannot 
sit  at  the  stern  ;  but  then  he  may  handle 
the  ropes,  or  manage  the  oars,  &c.  The 
self-seeker,  the  private-spirited  man,  may 
he  be  but  warm  in  his  own  feathers, 
regards  not  the  danger  of  the  house ;  he 
is  totus  in  se,  like  the  snail  still  within- 
doors and  at  home;  like  the  squirrel, he 
ever  digs  his  hole  towards  the  sun-rising ; 
his  care  is  to  keep  on  the  warm  side  of 
the  hedge,  to  sleep  on  a  whole  skin,  to 
save  one,  whatever  become  of  the  many. 
From  doing  thus,  Mordecai  deterreth  by 
a  heap  of  holy  arguments ;  discovering 
an  heroical  faith  and  a  well-knit  reso- 
lution. 

At  this  time. — There  is  indeed  a  time 
to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  to  speak 
(Eccles.  iii.  7).  But  if  ever  a  man  will 
speak,  let  him  do  it  when  the  enemies 
are  ready  to  devour  the  Church :  as 
Croesus's  dumb  son  burst  out  into,  Kill 
not  King  Croesus.  "  For  Zion's  sake  will 
I  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's 
sake  I  will  not  rest,"  &c.  (Tsa.  Ixii.  1). 
**  If  I  forget  thee,  0  Jerusalem,  let  my 
right  hand  forget  her  cunning.  If  I  do 
not  remember  thee,  let  my  tongue  cleave 
to  the  roof  of  my  mouth,"  &c. 

That  noble  Terentius  (general  to  Valens, 


the  Emperor),  being  bidden  to  ask  what 
he  would,  asked  nothing  but  that  the 
Church  might  be  freed  from  Arians ; 
and  when  the  Emperor,  upon  a  defeat  by 
the  Goths,  upbraided  him  with  coward- 
ice and  sloth  as  the  causes  of  the  over- 
throw, he  boldly  replied :  *'  Yourself  h  ive 
lost  the  day,  by  your  warring  against 
God,  and  persecuting  his  people." 

But  thou  and  thy  father's  house  shall 
be  destroyed. — Here  he  thundereth,  and 
threateneth  her,  if  to  save  herself  she 
shall  desert  the  Church.  Mordecai's 
message,  like  David's  ditty,  is  composed 
of  discords.  Sour  and  sweet  make  the 
best  sauce ;  promises  and  menaces 
mixed  will  soonest  work.  God  told 
Abraham  that  for  the  love  he  bare  him 
he  would  bless  those  that  blessed  him, 
and  curse  such  as  cursed  him.  Their 
sin  should  find  them  out,  and  they 
should  rue  it  in  their  posterity.  As 
one  fire,  so  one  fear,  should  drive  out 
another. 

Aiid.  who  hnoweth  whether  thou  art 
come  to  the  kingdom  ? — There  is  often  a 
wheel  within  a  wheel.  God  may  have 
an  end  and  an  aim  in  businesses  that  we 
wot  not  of  nor  can  see  into  till  events 
have  explained  it.  Let  us  lay  forth 
ourselves  for  him,  and  labour  to  be 
public-spirited,  standing  on  tiptoes,  as 
St.  Paul  did,  to  see  which  way  we 
may  most  glorify  God,  and  gratify  our 
brethren. — Trapp. 

Mordecai  manifests  a  precious  sense 
of  trust ;  "  For  if  thou  altogether  holdest 
thy  peace  at  this  time,  then  shall  there 
enlargement  and  deliverance  arise  to  the 
Jews  from  another  place."  But  he  who 
would  save  his  soul  shall  lose  it.  The 
risk  which  Mordecai  called  upon  Esther 
to  assume,  that  she  should  come  to  the 
king  uninvited,  and  manifest  herself  as 
a  daughter  of  the  people  thus  devoted  to 
destruction,  was  indeed  great  and  im- 
portant. Moreover,  the  hope  that  Xerxes 
would  recnll  his  edict,  thus,  according  to 
Persian  ideas,  endangering  the  respect 
due  to  his  royal  majesty,  and  likewise 
abandoning  his  favourite  minister,  was 
very  uncertain  of  fulfilment.  But  Esther 
had  been  elevated  to  a  high  position. 
Mordecai,  who  in  a  doubting  manner 
sends  her  word :  "  Who  knoweth  whether 


144 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[CITAP.  IT, 


thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such 
a  time  as  this  'I "  doubtless  did  it  from  a 
conviction  that  she  must  now  prove  her- 
self worthy  of  such  distinction,  if  she 
would  retain  it.  He  also  conveys  the 
idea  that  the  higher  her  position  the 
greater  her  responsibility,  and  conse- 
quently, in  case  of  failure  because  of 
carelessness  or  fearfulness,  the  more  in- 
tense her  guilt.  In  these  convictions 
of  Mordecai  are  contained  the  most  ear- 
nest exhortations  even  for  us.  This  is 
esp^  cially  true  since  we  are  all  called  to 
be  joint  heirs  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the 
throne  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  In 
the  deportment  of  Esther  a  no  less  re- 
minder is  contained.  It  appears  quite 
natural  that  Esther  should  order  a  fast, 
not  only  to  be  observed  by  Mordecai 
and  the  rest  of  the  Jews,  but  she  also 
imposed  on  herself  this  fast  of  three 
days'  duration.  Had  she  had  a  little 
more  of  the  common  discretion  of  her 
sex,  she  would  have  feared  the  effects  of 
the  fast  upon  her  appearance.  Hence 
she  would  have  adopted  quite  a  different 
plan  or  preparation  previous  to  her  en- 
trance into  the  king's  presence.  Here 
also  she  reveals  the  same  attractive 
feature  of  mind  and  manner  as  when 
she  was  first  presented  to  the  king. 
Instead  of  placing  reliance  upon  what 
she  should  externally  put  on  or  adorn 
herself  with,  we  find  her  trust  placed 
upon  something  higher.  She  well  knows 
that  she  will  only  succeed  if  the  great 
and  exalted  Lord  be  for  her ;  who,  not- 
withstanding his  glorious  majesty,  yet 
dwells  among  the  most  lowly  of  men. 
It  is  in  just  such  times  as  these,  when 
we  are  raised  to  the  greatest  endeavours 
and  self-sacrifices,  that  we  must  not  ex- 
pect to  accomplish  these  things  by  our 
own  power,  but  only  through  him  who 
in  our  weakness  is  our  strength.  Other- 
wise, despite  our  best  intentions  and 
most  successful  beginnings,  we  shall 
soon  grow  discouraged,  and  fail.  Our 
own  weakness  is  but  too  often  made 
manifest  to  our  eyes.  It  is  only  when 
we  consider  and  remember  that  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  is  in  it  all,  that  we  will  be 
saved  from  a  lack  of  courage. — Lange. 

These  were,  indeed,  times  for  the  de- 
velopment of  character — times  for  the 


birth  of  men.  And  the  men  were  there  > 
— the  wit,  the  poet,  the  divine,  the  hero 
—  as  if  genius  had  brought  out  her 
jewels,  and  furnished  them  nobly  for  a 
nation's  need.  Then  Pym  and  Hampden 
bearded  tyranny,  and  Russel  and  Sydney 
dreamed  of  freedom.  Then  Blake  se- 
cured the  empire  of  ocean,  and  the 
chivalric  Falkland  fought  and  fell.  In 
those  stirring  times  Charnock,  and  Owen, 
and  Howe,  and  Henry,  and  Baxter,  wrote, 
and  preached,  and  prayed.  "  Cudworth 
and  Henry  More  were  still  living  at 
Cambridge  ;  South  was  at  Oxford,  Pri- 
deaux  in  the  Close  at  Norwich,  and 
Whitby  in  the  Close  of  Salisbury.  Sher- 
lock preached  at  the  Temple,  Tillotson 
at  Lincoln's  Inn,  Burnet  at  the  Rolls, 
Stillingfleet  at  St.  Paul's  Cathedral, 
Beveridge  at  St.  Peter's,  Cornhill.  Men,'* 
to  continue  the  historian's  eloquent 
description,  "  who  could  set  forth  the 
majesty  and  beauty  of  Christianity  with 
such  justness  of  thought  and  such  energy 
of  language  that  the  indolent  Charles 
roused  himself  to  listen,  and  the  fastidi- 
ous Buckingham  forgot  to  sneer."  But 
twelve  years  before  the  birth  of  Bunyan, 
all  that  was  mortal  of  Shakespeare  had 
descended  to  the  tomb.  Waller  still 
flourished,  an  easy  and  graceful  versi- 
fier; Cowley  yet  presented  his  "perverse 
metaphysics  "  to  the  world  ;  Butler,  like 
the  parsons  in  his  own  *  Hudibras,' — 

"  Proved  his  doctrine  orthodox 
By  apostolic  blows  and  knocks." 

Dryden  wrote  powerful  satires  and  sorry 
plays  "  with  long- resounding  march  and 
energy  divine ; "  George  Herbert  clad 
his  thoughts  in  quaint  and  quiet  beauty  ; 
and,  mid  the  groves  of  Chalfont,  as  if 
blinded  on  purpose  that  the  inner  eye 
might  be  flooded  with  the  *'  light  which 
never  was  on  sea  or  shore,"  our  greater 
Milton  sang. — Punshon. 

0  the  admirable  faith  of  Mordecai 
that  shines  through  all  these  clouds?,  and 
in  the  thickest  of  these  fogs  descries  a 
cheerful  glimpse  of  deliverance !  He 
saw  the  day  of  their  common  destruction 
enacted ;  he  knew  the  Persian  decrees 
to  be  unalterable ;  but,  withal,  he  knew 
there  was  a  Messiah  to  come ;  he  was  so 
well  acquainted  with  God's  covenanted 


CHAP.  IV.] 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


145 


assurances  to  his  Church  that  he  can, 
through  the  midst  of  those  bloody  reso- 
lutions, foresee  indemnity  to  Israel, 
rather  trusting  the  promises  of  God 
than  the  threats  of  men.  This  is  the 
victory  that  overcomes  all  the  fears  and 
fury  of  the  world,  even  our  faith. — 
Bishop  Hall 

There  shall  enlargement  and  deliver- 
ance arise  to  the  Jews  from  another  place. 
— 0  the  power  of  faith  !  What  has  it 
not  done ! — what  can  it  not  do  !  It  is 
"  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the 
evidence  of  things  not  seen."  It  lifts 
the  person  above  the  level  of  his  own 
mind.  It  can  not  only  see  abundance 
of  rain  in  a  cloud  no  bigger  than  a  man's 
hand,  but  it  can  prophesy  of  it,  when 
the  heavens  above  are  as  burnished  brass. 
The  faith  of  God's  elect  has  removed 
mountains  —  not  literally  —  but  moun- 
tains of  difficulties,  and  mountains  of 
guilt  lying  on  the  conscience,  and  cast 
tliem  into  the  sea ;  dissipated  clouds — 
not  the  visible  clouds  —  but  clouds  of 
despair  wliich  oppress  the  soul ;  and 
dried  up  fountains — not  the  fountains 
of  the  deep — but  the  fountains  of  tears 
in  the  heart,  which  flowed  day  and 
night  for  the  slain  of  the  daughter  of 
Zion  !  Witness  its  effects  on  Mordecai. 
How  changed  is  he  from  the  figure  in 
which  we  saw  him  lately.  He  has 
shaken  the  dust  from  his  head,  his  filthy 
garments  he  has  exchanged  for  raiment 
far  surpassing  that  which  the  queen  had 
sent  him ;  and  the  wailings  with  which 
he  filled  the  streets  of  Shushan  have 
been  converted  into  strains  of  hope  and 
triumph.  It  is  faith— recovered  faith — 
which  has  set  his  feet  upon  a  rock,  and 
placed  him  in  a  pavilion,  from  the  top 
of  which  he  looks  down  with  derision 
on  the  malice  and  power  and  expectation 
of  his  enemy,  and  with  compassion  on 
his  timid,  distracted  daughter,  whom  he 
alternately  chides  and  comforts. 

But  what  is  this  faith  which  produces 
such  astonishing  effects'?  Is  it  just 
strong  confidence,  or  a  persuasion  that 
what  we  believe  will  take  place  1  It  has 
a  more  solid  foundation  than  this.  There 
is  confidence  in  it,  sometimes  rising  to 
full  assurance,  but  the  word  of  the  im- 
mutable God  is  the  base  on  which  the 


pillar  of  faith  rests  —  confiden-'e,  the 
spiral  top  with  which  it  seeks  the  skies. 
On  what  then  did  the  faith  of  Mordecai 
rest"?  On  the  promises  ot  God,  who  *'  is 
not  a  man  that  he  should  lie,  neither  tlie 
son  of  man  that  he  should  repent ;  hath 
he  said  and  shall  he  not  do  it? — or  hath 
he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  make  it 
good  1 " 

Thou  art  come  to  the  Iiiv/ihrni — to  a 
crown,  to  a  throne,  and  in  what  a  won- 
derful manner  !  Surely  it  becomes  you 
to  say,  with  greater  reason  than  David, 
''  Who  am  I,  0  Lord  God,  and  what  is 
my  house,  that  thou  hast  brought  me 
hitherto]"  And  to  add,  with  the  same 
godly  king,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto 
the  Lord,  for  all  his  benefits  towards 
me  ? "  Born  a  captive,  early  left  an 
orphan,  lately  the  reputed  daughter  of  a 
porter,  Providence  hath  raised  thee  be- 
yond all  men's  expectation,  and  of  none 
more  than  your  own,  to  be  the  second 
person  in  the  greatest  monarchy  of  the 
world.  Art  thou  not  then  bound  in 
gratitude  to  do  this  service  for  God  and 
his  Church  1 

And  who  knoweth  whether  thou  art 
come  to  the  Icingdom  for  such  a  time 
as  this?  —  It  is  possible;  it  is  highly 
probable.  The  singular  way  of  thy  ele- 
vation, and  the  striking  conjunction  of 
circumstances,  point  to  this,  and  seem  to 
say.  Because  the  Lord  loved  his  people^ 
therefore  he  made  Esther  queen,  that  by 
her  influence  with  the  king  she  might 
defeat  the  wicked  plot  for  their  destruc- 
tion. The  very  probability  of  this  was 
a  strong  incitement  to  her  to  bes*ir  her- 
self; for  if  God  had  destined  her  to  be 
the  deliverer  of  Israel,  then  he  would  be 
with  her,  and  give  success  to  her  exer- 
tions, and  this  would  be  an  honour 
greater  than  the  matrimonial  crown  of 
Persia ;  for  "  henceforth  all  generations 
would  call  her  blessed." 

The  event  showed  that  Mordecai  was 
right  in  his  cmijecture,  and  that  he  had 
correctly  interpreted  the  vva3''s  of  Provi- 
dence. There  is  a  wise  counsel  and 
design  in  all  the  works  of  him  who  sees 
the  end  from  the  beginning.  It  often 
is  unknown  to  us  until  it  is  carried  into 
effect,  though  we  might  know  more  of 
it  if  we  were  more  diligent  students  of 


146 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  rv. 


Providence ;  and  the  issue  proves,  that 
all  was  intended  for,  and  conduces  to, 
the  good  of  the  Church.  We  should 
seek  to  be  *'  workers  together  with  God," 
and  carefully  consider  for  what  end  he 
hath  put  us  into  the  place  which  we 
occupy.  Have  any  rank,  or  authority, 
or  talents,  or  wealth,  or  friends  ?  These 
are  the  gifts  of  God,  and  must  be  used 
for  his  glory.  When  any  special  oppor- 
tunity of  serving  God  and  our  generation 
presents  itself,  we  should  beware  of  let- 
ting it  slip,  or  excusing  ourselves ;  for 
an  account  will  be  exacted  of  us,  and 
exacted  with  impartiality.  Of  them  to 
whom  much  is  given  much  shall  be  re- 
quired. Every  one  hath  it  in  his  power 
to  do  something.  '*  What  knowest  thou, 
0  wife,  whether  thou  shalt  save  thy 
husband?  or  how  knowest  thou,  0  man, 
whether  thou  shalt  save  thy  wife?" 
And  we  should  **  provoke  one  another," 
by  our  example  and  our  advice,  "  to 
love  and  to  good  works." — McCree. 

This  lesson  may  be  drawn  from  his 
conduct, — that  a  resolute  will,  when  it 
is  exerted  for  the  accomplishment  of  any 
purpose,  is  usually  successful  in  the  end. 
In  the  pursuit  even  of  worldly  good, 
when  a  man  keeps  his  eye  steadily  fixed 
upon  some  one  object,  and  makes  that 
the  point  towards  which  his  efforts  di- 
rectly and  indirectly  tend,  he  commonly 
succeeds.  There  are,  indeed,  providential 
interpositions  which  overthrow  the  most 
promising  and  best -laid  schemes,  and 
show  the  insufficiency  of  human  wisdom 
and  power  to  effect  their  ends,  apart 
from  the  blessing  of  God.  But  gener- 
ally, when  there  is  no  impious  disregard 
of  the  order  of  Providence — a  resolute 
will,  combined  with  activity,  sweeps  all 
difficulties  out  of  its  path,  ai^d  succeeds 
in  accomplishing  its  aims.  Some  of  the 
greatest  movements  in  worldly  affairs 
are,  humanly  speaking,  to  be  traced  up 
to  this.  The  triumphs  of  the  Eeform- 
ation  for  example,  in  our  own  country 
and  in  other  lands,  where  it  did  triumph, 
while  they  are  really  to  be  ascribed  to 
the  overruling  providence  of  God,  are 
instrumentally  to  be  attributed  to  this, 
that  God  raised  up  and  quahfied  for  the 
work  certain  men  of  determined  will 
and  unflagging  energy,  who  kept  before 


them  the  great  purpose  which  they  sought 
to  effect,  and  would  be  turned  aside  by 
no  danger  or  difficulty  from  working  it 
out.    And  I  would  remark,  that  in  things 
spiritual — in  things  affecting  the  eternal 
salvation  of  man — resoluteness   of  will 
and  indomitable  energy  are  as  indispens- 
able as  in  the  pursuit  of  temporal  good. 
Nothing  must  be  allowed  to  obscure  the 
great  cardinal  truth,  that  salvation  is  <.f 
grace,  and  that  '*  it  is  not  of  him  that 
willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of 
God  who  showeth  mercy."     But  still,  it 
is  only  when  men,  by  the  grace  of  Gud, 
set  themselves  resolutely  to  contend  with 
their  spiritual  enemies  —  when,  lookino^ 
to  God  for  help,  they  will  not  be  driven 
from  the  path  of  well-doing  by  obstacles 
which  they  meet  with  in  pursuing  it ;  it 
is  only  then  that  they  are  treading  the 
course  which  will  terminate  in  the  re- 
wards of  a  glorious  victory. — Davidson. 
Ver.  1 4.    "  For  if  thou  altogether  bold- 
est thy  peace  at  this  time,  then  shall  there 
enlargement  and  deliverance  arise  to  the 
Jews  from  another  place  ;  but  thou  and 
thy  father's  house  shall   be  destroyed  : 
and  who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come 
to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  %  " 
Their  great  trouble,  their  deep  distress, 
and  their  most  deadly  danger  you  have 
in  that  (Esther  iii.  13).     "And  the  let- 
ters were  sent  by  posts  into  all  the  king's 
provinces,  to  destroy,  to  kill,  and  to  cause 
to  perish,  all  Jews,  both  young  and  old, 
little  children  and  women,  in  one  day, 
even   upon    the    thirteenth   day  of   the 
twelfth   month,    which    is   the    month 
Adar,  and  to  take  the  spoil  of  them  for 
a  prey."     Here  are  great  aggravations  of 
his  cruelty,  in  that  neither  sex  nor  age 
are  spared  :    rage  and  malice  know  no 
bounds.     Haman,  that  grand  informer, 
wit>h  his  wicked  crew,  would  have  spoiled 
them  of  their  lives  and  goods,  but  that 
they  were    prevented    by   a    miraculous 
providence,  as  you  know.     Now  in  this 
deep  distress  and  most  deadly  danger,  at 
what  rate  doth  Mordecai  believe?     Eor 
if  thou  altogether  boldest  thy  peace  at 
this  time,  then  shall  there  enlargement 
— (Heb.   respiration) — and  deliverance 
arise — (Heb.  stand  up,  as  on  its  basis  or 
bottom,  so  as  none  shall  be  able  to  with 
stand  it).     This  Mordecai  speaketh  not 


CHAP.    I  Y.J 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


HI 


by  a  spirit  of  prophecy,  "but  by  the  power 
and  force  of  his  faith,  grounded  upon  the 
precious  promises  of  God's  defending  his 
Church,  hearing  the  cries  of  his  people 
arising  for  their  relief  and  succour,  and 
grounded  upon  all  the  glorious  attributes 
of  God,  viz.  his  power,  love,  wisdom, 
goodness^  and  all -sufficiency,  &c. — all 
which  are  engaged  in  the  covenant  of 
grace,  to  save,  protect,  and  secure  his 
people  in  their  greatest  troubles  and 
most  deadly  dangers.  Mordecai's  faith 
in  this  black,  dark,  dismal  day,  was  a 
notable  faith  indeed,  and  worthy  of 
highest  commendation.  Faith  can  look 
through  the  perspective  of  the  promises, 
and  see  deliverance  at  a  great  distance, 
salvation  at  the  door.  What  though 
sense  saith.  Deliverance  cannot  come ; 
yet  a  raised  faith  gets  above  all  fears 
and  disputes,  and  says,  Deliverance  will 
certainly  come  ;  redemption  is  at  hand. 
The  Rabbins  put  Makom,  which  sig- 
nifies place,  among  the  names  of  God. 
Bythner  brings  them  in  expounding 
that  text  in  Esther,  *'  Deliverance  shall 
arise  from  another  place ;  "  that  is,  from 
God.  They  called  him  Place,  because 
he  is  in  every  place,  though  in  the  as- 
semblies of  his  saints  more  eminently 
and  gloriously.  God  is  present  with  all 
his  creatures — (1)  via  product lonis,  by 
raising  them  up ;  (2)  via  sustentationis^ 
by  staying  of  them  up  ;  they  are  his 
family,  and  he  feeds  and  clothes  them  ; 

(3)  via  inclinationis,  by  giving  unto  them 
power  of  motion  ;  man  could  neither  live 
nor  move  unless  the  Lord  were  with  him ; 

(4)  via  obsei^vatiomSjhj  taking  notice  of 
them;  he  observeth  and  marks  both  their 
persons  and  their  actions — he  sees  who 
they  are  and   how  they  are  employed ; 

(5)  via  ordinationiSj  by  governing  and 
ruling  of  them  and  all  their  actions,  to 
the  service  of  his  glory,  and  the  good  of 
his  poor  people. — Brookes. 

Consider  all  the  capacities  and  abilities 
we  have  to  do  good,  this  way  and  that 
way,  in  this  relation  and  that  relation, 
that  we  may  be  trees  of  righteousness, 
that  the  more  we  bear  the  more  we  may 
bear.  God  will  mend  his  own  trees. 
He  will  purge  them  and  prune  them  to 
"bring  forth  more  fruit."  God  cherish- 
eth  fruitful  trees.     In  the  law  of  Moses. 


wnen  they  besieged  any  place,  he  com- 
manded them  to  spare  fruitful  trees. 
God  spares  a  fruitful  person  till  he  have 
done  his  work.  We  knoAV  not  how  much 
good  one  man  may  do,  though  he  be  a 
mean  person.  Sometimes  one  poor  wise 
man  delivereth  the  city ;  and  the  right- 
eous delivereth  the  land.  We  see  for 
one  servant,  Joseph,  Potiphar's  house 
was  blessed.  Naaman  had  a  poor  maid- 
servant that  was  the  occasion  of  his  con- 
version. Grace  will  set  anybody  a-work. 
It  puts  a  dexterity  into  any,  though 
never  so  mean.  They  carry  God's  bless- 
ing wheresoever  they  go,  and  they  be- 
think themselves  when  they  are  in  any 
condition  to  do  good,  as  he  saith  in 
Esther  iv.  14.  '*God  hath  called  me 
to  this  place,  perhaps  for  this  end."  AVe 
should  often  put  this  quatre  to  ourselve^^, 
Why  hath  God  called  me  to  this  place  1 
— for  such  and  such  a  purpose. — Sibbes. 

As  it  is  the  most  pleasing  worship  to 
God  to  support  the  Church  with  all  our 
strength,  so  he  execrates  no  one  more 
than  him  who  withholds  from  the  Churcli 
when  in  danger  that  help  which  he  is 
able  to  render.  ...  If  the  cry  of  a  single 
poor  man  is  so  availing,  that  although 
unheard  by  man  it  finds  an  avenging  ear 
in  God,  what  must  be  the  influence  of 
the  cry  of  the  whole  Church  in  her  afflic- 
tion imploring  assistance  from  him  who 
it  hopes  is  able  to  help  1  .  .  .  This 
teaches  us  that  God  confers  power  upon 
princes,  riches  upon  the  rich,  wisdom 
upon  the  wise,  and  other  gifts  upon 
others,  not  that  they  may  abuse  them 
for  their  own  pleasure,  but  that  they 
may  assist  tlie  Church  of  God,  and  pro- 
tect it  whatever  way  they  can.  For  the 
Church  on  earth  is  so  great  in  the  eyes 
of  God,  that  he  requires  of  all  men  what- 
ever may  serve  her.  "  The  people,"  he 
says,  "and  the  king  that  will  not  serve 
thee  shall  perish,  and  the  nations  shall 
dwell  in  a  solitary  place." — Brenz. 

"  Think  not  that  because  thou  art  in 
the  king's  house,  thou  shalt  be  safe." — 
It  is  vain  to  trust  in  kings,  or  in  the  sons 
of  men,  in  M^hom  there  is  no  confidence. 
Kings  die.  In  that  day  their  breath 
goes  forth,  and  their  thoughts  perish. 
Kings  are  changeable  creatures,  like  other 
men.     The  kings  were  not  like  the  laws 


148 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IV. 


of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  which  could 
not  be  altered.  He  that  was  in  the 
morning  their  favourite,  might,  before 
the  evening,  be  hanged  by  their  orders. 
Herod,  king  of  Judea,  dearly  loved  his 
wife  Mariamne,  and  yet  he  ordered  her 
to  be  put  to  death  without  any  crirae 
but  what  was  committed  in  his  own  dark 
imagination.  Monema  was  a  beloved 
wife  of  Mithridates  the  great  King  of 
Pontus,  and  yet,  when  he  lost  a  battle 
against  the  Romans,  that  she  might  not 
fall  into  other  hands  than  his  own  he 
commanded  her  to  die ;  and  the  only 
favour  he  showed  her  was  to  give  her 
the  choice  of  her  own  death.  Her  choice 
was,  to  strangle  herself  by  her  royal  tiara, 
which  had  long  been  hateful  to  her.  But 
even  in  this  she  was  disappointed,  and 
her  last,  or  nearly  her  last,  words,  were, 
*'  Poor  bauble !  canst  thou  not  do  me 
even  this  mournful  office  % " 

Jesus  forbids  us  to  fear  them  that  have 
l)ower  only  to  kill  the  body.  Still  less, 
if  possible,  are  we  to  trust  them ;  for 
they  have  no  power  even  to  save  the 
body.  God  is  to  be  trusted  and  feared. 
He  is  the  lawgiver  who  is  able  to  save 
and  to  destroy. 

Enlargement  and  deliverance  will  arise 
to  the  Jews,  to  the  Israel  of  God,  under 
the  gospel,  as  well  as  under  the  law. 
Amidst  all  the  distresses  of  the  Church, 
we  may  rest  assured  that  she  cannot 
perish.  Particular  Churches  may  be 
destroyed,  but  the  Church  universal  is 
built  by  Christ  upon  a  rock,  and  the 
gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it. 
— Lawson. 

Yer.  14.  When  God  vouchsafes  his 
children  any  outward  privileges,  he  doth 
it  for  the  good  and  help  of  others.  Paul 
had  these  privileges,  that  he  might  beat 
down  the  pride  of  the  Jews  more  power- 
fully. And  Solomon  had  all  abundance 
of  wisdom,  riches,  and  the  like.  Why  '\ 
But  only  that  he  might  without  control 
judge  of  all,  as  of  "  vanity  and  vexation 
of  spirit ; "  and  make  it  to  be  believed 
more  firmly.  For  had  an  ordinary  man 
said  it,  men  would  have  thought  it  easy 
for  him  to  say  so ;  but  if  he  had  tried 
them,  he  would  have  been  otherwise 
minded.  In  these  later  times,  our  best 
teachers  were  at  the  first  Papists,  and 


of  the  more  zealous  sort ;  as  Bucer  and 
Luther,  being  also  learned  men ;  as  also 
Peter  Martyr  and  Zanchius,  were  brought 
up  in  Italy;  and  all  this,  that  they  seeing 
once  their  blind d ess,  might  be  the  more 
able  to  confound  them,  as  being  not  a 
whit  inferior  to  them  in  any  outward 
respect  whatsoever,  when  they  were  of 
their  belief. — Sihhes. 

God  never  yet  sufi'ered  any  Goliath  to 
defy  him,  but  he  raised  up  a  David  to 
encounter  him.  "  The  same  day  Pelagius 
was  born  here  in  Britain^  Augustine  was 
born  in  Africa."  Though  error,  like 
Esau,  hath  come  out  first,  yet  truth,  like 
Jacob,  hath  caught  it  by  the  heel,  and 
wrestled  with  it.  If  God  hath  sufi'ered 
any  horn  to  push  at  his  Israel,  he  hath 
presently  raised  a  carpenter  to  knock  it 
ofi". — Simeon  Ash. 

Things  all  serve  their  uses,  and  never 
break  out  of  their  place.  They  have  no 
power  to  do  it.  Not  so  with  us.  We 
are  able,  as  free  beings,  to  refuse  the  place 
and  the  duties  God  appoints ;  which,  if 
we  do,  then  we  sink  into  something  lower 
and  less  worthy  of  us.  That  highest  and 
best  condition  for  which  God  designed 
us  is  no  more  possible.  We  are  fallen 
out  of  it,  and  it  cannot  be  wholly  re- 
covered. And,  yet,  as  that  was  the  best 
thing  possible  for  us  in  the  reach  of  God's 
original  counsel,  so  there  is  a  place  de- 
signed for  us  now  which  is  the  next  best 
possible.  God  calls  us  now  to  the  best 
thing  left,  and  will  do  so  till  all  good 
possibility  is  narrowed  down  and  spent. 
And  then,  when  he  cannot  use  us  any 
more  for  our  own  good,  he  will  use  us 
for  the  good  of  others, — an  example  of 
the  misery  and  horrible  desperation  to 
which  any  soul  must  come,  when  all  the 
good  ends  and  all  the  holy  callings  of 
God's  friendly  and  fatherly  purposes  are 
exhausted.  Or,  it  may  be  now  that,  re- 
mitting all  other  plans  and  purposes  in 
our  behalf,  he  will  henceforth  use  us, 
wholly  against  our  will,  to  be  the  demon- 
stration of  his  justice  and  avenging  power 
before  the  eyes  of  mankind  ;  saying  over 
us,  as  he  did  over  Pharaoh  in  the  day  of 
his  judgments,  "  Even  for  this  same  pur- 
pose have  I  raised  thee  up,  that  I  might 
show  my  power  in  thee,  and  that  my 
name  might  be  declared  throughout  all 


CHAP.  IT.]                 nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  149 

the  earth."  Doubtless,  he  had  other  and  bates  ;  and  descending,  in  that  manner, 
more  genial  plans  to  serve  in  this  bad  to  a  fate  that  painfully  mimics  his.  God 
man,  if  only  he  could  have  accepted  such ;  has,  then,  a  definite  life-plan  set  for  every 
but,  knowing  his  certain  rejection  of  man  ;  one  that,  being  accepted  and  fol- 
these,  God  turned  his  mighty  counsel  in  lowed,  will  conduct  him  to  the  best  and 
him  wholly  on  the  use  to  be  made  of  noblest  end  possible.  No  qualification 
him  as  a  reprobate.  How  many  Pharaohs  of  this  doctrine  is  needed,  save  the  fear- 
in  common  life  refuse  every  other  use  f ul  one  just  named,  that  we,  by  our  per- 
God  will  make  of  them,  choosing  only  versity,  so  often  refuse  to  take  the  place 
to  figure,  in  their  small  way,  as  repro-  and  do  the  work  he  gives  us. — BushnelL 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  15,  16. 

A  Woman's  Heroism. 

A  woman,  through  the  delicacy  of  her  constitution  and  the  timidity  appropriate 
to  her  nature,  at  first  shrinks  from  the  performance  of  some  difficult  and  dangerous 
enterprise.  Yet  when  the  voice  of  stern  duty  calls,  when  the  demands  of  affection 
prompt,  she  shows  herself  the  most  heroic  of  beings.  Much  has  been  said,  and  not 
too  much,  about  the  heroism  of  woman.  A  great  deal  has  been  sung  and  written 
about  her  heroism.  There  are  also  unwritten  records  of  womanly  heroism.  She 
has  suffered  very  much  in  the  darkness,  in  silence,  and  in  obscurity.  Not  the  one 
half  has  been  told  of  her  heroic  glory.  While  we  applaud  the  heroism  of  Esther 
and  others  whose  good  deeds  have  been  celebrated  in  song,  let  us  not  forget  those 
whose  good  deeds  are  unsung.  Esther  was  no  heartless  beauty  intent  on  her  own 
elevation,  and  regardless  of  the  welfare  of  others.  If  there  is  anything  repellant  in 
this  world  it  is  a  beautiful  woman  that  possesses  either  a  heart  of  stone  or  a  spirit 
steeped  in  selfishness.  If  there  is  anything  attractive  in  this  world  it  is  a  maiden 
the  loveliness  of  whose  outward  form  is  but  the  beautiful  casket  of  a  still  more 
lovely  soul.  How  touching  to  watch  the  fair  maiden  meditating  with  patriotic 
heart  upon  the  sorrows  of  her  people,  and  the  dangers  that  threaten  her  nationality. 
There  is  refreshing  fragrance  in  the  very  sighs  that  come  from  her  heaving  breast. 
There  is  healing  anodyne  in  the  tears  that  fall  like  jewels  from  those  eyes  that  rain 
sweet  influences.  There  is  vast  encouragement  in  the  prayers  that  ascend  from  her 
lips  to  heaven.  The  world  is  bright ;  we  may  welcome  danger  itself,  and  be  the 
better  prepared  for  calamity,  as  we  see  the  Esthers  of  time  nobly  resolving  to 
step  into  the  places  of  danger,  and  undertake  the  works  of  deliverance.  Esther's 
heroism  then  was  of  the  noblest  type.  She  was  truly  heroic.  Let  us  examine  her 
claims  to  this  character. 

I.  The  greatness  of  Esther's  heroism  is  shown  by  her  wisdom.  Wisdom  has 
been  defined  to  be  the  use  of  the  best  means  for  attaining  the  best  ends,  and  in 
this  sense  implies  the  union  of  high  mental  and  moral  excellence.  Such  a  glorious 
union  is  manifested  in  the  answer  here  returned  by  Esther  to  Mordecai,  and  also 
in  the  conduct  of  Esther  when  she  comes  to  put  her  well-concerted  schemes  into 
operation.  A  woman's  heroism  is  a  grand  elevating  power.  She  becomes  almost 
supernatural  by  the  sharpness  of  her  vision,  by  the  quickness  of  her  judgment,  by 
the  depth  of  her  wisdom,  by  the  far-reaching  nature  of  her  schemes,  and  by  her 
wondrous  skill,  and  tact,  and  fertility  in  the  devising  of  the  best  means  for  attain- 
ing her  ends.  What  a  thrilling  history  is  the  history  of  the  expedients  devised  by 
heroic  women  !  Talk  we  of  the  diplomacy  of  statesmen,  let  us  talk  of  the  better 
diplomacy  of  women  devoted  to  the  accomplishment  of  noble  enterprises.  Talk 
we  of  the  skilful  arrangements  of  mighty  conquerors,  let  us  talk  rather  of  the 
arrangements  of  those  women  who  conquer  by  the  inspiration  of  heroic  daring 
and  heroic  consecration.     Talk  we  of  the  far-reaching  and  well-devised  methods  of 


150  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  iv. 

scientific  men.  This  we  may  do,  and  yet  we  must  feel  that  great  praise  is  due  as 
we  consider  the  well-devised  methods  of  unscientific  but  devoted  and  lofty-souled 
women. 

II.  Esther's  wisdom  is  here  shown  by  her  recognition  of  the  fact  that  Divine 
duties  are  superior  to  human  laws.  "  I  will  go  in  unto  the  king,  which  is  not 
according  to  the  laws."  Law  is  a  rule  of  action.  Tt  is  the  formulated  expression 
of  one  who  has  a  right  to  command  obedience.  Kings  have  a  right  to  command 
obedience.  Subjects  however  have  their  rights.  And  the  first  rights  of  a  well- 
regulated  and  conscientious  subject  are  entitled  to  respect,  and  may  well  dispute 
the  so-called  rights  of  kings ;  rights  that  are  not  based  on  principles  of  moral 
rectitude.  There  is  a  power  more  kingly  than  that  of  earthly  kings.  The  Divine 
law  is  superior  to  the  human  law,  and  is  the  true  rule  of  action.  All  human  laws 
should  be  in  harmony  with  Divine  laws.  The  voice  of  conscience  is  supreme. 
The  voice  of  earthly  legislators  is  subordinate.  ''  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather 
than  man."  The  voice,  however,  must  be  the  clear,  ringing,  commanding  voice  of 
an  enlightened  conscience.  Cautions  must  be  laid  down  for  fear  the  rule  obtains — 
so  many  men  so  many  consciences.  The  voice  of  caprice,  of  prejudice,  or  of  mere 
self-will  may  be  taken  for  the  voice  of  conscience.  The  supposed  voice  of  conscience 
may  tell  us  to  tithe  the  mint,  the  anise,  and  the  cummin  only  ;  while  the  true  voice 
commands  the  observance  also  of  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy, 
and  faith.  The  voice  of  conscience  may  say.  Follow  the  inner  light.  Sit  in  silence 
and  wait  for  the  motions  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  true  voice  proclaims  in  high 
places,  "  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony :  it  they  speak  not  according  to  this 
word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them  ? "  If  then  the  voice  of  conscience  and 
the  voice  of  human  institutions  oppose  one  another,  we  must  listen  so  as  to  catch 
the  deciding  voice  of  the  Divine  words.  If  we  cannot  clearly  discern  the  message 
of  that  voice,  we  must,  like  Esther,  give  ourselves  to  fasting  and  to  prayer,  and 
God  will  cause  the  voice  of  his  own  word  to  ring  out  more  distinctly.  Esther's 
duty  in  this  case  was  clear,  and  she  showed  herself  equal  to  the  occasion.  There 
are  many  cases  in  life  when  our  duty  is  clear.  Difficulties  must  not  be  created  as 
an  excuse  for  cowardice. 

III.  Esther's  heroism  and  wisdom  are  here  shown  by  her  recognition  of  the 
truth  that  Divine  duties  must  be  undertaken  in  a  spirit  of  self-abnegation. 
No  great  work  can  be  successfully  accomplished  without  self-denial.  The  way  to 
riches,  to  fame,  or  to  poAver  is  in  some  aspects  the  way  of  self-denial.  If  a  man  is 
to  be  a  successful  orator  he  must  have  the  power  of  self-forgetfulness  in  the  presence 
of  his  hearers.  This  self-forgetfulness  is  to  be  obtained  by  self-denial,  by  thorough 
absorption  in  the  subject,  and  by  earnest  desire  to  do  good.  What  is  true  then  of 
Divine  duties  is  true  of  what  may  be  called  human  duties.  The  one  lies  on  the 
same  plane  with  the  other  in  so  far.  Self-denial  in  the  pathway  of  human  duty 
does  not  always  meet  with  its  appropriate  reward.  Self-denial  in  the  pathway  of 
Divine  duty  is  never  without  its  harvest.  Esther's  self-denial  was  rewarded.  It 
is  a  very  cheap  way  of  getting  glory  to  say  "  If  I  perish,  I  perish  "  when  there  is 
not  the  slightest  chance  of  perishing.  Some  people  are  remarkably  heroic  when 
there  is  no  apparent  danger.  There  was  danger  in  Esther's  case.  There  is  a  sad 
tone  in  the  declaration  "  If  I  perish,  I  perish,"  and  the  sadness  is  not  without  its 
warrant.  These  words  however  are  not  the  words  of  despair.  They  are  the  words 
of  one  resigned  to  the  Divine  will,  of  one  willing  to  suffer,  and  yet  the  words  of 
one  who  still  has  hope  in  Divine  protection.  If  Esther  had  lived  in  our  day  a 
certain  class  of  companions  wouhl  have  told  her  not  to  mind  old  Mordecai,  and  let 
the  Jews  take  their  chance.  She  heeded  not  such  seductive  voices.  Esther  doubt- 
less valued  her  life ;  she  was  not  indifferent  to  the  flattering  nature  of  her  prospects. 
She  would  not  wish  to  be  typified  by  Moses  who  was  taken  up  to  the  Mount  of 
Vision  in  order  to  see  the  promised  land,  and  then  die  without  entering  into  posses- 
sion.    Still  she  may  also  have  felt  that  better  than  the  treasure  of  a  Persian  palace 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  151 


is  the  treasure  of  a  good  conscience ;  better  than  the  life  of  the  body  is  the  life  ol 
the  soul ;  better  than  the  glory  of  a  royal  position  is  the  glory  of  self-denial  for  the 
good  of  others.  In  these  words  we  may  find,  by  no  great  stretch  of  imagination,  a 
foreshadowing  of  that  spirit  displayed  by  Christ  Jesus,  by  his  apostles,  by  the 
martyrs,  and  by  the  noble  workers  of  all  time.  The  spirit  of  him  who  *'  pleased 
not  himself/'  who  had  a  perfect  self-surrender,  and  a  complete  submission  to  the 
Divine  will,  who  bare  our  sicknesses,  and  carried  our  sorrows,  finds  embodiment 
and  utterance  in  the  words,  "If  I  perish,  I  perish."  The  spirit  of  Esther  in  this 
passage  indicates  the  spirit  of  that  noble  apostle  who  counted  not  his  life  dear  unto 
him  that  he  might  finish  his  course  with  joy  and  the  ministry  which  he  had  received 
from  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  was  the  spirit  of  those  who  rejoiced  that  they  were  counted 
worthy  to  sufier  such  things  for  his  name's  sake.  It  is  the  spirit  of  all  in  every  age 
of  the  world  who  are  willing  to  suffer  for  the  good  of  humanity.  Are  we  prepared 
at  the  call  of  duty  and  in  obedience  to  the  voice  of  conscience  to  suffer  1 

IV.  Esther's  wisdom  is  shown  in  her  recognition  of  the  truth  that  Divine  duties 
may  be  undertaken  in  dependence  upon  human  co-operation.  We  may  be 
workers  together  with  God.  We  may  be  workers  together  with  one  another  for 
the  promotion  of  Divine  plans.  Those  who  have  to  undertake  a  special  Divine 
mission  may  be  helped  by  the  sympathies  and  the  prayers  of  others  who  are  not  so 
directly  and  specially  appointed.  The  minister  by  his  people.  The  missionary 
by  those  who  stay  at  home.  Esther  by  all  the  praying  Jews  in  Shushan.  Co- 
operation is  good  in  commercial  matters.  Co-operation  is  also  good  in  Divine 
commerce.  Let  us  take  the  word  that  speaks  of  material  affairs,  that  summons  up 
the  laws  of  political  economy,  and  so  put  its  principle  to  use  in  things  spiritual, 
that  it  may  become  lifted  into  higher  spheres,  and  clothed  with  a  grander  signifi- 
cance. Some  people  have  a  one-sided  idea  of  co-operation,  especially  when  any 
great  work  is  to  be  done,  and  when  any  great  sacrifice  is  to  be  made.  They  for- 
get that  Co.  means  two  or  more.  Esther  had  the  true  idea  of  co-operation.  She  not 
only  asks  Mordecai  and  all  the  Jews  present  in  Shushan  to  fast,  but  she  says,  "  I 
also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  likewise."  There  were  two  sides  to  this  co-operation. 
Esther  and  her  maids  would  join  with  all  the  Jews  in  Shushan,  in  order  to  bring 
about  a  successful  result.  The  Church  of  to-day  needs  more  co-operation.  The 
minister,  for  instance,  is  to  go  on  a  difficult  mission ;  he  is  to  fast,  and  to  pray,  and 
to  visit,  and  to  be  self-denying.  All  right  if  it  can  be  secured.  Something  more 
is  required.  True  co-coperation  is  needed.  The  rich  member  must  say,  I  also  will 
fast,  and  pray,  and  give,  and  work  likewise. 

V.  Esther's  wisdom  is  shown  in  the  recognition  of  the  truth  that  Divine  duties 
can  only  be  successfully  undertaken  by  Divine  help.  It  is  vain  to  make  an 
objection  to  the  Book  of  Esther  on  the  ground  that  there  is  not  in  it  the  religious 
spirit.  There  can  be  no  point  in  fasting  if  it  is  not  connected  with  religion. 
This  request  for  a  general  fast,  and  this  determination  on  her  own  part  to  fast, 
must  have  meant  an  appeal  to  God  for  help.  Fasting  and  prayer  were  very 
generally  joined  in  the  Old  Testament  writings.  In  the  Book  of  Joel  it  is  said, 
"  Sanctify  ye  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly  ;  gather  the  elders,  and  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  land  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  your  God,  and  cry  unto 
the  Lord  !  "  Mere  abstinence  from  food  can  be  of  little  service.  We  may  reason- 
ably picture  Mordecai  carrying  out  Esther's  request,  and  calling  the  Jews  together 
to  a  solemn  assembly,  and  proclaiming  a  general  fast,  and  national  humiliation 
before  God,  and  earnest  prayer  to  God  for  success  to  Esther  in  her  mission.  In 
these  modern  days  we  do  not  believe  in  fasting.  This  may  be  a  reaction.  It 
may  be  a  consequence  of  our  objection  to  those  who  carry  the  principle  of  tor- 
turing the  body  to  an  extreme.  It  may,  however,  be  a  growth  of  the  luxury  of 
the  present  times.  There  is  not  much  disposition  now-a-days  to  keep  the  body 
under  and  bring  it  into  subjection.  We  have  need,  however,  of  deep  humiliation 
before  God.       The  disasters   in  the   nation,    the  decline  of  spiritual  life   in  the 


lo2 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IV. 


Church,  call  for  humiliation.  There  can  be  no  success  without  Divine  help.  We 
must  call  mightily  unto  God.  Let  us  give  him  no  rest  until  he  make  Jerusalem 
a  praise  in  the  earth.  Here  learn  the  ennobling,  transforming,  and  creating  power 
of  love.  Esther's  love  to  her  people  Avas  strong.  This  love  was  a  growth  from 
the  love  she  had  to  God.  Let  there  be  love  to  God,  and  this  will  increase  all 
lower  loves.  True  love  seeks  the  enlargement  of  opportunities  ;  and  becomes 
creative  in  its  very  intensity.  The  loyal  and  patriot'c  subject  does  not  strive  to 
pare  down  the  demands  of  his  sovereign.  The  loving  child  does  not  endeavour  to 
strip  the  father's  word  of  all  binding  force  by  skilful  manipulations.  And  the 
true  heart  does  not  inquire.  How  can  I  do  the  very  least  for  my  God]— but  thinks 
that  the  very  greatest  it  can  either  do  or  ofier  is  far  too  little.  Oh  for  a  love  which, 
though  it  has  only  two  mites  to  give,  yat  casts  them  into  the  treasury  of  him  unto 
whom  belongeth  both  the  gold,  the  siher  and  the  copper  !  Oh  for  a  love  which 
takes  the  alabaster  box  of  ointment — very  precious, — and  breaks  it  over  the  Saviour's 
head  in  loving  consecration  to  his  predestined  offering  !  Oh  for  a  love  which, 
though  it  has  only  tears  to  give,  yet  pours  them  in  plentiful  measure  on  the 
Saviour's  feet,  and  with  the  rich  tresses  of  a  head,  full  of  grateful  thoughts,  wipes 
the  tear-bedewed  feet  of  Immanuel  ! 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  15,  16. 


There  is  something  well  worthy  of  re- 
mark in  the  concluding  words  of  Esther : 
"  So  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king,  which 
is  not  according  to  law  ;  and  if  I  perish, 
I  perish."  This  is  not  the  resolution  of 
a  fatalist,  who  acts  upon  the  principle, 
that  what  is  destined  to  be  must  be,  and 
that  therefore  it  is  useless  either  to 
attempt  to  ward  off  evils,  or  to  complain 
when  they  have  been  inflicted.  Neither 
is  it  the  resolution  of  a  person  wrought 
up  to  a  state  of  absolute  desperation,  and 
acting  under  the  impulse  of  the  feeling 
— "matters  cannot  be  worse,  and  to  have 
done  the  utmost  may  bring  relief,  while 
it  cannot  possibly  aggravate  the  evil." 
Neither  is  it  the  resolution  of  a  person 
prostrated  under  difficulties,  and  yet, 
with  a  vague  hope  of  deliverance,  say- 
ing, "  I  will  make  one  effort  more,  and 
if  that  fail,  and  all  is  lost,  I  can  but  die." 
Esther's  purpose  was  framed  in  a  spirit 
altogether  different  from  that  of  any  of 
those  persons,  although  her  language  ap- 
pears to  be  almost  the  same  as  they 
would  have  used.  And  there  is  an  actual 
case  recorded  in  the  Scriptures  which 
illustrates  the  difference.  When  Samaria 
was  besieged  by  the  Syrians,  and  the 
people  were  dying  of  famine  within  the 
walls,  four  leprous  men,  that  had  their 
dwelling  without  the  wall,  said  to  one 
another :  "  If  we  enter  into  the  city, 
famine  is  in  the  city,  and  we  shall  die 


there;  and  if  we  sit  still  here,  we  die 
also.  Now,  therefore,  come  and  let  us 
fall  unto  the  host  of  the  Syrians  ;  if  they 
save  us  alive,  we  shall  live :  and  if  they 
kill  us,  we  shall  but  die."  Here  we  have 
men  reduced  to  a  state  of  utter  reckless- 
ness by  suffering,  from  which,  if  they  did 
not  obtain  immediate  relief,  they  must 
inevitably  perish  in  one  way  or  other, 
and  so  they  adopted  the  only  course 
which  presented  the  possibility  of  relief. 
But  in  the  case  of  Esther,  we  have 
neither  fatalism,  nor  desperation,  nor  the 
listlessness  of  waning  hope,  which  says, 
"It  matters  not  what  I  do."  Hers  is 
the  heroism  of  true  piety,  which,  in  Pro- 
vidence shut  up  to  one  course,  and  that 
full  of  danger,  counts  the  cost,  seeks  help 
of  God,  and  calmly  braves  the  danger, 
saying  :  "  He  will  deliver  me  if  he  hath 
pleasure  in  me ;  if  not,  I  perish  in  the 
path  of  duty."  Her  noble  resolution 
entitles  her  to  a  place  among  the  most 
eminent  of  those  who  wrought  out 
deliverances  for  Israel. 

And  now,  in  conclusion,  have  not  her 
Avords  peculiar  significance  when  applied 
to  the  case  of  those  Avho,  under  the 
burden  of  their  sin,  are  afraid  to  come  to 
Christ  lest  he  reject  them'?  Some  such 
Ave  have  knoAvn.  There  may  be  some  of 
them  here.  Do  you  feel  that  you  are 
lost  1  Do  you  acknowledge  that  Christ 
might  justly  throw  you  off,  even  were 


CHAP.   IV.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


153 


you  to  cast  yourself  upon  his  mercy? 
And  are  you  now  almost  without  hope  ? 
Still  we  say,  his  invitations  are  addressed 
to  sinners,  and  none  need  them  more 
than  you.  You  are  lost  without  him  : 
then  make  the  great  effort  to  lay  hold  of 
him.  Job  said  :  "  Though  he  slay  me  I 
will  trust  in  him."  You  may  say  :  "  If 
I  perish  I  perish,  but  it  shall  be  at  the 
foot  of  the  cross,  looking  to  Jesus."  And 
I  can  tell  you,  my  friends,  that  none  ever 
perished  there,  putting  all  their  trust  in 
the  Lamb  of  God.  Amen. — Davidson. 
Gospel-consecration  does  not  go  farther 
than  this.  Everything  dear  and  valued 
was  left  behind  in  order  that  she  might 
serve  God.  '*  All  things  were  counted 
but  loss "  that  she  might  maintain  "  a 
conscience  void  of  offence  towards  God 
and  towards  men."  Ah  !  how  this  be- 
liever, in  olden  times,  when  as  yet  the 
Saviour  was  only  had  in  promise,  puts 
to  shame  many  in  these  latter  days  who 
are  in  possession  of  the  finished  salva- 
tion !  Even  the  pleasures  of  sense,  and 
the  wealth  and  rewards  of  the  world, 
keep  them  in  a  state  of  indecision  and 
vacillation,  if  not  of  absolute  indiffer- 
ence, to  tlie  call  and  claims  of  the  gospel. 
They  will  only  go  as  far  with  God  and 
his  people  as  it  may  serve  their  own  self- 
ish ends,  and  promote  their  own  selfish 
interests.  Self-denial  and  self-surrender 
are  not  words  to  be  found  in  their  vocabu- 
lary. But  let  there  be  no  mistake  here. 
The  spirit  displayed  by  Esther  is  the 
spirit  demanded  by  the  Saviour,  and 
without  which  we  cannot  be  his  dis- 
ciples. You  may  not  be  called  upon 
actually  to  make  the  sacrifice,  but  you 
cannot  dispense  with  the  spirit  of  readi- 
ness to  do  it.  Yea,  it  must  have  been 
already  done  in  spirit,  as  though  in  pre- 
paration for  its  actual  execution.  For 
the  love  of  Christ,  the  glory  of  his  name, 
and  allegiance  to  his  crown,  we  must 
have  laid  the  world  at  his  feet,  and  con- 
secrated our  life  to  his  service.  What 
were  the  words  which  he  addressed  to 
the  multitudes  who  went  after  him"? 
Are  they  not  **  hard  sayings "  when 
spoken  in  the  midst  of  his  people  still  % 
"  If  any  man  come  to  me  and  hate  not 
his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and 
children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  and 


his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  dis- 
ciple ;  and  whosoever  doth  not  bear  his 
cross,  and  come  after  me,  cannot  be  my 
disciple." 

It  may  be  that  you  may  fall  at  the 
post  of  duty.  You  have  no  security 
against  this  contingency.  The  graves  of 
many  faithful  servants  of  Christ,  at  home 
and  abroad,  bear  testimony  to  that.  But 
are  not  the  men,  who  prefer  rather  to 
perish  at  the  post  of  duty  than  have 
life  prolonged,  with  a  sense  of  desertion, 
counted  worthy  of  double  honour?  The 
soldier  who  has  kept  a  perilous  position 
in  the  field  of  battle,  and  has  chosen 
rather  to  fall  than  flee  ;  the  captain  who 
has  gone  down  with  his  ship  in  his 
anxiety  and  efforts  to  save  others ;  and 
the  Christian  who  has  regard  to  the 
future  rather  than  to  the  present,  can 
best  afford  to  sink  the  life  that  now  is 
in  the  life  which  is  to  come.  The 
apostles,  martyrs,  and  confessors,  who 
have  fallen  at  the  post  of  duty,  shall 
have  no  cause  to  regret  their  fidelity  in 
heaven.  They  shall,  in  consequence, 
have  a  more  richly  jewelled  crown,  and 
shine  forth  in  the  kingdom  with  a 
brighter,  fuller  glory.  And  oh  !  if  there 
should  yet  come  upon  the  Church  dark 
and  cloudy  days,  when  the  spirit  of  per- 
secution and  hostility  to  the  people  of 
God,  which  is  not  dead  but  only  slumber- 
ing, shall  again  be  awakened  to  try  the 
faith  of  men  and  prove  their  steadfast- 
ness, whether  in  our  own  times  or  the 
times  of  our  children,  or  children's  chil- 
dren, the  loss  and  shame  will  be  theirs 
who  forsake  the  standard  of  the  Cross, 
but  the  honour  and  recompense  be  in 
store  for  them  who  are  "  faithful  unto 
death " — loss  and  shame  to  those  who 
will  only  be  able  to  say  on  that  day  **we 
feared  and  fled,"  but  honour  and  recom- 
pense to  such  as  will  be  able  to  declare 
"  we  loved  Thee,  Lord,  more  than  life ; 
we  fought  and  fell."  So,  in  the  spirit 
of  Esther,  let  us  go  forward  in  the  path 
of  duty  and  religion  through  difficulty, 
danger,  and  the  fear  of  death.  God  will 
shield  us  if  it  is  for  the  good  of  his 
Church  and  his  own  glory,  and  "if  we 
perish,  we  perish." 

There   is  one  other  reference  of  the 
words  which,  though  obvious,  we  would 


154 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[chap.  IV 


not  overlook.  There  are  some  who  deem 
themselves  too  sinful  to  be  saved  ;  some 
whose  cup  of  iniquity  is  indeed  well-nigh 
full,  and  who,  when  aroused  to  a  sense 
of  it,  are  overwhelmed  with  terror. 
What  must  they  do?  Whither  must 
they  betake  themselves  1  We  are  not 
surprised  though  they  should  try  reform- 
ation, for  where  there  is  true  repentance 
there  will  always  be  renunciation  of  sin. 
But  let  the  sinner  be  in  the  very  agonies 
of  dying,  pressed  down  under  the  tre- 
mendous load  of  high-handed  transgres- 
sion, and  having  no  time  left  for  reform- 
ation of  life,  what  must  he  do  1  whither 
betake  himself?  We  have  to  announce 
to  him  the  great  truth  that  "  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanseth  us 
from  all  sin,"  and  that  "  him  that  cometh 
unto  God  through  him  shall  in  no  wise 
be  cast  out."  And  with  these  Scriptures 
syllabled  in  his  ears  and  lodged  in  his 
heart,  we  have  no  difficulty  in  telling 
him  what  he  must  do,  and  whither  he 
must  betake  himself.  He  must  go  in 
unto  the  King — not  one  whose  wrath  he 
has  to  dread,  but  in  whose  redeeming 
love  he  has  to  confide ;  not  waiting  till 
he  is  better,  but  urged  by  the  desperate- 
ness  of  his  case  to  instant  action,  and 
throw  himself  in  all  his  conscious  help- 
lessness on  his  mercy.  0  no  !  There 
is  no  hope,  no  help,  no  remedy,  no 
refuge  for  you,  but  this.  Look  where 
you  will,  try  what  experiment  you  may, 
everything  else  will  be  in  vain.  Your 
darkness  and  despair  will  only  be  deep- 
ened apart  from  this.  But  go  in  unto 
the  King,  and  even  though  your  dark- 
ness be  as  midnight,  there  shall  gleam 
forth  a  star  of  hope ;  and  though  your 
despair  be  even  as  death,  there  shall  be 
awakened  in  you  the  pulsations  of  a  new 
life.  You  must  perish  if  you  do  not. 
You  can  but  perish  if  you  do.  So  let 
your  resolve  be  that  of  Esther,  and  Jesus 
will  bid  you  a  cordial  and  happy  wel- 
come. "  I  will  go  in  unto  the  king,  and 
if  I  perish,  I  perish." — McEwan. 

Go  gather  together  all  the  Jews. — 
Great  is  the  power  of  joint  prayer;  it 
stirs  heaven  and  works  wonders.  Oh, 
when  a  Church  full  of  good  people 
shall  set  sides  and  shoulders  to  work, 
when  they  shall  rouse   up   themselves 


and  wrestle  with  God,  when  the  pillars 
of  incense  shall  come  up  into  his  pre- 
sence, and  their  voices  be  heard  as 
the  voices  of  many  waters,  and  as  the 
voice  of  a  great  thunder  (Rev.  xiv.  2), 
what  may  such  thundering  legions  have 
at  God's  hands  !  Have  it  they  will : 
Caelum  tundimus,  preces  fuiidimus, 
misericordiam  extorquemus,  said  those 
primitive  prayer-makers  (Rev.  ix.  13); 
the  prayers  of  the  saints  from  the  four 
corners  of  the  earth  sound,  and  do  great 
things  in  the  world  ;  they  make  it  ring 
It  was  the  speech  of  a  learned  man.  If 
there  but  one  sigh  come  from  a  gracious 
heart  (how  much  more,  then,  a  volley  of 
sighs  from  many  good  hearts  together  !) 
it  filleth  the  ears  of  God,  so  that  God 
heareth  nothing  else. 

/  also  and  my  maids  will  fast. — She 
herself  would  be  at  the  head  of  them,  as 
Queen  Elizabeth  also  told  her  soldiers  at 
Tilbury  camp  for  their  comfort ;  and  a 
Caesar  used  say  to  his  soldiers.  Go  we, 
and  not  Go  ye — non  ite,  sed  eamus  ;  and 
as  Joshua  said,  I  and  my  house  will 
serve  Jehovah  (Josh.  xxiv.  15).  Esther's 
maids  must  fast — must  fast  and  pray — 
or  they  are  no  maids  for  her. — Trapp. 

**  Every  subject's  duty  is  the  king's  ;  but  every 
subject's  soul  is  his  ovm."'— Shakespeare. 

Heroical  thoughts  do  well  befit  great 
actions.  Life  can  never  be  better 
adventured  than  when  it  shall  be  gam 
to  lose  it.  There  can  be  no  law  against 
the  humble  deprecation  of  evils  :  where 
the  necessity  of  God's  Church  calls  to 
us,  no  danger  should  withhold  us  from 
honest  means  of  relief.  Deep  humilia- 
tion must  make  way  for  the  success  of 
great  enterprises  :  We  are  most  capa^>le 
of  mercy  when  we  are  thoroughly 
empty.  A  short  hunger  doth  but  whet 
the  appetite ;  but  so  long  an  abstinence 
meets  death  half  way,  to  prevent  it. 
Well  may  they  enjoin  sharp  penances 
unto  others  who  practise  it  upon  them- 
selves. It  was  the  face  of  Esther  that 
must  hope  to  win  Ahasuerus ;  yet  that 
shall  be  macerated  with  fasting  that  she 
may  prevail.  A  careful  heart  would 
have  pampered  the  flesh  that  it  might 
allure  those  wanton  eyes ;  she  pines  it 
that  she  may  please.     God,  and  not  ehe^ 


CHAP.   IV.] 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


155 


must  work  the  heart  of  the  kinf^.  Faith 
teaches  her  rather  to  trust  her  devotions 
than  her  beauty. — Bishop  Hall. 

A  well-known  author  once  wrote  a 
very  pretty  essay  on  the  power  of  educa- 
tion to  beautify.  That  it  absolutely 
chiselled  the  features  ;  that  he  had  seen 
many  a  clumsy  nose  and  thick  pair  of 
lips  so  modified  by  that  awakening  and 
active  sentiment  as  to  be  unrecognizable. 
And  he  put  it  on  that  ground  that  we 
so  often  see  people,  homely  and  un- 
attractive in  youth,  bloom  in  middle  life 
into  a  softened  Indian  summer  of  good 
looks  and  mellow  tones.  Secular  educa- 
tion may  do  a  great  deal ;  but  sacred 
education  will  do  vastly  more.  The 
true  beautifying  power  for  woman  is 
the  gospel,  is  that  principle  of  benevo- 
lence which  it  ever  infuses.  How  nobly 
beautiful,  as  well  as  grandly  heroic, 
must  Esther  have  now  appeared  as  she 
resolves  to  save  her  people  at  the  ex- 
pense of  her  own  life  if  need  be. 

It  is  with  him  as  with  Esther  in 
her  undertaking  for  the  Jews.  If  she 
should  go,  and  the  king  not  hold  forth 
the  golden  sceptre  to  her,  she  was  but 
a  dead  woman ;  but  then  if  she  did  not 
go  there  was  no  other  way  to  save  her 
and  her  nation  from  ruin,  and  therefore 
she  resolves,  **  I  will  go  in  unto  the 
king,  and  if  I  perish  I  perish  : "  so  here, 
if  I  go  to  Christ  (thinks  the  trembling 
sinner),  and  take  sanctuary  in  him,  it 
may  be  justice  may  pursue  me  thither. 
Oh !  but  if  I  go  not,  then  there  is 
nothing  for  me  but  certain  destruction ; 
thereupon  he  resolves,  I  will  go  to 
Christ,  I  will  lay  hold  on  him,  and  if  I 
perish  I  will  perish  there  ;  if  wrath  seize 
on  me,  it  shall  find  me  in  the  arms  of 
Christ ;  if  I  die,  I  will  die  at  his  feet. 
When  Joab  had  fled  for  refngre  to  the 

o 

tabernacle,  and  caught  hold  of  the  horns 
of  the  altar,  Benaiah,  sent  to  execute 
him,  bids  him  leave  his  sanctuary  : 
**  Thus  says  the  king,  come  forth." 
"Nay,"  says  Joab,  "but  I  will  die 
here  ; "  if  there  be  no  mercy  for  me,  no 
remedy  but  I  must  die,  I  will  die  here. 
Says  also  the  believing  soul,  but  if  I 
must  die,  I  will  die  here ;  if  justice 
smite  me  it  shall  smite  me  with  Chriet 
in  my  arms ;  though  he  kill  me,  yet  will 


I  rely  on  him  ;  here  will  I  live  or  here 
will  I  die  ;  I  will  not  quit  my  hold, 
though  I  die  for  it. —  Clarlcson. 

The  bloody  plot  being  thus  laid  by 
Haman,  the  king's  minion,  behold  the 
footsteps  of  God's  favourable  signal,  and 
eminent  presence  for  his  people  and  with 
his  people  in  their  deadly  dangers,  and 
that  in  raising  up  in  them  a  very  great 
spirit  of  faith,  prayer,  and  mourning, 
and  by  raising  an  undaunted  courage 
and  resolution  in  Esther  :  **  And  so  I  will 
go  in  unto  the  king,  and  if  I  perish, 
I  perish"  (Esther  iv.  16).  This  she 
speaks  not  rashly  or  desperately,  as  pro- 
digal of  her  life,  but  as  one  willing  to 
sacrifice  the  same  for  the  honour  of  God, 
his  cause  and  people,  saying,  as  that 
martyr,  "  Can  I  die  but  once  for  Christ  1 " 
Esther  had  rather  die  than  shrink  from 
her  duty.  She  thought  it  better  to  do 
worthily  and  perish  for  a  kingdom,  than 
unworthily  and  perish  with  a  kingdom. 
Here  was  a  mighty  preference  of  God 
in  raising  Esther's  heroical  courage  and 
resolution  above  all  those  visible  dangiMs 
that  did  attend  her  attempt  of  going 
in  to  the  king  against  the  known  law  of 
the  land. — Brooks. 

Behold  us  willing  to  sufier  in  this  life 
the  worst  it  may  please  thee  to  bring 
upon  us;  here  lay  thy  rod  upon  us  ;  con- 
sume us  here,  cut  us  to  pieces  here,  only 
spare  us  in  eternity ! — St.  Augustine. 

The  heroic  response  of  Esther  might 
well  send  her  foster-father  home  content. 
It  was  the  full  reward  of  all  his  care 
in  years  gone  by  to  have  a  daughter 
worthy  of  Abigail,  and  Ruth,  and 
Deborah,  and  Hannah.  She  would  not 
act  on  impulse,  but  came  to  a  resolution 
which  was  not  to  be  put  in  force  for 
three  days.  It  is  an  advantage  to  any 
one,  more  to  a  woman  than  to  a  man,  to 
move  forward  rapidly  on  the  wave  of  a 
warm  impulse  ;  but  she  relinquished 
that  advantage,  and  looked  steadily  at 
the  worst  issue.  "  If  I  perish,  I  perish." 
Her  resolution  was  humble  and  prayer- 
ful. Let  those  who  will,  despise  prayer- 
meetings  and  special  requests ;  remem- 
bering the  young  men  of  Babylon,  and 
the  company  in  the  upper  room  before 
Pentecost,  believers  can  afford  to  sit 
easy  under   the  world's   scorn.     "  Fast 


166 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.   IV. 


ye  for  me  :  I  also   and  my  maids  will 
fast  likewise." 

That  was  the  secret  of  Esther's  hero- 
ism. When  the  third  day  came  she  put 
on  her  royal  apparel,  and  did  not  appear 
unto  men  to  fast  ;  but  meanwhile  there 
was  "  another  King  "  to  whom  she  could 
go  without  delay,  with  whom  she  could 
remain  longer,  and  to  whom  she  could 
pour  out  all  her  heart.  The  mere  force  of 
c(nitrast  with  the  exclusive  monarch  of 
Persia  brings  up  comforting  and  tender 
thoughts  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  does 
not  debar  from  his  presence  the  weary 
and  heavy-laden,  but  bids  them  come ; 
who  has  chosen  the  contrite  heart  as  his 
earthly  dwelling-place ;  who  proclaims 
it  as  the  glory  of  his  home  above  that 
there  he  shall  wipe  away  all  tears. 

A  seraglio  is  a  sad  enough  place,  with 
its   year-long   monotony,   its  petty  jea- 
lousies, its  gilded  restraints  ;  but  when, 
as  the  curtain  now  falls,  we  see  Esther, 
with  firm-set  lips,  going  to  arrange  for  a 
long  prayer-meeting  with    her  maidens, 
we  feel  that  this  queen  has  brought   a 
good  thing  into  a  sad  place.     The  reli- 
gion of  the  heart  is  never  monotonous. 
Mordecai  also"  moves  homeward  with  a 
new  light  in  his  strong  face,  to  gather 
such  of  his  brethren  as  are  within  the 
capital,  that   they  may  strengthen    one 
another  in  seeking '' the  God  of  Israel, 
the  Saviour  who  hideth  himself."     For 
three  days  there  is  silence.     After,  we 
shall  see  Esther  and  Mordecai  again  in 
their  place,  acting  with  plenty  of  deci- 
sion and  vigour ;  but  let  us  not  forget 
this    "  pause   more   full    than   speech," 
this  *'  hush  more  sweet  than  song." — 
A.  M.  Symington,  B.A. 

Woman^s  self-devotion. — Courage  is  a 
noble  feminine  grace — courage  and  self- 
devotion.  We  are  so  accustomed  to 
associate  courage  with  physical  strength 
that  we  do  not  often  think  of  it  as  pre- 
eminently a  feminine  grace  when  the 
feminine  nature  has  been  fully  unfolded 
and  trained,  but  it  is.  The  reckless 
rapture  of  self-forgetfulness,  that  which 
dominates  and  inspires  persons  and 
nations,  that  which  is  sovereign  over 
obstacle  and  difficulty  and  peril  and 
resistance,  it  has  belonged  to  woman's 
heart  from  the  beginning.     In  the  early 


Pagan  time,   in  the  Christian  develop 
ment,  in  missions  and   in  martyrdoms? 
it  has  been  shown  ;  in  the  mediaeval  age 
as  well  as  in  our  own  time  ;  in  Harriet 
Newel   and    Florence    Nightingale ;   in 
Ann  Haseltine  as  truly  and  as  vividly 
as  in  any  Hebrew  Hadassa  or   in  any 
French  Joan  of  Arc.      You  remember 
the  Prussian  women  after  the  battle  of 
Jena,    when    Prussia   seemed    trampled 
into  the  bloody  mire  under  the  cannon 
of  Napoleon  and  the  feet  of  the  horses 
and  men  in  his  victorious  armies,  Prus- 
sian women,  never  losing  their  courage, 
flung  their  ornaments  of  gold  and  jewel- 
lery into  the  treasury  of  the  State,  taking 
back    the  simple   cross   of  Berlin   iron 
which  is  now  the  ])recious  heirloom  in 
so  many  Prussian  families,  bearing  the 
inscription,  "I  jiave  gold  for  iron."  That 
is  the   glory  of   womanhood ;  that  pas- 
sion, and  self-forgetfulness,  that  suprt-me 
self-devotion,  with  which  she  flings  h^^r- 
self  into  the  championship  of  a  cause 
that   is  dear   and   sacred  and  trampled 
under  foot.     It  is  her  crown  of  renown, 
it  is  her  stafi"  of  power.  — Dr.  Storrs. 

"  Fast  ye  for  me,  and  7ieither  eat  nor 
drink  for  three  days.'^ — They  were  not 
called  with  Esther  to  go  in  unto  the 
king.  A  far  less  dangerous  service  was 
required  from  them.  But,  what  they 
can  do,  and  are  called  to  do,  they  must 
do  as  conscientiously  as  Esther.  There 
are  many  great  works  which  are  beyond 
our  strength,  or  out  of  the  line  of  our 
calling ;  and  yet  we  may  and  ought  to 
take  a  part  in  them,  by  strengthening 
the  hands  of  those  who  are  called  to 
undertake  them.  Paul  had  many  helpers 
in  his  work  of  the  gospel,  even  among 
those  who  could  not,  or  to  whom  it 
would  not,  have  been  allowed  to  speak 
in  the  Church.  We  all  ought  to  be 
feUow-helpers  to  the  truth.  When 
many  go  abroad  to  spread  the  gospel 
amongst  heathens,  we  find  it  our  duty  to 
continue  in  the  land  of  our  nativity  ; 
but,  without  removing  from  it,  we  may 
promote  the  work  in  which  they  are 
employed,  by  our  contributions,  or  at 
least  by  our  prayers. 

There  are  some  who  beg  the  prayers 
of  others,  and  yet  pray  little  for  them- 
selves.    Esther,  who  requested  the  Jews 


OHAP     IV.J 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


157 


to  fast  for  her,  told  them  that  she  also 
would  fast,  and  would  abstain  as  strictly 
from  food  as  she  desired  them  to  do. 
She  had  been  accustomed  to  a  well- 
furnished  table ;  but  she  was  not  there- 
by disqualified  from  afflicting  her  soul 
by  fasting  when  she  saw  it  to  be  her 
duty.  She,  no  doubt,  observed  the  an- 
nual fasts  prescribed  to  the  Jews,  and 
she  determined  to  observe  this  extra- 
ordinary fast  which  she  herself  pre- 
scribed. She  hoped  to  obtain  mercy 
from  tlie  Lord,  that  she  might  escape 
death  by  the  laws  of  Persia,  and  might 
be  tlie  instrument  of  the  salvation  of 
her  people.  But,  if  she  miscarried,  her 
fasting  and  prayer  would  be  proper  acts 
of  preparation  for  her  latter  end. 

"/  and  my  maids  loill  fa^t^ — Some, 
it  is  probable,  of  Esther's  maids  were 
heathens  when  they  came  into  her  ser- 
vice. Yet,  we  find  her  promising  that 
they  would  fast.  She  can  answer  for 
them,  as  Joshua  for  his  household,  that 
they  would  serve  the  Lord.  If  mistresses 
were  as  zealous  as  queen  Esther  for  the 
honour  of  God,  and  the  conversion  of 
sinners,  they  would  bestow  pains  upon 
the  instruction  and  religious  improve- 
ment of  their  female  servants.  If  women 
may  gain  to  Christ  their  own  husbands 
by  their  good  conversation,  may  they 
not  also  gain  the  souls  of  their  servants  1 
and  if  they  are  gained  to  Christ,  they 
are  gained  to  themselves  also.  Esther  ex- 
pected much  benefit  from  the  devotional 
exercises  of  her  maidens.  Paul  expected 
much  from  the  prayers  of  his  converts. 
Those  whom  we  convert  from  the  error 
of  tlieir  ways  will  be  our  joy  and  helpers 
upon  earth :  they  will  be  our  joy  and 
crown  of  rejoicing  in  the  day  of  Christ. 

*^  /  and  my  maids  will  fast.''^ — Esther 
could  not  join  in  the  public  prayers  of 
the  Jews,  when  they  met  together  out 
of  many  families,  to  strive  together  in 
their  prayers  to  God.  But  she  will  fiist 
at  home,  not  only  by  herself,  but  with 
her  maidens.  There  are  public  fasts  in 
which  all  are  expected  to  join.  There 
ought  likewise  to  be  secret  and  family 
fasts  observed  by  us,  according  to  the 
calls  of  providence,  and  the  situation  of 
our  affairs,  or  the  condition  of  our  souls. 

**  And  then  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king. 


which  is  not  according  to  flic  lawT — 
She  would  not  go  in  unto  the  king  till 
she  had  made  her  supplication  to  the 
Lord,  and  till  the  Jews  had  given  her 
the  assistance  of  their  prayers.  She  was 
sensible,  that  though  "  all  men  will 
intreat  the  ruler's  favour,  every  man's 
judgment  comes  from  the  Lord  ; "  and 
that  the  hearts  of  kings  are  turned  by 
him  according  to  his  pleasure.  What, 
therefore,  she  desires  in  the  first  place  is, 
that  she  may  obtain  comfortable  assur- 
ance of  the  Divine  favour.  If  the  Lord 
be  on  her  side,  she  is  safe.  If  the  Lord 
favour  her  suit,  she  need  not  fear  the 
coldness  of  Ahasuerus,  or  the  mortal 
enmity  of  Haman.  "The  floods  may 
rage.  They  may  lift  up  their  voices  and 
make  a  mighty  noise  :  but  the  Lord  on 
high  is  mightier  than  the  waves  of  the 
sea,  or  the  voice  of  their  roaring." 

But  when  the  fast  is  over,  she  will  go 
in  unto  the  king.  She  will  not  think 
that  her  duty  is  done  when  she  has 
prayed  and  fasted.  She  will  seek,  by 
the  use  of  proper  means,  to  obtain  that 
blessing  which  she  has  been  asking. 
The  insincerity  of  our  prayers  is  too 
often  discovered  by  our  sloth  and 
cowardice.  We  ask  blessings  from 
God,  and,  as  if  he  were  bound  to  confer 
them,  not  according  to  his  own  will,  but 
according  to  ours  ;  we  take  no  care  to  use 
those  means  which  he  hath  appointed 
for  obtaining  them,  or  we  do  not  use 
them  with  requisite  diligence.  Esther 
will  go  in  unto  the  king,  although  she 
could  not  go  in  without  violating  the 
laws  and  risking  her  life. — Lawson. 

"  He  that  believeth  doth  not  make 
haste ; "  but  neither  doth  he  linger  like 
the  slothful.  Fasting  and  prayer  are 
preparatives,  not  substitutes,  for  active 
duties.  "  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses, 
Wherefore  criest  thou  unto  me  ?  speak 
unt )  the  children  of  Israel  that  they  go 
forward."  Good  resolutions,  when  ditfi- 
culties  and  dani^ers  must  be  broken 
through,  should  be  speedily  performed  ; 
and  we  should  not  damp  them  by  pro- 
lonLjini^  r.-iliLj-iou^  exercises.  Havincj 
sp^nt  the  time  allotted  to  fasting,  Esther 
rose  from  the  ground,  laid  aside  her 
sackcloth,  and  put  on  her  royal  apparel 
The  apocryphal  additions  to  this  book 


158 


HOMILETIC  COMMEUTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IV. 


represent  her  as  appealing  to  God,  that 
she  always  abhorred  these  signs  of  her 
high  estate.  That  her  adorning  was  in 
the  hidden  man  of  the  heart,  that  she 
did  not  glory  in  her  crown  and  em- 
broidered garments,  and  would  have 
been  willing  to  have  thrown  them  away 
for  the  sake  of  conscience  and  the  good 
of  her  people,  is  all  true.  But  why 
should  she  have  abhorred  them  in  them- 
selves'? There  was  nothing  sinful  or 
necessarily  contaminating  in  their  touch; 
they  were  given  her  of  God ;  they  were 
the  badge  of  the  rank  to  which  she  had 
been  raised  ;  and  had  she  appeared  with- 
out them,  or  worn  them  in  an  awkward, 
slovenly  manner,  she  would  have  dis- 
honoured her  husband,  and  defeated  her 
laudable  enterprise.  Esther  did  not 
adorn  herself  to  attract  the  regards  of 
Ahasuerus,  but  because  she  felt  it  in- 
cumbent on  her  to  appear  in  a  manner 
becoming  her  station.  There  is  no  sin 
in  persons  dressing  according  to  their 
rank.  The  king's  daughter  may  be  all 
glorious  within,  though  her  garments 
are  of  wrought  gold ;  and  the  plainest 
and  coarsest  garb  may  conceal  a  proud 
and  haughty  spirit. — Lawson. 

Our  flesh  is  always  timid  when  it 
has  to  encounter  a  hazard.  My  Christ, 
in  his  Divine  majesty,  stands  at  the 
entrance  into  the  faith,  and  sounds  the 
free   invitation  to   each   and   all,   ever 


frequent,  ever  dear,  ever  happy.  One 
should  succour  his  neighbour  in  peril 
and  need,  and  especially  the  brethren  in 
the  faith  even  at  the  peril  of  one's  own 
life.  We  are  born  for  good  not  to 
ourselves,  but  to  others,  and  thus  God 
oftentimes  shows  us  that  through  us 
he  aids  our  own  country  and  the  com- 
munity. Faith  is  the  victory  that  over- 
comes the  world.  We  may  use  ordinary 
prayer  for  important  blessings.  Life 
can  never  be  spent  better  than  when  it 
is  the  aim  to  lose  it. — Starke. 

A  woman  is  sometimes  wound  up  to 
firm  and  determined  action  when  the 
lives  of  her  kindred  are  at  stake,  which 
surpasses  the  marvels  of  heroic  story, 
and  sends  a  wild  pulsation  of  startled 
admiration  to  vibrate  through  all  hearts 
to  the  end  of  time.  Who  can  read  of 
Deborah  delivering  Israel  from  ruin 
without  rapture?  or  Margaret  Eoper 
breaking  through  a  London  crowd  to 
kiss  her  father,  Sir  Thomas  More,  about 
to  be  beheaded  1  or  Joan  of  Arc — that 
light  of  ancient  France — who,  a  mere 
girl,  delivered  her  country  from  invaders, 
and  restored  the  crown  to  her  sovereign 
at  the  high  altar  of  Rheims  1  or 

"Her,  who  knew  that  love  can  vanquish  death — 
Who,  kneeling  with  one  arm  about  the  king. 

Drew  forth  the  poison  with  her  balmy  breath, 
Sweet  as  new  buds  in  spring  "  ?—  B.  Kent, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verse  17. 

A  Good  Man's  Characteristics. 

I.  Mordecai  went  his  way  pondering.     Mordecai  was  a  man  of  thought,  as 

is  plainly  seen  from  the  whole  course  of  this  narrative.     His  course  of  conduct  was 

evidently  the  result  of  intense  thought.     And  this   was  a  special  occasion  for 

thought.     He  would  still  require  to  ponder  deeply,  for  we  must  think  not  only  to 

form  our  plans,  but  also  after  our  plans  are  on  their  way  to  accomplishment.     This 

is  characteristic  of  a  good  man,  that  he  thinks.     David  often  speaks  of  thinking. 

"  When  I  thought  to  know  this."     "  I  thought  on  my  ways."     The  prophets  were 

men  of  thought.     The  question  was  asked,  "  How  knoweth  this  man  letters,  or 

learning,  having  never   learned."      The  answer  may  be  given — that  Jesus  was 

supernaturally  endowed,  and  he  exercised   himself   to   acquire   knowledge.     He 

studied  the  Old  Testament  writings,  and  the  ways  of  men.     He  thought.     He 

increased  in  wisdom.     There  was  mental  development  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 

The  apostles  thought.     Goodness  is  helpful  to,  and  is  the  provocative  of,  thought. 

It  enables  the  mind  to  see  clearly.     It  stimulates  the  mind  to  think  deeply.     To 

pray  well  is  to  study  weU.     To  live  in  the  pure  atmosphere  of  gooduess  is  to 


OHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  159 


enlarge  the  nature.  Professedly  good  men  should  seek  to  think  more.  There  is  a 
want  of  strenuous  thinking  in  the  present  day.  We  do  not  ponder.  We  muse. 
We  sentimentalize.  We  indulge  in  sentiment  for  the  mere  luxury  of  excitement. 
There  is  further  a  want  of  thinking  for  others.  Our  thoughts  are  too  much  centred 
on  self.     Mordecai  thought  for  his  people. 

II.  Mordecai  went  his  way  believing.  The  man  of  faith  finds  that  the 
occasions  of  life  increase  his  faith.  The  movements  of  Providence  tend  to  strengthen 
his  confidence.  We  have  seen  that  Mordecai  was  a  man  of  faith,  and  here  in 
Esther's  answer  he  finds  encouragement  to  keep  on  believing.  His  faith  lived 
through,  and  was  not  destroyed  by,  Esther's  apparent  refusal,  and  now  his  faith  is 
wonderfully  enlarged  by  Esther's  gracious  answer  of  determination  to  make  the 
venture.  He  believed  before  that  enlargement  and  deliverance  would  arise  from 
another  place,  and  now  he  believes  still  more  strongly  that  God  will  save  his 
anointed.  God  has  given  enlargement  already  by  rewarding  Mordecai's  faith,  and 
giving  him  fresh  reasons  for  confidence.  The  faith  of  the  (]5hristian  is  not  killed 
by  the  trials  of  life,  and  is  developed  by  the  occasional  tokens  of  Divine  inter- 
position. Faith  leads  to  more  faith.  It  is  strengthened  by  the  storm.  It  ripens 
in  the  calm.  It  surmounts  discouragements.  It  finds  encouragement  where  there 
may  be  little  to  be  seen  by  doubt.  It  gathers  food  in  the  most  barren  spots.  It 
turns  the  sterile  rock  into  a  garden  of  promise.  It  never  sinks  beneath  the  billows, 
for  it  firmly  grasps  the  hand  of  omnipotence.  Lord,  we  believe,  but  our  faith  is 
weak.  Oh,  help  our  unbelief !  Give  signs  and  tokens  of  thy  presence  that  doubt- 
ing ones  may  become  believing  ones.  Raise  up  in  these  modern  times  heroes  of 
faith.  Oh,  let  the  mighty  power  of  faith  be  again  manifested !  The  world  re(|uires 
a  fresh  race  of  heroes  who  shall  through  faith  subdue  kingdoms,  work  righteous- 
ness, obtain  promises,  and  wax  valiant  in  moral  fights. 

III.  Mordecai  went  his  way  obeying^.  Faith  without  works  is  dead.  Mordecai 
did  according  to  all  that  Esther  had  commanded  him.  He  saw  that  Esther's  com- 
mand was  in  liarmx>ny  with  the  command  of  God,  and  therefore  he  obeyed.  Two 
things  are  to  be  taken  into  consideration  with  reference  to  earthly  commands. 
Who  commands?  What  is  the  nature  of  the  commandment*?  There  is  a  prima 
facie  objection  against  the  commands  of  some.  They  are  not  noted  either  for 
wisdom  or  for  piety.  We  very  soon  settle  in  our  minds  as  to  their  utterances. 
Esther  possessed  both  wisdom  and  piety.  Mordecai  might  therefore  very  properly 
consider  the  nature  of  her  requirements.  However,  it  is  human  to  err.  The  best 
people  make  mistakes.  We  have,  then,  to  examine  all  commands.  It  is  to  be  pre- 
sumed that  Mordecai  examined  the  command  of  Esther  and  saw  its  propriety. 
There  is  no  need  to  examine  the  propriety  of  the  commandments  of  God.  His 
commandments  are  not  grievous.  All  his  laws  are  right.  All  his  requirements 
are  the  result  of  wisdom.  Therefore  let  us  obey  promptly  and  persistently.  Be- 
hold, to  obey  is  better  than  to  sacrifice.  Here  note  that  God  gives  credit  for  an 
action  Avhen  the  true  purpose  is  found  in  the  mind  to  do  the  commandment. 
While  Mordecai  is  on  his  way  to  gather  together  all  the  Jews  that  were  present  in 
Shushan,  he  may  be  said  to  do  according  to  that  which  Esther  had  commanded. 
God  takes  notice  of  good  intentions,  of  holy  resolves,  as  well  as  of  actual  perform- 
ances. Death  may  intervene  between  the  resolve  and  its  execution  on  earth ;  but 
death  cannot  prevent  the  holy  resolution  being  developed  in  heaven,  death  cannot 
rob  the  earnestly  resolving  soul  of  its  Divine  reward.  Death  may  seem  to  kill  the 
noble  purpose,  but  there  is  a  sphere  where  death  has  no  power  and  where  the  noble 
purposes  of  earth  may  fructify.  In  this  aspect  heaven  is  the  complement  of  earth. 
It  is  man's  to  resolve  and  to  do  so  far  as  possible.  God  will  rightly  perfect  that 
which  concerneth  his  saints. 

IV.  Mordecai  went  his  way  praising.  It  is  not  a  great  stretch  of  imagination 
to  suppose  Mordecai  praising  God  for  his  goodness  on  his  way  from  the  palace- 
gates.     He  would  naturally  praise  God  for  the  readiness  with  which  Esther  now 


i60 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IV. 


entered  upon  the  difficult  enterprise.  We  must  praise  God  not  only  for  the 
accomplished  deliverance,  but  when  the  deliverance  is  being  accomplished.  Prayer 
must  be  joined  with  praise.  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  God.  Some  cannot 
see  an  opportunity  for  praise  when  it  is  a  season  of  fasting  and  prayer.  "  Moreover, 
when  ye  fast,  be  not,  as  the  hypocrites,  of  a  sad  countenance,  for  they  disfigure 
their  faces,  that  they  may  appear  unto  men  to  fast ;  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  they 
have  their  reward.  But  thou,  when  thou  fastest,  anoint  thine  head,  and  wash  thy 
face  ;  that  thou  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast,  but  unto  thy  Father  which  is  in 
secret ;  and  thy  Father,  which  seeth  in  secret,  shall  reward  thee  openly."  *'  Be 
careful  for  nothing,  but  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanks- 
giving let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God." 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Veese  17. 


So  Mordecai  went  his  way,  and  did 
according^  &c. — As  he  had  put  her  upon 
a  dangerous,  but,  as  the  cause  stood, 
necessary,  exploit  (nature  will  venture 
its  own  particular  good  for  the  general, 
as  heavy  things  will  ascend  to  keep  out 
vacuity,  and  preserve  the  universe) ;  so 
lie  is  ruled  by  her  (though  a  woman,  and 
once  his  pupil)  when  he  perceived  her 
counsel  was  good.  Abraham  must  hear 
Sarah,  and  David  Abigail,  and  Apollos 
Priscilla,  when  they  speak  reason.  It 
is  foretold  of  a  man  in  Christ,  that  a 
little  child  shall  lead  him. — Trapp. 

So  Mordecai  went  his  way,  and  did 
according  to  all  that  Esther  had  com- 
manded him.  —  Mordecai  commanded 
Esther,  and  she  obeyed  him.  Esther 
commanded  Mordecai,  and  he  obeyed 
her.  They  served  one  another  in  love. 
It  would  be  happy  for  us  if  we  knew 
how  to  command  and  how  to  obey  in 
our  turns,  being  subject  one  to  another 
in  the  fear  of  God. 

Mordecai  required  the  Jews  to  fast 
three  days  according  to  Esther's  orders ; 
and  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  of  their 
ready  and  grateful  compliance.  They 
would  not  think  it  hard,  but  necessary 
and  useful,  to  be  called  to  afflict  theii 
souls  to  an  extraordinaiy  degree,  when 
their  lives  and  the  lives  of  all  their 
people  were  in  question.  And  yet  the 
present  life  of  all  the  many  thousands 
of  Judah  was  not  of  equal  importance 
to  the  eternal  life  of  one  precious  soul. 
What,  then,  are  we  to  think  of  ourselves, 
if  the  sentence  of  eternal  death  denounced 
against  every  sinner,  has  never  induced 
us  to  devote  as  many  hours  to  fervent 
prayer,  as  these  Jews  employed  days  in 


prayer  and  fasting  to  obtain  deliverance 
from  temporal  death?  Is  it  not  to  be 
feared  that  we  do  not  really  believe  what 
the  Scripture  tells  us  about  that  jud*^- 
ment  which  is  come  upon  all  men  to 
condemnation,  if  we  think  it  too  niucli 
trouble  to  spend  some  hours  or  days  in 
considering  oar  condition,  and  pouring 
out  supplications  for  that  mercy  which 
we  so  greatly  need.  The  Jews  fasted. 
Esther  went  in  to  the  king,  uncertain 
about  the  event,  but  pressed  by  hard 
necessity.  Necessity  is  laid  upon  sin- 
ners, yea,  woe  unto  them  if  they  do  not 
obtain  mercy  !  But  great  encouragement 
is  given  them  to  come  to  the  throne  of 
grace  to  obtain  mercy.  God  himself 
puts  words  into  their  mouths,  and  will 
he  not  hear  those  prayers  which  are 
dictated  by  his  own  Spirit]  (Hos.  xiv.  2, 
3;  Jer.  xxxi.  18  —  20.) — Lawson. 

Ver.  17.  That  which  belongs  to  us 
in  our  calling  is  care  of  discharging  our 
duty ;  that  which  God  takes  upon  him 
is  assistance,  and  good  success  in  it.  Let 
us  do  our  work,  and  leave  God  to  do  his 
own.  Diligence  and  trust  in  him  is  only 
ours,  the  rest  of  the  burden  is  his.  In 
a  family  the  father's  and  the  master's 
care  is  the  greatest ;  the  child's  care  is 
only  to  obey,  and  the  servant's  to  do  his 
work  ;  care  of  provision  and  protection 
doth  not  trouble  them.  Most  of  our 
disquietness  in  our  calling  is,  that  we 
trouble  ourselves  about  God's  work. 
Trust  God  and  be  doing,  and  let  him 
alone  with  the  rest.  He  stands  upon 
his  credit  so  much,  that  it  shall  appear 
we  have  not  trusted  him  in  vain,  even 
when  we  see  no  appearance  of  doing  any 
good.    Peter  fished  all  night,  and  cat  died 


CHAP.    IV.] 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


161 


nothing,  yet  upon  Christ's  word  he  casts 
in  his  net  again,  and  caught  as  many  fish 
as  brake  his  net.  Covetousness,  when 
raen  will  be  richer  than  God  would  have 
them,  troubles  all ;  it  troubles  the  house, 
the  whole  family,  and  the  house  within 
lis,  our  precious  soul,  which  should  be  a 
quiet  house  for  God's  Spirit  to  dwell  in, 
whose  seat  is  a  quiet  spirit.  If  men 
would  follow  Christ's  method,  and  "  seek 
first  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  all  other 
things  would  be  cast  upon  them.  If 
thoughts  of  insufficiency  in  our  places 
discourage  us,  remember  what  God  saith 
to  Moses,  when  he  pretended  disability 
to  speak,  "Who  hath  made  man's  mouth  1 
have  not  I,  the  Lord  ! "  All  our  suffici- 
ency for  every  calling  is  from  God. 

God  is  never  nearer  his  Church  than 
when  trouble  is  near.  Usually,  after  the 
lowest  ebb  follows  the  highest  spring- 
tide.    Christ  stands  upon  Mount  Zion. 


There  is  a  counsel  in  heaven  that  will 
dash  the  mould  of  all  contrary  counsels 
on  earth  ;  and,  which  is  more,  God  will 
work  the  raising  of  the  Church  by  that 
very  means  by  which  his  enemies  s^ek 
to  ruin  it.  God  gave  too  dear  a  price 
for  his  Church  to  suffer  it  long  in  the 
hands  of  merciless  enemies.  Take  heed 
therefore  of  fretting,  because  of  the  man 
that  bringeth  wicked  devices  to  pass,  for 
the  arms  of  the  wicked  shall  be  broken. 
The  depths  of  misery  are  never  beyond 
the  depths  of  mercy.  God  oft,  for  this 
very  end,  strips  his  Church  of  all  helps 
below,  that  it  may  only  rely  upon  him, 
and  that  it  may  appear  that  the  Church 
is  ruled  by  a  higher  power  than  it  is 
opposed  by.  And  then  is  the  time  when 
we  may  expect  great  deliverances  in  the 
Church,  when  there  is  a  great  faith  in 
the  great  God, — Sibbes. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO  CHAPTER  TV. 


Ver.  3.  The  patriotic  Greek.  Be  like  that 
patriotic  Greek,  who  with  his  little  band  of  fol- 
lowers had  to  check  the  great  array  of  the  Persians. 
He  knew  that  to  go  down  into  the  open  plain  and 
to  expose  himself  there  to  all  his  enemies  at  once 
would  be  speedy  destruction.  He  therefore  took 
his  stand  in  the  narrow  mountain  pass,  ana  en- 
countered his  foes  as  they  carae  one  by  one.  So 
be  it  with  you.  Keep  to  the  narrow  pass  of  to- 
day. Face  your  troubles  one  by  one  as  they  arise. 
Do  not  commit  yourself  to  the  open  plain  of  to- 
morrow. You  are  not  equal  to  that.  God  does 
not  require  you  to  do  that. — Spurgeon. 

Haman  may  not  have  the  power  to  carry  out 
his  bloody  and  revengeful  decree.  God  will  inter- 
pose in  a  wonderful  method  to  your  deliverance. 
Face  for  the  present  only  the  trouble  caused  by 
the  proclamation,  and  do  not  ask  how  will  it  be 
when  the  time  comes  for  the  proclamation  to  take 
effect. 

Ver.  3.  Unskilful  persons  in  a  boat.  I  have 
seen  young  and  unskilful  persons  sitting  in  a 
boat,  when  every  little  wave  sporting  about  the 
sides  of  the  vessel,  and  every  motion  and  dancing 
of  the  barge,  seemed  a  danger,  and  made  them 
cling  fast  upon  their  fellows  ;  and  yet  all  the 
while  they  were  as  safe  as  if  they  sat  in  a  tree, 
while  the  gentle  wind  shook  the  leaves  into  re- 
freshment and  cooling  shade.  And  so  the  unskil- 
ful, inexperienced  Christian  shrieks  out  whenever 
his  vessel  shakes,  thinking  it  always  danger  that 
the  watery  pavement  is  not  stable  and  resident 
like  the  rock ;  and  yet  all  his  danger  is  in  him- 
self, none  at  all  from  without  ;  for  he  is  indeed 
moving  upon  the  waters,  but  fastened  to  a  rock  ; 
faith  is  his  foundation,  and  hope  his  anchor,  and 


death  is  his  harbour,  and  Christ  his  port,  and 
heaven  his  country  ;  and  all  the  evils  of  poverty, 
or  affronts  of  tribunals  and  evil  judges,  all  fears 
and  sad  anticipations,  are  bent  like  the  loud  wind 
blowing  from  the  right  point  ;  they  make  a  noise 
and  drive  faster  to  the  harbour. 

Ver.  3.  Sour  milk  and  black  bread.  "We  had 
traversed  the  Great  Aletsch  Glacier,  and  were 
very  hungry  when  we  reached  the  mountain  tarn 
half-way  between  the  Bel  Alps  and  the  hotel  at 
the  foot  of  the  Aeggischorn ;  there  a  peasant 
undertook  to  descend  the  mountain,  and  bring  us 
bread  and  milk.  It  was  a  very  Marah  to  us 
when  he  brought  us  back  milk  too  sour  for  us  to 
drink,  and  bread  black  as  a  coal,  too  hard  to  bite, 
and  sour  as  the  curds.  What  then  ?  Why,  we 
longed  the  more  eagerly  to  reach  the  hotel  to- 
wards which  we  were  travelling.  We  mounted 
our  horses,  and  made  no  more  halts  tiU  we  reached 
the  hospitable  table  where  our  hunger  was  abund- 
antly satisfied.  Thus  our  disappointments  on  the 
road  to  heaven  whet  our  appetites  for  the  better 
country,  and  quicken  the  pace  of  our  pilgrimage 
to  the  celestial  city. — Spurgeon. 

Ver.  4.  Hardening  effects  of  sensibility.  The 
frequent  repetition  of  tiiat  species  of  emotion 
which  fiction  stimulates  tends  to  prevent  benevo- 
lence, because  it  is  out  of  proportion  to  correspond- 
ing action  ;  it  is  like  that  frequent  **  going  over 
the  theory  of  virtue  in  our  thoughts,"  which,  as 
Butler  says,  so  far  from  being  auxiliary  to  it,  may 
be  obstructive  of  it.  As  long  as  the  balance  is 
maintained  between  the  stimulus  given  to  imagin- 
ation with  the  consequent  emotions,  on  the  one 
hand,  and  our  practical  habits,  which  those  emo- 
tions are  chiefly  designed  to  form  and  strengthen, 

M 


162 


nOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IV. 


on  the  other,  so  lon^  the  stimulus  of  the  imagin- 
ation will  not  stand  in  the  way  of  benevolence, 
but  aid  it ;  and,  therefore,  if  you  will  read  a 
novel  extra  now  and  then,  impose  upon  yourself 
the  corrective  of  an  extra  visit  or  two  to  the  poor, 
the  distressed,  and  afflicted !  Keep  a  sort  of 
debtor  and  creditor  account  of  sentimental  in- 
dulgence and  practical  benevolence.  I  do  not 
care  if  your  pocket-book  contains  some  such  me- 
moranda as  these  :  For  the  sweet  tears  I  shed 
over  the  romantic  sorrows  of  Charlotte  Devereux, 
sent  three  basins  of  gruel  and  a  flannel  petticoat 
to  poor  old  Molly  Brown  ;  For  sitting  up  three 
hours  beyond  the  time  over  the  **  Bandit's  Bride," 
gave  half-a-crown  to  Betty  Smith  ;  My  senti- 
mental agonies  over  the  pages  of  the  *'  Broken 
Heart"  cost  me  three  visits  to  the  Orplian  Asylum 
and  two  extra  hours  of  Dorcas  Society  work  ; 
Two  quarts  of  caudle  to  poor  Johnson's  wife,  and 
some  gaberdines  for  his  ragged  children,  on  ac- 
count of  a  good  cry  over  the  pathetic  story  of  the 
''  Forsaken  One."  If  the  luxury  of  sympathy  and 
mere  benevolent  feeling  be  separated  from  action, 
then  Butler's  paradox  becomes  a  terrible  truth, 
and  the  heart  is  not  made  better,  but  worse,  by 
it.  Those  who  indulge  in  superfluous  expression 
of  sentiment  are  always  neophytes  in  virtue  at  the 
best ;  and,  what  is  worse,  they  are  very  often 
among  the  most  heartless  of  mankind.  Sterne 
and  Rousseau  were  types  of  this  class, — perfect 
incarnations  of  sensibility  without  benevolence, — 
having,  and  having  in  perfection,  the  "form"  of 
virtue,  but  *'  denying  the  power  thereof." — Grey- 
son's  Letters. 

Ver.  5.  Etidocia  and  Chrysostom.  When 
Queen  Eudocia  angrily  threatened  Chrysostom 
with  banishment,  he  calmly  replied  :  "  Go  tell 
her  I  fear  nothing  but  sin.  He  who  serves  God 
need  fear  nothing  so  much  as  sin."  It  is  as 
Christ  Jesus  is  born  in  the  heart  that  we  are 
made  free  from  the  slavery  of  sin,  and  become 
the  servants  of  God.  This  is  the  sign  of  the  new 
birth,  that  the  man  is  afraid  of  sin.  The  man 
who  serves  God  may  well  be  delivered  from  all 
slavish  fear. 

Ver.  5.  Saxon  serfs.  Just  as  the  king's  livery 
frees  the  wearer  of  it  from  certain  civil  penalties 
and  taxes  ;  just  as  in  our  Saxon  institutions  the 
serfs  of  the  crown  were  noble ;  so  it  is  witli 
Christians.  The  serfs  of  Jesus  Christ  are  the 
truest  nobles.  They  rise  above  all  other  kind  of 
nobility.  The  wearers  of  heaven's  livery,  those 
who  bear  in  their  bodies  the  marks  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  ought  to  be  free  from  men.  They  are  to 
be  free  from  men,  free  from  the  world,  free  from 
cares,  free  from  self  and  sin.  What  a  liberty  is 
this  !  The  more  we  are  enslaved  the  more  we 
are  set  free.  The  more  serfdom  the  more  liberty. 
— Maclaren. 

Ver.  6.  Bead  swine  good.  To  do  a  few  good 
works  at  our  death  only,  it  is  a  swinish  doing 
good.  The  swine  will  do  good  when  he  is  dead. 
Then  there  is  profit  of  his  flesh,  though  all  his 
life  he  were  noisome.  Those  men  that  put  ofl" 
thus,  they  are  rather  swine  than  men,  beastly 
men.  God  seldom  accepts  the  good  they  do  then, 
and  it  is  a  forced  good.  If  they  were  not  to  die 
then,  no  good  at  all  would  be  done.     That  they 


do  is  because  they  can  keep  it  no  longer.  It 
shows  they  have  no  grace  nor  faith  at  all  ;  for  if 
there  had  been  faith  to  depend  upon  God  they 
would  have  done  good  before.  But  we  must 
serve  God  in  our  generation  if  we  will  be  saved. 
— Sibbes. 

Ver.  5.  Church -door  religion.  That  is  no 
religion  that  is  left  behind  in  the  Church  ;  as 
Lactantius  saith,  that  is  no  religion  that  we  leave 
behind  when  we  come  to  the  Church  door.  But 
that  is  religion  when  we  leave  our  duty  here,  and 
carry  it  in  our  breasts  to  practise  it  every  day  in 
the  week ;  when  we  show  it  in  our  places.  That 
is  the  service  of  God.  It  is  not  the  matter  or 
stufi",  but  the  stamp,  that  makes  the  coin  ;  so  it 
is  not  the  work,  but  the  stamp,  that  makes  it  a 
service.  Let  the  king  set  a  stamp  but  upon  a 
brass,  yet  it  will  go  for  current  if  it  have  the 
king's  stamp  upon  it.  Let  it  be  but  an  action 
of  our  callings,  if  it  have  God's  stamp  upon  it,  it 
is  a  "service  "  of  God.  Our  whole  life,  not  only 
in  the  Church,  but  in  our  particular  places,  may 
be  a  "service  of  God." — Sibbes. 

Ver.  5.  Cardinal  Wolsey.  The  following  was 
his  last  charge  : — "  Cromwell,  I  charge  thee,  fling 
awiiy  thy  ambition.  By  that  sin  fell  the  angels. 
How  can  man,  then,  the  image  of  his  Maker,  hope 
to  win  by  it?  Love  thyself  last;  cherish  those 
hearts  that  hate  thee ;  still  in  thy  right  hand 
carry  gentle  peace,  to  silence  envious  tongues. 
Be  just,  and  fear  not.  Let  all  the  ends  thou 
aimest  at  be  thy  country's,  thy  God's,  and  truth's; 
then,  if  thou  fallest,  oh,  Cromwell !  thou  tallest 
a  blessed  martyr.  Serve  the  king  ;  and,  pr'ythee, 
lead  me  in.  There  take  an  inventory  of  all  I 
have,  to  the  last  penny  :  'tis  the  king's ;  my  robe, 
and  my  integrity  to  heaven,  is  all  I  dare  now  call 
mine  own.  Oh,  Cromwell,  Cromwell !  had  I  but 
served  my  God  with  half  the  zeal  I  served  my 
king,  he  would  not  in  mine  age  have  left  me 
naked  to  mine  enemies." 

Ver.  6.  Sermo7i  to  one  hearer.  The  well-known 
American  divine,  Dr.  Beecher,  once  engaged  to 
preach  for  a  country  minister  on  exchange,  and 
the  Sabbath  proved  to  be  one  excessively  stormy, 
cold,  and  uncomfortable.  It  was  in  mid-winter, 
and  the  snow  was  piled  all  alonsj  in  the  roads,  so 
as  to  make  the  passage  very  ditticult.  Still  the 
minister  urged  his  horse  through  the  drifts,  put 
the  animal  into  a  shed,  and  went  into  the  little 
rural  chapel.  As  yet  there  was  no  person  in  the 
place,  and,  after  looking  about,  the  preacher  took 
his  seat  in  the  pulpit.  Soon  the  door  opened,  and 
a  single  individual  walked  up  the  aisle,  looked 
about,  and  took  a  seat.  The  hour  came  for  com- 
mencing service,  but  no  more  hearers  appeared. 
Whether  to  preach  to  such  an  audience  was  a 
question,  and  it  was  one  that  Lyman  Beecher 
was  not  long  deciding.  He  went  through  all  the 
services,  praying,  singing,  preaching,  and  the 
benediction,  with  only  one  hearer.  When  all 
was  over,  he  hastened  down  from  the  desk  to 
speak  to  his  "congregation,"  but  he  had  departed. 
Travelling  in  Ohio,  twenty  years  afterwards,  the 
doctor  alighted  from  the  stage  one  day  in  a  plea- 
sant village,  when  a  gentleman  stepped  up  and 
spoke  to  him,  familiarly  calling  him  by  name. 
"  I  do  not  remember  you,"  iaid  the  Doctor.     "  I 


CttAP,  IV.] 


nOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


163 


suppose  not,"  said  the  stranger  ;  **  but  we  once 
spent  two  hours  together  in  a  house  alone  in  a 
storm."  "I  do  not  recall  it,  sir,"  added  the  old 
man  ;  **  pray  when  was  it  ?"  "  Do  you  remem- 
ber preaching-,  twenty  years  ago,  in  such  a  place, 
to  a  single  person  ?  "  "  Yes,  yes,"  said  the  doc- 
tor, grasping  his  hand,  '*  I  do,  indeed  ;  and  if 
you  are  the  man,  1  have  been  wishing  to  see  you 
ever  since,"  "  I  am  the  man,  sir;  and  that  ser- 
mon saved  my  soul,  made  a  minister  of  me,  and 
yonder  is  my  church.  The  converts  of  that 
sermon,  sir,  are  all  over  Ohio." 

Ver.  7.  Sidney  Smith.  Sidney  Smith  once 
said  there  would  be  a  great  many  more  good 
Samaritans  in  the  world  if  it  were  not  for  the  oil 
and  for  the  twopence. 

Some  one  went  to  Theodore  Hook,  and  told 
him  that  a  certain  friend  of  theirs  was  in  want  of 
money.  "  How  much  ?  "  he  asked.  "Well,"  said 
the  other,  "  I  think  a  three  and  two  noughts  will 
set  him  right."  On  this  Hook  remarked,  "He 
is  a  right  good  fellow ;  I  tell  you  what  I'll  do, 
I'll  give  him  one  of  the  noughts." 

Ver.  8.  Bunyan's  wife.  Her  heroic  achieve- 
ments on  behalf  of  her  husband  are  admirably 
related  by  Bunyan.  She  travelled  to  London 
with  a  petition  to  the  House  of  Lords,  and  in- 
trusted it  to  Lord  Barkwood,  who  informed  her 
that  they  could  not  interfere,  the  king  having 
committed  the  release  of  the  prisoners  to  the 
judges.  Several  times  she  appeared  before  them  : 
love  to  her  husband,  a  stern  sense  of  duty,  a  con- 
viction of  the  gross  injustice  practised  upon  one 
to  whom  she  was  most  tenderly  attached,  over- 
came her  delicate,  modest,  retiring  habits,  and 
forced  upon  her  this  strange  duty.  This  delicate, 
courageous,  high-minded  woman  appeared  before 
Judge  Hale,  who  was  most  affected  with  her 
earnest  pleading.  It  was  the  triumph  of  love, 
duty,  and  piety,  over  bashful  timidity.  Bunyan's 
wife  in  pleading  with  the  judge  for  his  liberty, 
said,  *'  My  lord,  I  have  four  small  children  that 
cannot  help  themselves,  of  which  one  is  blind, 
and  have  nothing  to  live  upon  but  the  charity  of 
good  people."  Her  energetic  appeals  were  in 
vain ;  and  with  bitter  feelings  she  returned  to 
the  prison,  believing  that  it  would  be  the  tomb 
of  her  beloved  husband. 

Ver.  8.  Queen  Philippa.  After  the  surrender 
of  the  town  of  Calais  to  King  Edward  III.  he 
granted  to  the  inhabitants  their  lives,  but  expelled 
them  from  the  town,  and  demanded  that  six  of 
the  richest  burgesses  should  be  delivered  up  to 
his  vengeance  :  Eustace  de  St.  Pierre,  John 
Dacre,  James  and  Peter  Wisart,  and  two  others 
whose  names  iiistory  does  not  record,  nobly  vol- 
unteered to  resign  their  lives  for  tlie  safety  of 
their  fellow-citizens,  and  dressed  only  in  their 
shirts,  went  barefoot,  with  halters  round  their 
necks,  to  present  the  keys  of  the  town  to  Edward, 
who  ordered  them  to  immediate  execution ;  but 
the  prayers  and  entreaties  of  the  queen  procured 
their  pardon.  She  then  ordered  clothes  to  be 
brought  them,  entertained  them  in  her  tent,  and 
dismissed  them  with  presents. 

Ver.  14.  Buonapartes  activity.  It  is  noticed 
by  some  writer  concerning  Buonaparte,  that  he 
never  went  into  town  or  city  or  country  new  to 


him,  but  immediately  he  was  examining  and  con- 
sidering the  best  place  for  a  castle  or  a  camp,  for 
an  ambushment  or  an  attack,  for  the  means  of 
defence  or  annoyance.  Thus  he  was  not  waiting, 
but  always  seeking  to  be  in  preparation.  Those 
who  profess  to  have  nobler  ends  in  view  should 
always  be  planning  new  methods  bv  which  to 
extend  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Ver.  14.    Not  sick  when  duty  calls. 

'^^  Brutus.  0,  what  a  time  have  you  chose  out, 
brave  Caius,  to  wear  a  kerchief!  Would  you 
were  not  sick  ! 

Ligarius.  I  am  not  sick,  if  Brutus  have  in 
hand  any  exploit  worthy  the  name  of  honour. 

Bru.  Such  an  exploit  have  1  in  hand,  Liga- 
rius, had  you  a  healthful  ear  to  hear  of  it. 

Lig.   By  all  the  gods  that  Romans  bow  before, 
I  here  discard  my  sickness  !     Soul  of  Rome  I 
Brave  son,  deriv'd  from  honourable  loins  ! 
Thou,  like  an  exorcist,  hast  conjured  up 
My  mortified  spirit.     Now  bid  me  run, 
And  I  will  strive  with  things  impossible  ; 
Yea,  get  the  better  of  them.     What's  to  do  .^  " 

This  is  the  spirit  which  the  servant  of  God 
should  both  possess  and  manifest.  Not  sick  when 
duty  calls.  Ready  to  run  where  danger  thickens, 
and  where  honourable  exploits  are  to  be  performed 
for  God's  glory.  No  need  to  wait  long  and  ask 
what's  to  do  in  this  world  of  sin  and  of  misery. 
Oh,  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  Divine  exorcist, 
would  conjure  up  the  mortified  spirits  of  men 
morally  sick,  that  they  may  be  valiant  to  get  the 
better  of  things  impossible ! 

Ver.  14.  The  teaching  of  children.  These 
things  Mordecai  urges  to  Esther;  and  some  of 
the  Jewish  writers,  who  are  fruitful  in  inven- 
tion, add  another  thing  which  had  happened  to 
him  which  he  desired  she  might  be  told,  "  that 
going  home,  the  night  before,  in  great  heaviness, 
upon  the  notice  of  Haman's  plot,  he  met  three 
Jewish  children  coming  from  school,  of  whom  he 
inquired  what  they  had  learned  that  day.  One 
of  them  told  him  his  lesson  was,  Be  not  afraid  of 
sudden  fear ;  the  second  told  him  his  was.  Take 
counsel  together,  and  it  shall  come  to  nought; 
the  third  told  him  his  was,  I  have  made,  and  I 
will  bear,  even  I  will  carry  and  deliver  you. 
"0  the  goodness  of  God,"  says  Mordecai,  "who 
out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings  ordains 
strength  1 " — Matthew  Henry. 

Ver.  14.  The  shepherd  crushed  by  the  rock.  I 
remember,  away  up  in  a  lonely  Higliland  valley, 
where  beneath  a  tall  black  cliff,  all  weather-worn, 
and  cracked,  and  seamed,  there  lies  at  the  foot, 
resting  on  the  greensward  that  creeps  round  its 
base,  a  huge  rock  that  has  fallen  from  the  face  of 
the  cliff.  A  shepherd  was  passing  beneath  it; 
and  suddenly,  when  the  finger  of  God's  will 
touched  it,  and  rent  it  from  its  ancient  bed  in 
the  everlasting  rock,  it  came  down,  leaping  and 
bounding  from  pinnacle  to  pinnacle,  and  it  fell, 
and  the  man  that  was  beneath  it— is  there  now ! 
Ground  to  powder!  Ah,  my  brethren,  that  is 
not  my  illustration  —  that  is  Christ's.  There- 
for- ,  I  say  to  you,  since  all  that  stand  against  him 
shall  become  "  as  the  chaff  of  the  summer  thresh- 
ing-floor," an(  be  swept  utterly  away,  make  him 


ir>4 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[rHAf.  IV 


the  foundation  on  which  you  build  ;  and  when 
the  rain  sweeps  away  every  "  refuge  of  lies,"  you 
■will  be  safe  and  serene,  builded  upon  the  Rock 
of  Ages. — A.  McLaren. 

CONSECRATION  HYMN. 

Take  ray  life,  and  let  it  be 
Consecrated,  Lord,  to  thee. 
Take  my  moments  and  my  days  ; 
Let  them  flow  in  ceaseless  praise. 
Take  my  hands,  and  let  them  move 
At  the  impulse  of  thy  love. 
Take  my  feet,  and  let  them  be 
Swift  and  "  beautiful "  for  thee. 
Take  my  voice,  and  let  me  sing 
Always,  only,  for  ray  King. 
Take  my  lips,  and  let  them  be 
Filled  with  messages  frora  thee. 
Take  my  silver  and  ray  gold ; 
Not  a  mite  would  I  withhold. 
Take  ray  intellect,  and  use 
Every  power  as  thou  shalt  choose. 
Take  ray  will,  and  make  it  thine ; 
It  shall  be  no  longer  mine. 
Take  ray  heart,  it  is  thine  own ; 
It  shall  be  thy  royal  throne. 
Take  my  love ;  my  Lord,  I  pour 
At  thy  feet  its  treasure-store. 
Take  rayself,  and  I  will  be 
Ever,  only,  all  for  thee. 

F.  R.  Havergal. 

Ver.  16.  Not  necessary  to  live.  Sibbes  says: 
"It  is  necessary  we  should  be  just;  it  is  not 
necessary  wo  should  live."  This  saying  is 
enforced  and  illustrated  by  one  of  the  gems  of 
Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  preserved  by  Boswell.  A 
man  who  was  engaged  in  a  disreputable  business 
was  defending  himself  against  the  sarcasms  of 
Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  and  pleaded,  **  he  must 
live."  "Not  at  all,  sir  ;  there  is  no  necessity 
for  your  living,"  was  the  memorable  reprimand 
by  way  of  response,  Esther  felt  that  duty  must 
be  done.  It  was  not  necessary  for  her  to  live, 
but  it  was  necessary  that  an  effort  should  be 
made  to  thwart  a  cruel  and  vindictive  edict. 

Ver.  16.  ^  true  hero.  The  city  of  Marseilles 
in  France  was  once  afflicted  with  the  plague. 
So  terrible  was  it  that  it  caused  parents  to  desert 
children,  and  children  to  forget  the  obligations 
to  their  own  parents.  The  city  became  as  a 
desert,  and  funerals  were  constantly  passing 
Lh rough  its  streets.  Everybody  was  sad,  for 
nobody  could  stop  the  ravages  of  the  plague. 
The  physicians  could  do  nothing,  and  as  they 
met  one  day  to  talk  over  the  matter  and  see  if 
something  could  not  be  done  to  prevent  this 
great  destruction  of  life,  it  was  decided  that 
nothing  could  be  effected  without  opening  a 
corpse  in  order  to  find  the  mysterious  character 
of  the  disease.  All  agreed  upon  the  plan,  but 
who  would  be  the  victim,  it  being  certain  that 
he  should  die  soon  after }  There  was  a  dead 
pause.  Suddenly  one  of  the  most  celebrated 
physicians,  a  man  in  the  prime  of  life,  arose  from 
his  seat  and  said  :  "  Be  it  so,  I  devote  myself  to 
the  safety  of  my  country.     Before  this  numerous 


assembly  I  swear,  in  the  name  oi  humanity  and 
religion,  that  to-morrow  at  the  break  of  day  I 
will  dissect  a  corpse,  and  write  down  as  I  pro- 
ceed what  I  observe."  He  immediately  left  the 
room,  and  as  he  was  rich,  made  a  will,  and  spent 
that  evening  in  religious  exercises.  During  the 
night  a  man  died  in  his  house  of  the  plague,  and 
at  daybreak  the  following  morning,  the  physician, 
whose  name  was  Greyon,  entered  the  room,  and 
critically  made  the  examination.  He  then  lelt 
the  room,  thi-ew  the  papers  into  a  vase  of  vinegar, 
so  that  they  might  not  convey  the  disease  to 
another,  and  retired  to  a  convenient  place,  where 
he  died  in  twelve  hours. 

Ver.  16.  Devotion  of  Artninius  to  his  work. 
As  James  Arminius  passed  along  one  of  the 
poorer  districts  of  the  city,  he  heard  a  certain 
lowly  dwelling  resound  with  the  voice  of  wailing. 
Iraraediately  on  perceiving  that  the  whole  of  that 
household  had  been  seized  with  the  plague,  and 
were  in  torraent  arising  from  the  most  burning 
thirst,  he  not  only  gave  money  to  the  neighbours, 
who  were  standing  by,  with  which  to  purchase  a 
draught,  but  further,  when  not  one  of  them 
dared  to  enter  that  infected  abode  of  poverty,  he 
himself,  heedless  of  every  danger  to  which  by 
this  step  he  exposed  himself  and  those  dear  to 
him,  intrepidly  walked  in,  and  imparted  refresh- 
ment, at  once  for  the  body  and  the  soul,  to  every 
single  member  of  this  afflicted  family. — Brandt's 
Life  of  Arminius. 

The  Findern  flower.  Sir  Edmund  Burke  was 
writing  a  book,  and  he  went  to  the  North,  to 
inquire  particulars  of  a  certain  family  named 
Findern.  But  he  could  find  no  account  of  them 
remaining — no  memorial,  no  hall  in  ruins.  He 
asked  a  working  raan  if  he  could  tell  him  any- 
thing about  the  family,  and  he  said  he  could 
show  him  the  Findern  flower  —  a  small  blue 
flower,  said  to  have  been  imported  into  England 
by  Sir  Joshua  Findern  on  his  return  frora  the 
Crusades.  It  springs  up,  and  never  dies.  It 
grows  nowhere  else  in  England,  but  here  it  can- 
not be  eradicated.  Benevolence  is  a  beautiful 
flower;  like  the  Findern  flower  it  need  never  die; 
unlike  the  Findern  flower  it  can  flourish  any- 
where. It  may  grow  in  palace  or  in  cottage,  in 
the  hot-house  or  in  the  cold  night  of  an  Arctic 
winter.  This  flower  flourished  in  the  nature  of 
Esther,  and  how  beautiful  it  looked,  what  sweet 
fragrance  it  imparted,  what  glorious  colours  it 
unfolded  ! 

Ver.  16.  Everything  to  die  for.  A  corre- 
spondent relates  this  suggestive  incident; — *'  We 
recently  called  on  a  lady  of  culture  and  refine- 
ment, who,  having  just  taken  possession  of  a  new 
house  with  elegant  surroundings,  had  suddenly 
been  called  to  face  the  approach  of  a  fearful 
disease  that  seemed  beyond  human  power  to 
avert.  With  a  loving  husband  and  winsome 
daughter,  with  a  home  filled  with  evidences  of 
wealth  and  taste,  encircled  by  warm,  true-hearted 
friends,  with  everything  earthly  to  make  life 
glad  and  joyous,  we  remarked  :  *  You  have  every- 
thing to  live  for.  Does  it  not  depress  you  to 
think  that  all  this  must  be  given  up  if  this  disease 
is  not  stayed  ?  *  The  reply,  simple,  earnest, 
truthful,  *\Vhy,I  have  everything  to  die  for,' 
indicated  the    rich,   abiding  wealth   of  a   soul 


cHAt*.  nr.j 


nOMILETIC  COMMKNTAtiY :  ESTriEtl. 


ir.jS 


whose  trust  is  stayed  on  God,  and  showed  that 
she  was  lifted  up  into  a  life  of  serenity  and 
peace  that  could  never  be  shaken  by  storms  and 
tempests.  Can  any  faith  or  any  religion,  save 
that  of  the  Christian,  enable  one  thus  to  triumph 
over  pain,  thus  to  look  upon  death,  thus  to  con- 
template separation  from  the  dear  ones  linked  by 
the  holiest  of  earthly  ties!  All  things  to  die 
for  !  lleunion  with  friends  who  long  since  left 
us ;  pain  and  suffering  only  memories  of  a  former 
past ;  complete  and  eternal  freedom  from  sin ; 
complicity  with  unseen  power  of  evil  at  an  end ; 
the  presence  of  the  pure  and  the  holy;  com- 
munion with  him  who  shall  wipe  all  tears  from 
our  eyes  ;  at  home  and  at  rest  for  ever  with  the 
Lord — was  not  the  remark  of  our  friend  most 
emphatically  true?  On  the  grandeur  and  the 
beauty  of  that  faith  which  sees  through  the  rifted 
clouds  the  glory  beyond,  which  can  say  amid 
deepest  darkness,  *  The  morning  cometh ; '  that 
faith  which  with  'things  seen  and  temporal,' 
most  beautiful  and  attractive,  can  raise  up  into  a 
full  appreciation  of  '  the  things  that  are  unseen 
and  eternal ;  *  that  faith  which  biidges  over  the 
dark  river,  emabling  the  believer  to  tread  with 
firm  footstep  and  alone  the  way  that  leads  to  the 
unknown  land ;  that  faith  which  will  lead  one 
encircred  by  richest  earthly  gifts,  to  say  :  "  I 
have  everything  to  die  for  !'  " 

Esther  had  everything  to  live  for  according  to 
human  estimates,  yet  she  was  willing  to  die. 

Ver.  16,  A  young  Illinois  hero.  An  American 
paper  chronicles  a  bit  of  heroism  by  a  Peoria 
county  boy  which  deserves  recognition.  A  coal 
shaft  is  being  sunk  just  north  of  Hollis,  Illinois, 
and  the  other  day  a  workman,  by  the  name  of 
Harland,  lighted  a  slow  match  leading  to  the 
blast,  and  theo  signalled  to  be  drawn  up.    The 


depth  of  the  shaft  was  seventy  feet.  When  he 
liad  been  raised  fourteen  feet  he  struck  the  bottom 
of  a  board  partition,  and  was  thrown  back  to  the 
bottom.  Thomas  Crandall,  a  step-son  of  Harland, 
was  a  witness  to  the  accident,  and  promptly  slid 
down  the  rope,  seventy  feet,  and  tore  the  match 
from  the  fuze  in  time  to  prevent  an  explosion. 
The  act  was  a  brave  one,  scarcely  to  be  paralleled. 
The  boy's  hands  were  terribly  lacerated  by  the 
friction  of  the  rope.  The  step-father  was  rescued 
with  a  broken  rib  and  other  severe  bruises.  The 
heroic  act  of  this  brave  boy  can  be  not  only 
"paralleled,"  but  surpassed.  Esther  exposed 
herself  to  equal  risk  to  save  a  whole  people  to 
whom  she  was  bound  by  the  ties  of  nationality. 

V'er.  16.  The  Grace  Darling  of  Berstead.  The 
sea-coast  Sussex  village  of  Berstead,  adjacent  to 
Bognor,  is  justly  proud  of  Mrs.  Wheatland,  a 
brave  and  strong  middle-aged  matron,  the  mother 
of  a  large  family,  who  has  saved  thirteen  lives 
in  the  past  twenty  years,  by  swimming  out  to  the 
rescue  of  drowning  bathers.  So  here  are  no  less 
than  thirteen  lives  which  our  good,  strong  Mary 
Wheatland  has  saved.  How  many  more  there 
may  have  been  '*  goodness  knows ;  "  for  she  looks 
on  life-saving  as  part  of  her  regular  business — 
and  she  found  it  hard  to  tax  her  memory  even 
with  these  examples.  Thus  her  splendid  con- 
science is  hung  with  immortal  but  immaterial 
medals.  She  has  never  sought  any  from  the 
Humane  Society,  nor  does  she  seem  to  think  she 
has  done  anything  meritorious  or  worthy  of 
human  distinction.  How  many  lives  Esther  has 
saved  we  cannot  tell ;  she  saved  them  at  the  risk 
of  her  own — '*  If  I  perish  I  perish."  Surely  her 
splendid  conscience  was  hung  with  immortal  but 
immaterial  medals.  Surely  the  Jews  are  right 
in  perpetuating  the  glory  of  her  name. 


CHAPTER  V 


Cbitioal  Notes.]  1.  The  third  day]  must  be  counted  from  the  day  of  the  transaction  between 
the  queen  and  Mordecai ;  the  first  day  being  that  on  which  it  took  place.  The  fasting,  then,  would 
not  begin  till  midday;  and  on  the  third  day  Esther  went  to  the  king  to  invite  him  on  that  day  to  a 
banquet,  which  would  surely  take  place  in  the  forenoon.  Thus  tiie  three  days'  fast  would  last  from 
the  afternoon  of  the  first  to  the  forenoon  of  the  third  day,  i.  e.  from  40  to  45  hours. — Keil.  Put  on 
royal  apparel]  Lit.  put  on  royalty;  the  expression  signifies  royal  dignity;  appeared  as  became  the 
great  occasion.  The  inner  court  of  the  king's  house]  This  must  iiave  heen  situated  directly  in 
front  of  the  royal  audience  chamber,  or  "throne  room,"  where  the  monarch  was  wont  to  sit  when 
receiving  ministers  of  state,  and  attending  to  the  business  of  the  empire. —  Whed(»i's  Com.  2.]  The 
king  held  out  the  golden  sceptre  as  a  token  of  his  favourable  disposition  ;  and  Esther  drew 
near  and  touched  the  top  of  the  sceptre  ;  probably  kissed  it,  as  the  Vulgate  renders  the  word. 
3.  What  wilt  thou,  queen  Esther  ?]  Rather,  what  ails  thee }  According  to  Herodotus  (ix.  109), 
Xerxes,  when  pleased  with  one  of  his  wives,  ofifered  to  grant  her  any  request  whatever,  without 
hesitation. — Rnwlinson.  4.]  For  the  present  she  requests  nothing  further  than  that  the  king  and 
Haman  should  come  to  the  banquet  she  had  prepared.  She  desired  Haman  to  be  present,  in  order,  as 
Calov  remarks,  that  she  might  charge  him  by  name  in  the  presence  of  the  king  with  the  decree 
surreptitiously  obtained  against  the  people,  and  to  his  very  face  cut  off  every  possibility  of  cavil  ; 
perhaps  also  in  order  to  make  his  confusion  the  more  complete.  6.  And  the  king  said  unto  Esthei 
at  tho  banquet  of  wine]  After  the  meats  were  remoyed  it  was  customary  in  Persia  to  continue  the 


1«6  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  [ohap.  v. 


banquet  for  a  considerable  time  with  fruits  and  wine  (Herod.  1,  333).  During  this  part  of  the  feast  the 
king  renewed  his  offer. — Rawlinson.  The  king'  understood  that  theie  was  some  request  hesides  the 
mere  coming  to  her  banquet.  7, 8.  ]  Esther  answered,  My  petition  and  my  request ;  If  I  have  found 
favour  in  the  sight  of  the  king,  and  if  it  please  the  king  to  grant  my  petition,  and  to  perform  my 
request,  let  the  king  and  Haman  come  to  the  banquet  that  I  shall  prepare  for  them,  and  I  will  do 
to-morrow  as  the  king  hath  said]  i.  e.  make  known  my  reqiu'st.  she  did  not  esteem  the  time  an  appro- 
priate one  for  expressing  her  request.  9.]  Haman  was  joyful  at  the  thought  of  receiving  such  honour 
from  the  king  and  queen  ;  but  the  greatness  of  his  joy  rendered  liim  still  more  indignant  at  Afordecai  for 
his  stubborn  refusal  to  show  outward  tokens  of  respect.  10.]  However,  Hainan  refrained  himself  till 
he  could  consult  his  friends  and  his  wife  Zeresh.  His  friends— his  intimate  associates  and  companions 
— diviners  and  wise  men — with  whom  he  met  in  councils  and  in  festivities.  —  IFhedon's  Com.  11.  The 
multitude  of  his  children]  From  ix.  7  — 10  we  learn  that  Haman  had  ten  sons;  and  many  sons 
were  not  looked  upon  as  a  great  blessing  from  God  by  the  Israelites  only,  but  were  also  esteemed  a 
signal  prosperity  among  the  Persians,  the  king  aunnally  sending  presents  to  him  Avho  bad  the  greatest 
number  of  sons. — Keil.  12.]  Haman  had  also  the  honour  of  being  invited  to  the  banquet  alone. 
13.]  And  yet  all  his  good  fortune  is  embittered  to  him  as  often  as  he  sees  the  hated  Jew,  Mordecai. 
The  fact  that  such  a  Jew  may  defy  him  unpunished  seems  to  be  a  counter-proof  against  his  dignity 
and  power.  14.  Then  said  Zeresh  his  wife  and  all  his  friends  unto  him,  &c.]  The  name  Zeresh  is 
probably  connected  with  Zered  Zara,  "gold."  Compare  the  Greek  cJirysis. — Rawlinson,  Zeresh 
led  the  counsel.  Kings  as  well  as  their  chief  officers  doubtless  ofteii  allowed  themselves  to  be  directed 
by  their  wives.  Let  a  gallows]  Heb.  a  tree,  or  wood  :  that  is,  a  lofty  beam  or  post  for  impalement; 
not  a  gallows,  or  gibbet,  in  the  ordinary  sense.  Hanging  with  a  rope  by  the  neck  seems  not  to  have 
been  a  Persian  mode  of  punishment,  but  impalement  was  common.  Haman's  wife  and  friends 
proposed  to  make  the  post  of  wood  for  Mordecai's  execution  fifty  cubits  high — seventy-five  feet — so 
as  to  make  his  impalement  as  conspicuous  and  as  ignominious  as  possible.  Feuardent  well  says  : 
*'  But  why  make  it  so  high .-'  (t.  e.  the  tree,  gallows) .  In  order  that  his  disgrace  might  be  plainly  observable 
to  the  eyes  of  all,  and  the  more  striking.  Wherefore  should  be  be  in  such  haste  about  it?  Lest  there 
should  be  danger  in  delayer  procrastination.  For  what  reason  have  it  erected  before  bis  own  house? 
So  that  he  and  all  his  family,  going  in  and  out,  seeing  Mordecai  hanging,  might  mock  and  feast  their 
cruel  eyes  and  minds  with  so  miserable  and  foul  a  spectacle." 


MAIN  HOJMILETICS  OF  THE  PAEAGRAPH.     Verses  1,  2. 

The  Koyalty  op  Faith. 

Watson  says — "  True  faith  is  prolifical,  it  brings  forth  fruit ;  faith  hath  Rachel's 
beauty  and  Leah's  fruitfulness."  Esther's  faith  in  this  instance  gave  to  her  more 
than  Rachel's  beauty  and  Leah's  fruitfulness.  It  enhanced  the  claims  of  her 
natural  beauty.  It  gave  inexpressible  sweetness  to  her  sadness.  It  surrounded 
her  with  an  irresistible  grace.  Leah's  fruitfulness  was  of  a  natural  character; 
Esther's  fruitfulness  was  moral.  Let  us  now  consider  the  royalty  of  Esther's  faith, 
and  may  it  stimulate  us  to  seek  more  earnestly  to  be  invested  with  this  royal 
apparel,  and  inwardly  strengthened  with  this  royal  grace. 

I.  Royal  apparel  may  cover  a  sad  heart.  Esther  at  this  time  must  have  had 
a  sad  heart ;  and  however  tastefully  she  may  have  been  adorned,  the  sadness  of  her 
heart  could  not  be  concealed.  We  may  well  suppose  that  this  sadness  gave 
attractive  sweetness  to  her  countenance.  Sad  hearts  beat  and  throb  beneath  costly 
robes.  We  pity  the  beggar  in  his  rags.  We  are  superficial.  The  outward  affects 
more  than  the  inward.  Oftentimes  more  pity  should  be  evoked  by  the  sight  of 
those  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen.  Amid  the  splendours  of  royalty  the 
wretchedness  of  humanity  is  visible.  Shakespeare  says,  "Uneasy  lies  the  head 
that  wears  a  crown."  No  monarchs  have  risen  up  to  refute  the  libel ;  yea,  many 
kings  have  borne  witness  to  its  truthfulness.  In  ancient  history  we  read  that  the 
sleep  went  from  king  Darius ;  and  many  kings  since  then  have  tossed  in  sleepless 
misery  on  beds  of  down,  amid  drapery  of  purple  and  of  gold.  King  David  cries, 
**  I  am  poor  and  needy ; "  poor  in  the  midst  of  an  abundance  of  wealth  ;  needy 
while  thousands  are  ready  to  supply  his  wants. 

II.  The  royalty  of  faith  sustains  in  sadness.  Some  make  too  much  of 
Esther's  sadness  in  the  present  instance.  Sometimes  she  is  represented  as  fainting. 
Sad  no  doubt  she  was,  3ut  her  sadness  had  not  a  paralyzing  effect.     Sad  no  doubt 


CHjLP.  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER  167 

she  might  well  be,  considering  the  importance  of  the  interests  at  stake  and  tlie 
desperate  nature  of  her  venture ;  but  her  sadness  had  not  a  killing  effect  upon  her 
nervous  system,  for  we  may  be  well  assured  that  her  faith  sustained  her.  The  sacred 
record  says  nothing  about  her  fainting.  That  faith  which  led  her  to  exclaim,  **  If  I 
perish  I  perish ; "  which  supported  through  the  long  fast,  which  led  her  to  take  wise 
means  for  the  success  of  her  enterprise,  which  brought  her  to  face  the  worst — would 
not  fail  her  now  at  this  the  most  important  point  of  her  undertaking.  We  seem  to 
see  the  royalty  of  her  faith  eclipsing  far  the  royalty  of  her  apparel.  The  latt<'r 
could  not  prevent  her  sadness.  The  former  sustained  in  her  sadness,  and  made  it 
sweetly  beautiful.  Gloriously  charming  it  is  to  see  a  sustaining  faith  overcoming 
and  smiling  through  the  sadness  of  a  beautiful  woman.  The  royalty  of  faith  is 
the  only  power  to  sustain  in  sadness.  It  is  a  royal  power  that  possesses  the  true 
alchemy  which  can  transmute  the  base  metal  of  sadness  into  the  celestial  gold  of 
abiding  gladness.  Go  to  the  chamber  of  the  sick  saint,  and  ask  what  inspires  with 
patience,  and  even  with  holy  pleasure.  Go  to  the  cell  where  virtue  is  imprisoned, 
and  ask  what  enables  the  prisoner  to  sing  songs  of  rapture,  to  see  sights  of  beauty, 
to  feed  on  heavenly  manna,  to  ascend  the  Delectable  Mountains,  to  feel  the  light 
of  heaven  around,  and  to  catch  the  freshly-blowing  breezes  of  Paradise.  Go  to  the 
missionary  in  far-off  lands,  exiled  from  his  home,  in  loneliness  pursuing  his  weary 
but  heavenly  mission,  standing  bereft  of  wife  and  of  child  on  account  of  the 
unhealthiness  of  the  country  where  he  labours,  and  ask  what  sustains  under  such 
trying  circumstances.  Go  to  the  pastor  labouring  amongst  an  unresponsive  people, 
his  heart  well  nigh  broken  by  indifference  and  in  some  cases  by  actual  cruelty,  and 
ask  what  stimulates  to  heroic  perseverance.  Go  to  the  martyr  chained  to  the 
stake;  see  the  faggots  piled  round  about  him  ;  alieady  the  flames  lick  and  scorch  his 
body ;  but  lo  !  his  face  is  lighted  up  as  if  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  angel,  and  now 
he  sings  his  own  funeral  hymn,  not  a  sad  dirge,  but  inspiriting  strains ;  and  again 
inquire  whence  this  wonderful  triumph.  And  all  with  one  consent  acknowledge 
the  sustaining  power  of  faith.  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world — even 
our  faith. 

III.  The  royalty  of  faith  leads  to  daring  ventures.  We  can  scarcely  either 
understand  or  appreciate  the  daring  nature  of  that  venture  which  was  made  by 
Esther.  The  words  are  to  us  often  only  as  so  many  words — these  words  *'  And 
Esther  stood  in  the  inner  court  of  the  king's  house,  over  against  the  king's  house." 
It  would  be  something  to  brave  and  to  pass  the  sentinel,  and  all  the  court 
attendants,  and  present  ourselves  before  our  gracious  queen.  But  this  would  be  as 
nothing  to  what  Esther  did,  though  she  was  herself  a  queen.  We  understand  the 
heroic  power  of  faith  in  the  conduct  of  the  three  Hebrew  children.  We  can  admire 
the  splendid  moral  nobility  of  Daniel,  who,  in  spite  of  edicts,  in  spite  of  threatened 
lions,  holds  on  to  his  purpose  of  prayer  to  the  God  of  heaven.  But  let  us  try  to 
get  a  correct  view  of  the  greatness  of  Esther's  faith,  of  the  might  of  her  heroism, 
as  she  stands  '*  in  the  inner  court  of  the  king's  house,"  waiting  for  the  word  that 
may  mean  life,  but  might  very  possibly  mean  death.  She  stands  dressed  in  royal 
apparel,  but  that  royal  apparel  for  aught  she  knew  might  be  but  the  splendid  yet 
ghastly  preparation  for  the  doom  of  destruction.  If  we  celebrate  the  faith  of 
Abraham  who  was  ready  to  offer  up  his  only-begotten  son,  shall  we  have  no  meed 
of  praise  for  Esther  who  was  ready  to  offer  up  herself?  Why  Esther's  name  does 
not  appear  am^ong  the  list  of  those  worthies  whose  faith  is  celebrated  in  the 
Hebrews  we  cannot  tell  %  Perhaps  if  time  had  not  failed  the  writer  he  would  have 
used  Esther's  name  as  an  illustration  of  the  power  of  faith.  Certainly  we  cannot 
help  feeling  that  Esther's  faith  was  a  Divine  inspiration.  This,  however,  we  ought 
surely  to  learn — that  if  we  make  no  daring  ventures  it  is  because  our  faith  is  weak. 
Faith,  like  other  graces,  is  increased  by  exercise.  What  faith  prompts  us  to  do  let 
us  at  once  decide  to  do.  And  the  more  we  attempt  the  more  we  shall  be  disposed 
to  attempt. 


1S8  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap,  v 

IV.  The  royalty  of  faith  is  greater  than  the  royalty  of  mere  circumstantials. 
Here  is  a  contrast — a  suppliant  woman  standing  in  a  helpless  attitude,  and  in  an 
exposed  condition.  A  mighty  monarch  sitting  upon  a  royal  throne  in  the  royal 
house  whose  wish  is  law,  and  whose  word  is  either  life  or  death.  But  the 
suppliant  woman  masters  the  mighty  monarch.  Mere  worldly  considerations  will 
not  satisfactorily  account  for  the  victory.  "We  know  the  power  of  women  over  men. 
We  are  not  unmindful  of  the  great  influence  which  female  beauty  has  wielded  over 
the  hearts  of  kings,  over  the  counsels  of  courtiers,  and  over  the  destinies  of  nations. 
It  may  be  said  that  the  weak  monarch  was  captivated  and  overcome  by  the  charm 
of  Esther's  beauty.  But  this  will  not  meet  our  view  of  the  case.  We  believe  that 
Esther  was  victorious  because  she  was  royal  by  virtue  of  her  faith  in  God, 
Ahasuerus  was  conquered  because  he  was  merely  royal  in  circumstantials.  Faith 
is  a  royal  power  ;  it  sits  enthroned  above  the  might  of  sceptred  kings ;  it  is  mightier 
than  the  mightiest  of  the  earth-born.  Kings  have  killed  the  children  of  the  faith, 
but  their  royalty  has  not  been  overcome.  The  royalty  of  faith  has  subdued  kings, 
and  conquered  nations.  Who  are  the  men  that  rule  to-day  1  The  men  of  faith. 
These  are  the  true  kings,  not  those  the  world  calls  kings.  The  Csesars  and  the  Neros 
do  not  now  rule ;  death  has  stripped  them  of  the  outward  show  of  royalty.  The 
Pauls  and  the  Peters  now  rule.  They  rule  in  spheres  where  their  authority  is  not 
acknowledged.  They  overcame  death.  It  gave  them  a  larger  kingdom.  It  granted 
a  nobler  royalty.  The  men  of  faith  sit  on  a  throne  that  death  cannot  shake.  They 
wield  a  sceptre  which  death  cannot  touch  with  its  icy  hand.  As  time  advances,  and 
as  men  become  still  wiser,  the  men  of  faith  Avill  rule  in  still  larger  measure.  Faith 
is  better  and  mightier  than  weapons  of  war,  than  words  of  wisdom,  than  the  gilded 
trappings  of  earthly  royalty. 

V.  The  royalty  of  faith  commands  success.  Esther  obtained  favour  in  the 
sight  of  the  king,  and  he  held  out  to  her  the  golden  sceptre.  What  we  may  call 
natural  faith  is  essential  to  success.  The  man  must  have  faith  in  himself  who  is 
to  succeed.  The  farmer  must  have  faith  in  the  abiding  character  of  nature's  laws 
if  he  is  to  work  with  perseverance.  The  seaman  must  have  faith  in  the  safety  of 
his  vessel,  and  in  nautical  arrangements,  if  he  is  to  set  forth  on  his  voyage  with 
hope.  The  merchant  must  have  faith  in  the  promises  of  his  fellows  if  he  is  to 
trade  with  confidence.  This  natural  faith  is  working  all  through  society.  In  the 
moral  realm  faith  is  essential ;  faith  is  even  of  more  importance.  Faith  is  not  the 
cause  of  the  favour  of  God,  but  the  means  whereby  that  favour  is  disclosed  to  our 
hearts.  The  favour  of  God  towards  the  believer  is  antecedent  to  the  exercise  of 
faith,  but  the  exercise  of  that  faith  it  is  which  reveals  to  our  souls  the  existence  of 
that  favour.  Esther's  faith  and  Esther's  beauty  caused  her  to  obtain  that  favour 
in  the  sight  of  the  king  which  she  appeared  to  have  lost.  The  faith  of  the  sinner 
discovers  the  favour  of  God  which  is  waiting  to  manifest  its  goodness,  and  to 
bestow  its  blessings.  Faith  is  the  condition,  but  not  the  cause,  of  salvation.  "Thy 
faith  hath  saved  thee,"  saith  our  Lord  to  the  Avoman  who  anointed  his  head  with 
oil,  and  his  feet  with  ointment,  because  her  faith  laid  hold  of  Christ's  forgiving 
love.  That  readiness  to  forgive  was  there  prior  to  the  woman's  exercise  of  faith  ; 
but  this  faith  was  the  means  of  finding  out  the  greatness  of  that  love.  Faith 
brought  peace.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  salvation.  Without  faith  it  is  impossible 
to  please  God.  Faith  triumphs  over  moral  difficulties,  and  obtains  success  with 
heaven's  king. 

Finally,  The  royalty  of  faith  sways  the  golden  sceptre.  *'  The  king  held  out 
to  Esther  the  golden  sceptre  that  was  in  his  hand.  So  Esther  drew  near,  and 
touched  the  top  of  the  sceptre."  Esther  not  only  touched,  not  only  kissed  the  top 
of  the  sceptre,  but  swayed  the  golden  sceptre.  The  golden  sceptre  was  moved  by 
the  hand  of  Ahasuerus ;  but  Esther's  faith  moved  the  arm  that  moved  the  sceptre. 
Esther's  power  was  invisible.  The  unseen  is  mightier  than  the  seen.  Mind 
triumphs  over  matter.      Moral   force  conc^uers  brute  force.      J£sther  swayed  tlie 


CHAP,    v.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


169 


golden  sceptre  of  material  sovereignty  and  she  also  swayed  the  golden  sceptre  of 
moral  sovereignty.  Thus  Esther  was  queen  in  two  spheres.  She  was  enthroned 
in  both  the  material  and  the  moral  realms.  Faith  sways  a  golden  sceptre  that 
exerts  an  influence  reaching  farther  than  the  sovereignty  of  Ahasuerus.  He  ruled 
over  an  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  provinces.  A  great  kingdom,  yet  only  one 
kingdom.  Faith  rules  in  two  kingdoms.  It  has  to  do  for  power  in  time  and 
for  peace  in  eternity.  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things ;  having  promise  of 
the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.  Godlikeness  is  the  product  of 
living  faith.  This  royal  character  is  not  possible  without  the  working  of  a  royal 
faith.  It  is  tlien  a  mighty  power.  It  moves  the  arm  that  moves  the  world.  It 
touches  the  throne  of  God  with  wondrous  effect.  It  makes  all  heaven  listen  to 
the  prayers  of  earth.  Faith  has  an  arm  stronger  than  that  which  tore  the  gates  of 
Gaza  from  their  fastenings,  a  sound  more  powerful  than  that  which  overthrew  the 
walls  of  Jericho,  a  wisdom  superior  to  that  which  speaks  in  the  Proverbs  of  King 
Solomon,  and  visions  more  enrapturing  than  those  which  passed  before  the  mind  of 
Ezekiel.  Faith  sways  a  golden  sceptre  which  can  never  be  wrested  from  the  grasp. 
It  enables  its  possessor  to  ride  triumphantly  over  the  boiling  waves  of  trouble, 
and  to  pas>;  through  the  fires  unhurt.  By  the  aid  of  this  golden  sceptre  the  man 
is  sovereign  over  death.  He  can  ask  in  triumph,  *'  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  1  0 
grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  The  sting  of  death  is  sin ;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is 
the  law."  The  glorious  answer  is  given  :  '*  But  thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth 
us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  golden  sceptre  knocks  at 
heaven's  gate ;  it  flies  open,  and  the  redeemed  spirit  passes  among  the  royalties  of 
the  eternal  world. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  1 — 2. 


Of  all  the  virgins  presented  to  Ahasu- 
erus, none  was  so  pleasing  as  Esther. 
**Let  the  maiden  which  pleaseth  the  king 
be  queen  instead  of  Yashti."  When  that 
decree  was  published,  what  strife,  what 
emulations  (may  we  think)  was  among 
the  Persian  damsels  that  either  were,  or 
thought  themselves  to  be,  fair  !  Every 
one  hopes  to  be  a  queen  ;  but  so  incom- 
parable was  the  beauty  of  that  Jewess, 
that  she  is  not  only  taken  into  the  Persian 
court,  as  one  of  the  selected  virgins,  but 
hath  the  most  honourable  place  in  the 
seraglio  allotted  to  her.  The  other  virgins 
pass  their  probation  unregarded ;  when 
Esther's  turn  came,  though  she  brought 
the  same  face  and  demeanour  that  nature 
had  cast  upon  her,  no  eye  sees  her  with- 
out admiration.  The  king  is  so  delighted 
with  her  beauty,  that,  contemning  all  the 
more  vulgar  forms,  his  choice  is  fully 
fixed  upon  her.  Our  heavenly  King  is 
pleased  with  all  our  graces  ;  hot  zeal  and 
cool  patience  pleaseth  him ;  cheerful 
thankfulness  and  weeping  penitence 
pleaseth  him  ;  charity  in  the  height  and 
humility  in  the  dust  pleaseth  him ;  but 
none  of  them  are  welcome  V   him  with- 


out faith,  as  nothing  can  please  him 
without  Christ.  There  is  none  that 
dares  venture  into  his  presence  without 
faith ;  she  is  that  Esther  to  which  God 
holds  out  the  golden  sceptre.  Adorn  thy 
soul  with  this  grace  ;  "  so  shall  the  king 
greatly  desire  thy  beauty." — Adams. 

The  apocryphal  author  and  Josephus 
say  that  she  took  two  maids  with  her, 
on  one  of  whom  she  leaned,  while  the 
other  bore  up  her  train, — that  her  coun- 
tenance was  cheerful  and  very  amiable, 
but  her  heart  was  in  anguish, — that  the 
king,  lifting  up  his  countenance  that 
slione  with  majesty,  at  first  looked  very 
fiercely  upon  her,  whereupon  she  grew 
pale,  and  fainted,  and  bowed  herself  on 
the  head  of  her  maid  that  went  by  her ; 
but  then  God  changed  the  spirit  of  the 
king,  and,  in  fear,  he  leaped  from  his 
throne,  took  her  in  his  arms  till  she  came 
to  herself,  and  comforted  her  with  loving 
words.  Here  we  are  only  told,  that  he 
protected  her  from  the  law,  and  assured 
her  of  safety  by  holding  out  to  her  the 
golden  sceptre,  which  she  thankfully 
touched  the  top  of,  thereby  presenting 
^^erself  to  him  as  a  humble  petitioner. 


170 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  v. 


Thus  having  had  power  with  God,  and 
prevailed,  like  Jacob,  she  had  power  with 
men  too.  He  that  will  lose  his  life  for 
God  shall  save  it,  or  find  it  in  a  better 
life. — Matthew  Henry. 

The  unexpectedness  of  pleasing  objects 
makes  them  many  times  the  more  accept- 
able ;  the  beautiful  countenance,  the 
graceful  demeanour,  and  goodly  presence 
of  Esther  have  no  sooner  taken  the  eyes, 
than  they  have  ravished  the  heart,  of  king 
Ahasuerus  ;  love  hath  soon  banished  all 
dreadfulness.  "  And  the  king  held  out 
to  Esther  the  golden  sceptre  that  was  in 
his  hand."  Moderate  intermission  is  so 
far  from  cooling  the  affection,  that  it  in- 
flames it.  Had  Esther  been  seen  every 
day,  perhaps  that  satiety  had  abated  the 
height  of  her  welcome ;  now,  three  and 
thirty  days'  retiredness  hath  endeared  her 
more  to  the  surfeited  eyes  of  Ahasuerus. 
Had  not  the  golden  sceptre  been  held 
out,  where  had  queen  Esther  been  1  The 
Persian  kings  affected  a  stern  awfulness 
to  their  subjects ;  it  was  death  to  solicit 
them  uncalled.  How  safe,  how  easy, 
how  happy  a  thing  it  is,  to  have  to  do 
with  the  King  of  heaven,  who  is  so  pleased 
with  our  access  that  he  solicits  suitors  ! 
■who,  as  he  is  unweariable  with  our  re- 
quests, so  he  is  infinite  in  his  bene- 
ficences ! 

Commonly,  when  we  fear  most  we 
speed  best ;  God  then  most  of  all  magni- 
fies his  bounty  to  us  A^hen  we  have  most 
afflicted  ourselves.  Over-confident  ex- 
pectations are  seldom  but  disappointed, 
while  humble  suspicions  go  laughing 
away.  It  was  the  benefit  and  safety  of 
but  one  piece  of  the  kingdom  that  Esther 
comes  to  sue  for ;  and,  behold,  Ahasuerus 
ofiers  her  the  free  power  of  the  half ;  he, 
that  gave  Haman,  at  the  first  word,  the 
lives  of  all  his  Jewish  subjects,  is  ready 
to  give  Esther  half  his  kingdom  ere  she 
ask.  Now  she  is  no  less  amazed  at  the 
loving  munificence  of  Ahasuerus  than 
she  was  before  afraid  of  his  austerity. — 
Bislwp  Hall. 

It  is  likely  that  she  left  her  attendants 
without,  lest  she  should  draw  them  into 
danger;  and  contented  herself  (when 
she  went  in  to  the  kinf:^)  with  those 
faithful  companions.  Faith,  Hope,  and 
Charity,  who  bi-ought  her  off  also  with 
safety. 


And  the  king  sat  upon  his  roijal 
throne.  Eoyal  indeed,  as  Athenaeus 
describeth  it.  It  should  be  our  earnest 
desire  to  see  the  King  of  Glory  upon 
his  throne.  Austin  wished  that  he 
might  have  seen  three  things  :  1.  Romam 
in  flore  ;  2.  Paulum  in  ore  ;  3.  Christum 
in  corpore.  Rome  in  the  flourish,  Paul 
in  the  pulpit,  Christ  in  the  flesh. 
Venerable  Bede  cometh  after,  and  cor- 
recting this  last  wish,  saith,  Imo  vero 
Christum  in  solio  sedentem.  Let  me  see 
Christ  upon  his  throne  royal  rather. 

And  the  hing  held  out  to  Esther  the 
golden  sceptre.  He  did  not  kick  her  out 
of  his  presence,  as  some  Cambyses  would 
have  done,  neither  did  he  command  her 
to  the  block,  as  Henry  VIII.  did  his 
Anne  BuUen  upon  a  mere  misprision  of 
disloyalty  ;  neither  yet  did  he  cashier 
her,  as  he  had  done  Vashti  for  a  less 
offence  ;  but,  by  holding  out  his  sceptre 
shows  his  gracious  respects  unto  her. 
This  was  the  Lord's  own  work,  as  was 
likewise  that  of  old,  that  Laban  should 
leave  Jacob  with  a  kiss.  Let  a  man's 
ways  please  the  Lord,  and  men  shall 
quickly  befriend  him. — Bishop  Hall. 

This  is  truly  heroic  magnanimity,  by 
which  Esther  declares  as  great  a  faith 
towards  God  as  love  towards  his  Church. 
Her  trust  in  him  is  such  that  she  incurs 
the  peril  of  her  life  in  obedience  to  his 
call.  For  though  all  the  circumstances 
of  the  case  threaten  her  destruction,  still 
she  hangs  by  faith  upon  the  Divine 
promises.  For  whom  God  calls  and 
leads  into  danger,  to  him  he  has  also 
promised  preservation  and  deliverance  in 
those  dangers.  To  Abraham  he  said, 
"  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  thy 
father's  house."  This  was  a  call  to  face 
danger.  But  he  also  added  the  promise, 
*'  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation.'* 
It  is  love  alone  that  exposes  itself  in 
behalf  of  the  Church  of  God,  and  would 
rather  risk  its  own  life  than  leave  the 
Church  of  God  in  danger. — Brenz. 

Esther  was  not  one  of  those  who  re- 
solve and  promise  well,  but  do  not  per- 
form. How  ready  are  we,  like  the  dis- 
obedient son  in  the  parable,  to  say.  We 
will  go  and  work  in  the  vineyard,  and 
after  all  go  not !  But  what  excuse  shall 
we    have   for    breaking    our    promises 


CHAP,    v.] 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


171 


through  the  mere  power  of  laziness,  when 
Esther  kept  her  word  at  the  risk  of  her 
life  1  She  deserves  to  be  ranked  with  the 
noble  army  of  confessors,  if  not  of  martyrs. 
She  went  in  unto  the  king  when  a  law 
faced  her  which  declared  it  to  be  death 
lor  any  subject,  not  excepting  the  queen, 
to  go  in  unto  the  king's  private  apart- 
ments without  his  leave. 

IN' or  did  she  linger  in  doubt  whether 
she  should  go  in  unto  the  king  or  not. 
If  she  had,  new  temptations,  dangerous 
to  her  virtue,  might  have  assaulted  her. 
Her  resolution  had  been  already  formed, 
and  she  makes  haste,  and  delays  not  to 
do  the  commandment  of  Mordecai,  which 
she  considers  as  a  commandment  from 
God.  On  the  third  day,  she  went  in 
unto  the  king.  Her  fast  did  not,  it 
seems,  consist  of  three  complete  days 
and  nights.  In  the  language  of  the 
Jews,  *'  three  days  and  three  nights " 
might  mean  one  whole  day  and  part  of 
two  others.  Jesus  is  said  to  have  been 
''  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the 
heart  of  the  earth,"  and  yet  he  is  said  to 
have  risen  "  on  the  third  day." 

She  observed  her  fast,  and  it  was  no 
sooner  over  than  she  went  in  unto  the 
king.  It  was  wise  in  her,  when  she  had 
finished  her  supplication,  to  present  her 
petition  to  the  king.  When  Hannah 
prayed  in  the  bitterness  of  her  grief,  her 
heart  was  eased ;  she  was  no  more  sorrow- 
ful. We  have  reason  to  think  that 
Esther's  anxieties,  too,  were  banished  by 
her  devotion.  She  had  been  lifting  up 
her  soul  to  the  Lord.  She  had  been, 
doubtless,  remembering  her  song  in  the 
night,  and  the  wonderful  works  of  former 
times  would  inspire  her  with  hope  of  a 
happy  event  to  her  present  enterprise. 
Thus  she  was  able  to  approach  unto  the 
king  with  all  that  composure  of  mind, 
and  cheerfulness  of  countenance,  which 
were  necessary  for  the  occasion. 

She  put  on  her  royal  apparel  when 
she  went  in  to  the  king.  She  cared  not 
for  the  distinction  of  her  rank,  and  placed 
not  her  delight  in  the  outward  adorning 
of  gold,  and  pearls,  and  costly  array. 
But  it  was  necessary  to  lay  aside  her 
mourning  apparel,  and  to  put  on  her 
beautiful  garments  when  she  went  in  to 
the  king.     Good  wives  will  endeavour 


to  please  their  husbands  by  a  decency  in 
dress,  as  well  as  other  things  that  may 
appear  little  when  they  are  not  considered 
as  means  to  gain  an  important  end.  The 
married  women  care,  and  ought  to  care, 
how  they  may  please  their  husbands  ; 
and  those  women  do  not  act  as  becomeih 
saints,  whose  dress,  or  any  part  of  their 
behaviour,  naturally  tends  to  produce 
disgust.  Esther  had  a  peculiar  reason 
for  dressing  berself  with  her  beautiful 
garments  when  she  went  into  the  king's 
presence.  But  all  women  are  bound  to 
please  their  husbands  in  things  lawful 
and  consistent,  because  the  law  of  Christ 
binds  them  to  reverence  their  husbands : 
and  their  husbands,  if  they  are  not  fools, 
will  not  desire  them  to  transgress  the 
laws  concerning  dress,  which  two  apostles 
have  thought  it  necessary  to  record  for 
their  direction.* 

The  countenance  of  Esther  at  this 
critical  moment  was  highly  interesting 
to  the  king,  her  husband.  Grief,  anxiety, 
and  pity,  painted  in  her  beauteous  face, 
awakened  his  pity  and  attracted  his  love. 
She  found  favour  in  his  eyes,  and  he 
held  out  to  her  the  golden  sceptre,  the 
sign  of  grace  and  pardon,  which  Esther 
touched,  in  thankful  acceptance  of  the 
offered  mercy. 

"  As  a  prince,"  said  God  to  Jacob, 
"  hast  thou  power  with  God  ;  and  with 
men  also  shalt  thou  j)revail."  Esther 
had  been  weeping  and  making  suppli- 
cation, like  her  father  Jacob,  and  had 
prevailed,  and  saw  the  face  of  the  king 
as  if  it  had  been  the  face  of  God,  and 
her  life  was  preserved  ;  and,  what  was 
still  better,  slie  had  the  happy  presage 
of  the  preservation  of  the  life  of  all  her 
people,  in  that  favour  which  was  ex- 
tended to  herself.  What  wonderful 
favours  from  men  may  fervent  supplica- 
tion to  God  obtain  !  *'  If  He  be  for  us, 
who  can  be  against  us  1 " — Laiuson. 

Delays  in  matters  of  importance  are 
to  be  deeply  censured,  and  the  weightier 
the  matter  the  more  censurable  is  pro- 
crastination. Who  then  can  estimate 
the  folly,  the  egregious  folly,  of  delay  in 
the  concerns  of  a  never-ending  futurity  ! 
— concerns  compared  with  which  the 
weightiest  affairs  of  time  are  less  than 
♦  2  Tim.  ii.     1  PeU  iii, 


172 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  V. 


nothing  !  The  next  thing  to  delay  is 
total  neglect — to  putting  off  to  another 
opportunity,  putting  off  altogether,  and 
delays  too  frequently  thus  terminate. 
When  a  man  is  somewhat  impressed  with 
his  danger  as  a  violator  of  the  Divine 
law,  and  a  rehel  against  the  Majesty  of 
heaven,  but  seeks  a  more  convenient 
season  to  devote  himself  to  the  grand 
work  of  salvation,  he  is  as  yet  in  the 
enemy's  hand  ;  the  chain  is  not  broken  ; 
he  is  in  danger  of  wearing  off  his  good 
impressions,  of  falling  back  to  his  former 
inconsiderateness,  and  of  increasing  the 
callousness  of  his  heart.  It  is  not 
always  that  hesitating  between  God  and 
the  world  ends  well — it  is  not  always 
that  they  who  halt  between  two  opinions 
are  led  to  say.  The  Lord,  he  is  the  God, 
and  after  him  we  will  go.  Oh,  beware 
of  delay. 

Fasting,  and  prayer,  and  communion 
with  God  therein,  are  the  true  strength 
of  the  soul.    They  lift  it  above  temporary 
danger,  and  fill  it  with  holy  fortitude. 
They  are  likewise  the  parents  of  spiritual 
activity  and   diligence.     Esther   is  not 
the  only  character  whom  we  find  gath- 
ering holy  boldness  for  perilous  duties 
(iv.   16)   through  earnest  supplications. 
When  Jacob  was  returning  from  Laban, 
he  prepared  to  meet  his  enraged  brother, 
by  first  imploring  the  guidance  and  pro- 
tection of  God.     He  knew  it  to  be  his 
duty  to  go  forward,  and  not  to  return  to 
Mesopotamia,  yet  he  could  not  go  for- 
ward but  at  the  peril  of  his  life,  and 
that   of  his  wives   and   children.      He 
nerved  his  soul,  however,  with  strength 
suited  to  the  emergency,  by  humbling 
himself  before  the  mercy -seat  of  his  God, 
and  his  fathers'  God,  and  imploring  his 
heavenly  interference.     He  prayed  and 
prospered.    Jehoshaphat,  surrounded  by 
multitudes  of  Moabites,  Ammonites,  and 
others,  sought  for  courage  to  meet  them 
at  the  throne  of  grace.     His  eyes  were 
upon  God,  and  his  heart  was  not  afraid. 
He  prayed  and  conquered.     He  prayed, 
and  God  made  the  battle  his  own,  and 
triumphed  gloriously :  he  sent  forth  his 
wrath,  which  consumed  these  uncircum- 
cised  hosts  as  stubble.     And  how   did 
our  Divine  Master  himself  obtain  that 
fortitude,    which   was  needful   for   the 


mighty  combat  which  was  before  him  1 
How  did  he  prepare  for  the  most  arducms 
enterprise  that  was  ever  undertaken  1 
In  the  same  way  as  the  pious  queen  be- 
fore us.  He  repaired  to  the  garden  of 
Gethsemane,  and  poured  forth  his  soul 
"  with  strong  crying  and  tears,"  and  be- 
ing heard  in  that  he  feared,  he  presented 
an  undaunted  face  to  his  enemies,  and 
entered  on  the  conflict  with  holy  earnest- 
ness and  anxiety.  "  Rise,"  said  he  to 
his  sleeping  disciples,  "  let  us  be  going, 
behold,  he  is  at  hand,"  &c.  (Let  us 
meet  him  :  for  1  have  prayed,  and  my 
prayers  have  been  heard  ;  I  have  prayed, 
and  heaven  is  on  my  side.)  Brethren, 
we  know  not  what  we  lose — of  what 
rich  blessings  we  deprive  ourselves,  by 
not  abounding  in  prayer.  "  We  will 
give  ourselves  continually  unto  prayer." 
Abundant  prayer  brings  joy  to  the  heart, 
and  "the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength." 
What  dangers  should  we  deem  too  great 
to  face,  were  our  souls  but  thus  filled 
with  the  presence  of  the  Lord  ! — what 
services  should  we  deem  too  arduous  and 
self-denying  !  "  Wait  on  the  Lord,  and 
He  shall  strengthen  thine  heart."  "  The 
love  of  Christ  constraineth  us  to  live  ih> 
longer  to  ourselves,  but,"  &c. 

The  goodness  of  God,  in  this  case,  to 
his  fasting  and  praying  servants,  demantls 
our  attention,  "  And  it  was  so  when 
the  king  saw  Esther  the  queen,  standing 
in  the  court,  that  she  obtained  favour  in 
his  sight :  and  the  king  held  out  to 
Esther  the  golden  sceptre  that  was  in  his 
hand."  God,  in  whose  hands  are  all 
hearts,  on  many  of  which,  however,  he 
works  to  answer  his  own  wise  purposes, 
but  not  so  as  to  change  or  sanctify  them 
— God,  we  say,  disposed  the  king  thus 
courteously  to  treat  the  queen.  She  was 
not  killed  (iv.  11),  but  kindly  invited 
to  approach.  The  God,  who  made  Esau 
embrace  with  fraternal  affection  him, 
whom  a  few  hours  before  he  designed  to 
murder,  to  fall  on  his  neck  and  kiss  him, 
— made  this  selfish,  capricious,  and  un- 
reasonable monarch  behave  thus  conde- 
scendingly to  the  queen.  *'  When  a 
man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he  "  often 
"  makes  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with 
him."  *'  What  time  I  am  afraid,  I  will 
trust  in  thee." 


CHAP,   v.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


173 


Now,  let  us  take  occasion,  from  this 
act  of  Ahasuerus,  to  consider  the  conduct 
of  another  King — the  blessed  and  only- 
Potentate,  to  whom  be  honour  and  power 
everlasting.  Ahasuerus  held  out  the 
sceptre  to  his  queen,  who  had  never 
offended  him,  nor  been  unfaithful  to 
him ;  but  Jehovah  holds  out  his  sceptre 
to  the  unfaithful.  How  wonderful  the 
language,  in  Jer.  iii.  i,  on  this  point. 
**  They  say,  If  a  man  put  away  his  wife, 
and  she  go  from  him,  and  become  another 
man's,  shall  he  return  to  her  again  %  shall 
not  that  land  be  greatly  polluted  ?  But 
thou  hast  played  the  harlot  with  many 
lovers;  yet  return  again  to  me,  saith 
the  Lord."  "  Eeturn,  thou  backsliding 
Israel,  saith  the  Lord,  and  I  will  not 
cause  mine  anger  to  fall  upon  you  ;  for 
I  am  merciful,  saith  the  Lord,  and  I  will 
not  keep  anger  for  ever  :  only  acknow- 
ledge thine  iniquity,  that  thou  hast 
transgressed  against  the  Lord  thy  God, 
and  hast  scattered  thy  ways  to  the 
strangers  under  every  green  tree,  and  ye 
have  not  obeyed  my  voice." — Hughes. 

"  Now  it  came  to  pass."  These  words 
call  for  special  notice  in  a  book  which 
strikingly  illustrates  the  providence  of 
God  both  in  regard  to  nations  and  indi- 
viduals. They  remind  us  that  there  is 
nothing  stationary — that  what  comes  is 
moving  on.  Seasons  of  trial  and  per- 
plexity would  be  overwhelming  if  they 
had  the  character  of  fixedness.  It  is  hap- 
pily not  so.  As  you  have  stood  gazing 
on  a  mountain,  bathed  in  sunlight,  you 
may  sometimes  have  observed  a  dark 
shadow  creeping  along  the  side  of  it,  as 
though  hastening  to  accomplish  its  mis- 
sion, and  quickly  gliding  away  out  of 
sight,  leaving  the  landscape  all  the  more 
beautiful  because  of  your  remembrance 
of  it.  So  is  it  with  what  is  painful  and 
sad  in  providence.  Events  of  this  kind 
have  come  at  intervals,  but  it  was  only 
to  pass — not  to  abide — like  the  floating 
of  little  clouds  between  us  and  the  sun  ; 
and  when  past,  giving  to  human  life,  as 
to  nature,  a  great  richness  and  variety. 
Biographies  are  but  commentaries  on 
these  familiar  words.  Indeed,  men  them- 
selves but  come  to  pass.  ^'  The  workmen 
die,  the  work  goes  on."  While  the  river 
is  moving  on,  and  we  are  observing  the 


things  which  fringe  its  banks,  and  being 
differently  affected  by  them,  we  are  our- 
selves sailing  on  the  surface  of  the  waters, 
and  being  swiftly  borne  along  to  the 
great  ocean  of  eternity.  *^  Now  it  came 
to  pass." 

Three  days  had  been  spent  byMordecai 
and  the  Jews,  Esther  and  her  maids,  in 
fasting  and  prayer ;  three  days  which 
were,  in  the  experience  of  all  of  them, 
like  the  gathering  up  of  spiritual  strength, 
and  the  marshalling  of  spiritual  forces  to 
battle.  It  was  not  by  carnal  weapons 
that  they  were  to  contend  against  the 
cruel  menace  of  the  world,  but  by  faith, 
and  in  dependence  on  the  Lord  of  Hosts. 
— McEioan. 

We  all  expect  to  see  any  gift  we  have 
bestowed  upon  another  applied  to  its 
destined  use,  and  the  neglect  of  the  gift 
is  regarded  by  us  as  equivalent  to  a  con- 
tempt of  the  donor.  Now  it  was  in  pre- 
sents of  dress,  and  ornaments  connected 
with  it,  that  the  Easterns  displayed  and 
still  display  their  munificence ;  so  that 
Esther,  arrayed  in  her  royal  robes,  going 
to  cast  herself  upon  the  king's  favour, 
just  went  to  him  in  the  way  that  would 
most  vividly  remind  him  that  she  was 
the  creature  of  his  bounty,  as  she  had 
been  the  object  of  his  love. 

We  may  take  an  illustration  here  from 
our  Lord's  parable  of  the  Wedding  Gar- 
ment. There  is  something  in  that  par- 
able which  at  first  appears  inexplicable. 
The  persons  who  were  brought  in  to  the 
marriage -supper  were  those  whom  the 
king's  servants  had  gathered  together 
from  the  highways  ;  and  how,  it  may  be 
asked,  could  the  man  be  found  fault  with 
who  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment  *? 
Here,  then,  lies  the  solution  of  the  diffi- 
culty. Dresses  befitting  the  occasion 
were  furnished  to  the  guests,  according 
to  the  custom  of  the  time  ;  and  he  who 
had  not  on  the  proper  dress  must  have 
supposed  that  his  own  clothing  was  good 
enough,  and  must  have  rejected  the  offer 
of  a  garment  suitable,  which  was  made 
to  him  by  the  keeper  of  the  king's  ward- 
robe. For  this  contempt,  then,  he  was 
righteously  charged  and  condemned. 
And  so  in  tlie  case  before  us,  Esther 
would  have  been  subject  to  displeasure, 
and  righteously  punishable  according  to 


174 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


[CHAP.  V. 


the  established  law,  if,  when  the  king 
had  furnished  her  with  the  apparel  and 
decorations  suited  to  her  exalted  station, 
she  had  appeared  before  him,  as  he  sat 
upon  his  throne,  in  attire  more  homely. 
But  she  had  too  much  wisdom,  and  too 
strong  a  sense  of  what  was  becoming  and 
proper,  to  expose  herself  to  challenge  on 
such  a  ground ;  and  hence  her  careful- 
ness to  come  forth  in  all  the  splendour 
of  her  queenly  dress  and  ornaments. 

And  now,  with  life  or  death  depending 
on  every  step,  and  with  a  timidity  that 
must  have  made  her  look  more  beautiful 
than  ever,  she  comes  within  reach  of  the 
king's  glance.  He  had  not  seen  her  for 
more  than  thirty  days.  The  sight  of  her 
at  that  moment,  and  in  that  place,  was 
altogether  unexpected.  Without  having 
time  for  reflection,  or  for  speaking  to 
Haman,  who  no  doubt  was  beside  him, 
of  this  strange  disregard  of  the  courtly 
etiquette,  his  former  love  was  rekindled 
in  his  heart  by  the  sight  of  the  beautiful 
visi(m.  He  smiled,  and  held  out  to 
Esther  the  golden  sceptre  that  was  in 
his  hand.  She  felt  that  she  was  safe, 
and  so  drew  near  and  touched  the  top  of 
the  sceptre. 

Thus  far  the  simple  words  of  the  his- 
tory conduct  us ;  and  those  who  were 
spectators  of  this  strange  scene,  would 
see  nothing  more  in  it  than  a  most  daring 
adventure  on  the  part  of  the  queen,  with 
a  singular  exhibition  of  good  will  on  the 
king's  part.  But  with  the  help  of  what 
is  stated  in  the  preceding  chapter,  we 
get  a  clearer  light  upon  the  whole  scene, 
and  can  understand  the  real  meaning  of 
the  words  :  **  Esther  obtained  favour  in 
the  king's  sight."  The  prayer  and  fast- 
ing of  the  three  previous  days  had  not 
been  without  fruit.  A  Divine  influence 
had  been  put  forth  to  touch  the  heart  of 
the  king  ;  and,  without  knowing  it  him- 
self, by  that  influence  he  was  led — not 
only  to  forgive  the  queen's  unwarrant- 
able intrusion  into  his  presence,  but  also, 
as  we  shall  see,  to  grant  her  any  request 
which  she  might  make.  Here,  then, 
there  is  the  dawning  of  the  day  of  de- 
liverance for  the  Jews. 

Now,  let  us,  before  going  farther,  make 
some  practical  application  of  this  part  of 
our  subiect.     1.  In  the  first  place,  this 


lesson  is  obviously  to  be  taken  from  it, 
that  when  we  are  to  engage  in  any  special 
work  or  enterprise  involving  difficulty  or 
danger,  the  most  efl'ectual  way  to  gain 
the  object  we  have  in  view  is  to  seek 
help  and  direction  from  on  high.  No 
man,  indeed,  whose  heart  is  really  imbued 
with  the  fear  of  God,  will  fail  every  day 
to  ask  direction  and  a  blessing  in  the 
conducting  of  his  ordinary  aff'airs.  And 
this  is  one  circumstance  which  makes  a 
difl"erence  between  the  pursuits  of  the 
mere  worldling  and  those  of  the  Chris- 
tian, although  externally  they  may  seem 
to  be  engaged  in  the  very  same  kind  of 
business. 

But  when  there  are  momentous  inter- 
ests at  stake,  when  things  have  to  be 
done  out  of  the  ordinary  course,  then, 
we  say,  there  ought  to  be  a  special  appli- 
cation made  for  Divine  assistance  and 
guidance.  This  is  not  to  supersede  the 
use  of  such  means  as  prudence  and  ex- 
perience may  dictate  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  end  in  view.  On  the  con- 
trary, one  of  the  subjects  of  prayer  in 
such  cases  is,  that  the  mind  may  be  en- 
lightened and  strengthened  so  as  to  lead 
to  the  selection  of  the  best  means.  But 
then,  with  all  this,  the  committing  of  the 
issue  to  the  appointment  of  God  is  the 
right  procedure  on  the  part  of  all  who 
believe  in  a  Divine  providence,  and  look 
up  to  the  God  of  providence  as  their 
Father  in  heaven.  Esther,  although  she 
fasted  and  prayed,  did  not  neglect  the 
duty  of  arraying  herself  suitably  to  her 
station,  and  as  the  honour  of  the  king 
required  her  to  do.  But  we  doubt  not, 
that  as  she  pat  on  her  ornaments,  and 
as  she  went  with  throbbing  heart  across 
the  court  which  separated  her  apartments 
from  those  in  which  the  throne  stood, 
her  thoughts  were  more  in  heaven  than 
on  earth.  And  from  her  example  we 
learn,  that  the  spirit  in  which  we  should 
conduct  our  most  important  aff'airs  is, 
that  of  committing  our  way  to  God,  while 
we  endeavour  not  to  be  awauting  in  per- 
sonal activity,  and  in  the  employment  of 
such  lawful  means  as  seem  most  likely  to 
promote  our  purpose. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  we  learn  from 
this  part  of  the  narrative,  that  there  may 
be  Divine  influence  at  work  upon  the 


OltAP.    V.) 


fi(ntiLP:T!a  comuentary:  mrSER. 


175 


heart  and  will  even  of  those  who  have 
no  personal  regard  for  religion,  by  which 
they  are  unconsciously  rendered  instru- 
mental in  advancing  the  interests  of 
God's  people  and  of  his  cause.  As  has 
been  already  said,  we  cannot  avoid  con- 
necting the  sacred  exercises  in  which 
Esther  and  her  friends  were  engaged, 
with  the  turning  of  the  king's  heart  to- 
ward her.  And  many  other  examples 
of  the  same  kind  might  be  selected  from 
the  sacred  record.  There  is  the  memor- 
able one  in  the  case  of  Cyrus,  when  he 
was  moved  by  the  Lord  to  take  compas- 
sion on  the  captive  Jews,  and  to  permit 
all  of  them  who  chose,  to  return  to  their 
own  land  and  rebuild  the  city  of  Jeru- 
salem. There  is  another  in  the  case  of 
the  same  Artaxerxes  who  showed  favour 
to  Esther,  to  which  reference  is  made  in 
the  book  of  Nehemiah.  When  this  pa- 
triotic and  pious  man  was  troubled  on 
account  of  the  desolations  of  Jerusalem, 
he  prayed  fervently  that  the  heart  of  the 
king  might  be  affected  so  as  to  lead  him 
to  grant  assistance  for  remedying  the 
evils  which  were  felt  by  the  Jews  who 
had  gone  to  repair  the  waste  places  of 
the  holy  city.  And  the  king  was  moved 
accordingly. 

It  does  not  follow  from  those  cases, 
that  the  putting  forth  of  Divine  influence 
to  incline  these  heathen  monarchs  to  do 
what  was  for  the  good  of  God's  people, 
implied  any  gracious  operation  upon  their 
hearts  in  the  way  of  delivering  them  from 
their  deadly  errors.  All  that  can  be  in- 
ferred is,  that  God's  creatures,  high  and 
low,  are  as  the  clay  in  the  hand  of  the 
potter.  But  this  conclusion  is  very  mani- 
fest, that  as  the  settlement  of  numberless 
affairs,  in  which  the  interests  of  God's 
people  are  concerned,  rests  upon  the  will 
of  individuals  who  may  not  be  naturally 
well  disposed  towards  their  cause  ;  this 
is  one  direction  which  their  prayers  may 
well  take,  that  God  would  overrule  the 
heart  and  will  of  those  enemies,  so  that 
the  truth  may  prosper.  In  this  way,  in 
answer  to  believing  and  persevering 
prayer,  the  words  of  the  Lord  may  still 
be,  as  they  often  have  been,  verified,  that 
mountains  of  difficulty  are  removed : 
"  The  crooked  things  are  made  straight, 
and  the  rough  places  plain." 


3.  In  the  third  place,  from  the  verses 
under  review,  compared  with  the  previous 
history,  we  may  draw  an  illustration  of 
some  important  principles  in  the  economy 
of  grace.  I  must,  however,  remind  you 
here  of  a  distinction  which  requires  to 
be  kept  in  view  in  all  comments  upon 
the  Old  Testament  history,  and  in  tlie 
illustration  of  Scripture  generally — a  dis- 
tinction between  truths  evidently  dedu- 
cible  from  the  historical  narrative,  and 
directly  bearing  upon  subjects  of  belief 
and  practice,  which  are  applicable  to  all 
times  and  circumstances  ;  and  reflections 
suggested  by  certain  portions  of  the  his- 
tory, but  suggested  by  them,  ratlier  thnn 
manifestly  designed  to  be  taught  by  them. 
There  has  often  been  a  tendency  exhibit- 
ed by  interpreters  of  Scripture  to  spiritu- 
alize all  the  events  recorded  in  it.  And 
in  many  cases,  it  must  be  acknowledged, 
this  has  been  so  happily  done,  as  to  make 
us  feel  as  if  we  were  refreshed  by  water 
from  the  flinty  rock.  Yet  we  must  never 
overlook  the  difference  between  trutli 
directly  revealed,  and  truth  suggested 
merely  in  the  way  of  illustration.  Now, 
w^ith  these  remarks,  the  point  which  I 
would  have  you  for  a  moment  look  at 
here,  as  bearing  upon  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  is  suggested  by  the  contrast  be- 
tween Esther's  first  appearance  before 
the  king  and  her  appearance  now  in  the 
manner  above  described.  In  the  first 
instance,  she  sought  not  the  aid  of  orna- 
ment, but  appeared  in  simple  attire.  And 
just  as  she  was  she  gained  the  king's 
heart.  But  now,  when  she  is  about  to 
present  an  important  request  to  him,  a 
request  involving  life  or  death  to  herself 
and  multitudes  besides,  she  goes  arrayed 
in  the  dress,  and  ornaments,  and  jewels, 
which  were  the  king's  gifts  to  her,  that 
he  might  recognize  his  own  love- tokens, 
and  be  moved  to  show  favour  again  by 
the  remembrance  that  he  had  shown 
favour  before. 

You  will  easily  perceive  the  application 
we  make  of  all  this.  The  sinner  at  first 
casts  himself  upon  the  mercy  of  God  in 
Christ,  in  all  his  natural  worthlessness, 
feeling  that  he  has  nothing  to  rely  upon 
for  acceptance  and  favour  but  sovereign 
grace.  And  God,  in  accepting  him,  is 
moved   solely  by  his   own  mercy ;  for 


176  noMlLETtC  COMMEJ^TAUT:  ESTHM.  [nitAt>.  V. 


many  others,  who  are  more  highly  gifted,  them.     They  may  be   labouring   under 

and  who  have  many  qualities  that  might  fears  and  doubts  almost  as  depressing  as 

seem  to  give  them  a  preference  according  those  by  which  they  were  weighed  down 

to  human  judgment,  are  passed  by.   Our  when  they  first  threw  themselves  at  his 

heavenly  King  has  no  respect  of  persons,  feet  imploring  mercy  to  pardon.     But 

so  far  as  birth  and  the  external  circum-  they  stand  now  in  a  different  relation  to 

stances  and  condition  of  men  are  con-  him.    He  has  been  gracious  toward  them, 

cerned  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  his  love  and  in  their  distress,  although  it  may  be 

is  bestowed  sovereignly.    "He  has  mercy  the  distress  which  is  the  result  of  con- 

upon  whom  he  will  have  mercy."     But  scions  backsliding,  he  perceives  his  own 

when  his  believing  people  go  to  him  in  marks,  or,  as  the  Scripture  expresses  it, 

their  difficulties  and  troubles  to  implore  "The  spots  of  his  own  children,"  upon 

his  aid,  then  he  recognizes  in  them,  amid  them,  and  as  his  own,  he  welcomes  them, 

all  their  deficiencies,  something  of  his  and  graciously  answers  their  requests.-  • 

own  comeliness  which  has  been  put  upon  Davidson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAEAGEAPH.     Verses  3—5. 

A  Large  Offer  and  some  of  its  Consequences. 

I.  A  sympathetic  inquiry.     The  king's  heart  was  touched  by  the  aspect  of 
beauty  saddened,  and  he  asks,  "What  wilt  thou,  Queen  Esther?     What  ails  thee*? 
What  has  brought  that  sadness  on  to  thy  lovely  countenance  1     What  has  given 
thee  that  mournful  look  1   Thou  art  more  attractive  in  thy  sadness  ;  but  still  I  would 
know  the  cause  of  thy  grief,  that  I  may  remove  it  if  possible."    The  young  and  the 
beautiful  in  sadness  are  especially  touching.    Why  should  the  young  suffer  %    Why 
should  the  beautiful  have  the  glory  of  their  loveliness  eclipsed  by  sorrow  1     Why 
the  tears  and  groans  of  infant  life  %     Why  the  merry  laughter  of  youth  so  soon 
turned  into  the  wail  of  mourning  %     Why,  because  Haraan  and  others  have  sinned. 
The  curse  of  Haman  has  visited  and  pained  the  innocent  heart  of  Esther.     Sin  is 
far-reaching.     The  first  sin  has  reached  from  creation's  dawn  to  the  present  hour, 
and  will  go  on  working  to  creation's  final  doom.     Oh  !  we  do  not  rightly  consider 
the  mischief  we  do,  the  pain  we  may  cause,  when  we  sin.     By  sin  pain  and  injury 
are  caused  both  to  the  sinner  himself  and  to  those  who  are  seemingly  far  removed 
from  the  sphere  of  his  influence.    Esther's  sorrow  was  the  consequence  of  Haman's 
sin.     Esther's  sorrow  touched  the  nature  of  Ahasuerus.     Sympathy  was  evoked, 
and  this  sympathy  found  vent  in  the  gracious  inquiry  and  in  the  large  offer.     In 
the  presence  of  sorrow,  silence  may  be  profound  sympathy.     If  the  heart  is  moved 
to  utterance  the  words  should  be  few  and  well-chosen.     A  truly  sympathetic  nature 
will  suggest  the  right  words,  if  indeed  the  nature  be  not  so  overcharged  with  sym- 
pathy as  to  be  divested  of  the  power  of  utterance.     The  better  part  of  Ahasuerus 
comes  out  in  this  inquiry  which  he  put  to  Esther,  and  is  an  illustration  of  the 
csaying.  There  is  good  in  all,  while  none  are  all  good. 

II.  A  large  offer.  Some  people  put  the  seemingly  sympathetic  inquiry,  and 
yet  do  not  follow  it  up  with  promises  of  help.  Ahasuerus  felt,  which  was  good. 
Ahasuerus  promisee?  to  help,  which  was  better.  "What  is  thy  request?  It  shall  be 
even  given  thee  to  the  half  of  the  kingdom."  A  large  offer  truly  if  it  be  only 
regarded  as  a  mere  proverbial  expression.  Proverbs  have  their  deep  meaning.  A 
proverbial  expression  used  as  a  promise  must  intend  much  on  the  part  of  the 
promisor,  (a)  A  large  offer  may  be  made  at  the  prompting  of  mere  feeling,  and 
when  the  feeling  evaporates  the  promise  is  forgotten,  or  not  considered  binding. 
However,  if  the  promise  be  legitimate  and  capable  of  fulfilment  it  ought  to  be  per- 
formed, though  it  was  made  at  the  dictate  of  feeling.  Be  careful  not  to  let  feeling 
over-ride  judgment.     The  man  without  feeling  is  not  a  properly  developed  man. 


cnAt>.  v.]  ROMiLETIC  COMMENTAUY:   EF^TTTEH.  177 

The  man  all  feeling  loses  the  glory  of  his  manhood,  {h)  A  large  offer  may  be  m^irie 
without  a  due  consideration  of  the  limiting  nature  of  our  circumstances.  Ahasuerus 
might  promise  the  half  of  his  kingdom,  but  could  he  have  granted  it  *?  Esther  could 
not  really  have  herself  monopolized  the  half  of  that  vast  kingdom.  We  forget  tlie 
limits  of  our  circumstances  and  of  our  capacities  sometimes  in  the  largeness  of  our 
offers.  Infinitude  is  not  our  attribute.  Man  is  but  a  creature.  There  is  truth  in 
one  view  of  the  statement  that  man  is  the  creature  of  circumstances,  (c)  A  large 
offer  may  be  made  without  a  due  consideration  of  the  benefit  of  the  promisee.  If 
any  one  was  likely  to  be  benefited  by  large  material  possessions  that  person  was 
Esther.  Even  she,  however,  might  have  suffered  had  she  received  what  was  thus 
offered.  The  deceitfulness  of  riches  might  have  choked  the  good  seed.  Earthly 
love,  as  a  mere  sentiment,  is  sometimes  blind  both  in  its  promises  and  in  its 
bestovrals.  The  blind  passion  of  a  mother  has  done  much  injury  to  her  offspring. 
Heavenly  love  is  never  blind.  Judgment  and  feeling  shape  the  fashion  of  Divine 
promises.  There  are  no  limitations  to  the  heavenly  promiser.  What  he  has 
promised  he  is  able  to  perform.  Divine  promises  always  purpose  ;  are  intended  to 
promote  the  highest  welfare  of  the  promisee.  Let  us  receive  Divine  promises  in  all 
their  fulness.  Let  us  judge  him  who  has  promised  to  be  both  faithful  and  all- 
powerful. 

III.  A  small  request.  For  the  present  Esther  simply  contented  herself  with 
the  small  request,  "  If  it  seem  good  unto  the  king,  let  the  king  and  Haman  couie 
this  day  unto  the  banquet  that  I  have  prepared  for  him."  (a)  Our  requests  should 
be  shaped  with  a  view  to  the  character  and  ability  of  the  promiser.  Esther  was 
wise.  She  had  a  woman's  sharp  wit,  and  a  woman's  keen  penetrating  power.  She 
saw  that  for  the  present  this  was  all  which  she  could  likely  secure  from  the  hand 
of  Ahasuerus.  She  must  wait  for  the  perfecting  of  the  good  work  already  begun 
in  Ahasuerus.  God's  ability  and  willingness  to  give  are  large.  But  we  too  may 
have  to  wait.  His  purpose  for  us  may  not  be  ripe.  At  first  he  may  give  small 
blessings,  the  harbinger  of  yet  greater  blessings.  His  best  things  he  gives  last. 
The  ruler  of  the  feast  said  more  than  he  meant,  *  Thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  till 
now."  Let  our  askings  be  in  harmony  with  Divine  purposes,  so  far  as  we  can 
understand  them,  (h)  Our  requests  should  be  shaped  with  a  view  to  our  wants 
and  to  our  circumstances.  This  was  how  Esther  shaped  her  reque4.  This  was  all 
she  wanted  for  the  present,  and  this  was  all  that  her  circumstances  would  now 
allow  her  to  obtain.  We  do  not  always  know  our  true  wants.  The  complexity  of 
our  circumstances  baffle.  Our  first  prayer  is — "  Lord,  show  us  what  we  need  ;  teach 
what  our  circumstances  require.  Adapt  thy  gifts  to  our  necessities.  Arrange  thy 
blessings  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  our  circumstances."  Definite  requests  may  be 
prompted  by  presumption  as  well  as  faith. 

IV.  A  speedy  fulfilment.  Some  promises  are  rashly  made.  After-consideration 
may  reveal  their  folly.  Yea,  after-consideration  may  show  that  they  are  neither 
lawful  nor  binding.  Herod  made  a  foolish  promise  to  the  daughter  of  Herodias. 
Had  it  been  his  own  head  that  was  required,  he  would  at  once  have  seen  the  folly 
of  his  conduct,  and  refused  the  request.  Neither  the  oath  nor  the  company  would 
have  induced  him  to  yield.  When  the  promise,  however,  is  legitimate  it  ought  to 
be  speedily  performed  even  at  the  cost  of  the  promiser.  It  was  an  easy  thing  for 
Ahasuerus  to  grant  Esther  her  small  request.  "  Then  the  king  said,  Cause  Haman 
to  make  haste,  that  he  may  do  as  Esther  has  said."  The  weak  king  was  capable  of 
promptness.  This  is  also  a  good  trait  in  his  character.  Love  induces  zeal.  Zeal 
is  prompt  in  its  actions.  What  zeal  should  possess  the  lovers  of  Jesus  !  And  yet 
what  laggards  we  are  in  attending  the  banquets  of  heaven.  Let  us  make  haste  to 
the  heavenly  banquet.     Let  us  earnestly  bid  others  to  the  feast. 

V.  A  consequent  incongruous  assembly.  The  king's  great  offer  has  a  seem- 
ingly insignificant  result.  The  king  and  Haman  and  Esther  appeared  together  at 
the  banquet.     So  far  this  is  illustrative  of  human  proceedings.     Pretentious  begin- 

N 


ns  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  y. 


nings,  small  results.  Look  a  little  further,  and  we  shall  see  that  this  is  one  of 
the  links  in  the  chain  of  circumstances  leading  on  to  the  Divinely-purposed  result. 
Very  small  are  the  links  in  the  chain  of  Divine  purposes.  Small,  but  strong  as 
adamant.  What  an  incongruous  assembly  !  The  weak  and  mighty  monarch.  The 
wily  and  wicked  Haman.  The  beautiful  and  virtuous  and  strong-souled  Esther. 
The  intended  victim  entertaining  the  victimizer.  The  victim  will  soon  become  the 
conqueror.  ^  She  is  now  on  the  high  road  to  victory.  The  victimizer  will  soon  be 
caught  in  his  own  toils.  Thus  the  banquets  of  earth  bring  together  very  opposite 
characters,  and  are  fraught  with  unlooked-for  results.  There  are  not  only  social 
and  intellectual,  but  moral,  differences  at  earthly  banquets.  There  is  a  banquet 
coming  where  there  will  be  no  disunion.  In  heaven  there  will  doubtless  be  intel- 
lectual differences,  but  there  will  be  no  moral  incongruities.  The  music  of  heaven 
is  harmonious.  Moral  natures  in  heaven  will  be  rightly  adjusted.  Heart  will 
respond  to  heart  in  perfect  unison,  as  harp  answers  to  harp  in  the  hands  of  angel 
performers.  The  wicked  Hamans  will  not  be  summoned  to  the  great  and  final 
feast.  Whatsoever  defileth  shall  not  pass  the  pearly  gates.  Only  the  redeemed 
shall  there  be  allowed  entrance.  Let  us  seek  to  be  justified  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ, 
and  sanctified  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  keep  in  constant  view  the  abundant  entrance 
to  heaven's  glorious  banquet. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  3 — 5. 

It  is  not  good  to  swallow  favours  too  not  skill  to  do.     Esther  prudently  and 
greedily,  lest   they  either   choke  us   in  modestly    improveth    the    immoderate 
the  passage,  or  prove  hard  of  digestion,  ofier  of  the  king,  and  conceiveth  good 
The    wise   queen,   however   she   might  hope.     How  much  more  may  we  (upon 
seem  to  have  a  fair  opportunity  offered  those  exceeding  great  and  precious  pro- 
to  her^  suit,  finds  it  not  good  to  appre-  mises  given  us  by  God),  of  an  exuberancy 
hend  it   too  suddenly,  as  desiring,   by  of  love,  and  a  confluence  of  aU  comforts 
this  small    dilation,  to  prepare  the  ear  for   this   life   and   a   better;  especially 
and  heart  of  the  king  for  so  important  since  God   doth   not   pay  his  promises 
a  request. — Bishop  Hall.  with  words,  as  Sertorius  is  said  to  have 
And  what  is  thy  request  ?—q.  d.   ''Fear  done;  neither  is  he  off  and  on  with  his 
not  to  utter  it ;  I  am  very  earnest  to  people,    but    performeth   all   with    the 
know  it,  and  fully  resolved  to  grant  it."  better;  as  ISTaaman pressed  the  prophet's 
It  was  more  troublesome  to  Severus  the  man  to  take  two  talents  when  he  asked 
emperor   to  be  asked   nothing   than  to  but   one.     The  widow  of   Sarepta  had 
give  much.     When  any  of  his  courtiers  more   than   she  could  tell   what  to   do 
had  not  made  bold  with  him,  he  would  with  ;  her  cruse  never   ceased   running 
call  them  and  say,  «'  What  meanest  thou  till  she  had  no  room.     The  Shunammite 
to  ask  me  nothing^"    "  Hitherto  ye  have  would  ask  nothing  of  the  prophet,  nor 
asked    me  nothing  (saith   the  King  of  make  use  of  his  offered  courtesy.     He 
Saints  to  his  beloved  Esther)  ;  ask,  that  sends  for   her  again,  and  makes  her  a 
your  joy  may  be  full."     He  is  worthily  free   promise   of  that   which  she    most 
miserable  that   will   not  make  himself  wanted  and  desired — a  son.     God's  kiud- 
happy  by  asking.  ness  is  beyond  all  this.     He  giveth  his 
It  shall  he  given  thee,  to  the  half  of  the  servants  what  they  forget  or  presume  not 
kingdom. — A   proverbial  rather  than   a  to  ask;  and  sends  his  Spirit  to  help  them, 
prodigal  speech,  and  much  in  this  king's  and  to  form  their  prayers  for  them,  and 
mouth.     If  some  ambitious    Semiramis  thereby  to  seal  them  up  to  the  day  of 
had   had   such   an    offer,    what   ill  use  redemption,  to  assure  them  of  the  king- 
might  she  soon  have  made  of  it !     The  dom. 

dancing  damsel  made  no  good  use  of  the  If  it  were  policy  in  Esther  to  invite 

like  from  Herod.     But  a  bee  can  suck  Haman  whom  she  hated,  was  it  likewise 

honey  out  of  a  flower,  that  a  fly  can-  piety  1  did  she  not  dissemble  1    K.  Solo- 


oitAP.  v.]  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  179 


mon   saith,    she   invited   Haraan  alone  world  to  such  a  real  advantage  as  the 

with     the    king,    that    other    courtiers  saints ;  for  the  love  of   Christ   has  so 

might  envy  him,  and  so  undermine  liim.  ordered  the  world,  and  everything  in  it, 

But  that  is  but  a  sorry  excuse,  neither  as   it   tends  to    their   happiness.     And 

doth  Syra's  allegation  of  her  good  inten-  what    greater   benefit   imaginable    than 

tions  mend   the  matter.     They  answer  Imppiness  1— CI arkson. 
better   who  say,  that   she  invited  him  In  the  country  Carniensis   of  Spain, 

that  she  might  accuse  him  to  his  face  ;  there  is  a  river  that  shows  all  the  fish  in 

and  so  cut  off  all  matter  of  his  excuse  or  it  to  be  like  gold  ;  but  take  them  into 

escape.     Hereby  also  she  would  show,  your  hand,  tliey  appear  in  their  natural 

saith  Lavater,  that  she  accused  him,  not  kind  and  colour.     Such  are  promises  and 

out  of  wrath  or  revenge ;  but  that  she  specious  pretences  of  love  in  his  mouth 

was  drawn  to  it,  and,  as  it  were,  driven  that   would    obtain  his  purpose  ;  bring 

by  mere  necessity.— rrai?^?.  them  to  the  touch,  and  thou  shalt  find 

To   promise   much   is    the   universal  all   is    not   gold    that   glitters.       Great 

custom  of  great  men,  but  those  keeping  boast  and  small  roast  will  never  fill  the 

promises  are  few  in  number.     It  is  far  belly  ;    he    therefore    that   will    engage 

easier  to  obtain  favours  by  an  humble  himself  into  any  great  action,  upon  pr^o- 

and  modest  behaviour  than  by  sullen-  mise  of  great  assistance,  if  he  be  not  as 

ness  and  a  boasting  mmner. —StarJce.  sure  of  his  friend's  ability  in  power  as 

Those  two  great  monarchs  made  great  readiness  in    will,  he    reckons  without 

grants  and  largesses,  the  one  to  Esther,  his  host,  and  sits  down  with  the  loss.— 

the   other  to  Herodias's  daughter;  bit  Spencer. 

yet  they  were  limited  only  to  the  half  But  let  us  now  make  a  brief  improve- 
of  their  kingdoms ;  and  the  royal  power  ment  of  the  verses  which  have  been 
in  their  kingdoms  they  meant  still  to  considered.  And  here  the  train  of 
retain  and  reserve  wholly  to  themselves,  thought  suggested  to  us  will  have  already 
But  God,  having  placed  Christ  on  his  occurred  to  the  minds  of  some.  It  em- 
throne,  bids  him  ask  men  to  the  whole  braces  two  particulars  :  the  largeness  of 
of  his  kingdom,  for  God  hath  made  him  the  king's  otfer,  and  Esther's  hesitancy 
a  king,  sitting  on  his  throne  with  him,  at  once  to  avail  herself  of  it. 
not  to  share  hdves,  but  to  have  all  1.  With  respect  to  the  largeness  of 
power  in  heaven  and  earth.— (7yoc?w;iw.  the  offer.     ''Even  to    the  half   of  my 

Oh  the  wonderful  love  of  Christ !  the  kingdom,"    the   king   said,    *'  wUl     thy 

wonderful  bounty  of  his  love  !     It  was  request   be   granted."       This,   we    have 

a  royal  offer  of  Ahasuerus  to  Esther,  and  remarked,  was  the  language  of  exa^^^rera- 

a  sign  of  great  love  !     "  What  is   thy  tion.       But    we    have   it    declared^   in 

request]  it  shall  be  given  thee  to  the  the   words    of   truth  addressed   by  our 

half  of  the  kingdom."     Ay  ;  but  Christ  heavenly  Lord  to  his  people  :  '*  Yerily, 

not  only  offers,  but  gives,  not  half,  but  verily   I  say  unto  you,    whatsoever  ye 

whole,  kingdoms ;   yea,    whole    worlds,  shall  ask   the   Father  in  my  name,  he 

But  you  will  say,'  This  is  but  a  chimera,  will    give    it   you.      Hitherto    have   ye 

an  empty  notion ;  for  we  see  there  are  asked  nothing  in  my  name  :  ask,  and  ye 

none  enjoy  less  of  the  world  than  those  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full." 

whom  you  say  Christ  loves.     I  answer.  Here  there  is  no  limitation,   but  what- 

The  world  is  not  able  to  judge  of  true  ever  is  needed  to  the  completion  of  our 

enjoyments.     There  are  none  that  have  true  spiritual  joy  we  are  invited  to  ask 

a  more  real,   and  advantageous,  and  a  in  the  name  of  Christ ;  and  if  we  ask  in 

less   troublesome  and  dangerous  enjoy-  faith,  as  we  are  elsewhere  told,  it  will 

ment  of  the  world  than  saints.     And   [  be   given,    "  that    the    Father    may    be 

prove  it  thus.     We  may  be  most  truly  glorified  in  the  Son."     '*  All  things  are 

said  to  enjoy  that  which    we  reap  the  yours,"  it  is  said  to  believers  ;  and  il  may 

greatest  emolument  from,  and  get  the  well  be  said,  since  Jehovah  gives  himself 

greatest  benefit  by,  that  can  be  imagined ;  to  them  as  their  God,  and  Christ  is  theirs, 

but  there  are   none   that   improve   the  and  the  Spirit  dwells  in  them. 


180 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


[chap.  r. 


2.  But  then,  secondly,  as  Esther  was 
afraid  all  at  once  to  ask  what  she  most 
desired,  so  God's  people  are  often  slow 
or  afraid  to  avail  tliemselves  to  the  full 
of  their  privilege  of  asking.  Many  are 
contented  to  live  from  year  to  year,  with 
little  more  to  uphold  them  than  an 
indistinct  hope  that  they  shall  reach 
heaven  at  last,  when,  if  they  would  but 
take  home  God's  promises  in  all  their 
freeness  and  richness,  they  might  be 
able  to  rejoice  in  him  as  their  portion. 
Many  even  seem  to  think  that  it  would 
be  presumptuous  in  them  to  expect  such 
comfort  and  enlargement  of  heart  as 
they  read  that  others  have  enjoyed ; 
whereas  the  Scripture  tells  them  that 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  not  straitened, 
and  that  they  are  only  straitened  in 
themselves. 

But  perhaps  it  may  be,  that  as  Esther 
did  not  feel  herself  in  a  condition  all  at 
once    to    close    with    the   king's    most 
liberal    offer,  so    some   among   us,    for 
other  reasons  than   the  feeling  that   it 
would   be  presumptuous,  may  be  exer- 
cised in  the  same  way  with  respect  to 
spiritual  privileges.    This  point  deserves 
a   moment's   notice.      There   are   some 
professed   followers  of   Christ   who  are 
not  altogether  prepared  either  to  ask  or 
to  receive  the  full  measure  of  privilege 
which   he  offers  to  his  people.       They 
have  still  some  lingering  desires  after  the 
world  and  its  pleasures  which  they  are 
unwilling  all  at  once  to  renounce  ;  and 
though  they  seem  to  have  cast  in  their 
lot     with    the    redeemed,    they   would 
rather  have  the  process  of  self-renuncia- 
.  tion  and  of  sanctification  to  be  gradual 
than  summary.     In  a  word,  with  their 
present  feelings,  they  would  be,  I  must 
say,  unwilling,    or   at   least   afraid,    to 
receive    the    large   communications    of 
grace  which  Christ  has  promised  to  be- 
stow.    Now  this  is  a  most    dangerous 
state  of  mind,  and  cannot  be  otherwise 
designated   than  as    a    grieving  of    the 
Spirit  of  God.     And  if   there  be  any 
here  to    whom  the  above  remarks  are 
applicable,   I   would  beseech   them    no 
longer  to  sport  with  offered  blessings — 
no  longer  to  imagine  that  they  can  serve 
Christ  and  the  world  together.     Esther 
only  deferred  craving   sdl   she   wished, 


because  that  was  the  best  way  to  obtain 
it  in  the  end.  But  if  you  are  unwilling 
to  take  all  that  you  might  have,  because 
in  that  case  you  must  bid  adieu  to  cer- 
tain pleasures  which  you  desire  to  retain, 
then  you  provoke  the  Lord  to  withdraw 
from  you  altogether  the  sense  of  his 
favour,  and  to  leave  you  in  utter  dark- 
ness. — Davidson. 

"  What  wilt  thou,  queen  Esther  i 
And  what  is  thy  request?  It  shall  he 
even  given  thee  to  the  half  of  the  king- 
dom.'^ — What  encouragement  is  here 
presentt  d  to  those  who  are  called  to 
venture  their  lives,  or  their  reputation, 
or  their  substance,  in  the  cause  of  God  ! 
They  shall  not  only  have  these  preserved, 
but  in  one  way  or  another  increased. 
IIow  often  has  God  prevented  the  fears, 
and  outdone  the  hopes,  of  his  servants  ! 
It  is  the  cowardice  of  Christians  that 
spoils  their  fortune.  Their  fears  kill 
them,  and  benumb,  and  palsy,  and 
deaden  their  exertions  for  God  and  his 
Church.  If  we  had  more  faith,  and 
"added  to  our  faith  fortitude,"  our 
trials  would  be  less,  and  our  success 
greater.  "  Said  I  not  unto  thee,  that  if 
thou  wouldst  believe,  thou  shouldst  ^ee 
the  glory  of  God  ]  "  * 

Erom  the  story  of  the  unjust  judge 
our  Saviour  took  occasion  to  teach  that 
•'  men  ought  always  to  pray  and  not  to 
faint ; "  and,  without  wandering  from 
the  subject,  I  may  surely  take  oppor- 
tunity from  this  portion  of  history  to 
inculcate  the  same  duty.  Did  this 
haughty  monarch  hold  out  the  sceptre, 
and  say,  What  wilt  thou,  and  what  is 
thy  request  1  and  shall  not  God  hear 
his  own  elect — his  chosen  spouse,  crying 
to  him  day  and  night  1  Esther  had  to 
go  into  the  presence  of  a  proud  im- 
perious man,  we  to  go  into  the  presence 
of  a  God  of  love  and  condescension. 
She  was  not  called ;  we  are  invited. 
She  went  in  against  the  law ;  we 
have  both  precept  and  promise  in 
our  favour — yea,  precept  upon  precept, 
and  promise  upon  promise.  "  Ask, 
and  it  shall  be  given  you  ;  seek,  and 
ye  shall  find  ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be 
opened  unto  you."  She  had  no  friend 
at  court  on  whom  she  could  lely,  and 
•  John  xi.  40. 


CITAP.   T.] 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  KSTHEn. 


\H\ 


the  great  favourite  was  the  accuser 
of  her  brethren,  the  mortal  foe  of  lier 
name  and  race  ;  we,  even  when  we  have 
sinned,  and  sinned  after  light  and  par- 
don, have  an  advocate  with  the  Father, 
his  beloved  Son  in  whom  lie  is  well 
pleased,  who  also  is  the  propitiation  for 
our  sins.  Esther  was  encouraged  to  ask 
to  the  extent  of  the  half  of  the  kingdom 
of  Persia ;  we  are  encouraged  to  ask  to 
the  whole  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
with  a  life-rent  on  earth  of  all  that  is 
needful  for  us.  Ought  we  not  then  to 
"  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  "  ? 
— McCrie. 

She  would  act  with  calmness  and 
deliberation,  as  one  who  Avaited  and 
relied  upon  the  leading  of  providence. 
The  king  broke  the  silence  hy  encourag- 
ing her  to  speak,  and  promising  to  grant 
her  petition  whatever  it  was,  even  "  to 
the  half  of  the  kingdom."  There  seems 
to  be  more  implied  in  this  promise  than 
the  loose  language  of  exaggeration.  It 
has  been  usual  to  interpret  it  in  this  way, 
but  inquiry  into  the  custom  of  ancient 
Persian  kings  presents  it  in  a  different 
aspect.  It  was  customary  for  them,  we 
are  informed,  to  bestow  grants  or  pen- 
sions to  their  favourites,  ''  not  by  pay- 
ments from  the  treasury,  but  by  charges 
upon  the  revenues  of  particular  provinces 
or  cities."  One  province  or  city  was 
charged  with  providing  the  particular 
favourite's  clothes,  another  his  meat, 
another  his  wine,  another  his  jewellery, 
and  so  on,  thereby  enabling  the  person 
to  live  in  great  luxury  and  magnificence. 
Because  of  this  charge  laid  upon  special 
districts,  they  were  called  by  the  article 
which  they  had  to  supply,  such  as  "  The 
queen's  girdle,"  *•'  The  queen's  head- 
di-ess!,"  et  csetera.  And  if  we  take  into 
account  this  old  custom,  it  is  probable 
that  the  promise  of  the  king  to  Esther 
amounted  to  thi^,  that  he  would  even 
lay  the  half  of  his  kingdom  under  some 
burden  or  tribute  for  her  special  benefit. 
Perhaps  this  also  was  an  exaggeration, 
but  it  gives  to  the  words  a  significance 
which  we  should  not  otherwise  have 
understood.  "  Then  said  the  king  unto 
her,  What  wilt  thou,  queen  Esther] 
and  what  is   thy  request]  it  shall   be 


even  given  thee  to  the  half  of  the  king- 
dom." 

Without  branching  out  upon  far- 
fetched analogies,  and  remotely  sug- 
gested themes,  we  would,  for  the  sake 
of  the  comfort  which  it  may  afford,  refer 
to  ourselves  as  suppliants  in  the  presence 
of  our  King.  The  Church  is  "  the 
Lamb's  Avife."  She  has  free  access  to 
the  throne  of  the  King  of  kings.  O 
how  timidly  and  doubtfully  do  believers 
sometimes  draw  near  to  him  !  It  is  as 
though  they  feared  his  royal  sceptre, 
forgetting  that  it  is  the  sceptre  of  mercy ; 
as  though  they  were  apprehensive  that 
he  had  taken  away  his  love  from  them, 
forgetting  that  "  having  loved  his  own 
who  were  in  the  world,  he  loves  them 
unto  the  end."  He  has  no  half-measures 
— no  half-kingdoms  to  offer.  He  pro- 
mises you  the  kingdom — wholly,  will- 
ing, unreservedly, — and  even  chides  you 
for  having  *'  hitherto  a^^ked  nothing  in 
his  name,"  and  encourages  you  to  "ask, 
and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may 
be  full."  Kincr  Ahasuerus  could  not 
anticipate  the  request  of  Esther  ;  after 
his  own  carnal  heart  he  thought  that  it 
must  be  some  additional  temporal  good. 
But  our  King  knows  all  beforehand,  and 
has  provided  for,  and  is  ready  to  bestow 
upon,  us  all  that  we  can  need  upon  the 
earth,  and  all  that  we  can  desire  to  pre- 
pare us  for  heaven.  And  surely,  if  we 
require  to  be  stirred  to  earnestness  and 
importunity  by  the  presence  of  a  great 
cause,  we  all  have  it  in  the  condition  of 
our  own  hearts,  the  souls  of  others,  and 
the  salvation  of  the  world.  There  are 
spiritual  as  well  as  natural  laws,  accord- 
ing to  which  God  works — a  law  which 
requires  that  the  husbandman  should 
sow  the  seed  if  he  would  reap  a  harvest, 
and  a  law  which  requires  that  we  should 
pray  if  we  would  obtain  the  blessing. 
By  our  own  large  spiritual  necessities 
and  the  wants  of  the  world  around,  as 
well  as  by  the  unstinted  generosity  and 
beneficence  of  our  Kingr,  are  we  urj]:e  I 
on  all  hands  to  abound  more  in  prayer — ■ 
'•  Then  shall  the  earth  yield  her  increase, 
and  God,  even  our  own  God,  shall  bless 
us  ;  God  shall  bless  us,  and  all  the  entls 
of  the  earth  shall  fear  Him." — McEwan. 


182  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EHfTtEU.  [chap.  ?. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAEAGRAPH.     Verses  6—8. 

Directions  for  Prayer. 

If  in  the  book  of  Esther  only  this  one  passage  were  found  we  ought  to  feel  that 
the  book  had  not  been  written  and  preserved  in  vain ;  for  it  is  a  passage  that  has 
served  good  purpose  in  the  way  of  illustrating  and  enforcing  theological  lessons. 
It  is  one  of  the  passages  that  readily  presents  itself  to  the  mind  of  those  who  wish 
to  speak  about  prayer.  In  other  passages  it  might  appear  as  if  the  moral  lessons 
were  brought  to  the  text  instead  of  being  naturally  and  logically  deduced ;  but  in 
this  passage  the  mind  at  once  seizes  upon  the  subject,  and  reads  from  it  a  lesson  or 
prayer.  Following  the  plan  of  textual  division  and  exposition  we  find  here  laid 
down  ample  directions  for  prayer. 

I.  There  must  be  method  in  prayer.  What  is  thy  petition,  and  what  is  thy 
request]  These  are  questions  which  the  praying  soul  may  well  put  to  itself  as  it 
is  about  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace.  Self-examination  is  good,  and  it  is  especially 
beneficial  as  we  are  about  to  approach  our  God.  Too  many  in  these  busy  times 
simply  content  themselves  with  the  idea  that  prayer  is  to  be  ofiered.  Prayer  with 
them  is  too  much  like  the  hurried  salute  given  to  a  passing  friend.  Prayer  with 
them  is  like  the  quick  march  of  an  army  past  the  royal  standard.  It  is  a  kind  of 
ofi'ering  presented  in  order  to  propitiate  Deity.  It  is  only  counting  beads  strung 
on  a  cord.  It  is  only  as  one  turning  a  praying  wheel.  God  does  not  require  such 
offerings.  He  inquires,  What  is  thy  petition "?  And  we  too  should  ask  ourselves  the 
sam3  question.  Self-examination  and  meditation  before  prayer  will  give  speed  to  our 
prayers,  and  enable  us  to  derive  benefit  from  the  same.  We  go  as  beggars ;  let  us 
understand  what  we  want,  and  shape  our  requests  accordingly.  We  go  as  children  ; 
let  us  try  to  perceive  that  we  need  light,  and  love,  and  guidance,  and  earnestly 
appeal  to  God  for  the  required  blessings.  If  at  the  close  of  closet  prayer  an  an^el 
were  to  appear  and'to  ask,  What  is  thy  petition  1  how  startled  we  should  be,  and  we 
should  have  to  answer,  I  was  not  thinking  very  much  about  it,  only  I  felt  that  I 
should  be  uneasy  if  a  few  words  were  not  said  before  I  retired  to  rest.  If  God's 
angels  were  to  stand  some  Sunday  morning  beside  the  thirty  or  forty  thousand 
pulpits  of  our  land,  and  say  aloud  to  every  minister,  What  is  thy  petition  1 — the 
ministers  and  the  congregations  would  be  surprised  out  of  their  inane  proprieties. 
And  if  those  angels  had  the  power  of  making  the  true  thoughts  speak  out,  still 
greater  would  be  the  surprise.  The  Church  minister  might  say,  I  had  no  request, 
I  only  thought  of  reading  the  prayers,  and  I  did  not  even  think  much  of  the  words 
written  in  the  Prayer-book.  In  fact  I  was  not  conscious  of  being  in  a  devotional 
spirit.  The  dissenting  ministers  would  have  varying  answers.  Some  were  earnestly 
pleading  with  God  for  a  blessing,  as  some  devout  Church  ministers  do  pray  by  means 
of  written  and  read  prayers.  But  what  of  others  1  Some  might  say,  I  was  trying 
to  be  philosophical ;  some,  rhetorical ;  some,  beautifully  simple  ;  some,  I  was  trying  to 
reach  my  ideal  of  what  prayer  should  be ;  and  other  some,  a  few  it  is  hoped,  I  was 
imitating  this  one  or  that  one  noted  for  the  beauty  of  his  prayers.  Surely  modern 
Christianity  would  be  a  greater  power  in  the  earth  if  all,  or  a  vast  majority,  were 
able  to  give  a  definite  answer  to  the  question,  What  is  thy  petition  1  God  pity  our 
weakness.  He  does  pity;  he  bears  long;  he  remembers  tlio>e  who  do  pray,  a  larger 
number  than  perhaps  we  sometimes  think.  Oh  for  more  strength  in  prayer ! — and 
this  is  gained  by  more  method.  God  graciously  asks,  What  is  thy  petition? — shall  we 
not  respondently  inquire,  What  am  I  going  to  do  1  What  blessings  do  I  require  % 
What  is  the  urgent  requisite  for  the  assembly  for  whom  I  pray  1 

II.  There  must  be  assurance  in  prayer.  Not  merely  the  assurance  that  God 
is  ready  to  hear  prayer,  but  the  assurance  that  we  "  have  found  favour  in  the  sight 
of  the  King."    Esther  desired  to  feel  her  ground  sure  on  this  important  point.    How 


CHAP,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  183 

shall  we  know  that  the  King  of  heaven  is  favourable?  We  may  know  by  looking 
to  the  unspeakable  gift.  *'  God  commendeth  his  love  towards  us  in  that  while  we 
were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  May  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  each 
one  to  know  and  to  feel  Christ  died  i'or  me  a  sinner !  We  need  not  doubt  the 
favour  of  God  if  we  rest  fully  upon  the  Son  of  his  love.  In  Christ  we  may  know 
that  it  will  please  the  heavenly  King  to  grant  our  petition.  "  He  that  spared  not 
his  own  Son,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  % "  Here  is 
a  large  charter  of  blessings.  God's  great  gift  of  Jesus  implies  the  gift  of  all  things 
needful.  It  includes  and  surpasses  every  other  charter  of  blessings.  We  cannot 
stand  anywhere  out  of  the  reach  of  God's  blessed  ''all  things."  The  atmosphere 
seems  to  be  an  all-pervading  force  ;  but  God's  "  all  things  "  go  even  further,  and  are 
more  enduring  than  that  life-giving  atmosphere.  Riches  may  take  to  themselves 
wings  and  fly  away ;  a  fair  reputation  may  be  blighted ;  health  may  decline ; 
friends  may  depart ;  relatives  may  become  indiffv'^rent ;  even  father  and  mother  may 
forsake ;  death  itself  may  come  as  if  to  complete  the  awful  ruin  ;  but  still  God's 
*'  all  things  "  abide  to  the  Christian  amid  every  change,  and  in  the  midst  of  every 
disaster.  Assurance  in  prayer,  why  should  we  ever  doubt  *?  Let  boasting  scientists 
talk  ;  we  are  not  careful,  even  if  we  were  able,  to  answer  them  in  this  matter.  We 
betake  ourselves  to  prayer,  and  forget  the  babbling  noise  of  opposing  tongues.  God's 
"  all  things  "  are  vaster  than  the  scientist's  few  things  imperfectly  understood.  God's 
"  all  things "  are  deeper  and  higher,  longer  and  broader,  than  philosophies  fldsely 
so-called. 

III.  There  may  be  hesitancy  in  prayer.  Not  the  hesitancy  of  doubt,  but  of 
deliberation.  Preachers  are  sometimes  exhorted  to  cultivate  the  pause  in  their 
sermons.  All  may  with  great  advantage  be  exhorted  to  cultivate  the  pause  in  their 
prayers.  The  silent  waiting  of  the  Society  of  Friends  is  not  without  its  instructive 
teaching  to  those  who  have  too  much  fluency  in  prayer.  Esther  answered  and  said, 
''  My  petition  and  my  request  is ;"  then  she  stopped  as  if  to  think.  The  sentence  is  not 
properly  punctuated  if  we  look  into  Esther's  mind.  A  full  stop  would  be  appropriate. 
There  was  doubtless  a  full  stop  in  Esther's  mind.  *'  My  petition  and  my  request  is." 
Oh,  is  there  not  prayer,  the  truest  prayer,  when  the  heart  is  too  full  for  utterance  1 
Unspoken  prayers  make  more  noise  in  heaven  than  "the  greatest  prayers"  ever 
addressed  to  applauding  audiences.  "  Now,  let  us  have  a  few  minutes'  silent  prayer," 
says  the  revivalist,  at  the  close  of  an  exciting  address;  and  perhaps  most  of  the  people 
are  not  in  a  state  for  prayer.  Many  do  not  know  what  to  pray  for.  Well,  the  silence 
will  be  beneficial  after  so  much  bluster.  It  can  do  no  harm.  The  silence  we  desire 
is  not  that  which  is  produced  at  the  command  of  another.  There  must  be  the  deep 
true  silence  of  the  soul.      "  Commune  \\ni\\  your  own  heart,  and  be  still." 

IV.  There  must  be  submission  to  the  Divine  will  in  prayer.  "  I  will  do  to- 
morrow as  the  king  hath  said."  Here  Esther  answers  the  king,  but  she  also  answers 
the  workings  of  her  own  devout  mind.  She  is  watching  the  leadings  of  providence; 
she  is  waiting  for  the  finger  of  God  to  point  the  way  in  which  she  is  to  walk ;  she 
is  intently  listening  fur  the  Divine  voices  to  speak  to  her  in  the  silence  of  her  prayerful 
waiting ;  she  is  in  no  hurry.  To-morrow  will  do,  if  to-day  the  purpose  is  not  ripe. 
To-morrow  will  do,  if  it  is  in  God's  hands.  She  will  not  limit  the  Divine  to-morrow. 
Certainly  we  must  not.  Human  to-morrows  are  easily  measured.  Divine  to- 
morrows out-pass  the  petty  measurements  of  time.  The  praying  soul  may  desire 
the  blessing  to-day,  but  God  may  say  to-morrow  is  best.  Delay  is  part  of  the 
Divine  ])lan  in  dealing  with  his  people  and  his  Church.  The  to-morrow  sometimes 
seems  a  long  way  off,  and  a  long  time  in  coming.  Let  patience  have  its  perfect  work. 
The  Divine  silence  will  be  broken.  God  is  moving  though  we  see  him  not,  and  though 
we  hear  not  the  tread  of  his  feet.  There  are  times  in  the  Church's  history  when 
God  seems  to  answer  not  a  word,  but  ere  long  the  Divine  goings  are  heard.  Let 
faith,  patience,  and  prayer  be  continued  till  the  Divine  silence  is  broken.  God 
8(jmetimes  in  answering  not  a  word  to  a  prayer  gives  the  best  answer.     He  answeyg 


184 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  v. 


not  to  the  mere  words  but  to  the  true  purpose,  and  the  lasting  good,  of  him  who 
sincerely  prays.  Silence,  then,  is  not  denial,  but  encouragement.  May  the  good 
Lord  increase  our  faith,  strengthen  our  patience,  enlarge  our  spirit  of  prayer,  and 
crown  all  with  Divine  benedictions. 


SuGQEsriVE  Comments  on  Yerses  6 — 8. 


To  make  prayer  of  any  value,  there 
must  be  definite  objects  for  which  to 
plead.  We  often  ramble  in  our  prayers 
after  this,  that,  and  the  other,  and  we 
get  nothing,  because  in  each  we  do  not 
really  desire  anything.  We  chatter 
about  many  subjects,  but  the  soul  does 
not  concentrate  itself  upon  any  object. 
Do  you  not  sometimes  fall  on  your 
knees  without  thinking  beforehand  what 
you  mean  to  ask  God  for  1  You  do,  as  a 
matter  of  habit,  without  any  motion  of 
your  heart.  You  are  like  a  man  who 
would  go  to  a  shop  and  not  know  what 
articles  he  would  procure.  He  may, 
perhaps,  make  a  happy  purchase  when 
he  is  there,  but  certainly  it  is  not  a  wise 
plan  to  adopt.  And  so  the  Christian  in 
prayer  may  afterwards  attain  to  a  real 
desire,  and  get  his  end  ;  but  how  much 
better  would  he  speed  if,  having  prepared 
his  soul  by  consideration  and  self-ex- 
amination, he  came  to  God  for  an  object 
at  which  he  was  about  to  arrive,  with  a 
real  request.  Did  we  ask  an  audience 
at  her  Majesty's  court,  we  should  not 
be  expected  to  go  into  the  presence  of 
royalty,  and  then  to  think  of  some  peti- 
tion after  we  came  there.  Even  so  with 
the  child  of  God.  He  would  be  able  to 
answer  the  great  question  :  "  What  is 
thy  petition,  and  what  is  thy  request, 
and  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee  % "  Im- 
agine an  archer  shooting  with  his  bow, 
and  not  knowing  where  the  mark  is  ! 
Would  he  be  likely  to  have  success  1 
Conceive  a  ship,  on  a  voyage  of  dis- 
covery, putting  to  sea  without  the  captain 
having  any  idea  of  what  he  was  looking 
for  !  Would  you  expect  that  he  would 
come  back  heavily  laden  either  with  the 
discoveries  of  science  or  with  treasures  of 
gold?  In  everything  else  you  have  a 
plan.  You  do  not  go  to  work  without 
knowing  that  there  is  something  that 
you  designed  to  make ;  how  is  it  that 
you  go  to  God  without  knowing  what 
blessing  you  design  to  have] — Sj^turgeon, 


And  I  will  do  to-morrow  as  the  king 
hath  said. — She  had  learned  to  piefer 
opportunity  before  time.  There  might 
be  some  by  at  this  first  banquet  whose 
company  she  liked  not ;  or  she  might  not 
yet  have  so  clear  an  answer  in  her  own 
heart  to  her  former  prayers,  and  therefore 
desireth  some  further  time  that  night  to 
seek  God  ;  whatever  the  reason  of  her 
putting  it  off  till  next  day  was,  God's 
holy  hand  was  in  it,  that  Mordecai  might 
be  first  so  greatly  honoured,  and  Haman's 
high  gallows  prepared :  Ilium  utiquemagis 
securum,  Regem  autem  magis  benevolura 
magisque  fecit  attentum,  saith  Rupertu^. 
Hereby  she  made  Haman  more  secure, 
and  the  king  more  kind  and  attent. — 
Trapp. 

We  may  recognize  the  picture  of  a 
soul  praying  to  God  in  the  image  of 
Esther  standing  with  humble  and  im- 
ploring attitude  before  Ahasuerus. 
Sacred  poetry,  especially,  has  made  use 
of  single  features  or  expressions  of  this 
history  in  this  regard.  So  Dressier  in 
his  beautiful  hymn,  "My  Jesus,  to  whom 
seraphim,"  &c.,  causes  the  pious  suppli- 
cant to  say  : 

"  Reach  thy  sceptre  to  my  soul, 
Which  like  an  Esther  bows  to  thee, 
And  shows  herself  thy  bride  to  thee." 

"  Speak :  'Yea,  thou  art  she  whom  I  have 
chosen.'"  The  representative  significa- 
tion of  the  persons  in  this  history  have, 
as  it  were,  brought  with  them  their  own 
recognition.  The  Christian  may  certainly 
employ  them  in  this  sense.  So  Starke, 
when  he  says  :  "  If  a  heathen  king  can 
willingly  grant  such  grace,  how  much 
more  willing  is  the  most  faithful  Lord 
to  receive  all  poor  destitute  sinners 
coming  to  him  in  faith,  and  in  the  good 
time  to  come  to  place  them  upon  his 
throne!"  Ahasuerus  paid  no  regar  1  to 
the  fact  that  Esther  had  violated  his 
commandment,  but  received  her  very 
graciously,  although  his  irrevocable  edict 
stood  in  the  way  of  granting  her  petition. 


CHAP,  v.]                   HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  185 

The  father  heart  of  God,  although  we  expressed ;    the   door  opens   before  the 

violate  all  his  laws,  and  though  his  un-  hand   has   struck   it ;    while   prayer   is 

changeable  holiness  be  against  the  sinner,  travelling  up  the  one  line,  the  answer  is 

still  yearns  towards  us  in  its  great  love  speeding    down   the    other.      Hear   the 

and  grace.      But  just   as   Esther   came  voice  of  the  Lord :   "  It  shall  come   to 

boldly  and   yet  modestly,   so    we    also  pass  ;  before  they  call  I  will  answer,  and 

must  combine  with  true  humility  a  true  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  hear." 

and  elevated  courage,  a  disheartened  re-  Child  of  God  !  pray  on.     God's  peo[)le 

pentance  together  with  confiding  faith,  are  more  dear  to  him  than  our  childnii 

— Lange.  can  be  to  us.     He  regards  them  with 

He  that  would  be  little  in  temptation,  more  complacency  than  all  the  shining 

let  him  be  much  in  prayer.     Praying  orbs  of   that  starry  firmament.      They 

only  for  carnal   things  shows  a  carnal  were  bought  at  a  price  higher  than  would 

heart,  and  leaves  it  carnal.     Prayer  is  a  purchase  the  dead  matter  of  ten  thousand 

key  in  the  hand  of  faith  to  unlock  God's  worlds.     He  cares  more  for  his  humblest, 

treasures.     A  family  without  prayer  is  weakest  child  than  for  all  the  crowned 

like  a  house  without  a  roof — exposed  to  heads  of  earth,  and  takes  a  deeper  interest 

every  wind  that  bloWvS,  and  every  storm  in  the  daily  fortunes  of  a  pious  cottage 

that  rages.     Prayer  will  compel  a  man  than  in  the  fall  and  rise  of  kingdoms, 

to  leave  off  sinning,  or  sinning  will  make  Child   of  God  !    pray   on.      By  prayer 

him  leave  off  praying.     The  greatest  and  thy  hand  can  touch  the  stars,  thy  arm 

hardest  preparation  for  heaven  is  within ;  stretch  up  to  heaven.     Nor  let  thy  holy 

but  the  spirit  of  prayer  can  effect  this,  boldness  be  dashed  by  the  thought  that 

Do  yoi  profess  to  love  any  one  for  whom  prayer  has  no  power  to  bend  these  skies, 

you  have  never  prayed  ?    Ehetoric  cannot  and  bring  down  thy  God.    When  I  pull 

pray,  with  all  his  words;  but  Faith  can  on  the  rope  which  fastens  my  frail  aiui 

pray,  even  when  she  has  no  words.     In  little  boat  to  a  distant  and  mighty  shi[). 

prayer  it  is  better  to  have  a  heart  with-  if  my  strength  cannot  draw  its  vast  bulk 

out  words  than  words  without  a  heart,  to  me,  I  draw  myself  to  it — to  ride   in 

Pray,  not  only  in  the  name  of  Christ,  safety  under  the  protection  of  its  guns  ; 

but  in  the  faith  of  Christ.     The  gift  of  to  enjoy  in  want  the  fulness  of  its  stores, 

prayer  may  have  praise  from  men,  but  And  it  equally  serves  my  purpose,  and 

the  grace  of  prayer  has  power  with  God.  supplies  my  needs,  that  prayer,  although 

— American  Churchman'' s  Almanac.  it  were  powerless  to  move  God  to  me, 

Let  us  need  present  help,  and  you  moves  me  to  God.  If  he  does  not  de- 
shall  see  that  he  is  "a  very  present  help  scend  to  earth,  I — as  it  were — ascend  to 
in  time  of  trouble."  Let  the  disciple  be  heaven.  Child  of  God  !  pray  on.  Were 
sinking  amid  the  waves  of  Galilee,  cry-  it  indispensable  for  thy  safety  that  God 
ing,  "  I  perish  " — let  the  prophet  be  on  should  rend  these  heavens,  it  should  be 
his  knees  in  the  depths  of  the  sea  and  done — a  wondering  world  should  see  it 
the  dark  belly  of  the  whale  —  let  the  done.  I  dare  believe  that ;  and  "  I  am 
widow's  last  mite,  and  the  barrel's  last  not  mad,  most  noble  Festus."  Have  not 
handful,  have  come — let  the  confessor  these  heavens  been  already  rent"?  Eighteen 
be  descending  into  the  lions'  roaring  hundred  years  ago,  robed  in  humanity, 
den  —  let  the  queen  have  her  brave  God  himself  came  down.  These  blue 
hand  upon  the  door,  with  these  words  of  skies,  where  larks  sing  and  eagles  sail, 
high  resolve  upon  her  lips,  "  If  I  perish,  were  cleft  with  the  wings  and  filled  with 
I  perish  " — let  the  trembling  host  have  the  songs  of  his  angel  train.  Among  the 
the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  roaring  in  ancient  orbs  of  that  very  firmament,  a 
their  frint,  and  the  chariots  of  Egypt  stranger  star  appeared,  travelling  the 
pressing  on  their  rear — let  God's  people  heavens,  and  blazing  on  the  banner 
have  reached  such  a  crisis ;  let  them  borne  before  the  King,  as  he  descended 
stand  in  any  such  predicament ; — and  his  on  this  dark  and  distant  world.  On 
answer  anticipates  their  prayer.  The  Canaan's  dewy  ground — the  lowly  bed 
supply  is  on  the  road  before  the  want  is  he  had  left — the  eye  of  morning  shone 


186 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[chap.  v. 


on  the  shape  and  form  of  the  Son  of 
God  ;  and  dusty  roads,  and  winter  snows, 
and  desert  sands,  and  the  shores  and 
very  waves  of  Galilee,  were  impressed 
with  the  footprints  of  the  Creator.  By 
this  manger,  where  the  babe  lies  cradled ; 
beside  this  cross,  upon  whose  ignomini- 
ous arms  the  glory  of  the  universe  is 
hung ;  by  this  silent  sepulchre,  where 
wrapped  in  bloody  shroud,  the  body  is 
stretched  out  on  its  bed  of  spices,  while 
Roman  sentinels  walk  their  moonlit 
round,  and  death — abound  captive — sits 
within,  so  soon  as  the  sleeper  wakes,  to 
be  disarmed,  uncrowned,  and  in  himself 
have  death  put  to  death — faith  can  be- 
lieve all  that  God  has  revealed,  and  hope 
for  all  that  God  has  promised.  She  reads 
on  that  manger,  on  that  cross,  deeply 
lettered  on  that  rocky  sepulchre,  these 
glorious  words :  "  He  that  spared  not 
his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us 
all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely 
give  us  all  things  ^  "  And  there  lifting 
an  eagle  eye  to  heaven,  she  rises  to  the 
boldest  flights,  and  soars  aloft  on  the 
broad  wings  of  prayer  : 

'*  Faith,  bold  faith,  the  promise  sees, 
And  trusts  to  that  alone, 
Laughs  at  impossibilities, 

And  says  it  shall  be  done." — Dr.  Guthrie. 

Prayer  may  be  supplication,  or  thanks- 
giving, or  confession.  Or  it  may  be 
simple  intercourse.  He  that  muses  to- 
ward God  prays.  If  you  can  conceive 
of  a  child  in  the  presence  of  a  parent 
most  beloved  that  speaks,  that  is  silent, 
that  speaks  again,  that  is  again  silent ; 
now  thought,  now  fancy,  now  feeling,  in 
turn,  as  it  were,  wheeling  the  orb  of  its 
little  mind  round  completely,  so  that  on 
every  side  it  receives  light  or  gives  light 
to  the  parent — the  intercourse  of  that 
child  with  the  parent  is  the  fittest  symbol 
of  true  prayer. 

Prayer  is  the  soul  of  a  man  moving  in 
the  presence  of  Gody  for  the  purpose  of 
communicating  its  joy,  or  sorrow,  or  fear, 
or  hope,  or  any  other  conscious  experi- 
ence that  it  may  have,  to  the  bosom  of  a 
parent. — Beecher. 

It  is  right  not  to  put  off  till  to-morrow 
the  duty  of  to-day,  but  it  may  be  wise 
to  defer  to-day  what  can  be  done  better 
and   more   hopefully  to-morro>y.      The 


greenness  of  to-day  may  be  ripeness  to- 
morrow— the  blossom  of  to-day  may  be 
fruit  to-morrow, — and  it  is  the  policy 
of  wisdom  to  know  when  to  wait  and 
when  to  act,  not  waiting  too  long  nor 
acting  too  hastily ;  only  to,  but  no  far- 
ther than,  the  ripeness  and  the  fruiting 
— *'  I  will  do  to-morrow  as  the  king  hath 
said." 

To-morrow  !  As  little  could  Esther 
as  Haman  have  divined  what  was  to 
happen  before  to-morrow.  By  faith  the 
Christian  leaves  to-morrow  in  the  hand 
of  God  ;  but,  confident  in  proud  self,  the 
worldly  man  doubts  not  but  that  to- 
morrow will  be  as  this  day,  and  yet  more 
abundant.  There  are  shadows  which 
are  thrown  forward,  losses  and  bereave- 
ments which  make  the  whole  of  life  more 
sombre  and  sad  than  it  had  been  before ; 
but  if  each  to-morrow  was  to  be  known 
beforehand  there  would  be  shadows 
thrown  backward  as  well  as  forward, 
darkening  our  joys  and  intensifying  our 
sorrows.  As  the  past  has  scarcely  proved 
what  we  could  have  anticipated,  so  can- 
not we  now  antedate  the  future.  It  is 
well  that  it  should  be  so — well  if,  like 
Esther,  we  are  exercising  faith  in  God, 
and  well  too  if,  like  Haman,  we  are 
drawing  near  his  signal  judgment.  Let 
us  advance  upon  each  to-morrow  as 
though  to-morrow  may  be  our  last,  and 
our  last  to-morrow  will  not  take  us  by 
surprise.  "Go  to  now,  ye  that  say,  To- 
day or  to-morrow,  we  will  go  into  such  a 
city,  and  continue  there  a  year,  and  buy 
and  sell  and  get  again.  Whereas  ye 
know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow." 

"  Then  went  Haman  forth  that  day 
joyful  and  with  a  glad  heart."  Be  not  so 
cruel  as  speak  to  him  of  to-morrow  !  Let 
the  wicked  enjoy  their  bright  to-day — it 
is  the  only  bright  to-day  which  they  will 
ever  have.  It  was  different  with  Lazarus 
than  with  the  rich  man  in  the  parable. 
To  the  one  the  last  to-morrow  was  a  day 
of  comfort,  but  to  the  other  a  day  ef 
dread  decision  and  despair.  And  ah  ! 
how  different  the  to-morrow  of  Mordecai 
and  hiri  inveterate  enemy  Haman.  The 
sun  is  about  to  rise  on  the  one,  just  as 
it  is  setting  on  the  other.  Without 
farther  anticipating  that  to-morrow,  we 
know  not  whether  to  congratulate  tho 


UHAP.  V.J  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  187 


pious  Jew  the  most,  or  to  pity  and  com-  last  to-movrow  !     ''He  that  being  often 

miserate   the   haughty  Agagite.      They  reproved  hardeneth  hi^  neck  shall  sud- 

raeet  to-day,  and  they  shall  meet  again  denly  be  destroyed,  and   that   without 

to-morrow.       Yes,     to  -  morrow  !      Let  remedy." — McEwan, 
worldly  men  fear  and  prepare  for  their 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PAKAGRAPH.     Verses  9,  10. 

The  Superficial  Man. 

We  can  readily  picture  Haman  going  forth  from  the  royal  banquet  with  glad 
heart,  with  elated  step,  and  haughty  mien.  Not  more  proudly  did  Nebuchadnezzar 
walk  in  the  palace  of  the  kingdom  of  Babylon,  and  gaze  upon  the  mighty  city 
with  feelings  of  self-laudation,  than  did  the  wicked  Haman  go  forth  from  the  palace 
that  was  in  Shushan,  and  congratulate  himself  on  his  success.  And  not  more 
certainly  did  pride  have  a  dreadful  fall  in  the  case  of  Nebuchadnezzar  than  it  was 
destined  to  have  in  the  case  of  Haman.  Now  he  is  glad,  but  soon  his  gladness  is 
turned  into  the  wailing  of  discontent.  Now  he  is  proud,  but  soon  he  will  be 
humbled. 

I.  Hainan's  gladness.  ''Then  went  Haman  forth  that  day  joyful,  and  with  a 
glad  heart."  Haman's  gladness  arose  from  a  false  estimation  of  himself.  He  vainly 
fancied  that  the  banquet  was  in  his  honour.  He  regarded  all  the  costly  and  painful 
preparation  as  a  fitting  homage  to  his  own  self-importance.  These  kinds  of  false 
estimates  are  not  peculiar  to  the  Hamans.  The  poet  may  exhort,  but  the  poet  does 
not  give  the  power,  to  see  ourselves  as  others  see  us.  Perhaps  after  all  the  power 
would  not  be  so  beneficial.  Many  a  man  would  be  less  useful  if  he  saw  himself 
through  other  people's  spectacles.  Still  exaggerated  views  of  self  are  harmful.  A 
true  estimate  of  self,  with  firm  dependence  upon  God,  and  an  earnest  desire  to  do 
our  duty,  will  furnish  the  most  lasting  satisfaction.  Haman's  gladness  arose  from 
a  false  estimate  of  his  position.  We  are  sometimes  never  less  safe  than  when  we 
feel  most  secure.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  a  doubt  crossed  Haman's  mind  as 
he  passed  away  from  the  royal  presence.  He  did  not  perceive  the  dark  shadow 
dogging  his  steps.  Many  are  glad  instead  of  being  sorry  because  they  take  false 
estimates  of  their  position.  They  build  on  the  sand,  and  not  on  the  rock.  Happy 
the  man  who  builds  on  the  rock  Christ  Jesus  !  Here  is  abiding  gladness.  Here 
is  heavenly  calm.  Here  is  enduring  safety.  Thus  Haman's  gladness  was  super- 
ficial, and  consequently  transitory.  The  rapturous  gladness  of  earth  is  superficial 
and  transitory.  The  chastened  gladness  of  the  soul  resting  upon  Christ  is  profound 
and  abiding. 

II.  Hainan's  use  of  his  eyes.  He  saw,  but  he  did  nob  see  deeply;  he  did  not 
see  correctly.  Pride  had  cast  a  film  over  his  mental  vision.  He  saw  only  Mordecai's 
stubbornness.  He  did  not  see  that  the  stubbornness  rightly  read  meant  integrity 
of  purpose.  He  did  not  see  glorious  heroism  in  that  unbending  form.  Prejudice 
lessens  the  power  of  vision.  Green-eyed  jealousy  cannot  possibly  see  corre  tly. 
A  vast  deal  of  sufi'ering  would  be  saved  if  eyes  were  used  in  a  right  manner.  ]\Ien 
see  and  yet  do  not  see.  Seldom  do  men  see  one  another  justly.  We  either  see 
too  much  or  see  too  little.  Most  see  through  other  people's  sj^ectacles.  We  see 
virtue  and  genius  in  the  man  who  has  a  reputation.  We  see  a  repellent  sight  in 
the  Jew  who  sits  unbendingly  at  the  king's  gate.  Let  eyes  be  allowed  to  do  their 
own  proper  work. 

III.  Hainan's  consequent  change  of  state.  The  eyes  affect  the  heart.  Haman 
saw,  and  Haman  became  full  of  indignation.  Had  Haman  seen  correctly  he  would 
have  been  full  of  admiration.  A  false  use  of  the  eyes  has  its  penalties.  No  God- 
given  power  or  faculty,  whether  physical,  intellectual,  or  iporal,  can  be  perverted 


188  nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  v. 

or  misused  without  bringing  retribution.  There  is  an  indignation  which  is 
righteous,  and  there  is  an  indignation  which  is  unrighteous.  When  we  see  tyranny, 
oppression,  and  vice  flaunting  itself  in  high  places,  then  we  do  well  to  be  full 
of  indignation.  But  when  we  see  integrity  in  low  places ;  when  we  see  a  man 
determined  to  be  honest  though  it  may  mean  poverty ;  a  man  who  resolves  not  to 
cringe  to  wickedness,  and  not  to  fawn  upon  and  to  flatter  even  royal  sinners,  then 
we  do  badly  to  be  full  of  indignation.  There  is  so  much  false  propriety  in  the 
present  day  that  we  are  not  allowed  to  be  indignant.  Zeal  is  rude.  Zeal  must 
never  violate  the  proprieties  of  polite  life.  A  man's  indignant  feelings  must  never 
get  the  better  of  his  self-control .  If  a  man  can  be  zealous  and  not  run  counter  to 
aesthetic  rules,  and  not  hinder  his  success,  well  and  good.  But  woe  to  the  man 
who  lets  zeal  get  the  better  of  discretion ! 

IV.  Haman's  power  of  self-control.  **  jS"evertheless,  Haman  refrained  himself." 
Haman  had  evidently  some  of  that  power  which  would  have  fitted  him  to  take  his 
place  in  modern  polite  society.  He  could  keep  his  feelings  in  subjection  when  it 
served  his  purpose.  Perhaps  if  Mordecai  had  met  him  at  the  banquet  Haman 
could  have  carried  on  a  conversation  with  the  man  whom  he  thoroughly  hated. 
Too  many  set  Haman  before  them  as  an  example.  They  refrain  themselves. 
Words  smoother  than  butter  are  on  their  tongues ;  war  is  in  their  hearts.  With 
the  mouth  they  kiss ;  the  concealed  dagger  is  in  the  hand.  Hail,  master  !  is  the 
voice  of  the  betrayer,  but  the  meaning  of  that  voice  is  too  often  only  known  to 
the  Divine.  The  power  of  self-control  for  the  time  being,  however,  is  not  to  be 
despised.  But  the  power  of  perfect  self-conquest  is  a  noble  achievement.  Haman 
should  not  only  have  refrained  himself,  but  subdued  himself.  "  He  that  is  slow  to 
anger  is  better  than  the  mighty ;  and  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh 
a  city." 

V.  Haman's  resource  in  trouble.  He  went  home,  and  consulted  his  friends 
and  his  wife.  Happy  the  man  who  can  feel  that  his  home  is  a  place  of  refuge  ; 
who  can  go  there  and  forget  his  sorrows.  This  is  wonderful,  that  thoroughly  bad 
men  have  attached  to  themselves  wives  who  have  stuck  to  them  in  all  calamities. 
However,  Haman's  home  was  not  a  safe  place,  for  his  wife  was  evidently  a  bad 
woman.  Only  a  good  true  wife  can  make  a  good  home;  a  safe  place  when  troubles 
come.  Haman's  resource  in  trouble  should  not  be  ours,  or  at  least  not  our  only 
one,  A  wife  may  be  wicked ;  if  not  wicked  she  may  be  weak.  The  best  wife 
may  lead  us  wrong.  Jesus  Christ  has  love  dearer  than  that  of  fondest  wives. 
Eaithly  friends  may  be  false,  or  if  not  false,  unwise.  There  is  a  friend  that 
sticketh  closer  than  a  brother.  There  is  a  friend  who  knows  how  to  help  in,  and 
deliver  from,  trouble.  Let  prayer  to  the  great  High  Priest  be  our  resource  in 
trouble.  And  then  when  we  pass  away  from  the  homes  of  earth  we  shall  go  to 
the  home  of  the  blest,  where  Mordecais  cannot  trouble. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  9,  10. 

And  with  a  glad  heart. — But  he  re-  now  the  happiest  man  alive ;  as  having 

joiced  as  many  more  do  in  a  thing  of  the  royalty,  not  of  the  king's  ear  only 

nought.     And  the  end  of  this  his  mirth  but  of  the  queen's  too,  as  he  foolishly 

was  heaviness.     It  was  risus  sardonius,  fancied.     This   wicked  one  boasted    of 

like  that  of  those,  who  being  stung  with  his   heart's   desire,  and   as    for  all   his 

the    tarantula    (a   viper   in   Italy),    die  enemies,  he  puffed  at   them.     He  said 

laughing  and  capering.     Or  as  the  dol-  in    his  heart — I  shall   not    be   moved, 

phin,  that  sporteth  most  before  a  storm.  I  shall  never  be  in   adversity.     Hero- 

Or  as  the  little  fishes,  that  swimming  dotus  saith  of  Apryes,  king  of  Egypt, 

merrily    down    the    silver    stream    of  that    he   conceited   and    bragged    that 

Jordan,  fall  shortly  after  into  the  Dead  his    kingdom    was     better    settled     to 

Sea.      Haman   doubtless   held   himself  him  than  that  any,  either  God  or  man, 


CHAP,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  189 


could  remove  him ;  yet  was  lie  after-  wisdom,  as  is  said  of  Haman,  that  he 
wards  taken  and  hunged  by  his  own  restrained  himself.  Yea,  many  times 
subjects,  .^ian  tells  us,  that  Diony-  one  lust  restrains  another.  "  He  restrains 
sius,  the  tyrant,  thought  it  impossible  himself  "  (speaking  of  a  covetous  man), 
that  he  should  have  been  cast  out  of  "  and  bereaves  his  soul  of  good."  One 
Italy,  but  it  proved  otherwise.  How  lust  eats  up  another;  yea,  sometimes 
suddenly  were  Alexander,  the  great  con-  and  often  God  doth  restrain  by  the 
queror,  and  Julius  Caesar,  the  perpetual  immediate  work  of  his  own  Spirit,  by 
dictator,  cut  off,  and  quenched  as  the  the  gift  of  continence ;  for  there  is  a 
tire  of  thorns.  Sic  transit  gloria  mundi.  spirit  put  into  every  man  by  nature  of 
The  world's  greatest  dealings  are  in  no  moral  virtues,  by  which  the  Lord  re- 
better  condition  than  the  bull  that  goes  strains  the  corruptions  of  nature.  And 
to  be  sacrificed  with  garlands  on  his  though  naturally  men  are  filled  with  all 
head,  and  music  before  him,  but  sud-  unrighteousness,  and  every  lust  is  as  a 
denly  feels  the  stroke  of  the  murdering  hole  to  let  it  out,  yet  God  oftentimes 
axe. — Trapp.  stops   and   plugs   up   the   holes   as   he 

Then  went   Haman  forth   that   day  pleaseth,  that  they  may  not  run  out  at 

joyful^  and  with  a  glad  heart. — This  is  every  hole.     God  doth  not  broach  every 

true  to  human  nature,  to  common  fact,  lust  in  every  man,  yet  so  as  in  some 

A  man's   heart   may  be  black  as   hell  man  or  other,  all  corruption  is  broached ; 

with  lying,  treachery,  and  murder,  yet  some  in  one  and  some  in  another ;   and 

there    are    times   when    he   is    joyful ;  in  all  the  barrel  is  no  less  full.     And 

moments  when  everything  goes  accord-  though  there  be  a  sluice  to  keep  in  the 

ing  to  his  wish;   even  when,  as  now,  water,  though   there  be  a  less  stream, 

unsought  smiles  are  shed  on  him.     The  yet  there  is  nevertheless  water ;    even 

future  is  hidden  in  the  blaze  of  present  so,  though  lusts  be  restrained,  yet  there 

light ;  vengeance,  treading  close  behind,  is   nevertheless   corruption    within ;    so 

is  "  shod  with  wool "  and  unheard.     It  that  God's  restraining  of  men's  lusts  is 

is  a  ghastly  fact,  profitable  to  be  ob-  no   argument   to   prove   that    therefore 

served,    when    it    comes   in    our   way.  they  have  not  all  sin  in  them. 

"That  day!"     Before  the  next,  Haman  Natural   wisdom,    which   doth    both 

will  be  hanged  high  on  his  own  gibbet,  assist  conscience,  and  help  to  strengthen 

Haman's   gladness    did   not    last    him  these    moral    dispositions,    and    assists 

home,  for  Mordecai,  his  sackcloth  laid  against  many  sins,  so  Haman,   though 

aside,  was  again  at  his  post.     He  had  his  revenge  began  to  boil,  and  was  ready 

fasted  to  good  purpose,  having  regained  to  break  forth,  and  he  was  exceedingly 

quietness  of  mind.  wroth  with  Mordecai,  yet  notwithstand- 

Haman  strutted  forth  in  all  his  mag-  ing  he  was  kept  by  his  wisdom  from 

nificence,    drinking    with    greedy    eyes  present  revenge,  for  he  thought  to  take 

the  obsequious  homage  of  the  menials ;  a   fitter  opportunity  for  it  afterwards ; 

but  in  a  moment  a  black  scowl  of  rage  it  is  said,  "  he  refrained  himself."     So 

eclipsed  the  simper  of  gratified  vanity.  Said,  his  natural  wisdom  moved  him  to 

How   small   this   great   man    was  I     It  moderation,  for  though  a  band  of  men, 

would    appear   that    he   had    expected  whose  hearts  God  had  touched,  followed 

Mordecai   to   bow  at   last.     But   there  him,  yet  there  was  a  company  of   the 

Mordecai  sat  unmoved,  not  pointing  the  children   of    Belial,    who    said,    **  How 

finger  at  Haman,  not  calling  him  traitor  shall   this   man   save    us  ]      And   they 

or  murderer,   but    not   standing  up  or  despised    him,    and    brought    him    no 

moving — a  spectacle  to  men  and  angels,  present '^ ;  but  he  held  his  peace  ; "   that 

Possibly  he  was  pondering  these  words  is,  Saul  winked  at  this,  and  did  not  go 

of  Zophar ;  '*  Knowest  thou  not  this  of  about    to   revenge   it,    for    his    natural 

old,  since  man  was  placed  upon  earth,  wisdom  tul  I   him  that  it  was  best  for 

that   the  triumphing  of   the  wicked  is  him  to  be  silent  until  he  had  made  his 

short  1 " — A.  M.  Symington,  B.  A.  party  good. 

God  restrains  men's  lusts,  either  by  Fleshly   wisdom   is   a   great    princi- 


190 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


[chap.  v. 


pie  by  which  the  world  is  guided.  — 
Goodwin. 

It  were  a  blessed  thing  if,  in  matters 
which  affect  the  interests  of  religion  and 
practical  godliness,  the  followers  of 
Christ  would  exhibit  the  same  kind  of 
firm  determination  as  we  read  of  in  the 
case  of  Mordecai.  There  would  then  be 
a  more  decided  separation  between  the 
Church  and  the  world,  and  less  of  tha 
tendency  to  combine  the  two  services  of 
Christ  and  the  world  which  prevails 
among  us  so  extensively.  If  men  were 
estimated  according  to  their  real  char- 
acter, and  treated  rather  as  their  moral 
worth  merits,  than  with  deference  to 
their  wealth — if  the  true  elements  of 
greatness,  such  as  the  fear  of  God,  the 
love  of  truth,  and  unbending  adherence 
to  Christian  principle,  were  honoured 
by  those  who  profess  to  follow  Christ, 
and  the  opposite  qualities  were  visited 
with  the  disapprobation  they  deserve, 
then  the  Church  would  occupy  her 
proper  ground,  and  her  members,  al- 
though hated  by  the  world,  would  be 
the  object  of  its  secret  respect. 

"  When    the    all-influential    man    of 
power  saw  the  Jew  in  the  king's  gate, 
that   he  stood  not  up   nor  moved  for 
him,  he  was  full  of  indignation  against 
Mordecai."     He  had  come  out  from  the 
banquet,  we  are  told,  joyful  and  with  a 
glad  heart.     And  no  wonder ;   for  the 
honour  which  had  been  conferred  upon 
him,  of  being  invited  to  such  an  enter- 
tainment, was  higher  than  usually  fell 
to  the  lot  of  the  most  exalted  subject. 
He    seemed    now  to    be    secure  in    the 
possession  of  Ids  dignities  and  influence, 
when  he  stood  so  high  in  the    favour 
both   of  the   king  and   of   the  queen. 
Visions    of   still   greater    grandeur    and 
wealth  than  he  had  yet  attained  floated 
before    his    mind ;    and    as    he    passed 
along,  receiving  the  profound  homage  of 
the  servile   crowd    of   attendants,    who 
knelt    as    he   approached,    and    shaded 
their  eyes,  as  if  it  had  been  presump- 
tuous to  look  upon  the  face  of  so  great 
a  man,  he  was  the  more  pufl'ed  up  with  a 
sense  of  his  own  pre-eminence.     But  all 
at   once   he  comes   to    the  &pot   where 
Mordecai   sits,    and   here   his    triumph 
©uds,     The  Jew  takes  fto  more  notice  of 


him    than    if    he    were    the    humblest 
officer  about  the  court,  excepting  that 
there  is  in  his  countenance  an  expression 
of   contempt,    and    perhaps    of   dislike. 
This  scorn  is  like  a  dagger  in  Haman's 
heart.     All   the   feelings   of   self-gratu- 
lation    which    he    had    so    pleasinjiily 
cherished,  and  the  visions  of  yet  higher 
honour  which  he  was  to  attain,  are  at 
once  dissipated,  and  he  retires  to   his 
house,    with    the    mingled   passions   of 
anger,  and  hatred,  and  revenge  burning 
in  his  bo-orn.     It  is  remarkable,  and  it 
is  profitable  to  notice,  how  completely 
worldly  men  lie  at   the  mercy  of  very 
trifling  incidents  for  the  preservation  of 
their  comfort  and  happiness.     A  circum- 
stance in  itself  of  no  importanoe,  falling 
out  unexpectedly,  will  have  the  effect 
of  disturbing  and  deranging  the  whole 
train   of    their   enjoyments.       A   little 
matter,  which  you  would  think  scarcely 
worth  their  notice,  is  poison  in  the  cup 
of   their    pleasures,  and    converts    their 
satisfaction  into  exquisite  misery.     Ha- 
man's case  finds   many  parallels.      We 
have  referred  to  the  subject  before  :  we 
may    allude    to   it   again.       From    the 
banquet   and    the   gay   assembly,    from 
which  it  might  have  been  supposed  that 
all    vexation,    and    care,    and    trouble 
would    be    excluded,    the    votaries    of 
fashion  frequently  part  with  such  bitter- 
ness   of    spirit,  as    to    make    them    the 
ol)jects  rather  of  pity  than  of  envy.     A 
supposed  slight,  a  contemptuous  glance, 
a  suspicious  whisper,  a  preference  shown 
to  some  other  party  over  them  by  those 
whose  favour  and  patronage  are  regarded 
as   of  consequence,  will   throw  a  deep 
cloud    of    disquietude   and    discontent 
over  the  minds  of  those  lovers  of  vanity, 
which  distresses  them  more  than  many 
of  the  real  ills  of  life  would  do.     In 
this  way  it  is  that  the  proud,  and  vain, 
and  frivolous  are  partly  punished,  even 
in    this   life,    for   their   sin   and    folly 
They  carry  about  in  their  own  breast 
the  materials  which,  by  a  just  retribu- 
tion, turn  their  sweetest  enjoyments  into 
gall  and  wormwood. 

The  chief  lesson  which  is  evidently 
deducible  from  the  verse  before  us  ia 
founded  upon  the  contrast  between  the 
two  individuals  meutioaed  iu  it — Mor^ 


CHAP.  V.J  HOMILETIC  COMMKnTAttT:    mTUEH.  101 


decai  and  Haman  ; — between  the  servant  had  committed  to  him  the  whole  issue 
of  God  and  the  wicked  enemy  of  God's  of  that  affair  in  which  all  the  Jews  were 
people.  Mordecai  occupied  the  suhordi-  so  deeply  interested.  He  could  tlms 
nate  place  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  he  was,  look  forward  with  good  hope  to  a  happy 
withallhiscountrymen,  doomed  to  death  deliverance  from  danger,  through  the 
in  consequence  of  the  royal  edict.  He  interposition  of  the  God  of  Abraham, 
had  done  good  service  to  the  king,  even  who  had  told  his  people  that  he  was 
tothepreservationof  his  life,  but  for  that  the  shield  and  the  reward  of  all  who 
service  he  had  received  no  reward.  If  trusted  m  him.  Mordecai,  therefore, 
he  had  been  of  morbid  temper,  he  would  possessed  his  soul  in  patience,  assured 
have  been  dissatisfied  on  this  account :  that  some  outlet  would  be  found  from 
and  more  especially,  with  the  prospect  the  threatened  danger.  Haman,  on  the 
before  him  of  the  coming  evil,  he  would  other  hand,  was  destitute  of  all  fear  of 
have  been  unfitted  for  all  his  ordinary  God,  and  unaccustomed  to  lay  any  re- 
duties.  Only  three  days  before  he  was  straint  upon  his  passions,  except  when 
running  about  in  sackcloth  —  wailing,  self-interest  prompted  him  so  to  do. 
and  refusing  to  be  comforted.  But  now  His  success  in  life  had  only  stimulated 
he  is  in  his  ordinary  dress,  and  in  his  the  evil  principles  of  his  nature,  and 
usual  place,  as  calm  and  composed  as  if  rendered  him  haughty,  imperious,  and 
all  his  affairs  had  been  most  prosperous,  revengeful,  where  he  had  power  to 
and  with  as  independent  and  manly  a  gratify  his  dispositions.  He  was  there- 
spirit  and  as  unabashed  countenance  as  fore  capable  of  any  villany,  and  incapa- 
if  he  had  had  nothing  to  dread.  We  ble  of  enjoying  the  blessings  of  his  con- 
may  truly  say  of  him,  then,  that  in  the  dition,  as  all  must  be  who  are  strangers 
midst  of  his  trials  he  was  happy.  There,  to  self-government. — Davidson. 
again,  is  Haman,  who  is  the  next  man  Haman  refrained  himself.  — It  is  a 
to  the  king,  and  who  really  possesses  circumstance  not  unworthy  of  notice, 
more  power,  because  he  can  mould  the  that  even  those  persons  who  are  habit- 
king  to  his  purposes.  Eank,  wealth,  ually  self-willed,  and  destitute  of  the 
and  honour  are  his,  sufficient,  it  might  power  of  self-government,  can  neverthe- 
be  thought,  to  satisfy  the  most  ambitious  less,  when  occasion  requires  it,  exercise 
mind.  Thousands  bow  before  him, —  a  wonderful  control  over  both  their 
his  will  is  law, — the  lives  and  destinies  speech  and  their  passions.  Thus,  for 
of  millions  are  in  his  hand, — he  can  example,  a  man  who  is  addicted  to  the 
rule  everything  but  his  own  spirit,  sin  of  profane  swearing,  will  be  found 
Here,  however,  he  is  a  slave — a  slave  to  to  put  such  guard  upon  his  words  in  the 
fiendish  passions.  And  in  consequence  presence  of  a  superior  who  detests  that 
of  this,  because  Mordecai  the  Jew  would  sin,  that  not  one  oath  will  escape  from 
not  do  him  reverence,  he  is  frantic  with  his  lips.  A  man  who  has  no  command 
rage.  He  forgets  aU  the  real  benefits  of  his  temper  at  ordinary  times,  will 
he  enjoys  by  reason  of  the  slight  put  appear  smooth  and  unruffled  in  his  inter- 
upon  him  by  this  one  man.  It  needs  course  with  those  on  whom  he  is  depend- 
no  argument  to  prove  which  of  these  ent,  or  whose  good  opinion  he  desires 
two  persons  is  truly  the  greater  char-  to  gain.  A  man  given  to  excess  in  the 
acter,  and  which  of  them  is  most  entitled  indulgence  of  his  appetites,  will  be  care- 
to  our  respect.  But  how,  it  may  be  ful  not  to  transgress  in  comp;my  where 
asked,  came  Mordecai  to  be  able  to  bear  it  would  be  accounted  shameful.  Now 
with  such  equanimity  the  pressure  of  there  is  an  important  principle  involved 
real  trouble,  while  his  enemy  was  all  in  all  this,  deeply  atlecting  the  moral 
discomposed  by  an  imaginary  wrong,  or  responsibility  of  such  men  for  all  their 
by  that  which,  if  it  was  a  real  injury,  he  conduct.  For  if  they  can  lay  themselves 
could  so  well  afford  to  overlook]  The  under  such  restraint — when  it  serves 
answer  to  this  question  is  easily  given,  their  purpose — that  long-formed  habits 
Mordecai's  heart  and  mind  were  under  can  be  checked  and  mastered,  then  we 
the  influence  of  the  word  of  God.     He  think  tliat  even   they  themselves  must 


192 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  -v. 


admit  that  they  are  deprived  of  all 
excuse  when  they  suffer  themselves  to 
be  usually  governed  by  these  habits. 
And  if  regard  for  the  opinions  and 
feelings  of  their  fellow-men  exerts  a 
power  over  them  which  the  law  of  God 
does  not  possess,  then  manifestly  they 
are  chargeable  with  the  guilt  of  standing 
more  in  awe  of  men  than  of  God.  These 
remarks  have  been  suggested  by  the 
words  of  the  text,  that  *'  Haman  refrained 
himself."  Sorely  galled  as  he  was  by 
Mordecai's  contemptuous  look  and  atti- 
tude, he  did  not  openly  give  vent  to  his 
passion.  It  must  have  been  a  hard 
struggle;  but  he  contrived  to  conceal 
his  wrath,  so  as  to  appear  in  the  sight 
of  all  the  king's  servants  calm  and 
dignified,  as  became  his  exalted  station. 
And  very  probably  it  was  this  feeling, 
that  he  had  a  character  to  sustain,  and 
that  it  would  have  been  beneath  his 
dignity  publicly  to  notice  the  affront 
that  he  had  received  from  a  Jewish 
slave :  it  was  this  that  prevented  him 
from  giving  way  to  the  rage  that  swelled 
in  his  breast. 

Then  went  Haman  forth  that  day 
joyful,  and  with  a  glad  heart. — The 
wickedest  of  men  may  be  not  only 
prosperous,  but  joyful;  though  their 
hands  are  stained  with  blood,  though 
their  thoughts  may  have  been  "devising 
inquity  on  their  beds,  that  they  may 
practise  it  when  the  morning  is  light,"  * 
yet  they  go  forth  with  a  glad  heart  and 
a  light  step.  With  consciences  as  black 
as  hell,  they  are  not  afraid  to  look  on 
the  unsullied  orb  of  day,  or  to  be  seen 
by  the  moon  when  she  walks  in  bright- 
ness. Such  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin, 
especially  when  it  is  cherished  by  pros- 
perity. "  They  are  corrupt,  they  speak 
wickedly  concerning  oppression :  they 
speak  loftily.  They  set  their  mouth 
against  the  heavens;  and  their  tongue 
walketh  through  the  earth.  They  say, 
The  Lord  shall  not  see,  neither  shall  the 
God  of  Jacob  regard  it."  This  has  often 
been  a  source  of  bitter  distress  to  good 
men,  who  have  been  "envious  at  the 
foolish,  when  they  saw  the  prosperity  of 
the  wicked."  But  this  is  their  infirmity, 
and  they  are  brought  to  confess  it.  Why 
*  Micah  ii.  1. 


should  they  envy  that  joy  which  dwells? 
in  a  guilty  heart — that  prosperity  which 
betrays  them  to  their  ruin]  There  is 
greater  reason  for  deriding  them  ;  for 
"  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  short." 
What  a  pitiable  object  would  Haman  be 
in  the  eyes  of  Esther  that  day,  when 
she  viewed  him  from  the  lattice  of  her 
window,  as  he  left  the  palace  !  "  The 
virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion,  hath  de- 
spised thee,  and  laughed  thee  to  scorn ; 
the  daughter  of  Jerusalem  hath  shaken 
her  head  at  thee."  f 

Then  went  Haman  forth  that  da.y 
•^oyful,  and  with  a  glad  heart.  — That 
day  was  the  last  of  his  gladness ;  next 
morning's  sun  should  not  set  before  all 
his  glory  was  laid  in  the  dust.  Nay, 
that  very  day,  and  that  very  moment 
when  it  was  most  buoyant,  his  joy  was 
destined  to  suffer  a  dash  from  which  it 
would  never  completely  recover.  Before 
he  left  the  court  of  the  palace,  from 
which  he  had  come  out  with  such  up- 
lifted spirits,  a  dart  entered  his  liver, 
and  inflicted  a  wound,  which  the  zeal 
and  art  of  all  his  physicians  could  not 
heal.  But  when  Haman  saio  Mordecai 
in  the  king's  gate,  that  he  stood  not  up, 
nor  moved  for  him,  he  was  full  of  indig- 
nation against  Mordecai. 

There's  a  picture !  standing  out  in 
bold  relief,  and  contrasted  with  that  of 
the  proud  but  worthless  premier.  The 
one  haughty  and  enraged ;  the  other 
humble,  but  composed  and  dignified. 
It  is  not  the  port,  the  state,  the  pageant- 
ry ;  it  is  not  the  rank,  riches,  or  power ; 
the  mind  and  spirit — that  is  the  man. 
The  person  who  occupies  the  place  of  a 
common  porter  may  have  within  him  a 
soul  that  towers  in  real  greatness  far 
above  that  of  the  proudest  and  most 
titled  grandee.  He  may  have  that  with- 
in him,  which,  while  it  rouses  the  indig- 
nation, quails  the  courage  of  him  who 
has  armies  at  his  beck.  He  who  is  con- 
scious of  acting  rightly,  has  no  reason  to 
grow  pale  at  the  siglit  of  danger.  He 
who  is  embarked  in  the  cause  of  God 
and  his  people,  and  whose  conscience 
acquits  him  of  having  failed  in  his  duty 
to  his  prince,  or  of  having  done  evil 
to  any  man,  feels  himself  clad  in  the 
t  2  Kings  xix.  21, 


OHAP.  T.] 


HOMILETIO  OOMMhJNTARy:  ESTHER. 


193 


panoply  of  heaven,  stands  fearless  and 
scathless,  is  immovable  in  his  purpose, 
and  will  not  do  a  meaa  or  unworthy,  far 
less  a  sinful,  thing,  to  save  his  own  life, 
or  the  lives  of  those  whom  he  holds 
dearest. 

Such  was  Mordecai.  He  had  had 
ample  leisure  to  reflect  on  his  conduct  in 
refusing  the  homage  claimed  by  Haman. 
That  refusal  had  drawn  dowa  the  venge- 
ance of  the  wicked  favourite  on  himself 
and  his  people.  But  still  Haman  is 
''contemned  iu  his  eyes  as  a  vile  person." 
He  exhibited  no  tokens  of  positive  dis- 
respect. He  would  not  insult  him,  he 
would  not  rail  upon  him  as  he  passed, 
or  behind  his  back.  But  he  would  not 
yield  him  any  direct  homage ;  "  he  stood 
not  up,  nor  moved  for  him."  An  ordi- 
nary patriot  would  have  been  disposed 
to  act  in  a  different  manner.  He  would 
have  said,  "  My  daughter  is  employed 
in  using  means  for  obtaining  from  her 
royal  husband  a  revocation  of  the  decree 
for  the  slaughter  of  the  Jews  ;  but  she 
has  to  contend  against  powerful  influence. 
I  will  endeavour  to  smooth  her  diffi- 
culties ;  and  much  as  I  despise  this 
minion,  I  will  for  once  abase  myself 
before  him,  and  try  to  assuage  his  resent- 
ment and  propitiate  his  favour,  by  off'er- 
ing  him  that  obeisance  which  is  so  grate- 
ful to  his  pride."  Moses  did  not  act  on 
this  principle,  when  Pharaoh,  awed  by 
the  plagues  which  he  had  suffered, 
offered  to  allow  the  Israelites  to  go,  pro- 
vided they  left  their  flocks  and  herds 
behind  them  :  *'  There  shall  not  an  hoof 
be  left  behind  !  "  Our  Saviour  did  not 
act  upon  this  principle,  when  the  Phari- 
sees said,  *'  Get  thee  out  and  depart 
hence,  for  Herod  will  kill  thee."  *'  Go, 
tell  that  fox,  behold,  I  cast  out  devils, 
and  do  cures  to-day  and  to-morrow,  and 
the  third  day  I  shall  be  perfected."  Nor 
would  Mordecai  act  upon  this  principle. 
Haman  had  devised  a  deed  which  created 
horror  both  in  heaven  and  earth  ;  the 
devoted  Jews  were  cast  on  the  special 
protection  of  Providence  ;  Mordecai  was 
persuaded  that  enlargement  and  deliver- 
ance would  arise  to  them  from  some 
quarter,  and  he  entertained  sanguine 
hopes  that  Esther  had  come  to  the 
kingdom  for  this  very  end.     He  would 


not,  therefore,  displease  God,  and  dis- 
honour himself,  by  having  recourse  to 
the  mean  expedient  of  cringing  to  the 
author  of  his  country's  wrongs,  lest  the 
day  of  their  deliverance  should  witness 
his  own  destruction  and  that  of  his 
father's  house. 

This  conduct  on  the  part  of  Mordecai 
exceedingly  enraged  Haman.  Perhaps 
he  had  heard  of  the  distress  into  which 
the  object  of  his  hatred  had  been  thrown 
by  the  decree  for  exterminating  the 
Jews,  and  therefore  expected,  the  next 
time  they  met,  to  see  him  grovelling  in 
the  dust.  But  when  he  found  his  in- 
dependent spirit  unbroken,  and  that  he 
neither  rose  up  nor  moved  at  his  ap- 
proach, he  boiled  with  indignation,  and 
his  wounded  pride  demanded  instant 
revenge.  **  Oh  that  I  had  of  his  flesh  ! 
T  cannot  be  satisfied."  * 

*' Proud  and  haughty  scorner  is  nis 
name  that  dealeth  in  proud  wrath." 
Pride  was  the  first  sin  that  entered  into 
the  universe.  It  was  pride  that  turned 
angels  into  devils.  It  was  pride  that, 
after  thinning  heaven  and  peopling  hell, 
invaded  our  world,  and  drove  man  out 
of  paradise.  It  was  pride  that  caused 
the  tirst-born  on  earth  to  embrue  his 
hands  in  the  blood  of  an  only  brother. 
Pride  has  broken  the  peace  of  families 
and  nations,  and  carried  fire  and  sword 
through  the  earth.  It  is  equally  the 
parent  of  oppression  and  licentiousness, 
setting  the  father  against  the  son,  and 
the  son  against  the  father;  the  master 
against  the  servant,  and  the  servant 
against  the  master ;  the  sovereign  against 
his  subjects,  and  the  subjects  against 
their  sovereign.  Pride  has  marred  the 
work  of  God,  given  birth  to  infidelity, 
apostasy,  impiety,  blasphemy,  and  perse- 
cution ;  it  is  the  mother  of  heresy,  and 
has  fomented  strife  and  contention,  and 
wrath,  and  swellings,  and  tumults,  with- 
in the  sacred  enclosures  of  the  house  of 
God.  0  beware  of  giving  place  to  this 
monster !  The  man  that  harbours  pride 
in  his  heart,  harbours  a  murderer,  a 
fratricide,  a  parricide,  a  suicide,  a  deicide; 
— for  it  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory,  and 
still  crucifies  him  afresh  in  his  doctiine 
and  in  his  members." — McQrie* 
•  Job  xxxL  3L 


194  nOMTLKTra  COMMENTAHY:   ESTHER,  [ohap.  V. 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  11  and  13. 

The  Discontented  Man  as  a  Reckoner. 

The  discontented  man  is  a  poor  hand  at  accounts.  He  cannot  reckon  up  correctly 
either  his  own  affairs  or  the  affairs  of  other  people.  He  is  apt  to  give  himself 
credit  for  too  few  blessings,  and  other  people  credit  for  too  many  blessings.  His 
distorted  imagination  plays  strange  freaks.  In  looking  at  himself  it  is  a  diminish- 
ing power,  and  in  looking  at  other  people  it  too  often  becomes  a  magnifying  power. 
The  advantages  of  his  own  position  are  ignored,  while  the  advantages  of  others 
are  brought  into  undue  prominence.  It  is  not  merely  that  he  thinks  that  he  gets 
less  than  he  deserves,  and  other  people  get  more  than  they  deserve ;  but  putting 
the  matter  of  desert  on  one  side,  he  sees  himself  destitute  and  forsaken,  though 
surrounded  with  many  of  this  world's  good  things  ;  and  others  as  rolling  in  affluence, 
as  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  faring  sumptuously  every  day,  and  as 
having  more  than  heart  can  wish.  On  close  examination  we  shall  find  that  this 
was  the  case  with  poor  Haman.  He  does  not  liere  give  us  his  views  about  other 
people,  but  the  view  he  gives  of  himself  is  in  one  aspect  very  incorrect,  and  may 
warrant  us  in  supposing  that  the  view  he  would  hive  given  of  other  people  would  be 
but  equally  incorrect.  Let  us,  however,  seek  to  take  just  views  of  ourselves,  of  God's 
dealings  with  us,  and  of  the  world  at  large.  Divine  grace  in  the  heart  is  the  power 
by  which  the  balancing  faculty  will  be  able  to  work  correctly.  Subjection  of  the 
human  will  to  the  Divine  will  must  tend  to  give  calmness  and  satisfaction  in  this, 
after  all,  unsatisfactory  world. 

I.  The  discontented  man  is  a  good  reckoner,  up  to  a  certain  point.  Here 
Haman  reckons  up  the  advantages  of  his  position,  and  the  sum  is  rightly  laid 
down.  There  are  four  leading  items  in  the  statement.  Look  at  them :  riches — 
children — position — honour.  What  more  would  a  man  be,  and  what  more  could 
a  man  desire'?  Certainly  the  man  who  looks  for  happiness  to  the  material  and  the 
sensible  can  scarcely  mention  anything  else  that  is  desirable  in  order  to  the  per- 
fection of  human  happiness.  Why,  these  are  the  very  things  that  represent  the 
ideal  of  happiness  to  a  large  majority  of  men.  A  man  who  is  able  to  say  as  much 
of  himself  as  Haman  could  say  of  himself  would  be  the  man  to  be  regarded  wdth 
envious  eyes  not  only  in  Haman's  days,  but  in  Queen  Victoria's  days,  and  in  this 
Christian  country.  We  talk  about  angels  preferring  to  visit  the  cottage  where 
piety  reigns,  and  where  the  sacred  hymn  of  praise  is  devoutly  sung;  and  yet  the 
song  sung  by  Haman  in  recording  his  greatness  is  the  one  to  which  the  majority 
the  most  devoutly  listen,  and  the  one  they  most  desire  to  sing.  We  speak  about 
God's  blessing  resting  upon  the  home  of  the  pious  poor,  but  the  poor  man  is  still 
despised,  and  his  words  are  not  heard ;  while  the  man  who  can  tell  of  the  glory  of 
his  riches,  and  his  influence  at  Court,  is  honoured;  his  feeblest  words  are  recorded  as 
if  they  were  the  utterances  of  a  Solomon ;  he  is  sent  to  Parliament ;  he  is  made  a 
director  of  a  railway  company,  and  he  is  the  chairman  of  a  Christian  assembly,  if 
he  will  condescend  to  patronize  that  which  should  not  bow  the  knee  to  this  world's 
Baal.  A  small  amount  of  goodness  as  well  as  of  wisdom  goes  a  long  way  when  it 
is  backed  up  by  the  "  glory  of  riches."  However,  we  must  not  forget  poor  Haman ; 
poor,  after  all,  like  too  many  more,  in  the  midst  of  his  riches.  We  have  every 
reason  to  suppose  that  Haman  stated  the  case  correctly.  His  riches  must  have  been 
great  to  be  able  to  promise  the  sum  he  did  to  the  king  as  a  compensation  for  the 
destruction  of  the  Jews.  We  read  of  ten  sons.  His  influence  at  Court  was  evidently 
supreme,  and  it  was  true  that  he  only  was  invited  to  the  banquet  that  Esther  had 
prepared  for  the  king.  Up  to  a  certain  point,  then,  the  discontented  man  can  reckon 
correctly.     We  may  have  seen  him  at  the  computation;   the  whole  was  stated 


CHAP,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  195 

accurately;  and  yet  the  result  is  false      How  is  thisl     How  was  it  in  Haman's 
case? — how  is  it  in  many  cases  from  that  day  to  the  present  time? 
II.  The  discontented  man  is  a  bad  reckoner,  for  the  following^  reasons :  (a) 

He  places  too  high  an  estimate  on  the  mpve  material.      Wicked  as  Haman  was  he 
felt  that  these  material  blessings  could  not  satisfy  the  cravings  of  his  soul.     Poor 
fellow  !  he  blamed  Mordecai,  and  did  not  seem  to  understand  that  he  himself  was 
seeking  for  happiness  and  for  satisfaction  where  they  are  not  to  be  found.     The 
material  was  to  till  and  to  satisfy  an  immaterial  nature.     We  all  place  too  high  an 
estimate  on  the  material.     Not  only  our  moral  but  our  social  reckonings  will  lead 
us  to  false  conclusions  if  we  do  not  give  to  the  material  its  proper  value.     What  is 
the  meaning  of  the  unrest  and  the  discontent  in  our  modern  life  %    They  are  caused 
by  too  high  an  estimate  being  placed  on  the  material.     The  soul  cannot  feed  on 
money ;  good  and  useful  as  it  undoubtedly  is  in  its  place.     The  soul  cannot  rest 
on  the  lap  of  worldly  honours.     The  soul   must  rest  in  God  if  it  is  to  obtain 
perfect  repose.     The  soul  must  find  the  true  riches  if  it  is  to  be  delivered  from 
poverty.     (6)    He  does  not  tnke  into  account  the  unknown  quantity.      There  is 
often  an  unknown  quantity  absent  from  human  calculations,  and  by  careful  scrutiny 
we  might  very  possibly  find  it  out,  and  thus  it  would  be  an  unknown  quantity 
no  longer.     The  unknown  quantity  in  Haman's  case  was  the  favour  that  he  supposed 
he  possessed  with  Esther.     *'  Yea,  Esther  the  queen  did  let  no  man  come  in  with 
the  king  unto  the  banquet  that  she  had  prepared  but  myself."     Surely  Haman 
might  have  got  to  know  that  he  was  not  likely  to  stand  well  with  Esther.     Had 
he  never  heard  of  the  relationship  that  existed  between  Esther  and  Mordecai? 
Was  he  not  shrewd  enough  to  guess  that  the  man  who  persecuted  Mordecai  also 
persecuted  Esther?     It  may  be  well  supposed  that  success  had  blinded  Hamau. 
He  did  not  use  his  eyes  aright.     It  may  be  tliat  a  correct  knowledge  of  this  fact, 
and  a  right  use  of  the  knowledge,  might  have  saved  him  from  destruction.     Is 
there  an  unknown  quantity  in  our  lives? — a  something  absent  from  our  calculations 
which  spoils  the  correctness  of  our  reckonings  ?    We  have  not  thought  of  it  before. 
It  is  just  the  very  thing  to  give  rounded  perfection  to  existence.     Look  attentively 
inside  and  outside,  all  round  about,  to  find  out  that  which  prevents  you  living  in 
safety,  or  reaching  that  happiness  which  may  be  possible  to  you  in  the  present 
state.     The  absent  quantity  in  most  lives  is  the  salvation  of  the  gospel.      Without 
Christ  Jesus  in  the  heart,  the  hope  of  glory,  a  man  cannot  reckon  up  so  as  to  come 
to  a  satisfactory  conclusion.     This  it  is  which  is  needful  to  make  up  the  perfection 
of  our  nature,     (c)  He  over-estimates  his  oion  deserts.     If  it  be  true  that  there  is 
good  in  all,  while  none  are  all  good,  then  there  was  good  even  in  wicked  Haman. 
Whether  this  be  so  or  not,  it  is  sufficient  for  our  present  purpose  that  Haman  acted 
as  if  he  thought  he  had  deserts.     The  blessings  he  here  enumerates  he  takes  for 
granted,  as  if  they  were  no  more  than  he  deserved ;  while  the  refusal  of  Mordecai 
to  render  homage  is  considered  not  as  arising  from  Haman's  want  of  goodness,  but 
from  Mordecai's  stubbornness.    If  Haman  had  rightly  considered  himself,  he  would 
have  bowed  to  Mordecai  instead  of  being  offended  that  Mordecai  did  not  bow  to 
him.     More  humility  on  Haman's  part  would  have  saved  his  feelings,  and  might 
very  possibly  have  prevented  his  downfall.     What  a  different  picture  Haman  would 
have  made  in  history  if  he  had  asked  himself,  Who  am  I  that  all  this  has  been  done 
to  me  ?     Who  hath  made  me  to  differ  ?     Haman's  fault  is  the  glaring  fault  of  most. 
We  intone  the  words,  "  Have  mercy  upon  us,  miserable  sinners,"  and  then  we  go  away 
and  whine  and  complain  if  the  rod  of  correction  be  applied  in  order  to  make  us 
obedient  children.     Why  should  miserable  sinners  have  riches,  and  chUdron,  and 
position,  and  honours  ?     Why  should  miserable  sinners  complain  if  it  is  not  found 
possible  to  make  the  best  of  this  world  ?     Is  it  to  be  regarded  as  an  uncharitable 
statement  if  we  affirm  that  those  who  neglect  Jesus  Christ  as  Mediator  over-estimatt^ 
their  deserts?     Certainly  many  fancy  themselves   whole   who  have   urgent  and 
pressing  need  of  the  help  of  the  good  Physician,     {d)  He  is  had  at  suMraction. 


196  HOMILETIC  COMMENT ABY :  ESTHER  [ohap.  V 


He  enumerates  his  blessings  as  four,  and  his  drawback  as  one.  He  subtracts  one 
from  four,  and  makes  notJiing  the  strange  result.  Mordecai  sitting  at  the  gate  is 
the  one  item  that  exceeds  the  other  four  in  magnitude.  Had  Mordecai  only  known 
the  importance  that  he  assumed  in  the  estimation  of  Haman,  he  might  well  have 
plumed  himself  on  his  greatness,  and  said  that  "  After  all  I  am  greater  than  Haman ; " 
which  in  fact  he  really  was ;  for  any  good  man,  however  poor,  is  greater  than  any 
wicked  man,  however  exalted  in  this  world.  If  Haman  had  known  how  to  balance 
correctly  he  might  have  proceeded  more  sweetly  in  spite  of  his  Avickedness.  Men 
and  women  do  not  yet  know  how  to  subtract,  even  if  they  know  how  to  reckon 
up,  their  blessings  correctly.  Too  often  blessings  are  overlooked,  or  not  rightly 
enumerated.  Where  this  fault  is  escaped,  the  mistake  may  be  committed  of 
saying,  My  disadvantages  quite  overbalance  my  advantages  ;  the  one  crook  in  the 
lot  destroys  the  pleasure  of  the  appointment.  One  ghost  of  the  imagination  fills 
the  soul  with  terror,  and  hides  from  view  all  delightful  realities.  Eiches^  children, 
position,  honours  are  destroyed  by  one  frowning  Mordecai.  Haman  speaks  of  one 
man  who  destroys  all  the  good  in  life ;  the  Christian  may  speak  of  one  man 
who  develops  all  the  good  in  life,  and  brings  the  highest  good  into  life.  The 
God-man  brings  the  highest  good.  We  may  speak  of  riches,  children,  position, 
honours,  and  say,  All  this  availeth  nothing  if  Jesus  is  not  my  assured  friend.  We 
may  speak  of  riches,  children,  j^osition,  honours,  and  say,  All  these  avail  something, 
a  vast  something,  as  they  are  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  Saviour's  love,  (e)  He  is 
defective  in  multiplication.  From  Haman's  stand-point  too  much  is  made  of  the 
insignificant  fact  that  Mordecai  refused  to  render  homage.  Haman  made  more  of 
the  circumstance  than  it  deserved.  The  imagination  of  the  discontented  man  is 
always  an  unreliable  multiplier.  Sometimes  it  is  creative.  It  makes  evils  where 
there  are  none.  Always  it  makes  more  of  the  evils  than  it  ought  to  do.  When 
we  have  passed  through  the  ordinary  troubles  of  life,  and  come  to  the  other  side, 
we  often  wonder  that  we  have  thought  so  much  about  them.  The  advice  of  that 
wise  moralist,  Dr  Johnson,  to  a  friend  under  the  discomfort  of  some  sore  annoyance 
was — to  bethink  himself  what  a  trifle  it  would  appear  that  day  twelvemonths.  If 
we  could  thus  get  the  power  of  looking  at  present  troubles  as  we  look  at  past 
troubles  we  should  be  able  to  bear  them  with  greater  patience,  and  find  them 
perhaps  smaller  than  we  had  supposed.  Mordecai  as  well  as  Haman  has  his 
troubles.  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous.  Let  us  look  forward  to  that 
blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God,  our  Saviour,  and  then 
backward,  as  it  were,  upon  the  sorrows  and  trials  of  life ;  and  then  we  shall 
consider  them  as  light  in  comparison  with  the  joy  which  is  before.  Peacefully 
should  the  Christian  stand  amid  the  storms  of  time.  "  As  meets  the  rock  a 
thousand  waves,"  so  should  the  Christian  meet  the  shocks  of  the  present  life.  As 
the  oak  gathers  strength  from  the  storm,  so  the  Christian  should  gather  strength 
from  his  troubles.  They  should  develop  to  nobler  conditions.  As  the  light  shines 
on,  and  sends  its  cheering  rays  through  the  billows  that  cast  their  spray  over  the 
lighthouse  top,  so  the  Christian  should  let  the  light  which  is  within  shine  on,  and 
send  its  cheering  rays  through  the  billows  that  shake  his  whole  nature.  The  hope  of 
the  gospel  is  the  true  sustaining  power.  Men  and  women  have  tried  this  hope  when 
tlisappointment  has  withered  the  heart,  when  sickness  has  saddened  the  household, 
when  trouble  in  many  shapes  has  visited,  when  death  with  muffled  tread  has 
approached,  and  have  found  that  it  could  strengthen  amid  the  failings  of  flesh, 
and  comfort  amid  the  misgivings  of  the  mind,  and  sustain  amid  the  sore  bleedings 
of  a  wounded  heart. 

III.  The  discontented  man  unknowingly  makes  a  good  computation.  *'  Yet 
all  this  availeth  me  nothing,  so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting  at  the  king's 
gate."  It  is  asserted  that  this  is  an  exaggeration  on  the  part  of  Haman.  Where 
is  the  exaggeration*?  Was  not  poor  Haman  at  this  moment  as  miserable  as  he 
well  could  hel     His  good  things  availed  him  nothing  except  to  intensify  that 


OHAP.  v.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  197 


discomfort  which  he  felt  at  not  receiving  Mordecai's  homage.  However  that  may 
be,  Haman's  riches,  children,  position,  and  supposed  honours  availed  nothing  foi 
his  salvation  against  Mordecai  sitting  at  the  king's  gate,  who  was  in  Divine  provi- 
dence to  become  Haman's  destroyer.  Haman  is  liere  an  unconscious  prophet.  He 
foretells  his  own  doom.  Truly,  Haman,  all  the  gloiy  of  thy  riches,  all  the  strength 
of  thy  children,  all  the  pomp  of  thy  position,  all  the  tinsel  of  thy  honours,  will  avad 
thee  nothing  before  the  wondrous  strength  of  the  Jew  sitting  at  the  king's  gate. 
Should  we  not  here  learn  the  lesson  we  are  all  so  slow  to  learn, — that  all  worldly 
good  avails  nothing  if  God  be  not  our  friend,  if  God  do  not  have  the  highest  place 
in  our  esteem  %  Riches,  children,  position,  and  honours  are  desirable  possessions  if 
lightly  employed.  But  they  cannot  satisfy  the  immortal  nature.  Mournful  cries 
reach  our  ears  from  the  disappointed  hearts  of  those  who  have  sought  the  supreme 
good  in  material  possessions.  "  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,"  is  the  despairing 
statement  of  those  who  have  taken  their  fill  of  this  world's  good  things,  and  have 
forgotten  God  their  Maker, — a  statement  repeated  from  age  to  age, — a  statement 
which  never  seems  to  hush  its  sad  refrain.  Whatever  these  blessings  may  do  in 
other  circumstances  of  life,  they  "avail  nothing"  in  the  contest  with  death.  Here 
the  man  struggles  alone.  Death  cannot  be  bribed.  Earthly  friends  cannot  soften 
the  grim  conqueror.  Honours  laid  at  his  feet  are  useless.  Death's  conqueror 
alone  is  death's  helper.  The  soul  triumphs  by  reason  of  the  possession  of  immortal 
riches.     Death  cannot  deprive  of  the  honour  that  cometh  from  God. 

Another  lesson  learn,  perhaps  a  little  more  remote,  but  none  the  less  salutary. 
As  all  Haman's  possessions  and  privileges  availed  him  nothing  for  salvation  so 
long  as  Mordecai  was  not  his  friend  ;  so  all  our  possessions,  whether  of  fancied  or 
1  eal  good  ;  all  our  supposed  moral  possessions ;  all  the  privileges  we  enjoy,  will  avail 
us  nothing  for  salvation  so  long  as  Jesus  Christ  is  not  our  friend.  We  do  not 
know  what  was  the  appearance  of  Mordecai  as  Haman  passed  by.  He  may  have 
looked  sour.  Perhaps  there  was  nothing  on  his  part  to  invite  Haman  to  terms 
of  reconciliation.  But  Jesus  Christ  attracts  by  the  sweetness  of  his  aspect.  His 
voice  is  very  tender  and  very  loving.  In  the  days  of  his  flesh  he  was  the  friond 
of  publicans  and  of  sinners  ;  and  he  is  still  the  same.  He  is  not  only  waiting  for, 
but  inviting,  sinners  to  become  reconciled.  With  Jesus  against  us  all  will  avail 
nothing  for  our  safety  and  happiness.  With  Jesus  on  our  side,  and  in  our  hearts, 
all  will  avail  nothing  that  may  be  arrayed  against  us  for  destruction. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  U — 13. 

Add  unto  this  a  great  childish  kind  of  are  most  vexed  in  their  crosses.  It  is 
peevishness ;  when  they  have  not  what  not  for  those  to  be  wilful  that  have  not 
they  would  have,  like  children,  they  a  great  measure  of  wisdom  to  guide  their 
throw  all  away ;  which,  though  it  be  wills ;  for  God  delights  to  have  his  will 
very  offensive  to  God's  spirit,  yet  it  of  those  that  are  wedded  to  their  own 
seizeth  upon  men  otherwise  gracious,  wills,  aa  in  Pharaoh.  No  men  more  sub- 
Abraham  himself,  wanting  children,  un-  ject  to  discontentments  than  those  who 
dervalued  all  other  blessings ;  Jonah,  be-  would  have  all  things  after  their  own 
cause  he  was  crossed  of  his  gourd,  was  way. — Sibbes. 

weary  of  his  life;  the  like  may  be  said  of         Let  us,  therefore,  when  any  lawless 

Elias  fleeing  from  Jezebel.    This  peevish-  passions    begin    to    stir,  deal   with    our 

uess  is  increased  by  a  too  much  flattering  souls  as  God  did  with  Jonah,  "  Doest 

of  their  grief,  so  far  as  to  justify  it ;  like  thou  ^vell  to  be  angry  'i "  to  fret  thus. 

Jonas,  *'  I  do  well  to  be  angry  even  unto  This  will  be  a  means  to  make  us  quiet ; 

doath ; "  he  would  stand  to  it.     Some,  for,  alas  1    what  weak  reasons   have  we 

like  Kachel,  are  so  peremptory  that  they  often  for  strong  motions  :  such  a  man 

*•  will  not  be  comforted,"  as  if  they  were  gave  me  no  respect ;  such  another  looked 

in  love  with  their  grievances.  Wilful  men  more  kindly  upon  another  man  than  upon 


19S 


HOmiETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  V. 


me,  &c.  You  have  some  of  Haman's 
spirit,  that  for  a  little  neglect  would  ruin 
a  whole  nation.  Passion  presents  men 
that  are  innocent  as  guilty  to  us — facit 
ira  nocentes ;  and  because  we  will  not 
seem  to  be  mad  without  reason,  pride 
commands  the  wit  to  justify  anger,  and 
so  one  passion  maintains  and  feeds  an- 
other.— Sibhes. 

Look  what  comforts  men  have  at 
present  in  their  possession  and  at  com- 
mand !  what  excellencies  or  endowments ! 
men  love  to  be  alone  to  study  and  think 
of  them  ;  and  when  they  are  sequestered 
from  the  present  use  of  them,  yet  they 
will  then  be  again  and  again  recounting 
and  casting  of  them  up,  taking  a  survey 
of  their  happiness  in  them,  applauding 
their  own  hearts  in  their  conditions;  and 
as  rich  men  that  love  money,  love  to  be 
looking  on  it,  and  telling  it  over ;  so  do 
men  to  be  summing  up  their  comforts 
and  privileges  they  enjoy,  which  others 
want ;  as  how  rich  they  are,  how  great, 
how  they  excel  others  in  parts  and  gifts, 
&c.  Oh,  how  much  of  that  precious 
sand  of  our  thoughts  runs  out  this  way  ! 
Thus  he  in  the  Gospel ;  he  keeps  up  an 
audit  in  his  heart ;  "  Soul,"  saith  he, 
''  thou  hast  goods  laid  up  for  many 
years."  So  Haman  takes  an  inventory 
of  his  honours  and  goods ;  he  talks  of 
''  all  the  glory  of  his  riches,  and  all  the 
things  wherein  the  king  had  promoted 
him."  So  Nebuchadnezzar,  as  it  may 
seem  ;  he  was  alone  walking  and  talking 
to  himself  like  a  fool,  saying  to  himself, 
*'  Is  not  this  the  great  Babel  which  I 
have  built  by  the  might  of  my  power, 
for  the  glory  of  my  majesty  1 

Then  greediness  appears,  that  if  one 
lust  be  not  satisfied,  nothing  else  can 
please  us  as  long  as  the  fit  lasts.  Each  el, 
when  she  could  not  have  her  longing, 
she  would  in  fact  die  in  all  haste, — 
**  Give  me  children,  or  else  I  die," — 
though  she  had  an  husband  was  worth 
ten  children  to  her.  And  so  was  it  with 
Haman  ;  all  the  honour  and  riches  which 
he  possessed  would  not  content  him,  so 
long  as  he  was  not  revenged  on  a  poor 
porter  that  would  not  rise  to  him.  So 
Ahab,  though  a  king,  had  his  stomach 
took  away  to  aU  other  delights,  because 


that  he  wanted  one  bit,  "Naboth's  vine- 
yard, which  he  coveted. — Goodwin. 

A  little  sickness,  or  old  age,  or  a 
cross,  make  our  lusts  to  vanish,  though 
the  objects  remained,  health  being  the  salt 
to  all  blessings.  In  old  age  men  come 
to  say,  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them  ; " 
yea,  a  little  affliction  deadeneth  a  man's 
lusts,  as  the  toothache  vexeth  more  than 
the  health  of  all  the  members  doth  de- 
light. The  affliction  of  an  hour  makes  a 
man  forget  all  pleasure,  takes  a  man's 
heart  from  all,  that  all  avails  him  nothing, 
as  it  did  Haman.  Nay,  if  one  wayward 
lust  be  crossed  (as  his  was),  one  ounce 
of  sorrow  spoils  a  sea  of  pleasure ;  for, 
segnius  bonam  quam  mala  sentimus,  we 
have  a  slower  and  duller  sense  of  good 
than  evil. — Goodwin. 

Take  some  quiet,  sober  moments  of 
life,  and  add  together  the  two  ideas  of 
pride  and  man ;  behold  him,  creature  of 
a  span  high,  stalking  through  infinite 
space  in  all  the  grandeur  of  littleness. 
Perched  on  a  speck  of  the  universe, 
every  wind  of  heaven  strikes  into  his 
blood  the  coldness  of  death  ;  his  soul 
floats  from  his  body  like  melody  from 
the  string  ;  day  and  night,  as  dust  on  the 
wheel,  he  is  rolled  along  the  heavens, 
through  a  labyrinth  of  worlds,  and  all 
the  creations  of  God  are  flaring  above 
and  beneath.  Is  this  a  creature  to  make 
for  himself  a  crown  of  glory,  to  deny  his 
own  flesh,  to  mock  at  his  lellow,  sprung 
from  the  dust  to  which  both  will  soon 
return  1  Does  the  proud  man  not  err? 
Does  he  not  suffer  ]  Does  he  not  die  ] 
When  he  reasons,  is  he  never  stopped  by 
difficulties  1  When  he  acts,  is  he  never 
tempted  by  pleasure  1  When  he  lives, 
is  he  free  from  pain?  When  he  dies, 
can  he  escape  the  common  grave  ?  Pride 
is  not  the  heritage  of  man ;  humility 
should  dwell  with  frailty,  and  atone  for 
ignorance,  error,  and  imperfections. — 
Sidney  Smith. 

Eemark  in  Haman  the  stupendous  and 
wonderful  judgment  of  God ;  for  the 
impious  Haman  is  most  exultant  and 
fearless  as  regards  the  preservation  and 
augmentation  of  his  dignity  and  power ; 
and  h©  is  most  certain  also  of  the  de- 
struction of  Mordecai,  whom  he  prosecutes 


CITAP.  V. 


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   Er^TnER. 


199 


with  hatred.  But  behold  now  the  end 
of  tlie  thing.  The  impious  and  seciu-e 
Huniau  should  perisli  with  sudden  de- 
struction ;  while  the  pious  and  afflicted 
Mordecai  is  unexpectedly  raised  to  the 
liigliest  dignity.  Let  us  therefore  cast 
away  all  impious  security,  and  fear  God  ; 
so  that,  walking  according  to  the  calling 
of  God,  you  may  be  preserved  thougli 
the  sky  fall,  and  the  earth  be  removed. — 
Breiiz. 

Those  that  are  disposed  to  be  uneasy 
will  never  want  something  or  other  to 
be  uneasy  at;  and  proud  men,  though 
they  have  much  to  their  mind,  yet,  if 
they  have  not  all  to  their  mind,  it  is  as 
nothing  to  them.  The  thousandth  part  of 
what  Haman  had  would  serve  to  make  a 
humble  modest  man  as  much  of  a  happi- 
ness as  he  expects  from  this  world  ;  and 
yet  Haman  complained  as  passionately 
as  if  he  had  been  sunk  into  the  lowest 
d  egree  of  poverty  and  disgrace. — Matthew 
Henry. 

"  Yet  all  this  availeth  me  nothing,  so 
long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting 
at  the  king's  gate. 

Haman's  misery  sprung  from  his  most 
prominent  vice.  The  avenger  did  not  so 
much  track  his  path,  like  an  independent 
retributive  messenger,  as  that  it  was 
secreted  in  his  very  sin.  It  is  often  so 
in  providence.  God  does  not  need  to 
stretch  forth  his  hand  against  the  sinner. 
It  is  enough  that  he  allows  the  working 
of  his  sin  to  overtake  him.  Had  there 
been  no  pride  in  Haman's  heart  he 
could  never  have  been  subjected  to  this 
soul-torture  because  of  a  harmless  affront 
by  an  inferior  in  rank ;  but  forasmuch 
as  he  had  nursed  and  cherished  his  pride 
to  an  ungovernable  extent,  the  pain  and 
anguish  which  he  had  to  endure  when  it 
was  thwarted  and  injured  was  crucifying 
to  all  his  prosperity  and  joy.  He  be- 
came his  own  tormentor.  The  law  is 
universal,  giving  to  all  sin  its  entail  of 
evil.  The  sinner  may  suppose  that  his 
sin  is  not  known,  and,  because  not  known, 
that  it  will  escape  punishment ;  but  the 
sin  will  itself  find  out  the  man,  and  the 
punishment  will  grow  out  of  it  as  a 
poisonous  plant  from  a  hidden  seed. 
Sceptics    may    theorotioalij    dtny    th« 


Divine  government,  but  practically  it  is 
beyond  dispute.  By  an  inexorable  law 
"  evil  pursueth  sinners,  but  to  the  right- 
eous good  shall  be  repaid.'' 

Intimately  connected  with  this  thought, 
there  is  another  of  equal  importance — 
that  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  judge  of 
the  relative  amount  of  happiness  or  un- 
happiness  in  the  lot  of  man  upon  the 
earth.  Surveyed  from  without  there 
might  not  appear  to  be  a  more  enviable 
man  than  Haman.  If  earthly  good  could 
make  happiness  there  was  no  element 
a  wan  ting  in  his  case.  From  his  own 
admission  he  had  everything — riches, 
family,  exaltation  ;  and  all  his  surround- 
ings were  grand  and  delightful.  There 
was  ostensibly  no  comparison  between 
his  lot  and  that  of  some  contented  poor 
man,  who,  besides  meanness  and  ob- 
scurity, has  to  bear  the  burden  of  bodily 
suffering.  Nevertheless  you  might  never 
get  from  the  poor  sufferer  under  the 
influence  of  religion  the  same  confession 
of  wasted  happiness  and  blighted  peace, 
that  we  have  from  this  lordly  great  man 
in  the  high  day  of  his  abounding  pros- 
perity. Let  the  outward  condition  be 
what  it  may,  his  spirit — the  real  man — 
rises  superior  to  it,  and  is  not  touched 
by  it.  But  in  the  other  case  it  was  the 
spirit  which  was  diseased,  and  which, 
like  the  scorpion  when  surrounded  by 
fire,  turned  its  sting  in  upon  itself.  So 
that,  before  we  could  estimate  relative 
individual  happiness  or  unhappiness,  we 
would  require  to  go  below  the  surface  of 
things  and  look  upon  the  heart.  The 
most  enviable  might  then  be  found  to  be 
really  the  least,  and  the  least  the  more 
so.  Injured  pride,  malice,  jealousy,  and 
hatred,  though  all  unseen,  may  yet  have 
rendered  the  heart  inconceivably  more 
miserable,  and  the  man's  estate  vastly 
less  desirable,  than  any  amount  of 
poverty  and  merely  physical  suffering 
could  possibly  have  produced.  Neither 
his  pride,  the  presence  of  friends,  nor 
the  prospect  of  again  banqueting  with 
the  king  and  queen  on  the  morrow, 
could  restrain  Haman  from  making  the 
humiliating  confession  that,  because  of  one 
thing  which  was  rankling  in  his  soul,  he 
was  truly  an  unenviable — miserable  man. 


200 


HOMTLKTTC  COMMEWTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  V, 


Moreover,  we  cannot  fall  to  notice  that 
outward  prosperity  in  an  unsanctifiod 
heart,  renders  the  man  more  susceptible 
to  trifling  annoyances.  He  becomes  so 
accustomed  to  what  is  highly  pleasing 
tliat  a  very  small  thing  occasions  great 
uneasiness.  While  he  looks  at  his  good 
things  through  the  large  end  of  the 
telescope  he  beholds  what  is  troublesome 
and  vexatious  through  the  small.  What 
a  hardier  nature  would  dash  off  as  a 
hot  plate  does  water,  the  nature  softened 
to  effeminacy  by  luxury  receives  as  a 
poisonous  drug,  and  because  of  it  can 
find  no  rest.  The  more  that  it  gets  the 
more  does  it  crave ;  and  until  the  little 
thing  craved  has  been  obtained — and 
yet  on  the  back  of  it  there  is  always 
another  and  another — the  confession  is, 
an<l  it  is  the  confession  of  every  vain, 
worldly,  wicked  life,  **  All  this  availeth 
me  nothing." 

Whilst  we  now  leave  Haman  foment- 
ing his  rage  and  preparing  for  revenge 
on  the  morrow,  there  is  one  great  spiritual 
truth  which  his  lamentable  confession 
should  press  home  upon  our  hearts.  Let 
a  man  have  the  whole  world  laid  at  his 
feet,  there  shall  yet  be  a  void  in  the 
soul,  which  cannot  be  reached  by  all  its 
pleasures  and  rewards — a  void  which, 
until  it  has  been  supplied,  the  whole 
world  will  avail  him  nothing.  The 
world's  broad  way  is  crowded  with  eager 
seekers  after  happiness.  "  It  is  here," 
cries  one,  and  there  is  a  rush  in  that 
direction,  only  to  be  followed  by  dis- 
appointed looks  and  longing  hearts.  "  It 
is  there,"  cries  another,  and  there  is 
anxious  toiling  and  plodding  for  its  attain- 
ment ;  but  the  cisterns  are  found  at  last 
to  be  broken  and  empty.  In  the  midst 
of  this  thirsting,  moiling,  weary  world, 
Jesus  has  caused  his  voice  to  be  heard, 
pleading  and  saying  : — "  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink." 
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and 
are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you 
rest." — McEwan. 

1.  In  the  first  place,  in  the  case  of 
men  worldly-minded  and  destitute  of  the 
fear  of  God,  there  is  generally  some 
dominant  principle  or  passion  which 
destroys  their  comfort,  and  precludes 
them   from   reaping  the  full  benefit  of 


the  blessings  which  God  has  bestowed 
upon  them.  Thus  the  man  whose  heart 
is  full  of  covetousness  can  never  be 
happy.  What  he  has,  although  it  is  far 
more  than  sufficient  to  supply  his  wants, 
is  yet  so  far  beneath  what  he  desires, 
that  he  will  not  take  full  use  of  it,  just 
because  it  is  not  so  much  as  he  would 
have.  What  Mordecai  was  to  Haman, 
some  imagined  amount  of  wealth  is  to 
him ;  and  thus  his  present  acquisitions 
avail  nothing,  so  long  as  he  cannot  get 
all  he  aims  at.  Again,  the  envious  man 
cannot  be  happy.  Oh,  with  what  ma- 
lignant eye  he  lo(/ks  upon  his  neighbour's 
good,  and  marks  his  advancement,  and 
observes  the  success  of  his  schemes,  and 
his  growing  prosperity !  He  may  be 
thriving  in  the  world  himself  beyond 
what  he  could  have  anticipated,  and  may 
have  all  the  substantial  comforts  of  life 
in  abundance ;  but  he  cannot  find  enjoy- 
ment in  them,  because  this  other  man 
stands  so  much  higher  than  he.  What 
Mordecai  was  to  Haman,  his  neighbour's 
worldly  advantages  are  to  the  man  in 
whose  heart  envy  dwells ;  for  it  eats  out 
all  happiness.  Again,  the  victim  of  pride 
and  vanity  cannot  be  happy.  The  self- 
importance  to  which  these  passions  give 
birth  cannot  escape  unruffled  in  the 
world.  Men  are  not  always  measured 
by  their  own  pretensions ;  and  when 
any  respect  or  honour  is  withheld  from 
them  to  which  they  think  themselves 
entitled,  they  are  far  more  deeply  troubled 
than  they  would  be  by  any  temporal 
loss.  They  deem  themselves  insulted 
and  degraded ;  they  cannot  look  with 
patience  upon  objects  which  formerly 
pleased  them  ;  and  they  long  for  an  op- 
portunity to  make  retaliation  for  the 
wrong  or  slight  they  have  received.  This 
is  a  case  analogous  to  that  of  Haman ; 
and  those  who  are  animated  by  these 
feelings  must,  like  him,  be  necessarily 
wretched.  I  might  protract  these  re- 
marks, but  enough  has  been  said  to  illus- 
trate the  principle,  that  whatever  amount 
of  worldly  good  men  who  fear  not  God 
may  have,  yet,  by  allowing  some  evil 
passion  or  propensity  to  obtain  the  mas- 
tery over  them,  they  destroy  their  own 
comfort,  and  pierce  themselves  through 
with  many  sorrows. 


OilAP.  V.J 


nOMLLETW  COMMENTARY:    mVllEa. 


201 


2.  Bat  now,   in  the  second  place,  T 
would  advert  for  a  moment  to  tlie  danger 
to  which  such  people  expose  themselves. 
That  which  the  covetous  spirit  feels  to 
be  lacking  to  satisfy  its  desires,  it  will 
often  strive  to  attain  by  most  unwarrant- 
able  means.       Hence  the  sins    of   dis- 
honesty,  deceit,   falsehood,   and,    when 
opportunity  Serves,  violence  and  rapacity, 
are  superadded  to  the  sin  of  covetousness, 
and  men,  ere  tliey  are  well  aware,  are 
drawn  into  courses  from  which  at  one 
time  they  would  have  shrunk  back  with 
horror.     So  also   the  cherishing  of  the 
spirit  of  envy  leads  to  the  sins  of  un- 
charitable judging,    malice,    detraction, 
slander,  all  of  which  are  destructive  of  a 
man's  personal  happiness,  as  well  as  of 
the  peace  of  society.     In  the  same  way 
vanity  and  pride  stand  not  alone,  but 
bring  in  their  train  hatred  and  revenge, 
as  we  see  in  the  text,  and  as  all  history 
testifies.      And  thus,  by  the  indulgence 
of  forbidden  passions  and  desires,  men 
not  only  deprive  themselves  of  the  com- 
fort which  they  might  derive  from  the 
blessings  of  a  kind  providence,  but,  as 
one  sinful  propensity  leads  to  another, 
they  lay  themselves  open  on  every  side 
to  many  positive  evils,  from  which,  with 
better  regulated  hearts,  they  would  have 
been  completely  free. 

3.  But  in  the  third  place,  there  is 
another  and  more  general  application 
that  may  be  made  of  the  text  to  matters 
bearing  more  directly  upon  the  spiritual 
interests  of  men.  Haman,  describing  to 
his  friends  his  wealth,  his  grandeur,  his 
various  possessions,  and  his  vast  influ- 
ence, had  to  conclude  by  saying  :  "  All 
this  Ctvaileth  me  nothing."  There  was 
still  a  something  needed  to  complete  his 
happiness.  Now,  we  say  this  is  a  true 
picture  of  the  feelings  of  worldly  men, 
who  are  destitute  of  the  fear  of  God, 
even  when  it  cannot  be  affirmed  of  them 
that  they  are  in  any  marked  manner  the 
slaves  of  evil  passions.  There  is  always 
some  dissatisfaction  with  their  present 
lot  which  needs  to  be  removed  ;  there  is 
a  want — a  something  which  the  soul 
requires  to  its  full  and  thorough  well- 
being,  which  all  the  world's  good  cannot 
supply.  That  want  originated  in  man's 
apostasy,  when  he  ceased  to  have  God 


as  his  friend  and  his  chief  good.  Tt 
makes  itself  felt  ofttimes  in  the  midst  of 
such  profusion  of  earthly  enjoyment  as 
would  lead  one  to  think  that  there  could 
be  no  want  there.  It  will  make  itself 
be  felt  awfully  when  the  soul  hovers  on 
the  brink  of  eternity.  Now  this  want 
the  Gospel  of  Christ  supplies.  Through 
the  acceptance  of  him  by  faith  as  the 
Redeemer  of  the  lost,  the  light  of  God's 
countenance  shines  upon  the  soul,  and 
God  himself  comes  again  to  be  enjoyed 
as  the  soul's  chief  good  and  portion. 
Then  providential  blessings,  and  chastise- 
ments also,  are  felt  to  be  good  ;  yea,  all 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them 
that  believe  in  the  Son  of  God,  for  they 
are  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with 
Jesus  Christ. 

Yet  let  me  here,  before  concluding 
the  present  lecture,  remind  you  that  the 
feeling  of  dissatisfaction  with  earthly 
good  does  not  of  itself  indicate  a  spiritual 
mind,  although  sometimes  it  is  unhappily 
mistaken  for  it.  I  have  referred  to  the 
soul's  want  as  felt  and  expressed  n')t 
unfrequently  when  death  approaches. 
And  so  it  is,  that  under  deep  suffering, 
and  after  long-protracted  illness,  the 
confession  will  be  made  that  the  world 
cannot  satisfy,  and  that  the  strength  has 
been  spent  for  that  which  is  not  bread. 
But,  my  friends,  do  not  wait  till  that 
time  ere  you  make  the  confession  and 
seek  the  better  portion.  Why  should 
you  live  under  the  pressure  of  a  felt 
want  which  can  be  at  this  moment  sup- 
plied %  Why  should  you,  under  the 
dominance  of  some  evil  principle,  de- 
prive yourselves  of  the  right  relish  for 
the  good  gifts  of  God,  by  saying  :  **  All 
this  availeth  me  nothing,  while  the  very 
thing  I  long  for  is  not  given  me."  Does 
not  the  Saviour  declare,  with  reference 
to  earthly  good :  "  He  that  drinketh  of 
this  water  shall  thirst  again,  but  he  that 
drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give 
him  shall  never  thirst."  Trust  his 
word,  then,  and  take  himself,  and  your 
soul  will  have  substantial  and  imperish- 
able realities  to  feast  upon.  Amen. — - 
Davidson. 

Ver.  13. — Yet  all  this  availeth  me 
nothing,  so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the 
Jew  sitting  at  the  king's  gate. 


202 


HOMlLETia  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER, 


[OHAP.  V. 


Haman  himself  confesses  the  vanity  of 
his  high-swelling  words.  "Why  does  he 
talk  of  his  riches,  of  his  children,  of  the 
favour  of  the  king  and  queen,  of  the 
grandeur  of  his  condition*?  That  his 
friends  might  congratulate  him  as  the 
happiest  man  in  the  king's  dominions. 
Yet  with  the  same  breath  he  declares 
himself  unhappy.  He  confesses,  that  all 
that  confluence  of  blessings  which  swelled 
him  with  pride,  were  not  blessings  to 
him,  because  a  certain  man  whom  he 
despised  did  not  bow  the  knee  to  him. 

There  are  few  who  will  confess  so 
plainly  as  Haman  the  weakness  of  their 
own  spirit.  Men  are  ashamed  to  say 
that  trifles  disturb  their  minds,  and  de- 
prive them  of  self-enjoyment.  But  it  is 
certain,  that  numbers,  like  Haman,  are 
miserable  amidst  the  means  of  happiness, 
because  they  want  a  disposition  for  en- 
joying happiness.  They  are  so  unreason- 
able, that  a  thousand  enjoyments  lose 
their  relish,  for  the  want  of  something 
else  which  they  cannot  obtain.  "  A  good 
man  is  satisfied  from  himself ;  "  and  he 
that  is  not  satisfied  from  himself,  will 
not  be  satisfied  from  anything  without 
him.  He  is  like  a  sick  man  surrounded 
with  the  richest  dainties.  He  cannot 
relish  them.  He  starves  in  the  midst  of 
plenty. 

Give  a  whole  world  of  pleasure  to  a 
man  who  loves  the  world,  and  the  things 
of  it,  he  will  soon  find  that  something 
is  wanted,  though  perhaps  he  does  not 
know,  so  well  as  Haman  thought  he  did, 
what  it  is.  He  finds  some  gall  and 
wormwood  that  spread  poison  over  his 
pleasures.  All  his  abundance  cannot 
compensate  for  the  loss  of  some  one 
thing  or  other  that  he  deems  essential  to 
his  happiness.  The  fact  is,  that  the 
world  cannot  give  a  right  constitution  to 
his  disordered  soul,  or  be  a  substitute 
for  that  Divine  favour  in  which  lies  the 
life  of  our  souls.  Habakkuk,  Paul,  and 
other  good  men,  could  be  happy  in  the 
want  of  every  earthly  enjoyment ;  nor 
could  all  the  miseries  which  are  abhorred 
by  the  generality  of  mankind  greatly 
disturb  their  tranquillity  ;  for  God  was 
the  portion  of  their  inheritance,  and  in 
him  they  had  what  a  thousand  worlds 
could  not  give.     But  those  who  know 


not  God,  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  in 
whom  are  tlie  light  and  the  life  of  men, 
know  not  the  way  of  peace.  Whatever 
they  have,  they  want  the  one  thing  need- 
ful, without  which  all  things  else  are 
vanity,  and  vexation  of  spirit. 

"  I  have  all  things,  and  abound,"  said 
an  apostle,  who  was  often  in  hunger,  and 
thirst,  and  nakedness,  and  who,  at  the 
time  when  he  wrote  these  words,  was  a 
poor  prisoner  that  had  newly  received  a 
temporary  supply  from  his  friends.  This 
man  had  nothing,  and  yet  possessed  all 
things.  Ten  thousand  talents  were  but 
a  small  part  of  Haman's  wealth,  and  yet 
he  is  miserably  poor,  for  all  that  he  had 
could  avail  him  nothing.  The  believer 
in  Christ  must  be  rich  in  the  midst 
of  poverty ;  for  he  is  possessed  of  gold 
tried  in  the  fire.  The  man  who  knows 
not  Christ,  is  poor  though  he  be  rich ; 
because  he  is  utterly  destitute  of  the 
true  riches. — Lawson. 

Suppose  a  man  has  a  very  fair  house 
to  dwell  in,  and  he  has  fair  orchards  and 
gardens,  and  set  about  with  tall  brave 
trees  for  ornament;  what  a  most  unreason- 
able thing  were  it  for  him  to  be  weeping 
and  wringing  his  hands  because  the  wind 
blows  off  a  few  leaves  of  his  trees,  when 
he  has  abundance  of  all  kinds  of  fruit ! 
Thus  it  is  with  many ;  though  they  have 
a  great  many  comforts  about  them,  yet 
some  little  matter,  the  blowing  off  a  few 
leaves  even,  is  enough  to  disquiet  them. 
— Burroughs. 

Our  base  hearts  are  more  discontent- 
ed at  one  loss  than  thankful  for  a  hun- 
dred mercies.  God  hath  plucked  one 
bunch  of  grapes  for  you ;  but  how  many 
precious  clusters  are  left  behind.  — 
Watson. 

Discontent  is  a  secret  boasting  of  some 
excellency  in  ourselves,  as  if  God  did  not 
govern  well,  or  we  could  govern  better ! 
Should  a  silly  passenger,  that  understands 
not  the  use  of  the  compass,  be  angry  that 
the  skilful  pilot  will  not  steer  the  vessel 
according  to  his  pleasure  ]  Must  we  give 
out  our  orders  to  God,  as  though  the 
counsels  of  infinite  wisdom  must  roll 
about  according  to  the  conceits  of  our 
fancy . — Cham  ock. 

To  secure  a  contented  spirit,  measure 
your  desires  by  your  fortunes,  and  not 


CHAP,    v.] 


HOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER, 


your  fortunes  by  your  desires. — Jeremy 
Taylor. 

Contentment  is  a  pearl  of  great  price, 
and  whoever  procures  it  at  the  expense 
of  ten  thousand  desires  makes  a  wise  and 
happy  purchase. — Balguy. 

Be  content ;  and  the  best  way  to  be 
contented  is,  believe  that  condition  best 
which  God  carves  out  to  you  by  his 
providence.  If  God  had  seen  it  fit  for 
us  to  have  more,  we  should  have  had  it ; 
but  his  wisdom  sees  this  best  for  us. 
Perhaps  we  could  not  manage  a  great 
estate ;  it  is  hard  to  carry  a  full  cup  with- 
out spilling,  and  a  full  estate  without 
sinning.  Great  estates  may  be  snares; 
a  boat  may  be  overturned  by  having  too 
great  a  sail.  The  believing  that  estate 
best  God  carves  for  us  makes  us  content. 
—  Watson, 

*'  The  noblest  mind  the  best  contentment  has." 

Spenser. 

"All  great  souls  still  make  their  own  content ; 
We  to  ourselves  may  all  our  wishes  grant ; 
For,  nothing  coveting,  we  nothing  want." 

Dri/den. 

"  My  crown  is  in  my  heart,  not  on  ray  head  ; 
Nut  decked  with  diamonds  and  Indian  stones, 


Nor  to  be  wen  ;  my  orown  is  call'd  content ; 
A  mown  it  is  that  seldom  kings  enioy." 

Shakeipearc. 

"  Cellars  and  granaries  in  vain  we  fill 
With  all  the  bounteous  summer's  store, 
If  the  mind  thirst  and  hunger  still ; 
The  poor  rich  man's  emphatically  poor. 
Slaves  to  the  things  we  too  much  prize, 
We  masters  grow  of  all  that  we  despise." 

CowUy. 

"  Contentment  gives  a  crown, 
Where  fortune  hath  denied  it." — Ford, 

The  nature  of  true  content,  says  an  old 
writer,  is  to  fill  all  the  chinks  of  our  de- 
sires, as  the  wax  does  the  seal.  Content 
is  the  poor  man's  riches,  and  desire  is 
the  rich  man's  poverty.  Riches  and 
poverty  are  more  in  the  heart  than  in 
the  hand;  he  is  wealthy  that  is  contented; 
he  is  poor  that  wants  it.  0,  poor  Ahab, 
that  carest  not  for  thine  own  large  pos- 
sessions, because  thou  may  est  not  have 
another's  !  0,  rich  Naboth,  that  carest 
not  for  all  the  dominions  of  Ahab,  so 
thou  mayest  enjoy  thine  own  !  Content 
produces  in  some  measure  all  those  efi'eets 
which  the  alchemist  usually  ascribed  to 
what  he  calls  the  philosopher's  stone,  and 
if  it  does  not  bring  riches,  it  does  the 
same  thing  by  banishing  the  desire  of 
them.  — A  ddison , 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Yerse  14. 


The  Speech  op  a  Foolish  Wipe. 

Job  said  unto  his  wife,  *'Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish  women  speaketh ;" 
and  if  Haman  had  been  as  good  and  as  wise  as  Job  he  might  have  said  the  same 
unto  his  wife,  Zeresh.  But  Haman  was  not  like  Job  ;  and  it  may  be  that  his  wife 
and  his  friends  spoke  according  to  that  which  they  knew  would  harmonize  with 
his  depraved  and  wicked  nature.  Sometimes  the  wife  is  the  salvation  of  her 
husband,  but  too  often  by  the  natural  delicacy  of  her  nature  she  follows  his 
leadings.  We  know  little  about  Zeresh,  but  her  speech  in  this  verse  at  least  does 
not  tend  to  give  us  an  exalted  view  of  her  character.  Here  we  find  that  the  wicked 
Hainan  is  joined  to,  and  backed  up  by,  a  wicked  wife.  We  now  refer  to  the  wife, 
and  leave  the  friends  alone,  for  she  is  evidently  the  mouth-piece  of  the  company. 
She  leads  the  counsel;  she  lays  down  the  diabolical  plan  by  which  Haman  may  seek 
to  satisfy  his  revenge.  A  good  wife,  Avho  shall  tell  her  value  %  A  bad  wife,  who 
shall  declare  her  power  of  mischief?  Haman  was  now  far  gone  in  wickedness  ;  but 
a  ^(mm\  wife  might  still  have  done  much  for  his  restraint. 

I.  The  speech  of  this  foolish  wife  is  vindictive.  Here  are  none  of  those  sweet 
words  which  we  naturally  expect  from  a  gentle  woman.  There  is  not  the  slightest 
trace  of  that  tenderness  which  should  be  the  characteristic  and  the  glory  of  the 
female  nature.  There  is  rather  the  hard  cruelty  of  Lady  Macbeth  inciting  her 
shrinking  husband  to  the  performanc*  of  tk«  murdoroui  datd.     ''  L«t  a  gallows  be 


204  HOMlLETrC  GOMMKNTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  v. 

made  of  fifty  cubits  high."  Let  the  lofty  gallows  speak  of  the  all-mastering  force 
of  the  revenge.  Let  the  ignominious  nature  of  the  punishment  set  forth  thy 
determination  to  glut  thy  wicked  feelings.  Revenge  is  loathsome  in  any.  Never 
does  revenge  seem  more  loathsome  than  in  a  woman.  The  wife,  the  mother, 
appears  to  view  with  a  nature  so  hard  that  we  can  scarcely  imagine  her  capable  of 
motherly  feeling.  Is  it  possible  that  the  woman  who  speaks  in  this  verse  ever 
gloated  with  motherly  love  and  fondness  over  the  infant  beauty  of  her  first-born  1 
But  what  strange  mixtures  we  are.  Zeresh  might  have  run  to  her  child  in  distress, 
and  have  gently  nurtured  the  sick  ones;  and  yet  can  say,  "Let  a  gallows  be  made 
of  fifty  cubits  high."  Strange  inconsistency  !  Our  human  love  is  too  often  of  a 
mere  selfish  character.  Divine  love  is  not  self-considering.  It  flows  out  to  the  evil 
and  the  good.  Human  love  must  be  formed  after  the  pattern  of  Divine  love  if  it 
is  to  work  beneficially,  and  to  be  ennobling. 

II.  The  speech  oif  this  foolish  wife  is  flattering.  "  To-morrow  speak  thou 
unto  the  king."  Thou  art  all-powerful  at  Court;  use  thy  power  for  the  removal  of 
thy  hated  enemy  sitting  at  the  king's  gate,  and  causing  thee  constant  annoyance. 
The  pleasant  words  of  a  dear  wife  are  encouraging.  The  busy  world  does  not 
sufficiently  consider  how  much  it  owes  to  the  stimulating  words  of  good  wives 
living  in  retirement,  living  for  those  whom  they  fondly  love,  living  to  strengthen 
their  husbands  for  the  stern  battle.  The  faith  of  a  fond  wife  in  her  husband's  power 
has  but  the  husband's  salvation.  Happy  is  it  for  the  nervous  and  sensitive  husband 
that  the  wife  considers  him  a  hero,  and  loves  to  extol  his  virtues.  A  true  wife  has 
large  conceptions  of  her  husband's  abilities.  Zeresh  may  still  have  believed  in  her 
wicked  husband.  But  her  flattery  is  ruinous.  Let  discretion  rule  in  our  loving 
words.  Let  us  beware  lest  we  be  led  astray  to  our  own  destruction  by  flattering 
words. 

III.  The  speech  of  this  foolish  wife  is  cruel.  Bitterly  cruel  as  coming  from  a 
woman.  Cruel  if  we  consider  the  doom  proposed  for  poor  Mordecai ;  and  cruel  if 
we  consider  the  repellent  selfishness  to  be  encouraged  by  the  exhortation.  *'  Then 
go  thou  in  merrily  with  the  king  to  the  banquet."  What  is  Mordecai's  crime  that 
he  should  be  impaled  on  the  lofty  tree^  What  has  so  hardened  the  delicate  nature 
of  a  woman  that  she  can  speak  callously  of  that  most  awful  form  of  human  punish- 
ment ?  How  very  hard  a  woman  can  be  when  she  sets  herself  to  be  hard.  The 
hellish  cruelty  of  a  cruel  woman  is  the  most  awful  fact  on  God's  sin-blighted  earth. 
Happy  the  man  so  far  who  has  never  had  to  experience  the  efl^ects  of  such  cruelty ! 
Oh,  Zeresh,  this  is  not  the  high  road  to  merriment !  The  gallows  on  which  the 
Mordecais  hang  are  not  the  means  by  which  it  is  to  be  secured.  Well,  yes,  perhaps 
merriment,  but  not  lasting  happiness.  The  laughter  of  fools,  but  not  the  deep 
joy  of  the  righteous.  Merriment  and  hanging  !  The  banquet  and  the  gallows ! 
Extremes  meet  in  this  world  of  contradictions.  Joy  and  sorrow  tread  upon  each 
other's  heels.  Tears  and  smiles  are  close  together  in  this  strangely  disordered 
universe.  The  gallows  is  raised  by  selfishness.  Merriment  is  the  outcome  of 
selfishness.     Celestial  joy  is  the  outcome  of  benevolence. 

IV.  The  speech  of  this  foolish  wife  was  pleasing.  *'The  thing  pleased 
Haman."  It  was  intended  to  please,  and  the  object  was  accomplished.  Depraved 
nature  is  pleased  by  that  which  ministers  to  its  depravity.  Had  Zeresh  set  herself 
to  reform  Haman,  the  work  would  have  been  more  difficult,  less  pleasing,  but 
perhaps  more  satisfactory  in  the  long  run.  The  work  of  the  reformer  is  always 
difficult,  and  not  always  satisfactory  in  this  world.  Some  tell  us  that  speaking  the 
truth  always  pays.  That  men  at  first  may  not  like  the  truth,  but  that  afterwards 
they  come  to  respect  the  speaker,  and  even  give  a  testimonial.  The  only  testimonial 
that  Stephen  rece  ved  was  stones,  not  curiously  carved,  not  having  inscribed  upon 
them  his  virtues,  and  not  presented  by  a  kid-gloved  deputation.  Stephen  was  not 
likely  to  receive  much  benefit  in  this  world  from  the  report  of  his  testimonial  as 
^ent  to  the  Christian  newspapers  of  his  time.     Zeresh  had  evidently  no  high-souled 


03AP.   v.] 


HOMlLF/nO  QOMMENIARY:    ESTHJJJR 


2(n 


views;  she  spoke  of  the  present,  like  too  many.  She  pleased  Haman,  and  thought 
of  no  dreadful  future. 

V.  The  speech  of  this  foolish  wife  was  ruinously  successful.     Haman  caused 

the  gallows  to  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  suggestion  of  Zeresh  and  the  friends. 
There  is  a  success  which  is  ruinous,  and  this  was  one  of  the  kind.  Ruinous  not 
to  Mord(^cai,  hut  to  Haman  and  to  Zeresh.  Our  own  words  are  sometimes  our  own 
Intter  and  relentless  destroyers.  '*By  thy  words  thou  shalt  he  justified,  and  by 
thy  words  shalt  thou  be  condemned."  In  lonely  hours  of  bitter  grief  did  the  words 
of  Zeresh  haunt  her  memory,  and  fill  her  soul  with  anguish.  As  she  saw  her  poor 
Haman  impaled  on  the  lofty  gallows,  how  she  would  have  liked  to  have  recalled  the 
foolish  words.  But  they  cannot  be  recalled.  Foolish  words  once  spoken  are  spoken 
beyond  control.  Be  slow  to  speak.  Be  swift  to  hear.  In  consigning  other  people 
to  sorrow  we  must  inflict  sorrow  on  ourselves.  Those  who  erect  the  gallows  for 
others  should  walk  very  carefully  themselves. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verse  14. 


An  envious  man  cannot  peacefully 
enjoy  the  benefits  which  God  gives  him. 
"  Go  not  after  thy  lusts,  but  refrain  thy- 
self from  thine  appetites."  It  is  very 
grievous  of  wives  to  urge  their  husbands 
to  do  wickedly.  He  who  digs  a  pit  for 
others  will  fall  in  himself.  We  must 
not  of  ourselves  revenge  ourselves  on 
our  enemy,  but  first  bring  him  before  the 
proper  tribunal.  When  the  wicked  are 
busy  to  remove  from  their  path  what 
will  mar  their  earthly  joy,  then,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  godly  should  be  diligent 
to  remove  that  which  will  embitter  fcheir 
spiritual  and  heavenly  joy. — Starke. 

Observe  how  false  and  vain  is  the  con- 
lidence  of  impious  and  cruel  men,  who 
seek  and  hope  to  oppress,  and  utterly 
destroy,  the  servants  of  God.  It  is  them- 
selves that  perish  by  the  just  judgment 
of  God,  and  they  are  often  caught  by 
the  very  snares  they  lay  for  others; 
while  God  rescues  his  servants,  and 
magnificently  vindicates  them.  Goliath 
and  Holofernes  are  slain  with  their  own 
swords,  and  the  saints  triumph  with  their 
heads.  The  Babylonian  satraps  seemed 
to  themselves  secure,  when  the  flames 
and  the  lions  were  about  to  devour 
Daniel  and  his  companions  ;  but  the 
latter  were  gloriously  preserved,  and  the 
former  ignominously  perished  by  their 
own  artifices  and  instruments.  Pharaoh 
boasted,  *'  I  will  overtake  (the  Hebrews); 
I  will  divide  the  spoil  ; "  but  he  imme- 
diately became  food  for  the  fishes,  and  a 
prey  for  the  servants  of  the  Lord.  "  The 
Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts  of  man,  that 


they  are  foolishness."  "  He  that  sitteth 
in  the  heavens  shall  laugh  at  them." 
These  are  the  efl'ects  of  the  judgment  of 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  speaks  by  the 
prophets  :  "Evil-doers  shall  be  cut  off"; 
but  those  that  wait  upon  the  Lord,  they 
shall  inherit  the  earth."  Let  us  there- 
fore cast  away  impious  security,  contempt 
of  God,  and  inhumanity  towards  others  ; 
but  let  us  walk  in  the  love  and  fear  of 
tlie  Lord,  that  at  length  we  may  come 
to  His  heavenly  kingdom. — Feuardent. 

The  wit  of  women  hath  wont  to  be 
noted  for  more  sudden,  and  more  sharp. 
Zeresh,  the  vvife  of  Haman,  sets  on  foot 
the  motion  of  speedy  revenge,  which  is 
applauded  by  the  rest.  I  do  not  hear 
them  say  :  Be  patient  awhile  ;  thou  hast 
already  set  Mordecai  his  last  day ;  the 
month  Adar  will  not  be  long  in  coming  ; 
the  determination  of  his  death  hath 
made  him  desperate;  let  him  in  the 
mean  time  eat  his  own  heart  in  envy  at 
thy  greatness.  But  they  rather  advise 
of  a  quick  despatch.  Malice  is  a  thing 
full  of  impatience,  and  hates  delay  of 
execution  next  unto  mercy.  While  any 
grudge  lies  at  the  heart,  it  cannot  be 
freely  cheerful.  Forced  smiles  are  but 
the  hypocrisy  of  mirth.  How  happy 
were  it  for  us,  if  we  would  be  zealously 
careful  to  remove  the  hindrances  of  our 
true  spiritual  joy,  those  stubborn  corrup- 
tions that  will  not  stoop  to  the  power  of 
grace. — Bishop  Hall. 

"  Thou  canst  never  pi-evaii  against 
Mordecai  by  means  which  have  already 
been  brought  to  bear  against  his  people/' 


206 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OBLIP.   V. 


said  Zeresh  to  Hainan.  "  Thou  canst 
not  kill  him  with  a  knife  or  sword,  for 
Isaac  was  delivered  from  the  same ; 
neither  canst  thou  drown  him,  for  Moses 
and  the  people  of  Israel  walked  safely 
through  the  sea.  Fire  will  not  burn 
him,  for  with  Chananyah  and  his  com- 
rades it  failed ;  wild  beasts  will  not 
tear  him,  for  Daniel  was  rescued  from 
the  lion's  fangs ;  neither  will  a  dungeon 
contain  him,  for  Joseph  walked  to  honour 
through  a  prison's  gates.  Even  if  we 
deprive  him  of  sight,  we  cannot  prevail 
against  him,  for  Samson  was  made  blind, 
and  yet  destroyed  thousands  of  the 
Philistines.  There  is  but  one  way  left 
us ;  we  must  hang  him."  It  was  in  ac- 
cordance with  this  advice  that  Haman 
built  the  gallows  fifty  cubits  high. 
After  he  had  erected  this  dread  instru- 
ment of  death,  he  sought  the  presence 
of  Mordecai,  to  gloat  over  his  coming 
triumph.  He  found  the  Jew  in  the 
College,  with  his  pupils  gathered  around 
him.  Their  loins  were  girded  in  sack- 
cloth, and  they  wept  at  the  words  which 
their  teacher  was  addressing  to  them. 
"To-morrow,"  said  Haman,  "I  will  first 
destroy  these  children,  and  I  will  then 
hang  Mordecai  on  the  gallows  I  have  pre- 
pared." He  remained  in  the  school  an<l 
saw  the  mothers  of  the  pupils  bring  them 
their  meals ;  but  they  all  refused  to  eat, 
saying :  "  By  the  life  of  our  teacher, 
Mordecai,  we  will  neither  eat  nor  drink  ; 
fasting  will  we  die." 

But  Haman  was  to  receive  his  punish- 
ment. There  is  a  saying  of  the  Babbis  : 
*'  If  a  stone  falls  upon  a  pitcher,  the 
pitcher  breaks ;  if  the  pitcher  fixlls  upon 
the  stone,  the  pitcher  also  breaks."  Be 
it  as  it  may,  it  is  bad  for  the  pitcher, 
and  bad  similarly  for  the  enemies  of 
Israel ;  for  even  when  Israel  strays  from 
righteousness,  the  instruments  of  their 
chastisement  are  also  punished,  as  in 
the  instances  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  Titus, 
Haman,  &c. — Talmud. 

Haman  was  pleased  with  the  advice 
of  his  friends,  and  began  to  put  it  in 
execution.  But  he  found  too  soon,  that 
"  he  who  flattereth  a  man  spreadeth  a 
net  for  his  feet."  Haman  prepared  f"r 
Mordecai  in  intention,  but  for  himself 
in  reality,  a  gallows  of  fifty  cubits  high. 


Remember  and  believe  the  instruction  of 
the  wise  man,  "  He  that  diggeth  a  pit 
shall  fall  into  it ;  and  whoso  breaketh 
an  hedge  a  serpent  shall  bite  him." — 
Lawson. 

As  Mordecai's  offence  had  been  pre- 
sumptuous above  measure  in  the  view  of 
Haman  and  his  friends,  so  the  punish- 
ment of  it  was  to  be  conspicuous.     The 
gallows  on  which  he  was  to  be  hanged 
was  to  be  upwards  of  forty  feet  (seventy- 
five  feet)  in  height,  so  that  the  victim 
might  be  exposed  to  the  view  of  the 
whole  city — so  that  all  might  learn  that 
it  was  no  slight  matter  to  provoke  the 
vengeance  of  the  favourite  of  the  king. 
And  mark  how  the  thirst  for  vengeance 
converts  men  into  fiends.  Far  more  grati- 
fying than  any  of   the  luxuries  which 
he  could  taste  at  the  table  of  the  queen 
would  be  the  sight  to  Haman  of  Mor- 
decai hanging  on  the  gibbet.     *'  Have 
everything  ready  to  feed  your  revenge," 
his  friends  said  to  him,  "  and  then  go  in 
merrily  with  the  king  unto  the  banquet." 
Generally  a  deed  of  cruelty  and  blood- 
shed for  a  time  destroys,  even  in  wicked 
men,   their  relish  for  their  usual  plea- 
sure.    But  there  are  monsters  in  human 
form,  as  the  recent  massacres  in   India 
show   us  ;  indeed  as  all  history   shows 
us  ;  and  as   we  see  here  in  the  case  of 
Haman.     There  are  human  fiends  who, 
when  their  passions  are  inflamed,  riot  in 
cruelty,  and  feel  as  if  the  exercise  of  it 
gave  a  zest  to  all  their  other  enjoyments. 
Some  philosophers   talk  of    the  innate 
dignity  and  excellence  of  human  nature, 
but  it  may  be  safely  said  that  there  is  no 
enormity  which  men  will  not  perpetrate 
when  they  are  left  to  themselves,  and 
(i(  stitute  of  the  softening  and  elevating 
influence  of  true  religion. 

But  passing  from  this  topic,  we  may 
suppose  now,  when  Haman  was  com- 
forted by  the  suggestion  of  his  friends, 
that  the  two  things  which  chiefly  occu- 
pied his  mind  and  pleased  him,  were  the 
preparation  of  the  gallows  for  Mordecai, 
and  the  thought  of  the  interview  witli 
the  king  on  the  morrow,  when  he  felt 
sure  he  would  obtain  the  request  he  was 
to  make.  ''  Behold  the  wicked,"  says 
the  Psalmist,  ''  he  travaileth  with  in- 
i(juity,  and  hath  conceived  mischief  :  he 


CHAP,  v.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


207 


made  a  pit  and  digged  it,  and  is  fallen 
into  the  ditch  which  he  made  :  his  mis- 
chief shall  return  upon  his  own  head, 
and  his  violent  dealing  shall  come  down 
upon  himself."  That  night  was  spent 
in  Haman's  house — -by  his  slaves  in 
making  all  ready  for  the  murderous  deed 
of  the  morrow,  and  by  himself,  in  joyous 
anticipation  of  having  his  victim  fully 
within  his  power. 

'•  Macbeth.  If  we  should  fail, 

Lady  M.  We  fail. 

But  screw  your  courage  to  the  sticking  place, 
And  we'll  not  fail.     When  Duncan  is  asleep, 
(Whereto  the  rather  shall  his  day's  hard  journey 
Soundly  invite  him,)  his  two  chamberlains 
Will  I  with  wine  and  wassel  so  convince, 
That  memory,  the  warder  of  the  brain, 
Shall  be  a  fume,  and  the  receipt  of  reason 
A  limbeck  only :  When  in  swinish  sleep 
Their  drenched  natures  lie,  as  in  a  death, 
What  cannot  you  and  I  perform  upon 
The  unguarded  Duncan  ?  what  not  put  upon 
His  spongy  officers  :  who  shall  bear  the  guilt 
Of  our  great  quell  ?  " 

Shakespeare. 


A  good  wife,  says  an  old  writer,  ia 
heaven's  last,  best  gift  to  man :  his 
angel  of  mercy  ;  minister  of  graces  in- 
numerable ;  his  gem  of  many  virtues  ; 
his  casket  of  jewels.  Her  voice,  his 
sweetest  music;  her  smiles,  his  brightest 
day  ;  her  kiss,  the  guardian  of  innocence ; 
her  arms,  the  pall  of  his  safety,  the  balm 
of  his  health,  the  balsam  of  his  life  ;  her 
industry,  his  sweetest  wealth;  her  eco- 
nomy, his  safest  steward  ;  her  lips,  his 
faithful  counsellors;  her  bosom,  the  softest 
pillow  of  his  cares  ;  and  her  prayers,  the 
ablest  advocates  of  heaven's  blessing  on 
his  head.  A  married  man  falling  into 
misfortune  is  more  apt  to  retrieve  his 
situation  in  the  world  than  a  single  one, 
chiefly  because  his  spirits  are  soothed 
and  retrieved  by  domestic  endearment-!, 
and  his  self-respect  kept  alive  by  finding 
that  although  all  abroad  be  darkness 
and  humiliation,  yet  there  is  a  little 
world  of  love  at  home  over  which  he  is 
monarch. 


ILLUSTEATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  V. 


Vers.  1,  2.  Worlcmen  in  the  tunnel.  Not 
many  years  since  a  number  of  workmen  were 
engaged  in  constructing  a  railway  tunnel.  In 
the  midst  of  their  work  there  was  a  sudden  fall 
of  earth,  which  completely  closed  the  entrance, 
and  shut  them  up  from  the  outer  world.  Their 
comrades  outside,  as  soon  as  they  discovered 
what  had  happened,  began  digging  through  the 
mass  of  earth.  It  was  many  hours  before  the 
task  was  accomplished.  They  found  them  quietly 
pursuing  their  labour  inside  the  tunnel.  Their 
work  had  never  been  interrupted.  They  had 
eaten  their  dinner,  and  gone  on  digging  and 
boring.  They  knew,  they  said,  that  their  fellow- 
workmen  would  rescue  them  ;  and  so  they  went 
on  with  their  labour.  Transfer  their  state  of 
mind  to  the  Christian  in  his  perplexities,  and 
we  see  exactly  what  practical  faith  is.  Faith 
teaches  the  believer,  in  the  midst  of  the  severest 
difficulty,  not  to  set  about  forcing  a  way  out  of 
his  trouble,  but  just  to  ply  his  pickaxe  and  spade 
in  the  work  which  is  straight  before  him,  leaving 
it  to  the  Father  above  to  make  a  way  of  escape 
for  him.  In  the  right  manner,  and  at  the  right 
moment,  the  help  comes,  and  the  Christian  goes 
on  his  way  more  rejoicing. — Hooper. 

Vers.  1,2.  The  spider* s  web.  See  the  spider 
casting  out  her  film  to  the  gale ;  she  feels  per- 
suaded that  somewhere  or  other  it  will  adhere, 
and  form  the  commencement  of  her  web.  She 
commits  the  slender  filament  to  the  breeze,  be- 
lieving that  there  is  a  place  provided  for  it  to  fix 
itself.  In  this  fashion  should  we  belieringly 
oast  forth  our  endeavours  in  this  life,  ooiifid«nt 


that  God  will  find  a  place  for  us.  He  who  bids 
us  pray  and  work  will  aid  our  efforts,  and  guide 
us  in  his  Providence  in  a  right  way.  Sit  not 
still  in  despair,  0  son  of  toil,  but  again  cast 
out  the  floating  thread  of  hopeful  endeavour,  and 
the  mind  of  love  will  bear  it  to  its  resting-place ! 
— Spurgeoit. 

Vers.  1,2.  Christopher  Columbus.  Christopher 
Columbus,  if  we  have  a  right  understanding  of 
his  character,  was  a  man  of  a  self-controlled  and 
quiet  spirit.  The  foundation  of  this  subdued 
and  immovable  calmness  of  spirit,  which  sup- 
ported him  under  immense  labours,  deprivations, 
and  sufferings,  was  faith,  undoubtedly.  And  it 
is  very  possible  that  it  was,  to  a  considerable 
degree  at  least,  natural  faith.  That  is  to  say, 
he  had  faith  in  his  mathematical  and  geographical 
deductions ;  he  had  faith  in  his  personal  skill  as  a 
navigator  ;  he  had  faith  in  his  own  personal  in- 
fluence over  minds  of  less  power ;  he  had  faith 
in  his  integrity  of  purpose.  He  felt,  therefore, 
that  he  stood  on  a  strong  foundation ;  and  this 
inward  conviction,  strengthened  perhaps  in  some 
degree  by  religious  sentiments,  imparted,  both 
inwardly  and  outwardly,  that  self-possessed  and 
delightful  calmness  of  spirit  and  manner  which 
is  one  of  the  surest  indices  of  true  greatness. — 
XTpham. 

Dr.  Livingstone^ 8  tonic. — ^This  certainly  served 
the  great  traveller  well  in  the  long  conuest  with 
obstacles  of  every  kind.  His  work  was  conse- 
crated to  God,  and  the  consciousness  that  he  was 
faithfully  serving  him  gave  strength  in  the  midsl 
of  weakness,  and  saTed  him  from  despair.     Om 


208 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  V. 


month  before  his  death  he  wrote  :  "  Nothing 
earthly  will  make  me  give  up  my  work  in  despair. 
I  encourage  myself  in  the  Lord  my  God,  and  go 
forward."  It  was  this  spirit  that  sustained  hira 
from  the  first.  He  might  be  prostrated  again 
and  again  by  bodily  illness,  but  nothing  could 
make  him  an  invalid  Christian,  even  for  a  day. 

Singing  in  prison. — On  one  occasion  some 
of  the  converts  were  apprehended,  and  unjustly 
put  in  prison.  One  of  the  party  was  the  native 
preacher.  They  were  kept  in  prison  several  days. 
The  Sabbath  came  round,  and  though  shut  up, 
like  Paul  and  Silas,  they  determined  to  worship 
God  in  the  jail.  They  sang  aloud  the  praises  of 
God.  Their  keepers  came  to  forbid  and  scold 
them  ;  the  native  preacher  then  began  to  preach 
to  them.  At  length  the  chief  officer  of  the 
Zemindhar  was  obliged  to  set  them  at  liborty, 
saying,  *'  "What  can  we  do  with  these  people  ? 
If  we  imprison  them  they  sing ;  if  we  scold  them, 
they  preach  and  argue." 

When  Madame  Quyon  was  imprisoned  in  the 
Castle  of  Vincennes,  in  1695,  she  not  only  sang, 
but  wrote  songs  of  praise  unto  her  God. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Martyrs^  heroism.  When  the 
executioner  went  behind  Jerome  of  Prague  to  set 
fire  to  the  pile,  "  Come  here,"  said  the  martyr, 
•'  and  kindle  it  before  my  eyes  ;  for  if  I  dreaded 
such  a  sight,  I  should  never  have  come  to  this 
place  when  I  had  a  free  opportunity  tc  escape." 
The  fire  was  kindled,  and  he  then  sang  a  hymn, 
which  was  soon  finished  by  the  encircling  flames. 
Algerius,  an  Italian  martyr,  thus  wrote  from  his 
prison,  a  little  before  his  death  •  *'  Who  would 
believe  that  in  this  dungeon  I  should  find  a  para- 
dise so  pleasant  ? — in  a  place  of  sorrow  and  death, 
tranquillity,  and  hope,  and  life  ;  where  others 
weep,  I  rejoice."  Wishart,  when  in  the  fire 
which  removed  him  from  the  world,  exclaimed  : 
"  Ihe  flame  doth  torment  my  body,  but  no  whit 
abates  my  spirits." — New  Cyelopcedia  of  Anecdote. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Faith  the  soul's  venture.  Faith  is 
nothing  else  but  the  soul's  venture.  It  ventures 
to  Christ,  in  opposition  to  all  legal  terrors ;  it 
ventures  on  Christ,  in  opposition  to  our  guilti- 
ness ;  it  ventures  for  Christ,  in  opposition  to  all 
difficulties  and  discouragements. — W.  Bridge. 

Ver.  2.  A  bold  petitioner.  The  Romans  had 
a  law  that  no  person  should  approacli  the  em- 
peror's tent  in  the  night,  upon  pain  of  death  ;  but 
it  once  happened  that  a  soldier  was  found  in  that 
situation,  with  a  petition  in  his  hand,  waiting  for 
an  opportunity  of  presenting  it.  He  was  appre- 
hended, and  going  to  be  immediately  executed;  but 
the  emperor,  having  overheard  the  matter  in  his 
pavilion,  cried  aloud,  saying,  "  If  the  petition 
be  for  himself,  let  him  die ;  if  for  another,  spare 
his  life."  Upon  inquiry,  it  was  found  that  the 
generous  soldier  prayed  for  the  lives  of  his  two 
comrades  who  had  been  taken  asleep  on  the  watch. 
The  emperor  nobly  forgave  them  all. — Biblical 
Museum. 

Vers.  3,  5.  Alexander  the  Great.  Alexander 
the  Great  had  a  famous  but  indigent  philosopher 
in  his  Court,  who,  on  one  occasion,  being  particu- 
larly straitened  in  his  circumstances,  applied  to 
his  patron  for  aid.  Alexander  at  once  gave  him 
a  commisuon  to  receive  of  his  treasurer  what- 


ever he  wanted.  He  immediately  demanded,  in 
his  sovereign's  name,  ten  thousand  pounds.  The 
treasurer,  before  complying,  waited  upon  the 
king,  and  told  him  how  exorbitant  he  thought 
the  sum.  Alexander  heard  him  with  patience, 
and  then  replied  :  "  Let  the  money  be  instantly 
paid ;  I  am  delighted  with  this  philosopher's  way 
of  thinking ;  by  the  largeness  of  his  request,  he 
shows  the  high  idea  he  has  conceived  both  of  my 
superior  wealth  and  my  royal  munificence. 

Vers.  3,  5.  Theodosius  and  Sigismund.  Theo- 
dosius,  Archbishop  of  Cologne,  when  the  Em- 
peror Sigismund  demanded  of  him  the  directest 
and  most  compendious  way  how  to  obtain  true 
happiness,  made  answer  in  brief  thus  :  "Perform 
when  thou  art  well  what  thou  promisedst  when 
thou  wast  sick."  David  did  so  ;  he  made  vows  in 
war,  and  paid  them  in  peace.  And  thus  should 
all  good  men  do,  not  like  the  cunning  devil,  of 
whom  the  epigrammist  thus  writeth  : 

'*  iEgrotat  daemon,  monachus  tunc  esse  volebat ; 
Convaluit  daemon,  monachus  tunc  esse  nolebat." 

Well  Englished— 

"  The  devil  was  sick,  the  devil  a  monk  would  be  ; 
The  devil  got  well,  the  devil  a  monk  was  he." 

Nor  like  unto  many  now-a-days,  that  if  God's 
hand  do  but  lie  somewhat  heavy  upon  them,  oh  ! 
what  promises,  what  engagements  are  there  for 
aniendment  of  life  !  How  like  unto  marble  against 
rain  do  they  seem  to  sweat  and  melt,  but  still 
retain  their  hardness ;  let  but  the  rod  be  taken 
off  their  backs,  or  health  restored,  then  as  their 
bodies  live  their  vows  die,  all  is  forgotten ;  nay, 
many  times  it  so  falleth  out,  that  they  are  far 
worse  than  ever  they  were  before. — Spencer. 

Ingratitude  to  God. — The  English  proverb 
says,  ''  The  river  past  and  God  forgotten,"  to 
express  with  how  mournful  a  frequency,  he 
whose  assistance  was  invoked — it  may  have  been 
earnestly  in  the  moment  of  peril — is  remembered 
no  more  so  soon  as  by  his  help  the  danger  has 
been  surmounted.  And  the  Italian  form  of  it 
sounds  a  still  sadder  depth  of  ingratitude  :  '*  The 
peril  passed,  the  saint  mocked,''  the  vows  made  to 
him  in  peril  remaining  unperformed  in  safety, 
and  he  treated  somewhat  as  in  Greek  story  Juno 
was  treated  by  Mandrabulus  the  Samian,  who 
having,  under  her  auspices  and  through  her  di- 
rection, discovered  a  gold  mine,  in  his  instant 
gratitude  vowed  to  her  a  golden  ram,  which  he 
presently  exchanged  in  intention  for  a  silver  one, 
and  again  this  for  a  very  small  brass  one,  and 
this  for  nothing  at  all. — Trench. 

Ver.  3.  God's  protnises  conditional.  A  pro- 
clamation is  read,  wherein  a  Christian  king  grants 
honour  and  wealth  to  certain  of  his  subjects,  with 
assurance  of  donation  on  their  just  demand.  One 
amongst  the  multitude  leaps  at  the  news,  springs 
away,  and  stays  not  to  hear  it  out ;  there  is  a 
condition  following,  provided  first,  that  they  put 
on  arms,  and  expel  the  Turk  which  infests  some 
part  of  his  dominions.  This  man  comes  one  of 
the  foremost  to  demand  the  promised  honours ; 
he  is  asked  for  a  testimony  of  his  valour  and 
service  in  the  wars.  Alas,  he  never  tarried  t » 
hear  that  condition^  and  therefore  lost  the  retri- 


ohap.  v.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


209 


bution.  Thus  it  is  that  God  promiseth  eternal 
life  to  men ;  withal  chargeth  them  to  believe  in 
Christ,  and  to  do  their  faithful  service  against  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  but  so  it  is,  that 
niMny  are  quite  lost,  for  not  staying  to  hear  the 
j)rooianiation  of  the  Gospel  out,  they  run  away 
with  opinion  of  sufficient  belief,  and  never  think 
of  obedience ;  whereas  the  promises  of  God  are 
conditional.  As  th«  re  is  a  reward  promised,  so 
there  is  a  condition  promised ;  it  must  be  our 
obedience  first,  and  then  comes  in  God's  reconi- 
pence ;  our  devotion  goes  before,  and  his  retri- 
bution follows  after. — Spencer. 

Vers.  6,  8.  Gossner.  Standing  by  his  grave, 
one  said  of  him,  that  it  was  not  hyperbole,  "  He 
prayed  up  the  walls  of  an  hospital,  and  the  hearts 
of  the  nurses  ;  he  prayed  mission-stations  into 
being,  and  missionaries  into  faith;  he  prayed 
open  the  hearts  of  the  rich,  and  gold  from  the 
most  distant  lands."  And  as  for  his  sermons, 
the  power  of  the  Word  did  not  lie  so  much  in  the 
thoughts,  or  in  the  art  of  the  preacher,  as  in 
prayer.  Prayer  was  his  atmosphere ;  he  could 
not  live  without  it.  So  soon  as  he  came  to 
Berlin,  he  gathered  a  few  round  him  for  prayer. 
They  continued  in  prayer  while  he  lived.  He 
could  not  be  present  where  it  was  excluded. 
The  Bible  Society  had  determined  to  open  its 
committee  meetings  only  with  silent  prayer;  he 
protested,  and  the  protest  showed  how  deeply  his 
heart  was  sunk  in  the  heart  of  Christ.  **A 
Bible  society  that  does  not  begin  with  prayer  is 
to  my  mind  a  synagoga  profanorum.  I  do  not 
despise  a  short  silent  prayer  ;  but  it  is  too  little 
at  a  Bible  Society,  and  no  more  than  if  a  nurse 
said  to  a  child,  *  Make  a  curtsey,*  and  it  made 
it,  and  that  was  all.  If  I  went  to  the  meeting 
and  sought  prayer,  and  it  was  forbidden,  I  would 
take  my  hat  and  stick  and  run  out  as  if  a  mad 
dog  had  bitten  me.  If  I  could  raise  the  dead,  I 
would  go  to  "Wittenberg  and  call  Luther  out  of 
his  grave,  and  Spener,  and  Arndt,  and  Andrea, 
and  bring  them  to  the  Bible  Society  at  Berlin, 
and  let  them  decide." — Stevenson'' s  Praying  and 
Working. 

Vers,  6,  8.  Effective  prayer. — God  looks  not 
at  the  pomp  of  words  and  variety  of  expressions, 
but  at  the  sincerity  and  devotion  of  the  heart. 
The  key  opens  the  door,  not  because  it  is  gilt,  but 
because  it  fits  the  lock. 

Constant  in  prayer. — Felix  Neflf  once  made 
the  following  comparison :  "  When  a  pump  is 
frequently  used,  but  little  pains  are  necessary  to 
have  water;  the  water  pours  out  at  the  first 
stroke,  because  it  is  high.  But  if  the  pump  has 
not  been  used  for  a  long  while,  the  water  gets 
low,  and  when  you  want  it  you  must  pump  a 
long  while,  and  the  water  comes  only  after  great 
efi'orts.  It  is  so  with  prayer ;  if  we  are  instant 
in  prayer,  every  little  circumstance  awakens  the 
disposition  to  pray,  and  desires  and  words  are 
always  ready.  But  if  we  neglect  prayer  it  is 
diflficult  for  us  to  pray  ;  for  the  water  in  the  well 
gets  low." 

Vers.  6,8.  Answer  to  earnest  prayer. — "At 
the  time  the  Diet  of  Nuremburg  was  held,"  says 
Tholuck,  "Luther  was  earnestly  praying  in  his 
own  dwelling ;  and  at  the  very  hour  when  the 


edict  granting  free  toleration  to  all  Protestants 
was  issued,  he  ran  out  of  his  house,  crying  out, 
*  We  have  gained  the  victory !  Do  you  under- 
stand that?""' 

Vers.  6,  8.  Access  to  God.  However  early  in 
the  morning  you  seek  the  gate  of  access,  you  find 
it  already  open ;  and  however  deep  the  midnight 
moment  when  you  find  yourself  in  the  sudden 
arms  of  death,  the  winged  prayer  can  bring  an  in- 
stant Saviour,  and  this  wherever  you  are.  1 1  needs 
not  that  you  should  enter  some  awful  shrine,  or 
pull  off  your  shoes  on  some  holy  ground.  Could 
a  memento  be  reared  on  every  spot  from  which 
an  acceptable  prayer  has  passed  away,  and  on 
which  a  prompt  answer  has  come  down,  we 
should  find  Jehovah-shammah,  '*  the  Lord  has 
been  here,"  inscribed  on  many  a  cottage  hearth 
and  many  a  dungeon  floor. — Dr.  Jaynes  Hamilton. 

Vers.  6,  8.  Christ  presenting  our  prayers. — 
"  A  child,"  says  Ambrose,  "  that  is  willing  to  pre- 
sent his  father  with  a  bouquet,  goes  into  the 
garden,  and  there  gathers  some  flowers  and  some 
weeds  together  ;  but,  coming  to  his  mother,  she 
picks  out  the  weeds  and  binds  the  flowers,  and 
so  it  is  presented  to  the  father."  Thus,  when  we 
have  put  up  our  prayers,  Christ  comes  and  picks 
away  the  weeds,  the  sin  of  our  prayers,  and  pre- 
sents nothing  but  flowers  to  his  Father,  which  are 
a  sweet-smelling  savour. — T.  Watson. 

Ver.  6,  7.  The  late  Dr.  William  Fatten, 
The  story  is  told  that  Dr.  Patton  once  met  a 
pious  friend  with  a  troubled  face,  who  said ; 
"  Doctor,  you  are  just  the  man  I  have  been 
wanting  to  see ;  I  wish  to  ask  you  a  question." 
"Well,"  said  the  Doctor,  **wliat  is  it  that  is 
troubling  you  to-day.''"  "Be  quiet,"  said  his 
friend,  "  and  I  will  tell  you !  Now  we  read  that 
God  is  just,  merciful,  and  kind,"  said  the  friend 
"That  is  what  we  preach,"  said  Dr.  Patton. 
"  The  Bible  further  says  :  '  Ask,  and  ye  shall 
receive ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it 
shall  be  opened  unto  you.* ' '  "  Correctly  quoted," 
said  the  Doctor.  "Again,"  added  his  friend, 
"  the  good  Book  says,  *not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  my 
Word  shall  fail.' "  "  Very  true,"  said  the  Doctor. 
"  Now,"  said  the  anxious  friend,  "  if  all  that  I 
have  quoted  is  correct,  and  the  Bible  be  true,  I 
want  to  ask  you  how  it  is,  Doctor,  that  I  have 
been  praying  to  God  for  the  last  thirty  years  that 
he  will  do  certain  things  for  me,  and,  so  far  as  I 
know,  not  a  single  thing  that  I  have  asked  for 
has  been  granted  ?  Pray  tell  me  why  I  have  not 
received  answers  to  my  prayers }  "  The  Doctor 
replied :  "  My  friend,  did  it  ever  occur  to  you 
that  you  were  presenting  bills  to  God  and  ask- 
ing payment  for  the  same  before  they  were  due  ?" 
— Christian  Age. 

Ver.  6.  Frotection  through  prayer.  In  a  vil- 
lage in  Germany,  a  poor  widow  was  lying  sick  in 
bed,  when  suddenly  a  party  of  soldiers  came  into 
the  room.  They  said  they  had  been  sent  to  stay 
at  her  house,  and  in  a  violent  way  they  demanded 
bread,  and  meat,  and  beer.  The  poor  woman 
said  she  had  not  bread  enough  in  the  house  for 
herself  and  her  little  ones  to  eat,  and  that  for  her 
to  feed  them  was  impossible.  This  made  the  men 
angry.  They  began  to  break  and  smash  things 
to  pieces.     They  swore  at  her  terribly,  and  even 


210 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER, 


[chap.  t. 


threatened  to  beat  her,  nnless  she  gave  them  what 
they  wanted  at  once.  Just  then,  a  little  boy, 
about  four  years  old,  who  had  ran  into  a  corner 
to  hide  himself,  in  terror,  when  the  soldiers  first 
entered  the  house,  came  out  from  his  hiding-place. 
He  kneeled  down  by  his  mother's  bed,  and  oflfered 
this  simple  prayer  :  '*  0  dear,  kind  Jesus,  please 
don't  let  them  hurt  mother  !  make  them  good  to 
her,  and  bless  them.  Amen."  One  of  the  soldiers, 
who  had  a  little  boy  at  home,  of  about  the  same 
age,  was  very  much  moved  by  the  dear  child's 
prayer.  It  brought  the  tears  to  his  eyes,  and  in 
a  low  voice  he  said :  "  Comrades,  let's  go  some- 
where else.  In  a  house  where  a  pious  child  like 
this  lives,  God  himself  must  dwell.  This  is  no 
place  for  us.  Let's  go."  They  did  go  ;  but  be- 
fore going,  the  soldier  put  two  pieces  of  money 
in  the  hand  of  the  child. — Rev.  R.  Newton. 

Yer.  6.  Family  prayers.  Family  prayers 
will  be  a  secular  advantage.  A  father  went  into 
the  war  to  serve  his  country.  His  children  stayed 
and  cultured  the  farm.  His  wife  prayed.  One 
of  the  sons  said  afterward,  "  Father  is  fighting, 
and  we  are  digging,  and  mother  is  praying." 
"  Ah  !  "  said  some  one,  **  praying,  and  digging, 
and  fighting,  will  bring  us  out  of  our  national 
troubles."  We  may  say  in  the  morning,  *'  Give 
me  this  day  my  daily  bread,"  and  sit  down  in 
idleness  and  starve  to  death;  but  prayer  and 
hard  work  will  give  a  livelihood  to  any  family. 
Family  religion  pays  for  both  worlds.  Let  us 
have  an  altar  in  each  one  of  our  households.  You 
may  not  be  able  to  formulate  a  prayer.  Then 
there  are  Philip  Henry's  prayers,  and  there 
are  McDuff's  prayers,  and  there  are  Philip 
Doddridge's  prayers,  and  there  are  the  Episcopal 
Church  prayers,  and  there  are  scores  of  books 
with  supplications  just  suited  to  the  domestic 
circle.  I  have  been  told  that  in  the  White 
House  at  Washington  every  day  the  President's 
family  kneel,  and  recite  the  Lord's  prayer. 
Family  prayers  in  the  White  House  have  kept 
the  Administration  cool  and  calm,  while  much 
of  the  time  Congress  has  been  playing  the  fool. 
— Talmage. 

Ver.  13.  Selfishness.  Haman  as  a  type.  We 
are  all  too  slow  to  learn  the  lesson,  "  Thou  art 
the  man  ;  "  so  that,  whilst  one's  thoughts  centre 
upon  Haman,  the  victim  of  selfishness,  we  can 
with  difficulty  realize  the  antitype  in  ourselves. 
Nevertheless,  the  scene  in  Shushan  the  palace  is 
a  scene  in  every-day  life.  The  world  is  a  palace 
of  vanity,  and  abounds  with  Hamans.  "  I  would 
have  this  or  that,"  is  the  utterance  of  the  soul 
coveting  some  longed-for  possession.  It  has  it, 
and  it  is  not  satisfied.  How  can  it  ?  An  immortal 
be  satisfied  with  the  painted,  tinselled  finery  of 
fading  time !  It  asks  for  some  near  object.  **  Oh 
that  I  had  but  that ! "  It  obtains  it,  and  its 
appetite  is  but  whetted  for  more.  Another  prize, 
and  another  disappointment ;  another  tide  of 
homage,  fame,  adulation,  and  another  ebbing, 
with  only  worthless  weeds  left  on  the  forsaken 
shore.  Another  freight  of  honour  to  Haman,  and 
another  unbending  figure  in  the  rear,  whose  dark 
shadow  lies  outspread  upon  his  pathway,  so  that 
all  he  hath  availeth  bim  nothing, — "  he  i»  not 
Batisfied."     If  all  this  then  availeth  nothing, 


what  will  avail  ?  Now  "  sin,"  says  Bishop 
Reynolds,  *'  put  bitterness  into  the  soul,  that  it 
cannot  relish  the  creature,  and  it  put  vanity  into 
the  creature  that  it  cannot  satisfy  the  soul ; 
therefore  the  creature,  so  long  as  it  is  empty  of 
God,  must  needs  be  full  of  vanity  and  vexation." 
Hence  no  one  can  be  truly  happy  and  contented, 
be  his  possessions  ever  so  large  and  splendid,  till 
he  grasp  by  faith  the  "pearl  of  great  price;" 
then  envy  dies,  and  Mordecai  vanishes. — New 
Cyclopcedia  of  Anecdote. 

Ver.  11.  The  ungodly  Pope.  A  certain  Pope 
had  engraved  upon  the  gates  of  his  new-built 
college:  "Utrecht  (where  he  was  born)  planted 
me;  Lovain  (where  he  was  bred)  watered  me; 
but  Ceesar  (wlio  promoted  him  to  the  Popedom) 
gave  increase  ;  "  and  a  merry  passenger  under- 
wrote :  "Hie  Deus  nihil  fecit" — here  God  did 
nothing.  God  had  done  much  for  him,  but  for  a 
mischief  to  him  ;  as  he  once  gave  the  Israelites 
quails  to  choke  them,  and  a  king  to  vex  them  ;  as 
Saul  gave  Michal  to  David  to  be  a  snare  to  him  ; 
and  as  our  Saviour  gave  Judas  the  bag,  to  discover 
the  rottenness  of  his  heart.  Haman  telleth  what 
the  king  had  done  for  him,  but  not  a  little  what 
God.     God  was  not  in  all  his  thoughts. —  Trapp. 

Ver.  13.  The  danger  of  discontent.  I  recall 
a  picture  I  once  saw  in  a  public  gallery.  It  was 
a  scene  in  the  higher  Alps.  A  noble  eagle  was 
in  flight,  and  scores  of  birds  were  pursuing  him. 
The  hawks  and  other  larger  birds  he  could  keep 
at  a  distance,  as  whenever  they  came  near  he 
tore  them  with  his  claws,  or  struck  them  with 
his  beak.  Some  humming-birds  had  joined  the 
others  in  an  attack  on  the  eagle  ;  one  of  them, 
scarcely  visible  in  the  picture,  so  tiny  a  thing  is 
it  in  comparison  with  the  king  of  birds,  was 
sitting  on  his  head,  pecking  away,  and  scattering 
the  feathers  as  the  eagle  soared  higher.  Natural- 
ists tell  us  that  sometimes  the  humming-bird  will 
so  peck  the  head  and  injure  the  brain  of  the 
eagle  as  to  cause  his  death,  while  seldom  or 
never  in  a  fair  fight  with  larger  birds  is  he 
injured.  The  humming-bird  is  small,  and  has  a 
small  beak  and  but  little  strength  ;  but  sitting 
on  the  vital  part,  and  constantly  teasing,  he 
very  frequently  accomplishes  his  work  of  death. 
The  eagle  cannot  bito  or  claw  him,  and  he  has 
not  the  presence  of  mind  to  dip  his  head  in  the 
sea,  and  thus  drown  nis  pursuer. 

How  often  is  it  the  case  that  we  allow  little 
things  to  annoy  us,  to  destroy  our  peace,  and 
our  happiness,  and  health  ?  Great  troubles  we 
manfully  meet  and  conquer  ;  but  little  things — 
humming-bird  troubles  — get  near  our  heart,  and 
we  know  not  how  to  shake  them  oflT. 

It  is  related  by  a  London  physician,  of  a 
patient  whom  he  was  attending,  that  he  was  a 
great  beauty.  By  some  accident,  one  of  his 
hands  was  the  victim  of  a  malformation.  The 
thing  troubled  the  man  day  and  night,  and  his 
health  began  to  fail.  He  could  not  bear  to  have 
fingers  so  white  and  graceful  disfigured.  "  My 
patient,"  says  the  doctor,  "  was  also  suffering 
from  a  disease  that  I  knew,  and  he  knew,  would 
ultimately  be  fatal.  This,  however,  did  not  seem 
to  trouble  him.  It  was  his  maimed  left  hand 
that  haunted   him  everywhere,  and  concerning^ 


CHAP,  v.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER, 


211 


which  he  made  perpetual  complaint  to  me.  At 
length  he  was  taken  with  a  fever,  traceable,  in  a 
measure,  to  his  unhappy  frame  of  mind,  and  in  a 
few  days  Aia^.—  Preacher' s  Lantern. 

Ver.  13.  Literary  Jeremiads.  Goethe,  the 
greatest  of  German  poets,  whose  long  life  was  one 
success,  said,  "They  have  called  me  a  child  of 
fortune,  nor  have  I  any  wish  to  complain  of  the 
course  of  my  life.  Yet  it  has  been  nothing  but 
labour  and  sorrow  ;  and  I  may  truly  say,  that  in 
seventy-five  years  I  have  not  had  four  weeks  of 
true  comfort.  It  was  the  constant  rolling  of  a 
stone  that  was  always  to  be  lifted  anew."  A 
mournful  echo  of  the  old  patriarchal  words,  '*  Few 
and  evil  have  the  days  of  the  years  of  my  pil- 
grimage been."  Who  can  read  the  posthumous 
memoirs  of  Chateaubriand  without  being  struck 
with  the  illusive  nature  of  worldly  honours  and 
worldly  pleasures.  Contemporary  applause  was 
not  wanting  to  cheer  the  craving  spirit  of  this 
scholar  and  statesman.  The  author  of  the  *  Genius 
of  Christianity,'  and  the  ambassador  of  France 
at  the  court  of  London,  could  not  complain  that 
what  men  call  honourable  and  enviable  was 
denied  to  him.  The  following  passage  from  the 
great  Frenchman's  memoirs  contains  a  sad  and 
home  truth  : — **  I  know  not  in  history  a  reputa- 
tion that  would  tempt  me ;  and,  were  it  neces- 
sary to  stoop  to  pick  up  from  my  feet,  and  for 
my  own  advantage,  the  greatest  glory  the  world 
could  offer,  I  would  not  give  myself  the  trouble." 
Are  not  these  like  the  words  of  "  the  preacher, 
the  son  of  David,  the  king  of  Jerusalem  ?  "  The 
miserable  lamentations  of  Lord  Chesterfield,  a 
mere  drudge  of  earthly  pleasure,  over  the  wretch- 
ed inanity  of  a  worldly  and  sensual  life,  may  be 
considered  one  of  the  best  sermons  unintentionally 
preached  against  the  inordinate  love  of  this  world, 
coming,  as  the  sentiment  does,  from  one  of  its 
successful  votaries.  Let  his  own  words,  penned 
in  the  evening  of  life,  tell  what  he  had  found 
the  result  of  his  experience  to  be  :  "  I  am  now 
at  the  age  of  sixty  years ;  I  have  run  the  silly 
rounds  of  pleasure,  and  have  done  with  them  all. 
I  have  enjoyed  all  the  pleasures  of  the  world, 
and  consequently  know  their  futility,  and  do  not 
regret  their  loss.  I  have  been  as  wicked  and  as 
vain  as  Solomon ;  I  have  not  been  so  wise  ;  but 
this  I  know,  I  am  wise  enough  to  test  the  truth 
of  his  reflfction,  that  all  is  vanity  and  vexation 
of  spirit.''  J>ord  Byron  gave  a  similar  testimony 
to  Dr.  Miliingen,  who  attended  him  in  his  last 
illness.  *'  Do  you  suppose  I  wish  for  life  ?  I 
have  grown  heartily  sick  of  it,  and  shall  welcome 
the  hour  I  depart.  Why  should  I  regret  it.> 
Can  it  afford  me  any  pleasure?  Have  I  not 
enjoyed  it  to  a  surfeit  ?  Few  men  can  live 
faster  than  I  did ;  I  am,  literally  speaking,  a 
young  old  man.  Pleasure  I  have  known  under 
every  form  in  which  it  can  present  itself  to 
mortals.  I  have  travelled,  satisfied  my  curiosity, 
lost  every  illusion ;  I  have  exhausted  all  the 
nectar  contained  in  the  cup  of  life;  it  is  time  to 
throw  the  dregs  away.  He  had  sought  his 
happiness  in  the  things  of  the  world,  the  result 
was  dissatisfaction  of  spirit. — Freacher^s  Lantern. 

Ver.  13.      Worldly  dignity  renounced.     Baron 
Ton  Bulow  had  been,  during  the  earlier  part  of 


this  century,  chiefly  engaged  in  the  sanguinary 
scenes  of  war.  He  had  signalized  himself  on 
the  field,  and  received  every  honourable  testi- 
mony to  his  skill  and  courage ;  a  special  hand- 
some gold  medal  also  had  been  given  him,  the 
inscription  was,  of  course,  in  German,  with  the 
royal  cypher.  Late  in  life  he  attended  the 
Continental  Peace  Confederation,  at  which  he 
said,  he  had  endured  many  hardships  through 
life  ;  for  more  than  forty  years  he  had  gduc 
through  various  scenes,  often  misled  by  worldly 
pleasure,  and  frequently  by  infidelity  ;  but  now, 
without  discussing  the  propriety  of  a  military 
life,  he  felt  in  his  heart  that  the  best  service  was 
that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  had  rescued 
him  from  darkness  and  brought  him  to  a  know- 
ledge of  the  gospel.  He  then,  with  deep  feeling, 
took  from  his  breast  the  badge  of  honour  which 
he  had  received  in  foreign  military  service, 
saying,  as  he  handed  it  to  the  chairman,  with 
much  emotion,  ''  This  I  bought  with  my  blood, 
but  it  is  all  over,  sir ;  I  do  not  give  it  to  you,  or 
to  this  Society,  but  I  give  it  up  to  the  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ." — Treacher's  Lantern. 

Ver.  13.      Things  temporal.     Never,  perhaps, 
in  any  period  of  the  world's  history  did  literary 
talent  receive  a  homage  so  universal  as  that  of 
Sir   Walter   Scott.     His  reputation   was  co-ex- 
tensive, not  only  with  the  English  language,  but 
with  the  boundaries  of  civilization.     The  king 
conferred  on  him  a  baronetcy;  and  wherever  he 
appeared,  at  home  or  abroad,  he  was  the  lion  of 
the  day.     All  the  good  things  of  life  were  his. 
His  mansion  at  Abbotsford  realized  the  highest 
conceptions  of  a  poet's  imagination,  and  seemed 
like  a  "poem  in  stone."     His  r.ompany  was  of 
the  most  honourable  of  the  land,  and  his  domestic 
enjoyments  all  that  his  heart  could  desire.     Yet 
he  was  not  happy.     Ambitious  to  found  a  family, 
he  got  into  debt,  and  in  old  age  he  was  a  ruined 
man.     When  about  to  have  Abbotsford  for  the 
last  time,  he  said  :  "When  I  think  of  what  this 
place  now  is,  with  what  it  was  not  long  ago,  I 
feel  as  if  my  heart  would  break.     Lonely,  aged, 
deprived  of  all  my  family,  I  am  an  impoverished 
and    embarrassed   man."     At  another   time   he 
writes  :  '*  Death  has  closed  the  dark  avenue  of 
love  and  friendships.     I  look  at  them  as  through 
the  grated  door  of  a  buri;jl-place  filled  with  the 
monuments  of  those  who  once  were  dear  to  me, 
and  with  no  other  wish  tlnin  that  it  may  open 
for  me  at  no  distant  period,"    And  again  :  "Some 
new  objection  or  comphiiut  comes  every  moment. 
Sicknesses  come  thicker  and  thicker;  friends  are 
fewer  and  fewer.     The   r(  collections  of  youth, 
health,  and  powers  of  activity  neither  improved 
nor  enjoyed,  is  a  poor  gmund  of  comfort.     The 
best  is,  the  long  halt  will  arrive  at  length  and 
close  all."     And  the  long  halt  did  arrive.     Not 
long  before  he  died,  Sir  Walter  Scott  requested 
his  daughter  to  wheel   him   to  his  desk.     She 
then  put  a  pen  into  his   hand,  but  his  fingers 
refused   to  do  their  office.     Silent  tears  rolled 
down  his  cheeks.     "  Take  me  back  to  my  own 
room,"  he  saia  ;  '*  there  is  no  rest  for  Sir  Walter 
but  in  his  grave."     A  few  days  after  this  he 
died,   realizing,    in   reference    to   all    his   fame, 
honour,    and   renown,    the    truth   of    Solomon, 


212 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER, 


[chap,  V. 


"Vanity  of  vanities,  aaith  the  Preacher,  vanity  of 
vanities  ;  all  is  vanity." 

Campbell,  the  author  of  the  '  Pleasures  of 
Hope,'  in  his  old  age  wrote  :  "1  am  alone  in 
tlie  world.  My  wife  and  the  child  of  my  hopes 
are  dead ;  my  surviving  child  is  consigned  to  a 
living  tomb — a  lunatic  asylum  ;  my  old  friends, 
brothers,  sisters,  are  dead,  all  but  one,  and  she 
too  is  dying ;  my  last  hopes  are  blighted.  As 
for  fame,  it  is  a  bubble  that  must  soon  burst. 
Earned  for  others,  shared  with  others,  it  was 
sweet;  but  at  my  age,  to  my  own  solitary 
experience,  it  is  bitter.  Left  in  my  chamber 
alone  by  myself,  is  it  wonderful  my  philosophy 
at  times  takes  flight ;  that  I  rush  into  company, 
resort  to  that  which  blunts  but  heals  no  pang  ; 
and  then,  sick  of  the  world,  and  dissatisfied  with 
myself,  shrink  back  into  solitude  ? "  And  in  this 
state  of  mind  he  died. 

Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan,  the  great  orator, 
made  an  almost  similar  confession.  He  perished 
in  wretchedness  and  want.  His  last  words  were  : 
"I  am  absolutely  undone.'^ — Preacher^  s  Lantern. 

Ver.  13.  Honour  from  man.  The  meaning 
of  the  words,  "In  honour  preferring  one  ano- 
ther," appears  to  be  this  :  Consider  all  your 
brethren  are  more  worthy  than  yourself ;  and  let 
neither  grief  nor  envy  affect  your  mind  at  seeing 
another  honoured  and  yourself  neglected.  This 
is  a  hard  lesson,  and  very  few  persons  learn  it 
thoroughly.  If  we  wish  to  see  our  brethren 
honoured,  still  it  is  with  the  secret  condition  in 
our  own  minds  that  we  be  honoured  more  than 
they.  We  have  no  objection  to  the  elevation  of 
others,  provided  we  may  be  at  the  head.  But 
who  can  bear  to  be  even  what  he  calls  neglected? 
I  once  heard  the  following  conversation  between 
two  persons,  which  the  reader  will  pardon  my 
relating,  as  it  appears  to  be  rather  in  point,  and 
worthy  of  regard.  "I  know  not,''  said  one, 
"  that  I  neglect  to  do  anything  in  my  power  to 
promote  the  interests  of  true  religion  in  this 
place,  and  yet  I  seem  to  be  held  in  very  little 
repute,  scarcely  one  person  even  noticing  me." 
To  which  the  other  replied :  "  My  good  friend, 
set  yourself  down  for  nothing,  and  if  any  person 
takes  you  for  something,  it  will  all  be  clear  gain." 
I  thought  this  a  queer  saying ;  but  how  full  of 
meaning  and  common  sense  !  Whether  the  ob- 
ject of  this  good  counsel  was  profited  by  it  I  can- 
not tell ;  but  I  looked  on  it  and  received  in- 
struction.— Dr.  Adam  Clarke. 

Ver.  13.  The  Caterpillar.  An  Allegory. 
"  Patience  !  patience  !  until  1  become  a  butterfly, 
and  then  I  shall  laugh  at  all  my  enemies."  This 
was  a  common  saying  with  a  caterpillar,  while 
it  was  yet  a  caterpillar.  At  last  the  moment  of 
its  transformation  came.  On  a  beautiful  summer's 
morning  it  arose  out  of  its  dark  sepulchre,  dressed 
in  a  rich  golden  attire,  and  strong  in  the  strength 
of  a  new  life.  "Yes,"  said  she,  as  she  looked 
upon  herself,  "  now  I  am  satisfied  with  nature ! 
now  I  am  safe  !  "  But  alas  !  she  erred.  A  single 
leaf  could  screen  the  dark-hued  caterpillar  from 
many  enemies,  even  from  the  sharp-sighted  hunter 
of  insects.  Now,  as  a  many-coloured  butterfly, 
she  shone  in  radiant  beauty,  drew  on  her  the  eyes 
of  a  hundred  pursuers,  and  saw  only  too  soon  the 


impossibility  of  eluding  thera  all.  In  vain  she 
plied  her  new-born  wings  with  diligence,  in  vain 
she  flew  fearfully  from  bough  to  bough,  from 
flower  to  flower.  The  craft  of  her  enemies  sur- 
prised her  after  all,  and  on  the  third  day  she  was 
impaled  upon  the  murderous  needle  of  an  ento- 
mologist. A  dazzling  glory  is  often  the  fore- 
runner of  destruction. — Meissner. 

Ver.  13.  The  death  of  Saladin.  About  this 
time  (1193)  died  the  great  Sultan  Saladin,  the 
greatest  terror  of  the  Christians,  who,  mindful 
of  man's  fragility,  and  the  vanity  of  worldly 
honours,  commanded  at  the  time  of  his  death 
no  solemnity  to  be  used  at  his  burial ;  but  only 
his  shirt,  in  manner  of  an  ensign,  made  fast  unto 
the  point  of  a  lance,  to  be  carried  before  his  dead 
body  as  an  ensign,*  a  plain  priest  going  before, 
and  crying  aloud  unto  the  people  in  this  sort  : 
"  Saladin,  Conqueror  of  the  East,  of  all  the 
greatness  and  riches  he  had  in  this  life  carrieth 
not  with  him  anything  more  than  his  shirt."  A 
sight  worthy  so  great  a  king,  as  wanted  nothing 
to  his  eternal  condemnation  more  than  the  true 
knowledge  of  his  salvation  in  Christ  Jesus.  He 
reigned  about  sixteen  years  with  great  honour. — 
Gary's  Dante.     Notes. 

Ver.  13.  Alexander  and  the  Cynic.  Alexander, 
the  great  monarch  of  the  world,  was  discontented 
because  ivy  would  not  grow  in  his  gardens  at 
Babylon ;  but  the  Cynic  was  herein  more  wise, 
who  finding  a  mouse  in  his  satchel,  said,  he  saw 
that  himself  was  not  so  poor  but  some  were  glad 
of  his  leavings.  Thus,  had  we  but  hearts  to 
improve  higher  providences,  we  might  soon  rock 
our  peevish  spirits  quiet  by  much  stronger  argu- 
ments ;  as  to  take  notice  of  God's  bountiful 
dealing  with  us,  that  we  are  less  than  the 
least  of  his  mercies ;  that  though  we  be  not  set 
in  the  highest  form,  yet  there  are  many  below 
us;  that  God  is  our  good  benefactor,  —  this 
would  bring  us  to  that  pass,  as  to  conclude  with 
ourselves,  having  food  and  raiment,  therewith  to 
be  content ;  and  though  we  were  many  times 
cut  short  of  creature  accommodations,  yet  this 
would  limit  our  desires  after  them,  and  make  us 
rest  assured  that  nothing  is  withdrawn  or  with- 
held from  us  which  might  be  really  advantageous 
to  us. — Spencer. 

Ver.  1 3.  Apologue  of  a  Bird-catcher.  There 
is  an  old  apologue  of  a  bird-catcher,  who  having 
taken  a  nightingale,  the  poor  bird  pleaded  for 
herself  as  well  as  she  could,  and  seeing  divers  go 
to  the  pot  before  her,  said,  "  Alas;  I  am  not  worth 
the  killing;  I  have  little  or  no  flesh  on  my  back, 
therefore  you  may  well  let  me  go."  "No,"  says  the 
fowler,  "one  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the 
bush."  The  bird  replies,  that  her  notes  were 
worth  more  than  her  corpse,  and  that  she  would 
chant  him  out  three  songs,  for  which  he  should 
fare  the  better  all  the  days  of  his  life,  if  he  kept 
them,  than  if  he  killed  her.  The  bargain  was 
made,  and  the  bird  let  fly ;  the  songs  were 
these — 

1.  Strive  not  beyond  thy  strength. 

2.  Grieve  not  too  much  for  the  loM  of  that 

which  cannot  be  recovered. 

3.  Believe  not  that  w  hich  is  incredible. 
Now,  whilst  the  wise  bird-catcher  was  conning 


OHAF.  T.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


213 


these  lessons,  the  bird  flying  over  his  head  told 
bin)  that  he  had  lost  a  great  treasure;  for  she 
)iad  within  her  head  a  precious  stone  as  big  as  an 
ostrich  egg.     At  this  news  the  birder  began  to 
ply  the  nightingale  in  fair  words,  and  told  her, 
tliat  if  she  would  come  again  to  his  hand   he 
would  spare  the  meat  out  of  his  own  belly  to  feed 
her.     Then  answered  the  bird  :  "Now  1  see  thou 
art  a  fool  indeed  ;  thou  canst  make  no  good  use 
of  my  counsel ;  for,  first  thou  labourest  for  me 
whom    thou   canst   not   reach ;    secondly,   thou 
grievest   for   that   which   is  irrecoverable  ;  and 
thirdly,  thou  believest  that  which  no  wise  man 
will,  that  I  have  a  pearl  in  my  head  as  big  as  an 
ostrich  eg^,  whereas  all  my  whole  body  is  not  so 
big."  Thus,  surely,  there  are  many  of  these  fowlers, 
or  rather  foolers,  in  the  world,  such  as  doat  in 
^'w  reposals,  setting  up  their  rest  in  the  things  of 
this  world,  where  it  is  not  to  be  found,  and  in 
the  mean  time  neglect  to  seek  where  it  is  ;  for 
the   world   hath   no  more   sufficiency  to  man's 
desire  than  the  nightingale  had  the  true  pearl 
within  her  to  give  him  content;  all  the  advantages 
of  outward  things  being  to  man's  desire  but  as 
sharp  sauce  to  the  appetite,  which  doth  not  satisfy 
hunger,  but  provoke  the  stomach  to  hunger  after 
more. — Spencer, 

Ver.  13.  What  Diogenes  can  do  without. 
Diogenes  walked  on  a  day  with  his  friend  to 
see  a  country  fair,  where  he  saw  ribands,  and 
looking-glasses,  and  nut- crackers,  and  fiddles, 
and  hobby-horses,  and  many  other  gimcracks ; 
and  having  observed  them,  and  all  the  other 
finnimbrums  to  make  a  complete  country  fair,  he 
said  to  his  friend,  "  How  many  things  there  are 
in  this  world,  of  which  Diogenes  hath  no  need ! " 
And  truly  it  is  so,  or  might  be  so,  with  very 
many  who  vex  and  toil  themselves  to  get  what 
they  have  no  need  of.  Can  any  man  charge  God 
that  he  hath  not  given  him  enough  to  make  his 
life  happy?  No,  doubtless ;  for  nature  is  content 
with  a  little  ;  and  yet  you  shall  hardly  meet 
with  a  man  that  complains  not  of  some  want ; 
and  thus,  when  we  might  be  happy  and  quiet,  we 
create  trouble  to  ourselves.  1  have  heard  of  a 
man  that  was  angry  with  himself  because  he 
was  no  taller,  and  of  a  woman  who  broke  her 
looking-glass  because  it  would  not  show  her  face 
to  be  as  young  and  handsome  as  her  next  neigh- 
bour's was.  And  I  knew  another,  to  whom  God 
had  given  health  and  plenty,  but  a  wife  that 
nature  had  made  peevish,  and  her  husband's 
riches  had  made  purse-proud,  and  must,  because 
she  "vras  rich,  and  of  no  other  virtue,  sit  in  the 


highest  pew  in  the  church ;  which,  being  denied 
her,  she  engaged  her  husband  into  a  contention 
for  it ;  and  at  last,  into  a  lawsuit  with  a  dogged 
neighbour,  who  was  as  rich  as  he,  and  had  a  wife 
as  peevish  and  purse-proud  as  the  other  ;  and 
this  lawsuit  begot  higher  oppositions,  and  action- 
able words,  and  more  vexations  and  lawsuits ; 
for  you  must  remember  that  both  were  rich,  and 
must  therefore  have  their  wills.  Well,  tiis 
wilful  purse-proud  lawsuit  lasted  during  the  life 
of  the  first  husband  ;  after  which  his  wife  vexed 
and  chid,  and  chid  and  vexed,  till  she  also  chid 
and  vexed  herself  into  her  grave  ;  and  so  the 
wealth  of  these  poor  rich  people  was  cursed  into 
a  punishment,  because  they  wanted  meek  and 
thankful  hearts;  for  those  only  can  make  us 
happy. — Izaack  Walton. 

Ver.  13.  Joseph  Brother  ton.  In  Peel  Park, 
Manchester,  a  monument  is  erected  to  Joseph 
Brotherton,  having  on  it  this  statement,  *'  My 
riches  consist  not  in  the  extent  of  my  possessions, 
but  in  the  fewness  of  my  wants."  How  happy 
most  could  be  if  their  wants  were  not  so  many. 
The  great  majority  want  vastly  more  than  is 
actually  needful. 

Ver.   13.     Byron*s  lameness.     It  was  said   of 
Byron  by  Goethe,  that  he  was  inspired  by  the 
Genius  of  Pain  ;  for,  from  the  first  to  the  last  of 
his  agitated  career,   every  fresh  recruitment  of 
his  faculties  was  imbibed  from  that  bitter  source. 
His  chief  incentive,  when  a  boy,  to  distinction, 
was  the  mark  of  deformity  on  his  person,  by  an 
acute  sense  of  which  he  was  first  stung  into  the 
ambition  of  being  great.     In  one  of  his  letters 
to  Mr.  Hunt,  he  declares  it  to  be  his  own  opinion 
that "  an  addiction  to  poetry  is  very  generally  the 
result  of  '  an  uneasy  mind  in  an  uneasy  body ; ' 
disease  or  deformity ,'*  he  adds,  "had   been  the 
attendants  of  many  of  our  best.     Collins  mad— 
Chatterton,  I  think,  mad — Cowper  mad — Pope 
crooked — Milton  blind,"  &c.  &c.     His  reverend 
friend,  Mr.  Becher,  finding  him  one  day  unusually 
dejected,  endeavoured  to  cheer  and  rouse  him,  by 
representing,   in  their   highest  colours,    all   the 
various  advantages  with  which  Providence  had 
endowed  him — and  among  the  greatest,  that  of 
"  a  mind  which  placed  him  above  the  rest  of 
mankind."     "Ah,  my  dear  friend,"  said  Byron 
mournfully,  *'if  this  (laying  his   hand   on    his 
forehead)  places  me  above  the  rest  of  mankind, 
that  (pointing  to   his  foot)   places  me  far,  far 
below  them."    "  Yet  all  this  availeth  me  nothing, 
so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting  at  the 
king's  gate." 


214  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  Lohap.  vi. 


CHAPTER  VL 

Critical  Notes.]    1.   On  .  .  .  sleep]  Heb.  the  king's  sleep  fled  away,  an  unusual  thinc^. 
**  That  night]  which  succeeded  the  events  of  the  last  chapter,  settled  with  apparently  a  most 
ominous  cloud  upon  the  future  of  Mordecai,  but  it  was  the  harbinger  of  a  most  auspicious  day  for 
him.     God,  who  works  in  the  darkness  as  in  the  light,  caused  sleep  to  flee  from  the  kino-,  and 
disposed  him  to  beguile  the  wakeful  hours,  not  with  music  or  song,  but  by  having  one  to  read  to 
him  from  the  book  of  records  of  the  chronicles]  His  mind  was  in  a  mood  to  ruminate  on  the 
events  of  his  own  life,  and  the  State  annals  were  called  for  to  assist  his  memory.     Rawlinson  thinks 
that  the  Persian  kings  were  in  most  cases  unable  to  read." — Whedon's  Com.      They  were  read 
before  the  king]  These  were  in  the  act  of  being  called  over.     In  the  original  there  is  a  participle 
which  denotes  the  long  continuance  of  this  reading.     2.]  The  name  Bigthana  is  in  ii.  21  written 
Bigthan.     3.]  The  king's  question  means  what  honour  and  reward  has  been  assigned  him?     What 
has  been  apportioned  ?     How  has  he  been  requited  ?     "  It  was  a  settled  principle  of  the  Persian 
government  that  royal  benefactors  were  to  receive  an  adequate  reward,  the  names  of  such  persons 
were  placed  on  a  special  roll,  and  great  care  was  taken  that  they  should  be  properly  recommended. 
It  is  a  mistake,  however,  to  suppose  {Davidson)  that  they  were  always  rewarded  at  once.     The- 
mistocles  was  inscribed  on  the  list  in  B.C.  480,  but  did  not  obtain  a  reward  till  B.C.  465.     Other 
benefactors  waited  for  months,  or  perhaps  years,  before  they  were  recompensed.      Sometimes  a 
benefactor  received  no  reward  at  all." — Uawlinson.     The  king's  servants  answered  :   Nothing  has 
been  shown  him.     No  favour  has  been  shown  him.     No  greatness,  i.  e,  no  promotion  to  honour. 
4.]  The  question,   Who  is  in  the  court"?]  means  what  officer  is  now  present.     The  king  desires  to 
consult  with  him  as  to  what  distinction  would  be  appropriate  to  Mordecai.     It  seems  that  those 
desiring  to  be  admitted  to  the  king's  presence  had  to  wait  in  the  outer  court. — Lange.     From  this 
question  of  the  king  it  appears  that  it  was  already  morning.     5.]  Haman  was  waiting  in  the  outer 
court,  till  it  should  be  announced  that  the  king  was  ready  to  grant  audiences.     The  king  commands, 
Let  him  come  in]  (a  short  order)  namely,  into  the  house  of  the  king.   6.]  When  the  king  had  asked 
the  question,  Haman  thought  within  himself,  To  whom  would  the  king  delight  to  do  honour  more 
than  to  myself?]  Going  beyond  me,  more  than  myself. — Lange.     7.]  Hainan  was  quickly  prepared 
to  give  answer,  and  without  any  diflSculty  called  up  one  distinction  or  honour  after  another.     8,  9.] 
The  royal  garment  is  one  which  the  king  has  already  worn.     Hence  not  an  ordinary  state-robe,  the 
so-called  Median  apparel  which  the  king  himself,  the  chief  princes  among  the  Persians,  and  those 
on  whom  the  king  bestowed  such  raiment  were  wont  to  appear  in,  but  a  costly  garment  the  property 
of  the  sovereign  himself.     The  highest  mark  of  honour  to  the  subject.     So  too  was  the  riding 
upon  a  horse  on  which  the  king  had  ridden,  and  whose  head  was  adorned  with  a  royal  crown.     We 
translate  literally;  and  a  horse  on  which  the  king  is  wont  to  ride,  and  on  whose  head  is  set  a  royal 
crown.     We  do  not,  indeed,  find  among  the  classical  writers  any  testimony  to  such  an  adornment  of 
the  royal  steed ;  but  the  circumstance  is  not  at  all  improbable,  and  seems  to  be  corroborated  by 
ancient  remains,  certain  Assyrian  and  ancient  Persian  sculptures  representing  the  horses  of  the  king, 
and  apparently  those  of  princes,  with  ornaments  on   their  heads,  terminating  in  three  points,  which 
may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  crown. — Keil  (abridged).     10,  11.]  This  honour,  then,  the  haughty 
Haman  was  now  compelled  to  pay  to  the  hated  Jew.    That  Mordecai  was  a  Jew  and  accustomed  to  sit 
in  the  king's  gate  could  be  well  known  to  him  from  the  records  of  the  chronicle  of  the  empire  or  from 
the  courtiers,  who  read   the  history  to  him,  and  who  had  doubtless  also  given  him  still  other 
information   respecting    Mordecai.     12 — 14]    It   is   quite   consonant  with    Oriental    notions   that 
Mordecai,  after  receiving  the  extraordinary  honours  assigned  him,  should  return  to  the  paluce  and 
resume  his  former  humble  employment,  Ahasuerus  regarding  him  as  sufficiently  rewarded,  and  not 
yet  intending  to  do  anything  more  for  him. — Rawlinson.     Haman,  with  covered  head  and  sorrowful 
heart,  hastens  home  to  his   friends  and  wife  only  to  hear   the  discouraging  prophecy  that   the 
unfortunate  occurrence  will  be  the  beginning  of  his  end.     To  cover  the  head  was  a  sign  of  deep 
shame  and  distress.     His  friends  are  now  called  wise  men]  at  least  some  of  them,  because  they 
undertook  to  forecast  his  future. — Lange.     His  diviners  now  hesitate  not  to  predict  his  fall.     If  his 
enemy  is  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews]  a  new  and  startling  fact  that  seems  suddenly  to  have  impressed 
these  wise  men ;  then  it  is  certain  that  the  providence  which  has  ever  been  such  a  wondrous  power 
in  the  Jewish  nation,  and  which  has  now  so  strangely  elevated  Mordecai  at  the  very  moment  when 
Haman  thought  to  have  slain  him,  will  cause  the  Jew  to  triumph.     Hasted  to  bring  Haman]  The 
avenging  Fates  seem  to  hurry  him  to  his  doom. —  Whedon's  Com. 


CHAP.  VI.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  215 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verse  1. 

A  Humiliated  King. 

It  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  this  was  the  only  night  on  which  the  king  found  it 
impossible  to  command  the  recuperating  services  of  that  sleep  which  is  nature's 
sweet  restorer.  Other  niglits  there  were,  m  )st  likely,  when  the  king  could  not 
sleep.  But  on  those  other  nights  there  might  be  found  satisfactory  explanations  of 
the  sleeplessness.  There  may  have  been  physical  pain  preventing  the  enjoyment 
of  sweet  repose.  There  were  visible  or  ascertainable  causes  to  account  for  the 
unusual  restlessness.  On  this  occasion  the  king  could  not  sleep,  and  yet  he  could 
not  account  for  the  restless  condition.  How  is  it  that  I  cannot  sleep]  I  have  no 
physical  pain.  I  have  no  fears.  I  am  not  conscious  of  danger.  All  appears  to  be 
much  as  it  has  been  on  other  nights  when  I  have  enjoyed  repose.  The  king  was 
now  touched  by  a  hand  that  he  could  not  see.  The  king  was  now  moved  and 
controlled  by  a  power  that  he  did  not  acknowledge.  An  unseen  and  irresistible 
force  now  rendered  uneasy  the  couch  on  which  the  mighty  monarch  in  vain  sought 
for  sleep.  Kings  have  their  master.  Sleepy  and  sleepless  kings  have  their 
humiliating  conditions.  All  are  in  a  state  of  subjection.  God  can  at  all  times 
use  us  for  his  great  purposes,  but  he  has  need  of  wakeful  creatures.  Even  kings 
must  not  sleep  when  the  Great  King  has  work  to  be  performed.  Here  is  a  lesson 
for  all.  We  must  be  willing  to  sacrifice  sleep  when  God's  Church  and  God's 
world  has  pressing  claims  upon  our  immediate  service. 

I.  A  king  in  need.  Eastern  monarchs  sought  by  the  pomp  of  circumstances  to 
separate  themselves  from  their  subjects,  and  thus  to  maintain  a  condition  of 
superiority.  At  all  times  monarchs  have  been  regarded  by  the  vast  majority  as 
superior  beings.  Yet  it  is  plain,  and  a  truism  to  assert,  that  kings  have  their  needs 
as  well  as  subjects.  They  too  are  human,  and  require  those  helps  which  are  needful 
to  the  rest  of  humanity.  Ahasuerus,  the  monarch  ruling  over  a  hundred  and 
seven  and  twenty  provinces,  seeks  for  sleep  just  as  the  meanest  pea«?ant  seeks  for 
sleep  in  his  rude  cot.  Sleep  is  said  to  be  the  image  of  death.  As  the  latter,  so  the 
former  is  a  great  leveller.  They  know  no  distinctions  of  rank.  They  do  not 
recognize  the  gorgeous  trappings  of  royalty.  A  sleeping  king  is  just  as  helpless  as  a 
sleeping  beggar.  What  becomes  of  our  greatness  when  we  are  compelled  to  sleep  ? 
The  beggar  in  his  sleep  may  dream  himself  to  be  possessed  of  vast  wealth.  For  a 
beggar  may  have  his  pleasant  dreams ;  while  kings  may  be  haunted  with  the 
nightmare.  Kings  must  sleep,  or  kings  must  die.  Kings  too  must  sleep  the  final 
Bleep ;  the  sleep  from  which  there  is  only  one  awakening.  We  all  must  sleep  the 
great  sleep  of  death.  How  often  have  M'^e  laid  ourselves  down  to  sleep,  and  yet  it 
may  be,  that  many  of  us  have  never  thought  of  this  sleep  prefiguring  our  last  sleep  1 
Death  is  near  to  us,  not  only  by  our  liability  to  accident  and  to  disease,  but  by  its 
image  in  our  nightly  sleep.  When  death  comes  will  it  find  us  ready  1  Shall  we 
lie  down  to  sleep  with  the  assured  conviction  that  we  shall  awake  in  the  resurrection 
of  the  just  % 

II.  Thus  a  king  in  subjection.  A  king  ruling  and  yet  ruled.  He  is  in 
subjection  to  the  law  that  sleep  is  a  necessity  of  nature.  Kings  are  under  law. 
They  even  cannot  violate  the  laws  of  nature,  which  are  the  laws  of  God,  with 
impunity.  Philosophers  may  assume  kingly  prerogatives.  Tiiey  may  patronize 
nature  and  nature's  God.  They  may  talk  in  grandiloquent  terms  about  how 
the  universe  was  framed,  and  how  it  ought  to  be  framed.  But  philosophers  must 
sleep.  Philosophers  must  humbly  bow  and  submit  themselves  to  this  humiliating 
condition.  A  philosopher  snoring  is  a  withering  irony  on  a  philosopher  talking. 
Who  could  believe  that  the  philosopher  recumbent,  wrapped  in  the  embracef  of 


216  EOMILETIQ  QOMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  [okajp.  vi. 


sleep,  is  the  same  being  'as  the  philosopher  erect,  defying  with  his  tongue  all  the 
powers  in  earth  and  in  heaven  ]     If  the  kings  of  men  own  no  other  kingly  power, 
they  must  place  themselves  in  subjection  to  king  sleep.     This  is  one  of  the  great 
sovereigns  that  rules  humanity.     It  will  not  be  denied.     It  demands  its  offering  of 
time.     If  the  offering  be  not  constantly  presented,  it  comes  with  awful  vengeance. 
Sleep  is  the  messenger  that  death  sends  before  to  tell  of  his  coming.      Mighty  sleep, 
but  mightier  death  !     Sleep  is  a  king  ruling  gently  and  sweetly.     Death  is  a  king 
ruling  sternly  and  dreadfully.     God  is  a  king  mightier  than  either  sleep  or  death. 
They  rule  only  with  delegated  authority.     They  too  are  subject.     God  can  take 
away  sleep,  as  he  did  on  that  night  when  Ahasuerus  could  not  sleep.     God  can 
stay  death  as  he  did  in  the  cases  of  Enoch  and  of  Elijah.     If  we  would  sweetly 
sleep  and  calmly  die,  we  must  sleep  resting  assured  that  He  is  our  friend  who 
giveth   to  his  beloved  sleep ;    we  must  die  in  Jesus  Christ.      "  Blessed  are  the 
dead  that  die  in  the  Lord."     When  the  day  is  drawing  to  a  close,  when  night  is 
throwing  the  sable  curtains  about  a  bright  and  busy  world,  when  the  exhausted 
system  is  seeking  the  help  of  its  restorer,  and  is  wooing  the  sweet  embraces  of 
balmy  sleep  ;  how  delightful  to  feel  that  in  seeking  the  earthly  rest  we  get  a  type 
of  the  heavenly  rest,  and  to  say  to  the  body,  Eeturn  to  rest  on  that  pillow  which  will 
one  day  lose  its  power  to  soothe ;  to  the  soul.  Return  to  rest  on  that  bosom  of  Divine 
love  which  will  never  fail  in  its  comforting  and  recruiting  influences.     When  life's 
evening  is  drawing  to  its  close,  when  earth  can  no  more  give  rest,  when  with 
trembling  feet  we  are  treading  the  darkest  valley  of  all,  how  great  the  peace  if  we 
can  feel  that  we  are  going  to  rest  for  ever  where  no  adverse  forces  will  disturb  the 
divine  repose. 

III.  A  king  in  defeat.  Kings  have  their  defeats  as  weU  as  common  men ;  not 
only  on  the  battle-field,  not  only  in  the  national  councils,  but  in  the  ordinary 
circumstances  of  life.  Here  a  king  is  defeated.  Ahasuerus  seeks  sleep,  and  yet  it 
refuses  to  come  at  his  request.  He  cannot  now  secure  the  boon  which  is  obtained 
by  the  meanest  subject  in  his  realm.  All  material  appliances  are  at  his  command, 
and  yet  sleep  will  not  be  compelled.  Sweet  music  cannot  lull  to  repose  where  it  is 
denied.  Soft  couches  and  splendid  drapery  cannot  always  compel  the  embraces  of 
sleep.  It  is  coy  and  fickle ;  and  sometimes  when  most  earnestly  sought,  it  appears 
to  fly  the  farthest  away.  At  other  times  when  not  sought  at  all  it  comes  readily. 
On  that  night  could  not  the  king  sleep.  The  king  is  defeated.  Here  is  a  lesson 
for  Ahasuerus  if  he  had  only  been  wise.  What  a  lesson  on  our  limitations  I  Here 
is  a  lesson  for  all.  We  may  know  our  weakness,  and  yet  we  will  not  bow  in  lowly 
reverence  to  the  Great  Supreme.  How  humble  should  all  men  be  in  the  presence 
of  their  limitations  !  How  little  reason  has  a  proud  man  to  vaunt  himself  of  his 
greatness  ! 

IV.  A  king  in  subjection  commands.  He  commanded  to  bring  the  book  of 
records  of  the  chronicles.  He  commands  because  he  is  commanded.  He  was 
commanded  not  to  sleep.  He  was  also  commanded  to  turn  his  attention  in  sleepless 
hours  to  the  book  of  records  of  the  chronicles.  Here  we  have  doubtless  the  case  of 
an  ungodly  man  under  Divine  inspiration.  It  may  be  said  that  it  was  only  a  freak 
on  the  part  of  the  king.  He  was  restless  and  did  not  know  what  to  do  with 
himself,  and  so  he  turned  to  these  royal  records.  Such  a  freak,  however,  is 
unaccountable  unless  we  suppose  him  unconsciously  directed  from  heaven.  It 
would  have  been  more  natural  for  him  to  have  commanded  the  presence  of  a 
musician  to  bring  forth  dulcet  strains  to  soothe  the  restless  nature.  Or  to  have 
called  for  some  calmly  entertaining  story.  Or  to  have  summoned  the  doctor  to 
administer,  so  as  to  settle  the  perturbation.  Imagine  the  Queen  on  some  sleepless 
night  calling  for  the  Blue  Book  to  be  brought  into  her  presence.  Picture  yourselves 
asking  for  police  statistics,  for  the  records  of  crime,  when  sleep  forsakes  in  the  dark 
and  stilly  night ;  why  it  would  be  enough  to  drive  sleep  away.  It  may  be 
supposed   that    Ahasuerus  asked   for   these  chronicles  as  being  dry  reading  and 


CHAP.  VL]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER,  217 

calculated  to  induce  slumber,  just  as  some  people  take  a  volume  of  old  dry  divinity 
to  bed  to  read  :  just  as  some  people  go  to  cliurch  in  order  to  get  slumber.  Still 
the  case  is  not  altered.  However  it  came  about  in  human  working,  it  was  settled 
in  Divine  purpose  that  Ahasuerus  must  read  in  these  records,  and  read  at  the 
particular  part  of  those  records  relating  to  Mordecai.  Ungodly  men  may  be  under 
Divine  inspiration.  God  can  use  the  wicked.  But  God  will  use  the  good  for  their 
own  greater  good  ;  for  the  good  of  others,  and  for  his  own  glory.  Let  us  seek  to 
be  good,  and  ready  for  Divine  uses.  When  we  cannot  sleep,  when  an  unusual 
restlessness  takes  hold  of  our  nature,  what  should  we  summon  to  our  aid  1  Should 
we  not  ask  for  the  book  of  the  Divine  records  ]  Let  us  seek  ever  to  God's  word. 
Let  us  find  in  it  light  in  the  darkest  nights,  repose  in  the  most  restless  periods,  and 
help  in  our  varied  weaknesses. 

V.  A  king  in  defeat  listens.  A  king  in  defeat  is  more  likely  to  listen  than  a 
king  triumphant.  The  records  of  the  chronicles  were  read  before  the  king.  Dull 
reading  no  doubt,  but  still  he  listened.  When  the  attention  is  properly  engaged, 
then  the  dullest  reading  becomes  interesting.  It  would  require  a  skilful  reader  to 
make  these  chronicles  attractive  and  lively.  This  king  we  may  well  imagine  did 
not  look  for  the  nicely  modulated  voice.  He  was  Divinely  directed  to  take  a 
special  interest — an  interest  he  had  never  felt  previously ;  yea,  it  is  likely  he  had 
never  heard  the  records  before — in  these  dull  chronicles.  Our  times  of  humiliation 
are  mostly  our  best  times  of  listening.  Our  times  when  we  are  under  Divine 
impulses  are  our  times  for  receiving  with  meekness  the  engrafted  word  which  is  able 
to  save  our  souls.  Let  us  be  in  earnest  as  the  Divine  records  are  read  in  our 
hearing.  Let  the  attention  be  thoroughly  aroused  and  awake  to  the  subject  matter, 
and  then  the  manner  of  the  speaker  will  be  of  comparatively  small  importance. 
With  some  the  voice  of  the  messenger  is  the  all-important  concern.  The  message 
should  be  that  which  commands  and  engages  the  supreme  attention.  This  defeated 
king  listens  with  intelligent  interest.  He  notes  the  very  point  which  is  requisite 
for  the  working  out  of  Divine  purposes  ;  as  we  shall  see  more  fully  in  the  after- 
part  of  this  narrative.  Let  then  the  whole  mind  be  engaged  while  the  Divine 
records  are  being  proclaimed.  The  head  as  well  as  the  heart  must  be  employed. 
Listen,  for  important  interests  are  at  stake.  Listen  for  your  own  benefit,  and  thus 
you  will  become  of  benefit  to  others.  Ahasuerus  listened  for  himself,  and  in  thus 
listening  he  became  a  true  service  to  Mordecai  and  all  his  people.  Good  listeners 
help  to  make  good  readers  and  good  doers.  They  benefit  both  themselves  and  the 
community  at  large. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verse  1. 

God  has  employed  sleep  for  weighty  to  take  Mary  for  his  wife ;  because  that 
purposes,  in  various  ages  of  the  world,  which  had  been  conceived  in  her  was  of 
It  was  while  Adam  was  in  "  deep  sleep,"  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  was  in  the  same 
that  "  one  of  his  ribs  was  taken,"  and  condition,  when  he  was  warned  from 
made  a  living  being,  and  an  help  meet  above  to  take  the  Holy  Child  with  his 
for  him.  It  was  while  Jacob  was  asleep,  mother  to  Egypt,  to  avoid  the  death  in- 
that  he  was  favoured  with  that  wonder-  tended  him  by  Herod;  and  when  he  was 
ful  vision,  in  which  he  beheld  a  ladder  ordered  to  bring  him  back  to  Judea,  after 
set  upon  the  earth,  whose  top  reached  death  had  taken  that  cruel  tyrant  from 
to  heaven — a  striking  representation  of  the  earth.  But  here  God  carries  his  pur- 
God's  providential  care  for  his  people ;  poses  into  execution  by  means  of  the  ab- 
and  likewise  of  that  Redeemer,  who  is  sence  of  sleep.  He  is  never  at  a  loss  to 
the  way  to  the  Father — a  way,  in  which  bring  his  designs  to  pass.  AU  things  are 
whosoever  walketh,  the  angels  of  glory  in  his  hand,  and  he  maketh  them  all, 
continually  afford  to  him  their  friendly  even  those  most  contrary  to  each  other, 
ministrations.  It  was  when  Joseph  was  to  work  together  for  the  good  of  his 
aaleep,  that  he  was  directed  from  heaven  chosen.     "He  hath  put  aW  ^/i^7^^s  under 


218 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  VI, 


the  feet "  of  Christ  and  given  him  to  be 
the  head  over  all  things  to  the  Churchy 
for  the  benefit  of  his  believing  people. 

Sleep,  my  brethren,  is  the  gift  of  God, 
and  an  invaluable  mercy.  Our  feeble 
frames  require  it  frequently,  and  the 
Lord  frequently  imparts  it.  It  re-ani- 
mates our  drooping  spirits,  and  re-invigor- 
ates our  wearied  limbs :  with  grateful 
hearts  ought  we  then  to  say  with  David, 
**  I  laid  me  down  and  slept.  I  awaked  : 
for  the  Lord  sustained  me."  But  precious 
as  is  this  crift,  if  we  employ  the  bodies, 
whose  weakness  demands  these  frequent 
cessations  from  labour,  in  the  service  of 
him  that  bought  them,  they  shall  be  ere 
long  in  a  condition  in  which  it  will  not 
be  needed.  Our  resurrection  bodies  will 
be  as  active  as  our  spirits,  and  with  them 
will  serve  God  without  fatigue,  without 
intermission,  throughout  eternity.  "  It  is 
sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power." 

When  Ahasuerus  was  thus  supernatur- 
ally  robbed  of  his  sleep,  he  commanded 
the  records  of  the  empire  to  be  brought 
before  him.     He  might  have  fixed  upon 
many  other  ways  of  beguiling  the  slowly 
passing  hours  :  but  this  tended  to  facili- 
tate the  object  which  Esther  had  in  view : 
therefore  her  God  disposed  the  king  to 
adopt  it.     If  he  had  ordered  instruments 
of  music  to  be  brought  before  him  (which 
was  customary  among  the  Eastern  mon- 
archs,  Dan.  vi.  18),  he  might  have  di- 
verted his  mind,  and  possibly  rendered 
his  sleepless  hours  pleasurable ;  but,  in 
that  case,  Mordecai  would  not  have  come 
to  his  mind :  the  fidelity  of  that  subject, 
which  he  had  forgotten,  and  by  which 
his  life  had  been  preserved,  had  remained 
still  in  forgetfulness,  and  nothing  would 
have  been  done  towards  the  accomplish- 
ment of  Esther's  design.     Let  our  con- 
templation of  God's  wisdom  and  over- 
ruling power  herein,  constrain  us  to  say, 
''Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  who 
only  doeth  wondrous  things :  and  blessed 
be  his  glorious  name  for  ever,  and    let 
the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  his  glory. 
Amen  and  Amen." — Hughes. 

Ver.  \.  On  that  night  could  not  the 
Tdng  sleep,  and  he  commanded  to  bring 
the  hook  of  records  of  the  chronicles;  and 
they  were  read  before  the  king. 

The  king  could  not  sleep,  any  more 


than  we,  when  he  pleased.  Of  what  use, 
some  will  say,  is  royal  dignity,  if  it  can- 
not procure  sleep  to  the  wearied  eyelids '? 
A  king,  by  the  wise  administration  of 
government,  may  procure  sleep  to  his 
people ;  on  the  contrary,  by  his  oppres- 
sion, he  may  cause  many  wearisome 
nights  to  his  subjects,  in  which  their 
sorrows  will  not  suff'er  them  to  sleep. 
But  the  regal  dignity  will  not  insure 
sleep  to  him  who  enjoys  it.  It  is  more 
likely  to  debar  his  eye^  from  rest  by 
those  anxious  cares  which  attend  it ;  or 
by  those  uneasy  reflections  which  attend 
the  abuse  of  power.  Labour,  and  a  good 
conscience,  will  procure  sweeter  sleep 
than  all  the  riches  in  the  world. 

On  that  night  could  not  the  king 
sleep.  —  On  what  night  1  The  night 
preceding  the  decisive  day  on  which 
Esther  was  to  present  her  petition,  and 
the  morning  on  which  Haman  had  a  pe- 
tition of  an  opposite  kind  to  be  presented 
to  the  king.  Observe  how  Divine  Pro- 
vidence kept  sleep  from  the  eyes  of  Ahas- 
uerus, to  serve  its  own  gracious  purposes. 
It  is  said  that  "  God  giveth  his  beloved 
sleep."  But  he  sometimes  too  withholds 
sleep  from  them  for  good  purposes ;  and 
he  sometimes  hath  withheld  sleep  from 
other  persons,  or  disturbed  it  with  strange 
dreams,  for  their  benefit.  A  dream  was 
sent  to  Pharaoh,  that  Joseph  should  be 
delivered  from  his  prison,  and  exalted  to 
power.  Another  dream  was  sent  to 
Nebuchadnezzar,  to  procure  the  exalta- 
tion of  Daniel  and  his  friends.  Ahas- 
uerus was  kept  from  sleep,  that  he  might 
not  suff'er  Mordecai  to  be  hanged. 

It  is  of  great  use  to  know  how  to  im- 
prove those  moments  of  the  night  in 
which  we  are  debarred  from  sleep.  Ahas- 
uerus, it  seems,  thought  he  could  not 
employ  his  waking  moments  better  than 
by  hearing  the  chronicles  of  his  reign. 
Here  too  we  may  observe  the  superin- 
tending care  of  Providence.  Why  did 
not  a  prince,  who  delighted  in  pleasure, 
rather  call  for  the  melody  of  the  harp 
and  viol,  than  for  the  chronicles  of  his 
reign  1  It  was  the  will  of  God  that  he 
should  be  put  in  mind  of  what  Mordecai 
had  done  for  him,  because  now  the  fit 
time  was  come  that  he  should  receive  the 
reward  of  his  fidelity. 


OHAP.  VI.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


219 


"Blessings  on  him,"  says  Sancho 
Panza,  "who  invented  sleep."  This  is 
a  sentiment  in  which  all  the  world  will 
agree.  Sleep  is,  indeed,  as  much  the 
true  remedy  for  the  troubles  and  worries 
of  the  mind,  as  it  is  for  the  fatigues  of 
the  body.  In  every  one*s  life  there  are 
occasions  when  the  gloom  of  the  present 
is  only  exceeded  by  the  darkness  of  the 
future.  If  there  were  no  such  thing  as 
sleep,  a  man  would  succumb  either  men- 
tally or  bodily ;  he  would  die  of  exhausted 
nervous  power,  or  if  it  were  possible  for 
him  to  live,  would  become  a  maniac. 

After  some  hours  of  the  deepest  mental 
distress,  relief  is  usually  brought  by  sleep, 
and  the  sufferer  feels  his  exhausted 
powers  revive.  He  wakes  with  the 
memory  of  his  troubles  still  present  to 
his  mind,  but  also  feeling  that  he  is  better 
prepared  to  face  them.  The  keenness 
by  which  they  wound  him  is  somewhat 
blunted ;  and  this  gradual  process  of 
blunting  is  nightly  repeated.  Thus,  by 
causing  intermission  in  our  troubles,  it 
is  that  ''tired  nature's  sweet  restorer" 
reanimates  our  drooping  spirits.  Sleep 
was  supposed  to  be  caused  by  accumula- 
tion of  blood  in  the  head ;  and  in  sup- 
port of  this  view  the  facts  have  been 
advanced,  that  full-blooded  people  are 
usually  the  best  sleepers,  and  that  the 
recumbent  position  which  promotes  the 
flow  of  blood  to  the  brain,  induces  sleep. 
But  it  is  now  the  most  generally  received 
opinion,  that  sleep  is  caused  by  a  with- 
drawal of  blood  from  the  brain.  In  per- 
fect sleep  there  is  no  consciousness.  It 
has  been,  therefore,  called  with  truth  the 
image  of  death.  It  is  a  temporary  death, 
as  far  as  concerns  all  action  and  motion 
which  lie  under  the  power  of  the  will. 
But  although  the  brain  is  at  rest,  the 
heart  and  lungs  continue  their  tasks,  be- 
cause they  are  presided  over  by  a  depart- 
ment of  the  nervous  system  which  acts 
independently  of  the  brain.  The  brain 
is  the  seat  of  consciousness,  and  from  it 
all  the  nerves  which  originate  and  control 
voluntary  motions  take  their  rise  more  or 
less  directly.  The  intellectual  faculties 
sometimes  continue  active  during  sleep. 
La  Fontaine  made  admirable  verses  in 
his  sleep.  Alexander  is  said  to  have 
planned  battles.    In  the  same  way  mathe- 


maticians have  solved  problems,  and 
school-boys  have  accomplished  tasks.*— 
Physiology  for  Practical  Use. 

Earthly  crowns  often  sit  heavily  on 
the  monarch's  head  : — 

0  polished  perturbation !  golden  care, 
That  keeps  the  ports  of  slumber  open  wide 
For  many  a  watchful  night, 

Yer.  1.  This  is  as  it  is  written  in  the 
Psalm :  "  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them 
wrong ;  nay,  he  rebuked  even  kings  for 
their  sake."  For  the  pious  are  so  great 
a  care  to  God,  that  in  order  to  preserve 
them  he  does  not  even  spare  kings,  but 
brings  upon  them  various  calamities. — 
Brenz. 

Let  every  one  bear  in  mind  day  and 
night  that  pious  proposition  of  Augustine 
concerning  the  solicitude  of  God  for  his 
saints:  so  day  and  night  dost  thou  watch 
for  my  safeguard  as  if,  forgetful  of  thy 
whole  creation  in  heaven  and  earth,  thou 
considerest  me  alone,  and  hadst  no  can; 
for  others. — Feuardent. 

0  Lord,  it  is  good  to  trust  in  thee  in 
the  expectation  of  thy  help !  Thou  dost. 
continually  watch  over  the  souls  left  in 
thy  care,  and  thou  dost  even  wait  until 
things  have  come  to  extremities,  in  order 
to  cause  the  greater  exercise  of  faith,  so 
that  none  may  despair  of  thy  assistance, 
still  at  the  ri^jht  time  thou  art  ever  ready 
to  help.  What  indeed  is  more  natural 
than  that  a  king  could  not  sleep,  and  that 
he  should  wish  something  read  to  him  ] 
It  is  this  altogether  natural,  yet  wonder- 
ful, leading,  which  causes  the  hearts  of 
those  who  experience  it  to  rejoice  !  To 
all  other  hearts  this  is  dark.  This  wise. 
Divine  Providence  is  still  unknown  to 
those  who  only  live  in  and  for  themselves. 
—Berl  Bible. 

"  He  that  keepeth  Israel,  and  neither 
slumbereth  nor  sleepeth,"  causeth  sleep 
that  night  to  depart  from  him  that  had 
decreed  to  root  out  Israel.  Great  Ahas- 
uerus,  that  commanded  a  hundred  and 
seven  and  twenty  provinces,  cannot  com- 
mand an  hour's  sleep.  Poverty  is  rather 
blessed  with  the  freedom  of  rest,  than 
wealth  and  power.  Cares  and  surfeit 
withhold  that  from  the  great,  which 
passeth  upon  the  spare  diet  and  labour 
of  the  meanest.  Nothing  is  more  tedious 
than  an  eager  pursuit  of  denied  pleep, 


320  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  [chap.  VI. 

which,  like  to  a  shadow,  flies  away  so  hundred    and    twenty-seven    provinces 

much   faster  as  it  is  more  followed. —  cannot  command  an  hour's  sleep.     How 

Bisliop  Hall.  should   he   when   sleep   is   God's  gifti 

God  gives  sleep  to  the  bad,  in  order  And  it  was  that  at  this  time  kept  him 

that  the  good  may  be  undisturbed. —  awake  for  excellent  ends,  and  put  small 

Sadi.  thoughts  in  his  heart  for  great  purpose, 

Oh,  sleep,  sweet  sleep !  whatever  form  like  as  he   did  into  our  Henry  YIII., 

thou  takest,  thou  art  fair,  holding  unto  when  the  Bishop  of  Baion  (the  Frencli 

our  lips  thy  goblet  fill'd  out  of  oblivion's  ambassador)  coming  to  consult  with  him 

well,  a  healing  draught.  — Longfellow.  about  a  marriage  between  the  Lady  Mary 

Could  not  the  king  sleep.]  Heb.  the  and  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  cast  a  scruple 
king's  sleep  fled  away,  and,  like  a  shadow,  into  his  mind  which  rendered  him  rest- 
it  fled  away  so  much  the  faster  as  it  was  less,  whether  Mary  were  legitimate  (*Life 
more  followed.  Sleep  is  best  solicited  and  Death  of  Card.  Wolsey,'  65).  If  it 
by  neglect,  and  soonest  found  when  we  were  his  surfeiting  and  drunkenness  the 
have  forgotten  to  seek  it.  They  are  day  before  that  hindered  Ahasuerus  from 
likeliest  for  it  who  together  with  their  sleeping,  God's  goodness  appeareth  the 
clothes  can  put  off  their  cares,  and  say  more,  in  turning  his  sin  to  the  good  of 
as  Lord  Burleigh  did  when  he  threw  off  the  Church.  Venenum  aliquando  pro 
his  gown,  *^  Lie  there.  Lord  Treasurer."  remedio  fuit,  saith  Seneca.  He  can  make 
This  great  Ahasuerus  cannot  do  at  pre-  poisonful  viper  a  wholesome  treacle;  and 
sent,  for  crowns  also  have  their  cares,  by  an  almighty  alchemy  draw  good  out 
thistles  in  theii  arms  and  thorns  in  the  of  evil. — Trqpp, 
sides.      Lo,   he    that  commanded    one 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.    Yeeses  2,  3. 

A  King's  Sorrow  for  an  Unrewarded  Subject. 

The  chronicles  of  earthly  kings  are  concealing.  The  chronicles  of  the  heavenly 
King  are  revealing.  In  the  former,  events  may  be  recorded  and  forgotten.  In  the 
latter,  events  are  recorded  and  remembered.  For  five  or  six  years  the  conspiracy 
discovered  and  exposed  by  Mordecai  had  been  recorded  in  the  book  of  records  of 
the  chronicles.  It  must  have  remained  thus  for  ever,  had  it  not  been,  as  men  say, 
revealed  by  accident ;  but  by  what  we  ought  to  say,  the  direct  interposition  of 
God.  The  records  of  the  heavenly  state  are  not  managed  in  the  same  loose 
fashion.  All  that  is  needful  will  be  ultimately  brought  to  light.  Mordecai  had  to 
wait  because  the  Persian  king  was  either  ungrateful  or  unmindful.  Saints  may 
have  to  wait,  not  because  God  is  either  immindful  or  unwilling  to  reward  faithful 
service,  but  because  the  proper  season  has  not  come  for  the  fulfilment  of  his 
purposes.  "  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  promise,  as  some  men  count 
slackness."  Now  consider  the  state  of  Ahasuerus  after  listening  to  the  reading  of 
this  account  concerning  the  conspiracy  of  Bigthana  and  Teresh ;  and  its  discovery 
by  Mordecai. 

I.  The  working  of  remorse.  And  the  king  said.  What  honour  and  dignity 
hath  been  done  to  Mordecai  for  this  *?  The  gloomy  and  sleepless  night  is  a  season 
well  calculated  to  bring  about  mournful  reflections.  Then  the  brain  is  busy,  and 
the  memory  works  with  unwonted  activity.  Thoughts  come  and  go  in  quick 
succession.  As  instantaneously  there  flashes  before  the  drowning  man  his  whole  life, 
80  often  on  the  sleepless  bed  there  appears  the  ghostly  army  of  our  past  deeds,  and 
especially  misdeeds.  It  is  a  season  for  the  working  of  remorse.  And  we  can 
easily  suppose  that  Ahasuerus  required  no  reading  of  the  dull  chronicles  in  order 
to  stir  up  grief  for  past  deeds.     His  mind  is  not  now  diverted  by  the  pomp  and 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOMTT.ETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  221 


circumstance  of  his  great  position.  His  mind  was  now  ready  to  fix  upon  this  one 
tact,  that  a  deserving  man  had  been  unrewarded.  He  at  once  wakes  up  to  the  fact 
of  his  ingratitude,  and  asks  the  question  about  Mordecai's  reward.  The  eagerness 
with  which  he  asks  the  question,  the  promptness  with  wliich  he  proceeds,  and  the 
energy  with  which  he  resists  the  blandishments  of  his  favourite  minister,  show  that 
his  better  nature  was  asserting  itself;  for  even  Ahasuerus  had  a  better  nature. 
The  mighty  monarch  may  welli  say,  How  ungrateful  have  I  been!  Here  is  a  man 
to  whom  I  owe  my  life  left  pinng  in  obscurity. 

II.  The  working  of  repentance.  Ahasuerus  might  have  asked  the  question  in  a 
penitent  mood,  and  then  have  dismissed  the  subject  from  his  mind.  Too  many,  in 
moments  of  remorse,  utter  a  few  well-coined  phrases,  and  then  let  the  att'air  pass 
away.  Even  in  such  cases  it  is  not  fair  to  say  that  there  was  no  true  feeling  for 
the  time  being,  for  we  are  strange  mixtures  ;  the  subjects  of  fitful  clianges,  good 
this  moment  and  bad  the  next.  But  the  question  of  Ahasuerus  taken  in  connection 
with  his  after  conduct,  evinces  that  there  was  just  then  the  working  of  a  right 
s})irit.  He  desired,  and  set  himself,  to  make  the  only  reparation  in  his  power. 
He  had  been  unmindful  of  great  services,  but  he  will  be  unmindful  no  longer. 
He  seems  to  ask  with  noble  resolve  what  honour  and  dignity  hath  been  done  to 
Mordecai  for  this  %  Repentance  is  not  merely  to  weep  over  a  remediless  past,  but 
to  do  justice  to  those  who  have  suffered  from  our  previous  neglect,  or  to  repair  aa 
far  as  possible  the  injustice  we  have  done  them.  One  of  the  Divine  requirements 
is  ''to  do  justly."  In  order  to  carry  out  this  precept,  the  man  who  has  suffered 
from  our  injustice  must  have  his  wrongs  righted.  Ahasuerus  sets  himself  to  do 
justly  to  Mordecai.  Already  the  purpose  is  being  formed  in  his  mind  to  heap 
upon  this  man  the  highest  honours,  as  if  to  make  amends  for  past  neglect.  Well 
was  it  for  the  king  and  for  the  subject  that  Mordecai  had  not  passed  away  beyond  the 
reach  of  Ahasuerus.  Then  the  king  could  simply  have  erected  a  monument  to  his 
memory.  This  is  the  mode  in  which  too  many  seek  to  still  the  voice  of  conscience 
The  hero  starves  in  a  garret.  The  benefactor  pines  in  obscurity,  and  battles  with 
poverty,  is  worsted  in  the  contest,  and  dies  a  victim  on  the  altar  of  ingratitude. 
Then  the  nation  rouses  itself  to  an  appreciation  of  the  good  man's  claims.  A 
costly  monument  celebrates  his  worth,  but  no  line  is  written  to  tell  of  vile  neglect, 
and  of  a  nation's  base  ingratitude.  Even  the  luxurious  and  weak-minded 
Ahasuerus  may  speak  a  lesson  to  those  who  build  the  tombs  of  the  prophets,  and 
garnish  the  sepulchres  of  the  righteous  ;  but  who  persecute  the  living  prophets,  and 
are  blind  to  the  worth  of  the  living  righteous. 

III.  A  voice  from  the  guilty  past.  Then  said  the  king's  servants  that 
minister  unto  him,  There  is  nothing  done  for  him.  The  voices  of  the  present  are 
too  often  but  echoes  of  the  past.  Ahasuerus  was  too  deaf  during  six  years  to  hear 
the  still  small  voice  wliich  said  there  is  nothincr  done  for  the  deserving  Mordecai.   The 

o  o 

voice  gathers  force  and  volume,  and  now  it  comes  like  a  thunder-clap  to  the  soul 
of  Ahasuerus  as  the  servants  say  there  is  nothing  done  for  him.  j^eglected  duty 
has  a  voice ;  if  we  hear  and  at  once  obey,  much  sorrow  will  be  prevented.  If  we 
are  deaf,  purposely  deaf,  the  voice  goes  on  speaking,  and  in  the  dreary  night, 
when  all  is  still,  when  the  soul  is  awake,  it  speaks  with  tremendous  emphasis.  If 
then  we  listen  and  repent  destruction  may  be  prevented.  If  we  still  refuse  to  hear 
the  voice  will  speak  once  more,  when  the  only  response  can  be.  It  is  now  too  late. 
Let  us  listen  to  the  voices  of  the  present.  Do  they  echo  our  past  1  Do  they  say 
there  is  nothing  done  where  much  ought  to  have  been  done.  Let  us  pray  for 
Divine  mercy  through  Jesus  Christ  to  blot  out  our  past ;  and  for  Divine  grace  to 
remedy  the  past  as  far  as  possible,  and  to  do  nobler  and  better  in  the  future.  The 
king  listened  eagerly  and  penitently  to  those  preachers  who  had  only  a  tale  of 
misdoing  to  tell ;  for  not-doing  is  in  many  cases  misdijing.  Wise  are  those  hearers 
who  listen  to  the  preacher  who  declares  there  is  nothing  done  where  much  was 
rightly  expected.     The  king's  servants  proclaim  their  own  guilt.     There  is  nothing 


222  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  vi. 


done  for  him.  We  have  waited  and  never  urged  the  claims  of  good  Mordecai. 
Sometimes  in  proclaiming  the  injustice  of  others  we  pronounce  our  own  guilt 
Thou  that  reprovest  Ahasuerus  because  he  has  done  nothing  for  Mordecai,  what 
hast  thou  done  for  the  benefit  of  the  neglected  man?  Thou  that  ravest  about  a 
nation's  neglected  heroes,  what  hast  thou  done  for  the  heroes  round  about  thee,  for 
the  heroes  whose  heroism  is  not  on  a  large  scale,  for  the  heroes  who  tread  the  quiet 
walks  of  life,  but  whose  aggregated  worth  constitute  a  nation's  safety.  Neglected 
heroes  !  Unrecognized  worth !  They  seem  to  meet  us  everywhere.  In  the 
present  day  it  appears  too  much  the  case  that  the  only  heroism  which  receives 
notice  is  the  heroism  of  boasting.  In  the  heathen  kingdom  of  Persia  modest 
Mordecai  meets  at  last  with  some  reward.  In  the  Christian  kingdom  of  En^^land 
the  modest  Mordecais  too  often  pass  to  the  grave,  and  on  their  tomb-stones  may 
be  written  the  epitaph  :  There  has  nothing  been  done  for  them.  In  the  heathen 
kingdom  of  Persia  the  boasting  Haman  ends  on  the  gallows.  In  the  Christian 
kingdom  of  England  the  boasting  Haman  sadly  often  maintains  a  position  of  social 
influence,  and  crowds  follow  his  remains  to  the  grave.  Let  the  art  of  graceful 
puffing  be  taught  in  our  schools  and  colleges ;  let  its  glories  be  proclaimed  from 
our  pulpits  and  in  our  lecture-rooms.  IS'o  more  vainly  talk  about  the  virtues  of 
modest  merit.  The  cry  is  now  heard.  He  is  too  sensitive  to  make  his  way. 
Solomon  said,  Put  not  forth  thyself  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  set  not  out  thy 
glory.  The  modern  Solomon  says,  Put  thy  best  foot  foremost,  set  out  thy  glory, 
have  a  good  opinion  of  thyself  if  thou  wouldest  rise.  Well,  never  mind,  serve  thy 
God  by  serving  thy  fellows.  God  is  always  doing  something  for  his  faithful 
servants.  There  is  no  neglected  Mordecai  in  his  kingdom.  Let  each  so  live  and 
so  act,  that  pleasant  memories  may  delight  the  spirit  that  cannot  lose  itself  in  the 
sweet  oblivion  of  sleep.  However  we  may  have  neglected  our  fellows,  let  it  never 
be  said  that  we  have  neglected  the  God-man.  When  the  question  is  asked,  What 
honour  and  dignity  hath  been  done  by  us  to  Jesus  ? — let  not  the  reply  be  heard, 
There  is  nothing  done  for  him.  Nothing  done  for  Jesus  !  Nothing  done  for  him 
who  did  infinitely  much  for  mankind  ! — and  if  we  do  much  for  Jesus  we  should  do 
much  for  our  fellows.  He  who  does  not  try  to  serve  his  race  may  hear  the  awful 
reply :  There  is  nothing  done  for  Jesus.  ''  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  to  one  of  the 
least  of  these  my  brethren,"  &c.  What  room  for  grief  when  we  hear  the  question. 
What  honour  and  dignity  hath  been  done  to  Jesus  for  this  his  great  work  of  saving 
men?  It  is  high  time  to  repent.  Much  has  been  done.  But  when  we  consider 
his  claims  and  our  indebtedness  and  our  small  sacrifices,  we  appear  to  hear  a  guilty 
past  shouting  in  thunder  tones,  There  is  nothing  done  for  Jesus. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  2,  3. 

The  king  inquired  what  honour  and  been  kind  to  us,  yet  let  us  do  them 
dignity  had  been  done  to  Mordecai  for  honour  by  acknowledging  their  kind- 
this,  suspecting  that  this  good  service  ness  and  owning  our  obligations  to  them, 
had  gone  unrewarded,  and  like  Pha-  2.  Better  late  than  never.  If  we  have 
raoli's  butler  remembering  it  as  his  fault  long  neglected  to  make  grateful  returns 
this  day.  Note — The  law  of  gratitude  for  good  offices  done  us,  let  us  at  length 
is  the  law  of  nature.  We  ought  particu-  bethink  ourselves  of  our  debt, 
larly  to  be  grateful  to  our  inferiors,  and  The  servants  informed  him  that  no- 
net to  think  all  their  services  such  debts  thing  had  been  done  to  Mordecai  for  that 
to  us,  but  that  they  may  make  us  in-  eminent  service ;  in  the  king's  gate  he 
debted  to  them.  sat  before,  and  there  he  sat  still.     Note 

Two  rules  may  be  gathered  from  the  — 1.  It  is  common  for  great  men  to  take 

king's  inquiry  here  : — 1.  Better  honour  little  notice  of  their  inferiors.     The  king 

than  nothing.   If  we  cannot,  or  need  not,  knew  not  whether  Mordecai  was  preferred 

make  a  recompense  to  those  who  have  or  not  till  his  servants  informed  him. 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ESTHER. 


223 


High  spirits  take  a  pride  in  being  careless 
and  unconcerned  about  those  that  are 
below  them  and  ignorant  of  their  state. 
The  great  God  takes  cognizance  of  the 
meanest  of  his  servants,  knows  what  dig- 
nity is  done  them,  and  what  disgrace. 
2.   Humility,  modesty,  and  self-denial, 
though  in  God's  account  of  great  price, 
yet  commonly  hinder  men's  preferment 
in  the  world.     Mordecai  rises  no  higher 
than  the  king's  gate,  while  the   proud 
ambitious  Ham  an  gets  the  king's  ear  and 
heart;  but,  though  the  aspiring  rise  fast, 
the  humble  stand  fast.     Honour  makes 
proujd    men    giddy,    but    upholds    the 
humble  in  spirit.     Honour  and  dignity 
are  rated  high  in  the  king's  books.     He 
does  not  ask,  What  reward  has  been  given 
Mordecai^   what   money]   what  estate"? 
but  only,  what  honour*? — a  poor  thing, 
and  which,  if  he  had  not  wherewith  t  > 
support  it,  would  be  but  a  burden.     4. 
The  greatest  merits  and  the  best  services 
are  often  overlooked,  and  go  unrewarded 
among  men.     Little  honour  is  done  to 
those  who  best  deserve  it,  are  fittest  for 
it,  and  would   do    most  good  with   it. 
The  acquisition  of  wealth  and  honour  is 
usually  a  perfect  lottery,  in  which  those 
who  venture  least  commonly  carry  oft'  the 
best  prize.     Nay — 5.  Good  services  are 
sometimes  so  far  from  being  a  man's  pre- 
ferment that  they  will  not  be  his  protec- 
tion.    Mordecai  is  at  this  time,  by  the 
king's  edict,  doomed  to  destruction,  with 
all  the  Jews,  though  it  is  owned  that  he 
deserved  a  dignity.    Those  that  faithfully 
serve  God  need  not  fear  being  thus  ill 
paid. — Matthew  Henry, 

Princes  should  have  diligent  care  that 
none  who  have  deserved  well  of  the  State 
or  of  themselves  are  left  to  go  unrewarded. 
God  knows  our  acts  of  kindness;  and 
though  we  may  regard  them  as  lost  or 
ignored,  yet  he  can  bring  them  to  the 
light  at  the  proper  time  to  receive  even 
a  greater  reward  than  if  they  had  been 
immediately  rewarded. — Starke. 

Although  men  are  unmindful  of  bene- 
fits received,  and,  as  Pindar  says,  "  Old 
thanks  sleep,"  still  our  Lord  God  is  never 
forgetful.  When  God's  time  for  reward 
has  come,  then  even  the  zeal  of  enemies 
must  assist  him.  However  watchful  and 
diligent  our  enemies  may  be   in  order 


utterly  to  destroy  the  righteous,  yet  al! 
their  acts  and  labours  form  only  the 
ground  of  the  scene,  which  by  the  help 
of  God  is  made  to  serve  in  perfecting  the 
web  of  his  leadings. — Brenz. 

He  could  not  believe  that  he  had  been 
so  thoughtlessly  ungrateful,  as  never  to 
requite  for  such  a  length  of  time  a 
service  so  eminent  as  that  which  Mor- 
decai had  performed ;  and  was  astonished 
to  hear  his  servants  say  that  nothing 
had  been  done  for  him. 

Let  us  take  a  review  of  our  lives,  and 
consider  what  we  have  done,  or  not 
done.  If  our  memories  are  good,  we 
shall  be  surprised  at  many  instances  of 
our  conduct,  or  at  our  forgetf ulness.  Have 
we  showed  all  that  sense  of  gratitude  to 
our  benefactors,  to  which  we  must  ac- 
knowledge them  to  be  entitled  1  Have 
we  not  often  intended  to  do  what  we 
have  never  done,  although  we  must 
blush  at  the  thought  that  we  have  not 
done  iti  And  can  we  forget,  that 
amongst  our  benefactors  are  to  be  reck- 
oned our  parents,  and,  most  of  all,  God 
our  Maker  1 

We  are  taught  likewise  by  this  ques- 
tion of  Ahasuerus,  not  to  impute  to 
intention  what  may  be  the  eff'ect  merely 
of  inadvertence.  We  are  apt  to  make 
louder  complaints  than  we  have  any 
reason  to  make  of  the  ingratitude  of 
those  to  whom  we  have  performed  good 
offices.  Perhaps  they  have  forgotten 
that  they  did  not  requite  them.  Perhaps 
their  neglects  have  not  originated  in 
depravity  of  heart,  or  insensibility  to 
benefits,  but  in  thoughtlessness,  as  it 
were,  occasioned  by  the  many  avocations 
of  other  affairs.  We  cannot  indeed 
justify  those  who  do  not  with  the  first 
opportunity  requite  benefits  received ; 
but  we  must  not  aggravate  real  evils. 
Who  will  say  that  David  did  not  retain 
a  grateful  remembrance  of  what  Jona- 
than had  done  for  him?  And  yet 
several  years  seem  to  have  elapsed,  after 
he  was  advanced  to  the  regal  dignity, 
before  he  inquired  who  were  left  of  the 
house  of  Saul,  that  he  might  show  them 
the  kindness  of  God  for  Jonathan's 
sake ;  and  several  more  years  passed 
away,  before  he  brought  the  bones  of 
that  beloved  friend  from  Jabesh  Gilead 


224 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


[CHAP.  VL 


to  be  interred  in  the  sepulchre  of  his 
father. 

"  There  is  nothing  done  for  him," 
said  the  servants  of  Ahasuerus.  This 
was  a  disagreeable  truth  which  they 
could  not  conceal  from  the  king.  But 
the  evil  was  not  irreparable.  Mordecai 
was  still  alive,  and  the  king  could  yet 
testify  his  sense  of  the  benefit  received. — 
Lawson. 

TJie  king  said,  What  honour  and 
dignity  hath  been  done  to  Mordecai  for 
this  ?  Then  said  the  king's  servants  that 
ministered  to  him.  There  is  nothing  done 
for  him.  0  ye  smooth  sycophants, 
where  were  your  tongues  before  1  Ye 
were  not  ignorant  of  the  important 
service  performed  by  Mordecai.  Ye 
knew  well  the  mean  office  which  he  con- 
tinued to  discharge.  Why  did  you  not 
embrace  the  opportunity  which  your 
access  to  the  king's  person  gave  you  to 
remind  him  of  the  merits  of  a  neglected 
servant  •?  You  had  too  many  favours  to 
ask  for  yourselves  and  your  friends. 
Oh  !  if  Haman  had  come  a  little  earlier, 
you  would  have  abetted  his  plea,  and 
might  have  been  found  bearing  witness 
that  Mordecai  had  blasphemed  the  king 
and  his  favourite. 

We  should  not,  and  good  men  will 
not,  look  for  their  reward  from  creatures. 
The  world  is  full  of  ingratitude.  It  is 
often  seen  that  "  the  greatest  merits  and 
the  best  services  are  forgotten,  and  go 
unrewarded  among  men ;  little  honour 
is  done  to  those  who  best  deserve  it,  are 
fittest  for  it,  and  would  do  most  good 
with  it."  *  Modest  merit  is  overlooked, 
while  the  aspiring,  the  ambitious,  and 
the  time-serving  rise  to  honour  and 
riches.  Nor  is  ingratitude  confined  to 
courts.  It  is  the  vice  of  the  low  as  well 
as  the  high  —  the  sovereign  people,  as 
well  as  sovereign  princes.  "  There  was 
a  little  city,  and  few  men  within  it; 
and  there  came  a  great  king  against  it, 
and  besieged  it,  and  built  great  bulwarks 
against  it.  Now  there  was  found  in  it 
a  poor  wise  man,  and  he,  by  his  wisdom, 
delivered  the  city ;  yet  no  man  remem- 
bered that  same  poor  man.  Wisdom  is 
better  than  strength;  nevertheless  the 
poor  man's  wisdom  is  despised,  and  his 
*  Henry. 


words  are  not  heard."  f  Ingratitude  to 
God  and  to  his  servants  are  nearly  allied. 
*'  The  children  of  Israel  remembered  not 
the  Lord  their  God,  who  had  delivered 
them  out  of  the  hands  of  all  their 
enemies  on  every  side  :  neither  showed 
they  kindness  to  the  house  of  Jerubbaal, 
namely,  Gideon,  accordin^jj  to  all  the 
goodness  which  he  had  showed  unto 
Israel."  J  You  know  who  it  was  that 
'*  went  about  doing  good  ; "  and  yet,  as 
a  reward,  the  Jews  sought  to  stone,  and 
at  last  crucified  him. 

"  Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good, 
according  to  all  that  I  have  done  for 
this  people."  §  The  King  of  heaven 'has 
his  records — his  "  book  of  remembrance," 
in  which  are  entered  not  only  the  good 
deeds  which  they  have  done  in  his 
service,  but  also  their  dutiful  words  and 
their  gracious  thoughts.  This  book  is 
not  only  written  before  him,  but  it  is 
always  open  before  him.  He  whom  you 
serve  slumbers  not  nor  sleeps  at  any 
time.  He  stands  in  no  need  of  remem- 
brancers, and  no  adversary  can  poison 
his  ear  to  their  prejudice.  He  may 
delay  the  reward,  but  he  will  not  baulk 
their  expectations.  He  "  is  not  unright- 
eous, to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of 
love,  which  ye  have  showed  toward  his 
name."  When  the  books  are  opened, 
he  shaU  read,  "  I  was  an  hungered,  and 
ye  gave  me  meat ;  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye 
gave  me  drink ;  I  was  a  stranger,  and 
ye  took  me  in  ;  naked,  and  ye  clothed 
me ;  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me ;  I 
was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  me." 

If  we  are  thoroughly  convinced  of  our 
neglect  of  duty,  and  sorry  on  account 
of  it^  we  will  lose  no  time  in  repairing 
the  injury,  Satan  is  always  at  hand  to 
divert  us  from  a  good  purpose.  Had 
Ahasuerus  delayed  acting  on  his  present 
irai^ressions,  a  temptation  would  have 
assailed  him  which  might  have  proved 
too  strong,  and  led  him  to  add  cruelty 
to  ingratitude,  by  taking  away  the  life 
of  one  who  had  preserved  his  own. 


It  teaches  us  how  well  a  good  man  can 
afibrd  to  wait  for  the  due  acknowledg- 

t  Eccles.  ix.  14,  16. 
X  Judges  viii  34,  35.       §  Neh.  v.  19. 


CHAP.  VI.] 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


225 


ment  of  his  uprightness,  and  for  any 
reward  he  may  need  for  the  good  he 
has  done.  The  conjecture  is  that  six 
long  years  had  gone  by  since  Mordecai 
revealed  the  plot  of  the  chamberlains 
and  saved  the  king's  life,  and  not  even 
a  word  of  acknowledgment  had  come 
to  him  during  all  that  time.  At  first 
he  would  naturally  look  for  something 
of  the  kind,  for  it  was  usual,  it  was 
kingly,  on  such  occasions  to  confer 
honours  and  give  rewards ;  but  as  time 
went  on  expectation  would,  of  course, 
diminish,  and  finally,  in  all  probability, 
die  away,  so  that  when  acknowledgment 
and  reward  come  none  is  more  surprised 
than  he  who  had  ceased  to  expect  them. 
But  what  we  most  admire  is  his  be- 
haviour meantime.  If  he  had  been  a 
self-seeking  man,  he  could  easily  have 
found  means  to  refresh  the  king's  memory 
as  to  his  services ;  but  he  kept  silence. 
If  he  had  been  a  malignant  man,  he 
might  have  sought  what  he  would,  in 
that  case,  have  called  a  just  revenge  for 
the  ungrateful  neglect  with  which  he 
had  Seen  treated,  by  hatching  or  falling 
in  with  some  other  plot.  But  no;  he 
keeps  his  place,  and  does  his  office  at 
the  gate  quietly  and  faithfully,  and  with- 
out fail,  expecting  nothing,  complaining 
of  nothing,  faithful  to  duty,  and  fearing 
God.  And  then,  how  weU  all  turns  out 
in  the  end !  How  much  better  than  if 
the  reward  had  been  given  at  the  time  ! 
Suppose  he  had  got  some  gift  or  office 
at  the  time,  the  answer  to  the  king's 
question  could  not  have  been,  "  J^othing 
has  been  done  for  him ; "  and  Haman's 
plot  would  not  have  been  arrested,  but 
would  have  roUed  on,  on  wheels  of  fire, 
towards  the  destruction  of  a  whole 
people.  "He  that  believeth  shall  not 
make  haste  ; "  God's  time  is  always  the 
best.  Six  years  are  to  the  Lord  as  so 
many  moments.  And  God's  method  of 
reward  and  acknowledgment  is  the  best 
too.  Seldom,  indeed,  does  it  take  in 
the  case  of  any  of  his  servants  a  form  so 
dramatic  as  this.  We  misapprehend  and 
degrade  the  dramatic  element  in  this 
history  if  we  crave  the  repetition  of  it. 
It  is  brought  out  here  in  such  tragic 
splendour  in  order  that  the  great  moral 
truth  may  be  stamped  deeply  in  liuinan 


memory,  and  may  stand  out  vividly  to 
the  human  imagination.  You  have  done 
some  good  things  in  your  time  which 
have  never  been  acknowledged,  or  never 
adequately  rewarded,  even  as  such  things 
go  among  men.  Even  a  few  frank  kindly 
words  from  the  proper  quarter  would 
have  been  something.  As  it  is  you  are 
sometimes  a  little  chilled  and  discouraged 
by  what  you  feel  to  be  the  complete  and 
unwonted  neglect.  Well,  now,  don't 
expect  Haman  at  your  door  some  fine 
morning  with  the  king's  horse,  and  the 
royal  apparel  to  make  you  all  purple  and 
gold,  and  the  blaring  trumpets  to  tell  all 
the  city  what  you  have  done  ;  he  is  not 
likely  to  come  ;  you  must  do  as  you  can 
without  him.  Righteousness  is  its  own 
reward,  and  we  are  never  righteous  as 
God  would  have  us  be  until  we  feel  this 
deeply  and  act  accordingly. — Dr.  Raleigh. 
And  the  king  said,  What  honour  and 
dignity  hath  been  done  to  Mordecai  for 
this  ?  '  Lyra  saith  that  he  had  waited 
six  years  for  reward  and  had  none.  In 
princes'  courts  men  are  sure  to  meet 
with  two  evils,  delay  and  change ;  not 
so  in  heaven.  The  butler  forgat  Joseph. 
Solomon  speaketh  of  a  poor  man,  who 
by  his  wisdom  had  saved  the  city,  yet 
no  man  remembered  that  same  poor 
man;  this  is  the  world's  wages.  Mor- 
decai had  saved  the  king's  lite  and  yet 
is  unrewarded.  The  kings  of  Persia 
used  to  be  very  bountiful  to  those  that 
had  well  deserved  of  them,  or  of  the 
commonwealth  ;  calling  such  Orosangse, 
and  setting  down  both  their  names  and 
their  acts  in  the  chronicles,  as  Herodotus 
testifieth.  Among  the  rest  he  mentioned 
one  Phylacus,  who  was  put  upon  record 
for  his  good  service  to  the  king,  and 
rewarded  with  a  great  deal  of  land 
given  him.  Others  had  great  store  of 
gold  and  silver,  and  a  gallant  house,  as 
Democedes  Crotoniales,  the  physician 
who  cured  Darius,  had  at  Susis.  It  is 
well  known  out  of  Xenophon  what 
rich  gifts  Cyrus  gave  to  his  friends  and 
followers — chains  of  gold,  armlets,  bridles 
bossed  with  gold,  Persian  stools  called 
Dorophoricse.  Herodotus  telleth  us 
that  this  Ahasuerus,  alias  Xerxes,  gave 
Megabyzus,  for  his  good  service  at 
Babylon,  a   golden    mill    weighing   six 


226  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  [chap.  vi. 


talents.     Plutarch  writeth,  that  he  gave  should  not  have  a  present  recompense, 

Themistocles  above  two  hundred  talents,  but  that  it  should  be  deferred  till  a  fitter 

and  three  cities  besides,  viz.  Magnesia,  opportunity,  when  God  might  be  more 

Lampsacus,  and  Myuntis,  to  find    him  glorified  in  the  preservation  of  his  people 

food,  and  for  clothing  and  furniture  two  and  destruction  of  their  enemies.     Let 

more,  viz.  Percos  and  Palsescepsis.    How  us  not  therefore  be  weary  of  well-doing; 

came  it  then  to  pass  that  good  Mordecai  for  (however  men  deal  by  us)  we  shall 

was  so  forgotten  ?    Surely  it  was  a  great  be  sure  to  reap  in  due  season  if  we  faint 

fault  in  this  ungrateful  king — but  God's  not.     God  best  seeth  when  a  mercy  will 

holy  hand   was  in   it — that   Mordecai  be  most  sweet  and  seasonable. — Trap}). 


MAIN  HOMILBTICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Yersbs  4,  5. 

The  King's  Inquiry  and  Concession. 

From  the  conduct  of  Haman  on  this  occasion  we  learn  that  bate  inspires  a  man 
with  energy.  For  anything  we  know  to  the  contrary  Haman  may  be  but  an  active 
man,  one  who  is  prompt  in  business,  and  who  scarcely  allows  himself  sufficient 
leisure  to  take  necessary  sleep.  But  in  this  case  the  impelling  motive  is  hate. 
It  will  not  allow  him  to  sleep.  At  the  first  dawn  of  morning  he  rushes  to  carry 
out  his  nefarious  design.  He  is  waiting  with  eagerness  for  the  king's  appearance. 
He  is  all  alert  to  set  a-going  his  wily  and  dark  scheme.  He  is  ready  to  speak  unto 
the  king  to  hang  an  innocent  man.  Thus  there  are  too  many  Haraans.  Alas  ! 
sadly  too  many  to  speak  for  the  destruction  of  their  fellows.  Alas  !  sadly  too  few 
to  speak  for  the  salvation  of  their  fellows.  How  this  proclaims  the  depravity  of 
human  nature  !  It  rushes  to  destroy ;  it  creeps  to  save.  It  is  eager  to  listen  to 
the  voice  of  hate ;  it  is  deaf  to  the  voice  of  love.  Oh,  love  divine,  supplant  hate 
by  the  sweet  force  of  all-mastering  love  ! 

I.  The  human  inquiry.  The  king  said,  Who  is  in  the  court  1  It  does  not 
appear  to  us  likely  that  the  king  was  aware  that  Haman  was  already  in  the  court. 
The  king  was  evidently  still  in  the  bed-chamber,  whence  he  would  not  see  who 
was  waiting  outside.  He  could  scarcely  have  expected  Haman  at  such  an  early 
hour.  He  asks  in  ignorance.  This  is  characteristic  of  human  inquiries.  We  are 
ignorant,  and  desire  to  know.  We  ask  for  enlightenment.  But,  further,  the  king 
was  in  perplexity  and  desired  some  one  to  consult.  What  is  to  be  done  to  remedy 
this  long  neglect  1  Who  is  in  the  court  to  whom  I  may  speak  1  This  too  is 
characteristic  of  our  humanity.  Perplexity  will  come.  In  such  trial  we  ask  who 
is  in  the  court  1  Who  will  help  me  in  this  perplexity?  Who  is  there  to  whom  I 
may  successfully  appeal*?  We  seek  to  men,  but  they  fail.  Seek  to  the  court  of 
heaven.     If  any  man  lack  wisdom  let  him  ask  of  God. 

II.  The  Divine  response.  The  king's  servants  said  unto  him,  Behold,  Haman 
Btandeth  in  the  court.  God  speaks  by  human  voices.  Holy  men  are  generally  the 
vehicles  of  Divine  messages,  but  he  can  and  does  make  use  of  unlikely  vehicles. 
These  servants,  heathen  though  they  were,  were  God's  instruments.  They  were 
working  out  Divine  laws.  Why  did  they  at  once  fix  upon  Haman  1  Were  there 
no  others  in  the  court?  Doubtless  there  were.  The  true  answer  is,  not  that 
Haman  was  the  favoured  minister,  but  that  God  directed  them  to  announce 
Haman's  presence.  The  king  did  not  hear  the  Divine  response  in  the  answer  of 
his  servants,  but  it  was  there  all  the  same.  God  is  speaking  even  when  we  are 
too  deaf  to  hear.     Be  swift  to  hear  the  Divine  response. 

III.  The  disappointing  concession.  And  the  king  said.  Let  him  come  in. 
Earthly  kings  grant  their  audiences,  but  the  privileged  ones  find  that  the  concession 
is  disappointing.  Haman  found  it  so  to  his  cost.  Better  almost  for  him  had  the 
king  said,  Let  him  stop  out.     Even  when  those  who  seek  the  king's  presence  have 


OHAP.  VI.]  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER,  227 


no  dark  designs  there  is  disappointmont.  The  earthly  monarch  may  say,  Let  the  man 
come  in,  and  then  the  monarch  Icjts  the  man  go  out  as  empty  as  he  entered.  Higli 
hopes  have  often  heen  raised  hy  a  monarch's  summons  to  court,  but  it  has  only  been 
a  vain  parade.  No  false  hopes  are  raised  by  King  Jesus.  Does  he  say  to  a  man,  Let 
him  come  in?  then  he  means  to  enrich ;  and  does  he  not  say  it  to  all?  To  each 
the  invitation  is  given,  Let  him  come  in,  let  him  come  to  me.  Him  that  cometh  to 
me  I  will  in  no-wise  cast  out.  Even  a  proud,  ambitious,  and  bloodthirsty  Haman 
may  come.  How  sweet  the  word — come  !  Come  not  to  further  thy  dark  designs, 
Haman  ;  come  not  to  seek  help  in  the  promotion  of  thy  schemes  of  self-aggrandize- 
ment ;  but  come  to  be  taught  a  better  way ;  come  to  be  endowed  with  a  nobler 
spirit ;  come  to  learn.  Blessed  are  the  merciful :  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy ;  Blessed 
are  the  meek  :  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth. 

IV.  The  joyful  but  fatal  obedience.  So  Haman  came  in.  Haman  did  not  go 
in  like  one  moving  to  the  gallows,  which  in  fact  he  was  doing.  He  was  now  much 
nearer  that  fatal  structure  than  he  knew.  Had  Haman  lived  in  our  days  he  might 
have  thought,  This  is  now  the  tide  in  my  affairs  which  should  lead  on  to  further 
glory.  But,  oh !  it  was  the  dark  tide  leading  on  to  destruction.  Haman  went  in 
joyful,  but  came  out  sorrowful.  The  rosy  morning  was  bright  and  beautiful ; 
clouds  gather  on  the  evening  sky.  The  lightnings  flash  and  thunder  peals  in 
terrific  grandeur.  What  a  picture  is  presented  to  the  mind  by  those  simple  words — 
So  Haman  came  in.  Haman's  mistake  was  not  in  obeying  the  permission  of  the 
king,  but  in  obeying  the  voice  of  an  evil  spirit.  Had  Haman  repented  during  the 
night,  and  gone  in  a  right  spirit  and  with  wholesome  counsel  to  the  king,  all 
might  still  have  been  well.  The  motive,  then,  counts  for  much.  Let  us  look  to 
our  motives.  A  wrong  motive  will  cast  a  blight  on  the  obedient  action.  See  to 
it  that  good  deeds  arise  out  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  out  of  love  for  his  glory. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  4,  6. 

Haman  came  early,  but  too  late.  To  special  providence  of  God  in  this,  that 
us,  knowing  arrangements  made  on  either  Ahasuerus  should  take  advice  about 
side,  in  the  king's  mind,  and  in  his  honouring  Mordecai,  and  not  of  his  ser- 
favourite's,  it  is  a  neck-and-neck  race,  vants  that  attended  upon  his  person,  but 
AVho  should  have  the  first  word  ?  The  of  Haman  then  present  (though  for 
king  has  it  j  Haman  is  lost!  "A  single  another  purpose);  and,  concealing  the 
moment  to  teU  Ahasuerus  of  the  per-  man  he  means,  should  Haman  say  what 
severing  insolence  of  one  of  his  menials  :  was  fit  to  be  done,  and  then  do  it  ac- 
I  need  not  name  him ;  enough  to  say  cordingly.  Neither  the  king  nor  his 
that  he  is  one  of  the  race  doomed  all  to  servants,  likely,  would  ever  have  thought 
perish  on  the  thirteenth  of  Adar,  and  of  doing  Mordecai  so  great  honour  as 
that  I  am  but  anticipating  the  end  or-  Haman  prescribed.  See  here,  as  in  a" 
dained  for  him  a  few  months  hence."  mirror,  how  the  Lord  by  a  secret  pro vid- 
No,  Haman ;  not  a  single  moment  you  ence  bringeth  about  and  overruleth  the 
have  for  that  purpose  now  or  ever,  wiles  of  men,  their  affairs,  times,  counsels, 
Ahasuerus  had  no  wish  to  forestall  his  words,  and  speeches,  to  the  fulfilling  of 
friend.  Had  he  known  that  he  had  a  his  own  will  and  decree  ;  and  this  when 
request  of  his  own  to  present  he  must  they  think  least  of  doing  God's  will  or 
have  given  him  permission  to  state  it ;  serving  his  providence. 
and  had  Haman  then  only  avoided  nam-  So  Haman  came  iUf  meiTy  and 
mg  Mordecai,  the  king  must  have  jocund,  but  went  out  sad  and  heavy- 
granted  his  request.  It  is  "another  hearted.  These  hosts  (profit,  pleasure. 
King"  who  is  beforehand  with  the  Jew's  and  preferment),  though  they  welcome 
enemy. — Symington.  us  into  our  inn  with  smiling  counten- 

And  the  king  said,  Let  htm  come  in.  ances,  yet,  if  we  watch  them  not,  they 

See   here,  saith   Merlin,   a  sweet  and  will  cut  our  throats  in  our  beds.     It  is 

q2 


228  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHEB,  fCHAP.  vt 


observed  of  Edward  III,  that  he  had  for  haste,— at  least  he  was  impatient  of 
always  fair  weather  at  his  passage  into  delay  ;  and  who  was  this,  at  early  morn, 
France  and  foul  upon  his  return.  Pha-  pacing  the  outer  court  of  the  king's 
raoh  had  fair  weather  till  he  was  in  the  palace,  as  though  also  in  haste  about 
heart  of  the  Red  Sea.  The  sun  shone  some  great  work  1  Haman.  His  night's 
fair  upon  the  earth  that  morning  that  rest  had  not  pacified  his  thirst  for  revenge. 
Lot  came  out  of  Sodom,  but  ere  night  There  was  to  be  the  queen's  banquetln 
there  _  was  a  dismal  change.  He  that  an  after  part  of  the  day  ;  and  if  he  was 
lives  in  the  height  of  the  world's  bland-  to  go  in  merrily  to  it  he  must  first  have 
ishments  is  not  far  from  destruction. —  obtained  authority  for  the  execution,  and 
Trapp.  ^  ^  had  Mordecai  hanged  on  the  gallows 
Who  is  in  the  court  ?  The  morning  prepared  for  him.  How  fortunate  ! 
light  may  have  begun  to  fill  his  chamber  thought  Haman ;  the  king  is  early  astir^ 
when  the  king  nervously  addressed  this  and  calleth  for  me.  How  fortunate! 
question  to  his  attendants.  He  had  thought  the  king  ;  my  favourite  courtier 
spent  a  sleepless  night ;  and  might  it  not  and  counsellor  is  early  in  the  way  this 
be  because  another  conspiracy  was  being  morning,  and  is  the  best  man  to  whom  I 
matured  against  him  1  Might  it  not  be  can  commit  this  business.  Behind  the 
something  of  this  kind  which  was  troub-  back  of  each  of  them  there  was  the  pro- 
ling  the  queen?  Did  he  not  deserve  vidence  of  God,  secretly  working  out 
that  it  should  be  concealed  from  him,  his  own  purposes  of  mercy  and  judf- 
since  he  had  done  nothing  to  reward  his  ment.  '*  And  the  king  said,  Let  Haman 
former  preserver  1   There  might  be  cause  come  in." — McEwan. 

MAIN*   HOMILBTIOS   OF   THS   PARAGRAPH.     Verses  6,  IL 

Self-Flattery  Leading  to  Self- Humiliation. 

Outwardly  at  least  self-flattery  does  not  always  lead  to  self-humiliation.  But 
we  cannot  see  and  know  all.  We  cannot  perceive  the  bitter  stings  which  must 
be  endured  in  silence  by  the  conceited  man.  In  his  passage  through  time,  in  his 
contact  with  his  fellows,  he  receives  many  a  stab  which  he  must  conceal.  And 
these  hidden  sores  are  often  the  most  difficult  to  endure.  After  all  the  herb  of 
humility  is  a  true  heart's-ease.  The  modest  man  may  not  make  a  great  position  in 
the  world,  but  he  is  most  likely  to  possess  the  invaluable  treasure  of  contentment. 
Certainly  he  is  not  at  all  likely  to  find  himself  in  the  humiliating  position  to  which 
poor  Haman  was  reduced.  Sooner  or  later,  in  some  way  or  another,  in  time  or  in 
eternity,  pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall.  Better 
is  it  surely  to  be  of  a  humble  spirit  with  the  lowly.  Better  to  sit  with  calm 
resignation  with  Mordecai  at  the  gate  than  to  be  the  subject  of  those  great  inward 
shocks,  and  of  those  outward  humiliating  changes,  which  were  endured  by  the 
conceited  Haman. 

I.  An  artless  question  addressed  to  conceit.  And  the  king  said  unto  him. 
What  shall  be  done  unto  the  man  whom  the  king  delighteth  to  honour  ?  If  we 
may  so  say  there  was  either  designed  or  undesigned  artlessness  in  this  question 
on  the  part  of  king  Ahasuerus.  The  form  of  the  question  was  just  that  form 
calculated  to  bring  out  Haman's  over-weening  self-confidence.  The  question  was 
artlessly  vague,  and  leaves  room  for  Haman  to  conclude  that  he  himself  was  the 
man  whom  the  king  delighted  to  honour.  If  the  form  of  the  question  was 
designed,  if  he  purposely  keeps  the  name  of  Mordecai  in  the  background,  it  shews 
a  skill  on  the  part  of  the  king  which  the  history  does  not  prepare  us  to  expect. 
However,  it  was  a  natural  form  for  the  question  to  take ;  and  simple  straightfor- 
wardness is  often  the  most  direct  mode  of  defeating  the  schemes  of  the  cunning 
and  of  the  conceited.  It  was  so  in  this  case.  The  luxurious  monarch  proved 
himself  more  than  a  match  for  the  wily  politician.     However,  we  may  well  suppose 


OHAP.  yi.]  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :    ESTHER.  229 


that  the  monarch  was  moved  by  the  current  of  events.     The  form  of  the  question 
was  not  merely  of  the  king's  own  shaping.     There  was  a  higher  mind  suggesting. 

II.  The  reasoning  of  conceit.  A  conceited  heart  is  a  bad  guide  in  critical 
junctures.  This  was  a  crisis  in  Haman's  history,  and,  unfortunately  for  himself,  he 
listened  to  the  hollow  reasoning  of  a  conceited  heart.  Haman's  conceit  hindered 
him  drawing  a  correct  conclusion.  Some  of  the  premises  were  liidden  from  Haman, 
and  therefore  he  was  not  in  a  position  to  construct  a  perfect  syllogism.  He  should 
have  asked  himself,  are  the  premises  that  I  have  occupied  a  high  place  at  court, 
that  I  have  secured  an  edict  against  the  Jews,  that  Mordecai  is  still  sitting  at  the 
king's  gate  neglected,  sufficient'  to  warrant  me  in  concluding  that  I  am  the  man 
whom  the  king  will  most  delight  to  honour  %  A  conceited  n  iture  may  study  all 
the  books  on  logic  that  has  ever  been  written,  but  its  reasonings  for  all  that  are 
sure  to  be  faulty.  Logicians  sometimes  speak  of  vicious  reasoning ;  of  this  kind 
of  reasoning  a  conceited  nature  will  be  guilty.  To  be  a  correct  reasoner  there 
must  be  a  clear  head,  and  also,  and  perhaps  much  more,  a  clear  heart.  Errors  of 
the  head  most  frequently  spring  from  faults  of  the  heart.  Take  heed  to  thyself, 
and  then  to  the  doctrine — as  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart  so  is  he.  Haman 
thought  in  his  heart,  To  whom  would  the  king  delight  to  do  honour  more  than 
to  myself]  Of  course  not.  At  this  moment  self  was  with  Haman  the  sum-total  of 
the  universe.  Is  poor  Haman  the  only  one  who  raises  self  to  a  false  position,  from 
which  it  falls  with  hideous  ruin  1  Alas,  to  too  many  men  self  is  the  world.  There  is 
too  much  conceit  in  all.  Let  there  be  proper  selfdove,  but  let  it  not  degenerate 
into  selfishness. 

III.  The  answer  of  conceit  It  is  an  unscrupulous  and  fool-hardy  answer. 
Haman  here  seems  to  aim  at  royal  honours.  Practically  he  was  guilty  of  treason. 
He  now  asks  to  have  regal  honours  assigned  to  himself.  Outwardly  this  could  not 
be  charged  against  him,  for  he  might  have  pleaded,  I  am  yet  in  ignorance  as  to  the 
man  whom  the  king  will  delight  to  honour.  And  it  might  not  have  been  as  plain 
to  the  king,  and  to  the  listeners,  whom  Haman  meant  as  it  is  to  us  who  now  read 
the  whole  account  with  the  calmness  of  unprejudiced  investigators.  If  Haman  had 
thought  of  another  self  beside  his  own  self  as  likely  to  receive  these  honours  he 
might  not  have  been  so  lavish  in  his  description  of  what  should  be  done.  How 
lavish  we  are  in  expenditure  when  myself,  ourselves,  is  the  subject  of  consideration ! 
How  thrifty  and  parsimonious  we  become  when  we  have  to  consider  the  claims  of 
other  selves.  Self  says.  Look  every  man  on  his  own  things.  Self  asks  for  itself 
the  royal  apparel,  the  royal  horse,  the  royal  crown,  the  royal  procession  and 
proclamation.  Self  practically  says,  All  this  for  me  and  the  gallows  for  Mordecai. 
Is  not  this  a  solemn  figure?  How  difficult  would  it  be  for  the  judge  to  pass 
sentence  on  the  criminal  if  he  could  make  his  self  take  the  place  of  the  criminal's 
self  ]  The  world  would  be  much  altered  for  the  better  if  each  man  could  consider 
properly  the  claims  of  other  selves.  How  long  will  it  be  before  the  world 
practically  acts  out  the  injunction — Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but 
every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others  ]  Here  conceit  aims  at  the  subversion  of 
royal  supremacy.  There  is  much  conceit  at  the  bottom  of  republicanism.  Conceit 
does  not  believe  in  honouring  all  men  and  fearing  the  king.  And  is  there  not 
much  conceit  in  infidelity  ]  Is  there  not  an  eifort  to  destroy  Divine  supremacy  \ 
IMie  pride  and  the  daring  of  conceit  are  insufferable.  It  would  overturn  thrones. 
It  would  if  possible  overtop  the  throne  and  monarchy  of  God  himself. 

IV.  The  fearful  blow  to  conceit.  We  can  easily  suppose  that  the  command 
now  given  by  the  king  to  Haman  was  more  galling  than  the  rope  placed  round  his 
neck  when  he  was  hung  on  the  gallows.  How  galling  to  have  the  honours  I  had 
intended  for  myself  given  to  another,  and  that  other  the  man  I  most  hate,  the  man 
whose  destruction  I  have  most  earnestly  plotted  !  The  king  tohl  Haman  to  make 
haste.  What  a  hard  command  !  To  make  haste  is  a  hard  task  when  I  have  to 
carry  on  my  jouruej  a  broken  heart,  a  disappointed  nature,  blasted  hopes,  blighted 


230  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  [ohap.  vi 

prospects  ;  to  make  haste  when  in  myself  I  must  carry  the  hideous  ruins  of  that 
fair  castle  wliich  I  have  just  been  building  with  so  much  skill  and  labour.  Make 
haste  to  honour  the  man  I  have  most  hated  !  Love  your  enemies  is  the  gospel 
precept.  Where  is  the  Christian  that  makes  haste  to  heap  honours  on  his  enemy? 
Have  pity  then  on  wretched  Haman  if  his  heart-strings  crack  and  break  as  he 
strives  to  do  the  king's  bidding.  Oh  !  to  be  emptied  of  self-seeking,  to  lie  low  at 
the  foot  of  the  cross  !  it  will  save  us  from  many  a  hard  knock.  Stoop  low  if  thou 
wouldst  not  be  burt.     Think  not  too  much  of  thyself. 

V.  The  humiliating  condition  of  conceit.  The  most  humiliating  condition  in 
which  Haman  was  placed  was,  not  when  he  hung  on  the  gallows,  but  when  he 
marched  through  the  streets  of  the  city  by  the  side  of  Mordecai,  and  proclaimed 
before  him,  Thus  shall  it  be  done  unto  the  man  whom  the  king  delighteth  to 
honour.  The  righteous  one  is  now  exalted,  the  wicked  one  is  debased.  The  city 
may  well  rejoice.  The  truth,  like  Mordecai,  may  lie  long  neglected  ;  falsehood,  like 
Haman,  may  ride  in  triumph.  But  the  condition  must  be  reversed.  Truth  will  be 
lifted  out  of  its  degradation,  clothed  in  its  royal  apparel,  and  even  falsehood  will 
be  compelled  to  minister  to  the  honour  of  the  truth  and  proclaim  its  glories.  Also 
the  time  must  come  when  Jesus  will  ride  forth  in  royal  apparel,  and  his  enemies 
will  join  in  the  proclamation — This  is  the  man  whom  the  universe  delights  to 
honour.  Seek  to  be  the  friends  of  King  Jesus  now,  and  then  in  the  day  of  his 
glorious  appearing  we  shall  not  be  numbered  among  those  humiliated  by  his 
triumph. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  6,  11. 

Of  all  troubles  the  trouble  of  a  proud  when   they   deem   themselves    fetthest 

heart  is  the  greatest.     It  was  a  great  from  it. — StarJce. 

trouble   to  Haman  to  lead   Mordecai's  Ambition  (as  they  say  of  the  croco- 

horse,  which   another   man  would   not  dile)  groweth  as  long  as  it  liveth ;  and 

have  thought  so  ;  the  moving  of  a  straw  self-love,  like  to  a  good  stomach,  draws 

is  troublesome  to  proud  flesh.     First  or  to  itself  what   nourishment    it   liketh, 

last,   self-denial  and   victory  over  our-  and  casts  off  that  which  offends  it.     It 

selves  is  absolutely  necessary  ;  otherwise  maketh  men  unreasonable,  and  teacheth 

faith,  which  is  a  grace  that  requireth  them  to  turn  the  glass  to  see  themselves 

self-denial,  will  never  be  brought  into  bigger,    others    lesser,   than    they    are. 

the  soul  and  bear  rule  there. — Sibbes.  Herodotus    reporteth,    that    after     the 

Self-conceit,  obstinacy,  and  selfishness  Greeks  had  got  the   better  of  Xerxes 

are  three  shameful  and  harmful   evils  and  his  Persians,  and  came  together  to 

that    have   plunged    many   into    ruin,  divide  the  spoil,  when  it  was  put  to  the 

Worldly    persons    seek    their    highest  question  who  of  all  the  commanders  had 

good  in  external  pomp  and  appearance,  deserved  the  best  reward,  none  would 

Self-love  appropriates  all  things  to  itself,  yield  to  other,  but  every  man  thought 

and  concedes  nothing  to  its  neighbour,  himself   best   deserving  and  second    to 

Men  seek  perishable  honour ;  would  that  none.     In  the  battle  of  Belgrade,  where 

they   strove    diligently   after    the    im-  Mahomet,  the  great  Turk,  was  beaten 

perishable  honour  and  glory  of  heaven !  and  driven  out  of  the  field,  Capistranus 

The  manner  of  wicked  advisers  is,  when  and  Huniades  were  the  chieftains  there, 

the  haughty  fare  too  well,  to  goad  them  and  whereas  both   of   them  wrote  the 

on  to  vindictiveness ;  but  if  something  relation  of  that  day's  work,  neither  of 

unforeseen    checks    them    they    drive  them  so  much  as  once  mentioned   the 

them  to  despair.     God  is  the  same  al-  other,    but   each   one    took   the    whole 

ways;    He   can    bring   it    about    that  praise  of  it  to  himself.     Haman,  though 

neither  earth  nor  hell  can  prevail  against  altogether  unworthy  of  the  least  respect, 

Ufl.     The  wicked  are  nearest  destruction  yet  holds  himself  best  worthy  of   the 


OUAP.  VI.] 


mm  I  LET  to  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER, 


231 


greatest  honours,  and  therefore  will  be 
sure  to  be  no  niggard  in  advising  those 
ceremonies  of  honour  which  he  pre- 
sumes meant  to  his  own  person.  — 
Trapp. 

Ambition  may  rear  turrets  in  emula- 
tion of  heaven,  and  vainglory  build 
castles  in  the  air,  but  they  should  have 
no  roof,  as  the  latter  should  have  no 
foundation.  Philip  threatened  the 
Lacedemonians,  that  as  he  entered  their 
country  he  would  utterly  extinguish 
them.  They  wrote  him  no  other  answer 
but  si  (if)  ;  meaning,  it  was  a  condition 
well  put  in,  for  he  was  never  like  to 
come  there. — Adams. 

Four  distinct  services  did  Haman 
render  Mordecai.  First,  he  was  his 
hair-dresser,  for  he  shaved  and  anointed 
him  ;  secondly,  he  was  his  valet,  for  he 
attended  him  in  the  bath  ;  thirdly,  he 
was  his  footman,  for  he  led  the  horse 
Mordecai  rode;  fourthly,  he  was  his 
trumpeter,  for  he  proclaimed  before 
him  :  Thus  shall  be  done  to  the  man 
whom  the  king  desireth  to  honour. — 
Talmud. 

To  thyself  be  it,  Haman  I  Albeit 
what  may  please  thyself  may  hardly  be 
so  agreeable  to  another.  Pity  for  the 
*'  most  noble  prince  " — and  Haman  may 
have  had  some  one  in  view  whom  he 
wished  to  have  laid  at  his  feet — who 
should  be  appointed  to  execute  what 
thou  shouldst  prescribe  as  the  king's 
commandment !  There  was  no  honour 
and  distinction  high  enough  for  himself, 
and  no  service  too  menial  which  he 
would  not  have  done  to  him  by  another. 
"The  royal  apparel,"  by  which  was  meant 
the  gorgeous  outward  garment  of  the 
king,  which,  according  to  Persian  law, 
it  was  a  capital  crime  to  wear  without 
his  consent — the  horse  which  the  king 
was  accustomed  to  "  ride  upon,"  well 
known  both  by  its  excellency  and  its 
peculiar  trappings  and  ornaments, — ''the 
crown  royal,"  probably  such  a  lofty  tiara 
as  an  Oriental  writer  has  described,  "en- 
tirely composed  of  thickly  set  diamonds, 
pearls,  rubies,  and  emeralds,  so  exquis- 
itely disposed  as  to  form  a  mixture  of 
the  most  beautiful  colours  in  the  brilliant 
light  reflected  from  its  surface," — were 
to  be  brought,  and  "  one  of  the  king's 


most  noble  princes  "  was  to  act  the  part 
of  his  servant,  arraying  him  in  his  robe- 
setting  the  crown  upon  his  head,  and 
when  he  was  mounted,  to  go — reins  in 
hand  —  through  the  city  proclaiming 
before  him — "  Thus  shall  it  be  done  to 
the  man  whom  the  king  delighteth  to 
honour." 

The  intense  vanity  and  parade  of 
Haman's  advice  to  the  king  may  move 
our  contempt,  but  we  must  remember 
that  he  was  choosing  for  himself.  There 
are  many  others  who,  if  they  were  only 
to  put  their  wishes  into  words,  would 
ask  for  tilings  quite  as  foolish  and 
absurd.  In  every  case  they  would  reveal 
the  ruling  passion  of  their  hearts,  and  if 
it  proved  to  be  worldly  or  sensual,  what 
was  desired  in  large  measure  would  only, 
if  granted,  mature  it  and  injure  the 
receiver.  Sometimes  there  are  secret 
murmurings  that  God  does  not  leave 
every  man  to  choose  his  own  portion,  but 
if  we  only  knew  our  own  dispositions? 
better,  and  the  evil  principles  within  us 
which  require  to  be  checked  and  over- 
come, we  should  have  much  greater 
reason  for  gratitude  that  God  retains  our 
earthly  portion  in  his  own  care  and  allot- 
ment. Especially  when  we  take  into 
account  our  discipline  and  preparation 
for  eternity,  would  we  be  the  very  worst 
to  advise  regarding  what  would  be  best 
for  us.  A  Haman  would  choose  what 
would  minister  to  his  pride,  a  Demas  to 
his  worldliness,  another  and  another  to 
even  baser  lusts,  and  the  soul  would  be 
left,  like  a  temple  in  ruins,  more  and 
more  desolate,  and  infested,  in  an  ever- 
increasing  degree,  with  what  was  vile 
and  loathsome.  For  the  sake  of  our 
present  peace  and  future  hope,  we  should 
rejoice  rather  in  the  choice  of  God — 
'*  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord,  trust 
also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to 
pass." 

When  a  scheming  self-seeking  world- 
ling is  brought  to  poverty  and  punish- 
ment, sympathy  for  him  is  apt  to  spring 
up  in  some  breasts.  They  put  the  mi^n 
in  the  foreground,  and  by  his  miserable 
plight  are  moved  to  commiseration  and 
pity.  But  what  of  those  whom  it  was 
in  his  heart  to  have  ruined  1  The  widows 
and  children  whose  gains  he  would  have 


232 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  VI. 


greedily  grasped  and  used  for  his  own 
selfish  ends  ?     The  bed  which  he  would 
make  for  others  is  surely  good  enough 
for  him  to  lie  upon.     Simply  to  change 
places  with  his  intended  victims  is  a 
merciful  dealing  in  providence,  in  so  far 
as  it  is  calculated  to  convince  of  personal 
wrong-doing,  and  to  bring  to  repentance 
if  the  man  has  not  placed  himself  beyond 
it.     Haman  had  this  justice  meted  out 
to  him.     He  would  have  demeaned  one 
of  "  the  king's  most  noble  princes,"  by 
making  him  his  valet  and  public  pro- 
claimer  of  his  own  praise  through  the 
streets    of    Shushan.       His    selfishness 
blinded  him  to  the  suffering  and  mortifi- 
cation which  the  procedure  would  inflict 
upon  another.    But  ah !  what  a  revulsion 
of  feeling   must   he   have   experienced 
when  he  was  commanded  by  the  king 
to  change  places  with  that  other ;  to  be- 
come himself  the  menial  slave,  putting 
on  him  the  royal  robe  and  crown ;  and 
whilst  he  rides  on  the  king's  horse,  com- 
pelled himself  to  walk  at  its  head  and 
sound  the  other's  praise.     The  greatest 
grief  was  that  the  man  who  was  declared 
worthy  to  take  the  place  which  he  had 
pourtrayed  for  himself  was  "  Mordecai  the 
Jew," — the  man  who  had  refused  him 
homage  at  the  king's  gate  was  to  receive 
homage    from    himself    in    the    public 
thoroughfares  ;  and  the  same  for  whom 
he  had  provided  a  gallows  was  to  have 
a  crown  put  upon  his  head  by  his  own 
hands.    It  was  pitiful.     And  as  we  now 
see  him  executing  the  king's  order,  which 
he  knew  it  would  be  in  vain  to  oppose, 
commiseration  and  pity  for  him  are  liable 
to  bias  our  judgment.     How  downcast 
and  forlorn  he  must  have  looked.     How 
the  words  of  the  proclamation  must  have 
gulped  in  his  throat.    How  he  must  have 
hung  down  his  head  and  averted  the 
astonished  looks  of  the  people.     Still, 
he  had  only  changed  places  with  *'  the 
most  noble  prince,"  whom  he  would  have 
callously  subjected  to  the  same  ordeal. 
For  selfishness  to  reap  what  it  had  sown 
for  another  is  not  by  any  means  an  un- 
equal  punishment.     It  may  be  severe, 
but  not  more  so  than  this  intense  selfish- 
ness would  have  accounted  nothing  if 
prescribed  for  an  equal.     Oh,   no,   we 
cannot  even  compassionate  thee,  Haman ! 


If  it  had  been  thyself  who  had  been 
robed  and  crowned,  and  royally  con 
ducted  throuGfh  the  streets  ridini?  on  the 
king's  horse,  thou  wouldest  have  made 
sure  that  Mordecai  had  been  hanged  on 
the  gallows,  and  one  of  ''the  king's  mo^t 
noble  princes  "  would  have  been  degraded 
to  minister  to  thy  pride  and  selfishness. 
— McEican. 

This  is  a  great  infelicity  which  attends 
Avorldly  pursuits,  that  there  is  no  pro- 
portion between  the  pleasure  of  success 
and  the  pain  of  disappointment.  How 
unsatisfactory  to  Haman  would  the  wear- 
ing of  ro>  al  ornaments  for  a  small  part 
of  a  day  have  been,  and  all  the  other 
honours  w^hich  he  expected  to  enjoy  only 
for  a  few  moments  1  We  can  scarcely 
suppose  that  the  pleasure  of  this  feast 
to  his  vanity  would  have  lasted  longer 
than  a  night,  or  a  week.  But  how  dread- 
ful a  stroke  was  given  to  him,  by  hearing 
that  the  man  whom  he  mortally  hated 
was  the  man  whom  the  kinof  deliojhted 
to  honour ;  that  he  was  to  be  invested 
with  that  royal  pomp  to  which  Haman 
himself  looked,  as  the  perfection  of 
felicity,  and  that  he  must  become  the 
servant  of  that  man  for  whom  he  had 
erected  a  gallows  fifty  cubits  high ! 
What  exquisite  misery,  if  he  had  lived 
to  endure  it,  must  have  been  his  portion, 
at  the  galling  remembrance  of  his  own 
disgrace,  when  the  erection  of  that  lofty 
gibbet  published  to  the  whole  city  the 
height  of  his  hopes  and  the  bitterness 
of  his  disappointment ! 

"Let  nothing  fail,"  said  the  king,  *'of 
all  that  thou  hast  spoken." — He  counted 
no  honours  too  great  for  his  benefactor. 
He  would  compensate  by  his  liberality 
the  time  which  Mordecai  had  lived  un- 
rewarded and  unhonoured.  If  we  have 
neglected  to  do  good  when  we  should 
have  done  it,  let  us  use  double  diligence 
in  doing  it,  at  least  whilst  time  is  still 
left  us  to  repair  our  omissions. 

Then  took  Haman  the  apparel  and 
the  horsey  and  arrayed  Mordecai,  and 
hrouglit  him  on  horsehach  through  the 
street  of  the  city,  and  j^roclaiined  before 
him,  Thus  shall  it  be  done  fo  the  man 
whom  the  king  delight eth  to  honour. 
Do  you  complain  that  you  must  deny 
yourselves,  and  take  up  your  cross  in 


CHAP.    VI.] 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  ESTIIKR. 


233 


following  Christ  ?  But  who  is  the  man 
that  is  exempted  from  trouble,  or  the 
man  that  does  not  find  it  necessary  to 
deny  himself  on  many  occasions?  And 
is  it  not  better  to  deny  ourselves  for 
Christ  than  to  deny  oui selves  for  the 
sake  of  any  earthly  object  ?  You  see 
that  Haman,  great  as  he  was  in  the  court 
of  Ahasuerus,  must  serve  Mordecai  as 
his  lacquey,  and  perform  to  him  those 
services  which  to  Haman  himself  ap- 
peared the  most  glorious  of  all  others, 
when  he  would  have  given  thousands  of 
gold  and  silver  for  a  warrant  to  slay  him. 
The  greatest  earthly  princes  must  often 
do  things  displeasing,  or  omit  things 
pleasing,  to  themselves  for  temporary 
advantage,  or  even  without  the  prospect 
of  advantage.  What  could  Haman  gain 
from  Mordecai,  or  from  Ahasuerus,  for 
doing  what  he  could  not  do  without  the 
most  extreme  reluctance  ?  But  the  least 
instance  of  self-denial  for  the  sake  of 
Christ  shall  be  attended  with  a  great 
reward,  worthy  of  the  bounty  of  the 
Giver. 

Mordecai  was  too  wise  to  value  those 
childish  honours  which  appeared  so  glori- 
ous to  Haman.  He  was,  undoubtedly, 
struck  with  amazement  when  Haman 
brought  to  him  the  royal  robes  and  the 
royal  horse.  But  it  was  necessary  for 
him  to  yield  obedience  to  the  king's 
pleasure  ;  and  doubtless  he  saw  the 
gracious  hand  of  God  in  what  was  done 
to  him.  Mordecai  had  more  sagacity 
than  the  friends  of  Haman,  who  saw  the 
fall  of  Haman  before  Mordecai  the  Jew, 
presaged  by  this  instance  of  his  humilia- 
tion. Jacob  saw  the  love  of  God  in  the 
face  of  his  reconciled  enemy.  Mordecai 
saw  the  favour  of  God  in  the  reluctant 
services  performed  by  an  enemy  as  full 
of  malice  as  ever,  and  was  cheered  by 
the  dawnings  of  that  deliverance  to  his 
nation  for  which  he  had  been  praying 
and  looking.  — Lawson. 

As  I  have  said  in  a  former  lecture,  I 
am  reluctant  to  offer  any  conjecture  of 
my  own  on  a  subject  on  which  so  many 
learned  men  have  bestowedtheir  labour  ; 
but  it  does  seem  to  me  that  this  proposal 
of  Haman's  has  a  meaning  which  has 
not  been  commonly  observed.  Ac- 
quainted as  he  was  with  the  dangerous 


and  slippery  tenure  of  a  favourite  in  an 
P^astern  court,  what  possible  objectcould 
he  have  in  wishing  to  be  allowed,  for 
one  brief  hour,  to  act  the  king,  arrayed 
in  his  master's  robes  of  state,  with  the 
crown  of  Persia  on  his  head,  and  paraded 
through  the  streets  of  the  city  upon  the 
royal  horse  ?  And  this  strange  fancy 
becomes  stranger  still  when  we  remem- 
ber that  these  honours  were  accounted 
so  divine  and  sacred  by  the  Persians, 
that  to  assume  an  imitation  of  any  one 
of  them,  without  the  king's  express  com- 
mand, would  have  been  an  offence  to  be 
expiated  by  instant  death. 

The  true  explanation  of  Haman' s  pro- 
posal appears  to  me  to  be  this  :  that  he 
really  was  aspiring  to  the  sovereignty  of 
Persia,  and  was  meditating  an  attempt 
on  his  master' s  throne.  His  wealth  was 
incalculable,  and  his  power  was  already 
all  but  boundless  and  supreme.  All,  it 
appears,  that  was  wanting  to  his  happi- 
ness was,  that  he  should  be  decked  in 
the  external  badges  and  symbols  of 
royalty  : — a  very  unlikely  wish  for  any 
man  to  entertain  who  did  not  aspire  to 
royaltv  itself.  In  those  countries  the 
steps  from  a  throne  to  a  dungeon  were 
often  but  few,  and  the  transfer  of  the 
crown  from  the  prince  to  one  of  his 
nobles  or  favourites  was  sometimes  but 
the  work  of  a  few  hours.  Nor  is  it  at 
all  improbable,  that  the  incredible  pre- 
sumption and  conceit  of  this  vainglorious 
man  may  so  far  have  misconstrued  the 
extraordinary  favours  which  Esther  was 
now  showering  upon  him,  as  to  lead  him 
to  imagine  that  the  queen  herself  would 
not  regret  the  change.  Self  admirers 
are  generally  self-deceivers.  If  these 
suppositions  are  just  they  will  throw 
considerable  light  both  on  Haman's 
answer  and  on  what  soon  after  followed. 

But,  whatever  were  his  motives,  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  conceive  the  horror 
and  amazement  he  must  have  felt  at  the 
king's  reply.  If  the  ground  had  opened 
under  his  feet  he  could  scarcely  have 
been  more  dismayed  than  when  the 
clear  and  awful  tones  of  that  voice,  which 
few  ever  heard  without  trembling,issued 
from  the  sanctuary  in  which  the  great 
king  sat  enshrined,  and  the  wretched 
man  listened  to  those  memorable  words 


234 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  E8THEB. 


[chap.  VI. 


which  rung  out  the  knell  of  his  amhition. 
*'  Make  haste,  and  take  the  apparel  and 
the  horse,  as  thou  hast  said,  and  do  even 
so  to  Mordecai  the  Jew,  that  sitteth  at 
the  king's  gate :  let  nothing  fail  of  all 
that  thoa  hast  spoken."  "  Mordecai  the 
Jew" — **That  sitteth  at  the  king's  gate" 
— "  As  thou  hast  said."  — It  was  agony. 
It  was  madness.  Every  syllable  left  a 
poisoned  arrow  rankling  in  his  heart. 
But  he  heard  and  obeyed  without  a 
murmur:  wonderful  illustration  of  the 
self-command  which  a  man  of  such 
passions  could  assume,  as  well  as  of  the 
abject  submission  by  which  he  had  won 
the  favour  of  his  master. 

But  who  can  form  any  conception  of 
the  tortures  Haman  must  have  endured 
while  executing  such  an  order  1  With 
what  bitter  reproaches  must  he  have 
loaded  himself  for  having  given  such 
advice,  without  first  taking  the  precau- 
tion to  ask  the  name  of  the  person  whom 
the  king  designed  to  honour.  Never 
was  folly  more  fitly  punished.  That  he, 
Haman,  should  be  obliged  to  single  out, 
from  among  the  crowd  of  wondering 
courtiers,  the  object  of  his  loathing  and 
abhorrence  for  this  unparalleled  honour 
and  distinction ;  that,  publicly,  and  be- 
fore the  eyes  of  so  many  who,  he  well 
knew,  would  exult  over  his  humiliation, 
he  should  be  compelled,  with  his  own 
hands,  to  adorn  the  detested  Jew  in  all 
the  glories  of  that  royal  splendour  which 
he  coveted  for  himself ;  that  he  should 
be  forced  to  wait  as  a  lacquey  at  his 
horse's  rein,  and  amid  the  sneers  of 
multitudes,  who  were  perfectly  aware 
how  much  he  hated  Mordecai,  and  with 
what  scorn  Mordecai  had  defied  him,  to 
proclaim  with  his  own  lips  that  this  was 
the  man  whom  the  king  delighted  to 
honour;  and  as  he  walked  along,  while 
thousands  bowed  down  and  prostrated 
themselves — not  to  him,  but  to  Mordecai 
— to  know  that  he  himself  was  the 
contriver,  and  adviser,  and  doer  of  the 
whole  of  this  odious  pageant, — this  was 
a  punishment  so  exquisite,  so  just,  so 
utterly  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  have 
concocted,  that  it  was  scarcely  possible 
for  any  one  to  avoid  seeing  in  it  the 
hand  of  Providence  and  the  forewarning 
of  a  coming  fate. — Crosthwaite, 


There  is  an  increscent  power  in  evil 
(as  indeed  there  is  also  in  good),  in  view 
of  which  we  cannot  be  too  watchful  and 
anxious,  lest  by  any  means  we  should 
fall  under  the  power  of  it.  The  power 
of  it,  remember,  is  very  silent  and  gentle 
generally  in  its  operations.  The  use 
of  strong  metaphors  to  signify  the  growth 
of  evil  is  apt  to  mislead  and  deceive  us  ; 
and  the  contemplation  of  very  strong 
human  instances  like  this  of  Haman  is 
apt  enough  to  have  the  same  effect.  The 
growth  of  evil — Do  not  figure  it  by  the 
waters  of  Niagara  hurrying  down  the 
rapids  and  plunging  over  the  brink  in 
ocean  fulness.  Take  rather  a  plant  or 
slender  tree  in  your  garden,  which  has 
just  begun  to  grow  :  there  it  stands  in 
the  morning  sunlight;  there  it  stands 
in  the  evening  dew.  It  never  travels, 
never  plunges,  never  roars.  It  is  grow- 
ing— and  that  is  enough.  So  do  nut 
look  at  Haman  reeling  on  the  giddy 
eminence  he  is  trying  to  scale,  and  fall- 
ing thence,  as  Satan  did  from  heaven. 
But  look  at  a  man  growing  up  in  perfect 
quietness,  who  has  no  care  to  grow  up 
in  real  goodness,  no  fear  of  growing  up 
in  evil — and  there  you  have  the  picture 
which  would  be  to  us,  if  we  could  see 
things  as  they  are,  as  alarming  as  any 
other.  Anything  may  come  out  of  that 
— Haman,  Ahitophel,  Judas  Iscariot. 

Here  is  the  strength,  and  here  is  the 
fitness  of  the  Gospel,  and  here  its  in- 
estimable preciousness — that  it  goes  to 
the  root  of  all  evil  in  man.  It  is  a  re- 
generation, a  renewing,  a  quickening,  a 
redemption ;  when  it  comes  in  power  it 
is  death  to  the  principle  of  evil  within 
— considered  as  the  reigning  power  of 
the  life.  "We are  crucified  with  Christ ; " 
and  with  Christ  we  attain  to  "  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead."  0  happy 
change  that  puts  us  for  ever  on  the 
winning  side,  that  gives  us  the  pledge 
and  assurance  of  eternal  victory  by  the 
attainment  of  eternal  goodness.  Is  it 
wonderful  that  we  should  exhort  sinful 
men  to  flee  to  him,  and  to  trust  him  to 
the  uttermost  1  In  him  we  are  in  the  un- 
decaying  strength — in  the  perfect  purity 
— in  the  infinite  love — and  therefore 
in  the  eternal  blessedness. — Dr,  Raleigh, 


oiiAP.  vl]  HOMILETIG  GOMMENTARV:  ESTHER,  33* 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.     Vbrsbs  12—14. 

A  Small  Man  in  Adversity. 

Men  are  to  be  judged  so  as  to  form  an  estimate  of  their  greatness  or  their 
littleness,  not  by  their  sarrouiidiiigs,  bat  by  the  manner  in  which  they  conduct 
themselves  in  the  trying  changes,  in  the  ups  and  downs,  of  life.  We  must 
consider  their  conduct.  "  By  their  fruits  shall  ye  know  them."  Does  a  man 
carry  himself  with  calmness  in  prosperity  and  with  fortitude  in  adversity,  then 
we  may  pronounce  him  great.  Is  a  man  unduly  elated  by  prosperity  and  broken- 
hearted by  adversity,  then  we  pronounce  him  a  small  man.  Tried  thus  the 
despised  Mordecai  is  the  truly  great  man,  and  the  haughty  Haman  is  the  little 
man.  In  one  sense  we  are  the  creatures  of  circumstances.  We  cannot  help 
being  more  or  less  affected  by  them.  In  another  sense  we  ought  to  be  the  masters 
of  circumstances.  They  must  not  be  permitted  to  unman  our  natures.  In  the 
day  of  prosperity  be  joyful,  but  in  the  day  of  adversity  consider.  Adversity  so 
acts  upon  some  people  that  all  power  of  consideration  is  removed.  Oh,  to  be 
masters  of  ourselves  !  This  can  only  be  done  by  the  help  of  Divine  grace.  "  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Christ  strengthening  me." 

I.  A  great  man  in  prosperity.  Are  there  no  great  men  that  meet  with  no 
prosperity,  as  the  world  accounts  prosperity  %  Has  God  no  hidden  heroes  in  quiet 
walks?  We  may  believe  that  he  has.  Up  to  this  time  Mordecai  had  been  a 
great  man  in  obscurity.  Really  Mordecai  was  no  greater  when  riding  on  the 
king's  horse  in  triumphal  procession  through  the  city  than  when  sitting  at  the 
king's  gate.  We  are  slow  to  learn  and  believe  the  truth,  that  not  circumstances, 
but  character  makes  a  man  great.  Mordecai's  mind  was  so  great  that  he  rose 
above  the  state  of  things  and  men.  He  dwelt  in  a  higher  sphere  than  that  formed 
by  the  pomp  of  circumstances,  by  the  parade  of  royalty.  We  can  imagine 
Mordecai  with  calm  majesty  riding  through  the  city  Susa.  He  took  the  thing 
naturally ;  he  penetrated  to  the  heart  of  things.  When  the  little  show  was  over 
he  went  calmly  to  his  obscure  place  at  the  city  gate.  In  some  degree  he  is  a  type 
of  him  who  rode  forth  amid  the  hosannas  of  the  multitude,  and  then  listened,  as 
one  not  astonished,  to  the  cry,  Crucify  him,  crucify  him.  A  great  soul  had 
Mordecai.  He  had  food  to  eat  of  which  Haman  had  no  conception.  Seek  high 
conceptions  of  duty.  Sit  at  thy  post,  even  at  the  city  gate,  and  wait  only  for 
the  opening  of  heaven's  gate. 

II.  A  small  man  in  adversity.  Oh,  when  adversity  really  comes  are  we  not 
all  small  men"?  The  Bechuanas  sit  and  talk  as  if  they  felt  nothing  when  under- 
going a  painful  surgical  operation.  But  most  men  wince  beneath  the  sharp  knife 
of  adversity.  Most  are  but  bruised  reeds  when  the  blasts  of  sorrow  blow  keenly 
and  sharply,  and  they  give  forth  dismal  wailings.  Therefore  we  must  temper  our 
judgment  with  much  mercy  as  we  consider  Haman  in  adversity.  "  Our  grief  is 
but  our  grandeur  in  disguise ; "  but  our  grief  also  tells  of  our  littleness.  Most  are 
brothers  to  Haman  in  the  time  of  their  adversity.  The  dreaded  blow  of  trouble 
sends  them  to  their  houses  mourning.  Adversity  makes  us  acquainted  with  strange 
bed-feUows.  How  many  despise  the  guilty  Haman,  and  yet  are  by  trouble  reduced 
to  his  miserable  level.  Haman  was  a  small  man.  He  was  fretting  like  a  little 
child  because  the  coveted  toy  had  been  grasped  out  of  his  hand.  For  we  do  not 
suppose  that  Haman  as  yet  knew  that  this  honour  rendered  to  Mordecai  was 
but  the  beginning  of  his  own  awful  end.  So  far  Haman's  troubles  were  in  great 
measure  of  an  ideal  character.  A  great  many  of  our  troubles  are  of  this  character. 
But  ideal  troubles  cause  us  real  misery.  If  we  could  only  act  out  the  lesson,  man 
wants  but  little  here  below,  nor  wants  that  little  long,  we  should  not  have  many 
troubles.     Small  are  most  men  in  the  nature  of  their  desires  and  their  disappoint- 


236  BOMlLETia  COMMENT ARY:    ESTHER.  [ohap.  vi 


ments.  They  strive  and  fight  for  childish  toys,  and  when  they  get  them  they  are 
not  satisfied,  and  ask  for  more.  When  these  toys  are  wrested  from  them  they 
haste  to  their  houses  mourning,  and  have  their  heads  covered  for  grief. 

III.  A  small  man  in  adversity  seeks  for  counsellors.  He  went  to  his  wife 
and  his  friends.  Where  should  a  man  go  in  the  time  of  trouble  if  not  to  his  wife 
and  his  friends  %  A  good  wife  should  be  a  help-meet.  Like  the  ivy  plant,  she 
should  cling  the  faster  the  greater  the  ruin,  aad  be  a  helping  support  and  a 
graceful  ornament  even  to  that  ruin.  Where  can  a  man  in  sorrow  go  if  not  to  his 
friends  ?  where  Haman  little  thought  of  going.  Friends  are  not  always  glad  to 
see  humiliated  Hamans.  Even  the  wife  may  turn  round  upon  the  husband  and  say, 
Curse  God  and  die.  There  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother.  When 
my  father  and  my  mother  forsake  me,  then  the  Lord  will  take  me  up. 

IV.  A  man  in  adversity  obtains  poor  consolation.  One  thing  is  certain, 
Haman's  wife  and  his  friends  told  him  the  truth  now,  but  they  had  not  told  him  the 
truth  before.  They  had  not  warned  him  of  his  danger,  nor  showed  him  the  way 
out  of  his  difficulty.  Even  now  they  have  nothing  in  the  way  of  really  helpful 
advice  to  offer.  They  simply  predict  his  further  downfall.  Friends  too  often 
have  the  fatal  capacity  of  plunging  a  drowning  man  deeper  into  the  water.  Very 
sad  sometimes  is  the  errand  on  which  the  man  goes  when  he  consults  his  friend? 
as  to  the  best  thing  to  be  done  in  his  trial.  He  comes  back  a  sadder,  but  not 
always  a  wiser,  man  from  the  visit.  They  glibly  show  him  his  faults ;  they  tell 
him  where  he  has  made  a  slip ;  they  too  often  appear  as  if  they  were  taking  pleasure 
in  making  him  look  contemptible.  We  compassionate  Haman  from  the  bottom  of 
our  hearts.  He  has  sown  the  wind,  and  is  now  reaping  the  whirlwind.  He  is 
now  deserted  by  all,  left  to  his  own  bitter  fate.  Heaven's  consolations  even  then 
might  have  been  obtained.  Rich  ase  the  consolations  that  Jesus  brings.  He  never 
upbraids  on  account  of  our  faults,  if  he  does  not  deliver  us  from  our  distresses,  he 
gives  us  strength  that  we  may  bear  them  manfully. 

V.  A  man  in  adversity  receives  an  ominous  summons.  And  while  tney  were 
yet  talking  with  him  came  the  king's  chamberlains.  Trouble  upon  trouble ;  but 
Haman  did  not  understand  the  worst.  He  did  not  foresee  the  future.  He  little 
dreamt  that  Esther's  banquet  was  but  the  way  to  the  gallows.  We  sometimes  say, 
If  I  had  only  known  !  Well,  we  all  know,  or  might  know,  that  wrong-doing  will 
lead  to  trouble,  and  yet  we  go  on  doing  wrong  things.  Had  Haman  known, 
perhaps,  like  too  many,  he  would  simply  have  done  another  wrong  thing  to  prevent 
the  mischief  likely  to  come  from  past  wrong-doing.  No  need  for  prophetic  sight. 
We  know  that  sin  worketh  death  ;  let  us  then  forsake  all  evil.  From  all 
blindness  of  heart ;  from  pride,  vainglory,  and  hypocrisy ;  from  envy,  hatred,  and 
malice,  and  all  uncharitableness,  Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  12 — 14. 

In   prosperity  he  is   highly  insolent  and  heinous  sins  toward  God  and  his 

and    cruel,   but   in    adversity  he    is  so  servants,  of  his  duty  of  recognizing  the 

broken  and  dejected  that  he  knows  not  inevitable  judgment  of  God,  of  repent- 

which  way  to  turn.    But  his  counsellors  ance,   of  reconciliation,  then  perchance 

are   no    better    off  than  himself.     His  it  may  have  turned  out  better  with  him. 

friends  do  not  console  him,  nor  show  The  power  and  efficacy  of  truth  is  so 

him  any  plan  for  escaping  his  danger,  great  that  even  its  enemies  and  all  the 

which  nevertheless  was  then  the  most  ungodly  bear  testimony  to  it.     So  the 

needful  help  for  Haman  ;  but  they  throw  magicians  of  Pharaoh  are  compelled  to 

him,  just  hesitating  between  hope  and  explain.  This  is  the  finger  of  God ;    and 

fear,  into  despair.     "  Thou  wilt  surely  the    Egyptians'  cry.  Let  us  flee  before 

fall  in  his  sight,"  say  they.     Had  they  Israel,  for  the  Lord  fighteth  for  them. — • 

admonished  him  indeed   of  his  many  Feuardent, 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMILF/nC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


237 


Men  find  no  difference  in  themselves. 
The  face  of  a  Jew  looks  so  like  otlier 
men's  that  Esther  and  Mordecai  were 
not,  for  long,  taken  for  what  they  were. 
He  that  made  them  makes  the  distinction 
betwixt  them ;  so  as  a  Jew  may  fall 
before  a  Persian  and  get  up  and  pre- 
vail ;  but  if  a  Persian,  or  whosoever  of 
the  Gentiles,  begin  to  fall  before  a  Jew 
he  can  neither  stay  nor  rise.  There  is 
an  invisible  hand  of  omnipotency  that 
strikes  in  from  his  own  and  confounds 
their  opposites.  0  God,  neither  is  thy 
hand  shortened,  nor  thy  bowels  straitened 
in  thee  :  thou  art  still  and  ever  thyself. 
If  we  be  thy  true  spiritual  Israel,  neither 
earth  nor  hell  shall  prevail  against  us ; 
we  shall  either  stand  sure  or  surely  rise, 
while  our  enemies  shall  lick  the  dust. — 
Bishop  Hall. 

The  chief  reason  why  the  enemies  of 
the  Church  gnash  their  teeth  at  the  sight 
of  God's  gracious  dealings  is,  that  they 
take  the  rising  of  the  Church  to  be  a 
presage  of  their  ruin  :  a  lesson  which 
Haman's  wife  had  learned. 

Haman's  wife  had  learned  this,  that 
if  her  husband  began  once  to  fall  before 
the  Jews  he  should  surely  fall.  Wicked 
men  have  an  hour,  and  they  will  be  sure 
to  take  it ;  and  God  hath  his  hour  too, 
and  will  be  as  sure  to  take  that.  The 
judgments  of  the  wicked  are  mercies  to 
the  Church.  So  saith  David,  "  He  slew 
mighty  kings,  Og,  king  of  Bashan,  for 
his  mercy  endureth  for  ever." — Sibbes. 

In  the  narrative  which  follows  we 
have  an  example  of  that  decency  and 
propriety  with  respect  to  circumstances 
which  is  always  observed  in  Scripture, 
and  which  may  be  traced  in  what  is 
omitted  as  well  as  what  is  introduced. 
Nothing  is  said  of  what  passed  between 
Mordecai  and  Haman,  either  at  the  be- 
ginning or  close  of  the  ceremony.  The 
inspired  writer  gives  us  no  account  of  the 
acclamations  of  the  multitude  whom  the 
spectacle  drew  together.  They  would  no 
doubt  act,  poor  souls,  as  they  are  always 
accustomed  to  do,  hail  the  favourite  of 
the  day,  and  echo  back  the  voice  of  the 
herald.  Let  them  alone — they  would 
have  done  the  same  for  Haman.  We 
are  even  left  to  conjecture  what  were 
the  thoughts  of  the  judicious  few,  both 


Jews  and  natives,  who  might  be  led  by 
this  strange  event  to  augur  the  approach- 
ing fall  of  the  arrogant  prime  minister, 
and  the  rising  fortunes  of  the  object  of 
his  hatred.  The  sacred  narrative  passes 
over  these  things,  and  hastens  to  the 
crisis. 

The  pageant  is  now  over,  and  we  see, 
issuing  from  the  dispersing  crowd,  the 
two  principal  persons,  moving  in  differ- 
ent directions,  and  in  opposite  moods  of 
mind. 

Mordecai  came  again  to  the  king's 
gate.  But  Haman  hasted  to  his  house 
mourning,  and  having  his  head  covered. 
There  is  a  double  portrait  drawn  with 
one  stroke,  but  it  is  by  the  hand  of  a 
master !  We  see  the  hearts  of  the  two 
men  depicted  in  their  looks  and  gait ; — 
the  composure  and  humility  of  the  one, 
and  the  confusion  and  bitter  mortifica- 
tion of  the  other.  These  two  lines  give 
us  a  deeper  insight  into  the  characters 
of  the  men  than  a  would-be  painter  could 
have  conveyed  by  the  most  elaborate 
representation. 

Mordecai  came  again  to  the  king's 
gate.  He  did  not  remain  to  prolong 
his  triumph,  and  to  drink  in  the  incense 
offered  by  the  crowd.  He  did  not  go  to 
his  own  house,  and  gather  together  his 
friends  and  countrymen  to  tell  them  of 
his  high  honours,  and  to  receive  their 
congratulations.  He  did  not  hurry  back 
to  the  palace  in  expectation  of  receiving 
some  more  substantial  mark  of  the  royal 
favour.  He  did  not  seek  an  audience  of 
the  king  to  bring  an  accusation  against 
his  mortal  enemy.  But  he  came  again 
to  the  king's  gate  from  which  he  had 
been  taken,  and  resumed  his  former 
place  as  a  servant.  He  was  not  elated 
— he  was  not  even  discomposed  by  his 
honours.  "  He  stood  not  up,  nor  moved," 
for  all  that  Haman  had  done  to  him. 

"If  the  spirit  of  the  ruler  rise  up 
against  thee"  (saith  the  wise  man), 
*' leave  not  thy  place."  But  it  is  still 
more  difficult  to  keep  our  place  when 
we  are  visited  with  the  favour  of  the 
ruler.  Few  can  bear  honours  and  dig- 
nities with  equanimity,  even  when  they 
come  upon  them  gradually  ;  but  such 
sudden  and  high  advancement  was 
enough  to   make  any  ordinary  person 


238 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  ESTIJER. 


[OHAP.  VI 


giddy,  to  cause  him  to  forget  himself, 
and  behave  unseemly.  What  fatal 
effects  upon  the  head  and  heart  do  we 
often  witness  in  persons  who  have  all  at 
once  been  raised  from  poverty  to  riches 
and  rank.  Even  good  men  are  not 
always  proof  against  the  intoxicating 
influence  of  such  transitions.  How  in- 
coherently did  the  disciples  talk  on  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration  !  That  vessel 
needs  to  be  well  ballasted,  which,  after 
being  long  becalmed,  has  all  its  sails  at 
once  filled  with  a  favourable  gust  of 
wind. 

But  Mordecai  kept  his  place ;  like  a 
gallant  ship,  firmly  moored  in  a  bay, 
which  during  a  flood-tide  heaves,  and 
seems  for  a  time  borne  along  with  the 
lighter  craft,  but,  obeying  its  anchor, 
comes  round  and  resumes  its  former 
position.  The  pageantry  of  an  hour 
could  not  unsettle  his  mind;  he  regarded 
it  in  its  true  light — a  vain  show.  Had 
he  had  a  choice,  he  would  have  declined 
it ;  as  it  was,  he  sufi'ered  rather  than 
enjoyed  it.  It  may  be  difficult  to  deter- 
mine which  of  the  two  felt  most  awk- 
ward and  constrained — Haman  in  con- 
ferring or  Mordecai  in  receiving  the 
extravagant  honours.  Not  that  the 
latter  was  insensible  or  a  stranger  to 
feeling  on  the  occasion.  But  then  he 
viewed  it,  not  as  a  prelude  to  his  own 
aggrandizement,  but  as  an  earnest  of  the 
deliverance  of  his  people ;  and  as  his 
confidence  of  this  event  rested  on  surer 
grounds  than  his  own  advancement  or 
the  influence  of  his  daughter,  his  heart 
was  filled  with  astonishment  and  with 
gratitude  at  the  prospect ;  he  possessed 
his  soul  in  patience — he  stood  still,  and 
waited  for  the  salvation  of  God. 

But  let  us  now  turn  to  Haman.  He 
had  not  confidence  to  return  to  the 
palace  to  present  the  request  for  which 
he  had  visited  it  in  the  morning.  Nor 
could  he  endure  the  sight  of  the  people, 
before  whom  he  felt  himself  dishonoured. 
But  he  "  hasted  to  his  house  mourning ^ 
and  with  his  head  covered"  Had  Ha- 
man been  a  man  of  virtue  and  true 
dignity  of  mind,  this  occurrence  could 
not  have  disturbed  his  peace,  far  less 
broken  his  heart.  "  Why  %  what  harm 
has  it  done  to  me  ?    I  have  been  se- 


lected as  *  one  of  the  hing*s  most  noble 
princes^'  to  do  this  temporary  honour  to 
a  man  who  saved  the  royal  life."  At 
most  he  would  have  regarded  it  as  one 
of  those  freaks  which  fortune  delights  to 
play  in  arbitrary  courts,  and  which  break 
th(3  dull  monotony  of  a  palace.  He 
would  have  said,  "  I  have  seen  servants 
riding  upon  horses,  and  princes,  like 
servants,  walking  on  the  earth."  But 
tlie  man  who  could  complain  that  all 
his  wealth  and  honours  '*  availed  him 
nothing,  so  long  as  he  saw  Mordecai  the 
Jew  sitting  at  the  king's  gate,"  could 
not  fail  to  be  stung  to  the  quick  by  the 
recent  transaction.  Hatred,  and  disap- 
pointment, and  mortified  pride,  rankled 
in  his  breast,  and,  to  torment  him  still 
more,  awakened  remorse  for  the  past, 
and  fearful  forebodings  of  the  future. 
Surely  such  a  sight  is  sufiicient  to  cure 
those  who  have  been  smitten  with  pride 
or  with  envy  at  worldly  greatness. — 
McCrie. 

Then  said  his  mse  men  and  Zeresh 
his  wife  unto  him^  If  Mordecai  be  of  the 
seed  of  the  Jews,  before  whom  thou  hast 
begun  to  fall,  thou  shalt  not  prevail 
against  him,  but  shalt  surely  fall  before 
him.  Who  were  these  wise  men  *?  Either 
sages  whom  Haman  patronized,  and 
from  whom  he  expected  wise  counsel 
when  he  required  it,  or  diviners,  who 
were  believed  to  know  more  than  men 
could  know,  without  some  communica- 
tion with  superior  beings.  Many  of 
the  heathens  put  much  confidence  in 
diviners,  but  we  have  learned  better 
things  from  the  word  of  God.  By 
making  it  our  counsellor  at  all  times  of 
perplexity  we  shall  find  peace  to  our 
souls.* 

"  If  Mordecai  be  of  the  seed  of  the 
Jews,  before  whom  thou  hast  begun  to 
fall,  thou  shalt  not  prevail  against  him, 
but  shalt  surely  fall." — If  Mordecai  be 
of  the  seed  of  the  Jews.  Why  do  they 
Inj  so  much  stress  upon  the  stock  from 
which  Mordecai  sprung?  If  Mordecai 
had  been  a  native  Persian,  or  a  Baby- 
lonian, or  an  Egyptian,  would  they  not 
have  prognosticated  equal  success  to  him 
against  Haman  li  No ;  it  plainly  ap- 
pears that  the  dispensations  of  Divine 
•  Isa.  viii.  19,  20 ;  Psal.  cxix.  24, 


OHAPc  ▼!.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


239 


Providence  in  favour  of  the  Jews  were 
so  far  known  to  them  as  to  assure  them 
that  Providence  watched  over  their  in- 
terests in  a  manner  peculiar  to  their 
nation.  Although  most  men  are  dis- 
posed to  think  that  their  own  country  is 
happy  above  others  in  the  Divine  favour, 
and  although  the  Persians  at  this  time 
seemed  to  have  good  reason  to  flatter 
themselves  with  a  special  interest  in  the 
favour  of  Heaven,  yet  these  wise  Per- 
sians plainly  confessed,  that  the  Jews 
scattered  through  the  nations  were  the 
special  objects  of  the  Divine  care.  The 
wonders  done  in  Babylon  were  known 
to  all  the  world,  and  could  not  fail  to 
impress  all  confederate  princes  with  high 
sentiments  concerning  the  God  of  Israel. 
Haman's  wise  men  might  have  read  the 
sacred  books  of  the  Jews,  in  which  they 
would  find  that  their  God  had  wrought 
as  great  wonders  for  them  in  times  past 
as  in  the  period  of  the  Babylonian  cap- 
tivity. They  learned  instruction  from 
the  works  of  God.  They  saw  that  the 
same  God  who  had  preserved  Daniel 
and  his  companions  watched  over  the 
safety  and  fortune  of  Mordecai,  and 
they  concluded  that  Haman,  his  irrecon- 
cileable  enemy,  would  fall  under  the 
weight  of  his  vengeance. 

But  it  is  strange  that  these  wise  men, 
and  even  the  wife  of  Haman,  whatever 
they  thought,  expressed  to  him  their 
mind  so  fully.  If  they  did  not  choose 
to  flatter  him,  might  thay  not  at  least 
have  concealed  their  dismal  conjectures, 
especially  as  he  was  led  by  their  counsels 
to  that  public  disgrace  in  which  he  had 
involved  himself,  by  building  a  gallows 
for  the  man  who  was  appointed  to  be 
the  king's  favourite?  for  although  it 
was  built  in  the  court  of  his  own  house, 
yet  the  news  of  its  erection  was  soon  to 
spread.  It  appears  from  the  freedom 
they  used  with  Haman,  that  they  already 
considered  him  as  a  lost  man,  whom  it 
was  useless  to  flatter.  They  were  his 
friends,  as  long  as  his  friendship  could 
profit  them,  and  now  they  seem  to  have 
cared  little  whether  he  accounted  them 
as  his  friends  or  his  enemies.  Their 
prophecy  must  have  been  as  unpleasant 
as  the  howling  of  a  dog,  or  even  a  sen- 
tence of  death,  to  his  ears.     The  rich 


hath  many  friends  ;  but  when  poverty 
is  seen  coming  like  an  armed  man,  they 
vanish  away  like  snow  in  the  days  of 
sunshine. 

We  may,  however,  learn  useful  in- 
struction from  a  prophecy  dictated  by 
reflection  on  the  works  of  the  Lord. 
Blind  heathens  have  been  forced  to  see 
that  God  takes  care  of  his  people,  that 
he  often  interposes  wonderfully  for  their 
deliverance,  and  that  he  leaves  not  his 
gracious  works  in  their  behalf  unfinished. 
Why  do  not  God's  own  people,  in  the 
day  of  their  distress,  call  to  remembrance 
his  judgments  for  their  consolation  and 
the  support  of  their  faith?  When  he 
begins  to  deliver  them,  why  do  they 
indulge  distrusting  fears  about  the  ac- 
complishment of  that  work  which  he 
hath  taken  into  his  own  hand  ?  Why 
are  they  not  thankful  for  the  day  of 
small  things,  as  the  beginnings  of  months 
of  joy  %  After  Jesus  undertook  to  heal 
the  daughter  of  Jairus  strong  tempta- 
tions met  the  mourning  parent,  when 
Jesus  was  on  the  road  to  complete  his 
work,  and  fears  began  to  overwhelm  his 
soul.  But  what  said  Jesus?  **Fear 
not,  only  believe."  He  believed,  and 
received  his  daughter  back  from  death. 
— Lawson. 

Still,  although  we  may  despise  the 
wife  and  the  friends,  we  cannot  say  that 
by  their  counsel  now  they  do  Haman  any 
injustice.  They  do  not  render  him  the 
highest  service.  The  highest  service 
would  be  to  tell  him  the  truth,  and  help 
him  to  conform  to  it  by  confession,  re- 
pentance, and  amendment.  (If  they 
had  been  even  worldly  wise  they  would 
have  told  him  at  once  to  take  down  the 
gallows.)  But  they  do  him  no  injustice. 
The  poor  man  (for  now  pity  begins  to 
rise)  has  been  sowing  diligently,  and  he 
is  now  to  reap  as  he  has  sown.  Black 
harvest  comes  in  a  day.  It  begins  to 
come  in  his  own  house.  There — where 
he  had  plotted  the  mischief,  begins  to 
fall  the  shadow  of  doom. 

Yet,  let  us  not  overdraw  the  picture ; 
possibly,  if  we  knew  all,  there  are  softer 
lines  to  put  into  it,  and  some  lights  of 
human  kindness.  There  is  always  much 
untold  and  unknown  in  these  histories. 
Did  they  follow  up  their  confident  pre- 


240 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap,  vl 


diction  that  lie  could  not  succeed  against 
Mordecai  and  the  Jews,  by  earnest 
friendly  counsel  to  Ha  man  to  conceal 
himself,  or  at  once  to  take  flight  out  of 
the  empire,  or  away  to  some  distant 
part  of  it  %  We  know  not.  We  know 
only  that  they  were  still  talking  with 
him — talking  over  the  whole  matter — 
the  gathering  dangers,  the  possible 
methods  of  relief — when  the  conference 
is  interrupted  by  the  entrance  of  the 
king's  chamberlains,  who  have  come,  in 
haste,  to  bring  Haman  to  the  banquet 
that  Esther  had  again  prepared. — Dr. 
Raleigh. 

When  Haman's  wife  heard  her  hus- 
band say  that  Mordecai  was  against  him, 
because  he  was  an  Israelite,  she  said 
that  her  husband  should  take  the  foil, 
and  Mordecai  should  prevail.  What  if 
she  had  heard  her  husband  say  that  the 
Lord  of  Mordecai  was  against  him  %  If 
the  servant  be  so  terrible,  who  dare  en- 
counter with  his  master? — H.  Smith's 
Sermons. 

A7id  Mordecai  came  again  to  the 
king's  gate.  Was  there  ever  a  nobler 
man  than  this  1  You  will  find  ten 
Christians  who  bear  well  the  trial  of 
adversity  for  one  who  can  bear  well  the 
sharper  trial  of  prosperity.  Mordecai, 
returned  to  his  place,  was  wearing  fairer 
robes  than  the  king's — that  vesture  of 
humility  wherein  the  Son  o!  God  walked 
on  earth,  and  which  he  has  ordained 
as  the  livery  of  his  redeemed.  Go  tell 
him  that  he  has  now  a  splendid  oppor- 
tunity to  rise  in  the  world,  that  his  foot 
is  on  the  ladder,  and  he  needs  but  to 
climb;  and  he  will  tell  of  another 
ladder  he  is  climbing,  with  angels  for 
his  helpers,  and  that  the  show  this 
morning  had  aln)ost  cast  him  down. 
His  duty  is  at  the  king's  gate,  and  there 
he  will  wait  upon  God  to  show  him  the 
end  of  this  strange  thing. 

"  The  dew  that  never  wets  the  fliuty  mountain 
Falls  on  the  valley  free  ; 
Bright  verdure  fringes  the  small  desert  foun- 
tain, 
But  barren  sand  the  sea. 
The  white-robed  saints  the  throne-steps  singing 
under, 
Their  state  all  meekly  wear, 
Their  pauseleiss  praise  wells  uph-oin  hearts  that 
wonder 
That  ever  they  came  there." 


But    Haman   hastened  to    his   house 
mourning,  and  having  his  head  covered. 
The  change  was  swift  and  ominous  since 
morning,    when    he   had    seen    to    the 
gallows   being   ready,    and   gone    forth 
hopeful.     Not   a   man  in  all  the  city 
knew   that    two    hours    hence    others 
would  cover  his  face  and  lead  him  out 
to   death  ;    but   Haman   felt   that  God 
was  fighting    against  him,    and    antici- 
pated his  doom.     Is  it  wrong  to  mock 
him  now  1     Why  not  report  yourself  to 
the  king  as  having  done  his  bidding, 
and  ask  what  you  purposed  to  ask  this 
morning  ?     On  the  showing  of  your  own 
words,  the  king  has  treated  you  as  *'  one 
of  his  most  noble  princes."      Zereshand 
your  friends  are  expecting  you  to  bring 
back    your   victim    \Aith    you   for    the 
gallows.       Why   so    downcast  1      But, 
despicable   as  Haman  is,  pity   is  fitter 
for  us  than  scorn — pity,  with  a  prayer 
for  ourselves    that   we  may  escape  the 
fatal  madness  of  making  self  our  god. 
Haman's  friends  had  helped   him   last 
night,   and  roused   him  to  hope  ;    but 
they  failed  him  now.     These  were  sum- 
mer friends,  and  thought  it  not  worth 
while   even  to   lie   to  him   any  longer. 
Besides,  they  were  superstitious.     "If 
Mordecai  be  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews." 
Why  this  emphasis  on  Mordecai's  race  ^ 
The  case  would  not  have  been  so  bad  if 
he  had  been  an  Ethiopian  ;  but  there 
were  strange  features  about  these  Jews. 
They  sometimes  stood  out  on  ground  of 
high  principle,  and  when  they  did  so 
they  prospered   against  all  probability. 
The  friends  of  Haman  were  Amalekites, 
in  all  likelihood,  and  famihar,  therefore, 
with  a   history  of   warning.     "  Before 
whom  thou  hast  begun  to  fall."     His 
friends  see  no  hope   for   Haman   now 
that  he  is  started  on  the  swift  incline  of 
ruin.     When    great    men    of   this    sort 
begin  to  go  down  their  course  is  quick 
in  proportion  to  their  greatness  ;  and  it 
is  a  serious  aggravation  of  their  misery 
that    the    friends   of    their    prosperity 
hasten  their  unpitied  fall.     The  tempt- 
ers, in  this  world   or  the  next,  prove 
the  tormentors. — Symington. 


CHAP.  VI.1 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   EaTHEH, 


341 


ILLUSTEATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  VI. 


Ver.  1.  Saje  sleeping.  When  one  asked 
Alexander  how  he  could  sleep  so  soundly  and 
securely  in  the  midst  of  danger,  he  told  him 
that  Parmenio  watched  ;  he  might  well  sleep 
when  Parmenio  watched.  Oh  how  securely  may 
they  sleep  over  whom  he  watches  that  never 
slumhers  nor  sleeps  !  "  I  will,"  said  David,  ''  lay 
me  down  and  sleep,  for  thou,  Lord,  raakcst  me  to 
dwell  in  safety." — Venning. 

A  sleepless  night.  *'  Because  God  wouldn't 
let  him,"  was  the  answer  given  hy  a  little  boy 
in  one  of  our  Sunday  Schools  of  a  large  city  in 
the  West  of  England  to  a  question  asked  by  the 
teacher  in  reference  to  the  Persian  monarch  not 
being  able  to  enjoy  his  accustomed  slumbers. 
It  was  a  simple  but  sound  reply,  for  God's 
providence  was  watching  over  his  ancient  people, 
and  when  they  appeared  to  be  in  imminent  danger 
of  falling  by  the  hand  or  the  sword  he  again 
proved  faithful  to  his  promises,  and  made  tran- 
spiring events  and  circumstances  subservient  to 
his  purpose.  On  that  night  the  king  could  not 
sleep  because 

'*  There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends, 
Rough -hew  them  how  we  will." 

Biblical  Museum. 

A  sleepless  night.  A  few  years  ago,  a  pious 
man  at  Gravesend  had  retired  to  rest  late  on  the 
Saturday  night,  having  first  secured  the  doors 
and  windows  of  his  house  and  shop.  Weary, 
however,  as  he  was  with  the  labours  of  the 
week,  he  found  it  impossible  to  sleep ;  and, 
having  tossed  about  in  his  bed  for  an  hour  or 
two  without  rest,  he  resolved  to  rise  and  spend 
an  hour  in  the  perusal  of  his  Bible,  as  prepara- 
tory to  the  engagements  of  the  Sabbath.  He 
went  downstairs  with  the  Bible  under  his  arm, 
and  advancing  towards  one  of  the  outer  doors, 
he  found  several  men  who  had  broken  into  the 
house,  and  who  but  for  this  singular  interrup- 
tion would  probably,  in  a  very  short  period, 
have  deprived  him  of  the  whole  of  his  property. 
— R.  T.  S.  Anec.  quoted  in  Biblical  Museum. 

Providence  of  God  in  withholding  sleep.  — The 
late  Sir  Evan  Nepean,  when  Under-Secretary  of 
State,  related  to  a  friend  of  his  that  one  night 
he  had  the  most  unaccountable  wakefulness  that 
could  be  imagined.  He  was  in  perfect  health, 
had  dined  early  and  moderately,  had  no  care — 
nothing  to  brood  over — and  was  perfectly  self- 
possessed.  Still  he  could  not  sleep,  and  from 
eleven  till  two  in  the  morning  had  never  closed 
an  eye.  It  was  summer,  and  twilight  had  far 
advanced  ;  and  to  dissipate  the  ennui  of  his 
wakefulness,  he  resolved  to  rise  and  breathe  the 
morning  air  in  the  park.  There  he  saw  nothing 
but  sleepy  sentinels,  whom  he  rather  envied. 
He  passed  the  Home  OflBce  several  times,  and  at 
last,  without  any  particular  object,  resolved  to 
let  himself  in  with  his  pass  key.  The  book  of 
entries  of  the  day  before  lay  open  on  the  table, 

'  "      The 


and  in  sheer  listlessness  he  began  to  read. 


first  thing  appalled  hira  ! — **  A  reprieye  to  be 

sent  to  York  for  the  coiners  ordered  for  execution 
the  next  day."  It  struck  him  that  he  had  no 
return  to  his  order  to  send  the  reprieve,  and  he 
searched  the  minutes,  but  could  not  find  it.  In 
alarm,  he  went  to  the  house  of  the  chief  clerk, 
who  lived  in  Downing  Street,  knocked  him  up 
(it  was  then  long  past  three),  and  asked  him  if 
he  knew  anything  of  the  reprieve  being  sent.  In 
greater  alarm,  the  chief  clerk  could  not  remem- 
ber. *'  You  are  scarcely  avvake,''  said  Sir 
Evan ;  "  collect  yourself :  it  must  have  been 
sent."  The  chief  clerk  said  he  did  now  recol- 
lect he  had  sent  it  to  the  Clerk  of  the  Crown, 
whose  business  it  was  to  forward  it.  "  Good  ! " 
said  Sir  Evan  ;  *'  but  have  you  his  receipt  and 
certificate  that  it  is  gone  .>  "  "  No  !  "  '  *  Then 
come  with  me  to  his  house.  We  must  find  him, 
though  it  is  so  early  !  "  It  was  now  four,  and 
the  Clerk  of  the  Crown  lived  in  Chancery  Lane. 
There  was  no  hackney  coach,  and  they  almost 
ran.  The  Clerk  of  the  Crown  had  a  country 
house,  and  meaning  to  have  a  long  holiday,  he 
was  at  that  moment  stepping  into  his  gig,  to  go 
to  his  villa.  Astonished  at  the  visit  of  the 
Under-Secretary  at  such  an  hour,  he  was  still 
more  so  at  his  business.  With,  an  exclamation 
of  horror,  cried  the  Clerk  of  the  Crown,  **  The 
reprieve  is  locked  up  in  my  desk !  "  It  was 
brought.  Sir  Evan  sent  to  the  Post  Office  for 
the  trustiest  and  fleetest  express,  and  the  reprieve 
reached  York  at  the  moment  the  unhappy 
people  were  ascending  the  cart.  Surely  this 
was  the  finger  of  God. — Leisure  Hour. 

Ver.  3.  Count  Zinzendorf  owed  his  religious 
zeal  to  the  accidental  view  of  a  picture  of  the 
crucifixion,  underneath  which  was  this  simple 
inscription  — 

"All  this  for  thee,  how  much  for  me  ?  " 
What  honour  and  dignity  hath  been  done  to 
Jesus  ?     Remember  how  much  he  has  done  for 
thee,  and  then  ask  how  much  can  I  do,  how 
much  ought  I  to  do,  for  him  } 

According  to  Thieisch  Napoleon  maintained 
that  a  prince  who  followed  his  conscience  would 
be  a  good  and  noble  governor,  but  not  a  great 
man.  However,  Ahasuerus  in  this  history  only 
appears  a  truly  great  man  as  he  manifests  some 
uneasiness  and  regret  on  account  of  his  neglect  of 
the  great  services  of  Mordecai. 

Ver.  5.  ComCf  a  song-bird.  In  a  lonely  cot 
there  sat  one  night  an  aged  widow,  very  poor 
and  nearly  blind.  The  Christian  lady  had  been 
reading  from  the  best  of  books.  "  Ah,"  said  the 
poor  widow,  ''  there  is  one  word  sweeter  than  all 
the  rest.  It  is  a  song  for  my  darkness.  Can 
you  guess  what  it  is  ?"  The  visitor  thought,  and 
she  said  presently,  *' Yes,  I  think  I  know  ;  it  is 
Jesus,  the  name  above  all  other  names."  "  No," 
said  the  widow  ;  "  Jesus  is  a  blessed  word,  but 
that  is  not  enough  for  me,  unless  I  know  him  for 
my  Saviour.  It  is  no  comfort  for  me  that  he 
died  for  sinners,  unless  I  know  he  died  for  me." 


S, 


242 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.   VI. 


**  Perhaps  you  mean  heaven,"  said  the  visitor, 
**  for  he  is  there."  *'  No,"  said  the  widow ;  "what 
comfort  would  it  be  for  me  to  know  that  Jesus 
is  in  heaven,  and  others  should  see  his  face,  and 
love  and  serve  him  there,  if  I  am  not  bound  for 
heaven.  No ;  it  is  just  one  word  from  his  own 
lips,  I  call  it  my  little  song-bird — come."  Jesus 
says  come  in  a  far  different  sense  from  that  in 
which  Ahasuerus  said,  Let  him  come  in.  Ahasu- 
erus  said  this  for  his  own  enlightment.  Jesus 
says  "  Come  unto  me  "  for  our  enrichment. 

Royal  presents  to  an  official, — The  presenta- 
tion as  a  gift  from  a  royal  personage  of  that 
which  had  been  worn  on  his  own  person  was 
a  special  mark  of  favour  and  condescension. 
Morier,  in  his  narrative  of  *'  A  Second  Journey 
through  Persia,"  thus  illustrates  this  custom  ; — 
"  When  a  treaty  between  Russia  and  Persia  was 
concluded,  some  years  since,  in  the  commence- 
ment, according  to  the  usual  form,  the  ranks  of 
the  two  principal  persons  who  were  deputed  to 
arrange  it  had  to  be  specified.  The  Russian 
general  was  found  to  have  more  titles  than  the 
Persian  plenipotentiary,  who  was  therefore  at  a 
loss  how  to  make  himself  appear  of  equal  import- 
ance with  the  other  negotiator  ;  but  at  length, 
recollecting  that,  previous  to  his  departure  for 
the  place  of  conference,  his  sovereign  had  hon- 
oured him  by  a  present  of  one  of  his  own 
swords,  and  of  a  dagger  set  with  precious  stones, 
to  wear  which  is  a  peculiar  distinction  in  Persia, 
and  besides  had  clothed  him  with  one  of  his  own 
shawl  robes,  a  distinction  of  still  greater  value, 
he  therefore  designated  himself  as  *  endowed 
with  the  special  ^ifts  of  the  monarch,  lord  of 
the  dagger  set  in  jewels,  of  the  sword  adorned 
with  gems,  and  of  the  shawl  coat  already  worn.' " 
Ver.  12.  Fortitude  of  the  Bechuanas.  They 
are  excellent  patients.  There  is  no  wincing  ; 
everything  prescribed  is  done  instanter.  Their 
only  failing  is  that  they  become  tired  of  a  long 
course.  But  in  any  operation  even  the  women 
sit  unmoved.  I  have  been  quite  astonished 
again  and  again  at  their  calmness.  In  cutting 
out  a  tumour,  an  inch  in  diameter,  they  sit  and 
talk  as  if  they  felt  nothing.  "A  man  like  me 
never  cries,"  they  say  ;  *'  they  are  children  that 
cry.''  And  it  is  a  fact  that  the  men  never  cry. 
They  stand  in  striking  contrast  to  Haman,  who 
hasted  to  his  house   mourning  for   what  wag 


an  imaginary  evil  in  great  measure  ;  yea,  they 
reprove  a  great  many  who  profess  to  be  sustained 
by  higher  motives.  It  may  be  a  want  of  sensi- 
tiveness on  the  part  of  the  Bechuanas,  but 
with  increased  sensitiveness  there  should  be  an 
increased  power  of  self-control.  It  is  wonder- 
ful what  power  of  self-control  is  possessed  and 
manifested  by  the  members  of  the  Society  of 
Friends. — Dr.  Blaikie' s  Personal  Life  of  David 
Livingstone,  LL.D. 

Satan,  a  hard  tatk-master.  There  was  a  man 
in  the  town  where  I  was  born  who  used  to  steal 
all  his  firewood.  He  would  get  up  on  cold 
nights,  and  go  and  take  it  from  his  neighbours' 
wood-piles.  A  computation  was  made,  and  it 
was  ascertained  that  he  had  spent  more  time, 
and  worked  harder,  to  get  his  fuel  than  he 
would  have  been  obliged  to  do  if  he  had  earned 
it  in  an  honest  way,  and  at  ordinary  wages. 
And  this  thief  was  a  type  of  thousands  of  men 
who  work  a  great  deal  harder  to  please  the  devil 
than  they  would  have  to  work  to  please  God. — 
Beecher, 

So  Haman  worked  hard  to  please  the  devil  of 
an  evil  nature,  and  it  ended  in  mourning.  He 
would  have  found  more  satisfaction  in  the  long- 
run  if  he  could  have  set  himself  to  serve  a  good 
nature. 

Circumstances.  He  is  happy  whose  circum- 
stances suit  his  temper ;  but  he  is  more  excellent 
who  can  suit  his  temper  t?  his  circumstances. — 
Hume. 

If  you  can't  turn  the  wind  you  must  turn  the 
mill-sails.  Joseph  was  a  beautiful  example. 
See  him,  in  his  changed  positions,  still  the  upright 
saint ;  and  Jesus,  his  conduct  at  the  marriage 
and  in  the  temple.  William  Pitt  used  to  be 
called  the  minister  of  existing  circumstances.  A 
Christian  shepherd,  when  a  gentleman  said,  to 
try  him,  "  Suppose  your  master  were  to  change, 
or  your  flock  to  die;  what  then  }  "  replied,  '*  Sir, 
I  look  upon  it  that  I  do  not  depend  upon  circum- 
stances, but  upon  the  great  God  that  directs 
them."  The  Rev.  H.  W.  Fox,  when  dying,  had 
constantly  upon  his  lips  the  words  of  Baxter : — 
"  Lord,  when  thou  wilt  ,  where  thou  wilt ;  as 
thou  wilt."  Mordecai,  riding  in  the  procession, 
and  then  returning  to  sit  at  the  gate,  shows  his 
superiority  to  mere  externals. — Bowes, 


OHAP.  TO.]  EOMILETIG  00MMENTAR7:  ESTHSB.  248 


CHAPTER  VIL 

Critical  Notes.]     2.  The  king  said  again]  Compare  ch.  v.  6.    3.  Hylife, ...  my  people] 

Esther  has  had  time  to  carefully  prepare  her  words,  and  her  earnest  language  rises  to  the  emotionality 
of  poetic  parallelisms.     "We  may  throw  her  address  into  the  following  form  :— ^ 

If  I  have  found  favour  in  thine'eyes,  0  king, 

And  if  to  the  king  it  seem  good, 

Let  my  life  he  given  me  at  my  petition, 

And  my  people  at  my  request. 

For  we  are  sold,  I  and  my  people, 

To  he  destroyed,  to  he  slain,  and  to  perish. 
If,  now,  for  slaves  and  for  hondwomen  we  were  sold,  I  had  been  silent^ 
For  the  enemy  is  not  to  he  compared  with  the  injury  to  the  king, 

4.  We  are  sold]  Allusion  to  Haman's  offer  to  pay  into  the  king's  treasury  ten  thousand  talents. 
Destroyed,  .  .  .  slain,  .  .  .  perish]  She  quotes  the  very  words  of  the  fearful  edict,  and  thus  givee 
a  most  telling  point  and  emphasis  to  her  plea.  Although  the  enemy]  This  sentence  is  obscure,  and 
perhaps  Esther  meant  that  it  should  be  ambiguous.  The  common  version  conveys  the  meaning  that  if 
the  Jews  were  all  sold  into  slavery,  their  enemy,  who  brought  this^woe  upon  them,  could  not,  by  any 
payment  into  the  king's  treasury,  recompense  him  for  the  loss  he  would  sustain.  But  the  Hebrew 
seems  to  make  this  last  sentence  give  a  reason  for  Esther's  keeping  silence  ;  namely,  because  she  does 
not  consider  the  enemy  worthy  of  the  trouble  and  injury  it  must  cost  the  king  to  punish  him,  and 
counteract  the  decree  of  death  that  has  gone  forth  against  the  Jews.  The  enemy]  to  whom  she  con- 
temptuously refers  is,  of  course,  Ham  an.  Countervail]  The  Kal  participal — meaning,  to  be  equal 
with  ;  to  be  compared  with.  Damage]  may  be  here  taken  in  the  sense  of  injurious  trouble,  annoyance, 
vexation. —  Whedon's  Com.  Thus  Esther  says  (ver.  4),  The  enemy  has  determined  upon  the  total 
destruction  of  my  people.  If  he  only  intended  to  bring  upon  them  grievous  oppression,  even  the  most 
grievous  oppression  of  slavery,  I  would  have  been  silent,  for  the  enemy  is  not  worthy  that  I  should  vex 
or  annoy  the  king  by  my  accusation. — Keil.  5.  Who  is  he]  Ahasuerus  could  not  really  have  doubted ; 
but  he  affects  to  doubt,  that  he  may  express  his  anger  at  the  act,  apart  from  all  personal  considerations. 
— Rawlinson.  Who  ...  is  he  that  durst  presume]  Lit.,  as  the  margin,  whose  heart  has  filled 
him  to  do  this.  The  evil  and  ambitious  man  is  filled  with  foul  thoughts  and  purposes  from  the  corrupt 
fountain  of  his  own  wicked  heart.  6.]  Esther  replies,  "The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked 
Haman.  Then  was  Haman  afraid  before  the  king  and  the  queen."  7.]  The  king  went  into  the 
palace  garden  in  order  to  recover  from  the  first  burst  of  anger,  and  to  consider  what  was  to  be  done 
with  Haman.  He  stood  up  and  besought  Esther  to  shield  him  from  the  king's  fury.  8.  Haman 
was  fallen  upon  the  bed]  In  the  wild  emotion  and  alarm  of  the  moment  he  had  thrown  himself 
upon  the  couch  or  divan  on  which  Esther  reclined  at  the  banquet,  and  was  supplicating  for  his  life. 
Will  he  force  the  queen]  Of  course  the  king  did  not  believe  his  own  words.  But  he  meant  to  tax 
Haman  with  a  further  offence  in  not  sufficiently  respecting  the  person  of  the  queen,  and  he  thereby 
suggested  to  the  attendants  his  instant  execution. — Rawlinson.  Covered  Haman's  face]  The  cover- 
ing of  the  face  was  probably  the  beginning  of  the  execution.of  the  death  sentence.  (Compare  Curtius ; 
They  brought  Philetas  with  covered  head  into  the  palace.)  Even  old  interpreters  remind  us  of  the 
sentence  in  Cicero :  Lictor,  hind  his  hands,  veil  his  head,  hang  him  on  the  hapless  tree.  However, 
only  mentioned  here  as  a  Persian  custom.  9.  Harhonah  .  .  .  said]  This  eunuch  had  been  many 
years  in  Xerxes'  service.  Eehold  also,  the  gallows  fifty  cubits  high,  which  Haman  had  made 
for  Uordecai,  &c.]  may  not  imply  that  the  other  servants,  or  even  Harbonah  himself,  had  already 
brought  accusations  against  Haman,  and,  in  addition,  would  also  reproach  him  with  the  erection  of 
this  gallows ;  but,  from  Harbonah's  views,  it  points  out  the  most  appropriate  means  at  hand  offered 
by  the  prepared  gallows  for  the  fate  of  Haman.  This  is  more  significant  against  Haman.  In  giving 
prominence  to  the  fact  that  Mordecai  was  the  one  who  spoke  well  for  the  king  by  revealing  the  plot 
against  the  king's  life,  he  intimates  that  it  was  more  fit  for  Haman  to  grace  the  gallows  than  the 
one  for  whom  it  was  originally  erected. — Lange.  In  all  the  range  of  literature  we  find  no  more 
signal  display  of  righteoua  retribution  than  in  the  death  of  Haman. 


244  HOMILETIC  OOMMENTARI :  ESTHER.  [ohap.  vil 


MAIN  HOMILETIOS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.    Verses  1—4. 

A  Strange  Banquet. 

I.  The  banquet  was  strange  if  we  consider  the  incongruous  nature  of  the 
company.  Things  are  not  what  they  seem,  and  the  three  now  meeting  together 
at  the  banquet  are  not  what  they  might  seem  to  casual  observers.  They  were  not 
happy,  could  not  be  happy  under  the  circumstances.  Very  different  feelings  now 
took  possession  of  their  natures.  Ahasuerus  was  now  stirred  up  to  a  sense  of  his 
responsibility.  Haman  must  have  felt  the  approach  of  his  doom.  The  declaration 
of  the  wise  men  and  of  his  wife  must  have  been  ringing  in  his  ears.  And  Esther 
was  roused  up  to  the  fact  that  an  important  crisis  in  her  own  and  in  her  nation's 
history  was  now  at  hand.  A  deep  sense  of  uneasiness  must  have  pervaded  the 
company  which  the  wine  could  not  allay.  Thus,  if  we  could  only  pierce  the  out- 
ward we  should  find  that  the  gatherings  of  this  world  are  not  at  all  in  harmony. 
Sometimes  such  gatherings  end  without  any  startling  revelation;  but  it  was  not  so  in 
this  case.  It  came  to  a  fatal  end  for  Haman  at  least  The  harmonizing  spirit  of 
the  gospel  of  love  is  the  true  power  by  which  gatherings  may  be  rendered  pleasant 
and  profitable.  At  the  gospel  banquet  all  spirits  should  harmonize.  At  the 
banquet  of  heaven  we  may  expect  complete  harmony. 

II.  The  banquet  was  strange  if  we  consider  the  unaccustomed  constancy  of 
the  king.  Ahasuerus  was  evidently  a  vacillating  monarch,  to  one  thing  constant 
never.  But  now  he  shows  a  strange  exception.  For  the  third  time  he  asks  Queen 
Esther,  "What  is  thy  petition T'  The  king  appears  more  willing  to  give  than 
Esther  is  to  ask ;  and  in  this  he  is  a  type  of  God.  He  is  indeed  more  willing  to 
give  than  the  sons  of  men  are  to  ask.  Yea,  he  gives  before  we  ask;  gives  in  spite 
of  our  unwillingness  to  receive,  and  of  our  ingratitude.  He  is  giving  every  day.  Let 
us  be  more  constant  and  extensive  in  our  askings.  Ahasuerus  proves  his  willing- 
ness to  give  by  a  repetition  of  his  question.  In  this  he  is  a  small  type  of  the 
great  Giver.  He  repeats  and  repeats  his  assurances  of  his  willingness  to  give. 
His  invitations  and  his  promises  to  the  children  of  men  are  plentifully  scattered 
throughout  the  sacred  records.  Ahasuerus  showed  his  willingness  to  give  by  a 
large  promise.  God  shows  his  willingness  to  give  not  only  by  large  promises, 
but  by  large  bestowals.  How  many  are  the  bestowals  of  God !  How  vast  his 
bounties  1     What  a  proof  of  willinghood  in  the  gift  of  his  well-beloved  Son  ! 

III.  The  banquet  was  strange  if  we  consider  the  peculiar  character  of 
Esther's  petition.  Notice — {a)  The  graceful  modesty  of  the  preface.  "  If  I  have 
found  favour  in  thy  sight,  0  king,  and  if  it  please  the  king."  Could  anything  be 
more  graceful,  more  modest,  and  more  artistic?  Such  words  from  such  sweet  lips 
must  have  confirmed  Ahasuerus  in  his  determination  to  help  the  speaker  in  her 
present  difficulty.  It  is  evident  that  Esther  was  a  woman  of  skill  as  well  as  of 
beauty.  Modesty  becomes  the  petitioner.  Beauty  is  often  arrogant.  But  beauty's 
charms  are  increased  by  the  presence  of  modesty.  Morally  we  have  no  beauty  to 
plead  as  we  come  to  God  in  prayer.  Modesty  is  becoming.  Yet  boldness  is 
permitted  because  we  come  to  God  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  always  is  well 
beloved.  Let  us  go  to  God  not  pleading  our  deserts,  but  the  merits  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Saviour,  {h)  The  natural  and  the  benevolent  request.  She  pleads  for 
her  own  life,  and  that  was  natural.  "  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath 
will  he  give  for  his  life."  Wonderful  this  intense  love  of  life.  Wise  arrangement 
of  Diviue  providence.  Through  trial,  and  poverty,  and  pain,  and  sickness  the 
human  being  clings  to  life.  Esther  might  well  ask  for  life  with  her  propitious 
surroundings.  But  Esther  pleads  for  the  life  ofherpeoplCy  and  that  was  benevolent. 
Most  probably  Esther  might  have  secured  the  boon  of  her  own   life   without 


CHAP.  VII.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    ESTHER.  245 

securing  the  salvation  of  her  people.  This,  however,  would  not  have  satisfied  her 
benevolent  nature.  Hainan  was  very  fearful  when  hi»  own  life  was  threatened. 
He  was  very  reckless  about  the  lives  of  others.  Esther  was  calm  when  her  own 
life  was  in  danger,  and  was  anxious  for  the  salvation  of  the  lives  of  her  people.  A 
sweet  type  was  she  of  the  Son  of  man,  who  came  to  save  the  lost.  He  did  not  even 
go  so  far  as  to  plead  for  his  own  life.  Yea,  he  gave  his  life  a  ransom  for  many, 
lie  pleads  for  the  life  of  his  people.  As  Esther's,  so  the  Saviour's  intercession  was 
successful,  and  shall  be  to  the  end  of  time.  How  noble  the  office  to  plead  for  life! 
Esther  pleaded  for  physical  life  ;  Jesus  pleads  for  intellectual  and  moral  life.  Not 
because  God  has  issued  a  foolish  and  wicked  decree,  not  because  God  is  a  stern 
tyrant,  a  luxurious  despot,  but  because  the  claims  of  justice  must  be  met,  and  the 
interests  of  God's  moral  government  must  be  maintained.  Esther  asked  little  for 
herself.  She  asked  for  her  life,  but  that  was  a  prelude  to  the  further  request  of 
the  life  of  her  people.  The  granting  of  one  part  of  the  petition  was  a  pledge  for 
granting  the  rest.  Jesus  only  asks  to  see  the  fruits  of  the  travail  of  his  soul.  He 
desires  the  salvation  of  men.  Ahasuerus  would  be  astonished  at  the  nature  of 
Esther's  request.  God  is  not  astonished  at  the  nature  of  the  Saviour's  request. 
Not  like  Ahasuerus,  God  saw  the  danger,  and  provided  a  remedy.  Let  us  believe 
that  God  Almighty  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  (c)  Tlie  timely  confession. 
She  acknowledges  her  people.  She  confesses  that  she  belongs  to  the  persecuted 
race.  The  time  has  come  for  confession,  and  she  is  ready  to  face  the  worst.  The 
queen  talks  of  the  outcast,  despised,  and  death-decreed  race  as  her  people.  A 
period  will  come  when  a  more  wondrous  confession  than  this  will  be  made.  Jesus 
Christ  will  bring  forth  his  people  in  the  day  of  final  reckoning.  Yery  many  poor 
and  despised  ones  of  earth  will  then  be  spoken  of  by  Jesus  as  ''My  people."  Are  we 
now  the  people  of  God  1  Let  us  not  despise  any  in  whom  the  smallest  spark  of 
Divine  grace  is  found,  (d)  The  startling  avoioal.  "  For  we  are  sold,  I  and  my 
people,  to  be  destroyed,  to  be  slain,  and  to  perish."  There  is  more  harm  done 
through  want  of  thought  than  through  want  of  heart.  The  thoughtlessness  of 
Ahasuerus  caused  this  declaration  to  come  upon  him  in  a  startling  manner.  Very 
many  people  are  still  sold  to  destruction  through  this  very  thoughtlessness.  And 
too  often  Esthers  are  not  found  to  interpose  between  the  thoughtlessness  and  its 
bitter  consequences.  Let  us  think  about  our  conduct,  and  especially  as  to  its 
bearing  upon  other  people,  (e)  The  gracious  considerateness.  *'  But  if  we  had  been 
sold  for  bondmen  and  bondwomen,  I  had  held  my  tongue,  although  the  enemy 
could  not  countervail  the  king's  damage."  How  little  consideration  for  others  some 
people  possess !  A  little  personal  inconvenience  soon  sets  their  tongues  working, 
and  they  do  not  shrink  from  giving  much  trouble  to  those  about  them.  Esther 
would  have  held  her  tongue  had  it  been  a  small  thing  she  was  called  upon  to 
endure.  She  shrank  from  giving  the  king  needless  trouble.  Let  us  learn  to  keep 
the  door  of  our  lips,  not  for  reasons  of  worldly  policy,  but  because  we  do  not  desire 
to  give  trouble  that  can  lead  to  no  beneficial  results.  "  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth 
and  the  meditation  of  my  heart  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  0  God,  my  strength 
and  my  Redeemer."  Thus  shall  our  words  be  timely.  Thus  shall  our  words  be 
piofi table  to  others.     Thus  our  tongues  will  be  silent  even  in  suffering. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  1 — 4. 

Ahasuerus  is  not  more  liberal  in  his  had  said ;  yet  he  eats  it  not,  as  over 
ofifer  than  firm  in  his  resolutions,  as  if  lavishly  spoken,  but  doubles  and  triples 
his  first  word  had  been,  like  his  law,  it,  with  hearty  assurances  of  a  real  pro- 
unalterable.  I  am  ashamed  to  miss  that  secution  ;  while  those  tongues  which 
steadiness  in  Christians  which  I  find  in  profess  the  name  of  a  true  God  say  and 
a  pagan.     It  was  a  great  word  that  he  unsay  at  pleasure,  recanting  their  good 


246 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OHAP.  VII. 


purposes,  contradicting  their  own  just 
engagements,  upon  no  cause  but  their 
own  changeableness. — Bishop  Hall. 

Trembling  soul,  if  this  heathen  king 
is  so  trustworthy  in  his  promises,  then 
your  heavenly  King  is  far  more  faithful. 
The  former  promises  only  to  give  the  half 
of  his  kingdom,  but  he  to  give  you  the 
whole  kingdom.  Truth  may  be  crushed 
to  the  earth,  but  it  dies  not ;  it  can  be 
avoided  or  offended,  yet  it  will  finally 
come  to  light  and  triumph. — Starke. 

But  in  all  this  the  first  notable  thing 
is  how  far  apart  stand  the  judgments  of 
the  Almighty  and  those  of  this  world, 
since   those   whom   the   world   esteems 
most  happy  and  fortunate  are  truly  most 
unhappy  and   unfortunate  before  God. 
Men,  indeed,  seeing  only  what  appears, 
and  judging  according  to  the  outward 
semblance,  would  have  boldly  pronounced 
no    man   more  fortunate  than   Haman. 
But  in  fact,  and  in   God's  view,  who 
sees  the  heart,  he  was  of  all  men  the 
most   miserable.     For   he   was   inflated 
with  ambition,  he  was  hot  with  envyj^ 
he  was  bursting  with  hate,  and  went  to 
the  banquet  in  the  most  disturbed  state 
of  mind.     There  rankled  in  the  bottom 
of    his  heart  the  thought  of  the  fresh 
honour  which  he  had  lately  been  forced 
to  confer  upon  his  enemy ;  and  he  was, 
moreover,  goaded  to  desperation  by  what 
his  friends  had  told  him  to  his  face — 
that  he  himself,  having  once  begun  to 
fall  before  the  Jew,  would  for  ever  be 
his  inferior,  and  that  Mordecai  would  in- 
crease in  glory  and  honour. — Feuardent. 
"Let   me   make   haste   away  to  my 
country ;  there  are  my  excellent  ances- 
tors,  there   dwell   my   noble   relations, 
there   is  the  constant  residence  of  my 
dearest  friends  "  {Plotinus).  "  Oh,  happy 
will  that  day  be  when  I  shall  come  into 
that  glorious  assembly,  when  I  shall  have 
better  company  than  Homer,  Orpheus, 
Socrates,  Cato;  when  I  shall  sib  down 
with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  the 
palace  of  their  Friend  and  mine  !     Oh, 
happy  day,  when  I  shall  come  to  my 
Father's  house,  to  that  general  assembly, 
the  Church  of  the  first-born,  to  an  in- 
numerable company  of  angels,  to  Jesus 
the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  and 
to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  l" 


{TulT).  A  man's  knowledge  of  other 
things  may  add  to  his  fears,  and  make 
his  miseries  greater ;  but  the  more  know- 
ledge we  have  of  God,  the  less  our  fears 
and  sorrows  must  be ;  and  when  our 
knowledge  of  God  is  perfect,  all  our 
fears  and  sorrows  shall  be  for  ever  blown 
over.  I  cannot  omit  a  brave  speech  of 
that  noble  Stoic  which  comes  to  my 
mind  :  "  If  the  acquaintance  and  favour 
of  Caesar  can  keep  you  (as  you  are  made 
to  believe)  from  some  fears,  how  much 
rather  to  have  God  for  your  Father  and 
Friend  1  How  little  cause  have  such  to 
be  afraid  at  any  time  of  anything  !  Death 
itself  is  not  an  evil  to  a  friend  of  God  ; 
he  may  say.  Come,  let  us  go  quickly  to 
our  Father's  house  ;  our  Father  calls  us  " 
{Epid.). — Janewaifs  Quotations. 

The  concluding  words  were  calculated 
to  draw  his  attention  to  the  subject  as 
affecting  the  interests  of  his  kingdom. 
The  Jews  were  an  industrious  race.  Dis- 
persed throughout  the  kingdom  of  Persia, 
they  had  devoted  themselves  to  the  pur- 
suits of  agriculture  and  commerce.  They 
were  captives,  but  not  properly  slaves, 
having  their  settlements  here  and  there, 
for  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  or  for  mer- 
chandise, as  their  inclination  led ;  and, 
although  foreigners,  yet  mixed  up  with 
the  general  population  of  the  country, 
and  in  the  character  of  quiet,  peace- 
ful subjects,  contributing  toward  the 
general  wealth  and  prosperity.  That 
they  were  not  burdensome  for  their 
support,  but,  as  to  temporal  matters,  in 
a  flourishing  condition,  is  very  mani- 
fest from  Haman's  offer  to  pay  out  of 
their  spoil  so  large  a  sum  into  the 
royal  treasury.  To  have  swept  away, 
then,  by  a  wholesale  slaughter,  a  race  so 
active  and  industrious  as  the  Jews  were, 
would  have  been  to  inflict  a  heavy  blow 
upon  the  prosperity  of  the  kingdom. 
Their  spoils  might  be  a  present  benefit 
to  the  royal  exchequer,  but  the  loss  en- 
tailed upon  the  national  wealth  would 
be  permanent  and  irreparable.  And  the 
difference  would  not  be  great  as  to  the 
national  loss,  if  they  were  not  to  be  de- 
stroyed, but  merely  reduced  to  the  state 
of  slavery.  If  sold  as  slaves,  and  carried 
away  into  other  countries  by  the  slave- 
merchants  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  the  price 


CHAP.  VII.]                 HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  2\1 

paid  for  them  would  be  a  poor  return  the  wealth  of  the  countries  from  which 
for  the  fruit  of  their  continued  industry  they  came,  while  Britain,  on  the  other 
as  the  subjects  of  the  Persian  king.    And  hand,  was  rewarded  for  opening  her  arms 
if  tliey  were  made  slaves    in   his  own  to    shelter   the  oppressed  by  obtaining 
dominions,  there  would  be  the  loss  to  all  the  benefit  of  their  intelligence  and 
his  revenue  of  so  much  active  enterprise  labour,  as  not  only  skilful  artisans,  but 
on  the  part  of  a  people  who  paid  all  the  peaceful  and  religious  citizens, 
public  taxes,  and  increased  the  national  And  then  again,  with  respect  to  the 
resources  by  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  difference   between   the    exertions    and 
and  foreign  trading.       Esther  seems  to  enterprise   of    freemen  for  the   real  ad- 
have  known  better  than  the  king  did,  vantage  of  a  country,  as  contrasted  with 
and  better  than  some  modern  politicians  slaves,  Esther's  judgment  was  far  more 
have  done,  or  yet  do,  the  secret  of  the  correct,  for  instance,  than  that  of  the 
wealth   of  nations.      To   annihilate   an  Americans,  who  boast  so  much  of  their 
industrious  and  peaceful  people  she  re-  liberty  and  their  political  wisdom ;  and 
presents  as  an  act  equally  cruel  and  im-  her  judgment   is   corroborated   by    the 
politic.     To   substitute  slave-labour  for  sentiments  of  all  intelligent  travellers, 
the  labour  and  vigorous  and  persevering  who  have  recorded  their  experience  in 
industry  of  freemen  she   speaks   of  as  passing  through  those  States  of  America 
also  most  opposed  to  the  real  interests  where  slavery  is  legalized.*    The  labour 
of   the  state.     This  is  the  meaning  of  whicli  is  exacted  by  the  lash  is  neither 
her  words  :  "  If  we  had  been  sold  for  so  well  performed  nor  so  great  in  amount 
bondmen  and  bondwomen,  I  had  held  as  that  which  is  paid  for.     There  is  no 
my  tongue,  although  the  enemy  could  inducement  to  the  slave  to  cultivate  his 
not  countervail  the  king's  damage."    The  intellect.     When  he  sees  that  he  cannot 
sentiment  here  expressed  is  far  in  advance  better  his  condition,  he  naturally  sinks 
of  the  age  in  which  Esther  lived,  and  into  a  state  of  apathy,  or  endeavours  by 
the  truth  and  significance   of  it   have  craft  and  cunning  to  over-reach  his  task- 
often  been  illustrated  since   her   time,  masters.     And  thus,  altogether,  the  just 
although  only  illustrated  so  as  to  indi-  law  of  Providence  comes  in  to  punish 
cate  that   its   importance    was  not   yet  the    avarice  and  cruelty  of   those  who 
estimated,  nor  the  wisdom  of   it  prac-  trample  upon  the  rights  of  their  fellow- 
tically  felt.     Thus,  for  example,  when  men.     For  while  the  strength  of  a  coun- 
persecution  against  the  friends  of  Pro-  try  consists,  humanly  speaking,  in  the 
testantism  raged  fiercely  in  France  and  amount   of  its   industrious   population, 
Belgium,  and  those  who  preferred  the  with  a  full  supply  of  the  means  of  sub- 
religion  of  the  Bible  to  Popery  had  to  sistence — every  man  being  free  to  employ 
choose  between  remaining  at  home  to  be  his   mind  and   his  labour  in  the  field 
massacred,  or  seeking  a  refuge  abroad,  a  which  he  thinks  will  be  most  profitable 
vast  number  of  the  most  intelligent  and  — the  increase  of  a  slave  population  is  a 
industrious  of  the  population  took  refuge  source  of  positive  weakness,  as  well  as  a 
in  England  and  Scotland,  bringing  their  growing  cause  of  insecurity.    Apart  alto- 
skill  and  industry  with  them  to  benefit  gether  from  the  evils  and  sinfulness  of 
tlie   land    of  their   adoption.      History  the  system  of  slavery,  as  opposed  to  the 
settles  it  as  a  fact  beyond  all  question,  great  law  of  love  which  Christ  came  to 
that  these  refugees  for  conscience'  sake  enforce  and  establish,  and  apart  from  the 
contributed  more  largely  to  the  industrial  danger  which  results  from  the  preponder 
and    commercial   advancement    of    this  ance  of  a  class  between  whom  and  thos* 
country  than  it  would  be  easy  to  calcu-  above  them  there  cannot  be  any  real 
late.     For   in   those  days  we  were  far  good-will   and   sympathy,  slavery  is   a 
behind    our   continental   neighbours    in  positive  loss  to  a  community  in  all  re 
the  practice  of  the  mechanical  and  usc^ful  spects,    whether   moral   or  social ;    and 

arts ;  and  thus  the  bifirotrv  and  cruelty  .rm.      11           •      i-ti-j«a 

1  .  1    1                ii.-i    1      J          1              1  1  hough   slavery  18    abolished  in  America, 

\v  hich  drove  multitudes  to  seek  an  asylum  Davidson'!  remarks  hold  good  and  may  be  read 

in  this  island,  dried  up  the  sources  of  with  profit. 


248 


HOMILETIC  QOMMENTARY :   ESTHER. 


[OHAr.   VI J. 


Esther  spoke  the  truth  when  she  de- 
nounced it  as  calculated  to  work  damage 
to  the  king. — Davidson. 

Vers.  1,  2.  So  the  Icing  and  Haman 
came  to  banquet  vxith  Esther  the  queen. 
And  the  king  said  again  to  Esther  on 
the  second  day  at  the  banquet  of  wine, 
What  is  thy  petition,  queen  Esther  ?  and 
it  shall  be  granted  thee:  and  lohat  is 
thy  request  ?  and  it  shall  be  performed^ 
even  to  the  half  of  the  kingdom. 

Haman,  honoured  with  the  king's 
society  at  the  banquet  of  wine,  might 
expect  to  be  consoled  for  his  late  disap- 
pointment by  new  expressions  of  the 
royal  favour.  But  soon  did  his  hope  of 
any  remedy  prove  like  the  giving  up  of 
the  ghost.  He  was  brought  to  the 
banquet,  not  that  he  might  enjoy  tlie 
queen's  smiles,  but  that  he  might  hear 
an  accusation  against  himself,  which 
touched  his  life,  and  to  which  he  could 
not  answer. 

The  king  persisted  in  his  kind  senti- 
ments towards  Esther.  For  the  third 
time,  he  promises,  whatever  her  petition 
was,  to  grant  it,  even  to  the  half  of  the 
kingdom.  Who  would  not  liave  been 
emboldened  by  a  promise  so  often  given? 
To  have  deferred  the  petition  any  longer 
would  have  but  argued  an  angrateful 
distrust  of  the  king's  sincerity.  Let  us 
remember  how  much  greater  encourage- 
ment we  have  to  present  our  requests  to 
God,  and  what  distrust  we  discover  of 
his  faithfulness  if  we  do  not  come  be- 
fore his  throne  of  grace  with  boldness. 
No  less  than  six  times,  in  the  com- 
pass of  one  sentence,*  does  our  Lord 
»  Matt.  vii.  7,  8. 


Jesus  assure  us  that  our  prayers  shall  be 
heard. 

Ver.  3.  The7i  Esther  the  queen  an- 
swered and  said,  If  I  have  found  favour 
in  thy  sight,  0  king,  and  if  it  please 
the  king,  let  my  life  be  given  at  my 
petition,  and  my  people  at  my  request. 

Esther  at  last  ventured  to  bring  forth 
her  request.  The  nature  of  the  case 
pressed  her.  The  king's  solicitations 
urged  her.  His  kindness  and  his  pro- 
mises encouraged  her.  Unnecessary  de 
lays  are  dangerous,  especially  in  matters 
of  great  importance. 

The  request  was  for  her  life,  and  the 
life  of  her  people.  The  king  was  no 
less  surprised  at  this  petition  than  Festus 
was  at  hearing  the  accusation  of  the 
Jews  against  Paul.  It  was  certainly 
not  for  any  such  thing  as  the  king  sup- 
posed. It  never  came  into  his  mind 
that  his  beloved  queen  could  have  any 
occasion  to  present  a  petition  to  him  for 
her  life.  Although  by  his  own  author- 
ity (but  without  his  knowledge)  a  sen- 
tence of  death  had  been  pronounced 
against  her,  it  must  have  astonished  bin. 
to  hear  that  she  and  her  people  were 
doomed  to  destruction ;  and  it  must 
astonish  the  reader  of  this  history  that 
the  king,  five  years  after  his  marriage 
with  the  queen,  should  have  passed  a 
sentence  of  death  upon  her  whole  nation 
without  knowing  it.  Into  such  absurd- 
ities are  princes  led  who  are  too  indolent 
to  look  into  their  own  affairs,  and  leave 
them  to  be  managed  without  control  by 
favourites,  who  have  their  own  interests 
to  serve,  and  their  own  passions  to 
gratify.  — Laivson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAEAGRAPH.     Verses  5,  6. 
The  Doings  of  a  Wicked  Heart. 

Ahasuerus  was  yet  in  the  dark.  He  had  signed  the  decree  for  the  extermination 
of  the  Jews  at  the  instigation  of  Haman,  he  had  seen  Haman's  great  ambition,  he 
had  heard  Esther's  piteous  appeal,  but  still  he  is  not  sharp  enough  to  fix  upon 
Haman  as  the  offender.  Perhaps  it  is  that  he  does  know,  but*  waits  to  have  a  clear 
declaratioi*  from  Esther's  own  hps,  but  waits  to  see  the  case  plainly  settled  that 
Haman  was  the  guilty  one. 

I.  A  wicked  heart  induces  foolhardiness.  There  is  wisdom  apparent  in  the 
renderings  given  by  the  translators  of  the  Bible.  They  speak,  for  the  most  part,  as 
if  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Very  suggestive  is  their  rendering  of  the  question 
uttered  by  Ahasuerus.     "  Who  is  he,  and  where  is  he,  that  durst  presume  in  his 


OHAP.  VII.]  HOMILETIG  OOMMENTART:  ESTHER.  249 

heart  to  do  so  ? "  The  daring  presumption  of  those  impelled  by  wicked  hearts  is  indeed 
appalling.  A  wicked  heart  is  both  deceitfid  and  deceiving.  Haman's  wicked  heart 
must  have  deceived  him  as  to  the  daring  nature  of  the  course  he  had  been  pur- 
suing. He  only  thought  of  gratifying  an  evil  nature,  and  did  not  calmly  consider 
the  possible  and  very  probable  bitter  consequences.  This  is  characteristic  of  wicked 
hearts  through  all  time.  The  foolhardiness  of  the  wicked  is  astonishing.  They 
appear  as  if  bereft  of  their  senses.  When  we  see  how  clumsily  they  proceed  to 
work,  we  ask,  How  could  they  hope  to  escape  detection  1  What  induced  them  to 
take  the  fatal  step  %  How  is  it  that  they  actually  permit  themselves  to  be  caught 
in  their  own  toils  ^ 

II.  A  wicked  heart,  sooner  or  later,  meets  with  open  condemnation.  "  And 
Esther  said.  The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  Haman."  It  may  be  true  that 
the  wicked  heart  does  not  always  meet  with  a  righteous  and  indignant  Esther  come 
to  judgment.  Yet  it  cannot  escape  either  here  or  hereafter.  It  will  either  discover 
itself  or  be  discovered.  The  wicked  heart  will  discover  itself  by  its  wicked  fruits. 
For  a  long  time  it  may  work  in  secret,  but  ultimately  all  will  be  revealed.  He 
that  doeth  evil  may  avoid  the  light,  but  he  cannot  always  escape  its  detecting  rays. 
There  is  only  one  way  of  escape,  but  there  is  one  way,  and  it  is  all-sufficient.  That 
one  way  is  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If  the 
light  shines  upon  the  wicked  heart,  and  the  man  sees  with  holy  remorse  the  evil  of 
his  nature,  then  there  may  be,  and  is,  a  way  of  escape.  If  we  say  the  wicked  heart 
must  meet  with  open  condemnation,  wc  mean  if  that  wicked  heart  will  not  condemn 
itself,  but  continues  obdurate  and  impenitent. 

III.  A  wicked  heart  leads  to  fearfulness.  ''  Then  Haman  was  afraid  before  the 
king  and  the  queen."  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth.  If  a  man  has  not 
his  sensibilities  all  deadened,  then  he  must  be  afraid  in  the  midst  of  his  wickedness. 
All  the  annals  of  crime  tell  us  that  fearfulness  surprises  the  wicked.  They  live  in 
constant  terrors.  Haman,  however,  had  now  outward  reason  for  fear.  How  greatly 
was  he  troubled  at  this  crisis  !  He  had  fears  within.  There  were  fightings  against 
him  without.  Easy  it  is  for  us  to  say  that  Haman  was  a  coward.  Who  would 
not  have  been  a  coward  under  the  trying  circumstances  ]  A  virtuous  soul  may  be 
calm  and  brave  in  the  face  of  outward  terrors  ;  but  strange  would  it  be  if  a  vicious 
soul  did  not  give  way  to  fear.  Hardened  sinners  may  pass  through  the  terrors  of 
time  with  apparently  unmoved  natures ;  but  in  the  great  day  of  Divine  wrath  they 
will  say  to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him 
that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  5,  6. 

Now  Queen  Esther  musters  up  her  all  our  momentary  glory,  our  sins  shall 

inward  forces,  and,  with    an  undaunted  be    ripped  up,  and   our  iniquities   laid 

courage,  fixing  her  angry  eyes  upon  the  before  us,  to  our  utter  confusion.     With 

hated  Agagite,  she  says,  " The  adversary  what    consternation    did    Haman   now 

and   enemy    is   this   wicked    Haman."  stand  !     How  do  we  think  he  looked  to 

The  word  was  loath  to  come  forth,  but  hear   himself    thus   enstyled,    thus   ac- 

it  strikes  home  at  the  last.     Never  till  cused,  yea,  thus  condemned  1     Certainly 

now  did    Haman   hear  his  true   title  ;  death  was  in  his  face,  and  horror  in  every 

before,    some    had    styled    him   noble,  one  of  his  joints.     No  sense,  no  limb 

others    great,    others    magnificent,    and  knows  his  office.    Fain  would  he  speak  ; 

some,   perhaps,   virtuous;    only  Esther  but    his   tongue   falters,    and    his   lips 

gave  him  his  own,  "Wicked  Haman."  tremble.    Fain  would  he  make  apologies 

111  -  deserving   greatness   doth    in    vain  upon  his  knees  ;  but  his  heart  fails  him, 

promise  to  itself  a  perpetuity  of  applause,  and  tells  him  the  evidence  is  too  great. 

If  our    ways   be   foul,   the    time  sliall  Only  guiltiness  and   fear  look  through 

come  when,  after  all  vain  flattery,  after  his  eyes  upon  the  enraged  countenance 


250  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  [ohap.  mi. 


of  his  master,  which  now  bodes  nothing  dare  to  load   himself  with  such    guilt, 

to  him  but  revenge  and  death. — Bishop  Thus  David  was  filled  with  anger  against 

Hall.  a  man  who  was  only  the  emblem  of 

Ver.  6.    Then  the  king  Ahasuei'us  an-  himself.*      Consider   what    abhorrence 

sicered  and  said  unto  Esther  the  queen,  you  have  of  the  sins  of  other  men,  and 

Who  is  he,  and  where  is  he,  that  durst  consider  how  like  your  own  sins  are  to 

presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so  t  theirs,  and  let  your  souls  be  humbled 

What  I  to  compass  the  death  of  the  within  you.  Take  care  how  you  speak 
queen,  and,  as  if  that  were  too  small  a  of  the  sins  of  other  men,  lest  your 
wickedness,  the  destruction  of  all  her  tongues  condemn  yourselves.  Your  sins 
people  also  I  "Was  a  man  so  wicked  to  are  probably  much  liker  to  theirs  than 
be  found  in  any  of  the  hundred  and  you  imagine,  till  you  have  well  con- 
twenty-seven  provinces  of  the  king's  sidered  the  matter.  Perhaps  they  are  a 
dominions  ?  If  there  were  such  a  daring  great  deal  worse,  when  every  circum- 
criminal  to  be  found,  no  death  was  too  stance  is  considered, 
terrible  for  him.  Ver.  6.     And  Esther  said,  The  adver- 

What,  then,  will  our  Lord  do  when  sary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  Haman. 

he  rises  up  to  revenge  the  wrongs  done  Then  Haman  was  afraid  before  the  king 

to  himself  in  the  persons  of  his  brethren  ;  and  the  queen. 

of   those  who  are  espoused  to  him  in         Haman  now  finds  for  what  reason  he 

righteousness,  and  in  judgment,  and  in  was  invited  by  the  queen  to  her  banquet, 

loving-kindness,  and  in  mercies  1     Will  It  was,  to  be  accused  to  his  face  of  the 

he  not  account  the  wrongs  done  to  them  blackest  crime.     He  had  an  opportunity 

to  have  been  done  to  himself  ?     When  of  saying  what  could  be  said  (if  anything 

he  maketh  inquisition  for  blood,  woe  to  could  be  said)  in  his  own  vindication, 

them  that  are  stained  with  bloody  crimes  or  in  mitigation  of  his  offence.     But  if 

against  his  people.     The  wrath  of  Ahas-  he   had  nothing   to  say,  it  was   to  be 

uerus  against  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  expected  that  the  confusion  of  his  face 

was  a  fruit  of  God's  wrath  against  them,  would  be  a  witness  against  him. 
He  forgot  not  his  promise  to  Abraham,         This  was  actually  the  case.     "  Then 

"  I  will  bless  him  that  blesseth  thee,  and  Haman  was  afraid  before  the  king  and 

I  will  curse  him  that  curseth  thee,"  the  queen."     He  had  too  good  reason  to 

"  What  and  where  is  he  that  durst  do  tremble   for  his   life.     The  queen  had 

this  thing]" — What  if  Ahasuerus  him-  brought   a  dreadful   accusation  against 

self  is  the  man,  although  it  would  have  him,  and  his  guilt  was  too  apparent  to 

been  unwise  in  the  queen  to  tell  him  be  denied  or  to  be  extenuated.     It  was, 

that  he  was.     He  was  certainly^  though  besides,  of  a  nature  fitted  to  excite  the 

unconscious   of    it,   a   partner   in    this  king's  fiercest  indignation  and  bitterest 

wickedness ;  and  yet  he  was  filled  with  rage. — Lawson. 
horror  at  hearing  that  any  person  could  •  2  Sam.  xil 


MAIN  HOMILETIOS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.    Verses  7,  10. 

The  Fear,  the  Folly,  and  the  Doom  of  the  Evil-Doer. 

After  Ahasuerus  had  heard  Esther's  accusation,  he  went  out  into  the  palace 
garden.  Wrath  was  in  his  countenance  ;  wrath  in  his  hasty  tread.  The  sweet 
air  of  the  palace  garden,  laden  with  rich  odours,  did  not  allay  his  anger.  No  soft 
music  was  found  strong  enough  to  drive  away  the  evil  spirit.  Angry  he  went  forth, 
and  angry  he  returned.  The  off'ence  was  of  too  grave  a  character  to  be  thus  easily 
forgotten.  It  is  not  for  us  here  to  conjecture  how  far  Ahasuerus  might  have  gone 
on  the  line  of  forgiveness.  Perhaps  it  was  needful  for  the  interests  of  his  govern- 
ment that  this  bad  man  (Haman)  should  be  at  once  brought  to  judgment.  In 
human  codes  the  boundary  line  of  forgiveness  is  soon  reached.     In  the  Divine 


OOAP.  vn.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  251 


administration  there  is  the  exercise  of  forgiveness  on  a  vast  scale.  But  even  there 
we  seem  to  find  a  limit.  If  men  reject  all  the  Divinely  -  appointed  means  for 
obtaining  pardon,  there  only  remaineth  "  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment." 
*'  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ] "  Men  must  not  trifle 
vnW\  the  Divine  nature.  God  is  merciful,  but  God  is  just.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord 
while  he  may  be  found." 

I.  The  evil-doer  receives  warning.  *'  Haman  saw  that  there  was  evil  deter- 
mined against  him  by  the  king."  At  present  Haman  had  not  ascertained  the  extent 
and  the  nature  of  the  evil ;  but  he  clearly  heard  the  sound  of  the  avenging  deity, 
though  his  feet  might  be  shod  with  wool.  The  wrath  on  the  king's  countenance 
and  the  guilt  in  Haman's  soul  both  tended  to  give  him  awful  warning.  Evil-doers 
receive  warning.  Nature  gives  warning.  She  declares  that  evil-doing  must  bring 
damage  sooner  or  later.  She  is  stern,  and  will  not  suffer  her  great  laws  to  be 
violated  with  impunity.  Eevelation  gives  warning.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it 
shall  die."  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  History  gives  warning.  The  warnings 
too  are  given  long  before  it  is  too  late.  The  evil-doer  when  meeting  the  doom  of 
his  crimes  will  not  be  able  justly  to  say,  Had  I  known  only  in  time  !  had  some  voice 
only  spoken  early  enough  to  arrest  me  in  the  career  of  crime  !  The  voices  do  speak, 
but  the  evil-doer  turns  a  deaf  ear.  Oh,  let  us  listen  to  every  warning  voice ;  let 
us  be  wise  in  time.  Haman  now  heard  the  warning  voice,  but  it  was  almost  too 
late.     But  it  may  not  yet  be  too  late  for  us.     *'  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live." 

II.  The  foolish  evil-doer  works  his  own  destruction.  Perhaps  anything  that 
Haman  could  have  done  at  this  crisis  would  not  have  been  efficacious  to  avert  his 
awful  doom.  May  we  not  suppose,  however,  that  if  Esther  had  seen  the  signs  of 
genuine  repentance  in  Haman,  and  had  heard  from  his  lips  a  sincere  confession  of 
his  baseness  and  of  his  guilt,  she  would  have  done  something  for  his  pardon  1  But 
he  did  not  take  this  course.  He  was  found  by  the  king  in  a  position  that  tended 
to  excite  still  more  the  king's  wrath.  The  very  means  that  Haman  took  to  save 
his  life  was  the  means  of  bringing  about  his  speedy  execution.  All  through  this 
history  Haman  is  seen  working  for  his  own  destruction,  though  he  thought  he  was 
Avorking  for  the  destruction  of  his  enemies.  Sinners  work  their  own  destruction, 
and  bring  upon  themselves  their  own  awful  doom.  In  this  connection  we  may 
rightly  speak  of  the  inexorable  nature  of  law.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  sin  against 
the  great  laws  of  nature  and  of  revelation.  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  We 
bring  upon  ourselves  our  own  punishment.  In  this  sense  we  are  the  dread  arbiters 
of  our  own  fearful  fate. 

III.  The  evil-doer  raises  striking  evidence  of  his  own  guilt.  "  Behold  also, 
the  gallows  fifty  cubits  high,  which  Hainan  had  made  for  Mordecai,  who  had  spoken 
good  for  the  king,  standeth  in  the  house  of  Hainan."  Crafty  as  Haman  might  be, 
he  was  not  crafty  enough  to  keep  his  vile  purpose  a  secret.  It  was  evidently  well 
known  for  whom  the  gallows  was  intended.  Haman  in  raising  the  gallows  was 
preparing  a  terrible  and  irresistible  evidence  against  himself.  Facts  are  stubborn 
things,  and  whatever  poor  Haman  might  attempt  to  say  in  his  own  defence,  he  could 
not  talk  down  the  gallows  raised  fifty  cubits  high.  There  it  was  to  speak  for  itself, 
and  to  condemn  the  guilty  Haman.  How  often  in  life  do  we  see  the  evil-doer 
making  a  gallows  fifty  cubits  high  !  The  sinner  unwittingly  writes  bitter  things 
against  himself,  and  the  writing  is  brought  forth  in  an  evil  hour  to  his  condemn- 
ation. "  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee,  thou  wicked  servant.  Thou 
knewest  that  I  was  an  austere  man,  taking  up  that  I  laid  not  down,  and  reaping  that 
I  did  not  sow:  wherefore  then  gavest  not  thou  my  money  into  the  bank,  that  at  my 
coming  I  might  have  required  mine  ovvn  with  usury  1" 

IV.  The  evil-doer  is  practically  his  own  executioner.  "So  they  hanged 
Haraan  on  the  gallows  that  he  had  prepared  for  Mordecai."  We  must  pity  Haman 
in  his  direful  doom ;  still  we  feel  as  if  there  was  a  certain  fitness  in  the  case.  Our 
natures  approve  the  law  of  retribution.     We  seem  to  feel  that  unblushing  crime 


252 


HOMILETIG  GOMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


[chap.  VII. 


should  not  go  unpunished.  The  course  and  the  doom  of  Haman  may  not  be  the 
exact  counterpart  of  every  evil-doer's  course  and  doom ;  yet  there  is  here  portrayed 
a  great  general  law  which  we  would  do  well  to  note  with  all  seriousness.  When 
we  come  to  harm  on  account  of  our  sins,  we  are  too  apt  to  blame  our  fellows,  to 
blame  our  circumstances,  to  blame  the  devil.  We  ought  to  blame  ourselves.  W^e 
only  get  hung  on  the  gallows  we  ourselves  have  erected.  '*  Be  sure  your  sin  will 
find  you  out."  Let  us  at  once  proceed,  by  repenting  of  our  pride,  our  hate,  and 
our  jealousy,  to  destroy  the  gallov/s.  Let  us  look  by  faith  to  the  cross,  and  all  that 
is  signified  thereby,  and  then  any  other  cross  raised  by  sinful  folly  will  be  diverted 
of  its  power  to  do  us  lasting  damage. 

"  Then  was  the  king's  wrath  pacified."  The  flattering  minion  was  removed  out 
of  his  sight.  The  projector  of  wholesale  murder  was  himself  destroyed.  Ahasiferus 
himself  was  not  safe  so  long  as  Haman  was  allowed  to  exist.  Wrath,  however,  is 
cruel,  and  nothing  but  Haman's  death  could  pacify  the  angry  king.  If  it  must 
needs  be  that  capital  punishment  be  the  portion  of  certain  transgressors,  the  sentence 
should  not  be  carried  out  in  order  to  pacify  wrath,  but  to  meet  the  demands  of 
justice,  as  a  deterrent  to  crime,  and  to  promote  the  public  safety.  Well  were  it  if 
we  could  dispense  with  the  gallows.  Well  were  it  if  strict  justice  tempered  by 
mercy  always  administered  the  law  to  transgressors.  God's  laws  are  always  wisely 
and  righteously  administered.  I^ever  yet  can  it  be  said  that  God's  wrath  was 
pacified  by  the  execution  of  any  sinner.  The  crucifixion  of  Jesus  Christ  was  not 
an  exhibition  of  Divine  wrath,  but  of  Divine  love.  It  was  the  method  by  which 
God  could  be  just,  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  the  believer.  It  may  be  a  mystery,  but 
there  is  in  the  remedial  scheme  of  the  gospel  more  mercy  than  mystery. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  7 — 10. 


The  king  indeed  is  unjust  in  fixing 
this  calumny  upon  Haman ;  but  God  is 
just,  who  permits  the  righteous  penalty 
to  fall  upon  him  for  his  lies  and  calum- 
nies, inasmuch  as  he  would  have  brought 
violence  upon  other  virgins  or  matrons 
and  would  have  plunged  the  whole 
people  of  God  into  ruin.  Accordingly, 
it  is  written,  "By  what  one  sinneth, 
by  that  also  shall  he  be  punished ; " 
and  again,  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete, 
it  shall  be  measured  unto  you  again." 
— Feuardent. 

It  must  also  so  happen  in  the  just 
judgment  of  God,  that  since  the  highest 
minister  of  state  had  caused  the  highest 
gallows  to  be  erected,  in  accordance  with 
his  greatness  of  feeling  and  state  position 
and  honours,  before  which  all  bowed  in 
adoration  to  the  earth,  he  should  himself 
be  elevated  above  all  other  people  that 
wore  hung. — Starke. 

Said  before  the  king.]  Not  a  man 
opens  his  mouth  to  speak  for  Haman, 
but  all  against  him.  Had  the  cause 
been  better,  thus  it  would  have  been. 
P>ery  cur  is  ready  to  fall  upon  the  dog 
that  he  seeth  worried ;  every  man  ready 


to  pull  a  branch  from  the  tree  that  is 
falling.     Cromwell    had   experience   of 
this  when  once  he  fell  into  displeasure 
by  speaking  against  the  king's  match  with 
Lady  Catherine  Howard,  in  defence  of 
Queen  Anne  of  Cleve,  and  discharge  of 
his  conscience,  for  the  which  he  suffered 
death,  Stephen  Gardiner  being  the  chief 
engineer.    Had  Haman's  cause  been  like 
his,  albeit  he  had  found  as  few  friends 
to  intercede  for  him  as  Cromwell,  yet  he 
might  have  died  with  as  much  comfort 
as  he  did.     But  he  died  more  like  to 
the  Lord  Hungerford,  of  Hatesby,  who 
was  beheaded  together  with  the  noble 
Cromwell ;   but  neither  so   Christianly 
suffering  nor  so  quietly  dying   for   his 
offence  committed  against  nature,  viz., 
buggery.      Cromwell   exhorted    him    to 
repent,  and  promised    him  mercy  from 
God ;    but  his  heart  was  hardened,  and 
so   was   this    wicked   Haman's.       God, 
therefore,  justly  set  off  all  hearts  from 
him  in  his  greatest  necessity ;  and  now, 
to  add  to  his  misery,  brings  another  of 
his  foul  sins  to  light,  that  he  might  bo 
the  more  condignly  cut  off. — Trapp. 
It  was  an  excellent  saying  of  Ambrose, 


IJHAP.  VII.J 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


253 


"  If  thou  canst  not  hide  thyself  from 
the  sun,  which  is  God's  minister  of 
light,  how  impossible  will  it  be  to  hide 
thyself  from  him,  whose  eyes  are  ten 
thousand  timos  brighter  than  the  sun !  " 
You  know  what  Ahasuerus,  that  great 
monarch,  said  concerning  Haman  : 
'^  What,"  saith  he,  *'  will  he  force  the 
queen  before  me  in  the  house] "  There 
was  killing  emphasis  in  the  words  "  be- 
fore me."  Will  he  force  the  queen  be- 
fore me  ?  What,  will  he  dare  to  com- 
mit such  villany,  and  I  stand  and  look 
on  ?  0  sirs,  to  sin  in  the  sight  of  God 
is  a  thing  that  he  looks  upon  as  the 
greatest  affront,  and  as  the  highest  in- 
dignity that  can  possibly  be  done  unto 
him. — Brooks. 

The  thought  which  is  at  once  sug- 
gested to  our  minds  in  connection  with 
Haman's  execution  on  the  gallows  which 
he  had  himself  prepared  for  Mordecai, 
is  that  of  a  righteous  retribution  in  pro- 
vidence, a  subject  which  cannot  be  too 
delicately  handled,  nor  too  cautiously 
and  reservedly  applied.  There  are  some 
who  are  always  ready  to  interpret  calam- 
ity as  a  retribution  in  providence,  with 
the  greatest  self-blindness  as  to  their 
own  sins.  Let  a  terrible  accident  happen 
to  a  railway  train  travelling  on  sabbath 
day,  and  some  will  be  found  to  describe 
it  as  a  retribution  in  providence  against 
sabbath  desecration.  Alas !  Do  they 
never  desecrate  the  sabbath,  that  they 
should  be  so  ready  to  give  a  stone  for 
bread  to  the  wounded  and  mourning] 
Let  a  theatre,  or  some  other  place  of 
public  resort  not  generally  approved  of, 
be  destroyed  by  fire,  and  many  lives 
lost,  and  some  will  discourse  upon  it,  in 
like  manner,  as  a  retribution  in  provi- 
dence. Do  they  not  reflect  that  build- 
ings devoted  to  useful  manufacture,  and 
even  to  the  worship  of  God,  have  been 
destroyed  in  the  same  way,  and  with 
similar  disastrous  results  ]  If  they  would 
not  venture  to  apply  the  rule  in  the  one 
case,  why  should  they  do  it  in  the  other  ] 
Cowper  has  put  the  doctrine  of  a  uni- 
versal providence  in  two  lines,  with 
which  we  must  all  agree  : — 

"  Happy  the  man  who  sees  a  God  employed 
In  all  the  good  and  ill  that  chequer  life." 

But  when  men  sit  in  judgment  upon 


God's  judgments,  and  apply  the  law  of 
retribution  in  particular  cases,  according 
to  their  own  notions  of  things,  they  are 
in  danger,  like  Job's  friends,  of  mistak- 
ing the  chastisement  of  God's  children 
for  signal  marks  of  his  disapprobation, 
or,  like  the  barbarians  on  the  island  of 
Melita,  who  conceived  that  Paul  must 
be  a  murderer  when  the  viper  had  come 
out  of  the  fire  and  fastened  on  his  hand, 
but  who,  when  he  had  shaken  it  off  and 
suffered  no  harm,  changed  their  minds, 
and  said  that  he  must  be  a  god.  Better 
for  us  rather  to  make  the  personal  appli- 
cation of  all  the  calamities  which  occur 
in  the  providence  of  God  recommended 
in  the  Gospel  by  Luke,  and  read  therein 
these  words  of  solemn  warning  : — "  Nay ; 
but  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  like- 
wise perish." 

But  whilst  we  cannot  consent  to  men 
becoming  the  interpreters  of  God's  judg- 
ments in  particular  cases,  we  have  a 
great  law  of  retribution  clearly  indicated 
as  well  in  the  Bible  as  in  profane  his- 
tory. We  may  call  the  illustrations  of 
it  which  might  be  adduced  simply  coin- 
cidences ;  but  the  sin  is  so  conspicuously 
stamped  on  the  punishment  that  we  can 
hardly  avoid  connecting  the  one  with 
the  other  in  providence.  The  guilty 
Agagite  takes  the  place  of  the  unoffend- 
ing Jew,  and  bears  the  punishment 
which  he  had  prepared  for  him.  Joseph's 
brethren  sold  Joseph  into  Egypt,  and 
by-and-by  they  were  themselves  carried 
down  into  Egypt.  Adoni-bezek  had 
the  thumbs  and  great  toes  of  threescore 
and  ten  kings  cut  off,  and  when  he  him- 
self was  taken  in  battle  Judah  and 
Simeon  had  his  own  thumbs  and  great 
toes  cut  off,  moving  him  to  make  this 
confession  :  "  As  I  have  done,  so  God 
hath  requited  me."  Herod  the  Great 
massacred  the  innocent  little  children  of 
Bethlehem,  and  he  himself  was  over- 
whelmed with  agonizing  physical  disease, 
and  his  numerous  family  was  extinct  in 
a  hundred  years.  Pontius  Pilate,  who 
condemned  Christ  to  death ;  Judas, 
who  betraye-d  him;  and  Nero,  who 
slew  thousands  of  early  believers,  com- 
mitted suicide,  though  the  last  had  to 
call  in  the  aid  of  others  to  complete 
what    he  had   begun.     Almost  all   the 


254 


HOMlLETia  COMMENTARY:    E8THER. 


[chap.  VII. 


prominent  persecutors  of  the  Church 
have  died  deaths  of  violence.  Maxi- 
minus  put  out  the  eyes  of  thousands  of 
Christians,  and  afterwards  he  himself 
died  of  a  fearful  disease  of  the  eyes,  in 
great  agony.  And  Yalens,  who  caused 
fourscore  presbyters  to  be  sent  to  sea  in 
a  ship  and  burnt  alive,  himself,  defeated 
by  the  Goths,  fled  to  a  cottage  where  he 
was  burnt  alive.  Still  more  compre- 
hensively we  have  the  Apostle  Paul 
declaring,  with  reference  to  those  who 
"  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth  that 
they  might  be  saved,"  that  they  would 
be  smitten  with  judicial  blindness ; 
**  and  for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them 
strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe 
a  lie." 

In  avoiding  Scylla  we  must  beware  of 
falling  into  Charybdis;  in  refusing  to 
become  interpreters  of  particular  calami- 
tous providences,  we  must  be  on  our 
guard  against  denying  a  retributive  pro- 
vidence altogether.  No  doubt  this  spe- 
cialty in  providence  comprehends  both 
nations  and  individuals,  noiselessly  over- 
taking evil-doers  and  causing  them  to 
reap  as  they  had  sown,  according  to  the 
proverb — "The  feet  of  the  avenging 
deity  are  shod  with  wool."  Without 
commotion  or  tumult  the  punishment 
grows  out  of  the  sin,  and  the  transgressor 
is  visited  according  to  his  iniquity.  In 
most  instances  it  requires  no  direct  in- 
terference of  the  Almighty,  but  follows, 
surely  and  directly,  from  the  operation 
of  great  natural  and  spiritual  laws. 
**  Fret  not  thyself  because  of  evil-doers, 
neither  be  thou  envious  against  the 
workers  of  iniquity  ;  for  they  shall  soon 
be  cut  down  like  the  grass,  and  wither 
as  the  green  herb." 

Then  a  reflection  of  a  diff'erent  kind 
is  suggested  by  the  feelings  of  the  king 
after  the  execution  of  Ham  an  :  "  Then 
was  the  king's  wrath  pacified."  Modern 
theology  is  apt  to  drift  away  into  mere 
sentimental  views  of  the  character  of 
God.  It  may  be  a  reaction  from  the 
harsh  and  terrible  aspects  in  which  the 
Divine  character  was  presented  in  a 
former  age,  giving  to  childhood  and 
youth  such  an  idea  of  God  as  was  fitted 
rather  to  excite  terror  than  inspire  with 
reverence  and  love.     From  one  extreme, 


however,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  dart 
to  another,  equally  false  and  dangerous. 
We  must  not  conceive  of  God  as  simply 
all  love  and  mercy.  We  cannot  indeed 
exalt  too  highly  these  perfections  of  his 
nature,  but  we  must  not  allow  them  to 
shut  out  from  view  other  attributes  of 
his  being.  Let  these  alone  have  pos- 
session of  our  minds,  and  we  might  sup- 
pose that  there  was  no  need  for  God 
being  reconciled  to  sinners,  but  only  of 
them  being  reconciled  to  him ;  that  he 
is  all  love  and  mercy  toward  them  if  they 
would  only  return  to  him,  and  that  he 
will  be  their  Father  if  they  will  only 
submit  to  be  his  children.  There  is  a 
measure  of  truth  in  this  kind  of  reason- 
ing, but  it  is  only  a  half-truth ;  and  a 
half-truth  is  sometimes  more  perilous 
than  unmitigated  error.  He  assures  us 
that  he  is  "  angry  with  the  wicked  every 
day  ; "  that  he  is  a  "  consuming  fire  ;  " 
and  that  he  will  "  by  no  means  clear 
the  guilty."  Though  his  wrath  against 
the  wicked  has  nothing  of  vindictiveness 
or  revenge  in  it,  yet  is  it  none  the  less, 
but  the  more,  wrath — tremendous  wrath. 
■  If  a  king  is  merciful  and  loving,  as  well 
as  just  and  righteous,  his  wrath  is  all 
the  more  to  be  dreaded ;  and  whilst  God 
is  inhnitely  loving  and  merciful,  he 
cannot  allow  his  love  and  mercy  to 
overreach  his  justice,  righteousness,  and 
truth.  So  long  as  we  keep  in  view  only 
the  paternal  aspects  of  the  Divine 
character,  we  might  see  in  the  cross  of 
Christ  nothing  more  than  an  exhibition 
of  love  and  mercy,  to  attract,  if  possible, 
the  regards  of  mankind  sinners ;  no  reaj 
satisfaction  offered  for  sin — "  the  jusl 
for  the  unjust" — but  only  a  proof  anc 
pledge  that  God  was  kindly  disposed 
toward  them  if  they  would  only  returi 
to  him.  How  defective  and  misleading 
would  be  such  a  contemplation  of  thtt 
cross  of  Christ !  Besides  the  expression 
of  love,  it  is  the  endurance  by  One  who 
was  able  to  bear  it,  because  ho  had  no 
sin,  of  the  penalty  and  curse  of  sin  in 
the  room  of  all  who  believe.  So  that 
only  when  we  come  to  God,  presenting 
in  faith  the  atonement  for  sin  whicli 
Christ  made  on  Calvary,  is  God's  wrath 
pacified,  and  the  sinner  not  simply  recou' 
ciled  to  him,  but  he  also  to  the  sinner. 


OHAP.  vn.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ESTHER. 


255 


The  claims  of  his  law  and  the  demands 
of  his  righteous  government  are  only 
and  fully  satisfied  in  Clu'ist.  Accord- 
ingly, we  cannot  tell  the  sinner  that 
God's  wrath  is  pacified  towards  him  so 
long  as  he  has  not  accepted  Christ,  and 
is  not  to  he  found  in  him.  It  is  true 
that  God  is  all  loving  and  merciful ;  but 
his  love  and  mercy  cannot  reach  him 
so  long  as  he  is  outside  of  Christ.  Apart 
from  Christ,  through  unbelief,  he  cannot 
be  otherwise  surveyed  than  as  exposed 
to  wrath — a  wrath  which  shall  find  its 
full  manifestation  in  the  decisions  and 
allotments  of  the  final  day.  But  in 
Christ,  received  by  faith,  that  wrath  has 
already  emptied  itself  and  been  exhausted 
in  him,  and  for  the  true  believer  there 
are  only  love  and  mercy — love  and 
mercy,  the  fulness  of  which  can  be 
measured  only  by  the  greatness  of  the 
sacrifice  made,  in  order  that  they  might 
rest  with  him  for  ever.  *'  He  hath 
made  him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew 
no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  right- 
eousness of  God  in  him."  "  Then  was 
the  king's  wrath  pacified." — McEwan. 

As  of  one  crucified,  whose  visage  spake 
Fell  rancour,  malice  deep,  wherein  he  died ; 
And  round  him  Ahasuerus  the  great  king ; 
Esther  his  bride ;  and  Mordecai  the  just, 
Blameless  in  word  and  deed. 

Care'ifs  Dante. 

Thus  Pharaoh  drowns  the  Hebrew 
males  in  a  river ;  therefore  is  drowned 
himself  with  his  army  in  a  sea.  He  had 
laid  insupportable  burdens  on  Israel; 
God  returns  them  with  full  weight, 
number,  measure.  When  Israel  cut  off 
the  thumbs  and  great  toes  of  Adoni- 
bezek,  hear  the  maimed  king  confess 
the  equity  of  this  judgment :  "  Three- 
score and  ten  kings,  having  their  thumbs 
and  great  toes  cut  off,  gathered  their 
meat  under  my  table  ;  as  I  have  done, 
so  God  hath  requited  me."  As  proud 
Bajazet  threatened  to  serve  Tamerlane, 
being  conquered, — to  imprison  tiim  in  a 
cage  of  iron,  and  carry  him  about  the 
world  in  triumph, — so  the  Scythian, 
having  took  the  bragging  Turk,  put  him 
to  the  punishment  himself  had  lessoned; 
carrying  and  carting  him  through  Asia, 
to  be  scorned  of  his  own  people.  Thus 
Haman  is  hanged  on  his  own  gallows. 


Perillus    tries   the    trick    of    his   own 
torment.  — Adams. 

When  Haman  desires  the  ruin  of  the 
Jews,  procures  the  king's  commission, 
sends  despatches  to  all  the  governors  of 
the  provinces,  sets  up  a  gibbet  for  Mor- 
decai, and  wants  nothing  but  an  oppor- 
tunity to  request  the  execution,  he  tum- 
bles down  to  exchange  his  prince's  favours 
for  an  exaltation  on  the  gallows.  When 
the  serpent  increased  his  malicious  cruelty, 
and  cast  out  a  flood  against  the  Church, 
God  makes  the  earth,  the  carnal  world, 
to  give  her  assistance,  and  repel  the  force 
that  Satan  used  against  her.  *'  The  earth 
helped  the  woman."  When  "  multitudes 
shall  gather  together  in  the  valley  of 
decision,"  then  shall  "  the  Lord  roar  out 
of  Sion,  and  be  the  hope  of  his  people, 
and  the  strength  of  the  children  of  Israel." 
And  when  spiritual  Egypt  shall  make 
a  war  against  Christ,  who  sits  upon  the 
white  horse,  and  combine  all  their  force 
for  the  destruction  of  his  people,  then 
shall  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  be 
taken,  and  brought  to  their  final  ruin, 
and  their  force  be  broken  in  a  lake  of 
fire,  as  that  of  Egypt  was  in  a  sea  of 
water.  The  time  of  their  greatest  fierce- 
ness shall  be  the  time  of  Christ's  fury. 
— Charnock. 

Haman  missed  of  his  plot ;  he  fell  into 
danger ;  he  fell  into  the  same  danger 
which  he  contrived  for  Mordecai ;  and 
was  the  means  of  Mordecai's  advance- 
ment. It  had  been  enough  to  have 
woven  a  spider's  web,  which  is  done 
with  a  great  deal  of  art,  and  yet  comes 
to  nothing ;  but  to  hatch  a  cockatrice's 
egg,  that  brings  forth  a  viper  which 
stings  to  death,  this  is  a  double  vexation. 
Yet  thus  God  delighteth  to  catch  the 
"  wise  in  the  imagination  of  their  own 
hearts,"  and  to  pay  them  in  their  own 
coin.  The  wicked  carry  a  lie  in  their 
right  hand ;  for  they  trust  in  man,  who 
is  but  a  lie;  and,  being  liars  themselves 
too,  no  marvel  if  their  hopes  prove  de- 
ceitful, so  that,  while  they  sow  the  wind, 
they  reap  the  whirlwind. 

Mischievous  attempts  are  successless 
in  the  long  run  ;  for  did  ever  any  harden 
themselves  against  God  and  prosper  longi 
Let  Cain  speak,  let  Pharaoh,  Haman, 
Ahithophel,  Herod ;  let  the  persecutors 


256 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[OHAF.  Til, 


of  the  Church  for  the  first  two  hundred 
years,  let  all  that  ever  bore  ill-will  to- 
wards Sion,  speak,  and  they  will  confess 
they  did  but  kick  against  the  pricks, 
and  dash  against  the  rocks.  The  great- 
est torment  of  the  damned  spirit  is,  that 
God  turns  all  his  plots  for  the  good  of 
those  he  hates  most.  He  tempted  man 
to  desire  to  become  like  God,  that  so  he 
might  ruin  him ;  but  God  became  man, 
and  so  restored  him.      God  serveth  him- 


self of  this  arch-politician  and  all  his  in- 
struments ;  they  are  but  executioners  of 
God's  will  while  they  rush  against  it. 
Joseph's  brethren  sold  him  that  they 
might  not  worship  him,  and  that  was  the 
very  means  whereby  they  came  at  length 
to  worship  him.  God  delights  to  take 
the  oppressed  party's  part.  Wicked  men 
cannot  do  God's  children  a  greater  plea- 
sure than  to  oppose  them,for  by  this  means 
they  help  to  advance  them. — Sibbes. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  VIL 


Vers.  3,  4.  Philosopher  and  enraged  emperor. 
Joseph  charged  his  brethren  that  they  should 
come  no  more  in  his  sight,  unless  they  brought 
Benjamin  with  them.  We  come  at  our  peril 
into  God's  presence  if  we  leave  his  beloved 
Benjamin,  our  dear  Jesus,  behind  us.  When 
the  philosopher  heard  of  the  enraged  emperor's 
menace,  that  the  next  time  he  saw  him  he 
would  kill  him,  he  took  up  the  emperor's  little 
son  in  his  arms,  and  saluted  him  with  a  Potesne, 
Thou  canst  not  now  strike  me.  God  is  angry 
with  every  man  for  his  sins.  Happy  is  he  that 
can  catch  up  his  Son  Jesus ;  for  in  whose  arms 
soever  the  Lord  sees  his  Son,  he  will  spare  him. 
The  men  of  Tyre  were  fain  to  intercede  to  Herod 
by  Blastus.  Our  intercession  to  God  is  made 
by  a  higher  and  surer  way ;  not  by  his  servant, 
but  by  his  Son. — Adams. 

There  is  a  notable  story  which  is  commonly 
by  divines  applied  to  our  present  purpose ;  it  is 
concerning  a  law  among  the  Molossians,  where 
whosoever  came  to  the  king  with  his  son  in  his 
arms  should  be  accepted  with  favour,  let  his  fault 
be  what  it  might.  So  let  a  man  be  what  he  will 
before,  yet  if  he  come  to  God  in  Christ  he  can- 
not be  thrust  away. — Janeway. 

The  full  chest  hidden.  In  the  very  last  year 
of  the  Arctic  expeditions,  last  year  or  the  year 
before,  they  found  an  ammunition  chest  that 
Commander  Parry  had  left  there  fifty  years  ago, 
safe  under  a  pile  of  stones,  the  provisions  inside 
being  perfectly  sweet  and  good,  and  eatable. 
There  it  had  lain  all  those  years,  and  men  had 
died  of  starvation  within  arm's  length  of  it.  It 
was  there  all  the  same.  And  so,  if  I  may 
venture  to  vulgarize  the  great  theme  that  I  am 
trying  to  speak  about,  God  has  given  us  his  Son, 
and  in  him  all  that  pertains  to  life  and  all  that 
pertains  to  godliness.  My  brothers,  take  the 
things  that  are  freely  given  to  men  of  God.  — 
McLaren. 

The  gipsy  horsestealer.  There  was  a  time  in 
our  country's  history  when,  accordng  to  our 
Draconic  code,  death  was  the  penalty  of  horse- 
stealing. This  awful  sentence  was  passed  on  a 
poor  gipsy  who  had  been  guilty  of  this  crime,  and 
no  hope  of  mercy  was  held  out.  The  young  man, 
for  he  was  but  a  youth,  immediately  fell  on  his 


knees,  and  with  uplifted  hands  and  eyes  addressed 
the  judge  as  follows  :  "Oh,  my  lord,  save  my 
life !  "  The  judge  replied,  •*  No,  you  can  have  no 
mercy  in  this  world;  I  and  my  brother  judges 
have  come  to  the  determination  to  execute  horse- 
stealers, especially  gipsies,  because  of  the  increase 
of  the  crime."  The  suppliant  on  his  knees  still 
entreated,  "Oh,  my  lord  judge,  save  my  life. 
Do,  for  God's  sake,  for  my  wife's  sake,  for  ray 
child's  sake  ! "  **  No,"  replied  the  judge  ;  "  you 
should  have  thought  of  your  wife  and  child  be- 
fore ;  "  and  the  poor  fellow  was  literally  dragged 
away  from  his  earthly  judge.  Haman  pleaded 
for  his  life,  but  he  was  taken  to  the  gallows. 
Vast  is  the  mercy  of  Heaven.  At  the  eleventh 
hour  the  sinner  repenting  and  confessing  and 
believing  may  find  mercy, 

Ver.  7.  The  French  king.  By  imploring 
mercy  perhaps  you  may  be  saved,  but  by  justify- 
ing the  injury  you  cannot  but  be  lost.  As  the 
French  king,  Francis  the  First,  said  to  a  woman 
kneeling  and  crying  to  him  for  justice,  **  Stand 
up,  woman,  for  justice  I  owe  thee  ;  if  thou  beg- 
gest  anything,  beg  mercy."  So  if  you  request 
anything  of  God,  let  it  be  mercy,  for  he  owes  you 
justice  ;  and  in  this  point,  God  be  merciful  to 
you  all. 

Judge  Jeffreys.  Very  cruel  people  are  some- 
times very  cowardly.  Judge  Jeffreys  could  go 
through  his  black  assize  in  the  west  of  England, 
the  terror  of  the  land,  manifesting  the  fury  of  a 
wild  beast ;  but  when  the  tide  turned,  and  he  saw 
nothing  before  him  but  ignominy  and  disgrace, 
he  sank  into  a  state  of  abject  fear  which  was 
pitiable  to  see.  "  Haman  was  afraid  before  the 
king  and  the  queen  ? ''  As  he  well  may  be.  It 
is  an  awful  moment.  His  life  trembles  in  the 
balance.  If  the  king  keeps  his  couch  he  may  be 
spared.  If  he  rises  up  abruptly,  and  withdraws, 
he  is  doomed.  The  king's  retirement  is  like 
passing  solemn  judgment.  The  custom  has  de- 
scended to  our  times,  and  the  Shah  of  Persia,  or, 
if  not  he,  certainly  some  of  his  immediate  prede- 
cessors, have  condemned  men  to  death  in  this 
way. — Br.  Raleigh, 

Case  of  retribution.  Tamerlane  the  Great, 
having  made  war  on  Bajaiet,  Emperor  of  the 
Turks,  overthrew  him  in  battle,  and  took  him 


OHAP.  vni.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


257 


prisoner.  The  victor  gave  the  captive  monarch 
at  first  a  very  civil  reception ;  and,  entering  into 
lamiliar  conversation  with  him,  said,  *'Now, 
king,  tell  me  freely  and  truly  what  thou  wouldest 
have  done  with  me,  had  I  fallen  into  thy  power  ?  " 
Bajazet,  who  was  of  a  fierce  and  haughty  spirit, 
is  said  to  have  thus  replied  :  *'  Had  the  gods 
jciven  unto  me  the  victory,  I  would  have  enclosed 
thee  in  an  iron  cage,  and  carried  thee  about  with 
me  as  a  spectacle  of  derision  to  the  world." 
Tamerlane  wrathfully  replied,  **Then,  proud 
man,  as  thou  wouldest  have  done  to  me,  even  so 
shall  I  do  unto  thee."  A  strong  iron  cage  was 
made,  into  which  the  fallen  emperor  was  thrust ; 
and  thus  exposed  like  a  wild  beast,  he  was  carried 
along  in  the  train  of  his  conqueror.  Nearly  three 
years  were  passed  by  the  once  mighty  Bajazet  in 
this  cruel  state  of  durance  ;  and  at  last,  being 
told  that  he  must  be  carried  into  Tartary,  despair- 
ing of  then  obtaining  his  freedom,  he  struck  his 
head  with  such  violence  against  the  bars  of  his 
cage,  as  to  put  an  end  to  his  wretched  life. — Br, 
Cheever, 
Innocence  vindicated.     It  is  stated  as  a  singular 


circumstance  in  the  history  of  the  holy  and  de- 
voted John  Graham,  of  Ardclach,  that  he  quoted 
these  words  not  long  before  his  death  : — "  If  these 
men  die  the  common  death  of  all  men,  or  if  they 
be  visited  after  the  visitation  of  all  men,  then 
the  Lord  had  not  sent  me."  He  had  been  a  victim 
to  the  foulest  accusations,  and  driven  from  his 
ministerial  charge.  The  utterance  was  fulfilled 
in  mysterious  ways.  Those  who  had  persecuted 
and  calumniated  him  died  ofi"  long  ere  old  age  ; 
by  accident,  by  sudden  and  fatal  sickness,  or  by 
their  own  hands.  Thus  it  has  pleased  God,  on 
some  occasions,  to  vindicate  the  reputation  of  a 
faithful  servant  by  providences  which  none  can 
dispute.  Mordecai's  innocence  was  vindicated. 
His  triumph  was  complete.  Poor  Haman  was 
humiliated,  defeated,  and  executed.  If  the  history 
of  human  lives  could  be  rightly  interpreted  and 
correctly  written,  startling  and  triumphant  reve- 
lations would  be  made.  It  would  be  seen  that 
the  wicked  do  not  always  triumph.  They  cannot ; 
for  surely  eternity  will  adjust  the  false  measures 
of  time,  if  time  itself  does  not  so  rectify. 


CHAPTER  VIIL 


Critical  Notes.]  1.]  The  Targums  understand  by  "  house"  all  the  people  in  it,  and  the  entire 
property  belonging  thereto. — Lange.  The  confiscation  of  the  property  of  one  publicly  executed 
followed  as  a  matter  of  course.  And  to  whom  could  the  goods  of  the  Jews'  enemy  be  more  appro- 
priately transferred  than  to  Estlier  the  queen  } — Whedon.  Came  before  the  king]  Was  made  one 
of  his  officers.  2.  Took  off  his  ring]  (See  ch.  iii.  10).  By  this  act  Mordecai  was  advanced  to  the 
post  of  first  minister  of  the  king.  The  king's  seal  gave  the  force  of  law  to  royal  edicts. — Keil.  A 
pleasure-seeking  Persian  king,  like  Xerxes,  was  glad  to  be  relieved  of  the  toil  of  governing,  and 
willingly  committed  to  one  favo  irite  after  another  the  task  of  issuing  and  sealing  with  the  royal 
signet  the  decrees  by  wliich  the  government  was  administered. — Rawlinson.  3.]  Haman  was  dead, 
but  the  edict  which  lie  had  issued  remained  in  force  :  therefore  Esther  "  wept  and  made  supplica- 
tion" to  Ahasuerus.  5.]  The  introductory  formula  are  in  part  similar  to  those  used  before,  but 
strengthened  by  the  introduction  of  two  new  phrases.  Let  it  he  written  to  reverse  the  letters] 
Perhaps  Esther  was  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  Persian  law  to  know  that  no  royal  decree  could 
be  reversed. —  Whedon.  7.]  The  answer  of  Ahasuerus  is  a  refusal,  but  one  softened  as  much  as 
possible.  He  first  dwells  on  the  proofs  he  had  just  given  of  his  friendly  feeling  towards  the  Jews; 
he  then  suggests  that  something  may  be  done  to  help  them  without  revoking  the  decree.  Finally,  he 
excuses  himself  by  appealing  to  the  well-known  immutability  of  Persian  law. — Rawlinson.  Sheltering 
his  imbecility  behind  the  immutability  of  the  law,  the  king  commits  the  work  of  saving  the  Jews  to 
tlie  wit  of  Mordecai ;  but  reminds  him  that  his  device  shall  stand.  Thus  Ahasuerus  prepares  the 
way  for  a  most  fearful  corrflict  of  laws.  *'  The  suggestion  of  Ahasuerus  quickened  the  inventive 
powers  of  Esther  and  Mordecai.  The  scribes  were  at  once  summoned,  and  a  decree  issued,  not 
revoking  the  former  one,  but  allowing  the  Jews  to  stand  on  their  defence,  and  to  kill  all  who 
attacked  them.  It  has  been  pronounced  incredible  that  any  king  would  thus  have  sanctioned  civil 
war  in  all  the  great  cities  of  his  empire  ;  but  some  even  of  the  more  sceptical  critics  have  pronounced 
tliat  Xerxes  might  not  improbably  have  done  so." — Be  Wette.  Besides,  there  would  be  no 
slaughter  at  all  if  their  enemies  did  not  first  attack  the  Jews.  The  probability  was,  that,  when  the 
Jews  were  permitted  to  arm  themselves  and  stand  on  the  defensive,  there  would  be  no  conflict  at  all. 
But  the  result  showed,  that,  in  many  parts  of  the  empire,  the  heathen  attempted  to  destroy  the  Jews  in 
spite  of  the  edict. —  Whedon.  10.]  Posts  on  horseback.  On  horseback,  on  coursers,  government  coursers, 
the  sons  of  the  stud. — Keil.  Sent  letters  by  posts]  This  is  one  of  many  intimations  in  this  book  calcu- 
lated to  engage  the  attention  of  those  who  take  interest  in  studying  the  progress  of  society  in  the  arts  of 
convenience  and  civilization.  The  testimony  of  the  Greek  writers  coincides  with  this,  in  directing  our 
attention  to  Persia  for  the  origin  of  posts  and  couriers.     It  is  said,  that,  when  the  empire  became  so 

S 


268  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  [ohap.  viii. 

Tast,  a8  in  the  time  of  Cyrus,  that  monarch  thought  of  a  plan  for  facilitating  the  exchange  of  communi- 
cating between  the  court  and  provincial  governments.  After  having  ascertained  how  far  a  good  horse 
might  go  in  a  day  with  ease  and  expedition,  he  caused  stables  to  be  erected  at  the  determined  distances 
throughout  his  dominions,  each  with  a  suitable  establishment  %f  horses,  and  men  to  take  care  of  them. 
There  was  also  a  post-master  at  each  of  these  stages,  whose  duty  it  was  to  receive  the  packets  as  thev 
arrived,  and  immediately  despatch  them  with  fresh  horses  and  couriers.  Thus  the  posts  travelled  night 
and  day,  without  intermission ;  and  hence  it  was  proverbially  said  that  they  flew  faster  than  cranes.  The 
expedition  with  which  the  king  was  enabled  by  this  process  to  obtain  intelligence  from,  and  forward 
edicts  to,  the  remotest  parts  of  his  empire,  astonisbed  the  ancient  world.  Their  admiration  resembled 
that  with  which  European  travellers  regarded  the  posting  establishments  of  the  Mongol  empire, 
which  seems  to  have  been  similar  to  that  of  the  ancient  Persians.  There  is  a  full  and  interesting 
description  of  it  in  'Marco  Polo'  (ii.  90),  a  few  particulars  of  which  may  serve  to  complete  the  idea  of 
Oriental  establishments  of  this  class.  From  the  capital  (Kambalu)  roads  extended  to  every  part  of 
the  empire,  having  post-houses,  with  suitable  furniture,  at  every  twenty-five  or  thirty  miles.  There 
were  altogether  ten  thousand  of  these  stations,  with  two  hundred  thousand  horses.  The  post  rode  two 
hundred,  and  sometimes  two  hundred  and  fifty,  miles  in  a  day,  on  occasions  of  rebellion  in  the  pro- 
vinces, or  other  urgent  matters.  There  were  other  stations,  consisting  of  a  few  dwellings,  three  or 
four  miles  asunder,  occupied  by  runners  or  foot-posts,  who,  being  girded,  ran  as  fast  as  horses  (see  the 
note  on  1  Sam.  viii.  11).  These,  in  dark  nights,  ran  before  the  horsemen  with  links  to  light  them 
along ;  they  also  carried  letters,  mandates,  and  parcels,  to  or  from  the  khan,  who  thus  received  news 
or  fruit  in  two  days  from  places  ten  stages  distant,  as  from  Kambalu  to  Shangtu.  Similar  establish- 
ments are  still  kept  up  in  China  and  Japan. — Kitto.  11.]  But  would  not  the  Jews  have  defended  them- 
selves without  any  such  order  from  the  king  ?  They  could  expect  nothing  but  death  in  any  case,  and, 
therefore,  would  have  fought  with  the  energy  of  despair.  True,  but  this  edict  allowed  them  to  arm 
and  prepare  for  self-defence.  But  for  this  edict,  any  movement  towards  self-defence  would  have  been 
crushed  at  the  very  outset.  A  spasmodic  defence  with  empty  hands  would  have  accomplished  nothing; 
but  the  king's  decree  enabled  the  Jews  to  arm  and  gather  into  companies. —  Whedon  (abridged). 
14.  Being  hastened]  There  were  still  eight  months ;  but  the  messengers  were  hastened  that  the 
enemies  might  be  warned  not  to  make  any  attack,  and  that  the  Jews  might  everywhere  have  ample 
time  to  prepare  themselves  for  self-defence. —  Whedon.  15.  Crown  of  gold]  Not  a  crown  like  the 
king's,  but  a  mere  golden  band  or  coronet — Atarah. — Itawlinson.  Royal  apparel  of  blue  and  white. 
State  garments  such  as  became  the  grand  vizier ;  royal  robes  of  royal  colours. —  Whedon.  It  is  \veL 
to  compare  this  description  of  Mordecai's  appearance  on  leaving  the  palace  with  Xenophon's  descrip- 
tion of  the  attire  in  which  Cyrus  himself  appeared  in  public.  "Cyrus  himself  then  appeared,  wearing 
a  turban y  which  was  raised  high  above  his  head,  with  a  vest  of  a  purple  colour,  half  mixed  with  white; 
and  this  mixture  of  white  none  else  is  allowed  to  wear.  On  his  legs  he  had  yellow  buskins;  his  outer 
robe  was  wholly  of  purple ;  and  about  his  turban  was  a  diadem  or  wreath  "  (Cyrop.  viii.  23).  Every 
one  of  these  things  occur  in  the  description  of  Mordecai's  royal  attire,  except  the  yellow  buskins. 
Xenophon,  however,  adds,  that  the  diademed  turban  was  not  peculiar  to  the  king,  but  was  allowed  to 
his  relations.  This  doubtless  answers  to  the  "great  crown"  which  Mordecai  wore.  The 
description  does  not  correspond  with  the  appearance  of  the  cap  which  the  king  wears  in  the 
sculptures  of  Persepolis.  This  difference,  which  has  perplexed  antiquarians,  is  probably 
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  sculptures  represented  the  king  as  he  usually  appeared  in  his  palace ; 
whereas  the  description  refers  to  his  appearance  when  he  went  abroad,  or  on  occasions  of  high 
state  within-doors. — Kitto^  The  garments  in  which  Mordecai  left  the  king  are  evidently  the  State 
garments  of  the  first  minister,  which  Mordecai  received  at  his  installation  to  his  oflSce  ;  and,  as  such, 
no  fresh  token  of  royal  favour,  but  only  his  induction  in  his  new  dignity,  and  a  sign  of  his  induction 
to  all  who  saw  him  issue  from  the  palace  so  adorned. — Keil.  City  of  Shushan  rejoiced]  That  is,  the 
inhabitants  as  a  whole.  They  had  probably  deprecated  the  massacre  awaiting  the  Jews,  and  perhaps 
apprehended  with  fear  the  great  disorders  and  dangers  that  would  ensue. — Lange.  16.  The  Jews 
had  light]  Light  (this  particular  form  of  the  noun  occurs  only  here  and  Ps.  cix.  12)  is  a  figurative 
expression  for  prosperity.  17.  And  many  of  the  people  became  Jews]  This  must  not  be  explained 
only,  as  by  Clericus  and  Grotius,  of  a  change  of  religion  on  the  part  of  the  heathen  that  they  might 
procure  the  favour  of  the  queen,  and  avert  the  wrath  of  Mordecai.  This  may  have  induced  some; 
but  the  majority  certainly  acted  from  a  conviction,  forced  upon  thera  by  the  unexpected  turn  of  affairs 
in  favour  of  the  Jews,  of  the  truth  of  the  Jewish  religion,  and  the  power  of  that  faith  and  trust  in 
God  manifested  by  the  Jews,  and  so  evidently  justified  by  the  fall  of  Haman,  and  the  promotion  of 
\)rdecai. — Keil,  ^ 

MAIN  HOMILETIOS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.     Yersbs  1,  2. 

Sudden  but  Wise  Changes. 

In  ftffairs  of  conscience  first  thoughts  are  besfc.  In  affairs  of  prudence  second 
thoughts  are  best  But  even  in  affairs  of  conscience  deliberation  may  be  necessary, 
because  we  do  not  always  know  how  far  conscience  may  be  properly  enlightened. 


OtiAV.  vm.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY.  ESTHER,  259 

We  have  to  see  to  it  that  what  we  think  is  the  voice  of  conscience  be  not  some 
other  voice.  Sudden  movement,  then,  is  very  often  dangerous  and  misleading. 
Make  haste  slowly  is  a  wise  exhortation  for  the  management  of  human  affairs. 
Many  a  man  has  taken  a  hurried  step  which  has  proved  disastrous,  and  which  no 
after  movements  have  been  able  to  remedy.  Perhaps  the  English  nation  may  be 
considered  as  moving  too  slowly.  Certainly  it  takes  a  long  time  in  this  country  to 
repair  old  abuses.  But  this  very  slowness  may  help  to  give  us  our  national  stability. 
In  these  two  verses  we  have  sudden  changes ;  but  they  will  be  seen  to  be  wise  in 
every  respect.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Ahasuerus  had  any  cause  to  repent 
of  the  steps  which  he  now  took  so  suddenly.  Without  any  long  parliamentary 
deliberations  he  made  a  prime  minister,  and  most  important  changes  in  the  court, 
and  all  tended  to  increase  the  national  glory. 

I.  A  sensible  reversal.  **  On  that  day  did  the  king  Ahasuerus  give  the  house 
of  Haman  the  Jews'  enemy  unto  Esther  the  queen."  Not  only  was  Esther  the 
king's  favoured  queen,  but  she  showed  herself  a  virtuous  and  sensible  woman — one 
likely  to  make  a  wise  disposal  of  the  blessings  of  wealth.  Haman  only  thought  of 
using  wealth  for  selfish  purposes.  Esther  thought  of  using  her  temporal  advantages 
for  the  good  of  others.  That  she  so  thought  we  judge  by  her  conduct.  She  did 
not  talk  great  things  only,  but  did  them.  How  sadly  often  do  we  find  in  this  world 
that  the  "  house "  is  possessed  by  the  selfish  Haman  1  What  a  blessing  to  the 
community  when  the  **  house  "  becomes  the  possession  of  a  benevolent  and  patriotic 
Esther  !  Take  the  house  here  as  emblematical  of  Haman's  wealth.  When  the 
eternal  King  gives  a  "  house  "  it  becomes  us  to  feel  that  our  responsibility  is  thereby 
increased.  We  must  not  close  the  house,  but  open  its  doors  and  its  rooms  for  the 
benefit  of  others.  Still  be  careful  as  to  the  guests.  God  has  given  to  each  and  to 
all  a  soul-house.  We  are  to  be  careful  as  to  the  mastership.  Let  not  Satan  rule ; 
let  Jesus  rule,  and  then  there  will  be  light,  and  gladness,  and  joy,  and  honour  in 
tlie  house. 

II.  A  grateful  confession.  *'  And  Mordecai  came  before  the  king  ;  for  Esther 
had  told  what  he  was  unto  her."  The  confession  was  not  forced  from  Esther.  She 
did  not  utter  it  by  reason  of  the  terrors  of  the  inquisitor ;  she  did  not  own  the 
relationship  because  she  saw  that  Mordecai  was  about  to  make  the  declaration ;  she 
was  impelled  to  it  by  a  sweet  sense  of  gratitude.  Here  is  one  of  those  omissions  in 
the  narrative  that  we  could  wish  had  not  been  made.  A  pleasant  story  was  that 
which  Esther  had  now  to  tell  unto  the  king.  We  listen  in  pleasant  fancy  as  Esther, 
inspired  by  gratitude,  told  the  king  what  Mordecai  was  unto  her.  She  would  tell  of 
the  blood  relationship,  but  surely  she  would  tell  much  more.  Certainly  she  told 
much  more  if  she  told  all  that  Mordecai  was  unto  her.  Sometimes  the  words  fail 
us,  when  inspired  by  gratitude,  as  we  try  to  tell  all  that  a  true-hearted  one  has  been 
to  us.  Some  there  are  with  whom  we  have  no  family  connection  who  have  been 
more  to  us  than  the  nearest  relatives.  Esther  confers  honour  on  Mordecai  by 
declaring  all  that  he  had  been  unto  her.  We  confer  honour  by  grateful  confession 
of  the  services  rendered  to  us  by  others.  Let  us  not  forget  to  acknowledge  our 
indebtedness.  And  shall  we  not  bring  honour  to  Jesus  by  the  confession  of  what 
he  has  been  and  is  to  us.  Time  will  not  suffice  to  tell  the  tale  of  the  Saviour's 
doings  on  our  behalf.  We  have  to  tell  what  he  is  to  us  in  the  way  of  spiritual 
relationship  ;  we  have  to  tell  what  he  is  to  us  as  prophet,  priest,  and  king.  The 
sweet  tale  will  last  through  eternity. 

III.  A  reasonable  token  of  honour.  "  And  the  king  took  off  his  ring,  which 
he  had  taken  from  Haman,  and  gave  it  unto  Mordecai."  It  was  just  and  fair  that 
this  honour  should  be  conferred  upon  Mordecai,  for  he  had  rendered  important 
services  to  the  king,  and  was  evidently  a  man  that  might  be  safely  trusted  with  the 
management  of  most  important  affairs.  But  it  was  not  right  that  Mordecai  had 
been  compelled  to  wait  so  long  before  his  services  were  acknowledged.  Time  is  on 
the  side  of  him  who  will  but  wait ;  but  sometimes  we  have  to  wait  so  long  that  our 


260  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  [oSAi>.  viii. 


time  is  over.  We  do  not  now  live  for  centuries,  and  cannot  afford  to  keep  on  wait- 
ing too  long.  Many  a  man  has  waited  only  for  the  grave.  The  only  waiting  which 
cannot  end  in  disappointment  is  that  of  quietly  and  hopefully  and  earnestly  doing 
the  work  of  the  Lord,  and  looking  for  the  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away. 
Then  the  great  Master  will  give  his  tokens  of  approval  and  of  honour.  Oh,  to  be 
sealed  by  heaven's  eternal  King  ! 

IV.  A  judicious  arrangement.  "  And  Esther  set  Mordecai  over  the  house  of 
Haman."  If  Esther,  having  received  the  gift  from  the  king,  was  not  at  liberty  to 
transfer  it  to  Mordecai,  the  next  best  thing  was  to  make  Mordecai  steward  of  the 
property.  She  had  received  proof  of  Mordecai's  sagacity,  and  could  therefore  securely 
entrust  to  him  the  management  of  her  property.  He  would  turn  it  to  the  best 
possible  account,  both  for  individual  and  collective  advantage.  Having  shown 
himself  wise  and  faithful  in  small  spheres,  it  was  judicious  to  raise  him  now  to  fill 
a  higher  sphere.  All  his  recorded  after-course  declares  that  he  was  not  unfaithful 
to  his  many  important  trusts.  If  we  want  to  rise,  let  it  be  by  faithful  service  in  that 
sphere  where  we  find  ourselves  placed.  Woe  to  the  man  who  seeks  to  rise  by 
trickery  !  The  crash  must  come  sooner  or  later.  The  deception  must  be  found  out. 
The  blown  bladder  will  receive  a  prick,  and  then  there  will  be  the  humiliating 
collapse.  Many  instances  of  this  in  modern  times.  Better  to  remain  always  in 
obscurity  than  to  rise  by  false  methods,  for  such  rising  is  sure  to  end  in  a  most 
hideous  down-fall.  A  high  position  is  always  perilous — perilous  in  England  with 
its  stable  institutions,  as  well  as  in  the  Persian  empire  with  all  its  fickleness.  But 
a  high  position  reached  by  falsehood  and  deceit  is  especially  perilous.  "  He  that 
is  down  needs  fear  no  fall."  "  Better  it  is  to  be  of  an  humble  spirit  with  the  lowly 
than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  proud."  Haman  thus  had  not  reached  the  gallows. 
We  can  even  suppose  that  Mordecai  was  happier  at  the  king's  gate  than  when 
ruling  in  the  palace,  and  over  Haman's  house. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Yersbs  \,  2. 

We  are  taught  by  Mordecai's  example  vexation  would  Haman  have  thought  of 

that  even  pious  men  sometimes  come  to  that  wealth  in  which  he  gloried,  if  he 

the  head  of  affairs,  and  are  safely  en-  had  foreseen  that  it  was  to  be  possessed 

trusted  with  the  reins  of  government ;  by  a  Jewess.    Would  he  not  rather  have 

and   that  God   adorns  with   this  glory  chosen  to  live  a  beggar  all  his  days  than 

on  earth  those  whom  he  will  afterwards  leave  his  wealth  to  persons  whom  he  so 

crown   in   heaven    likewise.     They   are  mortally  hated  ? 

promoted,  however  not  so  much  for  their         The  queen  was  enriched  beyond  her 

own   sake   as   that   they   may  aid   and  expectations  and  wishes  ]  yet  the  wealth 

promote  the  Church  and  people  of  God,  bestowed  upon  her  would  enable  her  to 

and    may   free   and   console    those    in  perform  important  services  to  her  beloved 

M\Qi\on.—Feuardent.  nation.     The  donation  of  it  by  the  king. 

Be  not  solicitous  about  treasuring  up  to  whom  it  was   forfeited,  was  a  testi- 

the  riches  of  this  world.     What  you  can  mony  of  his  affection,  to  which  she  still 

gain  is  to-day  yours,  to-morrow  you  know  must  have  recourse,  with  new  petitions 

not  whose  it  shall  be.     Should  it  fall  for  her  people.    Above  all,  this  donation 

into   the   hands  of  your  children  after  was  a  remarkable  testimony  of  the  kind- 

you,  you  know  not  whether  they  will  be  nessand  justice  of  the  Divine  providence, 

wise  men  or  fools,  whether  they  will  be  which  put  into  her  hands  that  immense 

losers  or  gainers  by  the  possession  of  it.  wealth  of  the  enemy  of  her  nation,  by 

But  you  know  not  whether  it  may  not  which  he  would  have  bribed  the  king,  if 

fall  into  the  hands  of  your  most  abhorred  a  bribe  had  been  necessary,  to  procure 

enemies.     This  is  often  the  fate  of  ill-  their  destruction.    The  Lord  had  already 

gotten  riches.     ''  The  wealth  of  the  sin-  not  only  wrought  deliverance  for   her, 

ner  is  laid  up  for  the  just."     With  what  but  had  given  her  an  accession  of  riches 


cuap.  vni.) 


tlOMtLETIC  COMMENTARY :    ESTHER. 


261 


out  of  the  Shares  that  had  been  laid  for 
her  kinsman  ;  and  she  was  thereby  en- 
courage 1  to  hope  that  he  would  bring 
to  a  happy  conclusion  that  great  work 
that  occupied  her  mind. 

HiT  kinsman,  too,  was  highly  ad- 
vanced, both  on  her  account  and  his 
own.  The  king  had  formerly  caused 
his  favour  for  Mordecai  to  be  proclaimed 
through  the  city  of  Shushan  ;  but  now 
he  loaded  him  with  real  and  substantial 
honours,  which  could  put  him  into 
a  proper  condition  for  protecting  his 
nation,  exposed  to  danger  for  his  sake. 

It  was  now  the  fifth  year  since  the 
adopted  daughter  of  Mordecai  was  seated 
on  an  imperial  throne,  and  hitherto  it 
was  not  known  that  he  stood  in  any 
relation  to  the  queen,  or  had  showed  to 
her  the  kindness  of  a  father. 

The  king  must  surely  at  least  have 
condemned  his  own  thoughtlessness  in 
inquiring  so  little  after  Esther's  friends. 
He  now  discerned,  that,  besides  his  un- 
requited obligations  to  Mordecai  for 
saving  his  life,  he  owed  to  him  likewise 
the  graces  and  accomplishments  of  his 
queen,  and  almost  her  life ;  for  he  had 
been  to  her  a  second  father,  without 
whose  kind  care  none  knows  what  might 
have  befallen  her  in  her  tender  years. 

It  would  be  likewise  a  powerful 
recommendation  of  Mordecai,  that  he 
had  hitherto  lived  quietly  in  a  low 
station,  without  so  much  as  mentioning 
his  claims  to  preferment.  It  appeared 
plainly  that  he  was  more  careful  to 
deserve  the  king's  favour  than  to  enjoy 
it,  and  that  greatness  had  no  charms  but 
the  opportunities  it  might  give  him  of 
doing  good,  or  preventing  evil.  Those 
are  fittest  for  high  stations  that  are  best 
satisfied  with  any  station  in  which  Pro- 
vidence is  pleased  to  put  them. 

The  king  put  Mordecai  into  Haman's 
place ;  and  the  queen,  who  now  thought 
it  highly  expedient  to  inform  the  king 
of  Mordecai's  kindness  and  relation  to 
her,  did  likewise  make  him  her  steward. 
To  her  dying  day  she  forgot  not  the 
kindness  showed  to  her  in  the  days  of 
her  youth,  and  behaved  as  the  best  of 
daughters  to  the  best  of  fathers. 

Gratitude  to  benefactors  is  essential 
to  a  yirtuous  character.     If  you  caU  a 


man  ungrateful  you  need  say  nothing 
more  of  him,  you  have  already  said 
everything  that  is  bad  ;  nor  will  the 
highest  elevation  excuse  forgetfulness  of 
benefits  received  in  a  lower  condition. 
The  blessed  Jesus,  exalted  above  men 
and  angels,  forgets  none  of  the  kindnesses 
showed  to  him  in  the  persons  of  his 
brethren  in  a  low  condition  upon  earth  ; 
but  what  is  done  to  the  least  of  them  is 
rewarded  as  if  it  had  been  done  to  him- 
self. We  need  not  envy  those  women 
who  ministered  to  him  of  their  substance 
in  the  days  of  his  humiliation  the 
glorious  rewards  be -to  wed  upon  them  in 
his  state  of  exaltation.  We  still  have  it 
in  our  power  to  feed  him  when  he  is 
hungry,  to  give  him  drink  when  he  is 
thirsty,  to  clothe  him  when  he  is  naked; 
and  he  will  not  be  unrighteous  to  forget 
our  works  and  labours  of  love  to  his 
name.  Did  Esther  in  her  royal  condition 
retain  such  a  kind  remembrance  of  the 
friends  of  her  low  estate,  and  shall  we 
doubt  of  the  infinitely  superior  virtues 
of  him  who  is  the  fairest  among  the 
children  of  men,  to  the  operation  of 
whose  Spirit  we  owe  everything  that  is 
lovely  in  our  temper  and  conduct  ? 

Esther,  on  the  throne,  retained  the 
kindness  of  her  youth,  not  only  to 
Mordecai,  but  to  all  her  friends  and  all 
her  people. — Lawson. 

1.  In  the  first  place,  we  see  how,  in 
the  providence  of  God,  the  wealth  which 
worldly  men  would  use  in  opposition  to 
the  interests  of  God's  cause  and  people 
may  be  wrested  from  them,  and  made 
available  for  the  advancement  of  these 
interests.  It  was  painful  enough  to  the 
proud  spirit  of  Haman  to  be  compelled 
to  conduct  Mordecai,  whom  he  hated, 
through  the  city  in  triumph ;  but  it  would 
have  been  anguish  intolerable  to  him  if 
he  had  been  told  that  this  man  was  forth- 
with to  be  his  heir,  and  to  have  all  his 
wealth  placed  at  his  disposal.  So  not 
unfrequently  it  happens,  that  the  riches 
which  have  been  accumulated  by  those 
who  would  grudge  the  expenditure  even 
of  a  small  part  for  any  purpose  purely 
religious,  pass  into  the  hands  of  those 
who  feel  their  responsibility  as  stewards 
of  God's  bounties,  and  who  gladly  employ 
his  gifts  for  the  promotion  of  objects  by 


262 


tiOMlLETiC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHEtt. 


[OHAP.  VIII. 


which  their  fellow-nieri  are  really  bene- 
fited. The  conclusion  which  w^e  draw 
from  all  this,  and  which,  without  further 
remark,  we  leave  with  you,  is,  that  the 
best  and  happiest  arrangement  which  a 
man  can  make  with  respect  to  the  good 
things  which  have  been  bestowed  upon 
him  is,  that  in  his  lifetime  he  seek  to 
be  personally  the  dispenser  of  good  to 
others.  If  he  lives  and  acts  in  this 
spirit,  then  he  will  have  the  less  anxiety 
as  to  the  disposal  of  what  he  may  be 
able  to  leave  behind  him. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  the  peculiar 
providence  which  we  see  exercised  in  the 
case  of  Mordecai  teaches  us  that  men 
may  be  well  content  to  wait,  while  they 
are  in  the  way  of  well-doing,  until  they 
receive  their  recompense.  It  was  with 
no  view  to  temporal  reward,  we  most 
fully  believe,  that  Mordecai  assumed  the 
guardianship  of  his  orphan  cousin,  and 
brought  her  up  tenderly  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  God  of  her  fathers.  But  if  he 
had  any  expectation  of  reward,  when  he 
discovered  and  made  known  the  plot 
against  the  life  of  the  king,  and  such 
expectation  he  might  have  reasonably 
enough  cherished,  he  had  long  to  wait 
for  the  realizing  of  it.  But  he  waited 
patiently,  and  at  length  his  reward  came, 
in  greater  fulness  than  his  most  sanguine 
hope  could  have  anticipated.  Now  even 
in  worldly  things,  although  not  on  the 
same  large  scale,  we  often  can  mark  simi- 
lar movements  of  providence.  Worth 
and  faithfulness  and  humility,  after  they 
have  been  long  neglected,  are  brought 
into  the  light,  and  are  honoured  in  pro- 
portion to  the  neglect  which  they  formerly 
experienced. 

But  it  is  not  with  exclusive,  or  indeed 
with  special,  reference  to  the  administra- 


tion of  providence  in  this  world  that  we 
speak  at  present.  History  sets  before  us 
the  examples  of  many,  who  were  the 
excellent  of  the  earth,  persons  of  whom 
the  world  was  not  worthy,  whose  deeds 
of  benevolence,  and  whose  faithful  ser- 
vices to  the  Lord  and  the  men  of  their 
generation,  were  never  openly  acknow- 
ledged during  their  lifetime.  Against 
reproach  and  obloquy,  and  opposition 
the  most  crushing,  many  have  had  to 
pursue  their  way,  compelled  to  hear  even 
their  good  evil  spoken  of.  But  this  does 
not  alter  the  fact,  that  the  reward  of  all 
Christ's  faithful  servants  is  certain.  It 
is  not  for  reward  that  they  labour  in  his 
service ;  it  is  from  love  to  him,  and  for 
the  glory  of  God.  Yet  as  Christ  himself 
"looked  forward  to  the  joy  that  was  set 
before  him,"  so  his  people  are  taught  by 
his  word  and  his  example  to  have  respect 
to  the  recompense  of  reward.  JN'ow  as 
Mordecai  had  to  wait  for  a  season  before 
he  obtained  what  he  was  well  entitled 
to  receive,  would  it  have  been  a  matter 
of  great  consequence  although  he  had  to 
wait  for  a  few  years  longer'?  If  he  had 
received  at  length,  after  a  very  protracted 
season  of  delay,  what  he  waited  for, 
while  he  had  still  full  power  left  him  to 
enjoy  it,  would  it  not  have  been  well  ] 
Then  may  we  not  say,  that  although 
believers  in  Christ  have  to  wait  for  their 
reward  until  death  come  to  carry  them 
away,  or,  as  we  may  say,  until  this  their 
last  enemy  come  to  lead  them  in  triumph 
into  the  presence  of  the  King,  clad  in 
the  glorious  robe  of  his  righteousness, 
will  it  not  be  well,  seeing  that  then  they 
shall  be  in  condition  to  enjoy  fully  and 
for  ever  the  blessedness  of  being  with  him 
and  rejoicing  in  his  smile? — Davidsoti. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.    Verses  3,  4. 

Sin  Survives  the  Sinner. 

When  Haman  was  executed  Ahasuerus  doubtless  expected  to  be  left  at  peace. 
He  would  suppose  that  by  one  strenuous  effort  he  had  delivered  himself  from  the 
encircling  confusion  ;  and,  unaccustomed  to  personal  effort  and  responsibility,  he 
would  overrate  the  good  he  had  accomplished.  So  men  are  continually  surprised  if 
a  little  virtuous  effort  is  not  considered  a  full  compensation  for  a  long  course  of  sin 
But  evil  is  not  easily  rooted  out  of  a  heart,  or  out  of  a  state.      Bad  habits  once 


CHAP,  vni.]  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  263 


formed  in  the  heart  soon  become  inveterate ;  and  bad  institutions  once  founded  in 
a  state  tend  to  perpetuate  themselves  for  ever.  It  is  written  in  the  Psalms,  *' Thou 
wast  a  God  that  forgavest  them,  though  thou  tookest  vengeance  of  their  inventions." 
So,  frequently,  sin  bears  painful  fruits  long  after  the  sinner  himself  has  grievously 
repented.  Thus  David  received  Divine  forgiveness,  and  yet  along  with  Uriah's  life 
the  splendour  and  happiness  of  his  reign  faded  away  for  ever.  As  he  sinned  with 
Bathsheba,  so  Amnon  sinned  with  Tamar;  as  he  murdered  Uriah,  so  Absalom 
murdered  Amnon ;  and  as  his  pride  numbered  the  people,  so  Adonijah's  pride,  and 
Absalom's  pride,  rebelled  against  his  authority.  Let  no  man  fancy  that  by  a  little 
repentance  he  can  undo  the  elfects  of  a  great  sin.  As  some  weeds  are  hardly  to  be 
eradicated  from  a  favourable  soil,  so  sin  finds  a  congenial  lodging  in  the  heart,  and 
is  slow  to  leave.  Ahasuerus,  who  looked  to  spend  his  days  in  idle  dalliance,  now 
learnt  that  Haman's  death  had  not  delivered  him  from  his  troubles,  for  Esther  came 
to  him  to  put  away  the  mischief  of  Haman  the  Agagite. 

I.  Evil  outlives  its  first  contrivers,  (a)  Haman  is  dead,  but  the  mischief  he 
devised  still  hangs  over  the  Jews.  The  laws  of  Persia  could  not  be  reversed,  and 
therefore  Haman's  edict  bad  to  stand  ;  the  laws  of  nature  will  not  be  reversed,  and 
therefore  a  thing  done  once  is  done  for  ever.  A  passing  stranger  may  loosen  a  stone 
in  an  embankment,  and  go  on  his  way  ]  but  a  whole  province  will  bewail  his  folly. 
An  infidel  father  trains  most  carefully  an  infidel  son  ;  the  son  becomes  an  eminent 
and  influential  writer,  and  spreads  through  a  whole  generation  the  fatal  poison  he 
imbibed  on  his  father's  knee.  An  English  colonist,  filled  with  pity  for  the  Carib- 
beeans,  introduces  negro  slavery  into  the  West  Indies, — doing  evil  that  good  may 
come, — and  for  centuries  those  fair  islands  are  cursed  by  his  device.  Always  men 
perish,  but  their  work  remains.  As  he  who  scatters  thistledown  in  a  field  of  wheat 
does  an  evil  which  years  may  be  needed  to  cure ;  so  every  sinner  scatters  bad  seed 
into  a  proUfic  soil,  (h)  Evil  tends  to  permanency,  because  of  the  natural  corruption 
of  the  heart.  As  acids  and  alkalis  have  a  mutual  affinity,  so  that  they  rush  together 
with  violence,  and  can  only  be  separated  by  force  ;  so  is  there  an  affinity  between 
tlie  heart  and  sin.  Hence,  when  evil  is  once  published  there  are  many  ready  to 
embrace  it.  Certain  constitutions  of  body  will  take  every  infectious  disease  that  they 
approach  ;  and  every  form  of  evil  finds  somewhere  a  congenial  home.  This  principle 
is  assisted  by  the  solidarity  of  our  race.  The  whole  universe  is  bound  into  one 
system,  with  a  mutual  interdependence  among  all  its  parts  :  the  meanest  and  the 
noblest  parts  of  creation  are  indissolubly  bound  together.  Especially  is  this  true 
of  man.  No  man  liveth  to  himself.  We  are  all  so  closely  locked  and  interlocked 
together  that  what  affects  one  affects  all.  Now  if  man  were  not  liable  to  disease,  or 
if,  being  liable,  he  could  live  alone,  there  would  be  no  epidemics  ;  so  if  man  were 
not  liable  to  sin,  or  if,  being  liable,  he  could  be  set  free  from  his  fellow-sinners, 
evil  might  soon  cease.  But  as  the  case  is,  sin  ever  tends  to  spread  widely,  and 
to  stand  permanently. 

II.  Evil  yields  before  holy  self-sacrifice.  Esther,  having  had  formerly  so  free 
an  access  and  so  good  success  in  her  appeals,  ventures  to  draw  near  again,  (a)  Esther 
was  intensely  solicitous,  for  we  read,  "  she  wept  and  besought  him."  The  welfare  of 
the  people  was  dearer  to  her  than  her  own.  The  mere  dilettante  accomplishes  nothing, 
for  evil  grows  naturally ;  while  virtue  is  like  those  birds  of  song  which  come  from 
afar,  are  caught  with  difficulty,  and  are  ever  ready  to  depart.  There  must  be  strenuous 
eli'ort  on  the  part  of  those  who  would  do  good.  She  wept  over  temporal  ruin ;  do 
we  weep  over  spiritual  ruin  1  (/3)  Esther  was  persistent.  She  came  again.  As  her 
former  success  encouraged  her  to  approach  again  to  an  earthly,  so  our  former  successes 
should  encourage  us  to  approach  the  heavenly  King.  Like  the  poor  widow,  men 
ought  always  to  pray  and  not  to  faint,  (y)  Esther  was  boldly  self-sacrificing.  Un- 
bidden she  came  to  the  king,  bearing  her  life  in  her  hands.  A  noble  type  of  the 
sacrifice  and  intercession  of  Christ  is  presented  by  this  scene  in  the  life  of  Esther. 
In  ei)tire  self-forget  fulness  and  self-surrender  she  ventured  her  life  in  order  to  plead 


264  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY     ESTHER.  [chap.  viii. 


for  her  kindred ;  and  Christ  gave  his  life  that,  now  within  the  veil,  he  might  make 
intercession  for  his  kinsmen  after  the  flesh.  (3)  Esther  succeeded.  The  king 
stretched  out  the  golden  sceptre.  Oh,  Esther,  thou  hast  won  for  ever  the  gratitude 
of  every  Jew.  Moses  delivered  from  slavery ;  thou  hast  delivered  from  death  1  A 
sword  was  about  to  destroy  the  whole  race,  and  thy  fair  neck  was  stretched  under 
to  avert  the  blow !  Our  Intercessor  has  equal  success.  As  the  wishes  of  Mordecai 
were  presented  by  Esther,  and  she  brought  back  assured  safety ;  so  our  petitions, 
poor,  babbling  cries,  are  presented  by  Christ,  sprinkled  with  his  own  blood,  and 
return  to  us  in  showers  of  blessing. 

III.  Evil  crushed,  but  not  killed.  Ahasuerus  could  only  allow  Mordecai  to  invent 
some  contrivance  to  counteract  the  evil.  To  undo  the  wickedness  of  Haman  seemed 
impossible,  and,  to  avoid  the  results  of  it,  the  whole  empire  incurred  the  risk  of  civil 
war.  To  destroy  is  always  easier  than  to  save  ;  and  many  a  man,  who  has  no  hammer 
for  building,  has  a  good  torch  for  burning.  As  a  madman  may  set  on  fire  a  cathedral 
which  a  whole  generation  cannot  rebuild,  or  as  a  child  may  tear  a  painting  which 
only  a  Raphael  could  reproduce ;  so  one  sin  may  ruin  a  soul  which  only  God  could 
save.  Partially  the  efi'ects  of  sin  may  be  destroyed.  The  guilty  conscience  may  be 
set  at  rest,  and  the  foul  heart  may  be  cleansed ;  the  gates  of  hope  may  be  opened, 
and  those  of  despair  may  be  shut ;  but  some  of  the  effects  endure  for  ever.  A 
prodigal  wastes  his  estate  by  intemperance,  and  it  is  never  restored ;  a  nation  is 
hurried  by  ambition  into  unjust  war,  and  is  maimed  for  ever  ;  a  suicide  takes  poison, 
and  has  no  more  opportunity  of  repentance  on  earth.  The  action  may  be  temporary, 
and  the  results  eternal. 

IV.  Practical  lessons,  (a)  The  folly  of  infallibility.  For  either  Pope  or  Kaiser 
to  say,  ''  The  thing  is  settled,  and  cannot  be  reconsidered,"  is  to  doom  the  Church 
or  the  State  to  dire  disaster.  For  the  imperfect  state  of  man  on  earth,  "  live  and 
learn  "  is  a  suitable  motto.  But,  like  the  Bourbons,  the  kings  of  Persia  learnt 
nothing  and  forgot  nothing.  (/3)  The  power  of  intercession.  Our  Lord  himself 
takes  a  precisely  parallel  case  to  that  of  Esther  to  teach  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  As  she, 
in  the  parable,  won  by  her  importunity  a  blessing  from  the  unwilling,  much  more 
may  we  by  our  pleading  secure  the  mercy  of  the  ever- willing.  Esther's  earnestness, 
her  humility,  and  her  self-forgetfulness,  teach  how  to  draw  near  to  God.  (y)  The 
awful  nature  of  sin.  The  actions  that  are  performed  the  most  thoughtlessly  may 
ruin  the  soul.  As  one  frosty  night  when  the  bloom  is  on  the  trees  may  destroy  the 
hopes  of  spring,  as  one  fierce  gale  may  dash  the  gallant  ship  against  the  rocks ;  so 
one  sin  may  ruin  the  soul.  Sickness  does  not  weaken  its  hold,  and  death  does  not 
destroy  its  venom.  If  once  the  venom  is  seated  in  the  soul,  there  is  only  one  healer, 
and  he  Almighty,  who  can  wash  away  the  stain. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  3,  4. 

Sin  never  dies  of  age.     It  is  as  when  My  friends,  the  old  statement,  "  what 

a  young  man  dies  in  the  full  fire  and  soever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also 

strength  of  his  youth  by  some  vehement  reap,"  is  absolutely  true,  universally  true, 

distemper ;  it,  as  it  were,  tears  and  forces  The  gospel   is   not   its   abrogation.     It 

and  fires  his  soul  out  of  his  body.     He  modifies  it,  gives    it  a  new  aspect,  in 

that  will  come  and  fight  it  out  with  his  some  respects  it  gives  it  a  new  incidence; 

corruption  to  the  last  shall  find  that  it  but  be  sure  of  this,  that  the  harvest  has 

will  sell  its  life  at  a  dear  rate ;  it  will  to   be   gathered.       If    you   waste   your 

strive  and  fight  for  it,  and  many  a  doubt-  youth    no    repentance    will    send    the 

f ul  conflict  will  pass  between  that  and  the  shadow  back  upon  the  dial,  or  recover 

soul.   It  may  give  a  man  many  a  wound,  the  ground  lost  by  idleness,  or  restore 

many  a  foil,  and  many  a  disheartening  the  constitution  shattered  by  dissipation, 

blow  ;    for,  believe   it,  the   strong  man  or  give  again  the  resources  wasted  upon 

will  fight  for  his  possession. — South.  vice,  or  bring  back  fleeting  opportunities. 


CHAP.   VIII.] 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    ESTHER. 


266 


If  you  forget  God  and  live  without  him 
in  the  world,  fancying  that  it  is  time 
enough  to  become  "  religious  "  when  you 
"  have  had  your  fling," — even  were  you 
to  come  back  at  last,  and  remember 
how  few  do, — you  could  not  obliterate 
the  remembrance  of  misused  years,  nor 
the  deep  marks  which  they  had  left  upon 
imagination,  and  thought,  and  taste,  and 
habit. — Maclaren. 

When  the  king  "  held  out  the  golden 
sceptre  towards  Esther"  she  was  animated 
with  greater  confidence,  and  "stood  be- 
fore him"  with  touching  tenderness,  and 
hearty  self-consecration  to  the  cause  which 
she  pleaded.  She  importuned  him  to 
issue  a  new  decree,  reversing  the  edict 
of  Haman  for  the  destruction  of  the  Jews 
— "  For  how,"  said  she,  "  can  I  endure 
to  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  unto  my 
people  ?  or  how  can  I  enduie  to  see  the 
destruction  of  my  kindred  1 "  Her  love 
for  her  people  was  intense,  self-sacrificing, 
and  disinterested.  She  hinged  her  inter- 
cession upon  that  love.  For  her  own 
sake  did  she  ask  that  the  lives  of  her 
kindred  should  be  spared.  In  this 
aspect  of  it  her  intercession  reminds  us 
of  the  advocacy  and  intercession  of  the 
Saviour.  How  vast  was  his  love  for 
his  people  !  Not  only  did  he  imperil 
his  life  for  their  sakes,  but  gave  himself 
"a  ransom  for  many."  He  intercedes 
for  them  in  heaven,  and  is  mighty  and 
all-prevailing  because  that  intercession 
is  centred  in  himself.  How  could  he 
endure  to  see  those  perish  for  whom  he 
died?  and  whom,  in  his  exaltation,  he 
ardently  loves  %  If  such  a  contingency 
could  be  supposed  possible  the  trial  would 
overwhelm  him,  and  spoil  his  satisfac- 
tion and  joy.  They  are  his  kindred — 
his  brethren  ;  and  in  testimony  of  his 
lo\  e  for  them,  as  well  as  in  proof  of  his 
ceaseless  intercession  in  their  behalf,  he 
appears  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and 
of  the  elders,  and  of  the  living  ones,  "  a 
lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  How  many 
Jews  were  there  in  Persia  who  knew  of 
the  sentence  of  death  which  had  been 
passed  against  them,  but  who  knew  not 
the  powerful,  loving  intercessor  whom 
they  had  before  the  king  !  And  there 
are  not  a  few,  even  within  the  enclosure 
of  the  Church,  who,  whilst  dreading  the 


condemnation  under  which  they  have 
been  laid  by  sin,  take  not  home  to  their 
hearts  the  consolation  which  arises  from 
the  intercession  of  the  Saviour.  As  the 
appearance  of  Esther  before  the  king, 
with  her  tears  and  earnest  love-pleading, 
would  have  sent  a  thrill  of  hope  through- 
out millions  of  hearts  in  the  Persian 
empire,  had  it  been  everywhere  visible, 
so  could  the  siglit  of  Christ  before  the 
throne  of  God  be  witnessed  by  faith  by 
all  believers,  the  burden  of  fear  which 
oppresses  many  souls  throughout  the 
earth  would  be  removed,  and  there  would 
be  the  peace  and  tranquillity  of  resting 
in  his  love.  In  the  survey  of  our  own 
condition  he  could  not  discover  any 
arguments  which  he  could  successfully 
use  to  secure  our  forgiveness  and  final 
deliverance,  but  in  himself  he  has  all- 
prevailing  pleas.  And  whilst  the  be- 
liever's prayers  derive  their  power  from 
the  concluding  words — "  For  Jesus* 
sake ; "  these  words  receive  their  con- 
firmation and  response  in  heaven,  where 
Jesus  pleads  in  our  behalf  for  his  own 
name's  sake. 

"  Fair  is  the  lot  that's  cast  for  me, 
I  have  an  advocate  with  thee; 
And  he  is  safe,  and  must  succeed, 
For  whom  the  Lord  vouchsafes  to  plead.'* 

M'Ewen, 

Oh  queen,  thou  art  victor  now  !  Thou 
art  ascending  a  higher  and  a  holier  throne 
than  that  on  which  thou  wast  crowned 
on  the  day  of  thine  espousals.  Thy  great 
king  was  but  now  holding  forth  to  thee 
the  golden  sceptre  on  which  thy  very 
life  was  hung,  and  thou  didst  arise  and 
stand  as  a  weeping  suppliant  before  him. 
And  lo  !  now  thou  art  waving  a  far  more 
powerful  sceptre,  albeit  invisible,  over 
his  head  !  Thou  art  ruling  him  partly 
by  the  power  of  womanly  beauty  and 
accomplishment  over  a  fitful  but  suscep- 
tible nature,  but  stiU  more  by  the  irresist- 
ible power  of  moral  earnestness,  by  the 
grandeur  of  patriotism,  and  by  the  holy 
spell  of  self-sacrificing  love  !  And  soon 
the  pens  of  the  scribes  will  be  busy  foi 
thee,  and  the  swift  beasts  will  be  carrying 
thy  message  of  life  to  distant  provinces, 
and  thy  poor  people  far  and  near  will 
gratefully  bless  thy  name. — Raleigh. 


266  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  [chap.  vin. 


MAIN  JIOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  5,  6. 
The  Pleading  op  a  Great  Passion. 

Patriotism  is  among  the  noblest  and  strongest  passions  of  the  human  heart.  This 
warm  and  self-forgetting  devotion  to  the  claims  of  our  country  often  very  closely 
resembles  the  all-reaching  love  which  is  produced  by  Christianity.  If,  indeed,  the 
Church  can  boast  of  martyrs,  men  who  have  died  rather  than  deny  the  truth,  every 
great  nation  can  tell  of  patriots  who  chose  'ieath  rather  than  the  dishonour  of  their 
country.  In  ancient  Sparta  this  passion  burned  with  so  hot  a  flame  that  mothers 
rejoiced  when  their  dead  but  triumphant  sons  were  carried  home  upon  their  shields  ; 
and  a  mother  was,  at  least  on  one  great  occasion,  known  to  slay  her  son  who  had 
turned  coward  upon  the  field  of  battle.  The  patriotism  of  the  Jews,  being  a 
religious  as  well  as  a  national  sentiment,  was  peculiarly  strong.  With  the  glory 
of  the  nation,  the  success  and  even  the  existence  of  the  religion  were  inextricably 
involved :  if  Israel  were  destroyed,  the  worship  of  Jehovah  ceased  from  among 
men ;  and  if  David's  line  were  cut  off,  the  world's  Eedeemer  could  never  appear. 
Now,  if  it  was  the  proudest  boast  of  ancient  days  to  be  able  to  say,  "  I  am  a  Roman 
citizen ;  "  and  if  so  many  of  us  would  not  sell  for  untold  wealth  our  British  birth- 
right ;  how  much  more  noble  is  it  to  say,  "  I  am  a  citizen  of  heaven."  The  very 
dust  and  stones  of  Zion  should  be  precious  in  our  sight.  No  sacrifices  can  be  too 
great  which  are  made  for  Christ,  and  no  work  can  be  mean  which  tends  toward  the 
extension  of  his  kingdom.  The  noblest  offices  of  the  world  are  mean  and  poor 
beside  the  humblest  duties  of  the  Church.  We  cannot  refrain  from  a  lofty  emotion 
when  we  remember  the  glories  of  our  spiritual  temple.  The  temple  of  Jerusalem 
has  passed  awa}' ;  but  the  true  Zion,  of  which  that  was  but  a  type,  is  established 
for  ever.  Now  the  whole  of  Esther's  life  shows  that  she  was  under  the  influence 
of  both  the  national  and  the  religious  sentiments.  But  perhaps  in  all  the  story, 
her  patriotism  never  shines  so  beautifully  as  in  this  paragraph.  All  the  grace  of  a 
tender  woman,  all  the  exquisite  tact  of  a  woman  deeply  in  earnest,  and  all  the 
deep  pathos  of  a  woman's  heart,  are  richly  displayed. 

I.  A  great  passion  inspires  humility.  If  it  please  the  king,  and  if  the  thing 
seem  right  before  the  king.  Pride  is  effaced  in  the  presence  of  a  lofty  emotion. 
That  the  thing  was  in  itself  riglit  she  does  not  venture  to  assert,  but  recognizes  the 
supreme  power  of  the  Oriental  despot.  As  a  mountain  torrent,  swollen  by  the 
winter  rains,  sweeps  away  the  feeble  dykes  which  were  intended  to  impede  its 
overwhelming  progress ;  so  the  lofty  passion  which  inspired  her  heart  made 
Esther  oblivious  of  her  own  claims  upon  the  king.  Lest  she  should  injure  her 
plea,  she  does  not  stop  to  insist  upon  absolute  right ;  but  asks  as  a  favour  what 
might  have  been  demanded  as  an  act  of  justice.  She  was  the  wise  counsellor,  and 
Ahasuerus  was  the  fool ;  and  yet  she  descends  even  below  his  level.  Yet  if  her 
language  was  becoming  in  her  lips  when  she  addressed  only  an  earthly  monarch, 
much  more  is  such  submission  suitable  on  the  lips  of  a  r^hristian.  Possibly  many 
an  earnest  prayer  meets  with  no  Divine  "I  will"  in  answer,  because  what  ought 
to  have  been  asked  as  a  favour  is  demanded  almost  as  a  right.  Our  ignorance, 
which  knows  not  what  is  expedient, — our  folly,  which  wishes  for  injurious  comforts, 
— and  our  guilt,  Avhich  takes  away  all  merit  from  our  prayers, — are  all  arguments 
for  humility.  Above  all  is  the  example  of  our  Lord,  who  prayed  "  Thy  will  be 
done." 

II.  A  great  passion  consecrates  personal  gifts.  "  If  I  be  pleasing  in  his 
eyes."  What  treasures  of  wealth,  genius,  and  affection  have  been  laid  on  the  altar 
of  patriotism  1  Even  for  a  shilling  a  day  men  will  be  found  ready  to  die  rather 
than  submit  to  the  dishonour  of  their  flag.  No  need  to  travel  back  to  either  Jew- 
ish or  Roman  history  for  illustrations  of  the  text.     The  grand  valour  of  the  Putcb 


CHAP.  VIII.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  267 


in  their  wars  against  Spain,  or  the  countless  deeds  of  daring  performed  on  many  a 
desperate  field  by  British  troops,  show  that  every  generous  heart  holds  the  country 
dearer  than  the  life.  Equally  wonderful  the  triumphs  of  faith !  Elliott  and 
Brainard,  Martyn  and  Schwartz,  were  animated  by  the  same  passion  for  the  hea- 
venly that  inspired  Esther  for  the  earthly  kingdom.  So  the  Cobbler  of  Leicester- 
shire conquered  the  difficulties  of  forty  dialects  in  order  that,  beneath  the  shadow 
of  ancient  temples  or  high  on  the  slopes  of  swelling  hills,  he  might  preach  Christ 
to  the  people  of  India.  So  Howard,  or  Wilberforce,  or  Livingstone  were  equally 
inspired  by  Christ  with  the  grand  enthusiasm  of  humanity. 

III.  A  great  passion  creates  a  delicate  tact.  ''  Let  it  be  written  to  reverse 
the  letters  devised  by  Haman."  Thus,  with  all  a  woman's  subtle  insight  into  the 
heart,  she  does  not  remind  the  king  of  his  share  in  the  iniquity  ;  she  only  speaks  of 
the  sin  of  Haman.  A  lower  level  of  patriotism  might  have  reproached  the  king 
with  his  own  folly ;  but  in  her  lofty  zeal  for  her  people  she  avoids  all  manner  of 
reproach.  It  will  be  time  enough  for  reproaches  when  her  petition  has  failed.  If  the 
king  will  not  undo  the  wrong  that  he  has  done,  then  she  will  cast  in  her  lot  with 
her  kindred,  and  fling  the  king's  favours  back  in  his  face.  Meanwhile  she  builds 
for  him  a  bridge  of  gold.  Many  seem  more  anxious  to  reprove  the  sinner  than  to 
remove  the  sin.  Accordingly  they  are  full  of  invective,  and  the  sinner  "turns  away 
in  a  rage."  Those  who  are  pleading  for  Christ  need,  along  with  other  noble  gifts, 
a  delicate  tact.  It  is  easy  to  make  tlie  sinner  cry,  "  What !  am  I  to  beg  and  pray 
like  a  beaten  child  1,  No !  Let  Divine  vengeance  fall.  Terror  shall  not  make  me 
afraid."  And  truly  if  hell  were  the  only  motive  of  the  Gospel  there  would  be  some 
reason  in  the  bitter  words.  But  as  Esther  pleaded  delicately  for  her  people,  so  the 
preacher  should  plead  wisely  for  his  Master.  Men  are  oftener  to  be  led  than 
driven ;  as  flies  are  caught  by  honey  rather  than  by  vinegar. 

IV.  A  great  passion  is  called  up  by  a  great  occasion.  "  How  can  I  endure 
to  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  unto  my  people  1 "  It  is  sometimes  said  as  an 
objection  to  Christianity  that  the  Bible  does  not  teach  the  duty  of  patriotism.  But 
by  example  it  does.  The  example  of  our  Lord  as  he  wept  over  the  city  is  a  supreme 
instance.  Here  is  the  example  of  Esther,  (a)  Patriotism  is  a  noble  sentiment.  It 
arises  above  the  natural  selfishness  that  confines  affection  in  narrow  limits,  and 
extends  to  all  the  nation.  It  burns  more  brightly  in  a  small  brave  nation  than  in 
a  vast  empire ;  so  Athens,  Judea,  Montenegro  were  noted  for  this  virtue.  It  feeds 
upon  the  noble  traditions  of  the  past,  so  that  the  example  of  a  Washington  becomes 
reproductive.  It  is  injured  by  party  faction,  so  that  a  nation  torn  in  two  by  intes- 
tine strife  is  open  to  the  arts  of  any  invader.  Often  it  is  altogether  destroyed  by 
the  vices  of  a  ruler ;  thus,  it  is  said  that  the  Moors  were  introduced  into  Spain, 
and  the  English  into  Ireland,  in  order  that  certain  nobles  might  revenge  themselves 
upon  their  king.  But  this  virtue  never  shines  so  brightly  as  in  days  of  disaster. 
Motley's  '  History  of  the  Dutch  Republic '  is  a  magnificent  illustration  of  this  prin- 
ciple. As  Macaulay  speaks  of  that  stubborn  British  valour  which  never  shines  so 
brightly  as  at  the  close  of  a  long  and  doubtful  day  ;  so  true  patriotism  never  flames 
up  so  high  as  when  an  invader's  foot  is  planted  on  our  shores.  Then  a  patriot  may 
use  the  language  of  Pitt — '*  I  would  never  lay  down  my  arms ;  never  !  never ! 
never  !  "  (/3)  This  virtue  has  corresponding  dangers.  As  humility  tends  to  cow- 
ardice, courage  to  recklessness,  liberality  to  prodigality,  so  that  Aristotle  teaches 
that  virtue  is  always  a  mean  between  two  extremes ;  similarly  patriotism  tends  to 
ostentation,  to  self-confidence,  and  injustice.  A  Roman  pardoned  any  wickedness 
by  which  the  territory  or  wealth  of  Rome  was  increased  ;  Englishmen  condone 
many  a  crime  because  it  seems  to  be  for  the  national  advantage.  Artifices  which 
would  rouse  the  derision  of  the  whole  country  if  they  were  to  be  perpetrated  by 
the  French,  become  sacred  as  soon  as  they  are  practised  by  statesmen  of  our  own. 
{y)  Patriotism  will  some  day  be  merged  in  a  far  wider  sentiment.     As  the  farmer 


268  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [ohap.  vm. 

sows  two  kinds  of  seed  in  the  same  field,  and  when  the  one  which  grows  more 
rapidly  has  ripened  and  is  cut  down,  then  the  other  more  slowly  comes  to  maturity; 
so  amid  the  thick  growth  of  family  and  national  affection  there  is  slowly  develop- 
ing a  far  deeper  and  nobler  passion,  which  will  look  forward  to  the  day  when,  in 
all  the  earth,  there  shall  be  but  one  nation,  whose  king  is  Christ. 

V.  A  great  passion  does  not  overlook  family  affection.  "Or  how  can  I 
endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my  kindred  % "  The  national  sentiment  arises  first 
in  the  family;  and  as  the  domestic  affections  are  pure  and  strong,  or  corrupt  and 
weak,  will  be  the  growth  or  decline  of  the  nation.  In  the  great  days  of  Eome 
divorces  were  unknown  for  centuries  together ;  and  as  the  family  ties  relaxed  the 
■whole  empire  became  corrupt.  As  Moses  refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's 
daughter ;  so  Esther  could  not  separate  herself  from  her  people.  The  vine  which 
hangs  its  rich  clusters  of  grapes  over  some  stately  palace  sends  its  roots  far  under 
the  ground  to  perennial  springs  of  water ;  and  so,  while  Esther  adorned  the  palace 
with  her  beauty,  she  still  felt  that  she  grew  up  out  of  a  despised  race  of  Jews  who 
usually  lived  far  away  from  the  court.  Humanly  speaking,  her  whole  virtue  sprang 
from  her  adherence  to  her  people.  Distrust  the  man  who  treats  lightly  the  claims 
of  family  and  home.  Family  afi'ection  is  essential  to  the  State,  is  consecrated 
by  Christianity  ;  and  here  Esther  becomes  a  type  of  Him  who,  though  exalted 
to  a  nobler  throne  than  that  of  Shushan,  still  remembers  his  kinsmen  after  the 
flesh. 

SUGGESTITE    COMMENTS   ON   VeRSES   5,  6. 

1.  This  petition  Esther  presents  with  people  %  "  Little  comfort  can  I  have  of 
much  affection.  She  fell  down  at  his  my  own  life  if  I  cannot  prevail  for 
feet  and  besought  him  with  tears  :  every  theirs  :  as  good  share  in  the  evil  myself 
tear  as  precious  as  any  of  the  pearls  with  as  see  it  come  upon  them  ;  for  how  can 
which  she  was  adorned.  It  was  time  to  I  endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my 
be  earnest  when  the  Church  of  God  lay  kindred  that  are  dear  to  me]  Esther,  a 
at  stake.  Let  none  be  so  great  as  to  be  queen,  owns  her  poor  kindred,  and 
unwilling  to  stoop,  none  so  merry  as  to  speaks  of  them  with  a  very  tender  con- 
be  unwilling  to  weep,  when  thereby  cern.  Now  it  was  that  she  mingled  her 
they  may  do  any  service  to  God's  tears  with  her  words,  that  she  wept  and 
Church  and  people.  Esther,  though  made  supplication.  We  read  of  no  tears 
safe  herself,  fell  down  and  begged  with  when  she  begged  for  her  own  life;  but 
tears  for  the  deliverance  of  her  people.  now  that  she  is  sure  of  that,  she  wept 

2.  She  expresses  it  with  great  submis-  for  her  people.  Tears  of  pity  and  ten- 
sion, and  a  profound  deference  to  the  derness  are  the  most  Christ-like.  They 
king,  and  his  wisdom  and  will.  If  it  that  are  truly  concerned  for  the  public 
please  the  king,  and  if  I  have  found  would  rather  die  in  the  ditch  than  live 
favour  in  his  sight.  Even  then  when  to  see  the  desolations  of  the  Church  of 
we  have  the  clearest  reason  and  justice  God  and  the  ruin  of  their  country, 
on  our  side,  and  have  the  clearest  cause  Tender  spirits  cannot  bear  to  hear  of  the 
to  plead,  yet  it  becomes  us  to  speak  to  ruin  of  their  people  and  kindred,  and 
our  superiors  with  humility  and  modesty,  therefore  dare  not  omit  any  opportunity 
and  not  to  talk  like  demandants  when  of  giving  them  relief — M.  Henry. 

we  are  supplicants.     There  is  nothing  We  should   have  sympathy   for  the 

lost  by  decency  and  good  breeding.     As  oppressed  brethren  in  the  faith  ( 1  Peter 

soft  answers  turn  away  wrath,  so  soft  iii.  8;  Col.  iii.   12;  Gal.  vi.   10).     The 

askings  obtain  favour,  innocence    of    the   guiltless   should   be 

3.  She  enforces  her  petition  with  a  protected  (1  Sam.  xx.  32).  He  who 
pathetic  plea  :  "  For  how  can  I  endure  has  no  pity  for  the  pious  and  innocent 
to  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  upon  my  when  they  are  in  danger  is  not  worthy 


CHAP,  vm.]             HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  269 

of  the  name  of  a  man,  much  less  that  of  magnanimously   spare   the    life   of    an 

a  Christian  ;  for  we  are  members  of  one  enemy,  even  when,  by  sacrificing  that 

body  (1  Cor.  xii.  10). — Starke.  life,   his   own   advancement  would    be 

She  had  her  life  already  given  her  at  promoted.     But  among  all  the  moods  of 

her  petition  ;  but  unless  she  might  have  his  life,  none,  probably,  is  really  diviner 

her  people  at  her  request,  who  were  sold  than  that  which  is  expressed  in  these 

as  well  as  herself,  her  life  would  be  unto  words,    written    apparently   while    his 

her  a  joyless,  that  is,  a  lifeless,  life.     It  heart  was  melted,  while  his  tears  were 

is  rather  a  death  than  a  life  that  is  spent  flowing, — "  Rivers  of  waters  run  down 

in    heaviness   and    horror.       And    this  mine  eyes,  because  they  keep  not  thy 

would   be  Esther's  case  if   her  people  law." 

should   be  massacred,  as  was  designed  St.  Paul,  often  great  in  this  greatness, 

and  decreed.  .  .  .  How  can  I  %  and  shall  is   never  more   conspicuously   so   than 

I  see?  how  should  I  do  otherwise  than  when  he  declares    that  he  has  ^* great 

sink   at    the   sight?     Melancthon   said  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in  his 

that   the   good   CEcolampadius   died  of  heart,"  and  that  he  "could  wish  that 

grief  for  the  Church's  calamities.    Nehe-  himself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for 

miah  was  heart-sick  for  the  breaches  of  his  brethren,  his  kinsmen  according  to 

Joseph.       Moses    wished    himself    ex-  the   flesh."      Like   Esther,  his   cry    is, 

punged,  and  Paul  accursed,  rather  than  *'  How  can  I  endure  to  see  the  destruc- 

it  should  go  ill  with   God's  people. —  tion  of  my  kindred?" — only  his  mean- 

Trapp.                ^  ing  covers  the  spiritual  and  the  eternal, 

Indeed  there  is  no  sublimity  of  human  Esther's  only  afi'ecting  this  time-life, 

character  to  equal  that  which  is  reached  But  the  really  perfectly  suhlime  of  this 

in  such  a  mood.    Take  the  greatest  men  condition  or  state  is  found  only  in  the 

who     have     lived,    in    their     greatest  IMaster,  who  not  only  wished  and  desired 

moments,  you  will  find  that  either  they  the  good  of  all,  and  lived  promoting  it, 

are   in    this  mood    or   in  one   not   far  but  actually  died  for  us ;  gave  life  for 

removed  from  it.    Morally,  the  grandest  life,  the  just  for  the  unjust— redeemed 

act  in  the  life  of  Moses,  to  our  thinking,  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law  by  being 

is  not  to  be  found  on  the  granite  peaks  made  a  curse  for  us.     Oh  for  a  love  of 

of  Sinai  amid  the   thunders,   and    the  race-kindred  like  that  of  Esther  ;  for  a 

darkness,  and  the  flames ;  nor  on  Pis-  love  of  country  like  that  of  David ;  for 

gah,  with  the  far-stretching  land  of  pro-     a  love  of  souls  like  that  of  Christ ! 

mise   lying   in   light   before   him  ;  but  Raleigh. 

when  grieved,  and  humbled,  and  disap-  It  was  with  great  earnestness  and 
pointed  with  the  idolatries  of  the  people,  evident  marks  of  affection  that  Esther 
and  yet  clinging  passionately  to  them  urged  the  king  to  interpose  his  authority 
still,  he  threw  himself  before  God  as  to  prevent  the  execution  of  the  bloody 
their  intercessor,  crying,  "  Oh,  this  peo-  decree.  "  She  fell  down  at  his  feet,  and 
pie  have  sinned  a  great  sin  ;  yet  now,  if  besought  him  with  tears."  We  have 
thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin,— and  if  not,  here  a  bright  example  of  female  patriot- 
blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,  out  of  Thy  book  ism.  At  her  first  appearance  we  read  of 
which  Thou  hast  written."  If  I  fail  in  nothing  of  this  kind.  Then  she  was  a 
this  I  fail  in  everything.  Life  itself  party  concerned,— and,  with  the  dignity 
will  hardly  be  desirable  any  longer.  If  which  became  a  queen,  and  one  of  an 
this  people  for  whom  I  have  lived  is  to  injured  and  innocent  race,  she  pled  her 
die,  let  me  die  with  them,  and  let  us  all  cause,  and  boldly  arraigned  the  enemy 
be  forgotten  together.  and  adversary.  But  now,  her  own  life 
David  could  sing  with  loud  voice  to  having  been  secured,  she  appears  as  an 
the  praise  of  God.  He  could  cry  to  intercessor  and  advocate  for  others.  Her 
hini  in  the  lonely  wilderness  by  night  Avhole  soul  was  embarked  in  the  cause 
until  his  voice  echoed  among  the  rocks  which  she  had  undertaken— very  differ- 
and  hills.  He  could  fight  at  the  head  ent  from  a  man  of  law,  or  one  who 
of  the  bravest.      He  could  sometimes  engages  to  act  the  part  of  his  client  for 


270 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


[chap.  vni. 


fee  and  reward.  She  "  preferred  Jeru- 
salem above  her  chief  joy."  When  her 
own  life  was  in  danger  she  bent  no  knee, 
she  shed  no  tear ;  but  now  she  weeps 
and  makes  supplication,  and  refuses  to 
rise  from  the  ground  unless  her  people 
are  given  at  her  request.  To  obtain 
this  there  is  no  humiliation  to  which  she 
will  not  submit,  no  entreaty  that  she 
will  not  employ.  She  will  not  separate 
herself  from  her  kindred,  and,  like  the 
wife  of  Phinehas,*  cannot  think  of  sur- 
viving the  destruction  of  her  people. 
"  For  how,"  she  exclaims,  "  can  I  endure 
to  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  unto  my 
people,  or  how  shall  I  endure  to  see  the 
destruction  of  my  kindred  ^ " 

The  true  patriot  is  ready  to  sacrifice 
everything  for  the  public  weal ;  he 
prefers  public  to  personal  interests,  and 
would  rather  die  than  witness  the  deso- 
lations of  the  church  of  God  and  the 
ruin  of  his  country.  Such  was  the 
patriotism  of  Moses  : — **  Yet  now,  if 
thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin  ;  and  if  not, 
blot  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of  thy  book 
which  thou  hast  written."  t  And  such 
was  the  patriotism  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment Moses,  the  Apostle  Paul :  *'  I  say 
the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  con- 
science also  bearing  me  witness  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  that  I  have  great  heaviness 
and  continual  sorrow  in  my  heart.  For 
I  could  wish  that  myself  were  accursed 
from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  my  kins- 
men according  to  the  flesh  ;"  J — a  pas- 
sage, the  beauty  of  which  is  not  half 
seen  unless  it  is  compared  with  the  close 
of  the  preceding  chapter,  in  which  we 
find  the  Apostle  exulting  in  the  love  of 
God,  and  declaring  his  persuasion  that 
nothing  could  separate  him  from  Christ. 
*•  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  Christ  1  Shall  tribulation,  or  distress, 
or  persecution,  or  famine,  or  nakedness, 
or  peril,  or  sword?  Nay,  in  all  these 
things  we  are  more  than  conquerors, 
through  him  that  loved  us."  But  what 
all  these  things  could  not  do,  singly  or 
together,  his  love  for  his  brethren  would 
have  induced  him  to  undergo.  "  For  I 
could  wish  that  myself  were  accursed 
from  Christ  (separated  from  his  love) 

♦  1  Sam.  iv.  19.        t  Exod.  xxxii.  32. 
t  Rom.  ix.  1— 3f 


for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according 
to  the  flesh." — McCrie. 

At  no  time  was  Esther  more  beautiful 
than  when,  with  tearful  eye,  at  the 
king's  feet,  she  besought  him  to  pity  her 
brethren.  And  no  prayer  of  yours  will 
be  wafted  more  acceptably  to  the  hea- 
venly throne  than  that  which,  with 
thankfulness  for  good  you  have  your- 
selves received,  and  pressing,  tender 
desire  for  the  good  of  others,  you  pre- 
sent for  the  salvation  of  those  who  will 
not  and  cannot  pray  for  themselves. — 
Davidson. 

It  is  a  good  sign,  when  we  feel  an 
interest  in  the  welfare  of  those  related 
to  us,  and  when  we  can  with  importun- 
ity invoke  the  blessings  of  God  upon 
them.  Thus  did  Esther.  She  was  not 
more  earnest  for  herself  than  for  her 
people.  Thus  did  Jeremiah.  "  Oh  that 
mine  eyes  were  fountains  of  tears,  that 
I  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the 
slain  of  my  people."  Thus  felt  Jesus. 
"  When  he  was  come  near,  he  beheld 
the  city,  and  wept  over  it."  Thus  felt 
St.  Paul.  He  poured  out  his  very  soul 
for  his  people,  the  Jews,  though  they 
persecuted  him,  and  tried  to  effect  his 
destruction.  He  tells  us,  that  he  "  had 
great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in 
his  heart "  at  their  folly  and  wickedness 
in  rejecting  Christ,  and  that  his  "  heart's 
desire  and  prayer  unto  God  for  then: 
was,  that  they  might  be  saved." 

Brethren,  are  we  thus  minded  ?  Esthei 
fell  down  at  the  king's  feet  for  her  peo- 
ple. Have  you  done  so  for  your  rela- 
tives and  friends  1  She  wept  at  the 
temporal  ruin  which  was  coming  upon 
them.  Have  you  wept  at  the  eternal 
ruin  to  which  your  unbelieving  friends 
are  exposed  %  She  said,  **  How  can  I 
endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my 
kindred  ]  "  Have  you  said,  ^'  My  parents 
are  dark  and  careless.  Oh  what  heaviness 
I  have  in  my  heart  on  account  of  their 
spiritual  indiH'erence  1  My  children 
give  no  signs  of  grace.  They  '  remem- 
ber not  their  Creator  in  the  days  of  their 
youth,'  all  remonstrances,  admonitions, 
and  persuasions  are  lost  upon  them. 
They  loill  have  their  own  way, — *  How 
can  I  endure  the  destruction  of  my 
children  1 '   Lord,  enlighten  them  j  Lord, 


OttAf.  tnti.]  noMTLKTTC  COMMENTARt:  MSTHER.  273 

arrest  them  in  their  career  of  sin  and  Bring  them  to  the  Saviour,  that  they 

folly.     Make  them,  like  Obadiah,   '  to  may  be  among  thy  ransomed  ones  for 

fear  God  from   their  youth.'      Deliver  ever.     '  Oh  that '  my  children  *  miglit 

them  from  youthful  follies  and  vanities,  live  before  thee  ! '  " — Hughes. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Yeeses  7,  8. 

A  Monarch's  Imbecility. 

Weak  men  usually  trust  to  cunning.  The  lion  leaps  straight  upon  its  enemy, 
but  the  fox  has  recourse  to  trick ;  and  so  the  strong  man,  who  knows  his  own  pur- 
pose, boldly  faces  obstacles ;  while  the  weak  employ  indirect  courses.  Even  an 
open  lie  may  betray  less  feebleness  of  character  than  the  mean  evasions  to  which 
some  men  have  resort.  The  one  bespeaks  a  bold  bad  man,  the  other  reveals  a 
cowardly  bad  man.  As  a  known  enemy  is  always  preferable  to  a  treacherous  ally ; 
so  the  strong  but  wicked  man  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  weakling.  The  great  quali- 
ties which  the  former  will  be  likely  to  possess  may  win  admiration  ;  but  the  latter 
will  be  only  despised.  The  fact  is,  that  the  weaker  man  is  at  heart  as  false  as  the 
other,  but  has  not  the  courage  to  sin  boldly.  He  therefore  tries  to  cheat  both  God 
and  the  devil.  The  weakness  of  a  weak  man  is  never  seen  so  clearly  as  after  he 
has  committed  some  palpable  error.  He  does  not  manfully  confess  his  mistake 
but  twists  and  shuffles  tiU  he  persuades  himself  that  his  error  was,  at  worst,  a  mat- 
ter of  necessity.  Always  distrust  the  man  who  is  the  victim  of  circumstances. 
Great  men  make  their  circumstances,  and  little  men  are  made  by  them.  Not  unfre- 
quently  the  path  to  heaven  seems  to  lead  only  to  a  choice  of  difficulties.  Our  cor- 
rupt hearts  and  emasculated  wills  declare  that  virtue  is  impossible,  and  that  the 
only  path  open  to  us  is  one  that  leads  through  transgression.  When  the  trades- 
man smooths  over  a  palpable  dishonesty  by  speaking  of  the  necessities  of  trade  * 
or  when,  in  times  of  persecution,  the  timid  confessor  throws  the  incense  upon  the 
impious  altars  of  idolatry  ;  they  are  always  ready  to  excuse  the  enormity  of  their 
sin  by  the  force  of  the  temptation  :  that  is,  they  say  they  are  tempted  of  God.  But 
no  circumstances  can  make  the  good  Qian  sin,  or  the  really  strong  man  bend.  If 
then,  we  have  done  evil,  let  us  take  our  own  share  of  the  blame,  and  not  cast  it 
upon  our  circumstances.  Yet  circumstances  usually  make  a  second  sin  easier  than 
the  first.  In  that  downward  path  each  step  is  accompanied  by  an  increasincr 
impetus  ;  and  thus  sins  of  an  enormity  to  shock  the  inexperienced  become  easily 
possible  when  other  sins  have  prepared  the  way.  As  an  army  that  is  once  beaten 
becomes  by  that  very  fact  more  likely  to  be  defeated  again,  so  a  man  who  has  once 
been  mastered  by  temptation  will  be  all  the  more  likely  to  yield  when  next  he  is 
assailed.  Thus  Ahasuerus  finds  that  his  wicked  compliance  with  Haman  has 
enwrapped  him  in  difficulty.  .  A  good  man  could  never  have  fallen  so  low ;  a  wise 
man  could  never  have  been  so  foolish  ;  and  a  strong  man  could  never  have  descended 
to  such  a  monstrous  device.  He  was  unable  to  resist  the  pleading  of  Esther  ;  and 
therefore  his  course  was  boldly  to  disavow  his  infallibility.  Let  him  convene  an 
assembly  of  notables,  manfully  confess  his  error,  and  henceforth  declare  that  the 
laws  of  Persia  could  be  altered.  But  this  was  too  brave  a  course.  To  confess  an 
error  would  shake  the  national  respect  for  authority.  He  therefore  pleads  his  cir- 
cumstances, and  rather  than  acknowledge  an  error,  plunges  the  whole  empire  in 
danger  of  civil  war.  Even  this  responsibility  he  does  not  fully  assume.  The 
weakling  throws  upon  Mordecai  the  duty  of  contriving  a  remedy  against  his  own 
mistakes. 

I.  A  weak  man's  self-defence.     "  I  have  given  Esther  the  house  of  Haman,  and 

him  they  have  hanged  upon  the  gallows,  because  he  laid  his  hands  upon  the  Jews." 
Even  if  the  whole  race  of  the  Hebrews  perish,  the  king  had  proved  his  affection 


272  nOMlLETTC  COMMENTARt:  ESTUM,  [oha?.  Vlft 

for  Esther  by  endowing  lier  with  the  wealth,  and  sacrificing  to  her  the  life,  of  her 
enemy.  Wonderful  devotion  !  He  had  given  what  cost  him  nothing ;  he  had 
hanged  a  man  of  an  alien  race  !  Surely  these  Oriental  monarchs  prove  that  "  lust 
dwells  hard  by  hate."  His  love  for  Esther  was  simply  a  passion  which  had  not 
yet  spent  its  novel  force  ;  and  her  beauty  was  rewarded  by  the  life  of  her  foe. 
Ahasuerus  was  unworthy  of  his  queenly  wife.  She  is  inspired  with  profound  ten- 
derness for  her  people  ;  and  he  appeases  her  patriotism  by  the  execution  of  a  foe. 
Yet  what  would  the  wealth  of  Haman  benefit  Esther  when  her  heart  was  broken 
for  her  murdered  kinsmen  1  There  are  griefs  which  wealth  cannot  solace,  and 
which  vengeance  cannot  forget.  Better  a  thousand  Hamans  alive  than  one  Jew 
murdered.  Yet,  clearly,  the  monarch  fancies  that  Esther  will  pardon  the  edict 
which  he  has  signed  because  of  the  punishment  which  he  has  meted  out.  He  sees 
that  he  has  exposed  himself  to  the  hatred  and  contempt  of  his  fair  wife  by  yield- 
ing to  the  devices  of  Haman,  and  therefore  he  offers  her  the  life  of  her  enemy  as  a 
proof  of  his  devotion.  How  much  nobler  had  he  said,  "  Oh,  queen,  I  have  weakly 
allowed  myself  to  be  led  to  the  verge  of  a  great  wickedness  ;  now  that  my  eyes  are 
open  to  my  folly,  I  must  in  some  way  reverse  the  decree."  But  he  was  too  weak. 
With  a  maudlin  tenderness,  like  that  of  a  drunken  man,  while  she  is  inspired  with 
an  almost  Divine  passion  of  patriotism,  he  pleads  his  affection  for  her  person.  Surely 
Esther  despised  him  in  her  heart.  As  if  it  was  so  easy  to  forget  that  he  had  agreed 
to  murder  all  her  race.  Thus  we  have  a  great  wickedness  and  a  small  propitiation. 
As  if  the  hero  of  one  hundred  swindles  flung  a  copper  to  a  beggar ;  as  if  a  cowardly 
murderer  gave  a  crust  to  his  victim's  orphan  ;  as  if  a  life-long  sinner  offered  to  God 
the  compensation  of  a  Sunday  prayer  ;  so  Ahasuerus  hopes  that  Haman's  death  will 
make  Esther  unmindful  of  the  wickedness  devised  against  her  kindred. 

II.  A  weak  man's  *'  non  possumus."  "  That  which  is  written  in  the  king's 
name,  and  sealed  with  the  king's  seal,  may  no  man  reverse."  What  I  have  written 
I  have  written.  Eulers  too  often  say,  "  Thus  I  order ;  let  my  will  stand  instead  of 
a  reason."  Weakness  and  folly  usually  turn  to  obstinacy.  He  who  is  easily 
imposed  upon  at  last  takes  a  determined  stand,  and  usually  takes  it  in  the  wrong 
place.  The  determination  of  the  wise  is  no  way  to  be  feared,  for  they  will  yield  to 
right  reason  ;  but  it  requires  a  surgical  operation  to  make  an  argument  penetrate  to 
the  brain  of  a  fool :  hence  the  fool  is  obstinate,  because  he  cannot  understand. 
States  also  which  take  an  immoveable  stand  upon  the  "  wisdom  of  our  ancestors  " 
are  in  a  fair  way  to  ruin.  Time  is  the  great  innovator,  and  therefore  lapse  of  time 
brings  vast  changes  into  the  body  politic  ;  and  hence  "  he  that  will  not  apply  new 
remedies,  must  expect  new  diseases."  So  science  continually  takes  new  departures  ; 
and  he  who  rested  in  the  discoveries  of  a  previous  generation,  would  be  the  laugh- 
ing-stock of  his  own.  There  is  but  one  unchanging  truth, — the  revelation  of  Jesus 
Christ, — and  even  that  assumes  varying  aspects.  As  the  sun  now  draws  near  and 
now  departs,  now  is  glorious  in  mid-day,  and  yet  soon  leaves  us  in  darkness,  while 
still  himself  unchanged  and,  as  far  as  our  earth  is  concerned,  unmoved,  so  our 
holy  religion  is  compelled  to  vary  with  the  varying  aspects  of  the  times.  Only  the 
fool  never  learns  wisdom.  So  Ahasuerus  says,  ''Take  it  not  amiss  that  I  do  not 
reverse  the  decree  of  Haman,  for  the  king's  writing  stands  unaltered  for  ever." 

III.  A  weak  man's  refusal  of  responsibility.  "  Write  ye  also  for  the  Jews 
as  it  liketh  you  in  the  king's  name. "  Having  done  the  mischief,  he  commits  to 
Mordecai  the  work  of  undoing  it.  Ahasuerus  had  already  had  proof  of  the  folly  of 
committing  his  power  to  the  hands  of  his  minister  ;  but  even  experience  will  not 
make  fools  wise  ;  he  now  trusts  equal  power  to  Mordecai.  Doubtless  the  king  was 
right  in  thus  committing  himself  to  the  skill  and  loyalty  of  the  new  minister ; 
doubtless,  also,  this  minister  did  the  best  possible  for  him  to  do  in  the  circum- 
stances ;  but  if  the  king  had  bestirred  himself  in  a  true  kingly  manner,  as  already 
suggested,  it  would  not  have  been  necessary  to  deluge  the  land  with  blood.  Few 
evi£  are  more  ruinous  to  a  State  than  the  dread  of  responsibility.    It  leads  speedily 


CHAi».  vmj 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTABT:  MSTBEtt. 


273 


to  anarchy.  A  monarch  who  never  decides,  f^eneral  who  fears  to  take  prompt 
and  vigorous  action,  a  statesman  who  dares  not  step  beyond  the  line  of  musty  prece- 
dent, are  greater  curses  to  a  land  than  even  open  wickedness.  In  this  world  folly 
and  weakness  are  often  punished  more  severely  than  sin. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Yerses  7,  8. 


Ver.  7.  Then  the  king  Ahasuerus 
said  unto  Esther  the  queen  and  to  Mor- 
decai  the  Jew,  Behold,  I  have  given 
Esther  the  house  of  Haman,  and  him 
they  have  hanged  upon  the  gallows, 
because  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the  Jews. 
The  king  could  not  grant  to  Esther 
everything  that  she  requested.  But  he 
assures  her,  that  it  was  not  for  want  of 
good  will  either  to  herself  or  to  her 
people  that  he  did  not  in  direct  terms 
reverse  the  decree  procured  by  Haman. 
His  love  to  Esther  appeared  in  the  rich 
present  of  the  confiscated  estate  of 
Haman.  His  good  wishes  to  her  people 
appeared  in  the  ignominious  death  of 
their  capital  enemy.  But  kings  cannot 
do  everything.  The  most  noble  and 
potent  prince  in  the  world  had  not  the 
power  of  rescinding  his  own  decrees, 
however  desirous  he  might  be  of  un- 
doing foolish  things  done  by  himself. 

Ver.  8.  Write  ye  also  for  the  Jews, 
as  it  likeih  you,  in  the  king's  name,  and 
seal  it  with  the  king^s  riiig :  for  the 
writing  which  is  written  in  the  kijig^s 
name,  and  sealed  with  the  king^s  ring, 
may  no  man  reverse.  The  king  himself 
could  not  reverse  it ;  and  therefore  we 
find  that  Darius  the  Mede  laboured  in 
vain  till  the  going  down  of  the  sun  to 
save  Daniel  from  the  lions'  den,  and 
passed  a  miserable  sleepless  night  in  the 
anguish  of  a  fruitless  repentance  for 
passing  a  mischievous  law,  which  he 
conld  not  abolish.  The  Persians  thought 
their  kings  highly  honoured  in  that 
their  decrees  were  inviolable.  But  this 
honour,  like  some  others  enjoyed  by 
absolute  princes,  was  a  burden  too  heavy 
to  be  borne  by  mortals.  It  precluded 
them  from  the  comforts  of  repentance, 
too  often  necessary  for  vain  men,  who, 
though  they  would  be  wise,  are  born 
like  the  wild  ass's  colt. 

The  king,  therefore,  could  not  give 
Esther  and  Mordecai  a  warrant  to  pass 


an  act  rescissory  of  his  own  decrees 
against  the  Jews.  But  he  allows  them 
to  frame  a  decree  in  his  name,  and  to 
seal  it  with  his  ring,  for  counteracting 
its  effects.  As  the  first  decree  retained 
its  force,  the  king  could  not  legally 
punish  those  wicked  enemies  of  the 
Jews,  who  might  take  the  advantage  of 
it  to  gratify  their  malice.  Their  mur- 
ders were  already  legalized  by  a  decree 
that  could  not  be  altered.  But  a  law  for 
the  protection  of  the  Jews,  which  did 
not  rescind  the  former,  might  possibly 
be  devised  by  the  wisdom  of  Mordecai ; 
and  to  establish  such  a  law  the  king 
gave  him  his  ring.  He  had  been  too 
ready  on  the  former  occasion  to  lend  his 
authority ;  but  now  he  commits  it  to  a 
safe  hand,  and  under  necessary  restric- 
tions. He  gave  his  ring  to  Haman  to 
seal  a  bloody  decree  ;  he  now  gives  it 
to  Mordecai  to  seal  a  just  and  necessary 
decree  for  the  preservation  of  many  pre- 
cious lives.  The  inviolability  of  the 
king's  decrees,  which  gave  him  so  much 
trouble  by  guarding  the  wicked  laws 
procured  by  Haman,  would  guard  the 
intended  decree  from  violation. — Law- 
son. 

It  was  a  fundamental  article  in  the 
constitution  of  Persia,  that  a  law  once 
enacted  was  irrevocable.  A  most  pre- 
posterous provision  !  and  worse  than  pre- 
posterous— irrational  and  unrighteous. 
Of  aU  the  absurdities  into  which  nations 
have  fallen  in  their  systems  of  legisla- 
tion, especially  where  the  power  is 
entrusted  to  the  arbitrary  will  and 
caprice  of  a  single  individual,  this  is  the 
most  absurd  —  giving  perpetuity  and 
effect  to  every  species  of  injustice  and 
oppression  and  cruelty,  proceeding  on 
the  presumptuous  assumption  of  infalli- 
bility, and  arrogating  the  right  which 
belongs  exclusively  to  the  Supreme 
Being,  who  cannot  do  wrong,  all  whose 
enactments  are  necessarily  founded  in 


274 


nOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


fOHAP.  VXtL 


truth  and  rectitude,  and  '*  the  righteous- 
ness of  who.se  testimonies  is  everlasting." 
Tliis  arrogance  of  the  Persian  despots 
has  never  been  equalled,  except  by  the 
claim  to  infallibility  set  up  by  '*  the 
man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition,  who 
opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  above  all 
that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped ; 
so  that  he,  as  God,  sitteth  in  the  temple 
of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God." 
No  human  authority,  civil  or  sacred, 
whether  exercised  singly  or  collectively, 
is  free  from  error,  and  consequently  its 
decisions  and  enactments  must  always 
be  subject  to  review  and  reversal.  Some 
laws  may  be  morally  unalterable,  in  con- 
sequence of  their  being  founded  on  the 
eternal  principles  of  rectitude  and  just- 
ice, so  that  tlie  repeal  of  them  would  be 
unjust  and  morally  wrong;  but  this 
does  not  belong  to  them  simply  as  human 
laws,  with  respect  to  all  of  which  the 
maxim  of  our  law  holds  good — the  legis- 
lature which  enacts  can  annul. — McCrie. 
The  absurdity  of  the  Persian  law,  that 
a  decree  once  passed  was  unrepealable, 
has  been  often  commented  upon.  It 
has  been  said  that  it  was  the  assumption 
of  a  prerogative  which  was  to  be  exer- 
cised by  God  only,  and  that  it  rests  with 
him  alone  to  say  what  can  never  be 
altered.  But  whilst  this  is  true  on  the 
side  of  the  Divine  infallibility,  we  have 
instances  in  which  God  provides  for  the 
reversal  of  his  threatening  and  soletnn 
affirmation,  when  the  people,  against 
whom  these  are  made,  change  in  their 
relation  and  conduct  towards  himself. 
Nineveh  was  to  be  destroyed  in  forty 
days  from  the  time  that  the  prophet 
uttered  the  proclamation  in  its  streets ; 
but  when  the  inhabitants  bowed  them- 
selves to  the  earth  in  deep  penitence  and 
humility,  the  time  was  allowed  to  expire 
without  the  judgment  having  been 
inflicted.  But  the  law  of  Persia  would 
not  have  permitted  even  of  this  sus- 
pended action.  It  took  no  account  of 
altered  circumstances.     By  his  own  act 


the  king  rendered  himself  helpless  to 
defend  those  who  might,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  Jews,  have  been  hastily  and 
rashly  condemned  to  death.  No  allow- 
ance was  made  for  mistakes  in  judgment, 
inadvertence,  or  what  might  turn  out 
to  be  bad  legislation.  Besides  the  pre- 
sumption involved  in  such  a  law,  as 
though  the  king  could  do  no  wrong,  it 
must  often  have  led  to  great  injustice 
and  cruelty.  What,  for  example,  was 
Artaxerxes  now  to  do?  He  would 
gladly  have  yielded  to  Esther's  plead- 
ing. He  clearly  apprehended  the  un- 
rigliteousness  of  the  decree  which  had 
been  issued,  and  could  not  fail  to  look 
with  dismay  on  the  consequences  which 
would  result  from  its  being  carried  into 
effect.  Nevertheless,  all  that  he  could 
do  in  the  face  of  this  pretentious  and 
foolish  law  was  to  leave  the  matter  in 
the  hands  of  Mordecai  and  Esther  to 
make  another  edict  "  as  it  liketh  you," 
which  might  not  cancel  the  former  one, 
however  much  it  should  have  this 
design,  and  which,  when  passed,  would 
be  equally  irreversible. — McEwen. 

For  ill  to  man's  nature,  as  it  stands 
perverted,  hath  a  natural  motion  strong- 
est in  continuance  ;  but  good,  as  a  forced 
motion  strongest  at  first.  Surely  every 
medicine  is  an  innovation,  and  he  that 
will  not  apply  new  remedies  must  expect 
new  evils ;  for  time  is  the  greatest  inno- 
vator ;  and  if  time  of  course  alter  things 
to  the  worse,  and  wisdom  and  counsel  do 
not  alter  them  to  the  better,  what  shall 
be  the  end  % — Bacon. 

The  greatest  tyranny  that  ever  was 
invented  in  the  world  is  the  pretence  of 
infallibility,  for  Dionysius  and  Phalaris 
did  leave  the  mind  free,  pretending  only 
to  dispose  of  body  and  goods  according 
to  their  will ;  but  the  Pope,  not  content 
to  make  us  do  and  say  what  he  pieaseth, 
will  have  us  also  to  think  so,  denouncing 
his  imprecations  and  spiritual  menaces 
if  we  do  not. — Isaac  Barrow, 


CHAT,  viii.l  ilOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  2V6 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.     Verses  9—14. 

Evil  Counteracted.  ' 

In  the  conduct  of  life  wisdom  is  often  as  necessary  as  virtue  ;  hence  our  Lord 
comuiauds  his  followers  to  be  wise  as  serpents,  while  they  are  harmless  as  doves. 
Indeed  folly  will  ruin  an  earthly  career  as  effectually  as  vice.  Thus  to  have  a 
good  cause,  and  to  fight  manfully  for  it,  are  not  sufficient  in  any  conflict :  the 
general  needs  skill  in  the  arrangement  of  bis  troops,  and  also  a  sharp  eye  to  discern 
his  enemy's  mistakes.  Equally  in  the  battle  of  life  we  need  the  open  eye,  as  well 
as  the  strong  hand,  or  the  brave  heart.  It  is  only  folly  which  says,  that,  as  God  is 
righteous,  and  must  therefore  be  on  the  side  of  the  righteous,  righteousness  alone 
is  necessary  for  success.  This  may  be  true  on  that  large  scale  which  takes  eternity 
into  the  account,  but  here  upon  earth  it  is  not  true.  As  our  supreme  Judge  requires 
at  our  hands  the  cultivation  of  the  intellectual  as  well  as  of  the  moral  attributes  of 
our  nature,  he  wisely  makes  much  of  our  earthly  success  dependent  on  our  skill. 
Thus  a  righteous  imbecile  will  often  fail,  where  a  skilful  scoundrel  succeeds.  In 
the  case  of  nations  this  principle  is  even  more  conspicuous,  j^ations  have  no  here- 
after. They  are  judged  here  and  now.  An  individual  may  be  righteous  and 
miserable  ;  but  a  nation  must  be  exalted  by  virtue.  So  manifestly  is  this  prin- 
ciple written  on  the  pages  of  history,  that  one  of  the  leading  philosophers  of  our 
century  does  not  scruple  to  write,  "  The  cause  which  succeeds  is  that  which  has 
deserved  to  succeed."  It  follows,  that  in  matters  of  legislation  wisdom  and  right- 
eousness are  almost  synonymous  ;  but  if  we  could  imagine  a  ruler  who  was  himself 
utterly  immoral,  while  yet  his  large  intellect  guided  him  wisely  in  national  affairs, 
such  a  monster  would  yet  prove  a  blessing  to  his  country.  At  times,  however,  the 
folly  and  wickedness  of  the  legislature  are  equally  conspicuous.  When  most 
European  nations  oppressed  the  Jews ;  when  Spain  so  cruelly  drove  out  the  indus- 
trious Moors ;  or  when  France  expelled  those  Huguenots  who  were  the  very  brain 
and  heart  of  her  middle  classes,  it  seems  wonderful  that  no  one  propagated  the 
maxim,  that  "  What  is  morally  wrong  can  never  be  politically  expedient."  In 
times  like  these  a  statesman  who  is  both  wise  and  righteous  finds  a  noble  oppor- 
tunity. It  is  for  him  to  resist  the  passions  of  the  mob,  to  devise  means  whereby 
the  oppressed  may  be  relieved,  and  to  open  a  highway  leading  to  the  fair  fields  of 
national  greatness.  Such  was  the  work  now  committed  to  Mordecai.  It  was  his 
part  to  undo  the  folly  of  the  monarch  and  the  wickedness  of  the  minister.  Ahasu- 
erus  committed  to  him  the  task  of  reversing  the  mischief  devised  by  Haman  the 
Agagite. 

I.  A  sudden  decree.  The  right  of  self-defence,  which  in  some  aspects  of  it  may 
be  called  a  sacred  inheritance,  is  generally  held  in  abeyance  in  civilized  states.  If 
every  man  defended  himself  from  attack,  and  was  the  avenger  of  his  own  wrongs, 
society  would  become  impossible.  This  right  is  usually  yielded  up  to  the  govern- 
ment ;  yet  there  are  always  extreme  cases,  in  which  this  right  reverts  back  to  the 
original  owner.  So  the  laws  allow  of  homicide  when  a  burglar,  within  the  house 
at  night,  threatens  the  life  of  a  peacef id  inhabitant ;  or  if  a  traveller,  assailed  by  a 
garotter,  with  the  first  weapon  which  comes  to  hand  inflicts  a  fatal  wound,  he 
would  usually  be  held  guiltless.  In  England  homicide  is  said  to  be  justifiable  : 
(a)  To  prevent  the  commission  of  a  crime  which,  when  committed,  would  be 
punishable  with  death ;  and  also  (j3)  In  necessary  endeavours  to  carry  the  law  into 
execution,  as  in  suppressing  riots,  or  apprehending  malefactors.  Probably,  also, 
the  defence  of  chastity,  which  approaches  nearest  to  the  preservation  of  life,  would 
be  held  to  justify  the  same  extremities.  Now  with  men  of  a  western  race,  at  least 
with  men  of  the  brave  Teutonic  stock,  there  would  be  no  need  to  say  to  those 


276  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHEB.  [csAl».  vm. 


whose  lives  were  assailed  that  they  might  defend  their  right  to  live.  Possibly, 
however,  with  sleepy  Orientals,  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  the  magnitude  of  the 
empire,  there  might  be  some  occasion  for  a  stirring  decree.  Eemembering  how 
cheaply  men  will  sell  their  lives  in  China,  it  seems  not  improbable  that  the  sen- 
tence of  Haman  would  strike  the  Jews  into  a  dull  stupor,  from  which  they  needed 
to  be  aroused.  Yet  the  decree  granted  much  more  than  this.  It  gave  first  the 
right  of  association.  When  the  Jews  banded  together  in  armed  companies,  no 
heathen  ruler  of  a  province  could  compel  them  to  disarm.  Hence,  when  the  fatal 
day  arrived  they  were  ready  for  their  foes.  History  recor.ls,  that  after  the  Hugue- 
nots had  met  their  foes  in  battle  on  many  a  haid-fought  field,  they  fell  a  prey  to 
secret  and  solitary  assassination  :  thus  the  grand  old  Coligni,  who  had  no  equal  on 
the  field,  was  ruthlessly  murdered  in  his  own  chamber.  From  this  danger  the 
Jews  were  delivered.  Thanks  to  the  decree,  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  Adar  the 
Jews  were  able  to  say  to  their  foes,  the  motto  of  the  Napiers,  *'  Eeady,  ay.  Ready." 
Then,  secondly,  the  decree  was  an  act  of  indemnification.  Ko  Jew,  who  slew  his 
foe  in  self-defence,  need  fear  that  he  would  have  to  give  an  account  in  the  courts 
of  justice.  Those  Avho  were  killed  were  beforehand  pronounced  justly  killed. 
There  was  also  a  third  result  doubtless  contemplated  by  Mordecai.  No  one  would 
die  who  did  not  deserve  to  die,  because,  after  this  decree,  no  one  would  attack  the 
Jews  who  was  not  madly  animated  with  the  love  of  blood  and  plunder.  Orderly 
citizens  would  keep  the  peace ;  but  the  sequel  shows  how  terribly  Haman  had 
aroused  the  passions  of  the  mob.  No  foe  so  terrible  as  an  excited  mob  ;  it  resem- 
bles that  herd  of  swine  possessed  by  the  unclean  spirit.  One  passion,  one  soul,  one 
wild  spirit  seems  to  animate  the  mass  ;  and  the  vile  mobs  of  Persia  rushed  violently 
upon  their  own  ruin. 

II.  A  royal  sanction.  Even  in  the  records  of  Oriental  imbecility,  it  may  be 
doubted  whether  ever  monarch  betrayed  more  besotted  folly.  How  diff'erent  the 
records  of  the  East,  where  one  benevolent  imbecile  succeeds  to  another  bloated  sen- 
sualist, from  the  picture  painted  by  our  poet  Laureate.  He  tells  how  statesmen 
knew  how  to  make  the  bounds  of  freedom  wider  yet,  by  shaping  some  august 
decree,  and  how  freedom  widened  slowly  down  from  precedent  to  precedent.  Ori- 
ental despotism  is  a  pyramid  on  its  apex.  As  if  the  monarch  were  some  Epicurean 
deity,  who  was  wrapt  up  in  selfishness,  but  could  curse  all  mankind,  the  whole 
multitude  of  the  nation  living  for  his  glory  or  for  his  luxury.  In  a  lively  apologue, 
a  domestic  bird  moralizes  on  his  own  importance.  For  him  suns  rise  and  set  ;  for 
him  tides  ebb  and  flow  ;  to  provide  for  his  comfort  the  race  of  men  exist ;  and  thus 
the  whole  universe  is  employed  catering  for  the  happiness  of  one  exalted  goose 
So  Oriental  monarchs  fancy  that  they  are  the  world.  But  the  theory  that  the 
world  is  governed  by  kings  and  statesmen  begins  to  fade  away.  The  country 
belongs  to  the  people  who  have  made  it,  and  not  to  the  monarch  \^  ho  has  been 
accidentally  uplifted  above  his  fellows.  Every  child  has  a  right  to  happiness  ;  has 
a  right  to  an  education ;  has  a  right  to  that  career  which  suits  his  talents  ;  and  has 
a  right  to  a  voice  in  the  affairs  of  state.  The  state  is  the  private  property,  the 
exclusive  manor,  of  no  class  of  men  whatever ;  and  the  world  wiU  not  be  at  rest 
till  this  principle  is  everywhere  confessed.  Again,  also,  we  must  raise  our  cry 
against  the  folly  which  will  not  confess  a  mistake.  Not  to  sin  is  the  noblest  lot ; 
and  next  to  that,  whether  for  a  nation  or  a  man,  is  the  bold  virtue  which  dares  to 
make  restitution.  Having  taken  a  wrong  position,  Christianity  demands  that  we 
retreat  from  it  as  soon  as  the  mistake  is  discovered. 

III.  Swift  messengers.  Bad  news  proverbially  travels  fast ;  and  so  it  is  related 
that,  after  the  Indian  Mutiny,  long  before  the  tidings  could  possibly  have  reached 
England,  strange  rumours  were  current  in  London — rumours,  alas,  far  surpassed  by 
the  real  truth.  Here  good  news  travels  fast,  being  hastened  by  the  king's  com- 
mandment. The  haste  was  demanded  (a)  in  order  to  relieve  the  suspense  of  the 
Jews.      Suspense  paralyzes  all  exertion,  and  indeed  a  stunning  defeat  may  be  less 


CHAP,  vm.]  TTOHnLKTTO  COMMENTARY:  FST7TER.  277 

injurious  than  long-continued  anxiety.  To  the  Jews  these  tidings  would  come  like 
cold  waters  to  the  thirsty  soul.  When  a  vessel  has  been  long  becalmed  beneath  a 
sultry  sky,  when  tlie  slimy  ocean  has  grown  stagnant,  and  when  no  evening  dews 
moisten  the  cracking  timbers ;  or  when  the  travellers  of  the  desert  have  long  been 
lost,  when  the  cheeks  are  sunken,  and  the  li[)s  blackened  by  the  continued  thirst ; 
let  a  cloud  arise,  and  streams  of  rain  descend,  then  men  realize  the  sweetness  of 
good  news  from  a  far  country.  JSTow,  over  all  that  mighty  empire  the  Jew  would 
see  that  God  had  not  Ibrgotten  his  covenant,  but  that  he  was  still  mindful  of  his 
chosen  people  Israel.  From  the  banks  of  India's  mighty  rivers,  away  across  the 
deserts  as  far  as  the  mountains  of  Easselas,  the  cry  would  be  heard,  When  the  Lord 
turned  again  the  captivity  of  Israel,  we  were  like  them  that  dream.  Then  said  they 
among  the  heathen.  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  them,  whereof  they  are 
glad.  (/3)  This  haste  was  required  in  order  that  the  Jews  might  have  full  time  to 
prepare.  Lest  the  first  decree  should  take  effect,  tlie  people  must  have  opportunity 
to  concert  schemes  of  self-defence.  In  the  presence  of  so  overwhelming  a  disaster 
as  that  with  which  they  were  threatened,  solitary  effort  availed  nothing.  Union 
alone  was  strength,  (y)  This  haste  also  was  a  merciful  warning  to  all  the  heathen. 
Before  they  were  fairly  aroused  by  the  messengers  of  Haman  they  were  admon- 
ished by  the  decree  of  Mordecai.  To  the  more  distant  provinces  we  can  fancy  the 
messengers  of  mercy  speeding  onward,  if  haply  they  may  overtake  and  pass  by 
tlie  messengers  of  deatli.  So  England  to-day  in  her  right  hand  carries  to  China 
the  deadly  opium,  and  then  sends  afterward  swift  messengers  of  mercy  to  preach 
the  Gospel.  Possibly,  in  the  eyes  of  the  all-wise  God  the  folly  of  Ahasuerus, 
perched  on  his  infallibility,  is  no  greater  than  the  folly  of  Britain  murdering  a 
whole  empire  for  the  sake  of  revenue.  At  least  we  may  pray  that  the  messengers 
of  the  modern  Mordecai  may  undo  the  evil  devised  by  the  modern  Haman. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  9 — 14. 

Now  in  the  change  wrought  in  Pro-  done  for  themselves,   yet  had  they  to 

vidence  on  the  condition  of  the  Jews,  confront  and  beat  down  all  the  enemies 

as  well  as  in  the  work  which  was  yet  who  should  rise  up  against  them,  and 

imposed   upon  them  before  they  could  virtually  gain  a  victory  for  themselves, 

deliver  themselves  from  their  enemies  They  had  to  iiglit  in  the  king's  name, 

and  establish  themselves  in  the  enjoy-  and  with  the  king's  weapons,  and  under 

ment  of  their  own  liberties  and  privi-  the  king's  mandate.     The  conquest  was 

leges,  we  have  an  illustration  of  God's  sure,  but  the  battle  might  yet  be  severe. 

working  iiJ.  grace.     He  accomplishes  for  In  like  manner  has  God  done  for  us,  in 

us  in  his  grace  what  we  could  not  do  Christ,  what  we  could  never  have  done 

for     ourselves.       The    Jews    scattered  for  ourselves.     We  have  in  him  pardon, 

throughout  the  Persian  empire  had  no  reconciliation,  and  unmerited  grace.    We 

part  in  secuiing   this  second  decree  of  have  in  him  the  victory.     But  still  have 

the    king.       Though    they    had    loudly  we  to  "fight  the  good  fight  of  faith," 

prote.>teti  against  the  cruel  wrong  which  and  to  battle  against  every  enemy  who 

was  being  done  to  themselves  and  their  should  seek  our  soul's  ruin.     If  it  had 

families,  yet  would  it  all  have  gone  for  not  been  for  our  deed  of  emancipation 

nothing;  and  had  not  the  second  decree  and   salvation  accomplished   for  us  by 

been  passed,  apart  altogether  from  their  Christ,    when   we  were  ignorant  of  it, 

interference,  they  should  all  have  perished  and  could  have  done  nothing  to  forward 

when  the  day  fixed  had  arrived.      It  or  finish  it,  we  should  never  have  striven 

came  to  them  not  as  an  achievement  of  against  our  enemies,  or  had  only  struggled 

their  own,  but  simply  as  a  gift.    Whilst,  in  vain.     But  on  account  of  what  has 

however,   it    threw   around    them    the  been  done  for  us  we  have  to  be  ready 

favour  and  protection  of  the  king,  and  against  our  evil  day,  to  be  equipped  in 

did  for  them  what  they  could  not  Lave  the   armour  of   God,   and   to   contend 


27S 


noMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  KSTHER, 


[chap,  viit 


against  our  enemies  in  the  King's  name 
and  by  liis  authority.  TJiere  is  not  an 
evil  passion  or  hist  against  which  we 
are  not  called  upon  to  do  battlo,  not  a 
temptation  which  we  are  not  commanded 
to  resist,  not  a  spiritual  adversary  which 
we  are  not  required  to  put  forth  all  our 
energies  to  overcome.  In  our  "  evil 
day  "  we  are  summoned  by  our  King  to 
"  stand  for  our  lives,"  and  be  prepared 
to  war  against  our  enemies  as  though 
the  victory  lay  with  ourselves.  God 
helping  us,  we  will  do  it !  The  issues 
are  tremendous.  The  contention  is  not 
simply  for  the  life  of  the  body,  but  of 
the  soul.  Against  our  immortal  life  is 
every  fiery  dart  levelled.  The  spoil 
which  they  would  take  from  us  is 
nothing  short  of  our  faith  and  hope  in 
God,  our  security  in  Christ  and  pre- 
paredness for  heaven.  Let  the  people 
of  God  be  always  apprehensive  of  the 
"evil  day,"  and  be  ready  on  the  instant 
to  "  stand  for  their  lives."  The  victory 
is  theirs  if  they  will  only  earnestly  con- 
tend for  it.  Yield  not  an  inch  of 
ground.  *' No  mercy  1"  is  the  war-cry 
of  the  foe.  Man,  woman,  little  ones, 
and  spoil,  must  all  be  taken.  ^'No 
surrender  ! "  be  our  war-cry  in  reply. 
Everything  saved,  nothing  lost.  "  Where- 
fore take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of 
God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand 
in  the  evil  day,  and  having  done  all,  to 
stand. " — McEwen. 

"  The  posts  were  hastened  by  the 
king's  commandment." — He  was  now 
made  sensible  of  the  great  wrong  he  had 
done  to  the  Jews,  and  made  all  possible 
haste  to  undo,  as  far  as  he  could  undo, 
what  he  had  done.  Are  you  sensible 
you  have  done  wrong?  Make  haste, 
and  delay  not  to  repair  the  wrong,  if  it 
is  in  your  power.  How  can  you  say 
that  you  repent  of  the  evil  that  you 
have  done,  if  you  hold  it  fast?  The 
light  of  nature  teaches  men  that  they 
ought,  with  the  fircst  opportunity,  to  put 
away  the  evil  of  their  doings,  and  to 
redress  the  inj  uries  done  by  their  hands, 
or  their  tongues,  or  their  pens.  As  soon 
as  Jesus  brought  salvation  to  the  house 
of  Zaccheus,  he  said,  "  Lord,  if  I  have 
wronged  any  man  by  false  accusation,  I 


restore  him  four-fold."  Is  it  your  in- 
tention, in  some  future  ])art  of  your  life, 
to  compensate  the  wrongs  you  have  done 
in  the  former  part  of  it  ?  But  are  you 
sure  that  you  shall  see  another  week,  or 
even  another  day?  Boast  not  thyself 
of  to-morrow,  unless  a  prophet  of  as 
much  credit  as  Isaiah  has  brought  a 
message  from  God,  that  some  more  years 
of  life  are  allotted  you. — Lawson, 

The  decree  was  given  in  the  month 
Sevan,  "  the  montli  of  May,"  says  an 
old  author,  "  wlien  all  things  are  in  their 
prime  and  pride,  and  the  earth  chequered 
and  entrailed  with  variety  of  flowers, 
and  God  is  seen  to  be  magnus  in  minimis 
— great  in  the  smallest  creatures.  Then 
did  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise  to 
these  afflicted  exiles  with  healing  in  his 
wings,  like  as  the  sunbeams  did  to  the 
dry  and  cold  earth,  calling  out  the  herbs 
and  flowers,  and  healing  those  deform- 
ities that  winter  had  brought  upon  it." 
— Quoted  by  Dr.  Raleigh. 

If  such  anxiety  was  manifested  for 
this  newly-enacted  law  to  be  known 
throughout  the  empire,  how  much  rtiore 
anxious  should  we  be  to  circulate  the 
word  of  God  throughout  the  world  1  If 
it  was  deemed  so  important  that  the 
Jews  should  know  that  they  were 
allowed  to  withstand  their  enemies,  how 
much  more  so  is  it  that  mankind  should 
be  informed  of  the  strength  and  crafti- 
ness of  their  spiritual  adversaries,  of  the 
armour  with  which  they  are  to  be  clothed, 
and  of  the  great  Captain  of  salvation, 
under  whose  banners  they  shall  crush 
them  all,  and  enjoy  the  fruits  of  victory 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  for  ever  1 
And  if  it  was  deemed  of  such  moment 
that  the  decree  should  be  "  written  unto 
every  people,  after  their  language,"  how 
should  we  rejoice  that  the  great  charter 
of  salvation  has  been  translated  into  so 
many  of  the  languages  of  the  earth,  and 
that  a  copy  of  the  Scriptures  goeth  forth 
into  distant  parts  of  the  world  for  every 
moment  that  passeth  away  !  May  these 
Divine  writings  be  blessed  to  the  hasten- 
ing of  the  reign  of  Christ,  *'  from  the 
rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going  down  of 
the  same  I "  -  Hughes. 


CHAP.  VUL]  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER,  279 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  15—17. 

Days  of  Rejoicing. 

After  a  dark  and  stormy  night,  when  the  clouds  have  hidden  every  star,  and 
the  fierce  winds  have  been  howling  over  hill  and  dale,  what  gladness  fills  all 
animated  nature  as  the  sun  arises  in  the  East.     He  floods  the  valleys  with  his 
clieeiful  light,  and  kindles  a  blaze  of  glory  upon  the  mountain-tops.  Then  the  thief 
and  assassin,  with  every  unclean  and  loathsome  creature,  seek  their  hiding-place  • 
then  the  honest  artisan  goes  forth  to  his  task  until  the  evening ;  and  then  sweet 
concerts  are  heard  in  every  grove.     So  after  the  days  of  national  gloom  came  the 
morning  of  gladness  to  the  Jews.     Man's  extremity  once  again  proved  to  be  God's 
opportunity.     As  Avhen  the  breath  of  heaven  sweeps  onward  through  the  open 
sky,   and  meets  there  with  an  easy  reception,   it  creates  little  commotion;  but 
when  it  meets  the  strength  of  a  forest,  the  same  wind  grows  mighty,  and  dwells 
there  till  it  compels  the  tall  trees  to  bow,  and  yield  a  triumphant  passage  over  the 
top  of  all  their  glories.     So  in  days  of  quiet,  men  pass  easily  along,  and  are  barely 
conscious  of  the  presence  of  God  ;  but  when  afiliction  or  persecution  ariseth  because 
of  the  Word^  then  God  wonderfully  interferes  to  save  his  chosen  people,  and  even 
his  foes  are  constrained  to  cry,  "  Galilean,  thou  hast  conquered."     So  had  Jehovah 
vindicated  the  rights  of  his  people,  and  compelled  even  the  heathen  to  acknowledge 
that  his  ways  were  wonderful.     Days  can  never  be  so  dark  but  that  the  sun  may 
burst  through  the  cloud  ;  our  difficulties  can  never  be  so  great  but  that  our  Master 
can  lift  us  above  them  all ;  and  often  "  where  sin  has  made  a  difficulty,  grace  has 
made  a  triumph."     :N'ow  Haman's  devices  end  in  the  exaltation  of  Mordecai,  and 
the  threatened  destruction  of  the  Jews  leads  directly  to  the  enlargement  of  their 
nation. 

I.  Honour  paid  to  a  wise  minister.     The  once  despised  Mordecai  now  issues 
from  the  palace  clothed  in  royal  apparel,  and  wearing  a  crown  of  gold.     It  is  not 
always  that  a  wise  minister  wins  national  honour.     Every  age  has  seen  examples 
of  great  statesmen  hurled  from  power  by  the  vices  of  the  great,  or  by  the  folly  of 
the  crowd.     But  happy  is  that  country  in  which  the  poor  wise  man  is  not  despised, 
(a)  Such  a  man,  placed  at  the  head  of  the  state,  will  not  be  blinded  by  personal 
vices.     Frequently  the  dearest  interests  oi  a  nation  have  been  sacrificed  to  the 
luxury  of  the  minister ;  but  a  man  of  virtue  will  always  be  on  the  watch  for 
opportunities  to  serve  his  generation      (/3)  A  great  statesman,  again,  will  not  be 
biassed  by  selfish  motives.     To  increase  his  own  wealth  or  prestige,  to  promote 
the  prosperity  of  family  or  party,  or  to  injure  the  power  of  a  rival,  are  desires 
never  cherished  in  such  a  breast.     It  should  be  easier  to  turn  the  sun  from  his 
path  than  a  statesman  from  the  path  of  duty,     (y)  A  great  statesman  will  recognize 
the  supremacy  of  virtue.     The  will  of  God  is  his  supreme  law,  and  his  final  reward 
IS  the  approval  of  that  unseen  JMaster.     {h)  A  great  minister,  once  more,  will  live 
for  the  welfare  of  others.     To  raise  the  fallen,  to  vindicate  the  oppressed,  to  afford 
an  asylum  to  the  slave,  to  increase  the  food  of  the  poor,  to  care  for  the  education 
of  the  child,  and  to  promote  the  glory  of  God— such  is  the  noble  vocation  of  a 
truly  wise  mijiister  of  state. 

II.  A  nation  rejoicing  under  the  good  minister's  shakw.  "The  Jews  had 
light  and  gladness,  joy  and  honour."  The  Jews  had  (a)  the  joy  of  deliverance. 
The  poet  Spenser  writes  : — 

Ease  after  war,  port  after  stormy  seas, 

Rest  after  toil,  death  after  life,  doth  greatly  please. 

So  there  is  always  joy  in  a  sudden  change  from  danger  to  safety.     As  a  gentle 
mother  prepares  pleasant  surprises  for  her  child,  so  God's  providence  frequently 


280  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap,  viii. 

delights  his  people  with  a  sudden  change  of  prospect ;  and  he  who  was  in  darkness 
now  finds  the  light  doubly  precious.  There  was  also  (/3)  the  joy  of  safety.  The 
danger  was  not  only  postponed,  but  removed.  Hitherto  they  had  lived  as  strangers 
in  a  strange  land,  liable  at  any  time  to  plots  like  those  of  Haman.  Such  has  been 
the  history  of  the  Jews  in  every  nation  under  heaven.  Now,  at  least  for  a  time, 
they  were  safe  under  the  shadow  of  Esther  the  queen,  and  Mordecai  the  statesman. 
Every  history  tells  how  the  liability  to  a  crushing  disaster  unsettles  the  morals  of 
a  people,  and  drives  men  headlong  into  vice.  Every  man  knows,  also,  from  his 
own  experience,  how  completely  a  sense  of  insecurity  detracts  from  happiness. 
Hitherto  the  Jews  had  been  like  a  man  stood  on  a  narrow  plank  over  a  yawning 
chasm.  A  false  step,  a  sudden  breeze,  or  a  weak  spot  in  the  board,  will  precipitate 
him  into  the  abyss.  But  now  the  Jews  were  standing  on  a  massive  rock,  and  were 
able  to  look  back  on  the  danger  from  which  they  were  escaped,  (y)  They  had 
also  the  joy  and  honour  of  large  accessions.  A  man's  faith  redoubles  in  intensity 
when  he  can  persuade  others  to  believe  it;  and  the  Jews'  confidence  in  their 
national  glory  would  wonderfully  increase  when  they  saw  the  heathen  offering 
themselves  as  converts  to  the  true  faith. 

III.  The  triumph  of  religion.  "  Many  of  the  people  of  the  land  became 
Jews."  So  always  wise  rulers  may  be  as  nursing  fathers  to  the  Church.  Multitudes 
are  led  by  the  example  of  the  great ;  many  may  be  only  influenced  by  the  desire 
for  worldly  prosperity,  and  some  will  be  genuine  converts.  Without  the  imputa- 
tion of  any  sinister  motives,  two  valid  reasons  can  be  assigned  for  this  sudden 
development  of  Judaism,  (a)  Many  are  influenced  only  by  visible  signs.  Now 
this  wonderful  interposition  of  providence  on  behalf  of  the  Jews  would  be  to  many 
a  sufficient  proof  that  God  was  on  their  side.  (/3)  Others,  of  a  nobler  sort,  might 
first  hear  of  Judaism  as  a  power  in  the  State  through  the  very  tumults  excited  by 
Haman.  They  would  then  inquire  into  the  history  and  claims  of  this  strange 
religion,  aud  become  convinced  of  its  truth.  Thus  the  wrath  of  man  is  made  to 
praise  God. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  15 — 17. 

This  narrative  may  teach  us  that  in  nities  and  individuals  sitting  hopelessly 

the  darkest  and  most  unpromising  cir-  amid  the  gloom  of  their  own  failures, 

cumstances  there  is  nearly  always  some  amid   the   consequences    of    their    own 

way  of  relief  and  improvement.     How  mistakes,  amid  the  deepening  unhappi- 

seldom  are  things  so  in  human  life  that  ness  arising  from  the  memory  of  their 

literally  nothing  can  be  done  !     There  own  sins — the  strokes  of  penalty  heard 

is  something  unrepealable  in  all  import-  resounding  on  every  side,  the  waters  of 

ant  human   action.     But  there  is  also  misery  rising  silently  and  coldly  within, 

much  that  may  be  practically  repealed,  while    the    long    night    of    despair    is 

I  think  we  may  say  that  never,  at  any  deepening  and  settling  without.     Such 

one  time,  in  the  history  of  a  nation ;  pictures  arc  not  to  be  seen.     There  is 

never,  in  the  life  of  an  individual,  are  indeed   much  suffering   in   the  world ; 

things  so  dark  and  bad  that  nothing  can  some  of  it  penalty,  and  much  of  it  not. 

be  done  to  amend   and   lighten   them.  And  there  are  all  kinds  of   calamities, 

On  the   contrary,   this  world,   and  the  and   mischances,    and    unexpected    and 

social  and  individual  spheres  of  it,  this  unsuspected  griefs,  and  things  that  ought 

whole  mundane  system,  is  constructed  never   to    have   happened,    and   things 

on  the  plan,  so  to  say,  of   admitting,  which  fill  you  with  sympathy,  and  pain, 

suggesting,  prompting  to,  and  furnishing,  and  profound  regret,  and  perhaps  indig- 

the  means  of  continual  recovery.  nation,    as   soon   as    you    know    them. 

If  this  were  not  so,  the  world  would  And  there  are  many  mournful  people 

soon  be  full  of  the  most  pitiable  spec-  who  make  the  worst  of  them ;  or  shall 

tacles  that  could  be  couceived  \  commu-  we  say  the  best  of  them,  for  they  really 


OHAP.  vni.] 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER, 


281 


seem  to  find  a  kind  of  dismal  enjoyment 
in  seeing  how  bad  they  are,  and  in 
anticipating  that  they  are  going  to  be 
still  worse. 

But  who  knows  not,  also,  that  calami- 
ties and  misfortunes  are  retrieved,  that 
injuries  are  redressed,  that  mistakes  are 
rectified  ]  Who  knows  not  that  oppres- 
sions come  .to  an  end,  and  bloody  wars, 
and  other  evil  works'?  Yes,  and  those 
things  are  accompHshed  sometimes  just 
when  everything  appears  almost  hope- 
less, and  by  means  which  do  not  seem 
at  all  sufficient  or  equal  to  the  end. — 
Raleigh. 

The  joy  felt  by  the  Jews  was  greatly 
enhanced  by  the  distress  into  which 
they  had  lately  been  plunged,  and  by 
the  suddenness  and  strangeness  of  the 
transition.  They  felt  like  a  sick  man 
at  the  point  of  death,  when  he  hears  the 
voice.  Deliver  from  going  down  to  the 
pit ;  or  like  a  criminal  expecting  the 
hour  of  his  execution,  when  a  pardon  is 
put  into  his  hand.  They  felt  like  their 
fathers  when  the  Lord  turned  back  the 
captivity  of  Zion  ;  "  they  were  like  them 
that  dream  ;  their  mouth  was  filled  with 
laughter,  and  their  tongue  with  singing." 
And  such,  my  friends,  will  be  the  feel- 
ings of  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord,  when 
they  shall  come  to  the  heavenly  Zion ; 
the  recollection  of  all  that  they  have 
suffered  here  shall  only  serve  to  accent 
their  happiness,  and  convert  it  into  a 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 
"  Beloved,  think  it  not  strange  concern- 
ing the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try  you,  as 
though  some  strange  thing  happened 
unto  you ;  but  rejoice,  inasmuch  as  ye 
are  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings ;  that 
when  his  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye  may 
be  glad  also  with  exceeding  joy." 

The  deliverances  experienced  in  time 
by  the  Church  and  people  of  Jehovah 
are  earnests  of  that  felicity  and  glory 
which  shall  be  enjoyed  in  the  future 
world.  But  they  are  also  productive  of 
benefits  in  this  life,  which  make  them 
sources  of  joy  and  thanksgiving  to  all 
well-affected  minds.  Besides  confirming 
weak  disciples,  and  adding  alacrity  to 
the  strong,  they  are  often  blessed  for 
making  converts,  and  inducing  strangers 
to  join  themselves  to  the  people  of  God. 


Thus  it  is  written,  '*The  Lord  will  have 
mercy  on  Jacob,  and  will  yet  choose 
Israel,  and  set  them  in  their  own  land ; 
and  the  strangers  shall  be  joined  with 
them,  and  they  shall  cleave  to  the  house 
of  Jacob."* 

These  promises  were  partly  fulfilled  in 
consequence  of  the  visible  interposition 
of   Divine  providence,  on  the  occasion 
referred  to  in  the  text.     "  Many  of  the 
people  of  the  land  became  Jews,  for  the 
fear  of  the  Jews  fell  upon  them."     They 
became  proselytes  to  the  Jewish  religion 
(for  no  other  meaning  can  be  applied  to 
the  words,  when  the  Jews  were  foreign- 
ers), renounced  idolatry,  and  worshipped 
the   true   God.       ''When    the    Church 
prospers,  and  is   smiled  upon,"  says  a 
pious   commentator,   "  many  will   come 
into  it  that  will  be  shy  of  it  when  it  is 
in  trouble."     But  we  must  not  altogether 
despise  such  conversions.     Though  no- 
thing but  willing  and  cordial  submission 
will  advantage  the  souls  of  individuals, 
God  can  glorify  himself,  and  Christ  is 
glorified  in  the  "  professed  subjection  " 
of  men.     "  Thou  hast  delivered  me  from 
the  strivings  of  the  people ;   and  thou 
hast  made  me  the  head  of  the  heathen : 
a  people  whom  I  have  not  laiown  shall 
serve  me.     As  soon  as  they  hear  of  me, 
they  shall  obey  me  :  the  strangers  shall 
submit  themselves  unto  me ;  *'  or,  as  it 
is  in  the  margin,  "  shall  yield  feigned 
obedience   unto  me."t     Not  fear,   but 
love,  is  the   principle   of  genuine   and 
evangelical  obedience.     But  the  Spirit 
of  God  makes  use  of  the  natural  prin- 
ciple of  fear,  in  awakening  persons  to  a 
concern  about  salvation.     "  Save  your- 
selves from  this  untoward  generation," 
was   an    apostolical    exhortation ;    and 
among    the    effects    produced    by    the 
preaching  and  miracles  of  the  primitive 
Church,    this   is    particularly   specified, 
that  ''  fear  came  upon  every  soul ; "  and 
again,    "great  fear  came  upon  all   the 
Church,  and   upon   as   many  as   heard 
these  things;"  after  which  it  follows, 
''  and  believers  were  the  more  added  to 
the  Lord,  multitudes  both  of  men  and 
women. "     Amen. — Mc  One. 

Who  could  have   believed  that  the 

♦  Isa.  xlv.  1. 
t  Ps,  xviii.  43,  44 


282 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  E8THER, 


[OHAP.  vni. 


contrivances  of  Haman  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Jews  would  have  terminated 
in  the  increase  of  their  nation  ?  The 
lovers  of  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel 
would  tremble  at  Haman's  devices,  lest 
the  name  of  Israel  should  be  put  out, 
and  the  worship  of  the  God  of  Israel 
should  be  extirpated  from  the  earth. 
But  the  revolution  of  a  few  weeks  con- 
vinced them  that  their  God  was  the  same 
God  that  he  had  ever  been ;  and  that 
wherein  his  enemies  dealt  proudly,  he 
was  still  above  them.  Death  and  de- 
struction are  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord, 
and  he  can  make  them  instrumental  for 
the  life,  and  for  bringing  about  the 
safety,  of  his  people.  "  Before  him 
darkness  becomes  light,  and  sorrow  is 
turned  into  joy.  He  taketh  the  wise  in 
their  own  craftiness,  and  carrieth  the 
devices  of  the  fro  ward  headlong.  So 
the  poor  have  hope,  and  iniquity  stoppeth 
her  mouth." — Lawson. 

And  many  of  the  people  of  the  land 
became  Jeios. — That  is,  they  were  pro- 
selyted, professing  the  Jewish  religion, 
and  siding  with  them ;  some  in  sincerity, 
doubtless,  and  some  out  of  sinisterity, 
and  for  self-respects,  because  they  saw 


the  king  favoured  them,  the  queen  and 
Mordecai  were  altogether  with  them  and 
for  them.  So  that  mixed  multitude 
(Exod.  xii.  38),  moved  with  miracles, 
removed  out  of  Egypt  with  the  Israel- 
ites, took  hold  of  the  skirts  of  these 
Jews  and  said,  ''  We  will  go  with  you." 
So  in  David's  days,  whilst  he  dealt 
prudently  and  prospered,  so  that  he 
became  the  head  of  the  heathen,  a  people 
Avhom  he  had  not  known  submitted 
themselves  unto  him.  The  like  they 
did  in  Solomon's  days,  as  Josephus 
relateth,  as  also  that  the  people  were 
then  very  careful  how  they  received 
such  prosperity -proselytes.  So,  many 
strangers  followed  the  captives  returning 
out  of  Babylon  under  the  conduct  of 
Zerubbabel ;  and  many  heathens  joined 
themselves  to  the  Christian  congrega- 
tions under  Constantine,  the  first  Chris- 
tian emperor.  The  Huns,  well-beaten 
by  the  Christians,  concluded  that  their 
God  was  the  true  God,  and  received  the 
gospel.  Thus,  whether  it  be  in  pretence 
or  in  truth  (as  St.  Paul  hath  it)  that 
people  come  in,  God  is  glorified  and  his 
Church  amplified,  and  the  saints  therein 
do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice. — Trapp, 


ILLUSTEATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VIH. 


Vers.  1,  2.  Advantage  of  change.  As  Gott- 
hold  was  examining  with  delight  some  double 
pinks,  which  at  the  time  were  in  full  blossom, 
he  was  told  by  the  gardener  that  the  same  plants 
had  in  former  years  borne  only  single  flowers, 
but  til  at  they  had  been  improved  and  beautified 
by  repeated  transplantations,  and  that  in  the 
same  manner  a  change  of  soil  increases  the 
growth  and  accelerates  the  bearing  of  a  young  tree. 
'I  his  reminded  Gotthold  that  the  same  happens  to 
men.  Many  a  man  who  at  home  would  scai'cely 
have  borne  single  flowers,  when  transplanted  by 
Divine  Providence  abroad,  bears  double  ones; 
another,  who,  if  rooted  in  his  native  soil,  would 
never  have  been  more  than  a  puny  twig,  is 
removed  to  a  foreign  clime,  and  there  spreads  far 
and  wide  his  luxuriant  boughs,  and  bears  fruit  to 
the  delight  of  all.  We  may  also  notice  that,  as 
the  plant,  so  the  man  must  have  the  capacity  of 
bearing  fruits  and  flowers.  Esther  and  Morde- 
cai were  fruit-bearing  in  lowly  spheres,  and  then 
being  placed  in  his^b  positions  they  brought  forth 


more  fruit.  Through  them  light  and  gladness 
came  to  all  the  Jews. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Prosperity  not  suitable  for  every 
man.  Great  skill  is  required  to  the  governing 
of  a  plentiful  and  prosperous  estate,  so  as  it  may 
be  safe  and  comfortable  to  the  owner,  and  bene- 
ficial to  others.  Every  corporal  may  know  how 
to  order  some  few  files,  but  to  marshal  many 
troops  in  a  regiment  in  a  whole  body  of  an 
army  requires  the  skill  of  an  experienced  gen- 
eral. As  for  prosperity,  every  man  thinks  him- 
self wise  and  able  enough  to  know  how  to  govern 
it,  and  himself  in  it.  A  happy  estate,  we  imagine, 
will  easily  manage  itself,  without  too  much  care. 
Give  me  but  sea-room,  saith  the  confident  mariner, 
and  let  me  alone,  whatever  tempests  arise.  Surely 
the  great  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles  had  never  made 
this  holy  boast  of  his  divine  skill,  **  I  know  how 
to  abound,"  if  it  had  been  so  easy  a  matter  as  the 
world  conceives  it.  Mere  ignorance  and  want 
of  self-experience  is  guilty  of  this  error. 

Mordecai  had  shown  himself  possessed  of  jpreal 


CHAP.  VIII.j 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


283 


skill  in  the  manafj^cment  of  small  affairs,  there- 
fore It  was  fitting  that  he  should  be  promoted 
over  the  house  of  Haman,  and  to  the  principal 
position  in  the  kingdom  of  Ahasuerus. 

Signet  rings.  On  the  little  finger  of  the  right 
hand  is  worn  a  seal-ring,  which  is  generally  of 
silver,  with  a  cornelian,  or  other  stone,  upon 
which  is  engraved  the  wearer's  name  :  the  name 
is  accompanied  by  the  words,  "  His  servant " 
(signifying,  the  servant,  or  worshipper,  of  God), 
and  often  by  other  words  expressive  of  the  per- 
son's trust  in  God,  etc.  The  seal-ring  is  used 
for  signing  letters  and  other  writings,  and  its 
impression  is  considered  more  valid  than  the  sign- 
manual.  (Therefore,  giving  the  ring  to  another 
person  is  the  utmost  sign  of  confidence.)  A 
little  ink  is  dabbed  upon  it  with  one  of  the 
fingers,  and  it  is  pressed  upon  the  paper ;  the 
person  who  uses  it  having  first  touched  his 
tongue  with  another  finger  and  moistened  the 
place  in  the  paper  which  is  to  be  stamped. 
Almost  every  person  who  can  afford  it  has  a 
seal-ring,  even  though  he  be  a  servant. — Biblical 
Museum. 

Ver.  3.  Honesty  in  little  things.  One  of 
the  kings  of  Persia,  who  is  famous  in  history  for 
his  exact  justice,  was  once  out  hunting,  when, 
finding  himself  hungry,  he  ordered  the  people 
to  dress  a  deer  that  they  had  just  taken.  When 
all  was  nearly  ready,  they  found  that  they  had 
forgotten  to  bring  any  salt  with  them,  so  they 
sent  a  lad  off  to  fetch  some  from  a  village  at  a 
little  distance.  The  king  overheard  them,  and, 
calling  to  the  boy,  said,  "  And  mind  you  take 
money  to  pay  for  it.''  The  attendants  expressed 
their  surprise  at  his  thinking  of  such  trifles,  and 
asked  what  harm  there  could  be  in  taking  a 
handful  of  salt.  The  king  replied,  '*  All  the  evil 
that  now  troubles  the  earth  first  began  in  such 
trifles,  till  by  degrees  it  grew  to  its  present 
height ;  and  if  I  take  the  salt,  my  officers  will 
perhaps  seize  the  cow." 

**  To  put  away  the  mischief  of  Haman  "  as  it 
had  now  reached  its  climax  was  difficult.  Great 
evil  would  have  been  prevented  had  Haman  in 
the  first  instance  put  away  the  mischief  that  was 
brooding  in  his  heart. 

Ver.  5.  Ask  and  receive.  Sir  "Walter  Raleigh 
one  day  asking  a  favour  from  Queen  Elizabeth, 
the  latter  said  to  him,  "  Raleigh,  when  will  you 
leave  off  begging  ? "  To  which  he  answerc  d, 
"When  your  Majesty  leaves  off  giving."  Ask 
great  things  of  God ;  expect  great  things  from 
God  ;  let  his  past  goodness  make  us  "instant 
in  prayer."  Esther  kept  on  begging  till  she  had 
secured  a  position  of  security  for  her  country- 
men. So  great  was  her  earnestness  that  she 
besought  even  in  tears.  Not  for  herself,  but  for 
her  country  she  now  prayed  to  the  king.  She 
was  an  earnest  and  powerful  intercessor.  Not 
so  powerful,  however,  as  the  great  Intercessor; 
he  is  a  more  powerful  Pleader,  and  he  approaches 
a  more  powerful  and  more  liberal  King,  even 
the  King  of  heaven. 

Ver.  6.  Patriotism.  A  Corsican  gentleman, 
who  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  Genoese, 
was  thrown  into  a  dark  dungeon,  where  he  was 
chained  to  the  ground.     While  he  was  in  this 


dismal  situation,  the  Genoese  sent  a  mes^ige  to 
him,  that  if  he  would  accept  a  commission  in 
their  service,  he  might  have  it.  "  No,"  said  he  ; 
"  were  I  to  accept  your  offer,  it  would  be  with  a 
determined  purpose  to  take  the  first  opportunity 
of  returning  to  the  service  of  my  country.  But 
1  would  not  have  my  countrymen  even  to  suspect 
that  I  could  be  one  moment  unfaithful."  Esther 
in  the  same  spirit  asks.  How  can  I  endure  to  see 
the  destruction  of  my  kindred  ? 

Fatriot^s  duty.  When  Burnet  first  began  to 
grow  eminent  in  his  profession  of  the  law,  he 
went  down  to  visit  his  father  in  Wiltshire.  One 
day,  as  they  were  walking  in  the  fields  together, 
the  father  observed  to  him  that  men  of  his  pro- 
fession were  apt  to  stretch  the  prerogative  of  the 
Crown  too  far,  and  injure  liberty ;  but  charged 
him,  if  he  ever  came  to  any  eminence  in  his 
profession,  never  to  sacrifice  the  laws  and  liberty 
of  his  country  to  his  own  interest  or  the  will  of 
his  prince.  He  repeated  this  twice,  and  imme- 
diately fell  into  a  fit  of  apoplexy,  of  which  he 
died  in  a  few  hours  ;  and  this  advice  had  so 
lasting  an  influence  upon  the  son  that  he  ever 
after  observed  and  pursued  it.  Esther  preferred 
the  interests  of  her  country  before  her  own 
aggrandisement. 

Spartan  patriotism.  A  Lacedaemonian  mother 
had  five  sons  in  a  battle  that  was  fought  near 
Sparta,  and,  seeing  a  soldier  that  had  left  the 
scene  of  action,  eagerly  inquired  of  him  how 
affairs  went  on.  "  All  your  five  sons  are  slain," 
said  he.  **  Unhappy  wretch !"  replied  the  woman ; 
"1  ask  thee  not  of  what  concerns  my  children, 
but  of  what  concerns  my  country."  "As  to  that, 
all  i«  well,"  said  the  soldier.  '*  Then,"  said  she, 
'*  let  them  mourn  that  are  miserable.  M} 
country  is  prosperous,  and  I  am  happy." 

Esther  wept  over  the  sorrows  of  her  country, 
and  could  not  rest  till  she  saw  her  countrymen 
delivered  from  impending  dangers. 

Disinterested  loyalty.  After  the  battle  of 
Ivry,  Henry  IV.  of  France,  being  very  much  in 
want  of  money,  asked  one  of  his  most  trusty 
courtiers  where  he  could  procure  some.  The 
courtier  mentioned  a  rich  merchant's  wife,  who 
was  a  zealous  royalist.  The  monarch  in  disguise 
immediately  accompanied  his  courtier  on  his  visit 
to  the  lady,  Madame  le  Clerc,  who  received  them 
with  great  hospitality,  and  congratulated  them 
on  the  success  of  the  king's  arms.  "  Alas, 
madam,"  replied  the  courtier,  "to  what  purpose 
are  all  our  victories  ?  We  are  in  the  greatest 
distress  imaginable.  His  Majesty  has  no  money 
to  pay  his  troops ;  they  threaten  to  revolt  anil 
join  the  League.  Maycnne  will  triumph  at 
last."  "  Is  it  possible  ?  "  exclaimed  Madame  le 
Clerc  ;  '*  but  I  hope  that  will  not  afflict  our 
sovereign,  and  that  he  will  find  new  resources  in 
the  loyalty  of  his  subjects,"  She  then  quitted 
the  room,  but  soon  returned  with  several  bags  of 
gold,  which  she  presented,  saying,  "This  is  all  I 
can  do  at  present.  Go  and  relieve  the  king  from 
his  anxiety.  I  wish  him  all  the  success  and 
happiness  he  deserves.  Tell  him  to  be  confident 
that  he  reigns  in  the  hearts  of  his  subjects,  and 
that  my  life  and  fortune  are,  and  ever  will  be, 
at   bis  disposal."     The  king  eonld  no  longer 


384 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[oHAP.  vm 


conceal  his  incognito.  **  Generous  woman,"  he 
cried,  "  my  friend  has  no  occasion  to  go  far  to 
tell  his  Majesty  the  excellence  of  your  heart; 
here  he  stands  before  you,  and  is  a  witness  to  it. 
Be  assured  that  the  favour  will  be  indelibly  en- 
graven on  the  heart  of  your  prince."  From  that 
time  success  attended  the  king,  and  when  he  was 
master  of  the  capital,  and  safely  seated  on  the 
throne,  he  sent  for  Madame  le  Clerc,  and,  pre- 
senting her  to  a  full  and  brilliant  court,  said, 
'*  You  see  this  lady,  who  is  a  true  friend  of  mine. 
To  her  I  owe  all  the  successes  of  my  last  cam- 
paigns. It  was  she  who  lent  nie  money  to  carry 
on  the  war  when  the  troops  threatened  to  abandon 
me." 

Mordecai  and  Esther  were  loyal  both  to 
Eing  Ashasuerus  and  to  the  race  of  the  Jews. 
Haman's  fall  was  a  blessing  both  to  the  king  and 
to  the  nation.  The  extermination  of  the  Jews 
would  have  been  a  gr3at  disaster. 

Ver.  10.  Sealing  letters.  The  authenticity 
of  a  merchant's  letters,  as  of  his  bills,  depends 
entirely  upon  the  seal.  It  is  not  usual  to  sign 
either;  and  they  are  not  often  written  in  the 
hand  of  the  person  who  sends  them ;  so  that  it 
is  the  seal  which  is  of  importance.  Engraven 
upon  it  is  the  name  and  title,  if  he  has  one,  of 
the  person  it  belongs  to,  and  the  date  when  it 
was  cut.  The  occupation  of  seal-cutter  is  one  of 
much  trust  and  some  danger:  he  keeps  a  register 
of  every  seal  he  makes,  and  if  one  is  stolen  or 
lost  by  the  party  to  whom  he  sold  it,  his  life 
would  answer  for  the  crime  of  making  another 
exactly  the  same.  The  person  to  whom  it  be- 
longs, if  in  business,  is  obliged  to  take  the  two 
most  respectable  witnesses  of  the  occurrence,  and 
to  write  to  his  correspondents,  declaring  all 
accounts  and  business  with  his  former  seal  null 
from  the  day  upon  which  it  was  lost. — Biblical 
Museum. 

Cheerful  and  beautiful  for  Christ.    While  your 
religion  is  impressive  by  its  consistency,  let  it 
be  'attractive  by   its   amiableness.      Therefore, 
think  upon  and  pursue  whatsoever  things   are 
lovely  and  of  good  report.     In  excuse  for  the 
disagreeable  tempers  and  the  repulsive  manners 
of  some  Christians,  it  is  said  that  grace  may  be 
grafted  on  a  crab-stock.     Be  it  so.     But  instead 
of  excusing  the  improprieties,  the  metaphor  con- 
demns.    When  a  tree  is  grafted,  it  is_  always 
expected  to  bear  fruit  according  to  the  scion,  and 
not  according  to  the  stock  :  and  "the  fruit  of 
the   Spirit   is   love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,   temper- 
ance :  against  such  there  is  no  law."     Nothing 
commends  godliness  more  than  cheerfulness.    All 
men  desire  happiness  ;  and  if,  while  every  other 
candidate  for  the  prize  fails,  you  succeed,  your 
success  may  determine   others   to  follow   your 
envied  course.     Hence  it  is  not  very  desirable 
that  religion  should  be  so  often*  expressed  by  the 
word  "seriousness."  Among  many  people,  as  soon 
as  ever  a  man  has  become  religious,  it  is  said  he 
is  becoming  "serious."     But  does  not  religion 
also  make   him   humble,   and    benevolent,   and 
hopeful,  and  blessed .?    Why,  then,  should  we 
select  80  exclusively  for  the  designatiou  of  its 


influence  an  attribute  or  an  effect  which  is 
common  with  many  others,  but  yet  the  least  in- 
viting, and  most  liable  to  an  injurious  construc- 
tion ?  1  never  use  ii ;  and  if  1  were  obliged  to 
use  any  other  term  than  religion  itself,  I  would 
rather  say  the  man  was  becoming  happy. —  Wm. 
Jaij. 

'J'he  Jews  here  had  joy  and  honour.  The 
Christian  should  always  be  in  this  condition. 

Ver.  17.     House  of  joy. 

I  see  a  forest,  dark,  dim,  deep,  and  dread. 
Whose  solemn  shades  no  human  foot  or  eye 
Can  penetrate ;  but  now,  oh,  see !  a  veil 
Falls  from  my  strengthened  eyes  ;  and  now 
Even  in  its  deepest  centre  I  behold 
A  spot  more  beautiful  than  human  heart 
Can  comprehend;  it  is  the  home  of  joy ; 
And  there  the  blessed  spirit  broods  for  ever. 
Making  her  dwelling-place  a  heaven ;  there 
The  skies  are  pure  as  crystal,  and  the  eye 
Looks  through'their  clear  expanse  direct  to  God. 
No  sun  is  there ;  the  air  itself  is  light 
And  life ;  a  rainbow  spans  it  like  a  crown 
Of  tearless  glory,  and  the  forest  trees 
Sweep  round  it  in  a  belt  of  living  green. 
Colour,  that  wayward  sprite  of  changeful  mien, 
Is  here  subdued  to  an  intensity 
Of  burning  lustre.     Sound  has  but  one  voice, 
And  that  is  joyous  song  ;  sight  but  one  object, 
And  that  is  happiness  ;  mine  eyes  are  strained 
To  catch  the  lineaments  of  the  bright  queen 
Whose  dwelling-place  1  see ;  but  'tis  in  vain ; 
Nowhere  distinct,  yet  felt  in  all,  she  glides, 
A  shape  of  light  and  colour,  through  the  air, 
Making  its  pure  transparency  to  thrill 
With  the  soft  music  of  her  viewless  step. 

Eeddal. 

A  feast  and  a  good  day.     These  Jews  had  a 
feast  and  a  good  day,  for  they  were  delivered  from 
the  fear  of  their  enemies.     But  surely  we  may 
go  further,  and  picture  them  rejoicing  because 
the  righteous  are  vindicated,  and  the  holy  ones 
are  now  delivered  from  the  hand  of  the  oppressor. 
The  nation  may  well  rejoice  when  the  righteous 
are  exalted.     God  often  gives  to  his  people  on 
earth  a  feast  and  a  good  day.     Every  Sabbath 
should  be  such  a  day.    Every  good  day  on  earth 
should  be  a  type  of  the  unending  feast  and  unin- 
terrupted good  day  of  heaven.     And  how  tran- 
scendent the  glory  of   that  world  where  there 
shall  be  no  more  sin  o'T  imperfection,  where  we 
all  unite  in  the  song,  '*  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain ! "   "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  doth  lighten 
it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light   thereof."     The 
idolatrous  temple  of   Liana  was  so  bright  and 
splendid   that  the   door-keeper  always  cried    to 
them  that  entered  it,  "Take  heed  to  your  eyes." 
But  what    faculties  of  vision  must  we    have  to 
behold  the  glory  of  the  temple  above !     If  it  ia 
said  that  the  righteous  themselves    shall   shine 
forth  as  the  sun,  what  will  be  the  splendour  of 
the  Eternal  Throne !    What  a  delightful  change 
from  this  world  of  darkness  and  imperfection  to 
that  where  all  shall  be  light  and  glory  ! 

Ver.  8.     Snow  and  the  kings  edict.     Here,  a 
second  time  io  the  history  of  Artaxevxes,  wo 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOMILETLC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  285 


have  a  proof  of  the  felt  inconvenience  of  that  expedition,  and  encamped  in  a  place  convenient 

law,  which  despotism  itself  could  not  set  aside.  for  his  purpose,  gave  forth  his  edict   that  the. 

Gladly  would  the  kintr  be  a  party  to  the  practical  encampment  should  not  be  removed  until   the 

defeating  of  the  object  of  it;  but  in  its  literal  snow  had  disappeared   from   the  neighbouring 

acceptation  it  must  stand.  mountains.     The  season  was  severe.     The  snow 

It  is  said  that  something  like  the  principle  of  clung  to  the  mountains  longer  than  usual,  and 

the  unchangeableness  of  the  purposes  of  the  kings  in  the  mean  time  the  army  became  straitened  for 

of  Persia  has  been  preserved  in  that  country  even  supplies.      Here  was  an  unexpected  dilficulty. 

till  recent  times.     And  a  circumstance  may  be  The  king's   appointment   must  stand,   but  tl»e 

liore  alluded  to  in   illustration  of   this,  which  result  was  likely  to  be  ruinous.     To  avert  the 

although  somewhat  strange  and  almost  ludicrous,  difficulty,  then,  a  vast  multitude  of  labourers 

yet  does  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  difficulty  were  despatched  to  clear  away  as  far  as  they 

in  which  Artaxerxes  felt  himself  placed  between  could  the  snow  that  was  visible  from  the  camp  ; 

the  unalterable  law,  and  the  willingness  which  and  with  their  aid,  and  the  help  of  a  few  days 

he  displayed  at  the  same  time  to  get  quit  of  the  of  sunshine,  the  snow  disappeared,   and   then 

obligation  to  observe  it  literally.      A  Persian  immediately  the   army  was  put  in  motion. — 

king,  who  reigned  not  very  many  years  ago  (Aga  Davidson* 
Mahmed  Khan),  having  set  out  upon  a  military 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Critical  Notes.]  The  Jews  destroy  their  enemies,  and  at  Mordecai's  request  establish  the 
festival  of  Purim.  1.  In  the  twelfth  month,  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  same,  the  Jews 
gathered  themselves  together  in  their  cities,  &c.]  Several  parenthetical  clauses  succeed  tliis 
definition  of  time,  so  that  the  statement,  of  what  then  took  place  does  not  follow  till  ver.  2. — Keil. 
These  claises  state  the  meaning  of  the  day  just  named,  and  give  a  general  notice  of  the  conflict 
between  the  Jews  and  their  enemies.  The  word  translated  "  when  "  may  be  here  taken  as  the 
accusative  of  time,  in  which,  or  where,  the  king's  commandment  and  his  decree  drew  near  to  be  put 
into  execution,  i.  e.  in  which  the  king's  word  and  law  should  be  carried  out.  The  day  was  changed 
from  a  day  of  misfortune  to  a  day  of  prosperity  for  the  Jews.  *'  On  tlie  day  that  the  enemies  of  the 
Jews  hoped  to  have  the  mastery  over  them,  and  it  was  changed  (t.  e.  the  contrary  occurred),  that  the 
Jews  had  the  mastery  over  them  that  hated  them."  2.  For  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  all  the 
people]  A  general  terror  spread  from  a  feeling  that  the  Jews  were  the  special  favourites  of  the 
most  high  God  ;  and  while  this  feeling  disheartened  and  unnerved  their  enemies,  it  gave  inspiration 
and  power  to  the  Jews.  "We  may  naturally  suppose  that  Jewish  antipathy  and  anger  would,  at 
least  in  some  cases,  lead  them  to  assault  their  foes,  and  that  the  Jews  would  not  remain  wholly  on 
the  defensive.  3.]  All  the  princes,  the  satraps,  and  governors,  and  also  other  persons  of  rank  whom 
it  is  unnecessary  here  to  name  (comp.  chap.  iii.  9),  assisted  the  Jews.  Rawlinson  says  this  is  very 
important.  It  has  been  stated  that,  according  to  the  narrative  of  Esther,  the  Jews  were  allowed  to 
kill  75,000  Persians,  and  this  (supposed)  feature  of  the  narrative  has  been  pronounced  incredible. 
The  present  verse  shows  that  the  real  Persians,  who  formed  the  standing  army  which  kept  the 
empire  in  subjection,  and  were  at  the  disposal  of  the  various  governors  of  the  provinces,  took  the 
Jews'  side.  Their  enemies  were  almost  entirely  to  be  found  among  the  idolatrous  people  of  the 
subject  nations,  for  whose  lives  neither  the  Persians  generally  nor  their  monarchs  cared  greatly. 
4.  For  Mordecai  was  great  in  the  king's  house  (was  much  esteemed  by  the  king),  and  his  fame 
went  through  all  the  provinces:  for  this  man  Mordecai  became  continually  greater.]  6.  In 
Shushan  the  palace  the  Jews  slew  .  .  .  five  hundred]  Shushan  the  palace  is  h(!re  evidt  ntly  to 
be  taken  in  the  sense  of  the  place  or  city  of  the  palace,  equivalent  to  in  or  at  Shushan,  as  in  ver. 
15.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  work  of  slaughter  was  carried  on  within  the  palace  itself. 
—  Whedon's  Com.  7 — 9.]  These  names  of  Haman's  ten  sons  are  written  in  Hebrew  MSS.  in 
perpendicular  columns,  and  it  is  said  that  the  reader  in  tiie  synagogue  is  required  to  pronounce  them 
all  at  one  breath.  The  Targum  says  they  were  all  suspended,  one  above  another,  upon  one  cross, 
fifty  cubits  high,  which  Mordecai  had  prepared  for  the  purpose.  Most  of  these  names  are  of  Persian 
origin,  a  fact  which  has  great  weight  in  showing  the  genuineness  of  the  Book  of  Estlier. —  Whedon^t 
Com.  Jewish  rabbis  have  found  these  names  indicative  of  a  representative  inipertance,  and  have 
taken  the  individual  traits  to  mean  something  proph(;tic.  10.  On  the  spoil  laid  they  not  their 
hand]  To  show  that  they  only  sought  the  safety  of  their  own  lives,  and  had  no  desire  to  enrich 
themselves  by  the  goods  of  their  fallen  foes.  12.]  If  the  Jews  had  killed  five  hundred  men  in 
Susa,  how  many  may  they  not  have  slain  in  other  parts  of  the  kingdom  ?  The  king  recognizes 
the  fact  that,  if  the  Jewg  had  to  do  with  so  many  opponents,  they  could  hardly  have  mastered  them, 


286  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  [chap,  ix 

and  even  now  great  danger  threatened  them  on  the  part  of  those  remaining,  if  they  could  not  hunt 
down  such  in  their  hiding-places,  and  destroy  them  utterly.  13.  To  do  to-morrow  also  according 
unto  this  day's  decree]  This  request  of  Esther  has  been  pronounced  the  offspring  of  a  blood-thirsty 
vengeance,  and  desire  to  have  another  day  for  the  butchery  of  enemies.  But  vehat  was  "this  day's 
decree  "  which  the  queen  desired  to  be  continued  another  day.''  Merely  "  to  stand  for  their  life" 
against  all  that  would  assault  them.  Hence  we  infer  that  the  queen  believed,  or  had  reason  to 
suspect,  ti)at  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  in  Shushan  would  renew  the  attack  upon  the  following  day. 
So  fearfully  enraged  were  these  enemies  that  they  were  likely  to  retaliate  for  their  losses  by  an 
unauthorized  continuance  of  the  fight,  and  it  was  to  secure  her  people  against  such  an  event  Esther 
wisely  made  this  request.  This  extension  of  the  decree  was  to  have  effect  only  in  Shushan,  not  in 
the  provinces. —  Whedon's  Com.  Let  Haman's  ten  sons  be  hanged  upon  the  gallows]  ^.  e.  crucify 
the  (lead  bodies  in  order  to  increase  the  disgrace  of  their  execution,  but  more  in  order  to  augment 
the  fear  of  the  Jews.  This  was  the  Hebrew  and  Persian  custom. — Lange.  16.  And  had  rest 
from  their  enemies]  The  position  of  these  words  in  the  middle  of  the  verse  is  noticeably  strange. 
There  may  be  here  some  disarrangement  of  the  text,  or  it  may  be,  as  Keil  suggests,  "that  tha 
nairator  desired  at  once  to  point  out  how  the  matter  ended."  Such  apparent  disorder  of  the  text 
is  not  always  to  be  regarded  as  evidence  of  corruption  by  transcribers.  The  Hebrew  writers  are 
not  always  the  best  models  of  accuracy  and  perfection  of  literary  style.  Seventy  and  five  thousand] 
"The  slaughter  of  these  seventy-five  thousand  shows,"  says  Wordsworth, ''  that  a  very  large  number 
of  their  heathen  enemies,  who  had  been  exasperated  against  the  Jews,  had  prepared  themselves  for 
an  attack  upon  them  ;  and  that,  presuming  upon  their  own  numbers  and  forces  as  compared  with 
the  Jews,  they  assaulted  them  in  order  to  destroy  and  despoil  them,  and  to  enrich  themselves  with 
their  property  ;  and  that  the  Jews  made  a  vigorous  resistance,  and  by  the  help  of  God,  routed  their 
assailants  with  a  great  discomfiture.  The  slaughter  was  not  the  consequence  of  a  vindictive  spirit 
in  the  Jews,  but  of  the  bitter  animosity  of  their  enemies;  and  it  proves  that  the  Jews  would  have 
been  extinguished  (as  Haman's  decr(  e  intended  that  they  should  be)  if  God  had  not  interfered  to 
rescue  them  from  destruction."  17 — 19.  Therefore  .  .  .  the  fourteenth  day]  Because  the  Jews 
outside  of  Shushan  did  all  their  fighting  on  the  thirteenth,  and  rested  on  the  fourteenth,  as  stated  in 
ver.  17,  Therefore]  they  made  the  latter  day  their  duy  of  feasting  and  joy  ;  but  the  Jews  in  Shu- 
shan, having  fought  both  on  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth,  made  the  litteenth  their  feast  day  (ver. 
18).  Jews  of  the  villages]  Rather  of  the  country  places,  that  is,  as  distinguished  from  those  that 
dwell  in  cities  and  the  country  (not  unwalled  towns,  as  our  version  has  it,  for  some  of  these 
country  towns  may  have  h:id  walls).  The  writer  of  this  was  evidently  a  citizen  of  Shushan,  and 
seems  to  have  regarded  the  whole  Persian  empire  outside  of  this  capital  city  as  country. —  Whedon's 
Com.  And  of  sending  portions  one  to  another]  According  to  ver.  22,  one  made  presents  in  these 
feasts,  similar  to  the  sacrificial  feasts,  to  those  less  wealthy,  but  also  to  others  to  whom  one  desired 
to  signify  a  joyous  mind.  —  LaiKje.  20 — 32.]  The  feast  of  Purim  instituted  by  letters  from  Mordecai 
and  Esther.  20.  Mordecai  wrote  these  things]  Namely,  the  things  or  occurrences  that  transpired 
throughout  the  Persian  empire  on  the  thirteenth,  fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  of  Adar.  He  wrote  a 
report  of  the  matter  as  of  something  worthy  to  be  chronicled  for  everlasting  remembrance,  and  with 
this  record  he  also  sent  letters  unto  all  the  Jews  throughout  the  empire  of  Ahasuerus,  proposing  to 
them  what  is  stated  in  the  next  two  verses.  Mordecai's  official  position  in  the  Persian  court  enabled 
him  to  establish  this  festival  as  no  other  Jew  could  have  done.  He  could  issue  orders  with  royal 
authority,  and  use  the  posts  and  agents  of  the  empire  to  facilitate  his  plans.  The  statement  here 
made,  that  Mordecai  chronicled  these  events  and  wrote  letters  to  all  the  Jews,  will  not  warrant 
the  conclusion  that  he  was  the  author  of  this  Book  of  Esther,,  but  is  sufficient  to  show  that  such  a 
conclusion  is  not  therefore  improbable. —  IFhedon's  Com.  21.]  To  establish  a  niattei",  to  authorize 
it.  23.  The  Jews  undertook  to  do  as  they  had  begun,  and  as  Mordecai  had  written  to 
them]  They  had  begun,  as  ver.  22  tells  us,  by  keeping  both  days,  and  Mordecai  wrote  to  them  that 
they  should  make  this  an  annual  custom.  This  they  agreed  to  do,  in  consequence  of  Mordecai's 
letters.  The  reason  for  their  so  doing  is  given  in  vers.  24  and  25,  and  the  name  of  this  festival  is 
explained  in  ver.  26,  by  a  brief  recapitulation  of  the  events  which  gave  rise  to  it. — KeiL  25.  When 
Esther  came  before  the  king]  As  the  word  Esther  is  not  in  the  Hebrew  text,  and  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  context,  it  is  better  to  translate  "  when  it  came  before  the  king,"  that  is,  when  Haman's 
wicked  device  came  before  the  king. —  JVhedon's  Com.  26.]  They  evidently  chose  the  name  Purim 
in  ironical  reference  to  the  fact  that  Haman's  lucky  day  (designated  by  lot)  was  so  fortunate  for  his 
enemies,  and  so  unlucky  for  himself.  27.]  The  Jews  established  and  took  upon  themselves,  their 
descendants,  and  all  who  should  join  themselves  unto  them  (proselytes),  so  that  it  should  not  fail 
{i.e.  inviolably),  to  keep  (to  celebrate)  these  two  days  according  to  the  writing  concerning  them 
and  the  time  appointed  thereby  year  by  year. — KeiL  28.  And  that  these  days  should  be  remem- 
bered and  kept  throughout  every  generation,  every  family,  every  province,  and  every  city, 
and  these  days  of  Purim  are  not  to  pass  away  among  the  Jews,  nor  their  remembrance  to  cease 
among  their  seed]  The  continued  observance  of  Purim  to  this  day  is  a  monumental  proof  of  the 
truth  of  this  history.  29—32.]  A  second  letter  from  queen  Esther  and  ]\[ordecai  to  appoint  fasting 
and  lamentation  on  the  days  of  Purim.  29.]  And  Esther  the  queen  and  Mordecai  the  Jew  wrote 
with  all  strength,  that  is,  very  forcibly,  to  appoint  this  second  letter  concerning  Purim,  i.  e.  to  give 
to  the  contents  of  this  second  letter  the  force  of  laws. — Keil.  31.  The  matters  of  the  fastings 
^nd   their  cry]    Here  it  incidentally  comes  out  that  fasting  and  lameututiuu  were  also  to  b« 


cliAf.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  '2H' 


connected  with  the  observance  of  Purim.  The  modern  Jews  observe  the  thirteenth  of  Adar,  the 
anniversary  of  the  day  of  slaugliter,  as  a  day  of  fasting,  and  call  it  the  fast  of  Esther.  This  day  of 
fasting  and  supplication  is  preliminary  to  the  two  days'  feast  that  follows.  It  is  not  improbable 
that  Esther  herself  may  have  proposed  this  fast,  as  a  memorial  of  the  grief  that  preceded  their  joy, 
and  that  the  people  approved  and  sanctioned  it,  and  called  it  Esther's  fast.  32.  The  decree  ot 
Esther]  This  is  to  be  understood  as  tiie  same  with  the  k-tter  of  authority  respecting  Purim  wliich 
is  mentioned  in  ver,  29,  and  was  issued  by  both  Esther  and  Mordecai.  It  was  written  in  the 
book]  The  decree  of  Esther  was  recorded,  and  doubtless  with  it,  also,  an  account  of  the  institution 
of  the  feast  of  Purim.  The  book  referred  to  here  is  somewhat  uncertain.  Some  have  thought  the 
Book  of  Esther  is  intended;  but  the  author  of  that  book  would  hardly  have  designated  his  own  work 
in  this  way.  Bertheau  and  Keil  think  it  was  a  book  or  treatise  on  the  feast  of  Purim,  which  our 
author  used  in  preparing  his  work,  but  which  has  not  come  down  to  us.  This,  however,  is  purc^ly 
conjectural.  It  seems  most  natural,  since  we  have  in  several  other  passages  of  this  history  a  men- 
tion of  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  Media  and  Persia  (chap.  ii.  23  ;  vi.  1 ;  x.  2),  to  understand 
the  book  of  this  verse  as  that  same  book  of  State  annals.  The  documents  issued  by  Esther  and 
Mordecai,  establisiiing  the  feast  of  Purim,  and  perhaps,  also,  describing  its  origin  and  mode  of 
observance,  may  well  have  been  registered  among  the  national  chronicles.  The  following  account 
of  the  manner  in  wliich  the  feast  of  Purim  is  observed  by  the  Jews  of  the  present  day  is  substantially 
from  Smith's  'Dictionary  of  the  Bible' : — The  observance  commences  with  the  fast  of  Esther  (see 
note  above  on  ver.  31)  on  the  thirteenth  of  Adar.  If  the  thirteenth  falls  upon  a  sabbath,  the  fast 
is  placed  upon  the  Thursday  preceding.  As  soon  as  the  evening  preceding  the  fourteenth  of  the 
month  arrives,  candles  are  lighted  in  token  of  rejoicing,  and  the  people  assemble  at  the  synagogue. 
The  Book  of  i'^sther,  written  on  a  roll  called  the  MegiUah^  is  produced,  and,  after  a  short  prayer, 
the  reader  proceeds  to  read  it  in  a  histrionic  manner,  aiming  to  suit  his  tones  and  gestures  to  the 
sense.  When  he  pronounces  the  name  of  Haman  the  congregation  exclaim,  *'  May  his  name  be 
blotted  out,"  or,  ''  Let  the  name  of  the  ungodly  perish,"  and  at  the  same  time  the  children  present 
make  a  great  noise  with  their  hands,  or  with  pieces  of  wood  and  stone.  The  names  of  Haman's  ten 
sons  are  read  with  one  breath,  to  signify  that  they  were  all  hung  at  once.  (Comp.  note  on  chap.  ix. 
7 — 9.)  When  the  roll  is  read  through  the  whole  congregation  exclaim,  "Cursed  be  Haman;  blessed 
be  Mordecai  ;  cursed  be  Zeresh,  the  wife  of  Haman  ;  blessed  be  Esther ;  cursed  be  all  idolaters ; 
blessed  be  all  Israelites,  and  blessed  be  Harbonah,  who  hanged  Haman."  When  this  evening 
service  is  over  all  go  home  and  partake  of  a  simple  repast.  On  the  morning  of  the  fourteenth  all 
reso'rt  to  the  synagogue  again ;  prayer  is  offered,  and  the  passage  of  the  law  (Exod.  xvii.  8 — 16) 
relating  the  destruction  of  the  Amalekites  is  read,  for  the  Jews  regard  Haman  as  a  descendant 
of  Agag  the  Amalekite.  (See  note  on  chap.  iii.  1.)  The  roll  of  Esther  is  again  read,  as  on  the 
preceding  evening.  When  the  synagogue  service  is  ended,  all  give  themselves  over  to  feasting  and 
joy.  Presents  are  sent  to  and  fro  among  friends  and  relations,  and  liberal  gifts  are  bestowed  upon 
the  poor.  Games,  dramatical  entertainments,  dancing,  and  music  are  resorted  to,  and  every  effort 
is  made  to  promote  general  merriment  and  joy.  Such  festivities  and  joy  are  continued  through 
the  fifteenth  also,  but  any  Jews  who  desire  may  carry  on  their  usual  business  during  the  days  of 
this  festival.  Josephus  attests  the  observance  of  Purim  in  his  day  :  "  Even  now  all  the  Jews  in 
the  world  celebrate  these  days  with  feasting  {f.opraX,ov<jC),,  sending  portions  to  one  another.  .  .  , 
They  celebrate  the  fore-mentioned  days,  calling  them  Fhrouraim  {^povpaiovg)." — Afit.  xi.  13, 
A  number  of  Jewish  proverbs  also  attest  the  high  esteem  in  which  this  feast  was  held  :  **  The 
temple  may  fail,  but  Purim  never."  "The  Prophets  may  fail,  but  not  the  Megillah."  It  was 
even  said  that  no  books  would  survive  in  the  Messiah's  kingdom  but  the  Law  and  the  Megillah. — 
WhedofUs  Com. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Yerse  1. 

Hope  and  Foreboding. 

We  often  hear  that  it  is  darkest  just  before  the  dawn,  darkest  in  the  natural 
world,  darkest  in  the  moral  world,  darkest  in  the  world  of  God's  providential 
arrangements.  Often  has  this  been  illustrated  and  proved  in  the  history,  both  of 
individuals  and  of  nations.  The  laws  of  nature  are  typical  of  the  laws  of  God's 
kingdom  ;  essentially  they  are  the  same,  as  coming  from  the  same  ruler.  In  the 
natural  world  the  deeper  darkness  is  the  herald  of  coming  day  ;  so  it  often  has 
been  in  all  histories,  whether  individual  or  national.  The  darkness  was  now 
deepening  about  the  Jews  ;  the  month  Adar  was  now  close  at  hand.  The  fatal  day 
drew  near  when  the  king's  commandment  and  his  decree  were  to  be  put  into 
execution  ;  but  the  fatal  day  was  turned  into  the  festal  day.  The  light  afar  off 
was  sending  forth  its  beautiful  and  cheering  rays  ;  but  the  Jews  had  not  the  power 
to  catch  the  oncoming  gladness,  for  their  eyes  were  too  dull  to  see  :  so  it  may  be 


288  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  [chav    ix. 


with  us.  Let  us  trust  ia  God  through  the  storm,  and  through  the  darkness.  Let 
us  pray — Open  our  eyes  that  we  may  see  when  all  around  appears  dark  and  dismal. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  remembered  that  there  is  a  real  darkness  thickening 
around  the  sinner,  while  he  fondly  dreams  of  glorious  light.  It  was  so  with  these 
"  enemies  of  the  Jews."  They  vainly  thought  that  the  thirteenth  day  of  the 
month  Adar  was  to  be  the  day  of  their  victory.  On  that  day  the  sun  was  to  shine 
upon  their  pathway  of  triumph.  Alas  !  on  that  day  the  sun  was  but  to  shine  as  a 
funeral  taper  on  their  gloomy  pathway  to  the  everlasting  darkness.  Let  evil-doers 
beware ;  let  them  seek  to  be  wise  in  time ;  let  them  strive  to  have  understanding 
of  the  times  ;  let  them  not  dream  of  coming  light,  when  all  the  signs  indicate 
that  the  darkness  is  only  growing  more  intense. 

I.  Hope  blighted.  "In  the  day  that  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  hoped  to  have 
power  over  them."  From  a  human  point  of  view  it  was  natural  that  these  enemies 
of  the  Jews  should  entertain  such  a  hope.  The  human  reasonableness  of  this 
hope  may  be  shown — {a)  Irom  their  oion  nwnbers.  The  population  was  undoubtedly 
large  as  seen  from  the  immense  numbers  slain  by  the  Jews.  It  was  natural 
then,  as  it  is  natural  now,  to  rely  upon  numbers.  We  expect  success  on  the  side  of 
that  army  that  can  bring  the  largest  forces  into  the  field,  other  things  being  equal. 
{h)  From  the  insignificance  of  the  Jews.     A  few  people  scattered  up  and  down 

,that  vast  country  in  a  state  of  captivity,  could  have  no  chance  against  their  numerous 
and  powerful  enemies.  These  Persians  calculated  as  we  calculate  to-day,  and  they 
found,  as  we  moderns  too  often  find  tu  our  cost,  that  they  reckoned  without  their  host. 
There  is  a  true,  broad  sense  in  which  the  battle  is  the  Lord's,  and  He  can  save  by 
few  as  well  as  by  many,  (c)  From  the  known  unchangeableness  of  Persian  laio. 
There  did  not  seem  the  slightest  chance  for  the  Jews.  The  hope  of  these  enemies 
of  the  Jews  rested  on  as  good  giound  as  any  hope  could  do.  But  after  all  it  was 
blighted,  for  the  hope  was  changed.  In  a  short  time  there  was  a  marvellous 
vicissitude.  Their  sun  of  expectation  suddenly  shot  into  darkness  just  as  they 
were  fancying  that  it  was  nearing  the  meridian  of  splendour.  Thus,  the  hope  of 
the  unjust  must  perish  sooner  or  later.  There  can  be  no  escape.  The  goodly 
houses  built  upon  the  sand  of  human  reasoning  must  be  swept  away,  even  though 
the  sand  may  appear  to  possess  the  solidity  of  the  rock. 

II.  Foreboding  reproved.  The  same  human  reasoning  which  led  these  enemies 
of  the  Jews  to  entertain  hope  would  induce  the  Jews  to  give  way  to  dark  and 
injurious  forebodings.  If  the  faithful  and  valorous  Esther  had  her  great  fears, 
how  much  more  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  rest  of  the  Jews  would  look  forward 
to  the  month  Adar  in  a  spirit  of  agonizing  dread.  How  often  we  look  forward  to 
a  month  Adar,  and  see  it  shrouded  with  ominous  darkness.  There  is  such  a 
month  in  the  lives  of  most.  Yea,  there  are  gloomy  temperaments  to  whom  every 
year  has  its  month  Adar,  rising  gloomily,  and  yet  grand  in  its  gloom,  like  some 
lofty  mountain.  But  the  month  Adar  may,  after  all,  be  the  month  of  rejoicing. 
As  the  traveller  rejoices  when  he  reaches  the  mountain  top,  and  feasts  upon  the 
grand  panorama  of  nature,  so  these  Jews  might  rejoice  when  they  reached  the 
thirteenth  day  of  the  month  Adar.  The  very  day  we  feared  has  been  the  day  of 
Divine  deliverance  and  of  Divine  blessing.  It  is  a  day  of  rejoicing,  but  it  is  a 
day  of  humiliation.  God's  grant  of  success  may  be  God's  reproof  of  our  unbelief 
and  our  forebodings.  However  darkly  the  month  Adar  may  loom  in  the  distance, 
let  us  move  on  towards  it,  encouraging  ourselves  in  the  Lord  our  God.  Give  to 
the  winds  thy  fears  ;  hope,  and  be  undismayed.  Hope  on,  hope  always.  Above  aU 
things,  do  not  indulge  in  forebodings.  It  is  injurious  to  thy  own  nature.  It 
saps  thy  vital  energies.  It  undermines  thy  physical  strength  and  thy  mental 
power.  It  can  mend  nothing,  and  is  the  result,  in  part,  of  a  want  of  faith  in  God. 
It  is  sinful  if  there  be  no  effort  to  overcome. 

III.  True  hope  rewarded.  "  It  was  turned  to  the  contrary  that  the  Jews  had 
rule  over  them  that  hated  them."     Those  amongst  the  Jews  who  looked  above  the 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  2R9 


vain  state  of  men  and  things  to  the  great  supreme,  and  entertained  hope  in  spite 
of  all  that  seemed  to  make  against  hope,  had  their  glorious  reward  in  due  season. 
The  Jews  had  the  mastery  over  their  enemies.  God's  people  must  finally  triumph 
over  their  real  foes.  Eeal  foes,  for  there  are  foes  in  seeming  vhich  are  true  friends. 
But  no  real  foes,  that  is,  foes  that  militate  against  highest  interests,  will  be  allowed 
to  reign  in  perpetual  triumph.  Every  enemy  must  be  destroyed ;  even  the  last 
enemy,  death,  must  be  put  under  the  feet.  The  hope  of  the  righteous  cannot 
perish.  What  happened  unto  the  Jews,  happened  to  them  for  ensamples  to  the 
people  of  God  in  all  ages.  Our  moral  experiences  will  find  their  counterpart  in 
what  we  may  call  the  material  experiences  of  the  Jewish  people.  They  triumphed 
in  a  more  material  point  of  view.  Their  successes  were  even  in  the  present  state. 
God's  people  now  must  look  to  triumph  in  a  moral  point  of  view.  Their  true 
success  must  be  in  the  mighty  future  of  God's  eternity.  The  hope  that  is  built 
upon  God's  word  cannot  fail.  The  hope  that  springs  from  faith  in  Jesus  Christ 
must  bloom  into  the  flowers  of  paradise  that  never  fade,  and  ripen  into  the  fruits 
of  the  celestial  Eden  that  never  decay.  Have  faith  in  God,  and  in  Jesus  Christ 
his  only  Son, 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verse  1. 

He  himself  says  once,  with  more  just-  had  taken  the  beast.      This  they  had 

ness  than  originality  :  Man  is,  properly  done  before  in  1588,  when  in  assurance 

speaking,  based  upon  hope ;  he  has  no  of  victory  they  had  styled  their  forces 

other  possession  than  hope ;  this  world  the  Invincible  Armada  ;  and  also  after- 

of  his  is  emphatically  the  place  of  hope,  wards  at  the  powder-plot,  when  they  had 

What  then  was  our  professor's  possession]  presumptuously  disposed  of   the   chief 

We  see  him,  for  the  present,  quite  shut  offices,  holds,  and  revenues  of  the  land ; 

out  from  hope ;    not   looking  into  the  like  as  before  the  Pharsalian  field  was 

golden  orient,  but  vaguely  all  round  in-  fought,   the   Pompeians   were   in    such 

to  a   dim  copper   firmament,   pregnant  miserable  security,  that  some  of  them 

with  earthquake  and  tornado. — Sartor  contended  for  the  priesthood,  which  was 

Resartus.  Caesar's  office ;    others  disposed  of  the 

In  the  day  that  the  enemies  of  the  consulships  and  offices  in  Eome.  So  at 
Jews  hoped,  &c.  But  their  hope  ran  the  battle  of  Agincourt  in  France,  where 
aslope,  as  they  say ;  their  lucky  day  our  Henry  Y.  won  the  day,  the  French 
deceived  them.  Wicked  men's  hope,  were  so  confident  of  a  victory  that  they 
when  they  most  need  it,  will  be  as  the  sent  to  king  Henry  to  know  what  ransom 
giving  up  of  the  ghost,  and  that  is  but  he  would  give.  A  presumptuous  con- 
cold  comfort ;  and  as  the  spider's  web,  fidence  goes  commonly  bleeding  home, 
who  gets  to  the  top  of  the  window  as  when  an  humble  fear  returns  in  tri- 
high  as  she  can,  and  then  when  she  falls  umph. — Trapp. 

she  falls  to  the  bottom,  for  nothing  stays  TTiough  it  was  turned  to  the  contrary. 
her.  From  such  high  hopes  fell  our  — By  a  sweet  and  gracious  providence 
English  Papists;  first,  when  Queen  Mary  of  God,  whose  glory  it  is  to  help  at  a 
died.  You  hope  and  hope  (said  Dale  pinch,  to  alter  the  scene  all  on  a  sudden, 
the  promoter  to  Julian  Irving,  whom  to  begin  where  we  have  given  over,  and 
he  had  apprehended),  but  your  hope  to  cause  a  strange  turn  of  things,  accord- 
should  end  in  a  rope  ;  for  though  the  ing  to  that  of  the  Psalmist ;  God  should 
queen  fail,  she  that  you  hope  for  should  send  from  heaven  and  save  me  (when  it 
never  come  to  it ;  for  there  is  my  Lord  might  seem  to  some  that  salvation  itself 
Cardinal's  grace  and  many  more  between  could  not  save  me),  he  should  send  forth 
her  and  it.  Secondly,  at  Queen  Eliza-  his  mercy  and  his  truth,  and  then  what 
beth's  death,  that  long-looked  for  day,  should  hinder  the  Church's  happiness  1 — 
as  they  called  it,  triumphing  before  the  Trapp. 
victory,  and  selling  the  hide  before  they         The  day  in  which  the  enemies  of  the 


290 


nOMILKTTC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IX 


Jews  expected  to  see  the  realization  of 
their  hopes,  became  instead  for  the  Jews 
a  day  of  victory,  and  for  their  enemies 
a  day  of  reverse  and  defeat.  This, 
under  existing  circumstances,  seemed  to 
be  a  change  which  could  only  be  brought 
about,  as  it  were,  by  a  miracle.  It  was, 
indeed,  one  of  those  providences  by 
means  of  which  it  has  pleased  God  to 
reveal  himself  from  time  to  time  in  an 
especially  remarkable  manner.  At  all 
events,  the  prophets  had  foretold  such 
occurrences  as  a  matter  surely  to  be  ex- 
pected. When  the  captivity  of  Israel 
should  have  reached  its  culmination, 
when  the  people  of  God  are  on  the  point 
of  expiring  under  the  rod  of  their  drivers, 
tlien,  instead  of  really  perishing,  they 
should  become  captors  of  their  captors 
and  taskmasters  of  their  diivers.  What 
is  here  shown  in  a  small  prelude,  ac- 
cording to  such  prophecy,  should  attain 
a  much  larger  circumference  and  a  much 
greater  glory.  Our  book  itself,  accord- 
ing to  its  deeper  significance,  points  in 
in  a  manner  typical  or  prophetical  to 
this  great  and  glorious  final  history.  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  this  change  of  affairs 
was  itself  deeply  grounded  in  the  nature 
and  circumstances  of  things.  So  certain 
as  the  God  of  Israel  was  the  only  true 
God,  whose  kingdom  should  not  be  de- 
stroyed, but  through  all  apparent  reverses 
should  continually  rise  to  new  and 
greater  victories,  so  likewise  to  his 
people, — so  long  as  it  is  the  .sole  bearer  of 
his  sway,  the  grave,  which  threatens  to 
swallow  it  up,  should  ever  be  a  place  of 
revivification  and  resurrection.  And  to- 
day also  his  empire  must  continue ;  and 
that  which  thought  to  overcome  its 
power  must  itself  be  overcome,  and 
either  be  absorbed  or  consigned  to  de- 
struction. All  the  days  of  persecution 
of  God's  kingdom  are  days  indeed  in 
which  its  enemies  hope  to  overcome  it, 
but  it  always  turns  out  that  such  enemies 
are  themselves  conquered  at  last. — 
Lange. 

We  have  above  such  an  example  in 
Haman,  who  was  himself  hung  on  the 
cross  which  he  had  prepared  for  Mor- 
decai;  so  the  Egyptians  were  themselves 
overwhelmed  in  the  sea  to  which  they 
had   driven  the   Israelites  in  order  to 


overwhelm  them.  So  also  Saul,  who 
had  driven  David  over  to  the  Philistines, 
that  they  might  destroy  him,  was  him- 
self destroyed  by  the  Philistines. — 
Brenz. 

We  learn  from  this  passage  the  com- 
fortable truth,  that  God's  people  obtain 
the  victory  over  their  enemies.  What- 
ever hardships  and  troubles  God's  people 
have  to  endure  in  the  world,  and  how- 
ever dark  and  lowering  the  cloud  may 
be  which  sometimes  hangs  over  them, 
yet,  "  at  evening  time  it  will  be  light  to 
them,"  and  death's  temporary  triumph 
over  them  will  only  lead  to  their  eternal 
triumph  over  it  and  all  their  foes.  Be 
not  discouraged,  ye  that  fear  and  serve 
the  Lord.  Greater  is  he  that  is  for  you 
than  all  that  can  be  against  you.  Fight 
the  good  fight  of  faith,  the  crown  of  life 
is  sure  to  all  who  are  in  Christ. — 
Davidson. 

Foresight  and  foreboding  are  two  very 
different  things.  It  ic  not  that  the  one 
is  the  exaggeration  of  the  other,  but  the 
one  is  opposed  to  the  other.  The  more 
a  man  looks  forward  in  the  exercise  of 
foresight,  the  less  he  does  so  in  the  exer- 
cise of  foreboding ;  and  the  more  he  is 
tortured  by  anxious  thoughts  about  a 
possible  future,  the  less  clear  vision  has 
he  of  a  nicely  future,  and  the  less  power 
to  influence  it. 

What  does  your  anxiety  do  1  It  does 
not  empty  to-morrow  of  its  sorrows,  but 
it  empties  to-day  of  its  strength ;  it 
does  not  make  you  escape  the  evil,  it 
makes  you  unfit  to  cope  with  it  when  it 
comes ;  it  does  not  bless  to-morrow,  and 
it  robs  to-day.  For  every  day  has  its 
own  burden.  Sufficient  for  each  day  is 
the  evil  which  properly  belongs  to  it. 
Do  not  add  to-morrow's  to  to-day's.  Do 
not  drag  the  future  into  the  present. 
The  present  has  enough  to  do  with  its 
own  proper  concerns.  We  have  always 
strength  to  bear  the  evil  when  it  comes. 
We  have  not  strength  to  bear  the  fore- 
boding of  it.  As  thy  day,  thy  strength 
shall  be.  In  strict  proportion  to  the 
existing  exigencies  will  be  the  God-given 
power ;  but  if  you  cram  and  condense 
to-day's  sorrows  by  experience,  and  to- 
morrow's sorrows  by  anticipation,  into 
the  narrow  round  of  the  one  four-and 


cAiAT.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER.  291 

twenty  hours,  there  is  no  promise  that  mountains,  and  our  hopes  pierce  witliin 

as  that  day  thy  strength  shall  be.  that  veil  and  lay  hold  of   the  Eock  of 

God  gives  us  power  to  bear  all  the  Ages    that    towers    above    the     flying 

sorrows  of  his  making ;  but  he  does  not  vapours.     Let   us  then   be  strong,  for 

give  us  power  to  bear  the  sorrows  of  our  our  future  is  not  a  dim  perad venture,  or 

own  making,  which   the  anticipation  of  a  vague  dream,  nor  a  fancy  of  our  own, 

sorrow  most  assuredly  is.  nor  a  wish  turning  itself  into  a  vision  ; 

Our  hope  should  make  us  buoyant,  but  it  is  made  and  certified  by  him  who 
and  should  keep  us  firm.  It  is  an  is  God  of  all  past  and  of  all  the  present, 
anchor  of  the  soul.  All  men  live  by  It  is  built  upon  his  word,  and  the  bright- 
hope,  even  when  it  is  fixed  upon  the  est  hope  of  all  its  brightness  is  the  en- 
chanfring  and  uncertain  things  of  this  joyment  of  more  of  his  ])resence  and  the 
world.  But  the  hopes  of  men,  who  possession  of  more  of  his  likenes^s.  That 
have  not  their  hearts  fixed  upon  God,  hope  is  certain.  Therefore  let  us  live  in 
try  to  grapple  themselves  on  the  cloud-  it.  "  Reach  forth  unto  the  things  that 
rack  that  rolls  along  the  flanks  of  the  are  before." — Madaren. 

MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.     Verses  2,  3. 

Self- Help  brings  Help. 

I.  Divine  help.  In  this  narrative  we  see  all  along  that  the  Jews  were  helped 
by  God.  We  find  clear  traces  of  a  superior  power  delivering  this  people  from  the 
power  of  their  enemies.  Mere  human  reasons  cannot  account  for  the  fact  that 
these  Jews — captive  and  dispersed — so  marvellously  triumphed  over  the  many  and 
skilful  foes  arrayed  against  them.  We  are  now  brought  to  the  point  where  the 
Divine  power  is  most  manife.stly  revealed.  All  need  Divine  help,  and  all  must 
have  it  more  or  less  in  the  journey  of  life  if  it  is  to  be  successful  in  the  highest 
point  of  view. 

II.  Divine  help  fosters  and  succeeds  self-help.  Some  speak  loudly  in  the 
praise  of  self-help.  It  must  not  be  undervalued.  But  to  speak  to  bruised  and 
maimed  humanity  of  self-help  apart  from  any  other  help  is  a  solemn  mockery,  is  a 
withering  irony.  Should  we  tell  the  drowning  man  to  try  self-help,  and  not  throw 
out  to  him  the  rope  of  help"?  Should  we  tell  the  bankrupt  and  ruined  man  to  fry 
self-help,  and  give  him  no  capital  ?  Should  we  advise  the  poor  outcast  to  try  self- 
help,  and  yet  leave  him  without  a  character?  Our  ruined  selves  must  be  repaired 
from  above  before  we  can  effectually  help  ourselves.  Divine  help  must  first  work, 
and  then  there  can  be  successful  self-help.  Jesus  did  not  say  to  the  man  with  the 
withered  arm,  Trust  to  self-help.  Power  was  conveyed  in  the  word.  Stretch  forth 
thy  hand  ;  and  then  the  man  w^as  able  to  help  himself.  This,  too,  be  observed — 
put  forth  all  thy  power,  and  God  will  not  fail.  Help  thyself  first  by  heartily 
seeking  \\q\^  from  heaven,  and  then  by  doing  thy  very  utmost.  These  Jews  hel[)ed 
themselves  by  (a)  co-operation.  "  The  Jews  gathered  themselves  together  in  their 
cities  throughout  all  tlie  provinces  of  the  king  Ahasuerus."  In  these  days  of  vast 
co-operative  societies — of  the  teachings  of  political  economy — it  may  not  be  need- 
ful to  urge  the  advantages  of  co-operation.  However,  the  Church  still  needs  to 
learn  the  important  lesson  that  its  members  should  be  gathered  together,  not  as  so 
many  mere  material  bodies,  but  as  being  animated  by  one  spirit.  The  members  of 
the  spiritual  Israel  must  be  gathered  together  so  as  to  make  one  compact  body. 
The  day  has  not  yet  come  when  Christians  are  of  one  mind.  Many  men,  many 
minds  ;  many  Christians,  many  minds.  Members  of  the  same  branch  of  the  Chris- 
tian community  do  not  co-operate.  Let  us  gather  ourselves  together  around  the 
Cross  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  taste  the  outflowing  and  uniting  power  of  the  Saviour's 
love,     (h)  By  active  agency,    '*To  lay  hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt."    Never 


292  ^OMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    ESTHER.  [chap.  ix. 

mind  the  difficult  questions  suggested  by  the  course  of  proceedings  described  in 
this  chapter;  be  practical.  Learn  the  lesson  that  they  co-operated  for  work. 
They  did  not  co-operate  merely  by  assembling  together  at  public  meetings  in  order 
to  be  told,  in  eloquent  language,  how  the  thing  was  to  be  done,  and  then  dispersing 
without  any  well-timed  effort  to  do  the  thing.  There  was  no  Exeter  Hall  in 
Shushan  ;  there  was  no  need  of  priestly  eloquence.  Patriotism  stirred  their 
hearts  ;  a  common  danger  impelled  to  united  efforts  at  defence.  Patriotism  should 
stir  the  hearts  of  Englishmen  to-day.  The  common  danger  that  threatens  our  holy 
religion  should  impel  all  lovers  of  Jesus  to  united  and  mighty  efforts.  Let  us  lay 
the  hand  of  love  on  such  as  seek  the  hurt  of  all  that  is  true,  and  noble,  and  virtu- 
ous. There  is  a  call,  loud  and  long,  to-day  to  every  one,  whether  clergy  or  laity, 
to  active  agency  in  order  to  repress  evil,  and  to  promote  the  best  interests — that  is, 
the  Christian  interests — of  our  humanity,  (c)  By  a.  name  of  power.  The  fear  of 
the  Jews  fell  upon  all  the  people,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  for  the  leaders  of 
the  people  felt  this  fear.  Is  there  not  a  true  sense  in  which  the  fear  of  the  Chiis- 
tian  should  fall  upon  the  wicked *?  Does  not  the  sinner  quake  in  the  presence  of 
the  pure  and  the  holy  1  However,  the  Christian's  name  should  be  one  of  power, 
not  only  to  inspire  fear,  but  to  attract,  (d)  By  aggressive  measures.  "  No  man 
could  withstand  them."  There  was  a  time  when  it  seemed  to  come  near  the  truth 
to  say  that  no  man  could  withstand  the  influence  of  Christianity.  It  went  forth 
an  all-subduing  force ;  it  went  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer.  Wonderful  the 
successes  and  the  triumphs  of  the  primitive  Church  !  But  alas  !  what  shall  we  say 
of  these  times'?  Shall  we  take  up  our  lament  and  say.  How  is  the  mighty  fallen'? 
Shall  we  not  be  accused  of  pessimism  if  we  declare  that  Christianity  is  now  being 
conquered  by  the  world,  instead  of  the  world  being  conquered  by  Christianity  ? 
The  world  says  that  Christianity  is  effete.  Does  Christianity,  by  its  modern  suc- 
cesses, disprove  the  accusations  of  the  children  of  this  world'?  Certainly  much, 
very  much  more  requires  to  be  done.     Oh,  arm  of  the  Lord,  awake  ! 

III.  Self-help  secures  the  help  of  others.  That  is,  the  self  help  that  is  suc- 
cessful secures  the  help  of  otliers,  for  in  this  sense  it  often  is  that  nothing  succeeds 
like  success.  At  all  events,  all  the  rulers  of  the  provinces,  and  the  lieutenants, 
and  the  deputies,  and  officers  of  the  king  helped  the  Jews — to  what  extent  is  not 
stated.  They  probably  facilitated  the  Jews  in  their  preparations  to  defend  them- 
selves. These  governors  saw  that  the  Jews  were  on  the  high  road  to  victory,  and 
therefore  they  went  in  for  the  winning  side.  They  were  most  likely  politic  men, 
and  the  fear  of  losing  their  places  would  induce  them  to  help  the  Jews.  How  many 
helpers  in  this  world  are  ready  to  help  those  who  do  not  require  help*?  Alas  !  how 
few  are  found  to  give  help  to  the  really  helpless  and  forlorn.  The  poor  and  thirsty 
still  seek  the  water  of  help  and  of  deliverance,  but  hnd  none  ;  while  the  rich  and 
prosperous  have  much  abundance  poured  into  the  lap.  This  world's  helpers  go  to 
the  rich  and  the  great ;  Christ,  the  great  helper  of  humanity,  went  to  the  })ublicans 
and  harlots.  He  gave  help  to  the  helpless,  strength  to  the  weak,  water  to  the 
thirsty,  bread  to  the  hungry,  healing  to  the  poor  sick,  and  life  to  the  dead. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  2,  8. 

The  Jews  were  the  conquerors.    "  The  ployed  in  winning  it ;  and  the  first  was, 

day  in  which  their  enemies  hoped   to  the  valour  and  good  conduct  of  the  Jews 

have  power  over  them  was  turned  to  the  themselves.       They    "  stood    for    their 

contrary,  so  that  the  Jews  had  rule  over  lives,"    and    *'  remembering  the    Lord, 

those  that  hated  them."     This  was  the  who  is  great  and  terrible,"  "  fought  for 

doing  of   the    Lord,   and  ought  to   be  their    brethren,    their    sons   and    their 

wondrous  in  our  eyes.     But  though  the  daughters,  their  wives  and  their  houses." 

victory  was  of   God,    means  were   em-  And  their  prudence  equalled  their  cour- 


CHAP.  IX.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ESTIIEB. 


293 


age.  Had  each  endeavoured  to  protect 
himself  and  his  family,  they  would  have 
become  an  easy  prey  to  their  foes  ;  but 
they  "  gathered  themselves  together  in 
their  cities  in  all  the  provinces,"  and  in 
this  way  encouraged  one  another,  and 
presented  a  formidable  front  to  their 
adversaries.  Secondly,  their  enemies 
were  struck  with  terror.  Disappointed 
of  the  hopes  which  they  had  cherished, 
perceiving  the  boldness  and  wise  con- 
duct of  the  Jews,  and  convinced  in 
their  own  breasts  that  they  were  em- 
barked in  an  unjust  and  criminal  design, 
they  lost  courage  and  yielded  up  the 
day.  Thirdly,  the  rulers  in  the  differ- 
ent provinces  encouraged  the  Jews  by 
their  countenance,  being  induced  to 
this  by  the  awe  in  which  they  stood 
of  Mordecai,  who  not  only  retained 
his  high  place,  but  rose  daily  in  the 
royal  favour,  and  in  his  reputation 
as  an  able  and  virtuous  statesman. — 
M'Crie. 

The  Jews  gathered  themselves  together 
in  their  cities  throughout  all  the  pro- 
vinces of  the  king  Ahasuerus,  to  lay 
hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt :  and 
no  man  could  withstand  them ;  for  the 
fear  of  them  fell  upon  all  people.  ' '  Thou 
shalt  not  kill."  This  commandment,  in 
some  cases,  binds  us  to  kill.  It  requires 
us  to  use  all  lawful  endeavours  to  pre- 
serve our  own  life ;  and  in  preserving 
our  own  lives,  we  may  be  reduced  to  the 
unpleasant  necessity  of  taking  away  the 
lives  of  other  men.  The  Jews  were 
compelled  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the 
month  Adar  to  take  arms  into  their 
hands  to  destroy  all  that  might  rise  up 
against  them ;  and  they  acted  wisely  in 
uniting  themselves  in  large  bcTdies  to 
resist  the  power  of  their  enemies.  Had 
they  stood  single  in  arms,  they  might  all 
have  been  destroyed  with  ease.  But 
their  combination  in  the  various  cities 
of  the  king's  dominions  made  them  ter- 
rible and  irresistible.  Let  us  learn  from 
their  example  to  stand  fast  in  one  spirit, 
and  with  one  mind,  to  strive  against  the 
enemies  of  our  souls,  who  endeavour  to 
rob  us  of  our  laith,  more  precious  than 
our  lives.  The  Church  is  terrible,  like 
an  army  with  banners,  when  her  rulers 
and  members  are  closely  united,  under 


the  captain  of  salvation,  to  oppose  her 
enemies. 

No  man  could  now  withstand  tlie 
Jews,  for  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  all 
people.  They  had  the  king,  the  queen, 
the  prime  minister,  upon  their  side,  and, 
what  was  still  more,  they  had  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  upon  their  side.  "  He 
caused  judgment  to  be  heard  from  hea- 
ven," as  audibly  as  if  an  angel  had  pro- 
claimed his  favour  to  the  Jews,  and  his 
indignation  against  their  enemie-^.  The 
wonderful  works  of  Providence  have  oft 
struck  terror  into  the  hardiest  enemies 
of  Zion. 

And  all  the  rulers  of  the  provinces, 
and  the  lieutenants,  and  the  deputies, 
and  officers  of  the  king,  helped  the  Jews; 
because  the  fear  of  Mordecai  fell  upon 
them.  There  were  two  decrees  in  equal 
force  which  might  have  given  them 
a  fair  pretence  for  taking  the  part  of  the 
Jews,  or  of  their  enemies,  as  they 
pleased ;  but  it  was  plain  that  the 
king's  favour  was  towards  the  Jews,  and 
that  if  they  expected  any  favour  from 
him,  it  was  necessary  to  secure  the  good 
will  of  Mordecai.  They  chose  that  side 
in  the  contest  which  their  own  interest 
prescribed.  What  a  piry  is  it  that  all 
princes  do  not  favour  the  cause  of  reli- 
gion !  If  they  did,  iniquity  would  be 
compelled  to  stop  her  mouth,  and  those 
men  who  do  not  value  religion  would 
treat  it  at  least  with  respect. — Lawson. 

They  acted  in  unison.  '*  They  gather- 
ed themselves  together,  and  stood  for 
their  lives."  Union  is  power  :  concen 
tration  of  strength  is  mighty  for  good 
and  for  evil.  How  awful  the  extent  of 
the  mischief  perpetrated  by  the  evil 
spirits,  because  they  act  in  concert — 
unitedly  :  whereas  disunion  would  cause 
even  their  kingdom  to  fall.  By  virtue 
of  this  perfect  combination  they  succeed 
in  deceiving  the  nations,  and  leading 
myriads  captive  at  their  will.  Satan 
thus  maintains  such  a  sway  over  man- 
kind as  to  entitle  him  to  the  name  of 
"  God  of  this  world."  "  If  Satan  cast 
out  Satan,  he  is  divided  against  himself; 
how  then  can  his  kingdom  stand?" 
Union  and  co-operation  are  likewise 
powerful  for  the  production  of  good. 
Hence  copies  of  the  Divine  writings  aie 


294 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER. 


[chap.  IX. 


flying  to  all  parts  of  the  world ;  and 
missionaries  to  unfold  their  precious 
contents  to  those  who  are  perishing  for 
lack  of  knowledge.  What  would  indi- 
vidual efforts  do  in  cases  like  these  % 
Hence  arise  hospitals  for  the  bodies  of 
men,  and  places  of  instruction  for  their 
souls.  Amid  the  favourable  signs  of 
our  day,  this  is  among  the  most  cheer- 
ing— the  frequent  formation  of  associa- 
tions for  the  amelioration  of  the  state  of 
man.  May  new  plans  of  usefulness  be 
still  devised,  and  may  the  blessed  Spirit 
of  God  stir  up  the  people  to  support 
them,  so  that  at  home  and  abroad  truth 
and  holiness  may  flourish  and  abound. 

They  laid  hands  on  all  such  as 
sought  their  hurt,  and  no  man  could 
tvlthstand  them.  They  were  acting 
legally ;  for  the  royal  law  permitted 
them  to  defend  themselves  :  and  when 
we  act  legally,  we  may  act  boldly  and 
courageously. 

Trust  in  God,  in  his  power  and  faith- 
fulness, is  the  only  source  of  true  mag- 
nanimity. It  is  this  alone  that  makes 
man  undaunted  on  rational  grounds.' 
St.  Paul  tells  us  of  the  ancient  believers, 
that  "  out  of  weakness  they  were  made 
strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  and 
turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens." 
And  this,  he  tells  us,  was  the  effect  of 
relying  on  God. 

God  filled  the  Persians  with  fear  and 
trembling,  so  that,  when  the  battle  took 
place,  they  were  so  intimidated,  that 
they  made  but  the  feeblest  resistance, 
and  fell  an  easy  prey  into  the  hands  of 
their  enemies.  "  No  man  could  with- 
stand them"  (the  Jews),  ''for  the  fear 
of  them  fell  upon  all  people."  This 
was  one  way  by  which  the  Lord  pro- 
mised of  old  victory  to  the  Israelites 
over  their  enemies.  If  they  would 
regard  his  laws,  he  engaged  to  deprive 
their  adversaries  of  their  courage  and 
fortitude.  "  I  will  send  my  fear  before 
thee,  and  will  destroy  all  the  people  to 
whom  thou  shalt  come,  and  I  will  make 
all  thine  enemies  turn  their  backs  unto 
thee." 

Brethren,  none  can  injure  whom  God 
is  resolved  to  protect.  He  has  all  hearts 
in  his  hand.  Though  earth  and  hell 
combine  against  his  people,  they  shall 


not  prosper.  He  is  a  munition  of  rocks 
— a  strong  tower,  into  which  the  right- 
eous flee,  and  are  in  safety.  What  was 
David  compared  with  Goliath  ?  Yet, 
inasmuch  as  he  went  forth  in  the  name 
of  the  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  the 
vaunting  Philistine  soon  fell  before  him. 
God  is  a  man  of  war,  and  makes  liis 
people  more  than  conquerors  over  the 
opponents  of  their  salvation.  "  None 
shall  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's 
hands."  Trust  in  him,  ye  infirm  and 
feeble,  and  ye  shall  tread  down  youi 
enemies — one  of  you  shall  chase  a  thou- 
sand, and  two  put  ten  thousand  to  flight. 
Brethren,  we  have  more  formidable  ene- 
mies than  these  Jews  had, — more  crafty 
and  more  inveterate, — even  the  principal- 
ities and  powers  of  hell ;  and  the  conse- 
quences of  being  vanquished  are  infl- 
nitely  more  woeful.  None  can  defeat 
and  destroy  these  enemies  but  he  who 
defeated  the  counsel  and  prevented  the 
evil  designs  of  wicked  Haman.  Apply 
to  this  great  Being — this  Omnipotent 
Being — in  the  all-prevailing  name  of 
Christ,  and  you  shall  triumph  over  every 
foe  :  you  shall  have  a  day  of  feasting 
and  gladness — a  good  day — a  day  of 
pure  and  holy  and  everlasting  joy. 
Trust  in  him,  and  heaven  shall  be  your 
dwelling-place  for  ever.  "  The  Lord 
will  give  strength  to  his  people  :  the 
Lord  will  bless  his  people  with  peace." 
— Hughes. 

And  no  man  could  ivitlidand  them. 
A  good  cause,  a  good  conscience,  and  a 
good  courage ;  what  cannot  these  three 
do  when  they  meet?  How  should  any 
stand  before  tliose  who  are  strong  in  the 
Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might  1 
Pilate's  wife  could  warn  him  of  meddlir)g 
with  such ;  and  Haman's  wife  could  tell 
him  that  a  Jew  might  fall  I'cfoni  a  Per 
sian  and  get  up  again  and  prevail.  But 
if  a  Persian,  or  whosoever  of  the  Gentiles, 
begin  to  fall  before  a  Jew,  he  can  neither 
stand  nor  rise.  There  is  an  invisible 
hand  of  omnipotency  that  st nketh  in  for 
his  own,  and  confounds  their  opposites. 

For  the  fear  of  them  f 'II  upon  all  the 
people.  This  was  the  work,  not  of  some 
Pan  Deus  Arcadise,  Init  of  God,  the  sole 
giver  of  victory,  who,  when  he  please th, 
affrighteth  the  Church's  enemies,  as  he 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  295 

promiseth  to  do  in  many  places.     And  other  whiles  make  their  hearts  heartless, 

as  accordingly  he  did  it  on  the  Egyp-  their  hands  feeble,  their  eyes  fail,  and 

tians,   Midianites,    Philistines,   Syrians,  their  knees  knock  together,  as  Bekhaz- 

&c.     And  the  like  he  did  for  Baldwin,  zar's  did.     How  else  would  they  ever  be 

king    of    Jej'usalem,   against    the    great  brought  to  biing  presents  unto  him  that 

Caliph;  for  the  Hussites  against  all  the  ought   to  be   feared"?     If   Mordecai    be 

force  of  Germany ;  for  the  Angrognians  feared,  it  is    because  God   hath   put   a 

against    the    Pope's   army    that    came  majesty  upon  him,  and  made  him  dread- 

against  them.  ful,  as  Abraham  was  likewise  to  Abime- 

Because  the  fear  of  Mordecai  fell  upo7i  lech,    David    to    Saul,    the    Baptist   to 

them.     But   much   more,   because    God  Herod,   our    Saviour   to  the  Pharisees, 

himself  over-awed  them,  and  dispirited  Paul  and  Silas  to  their  persecutors.    And 

them.     How  else  should  he  appear  to  this   the  Lord  still  doth,  that  he   may 

be  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  and  dwell  upon  earth,  in  his  faithful  wor- 

that  in  the  thing  wherein  people  deal  shippers,  which  wicked  men  would  not 

proudly    he    was    above    them^      How  suffer,if  not  thus  reined  in  and  restrained, 

should  they  come  to  know  themselves  to  And,  secondly,  that  praise  may  wait  for 

be  but  men,  and  not  God  ;    and  their  him  in  Zion,  and  unto  him  may  the  vow 

horses  flesh,  and  not  spirit;  if  he  did  not  be  performed. — Trapp. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PAEAGRAPH.    Yerse  4. 

The  Greatness  of  Goodness. 

This  verse  is  given  as  a  reason  why  the  fear  of  Mordecai  fell  upon  all  the  people. 
'*  For  Mordecai  was  great  in  the  king's  house,  and  his  fame  went  out  throughout 
all  the  provinces  :  for  this  man  Mordecai  waxed  greater  and  greater."  It  is  given 
unto  but  few  to  attain  unto  that  social  and  political  greatness  that  was  the  posses- 
sion of  Mordecai  :  but  many  may  become  possessors  of  that  goodness  which  was 
the  foundation  of  Mordecai's  greatness,  and  therefore  we  must  speak  of  his  good- 
ness in  order  to  inspire  if  possible  a  reasonable  ambition.  Let  us  strive  to  be  good 
and  noble,  for  this  is  true  and  lasting  greatness.  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which 
was  in  Christ  Jesus. 

I.  Goodness  is  greatness.  This  is  a  truth  which  many  may  profess  but  which 
very  few  practise.  The  goodness  of  earth's  great  ones  is  admired ;  but  goodness  in 
earth's  little  ones  is  too  often  left  unnoticed.  However,  goodness,  wherever  found 
—in  cot  or  in  palace — is  not  unnoticed  by  the  good  God.  Mordecai  was  great 
because  he  was  good.  On  this  very  account  he  rose  to  the  highest  position  in  the 
Persian  empire.  He  was  great  in  the  king's  house,  not  through  political  intrigue, 
not  through  the  carrying  out  of  any  wily  schemes,  not  on  account  of  his  gifts  as 
an  orator,  but  on  account  of  his  goodness.  His  faithfulness  in  a  lowly  sphere 
when  he  discovered  and  exposed  a  wicked  conspiracy,  his  benevolent  attachment 
to  Esther,  and  his  patriotic  interest  in  his  countrymen,  were  the  reasons  of  his  pro- 
motion. He  did  not  follow  the  rules  of  goodness  as  being  the  way  to  earthly 
greatness.  He  did  not  act  on  the  principle  that  gain  is  godliness.  Let  us  aspire 
after  the  greatness  of  goodness.  In  lowly  walks  of  life,  without  any  sinister  objects 
in  view,  without  any  thought  that  a  virtuous  course  of  conduct  is  the  most  prudent 
and  the  most  profitable,  let  us  move  on  in  the  pathway  of  goodness.  Let  a  deep 
love  of  the  Saviour  be  the  all-compelling  motive  power.  Let  us  have  a  supreme 
res^>ect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  heavenly  reward. 

II.  The  greatness  of  goodness  extends.  Mordecai's  fame  went  out  throughout 
all  the  provinces.  He  was  not  little  at  home  and  great  abroad,  but  hewas  great 
abroad  because  he  was  great  at  home.     No  man  is  a  hero  to  his  valet.     But  the 


296  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  [chap.  ix. 


good  man  is  a  hero  everywhere.  Your  earthly  great  ones  are  only  great  on  lag-ge 
occasions  and  in  public.  The  spiritually  great  are  great  in  public,  but  their  bright- 
est glories  shine  out  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  know  them  best.  The  common 
people  heard  the  Saviour  gladly  ;  but  that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  saw  the  most 
of  his  Divine  greatness  and  glory.  Mordecai's  light  shone  in  the  palace,  but  it 
could  not  be  hid,  and  its  clear  rays  shone  out  to  the  remotest  provinces.  **  Let 
your  light  so  shine  before  men  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Oh  for  the  light  of  that  goodness  which  illumines 
and  gladdens  the  home,  and  then  extends  itself  in  ever-widening  and  ever-increas- 
ing circles  ! 

III.  The  greatness  of  goodness  developes.  This  man  Mordecai  waxed  greater 
and  greater.  Mordecai  was  a  growing  man.  We  see  his  noble  manliness  develop- 
ing day  by  day,  and  week  by  week.  Goodness  is  the  one  quality  which  may  be 
ever  increasing  and  developing.  Physical  power  can  only  be  increased  up  to  a 
certain  point  and  for  a  certain  period.  Samson  at  last  reaches  the  climax  of  mere 
physical  prowess.  Intellectual  greatness  has  its  limits.  Even  Solomon  could  only 
compass  a  certain  amount  of  knowledge.  Mordecai  socially  and  politically  could 
only  wax  greater  and  greater  for  a  short  period.  But  Mordecai  morally  and 
spiritually  could  wax  greater  and  greater  in  indefinite  spheres  and  through  eternity. 
Tlie  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the 
perfect  day.  We  follow  the  just  to  the  perfect  day  of  the  upper  Paradise,  but  even 
there  wa  see  them  waxing  greater  and  greater.  There  is,  we  believe,  growth  in 
heaven-  -growth  in  knowledge  and  growth  in  holiness.  However  that  may  be,  let 
all  seek  to  grow  on  earth.  Grow  in  grace  is  the  Divine  command.  We  must 
either^  morally  considered,  go  backward  or  forward.  ISTot  to  grow  is  to  decay.  To 
decay  is  to  die.  Excelsior  should  be  the  Christian's  watch-word.  Onward  and 
up*,rard  to  the  heights  of  holiness,  of  a  more  perfect  mastery  over  self  and  the 
w  >rld,  and  a  more  complete  likeness  to  the  blessed  Saviour. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verse  4. 

"  He  was  great."    Ah,  how  that  word  thirty  of  the  population.     He  "  sought 

"greatness"  is  often  misused  and  de-  the  wealth  of  his  people."     Jewish-like, 

based  !     A  man  bears  a  certain  name,  no  doubt,  is  this ;  but  observe,  it  wai\ 

and  therefore  he  is  great ;  or  he  wears  a  his   people's  wealth,  not   his  own,   he 

certain  robe,  and  therefore  he  is  great ;  sought.     And  the  last  word  concerning 

or  he  succeeds  in  slaughtering  an  itn-  him  on  record  is  this,  that  '^  he  spake 

mense  number  of   his  fellow-creatures,  peace  to  all  his  seed."     He  was  access- 

and    there    he   is  great ;     or    by  much  ible,  he  was  gentle,  he  was  generous  and 

cunning,  and  audacity,   and  cleverness  patriotic,    promoting  the   well-being  of 

withal,  he  keeps  himself  in  conspicuous  his  seed,  but  not  at  the  expense  of  the 

places  and  before  the  eyes  of  his  fellow-  country  in  which  he  was  born.     Would 

countrymen,  and  therefore  he  is  great  !  that  all  who  are  in  great  place  in  our 

Not  such  greatness  as  any  of  these  was  own  country,  and  in  this  our  own  day, 

that  of  Mordecai.     It  was  a  greatness  would    follow  very  literally  Mordecai's 

won,  no  doubt,  by  his  splendid  faculty  example  and  speak  "  peace." — Raleigh. 
of  management,  by  his  statesmanship,  Mordecai  was  great  in  the  king's  house. 

but  with  real  substance  in  it  of  truth  He  was  known  to  be  a  Jew,  and  deeply 

and  goodness.     He  was  great,  not  only  interested  in  the  protection  of  his  own 

as  at  the  practical  head  of  the  govern-  people.     He  had  shown  his  wisdom  as 

ment  of  this  great  empire  of  Persia,  but  well  as  his  power  in  the  decree  which 

he  was  so  esteemed  among  "his  own  had  been  issued  by  him,  and  during  the 

people,"  who  were  despised  and  perse-  intervening  months   his  greatness   had 

cuted  as  they  so  often  have  been,  and  been  steadily  on  the  increase.     What- 

who  numbered   not  more  than  one  in  ever  may  have  been  the  means  taken  by 


CHAP.  ix.J 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


297 


him  to  exhibit  this  ever-aupjmenting 
j3;reatness  to  the  people,  they  were  deeply 
impressed  with  it,  not  in  Shushan  only, 
hut  also  "  throughout  all  the  provinces." 
No  doubt  his  management  of  public 
business  would  be  of  a  very  different 
kind  from  that  of  his  predecessor. 
There  would  be  no  self-seeking,  no 
vacillation,  no  favouritism  toward  offend- 
ers, but  justice  and  equity,  influenced 
and  dispensed  with  high  religious  prin- 
ciple. Nothing  else  but  this  will,  in  the 
long  run,  stand  the  scrutiny  and  verdict 
of  public  opinion.  By  degrees  there  is 
gathered  around  it  a  moral  weight  which 
cannot  fail  to  be  respected  by  good,  and 
feared  by  wicked,  men.  It  is  a  great- 
ness which  is  at  once  the  off'spring  and 
reward  of  virtue.  The  fame  of  Mordecai 
made  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  afraid, 
and  fear  would  weaken  energy.  On  the 
other  side,  the  Jews  had  faith  in  him 
who  had  raised  up  and  given  to  Morde- 
cai this  power  and  greatness  in  their 
emergency  and  peril ;  and  this  faith  in 
God  was  the  harbinger  of  victory,  even 
as  the  fear  of  those  who  were  hostile  to 
them  was  the  sure  precursor  of  defeat. 
Faith  would  give  calmness  and  courage, 
just  as  fear  would  occasion  haste  and 
liesitation.  In  this  we  have  the  secret 
how  that,  with  lesser  numbers,  the  Jews 
yet  commanded  greater  power,  and  had, 
from  the  commencement  of  the  conflict, 
the  promise  of  success.  "  The  fear  of 
them  fell  upon  all  people." — McEwen, 

The  promotion  of  Mordecai  must  have 
soon  produced  a  most  important  change 
in  favour  of  the  Jews.  Mordecai  was 
universally  beloved  and  respected,  as 
well  by  the  Persians  as  by  his  own 
countrymen.  On  that  memorable  day 
when  he  went  forth  from  the  king's 
presence,  and  appeared  iov  the  first  time 
in  public,  arrayed  in  the  robes  and 
golden  tiara  which  belonged  to  his  office, 
as  chief  minister  of  the  Persian  empire, 
we  are  told,  that  "  the  city  of  Shushan 
rejoiced  and  was  glad  : " — rejoiced,  not 
only  at  its  deliverance  from  the  terror 
of  the  detested  Haman,  but  because  his 
successor  was  known  to  be  a  wise,  and 
good,  and  unselfish  man  ;  a  magistrate, 
from  whom  all  might  expect  justice ;  a 
ruler,  from  whom  all  honest  and  well 


disposed  persons  would  receive  favour 
and  protection.  The  advancement  of 
such  a  man  to  supreme  power,  added  to 
the  surprising  discovery  that  the  queen 
herself  was  a  Jewess,  and  the  nearest 
relative  of  the  new  minister,  must  have 
operated  everywhere  to  the  advantage 
of  the  Jews. 

That  a  wish  to  please  and  conciliate 
the  favour  of  any  one  in  Mordecai's 
station,  would  lead  the  provincial  author- 
ities to  espouse  the  cause  of  the  Jews, 
and  to  help  them,  both  in  preparing  for 
their  defence,  and  afterwards  in  resisting 
their  enemies,  is  only  what  might  have 
been  expected.  Mordecai  had,  in  eff'ect, 
the  absolute  government  of  nearly  the 
whole  civilized  world  in  his  hands.  And 
as  his  virtue,  his  moderation,  and  his 
disinterested  love  of  truth  and  goodness, 
became  known  and  understood,  his  moral 
influence  increased  every  hour.  "  Mor- 
decai was  great  in  the  king's  house,  and 
his  fame  went  out  throughout  all  the 
provinces  :  for  this  man  Mordecai  waxed 
greater  and  greater."  Like  Joseph  and 
Daniel,  his  illustrious  countrymen,  his 
power  was  used  for  the  good  of  others. 
His  authority  was  exerted  in  behalf  of 
truth  and  justice.  And  as  the  subordi- 
nate officers  of  government  would  neces- 
sarily take  their  tone  from  him,  the 
whole  weight  and  influence  of  his  office 
and  station  would  be  sure  to  operate  in 
favour  of  the  Jews,  and  raise  up  for 
them  pow^erful  friends  and  protectors. 
And  so  we  are  informed,  that  they  all 
"helped  the  Jews." 

But  besides  ;  all  reflecting  persons 
must  have  felt,  that  the  Jews  were 
protected  by  a  higher  power.  A  revo- 
lution so  sudden,  so  unlooked  for,  so 
unparalleled  in  history  ;  a  manifestation 
of  Providence,  more  wonderful  than  any 
interposition,  not  absolutely  miraculous, 
which  this  mysterious  people  had  ever 
before  experienced,  coming,  as  it  did, 
immediately  after  the  public  fastings 
and  prayers  with  which  they  had  cast 
themselves  and  their  families  upon  the 
Divine  mercy, — such  a  strange  and  sin- 
gular combination  of  events  must  have 
produced  a  great  and  widely-extended 
conviction,  that  H»'aven  itself  had  inter- 
fered to  save  them.    And  this  persuasion 


298 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IX. 


must  likewise  have  disposed  many  of 
the  better  and  more  thoughtful  sort,  to 
consider  more  attentively  than  hereto- 
fore, the  claims  of  the  religion  of  the 
Jews  to  be  a  revelation  from  the  supreme 
God.  Accordingly,  we  are  informed  by 
the  sacred  historian,  that  *'  many  of  tlie 
people  of  the  land  became  Jews ;  for 
the  fear  of  the  Jews  fell  upon  them.'* — 
Crosthwaite. 

At  the  time  of  the  deliverance  from 
Egypt  and  the  entrance  into  Canaan, 
the  Lord  showed  abundantly  that  he 
was  able  to  make  his  people  a  great 
nation,  despite  the  most  powerful  of 
their  enemies.  Now  in  its  exile  he 
again  showed  them,  as  for  himself,  he 
now  no  longer  had  need  of  them  as  a 
people,  at  least  as  a  politically  independ- 
ent one.  The  great  deeds  that  were 
then  done  were  edifying  and  elevating 
in  tendency  ;  what  he  now  did  was 
momentous  and  instructive.  It  was 
plainly  evident  that  he  could  accomplish 
his  purpose  aside  from  external  means 
or  political  circumstances.  It  is  still 
more  manifest  than  it  then  was  that 
it  has  pleased  him  to  be  powerful  in 
those  that  are  weak,  and  great  in  those 
who   have   little   influence.      In   those 


days  he  prepared  as  his  instiuments  the 
chief  persons  and  princes  of  his  own 
people,  who  were  in  a  special  manner 
filled  with  the  Spirit.  Now,  however, 
he  employs  instead,  the  satraps  and 
governors  of  Persia,  little  as  they  were 
willing  or  fit  for  such  work.  Together 
with  and  among  kings,  such  as  Cyrus 
and  Ahasuerus,  they  must  also  further 
God's  purpose.  There  was  a  time  when 
the  Lord  had  caused  fear  and  terror 
to  fall  upon  the  peoples  before  Israel, 
especially  those  who  stood  opposed  in 
war,  so  that  they  fled  from  before  them. 
Now,  however,  the  princes  and  govern- 
ors, who  had  great  fear,  were  obliged 
to  protect  the  rights  of  the  subjects  of 
the  king,  and  thus  they  protected  Israel. 
This  corresponded  entirely  to  his  great- 
ness. Therein  is  shown  his  claim  as  the 
God  of  all  men.  This  is  itself  further 
evinced  by  the  fact  that  if  his  people 
will  only  become  more  spiritual,  as  is 
his  wish,  and  partake  of  his  nature,  he 
will  by  no  means  leave  them  fatherless. 
But  the  more  spiritual  his  kingdom,  i.  e. 
his  people,  will  become,  the  more  will 
he  assist  them  to  arrive  at  truth,  justice, 
and  security  throughout  the  world  while 
in  it. — Lange. 


MAIN   HOMILBTIOS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.     Verses  5—11. 


The  Fate  of  Evil-doers. 

Justice  ought  to  be  tempered  by  mercy.  But  there  may  be  a  danger  of 
degenerating  into  what  we  may  call  sentimentalism.  We  seem  to  see  the  working 
of  this  feeling  in  the  present  day.  We  would  not  deal  harshly,  but  we  must  deal 
justly,  with  the  criminal  classes.  We  must  have  respect  to  the  welfare  of  society 
as  a  great  whole.  In  reading  some  of  the  Old  Testament  accounts  of  slaughters 
and  battles,  we  must  not  follow  our  own  modern  feelings;  and  we  must  make 
all  due  and  proper  allowance  for  the  difference  of  times  and  of  dispensations. 
After  all  proper  allowances  have  been  made,  there  will  still  be  about  those 
accounts  that  which  is  to  us  inexplicable  on  modern  and  even  New  Testament 
principles.  Here  are  great  slaughters  that  may  well  appear  to  us  very  strange. 
However,  the  narrative  does  not  warrant  the  assumption  that  there  was  anything 
vindictive  on  the  part  of  Esther  or  Mordecai.  The  Jews  slew  in  self-defence. 
They  killed  only  the  men ;  they  did  not  kill  for  personal  enrichment,  for  on  the 
spoil  laid  they  not  their  hand.  Let  us  seek  to  gather  instruction  from  the  whole 
narrative. 

I.  The  destruction  of  evil-doers.  The  enemies  of  the  Lord  and  of  the 
Lord's  Church  must  meet  with  retribution  sooner  or  later.  The  haters  of  the 
Jews  were  visited  with  slaughter  and  destruction.  Even  in  the  gospel  dispensation 
it  is  written,  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."    It  is  a 


CHAP.  IX.]  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTlfER.  299 

fearful  thing  for  the  hardened  and  tlie  finally  impenitent  ihiia  to  fall.  He  that 
being  often  reproved,  and  hardenetli  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  he  destroyed,  and 
that  without  remedy.  But  Jesus  Christ  came  to  provide  a  way  of  escape  from  final 
destruction.  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  is  lost. 
Thus,  through  Christ  Jesus,  the  stroke  of  retribution  may  be  averted.  By  his 
stripes  penitent  and  believing  .dinners  may  be  healed  and  saved.  If,  th«'n,  we  would 
escape  the  ministers  of  vengf^ance,  we  must  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us  in 
the  gospel.  Let  us  at  once  lay  hold  on  the  blessed  hope.  Let  us  penitently  bow 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  Let  us  believingly  apply  to  the  one  Mediator  between 
God  and  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  The  infamy  of  evil-doers.  The  ten  sons  of  Haman  receive  an  unenviable 
notoriety.  Their  names  are  recorded  and  handed  down  to  all  the  ages,  and  thus 
branded,  as  it  were,  with  undying  infamy.  Far  better  to  go  down  to  the  grave 
unknown  than  to  occupy  that  place  in  history  which  is  occupied  by  these  ten  men. 
Better  still  to  go  down  to  the  grave  along  the  pathway  of  righteous  endeavour  to 
keep  God's  commandments.  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  iu  the  Lord.  These 
ten  men  were  damaged  by  parental  influence,  but  we  do  not  read  that  they  made 
any  effort  to  lise  superior  to  the  evil  influence  of  their  circumstances.  It  is  some- 
times very  convenient  to  blame  parents,  and  to  blame  our  circumstances.  The 
question  will  arise.  Have  we  done  the  best  we  could  in  spite  of  our  circumstances "? 
Have  we  shown  the  noble  sight  of  men  bravely  battling  with  and  against  adversity  ] 
Faithful  endeavour  cannot  be  altogether  lost.  Men  will  be  judged  according  to 
their  light,  their  opportunities,  their  circumstances,  and  their  talents.  Be  wise  in 
time. 

III.  The  report  of  the  fate  of  evil-doers.  On  that  day  the  number  of  those 
that  were  slain  in  Shushan  the  palace,  was  brought  before  the  king.  An  account 
was  kept.  The  report  has  a  solemn  voice.  If  strict  accounts  are  kept  on  earth, 
strict  accounts  are  kept  in  heaven.  The  dead,  both  small  and  great,  must  stand 
before  God,  and  the  books  will  be  opened.  Oh,  who  shall  be  able  to  stand 
when  the  books  are  opened  1  How  very  many  would  shrink  from  the  exposure  of 
the  outvvnrd  acts  and  the  inward  thoughts  and  feelings  of  one  year  of  their  sinful 
lives?  What  a  dark  scroll !  Let  me  not  brave  the  opening  of  the  books  in  that 
great  day.  Let  me,  0  my  Saviour,  find  in  that  day  that  thy  precious  blood  has 
been  sprinkled  upon  the  pages  of  the  great  book,  and  all  the  black  record  of  my 
misdoings  has  been  wiped  clean  away,  and  nothing  is  to  be  seen  but  clear  pages. 
May  I  be  found  at  last  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  5 — 11. 

It  is  one  thing  to  take  revenge  of  joyed,  of  rejoicing  in  a  victory  over  their 
one's  self,  another  to  do  so  on  the  order  enemies ;  and  it  would  be  little  to  the 
of  authority  ;  not  the  latter,  but  the  purpose,  if  instead  of  aiming  at  their 
former,  is  forbidden.  The  simple  com-  conversion,  we  acquiesced  in  their  de- 
mand of  a  government  will  justify  such  struction.  Instead  of  justifying  the 
an  act  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  guaranty  complaint  that  we  do  not  pay  sufficient 
against  pure  thirst  for  revenge.  Every-  regard  to  Old  Testament  national  condi- 
thing  here  depends  upon  the  disposition  tions,  we  must  also  remember  that  Old 
of  mind.  But  we  would  certainly  mis-  Testament  saints  could  not  well  avoid 
judge  the  temper  of  the  then  Jews,  often  taking  a  stand-point  opposed  to 
were  we  to  assume  that  because  the  their  enemies,  just  as  we  are  still  allowed 
people  were  but  a  religious  community,  to  assume  a  position  at  variance  with 
we  are  at  liberty  to  apply  a  Christian  those  in  enmity  against  God.  Besides, 
standard  to  them.  It  would  be  unjust  we  are  not  to  forget  that,  for  those  who 
to  deny  them  the  privilege,  which  they  wall  not  join  themselves  to  the  kingdom 
as  an  independent  people  formerly  en-  or  people  of  God,  whatever  its  form  or 


300 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


[crap.    IX. 


degree  of  development,  this  very  hostility- 
is  a  ground  of  condemnation.  All  things 
that  cannot  be  employed  for  a  good  end 
will  finally  issue  in  destruction  and  ex- 
tinction. This  is  still  true,  and  will  be 
true  to  the  end  of  time.  In  the  same 
manner  even  the  angels  in  heaven  could 
not  have  acted  differently  from  Esther 
with  regard  to  those  enemies  in  the  city 
of  Shushan.  We  would  be  more  just 
to  Esther,  to  the  Jews  spoken  of  in  our 
book,  and  to  the  book  itself,  if,  in  what 
was  done  in  Shushan  as  well  as  in  all 
Persia,  we  would  see  an  anticipation  of 
the  judgments  connected  and  paralleled 
with  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  on  earth,  and  especially  of  the  final 
judgment.  If  the  animus  of  the  Old 
Testament  with  respect  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  enemies  seems  to  us  terribly  vin- 
dictive, rather  than  mild,  yet  this  may 
not  only  be  excusable,  but  may  even  be 
a  prophetic  intimation.  The  fact,  o 
prominently  and  emphatically  expressed, 
in  the  present  instance,  that  the  Jews 
did  not  stretch  out  their  hands  after  the 
goods  (spoils)  of  their  enemies,  proves  to 
us  that  they  meant  to  conduct  this  con- 
test as  a  measure  of  self-protection,  or 
better,  as  a  holy  war,  the  sole  purpose  of 
which  was  the  removal  of  their  enemies. 
— Lange. 

"  This  example,  however,  is  set  before 
us  not  that  we  should  take  it  upon  our- 
selves to  avenge  injuries,  according  to 
our  own  judgment,  but  that  we  may 
recognize  the  severity  of  the  Divine 
wrath  against  the  impious  persecutor  of 
the  people  of  God,  and  that  in  persecu- 
tion we  might  most  confidently  expect 
deliverance  through  faith,  and  be  obedi- 
ent to  the  calls  of  God." — Brenz. 

"This  is  written  in  admonition  of 
parents,  in  order  that  they  may  be  in- 
cited to  cultivate  piety,  lest  along  with 
themselves  they  may  also  drag  their 
children  down  into  destruction.  Such 
severity  of  God  is  stated  in  the  Deca- 
logue :  *  Visiting  the  iniquity  of  the 
fathers  upon  the  children  to  the  third 
and  fourth  generation  of  those  that  hate 


me.' " — Brenz. 


We  may  learn  from  this  part  of  the 
history  how  dangerous  it  is  to  enter  on 
a  wicked  course,  especially  in   concert 


with  others.  Persons  go  on  from  evil  to 
worse ;  they  encourage  one  another  in 
mischief.  This  is  especially  true  as  to 
those  practices  which  originate  in  malice, 
as  to  which  the  devil,  who  was  a  mur- 
derer from  the  beginning,  exerts  a  pecu- 
liar influence,  in  urging  his  children  to 
the  most  violent  extremes.  "  This  is  the 
message  that  ye  heard  from  the  begin- 
ning, that  v/e  should  love  one  another. 
Not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked 
one,  and  slew  his  brother.  And  where- 
fore slew  he  him  ?  Because  his  own 
works  were  evil,  and  his  brother's  right- 
eous." But  in  addition  to  the  consider- 
ations mentioned,  we  should  stand  in 
awe  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God, 
who  gives  up  wicked  men  to  the  uncon- 
trolled corruption  of  their  own  hearts, 
and  to  the  suggestions  of  the  evil  one, 
so  that  they  often  rush  with  their  eyes 
open  upon  ruin.  "  Whom  God  means 
to  destroy,  he  first  infatuates." 

This  was  remarkably  exemplified  in 
the  case  before  us.  In  spite  of  all  the 
discouragements  thrown  in  their  way, 
and  though  heaven  and  earth  both 
frowned  upon  them,  the  enemies  of  the 
Jews  persisted  in  their  hostile  intentions, 
and  assumed  an  offensive  posture  on  the 
long  looked-for  day. — M^Crie. 

It  may  appear  strange  that  the  Jews 
now  found  any  enemies  bold  enough  to 
contend  with  them  in  battle.  The  king 
was  their  friend,  God  was  their  friend, 
what  could  those  expect  who  sought 
their  lives,  but  destruction  to  them- 
selves %  It  is  indeed  wonderful,  but  not 
uncommon,  for  men  to  value  the  gratifi- 
cation of  their  malignant  passions  above 
their  best  interests,  and  above  their 
safety.  At  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
by  the  Romans,  it  is  well  known  that 
the  Jews  themselves  did  more  mischief 
to  one  another,  than  all  the  harm  they 
suffered  from  the  fury  of  their  conquer- 
ors. The  different  parties,  when  they 
found  respite  from  the  Romans,  destroyed 
their  provisions,  and  then  brought  upon 
themselves  a  famine,  which  destroyed 
them  by  thousands.  But  we  need  not 
look  seventeen  hundred  years  back  to 
see  the  tyrannizing  power  of  malice  and 
hatred  over  the  minds  of  men.  Are 
there  not  many  who  subject  themselves 


CHAP.  IX.] 


HOMILETIO   COMMENTARY:    ESTHER. 


301 


to  bitter  remorse,  to  ruinous  fines,  or  to 
an  ignominious  death  ?  Are  there  not 
many  more  who  sul)ject  themselves  to 
the  curse  of  God,  merely  to  gratify  their 
accursed  spite  against  their  fellow-men  ? 

Many  of  the  enemies  of  the  Jews, 
doubtless,  were  overawed  by  the  power 
of  Mordecai,  and  either  sat  quiet  in  their 
dwellings,  or  joined  with  the  Jews. 
Many  chose  rather  to  be  quiet  than  to 
venture  their  lives  in  battle  with  ene- 
mies that  were  sure  to  be  victorious. 
But  there  were  others,  not  in  small 
numbers,  who  chose  to  venture,  or  rather 
to  sell  their  lives,  and  the  lives  of  all 
that  were  dear  to  them,  rather  than  lose 
the  opportunity  given  them  by  law,  of 
attempting  to  destroy  a  race  of  men 
whom,  though  innocent,  they  hated  with 
a  deadly  hatred.  These  men  combined 
in  the  different  cities  to  fight  against  the 
Jews.  But  their  confederacy  was  against 
the  God  of  heaven,  who  spoiled  them  of 
their  courage,  and  gave  them  into  the 
hands  of  the  Jews,  to  do  to  them  as 
they  would.  They  were  so  far  from 
gaining  their  malicious  purposes  at  the 
expense  of  their  lives,  that  victory,  and 
triumph  to  their  hated  enemies,  were 
the  fruit  of  their  cruel  attempt.  Vain 
it  is  to  fight  against  God,  or  against 
those  whom  he  loves  and  protects.  If 
God  be  against  us,  who  can  be  for  us  ? 
If  we  harden  ourselves  against  the  Al- 
mighty we  cannot  prosper.  It  were 
better  for  us  to  dash  our  heads  against 
the  craggy  rock,  than  to  rush  upon  the 
thick  bosses  of  the  buckler  of  the 
Almighty. 

Why  should  men  fight  against  Godi 
And  yet  there  are  too  many  w^ho  fear 
not  to  carry  the  weapons  of  an  unright- 
eous warfare  against  their  Maker  and 
their  Judge.  *'  Whatever  ye  have  done, 
or  not  done,  to  one  of  the  least  of  my 
brethren,"  says  Christ,  "  ye  have  done, 
or  not  done,  to  me."  Enmity  against 
God  himself;  and  surely  "all  that  are 
incensed  against  him  shall  be  ashamed." 

Even  in  Shushan  the  royal  city,  under 
the  eye  of  the  king,  there  were  more 
than  five  hundred  men  that  combined, 
in  defiance  of  the  king's  known  senti- 
ments, to  attack  the  Jews.  But  they 
meddled  to  their  own  hurt.     When  we 


consider  the  audacity  of  that  behaviour, 
to  which  their  malice  prompted  them, 
we  see  that  Mordecai  had  too  much 
reason  to  tell  Esther  that  she  would  not 
be  safe  in  the  king's  palace,  if  she  did 
not  intercede  with  the  king.  The  men 
that  could  take  the  pretence  of  a  law  to 
attack  the  Jews  to  their  certain  destruc- 
tion, might  have  been  prompted  by  the 
same  outrageous  malice  to  attack  Esther 
in  the  palace,  when  they  could  plead  the 
king's  authority  for  the  enterprise. 

These  five  hundred  men  in  Shushan, 
who  sold  their  lives  in  this  desperate 
cause,  were  doubtless  some  of  Haman's 
creatures,  who  had  learned  from  him  to 
hate  the  Jews  with  a  bloody  hatred. 
Haman's  ten  sons  were  at  the  head  of 
them,  and  shared  in  their  fate.  They 
were  doubtless  trained  up  by  their  father 
in  the  hatred  of  that  nation,  and  his 
miserable  end,  instead  of  opening  their 
eyes,  irritated  their  resentment  to  their 
own  destruction. 

It  was  natural,  some  will  say,  for 
Haman's  sons  to  account  that  people 
their  enemies,  by  the  means  of  whom 
their  father  suffered  an  ignominious 
death.  It  was  natural,  it  must  be  con- 
fessed; but  it  does  not  follow  that  it 
was  right.  Children  are  to  honour  their 
parents  while  they  live,  and  venerate 
their  memory  when  they  are  dead,  but 
not  to  follow  their  example  in  anything 
that  is  evil.  The  children  of  wicked 
parents  ought  to  remember,  that  their 
Maker  must  have  the  precedency  to  all 
other  duties  ;  and  that  to  rebel  against 
God,  because  their  parents  rebelled 
against  him,  is  not  more  excu-^able  than 
for  a  man  to  be  a  thief,  or  a  traitor,  or 
an  adulterer,  because  his  father  was  so 
before  him.  God  commanded  his  people, 
when  they  were  carried  away  captives 
for  their  transgression,  to  confess  their 
own  iniquity,  and  the  iniquity  of  their 
fathers.  The  holy  son  of  the  wicked 
Ahaz  made  a  full  confession  of  the  sins 
committed  by  his  father,  and  by  the 
people  under  his  influence,  and  deserved 
high  praise  for  reversing  all  his  wicked 
institutions.  Jeroboam  had  only  one 
son  in  his  house  who  discovered  a  dislike 
of  his  father's  conduct,  and  was  the  only 
member  of  the  family  who  died  in  peace. 


302 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap,  ix 


"  Fill  ye  up  the  measure  of  your  fathers," 
said  Jesus  to  the  Jews ;  warning  them 
tliat  their  fathers'  example  would  be  so 
far  from  justifying  their  wicked  con- 
duct, that  the  vengeance  of  Heaven  was 
}  rought  the  nearer  them,  that  their  sins 
were  but  a  continuation  of  the  sins  of 
tlieir  progenitors. 

Parents,  pity  your  children,  if  you 
will  not  pity  yourselves.  You  know 
what  force  the  example  and  influence  of 
parents  have.  If  you  profess  bad  princi- 
ples, you  of  course  train  up  your  children 
in  the  profession  of  the  same.  If  you 
openly  practise  wickedness,  you  teach 
your  children  to  practise  it  likewise. 
Thus  you  pull  down  vengeance,  not  only 
upon  yourselves,  but  U{)on  your  houses. 
You  see  that  Haman  was  the  enemy  of 
the  Jews,  and  of  the  God  of  the  Jews, 
and  the  punishment  of  his  wickedness 
fell  heavy,  not  only  on  himself,  but 
upon  all  his  family,  which  was  probably 
rooted  out  of  the  earth.  His  sons 
might  have  been  suffered  to  live  in 
obscurity,  if  they  had  been  willing  to 
live  peaceably.  But  they  had  drunk 
deep  of  their  father's  spirit,  and  Ibllowed 
his  example,  and  ten  ([jrobably  all  of 
them)  perished  on  that  fatal  day,  on 
which  their  father,  a  few  months  before, 
had  hoped  to  feast  his  eyes  with  the 
blood  of  those  whom  he  chose  to  account 
his  enemies. — Law  son. 

But  on  the  spoil  laid  they  not  their 
hand. — Lest  the  king  should  be  dam- 
nified, or  themselves  justly  taxed  of 
covetousness  and  cruelty.  "  Give  none 
offence,  neither  to  the  Jews,  nor  to  the 
Gentiles,  nor  to  the  Church  of  God." 
This  is  oft-repeated  in  this  chapter,  to 
their  great  commendation ;  that,  al- 
though by  the  king-'s  grant  they  might 
have  taken  the  spoil,  yet  they  did  it  not. 
1.  To  show  that  they  were  God's  execu- 
tioners, not  thieves  and  robbers.  2.  To 
gratify  the  king  for  his  courtesy  towards 
them  by  leaving  the  spoil  wholly  to  his 
treasury.  3.  It  is  not  unlikely,  saith  an 
interpreter,  that  Mordecai  and  Esther 
had  admonished  them  how  ill  Saul  had 
sped  with  the  spoil  of  the  Amalekites, 


and  Achan  with  his  wedge  of  gold, 
which  served  but  to  cleave  his  body  and 
soul  asunder,  and  his  Babylonish  gar- 
ment, which  proved  to  be  his  winding- 
sheet. —  Trapp. 

Notwithstanding,  the  worst  passions 
of  some  had  been  roused,  and  neither 
the  king's  wish  nor  the  awe  of  Mordecai 
availed  to  restrain  them.  In  the  capital, 
five  hundred  men,  led  by  Haman's  ten 
sons,  threw  awaj^"  their  lives  in  the 
attempt  to  injure  the  Jews.  It  is  not 
easy  to  pity  them.  If  they  had  ceased 
from  hating  their  neighbours  and  resist- 
ing God  they  would  have  been  safe  j 
but  when  they  would  not,  there  was 
nothim^  left  but  to  kill  them.  In  the 
rest  of  the  provinces  seventy-five  thou- 
sand persons  perished  in  the  same  way. 
An  accurate  report  must  have  been 
gathered  by  the  prime  minister,  now 
Mordecai,  of  the  result  in  each  city. 
The  victory  was  uniform  and  complete 
from  India  to  Ethiopia.  The  lesson  of 
God's  care  over  his  people  was  thus 
taught  over  the  known  world  in  one 
day,  and  with  greatly  more  effect  than 
if  an  equal  number  of  enemies  had  fallen 
under  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  And 
another  lesson  was  taught  by  the  un- 
looked-for self-restraint  of  the  peculiar 
people.  "  But  on  the  spoil  laid  they 
not  their  hands."  You  can  imagine  the 
widows  and  weak  ones  who  were  left  in 
the  houses  of  the  foolhardy,  after  cower- 
ing in  terror  of  massacre,  or  worse,  all 
through  the  thirteenth  of  Adar,  and 
perhaps  the  next  day  also,  at  length 
beginning  to  breathe  freely.  "  How 
strange  these  Jews  are  !  They  care  not 
for  spoil,  they  in.^ult  us  not,  they  rob 
us  not,  they  have  no  revenge ;  they  can 
fight, — that  is  proved, — but  they  fight 
only  for  liberty  to  live  and  worship  tlieir 
God."  Yes;  the  whole  transaction  was 
oidained  to  vindicate  the  right  of  God's 
people  to  live  as  such  on  liis  earth  ;  and 
this  was  all  the  more  effectively  done 
when  the  humane  and  unworldly  cha- 
racter of  their  religion  was  so  strikingly 
manifested. — Symington, 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  303 


MAIN    HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.    Yerses  12—16. 

The  Rigour  op  Justice. 

Justice  is  stern,  and  in  the  course  of  justice  none  of  us  should  see  salvation. 
This  is  one  of  tlie  glories  of  the  new  dispensation,  that  we  may  live  under  the  reign 
of  merc}^  and  not  under  the  reign  of  justice.  However,  mercy  must  not  be  per- 
mitted to  induce  the  spirit  of  presum])tion.  If  mercy  harden,  justice  will  he 
allowed  to  do  its  severe  work.  The  prospect  of  mercy  must  lead  to  penitence,  to 
faith,  to  renewed  consecration,  in  order  that  the  stroke  of  justice  may  be  averted. 
In  this  paragraph  let  us  see  Esther  as  the  personification  of  justice,  and  thus 
notice — 

I.  Justice  works  by  striking  terror.  The  proceedings  of  the  Jews  on  this 
occasion  were  calculated  to  strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  their  enemies.  Five 
hundred  men  slain  in  Shushan  the  palace,  Haman's  ten  sons  destroyed,  the  leaders 
of  the  movement  against  the  Jews  were  all  slaughtered.  Thus  a  panic  was  spread 
amongst  all  those  who  had  shown  them>^elves  the  Jews'  enemies.  Justice  works 
by  terror.  It  is  so  under  human  rule.  It  is  so  under  Divine  rule.  Society  seeks 
to  restrain  the  criminal  by  fear.  But  this  can  never  be  a  permanently  renovating 
power.  It  is  by  the  indwelling  force  of  Divine  love  that  the  evil  must  be  extir- 
pated. God's  method  of  law  and  of  justice  in  the  old  dispensation  must  give 
place  to  the  brighter  and  surer  method  of  love  and  mercy  in  the  new  dispensation. 
It  is  highly  fitting  that  the  dispensation  which  was  to  be  permanent,  which  is  for  all 
races,  should  be  one  of  mercy,  and  of  love,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and 
Saviour. 

II.  Justice  pursues  to  the  bitter  end.  Haman's  ten  sons  are  slain,  and  then 
they  are  hanged  upon  the  gallows.  The  Jews  stood  for  their  lives,  and  slew 
seventy  and  five  thousand.  Justice  demands  the  uttermost  farthing.  It  says, 
"  Pay  me  what  thou  owest."  It  takes  the  penniless  debtor  and  casts  him  into 
prison,  there  to  lie  until  all  the  debt  be  paid.  Justice  is  an  exact  accountant. 
Escape  there  cannot  be  from  the  stern  grasp  of  justice  except  by  the  interposition 
of  a  higher  power.  Justice  and  mercy  are  harmonized  in  the  cross  of  the  blessed 
Saviour. 

III.  Justice  makes  a  distinction.  These  Jews  slew  only  their  foes.  They  did 
not  proceed  on  the  method  of  indiscriminate  slaughter.  They  do  not  appear  to 
have  touched  inoffensive  women  and  helpless  children.  They  did  not  even  confis- 
cate to  themselves  the  property  of  their  foes.  Divine  justice  will  be  exact  in  its 
distinctions.  It  will  judge  between  the  good  and  the  bad,  and  also  between  bad 
and  bad.     One  servant  will  receive  many  stripes,  and  another  the  few. 

IV.  The  administrators  of  justice  have  rest  when  the  appointed  work  is 
accomplished.  The  Jews  had  rest  from  their  enemies.  The  open  enemies  were 
destroyed.  The  concealed  enemies  were  afraid.  There  was  security,  if  not 
absolute  safety,  to  the  Jewish  nation.  How  blessed  that  word  rest  to  these  once 
persecuted,  fighting,  and  now  triumphant  Jews.  Rest,  after  all  their  fears  and 
forebodings  !  Rest,  after  all  their  awful  but  necessary  work  of  bloodshed  !  The 
warriors  find  rest.  The  stntement  implies  that  these  Jews  did  not  find  supreme 
delight  in  the  butchery  and  blood-shedding  of  man.  They  were  not  warriors  by 
trade  and  by  desire,  but  by  the  stern  necessity  which  has  no  law.  Sweet  and 
welcome  to  them  the  rest  after  long  and  bitter  months  of  fear  and  anxiety.  To 
all  those  who  fight  against  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  there  is  the  sure  prospect  of 
rest.  Every  Christian  has  such  enemies.  "We  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and 
blood,"  &c.  But  rest  will  come  ere  long.  Sweet  rest  in  heaven  ;  Divine  repose 
in  the  Father's  House.     The  soul  of  the  believer  pants  for.  rest  in  this  world  of 


304 


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IX. 


strife  and  turmoil.  Eest  from  moral  enemies.  Rest  from  the  strife  of  tongues. 
Rest  from  foes  without,  and  fears  within.  Lord  God,  give  us  to  taste  the  pure  rest 
of  heaven. 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  12 — 16. 


If  she  had  heen  put  upon  her  defence 
for  this  act,  she  might  have  urged  that 
love  for  her  countrymen  and  love  for 
her  religion,  prompted  her  to  deal  thus 
toward  the  fierce  enemies  of  both.  And 
we  shall  not  question  the  fact,  that  it 
was  by  these  feelings  she  was  chiefly 
animated,  and  not  by  the  desire  of 
revenge  alone.  But  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, that  although  this  furnishes  a 
sufficiently  satisfactory  explanation  of 
her  conduct,  it  does  not  justify  it.  It 
has  ever  been  under  the  pretext  of  zeal 
for  truth,  that  the  fires  of  religious  per- 
secntion  have  been  kindled.  Under 
this  plea,  for  example,  Popery  has  shed 
the  blood  of  the  righteous  like,  water, 
and  even  in  Protestant  countries  pains 
and  penalties  have  been  inflicted  upon 
those  who  refused  to  adopt  the  form  of 
religion  patronized  by  the  state.  In- 
tolerance has  always  had  its  arguments 
in  self-defence ;  but  these  do  not  serve 
for  its  vindication.  And  so  in  the  case 
before  us,  we  believe  most  assuredly 
that  Esther  acted  in  all  good  conscience, 
as  also  did  Mordecai,  by  whom  very 
probably  she  was  instructed  what  to  do 
on  the  occasion.  Yet  this  hinders  not 
our  regretting  that  she  was  hurried  away 
by  the  spirit  of  revenge,  rather  than 
moved  by  what  would  have  become 
her  better — the  mild  and  sweet  influence 
of  a  forgiving  heart.  In  defence  of  her 
religion  and  her  people  she  sufi'ered 
herself  to  act  with  unbecoming  zeal. 
I  would  take  occasion  to  observe  here, 
that  the  great  principle  of  toleration  in 
religion  is  still  imperfectly  understood, 
and  in  many  parts  of  what  is  called 
Christendom,  as  imperfectly  practised. 
The  principle  is  utterly  to  be  repudiated, 
that  man  is  not  responsible  to  God  for 
unbelief.  He  is  responsible,  as  Christ's 
words  imply,  when  he  says  that  men 
"  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  be- 
cause their  deeds  are  evil."  But  on  the 
other  hand,  this  other  principle  is  ever 
to  be  maintained  and  urged,  that  man  is 


not  responsible  to  his  fellow-man,  either 
for  his  belief  or  unbelief,  and  that  pains 
and  penalties  to  enforce  religious  con- 
formity are  altogether  indefensible.  That 
there  is  a  limit  to  be  affixed  to  the 
publication  of  opinions  which  are  blas- 
phemous, revoltingly  immoral,  or  licenti- 
ous, and  subversive  of  all  order  and 
government,  is  a  proposition  which  very 
few  will  call  in  question.  The  well- 
being  of  society  demands  that  care  be 
taken  lest  its  very  foundations  be 
undermined  by  men  whose  heart  is  set 
in  them  to  do  evil.  But  to  punish  any 
one  for  holding  particular  views  of 
Divine  truth,  or  for  refusing  to  conform 
to  the  belief  and  practice  of  the  majority, 
is  manifestly  wrong.  If  no  other  argu- 
ments could  be  advanced  for  the  as- 
sumption and  exertion  of  a  power  to 
compel  uniformity,  these  two  would  be 
sufficient :  that  the  application  of  ex- 
ternal force  in  matters  of  religion  implies 
that  those  who  have  recourse  to  it  must 
deem  themselves  infallible,  which  no 
man,  or  class  of  men,  can  rightly  do  ; 
and  that  it  evidently  supposes  that  the 
claims  and  evidences  of  true  religion  are 
not  so  powerful  of  themselves  as  to  be 
able  without  external  or  temporal  aid  to 
secure  the  approval  of  those  to  whom 
they  are  addressed.  Let  us  hope  that 
the  world  and  the  Church  also  will 
come  to  understand  better  than  either 
has  done  hitherto,  the  reverence  which 
is  due  to  the  inalienable  rights  of  con- 
science, when  these  are  pled  for. — 
Davidson. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  account' 
this — that  with  emphasis  it  is  stated 
that  in  Shushan  the  palace,  in  a  great 
city,  they  slew  500  men.  Twice  it  is 
said  they  slew  only  men.  They  were 
allowed  to  slay  women  and  children. 
But  as  this  was  not  necessary  to  their 
own  preservation,  they  took  the  course 
dictated  by  humanity  and  mercy.  And 
this  stands  well  to  their  credit. 

It  might  seem  perhaps  to  some  that 


CHAP.  IX.  J 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


300 


Esther  herself  was  lacking  in  this  hu- 
manity, when,  using  her  great  influence 
over  her  uxorious  husband,  and  in  reply 
to  his  desire  to  know  what  now  she 
wished  further  done,  assuring  her  that 
her  wish  should  immediately  be  royal 
command  —  she  asked  not  only  that 
Haman's  sons  should  be  hanged — but 
that  there  might  be  anotlier  day  of 
slaughter  added  to  the  first.  One  very 
vigorous  objector  speaks  of  it  as  "an- 
other day  of  butchery  in  the  palace." 
But  that  is  mere  excess  and  exaggera- 
tion. The  whole  meaning  of  Esther's 
prayer  is  that  the  Jews  might  be  allowed 
to  continue  the  defence  for  another  day, 
since  the  assault  had  not  yet  ceased. 

The  request  was  wholly  reasonable, 
and  it  was  at  once  granted.  It  was 
only  in  the  palace,  i.  e.  in  the  capital 
city,  that  this  was  necessary;  through- 
out the  provinces  of  the  empire  the 
fighting  began  and  ended  on  the  same 
day. — Raleigh. 

We  would  give   prominence  to  this 
circumstance,  because  some   have  been 
disposed   to    charge   the   Jews   with   a 
vindictive    and  merciless   spirit   in  the 
conduct  of  this  war — especially  for  the 
purpose  of  lowering  the  estimate  which 
we   have   formed,   and  endeavoured  to 
present,  of  the  character  of  Esther,  in 
not     being    satisfied    with    one    day's 
slaughter,  but   asking   the  king,  when 
the  opportunity  was  given  her,  that  it 
should  be  continued  on  the  following 
day,  and  that  the  dead  bodies  of  Haman's 
ten  sons  should  be  suspended  on  the 
gallows.     If  there  is  the  appearance  of 
severity  in  this,  it  is  difficult  to  see  that 
it  was  not  warranted  and  necessary  for 
the  future  peace  of  the  Jews  in  Persia. 
The  Jews  were  simply  acting  on  their 
own  defence.     They  were  not  the  ag- 
gressors.    If  their  enemies  had  wished 
to  be  let  alone,  they  had  nothing  to  do 
but  to  let  them  alone ;  and  having  risen 
to  exterminate  them,  they  could  hardly 
complain  if  they  should  be  themselves 
exterminated.     To   have   the  war   pro- 
longed over  another  day,  on  which  the 
dead  bodies  of  Haman's  ten  sons  should 
be  seen  hanging  on  the  gallows,  must 
not  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  pleasure 
in   bloodshed  and  cruelty,  but  rather 


what  was  needful  to  protect  the  Jews 
against  future  trouble  and  single-handed 
resistance  of  assault,  and,  as  has   he(3ii 
suggested,   "to  deter  otlier  councillors, 
at  any  time,  from  abusing  the  king  witli 
false   representations."       Many    of   the 
ringleaders   may  have    escaped    on  the 
first    day.       They   may   have    secreted 
themselves   in   houses,    or   fled    to    the 
suburbs,  knowing  that  the  decrees  only 
extended  over  one  day.     Tliey  would  be 
enraged  more  than  ever  against  the  Jews, 
and  might  concert  measures  for  private 
revenge.    Unprotected  households  would 
not  be  free  from  invasion  and  spoliation. 
The  work  was  not  completed.     But  let 
there  be  a  second  day,  accompanied  with 
the  terrible  spectacle  of  the  scafl'old  with 
its  ten  victims,  and  there  would  be  less 
likelihood  of  any  future  uprising  against 
the  Jews.     Moreover,  we  must  look  at 
the  retribution  on  the  Divine  as  well  as 
the  human  side.     If  these  enemies  of 
the  Jews  were  chiefly  Amalekites.  they 
lay  under  the  righteous  sentence  of  the 
Almighty,  whose  word  c^uld  not  fail  of 
accomplishment.       Thp.y   were    bitterly 
opposed,  not  only  to  the  people  of  God, 
but  to  God   himself,  and   would  have 
rooted   out   his    name   from    the   earth 
along  with  those  who  feared  and  wor- 
shipped   him.       jVIordecai   and   Esther 
were  only  instruiuents  in  his  hand  ;  and 
in  the  execution  of  the  Divine  purpose, 
and  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  we  do 
not  find  anything  in  their  conduct  which 
can  fairly  be  ascribed  to  personal  vin- 
dictiveness    and    vengeance,    but    only 
necessary,  though  severe,  expedients  for 
the  protection  and  honour  of  an  unjustly 
persecuted  and  reproached  people.     Far 
be  it  from  us  to  ascribe  the  results  of  all 
war,  even  of  defence,  to  the  judgment  of 
God ;  but  when  it  is  distinctly  pointed 
out,  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  though 
the  causes  should  be  veiled  in  mystery, 
we    can    only  bow   before    his   throne,' 
saying:  "Thou  art  righteous,  0  Lord, 
which  art,  and  wast,  and  shalt  be,  be- 
cause thou  hast  judged  thus." 

But  whilst  much  may  be  urged  on  the 
side  of  the  Jews,  Mordecai,  and  Esther, 
to  clear  them  from  the  charge  of  vindic- 
tiveness  and  cruelty,  we  have  a  thrice- 
recorded  declaration  with  regard  to  their 


306 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


[chap.  IX. 


clemency.     They  had    a   right  to  take 
the  property  of  their  enemies  for  a  spoil, 
The  clause  in  Haman's  edict  to  this  effect 
had   been   incorporated   in   Mordecai's ; 
but    both    with    reference    to    the    five 
hundred  who  were  slain  at  Slmshan  on 
the  thirteenth  of  the  month,   and  the 
three  hundred   who  were   slain  on  the 
following  day,  as  well  as  the  seventy- 
five   thousand  who  were    slain   in   the 
provinces,  we  have  this  declaration — a 
declaration   all   the  more   praiseworthy 
and  remarkable  when  we  consider  the 
proverbial  love  of  gain  ascribed  to  the 
Jews, — that  "  they  laid  not  their  hands 
on  the  prey."     Just  suppose  that  the 
enemies  of  the  Jews  had  been  victorious, 
and  had  carried  out  the  letter  of  Haman's 
decree  on  all  those  whom  they  destroyed, 
what  a  sad  record  should  we  have  had  I 
Not  the  men  only  who  were   actually 
engaged  in   the  conflict  were   to   have 
been   slain,    but   women    and   children 
also,  and  their  whole  goods  were  to  be 
taken.     If   Haman's   ten  sons  had  got 
their  own   way,  we  may  be  sure  that 
they  would  not  in  any  particular  have 
restricted    their    father's    will.       They 
would  have  been  deaf  to  the  pleadings 
of  mothers  and  the  frightened  cries  of 
little    children,    and   would    not    have 
spared  the  property.     In  contrast  with 
this  the  conduct  of  the  Jews,  Mordecai, 
and  Esther,  was  merciful  and  humane. 
They  only  slew  those  who  had  taken 
arms  against  themselves ;  and,  as  regards 
the  property,  though  they  had  authority 
to  take  it,  yet  did  they  not  appropriate 
anything.     The  wives  and  children  of 
such  as  were  slain  would  have  need  of 
it.     They  would  show  that  it  was  not  a 
war   of   self-aggrandisement,  malice,   or 
covetousness,  but  a  conflict  forced  upon 
them  for  their  own  preservation.     If  it 
had  been  vengeance  which  they  sought 
in   the   second    day's    conflict   and  the 
hanging  of  Haman's  sons,  they  had  an 
opportunity  of  taking  it  in  a  far  more 
effectual  and  grievous  manner ;  but  what 


they  wanted  was  simply  present  safety, 
and  some  guarantee  for  the  future.  They 
stopped  there,  and  by  their  conduct  set 
a  notable  example  to  contending  na- 
tions. All  war  is  to  be  deplored ;  but 
more  deplorable  still,  the  reckless  wa-te 
of  the  property  of  the  vanquished.  In 
certain  cases  it  may  be  necessary  in 
order  to  obtain  terms  of  peace,  but  when 
it  is  wanton  and  revengeful  it  must 
receive  the  just  censure  of  every  generous 
heart.  By  letting  alone  the  spoil,  which 
must  have  been  great,  and  which  they 
might  easily  have  seized  and  legally 
claimed,  the  Jews  must  have  commended 
themselves  to  the  peaceable  and  right- 
minded  of  the  population  of  Persia, — 
"  but  they  laid  not  -their  hands  on  the 
prey. " — McEwen. 

Let  it  be  granted   to   the  Jews,  &c. 
The  enemies  at  Shushan  could  not  be 
all  caught  the  first  day ;  lest  those  that 
lurked  should   hereafter  prove  trouble- 
some to  the  Church  by  hatching  new 
plots,  she  begs  that  they  also  may  receive 
condign    punishment.       And   Haman's 
sons  are  hanged  up  for  example.     This 
she  requested  not  out  of  any  private  and 
personal,  spleen  to  any,  but  for  the  glory 
of  God  and  the  Church's  peace.     Had 
her  aims  been  otherwise  than  good,  her 
good  actions  could  not  have  showed  her 
a   good  woman.     For,  though   a   good 
aim  doth  not  make  a  bad  action  good, 
as  we  see  in  Uzzah ;   yet   a    bad   aim 
maketh  a  good  action  bad,  as  we  see  in 
Jehu.     Lavater's  note  may  not  here  be 
let  slip  :  the  diligence  that  Esther  used 
in    rooting    out    her    temporal    enemies 
should  quicken  ns  to  do  the  like  to  our 
spiritual,  viz.  those  evil  affections,  mo- 
tions, and  passions,  that  war  against  the 
soul.     These  be  our  Medes  and  Persians, 
with  whom  we  must  make  no  truco,  but 
maintain  a  constant  deadly  feud,  till  we 
have  mastered  and  mortified  them    all, 
for  till  that  be  done  effectually  we  must 
never  look  to  have  true  peace,  either 
within  ourselves  or  with  others. — Trapp, 


CHAP.  IX.J  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER.  307 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Versks  17—28. 

A  National  Memorial. 

There  are  some  who  appear  to  frown  upon  all  national  memorials,  as  savouring 
of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  and  as  belonging  to  the  childhood  of  the  race. 
But  all  childishness  has  not  been  yet  eliminated  from  humanity.  And  we  do  not 
know  that  it  would  be  well  for  us  to  put  away  all  that  belongs  to  the  child-nature. 
Our  Saviour  teaches  that  we  must  become  as  little  children.  If  the  custom  of 
observing  national  memorials  belongs  to  primitive  and  less  enlightened  ages  it  is 
certainly  one  that  does  not  easily  pass  away.  AVe  see  no  reason  why  it  should. 
The  family  has  its  memorials,  the  nation  has  its  memorials.  All  religions,  the 
simplest  as  well  as  the  most  elaborate,  have  their  memorials.  They  are  founded 
upon  the  instincts  of  our  humanity.  They  serve  most  useful  purposes.  They  tend 
to  keep  alive  the  memory  of  great  public  events  in  a  way  that  could  not  be  so 
successfully  accomplished  by  any  other  method.  This  national  memorial  of  the 
Purim  has  not  been  without  its  beneficial  influences. 

I.  This  national  memorial  was  established  by  supreme  authority.  Mordecai 
was  now  the  prime  minister,  and  he  wrote  these  things  and  sent  letters  to  stablish 
this  among  them  that  they  should  keep  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  Adar, 
and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same,  yearly.  This  was  done  on  the  concurrence  of 
Esther  the  queen  and  Ahasuerus  the  king.  Those  that  are  in  high  places  in  the 
kingdom  should  set  themselves  to  establish  wise  customs  and  salutary  memorials. 
Such  a  custom  and  such  a  memorial  was  that  of  the  feast  of  Purim.  Even  modern 
rulers  are  not  always  wise  in  this  respect.  They  ought  to  be  cautious  in  all  their 
proceedings.  Let  them  not  establish  any  memorial,  nor  sanction  any  custom,  that 
does  not  tend  to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  Let  them  remember  how  the  influence 
of  those  in  high  places  percolates  through  all  classes  of  society,  and  acts  either 
injuriously  or  beneficially.  How  awfully  responsible  is  the  position  of  those  who 
are  placed  on  high  either  in  Church  or  in  State !  Well  may  we  earnestly  pray  for 
God's  guidance  and  blessing  to  and  upon  all  the  great  ones  of  earth. 

II.  This  national  memorial  was  approved  by  a  grateful  people.  The  Jews 
undertook  to  do  as  they  had  begun,  and  as  Mordecai  had  written  unto  them.  We 
can  easily  understand  and  picture  to  ourselves  the  gratitude  of  these  people  on 
account  of  their  great  deliverance,  and  how  readily  they  would  concur  in  the 
establishment  of  this  feast  of  Purim.  Happy  is  it  when  rulers  find  a  ready 
response  to  a  wise  decision  in  the  feelings  of  their  subjects.  Decrees  and  customs  in 
order  to  be  permanently  beneficial  must  be  heartily  received  by  an  enlightened  and 
virtuous  people.  And  if  the  people  do  not  at  first  readily  receive,  and  do  not  see 
the  propriety  of  any  measure,  they  must  be  taught  and  educated  up  to  the  proper 
standard.  It  may  be  correct  that  t-ome  few  of  the  Jewish  elders  objected  to  this 
memorial.  But  this  is  only  what  often  occurs.  Where  was  the  good  custom  and 
good  doctrine  yet  that  did  not  meet  with  opponents  ]  However,  we  must  hold  on 
our  way  till  all  enemies  are  overcome.  If  the  thing  be  good  and  true  it  must 
finally  stand  and  be  victorious.  Be  sure  you  are  right,  and  then  stand  to  the 
right  in  the  face  of  all  enemies,  and  triumph  must  ultimately  arrive. 

III.  This  national  memorial  was  sanctioned  by  the  marvellous  nature  of 
the  events  celebrated.  These  were  the  days  when  the  Jews  rested  from  their 
enemies,  and  this  was  the  month  which  was  turned  unto  them  from  sorrow  to  joy, 
and  from  mourning  into  a  good  day.  Here  was  fitting  reason  for  celebration. 
"Well  might  they  feel  grateful  for  the  great  benefits  conferred.  These  events  were 
marvellous.  The  deliverance  could  only  have  been  effected  by  Divine  interposition. 
They  would  not  merely  celebrate  the  fact  that  a  month  of  expected  sorrow  was 


308  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [chap.  ix. 

turned  into  a  month  of  joy,  but  also  the  marvellous  manner  by  which  it  was 
brought  about.  We  too  may  celebrate  the  month  which  has  been  turned  for  us 
from  sorrow  to  joy,  and  from  mourning  to  a  good  day,  and  the  marvellous  manner 
by  which  it  was  accomplished.  We  have  our  Christmas  memorial  which  rings  its 
joy  bells  through  time,  and  tells  the  advent  of  our  great  Deliverer.  We  have  our 
Good  Friday  memorial  which  rings  its  mournful  and  yet  hopeful  sounds.  We 
have  our  Easter  memorial  which  tells  of  the  once  crucified  but  now  risen  and 
triumphant  Eedeemer.  Let  us  penitently  and  believingly  celebrate  these  great 
events  of  Gospel  history. 

IV.  This  national  memorial  was  hallowed  by  the  manner  of  its  celebration. 
They  were  to  be  days  of  feasting  and  joy,  but  not  we  presume  of  gluttony  and  of 
drunkenness.  This  is  too  often  the  modern  notion  of  feasting,  and  modern  fashion 
of  observing  festal  occasions.  Very,  very  sad  it  is  to  see  that  our  most  sacred 
religious  festivals  are  desecrated  by  extravagant  and  sinful  licentiousness.  Religious 
people  must  check  this  not  by  ascetic  austerity  but  by  joy.  It  was  a  month  of 
joy.  Let  us  show  that  moderation  and  religious  sobriety  are  helpful  to  a  joy  that 
is  lasting  and  that  spreads  itself  through  all  life's  trials  and  difficulties.  But  the 
most  attractive  part  of  this  celebration  is  found  in  the  fact  that  it  was  a  time  ot 
sending  portions  one  to  another,  and  gifts  to  the  poor.  What  a  wide  diffusion  ot 
happiness  !  What  a  season  for  the  expansion  of  the  spirit  of  benevolence  I  What 
a  time  for  the  holy  enlargement  of  the  nature  1  Here  is  a  blessed  communism  that 
cannot  be  productive  of  evil  results  !  It  is  to  all  a  celestial  feast.  The  rich  taste 
the  luxury  of  doing  good.  The  poor  taste  the  rich  wine  of  benevolence.  The  rich 
sent  both  to  the  rich  and  the  poor,  and  thus  the  poor  are  not  pauperized.  They 
do  not  lose  a  sense  of  their  proper  manhood. 

V.  This  national  memorial  was  preserved  by  a  wise  method.  The  Jews  took 
methods  to  have  this  feast  of  Purim  made  known  and  observed  to  and  by  every 
family,  every  province,  every  city,  and  every  generation.  Here  we  have  on  this 
subject  home-missionary  work.  Let  us  teach  our  own  people.  The  Jews  may  be 
considered  as  too  exclusive.  However,  while  we  look  to  the  nations  beyond  we 
must  not  neglect  our  own  nation.  In  these  days  we  may  reasonably  feel  that  our 
own  beloved  nation  is  not  growing  more  religious.  How  vast  the  heathenism  of 
our  large  towns  and  cities  1  Yea,  how  much  of  ignorance  in  our  rural  districts ! 
Here  we  have  our  duty  towards  the  children  enforced.  The  seed  are  to  be 
instructed.  The  institution  is  to  be  made  known  from  generation  to  generation. 
It  is  by  the  wise  and  prayerful  training  of  children  that  we  must  hope  to  improve 
the  nation,  and  leave  behind  a  better  and  more  glorious  England  than  that  which 
we  found.     Let  us  gird  ourselves  afresh  to  the  holy  and  benevolent  enterprise. 

VI.  This  national  memorial  is  perpetuated  with  a  good  result.  These  days 
of  Purim  had  not  failed  from  among  the  Jews,  nor  has  the  memorial  of  them 
perished  from  their  seed.  However  much  the  Jews  may  be  degenerated  in  the 
manner  in  which  they  celebrate  this  memorial,  yet  the  fact  that  it  is  celebrated 
speaks  to  us  of  the  antiquity  and  authenticity  of  these  wonderful  records.  The 
public  observance  of  certain  customs  is  a  more  convincing  arguiuent  and  a  more 
powerful  and  more  easily  understood  demonstration  than  the  ablest  books  on  the 
evidences.  A  memorial  does  not  require  much  studying.  A  book  requires  much 
studying,  and  sometimes  in  certain  classes  of  minds  raises  more  doubts  than  it 
settles.  We  do  not  under-rate  good  books.  Both  books  and  memorials  have  their 
place.  Let  us  wisely  perpetuate  good  institutions.  Let  each  one  raise  the 
irresistible  memorial  of  a  holy  life.  This  can  never  be  refuted.  Ye  are  our 
epistles.  Oh  that  the  Lord  would  write  more  and  more  of  these  glorious 
epistles. 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  309 


Suggestive  Comments  on  Yerses  17 — 28. 

And  of  sending  ^  portions  one  to  them.  As  the  Mazzoth  (unleavened) 
another.  To  the  rich  they  sent  in  days  are  followed  by  the  serious  Paschal 
courtesy,  to  the  poor  in  charity,  and  sacrifice,  and  as  the  joy  of  the  feast  of 
both  these  to  testify  their  thankfulness  tabernacles  is  preceded  by  the  repent- 
to  God  for  their  lives,  liberties,  and  ance  of  the  fast  of  the  day  of  atonement, 
estates,  so  lately  and  graciously  restored  so  also  here  the  joyous  feast  of  Purim  is 
unto  them. — Trapp,  ^  connected  in  a  preparation  of  fasting  and 

We  can  well   receive  or  retain  good  mourning.      In   eternity  also  will  this 

church  ceremonies,  if  only  they  are  not  transition  hold  true. — Lange. 

opposed  to  the  Word  of  God,  in  view  of  :N"ow  the  feast  of  Purim  was  to  be 

our  Christian  freedom.     Even  the  holi-  observed.     And  of  this  let  us  see — 

days  ordered  by  the  authorities  of  one's  I.  What  was  here   enjoined,    which 

country  should  be  celebrated  in  a  be-  was  very  good,  that  they  should  make 

coming  manner. — Starhe,  it — 1.  A  day  of  cheerfulness,  a  day  of 

The  festivals  that  the  people  of  the  feasting  and  joy ;  and  a  feast  was  made 
Lord   as   such   celebrate,   have  quite  a  for    laughter.       When    God   gives    us 
different  purpose  from  those  of  heathen-  cause   to   rejoice,  why   should    we   not 
dom.      Ahasuerus  aimed  to   show   the  express  our  joy]     2.  A  day  of  generos- 
riches  of  his  glorious  kingdom.     God's  ity,  sending  portions  one  to  another,  in 
people  desire  first  of  all  to  praise  God's  token  of  their  pleasantness  and  mutual 
grace.     They  would  give  thanks  for  the  respect,  and  their  being  knit  by  this  and 
gifts  bestowed  upon  them.     They  would  other  public  common  dangers  and  de- 
secure  and  keep  what  they  already  had  liverances  so  much  the  closer  to  each 
by  rendering  thanks  and  praise  to  God  other  in  love.     Friends  have  their  goods 
as   its    author.      Theirs   are   feasts    of  in  common.     3.  A  day  of  charity,  send- 
gratitude.      Hence   these   also   have   a  ing  gifts  to  the  poor.     It  is  not  to  our 
different  character  from  the  others.    The  kinsmen  and  rich  neighbours  only  that 
pious    cannot   manifest   their   spirit   of  we  are  to  send  tokens,  but  to  the  poor 
gratitude  to   God   for   all   his  benefits  and   the   maimed.      Those    that    have 
without  also  proving  this  by  benefaction  received  mercy  must,  in  token  of  their 
to  their  brethren  in  the  faith.     The  love  gratitude,  show  mercy ;  and  there  never 
of  God  has  kindled  love  to  their  fellows  wants  occasion,   for  the  poor  we  have 
in  their  hearts  ;  this  would  prove  itself  always    with   us.       Thanksgiving    and 
in  deeds  of  kindness  and  benevolence,  almsgiving    should    go    together,    that. 
They  would  confess  their  allegiance  to  when  we  are  rejoicing  and  blessing  God, 
God  as  to  one  mild  and  kindly ;  they  the  heart  of  the  poor  may  rejoice  with 
would  else  deny  him  were  they  not  to  us,  and  their  loins  may  bless  us. 
give  way,  on  their  part,  to  mildness  and  II.  What  was  added  to  this,  which 
kindliness.      Their   festivals,  therefore,  was  much  better.     They  always,  at  the 
are  seasons  of  refreshing,  but  especially  feast,  read  the  whole  story  over  in  the 
so  to  the  poorer  brethren  among  them,  synagogue  each  day,  and  put  up  three 
At   the  same  time  there   is  joined   to  prayers  to  God  :  in  the  first  of  which 
their  spirit   of   rejoicing   one   of   great  they    praise    God   for    counting   them 
seriousness.      They  cannot  enjoy  their  worthy  to  attend  this  Divine  service  ;  in 
deliverance  without  also   looking  back  the  second  they  thank  him  for  the  mi- 
upon   the    sorrows    that    preceded    it.  raculous  preservation  of  their  ancestors ; 
They  can  only  appreciate  the  former  by  in  the  third  they  praise  him  that  they 
taking  a  fuU  view  of  the  latter.     They  have  lived  to  observe  another  festival  in 
do  not  forget  that  though  salvation  is  memory  of  it.     So  Bishop  Patrick, 
theirs,  still  there  are  even  yet  abundant  III.  What   it  has  since  degenerated 
cause  for  sorrow  and  grief.     The  chief  to,  which  is  much  worse.     Their  own 
cause  of  this  is  the  remains  of  sin  in  writers  acknowledge  that  this  feast  is 


310 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ESTHER, 


[chap.  IX. 


commonly  celebrated  among  tliem  in 
gluttony,  and  drunkenness,  and  excess 
of  riot.  Their  Talmud  says  ex})ressly, 
that  in  the  feast  of  Purim  a  man  should 
drink  till  he  knows  not  the  difference 
between  Cursed  he  Haman  and  Blessed 
he  Mordecai.  See  what  the  corrupt  and 
wicked  natnre  of  man  often  brings  that 
to  which  was  at  first  well-intended  :  here 
is  a  religious  feast  turned  into  a  carnival, 
a  perfect  revel,  as  wakes  are  among  us. 
Nothing  more  purifies  the  heart  and 
adorns  religion  than  holy  joy ;  nothing 
more  pollutes  the  heart  and  reproaches 
religion  than  carnal  mirth  and  sensual 
pleasure.  What  is  best  becomes,  when 
corrupted,  the  worst. — MaWieiv  Henry. 
The  celebration  of  the  victory  neces- 
sarily took  place  on  different  days  in 
the  city  of  Shushan  and  in  the  province^j. 
As  there  were  two  days  of  slaughter  in 
Shushan,  the  triumph  was  not  celebrated 
till  the  fifteenth  day ;  but  as  in  the 
lesser  cities  and  villages  of  the  empire, 
the  permission  granted  by  the  king  of  a 
second  day  was  not  known,  it  was  cele- 
brated on  the  fourteenth  day  of  Adar. 
They  rested  from  labour.  Some  must 
have  been  in  mourning  ;  for,  though  no 
mention  is  made  of  the  losses  of  the 
Jews  in  the  fierce  warfare,  it  is  too 
much  to  suppose  that  they  could  all 
have  escaped.  But  even  those  who  had 
suffered  the  loss  of  relatives  and  friends 
would  find  compensation  for  it  in  the 
great  and  general  deliverance  which  had 
been  wrought,  and  would  hardly  refrain 
from  joining  with  their  kinsfolk  and 
neighbours  in  their  joy.  They  feasted 
one  with  another,  and  gave  expression 
to  the  gladness  which  filled  their  hearts 
in  thanksgiving  and  praise.  The  day 
was  observed  as  "a  good  day,"  not  in 
the  sense  of  mere  worldly  mirth  and 
jollity ;  but,  along  with  '*  feasting  and 
gladness,"  there  would  be  the  remem- 
brance of  the  Lord,  who  had  so  marvel- 
lously and  mightily  interposed  for  their 
own  preservation  and  the  destruction  of 
their  enemies.  The  Jews  were  always 
ready  to  give  God  the  praise  of  their 
success  in  war,  and  as,  in  this  instance, 
they  had  sought  the  Lord  in  their  per- 
plexity and  sorrow,  so  would  they  now 
yield  to  him  the  glory  of  their  triumph. 


In  proof  of  their  gratitude  to  him  they 
extended  their  generosity  to  the  poor, 
and  such  as  were  not  in  circumstances 
to  make  a  feast  for  themselves.  They 
sent  "  portions  one  to  another " — meat 
from  their  tables  to  such  as  were  in 
need, — that  no  one  might  be  wanting  in 
the  means  of  enjoyment.  Even  to  the 
present  day,  the  Jews  have  a  rule,  that 
a  collection  of  money  should  be  made, 
at  this  time  of  the  year,  for  the  benefit 
of  the  poor,  that  they  may  provide  for 
themselves  the  things  necessary  to  make 
a  feast.  Verily,  that  is  ''a  good  day" 
on  which  the  hearts  of  the  {)eople  of 
God  are  warmed  with  gratitude  and 
praise  to  him  who  is  the  dispenser  of  all 
good,  and  feel  themselves  so  bound 
together  as  to  be  interested  in  the  supply 
of  each  other's  wants  and  comforts. 
After  a  different  fashion  from  this  the 
world  celebrates  its  victories.  It  may 
expend  lar^e  sums  of  money  in  the  roar 
of  cannon  and  magnificent  display, 
whilst  the  poor  are  left  struggling  in 
penury  and  want.  But  the  Church  of 
God,  through  all  her  members,  should 
feel  knit  one  to  another  by  the  ties  of  a 
common  kindred  and  fraternal  affection, 
prompting  kindness  to  the  poor  and  the 
suffering,  and  an  honest  benevolence  for 
their  relief.  In  our  feasting  and  glad- 
ness, because  of  some  signal  victory  in 
providence,  we  should  remember  those 
who,  on  account  of  their  need,  cannot 
rejoice  with  us  in  our  joy.  So  are  we 
now  presented  with  a  scene  which  is 
widely  separated  from  the  world — men 
regarding  themselves  as  members  of  the 
same  family,  concerned  for  each  other's 
happiness,  ministering  to  each  other's 
wants,  and  as  though  surrounding  a 
common  table: — "A  day  of  gladness 
and  feasting,  and  a  good  day,  and  of 
sending  portions  one  to  another." 

i^ow,  it  does  appear  strange  that  the 
people  of  God  should  be  represented  here 
and  elsewhere  in  Scripture — notably 
after  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh  and 
his  hosts  in  the  Red  Sea — rejoicing  over 
the  slaughter  and  destruction  of  thou- 
sands of  their  fellow-creatures.  One 
might  have  supposed  that  the  scene 
would  rather  have  been  contemplated 
with  subdued  silence  and  rea:ret.   If  the 


OHAP.  IX.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


311 


rejoicing  was  occasioned  simply  by  the 
satisfaction  afforded  by  national  and 
personal  revenge,  it  would  only  have 
merited  reproof ;  but  when  we  reflect 
that  these  same  feelings  of  jubilation 
and  gladness  are  shared  in  and  loudly 
expressed  by  the  redeemed  in  heaven,  at 
the  overthrow  of  God's  enemies,  we 
touch  upon  a  very  solemn  and  awful 
aspect  of  the  subject.  The  will  of  man 
becomes  so  thoroughly  harmonized  and 
identified  with  the  will  of  God,  as  actu- 
ally to  rejoice  in  the  darkest  providences 
and  heaviest  judgments.  We  cannot 
now,  indeed,  venture  to  interpret  all 
events,  which  are  beneficial  to  ourselves 
and  disastrous  to  others,  as  the  judgment 
of  God  upon  them  for  our  sakes.  It 
was  different  in  the  days  of  the  prophets, 
when  a  Divine  intiuiation  was  given  to 
this  effect.  But  the  redeemed  will  have 
such  a  clearness  of  apprehension  in  this 
respect  as  shall  prevent  the  possibility 
of  mistake.  Accordingly,  in  the  terrible 
events  of  the  latter  days,  and  in  the 
final  judgment  itself,  they  are  depicted 
in  the  Book  of  Eevelation  as  bursting 
forth  into  song  and  rejoicing  in  the  God 
of  judgment.  Most  thoroughly  do  they 
identify  their  own  cause  with  God's 
glory,  and  are  constrained  to  rejoice  over 
all  which  promotes  the  exhibition  of  it. 
As  the  judgments  of  God  upon  his  ene- 
mies, as  well  as  his  goodness  toward  his 
people,  are  for  the  manifestation  of  his 
glory,  they  are  moved  thereby  to  adoring 
song.  The  tempest  moves  our  adoration 
of  God  as  well  as  the  calm  ;  the  thunder, 
roaring  among  the  mountains,  as  well  as 
zephyr  breezes  gt^itly  shaking  the  leaves 
of  the  forest ;  the  whirlwind,  with  its 
terror,  as  well  as  the  dew  with  its  re- 
freshing. And  when  we  pass  from  the 
physical  to  the  moral,  it  is  only  our 
present  sympathy  with  sin  which  leads 
us  to  rejoice  more  in  God,  in  those  deal- 
ings which  are  smooth  and  pleasant, 
than  in  those  which  are  crushing  and 
retributive. 

There  is  nothing  which  so  fills  the 
believing  soul  with  adoration  as  the 
cross  of  Christ.  There  do  we  see  the 
flood-gates  of  Divine  wrath  opened  wide, 
that  the  penalty  of  sin  may  be  exhausted 
on   our  Divine  Surety  and  Eedeemer. 


And  because  that  stupendous  interpo- 
sition was  for  the  fullest  display  of  the 
Divine  perfections  and  glory,  we  surround 
that  cross  with  our  praises. 

What  we  now  see,  however,  only  as 
through  a  glass,  darkly,  the  redeemed 
see  clearly  in  the  light  of  immortality  ; 
so  that,  when  those  who  are  at  deadly  war 
with  God  upon  the  earth,  who  have 
spurned  at  offered  mercy,  and  turned  a 
deaf  ear  to  all  the  entreaties  of  redeem- 
ing love,  and  who  would  deny  the  name 
of  God,  and  bid  defiance  to  his  govern- 
ment, are  met  by  the  Lord  of  Hosts  on 
their  own  terms,  and  utterly  discomfited, 
it  cannot  be  wondered  at  that  the  re- 
deemed, who  had  pleaded  for  this  very 
thing  upon  the  earth,  and  waited  for  it 
in  hope  in  heaven,  should  join  their 
heai'ts  and  voices  in  the  praise  of  God. 
There  must  have  been  something  re- 
splendent and  mighty  in  the  angels  who 
fell,  and  were  cast  out  of  heaven ;  but 
yet,  on  the  putting  down  of  this  rebellion 
in  their  ranks,  there  must  have  been  joy 
and  gladness  in  the  breasts  of  those  who 
stood  firm  in  their  allegiance  to  God  and 
holiness.  And  when  the  wicked  are  at 
last  destroyed,  and  consigned  to  their 
own  place,  the  regrets  of  the  redeemed 
at  the  absence  of  some  whom  they  had 
known  upon  the  earth  shall  be  silenced, 
and  more  than  counterbalanced,  in  the 
maintenance  of  God's  throne,  and  the 
uneclipsed  splendour  of  his  glory.  We 
have  our  war-songs,  recording  our  vic- 
tories in  battle,  and  delight  in  singing 
them  ;  and  shall  it  not  be  that  the 
followers  of  the  Lamb  shall  find  delight 
in  singing  those  songs  which  shall  record 
the  Eedeemer's  triumph  over  sin  and 
Satan,  and  all  his  and  our  enemies  1 

Ah  1  the  thought  of  that  day  does 
involve  contingencies  and  consequences 
which  we  cannot  help  now  contemplat- 
ing with  fear  and  trembling.  It  shall 
be  the  celebration  of  the  grandest  victory 
which  perhaps  the  universe  shall  ever 
have  witnessed.  But  on  which  side 
shall  we  individually  stand]  In  every 
Amalekite's  and  enemy's  home  through 
the  Persian  empire  there  Avould  be 
lamentation  and  mourning  during  those 
days  when  the  Jews  were  jubilant ;  and 
whikt  the  redeemed  are  rejoicing  in  thd 


312 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER, 


[CHAP.  IX. 


victory  of  their  Lord,  and  their  own 
triumph  through  faith  in  his  name,  in 
the  ranks  of  the  wicked  and  finally  lost 
there  shall  only  be  weeping  and  wailing, 
remorse  and  despair.  It  is  now  left  for 
us  to  determine  whether  or  no  we  are 
on  the  Lord's  side.  The  opj^ortunity  is 
given  to  us,  and  according  to  the  im- 
provement which  we  make  of  it  shall 
be  our  place  and  portion  on  that  great 
and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord.  To  be 
numbered  among  the  redeemed,  and 
have  a  part  in  the  celebration  of  their 
victory,  should  be  enough  to  fire  our 
ambition,  quicken  our  zeal,  and  call  into 
action  all  our  energies.  Then  shall  that 
day,  with  all  its  terrors  and  partings,  be 
to  us  "  a  day  of  joy  and  gladness,  and  a 
good  day." — McEwen. 

As  the  days  wherein  the  Jews  i^ested 
from  their  enemies^  and  the  month  which 
ivas  turned  unto  them  from  sorrow  to 
joij,  and  from  mourning  into  a  good 
day:  that  they  should  ma'ke  them  days 
of  feasting  and  joy,  and  of  sending  por- 
tions one  to  another,  and  gifts  to  the  poor. 
All  things  work  together  for  good  to 
the  people  of  God,  by  promoting  their 
happiness,  as  well  as  their  holiness. 
Their  toils  sweeten  the  rest  which  suc- 
ceeds them.  The  sleep  of  the  labouring 
man  is  sweet,  although  he  should  sup 
sparingly  before  he  retires  to  rest.  The 
tears  which  the  Christian  must  often 
shed  are  remembered  with  joy,  when 
they  are  wiped  away  by  returning  pros- 
perity, Mordecai  wished  the  Jews  to 
be  ever  mindful  of  their  sorrows,  that 
their  joy  might  be  full. 

The  days  of  Purim  were  intended  to 
be  days  of  feasting  and  gladness.  In 
the  season  of  their  distress  they  would 
scarcely  be  able  to  eat  that  bread  which 
was  necessary  to  the  preservation  of 
their  life  )  when  they  thought  of  their 
deliverance,  and  of  the  mercy  of  God  in 
their  deliverance,  they  would  eat  their 
bread  with  gladness,  and  drink  their 
wine  with  a  merry  heart. 

These  days  were  to  be  "  days  of  send- 
ing portions  one  to  another,"  Their 
common  danger  and  their  common  de- 
liverance would  endear  them  one  to 
another,  and  open  their  hearts  to  mutual 
kindness.     How  much  more  ought  our 


common  salvation  by  Christ  from  our 
general  misery  bind  the  hearts  of  Chris- 
tians to  one  another  !  We  were  all  in- 
volved in  guilt  and  ruin  by  sin,  and  the 
same  sin  was  the  source  of  misery  to  us 
all.  We  are  all  redeemed  by  the  same 
precious  blood  ;  we  are  all  saved  by  the 
same  Almighty  arm.  Let  our  common 
joy  in  Christ's  salvation  overflow  in 
mutual  love.  If  we  are  penetrated  with 
the  love  of  Christ,  will  we  not  love  all 
those  who  are  the  objects  of  the  same 
exceeding  riches  of  grace  1 

"  Sending  of  gifts  to  the  poor,"  was 
to  be  another  of  the  duties  of  this  happy 
day.  There  might  be  many  poor  Jews 
who  were  not  able  to  afford  an  entertain- 
ment for  this  day  of  joy.  But  Mordecai 
would  have  the  poor  rejoice  as  well  as 
the  rich.  Although  we  find  our  circum- 
stances unprosperous,  we  must  not,  on 
that  account,  reckon  that  we  have  no 
right,  or  that  we  are  not  bound,  to  re- 
joice in  public  mercies.  That  the  poor 
may  not  be  tempted  to  repine  when 
others  rejoice,  as  if  they  were  cut  off 
from  the  public  happiness,  we  should 
be  ready  to  communicate  to  them  a 
share  of  our  blessings,  especially  when  our 
hearts  overflow  with  joy  in  God's  good- 
ness to  ourselves.  Why  should  the  rich 
eat  their  morsel  alone,  whilst  others  are 
pining  with  hunger  ?  If  you  desire  the 
continuance  of  your  own  happiness  from 
Divine  mercy,  endeavour  to  diffuse  it 
by  wise  liberality.  Every  expression  of 
Divine  goodness  to  ourselves  is  a  new 
obligation  laid  upon  us  to  do  good,  to 
those  especially  who  have  most  need  of 
our  bounty.  Above  all,  the  redemption 
by  Christ  binds  us  to  be  merciful.* 

And  the  Jews  undertook  to  do  as  they 
had  begun,  and  as  Mordecai  had  written 
unto  them.  They  cheerfully  promised  to 
comply  with  Mordecai's wishes,  both  from 
a  regard  to  his  authority,  and  from  a 
lively  sense  of  the  mercy  bestowed  upon 
them.  It  is  a  happy  thing  when  superiors 
require  nothing  from  their  inferiors  but 
what  themselves  see  to  be  just  and 
reasonable. 

Mordecai's  letters  could  not  but  have 
a  mighty  influence  upon  a  nation  who 
wore  indebted   to  him   for  their  lives, 
♦  2  Cor.  viii  9. 


OHAP.  LX.] 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER. 


313 


He  could  not  be  blamed  for  bringing 
them  into  the  dangers  Avhich  they  had 
escaped,  because  it  was  his  steadfast 
adherence  to  his  duty  which  provoked 
Haman's  wrath.  But  he  deserved  no 
less  praise  than  Estlier  herself  for  their 
preservation.  Gratitude  will  induce  us 
to  do  many  things  for  those  who  have 
been  the  instruments  of  preserving  our 
lives.  What  shall  we  render  to  the 
Author  of  our  lives,  and  to  him  who 
hath  redeemed  our  lives  from  destruc- 
tion 1 

Because  Haman^  the  son  of  Hamme- 
dafha,  the  A  gag  He,  the  eneiny  of  all  the 
Jews,  had  devised  against  the  Jews  to 
destroy  them,  and  had  cast  Pur,  that  is, 
the  lot,  to  consume  them,  and  to  destroy 
them.  The  remembrance  of  Haman's  fear- 
ful plot  against  all  the  Jews  powerfully 
instigated  them  to  observe  those  days  of 
joy  that  were  appointed  by  Mordecai. 
When  they  considered  how  formidable 
the  enemy  was,  and  how  bent  upon  their 
destruction,  they  could  not  think  of 
their  deliverance  without  surprise,  and 
joy,  and  thankfulness. 

It  would  be  useful  to  us  for  increasing 
our  joy  in  the  Lord,  to  think  upon  those 
enemies  of  the  Church  that  have  often 
brought  her  into  extreme  dangers,  that 
we  may  see  the  glory  of  that  grace  and 
power  to  which  she  is  indebted  for 
existence.  If  we  think  upon  the  Pha- 
raohs, the  Hamans,  the  Sennacheribs, 
the  Antiochuses,  the  Diocletians,  the 
beast  with  seven  heads  and  ten  horns, 
that  have  opened  their  mouths  like 
dragons  to  swallow  up  the  people  of 
God,  will  we  not  see  good  reason  still  to 
sing  that  song  of  ancient  times  ]  "  Many 
a  time  have  they  afiiicted  me  from  my 
youth,  may  Israel  now  say  ;  many  a 
time  have  they  afflicted  me  from  my 
youth,  yet  they  have  not  prevailed 
against  me." 

Haman  was  the  cause  of  much  terror 
to  the  Jews,  but  this  terror  ended  in 
triumphs  and  joyful  feasts.  Unhappy 
are  the  enemies  of  the  people  of  God. 
They  labour  for  the  profit  of  those  whom 
they  hate.  Amongst  those  things  that 
are  made  subservient  to  the  advantage 
of  the  people  of  God,  are  to  be  ranked 
aU  the  devices  of  their  most  malicious 


enemies,  Satan  himself,  their  greatest 
enemy,  not  excepted.  Sennacherib  was 
a  tremendous  enemy  of  Judah,  and 
struck  terror  into  the  minds  of  the  most 
valiant  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem. 
But  what  was  the  event  of  his  formid- 
able invasion  1  Disgrace  and  ruin  to 
himself,  gladness  and  joyful  feasts  to 
the  Jews  ;  as  Isaiah  foretold,  when  he 
was  marching  along  in  all  the  pride  of 
his  heart  at  the  head  of  his  innumerable 
army,  collected  from  his  extended  do- 
minions :  "  They  had  a  song,  as  in  the 
night,  when  an  holy  assembly  is  kept ; 
and  gladness  of  heart,  as  when  one 
goeth  with  a  pipe  to  come  into  the 
mountain  of  the  Lord,  to  the  mighty 
One  of  Israel." 

But  when  Esther  came  before  the 
king,  he  commanded  by  letters  that  his 
wicked  device,  which  he  devised  against 
the  Jews,  should  return  npon  his  own 
head,  and  that  he  and  his  sons  should 
be  hanged  on  the  gallows.  In  Mordecai 's 
letters  he  puts  the  Jews  in  mind, 
not  only  of  Haman's  plot  against 
them,  but  of  the  means  also  by 
which  it  was  disconcerted.  Let  us 
observe  and  call  to  mind  the  proce- 
dure of  the  providence  of  God  in  the 
works  which  he  accomplishes  for  his 
Church,  or  for  ourselves  in  particular. 
Every  step  of  his  going  of  majesty 
deserves  to  be  remarked  and  admired. 
They  are  all  beautified  with  wisdom  and 
grace. 

Who  could  have  expected  that  Esther, 
whom  the  king  had  not  desired  to  see  for 
thirty  days,  should  obtain  such  favour  in 
his  eyes  as  to  turn  his  wrath  against  his 
favourite  Haman,  whose  face  he  saw 
every  day  with  smiles'}  Yet,  when 
Esther  came  before  the  king,  the  mis- 
chief of  Haman  was  turned  upon  him- 
self, and  he  and  his  sons  were  hanged 
on  the  gallows.  Let  us  do  our  duty, 
and  leave  the  consequence  to  God. 
Without  the  protection  of  his  providence 
Esther  might  have  fallen  under  the 
sentence  of  that  cruel  law,  which  made 
the  king  inaccessible  to  his  subjects. 
But  her  life  was  preserved  by  that  God 
to  whom  she  had  poured  out  her  soul  in 
fasting.  She  did  great  things  and  pre- 
vailed ;  and  her  name  shall  live  to  the 


314 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


[CSAP.  IX. 


latest  posterity  in  the  records  of  those 
heroes  and  heroines  who  '*  wrought 
righteousness,  escaped  the  edge  of  the 
sword,  out  of  weakness  were  made 
strong,  and  turned  to  flight  the  armies 
of  the  aliens." 

"  Wherever  this  gospel  is  preached," 
said  Jesus,  ''  there  shall  also  this  that 
this  woman  (who  poured  precious  oint- 
ment on  his  head)  hath  done  be  told  for 
a  memorial  of  her."  Mordecai  hoped 
that  what  Esther  had  done  would  be 
told  in  every  succeeding  generation,  to 
her  honour,  and  for  the  encouragement 
of  women,  as  well  as  men,  to  do  every 
thing  in  their  power  to  promote  the 
interests  of  the  Church.  Women  are  too 
ready  to  say,  What  can  we  do  to  serve 
the  public  interest]  our  mode  of  life 
confines  us  to  our  own  families.  But 
Esther  is  not  the  only  woman  that  has 
gained  just  praises  by  her  public  spirit. 
Lemuel's  mother  taught  her  son  to  be 
a  blessing  to  his  people,  and  has  left 
lessons  behind  her,  by  which  women,  to 
the  end  of  the  world,  will  be  taught 
to  excel  in  virtue.  To  Priscilla,  as  well 
as  to  Aquila,  all  the  Churches  of  the 
Gentiles  gave  thanks  for  what  she  did 
for  Paul ;  and  many  of  them  had  reason 
to  thank  her  for  what  she  did  to  Apollos 
likewise.     Males  and  females  are  one  in 


Christ  Jesus.  They  are  equally  saved 
by  his  grace  ;  they  are  equally  obliged 
to  promote  his  interests  in  the  exercise 
of  virtue,  and  the  practice  of  duties 
suited  to  their  respective  situations  ;  and 
women,  as  well  as  men,  have  sometimes 
found  singular  opportunities  of  service 
to  their  generation,  which  they  could 
not  safely  neglect  to  improve. 

Wherefore  they  called  these  dmjs 
Purim,  after  the  name  of  Pur.  The 
very  name  of  these  days  afforded  an 
useful  lesson  to  the  people  of  God,  and 
might  have  afforded  an  useful  lesson 
to  their  enemies.  It  appeared  from  the 
event  of  the  lots,  which  gave  name  to 
this  day,  that  although  time  and  chance 
happen  to  all  men,  yet  nothing  is  con- 
tingent to  God.  Chance  is  under  his 
management,  and  those  things  which  to 
us  appear  most  acciJental,  are  managed 
by  his  providence  to  accomplish  his 
designs  of  mercy  to  them  that  love  him, 
and  of  vengeance  to  his  enemies.  Why, 
then,  should  the  friends  of  God  give 
themselves  any  anxious  trouble  about 
the  most  uncertain  events  %  The  whole 
disposal  of  the  lot  is  of  him.  Haman's 
lots  directed  his  measure  to  his  own 
destruction,  and  the  salvation  of  Judah. 
— Lawson, 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.    Verses  29—32. 

Important  Letters. 

This  is  the  day  of  writing  many  letters,  but  it  is  not  the  day  for  writing  those 
elaborate  and  important  letters  which  were  written  in  the  days  of  our  forefathers. 
Those  letters  live  as  masterpieces  of  composition.  It  would  be  difficult  to  collect 
letters  now-a-days  that  would  be  worth  printing.  Here  in  these  verses  we  have 
the  record  of  important  letters  written  by  Esther  the  queen  and  Mordecai 
the  Jew. 

I.  The  importance  of  letters  may  be  measured  by  the  earnestness  of  the 
writers.  Esther  and  Mordecai  wrote  with  all  authority,  or  with  all  strength,  viz. 
of  spirit  and  of  speech,  of  affection  and  expression.  We  have  so  many  letters  to 
write  now  that  we  cannot  put  all  our  strength  into  every  letter ;  but  when  letters 
are  important,  then  we  should  seek  to  put  forth  all  strength.  Earnestness  will  show 
itself  in  writing  as  well  as  in  speaking.  If  we  desire  people  to  read  what  we  have 
written  we  must  write  with  earnestness.  This  will  give  power  to  our  compositions 
and  distinctness  to  our  utterances. 

II.  The  importance  of  letters  may  be  measured  by  the  spiri*:  of  the 
writing.  Esther  and  Mordecai  wrote  with  words  of  peace  and  truth.  Fallow 
peace  with  all  men.     Speak  the  words  of  peace  and  of  truth  in  letters.     Good  may 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOMFLETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER,  31fi 

be  done  by  letter-writing.  Sometimes  we  bave  neitber  power  nor  opportunity  to 
speak  to  a  brotlier  about  his  spiritual  state.  A  letter  afForcfs  a  good  vehicle  for  the 
word  of  waining  and  of  instruction.  A  letter  may  reach  and  bless  him  that  could 
not  be  reached  by  word  of  mouth.  A  letter  written  with  earnestness  and  witb  prayer 
will  often  carry  conviction  to  the  soul.  Mucb  good  has  been  thus  accomplished, 
and  still  is  this  method  of  usefulness  available.  Words  of  peace  and  truth.  Let 
such  be  the  nature  of  our  communications.  Sincere  utterances,  truthful  words. 
Our  age  wants  such  words.  In  this  gabbling  age  words  are  too  cheap.  We  ought 
to  be  as  careful  not  to  circulate  false  words  as  we  are  not  to  circulate  bad  coin. 
When  will  the  great  im[)ortance  of  words  be  rightly  understood  and  estimated  1 

III.  The  importance  of  letters  may  be  measured  by  the  subject-matter 
of  the  communication.  These  letters  of  Esther  and  of  Mordecai  confirmed  the 
days  and  the  matters  of  Purim.  They  were  on  subjects  of  highest  importance  to 
the  Jewish  nation.  They  decreed  for  their  souls  and  for  their  seed  the  matters  of 
the  fastings  and  their  cry.  The  conflicts  of  the  soul  are  subjects  of  the  highest 
importance ;  but  they  are  too  often  overlooked.  In  all  ages  materialism  gains  too 
much  the  ascendancy.  Soul  concerns  are  put  in  the  background ;  the  matters  of 
the  fastings  and  their  cry  are  not  deemed  matters  worthy  of  supreme  attention. 
Still  those  letters  that  touch  the  essence  of  things  are  the  most  influential.  The 
letters  of  the  apostles  hold  a  sui)reme  position  on  this  very  account.  Their  subject- 
matter  testifies  to  their  divinity.  They  thus  commend  themselves  as  inspired  to 
the  unprejudiced  mind.'  Let  us  read  these  New  Testament  epistles,  for  they  are 
the  most  important  of  all  letters. 

IV.  The  essence  of  important  letters  will  not  be  lost.  These  letters  sent 
unto  all  the  Jews,  to  the  hundred  twenty  and  seven  provinces  of  the  kingdom 
of  Ahasuerus,  have  not  been  handed  down,  but  we  may  be  assured  that  all  which 
is  essential  in  those  letters  is  preserved.  The  decree  of  Esther  confirmed  these 
matters  of  Purim ;  and  it  was  written  in  the  book.  What  book  it  is  impossible 
to  say.  Certainly  it  does  not  seem  satisfactory  to  declare  in  the  Book  of  Esther, 
as  forming  part  of  the  canonical  books.  If  this  be  so,  then  this  thirty-second  verse 
and  the  tenth  chapter  do  not  properly  belong  to  the  inspired  books.  The  verses 
are  then  a  mere  postscript,  written  by  what  hand  and  with  what  authority  we 
cannot  determine.  To  make  the  expression,  *'it  was  written  in  the  book,"  an 
argument  for  the  canonicity  of  Esther,  is  far-fetched.  We  may  concur  with  Keil 
when  he  says,  "  The  book  in  which  this  decree  was  written  cannot  mean  the 
writing  of  Esther,  mentioned  in  verse  29,  but  some  written  document  concerning 
Purim  which  has  not  come  down  to  us,  though  used  as  an  authority  by  the 
author  of  the  present  book ; "  or  we  may  refer  it  to  the  book  of  the  Chronicles 
of  Media  and  Persia,  since  it  is  mentioned  in  other  passages.  Though  the  written 
document  is  lost,  yet  the  essence  of  the  document  remains.  We  may  then  believe 
that  all  which  is  worth  preserving  will  be  preserved  and  handed  down  from 
generation  to  generation.  Let  us  not  weep  over  burnt  libraries  and  destroyed 
manuscripts.  God  watches  over  the  truth.  His  Word  cannot  be  destroyed.  If  all 
that  had  been  destroyed  could  be  gathered  up  again,  if  there  could  be  a  resurrection 
of  dead  books,  and  diligent  inquiry  made,  we  are  persuaded  that  there  would  be 
no  substantial  addition  to  the  treasury  of  the  truth.  The  fire  burns,  but  the  gold 
and  the  silver  of  everlasting  truth  must  outlast  every  conflagration. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  29—32. 

And  the  decree  of  Esther  confirmed^  scribed.     The  like  may  be  here  said  of 

&c.     Dux   fcemina  facti.      Money  was  Queen  Esther ;  yea,  we  may  add  that  in 

coined  in  the  year  1588  in  honour  of  the  Gospel,  spoken  concerning  another : 

Queen   Elizabeth,    with   that   posy   in-  Whenevei;  this  history  should  be  read  in 


316 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    ESTHER, 


[oh  A  p.  IX. 


all  the  world,  this  that  she  hath  done 
should  be  spoken  to  her  eternal  com- 
mendation. 

And  it  was  written  in  the  hook. 
Tremellius  rendereth  it  thus  :  "  When, 
therefore,  the  edict  of  Esther  had  con- 
firmed these  things,  it  was  written  in 
this  book."  Lyra  and  others  thus  :  '*  She 
reijuested  the  wise  men  of  that  age,  that 
they  would  reckon  this  history  for  Holy 
Writ."  If  it  be  meant  of  any  other 
public  record  which  the  Jews  then  had, 
it  is  lost,  as  are  likewise  some  other 
pieces  which  never  were  any  part  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures ;  for  God,  by  his  provi- 
dence, ever  took  care  and  course  that  no 
one  hair  of  the  sacred  head  should  fall 
to  tlie  ground.  The  unsound  conceit  of 
Pelican  here  is  ])y  no  means  to  be  ad- 
mitted, viz.  tliat  this  latter  part  of  the 
chapter,  from  verse  25  to  the  end,  came 
from  the  pen  of  some  other  man,  not 
guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  that 
because  here  is  no  mention  made  of 
praising  God  at  this  feast,  or  stirring  up 
one  another  to  trust  in  him.  For  we 
know  that  all  Scripture  is  of  Divine 
inspiration,  and  it  is  to  be  presumed  that 
those  things  were  done  at  such  solemni- 
ties, though  it  be  not  recorded  in  each 
particular. — Trapp. 

And  he  sent  the  letters  unto  all  the 
Jews,  to  the  hundred  twenty  and  seven 
provinces  of  the  kingdom  of  Ahasiierus, 
'with  words  of  peace  and  truth.  When 
we  are  exalted  above  our  brethren,  we 
are  too  ready  to  forget  them  and  our- 
selves, as  if  the  change  of  our  condi- 
tion had  raised  us  to  a  higher  rank  of 
creatures.  Mordecai  and  his  adoptive 
daughter  were  not  negligent  in  the  exer- 
cise of  their  authority  for  purposes  that 
appeared  to  them  good  and  salutary  to 
the  nation  ;  but  they  still  retained  their 
humbleness  of  mind,  and  their  kind 
affections  to  their  kindred.  They  sent 
these  letters  to  all  the  hundred  and 
twenty-seven  provinces  "  with  words  of 
truth  and  peace ;  "  with  expressions  of 
the  warmest  benevolence.  Nor  were 
these  expressions,  like  many  of  our 
mutual  compliments,  merely  dictated  by 
a  politeness  which  too  often  conceals  a 
perfect  indifference  to  our  neighbour's 
welfare    under  good    words    and    fair 


speeches.  Their  words  were  words  of 
truth  as  well  as  of  peace,  when  they  ex- 
pressed their  desires  and  prayers,  that 
the  Lord  might  bless  his  people  with 
peace. 

Let  men  maintain  that  authority 
which  God  hath  given  them,  that  they 
may  attain  the  ends  for  which  it  is  given 
them,  but  let  it  be  always  tempered 
with  charity  and  gentleness.  Paul,  in 
his  epistles,  asserts  his  authority  as  an 
ap  >stle  of  Jesus  Christ;  but  he  writes 
with  words  of  peace  and  truth  when  he 
prays  for  grace  and  peace  to  the  churches 
from  God  the  Father,  and  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

To  confirm  these  days  of  Purlm  in 
their  times  appoiiifed,  according  as  Mor- 
decai the  Jew  and  Esther  the  queen  had 
enjoined  them,  and  as  they  had  decreed 
for  themselves  and  for  their  seed,  the 
matters  of  the  fastings  and  their  cry. 
At  the  motion  of  Mordecai,  the  Jews 
were  unanimously  determined  to  observe 
the  fe.-tival,  and  to  enjoin  the  observance 
of  it  to  their  posterity.  The  Jews  were 
confirmed  in  their  resolution  by  the 
second  letter  of  Mordecai,  in  conjunction 
with  Esther.  And  one  consideration 
which  would  dispose  them  to  observe 
the  commemoration  of  this  deliverance 
with  joy  and  exultation,  was,  that  they 
had  fasted  and  cried  for  it  under  the 
pressure  of  the  danger.  They  could  not 
eat  their  ordinary  food.  They  cried  out 
with  exceeding  loud  and  bitter  cries. 
They  fasted  and  cried  unto  the  Lord, 
and  he  heard  the  voice  of  their  suppli- 
cations. 

Spring  is  the  pleasantest  season  of  the 
year,  because  it  follows  the  dreary  deso- 
lations and  the  piercing  cold  of  winter. 
These  days  of  health  are  especially  de- 
lightful which  follow  days  of  extreme 
sickness,  when  we  had  the  sentence  of 
death  in  ourselves.  Remember  the 
dismal  thoughts  that  engrossed  your 
minds,  the  terrifying  apprehensions  that 
embittered  your  troubles,  and  the  exqui- 
site felicity  which  you  promised  to  your- 
selves, if  it  should  please  God,  beyond 
your  expectations,  to  send  you  relief. 
Thus  will  the  troubles  you  have  endured 
spread  happiness  in  the  retrospect,  over 
the  remaining  part  of  your  life.     You 


OHAP.  IX.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


317 


still  must  meet  with  trials  ;  but  you  will 
be  thankful  that  they  are  so  light  and 
easy  to  be  borne,  when  they  are  com- 
pared with  those  which  you  have  formerly 
endured. 

Have  you  fasted,  and  cried  unto  the 
Lord,  and  has  he  graciously  inclined  his 
ear  to  your  complaints  '?  With  what 
joy  and  peace  ought  you  to  recollect  the 
mercy  which  has  preserved  you  from 
going  down  to  the  chambers  of  the  grave, 
perhaps  to  the  regions  of  destruction  I 
David  will  teach  you  what  improvement 
to  make  of  your  fasting  and  cries,  when 
the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  grant  you 
the  deliverance  which  you  supplicated. 
*'  I  love  the  Lord,  because  he  heard  my 
voice  and  supplications.  Because  he 
hath  inclined  his  ear  unto  me,  therefore 
will  I  call  upon  him  so  long  as  I  live. 
The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and 
the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me  ;  I 
found  trouble  and  sorrow.  Then  called 
I  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  :  0  Lord, 
I  beseech  thee,  deliver  my  soul.  Gracious 
is  the  Lord,  and  righteous ;  yea,  our 
God  is  merciful.  The  Lord  preserveth 
the  simple :  I  was  brought  low,  and  he 
helped  me  :  I  will  walk  before  the  Lord 
in  the  land  of  the  living." 

And  the  decree  of  Esther  confirmed 
these  matters  of  Purim ;  and  it  was 
ivritten  in  the  hook.  The  high  and 
beloved  name  of  Esther  was  sufficient  to 
establish  the  decree  of  Purim.  She 
had  been  the  saviour  of  the  Jews.  At 
the  risk  of  her  life  she  had  preserved 
theirs.  What  do  we  not  owe  to  him  who, 
not  only  by  endangering  his  life,  but  by 
giving  up  himself  to  an  accursed  death, 
hath  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to  cornel 


"  And  it  was  written  in  the  book  "  of 
the  Jewish  institutions,  or  in  the  register 
of  their  transactions.  Books  are  neces- 
sary for  recording  those  things  that  are 
intended  for  the  use  of  posterity.  Were 
it  not  for  books  we  would  all  be  children 
in  understanding.  Let  us  carefully  im- 
prove those  things  that  were  written 
aforetimes  for  our  learning,  especially 
those  things  which  Divine  wisdom  hath 
directed  the  holy  men  of  God  to  record 
for  our  benefit. 

The  feast  of  Purim  is  still  observed, 
though  not  in  a  manner  agreeable  to 
Esther's  intention.  The  observance  of 
this  and  other  festivals  of  the  Jews, 
from  the  most  ancient  times,  is  attended 
with  this  great  advantage,  that  it  affords 
a  convincing  argument  of  the  truth  of 
those  facts  which  they  were  designed  to 
commemorate,  when  we  take  this  into 
the  account,  that  these  fasts  were  re- 
corded in  books  at  the  time  when  they 
were  instituted,  which  are  still  extant. 
The  observance  of  the  ancient  Jewish 
feasts  is  a  public  declaration  of  their 
firm  belief  of  the  Old  Testament  Scrip- 
tures. This  is  one  of  the  most  power- 
fully rational  arguments  of  the  truth  of 
our  holy  religion.  If  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  are  true,  the  Messiah  expected 
by  the  Jews  is  come  long  ago  into  the 
world  ;  and  none  but  Jesus  of  iN'azareth 
can  be  that  Messiah.  Thus  the  most 
determined  enemies  of  Jesus  give  a  de- 
cided, though  indirect,  testimony  that 
he  is  the  Son  of  God,  by  attesting  the 
truth  and  Divine  authority  of  those 
ancient  Scriptures  that  testify  of  him. 
— Lawson, 


CHAPTER  X, 


Critical  Notes  ]  And  the  king  Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  upon  the  land,  and  npon  the  isles 

of  the  sea]  Tribute — a  levy,  tribute-service — means  a  tax  levied,  and  for  tliis  reason  that  tribute- 
service  belonged  to  products  or  moneys  which  were  rendered  to  the  king.  Keil  thinks  the  author 
wished  briefly  to  indicate  at  the  close  whence  Ahasucrns  derived  the  means  to  support  such  magni- 
ficent state  as  was  described  at  the  beginning  of  our  book.  iJut  the  only  safe  answer  is  given  us 
by  the  manner  in  which  the  author,  in  ver.  2,  connects  the  power  of  Ahasuerus  with  the  greatoew 


318  BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER.  [ohap.  x 


of  Mordecai:  the  greater  the  power  of  Ahasuerus,  the  more  powerful  the  dignity  of  Mordecai. 
The  land  and  the  isles  of  the  sea  shows  the  extent  of  the  monarch's  sway.  2.]  The  author  does  not 
designate  either  the  wealth  or  the  power  of  Ahasuerus  or  of  Mordecai  more  minutely,  but  rather 
refers  for  particulars  on  both  to  the  archives  of  the  empire  of  the  Medes  and  Persians.  It  is  enouo-h 
for  him  to  be  able  to  refer  to  these,  and  it  is  especially  honourable  for  Mordecai's  cause,  that  even 
the  archives  of  heathen  kings  must  remember  him.  3.]  Here  the  author  must  once  more  give  pro- 
minence to  the  fact  that  Mordecai,  the  Jew,  who  for  him  stands  as  the  representative  of  Judaism, 
stood  next  to  King  Ahasuerus,  since  therefrom  it  follows  that  the  greatness  of  the  one  was  also  that 
of  the  other.  *'  The  second'*  here  means  the  first  minister,  and  hence  indicates  that  Mordecai  was 
great  among  the  Jews,  and  favoured  among  the  multitude  of  his  brethren,  i.  e.  that  he  really  occu- 
pied a  representative  position  among  them.  The  additional  sentence  also,  seeking  the  wealth  of 
his  people,  and  speaking  peace  to  all  his  seed,  is  quite  in  place  here,  in  so  far  as  it  indicates 
that  what  came  to  Mordecai  also  redounded  to  the  good  of  his  entire  people. —i«w^(9. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.     Verses  1,  3. 

A  Good  Government. 

Happy  the  people  that  live  under  the  government  of  Queen  Victoria,  for  it  is, 
upon  the  whole,  the  best  government  that  the  world  has  ever  seen.  There  is  the 
due  balance  of  powers.  There  may  be  evils,  but  there  are  fewer  evils  than  can  be 
found  in  any  other  government,  past  or  present.  It  is  not  contended  that  it  is 
perfect,  for  perfection  is  not  to  be  expected  in  this  sinful,  selfish,  and  imperfect 
world.  How  good  our  government  is  may  be  seen  by  instituting  a  contrast  betweeu 
it  and  some  ancient  forms.  The  Persian  government  was  far  from  perfect.  No 
one  would  desire  to  see  it  repeated.  It  is  not  here  to  be  placed  before  u§  as  ji 
model.  But  it  is  possible  for  these  verses  to  gather  together  some  of  the  character- 
istics of  a  good  government.  Let  each  subject  strive  to  mend  himself,  and  seek 
the  wealth  of  his  people,  and  thus  he  will  subserve  the  best  interests  of  the  state 
at  large. 

I.  A  good  government  has  a  wise  system  of  taxation.  This  is  needful  for 
the  purposes  of  government.  Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  upon  the  land,  and  upon 
the  isles  of  the  sea.  He  could  not  have  managed  without  such  a  tribute.  It  may 
have  been  oppressive.  A  larger  tribute  may  have  been  exacted  than  was  actually 
needful,  for  he  was  luxurious,  and  had  to  support  many  retainers.  A  certain  out- 
ward state  seems  essential  to  royalty  in  order  to  maintain  a  proper  position.  The 
incidence  of  taxation  should  fall  equally  and  justly  upon  all  classes,  and  upon  all 
parts  of  the  empire.  The  rich  can  bear  a  proportionately  larger  tax  than  the  poor. 
The  absolute  necessaries  of  life  should  be  free  from  taxation,  as  they  are  in  Great 
Britain.  Taxes  ought  to  be  freely  paid,  for  this  is  the  command  of  the  New 
Testament.  "  Render  therefore  unto  Csesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's,"  &c. 
"  Render  therefore  to  all  their  dues  :  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  due ;  custom 
to  whom  custom  ;  fear  to  whom  fear ;  honour  to  whom  honour." 

II.  A  good  government  makes  its  power  felt.  Weak  and  changeable  as  was 
Ahasuerus,  still  it  is  found  that  he  was  capable  of  acts  of  power  and  of  might. 
Every  good  government  is  powerful,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  It  must  be,  and 
will  be,  a  terror  to  evil-doers  ;  for  to  this  end  are  all  governments  instituted.  We 
can  easily  conceive  that  governments  would  not  be  required  if  there  were  no  evil- 
doers. How  wonderful  it  is  that  this  small  island  should  be  so  powerful  amongst 
the  nations  of  the  earth.  It  may  be  taken  as  a  sign  of  God's  favour  to  our  nation. 
It  becomes  us  to  appreciate  our  blessings,  and  be  careful  not  to  abuse  our  privi- 
lef^es.  We  must  endeavour  to  use  our  power  for  the  glory  of  God  and  for  the  high- 
est welfare  of  the  nations  of  the  earth.  May  God  in  his  mercy  still  preserve  our 
nation,  and  forgive  our  national  wrong-doings,  and  make  it  a  still  greater  power  for 

good. 

III.  A  good  government  places  good  men  in  office.  At  last  Ahasuerus  has 
a  good  man  for  prime  minister.     Ahasuerus  advanced  Mordecai  to  greatness.   This 


CHAP.  X.J  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  ESTHER.  31» 


Jew  became  next  unto  the  king.  Mordecai  was  not  a  good  man  without  capacity ; 
his  piety  was  not  a  cloak  for  imbecility.  A  mere  outward  profession  of  goodness 
ought  not  to  be  the  passport  to  high  })laces,  either  in  Church  or  in  State.  A  pious 
fool  may  be  as  injurious  to  the  state  as  a  wicked  philosopher.  A  man,  in  order  to 
be  prime  minister,  ought  to  be  both  intellectually  and  morally  stron^.  From  all 
that  we  read  in  this  record,  Mordecai  appears  to  be  the  right  man  in  the  ricrht 
place  when  he  was  placed  next  unto  King  Ahasuerus.  Oh  for  tridy  good  and 
great  men  sitting  at  the  helm  of  affairs,  both  civil  and  ecclesias'ical  !  Men  of 
commanding  intellects,  of  noble  hearts  and  true ;  men  that  dare  to  be  and  to  do 
the  right ;  men  that  shrink  with  abhorrence  from  all  meanness  and  wrono--(l()iiicy, 

IV.  A  good  government  promotes  the  welfare  of  the  people.  Mordecai^  as 
prime  minister,  sought  and  promoted  the  wealth  or  the  welfare  of  his  people  and 
through  them  the  welfare  of  the  people  at  large.  This  word  "wealth  "  indicates 
a  degenerating  tendency.  A  man  is  now  wealthy  who  possesses  houses,  lands,  and 
money.  Certainly  outward  prosperity  will  be  the  outcome  of  a  good  goverumeut. 
A  country  morally  degenerate  will  not  long  remain  prosperous.  When  vice  increases 
then  the  country  declines;  so  that  a  government  must  seek  the  suppression  of 
vice  and  the  development  of  virtue  if  it  is  successfully  to  promote  the  wealrJi  of 
the  people.  Godliness  is  after  all  great  gain,  both  to  the  individual  and  to  the  com- 
munity. A  good  government  cannot  be  atheistic.  Infidel  rulers  cannot  increase 
the  wealth  of  the  people  in  any  respect.  National  safety  must  consist  in  national 
acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  supremacy.     Fear  God;  honour  the  kino-. 

y.  A  good  government  strives  to  preserve  peace.  Mordecai,  °the  prime 
minister,  spoke  peace  to  all  his  seed.  We  may  be  assured  that  the  stern,  repressive 
measures  related  in  this  narrative  were  intended  for  the  promotion  of  peace  and  of 
the  greater  interests  of  the  whole  nation ;  for  Mordecai  was  not  the  man  to  speak 
peace  while  war  was  in  his  heart.  It  may  be  sometimes  necessary  while  speaking 
peace  to  carry  out  those  measures  that  appear  contrary  to  pacific  professions. 
"  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers."  *'  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,  live 
peaceably  with  all  men."  There  are  then  limitations  ;  there  are  impossible  men. 
Still,  better  to  suffer  a  little  than  to  destroy  peace.  But  never  let  a  so-called  love 
of  peace  induce  to  the  sacrifice  of  principle.  The  apostles  were  lovers  of  peace,  but 
they  produced  hatred  and  commotion.  The  gospel  is  a  pacificator,  and  yet  it'  is  a 
great  divider. 

VI.  A  good  government  is  acceptable  to  a  virtuous  and  enlightened  people. 
Mordecai,  the  chief  power  in  this  Persian  kingdom,  was  great  among  the  Jews,  and 
accepted  of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren.  A  government  is  firm  as  it  is  founded 
upon  the  respect  and  affection  of  the  well-conducted  portion  of  the  subjects.  We 
say  well-conducted,  for  licentiousness  spurns  all  government.  Wickedness  desires 
lawlessness  ;  rebellion  is  for  the  most  part  wickedness.  Blessed  is  the  fact  that  our 
throne  is  buttressed  by  so  many  faithful  and  attached  subjects.  God's  government 
rightly  understood,  will  be  acceptable  to  all  people.  It  is  a  righteous  government! 
In  serving  God  we  serve  the  best  and  most  glorious  King.  Christ  Jesus  our  Kin»*r 
is  wise,  judicious,  and  loving.  Happy  are  those  who  serve  him  on  earth,  and  who 
shall  be  called  to  serve  him  when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  opposing'  forces,  and 
shall  sway  the  glorious  and  beneficent  sceptre  of  universal  empire. 

Suggestive  Comments  on  Verses  1,  2. 

Mordecai  was  good,  very  good,  for  he  people,  the  Jews,  nor  was  he  ashamed 

did   good.      This   goodness   made   him  of   his  relation   to  them,   though   they 

truly  great,  and  then  his  greatness  gave  were  strangers   and  captives,  (Sspersed 

him  an  opportunity  of  doing  so  much  and  despised.     Still   he  wrote  himself 

the   more  good.     When   the   king  ad-  Mordecai    the   Jew,    and    therefore    no 

vanced  him— 1.  He  did  not  disown  hia  doubt  adhered  to  the  Jew's  religion,  bv 


320 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   ESTHER, 


[CUAP.  X. 


the  observances  of  which  he  distinguished 
himself,  and  yet  it  was  no  hindrance  to 
his  preferment,  nor  looked  upon  as  a 
blemish  to  him.  2.  He  did  not  seek 
his  own  wealth,  or  the  raising  of  an 
estate  for  himself  and  his  family,  which 
is  the  chief  most  aim  at  when  they  get 
into  great  places  at  court ;  but  he  con- 
sulted the  welfare  of  his  people,  and 
made  it  his  business  to  advance  that. 
His  power,  his  wealth,  and  all  his 
interests  in  the  king  and  queen  he 
improved  for  the  public  good.  3.  He 
not  only  did  good,  but  he  did  it  in  a 
humble,  condescending  way ;  was  so  easy 
of  access,  courteous  and  affable  in  his 
behaviour,  and  spoke  peace  to  all  that 
made  their  apjlication  to  him.  Doing 
good  works  is  the  best  and  chief  thing 
expected  from  those  who  have  wealth 
and  power;  but  giving  good  words  is 
also  commendable,  and  makes  the  good 
deed  more  acceptable.  4.  He  did  not 
side  with  any  one  party  of  his  people 
against  another,  nor  make  some  his 
favourites,  while  the  rest  were  neg- 
lected and  crushed  ;  but,  whatever  differ- 
ences there  were  among  them,  he  was  a 
common  father  to  them  all,  recommended 
himself  to  the  multitude  of  his  brethj'on, 
not  despising  the  crowd,  and  spoke  peace 
to  all  their  seed,  without  distinction. 
Thus  making  himself  acceptable  by 
humility  and  beneficence,  he  was  uni- 
versally accepted,  and  gained  the  good 
word  of  all  his  brethren.  Thanks  be  to 
God,  such  a  government  as  this  we  are 
blessed  with,  which  seeks  the  welfare  of 
our  people,  speaking  peace  to  all  their 
seed.  God  continue  it  long,  very  long, 
and  grant  us,  under  the  happy  protection 
and  influence  of  it,  to  live  quiet  and 
peaceable  lives,  in  godliness,  honesty, 
and  charity  ! — Matthew  Henry. 

Whereunto  the  king  advanced  him. 
Whereunto  the  king  greatened  him ; 
wherein  he  showed  himself  a  wise  and 
politic  prince  ;  as  did  likewise  Pharaoh 
in  advancing  Joseph  ;  Darius,  Daniel ; 
Constantius  Chlorus,  Christian  officers ; 
our  Henry  VIII. ,  the  Lord  Cromwell, 
whom  he  made  his  vicar-general.  Jovi- 
anus,  the  emperor,  was  wont  to  wish 
that  he  might  govern  wise  men,  and 
that    wise    men    might    govern     him. 


Justin  Martyr  praiseth  this  sentence  of 
divine  Plato :  Commonwealths  will  then 
be  happy  when  either  philosophers  reign 
or  kings  study  philosophy.  Jethro's 
justiciary  must  be  a  wise  man,  fearing 
God,  &c.  And  that  famous  maxim  of 
Constantius  Chlorus,  recorded  by  Euse- 
bius,  is  very  memorable :  He  cannot 
be  faithful  that  is  unfaithful  to  God, 
religion  being  the  foundation  of  all  true 
fidelity  and  loyalty  to  king  and  country. 
— Trapp. 

"  Mordecai,  in  order  to  vindicate  the 
glory  of  God  and  his  countrymen  from 
the  Hamanites,  endured  the  hatred  of 
many.  He  afflicted  himself  with  fast- 
ings, prayers,  sackcloth,  crjings,  and 
lamentations ;  he  constantly  spurned 
that  impious  man ;  and  was  at  last 
adjudged  to  suffer  on  the  ignominious 
cross,  i^ow,  however,  by  the  singular 
favour  of  God,  he  is  crowned  beyond  all 
men  (Ahasuerus  alone  excepted)  with 
glory  and  honour  even  in  this  world." — - 
Feuardent. 

The  concluding  chapter  of  the  Book 
of  Esther  refers  to  the  greatness  of 
Ahasuerus  a!id  his  prime  minister 
Mordecai.  The  king  laid  a  tax  upon 
every  part  of  his  dominions  over  which 
his  power  extended,  both  on  the  conti- 
nent and  on  the  islands  under  his 
dominion,  which  were  all  in  the  ^gean 
Sea.  He  did  great  things ;  but  as  it 
was  not  the  design  of  the  author  of  this 
history  to  record  "  the  acts  of  his  power 
and  of  his  might,"  reference  is  made 
by  him  to  "  the  book  of  the  chronicles 
of  the  kings  of  Media  and  Per^-ia." 
Where  is  this  written  record  nowl  It 
has  long  since  perished  from  the  earth. 
Vast  as  was  the  empire  of  Persia  itself, 
and  apparently  invincible,  it  fell,  in 
fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Daniel, 
before  the  power  of  Greece.  Is  it  not 
strange  that  these  chronicles  should  have 
perished,  and  that  this  mighty  empire 
should  have  been  overthrown,  and  yet 
that  the  records  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
among  men  should  have  been  preserved  ; 
and  that  kingdom  itself  should  not  only 
have  stood  amidst  the  revolutions  of 
empires,  but  should  now  be  spreading 
over  the  whole  earth  %  Have  we  not 
another  proof  in  this  that  God  specially 


CHAP.  X.] 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  ESTHEM. 


321 


guarded    his    own    word   from    passing 
away  from  tlie  earth  1     How  otherwise 
should   the  Book  of  Esther   not    have 
shared    the    fate    of    the    chronicles    of 
Media  and  Persia?     Have  Ave  not  evi- 
dence   also    that    his    kingdom    is    an 
everlasting   kingdom 'J     How   otherwise 
should  it  have  withstood  the  assaults  of 
its  enemies,  and  not  have  suffered  the 
fate    of    other    empires?       Books    have 
perished    by   hun<lreds    and  thousands, 
but   the  oldest   book  is  indestructible. 
The  Babylonian,  Persian,  Grecian,  and 
Roman  empires  have  all  had  their  day, 
and  then  been  broken  to  pieces,  but  the 


most  ancient  kingdom  of  God  among 
men  is  mightier  than  ever.  As  over 
that  book  we  can  read  the  words  of  its 
Divine  Author,  written,  as  though  clasp- 
ing it  all,  *'  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away,  but  my  Word  shall  not  pass 
away  ; "  so,  in  the  contemplation  of  his 
Church,  we  can  sing  in  the  language  of 
an  old  prediction — 

"  Its  walls,  defended  by  his  grace, 
No  power  shall  e'er  o'erthrow; 
Salvation  is  its  bulwark  sure 
Against  th'  assalHng  foe." 

There  is  next  a  high  eulogy  passed 
upon  Mordecai  the  Jew,  especially   in 
relation  to  his  own  kindred  and  people. 
He  was   "great   amongst    them."     Not 
the  greatness    merely   of  rank,  station, 
and   wealth,  but   highly  esteemed  also 
for  those  elements  of  character  which 
constitute  true  nobility.     He  was  "ac- 
cepted of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren." 
He  did  not  despise  them.     He  did  not 
disown  his  own  relationship  to   them. 
He  set  them  an  excellent  example  of 
integrity  and  virtue.     And  because  of 
his  goodness  and  humility,  as  well  as 
his  greatness  and  power,  they  honoured 
and  loved  him.     He  sought  "  the  wealth 
of  his  people;"  did  not,  like  his  prede- 
cessor in  ofhce,  enrich  himself  at  the 
public  expense,  but  in  all  his  acts  con- 
sulted their  welfare.     He  did  not  look 
upon  his  own  things  only,  but  also  on 
•■he   things    of    others.       He   identified 
himself  and  his  own  interests  with  them 
and  theirs,  and   generously  helped  for- 
ward, and  rejoiced  in,  their  prosperity 
and  happiness.     He  "  spake  peace  to  all 
*iis  seed."     He  was   accessible  to   all ; 


kind  and  courteous ;  not  favouring  one 
party  above  another,  but  endeavouring 
to  unite  all  parties  in  the  bonds  of  a 
common  faith  and  hope  ;  regarding  with 
equal   solicitude   and    concern  the  lich 
and  the  poor,  and  extending  his  sym[)a- 
thies  to  all  sections  of  the  community. 
We  have  surveyed  him  in  different  situa- 
tions and  circumstances — seated  at  the 
king's  gate,  and  conscientiously  resisting 
the  king's  commandment  to  pay  religious 
homage  to  a  man ;  rushing  through  the 
streets  of  Shushan  with  sackcloth  and 
ashes,  as  though  half  frantic  with  vexa- 
tion and  fear,  after  Haman's  iniquitous, 
decree    had    been   published  ;    bravely 
counselling  his  cousin,  and  at  her  request 
spending    three    days    in    fasting    and 
prayer ;  conducted  through  Shushan  on 
the  king's  horse,  led   by  his  enemy,  ar- 
rayed in  the  king's  robe,  and  having  tlie 
crown-royal  ui)on  his  head;   and  after- 
wards formally  installed  in  the  office  of 
Haman,    and    possessed    of    the   king's 
signet-ring;    but    throughout   all   these 
changes  in  his  outward  circumstances  he 
seems    to    have   maintained   the   same 
character.     It  was  not  so  much  to  find 
him  humble,  kind,  and  dutiful,  when  his 
position   was    less    honourable  and    his 
life  imperilled.     The  danger  lay  in  his 
exaltation.     There  are    not  many   who 
could  preserve  themselves  from  becoming 
vain,  worldly,   and  inflated,  when  sud- 
denly  elevated   from    a    comparatively 
humble  position,  to  a  place  in  a  great 
empire,  next  to  the  king  himself.     But 
in  his  elevation  those  admirable  qualities, 
which  had  formerly  had  but  a  limited 
sphere  for  their  exercise,  were  made  to 
shine    forth    conspicuously.     JiTot    only 
were   they  matured    and  strengthened, 
but  took  in  the  wide  range  of  all  his 
people,  making  him  honoured  and  loved 
whilst  he  lived,  for  his  humility,  good- 
ness, fear   of  God,  and    wise    counsel; 
and,  through  Divine  grace,  fashioning 
for  himself  a  name  worthy  of  veneration 
by  all  subsequent  generations.     "  Mark 
the  perfect  man,  and  behold  the  upright : 
for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace." — 
McEwen. 

Sir  John  Malcolm  tells  us  that  the 
sepulchre  of  Esther  and  Mordecai  stands 
near  the  centre  of  the  city  of  Hamadan, 


322 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER, 


[CHAP.    X. 


It  is  a  square  building,  terminated  by  a 
dome,  with  an  inscription  in  Hebrew 
upon  it,  translated  and  sent  to  him  by- 
Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  late  ambassador  to 
the  court  of  Persia.  It  is  as  follows  : — 
Thursday,  fifteenth  of  the  month  Adar, 
in  the  year  4474  from  the  crention  of 
the  world,  was  finished  the  building  of 
this  temple  over  the  graves  of  Esther 
and  Mordecai,  by  the  hands  of  the 
good-hearted  brothers  Eleas  and  Samuel, 
the  sons  of  the  deceased  Ishraael  of 
Kashon.     The  key  of  the  tomb  is  always 


in  the  possession  of  the  head  of  the 
Jews  resident  at  Hamadan,  and,  doubt- 
less, has  been  so  preserved  from  the 
interment  of  the  holy  pair,  when  the 
grateful  sons  of  the  captivity,  whose 
Uves  they  had  rescued  from  a  univei'sal 
massacre,  first  erected  a  monument  over 
the  remains  of  their  benefactors,  and 
obeyed  the  ordinance  of  gratitude,  in 
making  the  anniversary  of  their  preserv- 
ation a  lasting  memorial  of  Heaven's 
meicy,  and  the  just  faith  of  Esther  and 
Mordecai. — Bible  Cyclopcedia. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO   CHAPTERS   IX.,  X. 


The  Alpine  Travellers.  Three  tourists  were 
ftscending  the  Alps.  After  they  had  gone  a  con- 
Bidcrahle  distance,  and  were  getting  nearer  to  the 
eternal  snows,  and  thns  the  danger  increased,  it 
was  considered  necessary  to  attach  the  company 
by  ropes  to  one  another  and  to  the  guides.  But 
one  of  the  tourists,  an  old  traveller,  was  self- 
confident  and  self-reliant.  He  carried  the  doc- 
trine of  self-help  too  far,  and  refused  to  help 
his  neighhours.  He  fell  down  the  precipice  and 
lost  his  life.  We  often  best  help  ourselves  by 
helping  others. 

Mutual  help,  need  of.  As  an  apple  in  the 
hand  of  a  child  makes  "other  children  run  after 
and  consort  with  him  and  share  his  sports,  so 
does  he  convert  affliction,  and  the  need  we  have 
of  each  other's  aid,  into  a  girdle  of  love,  with 
which  to  bind  us  all  together;  just  as  no  one 
country  produces  all  commodities,  in  order  that 
the  different  nations,  by  mutual  traffic  and  com- 
merce, may  cultivate  concord  and  friendship. 
How  foolish  they  are  who  imagine  that  all  the 
world  stands  in  need  of  them,  but  they  of  nobody ; 
that  they  know  and  understand  all  thijigs,  but 
others  nothing ;  and  that  the  wit  of  all  man- 
kind should  be  apprenticed  to  their  wisdom.— 
Gotthold. 

WhUJield.  An  old  woman  relates,  that  when 
she  was  a  little  girl  Whitfield  stayed  at  her 
father's  house.  He  was  too  much  absorbed  in 
his  work  to  take  much  notice  of,  and  pay  much 
attention  to,  the  httle  girl.  She  did  not  remem- 
ber any  of  his  eloquent  utterances.  She  was, 
however,  observant,  and  noticed  the  great 
preacher  when  he  did  not  think  that  any  one 
was  observing  his  conduct.  And  the  impression 
made  upon  her  mind  by  his  holy  and  cheerful 
demeanour,  by  his  patience  under  trials  and 
difficulties,  and  his  evident  consecration  to  his 
work,  was  of  a  most  lasting  and  salutary  charac- 
ter. 'Well  were  it  if  all  great  preachers  would 
preach  at  home  !  We  must  be  great  in  the 
palace  of  home,  and  then  let  our  influence  work 


outwards  in  all  directions.      Home  religion  is 

powerful. 

The  young  Switzer.  There  was  a  young  man 
among  the  Switzers  that  went  about  to  usurp 
the  government  and  alter  their  free  state.  Him 
they  condemned  to  death,  and  appointed  hi? 
father  for  executioner,  as  the  cause  of  his  evil 
education.  But  because  Haman  was  hanged 
before,  his  sons  (though  dead)  should  now  hang 
with  him.  If  all  fathers  who  had  given  an  evil 
education  to  their  sons  were  punished  there 
would  be  a  large  increase  of  the  criminal  classes. 
At  the  present  time  the  State  is  doing  much  in 
the  way  of  educating;  but  the  State  cannot  do 
that  which  is  the  proper  duty  of  the  parent.  By 
precept,  and  even  by  the  fear  of  penalty,  should 
we  enforce  upon  parents  the  duty  of  seeing  faith- 
fully to  the  true  up-biinging  of  their  children. 

Faith  of  parents.  An  aged  minister  of  Christ 
had  several  sons,  all  of  whom  became  preachers 
of  the  Gospel  but  one.  This  one  lived  a  life 
of  dissipation  for  many  years.  But  the  good 
father's  faith  failed  not.  He  trusted  God  that 
his  wicked  son,  trained  up  in  the  way  he 
sliould  go,  in  old  age  should  not  dej)art  from  it. 
In  this  sublime  faith  the  aged  father  passed 
away.  Five  years  after,  this  son  of  many  prayers 
sat  at  the  feet  of  Jesus. 

Influence  of  parents.  The  last  thing  forgotten 
in  all  the  recklessness  of  dissolute  profligacy  is 
the  prayer  or  hymn  taught  by  a  mother's  lips, 
or  uttered  at  a  father's  knee ;  and  where  there 
seems  to  have  been  any  pains  bestowed,  even  by 
one  parent,  to  train  up  a  child  aright,  there  is 
in  general  more  than  ordinary  ground  for  hope. 
— The  experience  of  a  Prison  Chaplain. 

Says  the  venerable  Dr  Spring  :  "  The  first 
afflicting  thought  to  me  on  the  death  of  my 
parents  was,  that  I  had  lost  their  prayers." 

Great  men  Just  as  the  traveller  whom  we 
see  on  yonder  mountain  height  began  his  ascent 
from  the  plain,  so  the  greatest  man  of  whom  the 
world  can  boast  is  but  one  of  ourselves  standing 


CHAP.  X.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ESTHER. 


323 


on  higher  ground,  and  in  virtue  of  his  wider 
intelh'gence,  his  nobler  thoughts,  his  loftier 
character,  his  purer  inspiration,  or  his  more 
manly  daring,  claiming  the  empire  as  his  right. 
— Hare. 

True  greatness.  The  truly  great  consider, 
first,  how  they  may  gain  the  approbation  of  God; 
and,  secondly,  that  of  their  own  consciences. 
Having  done  this  they  would  willingly  conciliate 
the  good  opinion  of  their  fellow- men. — Cotton. 

The  greatest  man  is  he  wiio  chooses  the  right 
with  invincible  resolution ;  who  resists  the  sorest 
temptations  from  within  and  without ;  who  bears 
the  heaviest  burdens  cheerfully ;  who  is  the 
calmest  in  storms,  and  whose  reliance  on  truth, 
on  virtue,  on  God,  is  the  most  unfaltering. — 
Br.  Chening. 

Distinguishing  great  men.  I  think  it  is 
Warburton  who  draws  a  very  just  distinction 
between  a  man  of  true  greatness  and  a  medio- 
crist.  *'  If,"  says  he,  "  you  want  to  recommend 
yourself  to  the  former,  take  care  that  he  quits 
your  society  with  a  good  opinion  of  you ;  if  your 
object  is  to  please  the  latter,  take  care  that  he 
leaves  you  with  a  good  opinion  of  himself." — 
Cotton. 

Thus  Mordecai  was  truly  great,  considering, 
first,  how  to  gain  the  approbation  of  God  ;  and, 
secondly,  that  of  his  own  conscience.  He  rises 
above  others  by  virtue  of  his  wider  intelligence, 
his  nobler  thoughts,  his  loftier  character,  and 
his  more  manly  daring. 

A  good  name.  A  name  truly  good  is  the 
aroma  from  character.  It  is  a  reputation  of 
whatsoever  things  are  honest,  and  lovely,  and  of 
good  report.  It  is  such  a  name  as  is  not  only 
remembered  on  earth,  but  written  in  heaven. 
Just  as  a  box  of  spikenard  is  not  only  valuable 
to  its  possessor,  but  pre-eminently  precious  in  its 
diflfusion  ;  so,  when  a  name  is  really  good,  it  is 
of  unspeakable  service  to  all  who  are  capable  of 
feeling  its  aspiration.  Mordecai's  fame  went  out 
throughout  all  the  provinces. — Dr.  J.  Hamilton. 

Eastern  hospitality.  Nehemiah  charges  the 
people  thus ;  "  Go  your  way,  eat  the  fat,  and 
drink  the  sweet,  and  send  portions  unto  them 
for  whom  nothing  is  prepared."  Also  in  Esther; 
"Therefore  the  Jews  made  the  fourteenth  day  of 
the  month  Adar  a  day  of  gladness  and  feasting, 
and  a  good  day,  and  of  sending  portions  one  to 
another."  An  Oriental  prince  sometimes  honours 
a  friend  or  a  favourite  servant,  who  cannot  con- 
veniently attend  at  his  table,  by  sending  a  mess 
to  his  own  home.  When  the  Grand  Emir  found 
that  it  incommoded  D'Arvieux  to  eat  with  him, 
he  politely  desired  him  to  take  his  own  time  for 
eating,  and  sent  him  what  he  liked  from  his 
kitchen  at  the  time  he  chose.  So  that  the  above 
statements  must  not  be  restricted  to  the  poor. — 
Paxton's  *  Illustrations.' 

The  heaviest  taxes,  '*Th6  taxes  are  indeed 
beary/'  laid  Dr.  Frantdin  on  one  occasion,  and 


if  those  laid  on  by  the  Government  were  the 
only  ones  we  had  to  pay,  we  might  more  easily 
discharge  them  ;  but  we  have  many  others,  and 
much  more  grievous  to  some  of  us.  "We  are 
taxed  twice  as  much  by  our  idleness,  three  times 
as  much  by  our  pride,  and  four  times  as  much 
by  our  folly  ;  and  from  these  taxes  the  commis- 
sioners cannot  ease  or  deliver  us  by  allowing 
any  abatement. 

Safeguard  of  nations.  France  tried  to  go  on 
without  a  God  in  the  time  of  her  first  revolution; 
but  Napoleon,  for  reasons  of  State,  restored  the 
Catholic  religion.  M.  Thiers  gives  this  singular 
passage  in  his  history:  "Napoleon  said,  *  For  my 
part,  I  never  hear  the  sound  of  the  church  bell 
m  the  neighbouring  village  without  emotion.'  " 
He  knew  that  the  hearts  of  the  people  were  stirred 
by  the  same  deep  yearnings  after  God  which  filled 
his  own,  and  so  he  proposed  to  restore  the  wor- 
ship of  God  to  infidel  France.  Later,  and  with 
deeper  meaning,  Perrier,  successor  to  Lafayette 
as  prime  minister  to  Louis  Philippe,  said  on  his 
death-bed,  "France  must  have  religion"  (C. 
D.  Fors).  So  we  may  say,  the  nations,  if  they 
are  to  live,  must  have  religion. 

Punishment  of  nations.  It  was  a  sound 
reply  of  an  English  captain  at  the  loss  of  Calais, 
when  a  proud  Frenchman  scornfully  demanded, 
"When  will  you  fetch  Calais  again } "  •'  When 
your  sins  shall  weigh  down  ours." — Brooks. 

Nations.  In  one  sense  the  providence  of  God 
is  shown  more  clearly  in  nations  than  in  individ- 
uals. Retribution  can  follow  individuals  into 
another  state,  but  not  so  wi«th  nations ;  they 
have  all  their  rewards  and  punishments  in  time. 
— D.  Custine. 

England's  privileges. — It's  the  observation  of 
a  great  politician,  that  England  is  a  great  animal 
which  can  never  die  unless  it  kill  itself;  answer- 
able whereunto  was  the  speech  of  Lord  Rich,  to 
the  justices  in  the  reign  of  king  Edward  VI. : 
"Never  foreign  power,"  said  he,  "could  yet 
hurt,  or  in  any  part  prevail,  in  this  realm 
but  by  disobedience  and  disorder  among  our- 
selves ;  that  is  the  way  wherewith  the  Lord 
will  plague  us  if  he  mind  to  punish  us."  Polydor 
Virgil  calls  Regnum  Anglise,  Regnum  Dei,  tlie 
kingdom  of  England,  the  kingdom  of  God,  be- 
cause God  seems  to  take  special  care  of  it,  as 
having  walled  it  about  with  the  ocean,  and 
watered  it  with  the  upper  and  nether  springs, 
like  that  land  which  Caleb  gave  his  daughter. 
Hence  it  was  called  Albion,  quasi  Olbion,  the 
happy  country ;  "  whose  valleys,"  saith  Speed, 
"  are  like  Eden,  whose  hills  are  as  Lebanon, 
whose  springs  are  as  Pisgah,  whose  rivers  are  as 
Jordan,  whose  wall  is  the  ocean,  and  whose 
defence  is  the  Lord  Jehovah."  Foreign  writers 
have  termed  our  country  the  Granary  of  the 
Western  World,  the  Fortunate  Island,  the  Para- 
dise of  Pleasure,  and  Garden  of  God. — Clarke's 
*  Example^,' 


TBB  WKDm 


INDEX 


TO  THE  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


•  •• 

•  •• 

•  •• 

•  •• 


Abuse  of  wealth        ... 

Access  to  God 
A  feast  and  a  good  day 
Alexander  and  the  Cynic 
Alexander  the  Great 
Alpine  travellers 

Anger 

Anger,  control  of 

Anger  subdued 

Ask  and  receive        ...        • 

Bird-catcher,  apologue  of  a 
Bountiful  king  ...         • 

Brotherton,  Joseph  ...        • 
Bunyan's  wife  ...         • 

Buonaparte's  activity 
Byron's  lameness      ...        • 


Cardinal  Wolsey        

Caterpillar,  the 

Change,  advantage  of 

Cheerful  and  beautiful  for  Christ  . 

Christopher  Columbus 

Church- door  religion 

Circumstances 

Clay  made  fragrant  by  roses 

Clive  and  his  moderation     ... 

Come,  a  song-bird 

Conscience  guilty      

Conscience  wakeful 

Counsel,  wicked        

Count  Zinzendorf      

Danger        ^ 

Danger  of  discontent 
Danger  of  prosperity 
Dead  swine  good 
Deliverance,  Hubert  de  Burgo 
Devotion  of  Arminius 
Different  disposal  of  blessings 

Dignity     

Diogenes,  what  he  can  do  without 
x^ress  ...    ...    ...    ^^,    « 

Drinking  dangeioiu 


FAOS 

43 

209 

284 

212 

208 

322 

45 

64 

45 

283 

212 
44 
213 
163 
163 
213 

162 

212 

282 

284 

207 

162 

242 

78 

106 

241 

46 

46 

46 

241 

43 
210 

43 
162 
106 
164 
107 

43 
213 

77 

44 


Dr.  Livingstone's  tonic       207 

Duty,  its  own  reward          78 

Earth's  heroes  unknown      78 

Eastern  hospitality 323 

Envy 46 

Eudocia  and  Chrysostom     162 

Everything  to  die  for           164 

Excuses          46 

Executioners 106 

Faith,  the  soul's  venture     208 

Eaith  of  parents        322 

Favour  of  God           43 

Feast,  how  to  make  a          43 

Findern  flower          164 

Flattery           46 

Forgiveness 46 

Fortitude  of  Bechuanas       242 

French  king 256 

Friendship      46 

Full  chest  hidden      256 

Fulness  of  Christ      44 

Gipsy  horse-stealer 256 

God,  access  to            209 

God,  ingratitude  to 208 

God's  kindness           77 

God's  promises  conditional 208 

Good  name,  a            323 

Good  principles         104 

Gossner           209 

Grace  Darling  of  Berstead 165 

Great  men       322 

Great  men,  descendants  of 347 

Great  men,  distinguishing 32 

Greatness,  true          323 

Hardening  effects  of  sensibility      ...  161 

Hero,  true      164 

Hero,  young  Illinois             166 

Honesty  in  little  things       283 

Honour  from  man 212 

House  of  joy 284 


INDEX  TO  THE  JLLU8TItATI0N8. 


Hymn,  consecration ... 
Hypocrisy      

Idols    ...        ...        *•• 

Ingratitude^  ,,, 
Innocence  vindicated 
Intrepid  judge 


Judge  Jeffreys 


•*•        ••• 


Latimer  and  Bonner 
Laws  of  the  Jews 

Leech  and  surgeon 

Literary  Jeremiads  ... 
Look  to  the  end 
Lot  casting     ... 

Lot,  deciding  by        

Love  of  books,  and  want 
Loyalty,  disinterested 

Man  who  killed  his  neighbours 
Martyr's  heroism 

Mother's  glory  

Mutual  help,  need  of 

Nations 

Nations,  punishment  of       ... 

Nations,  safeguard  of 

Negro  and  his  enepay 

Not  necessary  to  live 

Not  sick  when  duty  calls    ... 

Parable  of  hog  and  horse    ... 
Parents,  faith  of 
Parents,  influence  of 
Passions,  discipline  of 

Patriotic  Greek  

Patriotism 

Patriotism,  Spartan 

Patriot's  duty  ...     ^    ... 

Patton,  the  late  Dr.  William 
Persian  king  and  snow 

Petitioner,  a  bold      

Philippa,  Queen        

Philosopher  and  enraged  emperor 

Pleasures        

Power 

Prayer,  answer  to     

Prayer,  constant  in  ... 

Prayer  effective 

Prayer,  protection  through 

Prayers,  Christ  presenting  our 

Prayers,  family 

Presents,  royal,  to  an  official 

Price  of  pleasures     

Pride  of  wealth         

Privileges,  England's 


... 
... 
••• 


vAoa 

164 

45 

45 

46 

257 

45 

256 

78 
105 
105 
211 
104 
104 
104 
107 
283 

105 

208 

77 

322 

323 
323 
323 
105 
164 
163 

107 
322 
322 
64 
161 
283 
283 
283 
209 
285 
208 
163 
256 
45 
43 
209 
209 
209 
209 
242 
210 
242 
45 
43 
323 


»A.aa 

Prosperity  not  suitable  for  every  man  282 

Prosperity  of  the  wicked     107 

Eadical  reform          64 

Page 105 

Eepentance  before  pardon 64 

Eepentance,  counterfeit       64 

Kesponsibility,  individual 64 

Eetribution,  case  of 256 

Eevenge          105 

Saladin,  the  death  of           212 

Satan,  a  hard  task-master 242 

Saxon  serfs     ...         ...         ...         ...  162 

Sealing  letters           284 

Selfishness      210 

Sermon  to  one  hearer           162 

Shepherd  crushed  by  the  rock        ...  163 

Sidney  Smith 163 

Sigismund  and  Theodosius 208 

Signet  rings    ...         ...         ...         ...  283 

Silence  a  virtue         ...         ...         ...  78 

Silken  gaiments  fresh          77 

Sin        46 

Sin,  impressions  of   ...         ...         ...  64 

Singing  in  prison       ^       ...  208 

Sleep,  Providence  in  withholding  ...  241 

Sleeping  safe 241 

Sleepless  night           241 

Soldiers,  not  butchers           106 

Sour  milk  and  black  bread 161 

Spider's  web 207 

Surgical  operation     ...         ...         ...  107 

Sympathetic  traveller           1 04 

Switzer,  the  young 322 

Taxes,  the  heaviest 323 

Teaching  of  children             163 

Things  temporal        ...         ...         ...  211 

Time,  loss  of 45 

Trouble  in  every  house        105 

True  greatness           ...         ...         ...  78 

True  hero        ,  164 

Tunnel,  workmen  in  the      207 

Ulysses  and  the  Syrens        107 

Ungodly  pope,  the 210 

Unskilful  persons  in  a  boat             ...  161 

Virtues,  the  true  adorning 77 

Whitfield        322 

Wife     45 

Woman,  degradation  of       ...         ...  64 

Worldly  dignity  renounced 211 

Wrath  cured •        106 


HOMILETICAL 


COMMEISTTAEY 


ON 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


n 


THOMAS    ROBINSON,    D.D., 

Author  qf  "  Suggestive  and  Homiletic  Qommeniary  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans** 
•  "  The  Evangelists  and  the  Mishna,"  ^e. 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 
London  and  Toronto 


TO  THE 

MINISTERS    OF    EVERY    DENOMINATION 

WHO   PEEACH 

JESUS  CHRIST  AND  HIM  CRUCIFIED  i 

AND  TO 
HIS  TRIED   AND  FAITHFUL  FOLLOWERS   OP  EVERY  NAMK; 

THIS   VOLUME 

IS   RESPECTFULLY   AND   AFFECTION  *TBLI 

INSC&IBSD. 


PREFACE. 


■•♦^ 


npHE  following  work  was  originally  intended  to  form  part  of  Dr.  Van 
Doren's  '' Suggestive  and  Homiletic  Commentary  on  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments;*'  and  consequently  to  be  accompanied  with  critical  notes 
similar  to  those  in  the  Author's  Commentary  on  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans,  already  published  in  connection  with  that  series.  That  under- 
taking, however,  having  been  given  up  by  Dr.  Van  Doren,  it  was 
proposed  to  the  writer  bj  the  Editors  of  the  '^  Homiletical  Commentary 
on  the  Books  of  the  Old  Testament''  to  reconstruct  aud  adapt 
his  work,  so  that  it  might  be  admitted  as  part  of  their  series.  The 
object  of  the  Editors  of  the  '^  Homiletical  Commentary,'^  however,  was 
rather  to  aid  in  the  use  of  existing  commentaries  than  to  produce  a  new 
one,  intending  their  series  to  contain  as  little  as  possible  of  what  might 
be  found  in  other  expositions.  The  writer  is  deeply  conscious  of  the 
many  imperfections  adhering  to  his  work;  he  has,  however,  made  it  his 
endeavour,  as  far  as  he  was  able,  to  carry  out  the  object  ot  the  Editors; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  prepare  an  expository  and  homiletical  work  on 
what  is  acknowledged  to  be  one  of  the  most  difficult  books  of  the  Bible, 
which  may,  by  the  Divine  blessing,  be  useful  both  to  ordinary  readers  of 
the  Word  and  to  those  who  have  to  minister  to  others. 

In  the  preparation  of  his  work  the  Author  has  availed  himself  of  all 
the  critical  and  practical  aids  within  his  reach,  in  order  that  it  might 
exhibit  the  results  of  the  studies  of  the  roost  eminent  Biblical  scholars 
and  expositors  of  the  Word  up  to  the  prestnt  timt.     Ho  is  sorry  that, 


IT. 


owing  to  the  change  of  plan,  he  is  not  able  to  present  to  the  student 
the  views  and  opinions  of  others  on  the  various  loci  difficilei  of  the  book, 
as  he  had  done  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Bomans.  If  he  has  thus 
appeared  in  any  place  to  adopt  sentiments  which  have  been  expressed  by 
living  writers  before  him,  without  mentioning  their  names,  he  takes  this 
opportunity  of  expressing  his  obligations  and  of  soliciting  their  kindly 
condonance.  In  connection  with  the  first  two  chapters,  he  was  especially 
pleased  with  remarks  found  in  some  papers  of  the  "Homilist**  on  the  Book 
of  Job,  probably  from  the  pen  of  the  accomplished  editor,  Dr.  Thomas. 

Those  who  are  best  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  Book  of  Job, 
as  one  of  the  most  ancient  books  in  the  world,  if  not  itself  the  most 
ancient,  and  with  the  difficulties  connected  with  the  original  language  of 
the  composition,  will  be  most  disposed  to  make  allowance  for  the  imper- 
fections discoverable  in  the  present  work.  If  he  shall  have  succeeded  in 
any  degree  in  aiding  the  readers  of  the  Word  in  the  spiritual  understanding 
of  this  frequently  obscure,  but  most  precious,  portion  of  it,  or  in  assisting 
any  in  expounding  it  to  others,  the  writer  will  have  had  his  desire  accom- 
plished, and  will  ascribe  all  the  praise  to  Him  "of  whom^  and  through 
whom,  and  to  whom  are  all  things:  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and 
ever.     Amen/' 


MOMILETIO    OOMMENTABT 


OV 


JOB. 


I.  The  Oeneral  Character  of  the  Book.  One  of  the  grandest  portions  of 
inspired  Scripture.  A  heaven-replenished  storehouse  of  comfort  and  instruction.  The 
Patriarchal  Bible,  and  a  precious  monument  of  primitive  theology.  Is  to  the  Old  Testament 
what  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  to  the  New.  Job's  history  well  known  to  early  Christians 
as  an  example  of  patience  (Jam.  v.  11).  Understood  by  them  typically  and  allegorically  of 
Christ.  From  the  second  century  the  book  read  in  the  churches  in  Passion  Week.  Stands 
unique  and  independent  among  the  books  of  the  Bible.  In  its  prose  parts  s©  simple  and 
easy  that  a  child  may  understand  it ;  in  its  poetic  portion,  the  deepest  and  obscurest  book 
in  the  Old  Testament.  Contains  milk  for  babes  and  strong  meat  for  those  of  full  age. 
Studded  with  passages  of  grandeur  and  beauty,  tenderness  and  pathos,  sublimity  and  terror. 
Acknowledged  to  surpass  in  sublimity  and  majesty  every  other  book  in  the  world.  In 
recent  times  studied  as  a  master-piece  of  poetry.  A  fountain  from  which  some  of  the 
greatest  poets  have  drawn  their  mspirations.  To  suflFering  believers  the  sound  of  Faithful's 
voice  to  Christian  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death. 

II.  Anthorship.  Uncertain.  Long  believed  by  most  to  be  Moses.  Moses  well  acquainted 
with  Egypt;  "learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,  and  mighty  in  words  and 
]jeeds  "  (Acts  vii.  22) ;  capable  of  writing  sublime  poetry  (as  Ex.  xv. ;  l)eut.  xxxii.  and 
ixxiii.) ;  himself  trained  in  the  school  of  affliction  (Heb.  xi.  25) ;  had  opportunities  in 
Midian  for  obtaining  the  knowledge  of  the  history  and  composing  the  poem.  Parts  of 
the  book  probably  in  previous  existence  as  traditional  poetry,  maxims,  or  sayings  of  earlier 
Bages  (tf.^.)  xii.  13 — 25  ;  xv.  20—35).  The  human  anthorship  uncertain, — no  doubt  about 
the  Divine.  The  author  of  the  greatest  and  sublimest  poem  in  the  world  unknown. — 
Little  matter  that  our  names  are  forgotten,  if  our  works  live, 

III,  Period  of  Composition.  Opinions  divided.  Two  periods  principally  assigned. 
1.  That  of  Moses  (see  above) ;  2.  That  of  David  and  Solomon.  Views  of  scholars  and 
critics  now  more  generally  in  favour  of  the  latter ;  (1)  From  the  style  and  character  of 
the  composition;  (2)  The  advanced  state  of  art  and  civilization  indicated;  (3)  The 
occurrence  of  certain  expressions ;  (4)  The  prevalence  of  the  idea  of  "  Wisdom ; " 
(5)  The  similarity  of  sentiment  and  language  to  those  in  Psalms  and  Proverbs,  particularly 
as  regards  the  state  of  the  dead  j  e.g,  in  Psahn  Ixxxviii.  and  Ixxxix.  (the  works  of  Hem  an 
and  Ethan  (1  Kings  iv.  31). 

IT.  Character  of  the  Book.  A  true  history  poetically  treated.  Proofs ;  (1)  Job 
mentioned  as  a  historical  person  with  Noah  and  Daniel  (Ezek.  xiv.  14 1  James  v.  11 ;) — 
(2)  The  localities  real,  and  names  of  persons  not  significant,  except  that  of  Job  himself  j 
—  (3)  Extended  fiction  not  according  to  the  spirit  of  high  antiquity,  and  especially  to  that 
of  the  Bible.  Probably  the  facts  given  substantially,  though  not  exactly,  as  tliey  occurred. 
The  speeches  not  necessarily  given  verbatim. 


INT&ODUCTICir. 


V.  Species  of  Composition.  A  drama,  bnt  only  in  a  loose  sense.  A  didactic 
narrative,  for  tlie  most  part  in  a  poetic  and  dramatic  form.  The  discussion  of  a  grave  and 
solemn  question  the  body  of  the  book.  The  controversy  carried  on  in  poetry,  the  introduction 
and  conclusion  in  prose.  Poetry  the  earliest  form  of  composition,  as  best  retained  in  memory. 
Sentiments  and  maxims  preserved  in  the  East  in  a  terse,  proverbial,  and  poetic  form.  The 
book  exhibits  the  chief  characteristic  of  Hebrew  poetry,  viz.  parallelism,  or  the  slightly 
varied  repetition  of  the  same  sentiment  in  parallel  clauses.  Earliest  examples  of  it  in 
Gen.  iv.  23  j  Jude  14.  Parallelism  a  key  to  the  interpretation.  The  poetry  of  Job  also 
strophaicy — arranged,  though  irregularly,  in  strophes  or  stanzas,  each  containing  more  or  less 
verses  or  connected  parallel  clauses. 

TI.  Gennineness  and  Integrity  of  tlie  Book.  The  whole  now  generally 
admitted  to  be  from  one  and  the  same  author.  The  three  parts, — introduction,  controversy, 
and  conclusion — intimately  connected  with  and  necessary  to  each  other.  The  speeches  of 
Elihu  necessary  as  a  complement  to  the  others,  and  as  preparatory  to  the  address  of 
Jehovah.  Possibly,  as  in  some  other  books  of  Scripture,  a  second  inspired  hand  may  have 
completed  the  book  as  we  now  have  it.  A  dislocation  of  some  passages  also  possible;  the 
instances  noted  in  the  commentary. 

Til.  Canonicity  and  Inspiration.  Universally  admitted.  Its  inspiration  not 
prejudiced  by  our  ignorance  of  the  human  author.  The  book  apparently  known  by  Ezekiel 
six  hundred  years  before  Christ  (Ezek.  xiv.  14).  Translated  into  Greek,  as  part  of  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures,  two  hundred  and  seventy  years  before  Christ.  Included  in  the  Scrip- 
tures used  and  referred  to  by  Jesus  and  the  apostles  as  the  inspired  word  of  God. 
Quoted  twice  by  the  apostle  (Heb.  xii.  5  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  19)  ;  in  the  latter  case  with  the  usual 
form  of  Scripture  quotation,  **  It  is  written.**  Its  morality  and  theology  in  harmony  with 
the  other  books  of  Scripture.  Completes  the  canon  by  presenting  a  view  of  the  Patriarchal 
Dispensation.  In  the  development  of  the  history  of  E^demption,  stands  midway  between 
the  Fall  and  the  Crucifixion. 

Till.  Subject  of  the  Book.  The  trial  of  Job ;  its  occasion,  nature,  endurance, 
and  issue.  The  trial  of  man  as  recovered  by  Divine  grace  from  Adam's  fall.  Proof  given 
against  Satan  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  disinterested  piety  in  the  world.  To  afford  this 
proof,  Job  visited  with  varied,  intense,  and  accumulated  suffering.  Keen  discussion 
arising  out  of  this  between  Job  and  his  three  friends,  as  to  why  he  is  thus  treated. 
The  cause,  according  to  the  friends,  some  secret  sins  on  the  part  of  Job ;  according 
to  Job  himself,  God's  mere  arbitrary  will.  Another  reason  hinted  at  by  one  of  the 
three  and  maintained  by  a  fifth  speaker, — the  benevolent  design  of  suffering  though 
induced  by  sin  (ch.  v.  17  $  xxxiii.  19 — 30).  The  book,  the  story  of  an  elect  one  in 
early  patriarchal  days,  taught  by  suffering  to  learn  practically  the  life  of  faith.  The 
nest  in  which  he  thought  to  die,  rifled  of  everything.  Job  righteous,  but  not  yet  prepared 
for  such  a  change.  To  be  made,  by  trial,  a  member  of  the  pilgrim  family.  Job,  like 
Abraham,  to  be  one  of  God's  strangers  in  the  world  (Heb.  xi.  ]  3).  Chastened  to  be  made  a 
partaker  of  God's  holiness  (Heb.  xii.  10).  Made  to  have  resurrection  in  his  experience 
as  well  as  in  his  creed. 

IX.  Design  of  the  Book.  Probably  manifold.  (1)  To  show  the  reality  of 
true  religion,  the  nature  and  the  power  of  faith.  (2)  To  exhibit  the  blessedness  of  the 
godly  however  assailed  by  auction.  (3)  To  show  that  true  piety  is  wisdom,  the  only 
way  to  man's  real  and  highest  welfare.  (4)  To  display  the  Providence  of  God  in  its 
inscrutableness,  justice,  and  mercy.  (5)  To  show  that  in  the  case  of  the  righteous, 
•*  behind  a  frowning  Providence  "  God  "  hides  a  smiling  face.*'  (6)  To  exhibit  the 
consistency  between  the  truths  of  Revelation  and  the  dealings  of  Providence.  (7)  To 
afford  an  example  ol  patience  and  trust  in  God  under  sorest  triale.  and  so  to  minister 

2 


INTRODUCTION. 


comfort  and  hope  to  tried  believers.  (8)  To  exhibit  a  child  of  God  set  to  learn  through 
trials  the  power  of  his  heavenly  calling.  (9)  To  illustrate  the  fact  of  human  depravity  even 
in  the  best.  (10)  To  teach  the  final  conquest  over  Satan  and  the  triumphs  of  righteousness 
and  peace  in  the  earth.  (11)  To  exhibit  a  picture  of  man's  fall  and  his  redemption  through 
faith  in  the  Redeemer.  (12)  To  present  in  Job  a  type  of  Christ,  the  righteous  sufferer  for  man's 
sake.  The  same  type  exhibited  in  many  of  the  Psalms,  as  the  twenty-second  and  sixty-ninth. 
The  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  should  follow,  tlie  central  truth  of  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  (1,  Pet.  i.  11).  The  testimony  of  Jesus  the  spirit  of  prophesy  (Rev.  xix.  10 ; 
Luke  xxiv.  27).  This  book,  like  the  rest  of  the  Old  Testament,  written  that  through 
patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  we  might  have  hope  (Rom.  xv.  4).  Profitable,  like 
all  inspired  Scripture,  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  and  for  instruction  in  righ- 
teousness  (2  Tim.  iii.  1 6). 

X.  Divisions.  Three  general  divisions  with  many  subordinate  ones ;  viz.,  the  intro- 
duction or  prologue  (ch.  i.  ii.) ;  the  controversy ,  including  Job's  lamentation  as  the  occasion 
of  it  (iii-xlii.,  6)  ;  the  conclusion  or  epilogue  (xlii.  7,  &c.).  Two  parts  in  the  controversy : — 
the  Controversy  proper  between  Job  and  his  three  friends ;  and  the  Solution  of  it,  in  the 
speeches  of  Elihu  and  the  address  of  Jehovah. 

XI.  Analysis  of  Contents. — I.  First  Division:  historical  introduction  (in  prose) 
(ch.  i.  ii.)  (1)  Job's  character,  prosperity,  and  walk  (i.  1—5).  (2)  Jehovah's  purpose  to 
prove  Job  by  suffering  (i.)  through  loss  of  property  (i.  16 — 17 ;  (ii.)  loss  of  cliildren  (18, 
19);  (iii.)  loss  of  health  (ii.  1 — 8).  (3)  Job's  perseverance  in  his  piety  (i.  20 — 22;  ii.  9, 10.) 
(4)  The  visit  of  his  friends  as  the  preparation  for  the  conflict  (ii.  11 — 13). 

II.  Second  Division  :  The  Controversy  and  its  Solution  (in  poetry).  (1)  Job's  de- 
sponding lament,  the  immediate  occasion  of  the  controversy  (ch.  iii).  (2)  The  controversy 
proper,  in  three  cycles  or  courses  of  dialogues. 

First  Course:  Commencement  of  the  controversy  (iv.—  xiv.). 

First  Dialogue— E[i\)\mz  and  Job  (iv. — vii.).  (1)  Elipha*  accuses  Job  and 
exhorts  him  to  repentance  (iv.,  v).  (2)  Job  justifies  his  lament  and  complains  of 
his  friends  (vi.,  vii). 

Second  Dialogue — Bildad  and  Job  (viii. — ^x.).  (1)  Bildad  reproves  Job  and  reminds  him 
of  the  end  of  wickedness  (viii.).  (2)  Job  maintains  his  innocence  and  complains  of  God's 
mysterious  severity  (ix.,  x.). 

Third  Dialogue—  Zophar  and  Job  (xi. — xiv).  (1)  Zophar  severely  charges  Job  and  urges 
him  to  repentance  (xi).  (2)  Job  attacks  his  friends  as  wanting  in  wisdom  and  justice,  and 
addresses  himself  to  God,  still  maintaining  his  innocence,  and  complaining  of  the  general  lot  of 
humanity  (xii. — xiv.). 

Second  Course :  Growtli  of  the  controversy  (xv. — xxi.). 

First  Dialogue — Eliphaz  and  Job  (xv. — xvii).  (1)  Eliphaz  reproves  Job's  obstinacy  in 
maintaining  liis  innocence,  and  asserts  God's  righteous  retribution  on  evil  doers  (xv.) 
(2)  Job  bemoans  his  forlorn  condition,  but  expresses  the  confident  hope  of  a  future  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  innocence  (xvi.,  xvii.). 

Second  Dialogue— ^W&di^  and  Job  (xviii.,  xix.).  (1)  Bildad  rebukes  Job  as  an  empty 
boisterous  talker,  and  reminds  him  of  the  fate  of  the  ungodly  (xviii.)  (2)  Job  retorts  on 
his  friends,  bewails  his  sufferings,  but  expresses  confidence  in  God  as  his  Redeemer  and 
Avenger,  and  warns  his  friends  of  the  consequence  of  their  uncharitableness  (xix.). 

Third  Dialogue — Zophar  and  Job  (xx.,  xxi.).  (1)  Zophar  maintains  the  short-lived 
prosperity  and  bitter  end  of  the  ungodly  (xxi.).  (2)  Job  in  reply  asserts  their  frequent 
prosperity  and  the  afilictions  of  the  godly  (xxi.). 

Third  Course:  Height  of  the  controversy  (xxii.— xxvii.). 

First  Dialogue — Eliphaz  and  Job  (xxii. — xxiv.).  (1)  Eliphas  openly  accuses  Job  of 
great  sins  and  warns  him  to  repent  (xxii.).    (2)  Job  expresses  hia  wish  that  God  would 


INTRODUCTION. 


appear  and  decide  the  case  Himself,  but  bemoans  His  withdrawal  from  him,  recounting  at  the 
same  time  similiar  cases  of  apparent  inequality  in  the  Divine  procedure  (xxiii.,  xxiv.). 

Second  Dialogue — Bildad  and  Job  (xxv.,  xxvi.).  (1)  BUdad  briefly  declares  God's 
greatness  and  purity,  and  man's  vileness  (xxy.).  (2)  Job  ridicules  Bildad's  common-places, 
and  enlarges  much  more  fully  on  God's  sovereignty  and  power  (xxvi.). 

Job  alone  in  the  field  (xxvii.,  xxviii.).  (1)  Solemnly  re-asserts  his  innocence,  and 
declares  his  joy  in  God,  with  the  certain  miserable  end  of  the  ungodly  (xxvii.).  (2)  Inthnates 
that  the  wisdom  which  can  solve  the  problem  is  only  found  with  and  through  means  of  true 
piety  (xxviii.). 

The  Solution  of  the  controversy. 

First  Step  in  the  Solution:  Guilt  cannot  be  the  cause  of  those  peculiar  sufferings.  Job's 
soliloquy  (xxix. — xxxi.).  (1)  Longing  retrospect  of  former  prosperity  (xxix.).  (2)  Mournful 
description  of  his  present  condition  (xxx.).     (3)  Solemn  protestation  of  his  freedom  from 

open  and  secret  sins  (xxxi.). 

Second  Step :  Afflictions  of  the  righteous  chastening  and  purifying,  Elihu's  speeches  (xxxii 
— ^xxxvii.).     (1)  His  introduction  by  the  poet,  in  prose  (xxxn.  1 — 6).     (2)  His  motive  and 
reasons  for  joining  in  the  controversy  (6 — 22). 

His  first  speech  (xxxiii.).  (1)  Invites  Job's  attention  to  himself  as  a  mild  judge  of  his 
case  (1 — 7).  (2)  Blames  his  confidence  in  his  innocence  (8 — 11).  (3)  Declares  God's 
gracious  deahngs  with  men  to  bring  them  to  repentance  (12 — 30). 

His  second  speech  (xxxi v.).     (1)  Blames  Job  for  doubting  God's  righteousness  (1 — 9). 

(2)  Maintains  that  righteousness,  as  necessary  to  the  government  of  the  world  (10 — 30). 

(3)  Reproves  Job's  sin  and  folly  in  charging  God  with  injustice,  and  in  calling  on  Him  to 
decide  the  controversy  (31 — 37). 

His  third  speech  (xxxv.).  Blames  Job  for  thinking  piety  useless  to  its  possessor  (1 — 8). 
Gives  reason  for  the  continuance  of  sufferings  (9 — 16). 

His  fourth  speech  (xxxvi. — xxxvii.).  (1)  Defends  the  righteousness  of  God  on  the 
ground  of  His  benevolent  object  in  afflicting  (1 — 21),  and  of  His  wise  and  mighty  opera- 
tions in  nature  (22 — 37;  xxxvii.  1 — 13).  (2)  Shows  the  lessons  from  these  operations 
(14—24). 

Third  Step  in  the  Solution :  None  may  dispute  against  God.  Jehovah's  speeches,  with 
Job's  confession  (xxxviii.,  xlii.  1^-6). 

Jehovah's  appearance  and  challenge  to  Job  (xxxviii.  1 — 3), 

His  first  speech  (xxxviii. — xxxix.).  (1)  Challenges  Job  to  answer  various  questions 
relative  to  creation  (4 — 15) ;  to  the  visible  universe  and  powers  of  nature  (16 — 27);  to  the 
wind  and  starry  heavens  (28 — 38) ;  to  the  preservation  and  propagation  of  wild  animals 
(xxxix.  1—30).     (2)  Conclusion  of  speech,  with  Job's  humble  reply  (xl.  1 — 5). 

Jehovah's  second  speech  (xl.  6,  &c.,  xli.).  (1)  Reproves  Job  for  doubting  God's 
righteousness  (xl.  7 — 14).  (2)  Points  to  humbling  proofs  of  his  weakness  in  relation  to 
certain  animals,  as  the  Behemoth  and  Leviathan  (xl.  15,  &c.,  xli.). 

Job's  humble  confession  of  the  divine  power  and  his  own  guilt  and  folly 
(xlii.  1—6). 

III.  Third  Division.  Historical  conclusion,  in  prose  (xlii.  7—15).  (1)  Jehovah's 
justification  of  Job  before  his  friends  (7—10).  (2)  Job's  restoration  to  former  honour  and 
dignitj  (11, 12).    (3)  The  doubling  of  his  estate  and  children  (IS— 17). 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTABJ:  JOB. 


CHAP,  i 


CHAPTER  I.    1—8. 
FIBST  PART  OF  PROSE  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OR  POEM. 


1.  Job's  personality  (verse  1).  "There 
was  a  man/'  &c. 

1.  His  actual  existence.  Job  a  historic, 
not  a  fictitious  character.  Mentioned-- with 
Noah  and  Daniel  (Ez.  xiv.  14).  Lived  m  the 
time  of  the  patriarchs.  Died  about  200  years 
old;  Abraham,  176;  his  father  Terah,  205. 
No  apparent  allusion  in  the  Book  to  the 
Exodus  or  the  Giving  of  the  Law.  Wor- 
ship, manners,  and  customs,  those  of  patri- 
archal times.  His  existence  a  proof  Ood  never 
left  Himself  without  a  witness, 

2.  His  residence.  *'  In  the  land  of  Uz." 
Uz,  east  or  south-east  of  Palestine.  Adja- 
cent to  the  Edomites,  who  appear  at  one 
time  to  have  occupied  it  (Lam.  iv.  21). 
Probably  in  Arabia  Deserta,  between  Pales- 
tine and  the  Euphrates.  Uz  the  name  of  a 
son  of  Aram  the  son  of  Shem  (Gen.  x.  23) ; 
of  the  firstborn  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother 
(Gen.  xxii.  21) ;  and  of  the  grandson  of  Seir 
the  Horite  (Gen.  xxxvi.  28).  The  country 
named  from  one  of  these.  Job*s  country, 
like  Abraham's,  at  that  time  tending  to 
idolatry  (ch.  xxxi.  26—28).  Grace  found 
flourishing  in  the  most  unfavourable  situa- 
tions. Job,  like  Abraham  aud  Daniel,  found 
"  faithful  among  the  faithless."  To  be  godly 
among  the  ungodly  a  high  excellence  and 
honour.  So  Obadiah  in  Ahab's  court  and 
the  saints  in  Cesar's  palace  (1  Kings  xviii. 
12 }  Phil.  iv.  22). 

3.  His  name.  "  Whose  name  was  Job." 
Denotes  "the  persecuted,"  or  "the  peni- 
tent." Names  m  the  east  often  significant, 
— descriptive  of  character  or  history.  Some  - 
times  given  from  events  connected  with  the 
birth,  as  Jabez,  Ichabod,  &c.  Sometimes 
changed  for  another  in  after-life,  as  Jacob 
for  Israel,  Jedidiah  for  Solomon.  Benoni, 
"  son  of  my  affliction,"  changed  by  Jacob  to 
Benjamin, — "son  of  my  right  hand"  (Gen. 
XXXV.  18).  Job  thought  by  some  to  be  the 
same  with  Jobab  (Gen.  x.  29).  "Job  "  also 
the  name  of  one  of  the  sons  of  Issachar 
(Gen.  xlvi.  13).  JoVs  name  a  memento  of 
the  possible  or  actual  reverse  to  his  pros- 
perity (ch.  iii.  25,  26).  His  afflictions  to  be 
remembered  as  waters  that  have  passed 
away  (ch.  xi.  16).  Profitable y  as  well  as 
pUatani,  to  remember  past  troubles  (Ps.  xlii. 
«»  8). 

II.  His  diargcter^    ''That  man  was 


perfect,"  &c.  The  question  not  so  much 
what  a  man  does  as  what  he  is.  Grace  men- 
tioned before  greatness.  A  gracious  character 
and  spiritual  blessings  a  man^s  choicest  pos^ 
sessions. 

"  Perfect."  Implies :  1.  Completeness. 
Job  complete  in  all  the  parts  of  his  moral 
character  (Jam.  i.  4).  Like  a  human  body 
with  no  member  or  organ  wanting  or  imper- 
fect. A  man's  morality  and  religion  to  be 
characterized  by  symmetry  and  thoroughness. 
Attention  not  to  be  given  to  one  class  of 
duties  to  the  neglect  of  another. — Job  con- 
scientious in  the  discharge  of  all  the  duties 
of  life  (Ps.  cxix.  6).  Kept,  like  Paul,  a  con- 
science void  of  offence  both  towards  God  and 
man  (Acts  xxiv.  16).  Believers  to  be  sancti- 
fied wholly,  throughout  body,  soul,  and  spirit 
(1  Thess.  V.  23.)  Are  actually  sanctified 
in  every  party  though  every  part  not  wholly 
sanctified.  A  perfect  man,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment sense,  an  advanced,  mature,  and  fuli^ 
instructed  Christian  (Phil.  iii.  15  ;  ]  Cor.  u 
6 ;  Eph.  iv.  13 ;   James  iii.  2). 

2.  Sincerity.  Job's  perfection  rather 
that  of  purpose  than  performance.  Aimed 
constantly  at  perfection.  Not  sinless  but 
sincere.  Without  guile  (John  i.  47). 
Without  hypocrisy  towards  God  or  double- 
dealing  towards  man.  Sincerity  the  founda- 
tion of  a  gracious  character.  Gives  religion 
all  its  worth  and  beauty.  Godly  sincerity 
is  Gospel  perfection.  Sincere  and  sound- 
hearted  believers  in  God's  sight  "  perfect." 

3  Blamelessness.  The  character  of  Ze- 
chariah  and  Elizabeth  (Luke  i.  6).  No 
fault  found  in  Daniel,  even  by  his  enemies 
(Dan.  vi.  4).  Moral  integrity  is  Bible  per- 
fection. Paul  lived  in  all  good  conscience 
(Acts  xxiii.  1 ).  Job  blameless  though  not 
sinless.  Reproved  by  Jehovah  (ch.  xlii.  5,  6). 
Noah  said  to  be  perfect  (Gen.  vi.  9). — 
God's  testimony  to  Job's  blamelessness  (ch.  ii. 
3).    His  own  (ch.  xxxi  throughout). 

Christian   FerfectioDn 

A  certain  perfection  belonging  to  saints 
both  in  Old  and  New  Testaments.  Thvs  holiness 
of  believers  on  earth,  partial  and prof/ressive. 
Christ  the  only  absolutely  righteous  and 
perfect  One.  Believers  perfect  and  complete 
in  Him,  now  representatively ^  hereafter  per- 
sonally (Col.  ii,  10).  Have  here  a  begws  per- 
feoikm  in  oonformitj  to  Chriat't  image  (ICodl 


CHAP.  L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY i  JOB. 


Tiii.  9,  29).  Tflat  conformity  to  be  in  time 
absolute  and  complete  (2  Cor  iii.  18).  Christ 
made  to  those  who  are  in  Him  both  "  wisdom" 
and  "sanctification"  (ICor.  i.  30).  Believers 
only  made  perfect  in  love  (1  Jolm  iv.  18). 
JoVscase  (ch.  xxix  11,16;  xxxi.16,20).  Love 
the  fulfilling  of  the  law  (Rom.  xiii.  10). 
Perfection  required  by  God  in  all  his  children 
(Matt.  V.  48  ;  Gen.  xvii.  1 ;  Jam.  i.  4).  To 
be  constantly  pressed  after  by  them  (Phil,  iii. 
12,  14).  Desire  and  endeavour  after  it  a 
test  of  sincerity.  Not  usually  to  be  attained 
without  afflictions  (Heb.  v.  8 ;  xii.  10,  11). 
The  Captain  of  our  salvation  himself  made 
perfect  through  suffering  (Heb.  ii.  10). 
Job  perfect  and  upright  before  his  trials, 
humble  and  contrite  after  them  (ch.  xl.  4 ; 
xlii.  6. 

"  Upright."  Refers  to  heart  and  life.  Or, 
**  perfect "  internally,  "upright"  externally. — 
Job  outwardly  what  he  was  inwardly,  and  vice 
versa.  Uprightness  of  life  and  conduct  the 
best  proof  of  inward  sincerity.  When  the 
heart  is  sincere  towards  God,  the  actions  will 
be  just  towards  men.  "  Upright  "=  straight. 
JoD  held  the  straight  path  of  rectitude. 
Sin's  ways  crooked.  Joshua  not  to  turn  to 
the  right  hand  or  to  the  left  (Joshua  i.  7). 
Like  Daniel,  Job  did  what  was  right,  regard- 
less of  consequences  (Dan.  vi.  10).  "  Perfect " 
and  "  upright "  connected  also  in  the  Psalms 
(Psalm  xxxvii.  37).  The  two  complete  the 
moral  character  of  a  man  of  God. 

"  One  that  feared  God."  Another  element 
in  his  character,  and  accounting  for  the  pre- 
ceding. Religion,  or  the  fear  of  God,  the  true 
basis  of  morality.  The  first  table  of  the  law 
the  foundation  of  and  preparation  for  the 
second.  A  morality  without  religion  is  a  body 
without  a  soul. — Job  profoundly  religious. 
The  horizon  of  his  soul  filled  with  God  (ch. 
xxix.  3, 4 ;  xxxi.  23).  Looked  at  all  things  in 
their  relation  to  God  and  His  will  (ch.  xxxi. 
2, 14, 15,  28).    Reverenced  His  majesty,  re- 

farded  His  authority,  dreaded  His  wrath, 
eared  God,  not  the  idols  of  his  country- 
men (ch.  xxxi.  26,  27).  So  Cornelius  (Acts 
X.  2.)  Feared  Him,  not  with  a  slavish  but  a 
filial  fear— a  fear  coupled  with  confidence  and 
love.  The  fear  of  the  saints,  rather  the  fear 
of  offending  than  the  dread  of  suffering. 
Believers  fear  God  for  His  goodness  as 
well  as  His  greatness  (Hos.  iii.  5).  Saints 
fear  God  because  He  pardons,  sinners  be- 
cause He  punishes  (Ps.  cxxx.  4).  Filial 
fear  the  product  of  Qod's  free  grace  re- 
vealed in  the  Gospel  (Jer.  xxxii.  39,  40; 
Rom.  viii.  15).  The  root  of  all  true  religion. 
Holiness  perfected  in  it  (2  Cor.  vii.  1.  For- 
giveness through  the  blood  of  Jesus  im- 
parted with  a  view  to  it  (Ps.  cxxx.  4).  That 
fear  required  by  God  (Jer.  v.  22).  Due  to 
Him  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  7).  Casts  out  the  fear  of 
6 


man  (Heb.  xi.  27;  Dan.  iii.  16—18). — The 
fear  of  God  the  secret  of  true  courage  and 
endurance.  —  Fabius  Maximus,  a  Koman 
general,  sought  to  impress  his  soldiers  with 
reverence  for  the  gods  as  the  best  means 
of  confirming  their  valour  [PluiarcK]. 

"Eschewed  evil."  Heb.,  "  Departed  from 
evil,"  from  its  practice  and  presence.  Hurried 
away  from  it  as  from  the  presence  of  a  monster. 
Avoided  it  as  offensive  to  God,  and  in  it^elf 
loathsome  and  abominable.  Sometimes  more 
difficult  to  avoid  evil  than  to  practice  good. 
Evil  often  fashionable.  Followed  by  the 
multitude  (Exod.  xxiii.  2 ;  Matt.  vii.  13).  To 
depart  from  evil  the  effect  and  evidence  of  the 
fear  of  God  (Ps.  iv.  4;  Prov.  viii.  13;  xvi. 
6).  Exhibits  the  spirituality  and  strength 
of  holiness.  The  spirit  active  against  evil 
in  order  to  depart  from  it.  Believers  while 
on  earth  beset  with  temptations  to  evil. 
Job  eschewed  all  evil.  Every  appearance  of 
it  to  be  abstained  from  (1  Thess.  v.  22) 
Evil  to  be  departed  from  in  its  pleasing  as 
well  as  its  repulsive  forms.  Not  only  evil 
itself  to  be  eschewed,  but  its  occasions, 
temptations,  and  incentives  (Prov.  iv.  14, 
15;  Matt.  v.  29,  30).  Job  withdrew  his 
eyes  from  evil  as  well  as  his  hands  and  feet 
(ch.  xxxi.  1).  To  depart  from  evil  neces- 
sary in  order  to  persevere  in  good.  Grace 
received  to  be  carefully  guarded  and  pre- 
served. Job's  perfection  not  sinlessness,  but 
a  constant  striving  against  sin. 

III.  His  prosperity. 

In  three  particulars  (verse  2). 

1.  His  children.  "  There  were  born  to 
him."  Children  esteemed  a  great  part  of  a 
man's  prosperity  and  happiness,  especially  in 
0.  T.  times.  Viewed  as  a  mark  of  the 
Divine  favour  and  blessing  (Ps.  cxxvii.  3—5  ; 
cxxviii.  3,  4).  Mentioned  first  as  the  chief 
part  of  Job's  outward  prosperity,  liis 
happiness,  however,  not  merely  in  having 
children,  but  having  them  godly  (verse  5). 
"  Born  to  him  J'"'  His  children  comforts  and 
blessings  to  him.  Job  eminent  for  holiness, 
yet  not  a  hermit  or  recluse. 

"Seven  sons  and  three  daughters.*'  In 
number  and  sex  the  ideal  of  a  perfect  family. 
Both  numbers,  as  well  as  their  sum,  mystic 
and  symbolical.  "  Seven,*'  indicative  oi per- 
fection; "ten,"  of  multitude.  The  more 
children,  if  gracious,  the  greater  blessing. 
More  sous  than  daughters,  an  enhancement 
of  his  prosperity.  A  large  family  no  hindrance 
to  piety,  uprightness,  and  charity  (ch.  xxix. 
11—17 ;  xxxi.  13—20,  32).  So  Enoch 
walked  with  God  300  years,  and  begat  sons 
and  daughters  (Gen.  v.  22). 

2.  His  property.  "  His  substance  was 
seven  thousand  sheep,"  &c.  Job  described 
as  an  Arab  prince,  emir  or   sheikh.     His 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY s  JOB, 


CEAF.  L 


possession  in  cattle,  though  not  a  wandering 
Bedowin  (ch.  xxix.  7).  No  land  or  houses 
mentioned,  tliough  living  in  or  near  a  city. 
Appears,  like  Isaac,  to  have  cultivated  land 
belonging  to  others  (ch.  xxxi.  39).  Wealth, 
in  earliest  times,  reckoned  not  by  extent  of 
land  but  number  of  cattle  (Gen.  xii.  16  j 
xxiv.  35  ;  XXX.  43).  Heaoenly  wisdom  the 
only  real  ** substance*'  (Prov.  viii.  21 ;  xxiii. 
6).  Piety  and  charity  ordinarily  the  best  way 
of  thriving  even  in  this  world.  Prayer  whets 
the  tools,  oils  the  wheels,  and  brings  a  bless- 
ing. Riches  an  evil  only  in  their  abuse.  In 
the  hand  a  blessing,  in  the  heart  a  curse. 
Riches  not  had,  therefore  given  to  the  good; 
not  the  best,  therefore  given  also  to  the  bad. 
Taken  from  the  good  for  trial,  from  the 
bad  for  conviction  or  'punishment.  Not 
money,  but  the  love  of  it,  the  root  of  all  evil 
(1  Tim.  vi.  10).  Job's  grace  seen  in  his 
having  riches  without  setting  his  heart  on 
them  (ch.  xxxi.  24,  25  j  Ps.  Ixii.  10).  One 
of  the  few  examples  in  which  the  camel  gets 
through  the  needle's  eye  (Matt.  xix.  24).  In 
the  N.r.,  the  poor  of  this  world  often  chosen 
as  heirs  of  the  kingdom  (Jam.  ii.  5).  The 
Master  himself  without  a  place  on  which  to 
lay  his  head  (Matt.  viii.  20).  Enough  for 
the  servant  that  he  be  as  his  Lord  (Matt.  x. 
25).  Job  pious,  and  his  piety  acting  as  a 
friend  to  his  prosperity ;  prosperous,  and  his 
prosperity  giving  a  lustre  to  his  piety 
{Henry^ 

"  Household."  Body  of  servants  or  slaves 
required  for  cattle  and  agriculture.  Job's 
slaves  or  servants  treated  by  him  with 
iustice  and  humanity  (ch.  xxxi.  13).    Re- 


garded by  him  as  in  God's  sight  on  the  same 
footing  with  himself  (ch.  xxxi.  14).  Could  all 
bear  honourable  testimony  to  his  conduct  and 
character  (ch.  xxxi.  31).  Like  Abraham, 
doubtless,  had  them  trained  for  God's  service 
as  well  as  his  own  (Gen.  xiv.  14). 

3.  His  dignity.  " So  that "  (or,  "and  ")  "  he 
was  the  greatest,"  &c.  A  new  feature  in  his 
prosperity.  Probably  indicates  his  eminence 
and  rank  as  a  prince  or  magistrate.  Job  not 
only  the  richest  but  the  most  respected  in 
the  land  (Gen.  xxiv.  35 ;  xxvi.  13 ;  Ecc.  ii. 
9).  A  man  of  great  authority,  not  only  from 
his  possessiorts  but  his  character.  His 
greatness  not  only  that  of  wealth,  but  of 
intellectual  and  moral  worth  (ch.  xxix.  11 
16  J  xxxi.  16 — 20).  Mentioned  to  show  the 
greatness  of  his  fall  and  his  ^race  in  bearing 
it.  Job,  like  David  and  Daniel,  an  example 
of  grace  coupled  with  earthly  nobility. 
Grace  graces  the  highest  position.  Good- 
ness, the  fairest  jewel  in  an  earthly  coronet. 
Grace  found  in  every  station.  Not  many 
noble  are  called,  yet  always  some  (1  Cor.  i. 
26).  Poor  Lazarus  reposes  in  rich  Abraham's 
bosom.  Goodness  appears  the  more  excel- 
lent when  associated  with  worldly  greatness. 
Has  then  most  to  overcome  and  can  most 
diffuse  its  influence. 

"  Men  of  the  East."  «  The  East "  applied 
to  countries  east  of  Palestine,  as  the  north  of 
Arabia.  Heb.,  "  Sons  of  the  East.*  Noted  for 
their  riches,  yet  Job  the  richest  of  them  all. 
Easy  with  God  to  make  his  children  the 
greatest,  yet  in  love  often  places  them  among 
the  least  in  this  world  (1  Cor.  l  27>  28). 


CHAPTER  1.    4,  5. 
SECOND  PART  OF  PROSE  INTRODUCTION, 


I.  Job's  happiness   in  his  children 

(verse  4). 

"  And  his  sons  went,"  &c.  Their  feast- 
ing tb<r  medium  of  social  intercourse  and 
of  maintaining  friendly  relations  with  each 
other.  ^  Shows  (1)  the  social  habits  of  his 
children ;  (2)  the  love  and  harmony  {)revail- 
ing  amon^  them.  An  exemplification  of 
Ps.  cxxxiii.  1.  Contrasted  with  the  family 
of  Adam  (Gen.  iv.  8)}  of  Abraham  (Gen. 
xxi.  9;  of  Isaac  (Gen.  xxvii.  41);  of  Jacob 
(Gen.  xxxvii.  4)i  of  David  (2  Sam.  xiii.  28). 

Festivity. 

"Feasting"  lawful, — when  (1)  moderate; 
(2)  seasonable  ;  (3)  in  the  fear  of  God  ;  (4) 
with  thankful  acknowledgment  of  his  good 
ness;  (5)  without  offence  to  others;  (6)  with 
charitable  remembrance  of  the  poor  and  needy 


(Luke  xiv.  12—14.  Ecc.  iii.  4)  The  general 
rule  of  Christian  feasting  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  Its 
limitation  (Rom.  xiv.  20,  21 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  13; 
X.  32,  33).  Unseasonable  times  for  feasting 
(Amos  vi.  4 — 6 ;  Joel  ii.  16 ;  Is.  xxii.  12, 13). 
Christ's  presence  and  miracle  at  Cana  a 
sanction  to  special  seasons  of  temperate 
festivity  (John  ii.  1—11).  The  creature 
given  not  only  for  necessity  but  delight  (Ps. 
civ.  14,  15). 

Job's  sons  feasted  (1)  in  their  own  houses ; 
indicating  their  wealth,  order,  and  harmony ; 
— also,  the  maturity  of  their  age.  Enhances 
the  calamity  of  their  death.  (2)  "  Each  on 
his  own  day,"  i.e.  his  birthday,  or  the  day 
on  which  it  was  his  turn  to  entertain  the 
rest.  Birthdays  in  the  East  days  of  great 
rejoicing  (Gen.  xk  20  ;  Matt.  xiv.  6).  (3.) 
They  sent  and  called  for  their  '^  three  aib* 


CHAP.  L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


ters,"  supposed,  like  women  in  the  East,  to 
be  living  with  their  mother,  in  their  own 
tent  or  apartment  (Gen.  xxiv.  67  ;  xxxi.  33, 
34 ;  Esther  ii.  9 — 14).  Beautiful  picture  of 
fraternal  harmony  and  affection.  Proof  of 
how  Job  had  trained  up  his  family. 

II.  Job's  spiritaal  care  orer  his 
children  (verse  5). 

"And  it  was  so,  when,"  &c.  A.t  the  con- 
clusion of  each  feast  Job  offers  special  sacri- 
fices for  his  children.  Uncertain  whether 
his  sons  were  present,  though  probable. 
"  He  sent  and  sanctified  them  ;  "  (1)  Doing 
what  is  immediately  after  related ;  or,  (2) 
Exhorting  them  to  prepare  themselves  for 
the  approaching  solemnity.  In  O.  T  lan- 
guage, people  often  said  to  do  that  which 
they  enjoin  to  be  done.  The  members  of  the 
family  usually  present  at  the  family  sacrifice 
(1  Sam.  XX.  6,  29). — Hence  learn : — 

1.  Christians  to  see  that  their  families  ob- 
serve  God's  worship  as  well  as  themselves. 
Family  worship  an  institution  of  God.  An 
acknowledgment  of  God  as  the  God  of  the 
family  and  the  author  of  family  blessings.  A 
prayerless  family  an  unblessed  one.  A  family 
without  worship,  a  garden  without  a  fence. 
The  presence  of  the  children  at  daily  family 
worship  calculated  to  produce  (1)  Reverential 
fear  and  filial  confidence  towards  God ;  (2) 
Dutiful  regard,  submission,  and  obedience  to- 
wards their  parents;  (3)  Harmony,  affec- 
tion, and  sympathy  towards  each  other. 

2.  Preparation  necessart/  for  solemn  ser- 
vices and  approaches  to  God  (Ex.  xix.  10, 
14 ;  Ps.  xxvi.  2).  As  men  measure  to  God 
in  preparation,  God  measures  to  men  in 
blessing  [Trapp'].  God  not  to  be  wor- 
shipped careless  y  and  slovenly,  but  in  the 
best  manner  possible  (Ecc.  v.  1).  Jews 
had  their  preparation  and  fore-preparation 
for  the  Passover.  Before  Christ,  such  pre- 
paration both  moral  and  ceremonial  (Gen. 
XXXV.  2).  After  Christ,  only  moral  (Ps. 
xxvi.  2). 

Job  took  measures  to  keep  his  child- 
ren in  a  pure  and  pardoned  state.  Parents 
cannot  make  their  children  spiritual  wor- 
shippers^ but  can  bring  them  to  spiritual 
ordinances.  Cannot  give  converting  grace, 
but  can  employ  the  means  through  which 
Gcd  may  impart  it. 

Job  recognized  and  sought  to  discharge  his 
responsibilities  as  a  father.  Bealized  his 
children's  relation  to  God  and  etenuty. 
Hence  more  concerned  that  they  should  have 
grace  in  their  heart  than  gold  in  their  house  ; 
should  stand  in  the  favour  of  God  than  en- 
joy the  smiles  of  the  world;  should  be  suticti- 
fied  for  the  next  world  than  be  accomplished 
for  this.  Job's  solicitude  contrasted  with 
Eli  s  indifference  (1  Sam.  ii.  29).    A  parenCt 

8 


responsibility  for  his  children  does  not  cease 
with  their  childhood.  Though  no  longer 
sheltered  by  the  parent  s  roof  they  can  and 
ought  to  be  sheltered  by  the  parent's  prayers. 
*•  Rose  up  early."  His  zeal  and  earnest- 
ness. Impatient  till  God  was  reconciled  to 
his  children.  An  early  hour  required  by  the 
largeness  of  the  work  as  well  as  the  solemnity 
of  it.  Sacrifices  usually  offered  early  in  the 
morning  (Ex.  xxxii.  6).  Not  safe  to  let  sin 
be  unrepented  of  and  unforgiven.  The  Psalm- 
ist's resolution  (Ps.  Ixiii.  1).  Abraham's 
practice  (Gen.  xxii.  3).  That  of  Moses  (Ex. 
xxiv.  4;  of  Jesus  Christ  (Mark  i.  35).  Has 
special  promise  attached  to  it  (Pro v.  viii. 
17).  What  our  hands  find  to  do,  to  be  done 
with  our  might  (Ecc.  ix.  10).  Well  to 
begin  the  day  with  prayer  and  application 
of  the  Atonement.  God,  the  author  of  every 
day,  ou<^ht  to  have  the^r*^  hour  of  it.  The 
mind  then  freshest  and  freest  from  earthly 
cares  and  distractions.  Early  worship  taught 
by  the  light  of  nature.  Practised  by  the 
heathen  (1  Sam.  v.  3,  4). 

III.  Job's  faith  in   the  Atonement. 

"  Offered  burnt  offerings,"  as  the  head  of 
the  family.  Patriarchal  custom.  So  Abra- 
ham (Gen.  xii.  7,  8) ;  Isaac  (Gen.  xxvi.  25)  ; 
Jacob  (Gen.  xxxiii.  20 ;  xxxv.  7).  The  Law 
with  a  priestly  family  not  yet  instituted. 

Sacrifices. 

The  **  burnt-offering "  a  victim  slain  and 
burnt  entire  on  the  altar  (Lev.  i.  9.) 
Under  the  law,  might  be  either  a  bullock, 
a  lamb,  a  goat,  or  turtle  doves  (Lev.  i.  2, 
10,  14).  Burnt-offerings  the  only  sacrifices 
mentioned  in  Patriarchal  times.  Sacrifices 
offered  from  the  earliest  period.  Found 
in  Adam's  family  (Gen.  iv.  4).  Probably 
prescribed  by  God  himself  on  the  day  man 
fell.  The  first  sacrifices  probably  the  beasts 
with  whose  skins  God  provided  coats  for  our 
first  parents  (Gen.  iii.  21).  The  first  express 
direction  from  God  regarding  sacrifice  given 
to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  9.)  Intended  to  keep 
in  view  the  promised  Seed,  to  be  bruised  in 
man's  stead  (Gen.  iii.  15).  Offered  with 
every  special  approach  to  God.  No  worship 
without  sacrifice.  Without  shedding  of 
blood  no  remission,  and  without  remission 
no  acceptable  approach  to  God.  Sacrifices 
told  (1)  Of  guilt;  (2)  Of  punishment;  (3) 
Of  substitution.  Sometimes  Eucharisticy  or 
connected  with  thanksgiving.  So  Noah's 
(Gen.  viii.  20)  ^omev'imt^  Federative,  or 
connected  with  a  covenant  (Ex.  xxiv.  4 
8).  In  Job's  case,  sim|>ly  Expiatory,  or 
with  a  view  to  forgiveness  of  sin.  Hence 
his  faith  (Heb.  xi.  4).  Sacrifice,  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  the  offender,  a  natural  instinct. 
Hence,  as  well  as  from  tradition^  universal 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    I. 


in  the  heathen  world.  There,  sometimes 
human  ones  offered,  as  of  more  supposed 
value  than  dumb  animals.  Impossible  for 
the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  to  take  away 
sin  (Heb.  x.  4).  The  insufficiency  of  all 
such  sacrifices  deeply  felt  in  the  conscience 
(Mic.  vi.  6,  7).  Ever^  bloody  sacrifice  a 
finger  pointing  to  the  07ily  sufficient  one  on 
Calvary  (John  i.  29).  Hence  the  cry 
on  the  cross,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  the 
rent  veil  (John  xix.  30 ;  Matt,  xxyii.  51.) 

"  Die  man,  or  justice  must,  unless  for  him 
Some  other  able  and  as  willing^  pay 
The  rigid  satisfaction,  death  for  death." 

Milton, 

"According  to  the  number  of  them  all." 
A  victim  for  each  of  the  seven  sons.  Job 
no  niggard  in  Gods  service.  Children  to 
be  prayed  for  individually  and  specifically. 
Each  has  his  particular  temper  and  circum- 
stances,  trials  and  temptations,  sins  and 
wants.  Christ's  one  offering  sufficient  for  all 
and  for  all  time  (Heb.  x.  12—14).  Particu- 
lar application  of  the  atonement  to  be  made 
by  and  for  each.  Each  sinner  needs  a  sub- 
stitute for  himself  or  a  personal  interest  in 
the  great  universal  one.  "  He  gave  Himself 
a  ransom  for  all;'  to  be  followed  by~"  He 
gave  Himself  for  me »  (1  Tim.  if.  6 ;  Gal. 
ii.  20).  * 

*'  For  Job  said,"  within  himself  or  to 
others.  Special  reason  why  Job  now  sacri- 
ficed. _  Religious  duties  to  be  grounded  on 
intelligent  reasons.  God  requires  a  reason- 
able service  (Rom.  xii.  1.  Not  ignorance, 
but  intelligence,  the  mother  of  true  devo- 
tion. "  Call  him  wise  whose  actions,  words, 
and  steps  are  all  a  clear  because  to  a  clear 
why  '*  [Lavater], 

**It  may  be  my  sons  have  sinned,"— 
during  their  festivities.  A  bloody  sacrifice 
rendered  necessary  bv  sin,  which  can  only 
be  washed  out  by  blood  (Heb.  ix.  22). 
Sin  such  an  outrage  on  God's  universe 
that  only  blood  can  atone  for  it  [Talmage:]. 
"  It  may  be.*'  Suspicion  of  sin,  much  more 
the  consciousness  of  it,  ought  to  send  us  at 
once  to  Christ's  blood.  A  blessing  to  have 
a  tender  conscience.  To  be  without 
allowed  sin,  the  holiness  of  earth;  to 
be  without  sin  at  all,  the  holiness 
ot  heaven.  Sm  easily  committed  in  the 
tumult  and  rush  of  pleasure.    The  time  of 


tecurity  the  time  for  greatest  apprehension. 
Job's  sons   usually  devout.      Their  sinnin'' 
now  only  a  contingency;  but  a  very  possible 
one.       Their     danger     that     of— (1)    Vain 
thoughts;    (2)  Excited   feeliiigs;    (3)  Un- 
guarded  words.     Cause  for   Job's  concern 
—(1)  In  the  depravity  of  the  heart ;    (2)  In 
the  frailty    and  folly    of  youth  j    (3)  in  the 
temptations  incident   to   a  feast.     Wine  a 
mocker;  sin  easily  committed  under  its  in- 
fluence (Prov.  XX.  Ij    xxiii.    29—35).     A 
double  guard  needed  in   the  social  use   of 
i*-— "Cursed   God   in   their   hearts  ;'*— re- 
proached or  renounced  Him  for  the  moment. 
Same  word  usually  rendered  '•  bless."   Somei 
times   also   the   opposite,   as   1  Kings  xxi. 
10.     Blessing  in  the  East  customary  on  part- 
ing as  well  as  meeting  (Gen.  xlvii.  7—10 ; 
1  Kings  viii  66).     Hence,  or  from  a  peculiar 
Hebrew  usage,  the  probable  double  meaning 
of  the  word  here  as  well  as  in  chap.  ii.  9. 
Allowed  sin    a   temporary    renouncement  of 
God.     Sin  itself  an   element  of  separation 
between    God  and  the  soul.     Great  danger 
of  such  renouncement  in  festivity  and  worldly 
pleasure.    *'  In  their  hearts  j  "—  (1)  thinking 
lightly  of  God's  favour  in  comparison  with 
present  enjoyment:  the  contrast  of  Tsalmiv. 
6,  7 ;  (2)  forgetting  and  not  acknowledging 
God    as    the   author   of   all  their   mercies. 
Heart  or  secret  sins  not  to  be  lightly  thought 
of(Ps.  xix.  12  J  1  Cor.  iv.  4).     Such  sins 
are  (1)  Dangerous;  (2)  Dt^serving  condem- 
nation;    (3)    Need     atoning   blood.      The 
morality  of  Job's  children.    Job  apprehen- 
sive only  of  heart  sins. 

IT.  The  habit  and    continuance  of 
Job's  piety. 

"Thus  did  Job  continually.'*  Marg. : 
"AH  the  days  J "  either,  while  the  feast 
lasted;  or  rather,  at  the  conclusion  of 
every  such  feast.  Job's  piety  habitual  and 
constant.  Mark  of  his  sincerity.  He  who 
serves  God  uprightly  will  serve  Him  con- 
tinually [ilf.  Henry].  The  same  occasions 
always  liable  to  bring  the  same  sins.  Same 
corrupt  nature  always  present.  Fresh  sins 
require  fresh  pardon.  Kenewed  pardon  re- 
quires renewed  application  to  the  atoning 
blood.  The  blood  of  Jesus  a  fountain  ever 
full  and  ever  free.  Prayer  and  care  to 
follow  the  godly  through  life.  Constant 
washing  of  the  feet  needed  (John  xiii.  10). 


CHAPTER  I.    6—12 
THIRD  PART  OF  PROSE  INTRODUCTION. 


I.  The    Celestial    Council    (verse    6). 

*  There  was  a  day.*      What  God  decrees  in 

eternity  has  its  day  of  accomplishment  in  time. 

"  Lver^thing  has  its  hour  "  IHebr^w  Proverb^, 


"The  sons  of  God  came."  Representa- 
tion of  God  s  court  and  administration.  So 
1  Kiu^s  xxii.  19.  The  veil  separating 
the  visible  from  the  invisible  drawn  aside. 


CHAF.  L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB^ 


Reveals  an  assembly  of  God's  angelic 
ministers  and  Himself  among  them.  All 
Job's  trials  the  result  of  transactions  in 
heaven.  The  same  true  of  ihe  sufferings 
and  death  of  Job's  great  Antitype  (Acts  ii. 
23 ;  iv.  27,  28) ;  and  of  the  trials  of  the 
least  of  His  suffering  members  (Rom. 
viii.  28—30). 

Angels. 

**Sons  of  God,"  i.e.,  angels,  celestial 
spirits.  So  xxxviii.  7.  All  ministering  spirits 
employed  in  Jehovah's  service  (Ps.  ciii.  21 ; 
Heb.  i.  14)  Perhaps  including  the  spirits  of 
departed  believers  (Rev.  vii.  13  }  ijixii,  8,9; 
Acts  xii.  14,  15).  "  Sons  of  God,"  from 
their  nature;  '* angels,"  or  messengers, 
from  their  office.  "  Sons  of  God,"  by  crea- 
tion ;  **  angels,"  by  Divine  appointment. 
"  Sons  of  God,"  as  resembling  God, — (1)  in 
spirituality  of  substance ;  (2)  in  intellec- 
tual, moral,  and  physical  qualities  (Ps.  ciii. 
20).  Of  various  ranks  and  orders,  and  invested 
with  various  powers  and  charges  (Rom.  viii. 
38  i  Eph.  i.  21 }  Col.  i.  16 ;  1  Peter  iii.  22  j 
Rev.  xiv.  18  ;  xvi.  5  j  xix  17).—*'  Pre- 
sent themselves  before  the  Lord,"  as  His 
ministers  or  attendants  (Psalm  xxii.  29; 
Zech.  vi.  5  ;  Luke  i.  19).  Ready  to  receive 
and  execute  His  orders  and  to  render 
their  account.  *'  Thousands  at  His  bidding 
speed,  and  post  o'er  land  and  ocean."  As 
supreme  Governor^  God  takes  cognizance  of 
all  thai  is  done  in  this  and  other  worlds. 
Mighty  spirits  the  ministers  and  execu- 
tioners of  His  behests.  Such  employed  in 
the  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain 
(Gen.  xix.  1,  12,  13) ;  in  the  promulgation 
of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai  (Gal.  iii.  19  j 
Acts  vii.  53  ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  17) ;  in  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Assyrian  army  and  deliverance  of 
Jerusalem  (Is.  xxxvii.  36)  j  in  the  restora- 
tion of  the  Jewish  church  and  state  after  the 
captivity  (Dan.  x.  20,  21  j  Zech.  i.  10,  11, 
20,  21 ;  vi.  1 — u)  J  in  the  establishment 
and  spread  of  the  Gospel  (Luke  ii.  9 — 12  ; 
John  i.  51) ;  in  the  destruction  of  the  king- 
dom of  Antichrist  (Rev.  xix.  14);  in  the 
transactions  of  the  last  day  (Matt.  xiii.  41, 
49,  50);  in  the  service  of  individual  be- 
lievers (Heb.  i.  14;  Acts  xii.  7)  ;  pre- 
eminently in  that  of  their  incarnate  Head 
(Ps.  xci.  11,  12;  Matt.  iv.  11). 

"The  Lord."  ZT^^.,  "Jehovah."  Always 
with  this  meaning  when  printed  in  capitals. 
Indicates  (1)  The  sell-existing,  eternal,  un- 
changeable Being  (Ex.  iii.  14;;  (2)  The  faith- 
ful fuifiUer  of  covenant  relations  and  engage- 
ments. Not  practically  known  to  the  patri- 
archs before  Moses  by  this  name  (Ex.  vi.  3). 
Appeared  only  at  the  Burning  Bush  as  the 
promise -fulfilling  Grod.  The  name  applied 
to  and  appropriated  by  Jesus  (Horn.  xiv.  10 

10 


—If }  Rev.  i.  8).  Given  specifically  to  the 
One  True  God  who  adopted  the  descendants 
of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  for  His 
people,  when  the  world  was  apostatizing 
into  idolatry.  The  name  never  applied  to  a 
false  God  or  to  any  mere  creature.  Given 
however  to  an  angel  who  is  called  "  the  angel 
of  the  Lord  "or  the  "angel  Jehovah,"  being 
the  second  person  in  the  Godhead ;  the  Mes- 
senger of  the  Covenant  and  Mediator  between 
God  and  men,  who  afteiv\ards  became  incar- 
nate. 

II.  Satan's  Presence. 

•*  And  Satan  came  also  among  them.** 

Satan. 

Here  first  introduced  under  this  name. 
Observe — 

1.  His  name.  Denotes  "the  adversary.'* 
The  devil  so  called  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  The  name 
without  the  article  applied  to  an  adversary 
in  a  court  of  justice  (Ps.  cix.  6).  Other 
names — the  Devil  or  Slanderer ;  the  Old 
Serpent  j  the  Great  Dragon;  the  Tempter ; 
the  Wicked  One;  Beelzebub;  Apollyon;  the 
Prince  and  god  of  this  world. 

2.  His  personality.  His  personal  exist- 
ence is  (1.)  In  accordance  with  reason. 
(i)  Existences  may  be  above  as  well  as  below 
man.  (ii.)  These  existences  may  fall  and  be- 
come unholy  as  truly  as  man.  (iii.)  Fallen  intel- 
ligent beings  usually  the  tempters  of  others. 

(2)  Testified  by  the  whole  of  Scripture.  The 
truth  regarding  him  gradually  developed  in 
the  Old  Testament.  Marked  out  as  a  ser- 
pent in  the  temptation  of  our  first  parents. 
Probably  the  lymg  spirit  in  the  mouth  of 
the  false  prophets  (1  Kings  xxii.  21).  The 
name  itself  given,  1  Chron.  xxi.  1 ;  Zech.  iii. 
1.  His  personality  pre-eminently  taught  by 
the   Lord   Jesus  Himself  in    the    Gospels. 

(3)  Confirmed  by  universal  belief  The  belief 
in  the  existence  of  such  a  spirit  common  to 
all  nations. 

3.  His  nature  and  character,  A  (y^eated 
spirit ;  probably  one  of  the  highest.  A  son 
ofGod  by  creation,  like  the  other  angels,  and 
originally  holy ;  but  fell,  apparently  through 
pride  (1  Tim.  Jii.  61;  Jude  vi.).  Has  become 
the  tempter  and  accuser  of  men,  especially 
of  the  good  (Rev.  xii.  10).  The  most  finished 
specimen  of  unsanctificd  intelligence.  His 
nature, — great  intellect  employed  for  selfish 
and  wicked  purposes.  Designated  by  Chri>>t 
a  liar  and  a  murderer  (John  viii.  44).  Christ's 
whole  life  a  conflict  with  him,  according  to 
the  promise  (Gen.  iii.  15).  The  life  of  everj 
believer  a  similar  conflict  (Eph.  vi.  11 — 17; 
1  Pet.  V.  8).  Believers  made  the  theatre  of 
Christ's  continued  victory  over  him.  Already 
overcome  by  Christ  on  their  behalf  (Col.  ii. 
15).    To  be  bruised  under  their  feet  shortly 


BOMILETIO  OOMMSNTART:  JOB. 


OHAf .  L 


(Rom.  xvi.  20).  Meantime  to  be  stcadfattly 
resisted  (1  Pet.  t.  9).  Times  of  signal  vio- 
tory  over  him  indicated  in  Luke  x.  18  j  Rev. 
xii.  10.  Seeks  every  advantage  over  us 
(2  Cor.  ii.  11).  Transforms  liiraself  iuto  an 
angel  of  light  (2  Cor.  xi.  14).  Is  overcome 
by  the  word  of  God  and  faith  in  the  blood 
of  Christ  (Rev.  xii.  11).  Law  and  justice, 
through  sin,  on  8atan*s  side  against  man ; 
(Heb.  ii.  l^) ;  but  through  Christ's  death, 
once  more  on  man's  side  against  Satan  (Is. 
xlii.  21 }  Ii.  8 ;  Kom.  viii.  32—34).  Believers 
to  reckon  on  hi»  repeated  and  sometimes 
sudden  assaults.  The  more  faithful  and 
walking  in  the  light,  the  more  exposed  to 
them. 

4.  His  works.     The  agent  in  Adam's  fall 
(2   Cor.  xi    3) — a    wide-spread    tradition. 
Sought  to  overthrow  Christ  and  to  draw  Him 
into  sin  (Matt.  iv).     He  blinds  men*s  minds 
against  the  liglit  of  the  Gospel  (2  Cor.  iv.  4). 
Seeks  to  catch  away  the  seed  of  the  word 
from  the  hearts  of  the  hearers  (Matt.  xiii. 
19).    Aims  at  beguiling  men's  minds  from 
the  simplicity  of  (Christ's  doctrine  (2  Cor.  ii. 
3).     Affects  mens  bodies  with  diseases  and 
infirmities   (Luke  xiii.  16).     Endeavours  to 
thwart  the  preachers  of  the  Gospel  (1  Thess.  - 
ii.  18).    Employs    his  messengers  to  buffet 
Christ's  servants  (2  Cor.  xii.  7).     Probably 
much  of  the  unsteadfastness  and  discomfort 
of  believers  due  to   his  agency   [^Homilist\ 
In  regard  to  Satan,  the  book  of  Job  in  close 
analogy  with  the  whole  Bible.     Job's  happi- 
ness the   object  of   his  envy,  like  that  of 
Adam  in  Eden.     Lying  spirits,  as  well  as 
ministering  angels,   sent   forth  from  God's 
presence  (also   in  1  Kings  xxii.  19).     The 
thorn  in  the  flesh  from  Satan,  alike  in  the 
case  of  Job  and  Paul. — "  Came  also."    Satan 
not  less  tiian  other  spirits  subject  to  God's 
authority.     Like    them    also    employed  in 
executing  the  divine  purposes.     An  intruder 
into  all  sacred  places  (1  Kings  xxii.  19,  &c. ; 
Luke,  iv.  33).  His  punishment  only  gradually 
inflicted.     Still  allowed  to  move  at  large. 
—"Among  them.*'     As  Judas  amon^  the 
Apostles.     StiU  foimd  in  the  assembhes  of 
God's  children.     No  place  on  earth  too  holy 
for  his  intrusion.     Puolic  ordinances  special 
occasions    for  the   exertion   of  his   power. 
Present  to  distract  the  thoughts,  defile  the 
imagination,  and  harden  the  heart. 

III.  JehoTah's  challeng-e  regarding 
Job  (verse  7). 

"  The  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  whence  comest 
thou  P"  The  highest  fallen  spirit  amenable 
to  Jehovah.  No  creature  able  to  outgrow  his 
responsibility.  That  responsibility  not  dimi- 
nished b^  a  course  of  sin.  God's  questions 
not  for  information  to  the  questioner  but 
coavictioa  to  the  questioned.    Similar  ques- 


tions to  Adam  (Gen.  iii.  2) ;  and  to  Cain  (Gen. 
iv.  9).  The  Question  intended  to  open  the 
way  to  Job's  desired  trial.  At  the  same  time 
lays  bare  Satan's  character  and  doings.  The 
most  secret  malice  open  to  the  eye  of  Omnis- 
cience. 

"From  going  to  and  fro."    Marks   (1) 
Satan's  present  circumstances.      Allowed  still 
to   roam   at   large,   though   ever  in  chains. 
Only  reserved  to  the  judgment  of  eternal  fire 
(Jude  vi. ;  Matt.  xxv.  52).     (2)  His  terrible 
activity.  Satan  no  laggard.  Ever  on  the  wing. 
In  constant  quest  of  opportunities  of  mischief 
(1  Peter  v.  8).    A  true  Apollyon;  assiduous 
in  his  endeavours  to  destroy.     (3)  His  horn^- 
lessness  and  unrest.     Like  Cain,  a  vagabond 
in   the   earth.     Seeks  rest   and  finds  none 
(Matt.  xii.  45).  No  rest  for  a  depraved  spirit 
(Is.  Ivii.  20,  21).     (4)  His  constant  increase 
of  knowledge.    Same  word  implies  "Search** 
(Num.  xi.  8  J  2  Sam.  xxiv.  2).     Satan  ever 
prying  into  the  ways  and  circumstances  of 
men.     Constantly  increasing  his  knowledge 
with  a  view  to  destroy. — "  In  the  earth.** 
This  earth  now  the  permitted  sphere  of  his 
activity.      No  place  therefore  secure   from 
his  attacks.     Good  to  remember  we  are  in  a 
world  where  Satan  is,   and  is  ever  active. 
— "  Going  up  and  down  in  it.**   Intensities  his 
activity    and    restlessness.      Satan's    name 
among  the  Arabs,  El  Harithy  "  The  Active,*' 
or  "The  Zealous.**     Seems  to  glory  in  his 
work.  Knows  he  has  but  a  short  time  (Rev 
xii.  12).   Goes  up  and  down  in  the  earth  but 
finds  no  home  in  it.  Satan  and  all  his  children 
homeless    wanderers    in    the    universe.    His 
answer  in  keeping  with  his  character.     Tells 
onlv  part  of  the  truth.     Says  nothing  of  the 
evil  he  does  and  seeks  to  do.     Unable  to 
report  an^  good  deed,  and  unwilling  to  own 
to  any  evil  one.    His  work  had  been  to  draw 
men  away  from  their  allegiance  to  God  and 
to  destroy  their  souls. — "  Hast  thou  con- 
sidered P  **  &c.     Satan  questioned  as  no  un- 
concerned spectator.  Allusion  to  his  character 
as  a  spy,  enemy,  and  accuser  of  good  men. 
— "  My  servant  Job.**     God  never  asJtamed  to 
own  his  faithful  servants.     An  interested  spec- 
tator of  a  good  man*s  ways  and  actions.     A 
faithful  servant  of  God  the  most  consider- 
able object  in  the  world  to  God  and  angels. 
"  A  servant  of  God  '*  the  most  honourable  and 
distinguishing  title.     May  be  mean  and  con- 
temptible  without^  but   all   glorious   within 
(Ps.  xlv.  131.     Job  God's  servant  consciously 
and  by  choice;  Nebuchadnezzar  God's  ser- 
vant unco7isciously   and  by  constraint  (Jer. 
xxv.  y).    God's  people  proved  by  living  as 
His  servants^  not  as  their  own  masters.   "  My 
servant  Job,**  a  stinging  word  to  Satan.     A 
true  taint  is  Satan* s  eye-sore.    A  good  man 
the  special  object  of  his  attention  and  malice. 
Job  mentioned  bv  tumt.     Implies  intimate 

11 


CHAP.  !• 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


knowledge  and  special  regard  (Ex.  xxxiii.  12 ; 
Is.  xlix.  1 ;  Jer.  xiii.  11;  John  x.  3).—"  That 
there  is,"  &c.  God  dwells  on  Job's  character. 
Delights  in  contemplating  his  saints  (Zeph. 
iii.  17. — '*Noiie  like  him,'*  in  the  degree  of 
his  piety  and  fidelity.  Degrees  of  excellence- 
Job  not  only  the  greatest  but  the  holiest. 
Eminence  in  goodness  to  be  aimed  at.  Paul 
gloried  in  being  "  not  a  whit  behind  the  very 
chiefest  Apostles"  (2  Cor.  xi.  5).  His  motto, 
•* Forward"  (Phil.  iii.  11—14)  "On  to 
perfection"  (Heb.  vi.  1).  God  notices  not 
only  a  man's  piety  but  the  degree  of  it.  Gives 
to  each  his  just  meed  of  praise. — "  A  perfect 
and  an  upright  man."  Job's  good  character 
endorsed  by  God.  Good  to  have  mans  testi- 
mony in  oiir  favour, — better  still  to  have 
God's.  God  more  observant  of  the  good  than 
the  evil  in  his  people  (Num.  xxiii.  21). 

IT.  Satan's  accusation  and  proposal 

(verse  9). 

"Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought?"  Satan 
true  to  his  name,  the  Devil^  or  Slanderer. 
Accuser  of  the  brethren  (Rev.  xii.  10).  A 
good  matCs  'praise  the  reproach  and  torment  of 
the  bad.  Satan  exalts  a  man's  piety  to  make 
him  proud,  denies  it  to  make  him  sad.  Cannot 
deny  Job's  religion,  but  challenges  iht ground 
and  reality  of  it.  A  mark  of  Sataiis  children 
to  be  a  detractor  of  true  godliness.  Satan's 
method  to  begin  by  questioning.  Insinuates, 
then  directly  charges.  Always  a  liar.  In 
Eden,  called  evil  good,  now  calls  good  evil. 
Satan's  insinuation  the  immediate  occasion  of 
Job's  trial.— "For  nought."  Eitiier  (1)  With- 
out sufficient  cause  (John  xv.  25) ;  or,  (2) 
Without  regardto  liis  own  interest  (Gen.  xxix. 
15).  Job's  religion  charged  with  mercenary 
motives— his  piety  mere  selfishness.  Bad 
men  judge  of  others  by  themselves.  With 
carnal  men  piety  is  policy.  A  truth  at  the 
bottom  of  Satan's  insinuation,  thougli  false 
in  regard  to  Job.  Everything  lies  in  the 
motioe.  A  selfish  piety  no  piety.  Common 
with  Satan's  children  to  call  God's  saints 
hypocrites.  An  evil  conscience  makes  men 
suspicious  of  others*  sincerity.  Satan's  charge 
against  Job  implicitly  one  against  God  him- 
self and  the  plan  of  Redemption.  If  Job's 
religion  is  hollow,  all  religion  is,  and  Redemp- 
tion is  a  failure. — Satan  s  words  true  as  a 
fact,  though  false  as  motive.  No  man  serves 
God  for  nought.  Godliness  profitable  unto 
all  things  (1  Tim.  iv.  8  j  vi.  6).  In  keeping 
God's  commandments  is  great  reward  (Ps. 
xix.  11).  God  himself  the  exceeding  great 
reward  of  His  servants  (Gen.  xv.  1).  True 
godliness  consistent  with  "  respect  to  the 
recompense  of  the  reward"  (Heb.  xi.  2G). 
Past  and  present  mercies  also  not  excluded 
from  the  motives  to  godliness  Rom.  xii.  1). 
Yet  true  religion  more  i\i^n  gratitude  for  past 

12 


or  regard  to  future  good  (Ps.  cxix.  129,  140). 
Satan  well  acquainted  with  mankind,  but 
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  true  grace.  Not 
only  a  deceiver  but,  like  all  unreojenerate  men, 
deceived  (Tit.  iii.  3) — "  Hast  thou  not  made 
%  hedge  about  him  "  (ver.  10).  Satan  speaks 
truth  when  it  serves  his  purpose.  The  saint's 
hap[>iness  and  enjoyment  ot  the  divine  favour 
the  object  of  his  hatred  and  envy.  God's 
protection  of  his  servants  a  blessed  truth. 
(Ps.  xci. ;  cxxi.).  His  angels  and  still  more 
Ilimself  the  hedge  of  His  people  (Ps.  xxxiv. 
7;  cxxi.  3;  Zech.  ii.  5).  Either  is  Him- 
self the  hedge  or  makes  one.  Satan  would 
leap  the  hedge,  but  dare  not,  and  cannot  with- 
out permission. — "And  about  His  house." 
Not  only  the  godly  but  their  belongings  the 
object  of  divine  care.  Horses  and  chariots 
of  fire  around  Elisha's  residence  (2  Kings 
vi.  17). — "  On  every  side."  Satan  a  wolf 
prowling  round  the  fold  and  vexed  to  find  no 
means  of  entrance. — "Hast blessed  the  work 
of  His  hands."  Satan  well  aware  of  the  source 
of  Job's  prosperity  (Prov.  x.  22).  Satan  no 
atheist.  Practical  atheism  makes  men  deny 
what  Satan  admits.  "  The  work  of  his  hands," 
— his  undertakings  and  engagements,  as  a 
man,  a  master,  and  a  magistrate.  Job  diligent 
in  business  as  well  as  fervent  in  spirit  (Koni, 
xii.  1 1.  God^s  blesssing  not  with  the  idle  but 
with  the  industrious.  All  toil  bootless  whicli  is 
unblest  by  God  (Ps.  cxxvii.  1,2).  Peter  toils  all 
night  but  catches  nothing  till  Christ  enters 
the  boat  (Luke  v.  5,  G). — "But  put  forth 
tliine  hand  now"  (ver.  11).  Satan's  impu- 
dence equal  to  his  malice.  Gives  God  the 
lie  and  challenges  Him  to  a  trial.  Asserts 
Job's  hypocrisy  and  offers  to  prove  it.  Adopts 
the  language  of  a  suppliant.  Satan  prays, 
but  in  malice.  Eager  to  see  Job  a  sufferer 
and  proved  to  be  a  hypocrite.  Unable  to 
put  forth  his  own  hand  without  permission. — 
"  Touch  all  that  he  hath," — children  and  pos- 
sessions. The  touch  intended  to  be  a  destruc- 
tive one  (Ps.  cv.  15).  Satan's  mercies  cruel. 
Earthly  possessions  subject  to  God's  disposal. 
Prosperity  vanishes  at  his  touch,  (Ps.  civ.  32). 
— "He  will  curse  thee," — reproach  or  re- 
nounce thee,  as  in  ver.  5.  The  natural  result, 
on  the  principle  of  selfishness.  Common  with 
unrenewed  nature.  Heathens  in  misfortune 
vilify  their  gods.  Pompey,  after  a  defeat,  said 
there  had  been  a  mist  on  the  eyes  of  Provi- 
dence. Margin,  "  If  he  curse  thee  not." 
Probably  an  oath  or  imprecation,  but  partly 
suppressed.  Profanity  the  devil's  language; 
yet  in  God's  presence  keeps  back  from  fear 
what  men  fear  not  to  utter. — "  To  thy  face," 
— boldly  and  openly.  Job's  fear  for  his  sons 
that  they  might  have  done  it  in  their  hearh. 
Boldness  and  openness  an  aggravation  of  sin. 
Charity  thinketh  no  evil ;  malice  thinks  all 
e?il. 


HOMILETIO  COMMMTART:  JOB. 


OHAT.  t 


Y.  The  Permission  (ver.  12). 

"Behold."  Marks  (1)  the  strangeness  of 
the  thing ;  (2)  the  impudence  of  the  demand ; 
(3)  the  purpose  of  God  to  make  the  whole 
conspicuous.  God's  thoughts  and  ways 
above  man's.  His  judgments  a  ^reat  deep. 
Makes  the  wrath  of  man  and  devil  to  praise 
Him.  Glory  to  God  and  blessing  to  man  by  tlie 
permission  now  given  to  Satan. — "  All  that  he 
Dath  is  in  thy  power."  Satan's  prayer  granted, 
and  himself  to  be  the  instrument.  A  double 
gratification,  but  to  issue  in  his  own  confu- 
sion. Not  always  a  mercy  for  a  man  to  have 
his  prayer  answered  (Ps.  cvi  15;  Hos.  xiii. 
10,  11).  Job  now,  like  the  disciples,  to  be 
for  a  time  in  Satan's  sieve  (Luke  xxii.  31). 
To  be  cast  into  the  furnace,  not  to  be  con- 
sumed, but  proved  and  purified.  Not  under- 
stood at  the  time,  though  sometimes  for  a  mo- 
ment apprehended  (xxiii.  10).  His  ignorance 
of  the  fact  the  cause  of  his  disquietude  and 
perplexity.  Believers  often  ignorant  of  the 
cause  and  object  of  their  trials  (John  xiii.  7). 
God'a  heart  always  towards  his  people  even 


when  his  hand  seems  against  them.  His 
dearest  saints  sometimes  apparently  for  a 
time  abandoned  by  Him  (Ps.  xxii.  1 ;  2  Chron. 
xxxii,  31).  The  most  crushing  trials  neither 
inconsistent  with  His  grace  in  us  nor  His 
love  to  us.  The  cup  drunk  by  the  Head  often 
tasted  by  the  members,  tliough  for  a  different 
object  (Matt.  xx.  23 ;  xxvi.  39).  Satan  God's 
scullion  for  scouring  the  vessels  of  His 
household  [T'mjojo]. — **0n  himself  put  not  forth 
thine  hand."  Satan  a  chained  lion,  and  the 
chain  in  our  Father's  hand.  Believers  tried 
no  farther  than  is  necessary. — "  So  Satan  went 
forth."  Gladly  and  eagerly  as  a  wolf  with 
permission  to  enter  the  fold  Thought  every 
liour  two  till  he  had  sped  his  commission 
[Trapp].  His  diligence  in  doing  evil  to  be 
emulated  by  us  in  doing  good. — "From  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,"— having  been,  like 
Doeg,  detained  against  his  will  (1  Sam.  xxi. 
7).  God^s  presence  no  place  for  an  unholy 
nature.  To  "  see  God,"  the  happiness  only 
of  the  "  pure  in  heart "  (Matt.  Y.  8 ;  1  John 
iii  I,  3;  Eev. xxiL  4). 


CHAPTER  I.  13—19. 


FOURTH  PART  OF  INTRODUCTION, -^INFLICTION  OF  THE  TRIAL. 


1.  Occasion  of  the  trial  (verse  13). 

**  There  was  a  dav."  Satan  watches  for 
the  time  best  suited  for  his  designs.  The 
occasion  chosen  that  the  trial  might  fall  the 
more  grievous  (Is.  xxi.  4).  Diabolical 
wisdom  in  doin^  mischief.  Satan's  terrible 
malignity. — "His  sons  and  his  daughters 
were  eating,  and  drinking  wine."  The 
children's  hilarit^y  to  be  an  aggravation  of 
the  father's  calamity.  The  more  unexpected 
Rud  unprepared  for,  the  heavier  the  stroke. 
Satan  likes  to  make  his  stroke  tell.  Turns 
mirth  into  mourning.  Job's  children  to  die 
when  most  likely  to  be  sinning  (ver.  5). 
Satan's  object  to  destroy  both  body  and 
soul  at  one  stroke.  Satan  as  well  as  Job 
knew  the  dangers  incident  to  wine.  Qod's 
judgments  often  come  when  men  are  most 
secure  (Luke  xii.  19,  20;  1  Thes.  v.  2). 
Good  to  rejoice  as  though  we  rejoiced  not 
(1  Cor.  vii.  30).  The  Saviour's  caution 
(Luke  xxi.  34).  Changes  in  circumstances 
to  be  prepared  for  (Prov.  xxvii.  1).  A  day 
may  have  a  fair  beginning  and  afoul  ending. 
*  In  the  greatest  calm  provide  for  a  storm* 
[Queen  Elizabeth]. — "  In  their  elder  brother's 
house."  Hence  no  ordinary  feast.  The 
celebration  of  the  eldest  son's  birthday 
ehosen  with  characteristio  malignity* 


II.  Tlie  trial  itself  in  its  four  par- 
ticulars. 

1.  Attack  of  the  Sabeans  on  the  oxen  and 
asses  (ver.  14,  15).  "There  came  a  messen- 
ger,"— spared  in  Satan's  malice  to  carry  the 
news,  A  "  cruel  messenger  "  to  be  sent  to 
Job,  as  if  a  **  rebellious  man  "  (Prov.  xvii. 
11). — "The  oxen."  Satan  begins  with  the 
cattle.  The  trial  must  rise  m  a  climax. 
— "Were  ploughing,"*  preparing  for  the  next 
year's  crop,  thus  also  to  be  lost.— "Asses 
feeding  beside  them,"  so  arranged  that  both 
might  share  the  same  fate  The  picture  of 
security  and  repose  heightens  by  contrast 
the  calamity  of  the  attack. — "  Sabeans."  A 
warlike  marauding  people  in  the  north  parts 
of  Arabia  Deserta.  Those  in  South  Arabia, 
or  Arabia  Felix,  merchants,  not  marauders 
(vi.  19 ;  1  Kings  x.  1).  Bedoween  incur- 
sions able  to  reduce  a  rich  man  to  poverty 
in  a  few  days.  Satan  at  no  loss  for  instru- 
ments to  do  his  work.  Possesses  a  mysterious 
power  to  influence  men's  minds  to  evil.  The 
ungodly  already  prepared  for  that  influence. 

•  Oriental  plougWng,  u  In  the  sonth  of  Europe, 
done  by  oxen.  Plough  of  wood,  consistine  of  a  share, 
two  handles,  and  %  pole  or  beam.  Drawn  oy  two  oxen 
yoked  together,  and  guided  hj  •  ploughman  using 

""•^  18 


OHAP.  I. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTART:  JOB. 


Satan^s  temptations  suited  to  mer^s  natural 
inclinations.  Bad  men  often  used  by  Ood 
for  the  trial  and  chastenina  of  his  children. 
— "  Fell  on  them," — rushed  on  them  with  a 
view  to  spoil.  An  unprovoked  attack. 
Exceptions  to  the  general  rule  in  Prov.  xvi.  7. 
— *'  Slain  the  servants."  Preparation  for  death 
to  be  taken  into  daily  duties.  Blessed  to  be 
ready  when  the  Master  calls.  Sudden  death 
then  sudden  glory. — "  I  only  am  escaped/* 
by  God's  special  Providence  and  Satan's 
malice  Some  escape  from  danger  as 
"brands  plucked  out  of  the  burning" 
(Amos  iv.  11). 

2.  Destruction  of  the  sheep  by  lightning 
fver.  16).  "  While  he  was  yet  speaking. ' 
Fiendish  rapidity  of  Satan's  work.  Aims  at 
stunning  and  overwhelming  the  sufferer. 
Trials  often  like  rapidly  succeeding  billows. 
Deep  calleth  unto  deep  (Ps.  xlii.  7).  Troubles 
seldom  single.  "  Welcome  misfortune,  if 
you  come  alone  "  [^Basque  Proverb\  —  *^  Fire 
of  God"' — Marg.y  "a  great  fire,'*  (like 
Ps.  civ.  Id).  "Hot  thunderbolts"  (Ps. 
Ixxviii.  48).  Rapid  lightnings,  apparently 
sent  by  God  though  really  by  Satan.  A  cut 
in  the  words  put  into  the  mouth  of  the 
shepherds.  Act  of  an  angry  God.  The 
object  to  represent  God  as  cruel  and  unjust, 
and  so  bring  Job  to  curse  Him.  A  limited 
mysterious  power  given  to  Satan  over  the 
elements  of  nature  (Eph.  ii.  2). — "From 
heaven."  From  the  upper  regions  of  the 
air,  but  apparently  from  God.  The  air  or 
lower  heavens  the  place  of  Satan's  special 
presence  and  operations  (Luke  x.l8;  Eph. 
li  2;  vi.  12).— *' Sheep."  The  greatest 
part  of  Job's  wealth  (ver.  3.)  Most  fre- 
quently used  in  sacrifice.  Smitten,  though 
sanctified  by  frequent  offerings.  God's  ways 
often  dark  and  mysterious. 

3.  Capture  of  the  camels  (verse  17). 
"Chaldaeans,"  Ueb.  "  Chasdim."  The  name 
related  to  that  of  Chesed,  Abraham's  nephew 
(Gen.  xxii.  22).  Two  such  peoples  men- 
tioned in  Genesis : — (1)  The  old  Semitic 
Chaldseans  of  the  mountains,  in  the  north 
of  Assyria  and  Mesopotamia  (Gen.  x.  22 ; 
xi.  28,31);  Abraham  himself  of  these  (Gen. 
xi.  28).  (2)  The  later  Chaldseans  of 
Mesopotamia,  descended  from  Nahor, 
Abraham's  brother  (Gen.  xxii.  22).  Called 
by  Jeremiah  an  "ancient  nation"  (Jer.  v.  15). 
A  fierce  and  warlike  people  (Hab.  i.  66, 11). 
First  subdued  by  the  Assyrians.  In  time 
overcame  their  masters,  and  formed  the 
Chaldsean  or  Babylonian  Empire  under 
Nabopolassar,  a  viceroy  in  Babylon,  about 
600  B.C.  Their  empire  overthrown  by  Cyrus, 
who  took  Babylon,  58 'i  B.C.  In  Job's  time 
a  body  of  hardy  mountaineers.  Always 
strong  enough  to  make  such  a  raid.  More 
fierce    and    powerful    than    the    Sabeans. 

u 


strokes  increase  in  severity.  Satan  inflames 
his  instruments  with  his  own  murderous 
passions. — "  Three  bands.'*  To  attack  in 
various  directions  and  let  nothing  escape. 
(So  Gen.  xiv.  15).  Three  bands  under  so 
many  captains,  Satan  really  commander-in- 
chief. — "  Fell  upon  the  camels."  Marg. 
"rushed."  Made  a  raid  upon  them,  as 
1  Sam.  xxiii.  27;  xxx.  14.  Arabs  sometimes 
make  a  raid  twenty  or  thirty  days'  march 
from  their  tents. — "Carried  them  away." 
Three  thousand  camels  no  slight  loss.  Sala^ 
goes  the  full  length  of  his  cord.  More 
grevious  to  be  stripped  of  riches  than  to 
be  always  poor. 

4.  Loss  of  all  his  children  (verses  18, 19). 
"  While  he  was  yet  speaking.**  Satan  never 
at  rest  till  he  has  done  all  the  mischief  he 
is  permitted.  Good  to  be  always  ready  for 
another  and  a  worse  encounter.  Seneca  says, 
'Caesar  sometimes  put  up  his  sword,  but 
never  put  it  off.'—"  Thy  sons.**  The  trial 
reaches  its  climax.  His  sons  the  object  of 
his  greatest  solicitude.  The  subjects  of 
so  many  prayers  might  have  been  expected 
to  be  spared,  or  at  least  some  of  them. 
The  mystery  increases. — "  Were  eating  and 
drinking."  When  Job  feared  most  they 
might  be  sinning  (verse  5).  Possible  to 
be  taken  from  the  festive  board  to  the  Judg- 
ment-seat. Festivity  unsafe  without  God 
and  His  blessing  in  it.  Well  to  be  prepared 
to  pass  from  earthly  joys  to  heavenly  ones. — 
"Behold.'*  Marks  the  greatness  of  the 
calamity.  Seven  sons  and  three  daughters, 
— the  whole  of  Job's  children, — all  arrived 
at  maturity, — all  prosperous  and  happy, — 
cut  off  at  one  stroke, — suddenly  and  un- 
expectedly,— amid  the  hilarity  of  a  feast  I 
— "  A  ^reat  wind."  A  tornado,  cyclone,  or 
whirl wmd.  Common  in  the  East.  Mysterious 
power  of  Satan  to  excite  the  atmosphere 
into  a  storm  *  Prince  of  the  power  of  the 
air.*  Wind  in  God's  hand,  but  now  for 
His  own  purpose,  partially  and  for  a  time, 
transferrea  to  Satan's  Prov.  xxx.  4). 
— "From  the  wilderness."  Whence  the 
fiercest  winds  came  (Jer.  iv.  11 ;  xiii.  24). 
From  the  south  part  of  the  great  North 
Arabian  Desert  (Is.  xxi.  1 ;  Hos.  xiii.  15). — 
"  Smote  the  four  corners  of  the  house.** 
At  once  or  successively;  coming  with  force 
and  steady  aim  as  under  Satan  s  direction. 
All  the  appearance  of  the  work  of  an  angry 
God.—"  And  it  fell.'*  The  object  for  which 
Satan  raised  the  storm.  Such  catastrophes 
not  uncommon  in  the  East.  Houses  of  com- 
paratively frail  construction  (Matt.  vii.  27). 
Well-known  violence  of  tornadoes.  One  in 
England,  in  1811,  tore  up  plantations  and 
levelled  houses  with  the  ground,  carried 
large  trees,  torn  up  by  the  roots,  to  the 
distance  of  twenty  or  thirty  yards;   lifted 


BOMILSTIC  COMMBNTART:  JOB. 


exAp.  I. 


cows  from  one  field  to  another ;  and  carried 
haystacks  to  a  considerable  distance.  Camels 
sometimes  lifted  off  their  legs  by  Eastern 
whirlwinds.  Ood  able  to  make  our  plagues 
wonderful  (Deut.  xxviii.  59).— "Upon  the 
young  men."  Mentioned  as  more  likely  to 
overwhelm  the  father;  sisters  incladed. 
— "  And  they  are  dead."  Crushing  tidings 
for  a  father's  ears.  All  dead,— dead  all^at 
once, — dead  prematurely ^ — dead  by  a  sudden, 
unusual^  and  miserable  death, — dead  as  if  by 
tha  hand  of  Ood  Himself  as  Bildad  regarded 


them,— dead  at  the  time  that  Job  had  most  need 
of  their  comfort  under  his  other  calamities. 
Job  reduced,  in  one  short  day,  from  being 
one  of  the  happiest  of  fathers  to  a  state  of 
childlessness  and  misery.  Our  heaviest  trials 
often  through  our  sweetest  comforts.  The 
sharpest  thorns  on  the  same  tree  with  the 
loyeliest  flowers.  The  beauty  of  all  earthly 
blessings  quickly  blasted  (Is.  xl.  6,  8).  Too 
much  not  to  be  expected  from  Qod,  nor  too 
little  from  the  creature. 


CHAPTEE  I.    20—22. 


FIFTH  PART  OF  INTRODUCTION— THE  RESULT  OF  SATAN'S  ATTEMPTS 


I.  Job's  grief  (ver.   20).     "Then  Job 
arose."     Probably  found  by  the  tidings  in  the 
usual  posture  of  Orientals.     Aroused  from 
wonted  calmness.      His  nature  now  stirred 
to  its  depths.     Deeply  moved,  but  not  pros- 
trated by  iiis  calamities.—"  Rent  his  mantle," 
or  robe ;  long  outer  garment  worn  by  men  of 
rank  (1  Sam.  xv.  27;  xviii.  4),  and  by  priests 
(1  Sam.  xxviii.  14;  Ex.  xxviii.  31);  still  worn 
by  wealthy  Arabs.    Rent  it  in  token  of  sorrow 
and  humiliation    (Gen.  xxxvii.   34).      Job 
neither  too  insensible  to  feel  grief,  nor  too 
proud  to  acknowledge  it.    Piety  not  stoicism  ; 
sharpens  rather  than  blunts  sensibility.    As 
little  virtue  in  not  feeling  sorrow  as  in  being 
overcome  by  it.     Not  to  feel  is  to  be  either 
more  or  less  than  a  man.  Jesus  wept.  Insen- 
sibility under  chastening  reproved  as  a  sin 
(Jer.  V.  3 ;  Hosea  vii.  9).    When  God  afflicts 
us  we  should  afflict  ourselves  (Jer.  xxxi.  18). 
Grace  teaches  us,  not  to  be  without  sorrow, 
but  to  moderate  it,  and   to  connect  with  it 
penitence  and  submission,  faith  and  hope  (2 
por-  7/i-  11 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13).— "Shaved  his 
head.    Another  token  of  mourning  (Ezra  ix. 
3;  Is    XV.  2;  xxii.  12;  Jer.  vii.  29;  xli.  5). 
Jorbidden  by  the  law  only  in  certain  cases 
and  m  certain  forms  (Lev.  xix.  27 ;    xxi.  5  ; 
Deut.  xiv.  1).  Nature  demands  some  external 
sign  of  grief,  and  religion  does  not  forbid  it.— 
"  Fell  down  upon  the  ground."   (1)  In  grief- 
so  Joshua  (Josh.  vii.  6);  (2)  In  humiliation; 
(3)  In  adoration.     Trouble  a  blessing  when  it 
leads  to  self-abasement  before   God.     Satan 
expected  to  see  Job  standing  on  his  feet  and 
cursmg  the  author  of  his  troubles 

II.  His  piety  (ver.  20,  21).  "And  wor- 
shipped. Praised  God  and  acknowleged 
his  sovereignty.  Bowed  submissivly  to  His 
"^^^\  anoi  dispensations.  Instead  of  cursing 
God  Job  adores  His  justice,  goodness,  and 
holiness.  Afflictions  draw  a  godly  man  nearer 
to  Ood  instead  of  driving  him  from  Him.  A 
sign  of  a  gracious  state  to  be  worshipping 
when  God  is  chastising.     The  best  way  to 


bear  and  be  benefited  by  trials  is  to  take  them 
to  God .    That  trouble  cannot  but  be  blest  which 
brings  us  to  our  knees.     Faith   calms   the 
crushed  spirit  by  conducting  it  to  a  God  in 
Christ.— "And  said."    Job  opens  his  mouth, 
but   not   as   Satan   expected.    Serious  and 
suitable  considerations  to  be  employed  under 
trouble.     Truths   suggested  by  religiou   to 
quiet  the  spirit  and  preserve  it  in  patience. 
— "  Naked  came  I  forth,"  &c.   Job's  first  con- 
sideration.     Nothing  originally  ours.     Man 
by  nature  destitute  even  of  clothes  for  his 
body.     The  truth  in  the  text  the  apostle's 
argument   for  contentment  (1  Tim.   vi.  7). 
— "  Naked  shall  I  return  thither."      Second 
consideration.     Earth  not  our  home.     We 
return  to  our  parent  dust.     Reference  to 
Gen.  iii.  19.     These  words  probably  copied 
or  referred  to  in  Ecc.  v.  15,  and  xii.  7.     Our 
condition  in  this  world  of  less  consequence  as 
we  are  so  soon  to  leave  it. — Third  considera- 
tion.     We  must  leave  the  world  naked  as 
we  entered  it  (1  Tim.  vi.  7).     Death  strips 
Dives  of  his  fine  linen  and  Lazarus  of  his 
filthy  rags.      Grace  the  only  riches  we  can 
carry  out  of  the   world  with   us.      To   be 
stripped  of  earthly  possessions  only  a  question 
of  time.      "Thither,"— unto   my   n-other's 
womb,  used  figuratively  for  the  earth.     So 
the  "  lower  parts  of  the  earth  "  used  for  the 
womb  (Ps.  cxxxix.  1 5).  The  same  term  some- 
times used  both  literally  and  figuratively  in 
the  same  sentence.     So   Matt.   viii.   22. — 
"  The  Lord  gave."  The  language  of  truth 
and  piety.     Contrasted  with  that  of   pride 
and  atheism,— "My  own  hand  hath  gotten 
me  this  wealth"  (Deut.  viii.  17).     Heathens 
by  the  light  of  nature  called  God  the  "  Giver 
of  good  things."    Power  to  get  wealth  the 
gift  of  God  (Deut.  viii.   18;  Prov.  x.   22). 
"  Gave,"  and  therefore  has  the  right  to  with- 
draw at  his  pleasure.     What  we  possess  we 
hold   only   as   stewards  of  another's  goods 
(Luke  xvi.  1—12;  1  Peter  iv.  10.)— "The 
Lord  hath  taken  away."    God's  hand  in  our 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


losses  as  well  as  our  gains.  Divine  philo- 
sophy. So  Joseph  Gen.  xlv.  5 — 8  j  David, 
Ps.  xxxix.  9  J  Eli,  1  Sam.  iii.  18.  "  The 
Lord," — not  the  Sabeans  and  Clialdseans, 
tlie  lightning  or  the  whirlwinds.  The  philo- 
sophy that  rests  on  second  causes  or  natural 
laws  a  philosophy  falsely  so  called.  Satan 
only  the  author  of  Job's  calamities  as  he 
received  permission  from  God.  The  arrows 
God's,  whoever  shoots  them.  Evil  as  well  as 
good  from  God  either  directly  or  permis- 
sively  (Is.  xlv.  7 ;  Amos  iii.  6).  Man's  and 
Satan's  sin  overruled  by  God  for  good ;  not 
therefore  the  less  sinful  (Acts  ii.  23).  God's 
hand  in  trouble  seen  by  the  eye  of  faith,  an 
alleviation ;  otherwise  an  aggravation. 

III.  The  Victory. 

1.  Positive  side.  Job  blesses  God  instead 
of  cursing  Him  (ver.  21).  "Blessed  be  the 
Wame  of  the  Lord."  The  word  chosen  with 
reference  to  Satan's  charge.  The  same  word 
used,  but  in  its  opposite  and  proper  sense. 
Satan  thus  entirely  defeated.  Every  word  of 
Job  gives  the  lie  to  his  slander.  Power  of 
grace  that  teaches  us  to  bless  God  in  troubles 
and  adversities  (2  Sam.  xv.  26).  No  ground, 
even  in  the  worst  times,  to  murmur  against 
God,  much  to  bless  Him.  Such  grounds  are : 
(1 )  Often  greater  love  and  richer  blessing 
when  He  takes  away  than  when  He  gives. 
Our  greatest  trials  and  losses  often  our  richest 
mercies.  "  For  all  I  bless  Thee,  most  for  the 
severe  '*  [Young']. — 2.  In  the  greatest  suf- 
ferings and  losses  the  believer's  main  interests 
are  secure.  The  pieces  of  silver  may  be 
lost,  the  casket  of  jewels  remains  safe.  (3.) 
The  sufferings  of  believers  are  seeds  to  bear 
precious  fruit  both  here  and  hereafter  (Rom. 
viii.  28  }  Heb.  xii.  10,  11).  Believers  there- 
fore strengthened  '*  unto  all  patience  and 
long  sufferings  with  joyfulness*"  (Col.  i.  11). 
IVue  Christian  piety  the  purest  heroism. 
Widely  different  from  stoical  insensibility  and 
pride.  Believers  weep,  but  bless  God  through 
their  tears.  Job's  blessing  God  must  have 
sent  an  echo  through  the  heaven  of  heavens. 
Unprecedented  trials,  heightened  by  the  con- 
trast of  unprecedented  prosperity,  meet  not 
merely  with  submission,  but  with  blessing 
on  the  Author  of  both.  To  bless  God  in 
prosperity  is  only  natural;  to  bless  Him 
m  adversity  and  trouble  is  music  that 
fills  heaven  and  earth  with  gladness. 
Job's  calamities  appeared  only  to  argue  God 
against  him.  Mighty  faith  that  blesses  Gk)d 
while  smiting  our  comforts  to  the  ground. 
The  grace  enjoined  on  N.  T.  believers,  exem- 
plified in  this  O.  T.  saint  (1  Thess.  v.  18). 
To  bless  God  in  our  comforts  the  way  to  have 


them  increased ;  to  bless  Him  in  our  afflic* 
tions  the  way  to  have  them  removed  \ Angus- 
tine].  A  thankful  and  pious  spirit  the  true 
philosopher's  stone— turns  all  things  into 
gold.  Faith  gilds  our  crosses  and  sees  a  silver 
lining  in  the  darkest  cloud. — ^Matter  for  praise 
under  the  most  trying  dispensations; — (1) 
The  past  enjoyment  of  undeserved  mercies 
so  long  continued ;  (2)  The  present  enjoyment 
of  some  mercies  however  few ;  (3)  'ihe  pos- 
session of  God  Himself  as  in  Christ  our  God 
and  portion ;  (4)  The  assurance  that  the  hea- 
viest trials  work  together  for  our  good  ;  (5) 
The  hope  of  a  better  and  enduring  inheritance 
reserved  for  us  in  heaven, — "  The  name  of  the 
Lord," — the  Lord  Himself  as  revealed  to  us 
in  the  Word.  Here  "Jehovah,"  the  ever- 
living  faithful  covenant  God  of  His  people. 
The  name  here  thrice  repeated.  Perhaps  not 
without  a  mystery,  like  Num.  vi.  24 — 27, 
compared  with  Matt,  xxviii.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xiii. 
14 ;  1  John  v.  7.  The  name  fondly  dwelt  upon 
by  the  afflicted  patriarch.  The  name  of  ihe  Lord 
the  tried  believer's  sweetest  consolation  and 
strongest  support.  A  strong  tower  into  which 
the  righteous  runs  and  is  safe  (Prov.  xviii.  10.) 
2.  Negative  side  of  victory.  In  all 
these  trials  Job  kept  from  sinning  (ver.  22.) 
"  Sinned  not,"  as  Satan  desired  and  declared 
he  would.  Glorious  triumph  of  grace  to  keep 
from  sinning  in  such  circumstances.  Sinned 
not,  either  by  impatience  or  passion.  Refer- 
ence to  the  case  in  hand.  Grace  given  to 
keep  us  from  sin,  not  absolutely,  but  relatively 
and  comparatively.  Sin  more  or  less  in  all  a 
believer's  actions,  though  all  his  actions  not 
sinful.  Scripture  written  that  the  believer 
sin  not  (1  John  ii.  1).  Looking  to  Christ, 
Peter  walked  on  the  water ;  looking  to  the 
wind,  he  began  to  sink  in  it  (Matt.  xiv.  28 — 
31).  The  flesh  or  old  nature  in  a  believer  must 
sin;  the  spirit  or  new  nature  in  him  cannot. 
(1  John  iii.  9).  A  constant  struggle  between 
the  spirit  and  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  17).  A 
believer's  duty  and  privilege  to  walk  in  the 
spirit,  and  so  be  kept  from  fulfilling  the 
desire  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  16).  I  feel 
and  grieve,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  I  fret  at 
nothing  [John  Wesley]. — "Nor  charged  God 
foolishly."  (1)  Imputed  no  folly,  injustice, 
or  impropriety  to  God ;  (2)  Vented  no  foolisli 
and  impious  murmurs  against  Him.  Ascribed 
nothing  to  God  unworthy  of  His  justice, 
goodness,  and  wisdom.  Entertained  no  dis- 
honourable thought,  uttered  no  murmuring 
ttjorfl?  against  Him.  Impiety  the  greatest  /oily . 
To  murmur  against  God's  dealings  is  as  foolish 
as  it  is  wicked.  To  misconstrue  God*s  charac- 
ter and  conduct,  the  great  sin  to  he  guarded 
against  under  heavy  trial*. 


IS 


nOMTlETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


OHAP.   II. 


CHAPTER  TI.  1—6. 

SIXTH    FART    OF    INTRODUCTION,— PREPARATION    FOR    JOB'S 

FURTHER    TRIAL. 


I.  Second  Celestial  Council  (verse  1). 

"  Again  there  was  a  day,"  some  time  after 
the  events  aheady  related.  Not  said  how 
long.  Heavenly  things  represented  under 
the  figure  of  earthly  ones,  in  condescension 
to  our  capacity.  In  heaven  no  succession  of 
day  and  ni.^lit  (Rev.  xxi.  25). — "The  sons  of 
God  came,"  &c.  Same  scene  represented  as 
befor  e.  God's pi'ovide</ce  continually  exercised^ 
and  extending  to  all  times  and  events.  His 
angelic  ministers  continually  serving  Him  in 
their  respective  spheres  (Kev.  xxii.  3).  "  His 
state  is  •'«^ngly ;  thousands  at  his  bidding 
speed,"  &c.  Good  to  remember — "  They  also 
serve  who  only  stand  and  wait.**  Angels  in- 
tensely interested  in  the  salvation  of  men^  and 
employed  in  helping  to  promote  it  (Acts  viii. 
26 ;  X.  3). — "  Satan  also  came/*  Summoned, 
or  expecting  a  fresh  permission.  Like  Saul 
of  Tarsus,  "  breathing  out  threatening  and 
slaughter,*'  and  eager  to  get  out  a  fresh  com- 
mission of  destruction  (Acts  ix.  1). — "To 
present  himself  before  the  Lord,**  having 
previously  received  a  commission.  This, 
therefore,  omitted  in  the  former  account. 
Men^  angelSy  and  devils^  amenable  to  Ood. 

II,  God's  testimony  to  Job's  stead- 
fastness (verse  2).  *'  From  whence  comest 
thou  P "  Happy  for  us  that  God's  eye  is 
continually  on  Satan's  movements  (Luke 
xxii.  31,  32). — "  From  going  to  and  fro.** 
Active  and  restless  as  ever.  Says  nothing 
of  the  harm  he  has  done.  An  evil  doer  seldom 
has  the  courage  to  speak  the  whole  truth  (2 
Kings  V.  25). — "Walking  up  and  down  in 
it.**  God  says  the  same  thing  of  him,  but 
tells  us  how  (I  Peter  v.  8).  As  Job  still  re- 
taiiied  his  integrity,  so  Satan  his  assiduiti/. 
Believers  neither  to  be  ignorant  of  his  de- 
vices, nor  forgetful  of  his  zeal.  (Verse  3). 
"  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job?*' 
Job  still  God's  servant.  God's  estimate  of 
His  jteople  not  diminished  by  their  sufferings. 
Precious  testimony  to  the  poor  persecuted 
church  at  Smyrna  (Rev.  ii.  9)—."  Still  hold- 
eth  fast  his  integrity.**  Perfect  and  upright 
as  before.  *'  Still,"  notwithstanding  these 
severe  and  accumulated  trials.  "Holdeth 
fast,"  implying  exertion.  Hard  to  hold  out 
in  such  a  storm.  Satan* s  efforts  to  rob  Job 
of  his  integrity.  Job's  to  retain  it.  Whatever 
a  godly  man  loses  he  will  keep  his  integrity. 
"  If  you  love  my  soul  away  with  it,"  said  a 


martyr  at  the  stake,  when  tempted  with  a 
pardon  to  recant.     Two  things  never  to  be 
let  go — Christ's  righteousness,  and  a  good  con- 
science.   The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  written 
to    strengthen  tried  believers  to  hold  fast 
their  profession  (Heb.  iii.  14 ;  iv.  ]4  ;  x.  23, 
35,  39).     God  a  concerned  and  compassionate 
obsetner  of  his  people's  conduct  under  trials 
(Jer.  xxxi.  18  ;  Hos.  xiv.  8).  Commends  their 
conduct  in  them,  without  at  once  delivering 
them  from  them.    What  is  well  done  is  sure, 
sooner   or  later,  to  receive  His    approving 
testimony.     God  neit  her  conceals  our  graces 
nor  our  improvement  of  them.     To  continue 
good  while  suffering  evil,  the  crown  of  goodness. 
A  good  man  persevering  in  evil   times  an 
object  of  Divine  admiration  [Seneca j.—GoA's 
further  commendation  of  Job  now  enlarged. 
Grace  qrows   in  conflict.      "Although  thou 
movedst  me  against  him."     Implies  success- 
ful urgency  (So  1  Kings  xxi.  25).     Spoken 
after  the  manner  of  men.    Satan  an  excellent 
orator  if  he  but  have  an  audience  \Trapp\ — 
"Thou  movedst  me."     God  "afllicteth  not 
willingly  "  (Lam.  iii.  33).     Satan  an  earnest 
pleader  agamst  the  saints :  Christ  as  earm  st 
for  them  (John  xvii.  11,  15,  17).     Satan's 
malice  and  calumny  the  occasion  of  Job*s 
sufferings,  and  so  of  his  subsequent  glory. 
God's  secret  purpose  to  exhibit  the  reality 
and  preciousness  of  His  servant's  faith.     All 
questioning   of   the   efficacy  of  Christ's  re- 
demption and  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  to 
be  for  ever  sUenced.     Not  only  events  them- 
selves  purposed  by  God,  but  the  way  and  occa* 
sion  of  their  occurrence. — "  To  destroy  him,*' 
Marg.,  "  to  swallow  him  up."     Satan's  cruel 
intention.  Satan's  object  in  trial  is  to  destroy  ; 
God's,  to  prove  and  purify.     God's  sympathy 
with  His  suffering  people.    What  Satan  called 
a  touchy  God  calls  destruction.     Awful  judg- 
ment to  be  left  in  the  hands  of  the  roaring  lion 
(1  Peter  V.8).—"  Without  cause."  (1.)  With- 
out  any  special  sin  of  his  to  merit  it.  This  testi- 
mony to  be  remembered  throughout  the  book. 
Believed   and   maintained   by   Job;    denied 
by   his   three    friends.      The   cause   of  his 
perplexity   and    distraction   aggravated    by 
their     opposition.        Tried    believers     often 
ignorant  of  God's  thoughts  concerning  them, 
and  of  the  cause  and  object  of  their  trial. — 
(2.)     Without   ground   or   necessity  for    it. 
Satan's  charge  proved  by  the  result  to  be 
unfounded. 

17 


CHAP.  n. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


III.  Satan's  farther  accnsation  (verse 
4).  *'  Satan  answered  the  Lord."  Satanic 
impudence.  Though  defeated,  he  has  still 
an  answer  for  God.  Boldness  acquired  by  a 
course  of  iniquity.  A  whore's  forehead  (Jer. 
iii.  3). — '*  Skin  for  skin.*'  A  proverbial  ex- 
pression. A  mere  question  of  barter.  Job 
has  yet  a  whole  skin.  He  will  part  with 
anything  to  save  his  life.  Will  give  up  wliat 
he  haSy  to  save  himself.  "We  must  give  up 
our  beards  to  save  our  heads"  [Turkish  Pro- 
verb'].— "All  that  a  man  hath  he  will  give  for 
his  life."  Not  only  his  property  and  children, 
but  probably  his  religion  too.  The  test  not 
yet  sufficiently  severe.  The  screw  needs  only 
to  be  driven  a  little  farther.  Satan  argues 
still  on  the  principles  of  man's  selfishness. 
His  words  too  often  verified  in  fallen  hu- 
manity. Peruvians  sacrificed  their  firstborn 
to  redeem  their  own  life  when  the  priest  pro- 
nounced them  mortally  sick.  Cranmer,  in  a 
moment  of  weakness,  at  first  recanted  in  order 
to  escape  martyrdom.  Abraham,  when  left 
to  himself  to  save  his  life,  gave  up  Sarah, 
and  instigated  her  to  tell  a  lie  (Gen.  xii.  12, 
13).  Yet  the  statement  a  libel  upon  the  race. 
Satan  true  to  his  character.  Self-preservation 
a  powerful  instinct,  but  not  supreme.  With  a 
good  man,  subordinate  to  the  principles  of 
morality  and  religion.  Yields  to  faith,  hope, 
and  charity.  Paul  counted  not  his  life  dear 
to  him  that  he  might  finish  his  course  and 
ministry  with  joy  (Acts  xx.  24).  Daniel, 
Stephen,  and  all  "the  noble  army  of  martyrs" 
ffive  Satan  the  lie.  Men  and  women  have 
died,  "  refusing  to  accept  deliverance,  to  ob- 
tain a  better  resurrection"  (Heb.  xi.  35). 
"  Welcome,  death !  "  said  Hugh  M'Kail,  on 
the  martyr's  scaffold.  "Welcome,  if  need 
be,  the  axe  or  the  gibbet ;  but  evil  befall  the 
tongue  that  dares  to  make  me  so  infamous  a 
proposal,"  said  Kossuth^  in  reply  to  the  Sul- 
tan's proposal  to  save  his  life  by  renouncing 
Christianity.  — "  Touch  his  bone  and  his 
flesh  '*  (verse  5).  Strike  home  at  his  person. 
Person  nearer  than  property  or  children. 


Intenaest  pain  and  suffering  intended.  The 
iron  to  enter  the  soul.  Satan's  cruelty.  A 
merciless  tormentor  (Matt,  xviii.  34).  Un* 
wearied  in  his  efforts  to  desti-oy  Always 
needful  to  prepare  for  new  assaults.  Satan 
acquainted  with  the  tendency  of  great  bodily 
suffering.  Fain^  a  powerful  means  of  disquiet- 
ing and  weakening  the  mind.  Without  disor- 
dering its  faculties,  able  to  exliaust  its  ener- 
gies and  sink  it  into  despondency.  A 
piercing  shaft  in  Satan's  quiver.  A  thorn  in 
the  flesh  Paul's  great  temptation  (2  Cor. 
xii.  7,  9).  Men  "  blasphemed  God  because 
of  the  pain*^  (Rev.  xvi.  9).  This  Satan's 
expectation  in  regard  to  Job. — "He  will  curse 
thee,"  &c.  Same  assertion  as  before.  Satan 
unwilling  to  yield.  Men^  lost  to  all  right 
principle  themselves,  have  no  faith  in  the  virtue 
of  othen, 

IT.  The  renewed  permission  (verse  6). 
"He  is  in  thine  hand"  Before,  only  his 
property  and  children ;  now^  himself.  Saints, 
for  trial  J  mysteriously  given  for  a  time  into 
Satan's  hand.  The  persecuted  church  at 
Smyrna  (Rev.  ii.  10).  Unknown  to  us  how 
far  bodily  affliction  may  be  from  Satan's  hand 
(Luke  xiii.  16).  Though  God  lengthens 
Satan's  chain,  he  never  loosens  it.  The  saints 
never  in  Satan's  hand  without  Christ  being 
with  them  (Dan.  iii.  25  ;  Ps.  xxiii.  4 ;  xci. 
15;  Is.xliii.2). — "  But  save  his  life."  Satan's 

f)ermission  in  regard  to  tlie  saints  always 
imited.  He  might  scratch  with  his  paw, 
but  not  fasten  liis  fang  {Trapp].  Job's  life 
to  be  endangered,  but  not  destroyed.  Life 
and  death  in  God's  hand,  not  Satan's.  A 
mercy  to  have  life  spared  (Jer.  xxxix.  18). 
Precious  blessings  still  for  Job  to  experience, 
and  important  work  still  for  him  to  do.  A 
man  immortal  till  his  work  is  done.  The 
limit  set  in  Job's  case,  not  prescribed  in 
Christ's.  Christ,  as  the  Shepherd,  smitten 
to  death  in  the  room  of  the  sheep  (Zech. 
xiii.  7  i  John  x.  11). 


CHAPTER  II.    7—10. 
SEVENTH  PART  OF  INTRODUCTION;  JOB'S  FURTHER  TRIAL 


I.  Satan's  use  of   God's  permission 

(verse  7). 

**  So  went  Satan  forth."  Glad  in  obtaining 
his  wish,  like  Saul  on  his  way  to  Damascus. 
Resolved  to  use  his  liberty  to  the  utmost. 
Gets  his  will,  but  with  limitation  (Luke  xxii. 
31,  32).— "Prom  the  presence  of  the  Lord." 
Like  Cain  (Gen.  iv.l6).  His  object  not  to 
•erve  God,  out  torture  man. — "  Smote  Job." 
18 


Implies  suddenness  and  vehemence.  The 
hand  heavy,  though  unseen.  So  Herod 
smitten  by  the  angel  (Acts  xii.  23).  Such 
smiting  often  ascribed  to  God,  whoever  the 
instrument  (Deut.  xxviii.  35).  Satanic  in- 
genuity in  smiting  the  body  yet  preserving 
life  and  mental  faculties.  Piety  and  patience 
under  one  trial,  no  security  against  another 
and  a  ieapur.  Heavy  burdens  laid  on  strong 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  f  JOB. 


CKAT.  II. 


Blioulders.  God  knows  the  metal  He  gives 
Satan  to  ring  [^Trapp].  Our  comfort  is,  that 
He  lays  no  trial  on  His  children  beyond  what 
He  enables  them  to  bear  (1  Cor.  x.  13). 

II.  Job's  Disease. 

"Sore  boils."  Heb.,  a  bad,  malignant 
ulcer,  or  inflammatory  ulceration.  Worst 
kind  of  leprosy.  Inflicted  on  the  Egyptians 
and  threatened  to  the  Israelites  (Deut.  xxviii. 
27).  Prevalent  both  in  Arabia  and  Egypt. 
Made  the  sufferer  loathsome  to  himself  and 
his  nearest  relations  (ch.  lix.  13,  19). 
Appeared  to  make  him  out  as  an  object  of 
the  Divine  dis[)leasure;  as  Miriam,  Gehazi, 
and  King  Azariah.  In  an  advanced  stage, 
fingers,  toes,  and  hands,  gradually  fall  off 
(ch.  XXX.  17,  30).  Attended  with  great 
attenuation  and  debilil  y  of  body  (xvi.  8 ;  xix. 
20 ;  XXX.  18).  Restless  nights  and  terrifying 
dreams  (xxx.  17;  vii.  13, 14).  Anxiety  of  mind 
and  loathing  of  life  (vii.  15).  Foul  breath 
and  difficult  respiration  (vii.  4;  xiii.  15;  xxx. 
17).  The  skin  itchy,  of  great  tenseness,  full 
of  cracks  and  rents,  and  covered  with  hard 
or  festering  ulcers,  and  with  black  scales 
(ii.  8;  xix.  20;  xxx.  18;  vii.  5;  xxx.  30). 
The  feet  and  legs  swollen  to  an  enormous 
size ;  hence  the  disease  also  called  Elephan- 
tiasis. The  mouth  swollen  and  the  coun- 
tenance distorted,  giving  the  patient  a  lion- 
like appearance ;  hence  another  name  to  the 
disease,  Leoniiasis.  Contagious  through  the 
mere  breath.  Often  hereditary.  As  a  rule,  in- 
curable. In  any  case,  one  of  the  most  pro- 
traded  as  well  as  dreadful  diseases. — "  From 
the  crown,"  &c.  So  in  Deut.  xxviii.  35.  The 
body  one  continued  sore.  Job  escaped  with 
the  skin  of  his  teeth — sores  every wliere  else 
(xix.  20).  The  tongue  \eii  free  for  an  obvious 
reason.  Satan's  mercies  cruel.  Rare  spec- 
tacle for  angels;  the  holiest  man  on  earth  tlie 
most  afflicted.  Astounding  sight  for  men; 
the  richest  and  greatest  man  in  the  land  made 
at  once  the  most  loathsome  and  miserable. 
Impossible  to  say  to  what  extent  God  may  allow 
his  dearest  children  to  be  afflicted.  After  Job, 
no  saint  need  be  staggered  at  his  suffering. 
Yet  all  Job's  sufferings  under  Divine  inspec- 
tion and  admeasurement  (Is.  xxvii.  8). — 
A  circumstance  marking  the  extremity  of 
Job's  affliction  (verse  8).  "And  he  took  him 
a  potsherd.'*  As  near  at  hand.  Arab  jars 
thin  and  frail,  and  easily  broken — sometimes 
by  merely  putting  them  down  on  the  floor. 
Hence  fragments  of  broken  jars  found  every- 
where (Is.  xxx.  14).  A  potsherd  used  by 
Job  instead  of  a  napkin.  Possibly,  however, 
an  instrument  still  used  in  the  East  for  similar 
purposes.  Required  to  remove  the  purulent 
matter  from  his  sores,  and  perhaps  to  allay 
their  irritation.  His  hands  and  ftngers  them- 
selves affected,  or  the  foulness  of  his  sores 
2— '3 


forbidding  the  touch.  "Without  friend,  phy 
sician,  or  relative  to  attend  to  his  disease. 
In  the  case  of  Lazarus,  dogs  supplied  the 
place  of  the  potsherd  (Luke  xvi.  20  —  21). 
God\s  dearest  saints  often  reduced  to  the  greatest 
extremities. — "  Sat  down  among  the  ashes." 
In  token  of  mourning  (xlii.  0;  Jon.  iii.  6; 
Matt.  xi.  21);  and  of  abasement  (Jer.  vi.  26; 
Is.  Ixi.  3;  Iviii.  5,  Ezek.  xxvii.  30). 
The  ash-heap  probably  outside  the  city. 
Dung-hills  still  similarly  used  in  the  East. 
One  part  of  the  leper's  affliction,  that  he  was 
to  be  removed  from  society  (Lev.  xiii.  46 ; 
Num.  xii.  14  -  15  ;  2  Kings  xv.  5). 

1.  Increased  affliction  calls  for  increased 
humiliation, 

2.  Self-abasement  the  certain  way  to  Divine 
exaltation  (Jam.  iv.  9 — 10). 

III.  Job's  trial  from  his  wife  (verse  9). 

'*  Then  said  his  wife."  Amazed  at  her  hus- 
band's sufferings  and  piety.  Herself  already 
tempted  and  overcome.  Spared  by  Satan  to  aiiv 
him  i  n  his  attem  pts  upon  her  husband.  Another 
of  his  cruel  mercies.  She  who  should  have 
been  a  comforter  now  becomes  a  tormentor. 
Her  former  piety  now  staggered  at  her  hus- 
band's trials.  Weak  professors  readily 
offended.  The  case  of  Adam  and  Kve  ex- 
pected to  be  repeated.  Satan  wise  in  select- 
ing his  instruments. 

1.  Those  who  fall  themselves  usually  em- 
ployed in  tempting  others. 

2.  Strongest  temptations  and  keenest  trials 
often  from  nearest  friends. 

"Dost  thou  still  retain  thine  integrity  ? " 
Already  affirmed  by  God  (verse  3).  What  is 
highly  esteemed  by  God  often  reproached  by 
many  and  vice  versa  (Luke  xvi.  15).  Job,  in 
his  wife's  eyes,  "  perversely  righteous  and 
absurdly  good  *'  [Sir  R.  Blackmore\  Per- 
severance in  piety  under  heavy  crosses  a  mystery 
to  the  world. — *'  Curse  God  and  die."  Three 
horrid  temptations — infidelity,  blasphemy,  and 
despair.  Same  word  used  as  in  i.  11;  but 
properly  denoting  "to  bless."  Perhaps  a 
bitter  taunt,  referring  to  i.  21  — *'  Go  on  with 
your  fine  religion  ! "  Probably — "  Renouncf 
God,  who  treats  you  so  vilely."  Includes 
the  idea  of  uttered  reproach  and  blasphem;^ 
(1  Kings  xxi.  10).  Job  urged  by  his  wife  to 
fulfil  Satan's  grand  desire. 

1.  Satan's  great  work  to  set  men  against 
their  Maker  and  His  service. 

2.  His  fiercest  temptations  often  reserved  for 
the  time  of  greatest  a£lictio7i. 

3.  Satan  tempts  men  to  put  the  worst  C07i- 
^truction  on  God's  dealings,  and  prompts  to  the 
worst  means  of  relief .  Points  Job  to  the  gulf 
of  Alheism  as  the  only  refuge  {Davidson]. 

4.  The  holiest  saints  liable  to  the  most  horrid 
and  bli/sphe/iious  temptations. 

6.  T'he  flesh  in  ourselves  and  othei'M  always 

19 


CHAY.  n. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


an  antagonist  to  faith  and  holiness  (Matt, 
xvi.  22  -  23). 

"  And  die."  As  the  end  of  all  your  trouble. 
So  Satan  tempted  Saul,  Ahithopel,  and  Judas 
Iscariot.  No  suggestion  so  horrid  but  Satan 
may  inject  it  into  a  believing  mind.  Job  after- 
wards still  pressed  with  the  same  temptation 
to  suicide  (vii.  15).  One  of  Satan" s  lies,  that 
death  ends  all.  His  object  to  make  men  die 
in  an  act  of  sin,  without  time  or  opportunity 
for  repentance.  His  friendliest  proposals  tend 
to  damnation  and  destruction.  Would  make 
men  imitators  of  his  blasphemy  and  partakers 
of  his  despair. 

IV.  Job's  continued  patience  and  piety 

(verse  10).  "But  he  said  unto  her."  Did 
not  curse  God,  and  then  use  Adam^s  excuse 
(Gftu.  iii.  12;.—"  Thou  speakest,"  &c.  Re- 
proves with  mingled  gentleness  and  firmness. 
So  Christ  reproved  Peter  (Mat.  xvi.  23). 
Dishonour  done  to  God  to  be  at  once  discounte- 
nanced and  reproved  (Lev.  xix.  17}  Prov. 
xxvii.  5;  xxix.  15). — "As  one."  A  gentle 
form  of  reproof.  Husbands  to  love  their 
wives,  and  not  be  bitter  against  them  (Col. 
iii.  19).  No  fierce  or  furious  language  here. 
Her  present  speech  not  like  her  usual  self. 
Speaks  out  of  iier  ordinary  character. 

1.  Believers  liable  to  be  drawn  into  sin. 

2.  Love  to  be  mingled  withy  and  to  mode- 
rate, r<?/)roo/ (Eph.  iv.  15). 

3.  Bsproof  to  be  respectful,  especially  when 
addressed  to  relatives  and  seniors  (1  Tim.  v.  1). 

"As  one  of  the  foolish  women  speaketh." 
**  Foolish,"  in  the  Old  Testament,  used  for 
"sinful  or  ungodly."  The  language  of 
Job's  wife,  that  of  foolish,  profane,  wicked 
women. 

1.  The  part  of  a  fool  to  deny  God  and  re- 
proach His  Providence  (Ps.  xiv.  ]). 

2.  Folly  to  judge  of  a  man's  condition  from 
God's  outward  dealings  with  him. 

3.  Unworthy  thoughts  of  God  the  mark 
of  a  carnal,  foolish  spirit. 

4.  Sin  not  ouly  vile  but  foolish, — as  truly 
opposed  to  man's  interests  as  to  God's  honour. 

5.  Impatience  and  passion  under  trouble  the 
greatest  foolishness.  Hard,  and  therefore 
senseless,  to  kick  against  the  pricks  (A.cts 
ix.  5).  Idolaters  wont  to  reproach  their 
gods  in  misfortune. 

"  What !  shall  \a  e  receive,"  &c.  P  What 
is  sinful  is  to  be  put  down,  not  with  rage  but 
wiih  reason.  Satan's  horrid  and  blasphemous 
ten  pt  it  ions  not  to  be  listened  to  for  a 
moment.  Sharp  reproof  consistent  with  love  and 
sometimes  required  by  ic  (Tit.  i.  13).  He  who 
knows  not  how  to  be  angry  knows  not  how 
to  love  \^Augu9tine.'\—**  Shall  we  receive  good 


at  the  hand  of  God  ?"  Present  miseries  not 
to  obliterate  past  mercies.  The  greatest 
sufferer  already  the  recipient  of  unnumbered 
benefits.  God's  mercies  "new  every  morn- 
ing." To  sinners  all  is  mercy  on  this  side 
of  hell.  Mercy  written  on  every  sunbeam 
that  gilds  and  gladdens  the  earth. — "  And 
shall  we  not  receive  evil  also?"  "Evil" 
put  for  affliction  and  adversity.  All  com- 
forts and  no  crosses,  unreasonable  to  expect 
and  undesirable  to  receive.  Evil  as  well  as 
good  to  be  not  only  expected,  but  thankfully 
accepted.  The  question  points  to  the  manner 
of  receiving,  as  well  as  the  matter  received. 
Both  equally  dispensed  by  God,  therefore 
both  to  be  reverentially  accepted  by  us. 
Both  worthy  of  God  to  dispense,  and  bene- 
ficial for  us  to  receive.  The  part  of  faith  and 
love,  to  accept  troubles  as  from  a  Father's 
hand.  The  true  spirit  of  adoption,  to  kiss 
the  rod  and  the  hand  that  holds  it. 
Thankfully  to  accept  of  good  is  merely 
human,  thankfully  to  accept  of  evil  is  Divine. 
In  every  thing  to  give  thanks,  God's  will  in 
Christ  concerning  us  (1  Thess.  v.  18).  Job 
here  greater  than  his  miseries.  More  than 
a  conqueror.  One  of  heaven's  as  well  as 
earth's  heroes. — "In  all  this,"  his  increased 
calamities  as  well  as  his  wife's  taunts  and 
temptations.  Job  now  lying  under  a  quater- 
nion of  troubles — adversity,  bereavement, 
disease,  and  reproach.  More,  however, 
yet  remained  for  Satan  to  inflict  and 
for  Job  to  suffer.  Continuance  of  suffering 
often  much  more  trying  than  suffering  itself. 
Inward  affliction  to  be  added  to  the  out- 
ward. Much  more  trying.  The  spirit 
of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity,  but  a 
wounded  spirit  who  can  bear?  (Prov. 
xviii.  14).  A  hint,  perhaps,  here  given 
of  further  trial,  with  a  less  gratifying 
result.  — "  Sinned  not  with  his  lips." 
Vented  no  reflection  on  God's  character 
and  procedure.  The  greatest  temptation 
in  such  circumstances  to  sin  with  the 
lips.  The  thing  Satan  desired,  endeavoured 
after,  and  waited  for.  The  temptation  to 
murmur  present,  but  resisted  and  repressed. 
Job  still  by  grace  a  conqueror  over  corrupt 
nature.  Not  always  thus  walking  on  the 
swelling  waters  of  innate  corruption.  Man's 
weakness  to  be  exhibited,  even  in  a  state  of 
grace.  Hitiierto  Job  shown  to  be  the  "  per- 
fect man"  God  declared  him  to  be  (Jam.  iii. 
2).  The  Old  Testament  ideal  of  a  perfect 
man  and  a  suffering  saint  An  illustrious 
type  of  Christ  in  His  suffering  and  patience 
(is.  liii.  7;  1  Pet.  ii.  23).  The  type  after 
wards  fails,  that  in  all  things  Christ  may 
have  the  pre-eminence  (Col  i.  18). 


20 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XL 


CHAPTER  11.     11—13. 
CONCLUDING  PART  OF  PROSE  INTRODUCTION— VISIT  OF  JOB'S  FRIENDS. 


I.  The  Friends.  (Verse  11.)  "Now  when 
Job's  three  friends  heard."  Rather,  "three 
friends  of  Job."  Probably  friends  most 
intimate  with  him,  and  from  whom  he  had 
most  to  expect  (ch  vi.  14,  15).  Perhaps 
connected  with  him  by  kindred  as  well  as 
acquaintance  and  religion.  "Worshippers  of 
the  true  God.  Eminent  in  their  day  and 
country  for  wisdom  and  piety.  Their 
religious  views  those  of  the  age.  Regarded 
retribution  as  very  much  a  thing  of  this  life. 
Hence  their  unfavourable  view  of  Job's 
character  from  his  condition.  Much  older 
than  Job.  Intending  comfort,  they  become 
under  Satan's  influence,  and  from  their 
narrow  mistaken  views,  his  severest  trial. 
Instead  of  soothing  they  add  to  his  grief, — 
by  uncharitable  suspicions,  false  reasonings, 
unseasonable  admonitions,  and  bitter  re- 
proofs. Good  easily  perverted  to  evil  by  Satan's 
malice.  Satan  used  Job's  wife  to  jeer  him  out 
of  his  religion,  and  his  friends  to  dispute 
him  out  of  it  [Gary  1.1 — "  Came," — probably, 
when  his  disease  was  now  considerably  ad- 
vanced (vii.  4).  Affliction  should  draw  us 
to  our  friends,  not  drive  us  from  them. 
Adversity  one  of  the  best  tests  of  friendship 
(Prov.  xvii.  17).  Good  manners  to  be  an 
unbidden  guest  in  the  house  of  mourning. 
[Caryf],  True  friends  hip  shewn  in  self-denying 
effort. 

"Eliphaz.**  An  old  Edomite  name.  A 
district  also  so  called  (Gen.  xxxvi.  11,  15). 
Denotes  "my  God  is  strength."  Indicates 
his  parent's  piety. — *'Temanite."  Erom  the 
stock  he  sprung  from,  or  the  place  (Teman) 
where  he  lived.  Temanites  celebrated  for 
their  wisdom  (Jer.  xlix.  7;  Obad.  8,  9). 
— "  Shuhite."  Of  Shuah,  in  the  east  part  of 
North  Arabia.  Shuah  one  of  the  settlements 
of  the  sons  of  Ke  urah  (Gen  xxv.  2). 
— "Naamathite."  From  Naamah,  probably  a 
district  in  Syria.  The  town  in  Judah  so 
named  (Josh.  xv.  41),  too  far  distant. 

II.  Object  of  the  Friends' visit.   "Had 

made  an  appointment  together."  Probably 
living  not  far  apart  from  each  other.  Good 
to  miite  together  in  works  of  charily  and 
mercy  (Mark  ii.  3). — "To  mourn  with  him." 
Sympathy  in  sorrow  an  instinct  of  humanity 
and  a  Christian  duty  (Rom.  xii.  15).  Ex- 
ample of  Jesus  (John  xi.  33,  35).  Job's 
own  character  (ch.  xxx.  25).  Tears  shed 
with  our  own^  often  the  must  soothing  hulm  in 
sorrow,    A  world  of  meaning  in  the  child's 


words, — "I  only  cried  with  her." — "And 
to  comfort  him."  The  motive  good,  though 
the  execution  faulty.  A  friend  m  trouble 
one  of  our  choicest  blessings.  A  brother 
born  for  adversity.  Comfort  of  mourners 
one  of  the  objects  of  the  Lord's  ministry 
(Is.  Ixi.  2).  See  His  mode  of  dispensing 
it,  Is.  xlii.  3  ;  Matt.  xi.  2S— 30.  To  com- 
fort in  trouble  orie  of  the  leading  parts  of 
Christian  duty  (1  Thess.  it.  18 ;  v.  11 ; 
Jam.  i.  27;  Matt.  xxv.  36).  Job's  own 
character  and  practice  (ch.  xxix.  25). 
— Verse  12,  "Lifted  up  their  eyes  afar  off. ' 
Where  yet  they  might  easily  have  recognised 
him.  So  the  father  of  the  prodigal  (Luke 
XV.  20).  Job  apparently  now  in  the  open 
air,  and,  as  a  leper,  outside  the  city. — "  Knew 
him  not."  So  altered  by  his  disease,  his 
sorrow,  and  his  place  among  the  ashes. 
Marks  the  depth  o?  his  calamity.  Unrecog- 
nizable by  his  friends.  When  men  know  us 
leasty  is  the  time  that  God  knows  us  t)est. 
(Ps.  xxxi.  7.) 

III.  Their  Sympathy.  Verse  12.  "  They 
lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept."  Marks  their 
deep  sympathy  and  their  friend's  deep  sorrow. 
In  the  east,  full  vent  usually  given  to  grief 
(Gen.  XX vii.  38;  xxix.  11 ;  Jud.  ii.  4  ;  Ruth 
i.  9;  1  Sam.  xxiv.  16). — "Spiinkled  dust 
upon  their  heads  towards  heaven."  Cast- 
ing it  into  the  air,  so  as  to  fall  down  on  their 
heads  (Acts  xxii.  23).  Token  of  grief, 
astonishment,  and  humiliation  towards  God 
under  a  great  sorrow  (Josh.  vii.  6;  Neh. 
ix.  1 ;  1  Sam.  iv.  12).  Their  fteliug,  con- 
sternation and  sorrow  at  the  sight  of  so 
sad  a  change. — "  Sat  down  with  him  upon 
the  ground"  (verse  13).  Another  token  of 
sympathetic  grief  (2  Sam.  xii.  16 ;  Is.  iii.  26 ; 
Lam.  ii.  10;  Ezra  ix.  3).  True  sympathy 
to  sit  down  on  the  ground  with  one  soioatli- 
some  in  himself,  and  apparently  an  object 
of  the  Divine  displeasure. — "  Seven  days." 
Usual  time  of  mourning  for  the  dead  (Gen. 
1.  10;  1  Sam.  xxxi.  13).  Job's  children 
dead,  and  himself  virtually  so.  So  in  time 
of  great  affliction  (Ezek.  iii.  15).  Depth  of 
Job's  calamity  marked  by  that  of  his  friends' 
svmpatiiy. — "  None  spake  a  word  unto  him." 
Irue  sympathy  expressed  by  silence  as  well 
as  tears.  Silence  usual  and  becoming  in 
presence  of  deep  d'stress  (Lam.  ii.  10).  "A 
reverence  due  to  such  prodigious  woe" 
[Sir  R.  Blackmore\  Unseasonable  words 
an  aggravation  of  the  sufferer's  grief.    The 

21 


CHAP,  in. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTABT:  JOB. 


friends  confounded  at  Job's  calamity  and 
unable  to  speak  to  it.  Ignorant  as  to  the 
cause,  and  apprehensive  of  Divine  displeasure. 
Prudence  and  skill  required  in  administer- 
ing consolation. — "  For  they  saw."  His 
affliction  apparently  much  greater  than  they 
had  anticipated.  The  heart  affected  by  the 
eye.  Good  to  place  ourselves  in  the  presence 
of  sorrow  (£cc.  vii.  2). — *'  That  his  grief  vv^as 
very  great."  The  stroke  as  heavy  as  it  was 
possible  for  Satan  to  inflict,  and  the  grief 
proportionate.  No  sin  for  our  feelings  to 
keep  pace  with  God's  dealings. 

Lessons  from  Job's  grief  and  the  occasion 
of  it  :— 

1.  God's  dearest  children  and  most  faithful 
seryants  may  be  the  subjects  of  deepest 
suffering. 


9.  No  part  of  piety  to  render  the  sou 

insensible  to  calamity. 

3.  The  sudden  removal  of  all  earthly  com- 
forts possible,  and  to  be  prepared  for. 

4.  Much  of  the  suffermgs  of  God's  ser- 
vants the  probable  result  of  Satan's  malice. 

5.  Patience  and  submission  to  God's  will 
consistent  with  the  deepest  grief. 

Job  in  his  deep  distress  a  type  of  the 
"  Man  of  Sorrows."  His  soul  '*  exceeding 
sorrowful,  even  unto  death."  lu  an  agony, 
prayed  the  more  earnestly  that  the  cup 
might,  if  possible,  pass  from  Him,  yet  meekly 
submitted.  His  bloody  sweaUt,  the  result 
of  a  frame  like  our  own  convulsed  by 
inward  distress  (Matt.  zz.yi.  37,  39 ;  Luke 
xxii.  44i), 


CHAPTER  III. 

COMMENCEWENT  OF  FIRST  GREAT  DIVISION  OF  THE  POEM. 

Job's  bitter  complaint  and  outburst  of  despondency — the  more  immediate  occasion  of  the  Con- 
troversy between  him  and  his  friends. 


I.  Job  breaks  the  prolonged  silence 

(verses  1,  2). 

"  After  this,"—  viz. :  the  visit  of  his 
friends  and  the  seven  days'  silence. — "Job 
opened  his  mouth."  Denoting — (1)  freeness 
ot  speech  (Ezek.  xvi.  63 ;  xxix.  21);  (2)earne8t- 
ness  in  speaking  (Prov.  xxxi.  8,  9 ;  Is.  liii.7); 
(3)  deliberate  and  grave  utterance  (Ps.  Ixxviii. 
2 ;  Prov.  viii.6).  Orientals  speak  seldom,  and 
then  gravely  and  sententiously.  Job  long 
silent  from  his  extraordinary  calamity.  Pro- 
found grief  shuts  the  mouth  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  4). 
Pent  up  anguish  now  finds  a  vent.  His 
sufferings  probably  increasing,  and  his  feelhigs 
now  irrepressible.  Patient  till  God's  anger 
seems  to  sink  into  his  soul  [Chr^sostoni], 
Satan,  to  exasperate  his  feelings  and  depress 
his  spirits,  now  acts  on  his  mind  and  imagina- 
tion, both  directly  and  through  his  disease. 
The  moment  now  arrived  that  Satan  had  been 
waiting  for.  Usually  great  danger  in  giving 
vent  to  pent  tip  feelings.  A  double  prayerful 
watch  then  needed  not  to  sin  with  one's  tongue 
(Ps.  xxxix.  i;  cxli,  3).  Danger  of  speakmg 
rather  from  heat  of  passion  than  light  of  wis- 
dom. Better  for  Job  had  he  kept  liis  mouth 
close  still  [Jrdf/ya].  "Either  say  nothing  or 
what  is  better  than  nothing  "  [^Greek  Proverb']. 
When  God's  hand  is  on  our  back,  our  hand 
should  be  on  our  mouth  [Brookes'].  The  ma- 
turity of  grace  proved  by  the  management  of  the 
tongue  (Jam.  iii.  2). — "Job  spake  and  said." 
Every  expression  m  Job's  speeches  not  to  be 
vindicated.      The  rashness  of   his  language 

22 


acknowledged  by  himself  (ch.  vi.  3).  Job  in 
the  end  not  only  hushed  but  humbled  for 
what  he  had  said  (ch.  xl.  5).  In  judging  of  his 
language  however  we  are  to  remember ; — 

1.  The  extremity  of  his  sufferings  and  the 
depth  of  his  distress.  His  language  extrava- 
gant but  natural.  Stunned  by  his  calamities. 
Great  sufferings  naturally  generate  great  pas- 
sions. Job's  sufferings  to  be  viewed  in  con- 
nection with — (1)  His  high  unblemished  cha- 
racter ;  (2)  His  previous  long  continued  pros- 
perity ;  (3)  The  preval^M  ideas  as  to  Divine 
retribution. 

2.  The  time  of  his  suffering  also  a  time  of 
spiritual  darkness.  Satan's  permission  ex- 
tended to  the  mind  as  well  as  the  body. 
Mental  confusion  often  the  result  of  Satan's 
buffetings.  Times  of  outward  trotible  often 
those  also  of  inward  conflict. 

3.  The  period  at  which  Job  lived.  Twilight 
as  compared  with  that  of  tlie  Gospel.  Topics 
of  consolation  limited.  No  suffering  Fore- 
runner and  Example  to  contemplate.  Pros- 
pects dim  as  regarded  the  future  world.  No 
Scriptures  with  examples  written  for  patience 
and  comfort. 

4.  The  usually  depressing  nature  of  Job*s 
disease. 

5.  The  fact  that  the  holiest  saint  is  nothing 
except  as  strengthened  and  upheld  by  Divine 
grace, 

6.  Even  in  Job*s  complaint^  no  reproach  it 
uttered  against  either  the  Author  or  ifutru- 
ments  of  hi*  trouble. 


HOMILETIC  COMMBNTARY:  JOn, 


CHAP.    Ill 


II.  Job  curses  the  day  of  his  birth 

(verses  I  — 3,  &c.). 

•'Cursed  his  day."  Vilified,  reproached, 
and  execrated  the  dayofhisbirtli.  A  different 
word  from  that  in  i.  5,  11 ;  ii.  5,  9;  but  the 
proper  Hebrew  word  for  cursing.  Wished  it 
to  be  branded  as  an  evil,  doleful,  unhappy  day. 
Similar  language  used  by  Jeremiah  under  less 
trying  circumstances  (Jer.  xx.  14 — 18).  The 
words  mark: — 

1.  SatarCs  defeat.  Job  curses  his  day ; 
Satan  expected  him  to  curse  his  God.  Under 
laWy  Satan  conquers;  under  grace^  suffers 
defeat. 

2.  JoVsfall.  The  language  a  contrast  with 
i.  21 ;  ii.  10.  A  secret  and  indirect  reflection 
on  Divine  Providence.  Job  hitherto  '*  a  per- 
fect man;"  is  he  so  now?  (Jam.  iii.  2).  An 
end  seen  to  all  human  perfection  (Ps.  cxix. 
96).  A  believer's  fall  comislent  with  final 
conquest  (Mic.  vii.  8).  Faitii  and  patience 
may  both  suffer  eclipse  without  perishing 
(Luke  xxii.  32).  A  sheep  mayyjz//  into  the 
mire,  while  a  swine  wallows  in  it  \Brookes\ 
Satan's  sieve  brings  out  the  saint's  chaff.  The 
Scripture  verified  (Kccles.  vii.  20;  1  Kings 
viii.  46 ;  Prov.  xx  9  ;  Jam.  iii.  2).  The  man 
Christ  Jesus  the  only  Righteous  One  (1  John 
ii.  Vy.  Tempted  in  all  points,  yet  without 
sin  (Heb.  iv.  15).  The  greatest  sufferer,  yet 
His  only  cry  :  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
Thou  forsaken  me*'  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  En- 
dured anguish  and  temptation  without  abate- 
ment of  love  or  trace  of  impatience.  Thought 
also  of  the  day  of  His  birth,  but  with  thank- 
fulness and  praise  (Ps.  xxii,  9,  10). 

3.  The  presence  of  the  flesh  in  believers.  In 
ch.  i.  21  and  ii.  10,  the  Spirit  spoke  in  Job ; 
in  iii.  3,  &c.,  'Ci^'d  flesh.  The  flesh  in  Job  cursed 
the  day  of  his  birth;  the  spirit  in  David 
blessed  God  for  the  same  thing  (Ps.  cxxxix. 
14  17).  The  believer  is  like  Rehekah  with 
two  nations  in  her  womb  (Gen.  xxv.  23).  These 
in  perpetual  conflict  with  each  other  (Gal.  v. 
17;  Rom.  vii.  25).  Hence  "  out  of  the  same 
mouth  proceedetii  blessing  and  cursing"  (Jam. 
iii.  10). 

4.  The  f'lly  and  wickedness  of  sin.  Foolish 
to  curse  a  day  at  all ;  wicked  to  curse  one's 
birthday.  Evert/  day  is  God's  creature ;  our 
birthday,  His  creature  to  us  iox  good.  Under 
a  dispensation  of  mercy,  every  man's  birth- 
day either  a  blessing,  or  may  be  such.  Present 
misery  not  to  obliterate  the  remembrance  of  past 
mercy.  The  very  thing  which  Job  had  formerly 
reproved  in  his  wife  (ch.  ii.  10). 

6.  The  passionate  vehemence  of  Job*s  grief. 
Seen  in  the  language  and  figures  he  employs. 
Verse  5.  *'  Let  darkness  and  the  shadow  of 
death  stain  it."  Take  away  its  beauty  and 
make  it  abominable ;  or  rather,  as  the  margin : 
•*  Claim  it  for  its  own ;"  take  it  back  and  keep 
entire  possession  of  it.    Allusion  to  primeval 


chaotic  darkness  (Gen.  i.  2).  —  "  Let  a  cloud 
dwell  upon  it;  "or,  "let  a  mass  of  clouds 
pitch  their  tent  over  it."  The  utterance  of  a 
deeply  moved  and  excited  S()irit.  Words 
similar  in  sense  heaped  together  to  intensify 
the  idea.  The  eloquence  of  grief.  -  "  Let  the 
blackness  of  the  day  terrify  it."  Let  what- 
ever tends  to  obscure  the  day,  as  eclipses, 
storms,  clouds,  hot  winds,  &c.,  make  it  dis- 
mal and  frightful.  The  day  on  which  Christ 
suffered,  thus  "  terrified,"  not  by  a  natural  but 
a  supernatural  darkness.  **  Surely  nature  is 
expiring,  or  the  God  of  nature  is  suffering," — 
said  on  that  solemn  occasion  by  a  heathen 
philosopher. — Verse  6.  "  Let  it  not  come  into 
the  number  of  the  months  ;" — let  it  disappear 
from  the  calendar ;  be  made  to  drop  out  of 
memory  and  existence. — Verse  7.  *' Let  that 
night  be  solitary,"  ungladdened  by  a  single 
birth,  and  destitute  of  all  social  converse  and 
festivity.  Returns  to  the  night  of  his  concep- 
tion. Sublime  accumulation  of  poetic  figures 
and  tragic  expressions. —  "Let  no  joyful 
noise  be  heard  therein;"  no  song  or  sound 
of  mirth;  no  voice  of  natal  or  of  nuptial 
joy.  Let  it  be  devoted  to  the  wail  of 
sorrow,  or  to  deep  perpetual  silence. — 
Verse  8.  "  Let  them  curse  it  that  curse 
the  day," — either  hired  mourners,  astrologers, 
or  unhappy  desperate  persons ;  those  accus- 
tomed to  execrate  daylight,  the  day  of  some 
special  calamity,  the  day  of  their  own  birth, 
or  that  of  some  friend's  death.  All  such  to 
be  employed  in  execrating  the  day  of  Job's 
birth. — "  Who  are  ready  to  raise  up  their 
mourning;"  or  rather,  as  in  the  margin, — 
**  to  raise  up  a  Leviathan," — the  crocodile 
or  other  monster  (Is.  xxvii.  1).  Same  per- 
sons described.  Probable  reference  to  some 
popular  superstition,  or  practice  in  lamenta- 
tion and  execrai  ion.  JoD  wishes  his  birth- 
day to  be  execrated  by  such  persons  in  the 
strongest  and  most  energetic  language. — 
Verse  9.  "Neither  let  it  see  the  dawning 
of  the  day."  The  Hebrew  full  of  poetic 
beauty, — ''Let  it  not  see  the  eyelids  of  the 
morning."  No  cheerful  rays  of  morning 
light  glancing  forth  from  the  rising  sun,  to 
succeed  that  baleful  night.  Picture  of 
eternal  darkness.  Heaven  a  nightless  day, 
hell  a  dayless  night  \Trapp\ 

III.  Job  wishes  he  had  never  been, 
or  had  died  when  he  began  to  live 
(verse  11), 

"  Why  died  I  not  from  the  wombP'*  In 
the  impetuosity  and  perplexity  of  his  spirit, 
puts  it  in  the  form  of  a  question.  Questions 
often  asked  by  a  troubled  spirit  in  petulance 
and  rebellion.  These  questions  among  the 
things  confessed  by  Job  with  humihation  and 
repentance  (ch.  xlii.  6).  "  God's  judgments  a 
great  deep ;   and  he  who  asks  why,  will  be 

23 


CBAF.  m. 


HOMiLSTW  commbntaut:  job. 


driven  out  on  this  deep,  for  there  is  no  chart 
to  guide  us  **  \_Beecher].  That  our  times  are 
in  God's  haud  quieted  David's  spirit,  but 
failed  to  quiet  Job's  (Pa.  xixi.  15).  Ob- 
serve : — 

1.  Times  may  come  when  the  sweetest  truths 
fail  to  comfort  a  child  of  God.  Unbelief  and 
passion  shut  out  the  light  and  refuse  to  be 
comforted. 

2.  JoVs  language  the  common  lament  of 
fallen  and  suffering  humanity.  Heathen 
philosopliy  concluded  that,  in  the  view  of 
the  troubles  of  life,  the  best  thing  is  not  to 
be  born  at  all ;  the  next  best  is,  to  get  out 
of  the  world  as  soon  as  possible. 

3.  JoVs  question  unanswerable  hut  for  the 
birth  in  Bethlehem.  Better  not  to  have  been 
born  at  all,  if  not  born  again.  With  a 
Saviour  provided  and  offered,  our  birth  either 
a  blessing,  or  might  be.  Under  an  economy 
of  grace,  life  spared  in  mercy  (Lam.  iii.  22 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  15). 

4.  A  solemn  question  for  eachy  Why  did  I 
not  die  from  the  womb  ?  Life  hivested  with 
the  most  solemn  responsibilities.  A  solemn 
thing  to  die,  perhaps  more  so  to  live.  Im- 
portant and  mysterious  purposes  connected 
with  each  one's  life.  The  babe  in  the 
mother's  arms  may  prove  a  Moses,  a  David, 
or  a  Paul.  "  What  will  ever  come  of  it  P" 
said  one  to  Franklin  in  reference  to  the  first 
discovered  balloon.  "  What  will  ever  come 
of  that  P"  replied  Franklin,  pointing  to  a  baby 
in  its  cradle.  Job  ignorant,  when  he  asked 
the  question,  that  his  name  should  become 
a  synonym  for  suffering  patience. 

IT.  Job  describes  the  graye  and  state 
of  the  dead  (verses  13—19). 

The  description  grand,  tragic,  and  poetical. 
Given  according  to  outward  appearance  and 
in  relation  to  earthly  experience. 

Death  and  the  Grave. 

1.  Death  a  state  of  quiet  tleep  (verse  13). 
A  sleep  as  regards  the  animal  frame.  Gives 
the  grave  an  attractiveness  in  a  world  of 
tumult  and  sorrow.  Death  a  boon  in  such  a 
world.  The  churchyard  a  hallowed  resting 
place,  where— "The  rude  forefathers  of  the 
hamlet  sleep."  Only  sin  disturbs  this 
beautiful  idea.  Sin  plants  thorns  and  deadly 
nightshade  among  roses  and  evergreens. 
Jesus  takes  away  the  sting  of  deaths  and  makes 
the  grave  a  bed  of  rest.  The  death  of  a 
believer  pre-eminently  a  sleep  (1  Cor.  xv.  51 ; 
1  Thess.  iv.  14;  v.  10).  The  sleep  in  Jesus 
followed  by  a  blessed  awaking  (1  Thess^iy. 
16). 

2.  The  grave  a  place  of  general  rendezvous 
(verses  14, 16, 19).  "  The  small  and  great," 
— ^infants  that  never  saw  the  ]igjai,  with  kings 

24 


and  their  counsellors  of  state,  all  gather  in 
the  common  ante-room  of  the  grave,  waiting 
the  resurrection  summons.  In  the  great 
cemetery  of  Cairo,the  magnificent  mausoleums 
of  the  caliphs  are  mingled  with  the  humble 
graves  of  the  poor.  Common  receptacle  for 
"the  wise  and  foolish,  cowards,  and  the 
brave." 

3.  A  place  of  absolute  equality  (verse  19). 
"  The  small  and  great  are  there ;"  or,  "  are 
there  the  same."  On  the  same  level,  and 
in  the  same  condition.  The  bones  of  the 
prince  undistinguished  in  the  charnel-house 
from  those  of  the  peasant.  "  Dust  to  dust " 
pronounced  over  the  coffin  of  the  monarch 
as  well  as  that  of  the  pauper.  The  burial 
place  of  Alexander  the  Great  shown  in  an 
obscure  corner  in  Alexandria.  The  only 
distinction  in  the  next  world  determined  by 
our  character  and  conduct  in  this. 

4t.  A  place  where  the  wicked  cease  from 
their  oppression  (verses  17,  18).  The  grave 
an  effectual  check  to  the  wrongs  of  the 
tyrant,  the  slave-owner,  and  the  perse- 
cutor. Herod  smitten  in  the  midst  of 
his  murders  and  eaten  up  of  worms  (Acts 
xii.  23). 

5.  A  place  of  rest  for  the  suffering  and 
weary  (verses  17 — 19).  "  The  prisoners 
rest  together;'* — hearing  no  more  "the  cruel 
voice  nor  sounding  rod."  Prisoners  in  the 
gold  mines  of  Egypt,  like  slaves  in  more 
recent  times,  were  driven  to  their  work  by 
the  lash,  their  taskmasters  being  barbarian 
soldiers,  who  spoke  a  foreign  language. — 
"The  servant  is  free  from  his  master." 
Slavery  viewed  as,  in  most  cases,  worse 
than  death.  To  make  the  repose  of  the  grave 
real  and  complete  was  the  mission  of  Jesus, 
(Matt.  xi.  28).  The  true  rest  in  death  taught 
in  Heb.  iv.  9 ;  Rev.  xiv.  13.  The  grave  a 
sweet  resting  place  only  to  those  who  have 
found  rest  in  Christ.  To  believers,  a  place 
of  rest — (1)  From  the  cares  and  troubles  of 
life;  (2)  From  the  oppression  of  man  and 
the  buffetings  of  Satan ;  (3)  From  the  burden 
of  a  carnal  and  sinful  nature ;  (4)  From  the 
conflict  with  sin  and  the  flesh;  (5)  From 
painful  labours  in  the  service  of  Christ  and 
numanity.  Do  your  work,  and  God  will  tend 
you  to  rest  in  good  time  [Trappl. 

6.  A  place  exhibiiifig  the  vanity  of  earthly 
glory  and  riches  (verse  1 4).  Kings  and  coun- 
sellors of  the  earth  among  the  tenants  of  the 
tomb  (Is.  xiv.  6;  Ez  xxxii.  21,  &c.).  "Earth's 
proudest  triumphs  end  in  '  Here  he  lies.'  *' 
"This"  (a  shroud  fastened  and  carried  at  the 
top  of  a  lance  by  his  own  command),  "  this 
is  all  that  remains  to  Saladin  the  Great  of  all 
his  glory."  "  Conquer  the  whole  earth,  and 
in  a  few  days  such  a  spot  as  this  (six  feet  of 
earth)  will  be  all  you  have  "  [Constantine  the 
Great  to  a mUer\    Ail  tibe  gkiry  of  Napoleon 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CRAP,  nt 


dwindled  down  to  a  pair  of  military  boots, 
wliich  he  insisted  on  having  on  when  dying. 
Death  and  corruption  mock  **  the  pride  of 
heraldry  and  the  pomp  of  power."  The 
bodies  of  Egyptian  kings  and  statesmen 
embalmed  and  preserved  for  thousands  of 
years.  Wealth  and  art  may  preserve  the 
body'sybrw,  but  neither  its  life  nor  beauty. 
— "  Which  built  desolate  places  for  them- 
selves.'* Only  that.  Their  gain  and  glory 
for  which  they  laboured,  only  a  desolation. 
Palaces  to  become  ruins, — pyramids  and 
mausoleums  to  be  rifled  of  their  contents. 
The  ruins  of  Caesar's  Golden  Palace  at  Rome 
now  partly  covered  with  a  peasant's  garden  ; 
those  of  Cleopatra's  palace  at  Alexandria 
scarcely  distinguishable.  The  great  pyra- 
mid at  Ghizeh  still  standing,  but  shorn  of  its 
original  beauty.  The  marble  casing  stripped 
from  its  sides  to  adorn  a  neighbouring  city. 
Its  granite  sarcophagus,  once  containing  the 
dust  of  Cheops,  its  royal  founder,  long  empty. 
In  the  second  pyramid,  the  body  of  its 
founder,  Cephren,  discovered  a  few  years  ago 
and  brought  to  England.  The  Egyptian 
tombs  themselves  usually  built  in  or  near  a 
desert.  These  tombs  generally  built  on  a 
scale  of  great  extent  and  magnificence. 
Often  hewn  out  of  the  solid  rock  and  highly 
decorated.  I'he  rock-hewn  tombs  at  Thebes 
about  two  miles  in  extent.  Of  the  pyramids 
at  Ghizeh,  the  largest  occupies  an  area  of 
13  acres;  the  second  11.  The  whole  one 
solid  mass  of  masonry,  with  a  small  chamber 
or  two  in  the  centre.  The  height  of  the 
Great  Pyramid,  479  feet,  or  119  higher  than 
St.  Paul's  Church  in  London.  These  pyra- 
mids built  by  the  kings  themselves,  and  for 
themselves.  Begun  at  their  accession,  en- 
larged each  successsive  year  of  their  reign, 
and  closed,  as  if  for  ever,  at  their  death. 
More  care  bestowed  by  the  Egyptians  on 
their  tombs  than  on  their  dwellings.  In 
Persia,  royal  sepulchres,  apart  from  others, 
cut  out  high  up  in  the  (ace  of  steep  cliffs. 
Shebna's  vanity  (Is.  xxii.  16).  Some  take 
more  care  about  their  sepulchres  than  their 
souls  \_Caryl\  A  heathen  poet  says  :  "  Light 
is  the  loss  of  a  sepulchre;"  but  who  can 
calculate  the  loss  of  a  soul?  (Matt,  xvi  26). 
— (Verse  15).  "  With  princes  that  had  gold." 
Had  gold.  Their  riches  a  thing  of  the  past. 
Their  gold  unable  to  bribe  away  death. 
— "  Who  filled  their  houses  with  silver," 
which  should  rather  have  filled  the  hungry. 
Gold  and  silver  often  preserved  to  be  a 
witness  against  its  possessor.  Treasure 
jieaped  together  for  the  last  days  (Jam.  v.  3). 
Perhaps  ordered  by  the  possessors  to  be  de- 
posited with  them  in  their  tombs,  also  called 
their  houses  (Is.  xxii.  16 ;  xiv.  18,  19).  Its 
presence  there  a  bitter  mockery,  its  former 
possessor  able  neither  to  use  nor  recognize  it. 


IT.  Job  complains  th«at  life  is  con- 
tinued to  the  siift'eriiig  and  sorrowing 

(verse  20.) 

*'  Wherefore  is  light  given  to  them  that 
are  in  misery  P  "  &c.  K  tacit  reflection  on 
his  Maker's  goodness,  justice,  and  wisdom. 
Another  of  those  things  that  Job  repented 
of  "in  dust  and  ashes,"  (eh.  xlii.  6). 

Life 

Wisely  and  graciously  continued  eren  to 

sufferers. 

1.  \i  unprepared  for  death,  the  suff'erer  is 
spared  in  \Vi%\Q,^  for  such  preparation.  Death 
to  the  unprepared  the  harbinger  of  death 
eternal.  An  infinitely  greater  evil  to  be  cut 
off  in  dti  than  to  be  spared  in  suffering.  The 
life  Q^i  nature  mercifully  continued,  that  the 
life  of  grace  may  be  obtained  here,  and  the 
life  of  glory  hereafter. 

2.  If  'prepared^  the  sufferer's  life  is  con- 
tinued for  various  wise  and  gracious  pur- 
poses. 

( 1 . )  For  proof  and  trial  of  his  state.  S  u  f- 
fering  a  touchstone  of  sincerity.  Affliction 
the  fire  that  tries  the  moral  metal  of  the  soul. 
God  uses  not  scales  to  weigh  our  graces,  but 
a  touchstone  to  try  them  [  Brookes\ 

(2  )  For  further  sanctification.  Afflictions 
God's  goldsmiths.  The  rising  waves  lifted 
the  ark  nearer  lieaven.  Affliction  the  Chris- 
tian man's  divinity.  Deepens  repentance 
for  sin,  the  cause  of  aU  suffering.  Promotes 
the  exercise  of  Christian  graces,  especially 
meekness,  patience,  and  submission.  Even 
Christ  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which 
He  suffered.  Trials  develope  and  strengthen 
Christian  character.  Each  succeeding  wave 
hardens  the  oyster-shell  that  encloses  the 
pearl, 

(3.)  Tor  enhancement  of  future  glory  and 
happiness.  As  we  suffer  with  Christ  we 
shall  be  glorified  with  him.  Labour  makes 
rest  sweeter  and  the  crown  brighter. 

(4.)  For  the  benefit  and  edification  of 
others.  Suffering  meekly  borne  by  a  believer 
exhibits  the  sustainiiig  j)ower  of  grace  and  so 
encourat^cs  others.  The  believer's  lamp  often 
trimmed  afresh  atafellow-christian's  sickbed 
Christian  animated  to  persevere  through  the 
Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death  by  the  sonnd 
of  Faithful's  voice  before  him.  Four  hundred 
persons  converted  to  Christ  by  witnessing 
Cacilia's  demeanour  under  suffering. 

(5.)  For  the  glory  of  Him  who  is  both  the 
Author  and  Fnasher  of  faith.  Affliction 
meekly  endured  exliibits  the  faithfulness  and 
love  of  God,  and  so  leads  both  ourselves  and 
others  to  praise  Him  (Is.  xxiv.  15  ;  I  Pet. 
i  7). — Suffering  a  blessing  to  society^  a?id 
one  of  its  regenerating  forces.  Tends  to 
humble  pride  and  check  evil-doers.    Exhibits 

2& 


CHAP.  IlL 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


the  evil  of  sin,  the  vanity  of  the  world,  and 
the  certainty  of  death  Affords  room  for 
the  exercise  of  syinpatliy,  compassion,  and 
benevolence.  Gives  scope  to  self-sacrifice, 
the  noblest  form  of  humanity. 

V.  Job  expresses  his  longing  for 
death  (verse  21). 

"Which  long  for  death,  &c."  Said  to 
be  especially  true  of  those  who  laboured  in 
the  gold  mines  of  Egypt.  A  peculiar  feature 
of  Job's  disease.  Probably  suicide  the  tempta- 
tion presented  to  him  by  Satan  through  his 
wife.  Suicide  SatarCs  recipe  for  the  ills  of 
hiAmanity.  Job  longs  for  death  but  is  kept 
by  grace  from  doing  anything  to  procure  it. 

Death. 

Our  time  in  God's  hand,  not  our  own. 
He  is  ill  fitted  to  die  who  is  unwilling  to  live. 
Physical  death  only  a  blessing  to  him  who 
has  been  delivered  from  spiritual  death,  and 
so  secured  against  death  eternal.  Death  a 
monster  only  to  be  safely  encountered  when 
deprived  of  his  sting.  His  terrors  only 
quenched  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  Deatk 
only  to  be  desired — (1.)  When  our  work  is 
done ;  (2.)  When  God  pleases  to  call  us  ; 
(3.)  That  we  may  be  freed  from  sin;  (4. )  That 
we  may  be  with  Christ  (Phil.  i.  23).  To 
bear  lifers  burden  well  is  better  than  to  be 
delinered  from  it.  Grace  makes  a  man  willing 
to  live,  amidst  life's  greatest  primtions 
and  sufferings;  willing  to  die,  amidst  its 
greatest  enjoyments  and  comforts. — "  And  it 
cometh  not.'  The  extreme  of  misery  to 
desire  death  and  not  be  able  to  find  it  (Rev. 
ix.  6).  The  misery  of  the  damned.  Endless 
existence  the  crown  of  hell's  torments.  Salt  ed 
with  fire  (Mark,  ix.  49).  The  jirst  death 
drives  the  soul  out  of  the  body  ;  the  misery  of 
the  second  death  is,  that  it  keeps  the  soul 
in  it. 

VI.  Job  plaintively  dweUs  on  his  sad 
condition  (verse  23). 

Describes  himself  as  "  A  man  whose  way 
is  hid,  and  whom  God  hath  hedged  in, ' — 
visited  with  troubles  which  he  cannot  under- 
stand, and  from  which  he  sees  no  way  of 
escape.  The  soul  in  darkness  misreads  all 
God^s  dealings,  and  only  looks  on  the  dark 
side.  Satan  had  said  of  Job  what  Job  here 
says  of  himself,  but  with  greater  truth. 
Satan  truly  but  enviously  viewed  God  a^ 
hedging  Job  round  wit  h  protection  and  bless 
ing  ;  Job  views  God  as  unkindly  hedging  him 
round  with  darkness  and  trouble.  Job  ascribes 
to  God  what  was  really  done  by  Satan  wit  h 
Qiodi^s  permission,  or  by  God  only  at  Satan  s 
instigation.  The  memory  of  past  good  too 
26 


often  obliterated  by  the  experience  of  present 
evil. — Represents  his  present  calamities  as 
the  realisation  of  his  worst  fears  (verse  25). 
"  The  thing  which  1  greatly  feared  is  come 
upon  me."  A  tender  conscience  (ears  reverses 
in  the  height  of  prosperity,  and  in  conse- 
quence of  it.  A  fall  after  great  felicity  an 
instinct  of  human  nature.  Paulus  Emilius, 
a  Roman  general,  on  the  death  of  his  two 
sons  immediately  after  an  unusually  splendid 
triumpii,  said:  "1  have  always  had  a  dread 
of  fortune ;  and  because  in  the  course  of 
this  war  she  prospered  every  measure  of 
mine,  the  rather  did  I  expect  that  some 
tempest  would  follow  so  favourable  a  gale." 
A  wise  man  feareth,  but  a  fool  rageth  and 
is  confident "  (Prov.  xiv.  16). 


Fear  of  the  Future, 

Apprehension  of  future  evil  right  and  pro- 
fitable— 

(1.)  When  it  preserves  from  carnal  and 
careless  security  (Ps.  xxx.  6,  7);  (2.)  When 
it  incites  to  the  use  of  right  means  to 
prevent  it  (Pro\'.  xiv.  16) ;  (3.)  When  it 
leads  us  to  prepare  for  it  by  seeking 
strength  to  endure  it ;  (4.)  When  it  arises 
from  the  conviction  of  the  uncertainty  of 
eaj'thly  good  ( Prov.  xxvii.  24)  ;  (5.)  When 
it  produces  earnestness  in  securing  a  better 
and  enduring  portion  (Matt.  vi.  20);  (6.) 
When  it  leads  to  fidelity  in  the  i'r-provement 
of  present  benefits. 

Such  apprehension  wrong  and  hurtful ; — 

(1.)  When  arising  from  undue  anxiety 
about  the  continuance  of  present  mercies; 
(2.)  When  attended  with  anxiety  and  dis- 
trust about  the  future  (Phil.  iv.  6);  (3.) 
When  preventing  the  thankful  enjoyment  of 
present  blessings  (Eccl.  ii.  23,  24);  (4.) 
When  leading  to  undue  means  to  preserve 
them. 

Apprehension  and  freedom  from  security  no 
prevention  of  the  evil  (verse  26).  *'  Yet 
trouble  came."  Learn  —  (1)  Prayer  and 
piety  are  no  security  against  trouble.  God 
has  not  promised  to  preserve  his  people /ro»i 
trouble,  but  io  support  them  in  it;  (2)  No 
human  caution  or  foresight  is  able  to  secure 
men  against  calamity.  The  race  not  to  the 
swift  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong.  (3)  To 
sit  loose  to  earthly  comforts  is  the  best  way  to 
retain  them,  or  to  bear  their  removal.  To 
God*s  people  no  trouble  comes  unsent,  or 
without  a  blessing  in  its  bosom.  Trouble  in 
the  believer's  inventory  (1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22). 
Among  the  "  all  things  "  that  work  together 
for  his  good  (Rom.  viii.  28).  Unable  to  sepa- 
rate him  from  Christ's  love  (Rom.  viii.  39). 
The  storm  makes  the  traveller  wrap  himseli 
more  closely  in  his  mantle. 


EOMILETIC  COMMEIiTAM:  JOB, 


CHAP.    IT. 


Trouble  and  its  Uses  to  the  Believer. 

To  believers  trouble  is, — 

1.  Purifi/ing.  Affliction  is  God*s  furnace 
for  purging  away  our  dross ;  his  thorn  for 
piercini;  throuiihour  pride.  The  Jews  clung 
to  idols  till  they  were  carried  captive  to 
Bal)ylon.  The  three  captives  lost  nothing 
in  the  furnace  bat  their  bonds. 

2.  Preservative.  Often  preserves  from 
greater  evils.  Auguj^tine  missed  his  way, 
and  so  escaped  intended  mischief.  The 
Christian's  armour  rusts  in  time  of  peace. 
Salt  brine  preserves  from  putrefaction. 

3.  Fructiftjing.  Affliction  makes  both  fra- 
grant and  fruitful.  God's  rod,  like  Aaron's 
buds,  blossoms,  and  bears  almonds.  Flowers 
smell  sweetest  after  a  shower.  Vines  said 
to  bear  the  better  for  bleeding.  Believers 
often  most  internally  fruitful  when  most 
externally  afflicted.  Manasseh's  chain  more 
profitable  to  him  than  his  crown.  Many 
trees  grow  better  in  the  shade  than  the 
sunshine. 

4.  Teaching,  Trouble  teaches  by  expe- 
rience. God's  rod  a  speakine  one.  At 
eventide  light.     Stars  shine  when  the  sun 


goes  down.  Some  scriptures  not  understood 
by  Luther  till  he  was  in  affliction.  God's 
house  of  correction  His  school  of  instruction. 

5.  Brings  consolation.  Suffering  times 
often  the  believer's  singing  times.  Songs  in 
the  night.  As  our  tribulations  in  Christ,  so 
our  consolations.  Every  stone  thrown  at 
Stephen  drove  him  nearer  to  Christ.  Ja- 
cob's most  bisssed  sleep  when  he  had  only 
stones  for  his  pillow.  Paul's  sweetest 
epistles  written  when  a  prisoner  at  Koine. 
The  most  of  Heaven  seen  by  John  when  a 
lonely  exile  ai  Patmos.  The  darker  the  cloud 
the  brighter  the  rainbow.  God's  presence 
changes  the  furnace  of  trial  into  a  fire  of  joy. 
God's  rod,  like  Jonathan's  staif,  brings  honey 
on  its  point. 

6.  Conforms  us  to  Christ.  God  had  one 
son  without  sin,  but  none  without  suffering. 
All  His  members  to  be  conformed  to  His 
suffering  image,  though  some  resemble  Him 
more  than  others  [^Rutherford]. 

7-  Is  the  way  to  the  Kingdom.  Affliction 
only  a  dark  passage  to  our  Father's  house, — 
a  daik  lane  to  a  royal  palace.  The  short 
storm  that  ends  in  an  everlasting  calm 
\Brookes\, 


CHAPTER  IV. 


COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE  CONTROVERSY  BETWEEN  JOB  AND  HIS 

THREE  FRIENDS. 

First  Course  of  the  Speeches,    First  Dialogue, — Eliphaz  and  Job. 


First  Speech  of  Eliphaz. 

Eliphaz  censures  Job  for  his  impatience, 
and  hints  at  sin  as  the  cause  of  his  suffering. 
Verse  1.  "  Then  Eliphaz  the  Temanite,"  &c. 
First  of  the  three  in  age  and  experience 
The  mildest  of  Job's  accusers,  and  superior 
to  the  rest  in  discernment  and  delicacy.  His 
tone  friendly  and  modest,  but  pours  vinegar 
rather  than  oil  on  Job's  wounds.  A  wise 
man  of  the  class  of  Solomon,  lleman,  and 
Ethan  (1  Kings,  iv.  30,  31)  Maintains  that 
no  innocent  person  is  ever  left  to  perish 
(verse  7).  His  statements  sound  inthemselves, 
but  false  in  their  application.  His  speech 
the  product  of  a  genuine,  pious,  wise  man 
of  the  east.  Characterized  by  the  legality 
and  narrowness  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived. 
Sadly  wanting  in  sympathy  and  heart. 
Eliphaz  immensely  Job's  inferior  in  intelli- 
gence, though  his  superior  in  age. 

I.  Introdnction  (verse  2). 

"  If  we  assay,"  &c      Begins  with  gentle- 
aess  and  courtesy.     Reproof  to  be  ^iven,  not 


only  with  love  in  the  hearty  but  tenderness  on 
the  tongue.  The  razor  cuts  cleanest  when 
whetted  with  oil.  Tenderness  especially  due 
to  sufferers  — *'  Wilt  thou  be  grieved,"  or 
**  take  it  ill  ?  '*  As  difficult  to  bear  reproof 
in  trouble  as  it  is  to  give  it.  Patiently  to 
bear  reproof  the  sign  of  an  honest,  if  not  a 
gracious  heart  (Prov.  xvi.  32).  Next  to 
the  not  deserving  of  a  reproof  is  the  well 
taking  oi  it  [Bishop  Hail].  No  little  grace 
required  to  say  "Let  the  righteous  smite 
me,  it  shall  be  a  kindness  "  (Ps.  cxli.  5). — 
"  But  who  can  withhold  himself,"  &c.  The 
reason  of  his  speaking.  CompCiled  by  con- 
science. GooQ  to  speak  and  act  only  from 
conviction  of  duty.  Care  to  be  taken,  how- 
ever, that  that  conviction  be  an  enlightened 
one.  Compulsion  from  our  own  spirit  not 
to  be  mistaken  for  impulsion  from  God's. 
Better  not  to  speak  at  all  than  not  to  speak 
to  the  purpose. 

II.  The  Reproof.  Contains — 1.  A  testi- 
mony to  Job^s  past  character  and  conduct^ 
(v.  3,  4).    "Thou  hast  instructed  many,"  &c. 


COAT.  IT. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


Job's  conduct  to  others  in  similar  circumstan- 
ces to  his  own.  "Instructed," — ''strength- 
ened,*' «*upheld."— Noble  testimony--(l .)  To 
his  sympathy  and  warmth  of  heart ;  (2.)  To 
his  wisdofii  and  intelligence — "hast  instruct- 
ed" ;  (3.)  To  his  zeal  and  self-denying  activity 
on  behalf  of  others — '*  instructed  many  "; 
(4.)  To  his  experience  in  the  things  of  God^ 
fitting  him  for  a  spiritual  comforter.  Job's 
character  not  merely  one  of  uprightness  and 
integrity^  but  of  kindness  and  benevolence. 
Elipliaz  endorses  the  testimony— a  "perfect'* 
as  well  as  an  "  upright "  man.  Does  this, 
however,  less  to  praise  \\\%  past^  than  to  cen- 
sure his  present  conduct.  Confirms  Job's 
own  testimony  of  himself  (xxix.  13,  &c. ; 
XXX.  25).  Job  the  opposite  of  a  selfish 
character.  Improved  his  prosperity  and 
influence  for  the  comfort  and  benefit  of 
others.  A  true  priest  and  minister  to  the 
neighbourhood  in  which  he  lived.  Not  only 
prayed  and  sacrificedy&r  others,  but  imparted 
instruction  and  consolation  to  them.  Not 
only  feared  God  himself  but  sought  to  lead 
others  to  do  the  same.  Sought  to  stimulate 
to  duty  and  to  strengthen  under  trial.  Per- 
formed for  those  in  trouble  the  part  of 
Jonathan  to  David  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  16).  His 
conduct  enjoined  as  a  New  Testament  duty 
(Is  XXXV.  3 ;  Heb.  xii.  12).  Practised  by 
Christians  as  a  New  Testament  grace  (Rom. 
XV.  14;  1  Cor.  xvi.  15 ;  Heb.  vi.  10;  1  Thess. 
V.  11).  The  work  and  ministry  of  Christ 
himself,  Job's  antitype  (Is.  xlii.  3 ;  Ixi.  1-3). 
Instruction  placed  firsts  as  the  means  and 
foundation  of  the  rest.  The  word  of  truth 
the  medium  to  be  employed  in  healing  sick 
and  wounded  spirits  (Ps.  cvii.  20). 

Christian  Ministry 

Especially  one  of  instruction  and  consola- 
tion (Is.  xl.  1,  2).  Requires  an  enlightcDcd 
mind,  a  tender  heart,  and  a  gracious  tongue. 
Abundant  room  for  such  a  ministry  in  a  sin- 
ning and  suffering  world.  Dark  minds,  weak 
hands,  and  tottering  knees  to  be  met  with 
everywhere.  The  feeble,  the  falling,  and 
the  fallen,  the  church  has  with  it  always. 
The  whole  creation  travailing  toj^ether  in 
pain ;  and  believers,  with  the  first  fruits  of 
the  Spirit,  groaning  within  themselves  (Rom. 
▼iii.  22,  23).  Cases  especially  requiring 
iuch  a  ministry  : — 1.  Affliction^  personal  or 
domestic;  2  Bereavement \  3.  Temporal 
losses  and  misfortunes ;  4.  Persecution  and 
cruel  treatment  from  others;  5.  Spiritual 
darkness  and  temptation;  6.  Sorrow  and 
contrition  for  sin  ;  7.  Infirmities  of  age  and 
approaching  dissolution.  "  Till  tears  are 
wiped  away,  and  hearts  cease  to  ache,  and 
sin  no  longer  desolates,  every  believer  has  a 
mission  in  this  world"  \Beecher\  Grounds 
of  consolation  and  support  in  the  character 
23 


and  truth  of  God  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  16.     The 

Old  and  New  Testaments  the  storehouse  of 
Divine  consolations  (Rom.  xv.  4).  Lamen- 
tations iii.,  Romans  viii.,  and  Hebrews  xii. 
especially  rich  in  such  topics.  The  believer 
and  well-instructed  scribe  to  be  always 
ready  to  draw  out  of  this  treasury  (Matt, 
xiii.  52). — Topics  of  consolation  in  time  of 
trouble  and  affliction: — (1.)  The  character 
of  God,  as  compassionate  and  faithful ;  (2.) 
The  hand  of  God  in  all  our  afflictions ; 
(3.)  God's  gracious  purposes  in  sending  trou- 
ble ;  (4.)  The  shortness  and  lightness  of  afflic- 
tion as  compared  with  the  "  eternal  weight 
of  glory  "  for  which  it  is  preparatory ;  (5.) 
The  promises  of  pardon,  grace,  guidance, 
provision,  and  protection  to  the  end ;  (6.) 
Christ  Himself  as  our  Redeemer,  in  whom 
we  have  all  things ;  (7.)  His  example  as  a 
sufferer  ;  (8.)  His  sympathy  in  our  affliction. 
2.  The  censure.  "But  now,"  &c.  To  com- 
mend with  a  "  but  "  is  a  wound  rather  than 
a  consolation  [Trapp'].  Christ's  reproofs, 
however,  sometimes  given  with  such  a  "  but " 
(Rev.  ii.  14). — "Now  it  is  come  upon  thee," 
— viz.,  trouble.  Storms  prove  the  ship's 
seaworthiness. — "And  thou  faintest."  Same 
word  as  in  verse  2,  rendered  "grieved." 
An  unfeeling  reproach.  Eliphaz  a  sorry 
imitator  of  what  he  had  just  commended  in 
Job.  Forgets  the  unprecedented  character 
of  Job's  sufferings.  Charges  him  with  being 
either  a  pretender  to  the  virtue  he  had  not, 
or  a  neglector  of  what  he  had.  Job's  anti- 
type similarly  taunted, — "He  saved  others," 
&c.  (Matt,  xxvii  42).  Yet  suggests  an 
important  truth  both  forChristians  and  minis- 
ters. 

Ministerial  Consistency. 

Heed  to  be  taken  not  to  preach  to  others 
without  practising  ourselves.  The  people's 
ears  not  to  be  holier  than  the  preacher's 
heart.  Jewish  Rabbies  condemned  for 
teaching  others  whilst  not  teaching  them- 
selves (Rom.  ii.  21).  Self  a  implication  of  en- 
forced truth  the  preacher's  duty  as  well  as  the 
people's.  The  exhortation  of  the  lips  to  be 
seconded  by  the  testimony  of  the  life.  Present 
doings  not  to  shd^va^ former  sayings  \Trapp\ 
One  said  of  Erasmus,  *' There  is  more  of 
Christ's  soldier  in  his  book  than  in  his  bosom  " 
The  easiest  thing  to  give  pood  counsel,  the 
hardest  to  act  on  it.  Self  application  of 
Divine  truth  man's  duty,  but  God's  gift. 
Sustaining  grace  needed  by  the  strongest  as 
well  as  the  weakest.  The  saddest  fall,  that 
"  when  a  standard  bearer  fainteth"  (Is.  x. 
18).  To  "faint"  in  the  day  of  adversity 
proves  our  strength  is  small  (Prov.  xxiv.  10). 
The  belie  cer^s  duty  to  do  each  day's  work  with 
Christian  diligence^  and  to  bear  each  day'i 


MOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


COAP.  IT. 


cross  with  Christian  patience.  The  charge  of 
Eliphaz  though  not  the  kindest,  yet  true. 
Job  had  both  "fainted,"  and  was  "troubled," 
or  confounded.  The  language  of  chap.  iii. 
a  sad  contrast  to  that  of  cliap.  i.  and  ii. 
The  shield  of  faith  vilely  cast  away.  How 
is  the  mighty  fallen ! — Faith  and  patience  in 
the  greatest  saints  subject  to  eclipse.  Job 
had  with  Peter  walked  on  the  water  j  but 
now,  with  Peter,  begins  to  sink  in  it. — In- 
constancy written  on  all  creature- excellence. 
Only  One  able  to  say  "I  change  not,"  (Mai. 
iii.  6).  David's  mountain  stands  strong  till 
God  hides  His  face,  and  he  is  troubled  (Ps. 
XXX.  7).  Job  to  learn  that  his  own  strength 
is  weakness,  and  that  his  righteousness  is  of 
God  and  not  of  himself.  The  strong  man 
must  glory  only  in  the  Lord  (ch.  xxix.  20 ; 
Jer.  ix.  23,  24).  Job,  like  Paul,  to  be  shorn 
of  his  strength,  that  the  power  of  Christ 
may  rest  upon  him  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  Only  he 
who  waits  on  the  Lord  renews  his  strength, 
so  as  to  walk  without  fainting  (Is.  xl.  31). 
In  spite  of  dashing  waves  the  limpet 
clings  to  the  rock  through  its  own  emptiness. 
— (Verse  6).  "Is  not  this  thy  fear,"  &c. 
Apparently  a  cruel  charge  of  hypocrisy. 
Probably,  however,  not  so  decided  and  di- 
rect as  appears  in  our  version.  Perhaps 
more  correctly  read :  "  Is  not  thy  fear  [of 
God]  thy  coniidence,  and  thy  hope,  the  up- 
rightness of  thy  ways  ?"  That  is,  "  Should 
it  not  be  so  ?'*  Doctrine :  A  man^s  religion 
ought  to  give  him  confidence  in  time  of  trouble. 
Like  his  former  statement,  the  question  of 
Eliphaz  a  testimony  to  Job's  piety.  An  en- 
dorsement of  ch.  i.  1.  Job  admitted  to 
have  been  distinguished  for  his  fear  of  God 
and  integrity  of  life.  The  only  question  now, 
"Is  it  realP"  Eliphaz  begins  to  suspect  it. 
— The  "  fear  of  God  "  another  word  lor  reli- 
gion. That  fear,  when  genuine,  coupled  with 
"uprightness"  of  life.  True  religion  ever 
accompanied  with  its  twin- sister,  morality. 
True  piety  ought  to  give  "confidence"  in 
regard  to  the  present^  and  "  hope  "  in  regard 
to  i\iQ  future.  1  he  words  of  Eliphaz  a  great 
truth  falsely  applied.  The  46th  Psalm  an 
exempUfication  of  that  truth.  Habakkuk's 
Song  another  (Hab.  iii.  17,  18).  Eor  this 
result,  however,  the  fear  of  God  to  be  coupled 
with 

Faith  in  God. 

JoW%  fear  of  God  unshaken,  but  his  faith 
in  God  beclouded.  A  past  religious  and 
moral  life  in  itself  not  sufficient  to  stajf  the 
mind  in  trouble.  The  peace  of  God  that 
keeps  the  heart  and  mind,  the  result  oi faith 
in  Jesus  Christ  (Phil.  iv.  7).  Not  a  blameless 
or  God-fearing  life,  but  a  mind  stayed  on 
God  and  trusting  in  Him^  keeps  the  soul  in 
perfect  peace  (Is.  xxvi.  3).    Such  a  Unut^ 


however,  the  usual  outcome  and  accompani- 
ment of  such  a  life.  Faith  in  God,  and  the 
fear  <9/*God  make  the  soul  triumph  in  eveiy 
trouble.  "  Let  us  sing  the  46th  Psalm,  and 
let  them  do  their  worst "  [Luther,  when  threa- 
tened by  enemies'].  "My  father  is  at  the 
helm,"  enough  to  quiet  the  soul  in  every 
storm.  "  He  has  nothing  to  fear  who  has 
Caesar  for  his  friend''  [Seneca].  Eor  Cassar, 
substitute  Christ.  The  privilege  of  beliecers, 
eagle-likcy  to  hold  on  their  career  through 
storms  and  tempests.  "The  righteous  is  as 
bold  as  a  lion,"  i.  e.,  with  faith  in  exercise. 
Job's  faith,  like  that  of  the  disciples,  tested 
in  a  storm  and  found  defective  (Mark  iv. 
40).  Sometimes,  however,  breaks  through 
the  cloud,  and  triumphs  over  all  opposition 
(xxiii.  10;  xvi.  19;  xix.  25—27;  xiii.  15). 
T/iere  are  times  when  the  belieoeis  faith  is 
scarcely  able  to  keep  head  above  water, 

III.  Exhortation,  with  yeiled  Reproof 

(verse  7). 

"  Remember,  I  pray  thee,"  &c.  Skilfully 
ambiguous.  May  serve  either  for  convic- 
tion or  consolation.  History  a  useful  teacher ^ 
but  requires  intelligence  to  read  its  lessons. 
The  part  of  true  wisdom  to  mark,  record, 
and  improve  God's  dealings  in  Providence 
(Ps.  cvii.  43).  His  works  made  to  be  re- 
membered (Ps.  cxi.  4).  Asaph's  and  David's 
conduct  in  times  of  trouble  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  11, 
12;  cxliii.  5). — "Whoever  perished  being 
innocent  ?"  Literally :  "  Who  is  that  inno- 
cent person  who  hath  perished  ?"  Asks  for 
any  such  known  example.  Eternity  not  in 
view.  "  Perished  "  by  some  signal  judgment. 
"Cut  off"  by  some  sudden  catastrophe. 
Reference  to  Job's  own  case.  Job  not  yet 
"  cut  off;"  hence  consolation  in  the  question. 
The  innocent  "cast  down  but  not  destroyed." 
Paul's  experience  (2  Cor.  iv.  9 ;  vi.  9). 
David's  (Ps.  Ixxi.  20).  Job  all  but  "  cut 
off}"  hence  the  question  for  conviction. 
Can  Job  be  an  innocent  person  P  No  such 
person  has  ever  perished.  No  example,  ac 
cording  to  Eliphaz,  of  a  godly  man  cut  off 
by  any  signal  judgment  or  overwiielming 
catastrophe.  Tne  opposite  side  maintained 
by  Job.  The  godly  fall  with  the  ungodly 
(ch  ix.  22,  23).  Same  truth  taught,  Ecc. 
ix.  2,  3  j  Ez.  xxi.  3.  The  godly  often  suffer 
while  the  wicked  prosper  (xii.  5,  6 ;  xxi.  7 ; 
Ps.  Ixxiii.  3,  12).  The  first  recorded  death 
of  a  believer  a  violent  and  bloody  one.  Saints 
at  times  "  killed  all  tiie  day  long,"  and  their 
«* blood  shed  like  water"  (Ps  xliv.  22; 
Ixxix.  3).  Paul  glories  in  the  long  martyr- 
roll  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  the  church  has 
since  done  in  that  of  the  New  (Heb.  xi. 
35-37).  Thousands  of  the  faithful  "cut  off" 
in  the  pertecation  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes 

29 


cnAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY t  JOB. 


(Dan.  xi.  33).  Still,  JoVs  case  an  unusual 
one,  and  not  belonging  to  any  of  these  classes. 
His  crushing  calamities  apparently  direct 
from  the  hand  of  God.  Everything  scented 
to  proclaim  him  an  object  of  the  Divine 
auger.  "  God  smites,  hence  there  is  guilt," — 
an  instinct  of  humanity  (Acts,  xxviii.  3,  4). 
Hence  the  suspicion  of  his  friends,  and  Job"'s 
own  perplexity  (ch.  xiii.  24 ;  xvi.  9 — 14  j  xix. 
10,  11).  Faith  has  often  a  hard  battle  to 
fight  against  appearances  and  carnal  reasoning. 
Job's  friends  instead  of  aiding  his  buffeted 
and  sometimes  staggering  faith,  help  his  un- 
belief. Their  object,  to  make  him  out,  and 
bring  him  to  acknowledge  himself  to  be, 
other  than  he  had  appeared.  The  experience 
of  Job  a  foreshadowing  of  that  of  Jesus  (is. 
liii.  3,  4;  Matt,  xxvii.  43,  46). 

T.  Eliphaz  adduces  his  own  observa- 
tion for  Job's  conviction  (verse  8). 

"  Even  as  I  have  seen."  Useful  for  the 
preacher  to  substantiate  his  arguments  and 
a^ppeals  by  facts  of  his  own  observation. 

Sin  and  its  Consequences. 

1.  Sin.  "  They  that  ^jlough  iniquity," — 
practise  2^ro;^^^,especially  m  relation  to  others. 
A  cruel  thrust  at  Job,  as  if  this  had  been  his 
character,  and  that  for  which  he  was  now 
suffering.  "  Plough  *'  iniquity — practise  it 
carefully,  industriously,  painfully,  perse- 
veringly,  and  with  expectation  of  profit 
(Prov.  xxii.  8  j  Hos.  viii,  7  ;  x.  13.  Sinners 
sore  labourers  (Prov.  xvi.  27 ;  Is.  lix.  5 ; 
Jer.  ix.  5).  Satan  the  worst  master ;  keeps 
his  servants  at  hard  work  with  miserable 
wages. — "  And  sow  wickedness,"  or  **  mis- 
chief j  " — continue  to  prosecute  wicked  and 
oppressive  schemes.  The  character  of  tyrants 
to  oppress  others  with  the  view  of  enriching 
themselves.  Sin  gradual  and  progressive. 
One  sin  prepares  the  way  for  another.  Plough  - 
ing  prepares  for  sowing.  The  sinner  urged 
on  to  persevere  in  sin.  One  sin  to  be  fol- 
lowed by  anot  her,  in  order  to  gain  the  result^ 
as  ploughing  by  sownng.  "Evil  men  and 
seducers  wax  worse  and  worse  "  (2  Tim. 
iii.  13).  Sin  is  never  at  a  stay  ;  if  we  do  not 
retreat  from  it,  we  advance  in  it  [Barrow]. 

2.  Its  consequences.  "Reap  the  same ;"  (1.) 
The  profit  of  their  sin.  (2.)  The  punishment  of 
it.  Retribution  correspondinir  with  the  sin, 
constantly  recognised  in  the  Bible  (Is.  xxxiii. 
1;  Rev.  xiii.  10  j  Matt.  vii.  2;  Jam.  ii.  13). 
Exeiiifilificd  in  Adonibezek  (Jud.  i.  7);  and  iu 
the  peisecutors  of  the  church  (Rev.  xvi,  6). 
The  Egyptians,  who  drowned  Israel's  infants 
in  the  Nile,  are  themselves  drowned  in  the 
Red  Sea.  Countries  distinguished  for  per- 
secution, as  Spain  with  its  Inquisition,  and 
France  with  its  Bartholomew  Massacre,  dis- 

90 


tinguished  also  for  the  horrors  of  bloody 
revolutions  and  civil  wars.  Charles  IX.  of 
France,  who  ordered  the  Massacre  of  1575, 
expired  in  a  bloody  sweat,  exclaiming,  '*  What 
blood !  What  murders !  What  shall  I 
do?  I  am  lost  for  ever."  linder  God's 
government,  sin  followed  by  suffering  as  a 
body  by  its  shadow  (Num.  xxxii.  !?3).  Men 
constantly  sowing  either  to  the  flesh  or  the 
spirit  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8).  The  crop  according 
to  the  seed. 

(Ver.  9).  The  fate  of  the  prosperous  wicked. 
Cruelly  held  forth  by  Eliphaz  as  if  to  teriify 
Job  and  identify  his  case  with  theirs.  The 
case  of  Job  and  his  children  terribly  resem- 
bling it.  Truth  misapplied  assumes  the  nature 
and  produces  the  effect  of  error.  *'  By  the 
blast  (or  breath)  of  God  they  perish."  A 
mere  breath  of  God  sufficient  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  ungodly.  "  Thou  didst  blow  with 
thy  wind,"  sung  over  the  ruin  of  Pharaoh's 
host  and  of  the  Spanish  Armada.  The  whirl- 
wind that  overthrows  the  dwelling  and  wrecks 
the  ship,  but  the  breath  of  the  Almighty,  The 
wicked  driven  away  by  God's  breath  as  so 
much  dust  or  chaff*  before  the  wind  (Ps.  i.  4). 
The  breath  that  made  the  world  can  as  easily 
destroy  it  ( Ps.  xxxiii.  6). — "  By  the  breath 
of  his  nostrils  are  they  consumed,"  like  vege- 
tation scorched  and  burnt  up  by  the  hot  wind 
of  the  desert  (Jer.  iv.  11;  Ez.  xvii.  10; 
Hos.  xiii.  15).  The  life  of  the  ungodly  is  — 
(1.)  Laborious  and  painful  in  its  efforts  ;  (2.) 
Often  prosperous  for  a  time  in  its  results  ; 
3.)  Miserable  in  its  end.  *'  Consumed/'  by 
Divine  judgments  in  this  life,  or  by  the 
experience  of  His  wrath  in  the  life  to  come. 
The  former  mainly  intended  by  Eiiphaz,  with- 
out exclusion  of  the  latter.  True,  as  to 
what  frequently  happens.  Examples, — the 
Antediluvians,  and  the  Cities  of  the  Plain. 
Its  universality  implied  by  Eliphaz,  but 
denied  by  Job  (ch.  xxi  7 — 14;  xii.  6).  Sen- 
tence against  an  evil  work  not  always  speedily 
ex(  cuted  (Ecc.  viii.  11).  Some  wicked 
m(  n  punished  here,  to  save  God's  providence; 
only  some  to  save  his  patience  and  promise 
of  future  judgment  [Augustine].  The  pre- 
servation of  the  ungodly  only  a  reserva- 
tion. God's  forbearance  no  acquitance. 
Divine  justice  slow  but  sure.  Has  leaden 
heels  but  iron  hands.  The  longer  in  draw- 
ing the  arrow,  the  deeper  the  wound. 
[Brookes.] 

(Verse  10).  Same  truth  poetically  set  forth 
under  another  figure.  "  The  roaring  of  the 
lion  and  the  voice  of  the  fierce  lion," — supply 
"is  silenced."  The  threatening  of  the  rich 
oppressor  and  the  terror  itispired  by  it  come  to 
an  end.  "Lions  "  used  in  Scripture  as  the 
symbol  of  cruel  and  rapacious  men  (Ps.  Ivii. 
4;  Jer.  1.  17  ;  Zepli.  iii.  3).  The  figure 
common  in  Arab   poetry  for  the  ricfe  ft»d 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    IV 


powerful.  Furnished  by  the  deserts  of 
Arabia  in  which  Elipliaz  lived.  The  refer- 
ence cruelly  intended  by  him  to  Job  and  his 
three  sons. — "  The  teeth  of  the  young  lions 
are  broken.*'  The  means  of  wicked  mcrCs 
doing  mischief  and  pracfisinq  oppression  ulti- 
mately taken  from  them.  The  teeth  of  the 
tyrant  and  persecutor  sooner  or  later  broken. 
Examples: — Belshazzar  (Dan.  v.  22,  30); 
Herod  (Acts  xii.  23) ;  Nero  (2  Tim.  iv.  17). 
Heartless  allusion  to  the  condition  of  Job 
and  his  family. — (Verse  11).  "The  old  lion 
perisheth.*'  Various  aspects,  and  perhaps 
species,  of  the  lion  indicated.  Usual  with 
Arab  poets  to  express  the  same  thing  by 
several  synonymous  terms ;  each,  however, 
with  a  variety  of  idea.  Various  forms  and 
degrees  of  wickedness,  and  various  classes 
of  persecutors  and  oppiessors;  as  lions 
differ  in  ferocity,  age,  and  strength.  Com- 
mon with  Scripture  to  represent  moral 
character  under  the  figure  of  various  animals  : 
cruelty  by  the  lion  and  bear;  rapacity  by 
the  wolf  and  the  leopard ;  subtlety  by  the 
fox  and  the  serpent  j  uncleanness  by  the 
swine  and  the  dog ;  innocence  by  the  dove  j 
meekness  by  tlie  lambj  industry  by  the  ant. 
Some  animals  with  natures  and  habits  for 
imitation,  others  the  reverse.  The  inferior 
creatures,  in  the  variety  of  their  natures  and 
habits,  the  divinely-constituted  symbols  of  the 
various  characters  and  dispositions  of  men. 
The  natural  world  a  Divine  mirror  of  the 
moral  and  spiritual. 

VI.  The  yision  (verse  12). 

"  Now  a  thini^  was  secretly  brought  to 
me,"  &c.  The  vision  related  by  Eliphaz  :— 
(1.)  To  gain  authority  to  his  own  reasoning 
and  doctrine ;  (2.)  to  reprove  Job's  mur- 
muring, and  sinful  reflection  on  the  Divine 
procedure;  (3.)  To  humble  his  apparent 
self-righteousness,  and  convince  him  he  was 
a  sinner.  The  doctrine  of  the  vision  true 
but  misapplied  by  the  narrator.  Visions 
frequently  afforded  in  patriarchal  times  in  the 
absence  of  a  written  revelation  (ch.  xxxiii. 
15,  16).  One  of  the  "  divers  manners " 
(Heb.  i.  1).  Such  communications  given 
"  secretly,"  in  the  absence  of  other  parties, 
(Dan.  X.  7,  8).  Elij)haz  probably  awake 
and  revolving  past  midnigjht  visions, — "  in 
thoughts,"  &c.  The  description  allowed  to 
excel  all  others  of  a  simdar  kind  in  sublimity 
and  horror.  Sublime  without  h^m»  obscure, 
circnmstantial  without  being  mean  [Kitto]. 
Wonderful  grouping  (5f  impressive  ideas. 
Midnight — solitude — deepsilence — approach 
of  the  spectre— its  gliding  and  flitting  motion 
— its  shadowy,  unrecognisable  form— its  final 
stationary  attitude— tlu;  voice— the  awful 
sdencc  broken  by  the  so'einn  question  of  the 
spirit— «.|\e  diili  horror  of  the  spectator- 


trembling  in  all  his  limbs — the  hair  of  his 
body  standing   up  from    fear.     Mach   more 
connected  with  the  earth  than  is  ordinarily 
visible.     Man  surrounded  with  a  countless 
invisible  population  of  intelligent  creatures. 
"Myriads    of    spiritual    beings    walk    the 
earth  "  \_Milton\.     Man  an  object  of  intense 
interest     both    to    good    and    bad    spirits. 
Communication  with   the    spirit    world   at 
present  confined  within  narrow  limits ;  partly 
through    our   physical    nature,    still    more 
through  our  fallen  condition.     Man  in  his 
present  state  naturally  alarmed   at  spiritual 
and  supernatural  appearances  (Dan.  x.  7,  8). 
Special  strength    required  to   endure   such 
appearances  and  receive   such    communica- 
tions (Dan.  x.  17—19).     Flesh  and  blood 
unable    to    inherit    the   kingdom    of    God 
(1  Cor.  XV  50).     Man's  natural  body  to  be 
changed  into  a  spiritual  one  to  hold  fellow- 
ship with  the  spirit  world  (1  Cor  xv.  44). 
— "  Mine  ear    received  a  little    thereof;" 
Heb.,  "  a  whisper."     The  amount  received, 
only  a  whisper  as  compared  with  a  full  out- 
spoken speech.     All  we   know  of   God,  a 
mere   whisper  in  comparison  with   mighty 
thunder  (ch.  xxvi.   14),     Little  of  Divine 
truth  communicated  compared  with  what  is 
to  be  known  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9).     The  greatest 
part  of  what  we  know,  the  least  part  of  what 
we  know  not      Things   heard   oy   Paul  in 
Paradise  unlawful  or  impossible  to  be  uttered 
(2  Cor  xii.  4).     Truth  communicated  only 
as  we  are  able  to  receive  it  (Mark,  iv.  33 ; 
John  xvi.  12).     "Even  in  the  Scripture,  I 
am  ignorant  of  much  more  than  I  know " 
lAugustine].  —  (Verse    16).      "  There   was 
silence  aud  I  heard  a  voice  ; "  or,  "  Silence, 
and  a  voice  I  heard,"  i.e.  a  still  small  voice, 
as  ]  Kings  xix.  12.    Deep  silence  the  result 
of  the  spectre's  appearance,  and  the  prepara- 
tion for  its  communication.  Silence  within  the 
hearer's  soul  as  well  as  in  the  world  without. 
Enjoined  in  the  Divine  presence  and  in  re- 
ceiving Divine  communications  (Hab.  ii.  20). 
Silence  in  heaven  before  the  sounding  of  the 
seven  trumpets  (Rev.  viii.  1).     The  "  foot " 
to  be   "kept,"  and  silent  attention  to    be 
maintained  in  the  house  of  God  (Eccles.  v. 
1,  2).     Preparation  of  heart  necessary   for 
receiving  Divine  truth  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  8 ;  1  Sam. 
iii.   9).     Silence   from— (1.)    The   voice   of 
pride  and  self  conceit ;    (2.)    The  opinions 
and  wisdom  of  the  flesh ;    (3.)  The  desires 
and  cravings  of  corrupt  nature  j    (4.)  The 
impatient  clamourings  of  selfwill. 

The  Spectre's  Coiumiinication. 

(Verse  17).  "Shall  mortal  man  be  more  just 
than  God,"— or,  "  be  just  before  God  ?  "  The 
object  of  the  commuirtcation  on  the  part  o' 
the  spirit, — (1.)  To  silence  man's  murmurin 

31 


CHAP.  IT. 


HOMILETIC  COMMEATAUr:  JOB. 


against  the  Divine  procedure,  as  if  man  were 
more  just  than  God  (ch.  iii.  10  —  23  ;  xxxv.  2; 
xl.  8).     To  murmur  under  trouble  is  to  reflect 
on  the  ViHne  wisdom  and  goodness,  and  to 
make  ourselces  more  righteous  than  God.     In 
the  view  of  Eliphaz,  this  the  sin  into  which 
Job  had  fallen.     The  sin  to  which  great  and 
accumulated  suffering  especially  exposes  our 
fallen  nature.     That  into  which  Asnph  had 
nearly  fallen  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2).     God  as  righteous 
when  he  afflicts  a  good  man  as  when  he  punishes 
a  bad  one.    Jeremiah's  Divine  philosophy, — 
"Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain?'* 
(Lam.  iii.  39).     It  is   "of  God's  mercies" 
that  a  saint  as  well  as  a  sinner  is  *'  not  con- 
sumed" (Lam.  iii.  22).    One  single  sin,  seen 
in  its  real  character,  enough  to  shut  the  mouth 
of  every  complainer.  Just  views  of  the  charac- 
ter of  God  and  of  the  nature  of  sin  calculated 
to  silence  murmurs  under  heaviest  troubles. 
(2.)  To  humhle  marts  pride,  and  to  grove  every 
man  in   God's  sight  a  sinner.     The  object  of 
the  first  three  chapters  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans.     The  lesson  Job  was  intended  to 
learn,  and  did  learn  (ch.  xHi.  5).     Taught 
Isaiah  by  th(5  vision  of  the  Divine  glory  in 
the  Temple  (Is.  vi.  1,  &c.) ;  and  Peter  by  the 
miraculous  draught  of   fishes  (Luke  v.  8). 
The  object  of  the  Gospel  to  teach  how  a  man 
may  be  just  before  God.     The  law-fulfilling 
and  justice-satisfying   work  of  Christ,  God's 
way  of  making  a  man  righteous  before  Uim. 
God  justifies  only  '*  the  ungodly  that  believe 
in  Je:^us"(Kom.  iv.  4,  6;  Lukexviii.  10, 14). 
The  reason  obvious  (Kom.  iii.  10,  23).    To 
become  righteous,  a  man  must  take  the  place 
of  a  sinner, — his  real  character.     The  sinner 
becomes  righteous  before  God  in  accepting 
the  righteousness  of  another.     Righteous  in 
Christ, — our  peace  in  life,  our  joy  in  death, 
and  our  passport  into  the  New  Jerusalem 
(Jer.   xxiii.  5,  6;  Is.  xlv.  24  j  1  Cor.  i.  30; 
2  Cor.  V.  21).     Job  a  "perfect  man"  ac- 
cording to  law  j  but  in  order  to  evangelical 
perfection,  his  comeliness,  like  Daniel's,  to 
be  "turned  into  corruption"  in  him  (Dan. 
X.  8).     The  saint's  highest  attainment  to  know 
himself  a  poor  sinner,  and  Christ  a  rich  Saviour. 
*'  1  a  poor  sinner  am,  but  Jesus  died  for  me," 
{Wesley's  deathbed  testimony). — The  believer's 
perfection,  thoroughly  to  know  his  absolute  imper- 
fection.   Education,  example,  correction,  and 
punishment,  may  do  much  fora  man,  but  cannot 
make  him  a  poor  sinner  [^Krummacher].     "  A 
sinner  is  a  sacred  thing;  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
made  him  so  "  [^Hart]. 

Yerse  18.  "Behold."  Always  indicating 
something  important,  and  calling  for  special 
attention.  Uncertain  whether,  in  what 
follows,  the  spirit  or  Eliphaz  himself  is 
the  speaker.  The  object, — to  humble  man, 
and  more  especially  Job,  as  in  nature  and  cha 
racter  so  much  inferior  to  the  angels.  The 
32 


constant  aim  of  Job's  "friends,"  to  bring  him 
down  from  his  excellency  (Ps.  Ixii.  4). — "He 
put  no  trust  in  his  servants."  Angels  God's 
servants  by  way  of  eminence  (Ps.  ciii.  20 — 
21  ;  civ.  4).  The  highest  honour  of  a  creature 
is  to  be  a  servant  of  his  Creator.  God's  service 
not  only  our  freedom,  but  our  glory.  God's 
dominion  over  all  created  intelligences.  The 
Seraphim  his  servants.  Man  as  well  as  angel 
must  serve;   but  he  may  choose  his  master. 

"  Thou  canst  not  choose  but  serve ;   man's  lot 

is  servitude. 
But  thou  hast  thus  much  choice — a  bad  lord 

or  a  good." 

God  puts  no  trust  in  the  angels,  as  being : — 
1.  Mutable    and    unstable.     Many  of    them 
fell ;  others  might,  but  for  sustaining  grace. 
God  alone  unchangeable  (Mai.  iii.  6;  Jam.  i. 
17).  Angels  secure,  like  men,  only  hy  a  Divine 
act  of  election  (i.  Tim.  v.  21).     2.  Imperfect 
and   liable  to  err.      Eallibility  and   imper- 
fection stamped    on  all  creature-excellence. 
God  only  wise  (Kom.  xvi    27) ;  only   holy 
(Rev.  XV.    4) ;    only   true   (John    xvii     3). 
Infallibility  a  Divine  attribute,  claimed  by,  the 
Pope  while  arrogating  to  himself,  as  the  pre- 
tended head  of  the  Church,  the  promise  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  made  by  Christ  to  His  Apostles. 
— "  His  angels  He  charged  with  folly ; " — (1) 
allowed;  (2)  marked;  (3)  visited,  sin  in  them. 
"Angels,"  so  called  from  their  office  as  God  s 
messengers  or  agents.     "  Sons  of  God,''  from 
their  nature  (see  ch.  i.  6).  Probable  allusion 
in  the  text  to  the  fall  of  some  of  them  (Jude 
i.   6)  ; — "  kept   not    their   first    estate,    but 
left  their  own  habitation"  (2   Peter  ii.  4). 
Rebellion  against  God  the  height  of  folly  in 
man  or  angel.     Sinning  angels  dealt  with  ac- 
cording to  their  folly  (Jude  vi. ;  2  Pet.  ii.  4). 
The  fall  of  angels  as  possible  and  as  likely  as 
the  fall  of  men.     Their  fall  a  mystery,  but 
clearly  revealed.      Man's  fall  connected  with 
that  ol  angels  which  preceded  it.     Fallen  in- 
telligences,  human   or  angelic,    naturally  the 
tempters  of  others. — The  angel's  fall  a  lesson 
of  humility  to  man  (verse  19).     "How  much 
less,"  i.e.  can  He  trust  men  ;  or,  "  how  much 
more  "  must  He  charge  men  with  folly.     The 
fallibility  and  imperfection  of  men  argued  from 
that  of  angels.  Job  pronounced  and  esteemed 
a  "  perfect  man."       His  spirit  and  conduct 
under  his  trials  at  first  in  accordance  with  this 
character.     Conscious  himself  of  his  spotless 
life  (ch.  xxix.,  xxxi).     Too  ready  to  glory  in 
it  (xxxi.  35 — 37).     Appeared  to  maintain  it 
in  a  way  unbecoming  in  one  who  was  a  sinner 
(xxxiii.  9  ;  ix.  17  j  x.  7).       Needed  to  be 
taught  more  dt  eply  the  imperfection  of  his 
perl'cction.     His  perfection  not  even  that  of 
an  imperfect  angel,  but  of  a  man.     The  object 
of  the  Book  of  Job,  as  of  God's  dealings  in 
general,  to  hide  pride  from  man  (xxxiii.  17). 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    IV. 


The  dust  the  'place  of  the  highest  and  the  holiest 
before  his  Maker. 

Poetical  and  affecting  description  of 
Man's  Condition  and  Circumstances. 

1.  As  inhabiting  a  frail  and  humble  body — 
(Verse  19).  "  Who  dwell  in  houses  of  clay.'* 
Oriental  houses  of  the  poorer  classes  usually 
of  clay  or  mud  dried  in  the  sun.  These 
naturally  of  the  frailest  and  humblest  cha- 
racter. Contrasted  with  the  houses  of  the 
great, — usually  of  hewn  stone.  Man's  fleshly 
body  so  spoken  of  (2  Cor.  v.  1).  Adam 
=  red  earth.  Hence  used  as  the  name  of 
the  race  (Gen.  ii.  15).  Elesh  a  sign  and 
cause  of  weakness  (Is.  xxxi.  3 ;  Gen.  vi.  3 ; 
I's  Ixxviii.  39).  Contrasted  with  the  angels, 
who  are  spirits,  and  therefore  strong  (Is. 
xxxi.  3 ;  Ps.  ciii.  20).  Man's  present  body 
as  "  natural,"  contrasted  with  his  resurrec- 
tion body  as  "spiritual"  (1  Cor.  xv.  42 — 
44;  2  Cor.  V.  1). 

2.  Formed  out  of  the  ground  and  returning 
to  it.  "  Whose  foundation  is  in  the  dust.** 
The  elements  of  man's  body  those  of  the 
ground  on  which  he  treads.  Man  frequently 
reminded  of  his  origin  to  keep  him  humble. 
His  lowly  origin  an  enhancement  of  redeem- 
ing love.  God's  Son  took  not  on  Him  (or, 
"  took  not  hold  of  '*)  the  nature  of  angels, 
but  that  of  Abraham  (Heb.  ii.  16).  Man  in 
his  creation  made  lower  than  the  angels ;  in 
his  regeneration^  higher  (Ps.  viii.  4,  &c. ; 
Rom.  viii.  16,  17).  His  return  to  dust 
natural,  but  not  necessary.  The  Divine 
sentence  on  Adam's  transgression  (Gen.  iii. 
19 ;  Ps.  xc.  3,8  ;  Eccles.  xii.  7)  Hitherto 
but  two  authentic  exceptions  (Gen.  v.  24 ; 
2  Kings  ii.  11.  "  *  Dust  to  dust  *  concludes 
earth's  noblest  song.** 

3.  Weak  and  easily  destroyed.  **  Crushed 
before  the  moth."  Crushed  to  death  as 
easily  as  a  moth  is  crushed  between  the 
fingers  ;  or,  crushed  "  in  presence  of  a  moth,** 
which  can  prove  his  death.  Man's  body  so 
frail  that  the  sliglitest  accident  can  termi- 
nate his  existence.  Pope  Adrian  actually 
choked  by  a  gnat.  A  dish  of  lampreys  the 
death  of  an  English  king.  Man's  continued 
existence  the  result  of  Divine  preservation 
(ch.  X.  12).  "Strange  that  a  harp  of 
thousand  strings,'*  &c. 

4.  Constantly  liable  to  death,  and  on  the 
way  to  it  (verse  20).  "  They  are  destroyed 
from  morning  to  evening."  Liable  every 
moment  to  accident,  disease  and  death.  A 
continual  tendency  to  dissolution.  The 
seeds  of  disease  and  death  iniierent  in  man's 
frame.  Death  the  immediate  consequence 
of  the  fall  (Gen.  ii.  17).  Man's  life  itself  is 
death  in  constant  development.  "  The  mo- 
ment we  begin  to  live,*'  &c.    Man  crushea 


"between  morning  and  evening.**     An  in- 
sect life.     Man  an  ephemeral ;  his  life  ad:iy, 

5.  Cut  off  in  death  from  the  visible  world 
without  ability  to  return  to  it.  "They 
perish  for  ever.**  Man's  death  a  finality. 
Only  one  life.  Appointed  once  to  die  (Heb. 
ix.  27).  *'  The  bourne  from  whence  no  tra- 
veller returns."  Man  as  water  spilt  upon 
the  ground,  not  to  be  taken  up  again  (2 
Sam.  xiv.  14).  Art  can  embalm  and  pre- 
serve the  body,  but  not  put  life  into  it. 
Galvanism  can  move  the  limbs,  but  not  re- 
store the  life.  Resurrection  here  out  of 
view.  The  text  speaks  of  what  is  apparent, 
natural,  and  ordinary.  Resurrection  the  result 
of  a  new  di«;pensation  and  a  second  Adam. 
Jesus  Christ  the  resurrection  and  the  life. 
Christ  the  first  fruits  (1  Cor.  xv.  20,  23). 
Specimens  of  bodily  resurrection  already 
afforded;  — (1)  In  Christ  himself;  (2)  In 
those  restored  to  life  by  Himself  and  by  others 
through  His  power ;  (3)  In  those  who  rose 
and  left  their  graves  after  His  resurrection 
(Matt,  xxvii.  52,  53).  The  resurrection  of 
all  believers  at  His  second  coming  (1  Cor. 
XV.  23;  1  Thess.  iv.  15—17).  To  be  fol- 
lowed by  a  general  resurrection  (Rev.  xx.  5; 
John  V.  28,  29).  A  new  earth  the  habita- 
tion of  risen  saints  (2  Peter  iii.  13). 

6.  Unnoticed  in  death  by  higher  orders  of 
beings.  *'  Without  any  regarding  it ;"— /.  e., 
as  to  any  appearance  of  it.  No  attempt 
made  by  angelic  beings  to  prevent  it.  No 
expression  heard  of  sorrow  or  concern  on 
account  of  it.  Man  dies  in  silence  from  the 
other  world  as  if  unnoticed  and  disregarded. 
This,  however,  only  in  appearance  (see 
Luke  xvi.  22 ;  Ps.  Ixxii.  14 ;  cxvi.  15). 

7.  Stripped  of  all  the  excellence  possessed 
on  earth  (verse  21).  "Doth  not  their  ex- 
cellence which  was  in  them  go  away  ?"  Not 
only  the  best  and  most  excellent  thing  which 
was  with  them, — as  riches,  dignity,  power, 
&c  , — but  which  was  in  them, — as  beauty 
and  strength  of  body,  powers  and  endow- 
ments of  mind  (Ps.  xlix.  14,  17 ;  Eccles.  ix. 
10).  True,  however,  only  in  appearance, 
and  in  regard  to  the  body.  The  spirit  returns 
to  God  who  gave  it  (Ecc.  xii.  7).  All  ex- 
cellence departs  from  the  body,  but  not  from 
the  man.  Excellencies  of  the  spirit  develope 
and  bloom  in  a  higher  sphere.  A  holy 
character  immortal,  and  stcrvives  the  tomb. 
Grace  the  only  glory  that  a  man  can  carry 
with  him  into  the  spirit-world. 

8.  Dying  without  attaining  to  wisdom. 
"They  die,  even  without  wisdom.*'  Man 
attains  in  this  life  to  comparatively  little 
knowledge  in  natural  things,  and  to  still  less 
in  spiritual  ones  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9 — 13).  Sir 
Isaac  Newton's  death  bed  estimate  of  his 
attainments  in  science, — a  little  child  gather- 
ing pebbles  on  the  sea-shore,  with  the  ocean 

83 


CHAP.  V, 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


"The 
least 


of  unexplored  knowledge  before  him. 
greatest  part  of  what  I  know  is  the 
part  of  what  I  know  not "  \_Augustine]. 
Most  die  without  true  and  saving  wisdom 


(Matt.  vii.  14  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  15).  Man's  wis' 
dom  in  life  is  rightly  to  prepare  for  death 
(Ps.  xc.  12;  Deut.  xxxii.  29). 


CHAPTEE  V. 
TEE  FIRST  SPEECH  OF  ELIPHAZ.— CONTINUED. 


T.  Application  of  the  Tision  (verse  1). 
"  Call  now,  if  there  be  any  that  will 
answer  thee ;  and  to  which  of  the  saints 
('holy  ones* — probably  angels,  as  xv.  15; 
Dan.  viii.  13)  wilt  thou  turn?"  Job  to 
expect  no  countenance  to  his  language  either 
from  holy  men  or  angels. 

Learn : — 

1  Fain  for  a  sinner  to  appeal  against 
God  either  to  saints  or  angels.  Every  angel 
in  heaven  will  take  God's  part  as:ainst  tlie 
complaining  sinner.  Angels  already  tauo;ht 
the  wickedness  and  woe  of  rebellion  against 
God.  Angels  themselves  cliarged  with  folly; 
how  then  dare  man  open  his  mouth  ?  The 
cry  of  a  poor  sinner  heard  in  heaven,  but  not 
thai  of  an  unhumbled  self-righteous  complainer. 
Tliat  cry  heard  when  directed  to  God,  not  to 
angels 

2.  No  ground  in  the  text  for  the  doctrine 
of  angelic  intercession  or  prayer  to  departed 
saints.  God  the  hearer  of  prayer ;  to  Him 
all  flesh  are  to  come  (Ps.  Ixv.  2).  To  pray 
to  others  in  trouble  or  difiBculty,  an  insult  to 
God,  as  if  either  unable  or  unwilling  to 
answer  (2  Kings  i.  3).  An  anuel  presents 
the  prayers  of  saints  to  God,  but  he  the 
*'  Angel  of  the  Covenant  '  (Rev.  viii.  3,  4 ; 
Mai.  iii.  1;  Zee.  iii.  1 — 8).  The  only  prayer 
in  the  Bible  addressed  to  a  departed  saint, 
that  of  the  rich  man  in  hell,  and  then  not 
heard  (Luke  xvi.  24,  27).  To  intercede  for 
others  the  part  of  saints  on  earth.  To  apply 
for  that  intercession  a  privilege  and  duty 
(ch.  xlii.  8;  Jam.  v.  15,  18;  1  John  v.  16). 
Angels  ministering  attendants  on  believers, 
not  interceding  priests  for  them  (Heb.  i.  14). 
One  Mediaior  between  God  and  men  (1  Tim. 
ii.  5).  One  Advocate  with  the  Eather 
(1  .lohn  ii.  1).  One  Priest  in  heaven  who 
makes  intercession  for  us  (Pom.  viii.  34 ; 
Heb.  vii.  -25  ;  ix.  24).  Men  to  come  to  God 
by  Him  (Heb.  vii.  -25;  John  xiv.  6).  Angels 
employed  by  God  for  the  benefit  of  his 
children  (Ps.  xxxiv.  7 ;  xci.  11 ;  Heb.  i,  14). 
Prayer  for  that  ministry  to  be  addressed, 
not  to  the  servatits,  but  to  the  Master  wno 
sends  them  (Matt.  xxvi.  53). 

3.  Angels  and  departed  saints  to  be  *^  turned 
to^"*  not  for  help  and  prelection,  but  for  exam- 
ple fPs.  ciii.  20  ;  Malt.  vi.  10).  Angels  our 
example: — (1)  In  obedifnc! ,  (2)  In  sub- 
mission; (3)  In  humility;  (4)  In  reverence. 

34 


The  prayer  oftener  uttered  than  realized, — 
"Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,"  &c.  God's 
will  done  in  heaven : — (1)  By  each  of  its 
inhabitants ;  (2)  Without  intermission  or 
deviation  \  (3)  With  promptitude  and  cheer- 
fulness \  (4)  Without  murmuring  or  ques- 
tioning. Earth  converted  into  heaven  when 
this  prayer  is  fulfilled.  A  consummation  to 
be  expected: — (I)  From  the  prayer  itself; 
(2)  Erom  express  promises  to  that  effect 
(2  Peter  iii.  13 ;  Is.  xi.  9  ;  Zeph.  iii.  9). 

II.  The  folly  and  effects  of  fretting 
against  God  (verse  2). 

"Eor  wrath  (passion,  and  displeasure 
against  God  for  his  dealings  in  Providence) 
killeth  the  foolish  man,  and  envy  {margin, 
*  indignation ')  slayeth  the  silly  one." 
Probably  one  of  the  traditional  sayings  of 
the  wise  in  common  use  among  the  sages  of 
Arabia.  A  specimen  of  the  proverbial  poetry 
of  the  ancients,  and  a  good  example  of 
Hebrew  parallelism.  "Poems  instead  of 
written  laws,** — one  of  the  Bedouin's  boasts. 
These  maxims  or  wise  sayings  freely  applied 
by  Job's  "comforters'*  against  him.  The 
present,  like  others,  an  important  truth. 
The  sentiment  extended  in  the  37th  Psalm. 
An  unfeeling  application  intended  by  Eliphaz 
to  the  case  of  Job. 

Learn : — 

1.  It  is  the  part  only  of  fools  to  fret  against 
God  a  fed  his  procedure.  To  complain  against 
G  d  and  His  dealings  as  absurd  as  it  is 
wicked.  The  extreme  of  folly  for  a  creature 
of  yesterday  to  find  fault  with  or  sit  in  judg- 
ment on  the  doings  of  the  Eternal  Creator. 
Rather  may  a  child  three  years  old  censure 
the  architect  s  plan  of  a  paiace,  or  an  ignorant 
boor  cavil  at  the  complications  of  a  steam- 
engine. 

(2.)  Fretting  against  God^s  dealings  brings 
its  own  punishment.  The  complainer  against 
God's  Providence  is  his  own  executioner. 
The  man  that  frets  in  trouble  is  like  the 
bird  which  is  said  to  eat  its  own  bowels. 
"Envy,"  or  impatient  fretfulness,  is  "  rotten- 
ness to  the  bones  "  (Prov.  xiv.  30).  Fret- 
ting and  passionate  complaining  "kills,"  as — 
(1.)  It  robs  of  peace,  which  is  the  spirit's  life  ; 
(2.)  Affects  the  health,  and  hastens  death ; 
(3.)  Injures  the  life  and  prosperity  of  the 
8oiU;    (4.)   Brings  greater  chastening  and 


HOMILMTW  COAlMMTAia:  JUB. 


CHAP.   V 


piinishmpnt  from  God.  No  greater  antago- 
nist to  health  than  a  fretful  spirit ;  no  f^reaier 
help  to  it  than  a  contented  and  submissive 
one.  Passion  and  impatience  in  trouble  more 
hurtful  and  crushing  than  the  trouble  itself. 
True  wisdom,  as  well  as  piety,  under  trial  is, 
to  commit  our  way  to  God  and  rest  in  his 
icisdom  and  goodness  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5 — 7). 

III.  Testimony  from  personal  obser- 
Tation  as  to    the    prosperous    wicked 

(verse  3 — 5). 

"  I  have  seen  the  foolish  (ungodly)  taking 
root,"  &c.  The  object  of  Eliphaz  to  confirm 
the  former  statement  (ch.  iv.  7 — 9).  Un- 
feeling allusion  to  the  case  of  Job.  Crush- 
ing language  to  come  from  the  lips  of  a  pro- 
fessed friend  and  comforter.  The  tongue 
that  uttered  it  as  truly  guided  bv  Satan  as 
that  of  Job's  wife.  Even  Peter,  by  his  car- 
nal though  friendly  counsel,  could'  earn  the 
title  of  "Satan"  (Matt.  xvi.  22,  23).  The 
truth  of  a  statement  no  justification  of  its 
cruel  and  uncharitable  application.  From 
the  statement  of  Eliphaz,  still  more  or  less 
realized,  we  learn  concerning 

Proyidence. 

1.  That  the  ungodly  frequently  prosper  in 
this  life.— (Yevse  3.)  *'I  have  seen  the  foolish 
taking  root,"  not  only  prospering,  but  appa- 
rently firm  in  his  prosperity.     Same  senti- 
ment and  figure  (Ps.  xxxvii.  35;  Jer.  xii. 
2).     The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  often  a 
mystery  and  stumbling-block  to  the  righteous 
(ch.  xii  6  ;  xxi.  7  ;    Ps.  Ixxiii.  3—12  ;  Jer. 
xii.  1).     The  lot  of   the  righteous  and  the 
wicked  in  this  life  often  a  contrast  to  each 
other,  but  a  contrast  the  reverse  of  what 
might  at  first  sight  be  expected  (Luke  xvi. 
25).     Wise  reasons  with  God  for  allowing 
the  ungodly  to  prosper.     (1.)  It  exercises 
the  faith   and  patience  of  the  godly ;  (2.) 
Teaches  the  great  inferiority  of  earthly  to 
heavenly  blessings  ;  (3.)  Confirms  the  truth 
of  a  judgment  to  come.     Insolvable  mystery 
but  for  a  future  state,  which  clears  up  all 
(Luke  xvi.  25 ;  Jam.  v.  1—7).     The  godly 
too  much  beloved  to  receive  their  portion  in 
this  life.     The   good   things   of  this  world 
only  the  bones  cast  to  the  dogs  [Rutherford']. 
2.  That  the  prosperity  of  the    ungodly  is 
followed  by  a  speedy  and  certain,  if  not  a 
sudden,^  fall.     "  Suddenly  I  cursed  his  habi- 
tation,"— soon  had  unexpected  occasion  to 
mark  it   as   accursed  of   God   and  doomed 
10  destruction.     The  prosperity  of  the  un- 
godly as  insecure  and  temporary  as  it  appears 
fair  and  promising.     "  Thou  didst  set  them 
on  slippery  places."     The  fall  often  in  this 
lile.     Exanij)les:    Nebuchadnezzar,   Haman, 
Napoleon.     Yet  not  always  (Ps.  xviL  14; 
3 — 3 


Ixxiii.  4 ;  Luke  xii.  16—20 ;  xvi.  19,  22, 25). 

Nor  even  generally ;  maintained  by  Job 
ao-ainst  his  three  friends  (ch.  xxi.  7 — 13; 
xii.  6).  If  not  sooner,  the  fall  certain  in 
death  (Luke  xvi.  23,  25;  xii.  20). 

3.  2hnl  the  children  of  the  ungodly  often  par- 
ticipate in  their  fall.— {Ytr^Q  4).  "His  child- 
ren are  far  from  safety,  and  they  are  crushed 
iu  the  gate," — ruined  by  a  judicial  sentence, 
cr  dying  by  the  judgment  of  God  (2  Kings, 
vii.  20).     Veiled  allusion  to  Job's  children. 
Children  often  involved  in  the  efl'eets  of  their 
parents'  sin  (Lev  xxvi.  39 ;  Is.  xiv.  20,  21). 
A  penalty  embodied  in  the  Decalogue  (Exod. 
XX.  5).     liepcated  in  the  solemn  declaration 
of   Jehovah's   name    and   character    (Exod. 
xxxiv.  7).     God's  face  set  not  only  against 
the    unirodly  themselves,  but   against    their 
family   (Lev.  xx.  5).     Examples:  Israel  in 
the  Wilderness  (Num.  xiv.  33)  j  Aehan  (Josh, 
vii.  24);  Ahab  (1  Kings,  xxi   29);  Gehazi 
(2  Kings,  V.  27).     So  general  as  to  have  be- 
come a  proverb   in   Israel   (Jer.  xxxi.  29  j 
Ezck.  xviii.  2).     The  children  of  the  ungodly 
often  inherit  the  father's  punishment  while 
imitating  his  sin  (Is.  Ixv.  7).    By  repentance, 
the  children  escape  many,   if   not   all,    the 
effects  of  their  parents'  conduct  (Ezek.  xviii. 
14—17).    No  small  part  of  a  father's  f)unish- 
ment,  that  his  sin  causes  his  children  to  snff'er 
both  with  him  and  af/er  him.     A  diseased 
constitution  and  a  degraded  position  among 
the  least  of  these  effects.     Vicious  habits  and 
propensities  often  the  sad  inheritance  bequeathed 
by   ungodly   parents   to    their    children.      A 
powerful  motive  to  such  parents  to  repent. 

4.  That  the  wealth  of  the  ungodly  often  be- 
comes the  prey  of  the  rapacious  and  covetous. 
(Verse  5).—**  Whose  harvest,  (literally;  or, 

*  what  he  has  gathered,'  i.e.,  by  a  course  of 
iniquity)  the  hungry  eatelh  up,  and  taketh 
even  out  of  the  thorns  (though  guarded  ever 
so  carefully,  as  by  a  thick  thorn-hedge) ;  and 
the  robber  (as  the  Sabeans  and  Chaldeans,  or 

*  the  thirsty ')  swalloweth  up  their  substance." 
Another  cruel  thrust  at  Job  (eh.  i.  15,  17). 
Crops  in  Syria  and  Arabia  seldom  safe  from 
plundering  Bedouin.  Backslidden  Israel 
obliged  to  liide  away  their  grain  from  the 
Midianites  (Jud.  vi.  11).  Earthly  treasures 
such  as  thieves  can  break  through  and  steal 
(Matt.  vi.  19).  A  frail  tenure  that  by 
which  the  ungodly  hold  their  wealth.  They 
often  taken  suddenly  from  it  or  it  from  them 
(Luke  xii.  20).  A  canker  in  an  ungodly 
man's  gold  and  silver  (Jam.  v.  3).  Some- 
times, however,  unintentionally  laid  up  for 
the  righteous  to  inherit  (ch.  xxvii.  17), 
Happy  they  on  whose  treasure  no  robber  can 
lay  his  hand  (Matt.  'vi.  20).  With  Christ 
we  have  *'  durable  riches,"  and  an  inheritance 
laid  up  for  us  in  heaven    (Prov.   viii.   18 

X  Pet.  i.  4). 

S5 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILBTIG  COMMENTAIU:  JOB. 


IT.  Poetical  aphorisms  as  to  the 
origin  and  extent  of  trouble  (verse  67). 

"Although  (or  *for'),  &c."  Perliaps 
another  example  of  the  traditional  sayint^s 
of  the  East.  A  commonplace,  intended 
partly  for  Job's  reproof  and  partly  for  his 
comfort.  Declares  the  origin,  universality, 
and  unavoidableness  of  trouble.  Foolish  to 
com[)iain  so  bitterly  of  what  is  unavoidable 
and  as  universal  as  the  race.  A  consolation 
to  know  that  our  sufferings  are  only  sucli  as 
are  common  to  man  (1  Cor  x.  13).  Suffer- 
ing saiuts  reminded  that  the  same  afflictions 
are  accomplished  in  their  brethren  that  are 
in  the  world  (1  Peter  v.  9).  Both  the  re- 
proof and  the  consolation  inapplicable  to 
Job's  case,  which  was  both  unprecedented  and 
unparalleled.  Implied  on  the  part  of  Eliphaz 
a  want  of  sympathy  and  appreciation  of  the 
depth  of  Job's  trouble.  Hence  felt  by  Job 
to  be  only  an  exasperation  of  his  grief  (eh. 
vi.  2—7). 

The  passage  suggests  concerning 

Trouble. 

1.  Its  origin.  Negatively. — (Verse  6). 
"Not  from  the  dust "  or  "  ground."  (1 .)  Not 
from  mere  chance,  as  a  weed  springing  up 
from  the  soil ;  nor  (2)  From  anything  merely 
external ;  not  from  the  ground  but  from  our- 
selves. Positively. — (Verse  7)-  "  Born  unto 
trouble."  Trouble  is — (1.)  From  a  necessity 
and  law  imposed  on  our  existence  in  this 
world;  (2.)  From  sin,  which  is  the  ground 
of  that  necessity.  The  origin  of  suffering  is 
in  man  himself  as  a  child  of  fallen  Adam. 
All  suffering  the  consequence  of  sin.  Man 
is  " born  to  trouble"  simply  because  he  is 
"bornin««"  (Ps.  li.  5).  Sin  and  suffer- 
ing linked  by  bonds  of  adamant.  In  the 
government  of  a  good  and  righteous  God, 
suffering  could  exist  only, — (1.)  As  a  legal 
necessity  in  consequence  of  disobedience  to 
His  laws ;  or  (2.)  As  a  moral  necessity  for 
the  discipline  of  His  erring  children.  All 
suffering  in  the  world  the  consequence  of 
the  first  transgression  (Rom.  v.  12); 

*  Of  one  man's  disobedience,  and  the  fruit 
Of  that  forbidden  tree,  whose  mortal  taste 
Brought  death  into  the  world  and  all  our 
woe." 

3.  Its  universality.  "Man  is  born  unto 
trouble.'*— (Ve  8  7).  Suffering  co-extensive 
with  the  race.  An  inmate  of  the  palace  as 
truly  as  of  the  prison.  Tears  moisten  the 
'pillow  of  down  as  well  as  the  pallet  of  straw. 
One  of  the  Hebrew  terms  for  *'  man "  is 
enosh,  or  "  the  miserable  "  Trouble  makes 
the  world  akin.  Suffering  universal,  because 
sin  is  so.    Follows  sin  as  its  shadow.    Its 

86 


universality  ouglit  to  render  us — (1.)  Patient 
under  our  own  trouble;  (2.)  Sympathizing 
with  that  of  others. — (i.)  Terrible  evil  of  sin 
that  has  filled  a  world  with  suffering,  (ii.) 
Heaven  all  the  more  desirable  as  entirely  free 
from  it.  (iii.)  Precious  grace  that  convert* 
it  into  a  blessing. 

3.  Its  certainty.  **As  the  sparks  fly 
upward."  This  by  a  law  of  nature.  Suffer- 
ing in  like  manner  a  law  of  our  being.  In- 
separable from  our  existence  in  the  present 
life.  The  hand  that  made  us  has,  since  the 
entrance  of  sin,  made  us  sufferers.  Man 
born  to  trouble  as  truly  as  he  is  born  to  live. 
Tears  track  man^ s  pathway  from  the  cradle  to 
thegrane.  No  wealth  can  purchase,  no  power 
effect,  immunity  from  the  common  lot.  Only 
through  the  incarnation  and  suffering  of  God's 
own  Son,  our  suffering  not  necessarily  eternal. 
*'The  wages  of  sin  is  death, — the  gift  of 
God  eternal  life,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord"  (Rom.vi.  23). 

V.  The  counsel  of  Eliphaz  (verse  8 — 16. 

**  I  would  seek  unto  God  (El,  the  mighty 
One),  and  unto  God  (Elohim,  plural, — denot- 
ing totality  of  Divine  perfections,  or  perhaps 
plurality  of  Divine  persons),  would  I  com- 
mit my  cause,"  &c.  This  to  the  end  of  the 
chapter  the  best  part  of  Ehphaz's  speech. 
Comes  down  from  the  place  of  a  reprover  to 
that  of  a  friendly  adviser.  His  counsel 
characterized  by  wisdom,  if  not  by  warmth. 
Its  only  fault  that  it  implies  an  uncharitable 
and  unj  ust  reflection,  as  if  Job  was  a  prayer- 
less  man  (*Si?^ch.  xvi.  20;  x.  2  ;  xii.  4;  xiii. 
20 ;  xiv.  6).  At  times,  however,  from  dark- 
ness and  confusion,  Job,  like  other  believers, 
hardly  able  to  pray  (xxiii.  3,  4,  15).  Our 
great  comfort  in  trouble  that  we  can  address 
ourselves  to  God  in  it.  God  to  be  sought 
unto  in  trouble, — (1.)  For  counsel  and  direc- 
tion in  it ;  (2.)  For  comfort  and  support  under 
it ;  (3.)  For  grace  so  to  bear  it  as  to  glorify 
God  by  it ;  (4.)  For  deliverance  in  His  own 
time  and  vid^j  out  of  it',  (5  )  For  the  spiritual 
benefit  and  improvement  intended  through 
it.  True  piety,  and  wisdom  to  commit  our 
cause  into  God's  hands  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5).  The 
very  hairs  of  our  head  all  numbered  by  Him 
(Matt.  X.  30).  Makes  all  things  work  to- 
gether for  good  to  them  that  love  Him  (Rom. 
viii.  28).  To  seek  unto  God  in  trouble  an 
instinct  of  nature.  Practised  even  by  the 
heathen  according  to  their  knowledge  (Jonah 
i.  5).  In  ordinary  circumstances  the  Athe- 
nians sacrificed  to  the  gods  of  the  Pantheon, 
but  in  time  of  calamity  prayed  to  the  Un- 
known God  (Acts  xvii.  23).  The  attributes 
of  God  such  as  to  render  Him  the  proper  object 
of  prayer  and  trust  in  time  of  trouble.  These 
attributes  described  by  Eliphaz  as  exhibited 
in  His  works. 


HOMIL^TW  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


ettAp.  ?. 


Attributes  of  God. 

1.  His  Almightiness. — (Verse  9).  "Who 
doeth  great  things  and  unsearchable,"  &c. 
A  God  almighty  to  help  and  deliver^  our  great 
comfort  in  trouble  (Ps.  xlvi.  1;  Ixii.  8;  Ixv.  5). 
Notliing  impossible  with  God.  His  almighti- 
ness seen  in  His  works  of  creation,  provi- 
dence, and  grace.  His  works  in  creation 
"marvellous"  and  "unsearchable,"  both  for 
greatness  and  minuteness,  number  and 
complexity.  His  works  in  providence  "un- 
searchable,"— (1)  In  the  end  designed  in 
them ;  (2)  In  the  manner  of  its  accomplish- 
ment. "Deep  in  unfatiiomable  mines,"  &c. 
More  now  seen  in  the  works  of  creation  than 
could  even  be  imaginediw  the  days  of  Eliphaz. 
The  discoveries  of  the  last  three  centuries 
give  an  emphasis  to  his  words  undreamt  of 
at  that  period.  Many  of  the  numerous 
nebula  or  dusky  spots  observed  throughout 
the  heavens,  already  resolved  by  the  telescope 
into  innumerable  stars,  each  itself  a  sun. 
Reason  to  conclude  the  same  of  the  rest, 
though  from  their  distance  as  yet  unresolved. 
Millions  of  suns,  probably  with  systems  like 
our  own,  found  to  compose  the  Milky  Way 
of  which  our  solar  system  is  a  part.  The 
microscope,  on  the  other  hand,  reveals 
animalcule  so  minute  that  a  thousand 
millions  of  them  together  do  not  exceed  in 
size  a  grain  of  sand  ;  yet  each  having  perfect 
and  distinct  formations  and  all  the  functions 
essential  to  life.  Such  a  view  of  God's 
almightiness  calculated  not  only  to  deepen  our 
reverence^  but  to  increase  our  trust. 

2.  Hts  goodness andhenecolence — (Verse  10, 
11).  "\Vho  giveth  rain,"  &c.  Rain  a 
striking  display  of  God's  goodness  as  well  as 
of  his  power  and  wisdom.  One  of  his  most 
common  but  precious  gifts  (Ps.  Ixv.  9,  10 ; 
Jer.  xiv.  22 ;  Amos  iv.  7 ;  Zee.  x.  1 ;  Acts 
xiv.  17).  One  of  the  most  beautiful  as  well 
as  beneficent  operations  in  nature.  The 
evaporation  of  moisture,  its  suspension  in 
clouds,  its  condensation  and  descent,  carried 
on  by  tlie  operation  of  natural  laws  of  which 
God  is  the  author  and  director.  The  changes 
of  temperature  on  which  tliis  operation 
depends, all  in  His  hands,  and  "unsearchable" 
to  us.  Eoery  drop  of  rain  comes  to  us  as  a 
witness-bearer  of  the  Dioine  benevolence  (Ps. 
Ixviii.  9, 10). — "  To  set  up  on  high  those  that 
be  low,"  &c.  The  change  on  the  part  oi 
thousands  from  wretchedness  and  despon- 
dency to  gladness  and  rejoicing,  often,  espe- 
cially in  the  East,  the  result  of  an  abundant 
rain.  In  this,  as  in  other  respectSy  the  natural 
abeautiful  and  instructive  figure  of  the  spiritual 
(Is.  xliv.  3—5  ;  Iv.  10—13 ;  Dent,  xxxii.  2). 

3.  His  wisdom— {Ver^e  12—14).  "  He  dis- 
appomteth  the  tiesires  of  the  crafty,"  ike. 
His  wisdom  displayed  in  overmatching  the 


crafty  and  disappointing  their  schemes. — 
(Verse  13.)  "  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their 
own  craftiness."  Quoted  by  the  apostle  in 
1  Cor.  iii.  19,  to  show  that  *'  the  wisdom  of 
men  is  foolisliness  with  God."  The  deepest 
devices  of  carnal  men  in  God's  view  only 
short-sii^hted  contrivances  of  little  children. 
Their  "  best  laid  schemes  '*  often  suddenly 
overturned  by  tlie  slightest  incident.  Hu- 
man "  enterprises,"  most  carefully  prepared 
and  likely  to  succeed,  often  made  to  collapse 
like  houses  of  cards.  The  splendid  Armada, 
designed  by  Spain  for  the  overthrow  of  the 
Reformation  in  England,  dissipated  and 
destroyed  by  unfavourable  weather.  Of  the 
three  attempts  of  the  French  to  effect  a 
landing  in  Ireland,  the  first  and  second  failed 
through  the  adverse  elements,  and  the  third 
by  the  influence  of  the  change  in  Buonaparte's 
counsels.  Haman's  well  laid  scheme  to  crush 
Mordecai  and  the  Jews  ends  in  his  own  dis- 
grace and  ruin.  At  David's  prayer  and  for 
David's  deliverance,  Ahithophel's  sagacious 
counsel  is  turned  into  foolishness  (2  Sam. 
XV.  31:  xvi.  20— 23;  xvii.  1—14).  The 
Birs  Nimroud,  on  the  plains  of  Babylon,  a 
standing  example  of  the  "counsel  of  fro- 
ward  "  Babel-builders  "  carried  headlong." 
0/<r  affairs  safe  in  the  hands  of  One  with 
whom  the  wisdom  of  men  is  only  foolishness. 

4.  His  compassion  {\Qvses>  14,15).  "But 
he  saveth  the  poor  from  the  sword,"  &c.  (or, 
*'He  saveth  the  oppressed  from  their  mouth, 
the  poor  from  the  hand,'  &c.)  From  tlieir 
"  mouth,"  open  to  devour,  and  from  their 
"hand"  lifted  up  to  slay  them.  Examj)les  : 
The  enslaved  Israelites  delivered  from  the 
iiand  of  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians  (Ex.  xviii. 
10) ;  Peter  from  the  hand  of  Herod  and  the 
expectation  of  the  Jews  (Acts  xii.  11);  Paul 
from  the  mouth  of  the  lion  Nero  (2  Tim.  iv. 
17).  God's  goodness  exercised  towards  men 
in  general ;  His  compassion  towards  the  needy 
and  oppressed.  The  helpless  and  afflicted  es- 
pecially the  objects  of  His  regard  (Ps.  Ixxii. 
12,  13;  ciii.  6).  An  additional  reason  for 
Job's  seeking  unto  God  and  committing  his 
cause  into  His  hands. — The  results  on  others 
from  God's  compassion  exercised  in  the  de- 
liverance of  the  afflicted.  (Verse  16). — (1.) 
"  rhe  poor  have  hope."  Job  in  his  affliction 
encouraged  to  hope  in  God  from  his  dealings 
with  others  in  a  similar  condition.  The  use 
to  be  made  of  all  God's  gracious  interposi- 
tions on  behalf  of  those  in  trouble  (Ps.  xxii 
4,  5  }  xxxiv.  6,  8,  11;  xl.  1 — 3).  Hope  ix 
God  the  object  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  exam- 
ples of  delivering  mercy  recorded  in  tliem 
(liom.  XV.  4).  Encouragement  to  hope,  the 
actual  result  of  God's  dealings  with  Job 
(Jam.  V.  11). — (2.)  "Iniquity  stoppeth  her 
mouth"  (found  also  in  Ps.  cvii.  42).  Perse 
cution  and  oppression  often  struck  dumb,— 

87 


CHAt.   t. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAltr,  JOB. 


(1)  by  God's  manifest  deliverance  of  the 
poor  that  trusted  in  Him  ;  (2)  by  His  judi?- 
ments  on  the  wicked  executed  along  with 
that  deliverance  (Ex.  xiv.  25).  God's  works 
will  put  the  unf^odly  to  silence  when  His 
words  do  not.  The  time  of  the  final  deliver- 
ance of  the  godly  that  of  the  shame  and  con- 
fusion of  the  wicked  (Dan.  xii.  2). 

TI.  The  plea   of  Eliphaz   for  Job's 
repentance  (verses  17 — 18). 

Holds  out  the  benevolent  object  and  happy 
effects  of  affliction.  Job  thus  addressed  as 
one  needing  repentance  and  now  under  the 
Divine  correction.  The  statement  true  and 
applicable  to  Job's  case,  but  not  as  Eliphaz 
supposed.  Job's  affliction  not  strictly  a  cor- 
rection for  sin,  but  to  be  employed  as  such 
for  his  spiritual  benefit.  His  "  captivity"  to 
be  "  turned,"  and  that  upon  his  repentance. 
His  repentance,  however,  not  as  Eliphaz 
thought,  for  sins  of  life,  but  for  that  of 
cavilling  at  the  Divine  procedure.  The  whole 
passage  a  fine  specimen  of  ancient  Shemitic 
poetry.  Probably  more  of  the  wisdom  of 
the  ancients  handed  down  in  verse  from  the 
earliest  times.  Contains  a  highly  coloured 
description  of  the  happiness  of  the  godly  in 
the  present  life.  Generally  true,  according 
to  the  Old  Testament  platform.  In  harmony 
with  other  Old  Testament  promises,  especially 
in  the  Psalms  and  Proverbs  New  Testament 
promises  rather  of  inward  j^eace  with  outward 
trouble  ;  all  our  need  supplied,  and  all  things 
working  together  for  our  good  (John  xiv.  27  j 
xvi.  33;  Phil.  iv.  19;  Rom.  viii.  28).  The 
error  of  Eliphaz  in  making  earthly  prosperity 
the  uniform  reward  of  godliness.  That  error 
seen  and  opposed  by  Job.  Some  of  the  pro- 
mises held  out  by  Eliphaz  felt  by  Job  to 
be  a  cruel  mockery  and  an  aggravation  of  his 
grief.  These  promises  however  afterwards 
fully  realised  in  his  experience  (ch.  xlii.) — 
"Behold,"  &c.  Calls  JoVs  special  attention 
to  what  he  is  now  to  advance.  The  thing 
stated  strange  in  itself  and  not  readily  be- 
lieved. "  Happy  is  the  man  whom  God  cor- 
recteth."  Same  sentiment  in  nearly  the  same 
words  (Ps.  xciv.  12).  Two  modes  of  correc- 
tion employed  by  God — (1)  By  His  Word  and 
Spirit ;  (2)  By  His  work  in  Providence.  The 
latter  here  intended  "  Correcteth,"  or  "  re- 
bukes," viz.,  with  the  "  rod  of  affliction " 
Lam.  iii.  1 ;  Ps.  xxxix.  10  11).  The  text 
contains: — (1.)  A  ^r«M  stated  ;  (2.)  Llesson 
drawn  from  it.  The  truth  :  Blessedness  found 
in  Divine  correction.  The  lesson  :  That  cor- 
rection therefore  not  to  be  despised. 

Divine  Correction. 

1.  Its  blessedness.      Seen —  (I)  In  its  ori- 

fin.    Its  origin — Divine  love  (Prov.  iii.  12  ; 
leb.  xii.  6 ;  Re?,  iii.  19).    Correction  the 
88 


part,  not  oidi  judge  but  of  h  father  (Heb.  xii. 
7 — 9j.  A  mercy  to  be  corrected  when  we 
might  have  been  destroyed  (Sam.  iii.  22). 
Sad  token  for  a  man  when  God  will 
not    spend    a    rod    upon    him    [^Brookes']. 

(2)  In  its  object.  Our  spiritual  benefit 
(Heb.  xii.  11); — Repentance  (Rev.  iii.  19); 
Removal  of  sin  (Is.  xxvii.  9)  ;  Participation 
in  God's  holiness  (Heb.  xii.  10).  Affliction 
is  God's  medicine  to  heal,  and  His  furnace  to 
purift/  His  children.  (3)  In  its  actual  result. 
Affliction  in  itself  a  fruit  of  sin,  but  in  God's 
hand  a  means  of  good.  When  God  corrects 
His  children,  He— (i.)  Supports  them  in  the 
affliction ;  (ii.)  Purifies  them  by  it ;  (iii.) 
Delivers  them  out  of  it.  *'  None  more  un- 
happy than  he  who  never  felt  adversity " 
\_Seneca']. 

2.  Its  improvement.  Here  negatively  ex- 
pressed. "Despise  not  thou,"  &c.  So 
Prov.  iii.  11 ;  Heb.  xii.  5.  God's  correc- 
tions are  not  to  be — (i.)  Refused  as  some- 
thing nauseous ;  nor,  (ii.)  Rejected  as  some- 
thing hurtful',  nor,  (iii.)  Slighted  as  some- 
thing useless.  The  exhortation  implies  the 
opposite  duty.  God's  corrections  are  on  tlie 
contrary  to  be — (1)  Highly  prized;  (2) 
Carefully  improved.  Prized,  as — (i.)  From 
a  Father's  hand;  (ii.)  Sent  in  love ;  (iii.) 
Designed  for  our  highest  good.  Affliction 
to  be  improved — (1)  By  consideration  of  its 
object ;  (2)  By  examination  into  its  cause ; 

(3)  By  endeacour  after  its  fruit  (Lam.  iii. 
39 — 42).  Trials  only  profitable  when  we  are 
rightly  exercised  mider  them  (Heb.  xii.  11). 
To  be  benefited  by  God's  rod,  it  is  necessary 
to  be  taught  out  of  God's  Word  (Ps.  xciv.  1 2). 
— The  correction  that  of  "  the  Almighty," 
or  All-sufficient.  Indicates — 1.  His  benevo- 
lence in  the  correction  j  the  *'  Almighty  " 
under  no  obligation  to  sinning  creatures. 
2.  His  ability — (1)  To  sustain  us  under  it ; 
(2)  To  sanctify  us  by  it ;  (3)  To  deliver  us 
out  of  it.  God's  corrections  are  sores  which 
He  himself  will  heal  again. 

Verse  18.  "  He  maketh  sore  and  bindeth 
up."  Same  truth  (1  Sam.  ii.  6  ;  Hos.  vi.  1). 
All  pains  and  griefs  from  God.  True  even 
in  Job's  case,  though  not  as  Eliphaz  sup- 
posed. This  thought  an  aggravation  to  Job's 
distress.  "Maketh  sore,"  as  a  surgeon 
amputating  a  limb  or  cutting  out  a  gangrene. 
The  pain  no  further  inflicted  than  is  neces- 
sary (Lam.  iii.  33).  '*And  bindeth  up," 
— as  a  wound  or  amputated  limb  (Ps.  cxlvii. 
3).  God  himself  the  Physician  of  souls 
(Ps.  ciii.  3).  Jehovah  Rophi  (Ex.  xv.  26). 
The  office  assumed  and  executed  by  the 
incarnate  Son  (Luke  iv.  18,  23  j  Matt.  ix. 
12).  The  bandages  employed— the  doctrines, 
promises,  and  consolations  of  the  Gospel 
(Ps.  evii.  20). — "  He  woundeth,"  as  with  a 
surgeon's  kmfe  or  lancet.    God  wounds  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


ciiAp.  y. 


heal.  His  wounds  faithful,  as  those  of  a 
friend  (Prov.  xxvii.  6  ;  Fs.  cxli.  5).  Judicial 
wounds  reserved  for  the  head  of  obstinate 
transgressors  (Ps.  Ixviii.  21). — "And  his 
hands  make  whole "— literally,  "sew  up," 
viz  ,  the  wound.  His  own  hands;  implying 
— {\)  Readiness  \  {V)  Tenderness  \  {^)  Skill  \ 
(4)  Surcess  in  the  operation.  Learn — (i.) 
Those  wounds  well  and  lovinglt/  sewed  wp  that 
are  sewed  up  by  the  hands  of  the  Almighty. 
(ii.)  We  may  well  endure  wounds  that  are  to 
be  sewed  up  by  such  a  Physician. 

yil.  Motive  to  repentance  drawn 
from  the  promises  (Verse  19,  &c.). 

These  promises  held  out  on  the  supposition 
of  repentance  and  pra>/er.  Most  of  God*s 
promises  both  to  saints  and  sinners  condi- 
tional. The  blessings  here  enumerated  both 
of  a  negative  and  positive  nature  Most  of 
them,  according  to  the  Old  Testament  dis- 
pensation, pertaining  to  the  present  life. 

The  Promises, 

1.  Negatively.  Safety  and  deliverance  in 
times  of  trouble.  **  In  six  troubles  Pie  shall 
deliver  thee.'*  "Six;"  a  definite  number 
for  an  indefinite:  many  and  manifold  troubles" 
(Prov.  vi.  16 ;  I  Pet.  i.  6).  "  Many  are  the 
afflictions  of  the  righteous"  (Ps.  xxxiv.  19). 
"One  woe  past,  another  woe  cometh." 
"Lord,  how  are  mine  enemies  increased'* 
(Ps.  iii.  1).  Deliverance  promised  not  in  one 
or  two  troubles,  but  in  all^  however  many 
(Ps.  xxxiv.  19).  Every  new  trouble  needs 
Divine  support  and  deliv(  ranee.  '*  In  "  six 
troubles,  viz. — the  troubles  you  yourself 
are  in ;  or,  tb.e  dangers  and  calamities  pre- 
vailing around  you.  "  A  thousand  shall  fall 
at  thy  side,"  &c.  (Ps  xci.  7).  Tiie  promise 
is  either — (1)  to  be  kept  ^vom  falling  info  the 
troubles  or,  (2)  to  be  preserved  from  injury  by 
it ;  or  (3)  to  be  in  due  time  taken  out  of  it. 
Preservation  in  trouble,  support  under  it,  and 
deliverance  out  of  it,  all  in  the  believer's 
charter.  The  cross  not  immediately  taken 
from  the  shoulder,  but  strength  given  to  bear 
it.  The  lime  and  mode  of  deliverance  best 
reserved  in  God's  own  hands.  Deliverance 
from  troubles  either  temporary  and  partial,  or 
p,nal  and  complete.  Only  the  former  usually 
experienced  in  this  life.  Here,  trouble 
succeeds  trouble  as  wave  succeeds  wave. 
One  past,  we  are  to  prepare  for  another. 
Final  and  complete  deliverance  only  at  death. 
Leath  strikes  off  every  link  of  the  believer's 
chain,  except  the  last  one,  which  is  itself. 
That  link,  which  binds  the  body  to  the  grave, 
struck  off  at  the  Lord's  appearing  (1  Cor. 
XV.  52,  57).  —  "Yea,  in  seven;"  however 
accumulated  in  number  and  excessive  in 
severity.  "Seven"  the  number  of  y«/«^w. 
Not  one,  nor  many,  but  "  all  thy  waves  and 


thy  billows,"  &c.  (Ps.  xlii.  7).  The  furnace 
heated  "  seven  times  "  more  than  usual  for 
the  three  young  captives  (Dan  iii.  19). 
— "Tiiere  shall  no  evil  touch  thee'* — so  as 
really  to  injure  or  destroy  (Ps.  xci.  7,  10). 
The  lions  ii»  the  den  lie  harmless  at  Daniel's 
feet.  The  fire  leaves  the  captive's  hair  un- 
singed,  while  it  consumes  their  boniis  (Dan, 
iii.  25).  Even  physical  evil  not  always  a 
real  evil.  Rutherford,  in  his  exile,  dates  his 
letters  from  his  "  palace  at  Aberdeen."  Such 
evils  often  the  prevention  of  greater  ones,  and 
the  means  of  obtfiining  blessings.  Bernard 
Gilpin  breaks  his  leg  by  an  accident,  and 
escapes  the  fires  of  Smithfield.  "  Children, 
we  should  have  been  undone,  had  we  not 
been  undone,"  said  Themistocles,  when  an 
exile  at  the  Persian  Court.  Joseph's  confine- 
ment in  prison  his  stepping-stone  to  the 
throne  of  Egypt.— X^W^  of  deliverance  pro- 
mised.  (1)  Yvom  famine  (verse  20).  "  In  fa- 
mine," ( — arisiui^^  from  failure  in  the  crops — ) 
"He  shall  redeem  thee  from  death."  Be- 
lievers may  suffer  in  famine,  but,  as  a  rule, 
not  die  from  it.  The  righteous  not  even 
then  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  bread 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  25).  (2)  From  calumny  (verse 
21).  "Thou  slialt  be  hid  from  the  "scourge 
of  the  tongue  " — so  as  not  to  be  hurt  by 
calumny  and  false  accusation.  The  tongue 
often  a  more  mischievous  instrument  than 
the  sword.  Slander  the  choice  weapon  of 
the  ungodly  against  the  faithful  (Jer.  xviii. 
18).  Times  of  spies  and  informers,  when  no 
godly  man  appears  safe.  Yet  God  has  a 
pavilion  to  hide  His  people  from  the  strife  of 
tongues  (Ps.  xxxi.  20).  Jeremiah,  Daniel, 
and  the  three  captives  assailed  by  the  tongue, 
but  delivered.  Stephen,  like  his  Master, 
falls  by  it,  but  only  the  sooner  to  gain  his 
crown.  Paul  smitten  with  it,  but  the  sooner 
obtains  his  desire  of  being  with  Christ.  God 
either  gives  to  His  people  what  He  promises, 
or  something  better.  (3)  From  foreign, 
invasion.  "  Neither  shalt  thou  be  afraid 
(i.  e.,  have  any  cause  to  be  afraid)  of 
destruction  ( — desolation  from  an  invading 
enemy)  when  it  cometh," — or  is  coming, 
either  upon  others  or  near  thyself.  The 
believer  not  taken  out  of  the  evil,  but 
kept  above  it.  Preserved  from  real  evil  in 
it,  and  from  fear  regarding  it.  Faith  grasp- 
ing the  promises  lifts  the  soul  above  fear.  The 
name  of  the  Lord  a  strong  tower,  &c.  "  Fear 
not,  thou  carriest  Caesar ;"  for  Ciesar  substi- 
tute Christ,  No  cause  for  fear,  therefore  no 
place  to  be  given  to  it.  God  a  wall  of  fire 
round  about  his  people  (Zee.  ii.  5).  Makes  a 
dense  mist  or  wreath  of  snow  such  a  wall 
at  his  pleasure.  "The  providence  of  God 
is  my  inheritance" — inscribed  on  an  old 
house  in  Chester,  the  only  one  in  the 
street  untouched    bj  the   plague.    (Verse 

89 


CHAP.  V, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY t  JOB, 


22.)— **  At  destruction"    ( — the  desolation 
as  already  come) — *'  and  fainiae*  ( — scarcity 
of   food   as   its    attendant — )  "thou    shalt 
lau^h."      The   promise   rises    in    a  climax, 
— safety  —  fearlessness  —  triumph.       Paith 
enables  believers  to  laugh  when  ot  hers  weep. 
A  holy  laughter  put  by  God  Himself  into  the 
mouths  of  His  servants  (ch.  viii.  21 ;    Ps. 
cxxvi.  2).     Believers  laugh  in  times  of  cala- 
mity, not  from  want  of  sensibility,  but  from 
warrant  of  safety.     The  godly  can  lauqh  from 
satisfaction  as  to  themselves,  while  they  weep  in 
sympathy  for  others.    To  laugli  at  destruction 
without  laith,  is  either  stoicism  or  cruelty;  to 
laugh  from  faith,  the  highest  piety.    Abra- 
ham   laughed   piously  from  faith ;     Sarah 
laughed  sinfully  from  the  want  of  it.     Faith 
and  fidelity  give  songs  in  the  darkest  night  of 
adversity.    God's  sweetest  consolations  often 
reserved  for  the  time  of  sorest  tribulations. 
(4).    Erom   wild    beasts.      "  Neither    shalt 
thou  be  afraid  of  the  beasts  of  the  earth  " — 
ravaging  a  country  wasted  by  an  invading 
foe.     The   incursions   of  wild  beasts  often 
spoken  of  as  a  Divine  judgment  (Deut  xxxii. 
24  ;  2  Kings  xvii.  25  ;  Ezek.  v.  17,  xiv.  21). 
Then  a  much  greater  terror  in  the  East  tiian 
now.     Term  probably  included  reptiles  (Gen. 
ui.  1).     Similar  promise  of  Divine  protection 
against  them  (Ps.  xci.  13).     Daniel's  God 
able  to  shut  the  lions'  mouths.     Paul  shakes 
off  the  viper  that  fastened  on  his  hand  and 
feels  no  harm   (Acts   xxviii.  1,   &c.)    Yet 
Polycarp   and    thousands  more  found  their 
martyr's  crown  in  the  jaws  of  wild  beasts. 
(5)  Erom  being  hurt  either  by  the  animate 
or  inanimate  creation. — (Verse  23.)     "Thou 
shalt  be  in  league  with  the  stones  of  the 
field,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at 
peace  with  thee."     The  covenant  made  with 
Dclievers  iDcludes  the  beasts  of  the  field  as 
their  friends  and  allies  (Hos.  ii.  18).     Man 
in  rebellion  against  His  Maker  has  all  creation 
at  enmity  with  him.     Reconciliation  with  God 
through  Christ  restores  man  to  friendship 
with  the  creatures.    Dominion  over  the  lower 
animals  lost  in  Adam  but  regained  in  Christ 
(Ps.  viii.  6 ;  Heb.  ii.  8).     Neither  stones  can 
hurt  nor  beasts  devour  against  God's  will. 
Stones  and  beasts  not  only  not  hurtful,  but 
made  profitable.     The  lions  that  refused  to 
touch   Daniel  devoured   his   enemies.     The 
.stones  of  the  field  afforded  Jacob  the  pillow 
on  which  he  slept  his  sweetest  sleep. 

2.  Point  of  transition  to  positive  blessings. 
These  such  as  are  held  most  valuable  among 
men.  Promised  to  Israel  while  faithful  to 
God.  Not  all  of  tliem  promised  to  believers, 
with  the  world  in  its  present  condition  and 
Satan  as  its  prince.  To  be  enjoyed  in  that 
better  state,  when  the  earth  shall  be  full  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  (Is.  Ixv.  17 — 
25  ;  Rom.  viii.  19-  22;  2  Pet.  iii.  13).  A 
40 


foreshadowing  of  that  state  in  Job's  condi- 
tion after  his  restoration  (ch.  xlii   10—17.) 
(1)   Domestic  peace  and  felicity  (Verse  24). 
**  l  hou  shult  know,"  &c ,  i.e.,  by  a  Divine 
assurance  and  a  happy  experience.     To  dis- 
cern a  mercy  is  itself  a  new  mercy  in  its  bosom 
\_Brookes\       "Thy  tabernacle  shall   be    in 
peace,"  or,  "be  peace," — so  thoroughly  per- 
vaded by   it.       In   safety  from  others;    in 
harmony  with  itself;   and  enjoying  a  general 
prosperity.     "  A  peaceable  habitation,  a  sure 
dwelling,  and  a  quiet  resting  place,"  among 
promised  blessings    ils.   xxxii.    18).       The 
voice  of  rejoicing  and  salvation  in  the  taber- 
nacles   of   the    righteous    (Ps.  cxviii.    15). 
God's    presence    the  only  sure  foundation  of 
family  peace.     That    peace    consistent   with 
trial,    sickness,  and    death   in  the    dweUing 
1  Pet.  i.  6).  —  (2)  Safety  and  prosperity  in  our 
secular  calling.  "  Thou  shalt  visit  thy  habita- 
lion,  (or  perhaps,'  thy  fold,' )  and  shalt  not 
sin;"  (or,  *  shalt  not  miss  any  of  thy  pro- 
perty;*  or,   'not    be    disappointed    in   thy 
\\o\iQ*— Margin,    "  Shalt  not  err").    "  Shalt 
visit  thy  habitation,"'  after  the  day's  journey  or 
toil;"  or,  "shalt  visit  thy  fold  or  pasture," 
as  one  looking  to  the  state  of  his  flocks  and 
herds  (Prov.  xxvii.   23).     A  great  mercy  to 
have  a  habitation  to  visit ;  a  still  greater  one 
to  be  made  to  visit  it  without  sin.     Domestic 
peace  a  precious  blessing  ;  domestic  purity  a 
still  more  precious  one,  and  essential  to  it. 
Better  to  be  kept  from  sinning  in  our  habitation 
than  from  suffering  in  it.       Gid's  blessing  on 
our  family  and  affairs  connected  with  diligence 
in  attending  to  tfiem.     Great  mercy  lo  find 
our  dwelling  preserved  from  flames  within 
and  foes  without.    The  contrary  on  one  occa- 
sion one  of  David's  great  trials  (1  Sam,  xxx. 
1 — 5).     Promises  not  fahififd  by  trials  that 
seem  to  run  counter  to  them.  —  (3)  A  numerous 
and  happy  offspring.  (Verse  25).  "  Thy  seed 
shall  be  great,"  &c.  A  numerous  and  power- 
ful family  accounted,  especially  in  the  East, 
one  of  the  greatest  blessings.     The  Bible  ex- 
presses the  feelings  of  humanity  in  reference 
to  children, — "Happy  is  the  man  that  hath 
his  quiver  full  of  them"  (Ps.  cxxvii.  5).  One 
of  the  most  frequently  promised  earthly  bless- 
ings in  the  Old  Testament.      The  promise 
supposes  godliness  in  the  parents,  and,  as 
its  consequence,  also    in  the  children  (Ps. 
cxxviii.  1,  4).     In  the  New  Testament,  the 
promise  not  so  much  of  a  great  as  of  a  gracious 
offspring  (Is.  xliv.  3 — 5).     Contrary  to  his 
expectation,  the  text  realized  in  Job's  case, 
notwithstanding   his   bereavement   (ch.   xlii. 
13). — (4)  A  ripe  old  age  with  a  peaceful  death 
a?id  burial.  (Verse  25).  "Thou  shalt  come  to 
thv  grave  in  a  full  age,'  &c.     "  Shalt  come." 
indicating — (1)  Willingness  to  die;  (2)  A  quiet 
passage.     "To  thy  grave," — buried  in   the 
sepulchres  of  thy  fathers.     A  peaceftd  grave 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    Vt. 


and  decent  burial  held,  especially  in  tlie  East, 
a  matter  of  great  importance.  The  want  of 
it  tlireateiied  as  a  Divine  judgment  (Deut. 
xxviii.26;  Jer.  xxii.  18, 19;  xxxvi.  30).  Graves 
in  the  East  usually  hewn  out  in  tlie  rock  or 
dug  deep  in  the  sand.  Bodies  otherwise  fre- 
quently exposed  to  birds  and  beasts  of  prey. 
The  promise  generally  fulfilled.  But  the 
godless  rich  man  died  and  was  buried  j  while 
nothing  is  said  of  the  burial  of  Lazarus. 
The  promise  of  a  ripe  old  age  especially  an 
Old  Testament  one  Made  tir^t  to  Abraham 
((icn.  XV.  15).  Made  generally  to  the  godly 
(Ps.  xci.  16).  The  desire  to  live  to  a  good 
old  age  an  instinct  of  human  nature.  Pre- 
mature death  often  threatened  to  the  ungodly. 
Length  of  days  in  wisdom's  right  hand 
(Prov.  iii.  16).  The  genet  al  result  of  a  holy, 
peaceful,  and  temperate  life.  A  course  of 
piety  in  every  respect  favourable  to  it.  Long 
life  connected  both  in  the  OhI  and  New 
Testament  with  obedience  to  the  fifth  com- 
mandment (Ex.  XX.  12  ;  Kph.  vi.  1 — 3).  A 
blessing  to  Hoe  while  we  can  live  to  purpose 
Life  to  be  measured,  not  so  much  by  xX^dajjs 
as  by  its  doings.  More  important  to  live 
well  than  to  live  long.  Inward  development 
not  necessarily  the  work  of  years.  The  pro- 
mise rather  of  ripeness  for  death  than  continu- 
ance of  life.  The  faithful  believer  is  satisfied 
tcith  life  whenever  called  to  quit  it.  Ripening 
for  death  the  result  of  Divine  grace,  and 
found  at  all  ages. 

Tin.  Application    of  the  foregoing 

(verse  27). 

1.  Affirmation  of  its  truth  with  the  grounds 
of  it,  "Lo  this — so  it  is."  Good  to  speak 
with  full  conviction  of  the  truth  of  what  we 
advance.  Personal  conviction,  however,  not 
necessarily  the  proof  of  truth.  Conviction 
may  be  more  or  less  enlightened.  Inspired 
utterances  always  true. — *'  We  have  searched 


it."  Eliphaz  the  spokesman  of  the  rest. 
Their  discourses  probably  the  result  of  pre- 
vious conference.  Their  minds  already  made 
up  on  the  subject  of  the  Divine  procedure  in 
reference  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked. 
The  statements  of  Kliphaz  the  result  of  study 
and  examination.  The  objects  of  his  search 
were  — (1)  The  actual  experience  of  men,  or 
God's  visible  dealings  in  Providence  ;  (2)  The 
traditional  maxims  of  wise  men  before  him. 
The  examination,  having  little  of  revealed 
truth,  both  jOityz-^/^r/ and  limited.  The  period  of 
Eliphaz  the  early  twilight  of  the  worhi.  All 
statements  in  respect  to  moral  and  religious 
truth  to  be  the  result  of  careful  examinalion^ 
according  to   the   means  within   our  reach. 

2.  Exhortation  to  personal  self-application 
of  the  truth  delivered.  "Know  thou  it." 
Truth  heard,  to  become  matter  of  personal 
experience.  In  order  to  this,  it  is  to  be — 
(1)  Examined;  (2)  Pondered  ;  (3)  Received. 
The  conduct  of  the  Beraeans  (Acts  xvii.  11). 
The  tone  of  Eliphaz  that  of  a  monitor  and 
teacher,  as  much  older  than  Job  (eh.  xv.  10; 
xxxii  6,  7;  xlii.  16). — "For  thy  good." 
The  hearer's  good  to  be  the  sprakei's  aim 
(Eph.  iv.  29).  His  duty  to  a[>p]y  iruth  heard 
for  his  own  advantage.  The  aim  of  Eliphaz, 
Job's  repentance  and  consequent  restoration 
to  Divine  favour.  His  motive  good,  but 
founded  on  a  mistaken  and  uncharitable 
view  of  Job's  character  and  the  cause  of  his 
sufferings.  Eliphaz,  viewed  as  an  example 
to  preachers — (1)  Sincere;  (2)  Earnest; 
(3)  Courteous;  (4)  Employs  variety  of  ar- 
guments and  illustrations ;  (5)  Adduces 
authorities;  (0)  Appeals  to  Divine  revela- 
tion. Fails  (1)  In  sympathy  and  warmth 
of  feeling ;  (2)  In  comprehensiveness  of 
view;  (3)  In  adaptation  of  his  authorities 
to  the  case  in  hand  ;  (4)  In  charitable  judg- 
ment ;  (5)  In  appreciation  of  the  case  of  his 
hearer. 


CHAPTER  YI. 


JOB'S  REPLY  TO  ELIPHAZ, 


I.  Justifies  his  complaint  (verse  2). 

"()  that  my  grief  were  thoroughly  weighed," 
&c.  Job's  case  neither  apprehended  nor 
appreciated  by  his  friends.  Desires  fervently 
that  his  suftVring  and  his  complaining  were 
weighed  against  each  other;  or  that  his 
calamity  and  the  grief  occasioned  by  it  were 
thoroughly  considered.  The  weight  of  it 
beyond  that  of  the  "sand"  of  the  sea, — too 
numerous  to  be  counted  and  too  heavy  to  be 
weighed.  The  greatness  of  it  beyond  his 
ability  to  express,  being  abo  the  cause  why 


he  had  expressed  himself  so  vehemently  and 
inconsiderately; — "therefore  my  words  are 
swallowed  up,"  or,  "  were  ra^h  "  or  *'  vehe- 
ment." Job's  outward  trials  accumulated 
and  intense  beyond  all  precedent.  These  at 
first  endured  with  extraordinary  meekness 
and  patience.  Now^  through  the  nature  of 
his  disease  and  Satan  operating  on  his  mind 
iu  consequence  of  it,  all  viewed  on  the  dark 
side.  Our  sufferings  very  much  as  we  are 
made  to  view  them.  The  bitterest  part  of 
Job's  sufferiogii  now  probably  internal  ones  ; 

41 


CHAP    VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


his  external  trials  being  viewed  as  sent  from 

God,  not  in  love  but  in  unaccountable  anger. — 
Describes  these  sufferings  (verse  4 1  according 
to  his  views  and  feelinj^s  : — (1.)  As  ""arrows : 
Sharp  and  penetrating;  coming  swiftly,  sud- 
denly, and  with  great  force ;  not  one  but 
many,  coming  in  quick  succession.  (2.) 
*'  Arrows  of  the  Alndghty*''  Shot  by  Him  as 
at  an  en(  my,  or  as  a  mere  butt  for  His 
arclierv.  The  Almighty's  arrows  must  be 
especially  sharp  and  dfeadly.  That  they  were 
the  Almightfs  arrows  the  bitterest  circum- 
stance connected  with  them.  (3.)  "Poi- 
soned arrows."  Hence  especially  deadly,  and 
discharged  by  a  deadly  foe.  Indicates  the 
intensely  painful  character  of  his  sufferings; 
poisoned  arrows  inflicting  especially  painful 
and  inflammatory  wounds.  (4  )  These  arrows 
not  only  discharged  against  him,  but  abiding 
" within'^  \\\m,  or  being  ** with"  him.  His 
distress  unintermitting.  (5.)  The  effect  of 
the  arrows,  their  poison  "drinking  up  his 
spirit  " — exhausting  his  vital  energy ;  or,  his 
spirit  drinking  up  their  deadly  poison. 

The  Arrows  of  the  Almighty. 

No  power  of  man  or  angel  able  to  with- 
stand these  arrows.  No  shield  but  the  shield 
of  faith  able  to  receive  them.  No  hand  but 
the  pierced  hand  of  Jesus  able  to  extract 
them.  No  balm  but  the  blood  of  the  Cross 
able  to  heal  their  burning  wounds.  One  of 
these  arrows  able  to  bring  down  the  stoutest 
adversary.  "  0  Galilsean,  thou  hast  con- 
quered,"— said  by  one  of  the  most  deter- 
mined enemies  of  Christ,  Julian  the  Apostate 
Emperor,  while  dying  on  the  battle-field. 
Job's  miseries  scarcely  half-told  in  the  pre- 
ceding history.  His  outward  calamities  rather 
the  occasion  than  the  cause  of  his  in  tensest 
suffering.  A  believer's  inward  trouble  in 
time  of  trial  sometimes  greater  than  the 
outward  trouble  which  occasioned  it.  His 
greatest  distress  often  from  a  cause  entirely 
different  from  the  outward  trial.  Heavy 
outward  trouble  often  light  in  comparison 
with  inward  distress  from  spiritual  and  un- 
seen causes.  The  rankling  arrows  of  the 
Almighty  much  more  dreadful  than  either  the 
loss  of  property  and  children,  or  bodily 
affliction.  A  terrible  aggravation  of  Job's 
outward  trouble.  Apprehended  wrath  on 
the  part  of  God  the  greatest  of  all  troubles 
to  a  believer.  The  essence  of  the  Hedeemer's 
suffering,  as  of  that  of  the  patriarch's, — 
"My  God,  my  God,"  &c.  The  awful  expe- 
rience of  the  lost.  No  greater  hell  than 
these  arrows,  "  sharp  in  the  hearts  of  the 
King's  enemies"  (Ps.  xlv.  5).  Fully  dis- 
chari^ed  against  the  Son  of  God  while  standin"; 
as  the  Sinner's  Substitute.  That  Substitute 
accepted    becomes    Himself    the    Siuner's 

42 


Shield.  The  arrows  felt  in  the  conviction  of 
sin  (Acts  ii.  37).  Brino-ing  the  sinner  to 
the  feet  of  the  Saviour  they  become  arrows 
of  mercy.  The  arrows  extracted  and  the 
wounds  healed  bv  simple  trust  in  Jesus  and 
His  blood.  Discliari;:ed  against  the  believer 
rather  in  his  own  apprehension  than  in  reality. 
The  apprehension  intended  as  a  discipline  and 
trial  of  faith  (Is.  liv.  8;  Ivii.  17,  18).  The 
experience  removed  when  the  object  has  been 
served  (Jer,  xxxi.  18 — 20).  Satan,  working 
on  our  unbelief  in  time  of  trouble,  able  to 
make  his  own  darts  to  be  mistaken  for  the 
arrows  of  the  Alunghty.  The  Almighty's 
arrows  now  in  the  Saviour's  hand  (Ps.  xlv.  5 ; 
Rev.  vi.  2). 

Job's  condition  sufficient  to  account  for  his 
complaint.  Even  ber/sts  do  not  utter  their 
cries  when  they  have  food.  (Verse  5) — '*  Doth 
the  wild  ass  bray  ?  "  &c.  The  ass  found  in 
a  wild  state,  large,  fleet,  and  strong,  in 
Arabia  and  west  of  the  Euphrates.  A  hint 
at  the  want  of  sympathy  on  the  part  of  his 
friends.  It  is  easy  to  be  quiet  when  suffering 
nothing.  True  sympathy  makes  us  sufl'er  in 
the  distress  of  another  (1  Cor.  xii,  26). 
Natural  to  feel  and  utter  complaint  under 
severe  suffering.  Men  cannot  eat  insipid 
and  tasteless  food  without  mixing  salt  with  it. 
(Verse  6) — "Can  that  which  is  unsavoury?" 
&c.  Salt  so  important  with  the  Arabs  as 
to  be  used  as  a  synonym  for  food,  their  diet 
being  chiefly  vegetable.  Mentions,  as  an 
example  of  the  insipid,  the  "  white  of  an 
egg,"  or  perhaps  the  herb  "purslain,"  pro- 
verbial among  the  Arabs  for  its  insipidity. 
Perhaps  Job  quotes  a  proverb  in  common 
use.  Indicates  not  only  the  naturalness  of 
complaint,  but  the  need  of  sympathy  and 
encouiagement  in  time  of  trouble.  Insipid 
things  need  salt  to  make  them  palatable. 
Speech  to  be  with  grace  seasoned  with  salt 
for  the  benefit  of  others  (Col.  iv.  6).  **  A  word 
spoken  in  season,  how  good  is  it."  "Heavi- 
ness in  the  heart  of  man  maketh  it  stoop, 
but  a  good  word  maketh  it  glad  "  (Prov.  xii. 
25).  The  true  humanity  of  Jesus  seen  in  His 
craving  for  human  sympathy  in  His  distress 
(Matt.  xxvi.  37 — 40).  A  bitter  aggravation 
of  trouble  when  *'  lover  and  friend  are  put 
far  from  us  "  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  18).  The  deepest 
poverty  is  to  be  without  a  friend  to  sympathize 
with  us  in  our  sorrow. — Job  reasserts  his  sad 
condition.  (Verse  6) — "  The  things  which 
my  soul  refused  to  touch,"  &c.  Sad  reverse 
when  what  we  could  not  even  touch  before 
is  now  our  daily  but  sorrowful  and  nauseous 
food.  Job  s  loathsome  ulcers  now  as  his 
daily  bread.  Similar  sentiment  (Ps.  cii.  9; 
xlii.  3;  Ixxx.  5).  Learn:  (1)  Painful  re- 
verses to  be  prepared  for.  (2)  Moderation 
and  humility  oar  duty  in  prosperity.  Some- 
times but  a  short  step  from  alfluence  to 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.  VI. 


destitution  (Prov,  xxiii.  5 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17). 
The  beauty  of  health  speedily  exchanged  for 
the  loathsomeness  of  disease.  A  single  day 
may  put  Dives  in  the  place  of  Lazarus,  or  a 
worse.  (3)  Theunrenai/if//ofeartkl//po!^ses- 
sions  and  enjoyments  to  be  improved  to  the 
securing  of  heavenly  ones.  Grace  teaches  the 
rich  man  to  rejoice  in  that  lie  is  made  low 
(Jam.  i.  10). 

II.  Repeats  and  justifies  his  desire 
for  death  (verse  8,  &c.). 

"  O  that  I  might  have  my  request,"  &c. 
His  request  a  release  from  present  suffer- 
ings by  death.  Asked  also  as  a  favour  from 
God  by  Elijah  under  the  juniper  tree,  and 
by  Jonah  at  Nineveh  (1  Kings  xix.  4 ;  Jon. 
iv.  3,  8).  God  the  arbiter  of  life  and  death. 
Job  leaves  his  time  in  God's  hand  (ch.  xiv. 
14).  Satan  and  Job's  wife  would  have  had 
him  taking  the  matter  into  his  own.  Ancient 
heathens  believed  they  had  a  riu:iit  to  end 
their  life  when  they  pleased.  Desire  for 
death  a  natural  feeling  under  deep  and  pro- 
tracted distress.  Often,  however,  rather 
from  the  impatience  of  the  flesh  than  the 
aspiration  of  the  spirit.  Only  men's  way- 
wardness and  hardness  of  heart  once  awakened 
something  of  the  feeling  in  Jesus  (Matt. 
xvii.  17).  Paul's  desire  to  depart  was  to  be 
with  Christ  (Phil.  i.  23).  Desire  for  death 
no  proof  of  fitness  for  it.  The  choice  be- 
tween life  and  death  best  referred  to  God 
Himself.  Preparation  for  death  implies  some 
ability  to  glorify  God  in  life.  Soon  enough 
to  rest  when  our  work  is  done.  A  favour 
to  "  cease  at  once  to  work  and  live."  Job's 
request  not  granted.  Some  prayers  better 
refused  than  answered.  A  sick  child  may  be 
spared  to  die  a  felon's  death. 

The  reason  of  Job's  desire  for  death: — 

(1)  The  comfort  in  the  prospect  of  a  speedif 
release  from  his  extreme  distress.  (Verse  10) 
— "  Then  should  I  yet  have  comfort  (or,  this 
should  be  my  comfort) ;  yea,  I  would  harden 
myself  in  sorrow:  let  Him  not  spare"  (or, 
I  would  leap  for  joy  in  my  unsparing  sorrow). 

(2)  The  conscious >/ ess  of  having  been  God's 
faithful  servant :  "  For  1  have  not  concealed 
(or  denied)  the  words  of  tlie  Holy  One." 
Implies — (i.)  Fearlessness  in  confessing  the 
truth ;  (ii.)  Faithfulness  in  communicating 
it.  The  sin  of  the  heathen  that  of  ''holding 
or  keeping  down  tlie  truth  in  unrighteous- 
ness." Truth  inwardly  beUeved  is  to  be 
outwardly  professed  (Kom.  x.  10).  God 
honoured  and  the  world  benefited  by  a  bold 
and  consistent  profession  of  the  truth.  The 
practice  of  God's  faithful  servants  in  every 
age  (Ps.  Ixxi.  17;  cxix.  46).  Examples: 
Enoch,  "Noah,  Abraham,  Daniel.  Truth 
received  in  order  to  be  communicated  (2  Cor. 
iT.  6;  Phil  ii.  16,  16).     The  language  of 


Job  used  by  David  and  his  great  Aniitype 
(Ps.  xl.  9,  10).  The  testimony  of  a  good 
and  enlit>l»tened  conscience  a  precious  com- 
fort in  the  midst  of  suffering  and  in  the 
prospect  of  death  (2  Cor.  i.  12;  2  Tim.  iv. 
6—8).  The  testimony  of  Job's  conscience, 
that  be  had  neitlier  by  fearfulness  nor  faith- 
lessness concealed 

The  Words  of  the  Holy  One. 

These  words  found  in  the  shape  of  —  (1) 
Doctrines;  (2)Promises;  (3) Commands.  They 
were  God^s  words,  as — (1)  Communicated  by 
Him  to  Adam  and  others,  and  handed  down 
to  their  posterity  ;  (2)  Revealed  to  Job  him- 
self. *'  God  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers 
manners  spake  to  the  fathers"  (Heb.  i.  1). 
The  Church  of  God  in  possession  of  such 
words  from  the  beginning.  Faint  echoes 
and  distorted  forms  of  these  words  found 
everywhere  among  the  heatlien.  Prominent 
among  these  was  the  proto-evangel  of  Gen. 
iii.  15.  These  words  the  precious  treasure 
of  the  children  of  God  in  every  age.  A  light 
to  their  feet  and  a  comfort  to  their  heart. 
Employed  by  Job  in  instructing,  sustaining, 
and  comforting  others  (ch.  iv.  3,  4).  God 
known  in  Job's  time  as  "the  Holy  One." 
So  called,  Is.  xl.  25 ;  Hos.xi.  9 ;  Hab.  iii.  3. 
His  name  Holy  (Is.  Ivii.  15).  God  alone 
holy  \Rev.  xv.  4).  Peculiarly  and  essentiallv 
holy  (1  Sam.  ii.  2).  Thrice  holy  (Is.  vi.  3'; 
Rev.  iv.  8).  Contrasted  with  the  gods  of 
the  heathen.  These  acknowledged  by  their 
very  worshippers  to  be  impure  and  unworthy 
of  imitation.  The  Greeks  and  l^omans 
justified  their  own  impurity  by  ihat  of  their 
gods.  People  naturally  resemble  the  deities 
they  worship.  Solemn  obligation  resting  on 
the  worsliippers  of  the  true  God  to  be  holy 
(Lev.  xi.  44;  1  Pet.  i.  16).  His  children 
made  partakers  of  his  holiness  (Heb.  xii.  10; 
2  Pet.  i.  4). 

Job  justifies  his  desire  for  death  on  the 
ground  of  his  grievous  affliction.  His  strcmgth 
unable  to  hold  out  under  such  accumulated 
evils  (verse  1 1).  "  What  is  my  stren2;th,"( — 
or  power  of  endurance — )"ihat  I  should 
h()|)e,"( — indulg(,'  the  slow  protracted  hope  of 
recovery  and  the  enjoymont  of  those  tem- 
poral blessings  held  out  by  Eliphaz)?  "And 
what  is  mine  end  "( — the  end  of  these  miseries) 
— "  that  I  should  prolong  my  life  ?  "( — or  con- 
tinue to  exercise  patience).  The  language 
of  the  flesh  Spoken  according  to  sense. 
Justified  by  appearance  and  carnal  reasoning. 
Despondency  and  impatience  natural  in  the 
absence  of  laith.  Faith  battles  with  appear- 
ances and  triumphs  over  them  (Ps.  xlii.  11 ; 
Mic.  vii.  7,  8;  Hab.  iii.  17,18).  No  time 
long  to  faith.  Abraham's  faith  held  out 
twenty-live  years  for  the  promised  birth,  till 

4& 


CHAP.   VL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


his  own  and  his  wife's  body  were  as  good  as 
dead.  Faith  the  mother  of  patience.  Looks 
not  at  the  weakness  of  the  creature,  but  the 
power  of  the  Creator.  Difficulties  and  ap- 
parent impossibilities  the  true  matter  for 
faith.  ** Laughs  at  impossibilities,"  because 
leaning  on  Omnipotence.  Faith  often  to  seek 
in  a  storm.  "  Every  man  is  a  believer  in  a 
fair  day "  [Rutherford].  No  express  pro- 
mise of  recovery  and  restoration  given  to 
Job.  Tlie  fact  of  God*s  omnipotence,  and 
the  truth  that  He  is  the  hearer  of  prayer, 
that  He  interposes  sooner  or  later  in  his  ser- 
vants' behalf,  and  that  He  does  all  tilings 
well, — enough  for  faith  to  rest  upon  in  time 
of  trouble.  Faith  at  times  triumphant  in 
Job,  though  not  with  reference  to  any  tem- 
poral deliverance  (ch.  xix.  25,  &c.;  xxiii.  10). 
— Verse  12.  "Is  my  strength  the  stiengih  of 
stones,  oris  my  flesh  of  brass  ?" — the  symbol 
of  hardness  and  durability.  The  nature  of 
unbelief  to  dwell  in  personal  weakness. 
Faith  looks  not  on  human  weakness  but  on 
Divine  strength.  Hence  makes  its  possessor 
strong  in  his  weakness.  Through  faith,  be- 
lievers *'out  of  weakness  were  made  strong" 
(Heb-  xi.  34).  Faith  enabled  Paul  rather  to 
glory  in  his  infirmities, and  to  say  :  "  When  I 
am  weak,  then  am  I  strong "  (2  Cor.  xii. 
9,  10). 

Job  justifies  his  desj)ondency  on  the  ground 
of  his  thorough  and  apparently  hopeless  pros- 
tration (verse  13).  "Is  not  my  help  in 
nie?  And  is  wisdom  driven  quite  from  me  ?" 
(Rather, — Is  it  not  the  fact  that  no  help  for 
me  is  in  myself,  and  that  recovery  (or  health) 
is  quite  fled  from  me?).  Expresses  his  real 
case  as  viewed  by  the  eye  of  sense.  Abra- 
ham*s  faith,  however,  did  not  stagger  even 
when  the  child  of  promise  was  to  be  offered 
on  the  altar.  Our  weakness  and  helplessness 
the  proper  theatre  for  the  display  of  God's 
power  and  Christ's  grace.  Divine  strength 
magnifies  itself  in  realized  weakness  (2  Cor. 
xii.  9).  A  higher  experience  than  that  at- 
tamed  by  Job  reserved  for  God's  children  in 
the  Gospel  age  (Heb  xi.  40  }  Matt.  xi.  11). 
The  feeole  to  be  then  like  David,,  and  the 
House  of  David  as  God  (Zee.  xii.  8;  Is. 
XXX.  26). 

III.  Complains  of  his  friends'  want 
of  sympathy  (versus  14 — 21). 

Kindness  to  the  afflicted 

1.  Job  states  a  moral  truth  (verse  14). 
"  To  him  that  is  afflicted,"  &c. 

Compassionate  kindness  to  the  suffering  a 
dictate  of  humanity,  and  one  of  the  first 
principle.^  of  religion  (Jam  i.  27 ;  Matt,  ix 
13).  The  good  Samaritan  Christ's  chosen 
example  for  His  disciples,  and  tlis  own  com- 
mentary on  the  second  t^^ble  of  the  law. 

4A 


Mercy  accompanied  with  truth  the  essence 
of  moral  perfection,  and  the  true  spirit  of 
Christianity  (Fs.  Ixxxv,  10;  Ixxxix.  14). 
Pity  to  be  shown  to  the  afflicted— (1)  In 
words  of  symp.ithy  and  kindness ;  (2)  In 
practical  assi^^tance,  as  far  as  in  our  power  j 
(3)  In  refraining  from  what  may  unneces- 
sarily wound  the  feelings  ;  (4)  In  commend- 
ing the  sufferer's  case  to  God  (Ps.  cxli.  5  ; 
Jam.  v.  15,  16).  This  to  be  done  for  any  in 
affliction,  especially  for  a  friend  (Luke  x 
29—37;  Prov.  xvii.  17). 

2.  Applies  this  truth  to  the  case  of  his 
friends.  "But  he  forsaketli  the  fear,"  &c., 
— viz.,  Eliphaz  and  the  others,  in  their  want 
of  kindness  and  sympathy  towards  Job. 
Want  of  love  to  our  neighbour  proves  want  oj 
love  to  God.  Love  to  our  neighbour  enjoined 
by  Divine  authority  as  the  second  part  of  the 
law.  The  want  of  it,  therefore,  an  evidence 
of  the  want  ofy^^ras  well  as  love  towards  God. 
Pity  is  love  to  our  neiglibour  in  affliction. 
Our  neighbour  has  always  a  claim  on  our 
love^  and  in  alJUciion  on  our  pity.  That  pity 
engendered  by  the  fear  of  God,  as — (1)  Qui- 
neiglibour  is  God's  own  offspring;  (2;  Our 
suffering  neighbour  is  the  object  of  His 
special  regard.  Pity  required  by  God  to- 
wards a  suffering  neighbour  as  He  has  h  id 
pity  on  ourselves  (Matt,  xviii.  33 — 35). 
Mercy  and  coni])assion  His  own  character, 
to  be  imitated  by  all  His  children  (Luke  vi. 
36).  The  fear  of  God  therefore  the  guarantee 
of  riglit  feelings  towards  man.  The  guardian 
of  all  the  social  and  r<  lative  duties.  Love 
to  God  unable  to  dwell  in  the  same  heart 
with  indifference  to  man.  Selfishness  in- 
compatible with  the  fear  of  God.  After 
God's  example,  kindness  and  pity  to  be 
shown  to  the  afflicted,  whatever  his  character 
and  religion.  Illustrated  by  the  parable  of 
the  Good  Samaritan,  and  the  legend  of  Abra- 
ham and  the  Idolater.  As  a  motive  to  shew 
kindness  to  the  poor  and  the  afflicted,  God 
has  identified  their  cases  with  His  own  ^ 
(Prov.  xiv.  31;  xix.  17).  Pity  due  loan 
afflicted  fellow-creature,  still  more  to  an 
afflicted  friend.  Duties  and  obligations  en- 
hanced according  to  relationship  (Mai.  i.  6  ; 
Prov.  xvii.  17  ;  xviii.  24). 

The  disappointing  conduct  of  the  friends 
touchingly  set  forth  by  a  continued  simile 
(verse  15,  &c.).  *'My  brethren  have  dealt 
deceitfully  as  a  brook,"  (or  wady — a  nar- 
row valley  or  bed  of  a  st  ream  between  two 
rocky  hills,  filled  with  water  in  winter  but 
usually  dried  up  in  summer)— "as  the  stream 
of  brooks  they  (or,  which)  pass  away,"  viz. 
in  the  heat  of  summer.  Three  points  in  the 
comparison  : — (1)  The  former  profession  of 
friendship^ — resembling  the  noisy,  rushing 
wad} -stream,  full  of  water  through  the 
melted  ice,  and  saow,  and  rains  of  winter, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAF.    VI. 


when  less  required.  (Verse  16).— (2)  The 
failure  in  real  kindness  and  sympathy  when 
needed, — like  the  drying  up  of  the  brook 
through  the  summer  heat,  and  the  entire 
disappearance  of  the  waters,  having  vanished 
into  vapour  or  been  lost  in  tlie  sands  of  tlie 
desert.  (Verse  17,  18).— (3)  The  bitter  dis- 
appointment, — like  that  of  the  caravans  of 
Tema  or  Ishmaelites,  and  the  trading  com- 
panies of  Sheba  or  Arabia  Felix,  wlion, 
contrary  to  their  expectation,  they  find  the 
stream  dried  up,  and  are  unable  to  obtain  a 
supply  of  water  (verse  19,  20).    Observe — 

(1)  The  right  of  the  afflicted  to  expect  kind- 
ness and  sympathy,  especially  from  their  friends, 

(2)  Care  to  be  taken  to  make  a  visit  of  condo- 
lence to  correspond  with  its  profession.  (3)  A 
great  part  of  friendship ^  to  be  true  in  time  of 
trouble.  Affection  not  to  be  cooled  by  afflic- 
tion. A  brother  born  for  adversity.  False 
friends  like  vermin  that  abandon  a  sinking 
vessel,  or  swallows  that  depart  at  the  approach 
of  winter.  True  friends  like  ivy  that  adheres 
to  the  tree  in  its  decay.  Genuine  friend  ship, 
like  the  light  of  phosphorus,  brightest  in  the 
dark.  (4)  Our  views  of  a  friend^  s  character  not 
to  be  lightly  changed,  least  of  all  by  his  circum- 
stances. Base  even  to  suspect  a  friend.  Love 
**  hopeth  all  things  "  and  *'  thinketh  no  evil." 

The  ground  of  his  complaint  (verse  21). 
"  For  now  ye  are  nothing," — are  to  me  like 
the  vanished  wady-stream,  as  though  you 
had  never  been.  Friends  by  profession  to 
prove  tiiemselves  wortliy  of  the  name.  Base 
to  profess  friendship  and  to  be  destitute  of 
its  feelings,  or  to  withhold  its  offices.  Love 
to  be  not  in  word  and  in  tongue,  but  in  deed 
and  in  truth  (1  John  iii.  18). — '*  Ye  have  seen 
my  casting  down,"  (my  prostration  and 
calamity)  *'  and  are  afraid."  Their  feelings 
read  in  their  faces.  Only  one  had  spoken 
with  his  lips,  all  with  their  looks.  Their 
fear  as  if  a  pious  dread  at  the  signal  display 
of  Divine  judgment,  and  horror  at  the  dis- 
covery of  secret  wickedness.  Afraid — (1) 
Of  being  found  sympathizing  with  a  guilty 
man;  (2)  Of  being  involved  in  the  same 
i?al amity ;  (3)  Of  being  called  upon  to  re- 
lieve or  defend  the  sufferer.  Base  to  with- 
hold sympathy  and  kindness  from  regard  to 
<»ur  own  comfort,  credit,  or  convenience. 

IV.  Remonstrates  witli  his  friends  on 
the  baseness  of  their  conduct  (verses  22 
—24). 

1.  He  had  asked  no  favour  at  their  hands 
(verses  22,  23).  "Did  I  say  (or,  is  it  be- 
cause I  said)  Bring  unto  me  (for  my  re- 
lief) ;  or  Give  a  reward  for  me  of  your 
substance  (to  repair  my  losses  or  obtain 
the  favour  of  the  judge) ;  or.  Deliver  me 
from  the  enemy's  hand?  Or,  redeem  me 
from  the  hand  of  the  mighty  ?" —  (who  have 


robbed  me  of  my  property,  or  are  now  adding 
to  my  affliclion).  The  right  of  the  afRicLcd 
and  suffering  to  receive  not  only  sympathy 
but  practical  help.  Afforded  by  Al)ra!i;un  to 
his  captive  nephew  (Gen.  xiv.  14).  Tliis  a 
noble  mind  recoils  from  asking,  though 
thankful  in  receiving.  The  favour  Job  re- 
fused to  ask,  afterwards  liberally  accorded 
(ch.  xlii.  11).  Sometimes  the  only  service  we 
can  render  is  a  cordial  sympathy. 

2.  They  had  not  attempted  to  show  him  his 
sin  (verse  21;).  *' Teach  me  and  I  will 
hold  my  tongue;  and  cause  me  to  under- 
stand wherein  I  have  erred."  Mark  of  an 
honest  and  ingenuous  mind  to  be  willing  to 
be  convinced  of  error  or  wrong- doing.  A 
prejudice  or  superstition  sitnply  to  infer 
sinning  from  sutiering.  Absurd  to  exhort 
to  repentance  without  attempting  to  convince 
of  sin.  Job's  friends  unable  to  point  out  any 
fault  in  his  former  life,  except  by  inference. 
The  language  of  his  Antitype  partially  his — 
*'  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin?" 
(John  viii.  46).  All  sin  an  erring  or  straying 
from  the  path  of  rectitude  and  the  will  of 
God.  Found  in  all.  Job  not  excepted ;  his 
friends  only  challenged  to  point  out  any 
breach  of  morality  or  religion  as  the  cause  of 
his  peculiar  suffering.  To  point  out  sin  when 
we  see  it,  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  our  neighbv^ur. 
Faithful  and  wise  reproof  required  by  the 
law  of  love  (Lev.  xix.  17).  Job's  seme  of 
the  value  of  such  reproof  (verse  25). 

Right   Words. 

"How  forcible  are  right  words!"  (Heb. 
"  words  of  uprightness"). 

1.  The/or>«of  such  words — (1)  Argument; 
(2)  Reproof;  (3)  Instruction;  (4)  Admoni- 
tion ;  (5)  Persuasion. 

2  The  character  of  the  words— "  right." 
(1)  Right  and  try£  in  themselves — unmixed 
with  error  and  falsehood — "  sound  speech 
that  cannot  be  condemned"  (Tit.  ii.  8).  in 
speaking  to  others  we  are  to  beware  of  daub- 
ing with  untempered  mortar  (Ezek.  xiii.  10); 
or  of  corrupting  the  Word  of  God  (2  Cor  ii. 
17).  To  speak  forth  only  "  the  words  of  truth 
ana  soberness  "  (Acts  xxvi.  25) ;  "  acceptable 
words,"  but  also  "  words  of  truth  "  (Eccles. 
xii.  10).  Arguments  to  be  sound, — premises 
true,  and  conclusions  iust.  Our  etatements 
to  be  according  to  the  law  and  the  testimony 
(Is.  viii.  20).  (2)  The  whole  truth,  so  far  as 
necessary,  in  connection  with  the  subject.  No- 
thing profitable  to  be  kept  back,  either  from 
fear  or  favour.  No  mere  one-sided  view  of 
the  truth  to  be  given.  Teachers  not  to  be 
partial  in  the  law  (Mai.  ii.  9).  Truth  to  be 
exhibited  in  all  its  parts,  and  in  their  due 
Tjropositions.  The  word  of  truth  to  be  rightly 
divided  (2  Tim  ii.  15).  The  mercy  of  G«'d 
not  to  be  enlarged  upon  to  the  ignoring  of 

45 


CILIF.  YI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


His  justice,  nor  the  converse.  The  promises 
not  to  be  without  the  precepts,  nor  the 
precepts  without  the  promises.  Faith  not 
to  be  urged  without  works  as  its  fruits, 
nor  works  without  faith  as  their  founda- 
tion. Not  morality  without  religion,  nor 
reh'^ion  without  morality.  Not  the  law 
without  the  Gospel,  nor  the  Gospel  without 
the  law.  Words,  to  be  right  words,  must 
be  evangelical  words — "the  truth  as  it  is 
in  Jesus."  Pardon  not  to  be  held  out 
apart  from  Christ's  blood  which  procures  it. 
Holiness  not  to  be  urged  apart  from  Ciirist's 
indwelling  spirit  as  its  author.  (3)  Correct 
in  their  application.  Tr u  th  may  be  so  ap  | )li('d 
as  to  become  practical  error.  The  fault  in 
Job's  friends.  Pillows  not  to  be  sewed  to 
all  armholes  ;  and  those  not  to  be  made  sad, 
even  with  truth,  whom  the  Lord  does  not 
make  sad  (Ezek.  xiii.  18—22).  Meat  to  be 
given  in  season  as  each  requires  and  is  able 
to  bear  it.  Milk  to  babes,  strong  meat  to 
those  of  mature  age.  Some  to  be  sharply 
reproved.  The  bruised  reed  to  be  bound 
up  with  tender  hand.  Not  only  truth  to  be 
preached,  but  seasonable  truth — **  the  present 
truth,"  (2  Pet.  i.  12).  Sound  doctrine  not  to 
be  so  preached  as  to  become  a  soporific. 
The  words  of  the  wise  to  be  as  goads,  there- 
fore to  be  wisely  directed.  *'  A  word  spoken 
in  season,  how  good  is  it  ?"  (4)  Spoken  in 
uprightness  and  sincerity.  Without  fear  or 
favour.  Without  prejudice  or  passion. 
Without  self-seeking  or  time-serving.  With 
simplicity  and  godly  sincerity.  As  in  the 
sight  of  God  and  in  the  view  of  eternity. 
The  speaker  to  be,  and  therefore  to  appear, 
in  earnest.  Truth  not  to  be  spoken  as  if  it 
were  tiction,  as  if  not  believed  by  the  speaker 
himself.  To  be  spoken  in  love,  in  tender- 
ness, sympathy,  and  concern  for  the  hearer's 
welfare.  The  speaker's  spirit  to  preach  as 
well  as  his  speech,  his  manner  as  well  as 
his  matter.  The  words  of  truth  on  the 
speaker's  lips  not  to  be  falsified  by  the  man- 
ner in  which  they  are  spoken,  or  by  the  in- 
consistency of  his  life. 

3.  The  efficocii  of  such  words.  "  Porcible," 
— powerful,  efficacious.  (1.)  In  enlightening 
the  understanding,  discovering  truth,  and 
so  producitig./dfeVA.  "  So  spake  that  a  great 
multitude  believed."  (Acts  xiv.  1).  A  well- 
constructed  argument  having  truth  for  its 
basis, irresistible {^A.Clarke\.  (2.)Iii awakening 
the  conscience,  convincing  of  sin,  and  so  pro- 
ducing repentance.  So  Peter's  words  at 
Pentecost,  and  Paul's  before  Felix  (Acts 
ii.  37 ;  xxiv.  25).  (3.)  In  moving  the  affec- 
tions and  will,  and  so  restraining  from  sin, 
and  persuading  to  duti/.  So  with  the 
awakened  at  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  41).  The 
Ephesians  burned  their  un<?odly  books  (Ads 
Xix.  lU  J.     Herod  heard  John  gladly  and  did 

4A 


many  things  (Mark  vi.  20).  (4.)  In  comfort- 
ing the  afflicted,  sustaining  the  weak,  and 
succouring  the  tempted.  "  Heaviness  in  the 
heart  of  man  maketh  it  stoop — a  good  word 
maketh  it  glad"  (Prov.  xii.  25).  The  effect 
of  Job's  own  words  in  his  former  condition 
(chap.  iv.  3,  4). 

V.  Complains  of  his  friends'  reproof 
and  their  conduct  towards  him  (verses 
25-27). 

1.  Their  argument  and  reproof  had  been 
pointless  and  profilless  (verse  25).  *'  What 
doth  your  arguing  reprove  ?  (or,  "  what  con- 
viction is  there  in  the  reproof  you  have  ad- 
ministered ?")  Eliphaz,  their  chief  speaker, 
had  (1)  shewn  no  sin  on  the  part  of  Job  as 
meriting  his  severe  treatment;  (2)  Ex- 
horted to  repentance  without  showing  the 
grounds  for  its  necessity.  In  discoursing  to 
others  we  are  to  have  a  clear  aim  and  dejirdte 
purpose.  That  aim  to  be  a  right  one  and  im- 
portant in  the  circumstances.  Our  purpose  to 
be  prosecuted  in  a  wise  and  suitable  manner. 
The  preacher  not  to  speak  "  as  uncertainly," 
nor  to  preach  "  as  one  that  benteth  the  air." 

2.  Their  reproof  was  directed  only  against 
words  uttered  in  deep  distress  and  great  dis- 
quietude of  spirit  (verse  26).  *' Do  ye  imagine 
to  reprove  words,  and  the  speeches  of  one 
that  is  desperate,  which  are  as  wind?"  (or, 
"  and  to  scrutinize,  sift,  or  *  air '  the  speeches 
of  one  thit  is  desperate?")  The  fault  of 
Job's  friends  that  they  had  attacked  the 
words  of  his  complaint  instead  of  showing 
the  evil  of  his  life.  As  a  rule,  by  our  words 
we  shall  be  justified  or  condemned  (Matt, 
xii.  37).  The  reason,  '*out  of  the  abundance 
of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  Ordi- 
narily, a  man  is  as  his  speech.  Allowance, 
however,  to  be  made  for  words  uttered  under 
deep  distress,  and  in  exce[)tionally  trying 
circumstances.  A  high  ofi'ence  in  God's 
sight  to  make  a  man  an  ofi'euder  for  a  word 
(Is.  xxix.  21).  Observe — (1.)  Rash  words, 
especially  tinder  provocation,  an'*  easily  beset- 
ting sin "  (Heb.  xii.  1).  Great  temptation 
to  such  words  under  exciied  feeling.  The 
lieart  to  be  kept  with  all  diligence,  especially 
in  time  of  trouble  (Prov.  iv.  23).  The 
mouth  to  be  kept  as  with  a  bridle  when 
God's  hand  is  heavy  on  us  (Ps.  xxxix.  1 — 
10).  (2.)  '\1\\Q  case  of  a  believer  may  appear 
^*  desperate*^  to  himself  and  others,  when  it 
appears  the  very  opposite  to  God.  A  child 
of  God  often  writes  bitter  things  against 
himself  when  his  Father  does  not.  A  tried 
believer  apt  to  judge  of  his  case  from  feeling 
and  appearance.  The  flesh  a  blind  judge  as 
to  a  man's  real  case  and  character.  That 
case  can  never  be  desperate  which  is  hnked 
to  the  Almighty's  throne.  *'  Thou  hast  no- 
thing to  fear  who  hast  Caesar  for  thy  friend." 
A  man's  case  cannot  be  desperate  who  has — ^ 


EOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB 


CHAF.   VTL 


(i)  a  place  in  the  Almighty's  heart;  (ii)  his 
hand  in  His  heavenly  Father's;  (iii)  an  in- 
terest in  the  everlasting  covenant  (2  Sam. 
xxiii.  6). 

Job  strongly  inveighs  agaitist  his  frientTs 
conduct  (verse  27).  "  ^a,  ye  overwhelm 
{margin,  *  cause  [a  net  or  noose]  to  fall 
upon ')  the  fatherless,  and  ye  dig  a  pit  for 
your  friend"  (seeking  to  catch  him  in  un- 
garded  words,  and  to  make  him  out  to  be  a 
hypocrite  and  transgressor).  Rightly  or 
wrongly,  Job  construes  his  friends*  language 
and  looks  into  malice.  Their  conduct  harsh 
and  unfeeUng,  but  according  to  Job,  diabo- 
lical. Strong  language  and  exaggerated  views 
of  the  conduct  of  others  towards  ourselves, 
a  natural  result  of  deep  trouble  and  ex- 
cited feeling.  Men  capable,  however,  of  the 
conduct  here  ascribed  by  Job  to  his  friends. 
Joseph's  brethren  an  example.  The  words 
strictly  true  of  the  enemies  of  Jesus,  their 
truest  and  best  friend.  The  conduct  of  Job's 
friends  all  the  guiltier  as  being — (1)  Under 
colour  of  friendship ;  (2)  Under  profession 
of  piety ;  (3)  With  considerable  knowledge 
of  Divine  truth.  Cruellest  feelings  sometimes 
covered  with  the  garb  of  greatest  sutictity. 
Example  ;  Torquemada  and  the  Spanish  In- 
quisitors. Important  prayer — "Search  me, 
U  God,  and  know  my  heart "  &c.  (Ps.  cxxxix. 
23). 

VI.   Job's  challenge  to  his   friends 

(verses  28—30). 

1.  Appeal  of  conscious  integrity  (verse  28). 
"  Now,  therefore,  be  content,  look  upon 
me;  for  it  is  evident  unto  you  {margin,  'it 
is  before  your  face ')  if  I  lie  "  (or,  "  sliall  I 
lie  to  your  face  ?")  Observe  : — (1)  Conscious 
innocence  not  only  allows  but  solicits  examina- 
tion. A  good  conscience  enables  a  man  to 
live  in  a  glass-house.  So  Jesus — "Which 
of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin  "  (John  viii.  4^)). 
A  mark  of  grace  to  come  to  the  liglit  tliat 
our  deeds  may  be  made  manifest  (John  iii.  21). 
Paul  prays  for  believers  that  they  may  be 
"  sincere,  '-  able,  in  heart  and  life,  to  bear 
the  scrutiny  of  daylight  (Phil.  i.  10).  A 
child  of  God  is  carefid  to  be  truthful  both  in 
lip  and  life.  A  Christian  is  one  who  is  more 
concerned  to  be  than  to  appear  such.  (2) 
Truth  and  sincerity  read  in  the  countenance. 


The  face  the  dial-plate  of  the  soul.  An  up- 
right heart  makes  an  open  countenance  (verse 
29).  "  Return,  I  pray  you,  let  it  not  be  ini- 
quity (or,  *  let  there  no  injustice  *■ — i^u 
unjust  or  partial  judgment) ;  yea,  return 
again,  my  righteousness  is  in  it"  {margin, 
"in  this  matter" — I  shall  be  found  inno- 
cent in  the  trial).  Truth  and  ifinocence  court 
investigation.  The  consciously  upright  desire 
only  impartial  and  unprejudiced  trial.  The 
language  of  Jesus,  and  of  those  wrapped  in 
His  righteousness — "Who  is  he  that  con- 
demneth "  (Isa.  1.  9 ;  Rom.  viii.  32—34). 
The  believer  a  paradox — "  Black  but  comely" 
—  black  in  himself,  comely  in  Christ;  guilty 
and  yet  righteous — guilty  in  his  own  person, 
righteous  in  his  righteous  Head  (2  Cor.  v. 
21).  Renounces  all  I'igh^eousness  but  Christ's 
in  the  sight  of  God,  yet  careful  to  maintain  a 
spotless  character  in  the  sight  of  men. 

2.  The  ground  of  Job's  ap'p^al — his  ability 
to  distinguish  and  judge  of  moral  conduct 
(verse  30).  "  Is  there  iniquity  (literally,  or, 
a  depraved  taste)  in  my  tongue  ?  Cannot  my 
taste  {mar(iin,  '  palate  ')  discern  perverse 
things  ? "  (am  I  not  able  to  distinguish 
between  right  and  wrong?)  No  small  ex- 
cellence to  possess  a  correct  moral  judgment. 
Moral  sense  obscured  and  weakened  by  the 
fall  and  by  a  course  of  sin.  The  moral 
judgment  becomes  depraved  by  sin  as  the 
taste  by  disease.  The  character  of  the  un- 
godly to  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil.  The 
mature  Christian,  one  who  has  his  senses 
exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil 
(Heb.  V.  14).  A  fruit  of  renewing  grace  to 
know  and  approve  "the  good,  the  perfect, 
and  the  acceptable"  (Rom.  xii.  2).  "Judg- 
ment "  to  "  approve  things  that  are  excel- 
lent," or  to  "  distinguish  between  things 
that  differ,"  a  gift  of  grace  (Phil.  i.  9,  10). 
A  part  of  spiritual  wisdom  to  understand 
what  the  w^ill  of  the  Lord  is,  and  the  oppo- 
site (Eph.  V.  17).  Grace  indicated  not  only 
by  a  tender,  but  an  enlightened  conscience. 
The  ungodly  know  not  what  at  they  stumble. 
"  They  know  not  what  they  do."  In  mur- 
dering Christ's  followers,  men  were  to  think 
they  were  doing  God  service  (John  xvi.  2). 
Paul's  former  case  (Acts  xxvi.  9—11).  Im- 
portant  prayer — "  Cause  me  to  know  the 
way  wherein  I  should  walk"  (Ps.  cxliii.  8). 


CHAPTER  VII. 
CONTINUATION  OF  JOB'S  SPEECH. 

Job  ceaees  to  altercate  with  Eliphaz  and  to  defend  himself.     Resumes  his  complaints,   and 

ends  by  addressing  himself  to  God. 


I.  Complains  of  the  general  lot  of 
Vnmanity  (verse  1). 

"Is  there  not  an  appointed  time  {margin, 
a   warfare,'  or  war-service)  to   man   (pro- 


perly, to  wretched  man,  Heb.,  'Enosh,' — man 
viewed  as  fallen,  and  therefore  miserable) 
upon  earth  ?  Are  not  his  days  also  as  the 
days  of  an  hireling  P"    Wishes  to  show — 


CHAP.   VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


(1)  His  desire  for  death  excusable  ;  (2) 
Suffering  not  peculiar  to  the  bad.  Suggests 
instructive  views  of 

Human  Life. 

1.  As  an  appointed  period.  War-service, 
and  the  time  of  a  hired  labourer's  employ- 
!jieut,  limited.  The  term  used  also  to  express 
the  time  of  a  Levite's  service  at  the  taber- 
nacle, namely,  twenty  years  (Numb.  iv.  23). 
Doctrine  :  The  bounds  of  man's  life  ap- 
pointed (ch.  xiv.  5).  Our  days  measured  out 
by  Him  who  created  us  (Psa.  xxxix.  4).  Our 
times  in  His  hand  (Psa.  xxxi.  15).  Not 
without  respect  to  the  means  necessary  for 
life's  continuance.  God's  predestination 
neither  interferes  with  the  human  will  nor 
the  operation  of  second  causes,  but  embraces 
both.  The  means  taken  into  view  along  with 
the  appointment  of  the  end.  The  crop  not 
appointed  without  the  ploughing  and  sowing. 
If  the  passengers'  hves  are  to  be  preserved, 
the  sailors  are  to  do  their  duty  (Acts  xxvii. 
22—31).  The  elect  saved,  but  not  without 
regeneration,  repentance,  and  faith.  If  a 
man  is  to  reach  his  "  threescore  years  and 
ten,"  he  is  not  to  shorten  them  by  neglect, 
intemperance,  or  crime.  The  wicked  often 
do  not  "  live  out  half  their  days," — the  days 
they  might  and  should  have  lived.  Disease 
as  much  appointed  as  the  death  it  occasions. 
Lessons  :  Life  an  appointed  period.  Hence — 
(1.)  Bear  meekly  its  trials  ;  they  are  but  for 
a  limited  time ;  (2.)  Wait  patiently  for  its 
termination :  it  will  come  in  God's  time. 
Neither  greatly  desire  nor  hasten  it  ;  (3.) 
Carefully  improve  its  continuance.  Much  to 
be  done,  and  but  a  short  time  to  do  it  in 
(Eccles.  ix.  ]0). 

2.  As  a  war-service.  Such  a  period  not 
one  of  ease,  enjoyment,  or  indulgence ,  but 
of  hardship,  privation,  unrest.  Job's  reason 
for  desiring  its  termination.  Life  a  war- 
service— (1)  As  a  time  of  trouble  and  suffer- 
ing. Man  born  to  trouble  (ch.  v.  7) ;  (2) 
As  a  time  of  conflict.  Sin  and  Satan  our  great 
enemies ;  (3)  As  a  time  of  service.  Man 
bound  to  serve  God  as  his  rightful  sovereign. 
Lessons :  (1)  Be  patient  of  hardship^  aud 
prepared  for  trial  and  suffering.  Man's,  and 
especially  a  Christian's,  is  a  soldier^s  life. 
"  Endure  hardness  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  3).  Tedious 
marches,  camp  discomforts,  field  duties.  (2) 
Be  careful  to  be  on  the  right  side.  We  must 
serve  j  but  it  may  be  either  under  Christ's 
banner  or  the  devil's.  (3)  Be  faithful^  obe- 
dient, and  active  ;  faithful  to  your  King, 
obedient  to  your  Captain,  active  in  discharge 
of  your  duty.  (4)  Be  hopeful^  courageous, 
and  enduring.  With  Christ  as  our  captain 
victory  is  certain ;  and,  after  short  and 
faithful  service,  comes  long  and  honourable 
reward  (2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8). 

48 


3.  As  the  term  of  a  hired  servant.  We 
may  have  a  hireling's  joo5^,witliout  a  hireling's 
spirit.  Salvation  by  grace  not  inconsistent 
with  "  respect  to  the  recompense  of  reward." 
Each  believer  has  his  work  in  the  vineyard, 
and  each  receives  "  his  penny."  A  hired 
labourer  has— (1)  Painful  and  self-denying 
labour  to  undergo ;  (2)  A  short  and  limited 
time  to  do  it  in ;  (3)  Due  wages  to  receive 
when  it  is  done.  Life  such  a  service.  Man 
must  serve — either  God  or  Satan,  righteous- 
ness or  sin  (Rom.  vi.  16 — 22).  Each  thought, 
word,  and  action,  a  service  to  one  or  other  ol 
these  two  masters.  Hence— (1)  ^'Choose 
the  best  master.  God's  service  is — (i.)  Honour- 
able; (ii.)  Pleasant;  (iii.)  Satisfying  to  the 
conscience.  Has  along  with  it — {a)  Kind 
treatment ;  {b)  Comfortable  provision ;  (<?) 
Liberal  remuneration. — (2)  Be  diligent  in 
doing  the  Master's  work  and  watchful  in 
looking  for  the  Master's  coming  (Mark  xiii. 
34—37.) 

II.  Renews  his  complaint  and  de- 
scribes his  sad  condition.    Mention  of  the 

"  hirehng  "  in  verse  1  suggests  to  him  the 
comparison  of  himself  to  a  slave  or  a  day- 
labourer  who  longs  for  the  evening  rest 
(verse  2).  "As  the  servant  (or  slave)  ear- 
nestly desireth  {margin — 'gapeth'  or  pants 
after)  the  shadow  [of  evening],  and  as  a 
hireling  (hired  servant,  as  distinguished  from 
a  slave)  looketh  for  the  reward  (or  finishing) 
of  his  work,  so,"  &c. 

Describes  his  afflicted  condition  in  three 
particulars:  — 

1.  Comfortless  days  and  painful  night* 
(verse  3).  "  So  am  1  made  to  possess  (Heb. 
*  to  inherit  *)  months  of  vanity  (without 
comfort  or  relief  to  myself,  and  without  profit 
either  to  myself,  or  others),  and  wearisome 
nights  {Heb.  '  nights  of  labour  or  trouble ') 
are  appointed  (Heb.  *  numbered ')  to  me." 
Such  days  and  nights  the  result — (J)  Of  his 
disease;  (2)  Of  his  bereavement;  (3)  Of 
spiritual  darkness.  Says  not  days,  but 
*'  months  "  of  vanity,  each  day  appearing  a 
month.  So  Jonah  speaks  of  his  three  days 
in  the  fish's  belly  as  an  eternity, — "  i'o; 
ever"  (Jon.  ii.  6).  "A  man  in  great 
misery  may  so  far  lose  his  measure  as  to 
think  a  minute  an  hour"  \_Locke^.  On 
the  other  hand,  as  grief  retards,  so  joy 
hastens  time.  The  bliss  of  heaven  makes 
"eternity  seem  as  a  day."  Job's  troubles, 
however,  may  now  have  probably  lasted  some 
months.  These  painful  days  and  nights 
spoken  of  as  an  inheritance.  A  bitter  irony, 
yet  true.  Trouble  handed  down  to  us  with 
sin  as  its  consequence.  "A  sad  inheritance 
of  woe."  Adheres  to  us  as  our  ancestral 
possession.  "  Mdde  to  possess "  them,  as 
against  his  wiii,     ''  i'he  creature  made  sub- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


CHAP.    VII. 


iectto  vanity,  not  willingly"  (Rom.  viii.  20). 
"Blessed  contrast  to  fliis  inheritance  is  that 
found  in  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  17 ;  Heb. 
ix.  15;  1  Pet.  i.  4).  Yet  montlis 
of  suffering  not  necessarily  **  months  of 
vanity."  These,  to  a  child  of  God,  amonj^ 
the  all  things  working  together  for  his  good 
(Rom.  viii.  28).  Times  of  affliction  are  made 
times  of  profit,  to  ourselves,  through  spiritual 
teaching  and  Divine  communion ;  to  others, 
by  the  example  afforded  of  patience  and 
Divine  support. 

"  In  all  my  list  of  blessings  infinite 
Stands  this  the  foremost,  that  my  heart  has 
bled." 

2.  Rest  lessness  of  mind  and  body  (verse 
4).  "  When  I  lie  down,  I  say,  when  shall  I 
arise,  and  the  night  be  gone  ?  (or,  '  but  the 
night  is  extended;*  margin,  'and the  evening 
be  measured  ?  ')  And  I  am  full  of  tossings," 
&c.  The  distressing  nights  dwelt  upon 
rather  than  the  days.  Long,  weary,  sleep- 
less nights  among  the  most  painful  circum- 
stances connected  with  sickness  or  soriow. 
Such  nights  contrasted  with  the  refreshing 
rest  of  the  worn-out  slave  and  weary  labourer. 
These  wearisome  and  restless  nights,  how- 
ever, counted  out  by  God  to  his  people, 
(verse  '^)  Not  one  too  many,  or  more  than 
He  will  over-rule  for  our  good.  God  an 
accurate  dispenser  of  His  people's  sufferings 
and  sorrow  (Is.  xxvii.  8).  Connected  with 
the  long  sleepless  nights  are  the  "  tossings 
to  and  fro  upon  the  bed."  "  We  change 
the  place,  but  keep  the  pain."  The  nocturnal 
tossings  in  mind  often  more  painful  than 
those  of  the  body  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  2 — 9 ;  Is. 
xxxviii.  13).  Sleep  God's  gift  to  his  beloved 
(Ps.  cxxvii.  2).  Its  absence  in  sickness  or 
trouble  itself  no  small  affliction. 

"Nature's  soft  nurse,  how  have  I  frighted 

thee, 
That  thou  no  more  wilt  weigh  my  eyelids 
I        down?" 

3.  Loathsomeness  of  body  (verse  5). 
"  My  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods 
of  dust  (literally,  or  in  appearance) ;  my 
skin  is  broken  and  become  loathsome;" 
(or,  breaks  [in  ulcers]  and  di&solves  [in 
matter]).  Corruption  breeding  worms,  ul- 
cerous running  sores,  and  rough  ashy  scales 
covering  the  body,  prominent  features  in 
Job's  disease.  The  IClephantiasis  a  species 
of  leprosv  (Lev.  xiii.  9 — 17).  Renders  the 
patient  loathsome  to  look  at,  and  forbids 
contact  or  near  approach.  Similar  revolting 
picture  probably  presented  in  Lazarus  (Luke 
xvi.  20),  and  in  Herod  (Acts  xii.  23).  Some- 
thing like  it  complained  of  by  David  (Ps. 
xxwiii.  3,  5,  7,  11),  and  by  Heman  (Ps. 
L\xx\ui.  8,  18).    A  sad  aggravation  of  our 


affliction  when  it  renders  us  loathsome  to 
our  friends. 

Lessons  from  Job's  Disease. 

(1)  Terrible  power  of  Satan.  Satan  the  im- 
mediate author  of  Jobs  disease.  (2)  Dreadful 
effects  of  siu.  But  for  sin  there  had  been  no 
disease.  Sin  turns  our  comeliness  into  cor- 
ruption, and  covers  a  formerly  fair  and 
healthy  body  with  foul  putridity  and  worm- 
breeding  sores.  (3)  Character  of  our  mortal 
body.  Soon  reduced  to  loathsome  putre- 
faction even  while  alive.  "  Our  vile  body," 
— the  "  body  of  our  humiliation"  (Phil.  iii. 
21).  (4 )  Tlie  saint  as  liable  to  the  most 
loathsome  diseases  as  the  sinner.  Witness 
Job  and  Laz;irus.  (5.)  The  love  of  Christ  in 
assuming  a  hody  with  such  liabilities.  Made 
''in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh"  (Rom. viii.  3). 
"Took  our  iutiimities  and  bare  our  sick- 
nesses" (Matt.  viii.  17,  quoted  from  Is. 
liii.  4).  Prom  the  same  prophecy,  the 
Messiah  said  by  the  Jews  to  have  his  place 
among  the  lepers.  (6.)  Freciousness  of  a 
glorious  resurrection.  Our  vile  body  cliaTip-ed 
and  fashioned  like  to  Christ's  glorious  dy 
(Phil.  iii.  21.)  (7.)  Affecting  picture  cf  the 
loathsomeness  of  sin.  Leprosy  the  most 
loathsome  of  all  bodily  diseases.  Sin  sym- 
bolized by  it  as  the  most  loathsome 
thing  in  the  universe.  The  only 
truly  loathsome  thing  iti  the  eyes  of  God 
and  holy  beiui^s.  Makes  the  soul  infinitely 
more  loathsome  than  Job's  disease  did  his 
body.  The  godless  rich  man  loathsome  with 
his  plump,  well-fed,  and  richly-clad  body ; 
podly  Lazarus  beautiful  and  comely  in  his 
sores. 

4.  The  prematureness  of  his  anticipated 
death  (verse  6).  "My  days  are  swifter 
than  a  weaver's  shuttle  (or,  'come  more 
quickly  to  an  end  than  the  weaving  of  a 
web'),  and  are  spent  without  hope,"  (viz.,  of 
extension  or  relief;  or,  'are  finished  for 
want  of  thread ')  so  Is.  xxxviii.  12.  Job 
anticipated  death  as  the  certain  and  not  dis- 
tant result  of  his  affliction  (ch  ix.  25,  26  ; 
xvii.  11).  Himself,  as  life  was  then,  still 
comparatively  young.  Probably  not  more 
than  seventy, — only  a  third  of  the  age  then 
usually  attained  and  actually  attained  by 
himself  (ch.  xlii.  16).  A  premature 
death,  especially  in  Old  Testament  times, 
viewed  as  a  grievous  calamity  (l^s  vi.  5  ; 
XXX.  9  ;  Is.  xxxviii.  10 — 19.  The  language 
suggestive  in  regard  to 

Time. 

1.  Its  rapid  flight  and  short  duration.  Set 
fcrrth  in  Scripture  under  various  comparisons : 
— a  flower,  a  vapour,  a  dream,  a  watch  of 
the  night,  a  tale  that  has   been  told,  &c 

49 


CHAP.  vn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


Here,  either  a  weaver's  shuttle  passino;  quickly 
to  and  fro,  or  a  web^  speedily  and  perhaps 
suddenly  finished  from  want  of  tliread.  Time 
represented  by  ihe  ancients  with  wings,  as 
not  running  but  Jibing.  Jacob  speaks  of  his 
days  as  few  at  the  age  of  130.  The  longest 
life  only  a  speck  in  comparison  with  eternity. 
A  northern  winter's  day,  when  the  sun  has 
scarcely  risen  before  it  sets  again  The  sun 
of  many  sets  while  it  is  yet  noon.  Job,  like 
most  others,  had  counted  on  a  long  life  (ch. 
xxix.  18).  Now  the  grave  seems  to  open 
its  mouth  for  him  (ch.  xvii.  1).  "  Though 
death  be  before  the  old  man's  face,  it  may 
be  behind  the  young  man's  back  "  \^Seneca.'\ 
Hence  the  vanitg  of  earthly  'pleasures  and 
enjoyments.  Like  Jonah's  gourd,  these  spring 
up  in  a  night,  and  perish  in  a  night.  But 
"  for  a  season,"  and  that  a  very  short  one. 
Earthly  pleasures  are,  according  to  one  who 
deeply  plunged  into  them, — 

"  Like  the  snow-falls  in  the  river, 
A  moment  white,  then  melt  for  ever ; 
Or  like  the  rainbow's  lovely  form, 
Evanishing  amid  the  storm." 

2.  The  value  of  time.  Time  the  short  seed- 
time for  eternity.  Bound  up  with  eternal 
destinies.  Its  value  seldom  realised.  No 
note  taken  of  it  but  as  the  clock  tells  of  its 
departure.  Men  speak  of  killing  time.  To 
destroy  time  is  *'  suicide,  where  more  than 
blood  is  spilt."  Greater  folly  to  throw  away 
hours  than  empires.  The  value  of  time  rea- 
lised on  a  dying  bed.  "  Millions  of  money 
for  an  inch  of  time"  \(^ueen  Elizabeth  on 
her  deathbed].  Time  ceases  at  death,  and 
gives  place  to  eternity.  "  No  clock  strikes 
in  hell,  to  say.  Thank  God,  another  hour  is 
past.  One  gigantic  clock  ther(%  without  a 
dial-pla*e  ;  its  pendulum  eternally  vibrating. 
Ever,  Never  j  Damnation  ever.  Redemption 
never "  \Krummacher\. 

3.  The  danger  of  delay  in  securing  the  souVs 
talvation.  Madness  to  put  off  till  to-morrow 
vrhat  ought  to  be  done  to-day.  "Serious 
things  to-morrow" — cost  both  Caesar  and 
Archias  their  life.  Procrastination  the  death 
of  souls.  Men  "  resolve  and  re-resolve,  and 
die  the  same."  Augustine  was  kept  seven 
years  from  closing  with  Christ  by  the  temp- 
tation, Time  enough  yet.  When  Hannibal 
could  have  taken  Rome,  he  would  not,  and 
when  lie  would,  he  could  not.  "  What  thy 
hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might." 
The  soul's  salvation  the  one  thing  needful. 
Sad  to  be  sowing  our  seed  when  we  should 
be  reaping  our  harvest  \^Brcoks'\.  Caesar 
Borgia  on  his  deathbed  said :  While  I  lived, 
I  provided  for  everything  but  death,  and 
now  death  comes  and  I  am  unprovided  for 
it.  A  promise  made  to  late  repentance,  but 
110  promise  of  late  repentance. 


"  Ala<,  that  men  should  lightly  spend 
In  godless  mirth  or  prayerless  toil  unblest, 
Their  brief  inestimable  day  of  proof, 
Till  the  last  golden  sands  run  out." 

IT.  Job   turns   imploringly   to    God 

(verse  7). 

"  O  remember,"  &c.  Better  in  trouble  h 
cry  to  God  than  to  complain  to  man.  God 
sometimes  appears  to  His  suffering  people  to 
forget  \X\^\\\  and  their  case  (Ps.  xiii.  1;  xliv. 
24;  Is.  xlix.  14).  The  contrary  affirmed  by 
God  for  their  comfort  (Is.  xlix.  15).  Job 
pleads  ft)r  mitigation  of  His  sufferings  on  the 
grotiiid — (1)  OS.  \\\^  frail  and  fleeting  nature 
of  his  earthly  life.  "  My  life  is  wind  " — a 
breath  or  puff  of  air  ;  a  "cloud"  or  smoke  ; 
unsubstantial  and  evanescent  (Ps.  Ixxviii. 
39  ;  (:^)  Its  speedy  termination  (verse  8). 
"  Thine  eyes  are  upon  me,  and  I  am  not." 
Speaks  of  himself  as  already  dead,  or  soon  to 
be, — a  living  corpse.  («)  Life  terminated  by 
a  look  from  ihe  Almighty.  His  glance  our 
death.  So  those  sent,  to  apprehend  Jesus 
fell  backward  to  the  ground  at  his  mere 
look  ;  {U)  Life,  compared  with  God's  eternity ^ 
only  a  moment — the  glance  or  twinkling  of 
an  eye.  (3)  The  impossibility  of  its  recall 
(verse  9,  10).  "  He  that  goeth  down  to  the 
grave  shall  come  up  no  more."  The  emitted 
breath,  the  cloud  or  smoke  disappearing 
from  the  sky,  never  more  to  be  recalled. 
Death,  "the  bourne  from  which  no  traveller 
returns."  Only  one  life  on  earth.  A  le.w 
special  exceptions  to  prove  the  rule.  Men 
die  but  once.  Solemn  responsibility  connected 
with  our  one  life.  No  second  to  correct  the 
errors,  undo  the  mischief,  or  make  up  for  the 
negligence,  of  the  first.  An  egress  from  the 
grave  in  reserve  for  each,  but  no  return  to  a 
mortal  life.  A  resurrection  to  come,  both  of 
the  just  and  the  unjust.  That  resurrection, 
however,  not  in  the  course  of  nature,  but  by 
the  special  command  and  power  of  God 
(John  V.  28  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  16).  Christ  Him- 
self the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  Resur-^ 
rection  committed  to  His  hands  (Johnxi.  25; 
vi.  54).  Resurrection  not  unknown  to  the 
patriarchs,  but  seldom  referred  to  by  Job. 
Enoch's  translation  a  testimony  to  the  early 
ages  of  the  existence  of  the  body  in  an  invi- 
sible state.  His  prophecy  a  distinct  revela- 
tion of  resurrection  (Jude  14,  15).  God's 
relation  to  the  godly  dead  as  their  God,  a 
guarantee  both  of  the  separate  existence  of 
their  spirits  and  the  future  resurrection  of 
their  bodies  (Matt,  xxii  31,  32).  The  doc- 
trine of  the  resurrection,  as  well  as  of  the 
state  after  deat  h,  one  of  gradual  development. 
Job's  age  the  twilight  of  revelation. 

V.  Job's  resolution  to  give  way  to 

complaint.    Occasioned  by  the  considera- 
tion of  his  misery  in  the  world,  and  big 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


CHAP.  ifn. 


anticipated  speedy,  untimely,  and  irrevocable 
departure  out  ol'  it  (verse  11).  "There- 
fore I  will  not  refrain  my  mouth,"  Ac.  Falls 
again  into  his  former  temptation.  His  spirit 
like  a  surging  sea,  quiet  for  a  little,  then 
heaving  again  its  angry  billows.  His  present 
resolution  the  worst  thing  he  could  do. 
Tended  to  a  continually  increasing  strife 
with  God.  Satan  doubtless  now  rejoiced  in 
his  apparent  advantage.  So  far  his  scheme 
likely  to  succeed.  Probably  thought  the 
next  thing  would  be  tliat  Job  would  "curse 
God  to  his  face."  Job  preserved  from  this 
only  by  imparted  and  indwelling  grace. 
Perilous  to  advance  so  near  the  brink  of  the 
precipice.  Dangerous  to  indulge  in  bitter 
language  in  reference  to  our  lot.  Safest 
when  God's  hand  is  on  our  back,  to  keep  our 
hand  on  our  mouth.  David's  resolution  in 
similar  circumstances  much  wiser  than  Job's 
(Ps.  xxxix.  1).  Free  utterance  to  excited 
feelings  only  adds  fuel  to  the  fire.  Grace 
shutting  the  lips  raises  up  a  barrier  to  the 
tempest  of  the  spirit.  Passion  acquires 
strength  by  indulgence  and  free  expression. 
"  Anguish  of  spirit  "  a  very  unsafe  guide  to 
speech.  Only  turbid  streams  likely  to  flow 
from  a  turbid  fountain. 

The  result  of  Job's  resolution,  petulant 
and  unbecoming  expostulation  with  God.  (Verse 
12).  "Am  I  a  sea  (or  a  desolating  inunda- 
tion, as  of  the  Nile),  or  a  whale  (or  sea- 
monster,  as  the  crocodile),  that  Thou  settest 
a  watch  over  me  (to  restrain  me  by  these 
terrible  sufferings  from  doing  injury)  ?" 
Very  erroneous  thoughts  often  suggested  in 
trouble  as  to  God's  motive  in  sending  it. 
We  may  sympathize  with  Job's  sufferings 
without  imitating  his  language.  His  lan- 
guage, however,  indicates — (1)  A  believer 
readily  ascribing  all  in  his  lot  to  God ;  (2)  A 
soul  moving  always  in  the  Divine  presence ; 
(3)  The  frequent  and  familiar  intercourse  of 
a  child  of  God  with  his  Heavenly  Father. 

VI.  Enlarges  farther  on  his  affliction 

(verses  13,  14). 

I.  His     distressing    nights    (verse     13). 

"When  I  say.  My  bed  shall  ease  my  complaint, 
then  thouscarest  me  withdreams  and  territiest 
me  with  visions  "  (images  presented  to  the 
imagination  while  half-sleeping,  half- waking). 
These  probably  a  natural  symptom  of  Job's 
disease.  A  grievous  aggravation  of  the 
affliction.  Niglit,  the  period  of  rest  to  others, 
made  more  distressing  than  the  day.  The 
blessing  of  "tired  Nature's  sweet  restorer, 
balmy  sleep,"  seldom  duly  appreciated  and 
acknowledged.  Our  minds  accessible  to  Satan 
as  well  as  God  and  good  angels  during  sleep. 
Dreams  either  natural  or  su[)ernatur;il ;  as 
sunernatural,  either  diabolical  or  Divine. 
J 00,  in  ignorance,  ascribes  to  God  what 
4—2 


was  properly  due  to  Satan.  Satan  cruelly 
skilful  in  adopting  suitable  means  to  accom- 
plish his  purpose  His  object  to  exhaust 
the  energies  of  Job's  body  and  spirit,  and 
by  representing  God  as  his  enemy,  to  bring 
him  to  despair  and  to  curse  or  renounce  Him. 
For  this,  he  employs  a  filthy  disease  and 
frightful  dreams,  and  tempts  liim  to  believe 
them  both  from  God.  Satan  a  merciless 
tormentor.  Possesses  a  terrible  power  of 
inflicting  pain.  Job's  case  a  picture  of  the 
misery  of  falling  into  Satan's  hands.  Still 
more  fearful  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
living  God  (Heb.  x.  31).  God  able  to  make 
every  organ  of  the  body  and  every  faculty 
of  the  mind  the  seat  of  intolerable  suf- 
fering.— Earnest  desire  for  death  the  effect 
of  these  sufferings  on  the  mind  of  Job 
(verse  15).  "So  that  my  soul  chooseth 
strangling  and  death  rather  than  life" 
{margin,  "  than  my  bones," — all  that  is  left 
of  me).  The  "  soul,"  or  mere  fleshly  nature, 
may  choose  death  as  a  release  from  suffer- 
ing; the  "  spirit  "  or  renewed  nature  savs — 
"  Not  my  will  but  thine  be  done  ;"  "  All  the 
days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I  wait,"  &c. 
(ch.  xiv.  14;).  Grace  the  truest  heroism. 
Brave  in  the  battle-field,  a  man  may  yet  flv 
in  the  battle  of  life.  Suicide  at  best  but 
moral  cowardice.  To  be  only  accounted  for 
by  the  absence  or  the  eclipse  of  faith.  Faith 
in  God  alone  gives  true  courage.  The 
strongest  mind  weak  when  left  to  itself 
under  depressing  thoughts  or  a  disturbed 
brain.  "Do  thyself  no  harm,"  a  timely 
voice  to  harassed  and  despairing  souls. 

2.  The  extremely  reduced  state  of  his  body 
and  the  certainty  of  a  speedy  death  (verse 
16).  "I loathe  it  {i.e.,  my  life;  or,  *I  am 
wasting  away');  I  would  not  (or,  'I  shall 
not')  live  always  {i.e.y  1  shall  soon  die  at 
any  rate) ;  let  me  alone  (leave  me  to  die,  or 
cease  to  harass  me  with  bodily  and  mental 
suffering),  for  my  days  are  vanity  "  [and  will 
soon  come  to  an  end].  Job's  spirit  tossed 
between  two  desires — either  an  immediate 
death  as  a  release  from  his  continued  misery, 
or  a  relief  from  suffering  for  the  few  days 
that  remained  to  him.  The  troubled  and 
agitated  spirit  seldom  long  in  one  stay. 

VII.  Man's  insignificance  urged  by 
Job  as  a  plea  for  deliverance  or  relief 

(verse  17). 

"What  is  man  {Heb.,  'wretched  man,* 
enosh)  that  thou,"  &c.  Same  question  asked 
by  David  from  an  entirely  different  conside- 
ration (Ps.  viii.  4).  The  same  truth  often 
viewed  in  different  aspects  and  with  different 
feelings  by  different  persons,  and  by  the  same 
person  at  different  times.  The  truth,  dark 
to  one  or  at  one  \'\\\\q,  is  bright  to  another  or 
to  the  same  person  at  another  time.     Truth, 

51 


CHAP.  vn. 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY.  JOB. 


like  the  cloud  that  followed  Israel,  presents 
both  a  dark  side  and  a  bright  one.  Happy, 
like  Israel,  to  be  on  the  bright  side.  God's 
great  attention  to  man  produced  in  David 
admiration  and  praise ;  in  Job  displeasure 
and  complaint.  To  the  Psalmist  God  appears 
amiable  as  a  Father  delighting  in  blessing 
His  children;  to  the  Patriarch,  stern  as  a 
judge,  constantly  examining  into  men's 
actions.  Faith's  office  is  to  view  the  truth 
as  it  iSy  apart  from  personal  feeling,  Feeling ^ 
in  Job,  asks  With,  petulance— '^  Why  doth  He 
visit  men  every  morning  ?"  Faith,  in  Jere- 
miah, exclaims  with  thankfulness,  amid  the 
desolations  of  a  sacked  and  burned  city — 
"  His  mercies  are  new  every  morning  "  (Lam. 
iii.  23).  God's  morning  visitation  a  mercy, 
and  should — (I)  lm\)dLvi  comfort ;  (2)  Awaken 
praise.  Opens  our  eyes  to  the  grateful  light 
of  day,  the  beauties  of  nature,  and  the  faces 
of  relatives  and  friends.  Imparts  to  us 
health  of  body,  soundness  of  mind,  comfort 
of  spirit.  Continues  to  us  day  after  day 
food,  raiment,  home,  society  of  friends.  In- 
vites us  every  morning  afresh  to  communion 
with  Himself  as  our  Father  in  Christ. 
Important  and  suggestive  question. 

What  is  Man  2 

At  once  the  least  and  the  greatest  of  God's 
creatures.  Lower  than  the  angels  in  crea- 
ture-position, immensely  higher  in  Redemp- 
tion-privilege. Lives  one  life  on  earth 
consisting  of  a  few  months  or  years ;  a  second 
in  another  sphere,  which  shall  last  for  ever. 
Has  a  body  that  allies  him  to  the  ground  on 
which  he  walks ;  and  a  spirit  that  connects 
him  to  the  God  that  made  him.  A  reed, 
but  a  reed  that  thinks  [Pascal^].  A  worm, 
but  a  worm  capable  of  measuring  the  dis- 
tances of  the  stars  and  of  grasping  the 
universe.  Made  in  the  image  of  his  Creator 
as  to  moral  nature,  intelligei  ce,  immortality, 
and  dominion.  Through  disobedience  and 
rebellion,  reduced  below  the  level  of  the 
brutes.  Mercifully  provided  with  deliverance 
from  his  fallen  condition  through  the  substi- 
tuted obedience  and  death  of  his  incarnate 
Creator. — Man  "magnified"  by  God, 

1.  In  Creation;  his  place  above  all  the 
creatures  around  him,  and  second  only  to 
that  of  the  angels  that  surround  the  Eternal's 
throne. 

2.  In  Providence  ;  the  attention  originally 
paid  to  his  comfort,  and  the  care  continually 
exercised  over  him. 

3.  In  Redemption;  the  highest  possible 
proof  of  Divine  regard  afforded  in  the  life, 
sufferings,  and  death  of  God's  own  Son  for 
his  deliverance  and  happiness. 

4.  In  his  Glorification  ;  united  to  the  Son 
of  God  and  made  like  Him  in  spirit,  soul, 

52 


and  body;  exalted  as  His  spouse  to  sit  with 
Him.  on  His  throne,  and  with  Him  to  judge 
angels. 

5.  In  the  Assumption  of  his  nature  by  the 
Son  of  God.  Christ  the  man,  the  second 
Adam  and  Head  of  ihe  race.  In  Christ 
man's  nature  taken  into  mysterious,  intimate, 
and  indissoluble  union  with  the  Divine. 
Man  exalted  in  Christ  to  the  throne  of  the 
universe. 

VIII.   Conclusion    of    Job's    speech 

(verses  19 — 21).    Contains  — 

1.  A  peevish  prayer  (verse  19)  "  How 
long  wilt  thou  not  depart  {Heb.,  Mook 
away')  from  me?  nor  let  me  alone  that  I 
may  swallow  down  my  spittle''  (even  for  the 
shortest  period)  P  Prayers  in  time  of  trial 
are  sometimes — (1)  Ignorant ;  (2)  Injurious ; 
(3)  Requiring  repentance.  The  flesh  inca- 
pable of  judging  aright  of  God  and  His 
dealings,  God  viewed  by  Job  as  an  adver- 
sary intent  only  on  overthrowing  him.  Yet 
His  removal,  or  the  withdrawing  of  His  eyes 
from  us,  our  certain  ruin.  The  same  spirit 
moved  the  Gadarenes  to  beseech  Christ  to 
depart  out  of  their  eoasts.  Prayer  often 
unanswered  in  compassion  to  the  offerer. 
Grace  needed  to  know  what  to  pray  for 
(Luke  xi.  I).  The  Holy  Spirit's  office  (Rorn 
viii.  26). 

2.  A  partial  confession  (verse  20).  "  I 
have  sinned;  what  shall  I  do  (or,  *Wliat 
have  I  [thereby]  done')  unto  thee?"  A 
confession,  but  neither  frank  nor  free.  Made 
rather  hypothetically, — "  granting  I  have 
sinned,"  or,  "  If  I  have."  Job's  conscience 
not  yet  sufficiently  enlightened  nor  his  soul 
sufficiently  subdued  to  make  the  Publican's 
confession.  The  confession  rather  extorted 
by  the  fact  of  suffering  than  the  conscious- 
ness of  sin.  Job  free  from  life  sins  ;  heart 
sins  not  yet  sufficiently  discovered  to  Idm. 
This  discovery  and  his  consequent  humble 
confession  not  made  till  Jehovah  has  revealed 
Himself  (ch.  xl.  4 ;  xlii.  5,  6).  Compare 
Is.  vi.  5 ;  Luke  v.  8. — In  order  to  be  accept- 
able. 

Confession  of  Sin 

must  be — (1)  Free ;  spontaneous,  uncon- 
strained; not  extortea  by  suffering,  or 
merely  in  order  to  deliverance  from  it,  as  in 
the  case  of  Pharaoh  (Fx.  ix.  27 ;  x.  16) ; 
(2.)  Frank;  open  and  sincere;  without 
guile  or  desire  of  concealment  (Ps.  xxxii. 
2^p;);(3.)  Full;  thorough  and  without  re- 
servation (Josh.  vii.  19—21);  (4.)  Parti- 
cular; not  merely  of  sin  in  general,  or  as 
common  to  the  race ;  "  I  have  sinned  and 
done  this  evil  in  thy  sight"  (Ps.  li.  4;  (5.) 
Serious  and  hear/felt;  with  sense  of  the 
heinousness  and  demerit  of  the  sin  confessed 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CPA.P.    VII. 


(Ps.  li.  8;  Luke  xviii.  13).  In  true  con- 
fession the  heart  is  both  affected  with  the 
sin,  and  engaged  against  it.  Confession  of 
sin  needful  in  tlie  lioliest  saint.  Sin  cleaves 
to  the  believer  as  ivy  to  the  wall.  The 
strongest  believer  not  al)ove  the  actings  oi  sin, 
the  weakest  not  under  \\\(\'power  of  it.  The 
more  we  realize  God's  .9/>o/f/^55/^(?5*,  the  more  we 
discern  our  own  spots.  Sweet  to  confess  sin 
in  sight  of  the  laver  of  a  Saviour's  blood. 
Confession  of  sin  with  the  lips  enhances  the 
preciousness  of  Clirist  in  the  heart.  Concealed 
sin  grows — (1)  In  strength;  (2)  In  guilt ; 
(3)  In  terror  (Ps.  xxxii.  3,  4).  Job's  confes- 
sion, such  as  it  was,  one  rather  of  the  mere 
fact  of  sin.  Acknowledges  no  m/ connected 
with  it,  or  demerit  attached  to  it.  Its  hei- 
nousiiess  and  malignity  as  against  God^  yet 
to  be  discovered.  "  What  liave  I  done  unto 
thee  P "  The  idea :  What  wrong  have  I 
done  thee  by  my  sin,  that  thou  shouldst 
thus  treat  me  as  thine  enemy  ?  Sin  to  be 
viewed  as  an  injury,  not  merely  to  our 
neighbour  or  ourselves,  but  more  especially 
against  God, 

Sin 

Is  injury  done  to  God,  as — 

(I.)  It  robs  Him  of  the  honour  due  to  Him 
(Mai.  i.  6).  Man's  sin  may  not  take  from 
God's  happiness,  but  it  takes  from  God's 
honour.  Every  sin  strikes  as  truly  at  God's 
honour  as  at  our  peace.  (2.)  It  tramples 
underfoot  His  authority.  Says  with  Pharaoh : 
"  Who  is  the  Lord  that  I  should  obey  His 
voice?"  (Ex.  v.  2).  (3.)  It  breaks  His  laws. 
(4.)  It  disturbs  the  harmony  and  happiness 
of  His  universe.  (5.)  It  introduces  disorder 
into  His  government,  and,  if  not  arrested  and 
punished,  would  bring  it  to  an  end.  (6.)  It 
interrupts  and  would  terminate  His  enjoyment 
of  His  own  works  (Gen.  i.  31 ;  Ps.  civ.  24). 
(7.)  It  obliterates  His  image  in  His  intelligent 
creatures,  and  substitutes  that  of  His  adver- 
sary.  Treasonably  effaces  His  image  and 
superscription  from  His  own  coin. 

Job,  in  his  confession,  petulantly  addresses 
God  as  the  watcher  and  observer  of  His 
creatures — "Oh,  thou  preserver  of  men." 
Same  word  denotes  "  guardian  "  and  "  ob- 
server" (chap,  xxvii.  18).  Latter  sense  here 
favoured  by  the  context  (so  chap.  xiv.  16). 
God  viewed  as  if  carefully  marking  men's 
faults  in  order  to  punish  them.  Only  per- 
verted and  dishonouring  views  of  God  taken 
by  the  flesh,  especially  under  trouble.  Satan's 
aim  to  foster  such  views  in  Job  in  order  to 
gain  his  object.  Jobs  complaint  in  keeping 
with  this  view.  *'  Why  hast  Thou  set  me  as 
a  mark  against  Thee  ?"  (to  shoot  at,  or  make 
an  attack  upon).  The  supposed  result  of 
God's  close  inspection  of  his  conduct,  and 
as   in    revenge    for    the   injury  done    to 


him.  Already  viewed  himself  as  shot  at 
by  the  Almighty's  arrows  (chapter  vi  4). 
iSpeaks  according  to  sense  and  appearance. 
God's  choicest  saints  often  appear  to  be  the 
butt  of  his  sharpest  arrows. — The  effect  and 
meaning  of  these  arrows  ;  "  So  that  I  am  a 
burden  to  myself"  or,  **  and  I  am  become 
a  burden  to  thee'*  (both  readings  found, 
the  latter  probably  the  true  one).  The 
sinner,  a  burden  to  God  through  his  sin, 
and  a  burden  to  himself  through  his  suffer- 
ing. When  sin  makes  a  man  a  burden  to 
God,  he  is  likely  to  become  a  burden  to  him> 
self.  A  sinner  left  to  himself  the  greatest 
burden  that  can  be  laid  upon  him.  Suffer- 
ing often  a  heavy  burden ;  sin  a  thousand 
times  more  so.  "  I  had  rather  go  into  hell 
without  sin,  than  into  heaven  with  it" 
[^Luther'].  Cain  said,  my  punishment  is  greater 
than  I  can  bear :  the  same  word  generally 
rendered  "  iniquity,"  as  in  verse  20.  Judas 
thought  to  throw  off  the  burden  by  hanging 
himself,  but  only  made  it  faster  and 
heavier.  Sin  makes  men  a  burden  to  the 
Creator  as  well  as  to  themselves.  God  wearied 
with  men's  iniquities  (Is.  xliiL  24). 
Pressed  under  them  as  a  cart  full  of  sheaves 
(Am.  ii.  13).  That  Job  was  a  burden  to 
himself  wa,s  his  own  feeling ;  that  he  was  a 
burden  to  God,  was  Satan's  suggestion. 

3.  A  passionate  question  and  a  plaintive 
appeal  (verse  2V|.  "And  why  dost  thou 
not  pardon  {Heb.  *  take  away '  or  remit,  as 
a  debt)  my  transgression,  and  take  away 
{Heb.  '  cause  to  pass  away '  as  a  cloud)  mine 
iniquity?"  "Transgression  "  and  "iniquity** 
embrace  all  kinds  of  sin,  those  of  commission 
and  omission,  presumption  and  ignorance, 
life  and  heart.  The  question  not  tliat  of  a 
humble  penitent  asking  forgiveness.  Job  yet 
to  be  made  a  poor  sinner.  Pardon  of  sin  a 
favour,  not  an  obligation,  or  matter  of  course. 

Pardon  of  Sin. 

Often,  as  here,  desired  rather  as  the  re- 
moval of  suffering  than  of  guilt.  Only  not 
bestowed,  because  the  sinner  is  not  prepared  to 
receive  it.  Pride,  impenitence,  and  unbelief 
shut  out  forgiveness  as  the  window -shutters 
exclude  the  sun.  Pardon  only  vouchsafed-— 
(1)  When  sin  is  realised  and  sincerely  con- 
fessed (1  John  i.  9;  Ps.  xxxii.  5  ;  Ps.  xxviii. 
13) ;  (2)  When  its  demerit  and  hell-deserv- 
ingness  is  acknowledged  (Ps.  li.  4,  11) ;  (3) 
When  deliverance  is  desired  from  its  prac- 
tice and  power  as  well  as  from  its  punish- 
ment (Ps.  li.  10);  (4)  When  pardon  is 
humbly  sought  as  a  matter  of  pure  mercy 
(Ps.  li.  1 ;  Luke  xviii.  13) ;  (5)  When  it  is 
accepted  as  only  bestowed  in  virtue  of  the 
suffering  and  death  of  Grod's  Son  as  the  sinner's 

68 


CMlp  .Vlll. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


Substitute  (Heb.  ix.  15,  22,  28 ;  1  John  i. 
7,  9;  ii.  1,  2;   Horn.  iii.  24-26). 

The  reason  of  Jof/s  passionate  question  the 
prospect  of  a  speedy  death.  "  For  now  shall 
1  sleep  in  the  dust."  Idea:  I  shall  soon 
die,  and  Thou  must  either  pardon  and  heal 
me  speedily  or  not  at  all.  Death  to  the 
believer  a  sleej).  The  thought  of  it  not  un- 
pleasant to  Job.  A  blessed  awaking  the 
hope  of  the  Church  (Ps.  xvii.  15  ;  Is.  xxvi. 
19 ;  Dan.  xii.  2  ;  I  Thess.  iv.  14—]  6  .  Job's 
hope  (ch.  xiv.  12— 15  j  xix.  25—27).  He 
can  calmly  lay  his  head  in  the  dust,  whose 
heart  is  already  in  heaven. — Job  believes  in  a 
time  of  Divine  relenting  towards  him.  "  Thou 


shalt  seek  me  in  the  morning  (/ .  e.,  diligently), 
but  I  shall  not  be" — (thy  desire  to  do  me 
good  will  be  too  late).  The  picture  that  of 
a  father  relenting  towards  a  suffering  child. 
Exhibited  also  in  Jer.  xxxi.  18 — 20;  Is.  liv. 
6  —  10.  God's  love  to  His  people  unchanging 
and  everlasting  (Jer.  xxxi.  3  ;  John  xiii.  1). 
His  de/t lings  with  them  may  change,  but  not 
his  delight  in.  them.  The  believer,  however 
tried,  still  unwilling  to  quit  his  hold  of  God's 
fatherly  relationship.  Faith  says,  "  Though 
His  hand  be  against  me,  His  heart  is  still 
towards  me."  Job's  comfort  too  at  times 
(ch.  xiii.  16,  16}  xiv.  16;  xix.  25—27; 
xxiii.  10). 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


BILDAUS  FIRST  SPEECH, 


Bildad  less  courteous  and  considerate  of 
Job's  feelings  than  even  Eliphaz.  Com- 
mences with  an  unfeeling  reflection  on  his 
speech.  Pursues  the  same  line  of  argument 
and  address  as  his  predecessor — (1)  God  is 
righteous — punishing  the  bad,  and  rewarding 
those  who  seek  and  serve  Hint ;  (2)  Job  ex- 
horted to  prove  the  latter  by  sincere  repen- 
tance and  prayer ;  (3)  The  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  short-lived,  and  sure  to  end  in  ruin : 
the  end  of  the  righteous  certain  joy  and 
triumph. 

I.  Bildad's  Introduction  (verse  2). 

A  harsh  censure  on  Job's  speech — (1)  For 
its  length.  ''How  long  wilt  thou  speak," 
&c.  Had  listened  to  Job  with  impatience. 
Due  to  every  man  to  hear  him  patiently, 
especially  a  man  in  affliction ;  (2)  For  its 
matter.  "How  long  wilt  thou  speak  these 
things?''  Uttered  with  contempt — these 
worthless  and  wicked  sentiments  ;  (3)  For  its 
vehemence.  "And  the  words  of  thy  mouth 
be  like  a  strong  wind" — recklessly  bearing 
down  all  before  thee,  human  and  Divine. 
Intensely  unfeeling  thus  to  attack  the  words 
of  a  man  in  such  deep  distress.  Faultiness 
in  another's  speech  no  excuse  for  unfeeling- 
ness  in  our  own.  Job  s  speech  not  more 
destitute  of  sobriety  than  Bildad's  is  of  sym- 
pathy. Difficult  even  under  the  Gospel  to 
have  our  "speech  always  with  grace,  seasoned 
with  salt."  Christians  so  to  speak  as  to 
"minister  grace  to  the  hearer,"  and  bring 
glory  to  God.  Bildad's  censure  not  without 
use  to  preachers.  Suggests  car6  as  to — (1) 
The  length ;  (2)  The  matter ;  (3)  The  manner 
of  tlieir  discourses.  Preachers  to  avoid — (1) 
Prolixity  ;  (2)  Unsound  or  unprofitable 
matter;  (3)  A  vehement  and  boisterous 
delivery. 
54 


II.  Bildad  strongly  asserts  the  Divine 

rigLteousness  (verse  3). 

"  Doth  God  pervert  judgment  P  or  doth 
the  Almighty  pervert  justice?"  This 
apparently  implied  in  Job's  complaints.  God 
essentially  righteous.  Incapable  of  injustice 
towards  His  creatures.  As  "  the  Almighty," 
He  is  beyond  any  temptation  to  act  unjustly. 
The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  cannot  but  do 
right  (Gen.  xviii.  25).  Severe  complaints 
like  Job's,  a  reflection  on  God*s  justice. 
God  is  righteous 

1.  In  punishing  sin.  The  reference  in 
Bildad's  mind  both  to  Job's  affliction  and  his 
children's  death.  Cruelly  treats  the  latter 
as  a  probable,  if  not  ceriain,  instance  of 
Divine  justice  (verse  4). — "If  (or,  *since') 
thy  children  have  sinned  against  Him,  and 
He  have  cast  them  away  for  [margin,  *in  the 
hand  of)  their  transgression,"  making  their 
sin  in  immoderate  feasting  to  be  its  own 
punishment,  &c.  An  erroneous  as  well  as 
unfeeling  application  of  the  general  truth, 
(1)  Job's  children  had  sinned,  but  not  above 
all  men  that  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Uz ;  (2) 
Their  sin  was  not  the  occasion  of  their 
death.  No  injustice  on  God's  part,  however, 
either  to  Job  or  his  children,  in  allowing  the 
calamity.  Sufficient  siu  in  each  to  merit 
more  than  any  earthly  affliction  (Lam.  iii.  39). 
Death,  in  the  case  of  believers'  children, 
their  removal  to  a  better  state.  To  the 
parents,  overruled  for  their  elevation  to  a 
higher  spiritual  life.  Bildad's  error  in  re- 
garding earth  as  the  sphere  of  God's  retribu- 
tive justice.  General  tendency  to  view 
calamity  as  the  rigliteous  punishment  of 
sinful  conduct.  The  tower  in  Siloam.  The 
error  reproved  by  Jesus  (Luke  xiii.  1 — 5). 
The  unjust  reserved  to  the  day  of  judgment 
to  be  punished  (2  Peter  iL  9).    The  present 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    Vlll 


life  rather  the  time  of  forbearance  and 
mercy  (2  Peter  iii.  9,  15).  Many  apparent 
anomalies  in  the  Divine  procedure.  Examples: 
Abel's  murder,  and  Cain's  long  and  pros- 
perous life.  A  future  state  necessary  to 
clear  up  these  anomalies,  and  fully  display 
the  righteousness  of  God. 

2.  In  rewarding  those  who  seek  and  serve 
Him  (verse  5). — **  If  thou "  (emphatic, 
thou  who  art  still  spared)  "vvouldst  seek 
unto  God  betimes  (repair  to  Him  earnestly 
and  at  once),  and  make,  &c.,  if  thou  wert 
pure  [in  thy  heart  and  motive]  and  upright 
fin  thy  profession  and  practice  while  so 
doing] ;  surely  now  [even  in  thy  extreme 
misery]  He  would  awake  for  thee"  (and 
come  quickly  to  thy  help).  The  error  and 
sting  in  all  this,  the  supposition  that  Job 
had  been  a  wicked  man  and  a  hypocrite. 
The  sentiment  in  itself  true  and  profitable. 

(1)  God  the  only  help  and  refuge  in  trouble 
(Ps.  xlvi.  1.)  (2)  The  duty  and  interest  of 
all  in  trouble  to  betake  themselves  to  Him. 
(3) This  to  be  attended  to  "betimes,"  at  once, 
and  with  all  earnestness.  (4)  Supplication 
to  be  made  to  llim  for  pardon,  deliverance, 
and  grace  (Lam.  iii.  41).  (5)  This  to  be  done 
in  sincerity  and  uprightness,  with  a  renounc- 
ing of  all  sin  (Ps.  Ixvi  .18).  (6)  The  result  a 
certain  and  speedy  interposition  in  our  behalf. 

A  twofold  promise  held  out :  1.  A  peace 
ful  and  prosperous  habitation;  2.  A  large 
increase  in  worldly  possessions  (verse  7). 
*'  He  would  make  the  habitation  of  thy  righte- 
ousness prosperous,"  (or,  "  would  restore  thy 
then  righteous  habitation,  and  endow  it  with 
perfect  felicity").  Temporal  blessing  pro- 
mised as  the  expression  of  the  Divine  favour. 
An  insinuation  that  Job's  dwelling  had  not 
formerly  been  a  righteous  one.  Two  great 
mercies  indicated  m  this  promise.  (1)  A 
pious  home ;  a  home  where — (i.)  God  is  daily 
and  duly  acknowledged  and  worshipped; 
(ii.)  The  members  of  the  family  live  in  love 
towards  each  other;  (iii.)  All  the  duties  of 
morality  and  religion  are  carefully  attended 
to.  Such  a  dwelling  contrasted  with  the 
"tents  of  wickedness"    (Ps.    Ixxxiv.    10). 

(2)  A  peaceful  and  prosperous  home  ;  where — 
'i.)  The  inmates  are  at  peace  with  God  and 
with  one  another ;  (ii.)  God  prospers  their 
honest  endeavours  to  obtain  a  competent 
livelihood;  (iii.)  They  are  preserved  from 
domestic  troubles;  (iv.)  All  the  inmates  are 
the  pardoned  and  accepted  children  of  God. 
A  pious  home  usually  a  peaceful  and  pros- 
perous one.  There  God  commands  liis 
blessing  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  3).  The  ark  brought 
a  blessing  with  it  into  Obededom's  house 
(2  Sam.  vi.  10,  11).  The  voice  of  rejoicing 
and  salvation  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  righte- 
ous (Ps.  cxviii.  15).  A  peaceful  habitation 
a  new  covenant   blessing   (Is.  xxxii.  18). 


The  dove  of  Divine  peace  hovers  over  the 
altar  of  domestic  worship. 

III.  Bildad  refers  Job  to  the  Fathers 
for  instruction  (verse  8). 

"  Enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  former  age, 
and  prepare  thyself  to  the  search  of  their 
fathers," — to  the  examination  of  the  records 
of  those  still  further  distant,  as  Noah,  Shem, 
&c.  The  reason  given :  "  For  we  (the 
present  generation  as  compared  with  the 
past,  or  viewed  as  single  individuals)  are  but 
of  yesterday  and  know  nothing"  ( — have 
comparatively  little  knowledge  and  expe- 
rience of  God's  dealings  with  men);  "because 
our  days  upon  earth  (as  mere  individuals,  or 
as  compared  with  those  of  our  ancestors),  are 
a  shadow.  Shall  they  not  teach  thee  and 
tell  thee  [how  God  acts  towards  men  in  this 
world],  and  utter  words  out  of  their  heart," 
— well-pondered  sayings  as  the  result  of  their 
careful  observation  and  reflection?  Know- 
ledge in  the  earlier  period  of  the  world 
rather  the  results  of  observation.  These 
embodied  in  poetical  and  proverbial  sayings. 
Such  sayings  existed  either  as  written 
records  or  as  traditional  poetry.  Especially 
valued  by  the  Arabs,  and  still  esteemed  by 
them  as  the  strongest  testimonies.  Mostly, 
however,  the  productions  only  of  human 
wisdom,  and  to  be  distinguished  from  Divine 
revelation.  Amongst  them  were  the  utter- 
ances of  inspired  men,  as  that  of  Enoch 
(Jude  14.). 

Tradition. 

Such  traditions  to  be  received  with  de- 
ference and  respect,  but  not  as  of  binding 
authority'.  Their  authority  that  of  the  argu- 
ments which  support  them.  Men  always 
fallible,  exce[)t  as  inspired  by  God  to  deliver 
truth.  The  fathers  of  the  race  and  the 
fathers  of  the  Church  in  the  same  category. 
Their  wisdom  and  experience  neither  to  be 
disregarded  nor  implicitly  received.  In- 
creased light  obtained  with  the  advance  of 
ages  and  the  increase  of  experience.  The 
wisdom  and  experience  of  each  generation 
to  be  valued  jss  a  contribution  to  that  of  its 
successors.  C>pinion  in  good  men  is  but 
knowledge  in  the  making  [^Milton].  It  is 
only  the  weak  who,  at  each  epoch,  believe 
mankind  to  have  arrived  at  the  culminating 
point  of  their  progressive  march  \_Humboldt\. 
The  famous  test  of  ecclesiastical  tradition  a 
safe  one,  if  it  could  be  found, — what  has 
been  taught  by  ally  taught  always^  and  taught 
everywhere.  The  longevity  of  the  earlier 
ages  favourable  for  wider  observation.  In 
the  time  of  Job,  human  life  reduced  to  about 
200  years.  Noah  lived  to  be  950 ;  Arphaxad, 
his  grandson,  only  438;  Peleg,  the  great - 


CHJlP.  viil 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


grandson  of  Arpbaxad,  239 ;  Serug,  Peleg's 

frandson,  probably  about  the  time  of  Job, 
30  ;  Terah,  Serug's  grandson  and  the  father 
of  Abraham,  205.  The  change  apparent  and 
striking  to  those  living  at  the  time.  Hence 
Bildad's  acknowledgment — 

Hnman  Life  a  Shadow. 

Time  measured  at  that  time  by  the  shadow 
projected  by  the  index  of  a  dial,  a  spear 
stuck  in  the  ground,  &c.  Man's  life  but  a 
solar  day, — as  the  shadow  fleeting  along  the 
dial-plate.  Life  mercifully  reduced  in  con- 
sequence of  sin.  A  long,  vigorous  life-time 
more  favourable  to  the  development  of  human 
depravity.  "  The  heart  never  grows  better 
by  age  :  I  fear,  worse, —  always  harder  *' 
[Lord  Chesterfield^  Great  longevity  only 
gives  occasion  to  the  godlj^  for  David's 
lament  (Ps.  cxx.  5,  6).  The  present  extent 
of  human  life  long  enough  for  a  child  of  God 
to  be  kept  from  home  (2  Cor.  v.  G,  8). 
Life,  as  a  **  shadoWy"  calls  for — (1)  Diligence 
in  the  improvement  of  it.  Momentous  issues 
hang  on  the  fleeting  shadow.  Eternal  inte- 
rests demand  despatch.  (2)  A  loose  hold  of 
things  of  time.  Like  life  itself,  '*  all  here  is 
shadow,  all  beyond  is  substance."  Foolish 
to  set  the  heart  on  a  shadow.  "  He  builds 
too  low  who  builds  beneath  the  skies." 
(3)  A  proper  estimate  to  be  made  of  the 
troubles  and  joys^  the  possessions  and  pursuits, 
of  the  present  life.  (4)  Earnestness  in  securing 
a  solid  and  lasting  happiness  beyond  the 
grave, 

IT.   Quotation    from    the    ancients 

(verses  11— J  9).    Exhibits: 

1.  The  temporary  prosperity  of  the  ungodly. 
Compared — (1)  To  the  paper-reed  qI  Egypt, 
and  the  flag  of  the  marsh  or  grass  of  the 
meadow   (verse    11).      "Can  the  rush  (or 

*  papyrus')  grow  up  without  mire?  Can 
the  flag  (*  marsh- plant/  or  *  grass  of  the 
meadow,' — same   word    wrongly   translated 

*  meadow  *  in  Gen.  xli.  2.)  grow  without 
♦vaterP"  The  papyrus  of  the  Nile  formerly 
used  in  the  manufacture  of  garments,  shoes, 
baskets,  boats,  and  paper,  whence  our  Eng- 
lish word.  The  papyrus  probably  employed 
by  the  Jews  of  Alexandria  for  writing  on 
while  translating  the  Old  Testament  into 
Greek,  having  used  this  very  word  in  the 
place  of  our  "  rush."  Now  only  found  in 
marshes  of  the  White  Nile  in  Nubia,  and  in 
one  or  two  spots  in  Palestine.  Such  plants 
capable  of  receiving  a  large  supply  of  water 
which  they  require  for  their  nourishment. 
Grow  tall  and  luxuriant  while  the  water  is 
supplied  ;  but  speedily  die  when  that  supply 
is  withdrawn.  Picture  of  worldly  men  who 
have  no  living  principle  of  enduring  pros- 

56 


perity  within  themselves,  cither  in  tiie  love 
of  God  in  them,  or  the  blessing  of  God  on 
them.  Their  prosperity  only  from  favoarable 
circumstances,  which  may  at  any  time  come 
to  an  end.  Contrast  Haman  with  Joseph, 
both  attaining  to  the  highest  prosperity. 
(2)  To  a  spider's  web,  constructed  with  the 
greatest  care,  and  expected  to  prove  a  lasting 
support  to  its  possessor,  but  which  the 
slightest  accident  may  disturb  and  destroy 
(verse  14).  "  Whose  trust  (his  riches,  &c., 
in  which  he  trusts)  shall  be  a  spider's  web  " 
— as  unsubstantial  and  as  certain  speedily  to 
perish.  "  The  spider's  most  attenuated  thread 
is  cord,  is  cable,"  compared  to  such  pros- 
perity and  trust.  (3)  To  a  luxuriant  garden- 
tree,  growing  near  a  fountain  and  striking  its 
numerous  roots  into  the  rocky  bed  on  which 
it  stands,  open  to  the  sun,  and  with  every 
advantage  of  soil  and  situation  (verse  16, 
17).  "He  is  green  (or  moist)  before  the 
sun  (enjoying  the  warm  and  genial  influence 
of  its  rays),  and  his  branch  shooteth  forth  in 
his  garden  :  his  roots  are  wrapped  about  the 
heap  (or  fountain),  and  seeth  the  place  of 
stones  "  (enjoys  the  benefit  of  rocky  strata 
for  its  support).  A  still  more  striking  pic- 
ture of  the  prosperous  ungodly  than  the  tall 
and  luxuriant  marsh-plant.  Compare  Ps. 
xxxvii.  35. 

2.  The  certain  and  speedy  termination  of 
that  prosperity .  (1)  The  papyrus  or  marsh- 
plant  suddenly  withers  from  want  of  the  re- 
quired supply  of  water  (versel2).  "Whilst  it 
is  yet  in  its  greenness  (promising  longcontinu- 
ance),  and  not  cut  down  ( — without  any  hand 
applied  to  pluck  or  cut  it  down),  it  withereth 
before  any  other  herb"  (suddenly  decays 
without  giving  notice  of  the  approaching 
change,  while  other  plants  less  dependent 
on  a  large  supply  of  moisture  continue  to 
live).  Soon  ripe,  soon  rotten.  The  pros- 
perity of  the  ungodly  a  Jonah's  gourd.  (2) 
The  spider" s  web,  on  which  he  depends  for  his 
support,  speedily  perishes  by  accident  or  the 
broom  (verse  15).  "He  (the  spider,  or  the  un- 
godly whom  he  represents)  shall  lean  on 
his  house  (on  his  web,  or  the  riches,  family, 
&c.,  of  the  worldly  figured  by  it),  but  it 
shall  not  stand ;  he  shall  hold  it  fast  (or,  lay 
hold  of  it — for  its  preservation,  or  rather 
for  his  own  support),  but  it  shall  not  endure." 
"Time  destroys  the  well-built  house  as  well 
as  the  spider's  web  "  \Arab  Proverb\  The 
prosperity  and  bliss  of  the  worldly  man 
perishes  like  that  flimsy  web.  It  is  well  if, 
like  that  web  also,  it  does  not  bury  its 
possessor  in  its  ruins.  (3)  The  luxuriant 
tree,  spreading  abroad  its  roots  and  branches, 
is  suddenly  struck  by  lightning  or  whirl- 
wind, and  at  once  becomes  a  leafless  skeleton, 
or  is  laid  prostrate  on  its  native  soil  (verse 
18).    "  If  he  destroy  him  (or,  *  if  he  [or  it] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


OHAP.  Tin. 


be  destroyed  * — Heb.  *  swallowed  up ')  from 
his  place,  then  it  shall  deny  him,  saying:  I 
have  not  seen  thee"— tlie  place  where  it 
stood  is  forgotten.  The  application  given 
by  the  Psalmist:  "He  (the  wicked)  passed 
away,  and  lo,  he  was  not ;  yea,  I  sought 
him,  hut  he  could  not  be  found'*  (Ps.  xxxvii. 
36).  History  full  of  such  iustances  Haman, 
instead  of  parading  on  the  monarch's  horse, 
is  left  hanging  on  a  felon's  gallows.  When 
the  Messenians  saw  the  renowned  Philo- 
poemon  stripped  and  dragged  along  with  his 
hands  ignommiously  bound  behind  his  back, 
*'  they  wept,  and  contemned  all  human 
greatness  as  a  faithless  support,  as  vanity 
and  noihing "  [Plutarch'].  The  Emperor 
Vitellius  was  driven  through  the  streets  of 
Rome  naked,  and  then  thrown  into  the 
Tiber. 

"  0  mighty  Caesar !  dost  thou  lie  so  low  I 
Are  all  thy  conquests,  glories,   triumphs, 

spoils, 
Shrunk  to  this  little  measure  ?  ** 

3.  The  application,  (verse  13).  "So  are 
the  paths  of  all  that  forget  God;  and  the 
hypocrite's  hope  shall  perisk." 

Forgetfiilness  of  God. 

Those  "who  forget  God"  placed  in  the 
same  class  with  the  "  hypocrite,"  or  rather 
the  "profane,"  or  "wicked."  Enough  to 
characterize  a  man  as  wicked,  that  he  "  for- 
gets God"  (So  Ps.  ix.  17;  1.  22).  To 
forget  God  is — (1)  Not  to  think  of  Him  j 
(2)  Not  to  thank  Him;  (3)  Not  to  serve 
and  obey  Him.  It  is  to  forget — (1)  His 
presence;  (2)  His  Providence;  (3)  His  pre- 
cepts. Eorgetfulness  of  another  implies — 
(1)  Want  of  love ;  (2)  Want  of  respect. 
Men  feel  wounded  on  being  forgotten  by 
those  whom  they  love,  and  on  wnose  love 
they  have  a  claim.     Observe — 

1.  Forgetfulness  of  God  is  the  root  and 
essence  of  all  sin.  It  is  to  ignore,  and,  as  far 
as  we  are  able,  to  annihilate,  Him  from  His 
own  universe.  It  is  to  treat  Him  as  though 
there  were  no  such  Being.  The  fool  hath 
said  in  his  heart,  "No  God"  (Ps.xiv.l).  To 
"  remember"  God  equivalent  to  loving  and 
serving  Him  (Secies,  xii.  1 ;  Is.  Ixiv.  5). 

2.  To  forget  God  is  to  forget  Him  who  pos- 
sesses all  claims  to  our  remembrance  ; — (1) 
From  what  He  is  in  Himself;  (2)  I'rom 
what  He  is  and  iias  been  tu  us.  God  is — (1) 
The  Being  who  is  the  Source  and  Centre  of 
all  possible  excellence  and  loveliness  j  (2) 
Our  Creator  and  Eather ;  (3)  Our  Preserver 
from  moment  to  moment ;  (4)  Our  Provider ; 
(5)  Our  Protector;  (6)  Our  Deliverer  from 
trouble  and  danger;  (7)  Our  Benefactor  and 
bebt  Eriend;   (8)  In  Cliiist  oui*  Redeemer 


and  Saviour  from  sin  and  all  its  direful  con- 
sequences. 

3.  In  forgetting  God  we  give  our  thoughts 
and  hearts  to  the  worlds  which  has  no  attrac- 
tion but  what  it  derives  from  Him,  and  which 
can  neither  satisfy  nor  save  us.  To  forget 
God,  therefore,  is  both  ingratitude,  robbery, 
and  idolatry.  It  is  to  rob  Him  of  His  honour 
as  well  as  ourselves  of  peace. 

4.  To  remember  God  is  to  elevate.,  ennoble^ 
and  purify  ourselves. 

Y.  Conclusion     of    Bildad's    Speech 

(verse  20 — 22).  Perhaps  another  of  the 
sayings  of  the  ancients.  Same  general  sub- 
ject— God's  dealings  with  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked.  Intended,  like  parts  of  the 
speech  of  Eliphaz,  either  for  consolation  or 
conviction,  or  perhaps  both.     Contains— 

1.  Comfort  for  the  godly  under  trial  (verse 
20).  "Behold,  God  will  not  cast  away  a 
perfect  man  "  (see  chap.  i.  1).  Hence,  com- 
fort for  Job,  if  such.  This,  however,  still  to 
be  proved.  A  righteous  man  may  be  cast 
down,  but  not  cast  away  (Ps.  xciv.  14 ;  2  Cor. 
iv.  9).  Hence  the  difficulty  to  Job's  friends 
in  judging  of  his  character.  For  the  present, 
to  all  appearance,  he  was  cast  away.  Him- 
self, his  family,  and  his  fortunes,  apparently 
a  total  wreck.  The  question  therefore 
natural — Has  Job  been  what  he  appeared  P 
Or  has  he  at  length  in  his  prosperity  turned 
his  back  upon  God?_  The  Divine  rule — "  If 
thou  forsake  Him,  He  will  cast  thee  off  for 
ever"  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  Job  himself 
conscious  this  was  not  his  case :  but  this 
uncertain  to  the  others.  A  truly  good  man 
proved  to  be  such  by  continuing  good.  Care 
to  be  taken  not  only  to  begin,  but  to  perse- 
vere in  well-doing.  Not  to  prove  a  castaway, 
Paul  kept  his  body  under  (I  Cor.  ix.  27). 
(verse  21).  "Till  (or,  'while' — connecting 
with  verse  22)  he  shall  fill  thy  mouth  with 
laughing,  and  thy  lips  with  rejoicing " 
{margin^  "  shouting  for  joy.")  "  Till,"  &c., 
implies  continuance  in  well  doing  and  well- 
suffering.  In  due  time  we  reap,  if  we  faint 
not.  Sowing  in  tears,  we  reap  in  joy.  The 
"  shouting "  of  victory  crowns  the  well- 
fought  buttle.  That  "shouting"  one— (1) 
of  joy.  "  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  re- 
turn, and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and 
everlasting  joy  on  their  heads  "  (Isa.  xxxv. 
10).  (2)  Oi praise.  "  Salvation  to  our  God 
that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the 
Lamb  "  (Rev.  vii.  10).  "  Not  unto  us,  0 
Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  to  thy  name,  give 
glory"  (Ps.  cxv.  1). 

2.  Warning  to  the  ungodly  (verse  20). 
"Neither  wiU  he  help  the  evil-doers." — 
Margin,  "  take  the  ungodly  by  the  hand,"  or, 
"  take  hold  of  their  liana," — i.e.,  with  the 
view  of  helpmg   and  countenancing    them. 

67 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  t  JOB. 


An  nnkind  cut  for  poor  Job,  who  seemed  far 
enough  from  Divine  help.  So  little  can  man 
know  either  love  or  hatred  from  that  which 
s  before  him  (Eccles.  ix.  1).  Now  men  see 
not  the  bright  light  which  is  in  the  clouds 
(ch.  xxxvii.  21).  ".Tudgenot  the  Lord  by 
feeble  sense."  A  solemn  truth  in  the  words 
of  Bildad.  The  help  which  the  ungodly  re- 
ceive is  not  God's  help.  Divine  help  the 
privilege  of  the  godly  (Ps.  Ixiii.  7 ;  Acts  xxvi. 
22).  To  enjoy  GoiTs  help  we  must  employ 
ourselves  in  God's  service  (verse  22). — "They 
that  hate  thee  shall  be  clothed  with  shame 
(as  Ps.  XXXV.  26;  cix.  29 ;  cxxxii.  18).  The 
ungodly,  however  prosperous  for  a  time,  con- 
demned to  shame.    Shame  the  natural  fruit 


of  sin  (Rom.  vi.  21).  Shame  and  contempt 
the  characteristic  and  doom  of  the  risen  un- 
godly (Dan.  xii.  2).  "  Shame  "  experienced 
— (1)  That  they  madly  threw  away  their 
souls  for  the  pleasures  of  sin;  (2)  That 
those  whom  they  hated  and  despised  they 
now  see  crowned  with  joy  and  victory  ;  (3) 
That  they  so  basely  fought  against  the  God 
that  made  them. — "And  the  dwelling-place 
{Ueb.  *tent,*  as  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  10)  of  the  wicked 
shall  come  to  nought," — as  a  tent  when 
struck  leaves  no  trace  of  it  behind.  The 
"tent"  of  the  ungodly  may  be  a  rich  pavi- 
lion, but  its  doom  is  written.  Sin  brings 
families  as  well  as  individuals  to  certain  rum. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 
JOB'S  REPLY  TO  BILDAD, 


Strongly  affirms  tlie  truth  of  Bildad's 
speech  as  to  God's  justice  (verse  1).  De- 
clares the  impossibility  of  fallen  man  estab- 
lishing his  righteousness  with  God.  The 
same  already  acknowledged  in  reference  to 
himself  (ch.  vii.  20, 21).  Only  maintains,  as 
before,  his  freedom  from  such  sins  as  to 
make  him  specially  obnoxious  to  God's  judg- 
ments. Enlarges  on  the  majesty,  power  and 
sovereignty  of  God,  as  exhibited  in  Eis  works 
of  creation  and  providence.  Again  complains 
of  his  severe  and  unmerited  sufferings,  and 
his  inability  to  plead  his  own  cause  with 

L  Acknowledgement  of  man's  sinful- 
ness and  guilt  in  the  sight  of  Ood  (verse 
2).  "  But  (or,  *  and ')  how  should  a  man  (a 
fallen,  mortal  man,  *enosh')  be  just  with 
GodP  if  he  will  contend  with  him,  he  cannot 
answer  him  one  of  a  thousand"  [of  the 
charges  to  be  brought  against  him].  The 
language  suggests  the 

Way  of  a  Sinner's  acceptance  with  Ood. 

1.  Man's  state  and  necessity  as  a  sinner 
the  foundation  of  the  Gospel.  Man  is  a  sinner, 
unable  to  justify  himself  before  God.  The 
Gospel  reveals  a  Saviour,  and  shows  how  man 
can  obtain  the  justification  he  needs.  In 
the  Gospel  is  revealed  "  the  righteousness  of 
God" — a  righteousness  provided  by  God  for 
man  s  justification;  or,  God's  righteous  way 
of  justifying  a  sinner;  viz.,  by  the  obedience 
and  death  of  His  own  Son  as  the  sinner's 
substitute  (Rom  i.  17).  To  show  this 
necessity  of  man  and  the  provision  made  in 
the  Gospfl  to  meet  ii,  Paul's  object  in  the 
Kj)istlc  tu  '.he  liomaua. 
68 


2.  The  necessity  acknowledged  by  Job  ;  the 
provision  unnoticed  by  him  as  not  bearing  on 
the  present  controversy^  and  as  not  yet  clearly 
known.  The  way  of  forgiveness  through 
vicarious  suffering  understood,  as  constantly 
exhibited  in  the  sacrifices.  That  of  a  sinner 
standing  accepted  and  righteous  before  God 
through  the  active  and  passive  obedience  of 
another  not  yet  fully  revealed.  The  "righte- 
ousness of  God  "  better  known  in  the  time 
of  David— "I  will  make  mention  of  thy 
righteousness,  even  of  thine  only  "  (Ps.  Ixxi. 
16).  Still  more  clearly  revealed  by  Isaiah — 
"  Surely  shall  one  say.  In  the  Lord  have  I 
righteousness  and  strength  ;  in  him  shall  all 
the  seed  of  Israel  be Justitiedand  shall  glory" 
(Is.  xlv.  24,  25).  The  light  still  advancing 
in  the  time  of  Jeremiah,  a  century  later:  "I 
will  raise  unto  David  a  righteous  branch — 
and  this  is  his  name  whereby  he  shall  be 
called,  the  Lord  our  Righteousness  "  (Jer. 
xxiii.  5,  6).  Clearer  still  in  the  time  of 
Daniel :  "  We  do  not  present  our  supplica- 
tions before  thee  for  our  righteousnesses, 
but  for  thy  great  mercies  " — "  for  the  Lord's 
(Adonai's)  sake  ;  "  "  Seventy  weeks  are  de- 
termined to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity 
and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness;" 
"Messiah  shall  be  cut  off,  but  not  for  him- 
self"  (Dan.  ix.  17,  18,  24,  2()). 

3.  That  provision  ^^  witnessed  to  by  the  law 
and  the  prophets''  but  only  "  now^'  in  the 
Gospel  dispensation^  "  manifested  "  (Rom.  iii. 
21).  Described  as  "the  righteousness  of 
God  without  the  law,  which  is  by  faith  in 
Jesus  Chiist,  unto  all,  and  up(m  all  them 
that  believe  "  (verse  -22).  The  same  ground 
and  necessity  of  it  allei^-ed  as  confessed  by 
Job  :  "  For  all  havr  sinned  and  come 
short  oi  the  glory  of  God"    (verse  23). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  JOB, 


CHAP.  IX. 


The  "righteousness  of  God"  to  show  that 
God  is  "just,  and  the  lustifier  of  him  that 
believeth  in  Jesus,"  declared  " at  this  time" 
in  the  **  remission  (or  passing  over)  of  sins 
that  were  past**  (in  previous  generations) 
(verse  26). 

4.  "How     CAN     A     MAN     BE     JUST    WITH 

God  P  *' —  the  great  question,  for  humanity. 
The  great  concern  for  a  d^ing  hour,  there- 
fore the  great  concern  now.  How  we  stand 
with  men  a  trifle  in  comparison.  Without 
the  Gospel,  man's  views  regarding  it  false, 
and  his  efforts  vain.  Men  look  for  it  —(1) 
From  their  own  virtues ;  (2)  From  the 
efficacy  of  sacrifices,  ceremonies,  and 
penances ;  (3)  From  the  merits  and  inter- 
cession of  others.  But  men's  greatest 
virtues  still  leave  them  sinners.  No  efficacy 
in  the  temporary  sufferings  of  man  or  beast 
to  atone  for  sin.  No  sinner  can  have  merit 
or  power  with  God  to  procure  his  neighbour's 
acceptance  any  more  than  his  own.  "  The 
sufficiency  of  my  merit  is  to  know  that  my 
merit  is  insufficient  **  \^Augustine\ 

5.  God's  way  of  acceptance  every  way  suited 
to  meet  the  case.  Salvation  and  acceptance 
through  a  substitute  according  to  reason 
and  analogy.  Common  among  men  to 
allow  the  merit  of  one  to  avail  on 
behalf  of  another.  The  eye  of  Zaleucus 
admitted  as  sufficient  satisfaction  to  justice 
for  that  of  his  son.  The  uplifted  stump  of 
iEschylus,  in  testimony  of  his  services  to  his 
country,  allowed  to  prevail  for  his  brother*s 
acquittal.  One  permitted  to  take  another's 
place  in  serving  his  country  in  time  of  war. 
Elements  in  the  substitution  of  Christ : — (1) 
The  Divine  law  receives  its  perfect  fulfilment 
and  righteous  penalty  for  man's  transgression 
in  man*s  nature ;  (2)  The  man  Christ  con- 
stituted by  God  a  second  Adam  and  head  of 
the  race ;  (3)  As  man  fell  by  tlie  disobedience 
of  one,  the  first  Adam,  he  rises  by  the  obe- 
dience of  one,  the  second  Adam ;  (4)  The 
dignity  of  the  Substitute,  as  the  Son  of  God, 
sufficient  to  impart  to  His  merits  all  necessary 
efficacy ;  (5)  His  Divine  nature  and  super- 
natural birth  exempted  Him  from  sin  and  the 
liability  of  the  race  j  (6)  Christ,  with  a 
human  mother  and  a  Divine  Father,  placed 
both  within  the  race  and  outside  of  it,  as 
necessary  for  substitution. 

6.  Righteous  in  the  righteousness  of  another ^ 
— the  only  way  left  for  a  sinner's  acceptance 
with  God.  Righteous  in  C  h  rist,  the  Gospel 
plan  and  the  believer's  glory.  Sufficient  for 
the  acceptance  and  justification  of  the  entire 
race.  A  man  who  is  now  not  just  and 
accepted  before  God  is  so  only  from — (1) 
Ignorance  of  God's  plan  of  making  a  sinner 
righteous  ;  (2)  Unwillingness  to  accept  of  it ; 
(3  Inability  to  trust  in  it ;  or  (4)  Indifference 
in  regard  to  his  salvatioI^ 


II.  The  folly  of  contending  against 

Ood  (verse  4), 

"He  is  wise  in  heart  and  miffhty  in 
strength ;  who  hath  hardened  himself  against 
Him  and  prospered?**  Men  harden  them- 
selves against  God — (1)  While  resisting  His 
authority  and  disobeying  his  commands ; 
(2)  Rebelling  and  murmuring  against  His 
dealings  in  Providence ;  (3)  Refusing  the 
offers  of  His  mercy  in  the  Gospel.  Man  pos- 
sessed of  the  fearful  power  of  hardening  him- 
self against  God,  The  foUy  of  such  conten- 
tion seen — 

1.  From  the  attributes  of  Ood.  God  "  wise 
in  heart  and  mighty  in  strength."  "  Wise  *' 
to  convict  the  offender  ana  know  how  to 
deal  with  him;  **MiQjhty*'  to  arrest  him  and 
inflict  the  merited  punishment.  "Wise**  to 
know  and  choose  what  is  best  to  do; 
"  Mighty  **  to  accomplish  it.  Strength  may 
prevail  against  wisdom,  and  wisdom  agamst 
strength ;  but  who  can  prevail  against  both 
combined?  Almighty  strength  safe  in  the 
hands  of  infinite  wisdom.  Strength  without 
wisdom  makes  a  tyrant ;  strength  with  wis- 
dom, a  God.  In  Christ  the  wisdom  and 
strength  of  God  are  both  employed  on  our  be- 
half. To  His  wisdom  and  power,  as  well  as 
to  His  love,  is  due  the  plan  of  man's  salva- 
tion (Eph.  iii.  10;  i.  19,  20).  Christ  both 
"  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God  *' 
(1  Cor.  i.  24). 

2.  From  the  facts  of  history.  "Who  hath 
hardened  himself  against  Him  and  pros- 
pered?'* The  sinning  angels,  Pharaoh, 
Sennacherib's  army,  the  infidel  leaders  in 
the  first  French  Revolution,  referred  to  for 
an  answer.  For  a  creature  to  oppose  God 
is  for  briars  and  thorns  to  do  battle  against 
fire.  Success  certain  in  falling  in  with 
God's  plan  and  procedure ;  certain  ruin  in 
opposing  it.  Prosperity  for  a  time  some- 
times the  apparent  result  of  opposing  God. 
That  prosperity  generally  only  the  precursor 
of  ultimate  ruin.  Pharaoh  never  appeared 
nearer  his  object  than  when  he  met  with 
destruction. 

Magnificent  description  of  the 

Power  and  Majesty  of  God, 

As  exhibited  in  the  works  of  creation  and 
providence  (verses  5 — 10).  The  description 
unequalled  for  poetic  grandeur.  Its  ele- 
ments— 

1.  The  sudden  overthrow  of  mountains 
(verse  5).  "Which  removeth  the  moun- 
tains, and  they  know  not  (or,  before  ever 
they  are  aware),  and  overthroweth  them  in 
his  anger"  (as  in  righteous  judgment  for 
the  sins  of  the  people).  "To  remove  moun- 
tains," synonymous  with  an  impossibility. 
Nothing  impossible    with   God.     Hannibal 

£9 


CHAP.    IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


celebrated  for  making  a  passage  over  the 
mountains;  God  removes  them  out  of  the 
way.  Thron^li  the  secret  operation  of  natural 
causes,  as  in  earthquakes  and  otherwise, 
mountains  sometimes  split,  and  portions  torn 
away  from  tlie  rest,  with  destruction  of 
human  life.  All  nature  under  God's  cont  rol, 
and  employed  by  Him  in  mercy  or  in  judg- 
ment. 

2 .  Trembling  of  the  earth* s  foundations,  aiid 
disappearance  of  portions  of  its  surface. 
(verse  6).  "  Which  shaketh  the  earth  out 
of  her  place,  and  the  pillars  thereof  (or,  it-Q 
foundations, — the  earth  represented  as  a 
fabric  or  building)  tremble."  No-thing  appa- 
rently more  firm  in  its  place  than  the  earth; 
yet  islands  and  other  large  portions  of  it 
frequently  made  to  disappear,  through  sub- 
terraneous agencies  in  earthquakes,  subsi- 
dences, and  submersions,  what  was  once  land 
now  becoming  sea.  Earthquakes  and  all 
apparently  natural  convulsions  and  changes 
entirely  under  God's  control. 

3.  The  sun  withholding  its  beams  in  obedience 
to  His  command  (verse  7).  "Which  com- 
mandeth  the  sun  and  it  nseth  not," — sends 
not  forth  its  rays ;  as  in  eclipses,  dense  fogs, 
the  darkness  frequently  accompanying  earth- 
quakes, or  when  clouds  and  tempests  darken 
the  sky.  The  Divine  command  as  powerful 
as  at  the  beginning  (Gen.  i.  3).  Joshua's 
command  but  an  echo  of  his  Master's  (Josh. 
X.  12). 

4.  The  starry  sky  sealed  up  as  a  folded  scroll. 
"And  sealeth  up  the  stars.''  The  starry 
heavens  God's  volume  nightly  spread  open 
before  us  (Ps.  xix.  1).  Its  characters  some- 
times entirely  hidden  by  clouds,  fogs,  or 
tempests,  as  in  Acts  xxvii.  20.  The  noc- 
turnal sky  usually  clear  in  the  East,  and  the 
stars  peculiarly  brilliant.  Hence  the  obscu- 
ration of  it  much  more  striking  than  with  us. 
The  clouds  God's  seal,  not  to  be  broken  by 
any  earthly  power.  The  scroll  to  be  one 
day  folded  up  (Is.  xxxiv.  4 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10 ; 
Rev.  vi.  14). 

5.  The  firmament  spread  out  as  a  canopy ^ 
and  the  clouds  made  His  chariot  (verse  8). 
"  W^hich  alone  (by  His  unaided  power, — the 
one  only  Creator  and  Preserver  of  all) 
spreadeth  out  (or  boweth)  the  heavens.*' 
Spread  out  the  firmament  at  the  beginning, 
still  keeps  it  spread,  and  spreads  it  out  afresh 
every  morning  as  a  curtain  (Ps.  civ.  2; 
Is.  xl.  22).  Employs  the  clouds  as  His 
chariot,  bowing  the  heavens  beneath  Him, 
and  putting  darkness  under  His  feet 
(Ps.  xviii.  9;  cxliv.  6).  Probably  a 
further  description  of  a  tempest.  The  verse 
a  miniature  of  the  scene  so  sublimely  de- 
scribed in  Ps.  xviii.  7 — 15. 

6.  The  towering  billows  made  a  pathway  for 
Bis  feet.     "And   treadetk  on    the    waves 

60 


{margin,  *  heights ')  of  the  sea.**  Sublimely 
expresses  His  control  over  the  mountain 
billows  of  the  ocean,  treading  on  them  as  a 
Conquerer  and  Ruler,  restraining  their  fury, 
and  keeping  them  from  returning  and  again 
deluging  the  earth.  So  Christ  visibly 
walked  on  the  stormy  lake  of  Galilee  (Matt, 
xiv.  26).  Comfort  for  the  tempest-tossed 
mariner,  to  remember  that  the  God  who  is 
love  both  walks  on  the  wings  of  the  wind 
and  the  waves  of  the  sea.  A  man  walking 
on  the  waves,  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphic  for 
impossibility.  "With  God  all  things  are 
possible." 

7.  The  constellations  of  heaven^  as  His 
creatures^  rising  and  setting  at  His  will 
verse  9).  "  Which  maketh  Arcturus  (or  the 
Great  Bear),  Orion,  and  the  Pleiades  (or 
Seven  Stars),  and  the  chambers  of  the 
south"  (or  the  Constellations  in  the  South- 
ern Hemisphere,  appearing  to  the  Arabs 
only  in  summer).  Preserves  them  in  their 
original  places,  marshals  them  as  His  hosts, 
sustains  and  directs  their  apparent  motions 
through  all  the  successive  seasons  of  the 
year. 

8.  His  acts  wonderful^  innumerable^  and 
unsearchable  (verse  10).  "  Which  doeth 
great  things  past  finding  out ;  yea,  and 
wonders  without  number.'*  In  creation. 
His  works  wondrous  and  unsearchable,  both 
in  their  multitude  and  magnitude,  their  com- 
plexity and  minuteness.  A  drop  of  water 
and  a  dusky  spot  hardly  visible  on  the  face 
of  the  sky,  each  reveals  such  wonders ;  the 
one,  millions  of  perfectly-formed  living 
creatures ;  the  other  millions  of  worlds,  eacn 
world  a  sun.  In  Providence  and  the 
government  of  the  universe.  His  works 
equally  great  and  marvellous,  innumerable 
and  beyond  our  power  of  investigation. 
"His  thoughts  a  great  deep.*'  "Deep  in 
unfathomable  mines,"  &c. 

Lessons  from  this  description : — 

1.  Ruinous  to  resist  a  Being  of  sach 
power  and  majestv. 

2.  Blessed  to  have  such  a  Being  for  our 
friend ;  miserable  to  have  Him  for  a  foe. 

3.  ()ur  duty  and  happiness  to  trust  Him 
in  the  most  trying  and  apparently  hopeless 
situations. 

4.  His  appointment  and  dispensations  to 
be  meekly  submitted  to. 

5.  A  Being  of  such  perfections  to  be  re- 
verenced, adored,  and  obeyed. 

III.  God's  Perfections  and  Deallngrs 
viewed  by  Job  in  relation  to  Himself. 

1.  Job  declares  God's  incomprehensibleness 
in  His  dealings  with  him  (verse  11).  **Lo, 
he  goeth  by  me  (is  near  me,  in  the  dealings 
of  iiis  Providence),  and  I  see  him  not ;  he 
passeth    on    also    (from   one    stroke    to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  t  JOB. 


euAT.  n. 


another,  or  'passeth  through  like  a  whirl- 
wind,* Is.  xxi.  1),  but  I  perceive  him  not " 
(do  not  apprehend  either   His  meaning  or 
His  love).     A  great  part  of  Job*s  trial,  that 
while  God  was  so  painfully  visiting  him  he 
was  entirely  in  tlie  dark  as  to  His  meaning. 
Contrasted  with  his   experience  in  former 
trials   (chap.   xxix.   3).      Observe — (1)    A 
child  of  Ood  sometimes  entirely  in  the  dark 
as  to  the  meanina  of  God^s  dealings  with  Him. 
Perplexity  and  bewilderment  as  to  the  cause 
of  our  trials  on  Ood's  side,  sometimes  no 
small  part  of  them.     One  of  the  greatest 
trials  of  a  believer  to  be  under  trouble,  and 
not   to   apprehend   God's  love  in  it.      (2) 
God^s  incomprehej/sUjleness    an   exercise  for 
faiths     His  children   to   trust  Him   in  the 
dark.     God  most  glorified  by  such  confiding 
faith.      Abraham    an    example    (Rom.    iv. 
19— 21 ;  Heb.  xi.  8, 17—19).      (3)    Incom- 
prehensibleness  a  feature  in  God's  character 
and     conduct.      His    ways     in     the    sea, 
and  His  footsteps  not  known  (Ps.  Ixxvii 
19).     His  ways  past  finding  out  (P.om.  xi. 
33).     Tiie  giory  ol  God  is  to  conceal  a  iiiing 
(Pr,  XXV.  2).     God's  dealings  incomprehen- 
sible to  us — (i.)  as  to  their  reasons-^  (ii.)  as 
to  their  ends.     "  What  I  do  thou  knowest 
not  now  "  (John  xiii.  7).     Part  of  the  dark- 
ness, of  sin  that  God  is  near  and  yet  not 
perceived.   His  close  and  constant  nearness  a 
matter  for  praise  and  adoration  (Ps.  exxxix. 
5).     Analogy    between    God's    dealings   in 
nature  and  in  Providence.     The  operations 
and  effects  obvious,  the  agent  Himself  un- 
seen.     The    operation    of    natural    causes 
manifest;  the    moving    power  behind  and 
under  these  entirely  hidden  (Acts  xvii.  28). 
2.  Job  acknowledges  God's  sovereignty  and 
irresistible  power  (verse  12).     "Behold,  he 
taketh  away,  who  can  hinder  him  P  [margin 
*  turn  him  away  ').     Who  will  say  unto  him, 
*What  doest  thou?'"     Observe— (1)  G^o^ 
takes  away  as  He  pleases.     Already  acknow- 
ledged by  Job  in  his  calamities  (ch.  i.  21  ; 
ii.  10).     Good  to  recognize  God's  hand  in 
our  losses.     No  evil  but  from  God,  either 
directly  or  indirectly  (Is.  xlv.  7;  Amos  iii.  6). 
Satan  rather  than  God,  the  immediate  author 
of  Job's  calamities.     Yet  Satan's  action  is 
not  without  God's  permission.     Satan  only 
God's  instrument  in  accomplishing  His  pur- 
pose of  trying  His  people. — (2)    When  God 
takes  away,   none  can   hinder  Him.      God 
possesses  not  only  the  right  but  the  might  to 
do  as  He  pleases.     Our  comfort  to  know 
that  both  are  exercised  in  wisdom,  goodness, 
.'.nd  holiness.     Good  to  remember  that  when 
God  takes  away,  that — (i.)  He  only  takes 
away  His  own;  (ii.)  He  takes  away  for  our 
good.     Job  a  greater  gainer  by  his  losses  than 
he  had  ever  been  by  his  gains.     To  say  to 
God,  What  doest  TLdu  ?  is  as  ignorant  as  it 


is  wicked.  What  God  does.  He  does  because 
it  is  best.  God  gives  no  reason  to  impeni- 
tent sinners  either  as  to  what  He  does  or 
why  He  does  it.  A  child  of  God  would  not 
hinder  Him  even  if  he  could. — (3)  Opposition 
to  God  and  His  will  as  useless  as  it  is  wicked 
(verse  13).  "  If  God  will  not  withdraw  his 
anger  (or  simply,  *God  will  not  withdraw,' 
&c.),  the  proud  helpers  do  stoop  under 
Him."  God's  anger  not  to  be  turned  away 
by  man's  opposition,  but  by  repentance, 
submission,  and  faith  (Ps.  ii.  10 — 12). 
His  "  anger  "  put  for  the  rod  which  is  the 
expression  of  it.  All  creature  help  against 
God  and  His  chastisements  utterly  vain. 
Israel's  sin,  that  when  under  the  rod  they 
went  to  Egypt  for  help  (Is.  xxx.  2; 
xxxi.  1).  Egypt  in  their  pride,  ready  to 
render  that  help  (Is.  xxx.  4).  Both 
helpers  and  helped  obliged  in  the  end  to 
stoop  under  the  rod  (Is.  xxxi.  3).  Not 
uncommon  for  the  ungodly  to  agree  to 
mutual  help  in  resisting  God  and  His  pur- 
poses (Ps.  ii.  I — 3;  Ixxxiii.  5 — 8;  Acts 
xxi.  28  ;  xxiii.  12).  Such  confederacies  fre- 
quent in  the  time  of  the  Reformation. 
Combinations  against  the  Protestant  religion 
combinations  against  God  and  his  truth. 
Pride  the  eharacteristic  of  such  confedera- 
cies (Ex.  V.  2 ;  XV,  9).  Their  end  seen  in 
the  overthrow  of  sinning  angels  and  the 
destruction  of  Pharaoh's  host  (Jude  6  ;  Ex. 
XV.  D).  The  final  destruction  of  anti-chris- 
tian  combinations  yet  to  be  exhibited  (Rev. 
xvii.  12 — 14;  xix.  11 — 21).  The  essence  of 
pride  to  oppose  oneself  to  God's  purposes. — 
(4)  Good  to  Cake  warning  from  others  not  to  fall 
into  their  sin  (verse  15).  "How  much  less 
shall  I  answer  him  [in  his  chaiges  against 
me],  and  choose  out  my  words  to  reason 
with  him  *'  [as  defendant  in  my  cause]. 
Humility  learned  by  consideration  of  God'* 
mightiness.  If  the  proudest  opposers  of 
God  and  His  purposes  must  stoop,  how  then 
shall  I  dispute  with  Him  ? — (5)  Silence  and 
submission  under  Godh  rebuke  our  interest  as 
well  as  our  duty  (verse  15).  "  Whom,  though 
I  were  righteous,  yet  would  I  not  an-wer  [at 
his  bar],  l)ut  I  would  make  supplication  to 
my  judge"  (or  to  him  deoating  with 
me).  Man's  wisdom  not  to  dispute 
with  God,  but  to  submit  to  Him.  God 
ever  ready  to  hear  the  sinner  when  he 
supplicates,  but  never  when  he  disputes. 
However  blameless  his  conduct,  or  good  his 
conscience,  fallen  man  still  a  sinner  before 
God.  "  Found  wanting,"  written  on  man's 
best  performances.  God  better  acquainted 
with  our  character  and  conduct  than  we  are 
ourselves  (1  Cor.  iv.  4 ;  1  John  iii.  20).  Con- 
stant reason  for  humiliation  and  faith  (Ps. 
xix.  12 ;  exxxix.  23, 24).— (6)  The  tried  soul 
ready  to  fall  back  into  despondency  and  un* 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMMTARY:  JOB. 


belief  (verse  16).  **  If  I  had  (or  have)  called 
[on  Him  to  answer  my  complaints],  and 
he  had  (or  hath)  answered  me  [by  conde- 
scend ini^  to  take  the  place  of  a  defendant], 
yet  would  (or  will)  I  not  believe  that  he 
had  (or  hath)  hearkened  to  my  voice." 
Unbelief  made  the  continuance  of  Job's  suf- 
ferings an  argument  that  God  had  not  heark 
ened  to  his  prayer.  The  part  of  the  flesh, 
to  reason  from  the  dealings  of  God's  hand 
to  the  purposes  of  God's  heart.  Trayer  often 
heard  before  the  yr oof  of  it  is  apparent.  Faith 
required  to  believe  this  (Mark  xi.  24).  Un- 
belief nm^i  see  the  answer  before  it  believes 
in  it ;  faith  believes  in  it  before  seeing  it. 
Prayer y  like  seed,  which  for  a  time  lies  buried 
in  the  earth.  God's  time  for  answering 
prayer  reserved  in  His  own  hand.  Prayer 
attended  tOy  and  prayer  answered,  two  different 
things.  The  former  usually  followed  sooner 
or  later  by  the  latter.  Receiving  an  answer 
to  be  distinguished  from  the  actual  en- 
joying of  it  (Mark  xi.  24).  Faith  believes 
that  it  receives  the  blessing  asked  before 
it  sees  it :  the  seeing  comes  in  God's  time. — 
(7)  Unbelief  eyes  outward  dealings  (verse 
17,  18).  "  For  he  breaketh  me  with  a  tem- 
pest (or,  *  crusheth  me  as  in  a  whirlwind '), 
he  multiplietii  my  wounds  without  cause. 
He  will  not  suffer  me  to  take  my  breath 
(enjoy  the  least  respite  or  relief),  but 
fiUeth  me  with  bitterness."  The  ground  of 
Job's  despondency  and  unbelief.  Continued 
suffering  forbids  him  to  believe  God  regards 
His  prayers.  Hard  to  believe  in  God's  love 
when  so  terribly  crushed  with  successive  strokes 
of  His  Providence.  A  tragic  but  true  de- 
scription of  Job's  sufferings.  "  Broken  " — 
crushed,  or  "bruised,"  as  in  Gen.  iii.  15. 
"  With  a  tempest,'*  or  "  in  a  whirlwind  " — 
suddenly — violently — irresistibly,  like  one 
continually  lifted  up  and  then  dashed  down 
again  forcibly  to  the  ground.  This  as 
suffered  "without  cause"  known  to  himself, 
only  all  the  more  painful.  His  suffering 
"  without  cause,"  God's  own  account  of  the 
matter  (ch.  ii.  3).  The  thing  denied  by  the 
friends,  but  persistently  maintained  by  Job, 
while  yet  acknowledging  himself  a  sinner 
before  God.  Job  ignorant  of  God's  purpose 
in  the  affliction.  What  was  really  done  by 
Satan,  Job  in  his  ignorance  ascribes  to  God. 
Ignorant  of  Satan's  malice,  he  can  only  think 
of  God's  arbitrariness.  Satan  having  de- 
stroyed Job's  children  by  one  "  whirlwind," 
thinks  to  destroy  Job  himself  by  another  of 
a  different  nature.  Sufferings  long  continued 
and  without  intermission  terribly  exhausting 
and  crushing  to  the  human  spirit.  The 
"  bitterness "  of  Job's  outward  sufferings 
only  the  counterpart  of  the  bitterness  in  his 
soul.  Heroic  faith  to  believe  in  God's  gracious 
regard  in  such   terribly   diUressing  circum- 

62 


stances.  Such  experience  and  faith  that  of 
Jesus  Himself  (Matt.  xxvi.  38 ,  xxvii.  46). 
Job's  faith  also  at  times  triumphant  (ch.  xix. 
25 ;  xxiii.  10), 

IV.  Job's  mental  agitation  in  respect 

to  his  case  (verses  19 — 21). 

1 .  His  inability  to  plead  with  God  (verse 
19) . — "  If  I  speak  of  strength  ( — if  the  ques- 
tion be  one  of  strength),  lo !  he  is  strong 
(or,  *  a  strong  One  is  here' ;  or,  'the  strong 
One  saith,  here  am  I*);  and  if  of  judgment 
—  (if  the  question  be  of  one  of  right),  who 
shall  set  me  a  time  to  plead "  (or,  *  who 
shall  bring  him  [or  us]  into  court*  [that  as 
umpire,  we  may  debate  the  case  before  him]. 
Though  conscious  of  innocence,  Job  feels 
there  is  no  possibility  of  pleading  his  case 
against  God.  As  regards  power,  God  is  the 
Mighty  One,  with  whom  no  creature  may 
contend.  He  is  sovereign  and  supreme,  so 
that  there  can  be  no  umpire  to  summon  both 
parties  to  trial.  No  creature  therefore  may 
dispute  with  God.  Happily,  no  creature 
needs.  Every  one's  case  left  safe  in  His  hands 
Only  agitation  and  unrest  till  this  is  done 
Job  at  last,  after  all  his  tumults  and  tossings, 
is  brought  to  this,  and  then  has  peace.  Ine 
lesson  for  Job  and  all  tried  ones, — not  to  dis- 
pute with  God,  but  to  leave  the  case  confidingly 
in  His  hands,  assured  that  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth  will  do  right.  The  lesson  that  of  the 
37th  Psalm.  "Commit  thy  way  unto  the 
Lord ;  trust  also  in  Him,  and  he  shall  bring 
it  to  pass.  And  he  shall  bring  forth  thy 
righteousness  as  the  light,  and  thy  judgment 
as  the  noonday  **  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5,  6). 

2.  His  certainty  of  condemnation  notwith- 
standing His  conscious  integrity  (verse  20). 
"  If  I  justify  myself  (or,  *  although  I  be 
righteous  *),  mine  own  mouth  shall  condemn 
me  ( -  by  its  very  utterances  will  shew  me 
guilty),  if  I  say,  I  am  perfect  (or,  *  although 
I  am  upright  *),  it  shall  also  prove  me  per- 
verse **  (or,  *  He,  i.e.  God,  shaH  declare  me 
guilty*).  A  great  truth ^/^,  though  unwil- 
lingly acknowledged  by  the  "perfect**  man. 
However  upright  and  consciously  innocent,  a 

fallen  man  must  yet  stand  condemned  before 
his  Maker.  To  exhibit  this,  one  of  the  great 
objects  of  the  book  of  Job.  Fallen  man,  at 
his  best  estate,  a  sinner,  and  %o  guilty  before 
God.  The  Apostle's  declaration,  as  shewing 
the  necessity  for  the  Gospel  scheme  (Rom. 
iii.  23).  No  flesh  living  capable  of  being 
justified  in  God's  sight  (Ps.  cxliii.  2).  "  No 
just  man  on  earth  that  doetn  good  and 
sinneth  not "  (Eccles.  vii.  20).  To  be  justi- 
fied before  God  on  the  ground  of  his  own 
merits,  a  man  must  be  absolutely  sinless 
(Gal.  iji.  10 ;  Jam.  ii.  10).  Such  a  person  no- 
where  to  be  found  (1  John  i.  8).  The 
mouth  that  pleads  "  Not  guilty  **  before  God 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAUl :  JOJi. 


CHAP.    IX 


eondemriM  itself.  Its  very  language  proves  tlie 
manasinner  by  convicting  him — (1)  Of  pride; 
(2)  Of  rebelliousness  ;  (3)  Of  falsehood. 
Self-righteousness  in  a  sinner  sufficient  to 
condemn  him.  The  object  of  the  law  not  to 
justify  but  to  silence  (Rom.  iii.  19).  A  man's 
salvation  and  peace  is  found — (1)  in  acknow- 
ledging guilt  and  taking  the  place  of  a  lost 
sinner  before  God ;  (2)  In  casting  himself  en- 
tirely on  His  mercy  as  flowing  through  a 
Saviour's  atoning  blood  (Rom.  iii.  24). 

3.  His  resolution  to  maintain  his  integrity 
at  all  costs  inverse  21).  "Though  I  were 
perfect,  yet  would  I  not  know  my  soul  (or, 
I  am  blameless  and  sincere,  I  care  not  for 
myself)  j  I  would  despise  (or,  I  *  despise*)  my 
life."  As  an  honest  man,  conscious  of  sin- 
cerity and  upright  ness,  Job  refuses  to  confess 
himself  a  hypocrite  and  secret  transgressor, 
in  order  to  obtain  the  restoration  to  tem- 
poral prosperity  held  out  by  his  friends.  A 
contest  maintained  by  Job  with  his  friends 
as  well  as  with  God.  As  against  God^  he 
was  wrong;  as  against  men^  he  was  right. 
Before  God^  he  must  and  does  acknowledge 
himself  a  sinner ;  before  men,  he  maintains 
his  integrity.  In  asserting  himself  "  per- 
fect "  (blameless,  sincere,  upright),  he  only 
does  what  God  had  done  for  him  (chap.  i.  8 ; 
ii.  3).  A  man  may  boldly  maintain  his  in- 
tegrity before  his  fellow  men,  while  he  humbly 
abases  himself  as  a  sinner  before  God.  In  the 
sight  of  God,  Paul  bows  as  "  the  chief  of 
sinners  "  (1  Tim.  i.  15) ;  before  a  human 
tribunal,  he  declares — "  I  have  lived  in  all 
good  conscience  before  God  until  this  day  ** 
(Acts  xxiii.  1). 

V.  Perplexed  thoughts  as  to  the 
Divine  procedure  in  the  present  world 

(verses  22—24). 

1.  Its  indiscriminateness  (verse  22).  "  This 
is  one  thing  (or,  *  it  is  all  one ') ;  therefore 
I  said  it,  he  destroyeth  the  perfect  (the 
blameless  or  upright)  and  the  wicked."  Both 
classes  treated,  as  a  rule,  without  discrimina- 
tion in  the  present  life.  Maintained  by 
Job — (1)  As  against  the  friends.  Calamities 
not  confined  to  the  wicked  ;  (2)  As  against 
God  Himself  No  special  regard  had  to 
those  who  serve  Him.  Such  indiscriminate 
procedure  maintained  in  the  Book  of  Eccle- 
siastes  (chap,  ix.  2,  3).  One  of  the  facts 
in  the  Divine  government  observed  by 
thoughtful  and  good  men.  Both  classes 
suffer  alike,  as  in  war,  famine,  pestilence, 
earthquake,  tempests,  &c.  Both  share 
equally  in  the  ills  and  calamities  of  life.  A 
mystery  and  a  stumblingblock.  To  be  re- 
garded— (1)  As  an  argument  for  a  future 
state.  The  difference  between  the  righteous 
and  the  wicked  reserved  for  a  future  day 
CMal.  iii  18).— (2)  M  a  trial  for  faith  in  ths 


Divine  character.     Hence  the  murmu rings 
of  unbelieving  professors  (Mai.  iii.  13,  15). 

2.  Its  apparent  indifference  to  the  sufferings 
of  the  godly  (verse  2^).  **  If  the  scourge 
slay  suddenly  (or,  indiscrimiuately),  he  will 
laugh  (or,  it  laugheth)  at  the  trial  of  the 
innocent."  The  su])[)(.^sed  case  already 
asserted  (verse  22).  Jobs  own  case  before 
his  view.  Providence  often  has  the  appear- 
auoe  of  cruel  indiiference  to  the  sufferings  of 
the  innocent.  The  feelings  of  God's  heart 
not  to  be  judged  by  the  dealings  of  His  hand. 
Divine  "love  and  hatred"  not  known  by 
any  mere  outward  dispensation  (Eccles.  ix. 
1).  The  godly  sometimes  "accounted  as 
sheep  for  the  slaughter'*  (Ps.  xliv.  22). 
The  Divine  sympathy  for  the  suffering 
exhibited  in  the  character  of  Jesus.  For  a 
time  Jesus  Himself  also  sometimes  appeared 
indifferent  to  suffering  (Matt.  xv.  23 — 26  ; 
Mark  iv,  38;  John  xi.  6).  The  Divine 
dealings  in  the  present  life  are — (1)  Proba- 
tive;  (2)  Disciplinary,  The  trial  of  the 
righteous  found  at  last  unto  praise,  and 
honour,  and  glory  (1  Pet.  i.  7).  Precious 
metal  proved  as  well  as  purified  by  the  fire. 
The  scourge  that  destroys  the  guilty  only 
tries  the  good  (So  Ps.  xi.  5  ;  vii.  11). 

3.  Its  apparently  unjust  partiality  (verse 
24).  "  The  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of 
the  wicked  j  he  covereth  the  faces  of  the 
judges  thereof."  Two  anomalies — (1)  The 
wicked  are  exalted  to  power,  while  godly 
men  are  depressed ;  (2)  Tyrants  are  allowed 
to  reign  while  rightful  rulers  are  treated 
with  ignominy  and  put  to  death  (Eccles.  vii. 
8.  Same  sentiment  (Ps.  xii.  8).  The  un- 
godly styled  "  the  man  of  the  earth  "  (Ps. 
X.  18).  Satan  himself  the  "  prhice  of  this 
world."  He  and  his  host  the  "rulers  of  the 
darkness  of  this  world."  Godly  men  in 
Christ  earth's  proper  judges  and  rulers 
(1  Cor.  vi.  2,  3:  Rev.  i.  5).  Such  often 
treated  in  the  providence  of  God  as  male- 
factors. Job  himself  an  example  (ch.  xxix. 
l—'\'!,  25  ;  XXX.  10—23).  God  the  author 
of  civil  government.  The  earth  with  its 
various  states  and  governments  in  His 
hand.  Given  over  by  Him  to  others  accord- 
ing to  His  will.  Often  in  judgment  to  bad 
men  (Dan.  iv.  17).  By  Him  kings  reign.  He 
putteth  down  one  and  setteth  up  another  (Ps, 
Ixxv.  7;  Dan.  ii.  21).  Ruleth  in  the  king- 
dom of  men,  and  appointeth  over  it  whomso- 
ever he  will  (Dan.  iv.  17,  25  ;  v.  21).  Does 
this  in  His  invisible  and  mysterious  provi- 
dence, without  infringement  on  man's  free 
will  or  the  operation  of  second  causes.  This 
fact  one  of  the  elements  in  the  doctrine  of 
"  wisdom,"  exhibited  in  this  and  other  in- 
spired books  of  the  same  period. 

4.  The  mysterious  certainly  connected  with 
it.    "K  not  ( — ^if  the  case  be  not  so),  where 

63 


CHAr.  DL 


aOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


and  who  is  he  [who  does  these  things]  P " 
Or,  "  if  the  case  be  not  thus  [viz.,  that  God 
does  these  things],  who  is  it  [that  does 
thein]  P  "  The  facts  undeniable ;  who  but 
One  can  be  the  author  of  them?  Acknow- 
ledged mystery  in  these  anomalies  in  the 
government  of  a  righteous  God.  Yet  none 
but  God  can  be  the  author  of  them.  Earth 
necessarily  under  a  Supreme  Euler.  That 
Ruler  necessarily  righteous.  The  doctrine 
of  two  co-ordinate  principles  not  to  be 
admitted.  God  the  author  Doth  of  good  and 
evil — light  and  darkness  (Is.  xlv.  7).  The 
existence  and  prevalence  ol"  evil  in  the  world, 
including  the  elevation  of  wicked  rulers,  one 
of  the  mysteries  in  Divine  Providence.  God 
the  author  of  evil — (1)  By  permission ;  (2) 
By  predestination ;  (3)  By  Providence. 
Satan  the  author  of  evil — (1)  Actually;  (2) 
Subordinately  ;  (3)  Instrumentally.  Evil 
under  the  Divine  government  permitted  for 
wise  and  benevolent  purposes.  His  wisdom 
and  benevolence  seen — (1)  In  restraining  the 
evil ;  (2)  In  overruling  it  for  good ;  (3)  In 
employing  it  for  the  exliibition  of  His  own 
perfections  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  God  displays 
His  glory,  while  "  from  seeming  evil  still 
educing  good."  Tyrants  and  evil  rulers  God^s 
scourge  to  a  guilty  land.  The  terrible  and 
destructive  thunderstorm  the  purifier  of  the 
atmosphere.  The  rainbow  the  offspring  of 
the  dark  cloud  behind  it.  The  grandest 
scenery  the  product  of  earth's  terrible  con- 
vulsions. The  stars  shine  out  most  brilliantly 
from  the  blackest  sky.  Deep  shadows  give 
effect  to  the  picture — an  occasional  discord 
to  the  music.  Old  and  fractured  instruments 
often  yield  the  sweetest  tones.  Wicked 
hands  the  agencies  in  man's  redemption 
(Acts  ii.  23). 

VI.  Reflections    on   his  own    pitiful 

condition  (verses  25 — 35). 

1.  The  rapid  termination  of  his  prosperity 
and  his  life  (verse  25).  "!Now  my  days  are 
(or,  have  been)  swifter  than  a  post  (or, 
runner, — a  state-courier  carrying  letters  or 
despatches,sometimes  travelling  a  hundredand 
fifty  miles  in  less  than  twenty-four  hours; 
dromedaries,  able  to  outrun  the  fleetest 
horses,  also  employed  (Esther  viii.  14)  j  they 
flee  (or,  have  fled)  away ;  they  see  (or,  have 
seen)  no  good."  Job  had  not  reached  the 
meridian  of  life.  Lived  after  his  troables  a 
hundred  and  forty  years.  His  present  age 
probably  not  more  than  the  half  of  that. 
His  death,  which  appeared  at  hand,  therefore 
sadly  premature.  His  past  prosperity  ac- 
cordingly short-lived.  In  the  presence  of 
his  now  accumulated  miseries,  his  days  ap- 
pear to  have  witnessed  no  happiness.  Pre- 
sent misery  apt  to  make  us  overlook  past 
iiercy.     Two  more  comparisons  to  represent 

64 


the  swiftness  with  which  his  life  had  sped 
to  its  close — (1)  A  reed-skiff  or  canoe, 
formed  of  the  papyrus  of  the  Nile,  remark- 
able for  its  lightness  and  swiftness  (verse 
26).  "They  are  (or  have)  passed  away  as 
the  swift  ships  '*  {margin,  "ships  of  desire," 
or,  "ships  of  Ebeh;"  more  probably  "ships 
of  papyrus,"  like  Is.  xviii.  2.)  (2)  An  eagle, 
swiftest  of  birds,  eagerly  pouncing  down  on 
its  prey.  "  As  the  eagle  nasteth,"  &c.  A 
frequent  comparison.  (See  Deut.  xxviii.  49  j 
Jer.  iy.  12 ;  Ltm.  iy.  19.) 

Human  Life  a  Yoyage. 

Each  individual's  life  fitly  compared  to  a 
swift  sailing  vessel  speeding  onwards  on  her 
voyage. — 1.  Constant  and  rapid  progress. 
No  stoppage  till  we  reach  the  place  of  des- 
tination.— 2.  ^\iQ  precise  length  of  the  voyage 
various  in  each  case. — 3.  The  length  of  the 
voyage  and  the  time  of  its  terminationpreviously 
unknown. — 4.  The  voyage  a  most  important 
one  to  each.  All  others  comparatively  insig- 
nificant. Its  issue  an  eternity  of  happiness 
or  woe. — 5.  The  freight  an  immortal  spirit 
with  boundless  capacities. — 6.  The  place  of 
destination  one  or  other  of  only  twOy  widely 
remote  from  each  other  in  character  and 
situation — a  paradise  of  bliss  and  a  home  of 
glory,  or  a  region  of  darkness  and  despair. — 
7.  Each  vessel  under  the  direction  of  an  in- 
visible power  that  presides  at  the  helm. 
The  helmsman  in  each  case,  either  the  Prince 
of  Life,  or  the  Prince  of  Darkness.  The 
object  of  the  former  is  to  steer  the  vessel  to 
glory ;  that  of  the  latter  to  wreck  it  on  the 
shores  of  death.  The  first  human  vessel 
launched  with  the  former  at  the  helm.  Man 
listening  to  the  flattering  proposals  of  the 
latter  accepted  him  for  his  pilot.  Since  then 
human  life  has  been  started  under  the 
influence  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness,  the 
"  god  of  this  world."  The  choice  made  by 
Adam  of  a  pilot,  confirmed  by  his  offspring 
who  are  bom  in  his  likeness.  Man  might 
have  been  hopelessly  left  to  his  miserable  and 
ungrateful  choice.  Mercy,  however,  places 
again  within  his  reach  a  change  of  pilots. 
The  Prince  of  Life,  having  atoned  for  man's 
rebeUion,  offers  again  to  take  charge  of  the 
vessel.  Conscious  of  their  sin  and  misery, 
many  thankfully  accept  His  offer  and  safely 
reach  the  port  of  peace.  Others,  rejecting 
it,  are  wrecked  on  the  rocks  of  eternal  ruin. 
— Two  important  questions — (1)  Whither  am 
I  bound  P  For  heaven  or  for  hell  P  (2)  Who 
is  my  pilot  ?    Christ  or  the  Wicked  One  P 

2.  The  inability  of  his  efforts  to  overcome 
his  heaviness  (verses  27,  28).  "  If  I  say,  I 
will  forget  my  complaint  (lay  aside  my 
lamentation)  ;  I  will  leave  off  my  heaviness 
and  comfort  myself  (or,  I  will  put  away  my 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    IX. 


sorrowful  eoantenance  and  brighten  up),  I 
am  afraid  of  all  my  sorrow  ( — 1  shudder  at 
mj  accumulated  griefs).  I  know  that  thou 
wilt  not  hold  (or,  treat  me  as)  innocent  '* 
(wliatever  I  ma.v  be  or  may  deem  myself). 
A  painful  struggle  between  the  enlightened 
•pirit,  and  the  flesh  aided  by  the  depressing 
nature  of  disease  and  the  buffetings  of  the 
invisible  adversary.  Similar  struggle  in 
David — "  Why  art  thou  cast  down  ?  '*  &c. 
(Ps.  xlii.  5,11;  xliii.  5).  The  belie oer  often 
conscious  that  he  ought  to  rejoice  when  un- 
belief forbids  him.  Much  more  under  the 
New  than  the  Old  Testament  to  make  a  child 
of  God  "  lay  aside  his  sorrowful  counte- 
nance and  brighten  up."  To  "rejoice  in  the 
Lord'*  in  the  midst  of  trials,  made  much 
easier  now  than  in  the  days  of  Job.  The 
aim  of  Jesus  to  give  his  people  ground  to 
"rejoice  in  tribulation,'*  (John  xiv.  27; 
XV.  11 ;  xvi.  33).  Enjoined  on  them  (Phil. 
iv.  4).  Their  actual  experience  (Rom.  v.  3  ; 
IPet.  i.6).  Job  kept  from  "brightening  up" 
by  the  thought  that,  though  conscious  of 
innocence,  God  would  still  iiold  and  treat  him 
as  guilty.  The  believer  able  now  to  rejoice 
in  the  thought  thai,  though  conscious  of  guilt , 
God  for  Christ's  sake  will  hold  and  treat 
bim  as  innocent,  making  him  accepted  in  the 
beloved." 

3.  Hit  despair  of  being  able  to  obtain 
acquittance  with  God  (verse  29).  "  If  I  be 
wicked  (orsimply,*  lam,'  or 'shall  be  wicked;' 
i.e.,  must  be  held  and  treated  as  such),  why 
then  labour  I  in  vain  "  [to  maintain  a  good 
conscience  or  attempt  to  prove  my  innocence]? 
A  hard  and  unbelieving  thought  of  God, 
suggested  by  his  own  carnal  nature,  and  by 
the  enemy  who  sought  to  bring  him  to  curse 
his  Maker  as  arbitrary,  tyrannical,  and  un- 
just. Satan's  old  trade  (Gen.  iii.  1,  4,  5). 
The  bitter  and  utiigenerous  thought  too 
fondly  dwelt  upon  by  Job.  Perhaps  some 
secret  consciousness  of  inward  corruption, 
and  of  the  truth  as  regarded  himself  (verse 
30).  "If  I  wash  myself  with  snow-water 
(the  purest  to  be  got),  and  make  my  hands 
never  so  clean  (or,  *  cleanse  my  hands  with 
lye' — used  with  oil  instead  of  soap),  jetshalt 
thou  plunge  me  in  the  ditch  (or  pit),  and 
mine  own  clothes  shall  abhor  me  '  {margin, 
**  make  me  to  be  abliorred  ").  The  idea  :  All 
my  attempts  to  make  my  heart  and  life  pure 
will  with  Thee  be  utterly  vain, — Thou  wilt 
still  regard  me  as  impure  and  abominable. 
The  thought  probably  suggested  by — (1) 
his  conscious  endeavours  to  maintain  purity 
of  heart  and  life ;  (2)  his  treatment  at  God's 
hands  being  such  as  apparently  to  indicate  the 
Divine  condemnation.  Should  have  been 
awakened  by— (1)  Conscious  corruption;  (2) 
Apprehension  of  the  Divine  puritv.  So 
Isaiah  (Ig.   vi.  5).      So  Job  himself  after- 


wards (ch.  xl.  4;  xlii.  5,  6).  The  language 
probably  now  dictated  by  peevishness  and 
bitterness.  Yet  true,  though  in  a  different 
sense  from  that  intended.  All  man's 
attempts  to  justify  and  purify  himself  before 
God  in  vain.  He  still  remains  wicked, 
guilty,  and  abominable  in  the  sight  of  a 
holy  God.  Man,  as  a  fallen  child  of  Adam, 
in  his  very  nature  corrupt  and  opposed  to 
God.  All  self-attempts  leave  his  nature  un- 
changed and  polluting  all  his  actions.  Such 
attempts  themselves  only  the  offspring  of 
pride  and  self- righteousness,  therefore  abomi- 
nable. Humility  and  love  the  only  things 
in  a  creature  acceptable  to  God.  Man's 
self-attempts  leave  him  destitute  of  both. 
Guilt  not  to  be  effaced  but  by  an  atonement, 
or  satisfaction  to  Divine  justice.  The  waters 
of  the  ocean  unable  to  wash  out  a  single 
blood-spot  of  guilt.  Only  Almighty  power 
able  to  remove  the  leopard's  spots  or  whiten 
the  Ethiopian's  skin.  In  Christ  provision 
made  both  for  the  removal  of  guilt  and  im- 
purity. His  blood  removes  the  one,  His 
Spirit's  grace  the  other.  From  His  pierced 
side  came  forth  both  "  blood  and  water " 
(John  xix.  34 ;  1  John  v.  6,  8).  The  true 
posture  of  each  fallen  child  of  man  in  Luke 
xviii.  13.  The  prayer  (Ps.  li.  7).  The 
invitation  (Is.  i.  18).  The  promise  (Ez. 
xxxvi.  25).  The  acceptance  (1  John  i.  7) 
The  thanksgiving  (Rev.  i.  5).  A  gracious 
plunging  of  the  self-purified  into  the  ditch, 
m  the  Divinely  awakened  consciousness  of 
guilt  and  corruption.  Saul  carefully  washed 
at  Jerusalem ;  blessedly  plunged  in  the 
ditch  at  Damascus  (Acts  ix.  9 — 11 ;  xxvi. 

4.  Job^s  inability  to  plead  his  cause  before 
Qod  (verse  32).  "  For  he  is  not  a  man  as 
I  am,  that  I  should  answer  him  [as  defendant 
at  the  bar],  and  that  we  should  come  to- 
gether in  judgment ''  [to  plead  our  respective 
causes].  Job  thinks  he  has  a  case  against 
God,  as  God  appears  to  have  one  against 
him.  Wishes  he  could  have  them  tried,  but 
feels  that  the  distance  between  him  and  God 
precludes  the  thought  (verse  33).  "  Neither 
is  there  any  daysman  betwixt  us  (margin, 
"one  that  should  argue;"  or,  "an  umpire;" 
properly,  an  arbitrator  with  authority  to 
restrain  each  party,  and  to  bind  them  to  his 
decision)*  that  might  lay  his  hand  [authorita- 
tively] upon  us  both."  Hence  the  supposed 
impossibility  of  an  equal  contest.  What 
Job  desiderated  has,  in  a  much  better  sense, 
been  provided  for  sinful  man.  A  dajsman, 
or  M^ediator,  has  been  found  in  the  person 
of  Jesus  Christ — the  fellow  both  of  God  and 
man  (Zech.  xiii.  7).  Not  to  afford  man  an 
opportunity  of  vainly  pleading  liis  innocence 
against  God,  but  of  humbly  acknowledf:ring 
o  guilt  and  obtaining  mercy  (1  John  i.  9. ; 

o5 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTART:  JOB. 


1  Tim.  ii.  5,  6).  Job  imagines  he  could  make 
gnod  his  case  but  for  the  Divine  power  and 
majesty  that  overawe  him  (verse  34).  "  Let 
liiiii  take  his  rod  away  from  me  ( — his  power, 
and  perhaps  the  effect  of  it,  his  affliction), 
and  let  not  his  fear  (or  terrible  majesty) 
terrify  me.  Then,  would  I  speak  and  not 
fear  him  :  but  it  is  not  so  with  me  **  {margin 
'*  but  I  am  not  so  with  myself  j"  or,  **  for  1 
am  not  so  in  mind," — as  to  fear  him  in  the 
controversy  from  any  consciousness  of  guilt). 
The  fear  of  the  Divine  majesty  the  common 
feeling  of  humanity.  Even  the  seraphim 
cover  their  faces  with  their  wings  before 
God.  The  doors  of  the  temple  and  the 
foundations  of  Sinai  shook  at  His  presence. 


**  A  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
the  living  God."  The  **rod'*  of  God  seen 
removed  in  the  person  and  work  of  Him  who 
was  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,"  and  who 
"suffered  for  our  sins,  the  Just  one  in  the  room 
of  the  unjust."  The  rays  of  Divine  majesty 
softened  in  the  God-man,  Christ  Jesus.  The 
Father  seen  in  him  who  was  the  "man  of 
sorrows"  (John  xiv.  9).  Jesus  the  way  to 
the  Father.  Through  Him  we  enter  with 
boldness  into  the  holiest  of  all  (John  xiv.  6  ; 
Heb.  X.  19—22).  Christ  the  true  Jacob's 
ladder.  The  foot  on  the  earth,  and  the  top 
reaching  to  heaven  (John  L  61 :  Gen.  xxviii. 
12). 


CHAPTEE  X. 
JOB'S  REPLY  TO  BILDAB— CONTINUED. 


His  speech  takes  the  form  rather  of  an 
expostulation  with  God  in  regard  to  his 
afflictions.  The  vehemence  of  his  spirit 
reaches  its  height  in  this  chapter.  Does  not 
renounce  God,  but  takes  great  liberty  in 
addressing  Him.  The  liberty,  however, 
rather  that  of  a  child  with  a  father  whose 
clouded  and  averted  face  he  can  neither  un- 
derstand nor  endure. 

I.  His  impatience  of  life,  and  his 
resolution  to  give  free  vent  to  his 
complaints  (verse  1). 

"  My  soul  is  weary  of  (or,  *  loathes,*  or 
'bursts  in')  my  life;  I  will  leave  my  com- 
plaint upon  myself  (I  will  give  loose  reins  to 
my  complaint)  :  I  will  speak,"  &c.  The 
language  of  a  deeply  distressed  and  even 
desperate  man.  Contrasted  with  Ps,  xxxix. 
1,  and  Lam.  iii.  39 ;  and  especially  with 
New  Testament  experience  (Phil.  iv.  5 — 7  ; 
Rom.  V.  3  ;  1  Pet.  i.  6 — 8).  In  Job's  words 
we  have — (1)  An  unhappy  state  of  mind 
allowed — "  My  soul  is  weary  of  my  life."  So 
Kebekah  (Gen.  xxvii.  46) ;  Elijah  (1  Kings 
xix.  4) ;  and  Jonah  (iv.  8).  Believers  in 
t  rouble  are  to  possess  their  souls  in  patience. 
A  mind  stayed  on  God  is  kept  "  in  perfect 
peace." — (2)  An  unwise  resolution  formed — 
"  I  will  leave  my  complaint  upon  myself, 
&c."  Safer  and  wiser  to  check  than  to  indulge 
complaints  regarding  God's  dealings  with 
us.  The  impatience  of  the  fesh  makes  men 
sit  under  Elijah! s  jumper  tree  and  Jonah^s 
gourd.  Yet  a  troubled  soul,  familiar  with 
God,  pours  out  its  complaints  into  His  eai 
without  sin  (Ps.  xlii.  6 — 11).  Life  in  itself  a 
mercy  ;  yet  sometimes  would  be  little  better 
than  hell  but  for  the  hopes  of  heaven  [Trapp'] 


II.  His  desire  not  to  be  treated  as 
guilty,  without  knowing  the  grounds 
of  it  (verse  2). 

"  I  will  say  unto  God."  Implies — (1) 
Deep  distress,  extorting  the  language.  (2) 
A  childlike  conjidence  and  freedom  towards 
God.  (3)  Peevishness  and  want  of  reverence. 
— "Do  not  condemn  me"  (or,  treat  me  as  a 
guilty  person).  A  father'' s  displeasure  is  a 
generous  child's  greatest  grief.  A  single  sin 
sufficient  to  make  us  guilty  before  God 
(James  ii.  10;  Gal.  iii.  10).  Only  one  way 
for  a  sinner  to  be  freed  from  condemnation 
(Rom.  T'ji.  1,  34).  Christ  the  Righteous 
suffers  in  the  place  of  the  condemned  sinner 
(2  Cor.  V.  21).  A  believer,  however,  still 
sometimes  either  really  or  apparently  under 
God's  displeasure  (Isa.  liv.  7 — 9 :  Ivii.  17 — 
18). — "  Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest 
with  me."  Job's  trial,  that  God  seemed  to 
have  a  controversy  with  him  while  he  was 
ignorant  of  the  cause.  A  spiritually  en- 
lightened man  thinks  that  God  has  a  con- 
troversy  with  him  when  there  is  none ;  an 
unrenewed  man  does  not  believe  in  it  when 
it  actually  exists. — With  different  classes 
and  individuals  God  may  have  various 

Grounds  of  Controversy. 

1.  'W\i\i.  nations  and  unconverted  men.  The 
grounds— (1)  Rebellion  against  his  autho- 
rity ;  (2)  IJnthank fulness  for  His  mercies  ; 
(3)  Apostacy  from  His  religion ;  (4)  Perse- 
cution of  His  cause  and  people;  (5)  Con- 
tempt of  His  ordinances;  (6)  Rejection  of 
nis  Son. 

2.  With  churches  and  individual  Christians. 
Tie  grounds  may  be— (1)  Departure  from 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAP.    X 


first  love  (Rev.  ii.  4,  5) ;  (2)  Formality  and 
hypocrisy  (Rev.  iii.  1) ;  (3)  Pride  and  self- 
satisfaction  (Rev.  iii.  I — 7)  ;  (4)  Lukewarrn- 
uess  (Rev.  iii.  15,  16) ;  (5)  Unfaithfulness 
and  unfruitfulness  (John  xv.  2) ;  (6)  Cove- 
tousness  and  wordly-mindedness  (Is.  Ivii.  17). 
Troubles  laid  on  believers  may  be — (1)  On 
Account  oi  past  or  present  sin  ;  (2)  For  trial 
and  manifestation  of  grace ;  (3)  For  pwrif- 
cation  and  spiritual  growth  ;  (4;)  For  exhibi' 
Hon  of  Dioine  support^ 

III.  Appeal  to  God  against  His  pre- 
sent treatment  (verses  3  —12). 
The  grounds  of  this  appeal : 

1.  Its  inconsistency  with  God^s  nature  and 
honour  (verse  3),  "  Is  it  good  unto  thee  that 
thou  shouldst  oppress,  that  thou  shouldst 
despise  the  work  of  thine  hands,  and  shine 
upon  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  ?  "  Three 
things  apparently  involved  in  Job's  afflic- 
tions : — (1)  Oppression  on  the  part  of  God ; 
(2)  Contempt  of  His  own  works;  (3)  Coun- 
tenance given  to  the  sentiments  and  practice 
of  ungodly  men  who  deny  His  providence 
if  not  His  very  existence,  and  maintain  the 
uselessness  of  religion.  In  Job's  case 
there  appeared  no  ground  for  such  severe 
treatment.  Though  God*s  own  creature,  he 
seemed  to  be  treated  as  unworthy  of  regard. 
As  a  religious  man,  his  great  afflictions  might 
give  occasion  to  the  ungodly  to  harden  them- 
selves in  their  irreligion.  All  this  is  incon- 
sistent with  God's  nature  and  honour.  God's 
nature  is  love.  A  God  of  truth  and  without 
iniquity.  Afflicts  none  willingly.  Despises 
cot  any.  Ungodliness  His  abomination. 
Observe:— (1)  God^s  procedure  sometimes 
apparently  at  variance  with  His  nature  and 
character.  (2)  That  inconsistency  only  in 
appearance.  God  cannot  act  but  in  accord- 
ance with  His  nature,  which  is  love  and 
light,  goodness,  purity,  and  justice.  (3) 
God's  glory  and  honour  involved  in  His  deal- 
ings with  His  creatureSy  and  especially  with 
His  servants,  (4)  God^s  nature  and  character 
0  rock  for  our  feet  under  the  most  trying  dis- 
pensations. 

2.  God's  Omniscience  (verse  4).  **Hast 
thou  eyes  of  flesli?  or  seest  thou  as  man 
seeth  ?  "  (Verse  7)  **  Thou  knowest  that  I 
am  not  wicked."  Conscious  of  innocence 
we  can  appeal  to  Divine  omniscience  for  a 
favourable  verdict.  Man  looks  on  the  out- 
ward appearance ;  God's  eyes  penetrate  the 
heart  (L  Sam.  xvi.  7).  Man  deceived  by 
appearances.  Sees  imperfectly  into  character 
and  conduct.  Requires  lengthened  observa- 
tion to  arrive  at  the  truth.  Often  swayed 
by  passion  and  partiality.  God  takes  all 
into  one  view  at  once  (Acts  xv.  18).  His 
eyes  a  flame  of  fire  (Rev.  i.  14).  liis  ser- 
vants' character  and  conduct  often  misjudged 

5—2 


by  men.  Perfectly  known  to  God.  Job's 
comfort  (ch.  xvi.  19;  xxiii.  10).  His  trial 
that  his  friends  read  his  character  in  his 
suflerings.  His  Antitype  similarly  misjudged 
(Is.  hii.  4 ;  John  vii.  23).  God's  knowledge 
of  Job's  innocence  already  shewn  in  the  his- 
tory. Job's  own  knowledge  of  it  as  yet  only 
from  his  own  consciousness.  This  conscious- 
ness his  confidence  towards  God.  "  If  our 
hearts  condemn  us  not,"  &c.  (1  John  iii.  21). 
Job  a  sinner,  but  not  a  "  wicked "  sinner. 
Sinned  not  deliberately  and  from  choice.  Not 
guilty  of  hypocrisy  and  secret  sin.  Not  to 
love  sin  or  allow  ourselves  in  it,  is  with  God 
not  to  sin  at  all  (1  John  iii.  6,  8,  9). 

3.  God's  eternity  (verse  5).  "  Are  thy 
days  as  the  days  of  man  ?  Are  thy  years  as 
man's  days  P "  [God's  eternity  marked  by 
*^ years"  in  contrast  with  man's  days.] 
(Verse  6). — "That  thou  inquirest  after  mine 
iniquity,  and  searchest  after  my  sin."  Short- 
lived man  requires  haste  to  investigate  and 
punish  crime.  His  few  years  afford  him  but 
few  opportunities  of  fully  ascertaining  charac- 
ter. The  judge  may  die  or  the  criminal 
escape.  God's  eternity  excludes  all  need  of 
haste,  and  secures  all  opportunity  for  know- 
ledge. With  God  no  need  of  torture  to 
elicit  confession.  The  severity,  rapid  succes- 
sion, and  long  continuance  of  Job's  afflictions, 
apparently  inconsistent  with  this. 

4.  His  omnipotence  (verse  7).  "Thou 
knowest  (or,  'Although  thou  knowest;  — 
margin^ — *  It  is  upon  thy  knowledge  ')  that  I 
am  not  wicked,  and  there  is  (or,  'and  that 
tliere  is')  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  thine 
hand."  No  fear  of  a  rescue  on  behalf  of 
God's  prisoners.  Hence  no  need  of  vehe- 
ment urgency  in  inflicting  punishment. 
Solemn  truth  for  the  impenitent.  "How 
shall  we  escape,"  &cP  (Heb.  ii.  3).  "Con- 
sider tbis,  ye  that  forget  God,"  &c.  (Ps, 
1.  22).  Precious  comfort  for  Christ's  sheep. 
None  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand 
(John  X.  29,  30). 

5.  His  relation  to  man  as  his  Creator 
(verse  8).  "Thine  hands  have  made  me 
(or, 'elaborated  me,' — margin,  'took  pains  with 
me*),  and  fashioned  ( — exquisitely  moulded 
and  adorned)  me  together  round  about 
( — every  part  of  me) ;  yet  thou  dost  destroy 
me."  Powerful  plea.  Workmen  respect  their 
own  work.  The  more  pauis  bestowed,  the 
more  regard  will  be  shown.  The  heavens  the 
work  of  God's  fingers ;  man  the  work  of  liis 
"  hands."  Man  the  most  exquisite  piece  of 
Divine  workmanship  even  in  his  body,  ^till 
more  in  his  soul,  most  of  all  in  the  union  of 
both.  The  "human  face  Divine''  an  example 
of  this  exquisite  moulding  and  adorning. 
The  head  apparently  designed  by  nature  as 
the  cupola  to  the  most  glorious  of  her  works 
[Addison\.     Galen,  the  physician,  converted 


CHAF.  X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAEr:  JOB. 


to  the  belief  of  a  Divine  Creator  by  the 
wisdom  displayed  in  tlie  structure  of  the 
human  frame.  Man  God's  glory  as  His  work 
in  creation ;  still  more  asHis  work  in  redemp- 
tion (Is.  xxix.  23  ;  xlv.  IJ  ;  Ix.  21). 

6.  Man  s  frailty  and  mortality  (verse  9). 
"  Remember,  I  beseech  thee,  that  thou  hast 
made  me  as  the  clay;  and  wilt  thou  (or,  thou 
wilt)  bring  me  unto  dust  again  ?"  Reference 
to  the  Creation,  and  to  the  sentence  pro- 
nounced on  man  at  the  Fall.  Similar  terms 
to  those  in  Gen.  ii.  7,  and  iii.  19.  Written 
documents  or  traditionary  records  of  the 
events  probably  then  in  existence,  and  after- 
wards em))loyed  by  Moses.  Man's  frail  and 
shortlived  existence  used  by  Job  as  a  plea 
for  milder  treatment.  Similar  plea  in  Ps. 
Ixxxix.  47.  An  availing  one  with  God  (Ps. 
ciii.  14;  Gen.  vi.  3).  God's  nature  compas- 
sion. Our  frailty  pleads  with  God  for  for- 
bearance, with  man  himself  for  earnestness 
(Eccles.  ix.  10). 

7.  Ood's  kindness  already  manifested.  (I) 
In  our  conception  (verse  10).  "  Hast  thou 
not  poured  me  out  as  milk,  and  curdled  me 
like  cheese  ? "  God  the  careful  and  benefi- 
cent Agent  in  our  conception  (Ps.  cxxxix. 
15,  16,  Eccles.  xi.  5).  The  process  of  nature 
in  the  womb  His  own,  as  instituted,  sustained 
and  controlled  by  Him.  Milk  coagulated 
into  cheese  an  image  of  the  formation  of  the 
embryo  of  the  future  man.  (2)  In  the  growth 
of  the  foetus  (verse  11).  "Thou  hast  clothed 
me  with  skin  and  flesh,  and  fenced  me  with 
bones  and  sinews."  The  development  of  the 
embryo  another  of  God's  mysterious  and 
beneficent  operations.  The  order  in  the 
text  that  of  Nature, — first  the  skin,  then  the 
flesh,  lastly  the  harder  parts  gradually 
added.  Among  other  important  purposes, 
"bones  and  sinews"  serve  for  protection  to 
the  more  vital  parts.  (3)  In  tlu  bestowment 
of  Z//*^ (verse  12).  "Thou  has  granted  me  life." 
Life  imparted  to  the  embryo  in  the  womb 
as  a  gift  of  God.  Natural  life  a  precious  gift ; 
how  much  more  spiritual  and  eternal !  That 
life  also  originally  imparted  to  man,  but  lost 
in  Adam  (Rom.  v.  17 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  21). 
Restored  in  Christ  who  is  the  Life  (John 
xiv.  6  ;  xi.  25  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  21  ;  Rom. 
V.  17,  21;  1  John  v.  11,  12.  (4)  In  the 
favour  and  kindness  accompanying  life.  "  Life 
and  favour."  The  kindness  of  God  visible 
in  every  stage  of  our  natural  life.  Con- 
spicuous in  infancy.  "  Cast  upon  him  from 
the  womb."  Kindly  watched  over  in  a  long- 
continued  period  of  helplessness.  Beneficent 
provision  made  in  parental  affection.  Each  in- 
dividual the  recipient  of  ten  thousand  mercies 
every  day  he  lives.  Divine  goodness  smiles 
on  ns  in  every  sunbeam,  and  fans  us  in 
every  breeze.  (5)  In  the  continued  preser- 
vation of  life,    **  And  thy  visitation  (provi- 

68 


dential  care)  hath  preserved  my  spirit." 
Natural  life  preserved  by  a  careful  a?id 
watchful  Providence.  The  hand  that  put 
the  heart  in  motion  sustains  its  pulsations. 
Provides  the  means  necesary  for  life's  sup- 
port. The  petition  answered  even  before 
it  is  offered — "Give  us  this  day  our  daily 
bread."  Protects  life  and  organs  from  con- 
stantly surrounding  dangers.  An  unseen 
hand  averts  a  thousand  accidents  each  day 
we  live.  The  mind  preserved  from  derange- 
ment and  disease  as  well  as  the  body.  The 
same  Divine  care  that  protected  the  brain, 
the  seat  of  life  and  thought,  by  a  strong, 
spherical,  bony  skull,  still  continued  in  pre- 
serving the  spirit.  Sleep,  as  needful  for  the 
mind  as  the  body,  the  daily  gift  of  a  bene- 
ficent Providence. — An  object  of  so  much 
regard  not  likely  to  be  soon  despised  or 
lightly  cast  away.  Neither  natural  nor  be- 
coming for  so  much  kindness  to  terminate 
in  cruelty. 

lY.  Complaints  against  God  and  His 

procedure  (verses  13 — 18). 

1.  That  his  sufferings  were  in  6od*s  secret 
purpose  amidst  all  His  past  kindness  (verse  1 3). 
"  And  these  things  hast  thou  hid  in  thine 
heart;  Iknow  that  this  is  with  ihee."  The  com- 
fort of  believers  that  all  events  in  our  lot  are 
part  of  God's  secret  counsel  (Ps.  cxxxix.  16  ; 
Eccles.  iii.  14).  A  truth  of  natural  religion 
that  what  God  does  in  time  He  purposed  in 
eternity  (Acts  xv.  1 S).  Necessary  and  desi- 
rable in  a  Being  infinite,  eternal,  and  un- 
changeable ;  omnipresent,  omniscient,  and 
almighty;  holy,  wise,  and  good.  Job's  pre- 
determined afflictions  in  his  view  an  apparent 
contradiction  to  God's  former  kindness. 
Life  seemed  given  only  to  make  him  miser- 
able. Such  ungenerous  thoughts  his  own 
infirmity.  God  neither  fickle  nor  cruel.  All 
things  made,  according  to  His  purpose,  to 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
Him  (Rom.  viii.  28).  Predestined  sufferings 
no  contradiction  to  experienced  kindness. 
Joseph's  imprisonment  under  a  false  abomi- 
nable charge  was  in  God's  secret  counsel  while 
delivering  him  from  the  pit  and  placing  him 
in  Potiphar's  palace.  Observe — (1)  The  na- 
ture ofthefiesk  is  to  put  a  wrong  construction 
upon  God's  dealings.  (2)  The  abject  of  Satan 
is  to  misrepresent  God,  as  arbitrary ^  cruel  and 
tyrannical.  (3)  Hard  thoughts  of  God  a 
special  temptation  in  time  of  trouble, 

2.  Complains  of  God's  excessive  strictness 
in  marking  and  punishing  offences  (verse  14).. 
"  If  I  sin  (rather,  '  have  sinned '),  then  Thou 
markest  (or  hast  marked)  me,  and  Thou  wilt 
not  acquit  me  from  mine  iniquity."  This 
perhaps  the  secret  counsel  complained  of  in 
j)receding  verse.  In  ignorance  Job  views  his 
afiQictions  as  the  effect  of  God's  strictness  m 


HOMILEIIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


OHAP.   JC. 


marking   his  sin.      As  yet  no  frank  and 
humble  confession.    Observe — (1)  Sin  often 
brought  to  mind  in  time  of  affliction.    (2)  Ai 
a  fact ^  the  sins  of  God's  children  often  visited 
token  those  of  others  are  not  so.     (3)  The 
views  of  the  flesh  in  regard  to  God  always 
perverted.    According  to  the  flesh,  God  is 
either— (1)  Indifferent  to   men's   conduct; 
soft   and  indulgent  to  their  sins;    or  (2) 
Stem   and    inexorable ;    strict  in   marking 
and  punishing  every  offence.      (4)    In    a 
believer^  the  flesh  speaks  at  one  time,  and  the 
spirit  at  another.     Job's  present  language 
uttered  under  the  influence  of  the  flesh  and 
the  promptings  of  Satan.     Yet,  in  itself,  in  a 
certain  sense  true,  as  (1)  Men's  sins  are  ob- 
served and  marked  by  God.     Men  judged  at 
last  "  out  of  those  things  which  are  written 
in  the  books."     For  every  idle  word  account 
to  be  given  in  the  day  of  judgment.    Men 
receive  according  to  the  things  done  in  the 
body— good  or  bad.    Tlie  secrets  of  men  to 
be  one  day  judged  by  Jesus  Christ  (Rom. 
ii.  16).     Every  evil  work  and  secret  thing  to 
be  brought  into  judgment.     (2)  The  guilty 
by  no  means  acquitted  by  God.     Yet  sin  is 
forgiven  and  the  guilty  are  pardoned.     The 
gracious  provision  of  tlie  scheme  of  Redemp- 
tion.    Through  the  substitution  and  satisfac- 
tion of  Christy  God  can  punish  and  yet  pardon. 
God  a  just  God  and  yet  a  Saviour;  just  and 
the  justifier  of  the  ungodly  tliat  believe  in 
Jesus.    Millions  of  sins  forgiven,  yet  not  one 
unpunished.    The  iniquities  of  men  laid  on 
the  one  righteous  man,  Christ  Jesus.    The 
Just  One  "  bruised  and  put  to  grief "  as  a 
sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  unjust.      The 
guiltless  takes  the  place  of  the  guilty,  and 
the  guilty  that  of  the  guiltless  (2  Cor.  v.  21). 
The  blood  of  Jesus  able  to  cleanse  from  all 
sm,  because  the  blood  of  God's  Son  (1  John 
i.  7).    Every  sin  marked  against  the  sinner 
answered  and  atoned  for  by  the  Surety.     The 
only  thing  now   required   for  the  sinner's 
pardon  is  his  humble  and  hearty  acceptance 
of  the  Substitute.     God  is  satisfied  with  the 
Surety.     It  only  remains  that  the  sinner  be 
so  too.     Confessing  his  guilt  and  accepting 
the  Substitute,  he  is  at  once  forgiven  (1  John 
i.    9).      Observe— (1)     The   peculiarity    of 
the  Gospel  age  is  that  its  provision  is  revealed 
with  a  clearness  and  fulness  before  unknown. 
(2)  The  Gospel  a  blessed  contradiction  to  the 
latter  part  of  Job's  present  utterance.     The 
Law  declares,  God  cannot  and  will  not  acquit 
the  guilty ;  the  Gospel  points  to  Calvary  and 
says,  the  guiltless  One  became  the  guilty 
and  suffered  the  penalty.     (3)  The  sinner  who 
refuses  the  Surety  retains  his  guilt,  and  suffers 
himself  the  punishment  of  it. 

3.  Complains  of  being  treated  as  he  is 
though  a  righteous  man  (verse  15).  "  If  I  be 
wicked  (—sin  deliberately  ;  or,  *  be  guilty  \) 
woe  unto  me  :  if  I  be  righteous,  yet  will  1 


(or  may  I)  not  lift  up  my  head."  A  dictate 
of  natural  religion  that  the  guilty  trans- 
gressor must  be  punished  "This  man  is  a 
murderer  whom  vengeance  sufl'ereth  not  to 
live  "  (Acts  xxviii.  4).  Also  the  teaching  o{ 
nature  that  the  just  man  may  lift  up  his  head 
with  confidence  and  joy.  "Be  just,  and 
fear  not.''  None,  however,  in  himself,  able 
to  do  this  before  God.  The  most  upright 
still  guilty  in  God's  sight.  Standing  righteou* 
in  Christ,  a  man  lifts  up  his  head  before  Goa. 
Job  unable  at  present  to  do  this— (1)  As 
not  realizing  his  standing  in  the  Surety ;  (2) 
Keeping  his  eyes  on  his  affliction ;  (.J)  His 
sufferings,  according  to  the  popular  view, 
seemed  to  proclaim  him  a  guilty  man.  — "  I 
am  full  (or,  '  being  full ')  of  confusion  (re- 
proach  or  ignominy)  ;  therefore  see  th  m 
(or,^*  seeing  as  I  do')  mine  affliction." 
Job's  other  trials  greatly  aggravated  by 
reproaches  from  his  friends.  Confusion, 
perplexity  and  shame,  natural  results  of  his 
affliction,  especially  in  the  time  In  which  he 
lived.  A  natural  tendency  to  judge  of  a 
man  from  his  circumstances.  An  aggrava- 
tion to  a,  good  man's  sufferings,  that  himself 
and  religion  are  misjudged  from  them. 
Hence  Paul's  anxiety  in  regard  to  his  suffer- 
ings as  an  apostle  (Eph.  iii.  13;  2  Tim. 
i.  8).  Himself  not  ashamed  of  them  C2  Tim. 
i.  12). 

4.  Complains  that  his  sufferings  only  in- 
creased  in    number  and    intensity.      Three 
trying  circumstances  in  Job's  afflictions.    (1) 
Their  continual  increase  from  the  commence- 
ment (verse  16).    "Eor  it  increaseth"  (rears 
itself  up  like  a  swelling  wave  j  or,  *'  should 
it  [my  head]  lift  itself  up").   Terrible  climax 
in  Job's  sufferings.     Commenced  with  loss  of 
oxen  and  asses,  and  increased  to  extreme 
bodily  affliction,  inward  darkness,  and  appre- 
hension   of    Divine    wrath.     Probably    his 
disease  itself  increased  in  violence  as  it  con- 
tinued.   {2)  "YhQiv  intensity.    **Thou  huntest 
me  as  a  fierce  lion  j  and  again  thou  showest 
thyself  marvellous  upon  me?"     God's  pur- 
pose seemed  to  be  to  hunt  him  down  as  a 
dangerous  animal ;  or  as  if  He  Himself  were 
a  fierce  lion  intent  on  tearing  him  to  pieces, 
as  Is.  xxxviii.  13;  Hos.  v.  14,  xiii.  7;  Ps. 
1.  22.     His  afflictions  appeared  like  a  display 
of  what  God    could    inflict.     His   plagues 
made    wonderful    (Deut.   xxviii.    59).   "(3) 
Their  variety  and  constant  change  (verse  17). 
"  Thou  renewest  thy  witnesses  (or,* weapons ;' 
margin,    'plagues')    against   me;    and    in- 
creasest  thme  indignation  upon  me ;  changes 
and  war  (or,  'successions  and  a  host,'  i.e., 
one  host  scuceeding  another)  are  ai>[ainst  me." 
God  appeared  to  be  employing  all  his  weapons 
against  him,  each  attack  a  fresh  "  witness  " 
produced  to  confront  and  confound  him  as  a 
guilty  man.    One  troop  of  troubles  seemed 
only  to  succeed  another,  equally  bent  on  his 

60 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


destruction.  Observe — (1.)  A  child  of  God 
views  all  his  troubles  as  from  the  Divine  hand. 
(2.)  This  often  an  exaggeration  rather  than  an 
alleviation  of  them.  (3.)  A  fearful  thing  to 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  Ood.  (4.) 
Blessed  to  have  God  for  a  friend,  terrible  to 
have  him  for  an  enemy.  (5.)  Believers  not  to 
be  staggered  at  the  heaviest  troubles  succeeding 
each  other.  (6.)  No  troubles  to  a  believer  but 
what  a  Father's  love  'permits  and  a  Father's 
hand  metes  out. 

V.  A  piteous  lament  (verses  18 — 22) 
Embraces — 

1.  A  regret  that  he  had  ever  been  born, 
or  permitted  to  live  (verses  18, 19).  "  Where- 
fore then  hast  Thou  brought  me  out  of 
the  wombP  O  that  I  had  given  up  the 
ghost,  and  no  eye  had  seen  me !  1  should 
have  been  as  though  I  had  not  been ;  I  should 
have  been  carried  from  the  womb  to  the 

frave."  The  feeling  and  thoughts  of  his 
rst  outburst  return  upon  him  (eh.  iii.  30 — 
16).  An  advance  in  the  complaint ;  his 
birth  directly  ascribed  to  God,  and  charged 
upon  him  as  an  evil.  The  idea  of  God  ex- 
tracting the  infant  from  the  womb  familiar 
in  the  Psalms,  as  Ps.  xxii.  9 ;  Ixxi.  6. 
With  David  a  matter  of  praise;  with  Job 
one  of  regret.  Unbelief  and  passion  cast  re- 
proach on  the  Author  both  of  our  being  and  our 
well-being.  Job  has  long  ago  regretted  the 
blindness  and  haste  which  dictated  these 
irreverent  and  ungrateful  words. 

2.  An  impassioned  request  for  a  short  relief 
from  suffering,  on  the  grounds  of  his  speedy 
departure  (verse  20).  *'  Are  not  my  days 
few  ?  Cease  then,  and  let  me  alone ;  that 
I  may  take  coinfort  (brighten  up,  as  ch.  ix. 
27)  a  little  before  I  go,"  Same  sentiment 
in  the  conclusion  of  his  reply  to  Eliphaz 
(cb.  vii.  19,21).  Observe — (1)  A  saint,  though 
sad  and  sinning,  cannot  be  restrained  from 
praying.  The  flesh  only  lifts  up  its  voice 
when  that  of  the  spirit  is  silent.  The  boon 
of  a  short  relief  testifies  the  depth  of  Job's 
distress.  (2)  Brief  respite  in  suffering  a 
mercy  to  the  sufferer.  Enables  him — (i.) 
To  rally  his  strength;  (ii.)  To  collect  his 
thoughts;  (iii.)  To  recover  calmness;  (iv.) 
To  prepare  himself  for  further  suffering.  (3) 
Terrible  doom  of  the  lost,  which  admits  of  no 
such  respite  (Luke  xvi.  24;  Mark  ix.  44  j 
Kev.  xiv.  10, 11. 

3.  Gloomy  description  of  the 

State  of  the  Dead 

as  viewed  by  Old  Testament  saints  (verses  21, 
22). 

1.  A  place  of  perpetual  exile  (verses  21). 
"  1  go  whence  I  shall  not  return ;  a  land," 
&c     Viewed  as  a  land  or  country;  its  in- 

70 


habitants  the  shades  or  spirits  of  deceased 
men.  Hence  the  sublime  description  in  Is. 
xiv.  9,  10;  Ez.  xxxii.  21.  A  land  from 
which  is  no  return  to  the  present  world. 

2.  A  place  without  attraction.  Return 
from  it  to  the  present  world  desirable,  but 
not  practicable.  Much  inferior  to  the  pre- 
sent life  for  enjoyment.  Banishment  to  it 
an  evil.  Hence  Hezekiah's  sorrow  and 
regret  at  the  prospect  of  having  so  soon  to 
enter  it  (Is.  xxxviii.  3 — 18). 

3.  A  place  of  confusion  and  disorder  (verse 
22).  "Without  any  order,"  (1)  No  dis- 
tinction  of  classes,  as  on  earth.  [Hence 
David's  prayer,  Ps.  xxvi.  9.]  A  place  of 
indiscrimmate  gathering  (1  Sam  xxviii.  19). 
(2)  No  pleasing  vicissitude  of  day  and  night, 
summer  and  winter.  (3)  No  beauty  or 
orderly  arrangement.  Chaotic  confusion,  as 
on  the  earth  before  the  six  day's  creation 
(Gen.  i.  2).  (4)  No  exercise  of  religious 
worship.  No  praise  or  thanksgiving.  This 
part  of  the  prospect  especially  deplored  by 
the  godly  (Ps.  vi.  5  ;  xxx.  9  ;  Ixxxviii.  10 — 
12;  cxv.  17;  Is.  xxxviii.  18). 

4.  A  place  of  darkness  and  gloom  (verse 
21).  "  The  land  of  darkness  and  the  shadow 
of  death,"  &c.  A  funeral  pall  of  midnight 
darkness  ever  resting  on  it.  Any  light  that 
penetrates  it  only  darkness, — "  The  light  is 
as  darkness."  The  view  probably  borrowed 
from  the  places  of  Oriental  sepulture,  sub- 
terranean grottoes.  The  darkness  of  these 
sepulchral  chambers  transferred  to  the  spirit- 
world.  The  experience  of  the  disembodied 
spirit  supposed  to  bear  affinity  to  the  circum- 
stances of  the  body.  The  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness had  not  yet  irradiated  the  world  beyond 
the  grave.  The  Forerunner  in  human  nature 
had  not  yet  entered  within  the  veil.  A  bliss- 
ful Paradise,  as  a  home  for  the  disembodied 
lust,  not  yet  known.  The  doctrine  of  a 
happy  intermediate  state  reserved  for  the 
teaching  of  Him  who  is  the  Way,  the  Truth, 
and  the  Life.  Perhaps  the  enjoyment  of  it 
reserved  for  the  time  when  He  Himself 
should  return  to  glory,  having  finished  the 
work  of  our  Redemption  (Luke  xxiii.  43). 
It  was  left  for  Jesus  to  dispel  the  darkness 
that  brooded  over  the  spirit-world,  and  show 
beyond  the  grave  the  hills  of  celestial  bliss. 
Life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  b^ 
Jesus  Christ  through  the  Gospel  (2  Tim.  i. 
10).  Jesus  carried  light  into  the  darksome 
grave  and  world  beyond — (1)  By  His  teach- 
ings (Luke  xvi.  22-  xxiii.  43;  John  xiv.  2). 
(2)  By  His  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension 
into  heaven.  By  His  lying  in  the  grave  He 
has  left  there  a  perpetual  light  for  the  com- 
fort of  all  His  dymg  people  [_Caryl\  Blessed 
contrast  between  the  prospect  of  death  to 
believers  now,  and  that  to  those  of  Old  Testa- 
went  timet.    The  kingdom  of  heaven  with  all 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    XL 


its  glory  and  beauty,  its  joy  and  song,  its 
inhabitants  and  employments,  opened  to  be- 
lievers by  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Jesus.  Instead  of  the  dreary  and  confused 
abode  of  half-conscious  spirits,  the  world 
beyond  is  now  the  believer's  bright  and 
happy  home  in  his  Father's  house.    Jesus 


has  tauffht  believers  joyously  to  sing  on  the 
bed  of  death,  as  well  as  amid  the  enjoyments 
of  life :  "Yonder's  my  house  and  portion 
fair,"  &c.  Hence  a  threefold  duty  lying  on 
New  Testament  believers  : — (L)  Thankful- 
ness; (2)  Joyfulness;  (3)  Heavenly-minded- 
ness. 


CHAPTER  XL 
FIRST  SPEECH  OF  ZOPEAB. 


Zophar  follows  in  the  same  train  with  his 
companions.  Misled  by  the  same  false  prin- 
ciple— great  sufferings  prove  great  sins — 
he  acts  the  part,  not  of  a  comforter,  but  of  a 
reprover  and  an  exhorter. 

I.  His  reason  for  speaking  (verses  2 
-4). 

"  Should  not  the  multitude  of  words  be 
answered?"  &c.  His  reason  involves  Job's 
censure.  Bitterly  reproves  him--(l)  As  a 
mere  talker  (verse  2).  "  Should  a  man  full 
of  talk  be  justified?"  (2)  As  a  vain  and 
lying  boaster  (verse  3).  *'  Should  thy  lies  make 
men  hold  their  peace  ?"  (3)  As  a  proud 
despiser  of  others  j  "  When  thoumockest,  shall 
no  man  make  thee  ashamed  ?  "  (4)  As  a  self- 
righteous  pretender  to  perfection^  both  in  his 
principle  and  his  practice  (verse  4).  *'  For 
thou  hast  said,  my  doctrine  (speech,  teach- 
ing, principles)  is  pure,  and  I  am  clean  in 
thine  eyes."  Observe — (1)  Euen  good  men 
can  speak  and  act  towards  others  like  the 
carnal  and  unconverted.  (2)  Religious  pro- 
fessors very  often  misunderstand  and  misjudge 
God's  tried  people.  (3)  Relievers*  greatest 
trials  sometimes  from  their  own  brethren  in 
the  faith.  Christ  a  merciful  as  well  b,s  faith- 
ful High  Priest,  touched  with  the  feeling  of 
our  infirmities  (Heb.  ii.  17,  18  ;  iv.  15). 

II.  Zophar  desiderates  Divine  teacli- 
in^  for  Job's  conviction  (verse  5). 

**  But  oh  that  God  would  speak,  and  open 
his  lips  against  thee ! "  God  speaks  with  a 
strong  hand  (Is.  viii.  11).  "  None  teacheth 
like  Him."  Such  teaching  needed  alike  by 
samt  and  sinner.  Necessary — (1)  for  con- 
viction ;  (2)  for  consolation.  Divine  teaching 
imparts — (1)  the  knowledge  of  ourselves; 
(2)  the  knowledge  of  God.  God  opens  his 
lips— (1)  ** against"  the  sinner,  for  nis  con- 
viction;  (2)  ybr  him,  for  his  consolation. 
•'  Spake  in  time  past  to  the  fathers  in  divers 
manners."  Speaks  now—  (1)  In  His  Word  ; 
(2)  By  His  Spirit.  The  Spirit's  office  to 
convince  the  world  of  sin,  righteousness,  and 
judgment  (John  xvi.  8).  The  Word  of  God 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword — a  dis- 


cemer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
heart.  Its  office  to  pierce,  to  the  dividing 
asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  joints  and  marrow 
(Heb.  iv.  12). — Two  things  desired  as  the  re- 
sult of  Divine  teaching  in  Job's  case ;  both 
important  for  shutting  the  mouths  of  com- 
plainers  against  God: — 

1.  The  discovery  of  God^i  transcendent  and 
unsearchable  wisdom  (verse  6).  **  That  he 
would  shew  thee  the  secrets  (hidden  depths) 
of  wisdom,  that  they  are  double  to  that  which 
is  "  (or,  "for  they  are  manifold," or  "there  are 
doublings,"— complications  or  intricacies 
— "in  his  understanding"). — All  complaints 
against  the  Divine  procedure  and  our  own  lot 
proceed  from  ignorance  of  God's  designs. 
"  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now."  God's 
judgments  a  great  deep.  His  way  in  the 
sea.  "Depth  of  riches,"  both  m  "the 
wisdom  ana  knowledge  of  God."  His  ways 
past  finding  out,  yet  all  just  and  true.  God 
not  to  be  traced  but  trusted.  "  Judge  not 
the  Lord  by  feeble  sense,"  &c. 

2.  The  discovery  of  Job's  own  sinfulness  as 
much  greater  than  his  sufferings.  "  Know  there- 
fore that  God  exacteth  of  thee  less  than  thine 
iniquity  deserveth  "  (or  "  consigns  to  oblivion 
in  thy  favour,"  or  "  remits  to  thee  [a  part] 
of  thy  iniquity,"  or  "  punishment ").  True, 
even  in  Job's  case,  on  the  supposition  that  his 
sufferings  were  the  punishment  of  his  sins. 
Any  affliction  in  this  life  only  a  part  of  what 
all  sin  deserves.  The  rich  man  in  torments 
probably  no  worse  than  his  neighbours  (Luke 
xvi.  19 — 23).  His  sin  not  even  mentioned  by 
the  Saviour.  Probably  only  worldliness  and 
self-indulgencCy  with  its  natural  consequence, 
heedlessness  of  the  wants  and  woes  of  others. 
His  belly  and  the  world  his  God.  To  offend 
in  one  point  of  God's  law  makes  a  man 
guilty  of  all.  Sin,  knowingly  committed, 
nothing  less  than  rebellion  against  God; 
causeless  anger  and  hatred  against  another, 
equivalent  in  God's  sight  to  murder.  Equally 
subjects  a  man  to  the  penalty  of  hell -fire 
(Matt.  V.  22;  1  John  iii.  15).  Covetous- 
ness  a  species  of  idolatry  (Eph.  v.  5  ;  Col. 
iii.  5).  Earth  a  place  of  mercy  and  for- 
bearance. The  full  punishment  of  sin  ro 
served  for  another  state. 

11 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  t  JOB. 


Ill,  Zophar  chides  Job's  presnmp- 
tion,  and  enlarges  on  the  unsearcliable- 
ness  of  the  Almighty  (verses  7—9). 

**  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God"  (or, 
"  wilt  thou  find  out  the  search,"  or  "  deep 
wisdom "  of  God  ?)  Canst  thou  find  out 
the  Almighty  unto  perfection  (or  "wilt  thou 
find  out  perfectly,*'  or  "  penetrate  to  the 
perfection  of  the  Almighty  P")  It  is  as  high 
as  heaven  {margin^  "  the  heights  of  heaven") ; 
what  canst  thou  do  [in  attaining  to  it,  viz., 
the  deep  wisdom  or  perfection  of  the  Al- 
mighty];  deeper  than  hell  (Sheol,  or 
Hades,  the  invisible  spirit-world,  supposed 
to  be  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth),  what 
canst  thou  know  ?  (or  how  wilt  thou  under- 
stand it?)  The  measure  thereof  is  longer 
than  the  earth  and  broader  than  the  sea." 
Poetical  description  of  the  Divine  wisdom 
and  knowledge,  and  in  general  of 

The  Unsearchahleness  of  God. 

God  unsearchable  to  finite  creatures — 

1.  In  Hi?,  Person.  His  Nature  or  Essence 
beyond  creature  ken.  As  easy  for  an  in- 
sect to  comprehend  man's  nature  as  for  man 
to  comprehend  his  Creator's.  The  more  the 
Grecian  sage  studied  the  question,  what  is 
God  ?  the  more  he  felt  himself  lost  in  it. 
Hence  the  altar  of  Athens  with  the  inscrip- 
tion :  To  the  Unknown  God.  In  God  is  both 
"that  which  may  be  known,"  and  which 
may  not  be  known  (Rom.  i.  19).  That  He 
is,  and  what  He  is,  may  be  known  ;  how  He 
is,  and  how  far  He  is,  is  beyond  a  creature's 
capacity  to  know.  God  capable  of  being 
apprehended,  but  not  of  being  comprehended. 
A  little  child  may  apprehend  God ;  a  seraph 
cannot  comprehend  Him.  God  is  incompre- 
hensible in  His  mode  of  being  as  the  One 
God;  still  more  as  the  Three  in  One.  To 
know  that  God  is  and  what  He  is,  necessary 
for  an  intelligent  creature's  happiness  i  to 
know  how  He  is,  were  it  possible,  could  only 
gratify  his  curiosity.  God  only  known  as  He 
IS  pleased  to  reveal  Himself.  Reveals  Him- 
self— (1)  In  His  works ;  (2)  In  the  human  con- 
sciousness J  (3)  In  His  word ;  (4)  Most  of  all 
in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  the  image 
of  the  invisible  God;  He  that  hath  seen 
Him  hath  seen  the  Father  (Col.  i.  15  ;  John 
xiv.  9).  The  incarnation,  life,  and  death  of 
Jesus  Christ, — the  final,  full  and  authentic 
exhibition  of  the  Divine  character  and  per- 
fections. Eternal  life,  to  know  the  only 
true  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath 
sent  (John  xvii.  3). 

2.  His  Perfections.  God's  Perfections  or 
Attributes  are — (1)  Natural  or  essential,  as 
His  Omniscience  and  Omnipotence;  (2) 
Moral,  as  His  justice  and  goodness.  God 
unsearchable  in  both  kinds.    The  universe  a 

72 


theatre  for  the  display  of  His  perfections.  A 
God  everywhere  present,  and  everywhere 
working, — sustaining  the  vibrations  of  an 
animalcule  and  the  revolutions  of  a  planet ; 
watching  over  a  sparrow,  and  giving  orders 
to  an  archangel;  and  doing  all  in  infinite 
wisdom,  and  justice,  and  goodness, — ^may  well 
be  unsearchable. 

3.  In  His  Purposes.  The  history  of  the 
world  and  of  the  universe,  as  well  as  of 
each  individual,  the  evolution  of  these  pur- 
poses (Acts  XV.  18;  ii.  23).  His  purposes 
unsearchable  (Rom.  xi.  33;  Ps.  xcii.  5). 
"  Deep  in  unfathomable  mines,"  &c. 

4.  In  His  Performances.  God  unsearch- 
able in  His  works  of  creation.  Examples  : 
Tiie  contents  of  a  drop  of  stagnant  water,  as 
examined  with  a  microscope  ;  the  starry 
heavens,  as  seen  through  Lord  Rosse's  tele- 
scope. Modern  astronomy  gives  a  meaning 
to  the  "  heights  of  heaven  "  undreamt  of  in 
the  days  of  Zophar.  Geology,  on  the  other 
hand,  reveals  displays  of  Divine  power  and 
wisdom  in  extinct  worlds  or  creations  far 
beneath  our  feet. 

5.  In  His  Procedure.  God's  dealings  in 
providence  both  in  regard  to  angels  and  men, 
the  human  race  and  the  individuals  com- 
posing it,  unsearchable.  Evil  permitted  in 
His  own  universe.  The  incarnation  and 
death  of  His  own  Son  an  atonement  for  it. 
Man  the  object  of  that  merciful  provision; 
sinning  angels  excluded  from  its  benefit. 

Lessons  from  the  unsearchahleness  of 
God:— 

1.  Modesty  and  humiliti/  in  judging  of 
God's  person  or  perfections.  His  works  or 
His  ways. 

2.  Submission  to  His  willy  and  acquiescence 
in  His  providence. 

3.  Implicit  trust  in  His  wisdom  and  good- 
ness. 

4.  Reverential y  loving,  and  admiring 
adoration.  The  result  of  the  contemplation 
of  God's  works  and  ways  in  the  apostle 
(Rom.  xi.  33 — 36),  and  in  the  glorified  in 
heaven  (Rev.  xv.  3, 4). 

IV.  Adduces  God's  resistless  power 
and  all- seeing  eye  as  arguments  to 
more  Job  to  repentance  (verse  10 — 12). 

1.  His  Almighty  poioer  (verse  10).  "If 
He  cut  off  "  {margin,  "  make  a  change,"  as 
He  has  done  in  Job  and  his  family ;  or,  "  if 
He  seize  "  as  a  criminal,  as  He  has  done  in 
Job's  case),  and  shut  up  (as  in  prison ;  or, 
"  deliver  over,"  i.e. ,  to  an  officer  for  trial), 
or  gather  together  (an  assembly  or  court  to 
try  the  criminal) — who  can  hinder  him  P 
{margin,  '*  turn  him  away.")  Awful  picture 
of  a  sinner  arrested  by  Divine  justice.  A 
sinner  in  the  hands  of  an  angry  God  !  Escape 
or  rescue  equally  impossible.  The  only  hope 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAP.    XI 


of  safety  for  a  sinner  lies  in  submission.  Same 
sentiment  uttered  by  Job  himself  (ch.  ix. 
4,  12,  13).  Argument  used  by  God  (Ps.  1. 
22);  by  Jesus  (Matt.  v.  25,  26);  by  the 
Apostle  (Heb.  ii.  3;  x.  31). 

2.  His  Omniscience  (ver.  12).  "For  He 
kuoweth  vain  men;  He  seeth  wickedness 
also ;  will  He  not  then  consider  it  ?" 
Another  weighty  argument  for  a  sinner's  re- 
pentance. To  elude  God's  eye  as  impossible 
as  to  escape  from  His  hand.  "  No  darkness 
or  shadow  of  death  where  the  workers  of 
iniquity  may  hide  themselves."  *'  All  things 
naked  and  open  to  the  eyes  of  Him  with 
«vhom  we  have  to  do."  Farther  considera- 
tions, however,  necessary  to  bring  a  sinner 
to  repentance.  Felix  "  trembled,"  and  said 
to  the  preacher:  "Go  thy  way  for  this  time." 
Only  the  apprehension  of  the  mercy  of  God 
in  Christ  able  to  soften  and  subdue  the 
sinner's  heart.  As  addressed  to  Job, 
these  arguments  were  —  (1)  Inapplicable; 
Job  not  the  sinner  Zophar  supposed. 
(2)  Useless ;  Job  probably  more  keenly  sen- 
sible of  these  truths  than  Zophar  himself. 
Arguments,  in  order  to  move  and  benefit, 
need  to  be  not  only  sound  and  solemn^  but 
suitable  and  seasonable. — One  important  part 
of  a  preacher's  duty  to  consider  the  character 
and  condition  of  those  whom  he  addresses. — 
Zophar's  application  of  the  foregoing  arguments 
(verse  12).  *'For  vain  man  would  be 
wise  (or  *  but  let  a  vain,  or  empty,  hollow- 
headed  man  become  wise ')  though  man  be 
born  as  the  wild  ass's  colt,"  (or,  "  and  let  the 
wild  ass's  colt  be  born  a  man  ").  The  latter 
part  of  the  verse,  as  thus  read,  an  Arab 
proverb.  "  Wild  ass,"  used  by  the  Arabs  as 
a  term  of  reproach.  Probably  the  whole 
a  proverbial  maxim  of  the  ancients.  Appa- 
rently an  exhortation  rather  than  a  statement. 
Contains  truth  in  reference  to  man  in  general. 

1.  Man  left  to  himself  ever  since  the  fall^ 
is  "vain."  Emptv  of  real  goodness  and 
sound  spiritual  understanding.  "There  is 
none  that  understandeth ;  there  is  none  that 
doeth  good."  Even  the  sages  of  antiquity 
"  professing  themselves  wise  became  fools  " 
(Rom.  i.  22). 

2.  Man  is  now  by  nature  froward  and  self- 
willed  "as  a  wild  ass's  colt.''  Like  that 
animal,  man's  disposition  is  to  be  free  and 
uncontrolled.  The  child,  like  the  man, 
wiuhes  to  be  its  own  master.  **  Our  lips  are 
our  own.  Who  is  lord  over  us  P  "  "  Who 
is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  serve  Him  P " 
"Let  us  break  their  bonds  asunder,  and 
cast  away  their  cords  from  us."  Frowardness, 
self  will,  and  intractablencss,  God's  frequent 
complaints  against  Israel.  "All  day  long 
have  I  stretched  out  my  hand  towards  a 
disobedient  and  gainsaying  people."  "  The 
heiurt  of  man  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evii." 


"  Madness  in  men's  hearts  while  they  live.** 
The  constant  tendency  of  man's  fallen  nature 
to  break  loose  from  the  restraints  of  Divine 
authority.  Apart  from  grace,  man,  after 
his  hardness  and  impenitent  heart,  treasures 
up  wrath  against  tlie  day  of  wrath  (Kom. 
ii.  5). 

3.  A  change  of  character  and  disposition 
necessary  in  order  to  man's  well-being  either  here 
or  hereafter.  The  vain  man  must  become  wise. 
The  wild  ass's  colt — froward,  self-willed, 
independent — must  become  a  man,  thought- 
ful, submissive,  obedient.  The  second  part 
of  Christ's  call  in  the  Gospel:  "Take  my 
yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;  and  ye  shall  find 
rest  to  your  souls  "  (Matt.  xi.  29). 

4.  Such  a  change  nothing  less  than  a  new 
birth.  The  wild  ass's  colt  must  be  "  born  " 
in  order  to  become  a  man.  A  new  birth 
necessary  to  froward,  self-willed,  independent 
man,  in  order  to  his  entering  the  kingdom  of 
God,  whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven.  The 
teaching  of  Jesus  (John  iii.  7).  The  promise 
(Ez.  xxxvi.  26).  The  prayer  (Ps.  Ii.  10). 
The  experience  of  it  (Tit.  iii.  5).  The  ex- 
hortation, as  addressed  to  Job,  was — (1) 
Inapplicable.  Job  neither  a  fool  nor,  except 
perhaps  in  his  trouble,  especially  when  wor- 
ried by  his  friends,  a  wild  ass's  colt.  (2). 
Uncharitable^  because  inappropriate.  "Charity 
thinketh  no  evil ;  hopeth  all  things."  (3). 
Rude.  No  part  of  wisdom  in  a  preacher  or 
monitor  to  apply  harsh  terms  and  ill  names, 
even  indirectly.  "  Be  courteous."  Hearers 
neither  to  be  flattered  on  the  one  hand  nor 
libelled  on  the  other.  (4).  Unfeeling.  No 
consideration  made  of  Job's  intense  sufferings 
and  accumulated  trials.  Zophar  pours 
vinegar  instead  of  oil  on  Job's  wounded 
spirit.  Sympathy  in  a  preacher  necessary  to 
success.  Want  of  sympathy  argues  want 
of  sense. 

Y,  Persuasion  to  repentance,  on  the 
ground  of  personal  advantage  (verse  13, 
—20). 

The  whole  passage  a  noble  strain  of 
moral  Oriental  poetry.  Perhaps  quoted  from 
the  ancients  by  Zophar,  from  its  supposed 
applicability  to  Job's  case.  Exhibits  the 
views  prevalent  at  the  period.  The  teaching 
that  of  the  Old  Testament  or  pre-Evangelic5 
platform.  Holds  forth  more  especially  the 
promise  of  earthly  comfort  and  prosperity  as 
the  result  of  repentance  and  piety.  Similar 
sentiments  expressed  by  Elipliaz  (ch.  v.  8, 
17__26) ;  and  by  Bildad  (ch.  viii.  5—7). 
Frequent  in  the  Psalms  and  Proverbs ;  as 
Psalms  i.,  xxxvii.  andcxxviii.;  Prov.  iii.,  iv., 
and  viii.  In  order  to  personal  profit,  the 
passage  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  New 
Testament   truth.     The  lamp  of  the  Neit 

73 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMtLETlC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


Testament  to  he  carried  with  us  in  exploring 
the  dark  chambers  of  the  Old.  In  the  New 
Testament,  the  promises  of  future  good  are 
mainly  connected  with  the  Lord*s  second 
appearing  (Acts  iii.  19 — 21 ;  1  Thess.  i.  9, 
10;  Tit.  ii.  11— ]  3).  The  posture  of  New 
Testament  believers  that  of  '*  strangers  and 
pilgrims  on  the  earth ;"  the  object  of  their 
desires  and  affections,  the  "  things  that  are 
above ; "  their  spirit,  contentment  with 
*'  such  things  as  they  have*'  (Heb.  xiii.  5, 14 ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  11 ;  Col  iii.  1,  2 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8). 
The  passage  contains — 

1.  The  terms  proposed^  or  the  duty  recom- 
mended (verse  13,  14).  The  condition  a  true 
turning  to  God.     Three  steps  indicated — 

(1).  A  preparation  or  right  disposition  of 
the  heart  (verse  13).  "  If  thou  prepare  (or 
set  right)  thine  heart."  Always  represented 
as  the  first  step  in  seeking  God  (1  Sam.  vii. 
3  :  2  Chroii.  xix.  3 ;  xxx.  19 ;  Ezra,  vii.  10 ; 
Ps.  Ixxviii.  8,  37).  Implies — {a)  Serious 
consideration ;  {b^  Firm  purpose;  {c)  Suitable 
frame  and  disposition ;  {d)  Removal  of  secret 
sin.  The  heart  naturally  biassed y  and  needs 
to  be  made  straight ;  unstable,  and  needs  to 
be  made  steadfast.  Sincerity  and  earnestness 
essential  in  seeking  God. 

(2).  Earnest  prayer.  "  If  thou  stretch 
forth  thine  hands  towards  Him."  A  common 
attitude  I?  Old  Testament  devotion  (Ps. 
Iviii.  U;  cxini.  6;  Is.  i.  15).  l&xamples: 
Moses  (Ex.  IX.  33) ;  Ezra  (ix.  5) ;  Solomon 
(1  Kings  viii.  22).  Includes  — («)  Confession 
of  sin;  (^)  Supplication  for  mercy. 

(3).  Amendment  of  life  (verse  14).  "  If 
iniquity  be  in  thine  hand,  put  it  far  away, 
and  let  not  wickedness  dwell  in  thy  taber- 
nacles" (or  tents, — Arab  chiefs  required 
more  than  one  for  their  household ;—  wicked- 
ness— not  to  be  allowed  in  any  of  them. 
Several  copies  and  ancient  versions,  however, 
read  the  (eord  in  the  singular).  Sin  to  be  put 
away  both  from  our  persons  and  our  pre- 
mises. "Iniquity," — injustice  or  wrong- 
doing not  to  remain  in  our  hand ;  "  wicked- 
ness,"— any  kind  of  open  sin — not  to  remain 
in  our  house.  Zacchseus  an  example  of  the  first 
(Luke  xix.  8) ;  David  of  the  second  (Ps.  ci. 
7).  A  man  is  greatly  responsible  for  what  is 
d  ne  in  his  household.  Domestic,  as  well  as 
personal  sins,  to  be  looked  after  and  put  away. 
The  commendation  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii. 
]  9) ;  The  neglect  of  Eli  (1  Sam.  ii.l  2, 17 ;  iii. 
11,  14);  The  resolution  of  David  (Ps.  ci.  2, 
7).  Observe — (1)  A  striking  gradation  in  the 
putting  away  of  sin ; — from  the  heart,  from 
the  hand,  from  the  house,  (2)  True  religion 
begins  with  the  heart,  and  ends  with  the  life. 
(3)  Sin  not  only  to  be  put  away,  but  "  far 
away."  Present  impressions  not  to  be  trusted. 
All  occasions  and  temptations  to  relapses  to 
be  avoided. 

74 


2.  The  promises  annexed  (verse  15 — 19), 
The  promises  suppose  pardon  and  acceptance 
of  the  penitent,  with  his  consciousness  of  it. 
This  promised  in  the  Old  as  well  as  in  the 
New  Testament,  upon  sincere  confession  and 
repentance,  with  faith  in  the  Sacrifice  (See 
Ps.  xxxii.  1,  6  ;  Prov.  xxviii.  13  ;  Is.  i.  17; 
Iv.  6,  7.)     The  promises  here  are — 

(L)A  cheerful  confidence  before  God  and 
men  (verse  15).  "  Thou  shalt  lift  up  thy  face 
without  spot ;  yea,  thou  shalt  be  steadfast, 
and  shalt  not  fear."  Sense  of  pardon  gives 
serenity  of  aspect.  A  purgea  conscience 
makes  an  uplifted  countenance.  "  Without 
spot," — either  of  guilt  or  its  consequences. 
A  face  unabashed  by  guilt  or  shame,  un- 
sullied by  grief  or  tears.  Spots  on  the  con- 
science transfer  themselves  to  the  counte- 
nance. Spots  of  ^a«7^  removed  by  the  sprinkled 
blood  ;  spots  of  ^n*?/" by  the  consciousness  of 
it.  Conscious  guilt  makes  the  countenance 
to  fall ;  sense  of  pardon  and  acceptance  lifts 
it  up  (Gen.  iv.  5,  6 ;  Luke  xviii.  13  ;  1  John 
iii.  21.)  The  face  sooner  and  better  lifted  up 
by  pardon  than  by  prosperity. 

(2.)  Deliverance  from  present  suffering  (verse 
16).  "  Thou  shalt  forget  thy  misery  and 
remember  it  as  waters  that  pass  (or,  have 
passed)  away."  Inward,  if  not  outward 
misery,  removed  by  sense  of  pardoning 
mercy  (Ps.  xxxii.  I,  5  ;  Ii.  8 — 14).  Inward 
suffering  sooner  or  later  the  fruit  of  sin. 
The  remembrance  of  previous  sorrow  swal- 
lowed up  by  present  joy.  Trouble  forgotten 
through  long  continued  triumph.  Remem- 
brance of  grief  often  only  an  enhancement  of 
joy.  No  trace  left  of  the  winter-torrent  that 
has  passed  away.  "  Your  joy  no  man  taketh 
from  you.'*  The  desolating  flood  that  has 
disappeared  only  remembered  with  thankful 
joy.  So  the  pardoned  soul  has  still  in  re- 
membrance, *'  the  wormwood  and  the  gall." 

i^,)  Abiding  peace  and  joy  (verse  17). 
**  Thine  age  shall  be  clearer  than  the  noonday 
(or,  "a  period,  or  happy  age,  shall  arise  to 
thee,  brighter  than,  &c.") ;  and  thou  (or  it) 
shalt  shine  forth,  thou  (or  it)  shalt  be  as  the 
morning"  (or,  "now  thou  art  in  darkness, 
but  then  thou  shalt  be  as  the  morning "). 
Light  out  of  darkness,  the  experience  of  a 
penitent  and  j)ardoned  soul  (Hos.  vi.  3). 
The  light  and  joy  of  acceptance  like  "the 
noonday  "  for  brightness ;  like  "the  morning" 
for  increase.  "The  path  of  the  just,"  the 
justified  and  sanctified  in  Christ,  a  light 
increasing  in  brightness  "  unto  the  perfect 
day  "  (Prov.  iv.  18).  The  believer's  joy  not 
diminished  by  manifold  trials  (1  Peter,  i.  6). 
Like  oil  poured  on  water,  comes  always  to 
the  surface.  At  times  unspeakable  and  fuU 
of  glory  (1  Peter  i.  8). 

i,^,) Safety  and  security  (verse  18,  19). 
"  Thou  shalt  be  secure,  because  there  is  liope  \ 


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CM  A  p.    Xil. 


yea,  thou  shalt  dig  about  thee  (making 
preparation,  according  to  patriarchal  custom, 
for  a  new  abode ;  or,  *  now  thou  art  ashamed 
but  then,  &c.'),  and  thou  shalt  take  thy 
rest  in  safety ;  also,  thou  shalt  lie  down  (as 
a  shepherd  with  his  flock),  and  none  shall 
make  thee  afraid.'*  Hope  in  God's  mercy 
through  Christ,  the  only  Ibundation  of  real 
security.  Divine  protection  one  of  the 
sweetest  of  new  covenant  blessings.  Christ's 
sheep  safe  in  His  hands  and  in  those  of  His 
Father  (John  x.  28,  30).  "Kept  by  the 
power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation." 
Preservation  of  the  soul  an  Old  as  well  as 
New  Testament  promise  (Ps.  exxi.  7). 
Oriental  tents  and  travellers  exposed  to 
danger  from  robbers,  wild  beasts,  and  reptiles ; 
believers*  souls  exposed  to  no  less  peril 
(Col.  ii.  8,  18;  1  Peter  v.  8;  2  Cor.  xi.  3). 

5.  Influence  among  men  (verse  19). 
"Many  shall  make  suit  to  thee.*'  The 
mark  of  a  great,  if  not  a  good  man.  "  Many 
entreat  the  favour  of  the  prince*'  (Prov. 
xix.  6).  The  same  promised  to  the  Church 
or  Bride  of  Christ  (Ps.  xlv.  12).  So 
Abimelech  made  suit  to  Abraham,  entreat- 
ing his  favour  and  alliance  (Gen.  xxvi.  26 — 
29.  Pardoned  people  are  praying  people; 
and  praying  people  are  Israels, — princes  that 
have  power  both  with  God  and  men  (Gen. 
xxxii.  28).  God's  presence  with  a  believer 
the  ground  of  true  greatness.  He  that  has 
power  with  God  likelv  to  have  influence 
among  men.  "  We  will  g;o  with  you  for  we 
have  heard  that  God  is  with  you  (Zech.  viii. 
23).  Believers  are  kings  and  priests  to 
God.  Their  duty  so  to  walk  as  to  gain 
respect  to  their  profession.  An  ill  sign 
witn  a  professor  when  nobody  seeks  the 
favour  of  his  prayers.  A  believer's  privilege 
so  to  carrv  Christ  about  with  him  that  men 
shall  feel  his  inrluence,  as  those  who  sought 
only  to  be  in  Peter's  shadow.  The  true 
character  of  a  pardoned  and  accepted  person 


is  to  have  so  much  of  Christ's  loving  spirit 
as  to  carry  with  him  a  constant  benefaction. 
Made  sweet  and  gracious  by  God's  favour 
on  them,  and  His  spirit  in  them,  believers 
carry  with  them  the  unconscious  influence  of 
a  sweet  and  gracious  atmosphere.  A 
pardoned  man,  walking  with  Ciirist  and 
imbibing  His  spirit,  as  sure  to  be  perceived 
as  a  bag  that  carries  sweet  perfume.  The 
privilege  and  duty  of  believers  to  exhale 
so  much  of  Christ's  loving  nature  as,  like 
modest  and  half-hidden  violets,  to  attract 
others  to  them  by  their  fragrance.  This,  as 
well  as  the  other  promises,  realised  in  Job's 
after  experience,  but  not  in  the  way 
imagined  by  Zophar  (eh.  xlii.  7 — 9). 

VI.  The  contrasted  case  of  the  un- 
godly (verse  20)  Includes— (1)  *' Anxiety 
and  disappointment.  "The  eyes  of  the 
wicked  shall  fail,*' — anxiously  looking  in 
vain  for  the  possession  of  good  and  de- 
liverance from  evil.  A  time  when  it  is 
too  late  to  knock  even  at  mercy's  door. 
"They  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they 
shall  not  find  me  (Prov.  i.  28.  (2)  Per- 
plexity and  hopelessness.  "They  shall  not 
escape.'*  (Heb.  "  Eefuge  has  perished  from 
them").  Calamity,  sooner  or  later,  overtakes 
the  Christless  and  impenitent,  from  which 
escape  is  impossible.  "  Because  I  called  and 
ye  refused, — I  also  will  lauL'h  at  your 
calamity  *'  (Prov.  i.  24—26).  "  How  shall  we 
escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation?'* 
(Heb.  ii.  3;  x.  26,  27).  (3)  Ruin  and 
despair.  "  Their  hope  shall  be  as  the  giving 
up  of  the  ghost**  {margin,  "as  a  puff  of 
breath  **).  The  hope  of  the  impenitent  and 
Christless  proves  as  vain  and  unsubstantial 
as  a  puff  of  breath.  Their  expectation 
terminates  with  their  life.  Having  chosen 
death  rather  than  life,  they  obtain  their 
choice.  "  All  they  that  hate  me  love  death.*' 
(Prov.  viii.  36.) 


CHAPTER  XIL 


JOB'S  REPLY  TO  ZOPHAR. 


I.  Defends  himself  against  the  charge 
of  ignorance  implied  in  Zophar's  speech 

(verse  2,  3). 

His  defence  is  : — 

1.  Ironical  (verse  2).  "No  doubt  but  ye 
are  the  people ;  and  wisdom  shall  die  with 
you;'*  the  wisdom  of  mankind  is  collected 
m  your  person,  and  when  you  die  wisdom 
must  perish  at  the  same  time.  Times  when 
it  may  be  proper  to  use  the  language  of 
irony  and  sarcasm.  Its  proper  use  to  put 
error  and  pretension  to  shame.     So  Elijah 


to  the  worshippers  of  Baal:  "Cry  aloud  for 
he  is  a  God  ;*'  and  Paul  to  the  Corinthians : 
"Ye  are  rich;  ye  have  reigned  as  kings 
without  us"  (1  Cor.  iv.  8).  Assumption  on 
the  part  of  preachers  and  monitors  sure  to 
render  their  words  powerless  and  themselves 
ridiculous. 

2.  Serious  (verse  3).  "  But  1  have  under- 
standing as  well  as  you :  I  am  not  inferior 
to  you."  Times  when  modesty  does  not 
forbid  a  man  to  speak  in  his  own  commenda- 
tion.   Allowable  when  for  our  own  defence, 

76 


CHAP.  xn. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB, 


or  for  the  interests  of  truth.  Paul  com- 
pelled by  his  detractors  to  this  "  foolishness 
of  boasting"  (2  Cor.  xii.  11).  A.  man's  duty 
to  know  himself;  and  especially  to  know 
whether  he  has  "understanding"  to  '*  know 
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom 
He  has  sent,  which  is  life  eternal"  (2  Cor. 
xiii.  5  ;  1  John  v.  20 ;  John  xvii.  3). 

3.  Contemptuous.  "  Yea,  who  knoweth  not 
such  things  as  these  "  {margin^  "with  whom 
are  not  such  things  as  these?").  Conceit 
and  pretension  to  be  taken  down.  Zophar*s 
vaunted  wisdom  was  after  all — ^(1)  Common- 
place.  His  speech  mostly  such  moral  and 
religious  sentiments  as  were  found  in  every- 
body's mouth.  (2)  Borrowed ;  second-hand 
maxims  handed  down  from  the  fathers. 
Preachers  to  be  careful — (1)  Not  to  deal  in 
mere  commonplace  sentiments,  or  to  ring 
changes  on  a  few  universally  admitted  truths. 
Hearers  to  be  taught  something  which  they 
do  not  already  know.  The  instructed  scribe 
to  "  bring  out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and 
old."  ^Jecessary  to  present  new  truths,  or 
old  ones  in  a  new,  clearer,  or  more  impres- 
Bive  light.  (2)  Not  to  parade  before  others 
what  is  not  really  their  own,  without  acknow- 
ledging it.  False  prophets  reproved  for 
stealing  God's  words,  **  every  one  from  his 
neighbour,"  and  passing  them  off  as  if  de- 
Uvered  to  themselves  (Jer.  xxiii.  30). 

II.  Complains  of  his  being  treated 
with  scorn  in  consequence  of  affliction 

(verse  4). 

"I  am  as  one  (or,  *I  am  one  who  is') 
mocked  of  his  neighbour,  who  calleth  upon 
God  and  he  heareth  him  (or,  '  that  he  may 
answer  him  ;*  or,  *and  let  him  answer  him ;' 
possibly  the  taunt  of  his  enemies,  as  Ps.  xxii. 
8 ;  Matthew  xxvii.  43) ;  the  just  upright  man 
is  laMghed  to  scorn."  This  treatment,  accord- 
ing to  the  ordinary  way  of  the  world  (ver.  5). 
'*  He  that  is  ready  to  slip  with  his  feet  is  a 
lamp  despised  (or  a  torch  thrown  away  as 
useless)  in  the  thought  of  him  that  is  at 
ease  "  (or,  **  contempt  adheres  to  calamity  in 
the  mind  of  the  prosperous  and  secure,  ready 
for  those  who  slip  with  their  feet" — who  are 
tottering,  or  already  fallen  into  adversity  and 
trouble).  Probably  one  of  the  proverbial 
maxims  referred  to  in  verse  3,  quoted  by  Job 
on  his  side  of  the  question,  and  as  descriptive 
of  his  own  case. 

1.  He  was  mocked.  No  small  aggrava- 
tion of  his  affliction  (ch.  xvi,  10,  20 ;  xvii. 
2,  6  J  xxi.  3 ;  xxx.  1,  9, 10).  The  experience 
of  David  (Ps.  xxii.  7;  xxxv.  16;  Ixix.  11, 
12  ;  and  of  David's  Lord  (Matt.  xxvi.  67, 
68 ;  xxvii.  27 — 31 ;  Luke,  xxiii.  35).  Mockery 
worse  to  bear  than  open  violence.  The 
bitterness  of  this  treatnent  enhanced  by  the 
previous  experience  of  honour  and  respect 
76 


(ch.  xxix.  7 — 25).  Believers  not  to  be  stag- 
gered at  "  cruel  mockings,"  either  from  the 
world  or  nominal  professors.  Such  mockery 
the  expression  of  inward  contempt, — "  in  the 
tliought  of  him,'*  &c.  The  followers  of  a 
de.'ipised  Christ  to  expect  no  better  treatment 
than  their  Master  (Is.  liii.  3  ;  John  xiii.  16). 

2.  Was  mocked  in  consequence  of  his 
affliction  (verse  5).  An  aggravation  of  the 
treatment.  Affliction  painful  enough  in 
itself,  and  demanding  sympathy.  Hard  to 
endure,  and  cruel  to  inflict,  mockery  and 
contempt  on  account  of  it.  This  experience 
of  Job  also  that  of  David,  and  of  the  great 
Antitype  of  both.  Christ  was  mocked  by 
men  when  bruised  by  God. 

3.  Job   thus  mocked  notwithstanding  his 
uprightness  and  piety .  (1.)  '£L\s>  uprightness, — 
"  the  just  upright  man."      The  testimony 
already  given  him  by  God  (ch.  i.  8 ;  ii.  3). 
(2.)  His  piety.     Manifested  in  his  prayer- 
fulness, — "who  calleth  upon  God,"  &c.   Ex 
emplified  in  his  conduct  in  reference  to  his 
children  (ch.  i.  5).    His  practice  still  in  his 
affliction  (ch.  xvi.  20).      Made  at  last   an 
intercessor  for  his  friends  (ch.xlii.8, 10).     A 
man  of  piety  necessarily  a  man  of  prayer. 
Affliction  draws  a  good  man  nearer  to  God, 
sends  a  bad  one  farther  from  Him.    Terrible 
aggravation  of  the   sin  when  the  mocked 
sufferer  is  an  upright  child  of  God.     The 
tremendous  guilt  of  the  Jews  in  relation  to 
Jesus.     Job's  prayers  ordinarily  heard  and 
answered,  though  apparently  not  so  now.     So 
with  Jesus  in  his  last  simering  (Ps.  xxii. 
2  ;  Luke  xxii,  42,  compared  with  John  xi. 
42).    Prayer,  offered  believingly  in  the  name 
of  Christ,   heard  and  answered,  though  in 
God's  own  time  and  way.    God's  answer  to 
believers*    prayers    his    testimony    to    the 
acceptance  of  their  persons. 

4.  Job  was  mocked  by  those  who  were  at 
ease  themselves  (verse  5).  Another  aggra- 
vation of  the  sin  as  well  as  of  the  suffering 
occasioned  by  it.  To  be  **at  ease,"  a 
common  description  of  the  ungodly.  Too 
often  applicable  even  to  the  professors  of 
religion  (Amos  vi.  1).  Job's  complaint  that 
of  Christ's  suffering  church  (Ps  cxxiii.  3.  4). 
Suffering  in  ourselves  the  parent  of  sympathy 
for  others, 

III.  Re-asserts  the  prosperity  of 
tlie  ungodly  (verse  6). 

"The  tabernacles  of  robbers  prosper ;  yea, 
they  that  provoke  God  are  secure;  into 
whose  hand  God  bringeth  abundantly**  (or, 
"  to  whom  God  bringeth  with  his  hand,"  or, 
"to  him  who  carrieth  God  in  his  hand"). 
Repeats  more  fully  what  he  had  asserted 
(ch.  ix.  24).  Perhaps  quotes  another  maxim 
of  the  ancients.     Observe — 

1.  The  characters  spoken  of ,     (1)   "Bob 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XII 


bers."  Reference  to  the  ungodly  who  put 
might  for  right.  The  earth,  previous  to  the 
flood,  filled  with  violence  by  such.  The 
giants  in  those  days,  mighty  men  of  renown 
(Gen.  vi.  4  ).  The  flood  the  consequence  of 
their  violence  and  its  prosperity.  A  similar 
state  of  things  not  long  after  that  event. 
Nimrod,  "a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord." 
Hence  the  war  of  the  kings  (Gen.  xiv).  The 
Sabeans  and  Chaldeans  (ch.il5 — 17)  other 
specimens  of  these  "robbers."  Lust  for 
property,  power  and  pleasure,  the  natural 
tendency  of  fallen  men.  Hence  wars  and 
fightings  (Jam.  iv.  1,  2).  Tyrants,  despots, 
and  great  conquerors,  often  only  robbers  on 
a  large  scale.  Unlawful  gains,  oppression  of 
tiie  poor,  and  mercantile  dishonesty,  other 
forms  of  "robbery"  (Jer.  xxii.  13 ;  Hab.  ii. 
12).  (2)  They  '* provoke  God  to  anger." 
The  effect  of  all  ungodliness.  God  angry 
with  the  wicked  every  day.  The  wrath  of 
God  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungod- 
liness and  righteousness  of  men  i  Rom.  i.  18). 
God's  anger  especially  provoked  by  cruelty 
and  wrong.  The  whole  life  of  the  ungodly 
a  continued  provocation  of  God.  Wealth 
treasured  up  against  the  day  of  wrath  (Rom. 
ii.  5).  Patience  no  proof  of  the  want  of  pro- 
vocations. 

2.  What  is  asserted  of  them.  They 
"  prosper."  The  prosperity  of  the  ungodly 
more  fully  enlarged  upon  (ch.  xxi.  7 — 13). 
The  stumbling-block  of  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2, 
12);  the  perplexity  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xii.  1). 
(1)  Their  dwellings  are  in  outward  peace  and 
prosperity.  Their  "  tabernacles  "  prosper. 
A  cluster  of  tents  required  to  form  an  Oriental 
chieftain's  household.  The  families  of  the 
ungodly  appear  to  prosper  (ch.  xxi.  8,  9, 11). 
Full  of  children,  and  leaving  the  rest  of  their 
substance  to  their  babes  (Ps.  xvii.  14).  Their 
homes  appear  likely  to  stand  for  many  gene- 
rations. Their  lands  called  by  their  own  names 
(Ps.  xlix.  11). — (2)  They  enjoy  abundance 
of  earthly  comforts.  Their  abundance  brought 
to  them  in  the  providence  of  God,  though 
idolatrously  ascribed  to  their  own  hand 
(Deut.  viii.  17;  Heb.  i.  16).  Observe— 
(i.)  Good  fortune  no  proof  of  Divine  favour. 
Dives  had  his  good  things  in  this  life,  Lazarus 
his  evil  things,  (ii.)  Earthly  goods  as  well 
as  trials  at  the  Divine  disposal.  These 
often  mysteriously,  always  wisely,  distributed. 
As  compared  with  spiritual  blessings,  rather 
the  husks  that  the  swine  eat,  or  the  bones 
thrown  to  the  dogs.  Ordinarily  given  as 
incitements  to  repentance,  gratitude,  and 
love.  When  lusted  after,  often  given  in 
judgment  rather  than  in  mercy.  The  desire 
gi anted,  while  leanness  is  sent  into  the  soul 
(Ps.  cvi.  15). 

IV.  An  Appeal  to  the  irrational 
creation  (verse  7 — 10). 


"Ask  now  the  beasts,  and  they  shall 
teach  thee,  &c.  Who  knoweth  not  in  all 
these  (or,  *  which  among  all  these  kn».>w("th 
not ')  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought 
this?"  (that  God — here  alone  in  the  dialogues 
spoken  of  as  "  the  Lord  " — is  both  Creator 
and  Governor  of  all  things).  Perhaps  a  third 
proverbial  maxim  quoted  by  Job.— Observe: 

1.  All  animate  and  inanimate  nature  man^s 
teachers. 

The  Book  of  Nature. 

Its  lessons  manifold  both  as  to  faith  and 
practice.  Job,  in  ihe  end,  referred  to  its 
teachings  by  God  himself.  Heaven  and  earth 
an  open  Bible,  speaking  both  from  God  and 
o/*Him.  The  nocturnal  sky  a  wide  unfolded 
scroll,  with  every  star  a  character.  David's 
delight  to  spell  in  it  the  glory  and  perfections 
of  God  (Ps.  xix.  1,  2).  Every  rising  sun 
proclaims  anew  His  goodness  and  faithfulness 
(Lom.  iii.  23).  Solomon  sent  his  readers  to 
the  ants  for  a  lesson  of  industry.  Jesus 
directs  His  disciples  to  the  birds  and  the 
flowers  to  learn  implicit  confidence  in  the 
care  of  their  heavenly  Father.  The  book  of 
nature  distinctly  enough  written,  and  the 
voices  of  creation  sufficientlyaudible  and  clear. 
But  sin  has  dimmed  our  spiritual  vision, 
dulled  our  hearing,  and  made  us  slow  to 
learn  either  about  God  or  ourselves. 

2.  Tlw  existence  of  an  all-pervading ,  all-sus- 
taining^  and  all-controlling 

Providence 

Insisted  on  by  Zophar  as  if  Job  had  been 
ignorant  of  it.  Declared  by  the  dust  on  a 
butterfly's  wing  as  well  as  by  the  lustre  of 
the  Dogstar.  Proclaimed  by  the  m.otion  of 
an  insect  as  it  dances  in  the  sun-beams,  as 
well  as  by  the  risinj^  and  setting  of  sun,  moon, 
and  planets.  The  hand  that  upholds  the 
sun  in  the  heavens  guides  the  spurrow  in  its 
fall  to  the  ground.  "Not  a  fly  but  has 
had  infinite  wisdon)  concerned,  not  only  in  its 
structure,  but  in  its  destination."  \Young^^ 
Nature's  works  designed  to  lead  up  to  nature's 
God. — "In  his  hand  is  the  soul  of  every 
living  thing,  and  the  breath  (or  spirit)  of  all 
mankind  "  (verse  10)  All  life  in  and  from 
God.  First  created,  and  then  supported 
and  preserved  by  Him.  "In  Him  we  live," 
&c., — not  only  by  Him  but  in  Him.  The  life 
of  men,  animals  and  plants,  no  longer  con- 
tinued than  He  pleases.  The  laws  of  exist- 
ence established  by  Him,  and  still  under  His 
control.  The  spirit  or  thinking  part  of  man 
as  well  as  the  soul  or  feeling  part  of  animals, 
equally  proceeding  from  and  dependent  upon 
Him.  The  highest  creature  no  more  able  to 
))rolong  his  existence  a  moment  beyond  His 

11 


tilAl-.    Xtl. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


will  than  to  create  a  universe.  The  power 
of  a  man  to  thinks  as  well  as  the  sense  to 
feel,  and  the  muscles  to  act^  alike  from  Him. 
A  glance  of  His  eye  able  to  reduce  creation 
to  its  original  nothingness.  All  events 
under  His  control.  Moral  evil  permitted, 
penal  evil  inflicted  by  Him.  The  twin 
truths  of  creation  and  providence  everywhere 
taught  by  external  nature.  The  truth  that 
nature  fails  to  teach,  that  which  man  most 
needs  to  learn.  For  man  to  learn  the  way 
of  pardon  and  reconciliation  with  God,  the 
volume  of  nature  required  to  be  supple- 
mented by  that  of  revelation. 

Y.  The  ri^ht  and  duty  of  exercising 
private  judgment  (verse  11). 

"Doth  not  the  ear  try  words,  and  the 
mouth  taste  his  meat  ?  *'  (or,  "  as  the 
mouth  tastes  its  food").  The  office  of  the 
ear  to  try  or  judge  of  the  statements 
submitted  to  it.  The  ear  put  for  the 
judgment  or  reason  which  acts  tlirough  it. 
Moral  and  religious  truths  at  that  time 
conveyed  through  the  ear  rather  than  the 
eye.  Books  or  writings  rarely,  if  ever,  found 
among  the  people  — Men*s  duty  to  examine 
and  judge  of  what  they  hear.  Applicable  to 
the  quotations  already,  or  yet  to  be,  made 
from  the  ancients  by  Job  and  his  friends,  as 
well  as  to  the  sentiments  uttered  by  them- 
selves. Job  bespeaks  candour  and  attention 
to  his  speeclies,  and  resolves  to  judge  for 
himself  as  to  what  is  advanced  by  his  friends. 
Observe,  in  reference  to 

Private  judgment, 

1.  Man  possesses  a  faculty  by  which  to 
judge  of  moral  and  religious  statements. 
Such  a  faculty  distinguishes  man  from  the 
brutes,  and  allies  him  to  angels.  The  faculty 
of  reason  or  judgment  originally  given  and 
*lill  continued  to  men,  though  weakened  and 
depraved  by  sin.  Appealed  to  by  God  in 
His  messages  to  men  (Isaiah  v.  3);  by 
Christ  (Luke  xii.  57);  by  His  apostles  (1 
Cor.  X.  15;  xi.  13 — 14).  Lies  at  the  founda- 
tion of  all  efforts  to  instruct,  enlighten,  and 
persuade  others  in  reference  to  religious 
subjects.  Implies  the  possession  and  the 
apprehension  of  a  standard  of  right  and 
wrong.  Its  highest  office  to  judge  of  moral 
and  religious  statements  by  that  standard. 
A  standard  of  moral  judgment  implanted  in 
man's  nature  at  his  creation,  but  now  much 
effaced.  Renewed  in  the  moral  law  and  in 
the  Scriptures  in  general.  The  object  of  the 
Bible  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  exhibit  that 
standard,  and  to  lead  mentojudge,  condude, 
and  act  according  to  it. 

?.  Mans  duty  to  exercise  that  faculty  in 
regard  to  all  statements  os  moral  and  reli- 
'78 


gious  subjects.  Appeal  to  the  law  and  the 
testimony  in  reference  to  what  man  teaches, 
enjoined  by  God  Himself  (Is.  viii.  20).  Men 
commanded  to  cease  to  hear  the  instruction 
that  causeth  to  err  from  the  words  of  know- 
ledge (Prov.  xix.  27).  The  apostolic  injunc- 
tion— "Prove all  things,  hold  fast  that  which 
is  good."  "  Believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try 
the  spirits,  whether  they  be  of  God  "  (1  Thes. 
V.  21;  1  John  iv.  1).  The  part  of  the 
**  simple  "  to  "  believe  every  word."  The 
Berseans  commended  for  searching  the  Scrip- 
tures daily  to  see  whether  the  things  spoken 
by  the  apostles  were  according  to  them  (Acts 
xvii.  11).  Superstition  and  priestcraft  deny 
to  men  the  right  of  private  judgment,  and 
forbid  the  ear  to  do  its  office.  To  believe 
only  because  the  Church  or  our  forefathers 
have  done  so,  is  for  the  ear  no  longer  to  "  try 
words."  Man  responsible  to  God  for  the 
right  exercise  of  the  judgment  He  has  given 
him.  When  God  speaks,  the  office  of  the 
judgment  is  to  discover  that  He  has  done  so, 
to  ascertain  what  He  has  spoken,  and  then,  un- 
questioningly,  to  accept  it.  God's  announce- 
ments often  above  reason,  never  contrary  to 
it.  The  judgment  to  be  exercised  on  moral 
and  religious  subjects  with — (1)  Seriousness 
and  attention ;  (2)  Candour  and  patience ; 
(3)  Modesty  and  humility ;  (4)  Impartiality 
and  absence  of  prejudice;  (5)  Prayer  for 
Divine  enlightenment. 

3.  Human  authority  on  religious  subjects  to  be 
respected^  but  not  regarded  as  paramount 
(verses  12,  13).  "With  the  ancient  is 
wisdom,  and  in  length  of  days  is  under- 
standing. With  Him  {i.e.  God)  is  wisdom 
and  strength,  he  hath  counsel  and  under- 
standing,*'— wisdom  in  both  its  forms,  specu- 
lative and  practical;  or,  wisdom  to  direct 
and  strength  to  accomplish.  The  latter 
verse  probably  the  commencement  of  another 
quotation.  Job's  object  in  it — (1)  To  vindi- 
cate his  knowledge  of  God  as  not  inferior  to 
that  of  his  friends  ;  (2)  To  show  that  the 
wisdom  of  God  infinitely  surpasses  that  of 
the  wisest  of  men.  Human  wisdom  ac- 
quired by  study,  observation  and  experience, 
— by  the  long- continued  exercise  of  the 
judgment  referred  to  in  verse  11.  By 
reason  of  use  men  have  their  senses  ex- 
ercised to  discern  good  and  evil,  and  so 
become  men  of  full  age  in  understanding, 
instead  of  children  (Heb.  v.  13,  14 ;  1  Cor. 
xiv.  20).  That  wisdom  always  imperfect 
and  fallible.  God  the  only  infallible  teacher. 
Wisdom,  in  men,  as  something  communica- 
ted ;  with  God,  as  something  eternally  and 
essentially  abiding.  In  man  as  a  stream, 
limited  and  uncertain  j  with  God,  as  a 
perennial  fountain.  An  appeal,  therefore, 
to  be  made  from  man's  teaching  to  God's. 
Divine  teaching  to  be  implicitly  submitted 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


OBAf .  XIL 


to  and  confided  in,  as  that  of  infinite 
wisdom. 

yi.  Spirited  description  of  God's 
providence  in  tlie  world  (verse  14 — 25. 

Probably  a  quotation  of  ancient  poetry,  or 
the  production  of  the  poet  put  into  Job*s 
mouth.  Properly  commences  with  verse  13. 
A  magnificent  ode  or  hymn  on  the  Divine 
perfections  and  procedure  in  the  world. 
The  similarity  in  language  and  sentiment  to 
parts  of  107th  Psalm  remarkable.  Celebrates 
especially  the  various 

Acts  of  Divine  Providence. 

Exhibits  its  operations  on  a  grand  and  ex- 
tensive scale.  Represents  God  as  ruhng 
over  nations  as  well  as  individuals.  His 
Providence  viewed  more  in  its  solemn  and 
judicial  aspects. 

1  In  acts  of  destruction  (verse  14). 
"  He  brealceth  down,  and  (or  *  so 
that')  it  cannot  be  built  again."  The 
part  of  the  Divine  Ruler  is  to  pull  down  as 
well  as  to  build  up — to  kill  as  well  as  to  make 
alive  (Is.  xiv.  7 ;  Am.  iii.  6 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  39). 
Breaks  down  houses,  cities,  individuals, 
families,  nations— the  earth  itself.  Seen  in 
the  Flood,  the  Cities  of  the  Plain,  perhaps 
the  Tower  of  Babel.  Breaks  down  cities, 
buildings,  &c.,  by  earthquakes,  inundations, 
volcanoes,  lightnings,  tempests,  &c;  nations 
and  kingdoms  by  invasions,  wars,  civil  dis- 
cord, foolish  counsels,  &c ;  individuals  by 
diseases  and  misfortunes.  Breaks  down  in 
various  ways  human  schemes  and  enter- 
prises (Gen.  xi.  3—8;  2  Chr.  xx,  36,  37). 
Reference  to  one  form  of  destruction  in 
verse  15.  "  He  withholdeth  the  waters  and 
they  dry  up  ;  also  he  scndeth  them  out  and 
they  overturn  the  earth."  Exemplified  in 
the  Deluge.  The  windows  of  heaven  then 
opened,  and  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep 
broken  up  (Gen.  vii.  11).  Inundations 
frequent  in  Arabia  and  Egypt. 

2.  In  laying  restraints  on  individuals. 
"He  shutteth  up  a  man  {Heb.  'over  a  man  ') 
and  there  is  no  onenins:."  Reference  to 
underground  prisons  (Jer.  xxxviii.  6 — 13], 

God  in  His  providence  shuts  up  individuals 
as  prisoners — by  affliction  and  misfortune 
(Job  himself  an  example);  by  delivering  them 
up  into  the  hand  of  enemies ;  by  brinj^ing 
them  into  difficulties  and  straits ;  by  inward 
darkness  and  distress  ;  by  insanity,  as  in  the 
case  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  When  God  shuts 
up,  none  but  Himself  can  open  (Is.  xxii.  22). 

3.  In  overruliug  both  merCs  misery  and 
mischief  (verse  16)  "The  deceived  and 
the  deceiver  are  His.*'  The  deceiver  can 
only  act,  and  the  deceived  suffer^  by  His 
permission.     The   deceiver  His,  to  restrain 


his  deception  and  employ  it  for  His  own 
wise  purposes.  The  deceived  His,  to  deliver 
him  from  the  deception,  or  to  correct  or 
punish  him  by  it.  The  deceiver  God*s  in- 
strument in  trying  the  good  and  punishing 
the  bad.  Satan  the  deceiver  of  the  nations 
(Rev.  XX.  3).  Lying  spirits  in  the  mouth 
of  false  prophets,  God's  instruments  in 
punishing  Ahab  and  his  people  (I  Kings 
xxii.  20).  False  Christs  and  false  prophets 
to  deceive  many,  but  not  the  elect  (Matt, 
xxiv.  11—24).  Antichrist's  advent  to  be 
with  all  deceivableness  of  unrighteousness 
in  those  that  receive  not  the  love  of  the 
truth  (2  Thess.  ii.  10). 

4.  In  'punishing  nations  and  timr  rulers 
(verse  17).     "He  leadeth  councillors  away 
spoiled  (stripped  as  captives  taken  in  war, 
or  deprived  of  their  dignity,  or  as  persons 
bereft  of  judgment),  and  maketh  the  judges 
fools  ;*'  ( — so  infatuates  tliem,  that  they  shall 
give   wrong   judgment,  and  so    bring  the 
nation  into  trouble).     So  God  threatened  to 
take  away  from  Judah  the  judge,  and  the 
prudent,   and   the  councillor,  and  to    give 
children  to  be  their  princes,  and  to  cause 
babes  to  rule  over  them  (Is.  iii.  2 — 4).    No 
greater  woe  to  a  land  than  when  God  in 
judgment  gives  it  up  to  unwise  rulers  and 
statesmen   (Ecc.  x.  16).— Verse  18.    "He 
looseth  the  bond  of  kings  (dissolves  their 
authority,  as  in  the  case  of  Rehoboam  and 
the  Ten  Tribes),  and  girdeth  their  loins  with 
a   girdle "    (perhaps    a  cord  or   rope,    as 
indicative    of    servitude).     No    uncommon 
thing  for  despotic  rulers  to  be  dethroned  by 
their  oppressed  and  discontented  subjects, 
and  instead  of  the  insignia  of   royalty  to 
have  to  wear  the  habit  of  a  prisoner  or  an 
exile  (Jer.  Hi.  8—11,  31—33).    Numerous 
examples  in  Europe  within  the  last  century. 
-  (Verse  24,  25).     "  He  taketh  away  the 
heart  (or  understanding)  of  the  chief  of  the 
people  of  the    earth  (or    the    land),  and 
causeth   them  to   wander   in  a  wilderness 
where   there  is  no  way,  &c."     Easy  with 
God  in  judgment   on    themselves   or  the 
nation,  to  leave  rulers  and  statesmen  in  such 
perplexity  as  not  to  know  what  to  do,  and  to 
abandon  them  to  foolish  and  ruinous  counsels. 
So  Rehoboam  adopted  the  unwise  counsel 
given  him  by  his  youthful  advisers.     The 
result  of  such  judicial  infatuation  seen  in 
foolish  and  hurtful  wars,  in  the  adoption  of 
uuwise  public  measures,  in  the  enactment 
of  intolerant,  partial,  and  unjust  laws,  an  J 
in  a  short-sighted  reactionary  policy   after 
one  of  enlightened  progress. 

5.  In  humbling  the  hrave^  the  gifted^  and 
the  great  (verse  19).  "He  leadeth  princes 
(or  priests — probab'y  civil  rulers,  viceroys, 
or  ministers  of  state)  away  spoiled,  and 
overthrowelh  the  mightv"  (warriors  mighty 

79  ' 


OHAP.  un. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


iu  battle).  No  king  saved  by  the  multitude 
of  a  host.  The  battle  is  the  Lord's,  who 
gives  the  victory  to  whom  He  will.  Threat- 
ened to  take  from  Judah  the  mighty  man 
and  the  man  of  war.  At  times  turned  the 
edge  of  Israel's  sword,  so  that  they  could 
not  stand  in  the  battle  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  43). 
Armies  and  their  generals  often  overthrown 
when  calculating  on  certain  victory.  God 
sometimes  overthrows  the  mighty  by  allowing 
them  to  overthrow  themselves  through  foohsh 
and  ambitious  counsfls.  (Verse  20.) — *'He 
removeth  away  the  speech  of  the  trusty  (the 
eloquence  of  the  patriotic  orator),  and 
taketh  away  the  understanding  of  the  aged" 
(the  prudence  and  wisdom  of  the  experienced 
senator).  So  God  threatened  to  take  away 
from  Judah  "the  eloquent  orator,  the 
ancient  and  the  honourable  man"  (Is.  iii. 
2,  3).  May  remove  such  by  disease  or 
death  without  supplying  their  places, 
by  withholding  the  desire  to  serve  their 
country  with  their  gifts,  or  by  withdrawing 
the  gifts  themselves.  Persuasive  elo- 
quence and  penetrating  judgment  not  in 
men's  own  keepini;.  The  influence  of 
wise  and  confidential  advisers  sometimes 
destroyed  to  serve  God's  own  purposes 
(2  Sam.  XV.  31;  xvii  1 4,  23).— Verse  21. 
"He  poureth  contempt  upon  princes,  and 
weakeneth  the  strength  of  the  mighty." 
Numerous  examples  furnished  by  Prance 
and  other  European  countries  during  the 
last  hundred  years. 


6.  In  disclosing  hidden  wickedness  (verse 
22).  "  He  disco vereth  deep  things  out  of 
darkness,  and  bringeth  out  to  light  the 
shadow  of  death."  (1)  Wicked  and  deep- 
laid  schemes.  Examples :  the  diabolical 
contrivance  of  Haman  for  the  destruction  of 
th(!  Jews  (Book  of  Esther);  the  Gunpowder 
Plot  for  the  overthrow  of  the  Protestant 
religion  in  England.  (2)  Secret  crimes  long 
hidden  from  men.  Examples;  Joseph's 
brethren,  Achan,  David.  The  verse  in  this 
sense  quoted  by  the  Apostle,  1  Cor.  iv.  5. 

7.  In  the  increase  and  decay  of  nations 
(verse  23).  "  He  increaseth  the  nations  and 
destroyeth  them;  He  enlargeth  the  nations 
and  straiteneth  them  again."  A  nation 
sometimes  made  to  rise  within  a  short  time 
to  great  power  and  influence.  Examples : 
Rome ;  Israel  under  David  and  Solomon ; 
and  in  more  modern  times,  England, 
America,  and  Prussia.  Examples  of  the 
decay  of  nations :  Israel,  after  the  death  of 
Solomon ;  Rome,  after  the  prevalence  of 
luxury,  pride  and  cruelty ;  Spain,  after  its 
persecution  of  the  truth  and  exclusion  of  an 
open  Bible.  Changes  in  the  condition  of 
nations  perhaps  as  early  as  the  times  of  Job 
(Gen.  xiv.).  Egypt,  a  powerful  monarchy 
at  a  very  early  period,  ultimately  for  its 
idolatry,  "the  basest  of  kingdoms."  The  seven 
nations  of  Canaan  extirpated  for  their 
wickedness  and  lust.  Only  a  short  period 
occupied  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  each  of  the 
first  three  universal  empires. 


CHAPTER  XIIL 


JOB'S  REPLY  TO  ZOPHAR— CONTINUED, 


!•  Job  re-asserts  his  knowledge  of 
the  Divine  procedure  as  not  inferior  to 
that  of   liis  friends  (verse  1,   2). 

"  Lo,  mine  eye,"  &c.  Right  in  certain  cir- 
cumstances to  maintain  one's  own  knowledge, 
but  without  vain  glory  (2  Cor.  xi.  6 ;  Eph. 
iii.  4).  Three  things  suggested  in  the  words 
of  Job  as  necessary  to  the 

Acquisition  of  knowledge* 

1.  Observation.  "Mine  eye  hath  seen 
all  this."  Important  to  make  a  right  use  of 
one's  eyes.  God's  works  both  of  creation 
and  ))rovidence  to  be  carefully  observed.  To 
observe  God's  works  and  ways  is  both  a  part 
of  wisdom  and  the  means  of  increasing  it 
(Ps.  cvii.  43).  A  mark  of  the  ungodly  and  a 
cause  of  their  destruction,  not  to  regard  the 
works  of  the  Lord  nor  the  operation  of  His 
hand  (Ps.  xxviii.  5  j  Is.  v.  12).  Often  ti»e 
best  knowlege  that  which  is  obtained  by 
fvr«ful  personal    observation.     "Come  and 


see,"    a    common    phrase    in   the    Jewish 

schools,  and  frequently  repeated  in  the  New 
Testament  (John  i. ;  Rev.  vi).  Better  to 
see  for  ourselves  than  to  hear  from  others. 
The  eyes,  as  well  as  the  ears,  are  the  pur- 
veyors for  the  mind. 

2  Attention  to  the  instruction  of  others. 
**  Mine  ear  hath  heard."  Moral  and  religious 
instruction  at  that  time  mostly  oral.  Con- 
sisted mainly  in  the  recitation  of  proverbial 
maxims  or  truths  delivered  in  short  sentences. 
Such  frequently  quoted  by  Job  and  his 
friends.  Reference  made  here  to  such 
Each  individual's  own  personal  observation 
necessarily  limited.  The  testimony  of  others 
required  to  supplement  our  own  observation. 
The  privilege  and  duty  of  one  to  avail  him- 
self of  the  testimony  and  conclusions  ot 
another.  Since  the  invention  of  printing, 
the  extension  of  education,  the  employment 
of  steam,  and  the  removal  of  the  taxes  on 
knowledge, — the  testimony  and  instruction  of 
ot  hers  now  addressed  nearly  as  much  to  the 


HOMILETIC  COMUBNTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.  xni. 


eye  as  to  the  ear.  Reading  now  greatly 
takes  the  place  of  hearing,  as  the  means  of 
obtaining  knowledge. 

Z.  Reflection.  "Hath  understood  (or 
considered)  it."  Reflection  an  appropriating 
and  assimilating  process.  Turns  to  account 
what  is  observed,  read,  or  heard.  Reading 
and  hearing  are  with  a  view  to  reflection,  as 
food  is  taken  into  the  mouth  only  with  a 
view  to  its  being  digested  in  the  stomach. 
Food  only  serves  the  purpose  of  nutrition 
when  properly  masticated  and  digested.  The 
eye  and  the  ear  collect  the  materials  for  the 
mind  to  work  upon.  Reading,  as  Bacoa  says, 
makes  a  full  man;  but  reflection  makes  an 
intelligent,  a  growing,  and  a  sure  man.  The 
want  of  consideration  the  characteristic  of 
tlie  way-side  hearers.  The  reason  of  tlie 
Word  of  God,  when  heard,  not  entering  the 
heart,  and  so  of  its  being  caught  away  by  the 
enemy  (Matt.  xiii.  19). 

II.  His  desire  and  resolution  to 
address  himself  to  God  (verse  3). 

"  Surely,  (or  *  however ')  I  would  (or  will) 
speak  to  the  Almighty;  and  I  desire  to 
reason  (or  debate  the  case)  with  God'* 
Observe — 

1.  Great  comfort  to  a  believer  in  being  able 
to  take  his  case  to  God.  Many  things  may 
be  poured  into  God's  ear  which  may  not  be 
>2ttered  to  man's.  Our  comfort  that  in  every 
controversy  an  appeal  may  be  made  from 
man  to  God.  The  heart  in  trouble  eased  by 
pouring  itself  out  to  our  Father  in  heaven 
The  best  way  to  dispose  of  difficulties  and 
perplexities  is  to  take  them  at  once  to  God. 
Better  to  take  our  case  to  God  than  to  man, 
as — (1)  He  is  better  acquainted  with  it,  and 
can  make  no  mistake  about  it ;  (2)  AVill  give 
a  more  just  decision,  being  neither  in- 
fluenced by  passion  nor  prejudice ;  (3)  Will 
shevy  more  tenderness  and  sympathy  in 
dealing  with  it. 

2.  God's  great  condescension  in  allowing  a 
creature  to  reason  with  Him.  His  desire  that 
we  should  do  so  (Is.  i.  18  ;  xli.  21 ;  xliii.  26). 
Our  privilege  to  plead  with  Him,  not  to 
ptstifi/  ourselves  as  righteous,  but  to  be  justified 
by  Him  as  siniiers.  In  the  Gospel,  God  per- 
mits us  to  plead  with  Him  for  justification 
and  acceptance  on  the  ground  of  a  better 
righteousness  than  our  own.  His  invitation 
(Is.  i.  18) ;  David's  resolution  (Ps.  Ixxi.  16)  ; 
Paul's  triumph  (Rom.  viii.  33,  34). 

III.  Vcliement  retort  from  Iiis  friends 

(verse  4). 

*'  But  ye  are  forgers  of  lies  (or,*  stitchers 
up  of  falsehood,'  'disappointing  surgeons,' 
or  'framers  of  false  arguments,'),  ye  are 
all  pliysicians  of  no  value  "  (or,  '  of  nothing- 
ness,'  or    'idol   physicians,'    as    Zcch.    xl 


17).  They  liad  come  professedly  to  bind  up 
their  friend's  wounds,  and  heal  his  diseased 
mind.  In  doing  this  they  had  only  employed 
false  and  futile  arguments.  Had  applied 
useless  remedies,  and  misa[)plied  good  ones. 
Had  set  out  on  the  false  principle  that  great 
sufi*erings  prove  great  sins,  and  that  temporal 
prosperity  must  always  accompany  true 
pietj.  Had  therefore  concluded  that  Job 
must  be  both  a  transc?ressor  and  a  hypocrite. 
Had  consequently  employed  arguments  to 
bring  him  to  humiliation,  repentance,  and 
prayer.  Among  other  arguments,  had  hela 
out  to  him  the  promise  of  deliverance  from 
trouble  and  restoration  to  prosperity. 
Observe — 

1.  Much  wisdom  required  in  ministering 
to  a  mind  diseased.  Care  to  be  taken  to 
employ  only  solid  considerations  and  sound 
arguments.  Only  truth  will  satisfy  and 
heal  a  troubled  spirit.  Preachers  to  beware 
of  "daubing  with  untempered  mortar." 

2.  Scripture  truths  rightly  applied,  the  only 
medichie  for  sin-sick  souls.  Scripture  written 
that  through  patience  and  comfort  from  it 
we  might  have  hope  (Rom.  xv.  4).  Paul's 
direction  to  Christian  mourners :  "  Comfort 
one  another  with  these  words,"— the  trutha 
he  had  just  stated  (1  Thess.  iv.  18). 

3.  The  honour  and  correspondhig  responsi- 
bility of  being  made  a  physician  of  souls. 
Requires— (1)  Study  and  knowledge  of 
cases  ;  (2)  Knowledge  of  the  requisite 
remedies;  (3)  Skill  in  applying  them  j 
(4)  Sympathy  with  the  suft'erer.  Christ 
the  Great  Physician  of  souls,  and  an 
example  to  all  others.  The  best  thing  the 
preacher  can  do  is  to  direct  the  Cliristian 
mourner  and  the  sin-sick  soul  to  Him 
(1  Cor.  ii.  2). 

VI.    Keen  remonstrance  and  reproof 

(verses  5 — 13). 

1.  Begs  his  friends  only  to  refrain  from 
speaking  altogether  (verse  5).  "O  that  ye 
would  altogether  hold  your  peace!  and  it 
should  be  your  wisdom." — Verse  13.  "Hold 
your  peace,  and  let  me  alone."  Applica- 
tion of  the  maxim  in  Prov.  xvii.  28.  Silence 
may  not  only  give  the  appearance  of  wisdom, 
but  is  often  wisdom  itself.  The  part  of  a 
wise  man  either  not  to  speak,  or  to  speak  to 
the  purpose.  Our  speech  to  be  **  with  grace, 
seasoned  with  salt." 

2.  Bespeaks  their  attention  to  his  reasoning 
and  reproof  (verse  6).  "Hear  now  5ny 
reasoning,  and  hearken  to  the  pleadings 
of  my  lips."  A  duty  owed  to  a  brother 
both  to  prove  and  reprove — to  prove  error 
and  reprove  sin  in  him  (Lev.  xix.  17; 
Prov.  ix.  S). 

3.  Shews  their  sin  in  acting  as  they  had 
done.      Their   sin— (1)   In   dissembling  and 

81 


ciiAp.  xili. 


BOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


using  false  arguments^  tcMle  pretending  to 
defend  God  and  His  'procedure  (verse  7). 
"  Will  ye  speak  wickedly  for  God?  and 
talk  deceitfully  for  him" — (speaking  dif- 
ferently from  what  their  consciences  believed, 
in  order  to  please  God  and  upliold  his  cause). 
To  make  God  appear  just  in  afflicting  Job, 
tliey,  contrary  to  their  convictions,  wished  to 
make  him  out  a  guilty  transgressor.  Observe 
— (i.)  God  needs  no  false  doctrine  or  unsound 
reasoning  to  defend  Him  or  His  doings. — (ii.) 
God's  cause  needs  no  sinful  compromises  or 
questionable  measures  to  uphold  it.  Neither 
the  wrath  nor  the  wrong-doing  of  man 
"  worketh  the  righteousness  of  God." — (2) 
In  giving  partial  judgment  for  God^  and 
presuming  to  make  themselves  His  patrons^  as 
if  he  needed  either  their  favour  or  defence 
(verse  8).  **  Will  ye  accept  his  person? 
will  ye  contend  for  God  ?"  Good  men  to  be 
God's  witnesses,  but  not  His  patrons  or 
advocates.  A  sin  in  His  sight  to  judge,  not 
according  to  the  merits  of  the  case,  but  the 
quality  of  the  parties.  Partiality  in  reference 
to  men  an  injustice,  in  reference  to  God  din. 
insult.  God's  cause  to  be  defended  not  with 
favour  and  partiality,  but  with  truth  and 
justice.  Favour  and  acceptance  of  persons 
in  judgment  so  obnoxious  to  God  that  He 
accounts  it  a  sin,  even  when  in  reference 
to  Himself.  Only  a  blind,  false,  and  super- 
stitious regard  to  reUgion  defends  it 
with  anything  but  truth  and  honesty. — 
(3.)  In  condemning  what  they  secretly  be- 
lieved to  be  right,  or  maintaining  with  their 
lips  what  they  did  not  believe  in  their  hearts 
(verse  9).  *'  Is  it  good  (or  will  it  be  for 
your  advantage)  that  he  search  you  out 
(examine  and  expose  your  secret  motives?) 
Or  as  one  man  mock<'tli  another,  do  ye  so 
mock  him  ?  He  will  surely  reprove  you, 
if  you  do  secretly  accept  persons.  Shall  not 
His  excellency  make  you  afraid  (of  acting 
thus  hypocritically),  and  His  dread  fall 
upon  you  ?"  (or,  •  is  it  not  His  majesty 
that  makes  you  afraid  [of  speaking  according 
to  your  convictions]  and  does  not  the  dread 
of  him  overwhelm  you?'  [so  as  to  act  hypo- 
critically in  the  matter].  Their  condemnation 
of  Job  not  from  conviction  of  his  guilt  but 
from  fear  of  God's  displeasure,  and  the 
desire  to  appear  on  His  side.  Observe — (i.) 
All  dissimulation  hateful  to  the  God  of  truth. 
lUlievers  so  to  act  as  willing  to  bear  the 
scrutiny  of  Him  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of 
(ire.  (ii.)  Fearful  mockery  of  God  to  cloak 
our  want  of  charily  to  man  with  a  pretended 
zeal  for  God.  (iii.)  Necessary  in  maintaining 
the  cause  of  religion,  to  examine  our  motives 
and  the  means  we  employ  in  doing  so.  A  good 
cause  may  be  defended  from  evil  motives,  and 
ti  bad  cause  may  be  upheld  under  the  apf)ear- 
ance  of  piety.  A  sin  to  act  from  slavish 
82 


fear  of   the    Almighty,   rather    than    from 
conviction  and  a  regard  to  truth. 

4.  Declares  the  worthlessness  of  his  friends* 
authorities  and  maxims  with  reference  to  the 
case  in  hand  (verse  12).  "Your  remem- 
brances are  like  ashes  (or,  *  your  memorial 
sayings  are  proverbs  of  ashes,' — worthless, 
aLd  easily  scattered  by  the  wind) ;  your  bodies 
to  bodies  of  clay"  (or,  *'your  towers, 
or  defences," —  i.e.^  your  arguments  and 
maxims — are  "towers  of  mud," — as  opposed 
to  those  of  stone,  without  strength  or  solidity, 
and  easily  thrown  down).  Probably  a  pro- 
verbial phrase  for  weak  and  worthless  argo 
ments.  The  reference  to  the  quotations 
from  the  ancients  in  his  friends'  speeches. 
These  called  "  remembrances,"  or  "  memorial 
sayings,"  as  intended  to  be  carried  in  the 
memory,  and  so  kept  ready  for  use.  Parti- 
cularly numerous  among  the  Arabs,  and 
taking  the  place  of  laws.  Abundant  in  the 
speeches  of  Job  and  his  friends,  especially  of 
the  latter.  Gieat  part  of  Oriental  wisdom 
and  learning  consisted  in  the  knowledge  and 
ready  recitation  of  these  traditional  maxims. 
Their  value  to  be  decided  on  their  respective 
merits.  Not  to  be  regarded  as  in  themselves 
inspired  productions.  Probably,  neither  their 
authors  nor  reciters  inspired  men.  As 
much  wisdom  required  in  the  application  as 
in  the  composition  of  them.  "  A  parable  in 
the  mouth  of  fools  "  proverbially  worthless 
and  injurious  (Prov.  xxvi.  7,  9).  In  the  case 
of  Job's  friends  the  fault  chiefly  in  the  appli- 
cation. The  maxims  tliemselves  generally 
good,  according  to  the  views  prevalent  at  the 
period.  Care  to  be  taken  by  preachers  and 
others — (1)  That  quotations,  especial y  those 
from  Scripture,  are  correctly  applied ;  (2) 
That  the  arguments  they  employ  are  solid  ones 
— not  "  defences  of  mud." 


V.  His  Resolution  to  plead  his  cause 
with  God  at  whatever  risk  (verse  13). 

"  Let  me  alone,  that  I  (or  I  myself)  may 
speak  {viz.  to  God),  and  let  come  on  me  what 
will."  (Verse  14). — "Wherefore  do  I  (or, 
'  come  what  may,' — repeated  from  previous 
verse, — '  I  will)  take  my  flesh  in  my  teeth,  and 
put  my  life  in  mine  hand."  A  prover- 
bial expression  for  *'  expose  myself,"  viz.^ 
to  the  threatened  peril  of  suffering  for  pre- 
sumption in  pleading  his  cause  with  God. 
The  attempt  considered  by  his  friends  as 
most  daring  and  perilous.  Faith  and  a 
good  conscience  are  courageous,  even  in 
reference  to  God  Himself  (1  John,  iii.  21). 
llie  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion  (Prov.  xxviii. 
]).  "Virtue  is  bold,  and  goodness  never 
fearful."  Job's  case  with  God  that  of 
Esther  with  the  king :  "  I  will  go,  and  if  1 
perish  I  |)erish"  (Esth.  iv.  16).  Abraham's 
case  in  pleading  for  Sodom :  "  I  have  taken 


UOMILETIC  COMMEN'TART:   JOB, 


CHAP.  XIIL 


npon  me  to  speak  unto  the  Lord,  who  am 
but  dust  and  ashes  (^Gen.  xviii.  27. 
Necessity  and  love  make  men  courageous. 
— Verse  15.  "Though  he  sL.v  me,  yet  will  I 
trust  in  Him  (or,  *  behold,  he  will  slay  me,'  or 

*  let  Him  slay  me,  I  will  not  expect'  [anything 
else] — the   Hebrew    words    for  *  not  *  and 

*  in  him,'  the  same  in  sound)  ;  but  I  will 
maintain  (or,  '  only  I  will  prove  and  argue') 
tiiy  ways  before  Him."  The  antithesis 
between  the  third  and  the  first  and  second 
clauses,  rather  than  between  the  second  and 
the  first.     Observe — 

J .  The  boldness  of  Job's  faith  and  con- 
scious integrity  here  rises  to  its  highest  pitch. 
Though  with  only  death  before  him  as  the 
result,  he  will  still  maintain  his  integrity, 
even  at  the  tribunal  of  the  Almighty, 
The   heat   and   tukniing   point   of  the 

CONFLICT     BETWEEN     GoD    AND     SaTAN     IN 

THESE  "WORDS.  Satau's  charge, — Job  will 
give  up  all,  even  his  religion,  to  save  his 
life.  Thus  it  will  be  shown  that  God 
has  not  a  sincere  disinterested  servant 
in  the  world;  that  all  religion  is  mere 
selfishness  and  time-serving  policy.  God 
will  thus  be  stripped  of  His  honour  in 
the  universe.  For  Job  to  have  given  up 
his  integrity  and  acknowledged  he  was 
not  the  man  he  had  appeared,  would 
have  given  the  victory  into  Satan's  hand. 
Job  would  have  been  condemned  out  of  his 
own  mouth.  Fear  would  have  made  him 
a  liar,  and  to  save  his  life  he  would  have 
thrown  away  his  religion.  This  the  aim  of 
Satan,  and  the  tendency  of  all  the  arguments 
of  his  friends,  cunningly  suggested  by  him- 
self. Job  prefers  to  die,  and  Satan  is 
defeated.  Glorious  triumph  of  faith  and 
a  good  conscience !  Many  a  believer,  like 
Job,  the  battle-field  between  God  and  Satan, 
As  he  maintains  faith  and  a  ^ood  con- 
science, God  is  honoured  and  Satan  put  to 
shame. 

2.  Job  persuaded  that  though  his  daring 
might  end  in  death^  it  would  ultimately  prove 
his  deli cerance  (verse  16).  "He  also  (or, 
'even  this')  shall  be  my  salvation;  for  an 
hypocrite  [as  Job's  friends  charged  him  with 
being]  shall  not  come  before  him."  The 
fact  of  his  appealing  to  God  in  the  face  of 
such  peril,  a  proof  of  his  innocence.  **The 
foolish  shall  not  stand  in  His  presence " 
(Ps.  V.  5).  The  righteous  Judge  would 
acquit  him  of  the  charges  of  his  friends,  and 
of  any  sin  as  the  cause  of  his  suflTering. 
Even  should  death  ensue,  a  deliverance 
awaited  him  beyond  death.  His  inno- 
cence would  be  vindicated,  which  with 
him  was  salvation.  The  day  would  come 
when  this  would  be  done  before  an  assem- 
bled universe  (ch.  xix.  25).  The  believer's  case 
ulways  safe  in  God's  hands  (2  Tim.  i  12.). 

6—3 


TI.  Job  requests  his  friends'  attention 
to  his  pleading,  and  predicts  his  success 

(verse  17). 

"  Hear  diligently  my  speech,  and  my 
declaration  [in  reference  to  my  innocence] 
with  your  ears.  Behold  now,  I  have  ordered 
my  cause  ( — have  already  set  in  order  my 
pleading  as  a  general  draws  up  his  forces 
for  battle) ;  I  know  that  I  shall  be  justified  " 
( — shall  gain  the  cause  and  be  pronounced 
righteous  by  my  Judge).  Job  actually  justi- 
fied by  God  as  he  expected,  t  hough  not  till 
he  had  humbled  himself  and  repented  in 
dust  and  ashes  (ch.  xlii.  6).  Observe — (1) 
The  boldness  and  assurance  of  a  good  con- 
science before  a  righteous  tribunal — (2) 
Job's  language  that  of  Christ  himself  and  of 
the  believer  trusting  as  a  sinner  in  Chrisfs 
merits  (Is.  1.  7—9;  Rom.  viii.  32—34). 
Job,  in  the  circumstances,  rightly  trusted  to 
his  innocence  and  integrity  as  the  ground 
of  his  justification  by  God.  Men,  as  sinners, 
have  not  to  plead  their  own  righteousness 
as  the  ground  of  their  acceptance,  but  that 
of  the  Surety  provided  for  them  by  God 
Himself.  *' Who  is  he  that  condenineth  ?  It 
is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather  that  is  risen 
again."  Christ's  name  and  title.  The  Lord 
our  righteousness  (Jer.  xxiii.  6).  This  also 
the  righteousness  of  Job,  viewed  as  in 
common  with  others  a  sinner  before  God 
(cli.  xl.  4 ;  xlii.  6).  Job  upright  in  his  life 
as  a  true  servant  of  God,  and  so  justified  by 
his  own  righteousness  before  men;  Job  a 
sinner  in  himself  in  the  eye  of  the  Divine 
law,  and  so  justified  by  the  righteousness 
oi  his  Surety  before  God, 

yil.  Introduction   to   the    pleading 

(verses  19—22). 

1.  Challenges  any  opponent  in  the  con- 
troversy {verse  19).  "Who  is  he  that  will 
plead  with  me  ?"  Defies  any  to  shew  that 
he  is  guilty  of  any  crime  deserving  such 
unusual  treatment.  Similar  challenge  by 
God's  righteous  Servant  (Is.  1.  8);  and  by 
the  Apostle  in  reference  to  believers  (Rom. 
viii.  34). 

2.  Expresses  his  intense  desire  to  plead  his 
cause  before  God,  whatever  the  result.  **  For 
now  if  1  hold  my  tongue,  I  shall  give  up  the 
ghost "  (or,  "  for  now  [if  he  can  make  good 
his  cause  against  me  and  prove  me  guilty] 
1  will  hold  my  tongue  and  die"). 

3.  Begs  only  to  be  freed  from  restraint  in 
pleading  (verse  20).  "Only  do  not  two 
things  unto  me,  then  will  1  not  hide  my- 
self from  thee."  These  two  things  speci- 
fied— (I)  The  removal  or  lightening  of  his 
present  suffering ;  "  Withdraw  thine  hand 
far  from  me"  (verse  21).  (2)  The  with- 
holding the  overwhelming  terror  of  his 
maiebty ;  "and  let  not  thy  dread  make  me 

^3 


OKkl,  XIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


afraid."  The  result  of  this  request  being 
granted, — "Then  call  thou  (as  plaintiff  in  the 
case),  and  I  will  answer  (as  defendant) ;  or 
let  me  speak  (as  plaintiff),  and  answer  thou 
me  [the  complaints  that  I  have  to  make]." 
His  wish  either  that  God  would  accuse  and 
jjive  him  an  opportunity  of  answering  for 
himself;  or  allow  him  to  present  his  com- 
plaint as  suffering  without  any  known  cause. 
No  small  presumption  in  the  eyes  of  the 
friends  for  Job  to  wish  either  of  these. 
The  language  only  to  be  excused  in  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case.  No 
sinner's  part  either  to  complain  against, 
Gody  or  to  answer  His  charges.  Ultimately 
Job  is  taught  to  give  up  the  place  both  of 
plaintiff  and  defendant.     Observe — 

1.  Job's  difficulties  in  pleading  his  cause 
were — God's  hand  upon  him,  and  God*s  dread 
over  him.  God's  hand  easily  made  too 
heavy  for  any  creature  to  bear.  If  so  heavy 
on  a  saint,  what  must  it  be  on  a  sinner*' 
"  If  these  things  are  done  in  the  green  tree, 
what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?"  If  God's 
dread  be  overwhelming  to  a  saint  in  a  world 
of  mercy,  what  will  it  be  to  tAie  sinner  in  a 
world  of  doom?  Good  so  to  realise  God's 
terror  now,  as  to  escape  it  hereafter. 

2.  The  difficulties  removed,  Job  would 
plead  with  God  and  not  hide  himself  from 
Him.  Natural  for  fallen  men  to  seek  to 
hide  themselves  from  God.  Adam's  first  act 
after  the  Fall  was  to  sew  fig-leaves  together 
to  hide  his  own  nakedness;  his  second,  to 
hide  himself  from  God  among  the  trees. 
Peter's  language  to  Christ  the  natural  ex- 
pression of  conscious  guilt  in  presence  of 
Divine  majesty :  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am 
a  sinful  man,  O  Lord.  Christ  the  true 
hiding-place  of  a  sinner  provided  by  God 
himself.  Hidden  by  faith  in  the  clefts  of 
that  Rock,  the  sinner  can  behold  the  majesty 
of  God  without  dread. 

Till.  Job  pleads  with  God  (verses 
23—28). 

1.  Asks  to  be  shewn,  his  sins  which  are  the 
cause  of  his  suffering  (verse  23).  "How 
many  are  mine  iniquities  and  my  sins  ?  Make 
me  to  know  my  transgression  and  my  sin. 
Wherefore  hidest  thou  thy  face,"  &c.  This 
not  a  confession  of  sin,  but  a  desire  to  have 
it  shown.  Asked  more  in  the  spirit  of  self- 
justification  than  of  humility.  Job  un- 
conscious of  such  sin  as  to  merit  such 
suffering,  yet  willing  to  know  it.  First, 
as  to  the  mumber  of  his  sins,  then  any 
particular  ti'ansgression  that  has  entailed 
such  chastisement.  Three  different  kinds  of 
offences  indicated — (1)  Iniquities,  or  perverse 
deviations  from  the  Divine  law ;  (2)  Sins,  or 
failures  in  duty ;  (3)  Transgression,  or  the 
most  li'Mii'Mi';  kind  of  sin,  involving  rebellion 

84 


and  wilful  breach  of  the  law  of  God. 
Though  not  the  cause  of  his  sufferings,  yet 
Job's  offences  immensely  more  numerous 
than  he  was  aware  of.  Like  Paul,  had  lived 
in  all  good  conscience ;  yet  secret  unknown 
sins  might  still  exist.  David's  acknowledge- 
ment— "  Innumerable  evils  have  compassed 
me  about — mine  iniquities  are  more  than  the 
hairs  of  my  head"  (Ps.  xl.  12).  God's  testi- 
mony in  regard  to  fallen  man  before  the 
Flood,  "  Every  imagination  of  the  thought 
of  his  heart  is  only  evil  continually ;"  affer 
the  Flood,  "The  imagination  of  man's  heart 
is  evil  from  his  youth  "  (Gen.  vi.  5  ;  viii.  21). 
Man's  natural  heart  a  poisonous  upas  tree 
and  a  corrupt  spring.  The  fruit  necessarily 
partakes  of  the  nature  of  the  tree ;  the 
streams,  of  that  of  the  spring.  Sin,  in  con- 
sequence of  its  effects  on  the  soul,  usually  not 
known.  Like  the  fish  that  discolours  the 
water  by  its  own  secretion,  and  so  escapes 
its  pursuer.  Important  prayer  (Ps,  xix.  1 2  ; 
xxvi.  2 ;  cxxxix.  23).  Job  ultimately  made  to 
know  his  transgression  and  his  sin  (ch.  xlii. 
6).  The  discovery  of  the  Divine  glory  is  at 
the  same  time  a  discovery  of  our  own  sin.  'I'he 
result  of  Job's  trouble,  as  of  all  sanctitied 
affliction.  Knowledge  of  sin  necessiry  to 
the  knowledge  of  salvation.  "The  whole 
have  no  need  of  the  pliysician."  Sense  of  sin 
needful  to  sense  of  the  blood  that  was  shed 
for  its  remission. 

2.  Pleads  his  present  condition.  (1)  As 
forsaken  by  God.  "  Wherefore  hidest  thou 
thy  face,  and  boldest  me  for  thine  enemy  ?  " 
(verse  21).  This  the  most  painful  element 
in  his  sufferings.  So  with  David  (Ps.  xiii. 
I  ;  xxii.  1),  and  with  David's  Lord  (Matt. 
xxvii.  46).  Implies  previous  enjoyment  of 
His  presence  and  favour  (ch.  xxix.  3-  5). 
Only  those  who  have  known  the  sweetness 
of  God's  fellowship  can  realise  the  great- 
ness of  its  loss.  Intolerable  to  a  child  of 
God  to  be  regarded  and  treated  as  an  enemv. 
(2)  As  feeble  and  afflicted.  "  Wilt  tho\i 
break  a  leaf  driven  to  and  fro  ?  and  wilt 
thou  pursue  the  dry  stubble  ?"  Touching 
images  of  frailty  and  prostration — a  leaf 
driven  to  and  fro  by  the  wind,  and  dry 
stubble,  worthless  and  ready  to  take  fire. 
Seemed  unbecoming  the  Divine  majesty  to 
pursue  so  feeble  a  creature  with  so  much 
severity.  Job's  sufferings  already  of  some 
continuance.  Had  consisted  in  successive 
blows,  increasing  in  severity,  without  mitiga- 
gation  or  suspension. — To  the  eye  of  se?i.se 
God's  dealings  often  unnatural  and  unlike 
Himself  Hereafter  seen  to  be  all  holy,  and 
wise,  and  good,  infinitely  becoming  His 
Divine  Majesty  and  character.  Winter  with 
its  gloom,  as  necessary  and  as  miicii  a  part 
of  nature's  economy,  as  sunivner  with  its 
glow.     "  God  is  His  own  interpreter,"  «^g 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JOB, 


CHAP.  XIY. 


Contrast    with    Job's    pleading    what    the 
Saviour  actually  does  (Ps.  xlii.  3). 

3.  Complains  of  the  Divine  treatment 
(verses  26 — 29). — (1)  That  God  visited  upon 
him  the  sins  of  his  youth.  "  Thou  writest  bitter 
things  against  me  ( — decreest  bitter  suffer- 
ings for  me  as  the  punishment  of  my  oflFences), 
and  makest  me  to  possess  {Heb.  '  inherit  *) 
the  iniquities  of  my  youth  ( — to  suffer  the 
punishment  of  sins  long  passed,  committed  in 
the  season  of  thoughtlessness,and  then  passed 
over)."  Job  entirely  in  the  dark  in  regard  to 
God*s  present  dealings  and  ihe  cause  of  his 
sufferings.  (?(?«?'* part  in  them  was  to  prove 
Job  to  be  his  faithtul  servant,  in  opposition 
to  Satan's  allegations.  BeUevers  unable  to 
judge  correctly  of  God's  dealings  from 
appearances.  "Blind  unbelief  is  sure  to 
err,"  &c.  Satan's  object  to  get  Job  and 
every  child  of  God  to  think  as  hardly  of  God 
as  possible.  God  might  visit  the  sins  of 
youth  on  our  riper  years.  Such  sins  de- 
serving punishment,  and  requiring  to  be 
repented  of  in  order  to  be  forgiven.  David 
remembered  them,  and  besought  God  not  to 
do  so  (Ps.  XXV.  7).  "  J^'ooiishness  bound 
up  in  the  heart  of  a  child."  The  thoughts 
of  man's  heart  evil  from  his  youth.  The 
natural  effects  of  youthful  sins  sometimes 
experienced  in  maturer  years.  Job,  con- 
scious at  least  of  youthful  sins,  sup- 
poses he  must  now  be  suffering  the  punish- 
ment of  them.  Yet  Job's  youth  eminently 
vurtuous  and  pious  (ch.  xxxi  1,  18).  The 
sins  of  youth  as  well  as  of  manhood  atoned 
for  by  a  Saviour's  blood  (Is.  liii.  6).  The 
bitterness  of  sin's  punishment  experienced 
by  the  Divine  Surety  on  the  cross  (Matt. 
xxvii.  46). — (2)  That  he  was  treated  igno- 
miniously  as  the  vilest  criminal  (ver.  27). 
*'  Thou  puttest  my  feet  also  in  the  stocks." 
These  a  kind  of  clog,  or  fetter.  Often  a 
public,  always  a  painful  and  ignominious 
punishment,  and  the  severest  restraint  on 
personal  liberty.  Inflicted  on  Jeremiah  ui 
the  gate,  or  most  public  place  of  the  city 


(Jer.  XX.  2)  j  and  on  Paul  and  Silas  in  the 
dungeon  at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  24).  Job's 
case  appeared  to  him  to  resemble  tliis. 
— "  And  lookest  narrowly  into  all  my  pat  hs" 
— either  with  the  view  of  punishing,  or  ol 
preventing  escape.  Job  appeared  to  be 
watched  as  by  a  spy,  or  guarded  as  by  a 
sentinel.  Similar  thought,  ch.  vii.  12,  20. 
His  temptation  common  to  believer?.. 
"Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense." 
God's  true  character  and  dealings  described 
by  the  prophet  (Mic.  vii.  18,  19).— "Thou 
settest  a  print  upon  the  heels  of  my  feet"— 
either — («)as  tracking  his  steps  with  a  view 
to  punishment;  or  (h)  as  marking  him  as  \ 
criminal  or  runaway  slave  with  branded  feet  •. 
or  (<?)  as  hemming  in  his  path  and  forbidding 
escape.  The  flesh  mistakes  friends  for  foes 
In  the  battle  of  Alma  men  fighting  in  the  dark 
fired  on  their  own  countrymen.  Satan's  doings 
often  mistaken  for  God's,  and  God  mistaken, 
for  a  foe. — (3)  That  his  lot  toas  to  pine  aicay 
and  perish  (verse  28).  "And  he  as  a  rotten 
thing  consumeth  (or,  *  and  the  same,*  viz., 
the  same  unhappy  culprit,  meaning  himself— 
a  poetical  and  tragical  change  of  the  person, 
as  better  indicating  his  sense  of  his  vile  con- 
dition),  as  a  garment  that  is  moth-eaten." 
The  humbling  comparison  of  himself  to 
worm-eaten  wood,  or  to  moth-eaten  clothes, 
suggested  by  his  bodily  condition.  The 
latter  a  common  poetical  figure  for  gradual 
but  sure  destruction.  Applied  to  the  body 
under  disease  (Ps.  xxxix.  11) ;  to  men  in 
general  (Is.  1.  9).  The  present  verse 
closely  connected  with  the  following  chapter, 
and  forming  a  point  of  transition  to  it. 
Job's  condition  as  frail  and  dying  a  plea  with 
God  for  pity  and  forbearance.  The  plea 
remembered  in  regard  to  Israel  (Ps.  Ixxviii. 
39) ;  in  regard  to  men  in  general  (Ps.  ciii. 
13,  14;  Is.  Ivii,  16).  God's  mercy  pities 
men's  persons  while  his  justice  punishes 
their  sins.  Hence  the  gracious  provision 
of  a  Substitute  (Is.  liii.  6). 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


CONTINUATION  OF  JOB'S  PLEADING  WITH  OOD. 


I.  Pleads  the  common  infirmity  of 
liuman  natnre  (verse  1 — 4). 

Man,  from  the  very  nature  of  his  birth, 
frail  and  mortal,  suffering  and  sinful.  "  Born 
of  a  woman."  Allusion  to  the  sentence  pro- 
nounced on  Eve  after  the  fall  (Gen.  iii.  16), 
"I  will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and  thy 
conception;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth 
children."  Like  parent,  like  child.  Suoh  a 
birth  a  plea  with  the  Almighty  for  lenience 


and  forbearance.     Three   evils  resulting  to 

humanity  from  that  birth — 

1.  Mortality.  "  Of  few  days."  Man  ever 
since  the  fall  has  been  short-lived.  Jacob's 
testimony  at  the  age  of  a  hundred  and  tiiirty 
— "  Few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the  years 
of  my  life  been"  (Gen.  xlvii.  9).  The  longest 
life  short — (1)  In  comparison  with  eternity ; 
(2)  As  compared  with  what  it  would  have 
been  but  for  the  fall.  Man's  death  the  result 

85 


CHAP.   XIV. 


tiUMlLEllC  COMMENTARY:  JOB 


of  sin.  Probably  the  tree  of  life  in  the 
gai  den  of  Eden  a  symbol  of  man's  immor- 
tality, and  a  means  of  effecting  it.  Death 
among  the  lower  animals  no  argument  against 
the  doctrine  that  man's  death  is  the  wages 
of  sin.  As  easy  for  God  to  make  man's 
body  immortal  as  to  make  it  at  all.  If  man 
reaching  the  age  of  Adam  and  Methuselah 
was  short-lived,  what  is  he  now  P  Sad  in- 
sanity, for  the  sake  of  this  short  span,  to 
throw  away  a  blissful  eternity  ! 

2.  Svffering.  "Full  of  trouble."  Man's 
life  on  earth  not  merely  sprinkled  with 
with  trouble,  but  saturated  with  it.  The 
first  scene  disclosed  by  Scripture  after  the 
Fall  is, — Adam  and  Eve  weeping  tears  of 
anguish  over  a  son  slaughtered  by  the  hand 
of  his  brother.  A  representative  event. 
Man's  history,  even  under  an  economy  of 
mercy  and  the  operation  of  grace,  a  record 
of  blood  and  tears.  "Few  and  evil,"  the 
description  of  most  men*s  lives.  The 
"  trouble  "  both  inward  and  outward.  Dis- 
quietude and  unrest  the  natural  man's  daily 
experience.  No  peace  to  the  wicked.  Man's 
soul  a  sea  continually  agitated  by  the  winds 
of  passion.  The  name  of  external  troubles 
"Legion."  Bodily  diseases  a  part  of  that 
death  which  is  the  wages  of  sin.  Death 
itself  a  prominent  element  in  the  troubles  of 
life.  Life  clouded  by  the  fear  and  apprehen- 
sion of  it,  in  respect  either  to  ourselves  or 
our  friends.  Deep  trouble  through  its  inroads 
into  the  domestic  or  social  circle.  Man's  in- 
humanity, unkindness,  and  wrong  to  his 
fellow-man.  Keverses  of  fortune,  poverty, 
want.  Not  least,  the  trouble  superinduced 
by  our  own  conduct.  Suffering  produced 
by  sin  as  heat  by  fire.  Trouble  as  man's 
lot  on  earth  a  fact  of  universal  expcii- 
ence.  "  Th»  world  is  an  abode  which  if  it 
make  thee  smile  to-day,  will  make  thee  weep 
to-morrow"  [Hariri,  an  Arabian poef], 

Man}  s  frailty  and  mortality  set  forth  under 
two  impressive  figures : — 

1.  A^o«?<?r  (verse  2).  '*He  cometh  forth 
as  a  flower  and  is  cut  down."  Man  com- 
pared to  a  flower — (1)  From  its  origin,  the 
earth;  (2)  Its  beauty;  (3)  Its  delicate  texture 
and  construction,  contrasted  with  the  fruit ;  (4) 
Its  frailty;  (5)  Its  end.  If  allowed  to  grow, 
soon  fades  and  falls  off,  but  liable  also  to 
many  casualties, — from  the  handof  n»en,  the 
tooth  of  animals,  the  nipping  frost,  the 
mower's  scythe.  Man  the  goodliest  flower 
framed  by  his  Maker's  hand.  "  Godlike, 
erect,  with  native  honour  clad."  His  good- 
liness  as  the  flower  of  tiie  field.  Like  the 
blossom,  which  opens,  expands,  reaches  its 
perfection,  fades,  and  then  lalls  to  its  native 
earth.  More  frequently  is  prematurely  '"'  cut 
down."  His  life  exposed  to  a  thousand 
casualties.     The  flower  however  falls  off  only 

8« 


to  make  way  for  the  fruit.  If  prepared  by 
grace,  man  dies  only  to  ripen  in  a  happier 
sphere. 

2.  A  shadow.  "He  fleeth  also  as  a  sha- 
dow and  continueth  not."  Time  early  mea- 
sured by  the  shadow  of  a  dial  or  a  spear 
stuck  in  the  ground.  The  shadow  on  the 
dial-plate  never  stands  still.  Glides  on  from 
hour  to  hour,  from  morning  to  noon,  and 
from  noon  to  night.  The  motion  impercep- 
tible, but  constant  and  progressive.  Neither 
stands  still  nor  goes  back.  Only  terminated 
by  the  setting  of  the  sun  or  an  unexpected 
cloud.  So  man^s  passage  from  the  cradle 
to  the  grave.  Hastens  to  the  evening  of 
death,  which  however  often  arrives  unex- 
pectedly before  it  is  noon.  The  primaeval 
sentence  in  continual  execution, — "  Dust 
thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return." 
The  shadow  an  appropriate  emblem  also  of 
the  pleasures  and  pursuits  of  time,  as  empty 
and  unsubstantial. — Lessons: — (I)  To  form 
atrue  estimate  of  the  enjoyments  and  interests 
of  time  and  eternity.  (2)  To  improve  our 
fleeting  stay  in  this  world  to  the  preparation 
for  a  better.  (3)  To  nmke  a  diligent  use  ol 
present  moments  which  alone  are  ours.  (4) 
To  stand  always  prepared  for  life's  unex- 
pected termination. 

Human  frailty  employed  by  Job  as  a  plea 
for  leniency  and  forbearance  (verse  3).  "And 
dost  thou  open  thine  eyes  upon  ( — pay  rigid 
attention  to)  such  an  one  ( — one  so  frail, 
miserable,  and  short-lived)  P  and  bringest  me 
(or  him)  into  judgment  with  thee  "  ( — accu- 
sing and  contending  with  him  for  his  faults 
against  thee)  ?  The  plea  acknowledged  by 
God  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  39;  ciii.  14;  Is.  Ivii.  16; 
Gen.  vi.  3).  God  however  has  opened  His 
eyes  on  frail  and  suffering  man,  but  differ- 
ently from  what  Job  intended.  Has  opened 
them  in  love  and  pity,  so  as  to  provide 
deliverance  from  man's  wretched  condition. 
So  in  regard  to  typical  Israel  (Exod.  iii.  7,  8). 
God's  eyes  opened  gi-aciously  on  every  hum- 
ble and  contrite  soul  (Is.  Ixvi.  2).  On  hi.s 
covenant  people,  to  watch  over,  defend,  and 
bless  them  (Zech,  iv.  9. 

3.  Depravity, —  the  third  evil  resulting  to 
man  from  his  birth  (verse  4).  **Who  can 
bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  Not 
one."  From  sinful  parents  can  come  only  a 
sinful  offspring.  The  plant  must  be  according- 
to  the  seed — the  fruit  according  to  the  tree. 
God  created  Adam  in  His  own  likeness  ; 
Adam,  after  the  Fall,  begat  children,  not 
in  God's  likeness,  but  his  own  (Gen.  v.  3). 
Men  now  shapen  in  iniquity  and  conceived 
in  sin  (Ps.  li.  5).  "  In  Adam  all  die," — 
spiritua.lly  as  well  as  physically  and  legally 
(1  Cor.  XV.  22).  The  corruption  of  hun\an 
nature  in  its  root  acknowledged  by  the 
heathen.     "  Nobody  is  born  without  vicerf^" 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


chjlp.  xn 


— the  saying  of  a  heathen  poet.  Man  found 
eyerv  where  and  in  all  circumstances,  corrupt 
and  depraved.  Savage  and  civilized  partake 
of  the  same  general  cliaracter.  Only  to  be 
accounted  for  by  a  common  depraved  nature. 
Children  exhibit  the  same  depravity  as  their 
parents.  Deceit,  envy,  covelinff,  and  self- 
will,  common  in  early  childhood.  No  out- 
ward restraint  or  apf)liances  able  to  remove 
or  overcome  this  innate  depravity.  No  clean 
or  holy  thing  ever  brought  forth  out  of  man's 
sinful  nature.  "  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil 
thoughts,"  &c.  "A  corrupt  tree  cannot 
bring  forth  good  fruit."  Grapes  not  gathered 
from  thorns.  What  is  holy  may  proceed 
from  a  sinful  man^  but  not  from  a  sinful 
nature.  God  does  not  produce  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit  from  man's  old  sinful  nature,  but 
from  a  new  one  imparted.  Two  distinct  and 
opposite  natures,  the  old  man  and  tiie  new, 
in  a  child  of  God,  each  producing  its  own 
proper  fruits.  The  presence  of  the  new 
makes  the  man  a  saint;  that  of  the  old  a 
sinner.  The  believer  is  holy,  and  produces 
holy  fruits  in  virtue  of  his  new  and  holy 
nature;  he  is  still  sinful,  and  produces  sinful 
fruits  in  virtue  of  his  old  and  sinful  one. 
Hence  the  Saviour's  teaching:  "Ye  must 
be  born  again."  The  old  nature  crucified 
in  a  believer  and  destined  to  die ;  the  new 
nature  victorious  even  now,  and  ultimately 
alone  in  the  field. 

II.  Pleads  for  remoyal  or  relaxation 

of  his  sufferings  (verse  5 — 12). 

Bis  pray ery  and  the  grounds  of  it. 

1.  His  prayer  (verse  6).  "  Turn  from  him  " 
(or,  "  look  away  from  him,"  i.e.^  from  Job  him- 
self), that  he  may  rest  (obtain  relief  from 
suffering,  or  rest  in  death),  till  he  accomplish  as 
an  hireling  his  day"  (or,  *  that  he  may  enjoy,' 
as  far  as  a  hireling  may  do  so, '  his  appointed 
period '  of  labour,  viz.,  the  present  life,  or  find 
the  rest  of  evening  after  his  toil,  viz.,  in 
death).  Human  life  already  spoken  of  as 
*' the  days  of  a  hireling"  (ch.  vii.  l)j — (1)  As 
a  certain  definite  period  ;  (2)  As  a  period  of 
toil  and  endurance.  Job's  day  now  felt  to 
be  especially  oppressive.  The  burden  and 
heat  of  the  day  for  day-labourers  in  the 
East,  especially  severe  (Matt.  xx.  12).  The 
rest  of  evening  greatly  longed  for  (ch.  vii.  2). 
Job  fluctuates  between  desire  for  alleviation 
of  the  burden,  and  for  rest  in  the  grave.  So 
also  in  ch.  vi.  8, 9  ;  vii.  19 ;  x.  20.  Times 
in  a  believer's  experience  when  life  seems 
especially  burdensome.  The  feeling  of  David 
(Ps.  Iv.  6) ;  of  Elijah  (1  Kings,  xix.  4) ;  of 
Jonah  (Jon.  iv.  3,  8)  ;  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  ix.  2  ; 
xii.  5).  Once  the  feeling  of  Jesus  (Matt.  xvii. 
17).  Christ  at  such  times,  as  "  a  river  of 
waters  in  a  dry  place,  and  tlu;  shadow  of  a 
gre&t  rock  in  a  weary  land."     believers  uot 


tempted  above  what  they  are  enabled  to 
bear.  In  the  day  of  the  rough  wind,  the 
east  wind  stayed.  Strength  made  equal  to 
our  day.  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee." 
2.  Grounds  of  the  prayer  (verse  v.  7 — 12) 
(1)  The  time  of  our  stay  on  earth  fixed  by 
God  himself  (verse  5).  "  Seeing  his  days  are 
determined,  the  number  of  his  months  are 
with  thee,  thou  hast  appointed  his  bounds 
that  he  cannot  pass."  Job  troubled  with  no 
doubts  on  the  subject  of 

Predestination. 

That  God  appointed  the  bounds  of  man's 
life  as  certain  with  Job  as  that  He  made 
him  at  all.  This  belief  held  firmly  by  the 
Arabians  to  the  present  day.  The  doctrine 
of  the  Bible.  Our  time  in  God's  hand. 
Man  unable  to  add  a  cubit  to  his  stature,  an 
hour  to  hid  age.  Consistent  with  the  opera- 
tion of  second  causes  and  natural  laws 
Means  appointed  along  with  the  end.  "  Man's 
life  no  more  governed  by  the  Stoio'b  blind 
fate  than  by  the  Epicuraean's  blind  fortune  " 
\M.  Henry\  The  fact  pleaded  by  Job  as  a 
ground  for  the  mitigation  of  his  sufferings. 
The  few  short  years  allotted  on  earth  may 
be  graciously  spared  such  excessive,  accumu- 
lated, and  continued  affliction.  It  is  still 
with  God  to  say  both  how  long  and  how 
severe  our  sufferings  on  earth  shall  be.  Pre- 
destination perfectly  consistent  with 

Prayer. 

The  Almighty  not,  like  the  God  of  the 
Stoics,  bound  by  fate.  May  not  change  His 
purpose^  but  may  alter  JLis procedure.  Changes 
in  His  outward  procedure  already  in  His  secret 
purpose.  The  thread  of  man's  life  in  God's 
hands,  to  lengthen  or  shorten  it  according  to 
circumstances  already  foreseen.  Hence  full 
scope  for  the  exercise  of  prayer.  Prayer  and 
its  answers  no  interference  with  God's  pur- 
poses. Not  only  what  God  does,  but  how  He 
does  it,  already  predetermined.  Believing 
prayer  one  of  the  means  appointed  with  the 
end.  God  builds  up  Zion  at  the  "set  time* 
to  favour  her,  because  He  regards  "the 
prayer  of  the  destitute"  (Ps.  cii.  13 — 17). 
The  duty  and  prevalence  of  prayer  a  fact  as 
well  of  experience  as  of  revelation.  Prayer 
and  its  efficacy  an  instinct  of  human  nature. 
One  of  the  great  moral  laws  under  which 
God  has  placed  His  intelligent  creatures. 
Man's  inability  to  reconcile  it  with  his  philo- 
sophy no  argument  against  it.  Man  must 
pray  ;  and  God  is  the  hearer  of  prayer. 

(2  )  Oar  departure  from  this  world  final  afid 
irrecocnble.  Man's  case  at  death  is — (i.) 
contrasted  with  that  of  ^felled  tree  (verse  7). 
"  I'or  there  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut 

87 


CHAP.  XIT, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


down,  that  it  will  sprout  again,  anil  that  the 
tender  branch  (or  shoot)  tliereol  will  not 
cease ;  though  the  root  thereof  wax  old  in 
the  earth,  and  the  stock  thereof  die  (to  all 
appearance)  in  the  ground ;  yet  through  the 
scent  of  water  ( — its  gentle  contact,  like  an 
exlialation  or  an  odour,)  it  will  bud  and  bring 
forth  boughs  {Heb.  *  a  crop  *  of  shoots)  like 
a  plant  (or,  *as  if  it  had  been  planted.*) 
But  man  (even  in  his  best  estate— //<?(^.  'the 
strong  man*)  dieth  and  wastelh  away  (or, 
•  is  prostrated  and  gone  * — loses  all  inward 
power  of  recovery  or  revival);  yea,  man 
{Heb. — man  as  sprung  from  the  earth, 'y^^«/»') 
giveth  up  the  ghost  and  where  is  he?"  {i.e., 
IS  no  more  to  be  seen — a  Biblical  and  Arab 
phrase). — (ii.)  Compared  to  water  disappearing 
by  evaporation,  absorption,  or  otherwise 
(verse  1] ).  "  As  the  waters  fail  from  the 
sea  (oi  lake, — the  term  applied  to  any  con- 
siderable collection  of  water,  Jer.  li.  36 ;  Is. 
xix.  5) ;  and  the  flood  (or  winter-torrent)  de- 
cayeth  and  drieth  up  (in  summer)  ;  so  man 
lieth  down  (in  the  grave)  and  riseth  not ;  till 
the  heavens  be  no  more  they  shall  not  awake, 
nor  be  raised  out  of  their  sleep.'*  Man  at 
death  disappears  for  ever  as  a  resident  of 
this  present  world.  No  return  to  a  mortal 
life.  "  The  bourne  whence  no  traveller  re- 
turns.** That  needs  to  be  well  done  that  can 
he  done  only  once.     (See  also  ch.  vii.  9,  10). 

The  question  asked  (verse  14) — "  If  a  man 
shall  die,  shall  he  live  again?'* — capable  of 
a  double  answer.  In  regard  to  the  present 
world,  or  the  world  in  its  present  state,  No  ; 
in  regard  to  a  future  resurrection,  Yes.  The 
fact  of  such  resurrection,  however,  probably 
not,  at  least  distinctly,  in  Job's  mind. 

The  doctrine  of  the 

Resurrection 

One  of  gradual  development.  Death  viewed 
by  most  nations  of  antiquity  as  a  "  perpe- 
tual sleep."  Revelation  assures  us  of  an 
awaking  out  of  it  (Dan.  xii.  2 ;  1  Tliess. 
iv.  14 — 17).  That  awaking  at  the  Lord's 
appearing,  when  "  the  heavens  shall  pass 
away  with  a  great  noise "  (2  Pet .  iii.  7,  10, 
11).  New  heavens  and  a  new  earth  the  pro- 
mised abode  of  resurrection  saints  (2  Pet. 
iii.  13;  llev.  xxi.  1).  Kesurrection  only  to 
follow  the  sin-atoning  and  death-destro.ying 
death  on  the  cross.  Hence  the  slight 
knowledge  of  it  by  Old  Testament  saints. 
The  knowledge  of  it  to  be  only  according  to 
the  knowledge  of  that  which  was  the  founda- 
tion of  it.  Life  and  immortality  brought  to 
light  by  Christ^  Himself  (2  Tim.  l  10).  As 
in  Adam  all  die,  so  only  in  Christ  shall  all 
be  made  alive.  Christ  rose  as  the  first-fruits 
of  them  that  slept.  Christ  the  first-fruits; 
afterwards  they  that  are  Christ's  at  His 
88 


coming  (1  Cor.  xv.  20—23).  Only  faint  and 
occasional  glimpses  of  the  resurrection  ob- 
tained by.  Old  Testament  believers.  David'i 
hope  expressed  prophetically  of  the  Messiah's 
resurrection,  rather  than  personally  of  his 
own  (Ps.  xvi.  8—10;  Acts  ii.  25— 31).  The 
Lord's  second  appearing^  and  His  people's 
resurrection  as  bound  up  with  it,  the  blessed 
hope  of  New  Tesianient  believers.  Yague 
and  dim  apprehension  now  exchanged  for 
glorious  certainty  (2  Cor.  v.  1  j  Phil.  iii.  21). 

State  after  death. 

The  question  "  Where  is  he  ?  (verse  10), 
solemn  and  important  in  relation  to  the  mun^ 
viewed  as  possessing  an  immortal  spirit. 
Only  two  states  after  death.  Lazarus  is 
carried  into  Abraham's  bosom.  The  rich 
man  lifts  up  his  eyes  in  hell,  being  in  tor- 
ments. "  I'he  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his 
wickedness."  Where?  Judas  went  to  his 
own  place.  "The  righteous  hath  hope  in  . 
his  death.'*  The  penitent  thief  was  in 
Paradise,  while  his  lifeless  body  was  cast  into 
a  pit.  Where  was  his  companion  who  died 
in  his  sins  ?  Psalm  ix.  17  gives  the  solemn 
answer.  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall 
see  the  Lord.*' 

III.   Job  desires  a  temporary  con- 
cealment in  tlie  grave  (verse  13). 

"  O  that  thou  wouldst  hide  me  in  the 
grave  until  thy  wrath  be  past  ( — the  present 
aflliction  viewed  as  a  token  of  that  wrath) ; 
that  thou  wouldst  appoint  me  a  set  time  and 
remember  me.**  Has  doubts  as  to  the 
possibility  of  this  wish  being  accomplished. 
*'  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again?  "  (verse 
14). — Returns  to  his  wish  and  states  what 
would  be  the  result  of  its  being  granted. 
"All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  (or  war- 
fare, as  ch.  vii.  1)  will  (or  would)  I  wait  till 
my  change  (dismission  or  renovation)  come. 
Thou  slialt  (or  shouidst)  call  and  I  will  (or 
would)  answer ;  thou  wilt  (or  wouldst)  have 
a  desire  to  the  work  of  thine  hands."  A 
confused  wish  of  Job's  troubled  spirit. 
Apparently  inconsistent  with  his  previous 
stateujcnts  about  man's  irrevocable  depar- 
ture out  of  this  world.  Prayer,  especially 
in  deep  affliction,  often  without  much  reflec- 
tion. Even  believers  sometimes  know  not 
what  they  ask.  Yet  a  great  truth  in  his 
words,  though  but  dimly  apprehended  by 
himself.  Truths  often  uttered  through  the 
presence  of  the  Spirit,  when  but  imperfectly 
understood  by  the  speaker  (1  Pet.  i.  12). 

"  To  the  imagination  may  be  given 
The  type  and  shadow  of  an  awful  truth." 

Much   more  when  the   human    spirit  is  in 
intimate  communion  with  the  divine.    God's 


UUMILMW  OOMMENTARI :  JUh. 


CHAP.    XIT 


■aints  actually  hidden  for  a  time  in  the  grave 
and  the  spirit-world.  Tlie  words  of  the 
prophet  (Is.  xxvi.  20),  almost  an  echo  of 
the  patriarcli's.  A  set  time  actually  aj  pointed 
to  God's  people  for  their  recall  from  the 
erave.  God  reniombers  them  there  as  he 
did  Noah  in  the  Ark  (Gen.  viii.  1).  Their 
death  precious  in  his  si^ht.  Their  names 
enf^raven  on  tiie  palms  ol  liis  hands.  Zion's 
wall's,  though  lying  in  ruins,  continually 
before  him  (Is.  xlix.  16).  Living  saints  at  the 
Lord's  appearing  not  caught  up  till  dead 
ones  have  been  raised  (1  Thess.  iv.  15 — 17). 
The  righteous,  previous  to  the  last  and  great 
tribulation,  mostly  taken  away  from  the  evil 
to  come.  Hidden  in  their  chambers  for  a 
little  moment  till  the  indignation  be  overpast 
(Is.  xxvi.  20).    Observe — 

1.  Job's  faith  and  patience  (verse  14). 
"  All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I 
wait  till  my  change  come.  Faith  foresees  the 
change  for  the  better,  and  patience  waits  for 
it.  Three  ^^ changes'**  in  a  believer's  expe- 
rience— (1)  When  he  is  horn  again,  and 
passes  from  spiritual  death  to  life.  (2) 
When  he  falls  asleep  in  Jesus  and  enters 
the  heavenly  rest.  (3)  When  he  rises  from 
the  grave  to  be  made  in  body  and  spirit  en- 
tirely like  Christ,  and  to  be  ever  with  the 
Lord.  Probably  the  third  of  these  vaguely 
and  dimly  indicated  in  Job's  words.  For 
this,  as  well  as  the  change  for  the  lietter  at 
death,  were  his  wish  to  be  granted,  he  would 
patiently  wait.  Deliverance  decreed  for 
God's  people  from  all  trouble  and  from  death 
itself.  The  time  of  that  deliverance  in  God's 
hands.  To  he  patiently  waited  for.  Patient 
waiting  the  posture  of  believers  in  this 
world  (Rom.  viii.  23—25  ;  1  Thess.  i.  10 ; 
Heb.  X.  36).  The  vision  is  for  an  appointed 
time.  The  promise,  Behold  I  come  quickly. 
Blessed  is  he  that  waiteth.  The  change 
at  a  believer's  death  worth  patient  wait- 
ing for;  much  more  the  change  at  the 
Lord's  appearing.  At  death  we  are  un- 
clothed, at  the  resurrection  clothed  upon  (2 
Cor.  V.  2). 

2.  Job's  joyous  anticipation,  should  his 
wish  be  granted  (verse  15).  "Thou  shalt 
callJ"  No  awaking  from  the  sleep  of  death 
but  at  the  Divine  call.  *'  Awake  and  sing, 
ye  that  dwell  in  dust "  (Is.  xxvi.  19).  For 
the  call,  see  also  John  v.  28 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  52; 
1  Thess.  iv.  14—17.  The  call  of  the 
Bridegroom  (Cant.  ii.  10 — 13). — A  ready 
response  given  by  believers  to  the  call.  "  And 
I  will  answer."  The  language  of  conscience 
innocence  in  the  case  of  Job ;  of  conscious 
acceptance  "  in  the  Beloved  "  in  the  case  of 
every  believer. — The  reason  of  that  Divine 
call — "  Thou  wilt  have  a  desire  to  the  work 
of  thine  hands"  Believers  especially  the 
work  of  God's  hands — (1)  In  creation.  Alan's 


body  a  masterpiece  of  Divine  skill  directed 
by  Divine  benevolence. 

"  In  their  looks  Divine 
The  image  of  their  glorious  Maker  shone; 
Truth,  wisdom,  sanctitude  severe  and  pure." 

(2)  In  regeneration  and  sanctification.  Be- 
lievers God's  workmanship  created  in  Christ 
Jesus  (Eph  ii  10).  The  expression  frequent 
in  Isaiah  as  af)plied  to  God's  f)eople  (Is. 
xxix.  23 ;  xlv.  11 ;  Ix.  21 ;  Ixi.  3).  Believers 
a  more  costly  work  than  all  creation  besides. 
Required  the  incarnation,  suffering,  and 
death  of  the  Creator.  The  heavens  the  work 
of  God's  fingers,  believers  the  work  of  God's 
hands  (Ps.  viii.  3).  To  this  work  of  His 
hands  God  has  a  special  desire.  That  desire 
one  of — (1)  Pity  and  benevolence ;  (2) 
Yearning  affection ;  (3)  Complacency  and 
delight.  The  Father's  desire  is  to  them  as 
His  children;  the  Son's,  as  His  Bride  and 
the  purchase  of  His  blood ;  the  Spirit's  as 
His  especial  work.  Faith  unable,  in  the 
darkest  time,  to  give  up  the  idea  of  God's 
loving  faiherhood.  Looks  through  the 
gloomy  passage  of  the  grave,  and  sees  more 
or  less  clearly  a  light  shining  at  the  farther 
end. 

IV.  Complains  again  of  God's  present 
severity  (verse  16,  17). 

"  For  (or,  '  but ' j  now  thou  numberest  my 
ste|)S (taking  strict  account  of  all  my  actions); 
dost  thou  not  watch  over  my  sin  (in  order 
to  punish  it)?  My  transgression  is  sealed 
up  in  a  bag  (as  if  so  much  treasure,  that 
none  may  be  lost  or  left  unpunished,  or  as 
so  much  evidence  preserved  against  me) ; 
and  thou  sewest  up  mine  iniquity  "  (in  order 
carefully  to  keep  it  for  future  punishment). 
A  constant  recurrence  of  God's  present 
apparent  severity.  Remembered  now,  either 
as  the  reason  for  Job's  wish  for  concealment 
in  the  grave  (verse  13),  or  as  the  contrast 
of  its  fulfilment  ('  butnosN  *  &e  ).  Hard  to 
get  over  present  grievances.  All  Job's  suffer- 
ings viewed  as  the  result  of  God's  resolution 
to  punish  his  every  failure.  Observe — 
(1)  *'  Faith  and  unbelief  view  God's  character 
and  dealings  in  an  opposite  light ;  (2)  A  time 
of  darkness  and  trouble  urfavouruble  for  a 
right  judgment.  Job's  p»'esent  view  of  God's 
character  and  dealings  entirely  a  mistaken 
one.  His  character  is — **  Slow  to  anger ;" 
"  Ready  to  forgive;"  **  Delighting  in  mercy.** 
Sin,  however,  in  order  to  its  being  forgiven, 
thus  dealt  with  in  the  case  of  the  Surety. 
The  iniquities  of  all  the  redeemed  laid  upon 
Him.  Strict  account  taken  of  sin  by  God 
in  dealing  with  the  Sin-bearer.  No  sin 
pardoned  in  the  sinner  without  being 
punished  in  the  Substitute.  God  just  while 
justifying  the  ungodly.     Job's  view  true  in 

89 


CHAP.   XIV. 


HOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


A  dispensation  of  simple  law.  Not  true  in 
a  dispensation  of  mercy  and  under  the 
covenant  of  grace.  Sad  to  live  under  a  dis- 
pensation of  mercy  and  not  to  avail  oneself 
of  its  benefits.  The  worst  of  all  cases,  to 
have  the  guilt  of  a  rejected  Saviour  added  to 
all  other  transgressions. 

V.  Again    bewails    man's    mortality 

and  wretchedness  (verse  18—22). 

First  bj  comparison  with  the  mutability 
everywhere  visible  in  Nature.  (1)  The 
mountain  and  the  rock^  that  seem  the  firmest 
of  all  earthly  objects.  These,  or  at  least 
portions  of  them,  lorn  away  from  the  rest  by 
earthquakes  or  other  agencies,  fall  and  then 
lie  mouldering  and  crumbling  on  the  ground 
(verse  18).  "And  surely  (or  'but')  the 
mountain  falling  cometh  to  nought,  and  the 
rock  is  removed,*'  &c.  (2)  Stones^  the 
hardest  of  earthly  materials,  are  worn  away 
by  the  slow  continual  action  of  water  (verse 
19).  "The  waters  wear  the  stones.''  (3)  The 
very  soil  forming  the  loose  surface  of  the 
earth,  with  the  trees,  grain,  &c.,  that  grow 
in  it,  is  washed  away  by  floods.  "  Thou 
washest  away  the  things  that  grow  out  of 
the  dust  of  the  earth  *'  (or,  "  the  floods  sweep 
away  the  dust,"'  &c). 

Man,  a  partaker  of  the  general  corrupti- 
bility and  decay.  "  And  (or,  *  so ')  thou 
destroyest  the  hope  of  man"  ( — 'wretched* 
man's  hope  and  expectation  of  prolonging 
his  life  on  the  earth).  Human  mortality 
m  keeping  with  the  decay  of  all  visible 
nature.  Man  ordinarily  thinks  of  death  as 
at  a  distance  from  him.  *' All  men  think  all 
men  mortal  but  themselves."  The  hope  of 
evading  the  last  enemy  vain.  The  sentence 
hns  gone  forth,  Dust  thou  art,  &c.  (verse 
20).  "Thou  prevailest  for  ever  against 
him  ( — 'always,*  or,  *to  complete  victory'), 
and  he  passeth,"  (or.  "he  is  gone,'* — departs 
of  this  world).  Man  properly  uses  his 
endeavour  to  prolong  his  life.  Battles 
against  the  sentence,  "TTnto  dust  shalt  thou 
return."  In  vain.  The  victory  always  with 
God  who  executes  his  own  sentence.  Three 
stages  in  this  victory — (1)  Disease.  "Thou 
changest  his  countenance."  Sickness  alters 
the  state  of  our  frame,  and  the  aspect  of  our 
face.  Instead  of  the  glow  and  plumpness  of 
health  comes  the  paleness  and  emaciation  of 
disease.  Job  himself  at  the  time  an  example 
of  his  own  words.  (2)  Death.  "  Thou 
B  nidest  him  away."  Death  is  God's  dis- 
mission. "  Return  ye  children  of  men." 
The  world  "  a  stage  where  every  man  must 
play  his  part.'*  The  time  for  his  exit  in 
God's  hand.    (3)  The  disembodied  state  i\i  iVQ 

World  of  Spii'its. 

Represented  by  Job— 
90 


1.  As  a  state  of  ignorance  of  what  taket 
place  on  earthy  especially  as  regards  surviving 
relatives  (verse  21).  "His  sons  come  to 
honour,  and  he  knoweth  it  not ;  and  they  are 
brought  h)W,  but  he  perceiveth  it  not  of 
them."  Parents  naturally  very  deeply  in- 
terested in  the  prosperity  or  adversity  of 
their  children.  In  the  spirit-world,  ignorant 
of  and  unaffected  by  either.  Absolute  se- 
paration from  all  the  living  and  the  creatures 
of  the  present  world.  This  however  not  ne- 
cessarily to  be  regarded  as  a  divine  declara- 
tion of  the  real  state  of  the  case.  Rather 
the  utterance — {a)  Of  Job's  own  melancholy  . 
spirit  at  the  time ;  {b)  Of  the  views  generally 
entertained  on  the  subject  at  that  early 
period.  The  knowledge  possessed  by  the 
departed  in  reference  to  survivors  still  a 
mystery.  Among  "the  spirits  of  the  just,** 
probably  more  of  such  knowledge  than  we 
are  aware  of.  Joy  among  the  angels  of  God 
over  one  repenting  sinner.  Naturally  also 
among  departed  saints.  Hence,  still  more, 
over  a  repenting  relative.  Such  knowledge 
an  obvious  increase  to  their  joy  and  praise. 
Angels  constant  attendants  on  believers  in 
life,  and  their  escort  to  paradise  at  death. 
Departed  saints  therefore  probably  made 
acquainted  by  angels,  if  not  more  directly, 
with  the  circumstances  of  converted  relatives 
on  earth.  The  mere  worldly  prosperity  or 
adversity  of  surviving  relatives,  however, 
even  if  known,  probably,  as  such,  a  matter 
of  the  utmost  insignificance  to  departed 
saints. 

2.  As  a  state  of  suffering  and  grief  (verse 
22).  "  But  his  flesh  upon  him  shall  have  pain, 
and  his  soul  within  him  shall  mourn"  (or, 
"only  his  flesh  shall  have  pain  on  account  of 
himself,  and  his  soul  on  account  of  himself 
shall  mourn").  The  dead  man  represented 
as  occupied  with  his  own  concerns,  not  those 
of  his  surviving  friends.  His  state  not  one 
of  pleasure  but  of  pain ;  liis  experience  not 
one  of  joy  but  of  grief.  Spoken  of  man  in 
general  without  reference  to  distinction  of 
character.  Also  spoken  according  to  the 
view  then  entertained  of  the  state  of  de- 
parted spirits.  That  state  one  of  anything 
but  comfort  or  joy  (see  ch.  x.  21,  22).  The 
"  flesh  "  and  "  soul "  here  viewed  as  making 
up  the  man,  who  is  regarded  as  still  conscious 
in  the  spirit- world.  That  consciousness, 
howewr,  one  only  of  discomfort.  Hence, 
the  desire  for  life  so  prevalent  in  Old  Testa- 
ment times.  Almost  any  kind  of  life  re- 
garded as  preferable  to  an  abode  in  the  world 
of  spirits.  Such  views  natural,  apart  from 
revelation.  Even  still  the  views  of  many 
living  under  the  Gospel  but  ignorant  of  its 
truths.  The  experience  of  the  body  trans- 
ferred to  the  departed  spirit,  as  if  partaking 
of  it.    The  thing  dreaded  in  death—"  To  lie 


HOMILEflC  COMMENTARY  t  JOB. 


CHAB.  XY. 


in  cold  abstraction  and  to  rot."  Views  of 
the  spirit-world  entirely  changed  since  the 
Advent  of  Him  who  is  both  the  Life  and  the 
Light.  Life  and  immortality  brought  by 
Him  to  light  through  the  Gospel.  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  opened  to  all  believers. 
ITie  spirit-world  now  their  Father's  house — 
the  better  country — Paradise — the  rest  from 
labour — the  Mount  Zion — the  place  of  Divine 
worship  and  communion — the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem— the  c^eneral  assembly  and  churcii  of 
the  llrst-born — the  innumerable  company  of 
angels — the  presence  of  Jesus,  the  Elder 
Brotlier  and  Mediator  of  the  New  Coveniuit. 
The  views  of  Job  more  correctly  applicable 
in  reference  to  the  unsaved  dead.  The  rich 
man  in  hell  (or  Hades)  lifted  up  his  eyes, 
being  in  torment.    Compared  with  the  con- 


dition of  an  unsaved  soul  in  the  world  of 

spirits — 

"  The  weariest  and  most  loathed  worldly  life 
That  ache,  age,  penury  and  imprisonment 
Can  lay  on  Nature,  is  a  paradise." 

Lessons  : — 

1.  The  comparative  insignificance  of  worldly 
prosperity  or  adversity  in  view  of  the  eternal 
world. 

2.  The  infinite  importance  of  securing  a 
place  of  happiness  beyond  the  grave — (1)  Eor 
ourselves  ;  (2)  For  our  children  and  friends. 

3.  The  value  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  duty 
of  making  ourselves  acquainted  with  its 
precious  contents. 

4.  The  paramount  necessity  of  a  personal 
interest  in  Him  who  is  the  Way,  the  Truth, 
and  the  Life. 


CHAPTER  XV. 
SECOND    COURSE  OF  DIALOGUES -SECOND    SPEECH  OF  ELIPEAZ. 


Eliphaz  less  gentle  and  courteous  than  in 
his  former  speech.  Probably  irritated  at  his 
little  success  with  Job,  who  rejected  his 
friend's  counsel  and  still  maintained  his  own 
uprightness.  The  hostility  of  the  friends 
more  pronounced  as  the  dialogue  proceeds. 

I.    Eliphaz    sharply   reproyes   Job's 
speeches  (verses  2 — 13). 
Censures — 

1.  Their  emptiness  and  vehemence  (verse  2). 
"Should  a  wise  man  {Heb.^  'the  wise  man') 
utter  vain  knowledge  {Heb.,  answer  [with] 
knowledge  of  wind,  or  windy  sentiments), 
and  fill  his  belly  (his  mind  or  heart,  John  vii. 
38)  with  the  East  wind," — cherishing  and 
uttering  opinions  which  are  not  only  empty 
as  the  wind,  but  injurious  to  himself  and 
others;  like  the  parching,  vehement  east  wind, 
SCO  ching  and  drying  up  all  vegetation.  Such 
language  as  Job  had  employed,  unbecoming, 
in  tlie  opinion  of  Eliphaz,  the  wise  man  that 
he  had  passed  for.  Job  celebrated  in  his  own 
country  for  wisdom  as  well  as  piety  (ch.  xxix. 
8,  9, 21— 23).  "  Should  the  wise  man,''  &c., 
— probably  a  taunt.  Men  with  a  character 
for  wisdom  to  be  careful  to  speak  and  act 
consistently  with  it.  A  little  folly  in  such 
men  like  the  dead  fly  in  the  apothecary's 
perfume  (Kcc.  x.  1). 

2.  Their  verbiage  and  unprofitableness  (verse 
3).  "  Should  he  reason  with  unprofitable 
talk,  or  with  speeches,'  &c., — as  if  Job's 
speeches  were  mere  talk.  A  charge  as  un- 
generous and  unfeeling  as  it  was  untruthful 
and  unjust.  Job  no  mere  talker,  though  his 
words  not  always  wise.  A  Christian's  speech 
to  be  with  grace  seasoned  with  salt,  and  good 


to  the  use  of  edifying.  The  abundant  talk 
of  the  lips  tendeth  to  penury.  In  the  mul- 
titude of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin.  Un- 
profitable talk  the  mark  of  an  unregenerate 
heart. 

3.  Their  impiety  and  hurtful  influence 
(verse  4)  "Yea  thou  casteth  off  fear  (or, 
makest  void  the  fear  [of  God  as  of  no  value], 
and  restrainest  ( — lessenest  or  discouragest) 
prayer  before  God  [as  of  no  use]".  Job's 
language  viewed  either  as  indicating  want 
of  reverence  and  piety  in  himself,  or  rather 
as  tending  to  discourage  it  in  others.  The 
danger  implied  in  Asaph's  hasty  conclu- 
sion: "Verily  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  in 
vain"  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  13) ;  or,  in  the  language  of 
the  fool's  heart:  "There  is  no  God"  (Fs.  xiv. 
1).  Observe — (1.)  The  interests  of  religion 
greatly  in  the  keeping  of  its  professors ;  (2.) 
A  believer  in  trouble  to  be  careful  so  to  speak 
as  to  bear  a  good  testimony  to  religion  before 
the  world. 

4.  Their  wickedness  and  deceit  (verse  5). 
"Thy  mouth  uttereth  thine  iniquity  (or, 
'thine  iniquity  teacheth  thy  mouth,'  viz.  to 
utter  such  wickedness),  and  thou  choosest 
the  tongue  of  the  crafty."  Job's  language 
viewed  as  the  studied  contrivance  of  a 
wicked  heart.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the 
heart  the  mouth  speaketh.  As  a  man  is,  so 
is  his  speech.  When  the  heart  restrains 
prayer  the  mouth  puts  forth  peevishness. 
What  piety  appeared  in  Job's  speeches  un- 
charitably viewed  by  Eliphaz  as  only  em- 
ployed with  the  intent  to  deceive.  His. 
tongue  that  of  the  crafty,  w  ho  "  by  good 
words  and  fair  speeches  deceive  the  hearts  of 
the  simple"  (Horn.  xvi.  18).     Nq  new  thing 

91 


CHAP.  Xt. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


for  an  upright  man  to  be  charged  with 
hypocrisy.  God's  testimony  regardini]^  Job 
the  opposite  to  that  of  Elipliaz.  Observe 
— (1.)  A  small  matter  for  men  to  speak  ill 
if  God  speaks  well  of  us ;  (2.)  Our  speecli 
and  conversation  to  be  with  "  simpliciti/  and 
godlu  sincerity ^  not  with  fleshly  wisdom, 
hMiby  the  grace  of  God''  (2  Cor.  i.  12). 

The  charge  of  Eliphaz  untrue  in  both  its 
senses.  Job  spoke  rashly,  but  neither  cast 
off  the  fear  of  God  nor  restrained  prayer. 
His  words  not  always  wise,  but  neit  her  tended 
to  destroy  religion  nor  discourage  devotion. 
A  godly  man  may  sin  against  the  command- 
ments ;  it  is  the  part  of  a  wicked  man  to  sin 
away  the  commandments  themselves.  The 
casting  off  of  God's  fear  the  cause  of  all  evil. 
When  the  fear  of  God  goes  out,  the  practice 
of  sin  comes  in.  The  fear  of  God  the  be- 
ginning of  wisdom  ;  the  casting  of  it  olf,  the 
abandonment  to  all  wickedness.  The  fear  of 
God  the  sum  of  all  godliness ;  the  casting  of  it 
off,  the  sum  of  all  sinfulness.  Sad  not  to 
possess  the  fear  of  God ;  still  worse  to  cast 
it  off.  To  be  without  it  ourselves  is  bad ; 
to  destroy  it  in  others  still  worse.  The 
deepest  brand  of  guilt  on  a  man's  brow  is, 
not  only  to  sin  himself,  but,  like  Jeroboam, 
to  make  others  to  sin  also  (1  Kings  xiv.  16  ; 
XV.  30,  34;  xvi.  2,  19,  26).  Job's  sin  that 
he  seemed  more  to  complain  against  God 
than  to  pray  to  Him.  Sad  at  any  time  to 
restrain  prayer,  still  more  in  the  time  of 
affliction  (Ps.  1.  15  ;  Is.  xxvi.  16).  Prayer  a 
principal  part  of  God's  worship  acd  of  man's 
religion.  A  prayerless  life  the  mark  of  a 
graceless  heart.  Prayer  is  restrained  either 
— (1)  From  distaste  for  it ;  or  (2)  From 
disbelief  in  its  efficacy ;  or  (3)  From  disdain 
and  self-sufficiency.  To  restrain  prayer  to 
God  is  to  be  a  god  to  ourselves.  Believing 
prayer  opens  the  door  of  mercy  and  the 
windows  of  blessing ;  to  restrain  prayer  is  to 
shut  both  against  us. 

5.  Job's  speeches  reproved  also  for  their 
arrogance  and  pride  (verse  7).  "  Art  thou 
the  first  man  that  was  born,  or  wast  thou 
made  before  the  hills  P  Hast  thou  heard  the 
secret  (or,  *  hast  thou  been  a  listener  in  the 
privy  council')  of  God,  and  dost  thou  restrain 
wisdom  to  thyself?  What  knowest  thou 
that  we  know  not?  What  understandest 
thou  which  is  not  in  us.  Witt  us  are  both 
the  greyheaded  and  very  aged  men,  much 
elder  than  thy  father.  Are  the  consolations 
of  God  small  with  thee  (or,  *too  small  for 
thee,'  or,  *of  little  account  with  thee')?  Is 
there  any  secret  thing  with  thee  (or,  *  and 
the  word  which  dealeth  gently  with  thee ;' 
or,  *  and  our  mild  addresses  to  thee')  ?" 
Job*s  ridicule  of  his  friends'  monopoly  of 
wisdom  retorted  by  Eliphaz  upon  himself. 
Grievous  words  stir  up  anger.    Job   bad 

92 


ridiculed  his  friends  as  if  tbey  were  the 
whole  race ;  is  now  ridiculed  himself  as  if 
he  were  the  first  man  that  had  been  born. 
Wisdom  rightly  supposed  to  have  been  much 
greater  in  Adam  than  in  his  children,  as 
made  after  the  image  of  God  himself.  Simi- 
lar language  to  that  addressed  here  in  ridicule 
to  Job  divinely  applied  to  Christ  as  the 
wisdom  of  God  (Prov.  viii.  2-2—26).  Hills 
spoken  of  as  the  firmest,  and  therefore  sup- 
posed to  be  the  most  ancient,  of  earthly 
things.  Said  to  be  everlasting  (Gen.  xlix. 
26 ;  Hab.  iii.  6).  Eliphaz  views  his  own 
and  his  friends' discourses  as  "the  consola- 
tions of  God,"  and  angrily  asks  Job  if  these 
were  too  small  for  him,  or  if  he  held  them  of 
small  account.  Their  discourses  and  con- 
solations, however,  rather  adapted  for  an  im- 
penitent sinner  than  a  tried  suffering  saint. 
Hence  Job's  low  esteem  of  them  (ch.  xiii.  4, 
12).  Preachers  and  others  to  take  care  that 
what  they  present  to  mourners  are  in  reality 

The  Consolations  of  God, 

God  the  God  of  all  comfort.  Comforteth 
those  that  are  cast  down  (2  Cor.  i.  3, 
vii.  6).  Comforts  tenderly  as  a  mother, 
effectually  as  a  Creator,  (Is.  Ixvi.  13,  Ixv. 
18).  Able  to  make  either  anything  or 
nothing  a  comfort  to  us.  Can  multiply 
comforts  as  fast  as  the  world  multiplies 
crosses.  His  consolations  viewed  either  as 
spoken  to  us  or  wrought  in  us.  Are  either 
good  things  done  for  us  or  promised  to  us. 
God  comforts — (1)  By  His  spirit;  (2)  By 
His  word;  (3)  By  His  providence.  His 
consolations  include — (1)  His  purposes  in 
trouble;  (2)  His  promises  of  support  and 
deliverance ;  (3)  The  benefits  resulting  from 
it;  (4)  The  example  of  the  saints  and 
especially  of  the  Son  of  God;  (5)  The 
fellowship  of  believers,  and  especially  of 
Christ  (Dan.  iii.  25) ;  (6)  God  Himself  as  our 
shield  here  and  our  portion  hereafter;  (7) 
His  love  as  the  origni  of  our  trouble;  (8) 
The  glories  of  eternity  as  infinitely  com- 
pensating for  the  troubles  of  time.  Trouble 
itself  a  consolation  to  a  child  of  God  as  the 
testimony  of  his  Father's  love.  God's  rod, 
like  Jonathan's,  brings  honey  on  its  point. 
"Thy  rod  and  thy  staff  comfort  me"  (Ps.  xxiii. 
4).  Observe — (1.)  The  consolations  of  God  are 
not  small.  Are  able  to  meet  every  case.  Strong 
consolation  (Heb.  vi.  18).  Exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  The 
Scriptures  written  that  through  patience  and 
comfort  we  might  have  hope.  The  plaster 
of  God's  Word  able  to  cover  the  largest  sore 
of  a  sin-stricken  soul.  God  has  great  con- 
solations for  great  sorrows.  His  consolations 
like  Himself  Christ  Himself  the  consola- 
tion of  Israel.    The  Holy  Ghost  the  com- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   Xt, 


forter.  The  consolations  of  God  are— (i.)  True 
and  solid;  (ii.)  Holy  and  satisfying;  (iii.)  Ade- 
auate  and  suitable  j  (iv.)  Lasting  and  durable. 
(2)  The  consolations  of  God  are  not  to  be  ac- 
counted smalt.  No  small  sin  to  slight  God's 
consolations,  as  either  insufficient  or  unsuit- 
able  to  our  case.  These,  on  the  contrary,  to 
be  highly  valued— (i.)  On  account  of  their 
origin— theloveof  God;  (ii.)Their costliness  — 
the  purchase  of  a  Saviour's  blood ;  (iii.)  Their 
efficacy— as  able  to  meet  our  case ;  (iv.)  Their 
freeness  on  God's  part  and  their  undeserved- 
ness  on  ours. 

6.  Job's  speeches  reproved  also  for  their 
passion  and  rebelliousness  (verse  12).  "  Why 
doth  thine  heart  carry  thee  away,  and  what 
do_  thine  eyes  wink  at  (as  indicating  passion, 
pride,  and  evil  purpose)  ?  That  thou  turnest 
thy  spirit  against  God,  and  lettest  such 
words  go  out  of  thy  mouth."  Unfeeling 
and  exaggerated  questions.  Neither  Job's 
spirit  nor  his  words  to  be  always  vindicated, 
but  undeserving  of  such  severe  reproof. 
Reproof,  when  unjust  and  excessive,  becomes 
cruelty  instead  of  kindness.  Tenderness  a 
duty  in  dealing  with  a  sinner,  stiil  more  with 
a  saint,  and  most  of  all  with  a  sufferer.  The 
language,  and  perhaps  the  looks  of  Job,  at 
times  indicative  of  unholy  passion.  The 
flesh  even  in  a  believer  weak.  Tiie  heat  of 
the  temper  apt  to  carry  away  into  hastiness 
of  the  tong^ue.  Job  at  times  too  bold  with 
God ;  yet  his  boldness  that  of  a  child,  not  that 
of  an  enemy.  The  spirit  of  an  impenitent 
sinner  is  turned  against  God  in  trouble,  that 
of  a  believer  is  turned  towards  Him.  The 
latter  the  attitude  of  Job's  spirit  in  his 
affliction  (ch.  xvi.  20). 

II.    Eliphaz   insists   on    man's    de- 
pravity (verse  14). 

•*  What  is  man  (wretched  fallen  man, 
Heb.y  *  Enosh'),  that  he  should  be  clean? 
and  he  which  is  born  of  a  woman,  that  he 
should  be  righteous  ?  Behold,  he  putteth  no 
trust  in  his  saints  (or  angels,— ^e<^.  *  holy 
ones') ;  yea,  the  heavens  (literally,  or  their 
inhabitants)  are  not  clean  in  his  sight. 
How  much  more  abominable  and  filthy  is 
man  (or,  *how  much  less  [shall]  abominable 
and  filthy  man  [be  clean  in  his  sight] ')  which 
drinketh  iniquity  like  water  p"  A  clear  and 
strong  declaration  of  man's  deep  and  uni- 
versal depravity.  The  object  to  prove  Job 
a  sinner,  and  convict  him  of  arrogance  in 
maintaining  his  uprightness.  The  argument 
is— (1)  Unsound.  The  premises  true  but 
the  conclusion  false.  Man  universally  de- 
praved, but  Job  not  therefore  a  bad  man  or 
a  hypocrite;  otherwise  Satan's  allegation 
just,— no  such  thing  as  genuine  religion  in 
the  world.  ^  Grace  and  holiness  in  the  indi- 
Tidual  consistent  with  depravity  in  the  race. 


The  object  of  redemption  to  renew  fallen  man 
to  purity.  Comparatively  blameless  morals 
and  upright  principles  found  even  among 
theheath(3n.  Examples;  Socrates,  Aristides 
the  Just,  Cyrus  the  Great.  (2)  Useless, 
Man's  depravity  admitted  and  maintained  by 
Job  as  well  as  Eliphaz  (ch.  xiv.  4).  Not 
absolute  but  relative  purity  claimed  by  Job. 
All  but  useless  for  a  preacher  to  labour  to 
prove  what  all  his  hearers  fully  admit.  The 
passage  valuable  as  a  testimony  to 

The  Depravity  of  Human  Nature. 

1.  Declared  in  the  name  given  to  man  here 
and   elsewhere  in  the   Hebrew   Scriptures, 
"  Enosh''  —  miserable  and  desperately  dis- 
eased. Man's  very  nature  morally  diseased.  In- 
ward renovation  necessary  in  order  to  purity 
and  holiness.     To  cleanse  and  renew  man's 
corrupt  nature,  the  work  of  tlie  Holy  Spirit 
through  the  instrumentality  of  Gospel  truth. 
**  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which 
I  have  spoken  to  you."     The  promise  in  the 
New    Covenant:    "I   will    sprinkle    clean 
water  upon   you   and   ye  shall   be   clean** 
(Ez.  xxxvi.  25).     David's  prayer:  "Create 
in  me  a  clean  heart.'*     The  object  of  Christ's 
death,  to  sanctify  and  cleanse  the  Church 
as  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word 
(Eph  V.  26).     His  prayer  to  the  Father : 
"  Sanctify   them   through   thy   truth  ;    thy 
word    is    truth'*    (John    xvii.   17).       The 
believer  in  one  sense  "clean  every  whit** 
(John  xiii.    10).     Apart   from   grace   none 
clean  in   God's   sight.       Sin  stains   man's 
best    performances.      His    righteousnesses 
filthy  rags  (Is.  Ixiv.  6).     Man  only  clean  and 
holy  as  a  member  of  Christ  the  Holy  One, 
and  in  virtue  of  a  new  nature  implant  ed  in 
him  by  the  Holy  Ghost.     At  death,  the  last 
remains  of  the  believer's  sinful  nature  for 
ever  gone.     The  leprous  house  taken  down 
and  rebuilt  entirely  free  from  the  vile  infec 
tion. 

2.  Man*s  depravity  the  result  of  his  birth. 
Born  naturally  of  a  fallen  woman,  man's 
nature  necessarily  depraved.  A  clean  thing 
not  to  be  produced  in  the  mere  course  of 
nature  from  an  unclean  (ch.  xiv.  4).  Mm 
now  shapen  in  iniquity  in  the  womb,  and 
conceived  by  his  mother  in  sin  (Ps.  li.  5). 
Like  mother,  like  child.  One  glorious  and 
necessary  exception.  Christ  "  born  of  a 
woman,'*  yet  righteous  and  clean  from  His 
birth.  The  reason :  "  His  conception  by  the 
immediate  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Luke 
i.  35).  Mm  s  Saviour  must  be  Himself  a 
man,  yet  absolutely  clean  from  his  birth. 
To  be  a  man  he  must  be  "born  of  a  woman ;  ** 
to  be  clean  his  conception  must  be  the  imme- 
diate production  of  Divine  power.  No  ne- 
cessity for  the  figment  of  the  immaculate 

93 


CUkt,  tt. 


BOMILBTW  COMMENT  ART:  JO  A 


conception  of  the  Saviour's  mother.  Mary 
a  holy  woman,  not  by  nature  but  by  grace. 
Her  song  that  of  a  saved  sinner  (Luke 
i.  47). 

3.  Man's  character  given  in  three  particulars 
— (1)  Abominable.  Something  to  be  loathed. 
Sin  the  abominable  thing  that  God  hates. 
Makes  every  creature  abominable  in  whom 
it  prevails.  Man,  as  depraved,  cast  out  like 
Israel  at  his  very  birth,  to  the  loathing  of 
his  person  (Ezek.  xvi,  5).  No  education, 
refinement,  or  accomplishment  able  to 
make  an  unrenewed  man  anything  less 
than  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God. 
(2)  Filthy^ — the  filthiness  rather  to  the 
smell  than  the  taste.  The  noisomeness  of  a 
corpse  or  of  a  sewer.  The  sourness  of  a 
fermenting  mass.  Sin  is  death  and  moral 
putrefaction.  Makes  a  man  in  whom  it 
reigns  a  living  corpse.  Not  all  the  perfumes 
of  Arabia  able  to  sweeten  an  unrenewed 
soul.  (3)  Drinking  iniquity  like  water .  (i.) 
Man  loves  and  delights  in  sin.  (ii,)  Thirsts 
for  it  and  pursues  it  eagerly,  (iii.)  Expects 
and  endeavours  to  satisfy  himself  by  its 
commission,  (iv.)  Commits  it  as  a  thing 
necessary  to  his  existence ;  can  no  more  live 
without  it  than  an  ox  can  live  without 
drinking  water,  (v.)  Practises  it  habitually, 
as  a  horse  must  daily  drink  water,  (vi.) 
Finds  pleasure  in  its  commission,  but  nothing 
that  permanently  satisfies  him ;  thirsts  again, 
(vii.)  Commits  it  abundantly,  not  sipping 
but  drinking  it.  (viii.)  Goes  to  it  naturally, 
as  an  animal  goes  naturally  to  drink  water ; 
sin  natural  to  a  depraved  heart,  (ix.)  Com- 
mits it  easily  ana  without  effort ;  sins  on 
easy  terms  and  small  consideration ;  water  a 
common  drink.  Observe,  however,  a  con- 
trast as  well  as  a  resemblance  in  the  case  : — 
(i.)  Water  a  creature  of  God  ;  sin  a  thing  of 
the  devil,  (ii.)  Water  designed  by  God  for 
the  use  of  man  and  beast ;  sin  strictly  for- 
bidden by  Him.  (iii.)  Water  necessary  for 
man's  existence  j  sin  not  only  not  necessary, 
but  ruinous,  (iv.)  Water  beneficial  to  the 
drinker  of  it ;  sin  only  hurtful  and  destruc- 
tive. 

III.  Elipliaz  proposes  to  convict  Job 
from  the  Fathers  (verse  17)  &c. 

"I  will  shew  thee,  hear  me;  and  that 
which  I  have  seen  ( — personally  observed  as 
well  as  heard  from  others)  I  will  declare ; 
which  wise  men  have  told  from  their  fathers, 
and  have  not  hid  it.  Unto  whom  alone  the 
earth  (or  land)  was  given  (for  their  residence 
and  government, — in  opposition  to  Job's 
statement  in  ch.  ix,  24,)  and  no  stranger 
passed  among  them "  (or,  "  came  among 
them,"  as  a  resident  or  invader).  Traditional 
maxims  of  the  ancients  avowedly  introduced 
by  Eliphaz,  as  had  already  been  done  by  Job 

94 


and  the  other  speakers.  These  ancients  the 
fathers  of  "wise  men,"  who  had  handed 
down  their  moral  sayings  to  their  posterity. 
To  this  posterity  belonged  Eliphaz  himself. 
Like  Job,  a  contemporary  of  Serug  and 
Reu,  the  son  and  grandson  of  Peleg,  in 
whose  days  the  earth  was  divided  after  the 
dispersion  (Gen.  x.  25).  The  ancients  or 
fathers,  therefore,  probably  Noah  and  his 
son  Shem,  or  Noah's  ancestors  back  to 
Adam.  The  "wise  men,"  those  to  whom  the 
land  of  Arabia  was  given  as  their  residence, 
viz.,  the  sons  of  Joktan,  the  younger  son  of 
Eber  (Shem's  gi  andson),  and  Peleg's  brother, 
by  whom  Arabia  was  first  populated  (Gen. 
X.  25—  30).  One  of  these  sons  of  Joktan 
named  Jobab,  supposed  by  some  to  be  the 
same  with  Job.  The  boast  of  Eliphaz  that 
amons:  these  "wise  men  "  or  sons  of  Joktan, 
"  no  stranger "  or  foreigner  had  ever  been 
allowed  to  corrupt  their  religion  and  morals. 
The  glory  of  the  Arabs  is  their  language, 
their  sword,  and  their  pure  blood.  The  true 
religion  often  corrupted  by  the  mixture  of 
foreign  nations.  Israel  forbidden  to  make 
alliances  with  the  nations  around  them  lest 
they  should  "learn  their  ways."  The  saying 
of  a  heathen  poet  endorsed  by  Revelation, 
"Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners." 
Arabia  famed  for  its  wise  men.  These  handed 
down  to  posterity  the  moral  and  religious 
truth  received  in  like  manner  from  their 
fathers. — The  true  religion  propagated  by 
parents  and  others  carefully  mstructing  the 
rising  generation  in  its  truths.  The  obvious 
and  sacred  duty  of  all  who  possess  it  (Ps. 
xlviii.  13  J  Ixxviii.  3,  4), 

IV.  Quotation  from  the  Fathers  in 
reference  to  the  experience  of  the  un- 
godly (verses  20 — 35). 

Noble  specimen  of  Oriental  poetry.  Sublime 
and  tragical,  and  among  the  most  ancient  in 
the  world.  A  description  of  unprincipled  men 
whose  only  aim  is  the  acquisition  of  wealth 
and  power,  stopping  at  no  means  to  obtain 
it,  and  then  abusing  it  to  the  oppression 
of  their  fellow-men.  Applicable  in  every 
period  of  the  world,  but  more  particularly  in 
its  earlier  ages,  when,  as  before  the  flood, 
"  the  earth  was  filled  with  violence."  The 
characters  especially  such  as  the  "mighty 
men  which  were  of  old,  men  of  renown" 
(Gen.  vi.  4,  ]1— 13).  Men  of  the  class  of 
Cain,  Nimrod  and  Pharaoh — impious  and 
daring  towards  God,  cruel  and  unjust  towards 
their  fellow-men.  The  application  wrong- 
fully intended  for  Job,  in  order  to  bring  him 
to  conviction  and  repentance.  The  only 
ground  for  the  application  in  his  circum- 
stances, none  whatever  in  his  character  and 
conduct.  Job,  once  rich  and  prosperous, 
was  now  in  great  misery  through  successive 


BOMlLEflC  COMMMTAHr.-  JOB. 


CMaP.  XV 


blows  of  Divine  providence.  This  sufTioimt 
ground  with  El iphaz  for  its  application.  The 
aoctrine  intended  by  Eliphaz  to  be  conveyed 
by  it,  as  to  the  constant  and  exclusive  attend- 
ance of  misery  upon  wickedness  in  this  world, 
repeatedly  denied  by  Job  (ch.  xii.  6;  xxi. 
7),  &c. 

The  description  contains  : — 

1.  The  character  of  the  persons  intended. 
All  sin  deservins^  of  punislinient,  but  some 
sins  more  heinous  in  God's  sight  than  others. 
'I'he  persons  intended  are  described  as — 
(1.)  Wicked  (verse  20).  Men  lawless  and 
unprincipled,  of  wicked  hearts  and  wicked 
lives.  All  men  sinners,  but  by  God's 
Providence  and  His  renewing  or  restrain- 
ing grace,  all  not  wicked  sinners.— (2.) 
Violent  oppressors  (verse  20).  The  dis- 
tinctive character  of  these  wicked  men. 
Their  wickedness  manifested  in  their  violent 
conduct  and  oppression  of  their  fellow-men. 
Their  object,  power  and  wealth  ;  their  means 
of  obtaming  them,  violence  and  wrong. 
Great  warriors  and  conquerors.  Ambitious 
chiefs  and  tyrants.  Robbers  on  a  large  as 
well  as  a  small  scale.  Particularly  described 
by  Zophar  (ch.  xx.  19).  The  character 
v\  Inch  Eliphaz  afterwards  directly  ascribes  to 
Job  (eh.  xxii.  6,  7, 9).  A  common  character 
in  those  early  ages,  and  in  the  barbarous 
and  uncivilised  state  of  a  community. — (3.) 
Daring  and  impious  (verse  25).  **Eor  he 
stretcheth  out  his  hand  against  God  and 
strengtheneth  himself  (or,  *  plays  the  hero  ') 
against  the  Almighty  ;  he  runneth  upon  him 
{viz.^  upon  God, — rushes  on  Him  with  swiftness 
and  fury,  as  Dan.  viii.  6),  even  on  his  neck 
(like  a  fierce  combatant,  eager  to  grapple 
with  bis  antagonist  in  close  quarters;  or, 
*with  his  neck,'  like  a  furious  bull  whose 
strength  is  in  his  neck  and  shoulders),  upon 
(or  with)  the  thick  bosses  of  his  bucklers" 
(like  a  band  attacking  with  joined  shields). 
The  language  of  Pharaoh  (Ex.  v.  2) ;  of 
Sennacherib  (Is.  xxxvi.  20) ;  of  the  crucifiers 
of  Christ  (Acts  iv.  25—27;  Ps.ii.  1).  Similar 
defiance  of  the  Almighty  exhibited  by  the 
Dragon  and  his  angels  (Rev.  xii.  7).  The 
character  of  obstinate  and  impenitent  trans- 
gressors in  general.  Men  "  fight  against  God" 
while — (i.)  Persevering  in  a  course  of  sin; 
(ii.)  Opposing  God's  cause  or  Gospel,  His 
Church,  or  any  of  His  people  (Acts  v.  39)  j 
(iii.)  Contending  for  an  object  in  opposition 
to  His  will,  and  by  means  which  He  forbids. 
Fearful  stage  in  sm  when  men  act  as  cham- 
pions of  hell  against  the  God  of  heaven. 
— (4.)  Projiigate  and  profane  (verse  34). 
"Hypocrites,"  or  rather,  profane  and  pro- 
fligate men.  Men  who  neither  *'  fear  God 
nor  regard  men."  No  reference  intended  by 
the  term  in  the  Old  Testament  to  religious  pro- 
fession.— (5.)  Covetous  and  unjust  (verse  34). 


Men  given  to  "bribery."  As  rulers  and  judges, 
accepting  gifts  as  the  bribe  for  a  favour- 
able though  unjust  sentence.  Men  who 
wronged  others  by  perverting  justice  in 
order  to  enrich  themselves.  Accepted  gifts 
for  the  perpetration  of  wicked  deeds. — 
(6.)  Plotters  of  mischief  {ytx^t  2th).  "They 
conceive  mischief  and  bring  forth  vanity  '* 
{Margin,  "iniquity").  The  same  clmraeter 
described,  Ps.  xxxvi.  4 ;  Prov.  iv.  16. 
Sins  against  our  neighbour  chiefly  intended. 
Those  who  do  not  fear  God  readily  plot  against 
men. — (7.)  Cunning  and  deceitful  (verse  35). 
"Their  belly  (mind  or  heart,  but  with  re- 
ference to  conception)  prepareth  (contrives 
or  matures)  deceit"  (for  others  in  order  to 
their  own  gain,  for  themselves  in  their  dis- 
appointment of  it).  Evil  ends  often  attain- 
able only  by  deceit.  So  Satan  and  our  first 
parents;  Ham  an  and  the  Jews;  Jezebel  and 
Naboth's  vineyard. 

2.  The  temporary  prosperity  of  the  persons 
intended  (verse  27).  "Because  he  covereth 
(or,  '  though  he  have  covered  ')  his  face  with 
fatness  (see  Ps.  Ixxiii.  7),  and  maketh  coUops 
of  fat  on  his  flanks  "  (or,  "  hath  made  fat  on 
his  loins").  Good  living  his  object.  His 
god  his  belly  (Luke  xvi.  19). — "And  he  in- 
habitetli  desolate  cities  (or,  'and  though  he 
inhubitt  d  cities  destroyed  by  him  *  and  taken 
into  his  own  possession, — conduct  ascribed  to 
Crassus  the  Roman  general),  and  in  houses 
which  no  man  inhabiteth  (—emptied  of  their 
proper  inhabitants),  which  are  ready  to  be- 
come heaps  "  (or,  "  are  doomed  to  ruins  **) — 
reminding  Job  of  his  own  calamity  in  the 
case  of  his  children  (ch.  i.  19).  Temporary 
success  in  sin  to  be  followed  by  ultimate 
ruin.  The  wicked  raised  for  a  deeper  fall. 
Iniquity  often  like  a  tree  full  of  blossom,  to 
be  blighted  by  the  frost  or  blasted  by  the 
lightning.  Prosperous  villainy  one  of  the 
mysteries  of  Divme  providence. 

3.  Their  subsequent  misery.  Suffering  cor- 
responding with  sin.  This  objected  to  by 
Job  as  to  its  universal  occurrence  in  this  life. 
The  passage  describes — (1.)  The  inward  ex- 
perience of  the  wicked  in  this  life  (verse  20, 
&c.).  "  The  wicked  man  travaileth  with  pain 
(or,  *  is  inwardly  tormented*)  all  his  days 
(lives  a  life  of  anxiety  and  fear) ;  and  the 
number  of  years  hidden  to  the  oppressor " 
(or,  "  and  the  number  of  years,"  or  "  the  few 
years  [which]  are  laid  up  for"  him).  The 
whole  life  of  the  oppressor  comes  to  be  full 
of  anxiety  and  alarm  under  the  goad  of  an 
evil  conscience.  Sin,  like  a  corpse  or  a 
putrid  ulcer,  breeds  worms. — "A  dreadful 
sound  {Heb.  *a  voice  of  alarms,' — not  one 
terror  but  many)  is  in  his  ears ;  in  prosperity, 
the  destroyer  (God's  avenging  justice,  or 
some  hand  of  violence  as  the  executioner  of 
it)  slmll  come  upon  him"  (what  actually  takes 

95 


CUAt.  IV. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTAM:  JOB, 


place,  or  what  the  voice  of  conscience  in- 
wardly threatens  him  with).     Tlie  Avenging 
Furies  of  the  heathen  expressive  of  facts  in 
the  experience  of   tlie  daring  transgressor. 
The  suddenness  of  tiie  destruction  intended, 
or  the  presence  of  these  voices  of  terror  in 
the  midst  of  outward  quiet  and  prosperity. 
The   unexpectedness   of   cahimity  a   serious 
aggravation  of  it.     "  When  they  shall  say, 
Peace   and   safety/' &c.  (Verse   ■22). — "He 
believeth  not  that  he   shall   return   out   of 
darkness  (that  he  shall  ever  escape  out  of 
the   misery  that   threatens   or   has   already 
overtaken  him, — the  language  sadly  sugges- 
tive of  Job's  own  case)  ;  and  he  is  waited 
for  of  the  sword "   (actually  or  in  his  own 
apprehension).      Besides    present    evils    he 
anticipates    future    ones.      The    sword     of 
Damocles  hangs  over  his  head  at  his  most 
sumptuous  feasts.     His  terrified  imagination 
sees  a  dagger  wherever  he  turns.     Only  a 
violent  and  bloody  death  is  before  his  eyes. 
"  Every  one  that  findeth  me  shall  slay  me." 
Despair  of  good  the  greatest  evil.     A  wicked 
man  has  neither  ground  nor  heart  to  believe 
[Caryl].     Faith  a  shield   against   the   fiery 
darts  of  the  devil ;  unbelief  a  shield  against 
the  tender  mercies  of   God.     Faith    makes 
evil  good;  unbelief  makes  good  evil. — (Verse 
23).     "  He  wandereth  abroad  for  bread,  say- 
ing, Where  is  it  ?  "     He  becomes  like  Cain, 
"  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  on  the  earth." 
Job's  fall  from  affluence  to  poverty  might 
seem  to  afford  an  example.     The  bread  he 
has  taken  from  others  now  fails  himself.  The 
wicked  wander  for  bread  when  they  are  rich 
as  well  as  when  they  are  poor.     The  godly 
are  content  in  every  condition. — "  He  kno  weth 
that  the  day  of  darkness  is  near  at  hand," — 
has  the  inward   conviction  that  a   time   of 
poverty  and  calamity  will  soon  overtake  him. 
Terrible    certainty    of  a  guilty   conscience. 
The    Furies     brandish    in    his     face    their 
threatening  whip.     Conscience  holds  up  the 
sentence   of  condemnation   before   his  eyes. 
The  experience  which  impelled  Judas  to  the 
fatal  tree.    The  certain  apprehension  of  future 
and  speedy  perdition  one  principal  cause  of 
suicide.  Such  terrors  aided,  if  not  generated, 
by  the  Tempter,  who  now  becomes  the  Tor- 
mentor.    The  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God, 
free  and  immediate  forgiveness  through  the 
blood  of  tlie  cross  to  the  chief  of  sinners,  the 
blessed  and  only  remedy  in  such  a  case.    The 
oil  of  pardoning  mercy  alone  able  to  smooth 
that  surging  sea.     Jesus  the  only  Physician 
that   can  minister  to   that   mind  diseased. 
"  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved,"  has  already  in  multitudes 
"cleansed  the  bosom  of  that  perilous  grief 
which  weighs  upon  the  heart,"  and  changed 
black  despair  into  bright  and  joyous  hope. 
"Fear  not,only believe."  (Verse 24).— "  Trou- 
96 


ble  and  anguish  ( — multiplied  and  intensified 
distress,  or,  outward  trouUe  and  inward 
anguish)  shall  make  him  afraid."  Again  too 
much  resemblance  to  Job's  case  (ch.  vi.  4). 
Worse  to  fear  evil  than  to  feel  it. — "  They 
shall  prevail  against  him"  (or  "hem  him  in"). 
Shall  break  his  spirit  or  end  his  life.  Shall 
scare  him  not  only  out  of  his  comfort  but 
out  of  his  senses  \_Cari/l']. — "  As  a  king  (or 
general)  ready  to  the  battle."  Trouble  and 
anguish  personified  as  a  general  in  the  midst 
of  his  troops,  surrounding  the  enemy,  rushing 
on  to  the  attack  and  overpowering  him.  The 
evil-doer  powerless  to  resist  this  attack  of 
outward  trouble  and  inward  anguish.  Trou- 
bles too  great  to  bear,  too  thick  to  escape 
from.  "  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I 
can  boar."  "  The  spirit  of  a  man  may  sus- 
tain his  infirmity,  but  a  wounded  spirit  who 
can  bear?"  Such  an  experience  often  the 
result  of  long-rejected  calls  to  repentance 
and  offers  of  mercy  (Prov.  i.  24 — 30). 

(2)  The  outward  visitation  of  the  wicked. 
(Verse  29).  "  Heshall  not  be  rich  (or  continue 
so, — shall  not  enjoy  his  ill-gotten  wealth,which 
shall  'flow  away  on  the  day  of  wrath'), 
neither  shall  his  substance  continue,  neither 
shall  he  prolong  the  perfection  thereof 
(or  *  extend  his  possessions,  flocks,  &c.') 
upon  the  earth"  (or  in  the  land).  Ap- 
parently another  side -glance  at  Job's  losses. 
Ill-gotten  goods  never  lasting.  Sinners 
earn  wages  to  put  them  into  a  bag  with 
holes.  Earthly  joys,  like  children's  toys, 
easily  broken  and  soon  forgotten. — (Verse 
30).  "  He  shall  not  depart  out  of  darkness" — 
shall  not  esca[)e  out  of  the  trouble  and 
misery  that  shall  overtake  him.  Endless 
misery  the  just  wages  of  unceasing  sin 
— "The  flame ( — lightning  or  the  hot  wind  of 
the  desert,  emblems  of  the  wrath  of  God) 
shall  dry  up  his  branches  ( — his  prosperity, 
more  especially  his  children;  another  sad 
cut  for  Job,  ch.  i.  16,  19) ;  and  by  the 
breath  of  his  mouth  ( — the  anger  of  God,  com- 
pared to  a  scorching  or  a  scattering  wind) 
shall  he  go  awa-y"  (retreat  as  a  worsted 
combatant,  or  be  whirled  away  as  chaff 
or  stubble,  Ps.  i.  4).  God's  mere  breath 
able  to  sweep  away  i  he  sinner.  Indicates  also 
the  suddenness  of  the  destruction. — (Verse 
32).  "It  {viz.  his  death)  shall  be  accom- 
plished (or,  'the  recompense  shall  be  fully 
paid';  or,  *he  shall  be  cut  oS"')  before  his 
time,  and  his  branch  shall  not  be  green" 
( — his  children  shall  not  survive  or  prosper,  or 
his  prosperity  shall  not  continue).  The 
prosperous  wicked  compared,  as  in  verse 
30,  to  a  flourishing  tree.  So  ch.  viii.  16, 
17 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  35.— (Verse  33).  "  He  (the 
sinner  under  the  figure  of  a  tree,  or  God  in 
his  mysterious  judgments)  shall  shake  ofif 
his  unripe  grape  as  the  vine,  and  shall  cast 


tiOMlLETlC  COMM^NTAitT:  JOB. 


cMxp.  ±n 


off  his  flower  as  the  olive*'  (when  smitten  by 
the  frost  or  a  pestilential  wind).  His  pros- 
perity brought  to  a  sudden  and  prematureeud. 
—  ( verse  34).  " For  the  cong-regHtion  of  hy- 
pocrites ( — the  wicked  tlieinsclvcs  and  their 
families  along  witli  them)  sli  Jl  be  desolate." 
Neither  numbers  nor  cottibinations  able  to 
secure  the  ungodly  against  God's  judgments. 
"Though  hand  join  in  hand  &c."  Wealth 
gathered  by  man's  unrighteousness  often 
scattered  by  God's  wrath.— "And  fire  shall 
consume  the  tabernacles  of  bribery"  ( — the 
dwellings  of  corrupt  and  covetous  judges). 
Divine  judgments  shall  overthrow  their 
families,  if  not  their  very  dwellings,  as  in  the 
mind  of  Eliphaz  they  had  done  in  the  case 
of  Job's  children  (ch.  i.  19).  A  literal  ex- 
emplification in  the  case  of  the  Cities  of  the 
Plain.  Job  cruelly  made  to  see,  as  in  a  mirror, 
his  own  calamities,  and,  to  intensify  their 
bitterness,  to  see  them  as  a  judgment  of  God. 
An  apparent  warning  parenthetically  in- 
troduced in  the  description  by  way  of  per- 
sonal application  (verse  31).  "  Let  not  him 
that  is  deceived  trust  in  vanity  ( — in  his  riches, 
or  in  the  iniquity  which  has  procured  them  j 
or,  let  not  him  [any  man]  trust  in  the 
vanity  by  which  he  has  been  deceived) :  for 
vanity  (probably  used  in  another  sense)  shall 
be  his  recompense."  A  caution  of  general 
use,  but  especially  intended  for  poor  Job. 
The  warning  suggests  the  following  lessons : 
— (1)  All  earthly  possessions  vanitj,  as  un- 
able to  satisfy  the  soul,  and  sure  to  dis- 
appoint those  who  trust  in  them  for  happiness. 
The  creature  is  vanity,  both  in  its  possession 
and  its  promises.  Promises — (i.)  Satisfac- 
tion; (ii.)  Protection;  (iii.)  Continuance. 
Most  vain  to  those  who  trust  in  it. — (2) 
Those  possessions  especially  vain  which 
have  been  dishonestly  or  violently  obtained. 
"  The  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tongue 
is  a  vanity  tossed  to  and  fro  of  them  that 
seek  death"  (Prov.  xxi.  6).— (3)  The  cha- 
racter of  the  ungodly  to  trust  in  vanity,  in 
eartlily  possessions  and  pleasures  which  can- 


not satisfy,  and  in  sinful  courses  which  only 
end  in  misery  and  ruin  (Is.  Iii.  2.)  Men 
must  trust  in  something,  either  God  or 
vanity.  —(4)  The  property  of  sin  to  deceive 
(Kom.  vii.  II).  The  dcccitfulness  of  sin 
(Ileb.  iii.  13).  Deceivableness  of  un- 
righteousness ii  Th.  ii.  10).  Sin  deceives, 
as  it  promises— (i)  Pleasure;  (ii.)  Profit; 
(iii.)  Impunity.  Sin  promises  all  pleasure, 
and  in  the  end  robs  of  all  peace. — (5)  Men 
apt  still  to  trust  in  that  by  which  they  have 
been  already  deceived  (Prov.  xxiii.  35), — 
(6)  All  unrenewed  men  deceived  (Tit.  iii. 
3).  He  feedeth  on  ashes ;  a  deceived  heart 
hath  turned  him  aside  (Is.  xliv  20).  Satan 
the  deceiver  of  the  nations  Rev.  xx.  8). 
Men  by  nature,  since  the  admission  of  Satan's 
first  great  deception,  call  evil  good,  and  good 
evil ;  put  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for 
darkness;  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet 
for  bitter  (Is.  v.  20). — (7)  The  recompense 
of  trusting  in  vanity  is  vanity — emptiness, 
dissatisfaction,  disappointment.  In  indulg- 
ing in  sin  and  sinful  pleasures  men  embrace 
a  cloud.  Like  the  apples  of  Sodom,  dust  in 
the  hand  that  grasps  them  instead  of  fruit. 
Beautiful  soap-bubbles.  Vanity  pursued 
ends  in  vanity  experienced. — (8)  Sin  in  itself 
the  recompense  of  sin.  Vanity  anoihernarae 
for  sin.  No  greater  punishment  than  to  be 
given  up  to  one's  own  lusts  and  passions 
(Rom.  i.  20,  28).  The  commission  of  one 
sin  often  punished  by  being  left  to  the  com- 
mission of  another.  Great  part  of  the  misery 
of  the  lost  the  abandonment  to  the  power  of 
sinful  lusts,  without  any  means  for  their 
gratification.  Their  fire  of  sinful  passions 
unquenchable,  with  no  object  any  longer  to 
act  upon.  To  sow  to  the  flesh  is  to  reap 
corruption.  He  that  is  filthy  shall,  after 
death,  be  filthy  still.  Sowing  the  wind,  men 
reap  the  wirlwind ;  wind,  but  more  boisterous 
and  destructive.  Sin  a  serpent,  which,  sleep- 
ing for  a  time,  awakes  only  to  sting  and 
torment  the  soul  that  harboured  it. 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 


JOB'S  SECOND  REPLY  TO  ELIPHAZ. 


I.  Complains  of  the  want  of  sym- 
pathy on  the  part  of  liis  friends  (verses 
2—5). 

1.  They  gave  him  only  verses  from  the  ancients 
about  the  punishment  of  tlie  wicked  and  the 
prosperity  of  the  righteous^  such  as  he  was 
already  familiar  with.  (Verse  2).— "I  have 
heard  many  such  things."  In  this,  and  the 
manner  in  which  they  did  it,  they  showed 
themselves  "  miserable  "  {margin,  *'  trouble- 
some") comforters;   {Heb.   "comforters  of 


trouble  or  mischief").  Professing  to  come  as 
comforters,  they  had  turned  out  tormentors. 
Professed  comfort  may  be  only  an  exaspera- 
tion of  sorrow.  No  small  sin  to  *'  talk  to 
the  grief  of  those  whom  God  has  wounded." 
In  speaking  to  tried  ones,  we  need  a  tender 
heart  and  a  gentle  tongue.  Easy  to  irritate 
the  wound  instead  of  healing  it.  Words 
may  either — 

"  Scorch  like  drops  of  burning  gall, 
Or  soothe  like  honey -dew." 

97 


CttAf .  XVL 


BOMILBTIC  COMMMTARY:  JOn. 


Deep  distress  and  despondency  not  to  be 
cured  by  moral  and  religious  aphorisms.  "  To 
preach  of  patience  is  often  the  very  means 
of  stirring  up  all  impatience"  \ Maurice]. 
The  tongue  of  the  wise  nowhere  more  needed 
than  in  the  house  of  sorrow.  The  two  re- 
quisites for  a  "comforter  "found  in  Solomon's 
virtuous  woman :  *'  She  openeth  her  mouth 
with  wisdom,  and  in  her  tongue  is  the  law 
of  kindness*'  (Prov.  xxxi  26). 

Men  are  "  miserable  comforters  " — (1) 
"When  they  comfort  others  with  error  and 
falsehood— as  with  erroneous  views  of  God, 
of  His  dealings,  or  of  themselves  ;  "daubing 
with  untempered  mortar ;  '*  healing  the  hurt 
of  the  mourner  "slightly,  saying:  peace,  peace, 
when  there  is  no  peace ; "  (2)  When  tliey 
direct  toimproper  means  for  relief — as  drown- 
ing the  remembrance  of  the  trouble  in  the 
pleasures  and  pursuits  of  the  world;  (3) 
When  they  seek  merely  to  divert  the 
mourner's  mind  from  the  trouble,  or  per- 
suade him  to  put  away  and  forget  his 
sorrow ;  (4)  When  they  fail  to  point  him  to 
the  true  source  of  comfort — Christ  as  a 
Saviour  and  sympathizing  Priend — the  truths 
of  the  Gospel  and  of  the  Word  of  God. 
"  The  waters  of  Lethe  will  not  change  the 
nature  of  sorrow,  but  the  blood  of  Christ 
will." 

To  be  a  true  "comforter"  we  require — 
(1)  To  be  able  to  sympathize  with  the 
troubled  ;  (2)  To  understand,  generally,  the 
meaning  and  use  of  trouble.  Trouble  a  part 
of  our  education  for  heaven,  as  well  as  for 
the  right  performance  of  our  duties  on  earth, 
— to  be  accepted  as  a  message  from  above — an 
angel  of  mercy  sent  by  the  God  who  is  love ; 

(3)  To  be  acquainted  ourselves  with  the 
truth  with  which  we  are  to  comfort  others, 
and  to  have  experienced  in  some  degree 
the    power    of    it     on    our  own    hearts; 

(4)  To  possess  the  spirit  and  imitate  the 
conduct  of  Him  whose  mission  on  earth  was 
to  "comfort  them  that  mourn;"  (5)  To 
speak  truthfully  and  suitably  to  the  case, 
while  we  present  such  views  of  God  and  His 
dealings  as  are  fitted  to  impart  light  and 
comfort  to  the  sad  and  sorrowing. 

2.  Job's  friends  spoke  as  not  realizing  his 
sorrow.  They  treated  him  either  with  un- 
feeling reproofs,  or  sometimes  with  fine 
speeches  (verse  3).  "  Shall  vain  words  {Heb. 
*  words  of  wind,' —  airy,  empty  speeches) 
have  an  end  ?  "  The  friends  had  all  followed 
in  the  same  unprofitable  strain.  Job  returns 
the  reproach  of  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  2).  Too 
much  of  the  spirit  of  angry  retort  in  these 
discussions.  The  time  and  country  of  the 
epeakers,  however,  to  be  remembered.  Ihe 
Gospel  of  Jesus  teaches  us  to  give  the  "  soft 
answer  that  turneth  away  wrath." — "Or 
what  emboldeueih  (or  exciteth)  thee  that 

98 


thou  answerest  P  '*  No  ground  or  need  for 
continuing  such  speeches.  Eliphaz  had 
spoken  as  a  man  under  excitement.  The 
style  and  spirit  of  his  second  speech  consi- 
derably different  from  that  of  his  first. 
Especially  important  for  a  comforter  and  in- 
structor of  others  to  exercise  patience,  and  not 
to  lose  his  temper.  No  small  part  of  wisdom 
to  know  how  we  "ought  to  answer  every 
man."  "  Every  man  shall  kiss  his  lips  that 
giveth  a  rijiht  answer"  (Prov.  xxiv.  26). 
Job's  friends  found  it  easy  to  repeat  common- 
places, and  shake  their  head. — (Verse  4).  "I 
also  could  speak  asj^ou  do:  if  (or  *wouldthat ') 
your  soul  were  in  my  soul's  stead,  I  could 
heap  up  words  ( — string  sentences  and  verses 
together)  against  you,  and  shake  mine  head 
at  you  "  ( — either  in  condolence  or  solemn 
admonition).  Easy  for  the  whole  to  advise 
the  sick.  The  great  want  in  Job's  friends  a 
genuine  sympathy.  After  the  first  oriental 
outburst  of  grief  at  their  friend's  calamity, 
all  was  cold,  heartless,  and  even  cruel. 
Selfishness  the  common  sin  of  our  fallen 
nature — 

"The  proud,  the  cold,  untroubled  heart  cf 
stone, 
That  never  mused  on  sorrow  but  its  own  " 

In  Job's  friends  this  coldness  aggravated,  if 
not  generated,  by  false  religious  views  and 
misinterpretations  of  Divine  Providence. 
True  religion  softens  the  heart,  and  inclines 
it  to  kindness  and  compassion.  A  false  re- 
ligion generally  the  parent  of  cruelty. 

Job  expresses  what  his  own  conduct  would 
be  were  they  in  his  situation  (verse  5).  "I 
would  strengthen  you  with  my  mouth,  and 
the  moving  (or  condolence)  of  my  lips  should 
assuage  your  grief  "  ( — or  perhaps,  ironically, 
*I  could  strengthen  you  with  my  mouth/  and 
give  you  lip-consolation  as  you  give  me, 
instead  of  the  "  hearty  counsel "  of  a  friend, 
Prov.  xxvii.  9).  Job's  actual  practice  de- 
scribed. Acknowledged  by  Eliphaz  himself 
to  have  been  a  comforter  of  many  (ch.  iv. 
3,  4).  His  own  testimony  as  to  his  manner 
of  life  in  the  time  of  his  prosperii,y  (ch.  xxix. 
25  ;  xxxi.  18).  His  friends  had  dealt  in 
words  which  had  no  weight  or  force  (ch.  vi. 
25),  and  which  only  tended  to  exasperate 
his  sorrow.  His  words,  had  their  places  been 
changed,  would  have  strengthened  and  re- 
lieved them.  Three  objects  to  be  aimed  at 
in  comforting  those  in  trouble — (1)  To 
strengthen  them  to  bear  their  trouble ;  (2) 
To  lighten  their  grief ;  (3)  To  lead  them  to 
the  right  improvement  of  their  trial.  The 
last,  the  object  more  especially  aimed  at  by 
EUhu  (ch.   xxxiii.  15—30). 

II.  Renews  his  sorrowlnl  complaint 
regarding  his  condition  (verse  6 — 16). 
His  sorrow   neither  mitigated  by  speech 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


CHAP.   XTl. 


nor  silence  (verse  6).  **  Though  I  speak  my 
grief  is  not  assuaged  ;  and  iliough  I  forbear, 
what  am  I  eased?"  Natural  for  grief  to 
find  relief  in  words.  The  troublrd  spirit  also 
often  calmed  by  silent  meditation.  Job  ex- 
perienced neither.  No  relief  found  in  the 
assertion  of  his  innocence  or  utterance  of  iiis 
sorrow.  He  had  spoken  to  God,  to  his  friends, 
to  himself,  yet  his  grief  remained.  Had  sat 
at  first  in  silence  many  days,  and  had  spent 
many  silent  hours  since  then.  Still  no  ease 
to  his  trouble.  A  bad  case  that  yields  to  no 
kind  of  treatment. 

He  ascribes  his  trouhles  to  God  (verse  7). 
"  But  now  he  hath  made  me  weary  "  ( — quite 
exiiausted  me,  or  laden  me  with  trouble). 
Job's  troubles  accumulated  and  now  of  some 
continuance,  with  as  yet  no  relief.  The  visit 
of  his  friends,  instead  of  a  balm,  had  proved 
a  bitterness.  All  ascribed  by  Job  to  God. 
Good  to  eye  God's  hand  in  our  troubles, 
whoever  and  whatever  may  be  the  instrument 
of  it.  No  trial  but  of  His  sending.  When 
Satan  was  labouring  to  *'  destroy  "  Job,  it 
was  only  by  God's  permission  and  authority 
(ch.  ii.  3).  The  part  of  a  sanctified  nature, 
to  see  God  in  every  event  of  our  lot,  whether 
})rosperous  or  adverse.  So  David— "Thou 
didst  it"  (Ps.  xxxix.  9).  "Let  him  curse, 
for  the  Lord  hath  bidden  him  "  (2  Sam.  xvi. 

He  turns  from  man  and  addresses  his  com- 
plaint to  God  Himself.  "  Thou  hast."  One 
word  spoken  to  God  in  our  trouble  better 
than  a  hundred  toman.  The  invitation  (Ps. 
I.  15).  The  resolution  (Ps.^  xlii.  8,  9). 
Tragic  and  touching  description  of  Job's 
sorrows.     Embraces — 

1.  The  loss  of  his  faulty  and  alienation  of 
his  friends  (verse  7).  "Tnou  hast  made  de- 
solate all  my  company  "  ( — overwhelmed  in 
calamity  all  my  family,  and  struck  with 
astonishment  all  my  friends).  Difficult  to 
forbear  recurring  to  grievous  visitations  and 
present  troubles.  All  Job's  children  removed 
by  one  fell  swoop.  His  property  gone.  Him- 
self a  mass  of  loathsome  ulcers.  His  wife 
and  friends  paralysed  and  alienated  by  his 
calamities.  His  very  servants  standing  aloof 
from  iiim  (ch.  xix.  13 — 19).  A  grievous 
agL'ravation  of  affliction  when  friends  are 
alienated  and  stand  a  distance  from  us  (Ps. 
xxxi.  11 ;  xxxviii.  1 ;  Ixxxviii.  18).  The  ex- 
perience of  the  Man  of  Sorrows  foreshadowed 
in  Job's  (Matt.  xxvi.  31,  34,  56). 

2.  His  wasted  appearance  construed  hy 
his  friends  into  a  token  of  guilt  (verse  8). 
"Thou  hast  filled  me  with  wrinkles  (or  4aid 
fast  hold  of  me,'  as  a  person  arrested  by  the 
hand  of  justice),  which  [in  tiie  opinion  of  my 
friends]  is  a  witness  against  me  [that  I  am  a 
guilty  man] ;  and  my  leanness  ( — or  *  liars,* 
or,   *  my  lie ')    rising  up    in  me    beareth 

7—2 


witness  to  my  face."  A  marred  and  meagre 
visage  may  testify  to  our  grief,  but  not  to 
our  guilt.  Christ's  visage  marred  more 
than  any  man's,  and  his  form  more  than  the 
sons  of  men  (Is.  lii.  14).  Our  guilt,  not  His 
ovm,  and  our  sorrows  carried  by  Him  as  our 
Surety,  marred  His  visage  and"  robbed  iiis 
form  of  comeliness  and  beauty  (Is.  liii.  2,  4). 

3.  The  apprehension  of  Divine  anger  in  His 
troubles  (verse  20).  "  He  teareth  me  in  his 
wrath  v\ho  hateth  me  {Heb.y  *his  wrath  liaih 
torn  and  violently  opposed  me')i  he  gnashelh 
upon  me  with  his  teeth:  mine  enemy 
sharpcneth  his  eyes  upon  me  "  (or,  *  as  my 
enemy  he  glares  upon  me  with  his  eyes,' — 
looks  on  me  with  fierce,  sparkling  eyes,  like 
an  enraged  lion,  ready  to  pounce  upon  his 
prey.)  The  perverted  view  of  God  which 
Satan  presents,  and  the  flesh  is  ready  to  take 
under  severe  and  protracted  trouble.  Sad 
that  our  best  Priend  should  be  viewed  as  a 
relentless  foe, — that  the  God  who  is  love, 
should  be  converted  into  a  furious  wild 
beast  or  a  wrathful  demon.  Such  a  view 
on  the  part  of  Job  Satan's  especial  object 
at  present.  His  aim  to  bring  him  to  curse 
God  to  His  face.  Satan  but  showed  himself 
to  Job,  and  sought  to  pass  himself  off  for 
God.  The  bitterest  ingredient  in  a  believer's 
trials,  when  not  love  but  anger  is  appre- 
hended in  them.  To  see  love  in  a  cro-^s 
takes  out  all  bitterness ;  to  see  wrath,  adds 
poison  to  the  dart.  David's  prayei — "  Ke- 
buke  me,  [but]  not  in  thine  anger,  chasten 
me,  [but]  not  in  thy  hot  displeasure" 
(Ps.  vi.  1). 

4.  The  bitter  hostility  of  his  friends  (verse 
10)  "They  have  gaped  upon  me  with  their 
mouth;  they  have  smitten  me  upon  the 
cheek  reproachfully ;  they  have  gathered 
themselves  together  against  me"  (as  con- 
spirators, to  effect  my  ruin  ;  or,  "  they  have 
attacked  me  with  combined  forces").  Terribly 
bitter  cup  when  botii  God  and  man — especially 
our  friends  and  professedly  good  men — seem 
to  be  turned  against  us.  The  cup  given  to 
Jesus  as  our  Surety.  The  words  of  the  first 
clause  of  the  verse  those  of  the  Psalm  which 
describes  His  experience  on  the  crosj 
(Ps.  xxii.  13).  His  cheek  literally  smitten, 
according  to  the  prophecy  (Mic,  v.  1; 
Matt.  xxvi.  67;  xxvii.  30;  John  xix.  3). 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  rulers  and  people,  were 
guthcred  together  against  Him  (Acts  iv.  27; 
(Ps.  ii.  12).  Man's  coml)ined  opposition, 
joined  to  a  frowning  providence,  no  proof 
either  of  guilt  or  Divine  displeasure.  David's 
prayer:  "Let  them  curse,  but  bless  thou" 
(Ps.  cix.  28). 

5.  His  apparent  abandonment  by  God 
into  the  hands  of  wicked  men  (verse  11). 
"  God  hath  delivered  me  to  the  ungodly 
{Ueb.y  'to  an  evil  one'),  and  turned  me 

99 


OHAF.  xn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


over  (or,  *  thrown  me  down  headlong  *)  into 
the  hands  of  the  wicked."  His  case,  in  his 
own  view,  like  that  of  a  criminal  delivered 
over  to  the  executioners  of  justice ;  or  one 
cast  into  a  gulf  or  duntieon,  as  the  punish- 
ment of  his  crime.  His  friends  appeared 
to  him  in  I  he  character,  and  as  acting  towards 
him  the  part,  of  wicked  men.  Job  delivered 
by  God  into  the  hands  of  an  "evil  one"  in 
a  way  that  he  was  not  then  aware  of.  Pos- 
sibly, however,  some  glimmering  of  the 
truth  as  to  the  immediate  agent  in  his 
affliction.  The  doctrine  of  evil  spirits,  and 
of  one  prominent  among  them  as  their 
leader,  not  likely  to  have  Ijcen  unknown  in 
Job's  time.  The  tradition  of  man's  temp- 
tation and  fall  widely  spread  and  preserved 
in  the  line  of  Shem.  No  uncommon  thing 
for  a  child  of  God  to  be  for  wise  purposes 
left  for  a  time  in  the  hands  of  bad  men  and 
bad  angels.  Divine  abandonment  the  bit- 
terest ingredient  in  the  Saviour  s  cup.  'I'lie 
only  thing  that  extorted  a  wail  of  sorrow 
from  His  Tips  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  To  be  left 
in  the  hands  of  the  wicked  was  itself  a 
grievous  affliction.  **  The  tender  mercies  of 
tlie  wicked  are  cruel."  To  anpear  to  be 
abandoned  by  God  at  the  same  time  a 
fearful  aggravation.  Tlie  Surety  actually 
delivered  into  the  hands  of  Satan  to  be 
tempted,  and  of  wicked  men  to  be  put  to 
death  (Matt.  iv.  1 ;  Acts  ii.  23). 

6.  The  sad  and  sadden  reoerse  in  his  ex- 
perience (verse  12).  "I  was  at  ease  ( — in 
tranquillity  and  prosperity),  but  he  hath 
broken  me  asunder  (or,  in  pieces,  thoroughly 
crushed  and  smaslied  me  as  an  earilien 
vessel)  ;  he  hath  also  taken  me  by  my  neck 
[as  a  wild  beast  does  his  prey]  and  shaken 
me  to  pieces  ( — or,  dashed  me  as  on  the 
ground,  or  against  a  rock),  and  set  ine  up 
for  his  mark "  ( — to  shoot  his  arrows  at,  as 
Saracenic  conquerors  sometimes  did  with 
their  captives,  and  as  his  own  soldiers  did 
with  Sebastian,  the  martyr  of  Gaul).  Great 
and  sudden  reverses  among  the  sorest  earthly 
trials.  The  remembrance  of  previous  comfoit 
and  prosperity  an  embittering  of  present 
calamity  and  suffering.  Once  none  more 
happy  and  prosperous  than  Job ;  now  none 
more  afflicted  and  wretclied.  No  greater 
contrast  between  past  and  present  ex- 
perience since  Adam  and  Eve  were  driven 
out  of  Paradise.  Labours  for  words  to 
express  the  grievousness  of  the  latter. 
Employs  words  of  double  form  and  inten- 
sified meaning.  "Broken  me  asunder,'* 
"shaken  me  to  pieces."  No  mere  hurt,  but 
utter  destruction,  like  that  of  a  glass  or  an 
earthen  vessel  dashed  to  the  ground,  and 
smashed  into  a  thousand  pieces,  no  more  to 
be  united.  Children  gone ;  property  lost; 
wife  alienated;  body  covered  from  head  to 

100 


foot  with  the  most  grievous  and  loathsome 
disease  that  ever  afflicted  fallen  humanity ; 
mind  harassed,  depressed,  distracted;  sleep 
taken  away  ;  what  sleep  obtained  made  more 
wretched  than  the  absence  of  it  by  horri- 
fying dreams;  his  sincerity  aiid  piety  more 
than  suspected  by  his  friends,  in  consequence 
of  his  sufferings;  and  his  bruised  spirit 
worried  and  irritated  by  their  flippant  and 
worldly  arguments,  to  convince  him  that  he 
must  not  be  the  man  he  had  been  taken  to 
be,  and  that  to  be  delivered  from  his  troubles 
he  must  repent  and  seek  God.  And  of  all 
these  overwhelming  reverses,  God  Himself, 
whom  he  had  diligently  and  faithfully  served, 
the  Author !  HiL^h  and  important  object 
that  for  which  God  could  do  such  violence  to 
His  nature  in  thus  dealing  with  a  faithful 
servant !  Transcendently  glorious  end  in 
view,  when  He  still  more  terribly  bruised 
His  faithful  and  well-beloved  Son  ! 

7.  A  tragically/  sublime  enlargement  on  his 
treatment  at  the  Dunne  hand  (verse  13). 
"  His  archers  (or  '  his  mighty  ones,'  perhaps 
*  his  darts ' — the  many  calamities  with  which 
God  had  visited  and  was  still  visiting  him) 
compass  me  round  about :  he  cleaveth  my 
reins  asunder  ( — attacks  me  in  the  most  vital 
parts,  and  inflicts  on  me  deadly  wounds),  and 
doth  not  spare :  he  poureth  out  my  gall 
upon  the  ground  "  ( — His  strokes  of  the  most 
fatal  kind,  leaving  no  hope  of  life).  No  pity 
shewn  in  dealing  with  His  servant,  but  all 
kinds  of  severity  inflicted.  Sometimes  God 
appears  to  lay  aside  His  attribute  of  mercy, 
even  in  dealing  with  His  own.  So  in  visiting 
Jerusalem  for  her  sins  :  "  Thou  hast  not 
pitied"  (Lam.iii.  43).  Thus  God  "  spared  not 
his  own  Son." — (Verse  14).  *'Hebreaketh 
me  with  breach  upon  breach;" — is  continually 
dealing  new  blows,  like  a  storming  party 
attacking  the  walls  of  a  fortress — is  always 
inflicting  new  griefs.  So  David's  complaint : 
"Deep  calleth  unto  deep  ;  all  thy  waves  and 
thy  billows  have  gone  over  me," — one  after 
another  in  rapid  succession  "  (Ps.  xlii.  7). 
One  severe  trial  often  found  almost  sufficient 
to  crush  us.  Ordinarily,  "  in  the  day  of  the 
rough  wind,"  He  "  stayeth  the  east  wind." 
Karely,  as  with  Job,  are  heavy  strokes  re- 
peated, successive,  and  accumulated.  Such, 
however,  the  experience  of  Jesus  in  the  last 
hours  of  His  earthly  life.  Prom  the  traitor's 
kiss  to  His  dying  cry  upon  the  cross,* 'bruised 
and  put  to  grief  "  by  God,  devils,  and  men  ; 
smitten  in  soul  and  body  with  one  wound 
after  another,  till  at  last  reproach  broke  His 
heart,  and  He  was  brought  to  the  dust  of 
death.  And  all  this,  while  standing  in  your 
place,  reader,  and  mine. — "  He  runneth 
upon  me  like  a  giant,"  or,  "  as  a  warrior," 
sword  in  hand,  with  strength  and  fury.  Ap- 
palling climax  I    Terrible  experience  for  a 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


CHAP.  XVL 


child  of  God.  Awful  situation  of  an  im- 
penitent and  Cliristless  soul.  "A  fearful 
tliino^  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living 
God/'  If  these  things  be  done  in  the  green 
tree,  wliat  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ? 

8.  The  effect  of  this  severity  on  the  part  of 
God  (veise  15).     "I  have  sewed  sackcloth 
upon  my  skin."     Sackcloth,  a  garment  of 
coarse  cloth  worn  by  mourners  and  penitents. 
Probably  assumed  by  Job  after  the  death  of 
his  children,  and  continued  ever  since.    Worn 
next  to  the  person,  and  now  adhering  to  his 
skin  through   the  purulent  matter   issuing 
from  his  ulcers.     God's  providence  able  very 
soon   to    change   our   silk   into    sackcloth. 
— "And  defiled  (or  thrust)  my  horn  in  I  he 
dust," — like  a  noble  animal  spent  with  fatigue 
or  overpowered  in  conflict.   Job  now  literally 
in  the  dust.     His   place    still  among  the 
ashes.    His  condition  one  of  the   deepest 
misery.     His  experience  that  of  sorrow  and 
humihation.      The    horn    an     emblem    of 
strength  and  dignity.     Job,  as  a  prince  or 
emir,  naturally  speaks  of  his  "  horn.'*    Easy 
with  God  to  bring  the  loftiest  horn  to  the 
dust.     Witness    Haman,    Nebuchadnezzar, 
VVolsey,   Masaniello,   the   fisherman-saviour 
of  Naples.    Soon  "  high  ambition  lowly  laid." 
(Verse  16).—"  My  lace  is  foul  (or  red)  with 
weeping."    Job  no  stoic.    His  eye  poured 
out  tears  to  God  (verse  20).    Manly  to  weep 
from  a  sufficient  cause.    Jesus  wept.     It  is 
only   sin   which    makes    men    callous    and 
insensible.     True  religion  neither  makes  men 
stones  nor  stoics.     *'  Scorn  the  proud  man 
that  is  ashamed  to  weep." — "And  on  mine 
eyelids  is  the  shadow  of  death."     A  speedy 
dissolution  anticipated  as  the  result  of  his 
calamities    and    disease.     The    dimness  of 
death  already  appearing  to  him  to  settle  on 
his  eyes.     Now  viewed  himself  as  a  dying 
man  (ch.  xvii.  1.)     Figuratively  also,  deep 
and  continued   sorrow  clouded  hi^5  eyes  as 
with  the  dimness  of  death.     The  effect  of 
grief  and  tears  on  the  sight  frequently  com- 
plained of  in  the  Psalms  (Ps.  vi.  7 ;  xxxi  9  • 
xxxviii.  10.     See,  also,Lam.  v.  17).  Paustus! 
son  of  Vortigcrn,  said  to  have  wept  himself 
blind  for  the  abominations  of  his  parents. 

III.  Re-asserts    his    innocence   and 
integrity  (verse  17). 

"Not  for  any  injustice  (or,  '  although,*^ 
or,  connectmg  with  what  follows,—*  because 
there  IS  not  any  violence')  in  mine  hands; 
also  my  prayer  is  pure."  Maintains  that  his 
suflerings  were  neither  on  account  of  wrono- 
done  to  his  neighbour  or  hypocrisy  towards 
bod.  Ihe  two  chari^es  alh-ged  or  insinuated 
against  him  by  his  friends.  The  gist  of 
their  speeches  to  sliew  that  he  must  have 
made  hmiself  rich  by  oppression,  or  had 
abused  his  riches  to  tlie  injury  of  his  uei^^h- 


bour,  and  that  the  justice  of  God  now  over- 
took him  for  his  crimes.  This  conduct  to- 
wards man  necessarily  implied  that  his  pro- 
fession of  religion  towards  God  had  been 
false  and  hollow.  Job  maintains,  like  Paul, 
that  he  had  exercised  himself  in  having  a 
conscience  void  of  offence  both  towards  God 
and  towards  man.  "Prayer"  here  put  for 
religion  or  religious  duties  in  general — his 
duty  towards  God.  A  great  part  of  religion 
consists  in  prayer  or  in  communion  with  the 
Father  of  our  spirits.  Divine  worship  an  ap- 
proach of  the  soul  to  the  mercy-seat.  Job 
a  man  of  prayer,  contrary  to  tlie  allegation 
of  his  friends  (ch.  xv.'i).  A  prayerless 
man  is  a  man  without  religion  and  without 
God.    Job  speaks  of 

Prayer 

as  a  matter  of  course,  as  a  thing  natural  for 
a  nian.     As  natural  for  a  man  to  pray  as  for 
an  infant  to  utter  cries  to  its  mother.     The 
natural    instinct    of    a    babe    towards    its 
earthly  parent  a  picture  of  that  in  a  human 
soul   towards    its   heavenly    one.     Because 
natural,   prayer    is   universal.      Prayer    to 
Deity  in  some  form  or  other  the  language 
of  man  wherever  found.     The  most  degraded 
still  sometimes  prays,  and  pays  respect  to 
prayer   when   olfered  by  another.      Prayer 
a  thing  of  the  spirit,  unconfined  to  time,  or 
place,  or  form.     In  prayer,  however,  as  in 
other  things,  the  spirit  seeks  outward  ex- 
pression—m  the  lips,  and  the  posture  of  the 
body,  as  bended  knees,  uplified  hands,  &c. 
Prayer  either  public,  solemn,  formal,  or  pri- 
vate,—in  the  family,  the  closet,  everywhere. 
"  I  will  that  men  pray  everi/where.'^     Nehe- 
miah  prayed  in  the  glittering  banquet-hall 
while  presentmg,  according  to  his  ofiice,  the 
wine-cup   to   his   royal   master.       Especial 
prominence   given   in  the    Bible  to   united 
prayer  (Matt,  xviii.  19;  Acts  xii.  5,   12). 
Prayer  to  be  made  for  others  as  well  as  for 
ourselves.  Jobanintercessor(ch.i.5;  xlii.  10). 
Patter7is for  prayer  ^iWQXi  everywhere  through- 
out   the   Scriptures.     Especially   found  in 
"  the  Lord's  Prayer:'     The  first  part  of  this 
Divine  form  of  devotion  consists  in  three 
petitions  for  God  himself — for  God's  glory. 
His  kingdom,  and  His  pleasure  ;  the  second 
part,  in  the  remaining  four,  for  ourselves  and 
our  neighbour.     Of  these  four,  tiie  first  is  for 
temporal  benefits ;  the  second  and  third  for 
spiritual  ones  ;  and  the  fourth  and  last,  for 
both  combined. 

Job  declares  that  his  prayer  was  ** pure.** 
Prayer  "  pure  '  when  olfered  with  a  sincere 
heart  and  pure  conscience.  More  particu- 
larly— 

1.  AVhen  not  in  hypocrisy  or  "out  of 
feigned  lipa  "  \  when  with  th'e  heart  and  not 

101 


CHAP.  XTl 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


merely  the  lip  or  outward  posture  (Is.  xxix. 
13  ;  Matt.  xv.  8). 

2.  Wlien  not  accompanied  with  the  practice 
of  sin.  The  sacrifice  of  tlie  wicked  an 
abomination  to  the  Lord  (Prov.  xv.  8  ;xxi. 
27  ;  xxviii.  9)  **  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my 
heart  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me"  (Ps.  Ixvi. 
18).     Men  to  lift  up  *'  holf/  hands.'* 

3.  When  for  right  objects  mid  from  right 
motives.  *'  Ye  ask  and  receive  not,  because 
ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  consume  it  upon 
your  lusts"  (James  iv.  3). 

4.  When  addressed  to  the  only  true  God 
(Ps.  Ixv.  2). 

5.  When  presented  in  a  way  according  to 
His  own  will,  not  through  images  or  pictures, 
or  with  superstitious  and  humanly  devised 
practices  (Col  ii.  xviii.  22). 

6.  When  offered  with  right  disposition 
and  feelings,  with  benevolence  and  forgive- 
ness of  injuries.  *'  Lifting  up  holy  liands, 
yN\i\\o\xi  wrath''  (1  Tim.  ii.  8).  "  When  ye 
stand  praying,  forgive  "  (Murk  xi.  25). 

7.  When  made  with  humility  ihrovgh  the 
one  Mediator,  and  with  faith  in  His  atoning 
sacrifice.  "  To  this  man  will  I  look  who  is 
poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit "  (Ts.  Ixvi.  2). 
"There  is  one  God  and  one  Mediator  be- 
tween God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus." 
"  No  man  cometh  to  the  Pather  but  by  me  " 
(1  Tim.  ii.  5  ;  John  xiv.  6).  Boldness 
given  to  enter  into  the  holiest  of  all  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus  (Heb.  x.  19). 

IT.  Apostrophizes  tlie  earth  in  an 
impassioned  prayer  that  his  innocence 
may  be  made  manifest  (verse  18). 

"O  earth,  cover  not  tliou  mv  blood,  and 
let  my  cry  have  no  place  "  (of  concealment, 
or  hindrance  in  its  access  to  God').  Perhaps 
connected  witli  the  preceding:  "Because  I 
am  innocent,  let  tliis  be  the  case.'"  Job,  as 
an  undeserving  sufferer,  regards  himself  as 
one  whose  blood  is  innocently  shed.  Pro- 
bable reference  to  Abel's  murder  (Gen. 
iv.  10,  11).  The  narrative  or  document 
containing  it  well  known  to  Job.  The 
shedder  of  Job's  blood  either  the  imme- 
diate agent  in  his  sufferings,  or  his  friends 
who  so  cruelly  persecuted  him.  Murder 
easily  and  often  committed  without  actual 
shedding  of  blood.  Parents  often  murdered 
by  the  unkindness  of  their  children,  and 
wives  by  the  harsh  treatment  of  their 
husbands.  Words  and  looks  kill  as  well  as 
blows.  Blood  shed  inwardly  as  wdl  as 
outwardly, — shed  where  no  eye  sees  it  but 
God's. 

Job's  prayer  heard.  His  innocence  and 
his  friends'  unkindness  at  length  revealed. 
No  innocent  blood  always  covered.  "  Murder 
will  out "  and  be  revenged.  The  blood  of  the 
•iauffhtered  Huguenots  visited  on  Charles  IX., 

102 


who  died  in  a  bloody  sweat,  crying :  "What 
blood  !  what  blood  f" — and  still  visited  in 
the  wars  and  revolutions  of  Prance.  A  day 
coming  when  the  earth  shall  '*  disclose  her 
blood," — the  blood  innocently  shed  on  it 
and  kept  by  it  against  a  future  day,  and 
shall  "no  more  cover  her  slain"  (Is.  xxvi.  21). 
K;irth  covers  innocent  blood  till  God  uncovers 
and  revenges  it.  Arabs  say  the  dew  never 
rests  on  a  spot  that  has  been  wet  with  it. 
The  innocent  blood  of  the  crucified  One  still 
speaks  in  heaven.  Led  to  the  sacking  and 
burning  of  Jerusalem,  with  the  slaughter  and 
dispersion  of  its  people.  Is  still  visited  on 
the  outcast  impenitent  shedders  of  it. 
Speaks  pardon  and  peace  to  all  who,  as 
guilty,  take  refuge  in  it  as  their  only  atone- 
ment and  hope. 

The  **  cry  "  of  the  helpless  and  oppressed 
never  unheard.  No  place  on  earth  able  to 
hide  it  from  God.  Enters  from  the  most 
humble  and  wretched  hovel  into  the  ears  of 
the  Lord  of  Sabaoth  (James  v.  4), 

y.  Job's  consolation  (verse  19,  20), 

1.  In  God's  consciousness  of  his  innocence 
(Versel9).*'Alsonow( — besides  the  testimony 
of  my  own  consciousness;  or,  *even  now,' 
in  the  midst  of  these  calamities  and  suffer- 
ings), behold  ( — strange  as  you  may  deem 
my  assertion)  my  witness  ( — he  who  can  and 
will  bear  testimony  to  my  innocence)  is  in 
heaven,  and  my  record  ( — the  eye-witness  of 
my  upright  life)  is  on  high."  Job's  integrity 
already  testified  to  by  God  in  a  way  he  was 
not  aware  of.  The  comfort  of  the  righteous 
under  oppression,  that  God  is  witness  not 
only  of  their  suffering,  but  of  their  integrity. 
God's  great  all-seeing  eye  the  terror  of  the 
sinner,  the  comfort  of  the  saint.  The  Eye- 
witness in  heaven  will  one  day  speak  out  on 
earth  (Matt.  xxv.  31 — 45).  A  grievous  trial 
for  a  ^ood  man  to  lie  under  suspicion  of 
hypocrisy,  especially  with  good  men.  His 
comfort  in  the  record  on  high, — the  Eye- 
witness unseen,  but  seeing  all. 

2.  In  his  constant  tearful  waiting  upon 
God  (verse  20).  "  My  friends  scorn  me 
{Hb.y  *my  mockers  are  my  friends'),  but 
mine  eye  poureth  out  tears  unto  God."  One 
of  Jobs  great  trials,  that  those  who  should 
have  befriended  and  comforted  him  only 
mocked  him,  by  dealing  in  wordy  harangues 
and  persuasions  to  repent  in  order  to  de- 
liverance from  his  overwhelming  tronbhs. 
His  comfort  in  being  able  to  turn  from  them 
to  God.  Wliile  his  ear  was  stunned  with 
their  unfeeling  reflections,  his  eye  was 
pouring  out  tears  to  Him  in  whom  "the 
fatherless  findeth  mercy."  Arelief  in  trouble 
to  be  able  to  weep,  much  more  in  being  able 
to  weep  to  God.  .  Tears  wept  to  God  do  not 
scald,  but  cool.    The  misery  of  the  world. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CUXf.   IVIL 


that  they  either  do  not  weep  in  trouble,  or 
do  not  weep  to  Him  who  is  aole  both  to  pity 
and  help  them.  Every  tear  wept  to  God  put 
into  His  bottle.  God's  lachrymatory  con- 
stantly filh'ng  with  the  tears  of  the  sorrow- 
ful wept  into  11  is  bosom.  A  day  comini^ 
when  each  tear  treasured  up  in  it  will 
sparkle  as  a  gem  in  the  mourner's  crown. 
Prayers  and  tears  the  weapons  of  the  saints. 
While  the  eye  pours  out  tears  to  God,  God 
pours  in  comfort  and  strength  unto  the  soul. 
With  God  the  eye  pleads  as  eflectually  as  the 
lips.  The  tearful  eye  an  eloquent  pleader 
when  the  tongue  is  unable  to  utter  a  word. 
Tears  wept  to  God  have  a  voice  that  He  who 
sees  them  well  understands.  Those  blessed 
troubles  that  open  the  sluices  for  tears  to  be 
poured  out  to  God.  Believers  weep  with 
their  face  to  God,  the  world  with  their  back 
to  Him.  Precious  grace  that  enables  a  man 
to  take  his  griefs  and  weep  out  his  tears  to 
God.  The  trouble  that  drives  unbelievers 
farther  from  God  is  only  driving  a  believer 
nearer  to  Him  ;  as  the  wind  that  drives  one 
mariner  farther  from  home  is  wafting  another 
nearer  to  it.  The  magnet,  amid  all  the  com- 
motions of  the  earth,  and  sea,  and  sky,  still 
keeps  pointing  to  the  north. 

VI.  His  long'ing'  desire  to  lifive  his 

case  tried  before  God  (verse  21). 

**  0  that  one  might  plead  for  a  man  with 
God,  as  a  man  pleadeth  for  his  neighbour  " 
(or,  *  O  that  a  man  might  plead,'  or  simply  as 
expressing  the  subject  of  his  prajei-, — 'that 
a  man, — viz.,  himself, —  might  plead  with  God 
as  a  son  of  man  with  his  neighbour').  Job's 
constant  desire,  from  a  consciousness  of  his 
integrity,  to  plead  his  cause  with  God 
(ch.ix.,19,  32-^-35).  His  aim  not  to  establish 
his  sinlessness,  but  his  sincerUy.  His  desii*e 
not  to  plead  with  God  in  reference  to  his 
personal  acceptance  with  Him,  but  in  refer- 
ence to  the  particular  matter  and  cause  of 
his  present  sufferings.  It  is  our  happiness 
that  we  have  not  to  plead  our  case  witli  God 
as  righteous  persons,  but  as  sinners.  Even 
Job  unable  to  answer  God  for  one  of  a 
thousand  charges  he  could  bring  against 
him  (eh.  ix.,  3).  It  is  the  comfort  of  the 
Gospel — (I)  That  a  sinner  does  not  need  to 
plead  with  God  in  order  to  establish  his 
righteousness  ;  God  justifies  the  ungodly 
who  believe  in  His  Son  ;  (2)  Tiiat  receiving 
Christ  as  a  Saviour  we  have  one  who  con- 


stantly pleads  for  us.  In  Christ  we  have  an 
Advocate  who  is  God  Himself  while  our 
Brother, — the  Man  who  is  Jehovah's  Fellow 
(Zech.  xiii.  7.)  Our  God-man  Advocate 
pleads  not  our  innocence,  but  His  obedience 
unto  death,  as  the  ground  of  our  justifica- 
tion. Exhibits  before  the  Divine  tribunal 
not  our  tears^  but  His  own  blood.  Mentions 
in  the  plea  not  our  works,  but  our  faith  in 
Himself. 

The  reason  for  Job's  earnest  desire  (verse 
22). — "  When  a  few  years  are  come  (or  *  for 
the  years  numbered  to  me,'  or,  *  my  few  years 
have  come,'  i.e.y  to  an  end^,  then  shall  I  go 
whence  I  shall  not  return."  The  apprehension 
of  approaching  death  now  always  present 
with  Job.  His  great  desire  that  his  cause 
might  be  tried  and  his  innocence  declared 
before  he  left  this  world.  Elsewhere  he 
comforts  himself  with  the  assurance  that 
even  if  death  should  intervene,  God  would 
vindicate  his  character  and  manifest  his  in- 
nocence (ch.  xix.,  25—27).  Natural  to 
desire  to  see  it  done  while  living.  Sad  for  a 
good  man  to  die  with  a  cloud  of  suspicion 
resting  on  his  character. — Things  which  each 
ought  to  be  earnest  and  diligent  to  have  done 
before  we  go  "  whence  we  shall  not  return." 

(1)  Our  own  acceptance  with  God  made  sure. 

(2)  The  salvation  of   our  children  secured. 

(3)  Our  family  and  affairs  rightly  ordered. 

(4)  Peace  and  reconciliation  sought  with  all 
men.  (5)  Duties  towards  our  family,  friends, 
and  nei^'hbours  discharged.  "Whatsoever 
thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might" 
(Eccles.  ix.  10). 

Solemn  enquiry  :  "  When  a  few  years  are 
come,"  where  shall  I  be,  and  what  shall  be 
my  place  and  experience  ?  Like  Job,  I  shall 
be  done  wath  a  present  world.  Its  joys  and 
sorrows,  its  cares  and  anxieties,  will  have 
ceased  with  me  for  ever.  Shall  I  be  enjoying 
a  better  state?  Have  I  a  house  not  made 
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens  ?  Have  I 
an  interest  in  Christ,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
say :  '*  To  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die 
is  gain?"  Do  I  know  that  God  is  the 
strength  of  my  heart  now,  and  that  He  shall 
be  my  portion  for  ever  ?  That  He  will  guide 
me  with  His  counsel  while  here,  and  after- 
wards receive  me  to  glory  ?  While  my  body 
is  mouldering  in  the  grave,  shall  my  spirit  be 
mingling  in  the  songs  of  saints  and  sera- 
phim before  the  throne  ?  Am  I  already 
washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  P 


CHAPTER  XYII. 

CONTINUATION  OFJOFS  REPLY  TO  ELIPIIAZ. 

I,    Bemoans     his    dying    condition      vital  energy  is  destroyed '),  my  days  are  ex- 

(verse  1).  tinct   (or,  extinguished,  as  a  lamp  or  taper 

"My  breath  is  corrupt  (or,  '  my  spirit  or      whose   flame  is  expiring),   the   giaves  are 

103 


CRAi,  xvn. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


5> 


ready  for  me "  (or,  the  place  of  graves,  or 
chambers  of  the  tomb,  are  destined  for  me, 
— Heb.y  *are  for  me/  or,  *are  mine').  •  Job 
takes  a  calm  but  gloomy  view  of  his  con- 
dition. Now  views  himself  always  as  a 
dying  man.  Speaks  the  language  of  deep 
despondency.  Vital  powers  exhausted. 
Energy  of  spirit  broken.  Tlie  lamp  of 
life  all  but  extinguislied.  His  only  ex- 
pected home  tlie  grave.  This  mentioned 
now — (1)  As  his  reason  for  desiring  to  have 
his  case  speedily  tried  and  his  character 
vindicated;  (2)  In  opposition  to  the  flat- 
tering prospect  held  out  by  his  friends  as 
the  result  of  his  repentance.     Observe— 

1.  Good  for  us  frequently  to  take  a  calm 
view  of  our  condition  as  mortal  and  dying 
men.  Philip  of  Macedon  kept  a  person  for 
the  sole  purpose  of  daily  reminding  him  of 
his  mortality.  Sad  to  be  surprised  by  the 
summons  of  death,  like  the  rich  fool  (Luke 
x:ii,  20).  A  good  man,  able,  like  Job,  to  chant 
his  own  dirge,  both  in  the  midst  of  life's  joys 
and  sorrows. 

2.  True  in  reference  to  each  what  Job  says 
of  himself — 

^^Tlie  grraves  are  ready  for  me. 

(1)  Death  is  appointed  to  us.     The  lot  of 
all  but  those  who  shall  be  living  at  the  Lord's 
appearing.     The  sentence  of  death  entailed 
on  Adam's   offspring   as    well    as    himself 
(Rom.  V.  12).     Death  an  enemy  which  all 
have  to  meet.     No  discharge  in  that  war. 
The  grave  the  home  appointed  for  all  living. 
Death  a  visitor  whom  no  wealth  can  bribo, 
no  power  resist,  no  artifice  elude. — (2)  Death 
is  near  to  us.   "  But  a  step  between  me  and 
death."     Death  or  the  Lord's  appearing  not 
far  from  each  of  us.     The  irrave  probably 
much  nearer  both  to  reader  and  writer  than 
to  Job,  when  uttering  these  words.  Job  after 
this  lived  a  hundred  and  forty  years.     Our 
entire  life  probably  not  more  than  half  this 
amount.       "  Where    is     to-morrow  ?      In 
another     world.      For    numbers    this     is 
certain."    Death  probably  much  nearer  to  us 
than  we  think.    L  ses  to  be  made  of  this  fact : 
— (i.)  To  make  careful  preparation  for  death. 
While  the  body  enters  the  grave  the  spirit 
enters   the    invisible    and    eternal     world. 
Prepare  to  meet  thy  God. — (ii.).  To  make 
right  use  of  time  while  it  lasts.     Much  to 
be  done,  and  but  a  short  time  to  do  it  in 
(Eccles.  ix.  10). — (iii.).  To  sit  loose  to  tlie 
things  of  a  present  world.    The  world  to  be 
used,  but  not  abused  or  used  eagerly  as  if 
our  all    (1  Cor.  vii.  29).     "  Why  all  this 
toil  for  triumphs  of  an  hour?" — (iv.).  To 
examine  faithfully  our  views  and  prospects 
in  regard  to  the  grave.     How  do  I  regard 
it  P     With  comfort  or  with  dread  h     Is  the 
104 


prospect  of  it  a  gloomy  or  a  pleasant  one  f 
To  the  believer  to  die  is  gain,  because  tu  de- 
part is  to  be  with  Christ.  To  Him,  the 
grave  is  only  **a  dark  lattice  letting  in 
eternal  day,"  the  avenue 

"  To  festive  bowers. 
Where  nectars  sparkle,  angels  minister, 
And  more  than  angels  share." 

Am  I  prepared  for  my  final  resting-place? 
Are  my  accounts  made  straight  with  God  ? 
Am  I  at  peace  with  my  Maker  ?  Are  my 
sins  cancelled  with  the  blood  of  Jesus  ? 

II.  Job  complains  of  the  conduct  of 
his  friends  (verse  2). 

"Are  there  not  mockers  (or  mockings) 
with  me?      Doth  not  mine  eye  continue 
{Eeb.y  remain  all  night;  in  thcjir  provoca- 
tion ?  '*    Cutting  words  and  cruel  reproaches 
not  easily  banished.       What  the  eye  sees 
and  the  ear  hears  by   day,  the  thoughts 
dwell  upon  by  night.      Such,  with  Job,  the 
unkind  looks  and  bitter  words  of  those  who 
should  now  have  been  his  comfort.     These 
things  now  his  "sorrowful  meat"  (ch.  vi.  7). 
The  conduct  of  his  friends  one  great  part  of 
his  affliction.     "  Man  is  to  man  the  sorest, 
surest  ill."  Instead  of  sympathy  to  soothe  his 
sufferings,  Job  had  only  scorn  to  aggravate 
them.     Such  painful  experience,  especially 
from  friends,  happily  the   lot  of  few  suf- 
ferers.   Yet   that  of  the   Man  of   sorrows 
standing  in  our  room.  Complained  of  by  Him 
as   one  of  his  keenest  trials  (Ps.  xxii,  7 ; 
Matt,  xxvii.  39).      "The  contradiction  of 
sinners  against  himself "  mentioned  as  the 
burden  of  his  sufferings  ( lleb.  xii.    3).  His 
heart  broken  by  reproach  (Ps.  Ixix.  20).    In 
proportion  to  the  sweetness  of  true  friend- 
ship and  sympathy  in  sorrow,  is  the  bitter- 
ness of  the  want,  and  especially  the  opposite^ 
of  it.     Friendship  the  "wine  of  Hie;"  un- 
kind   reproaches    from    professed    friends, 
especially  in  trouble,  distilled  wormwood. 

III.  Earnestly  beseeches  God  to 
grant    a    speedy    trial    of    his    case 

(verse  3). 

"  Lay  down  no^  (or,  *  give  a  pledge,  I 
pray  thee' ;  put  me  in  a  surety  with  thee 
(or,  'give,'  or,  *  be  surely  to  me  [in  this 
coni  rovcrsy  of  mine]  with  thee,' — that  thou 
wilt  afford  me  a  trial  and  act  as  a  party) ; 
who  is  he  that  will  strike  hands  with  me?  '* 
(or,  •  who  else  is  there  that  will,'  &c., — that 
is  able  to  enter  into  the  controversy  ?  or,  who 
is  there,  when  such  a  pledge  is  given  me  by 
Thee,  that  will  enter  into  the  controversy 
with  me  ?  I  will  challenge  anyone  to  prove 
me  a  wicked  dissembler).  Always  the  great 
burden  of  Job's  desire  to  have  his  case 
faii'ly  tried.    Tiie  result  and  evidence  of  his 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CBAl,   XYU. 


conscious  integrity.  The  most  painful 
part  of  his  suffering,  that  he  was  treated  as  a 
wicked  man,  and,  in  consequence  of  that 
treatment,  was  regarded  as  such  by  his 
friends.  A  good  man's  name  more  precious 
to  him  than  life.  The  cutting  taunt  of 
David's  enemies,  and  thos.e  of  David's  anti- 
type in  trouble,  where  is  now  thy  God  ?  (Ps. 
xlii.  10;  Matt,  xxvii.  41—43).  Christ 
esteemed  by  His  enemies,  **  stricken, 
smitten  by  God,  and  alflicled,"  as  a  man 
under  God's  dis])leasure,  and  suffering  for 
his  sins  (Is.  liii.  4).  For  the  consolation 
of  anxious  souls,  God  has  given  what  Job 
desired.  His  promise  and  His  oath  (Heb. 
vi.  17, 18).  These  given,  not  that  they  shall 
have  their  case  tried,  but  that,  on  accepting 
Christ  as  their  substitute  and  righteousness, 
they  shall  be  accepted  as  righteous  with 
God,  just  as  they  are.  God  Himself  a  surety 
to  such  that  no  evil  shall  befal  them  (Ps. 
cxix  122).  David's  comfort  that  God  had 
made  with  him  an  everlasting  covenant  (2 
Sam.  xxiii.  5).  Christ  provided  by  God  as 
the  surety  of  that  covenant  (Heb.  vii.  22). 
The  Divine  pledge  that  on  receiving  Him, 
no  good  thing  sjiall  be  witheld  from  us 
(Rom.  viii.  32).--The  reason  for  Job's 
request  (ver.  4)  "  For  thou  hast  hid  their 
heart  from  understanding  (withheld  from  his 
friends  the  wisdom  and  intelligence  necessary 
to  qualify  them  for  giving  a  right  judgment 
in  his  case,  or  to  make  them  successful 
parties  in  the  controversy)  ;  therefore  slialt 
thou  not  exalt  them  "  (as  righteous  judges, 
or  as  those  who  have  had  the  better  in  the 
case).  A  two- fold  ground  of  Job's  request 
for  a  fair  trial  of  his  case  by  God  Himself — 
(1)  The  incapacity  of  his  friends  to  judge  in 
the  matter;  (2)  His  consciousness  of 
his  innocence,  and  that  in  the  con- 
troversy he  will  gain  the  cause. 
Job  called  to  wage  a  double  controversy — 
(1)  As  against  God,  in  His  f)p})eaiing  to 
afflict  him  as  a  wielded  man ;  (2)  As  against 
liis  friends,  in  their  charo^in":  him  with  beins: 
such 

Observe — 

1.  The  highest  "understanding"  to 
judge  correctly  between  right  and  wrong  in 
principle  and  conduct,  and  rightly  to  inter- 
pret God's  dealings  and  dispensations  with 
men.  No  understanding  as  to  moral  and 
spiritual  subjects,  but  as  the  gift  of  God. 
With  God  either  to  give  or  witlihold  tliis 
understanding  (Matt.  xi.  25).  A  measure 
of  it  given  to  all  men  (John  i.  9).  That 
measure  capable  of  being  increased  or  di- 
minished. The  increase  or  diminution  ac- 
cording to  the  improvement  made  of  it, 
and  the  means  employed  for  increasing  it. 
"To  him  that  hath,"  &c.  "He  that 
walketh  with  wise  men    shall    be   wise." 


— The  want  of  a  clear  and  correct  moral 
judgment  the  consequence  of  sin.  A 
djm  perception  and  unsound  judgment  in 
moral  and  spiritual  things  one  of  the  na- 
tural, as  well  as  judicial,  effects  of  trans- 
gression. The  most  upright,  not  the  most 
learned,  the  most  capable  of  forming  a  cor- 
rect judgment  0[i  great  moral  questions. 
The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that 
fear  him.  "A  good  understanding  have  all 
they  that  keep  thy  testimonies." 

2.  The  true  "exaltation"  that  which 
comes  from  God  (Ps.  Ixxv.  5 — 7 ;  Dan.  iv. 
37).  The  possession  and  exercise  of  a 
sound  moral  judgment  the  ground  of  exalta- 
tion with  God  as  of  commendation  with 
men  (Prov.  xii.  8).  Prejudice  and  par- 
tiality in  judging  of  an  individual's  state 
and  character  a  serious  ground  of  Divine 
displeasure.  Harsh  and  uncharitable  judg- 
ment of  and  conduct  towards  a  faithful 
and  suffering  servant  of  His  the  object  of 
His  disapprobation.  Hence — (1)  The  fre- 
quent denunciations  in  tlie  Psalms  in  re- 
ference to  David's  enemies  and  persecutors; 

(2)  The  fearful  judgments  made  to  follow 
the  Jewish  nation  for  their  treatment  of 
God's  righteous  servant,  their  own  Messiah. 
Job's  friends  not  only  not  "exalted"  by 
God,  but  deeply  humbled  and  abased  by 
Him  in  the  end  (eh.  xlii.  7,  8).  The  enemies 
and  persecutors  ot  Christ  and  His  cause  ul- 
timately clothed  with  shame  (Ps.  cxxxii,  18), 
A  bad  cause  only  for  a  time  apparently  tri- 
umphant.    "  Magna  est  Veritas^''  &c. 

IV.  A  (leiiunciation  ag«ainst  trea* 
chcrous  and  unfaitliful  friends  (verse  5;. 

"  He  that  speaketh  flattery  to  his 
friends  (or  the  man  who  betrays  iiis  friends 
to  [become  a]  spoil  or  prey ;  who  deserts 
and  betrays  his  friends  from  selfish  con- 
siderations) the  eyes  of  his  children  sliall 
fail;"  his  sin  is  so  grievous  in  the 
sight  of  God  that  it  sliali  be  visited  not 
only  on  himself,  but  on  his  children.  The 
treacherous  and  unfaithful  conduct  of  Ji>b's 
friends  already  the  subject  of  his  sorrowful 
complaint  (ch.  vi.  15 — 27).  Observe — (1) 
Treacher  1/  and  nnfaithfuhieas  on  the  pari  of 
professed  friends  one  of  the  most  cutting 
trials  with  meriy  and  the  most  condemning 
sins  with  God.  These  concentrated 
in  the  conduct  of  Judas  Iscariot.  The 
frequent  com})laint  of  David,  and  the 
painful  experience  of  David's  antitype  iPs. 
xli.  9,  Iv.  12;  Johnxiii.  18).  ^2)  Some  sins 
more  heinous  in  themselres  and  more  disas- 
trous   in    their    consequences,  than    others. 

(3)  Sin  in  mayiy  cases  entails  its  consequences 
on  a  ma)i's  children  as  well  as  on  himself. 
Gehazi's  sin  followed  by  the  intliction  of 
Naaman's  leprosy  on  himself  and  his  pos- 

105 


CHAP.   XTO. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


\ 


terity  for  ever.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
virtuous  conduct  of  parents  entails  a  bless- 
ing on  their  offsprings.  So  the  faith  of 
Abraham,  the  zeal  of  Phinchas,  the  piety 
of  Obed-Edom.  In  the  text,  Job  retorts 
upon  l»is  friends  their  cruel  allusion  to  his 
children's  calamity  (ch.  v.  4;  viiii,  4;  xv. 
30j.  Not  only  speaks  according  to  the  Old 
Testament  platform,  but  announces  a 
general  law  m  God's  moral  government. 
The  consequences  of  parents'  sins  upon 
their  children  often  natural  and  in  the  ordi- 
nary course  of  Divine  Providence  j  at  the 
same  time  judicial,  whatever  may  be  the 
instrumentaUty  or  natural  causes. 

V.  Returns  to  his  own  distres'scd 
condition. 

His  sufferings  the  cause  of  the  suspicion 
resting  upon  his  character.     Mentions — 

1.  The  contempt  to  which  his  circum- 
stances exposed  him  (verse  6).  "  He  {i.e. 
God — frequently  spoken  of  without  being 
named)  hath  made  me  also  a  by- word  (or 
proverb)  of  the  people  ;  and  aforetime  I 
was  as  a  tabret "  (or,  "  and  I  am  become  an 
object  to  spit  before,"  or,  "  to  spit  at  in  the 
face").  Distressing  contrast.  Formerly 
the  object  of  universal  reverence  and  re- 
spect J  now  of  public  contempt  and  insult 
(ch.  XXX.  10).  To  spit  at  or  in  the  presence 
of  another  still  a  common  mode  of  showing 
contempt  among  the  Arabs.  IMahommedans 
often  thus  exhibit  their  contempt  of  Chris- 
tians. Trouble  greatly  aggravated  by  con- 
trast with  former  prosperity.  Contempt  a 
bitter  ingredient  in  a  noble-minded  man's 
cup  of  sorrow.  A  frequent  subject  of  com- 
plaint in  the  Psalms  (Ps.  xxii.  6,  7 ;  xxxv. 
15,  ]6i  Ixix.  7,  11,  12,  19;  cxxiii.  3,  4). 
The  experience  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows 
(Matt,  xxvii.  28,  29,  41—44;  Is.  liii.  3). 
Jesus,  like  Job,  spit  upon  by  the  rabble  (Is. 
1.  6 ;  Matt,  xxvi  67  ;  xxvii'.  30). 

2.  The  effect  of  grief  -upon  his  physical 
frame  (verse  7).  "  M  nie  eye  also  is  dim  by 
reason  of  sorrow,  and  all  my  members  (or 
features)  are  as  a  shadow."  The  eye 
dimmed  by  weeping  and  nervous  exhaustion. 
The  emaciation  consequent  on  protracted 
sorrow  still  more  common.  Grief  preys  on 
the  whole  frame.  Digestive  organs  retarded 
in  their  operation ;  nutrition  at  a  stand. 
Job's  case  (ch.  xix.  20).  David's  com- 
plaint (Ps.  xxii.  17).  So  the  projdiet  repre- 
senting the  Jewish  Church  in  its  trouble 
(Ps.  cii.  5 ;  Iiam.  iv.  8).  Job's  trouble  now 
of  some  continuance.  The  change  in  his 
appearance  already  such  as  to  render  him 
scarcely  recognizable  by  his  friends  (ch.  ii. 
12).  The  Man  of  Sorrows,  when  little  above 
thirty,  spoken  of  as  "  not  yet  fifty  years  old  " 
(John  viii.  57).    Job  already  a  "  by-word," 

106 


or  proverb,  of  suffering  or  sorrow.  Pro- 
bably regarded  as  an  example  of  the  justice 
of  God  overtaking  a  secret  transgressor,  and 
of  the  sudden  overthrow  of  those  who  have 
made  themselves  rich.  Similar  experience 
of  David  as  a  type  of  the  Messiah  (Ps.  Ixix. 
11).  Job  now  for  thousands  of  years  a 
proverb  of  patience.  His  tears  already 
gems.  "Our  sorrow  the  inverted  image  of 
our  nobleness ;  perhaps,  also,  the  measure 
of  our  sympathy  "  \C!arlyle\  In  Job  three 
superlatives  combined — nobleness  of  mind 
and  cliaracter ;  trouble,  with  grief  as  its 
natural  effect ;  patience,  at  least  for  a  time, 
in  enduring  it. 

VI.  The  contemplated  effect  of  his 
sufferings  on  others. 

This  twofold— 

1.  The  encouragement  of  svffering  innO' 
cence  (ver.  8).  "  Upright  men  shall  be 
astonished  at  this  [so  aggravated  is  suffering 
in  an  innocent  man,  who  yet  maintains 
his  integrity  under  it] ;  and  the  innocent 
[encouraged  by  my  example]  shall  stir 
up  himself  against  the  hypocrite  (or 
ungodly  man)."  Probably  contemplates 
the  effect,  not  merely  of  his  suffering, 
but  of  the  future  public  vindication 
of  his  character,  at  times  confidently  an- 
ticipated (ch.  xix.  25  —  29  5  xxiii.  10). 
Hence,  another  reason  for  wishing  a  speedy 
decision  of  his  case.  Job's  experience  an 
encouragement  to  all  suffering  behevers — 
(1)  Not  to  be  surprised  if  overtaken  by 
signal  afihction.  God's  dealings  with  His 
people  often  dark  and  mysterious.  Suffer- 
mg  saints  Asaph's  perplexity  (Ps.  Ixxiii. 
10 — 15).  (2)  Not  to  wonder  if  subjected 
to  misapprehension  and  suspicion  even  with 
good  men.  Job's  antitype  also  an  object  of 
astonishment  on  account  of  unparalleled 
sufferings  borne  with  unparalleled  patience 
(Is.  lii.  14 ;  hii.  7)  The  support  given  to 
believers  under  suffering  often  an  astonish- 
ment to  themselves,  as  well  as  admiration  to 
others.  Astonishing  trials  bring  astonishing 
consolations  and  deliverances,     llie  antici- 

{)ated  result  of  Job's  sufferings  realized  as 
ong  as  there  shall  be  suffering  believers  in 
the  world.  The  encouragement  of  such 
one  great  object  of  the  book.  Job  read  by 
the  early  Church  every  year  in  Passion- 
week.  The  subject  of  frequent  meditation 
with  the  Man  of  Sorrows — Job's  great  anti- 
type. One  means  of  building  up  his  man- 
hood and  preparing  him  for  patient  suffer- 
ing. Job  the  example  of  suffering  patience 
especially  for  the  Old  Testament  Church, 
as  Jesus  is  for  the  New  (Heb.  xii.  2,  3. 
As  the  result  of  Job's  sufferings,  the  pious 
should  ''stir  up  himself"  against  the  profane, 
however    prosperous    in  this  world;  not 


HOMILETIC  COMMMTARr:  JOB. 


CHAP.  xvn. 


against  their  persons,  but  tlieir  principles 
and  practice.  Saints  to  love  the  sinner  but 
to  hate  and  oppose  his  sin.  Observe — (1) 
The  duty  of  believers  to  stir  themselves  up 
(Is.  Ixiv.  7).  Godliness  requires  energy  and 
zeal  for  its  maintenance  and  practice.  This 
especially  in  times  of  persecution,  of  gene- 
ral backsliding  and  apostacj,  or  of  prevailing 
lukewarniness  and  worldliness.  No  ^mall 
matter  to  hold  on  against  prospeious  ungod- 
liness. (2)  The  effect  of  God's  providenfial 
dealim/s  with  Ills  church  and  people  often 
very  different  from  what  is  and  mif/ht  be  ex- 
pected. God  makes  both  tlie  wrath  of  man 
and  the  sufferings  of  the  saints — even  their 
sins — to  praise  Plim.  The  blood  of  the 
martyrs  the  seed  of  the  Church.  Hoi)efurs 
convers'on  due  to  Faithful's  martyrdom. 
i^Z)  A  mark  of  sincerity  to  take  part  with 
suffering  piety.  The  case  of  Nicodeaius 
and  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  Relievers  at 
Rome  waxed  confident  through  Paul's  bonds 
(Phil.  i.  14). 

2.  Encouraf/ement  to  perseverance  in  Godli- 
ness (verse  9).  "The  righteous  also  sh.ill 
hold  (or  take  firm  hold)  on  his  way,  and  he 
that  is  of  clean  hands  shall  be  stronger  and 
stronger."  The  example  of  perseverance  in 
one  an  important  means  of  promoting  it  in 
others.  God's  wisdom  and  kindness  in  pro- 
viding such  an  exam})le  as  Job  at  so  early  a 
period  of  the  world.  Men  more  influenced 
by  example  than  abstract  reasoning  or  simple 
precept.  The  value  of  bioi^raphy.  Hence  the 
large  proportion  of  the  Bible  occu])ied  with 
the  life  and  history  of  individuals.  Patient 
suffering  a  powerful  sermon. 

Perseverance  in  Holiness 

The  great  duty  of  believers.  Not  without 
strenuous  effort.  Much  to  discourage  and 
oppose.  The  current  of  the  world  and  the 
flesh  to  swim  against.  Principalities  and 
powers  to  be  resisted.  ISIany  adversaries. 
The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  written  to 
strengthen  believers  to  hold  on  their  way. 
Perseverance  tiie  test  of  sincerity  (1  John, 
ii.  19).  _  "The  path  of  the  just  as  the  shining 
light,  shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect 
day."  Promised  to  believers  (Phil.  i.  6). 
The  source  of  it,  the  power  of  God ;  the 
means,  faith  (1  Pet.  i.  5).  God's  printing 
done  with  fast  colours.  God  ai)le  to  keep 
His  people,  and  as  willing  as  He  is  able. 
Christ  both  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our 
faith.  Believers  not  of  them  that  draw  back 
unto  perdition  (Heb.  x.  39  ;  xii.  2). 

The  godly,  from  Job's  sufferings,  not  oidy 
to  hold  on  their  way,  but  to  I  ecome  "stronger 
and  stronger"  (Heb.,  "add  strength''). 
Not  only  perseverance  the  duty  and  mark  of 
believers,  but 


Growth, 

Growth  in  holiness  God*s  will  — "Grow 
in  grace.'*  Provision  made  for  it — "He 
giveth  more  grace."  The  object  of  Christ's 
advent  that  we  "  might  have  life,  and  have  it 
more  abundantly."  Believers  to  be  adding 
— "add  to  your  faith  virtue  or  courage, 
&c."  "  From  strength  to  strength."  Must 
either  advance  or  retrograde.  The  cha- 
racter of  those  wdio  grow— "He  that  is  of 
clean  hands."  Clean  hands  the  index  and 
result  of  a  clean  heart.  Hands  only  clean 
when  washed  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  cleans- 
ing. Growth  necessary.  New  strenj^th  for 
new  and  sorer  trials,  new  and  harder  duties, 
new  and  severer  battles  Means  of  growth 
— (1)  Waiting  on  the  Lord  in  prayer  and 
otherwise  (Is,  xl.  30,  31).  (2)  Converse 
with  the  word  of  God,  the  food  of  the  soul 
(1  Pet.  ii.  2).  (3)  Faith  in  Christ  as  our 
strength  and  life  (Heb,  xii.  2).  (4)  Fellow- 
ship with  God's  faithful  servants,  and 
especially  Christ  himself  (Prov.  xiii.  20). 
(5)  Contem[)lation  of  Christ's  glory.  His 
character,  and  His  cross  (2  Cor.  iii.  18). 
(t))  Exercise  and  improvement  of  the  grare 
already  given— "To  him  that  hath,  &c.'* 
(7)  Discipline  of  Divine  providence.  Strength 
of  religious  principle  heightened  by  suffering 
and  trial.  Tried  grace  is  growing  grace.  The 
more  Israel  were  afflicted  in  Egypt,  "the 
more  they  grew." 

Til.  Job's  dismission  of  his  friends 

(verse  10). 

"  But  as  for  you  all  (contrasting  them  with 
the  upright  innocfut  persons  just  mentioned), 
do  ye  return  and  come  now  (return  again, 
i.e.,  to  the  discussion — spoken  ironically; 
or,  return  and  depart,  i.e.,  to  your  own 
home)."  The  reason  of  this  dismission  of 
them  twofold : — 

1.  The  want  of  wisdom  they  had  manifested. 
"  For  I  do  not  find  one  wise  man  among 
you."  Want  of  capacity  shown  for  t  he  office 
they  had  undertaken.  Had  all  proved  them- 
selves "  miserable  comforters,"  "physicians 
of  no  value."  Had  either  nppH(d  bad  reme- 
dies or  misapplied  good  ones.  Observe — (1) 
Men  to  hold  an  office  no  longer  than  they  ex- 
Mint  capacity  for  it.  Preachers  listened  to 
only  as  long  as  they  are  able  to  produce 
"  words  of  truth  and  soberness."  (2)  Great 
pretension  to  wisdom  often  only  covers  the  want 
of  it.  Shallow  streauKs  make  greatest  sound. 
(3)  Wisdom  required  in  ministering  to  minds 
diseased.  "He  that  winnetli  souls,"  and  he 
that  rightly  comforts  mourners,  "  is  wise." 
A  "  wise  man,"  one  who  can  "  show  out  of 
a  good  conversation  (or  life)  his  works  with 
meekness  of  wisdom  "  (James  iii  13).  Two 
kinds  of  wisdom :  one,    "  earthly,   sensual, 

107 


CHAP.  xvn. 


EOMILETIC  COMUmTARY:  JOS. 


devilish  j "  the  other  "  from  above, — pure, 
peaceable,  gentle,  full  of  mercy  and  good 
fruits."  True  wisdom  is  to  know  the  truth 
and  do  it.  To  choose  right  ends,  and  seek 
them  by  right  means.  The  wise  man  one 
who — (i.)  Has  understanding  of  God  s  cha- 
racter and  ways,  and  is  able  to  interpret  tiiera 
to  others ;  (ii.)  "knows  both  time  and  judg- 
ment ;"  "  has  understanding  of  the  times ;" 
and  knows  what  both  himself  and  others 
oujjht  to  do,  and  does  it  j  (iii.)  Faithfully  and 
intelligently  aims  at  the  best  interests  of 
himself  and  his  fellow  men.  True  wisdom 
the  gift  of  God,  and  to  be  asked  in  believing 
prayer  (James  1.,  5,  6, 17  ;  iii.  17).  Christ 
made  wisdom  to  those  who  are  in  Him 
(1  Cor.  i.  30).  ^ 

2.  The  certainty  and  nearness  of  his  own 
death  which  contradicted  their  promises  of 
future  prosperiti/  (verse  2).  '*My  days 
(perhaps  his  happi/  ones)  are  past,  my  pur- 
poses are  broken  off,  even  the  thoughts 
{margin  '  possessions  * )  of  my  *  heart '  (the 
purposes  and  hopes  which  he  had  fondly 
cherished, — probably,  according  to  Job's 
character,  having  reference  more  to  the  wel- 
fare of  others  than  himself;  these  all  dashed 
to  the  ground  by  his  calamities  and  approach- 
ing death).  Observe — (1)  The  part  of  a  good 
man  to  form  plans  of  usefulness  for  his  fellow 
man  ;  (2)  Necessary  not  to  defer  the  execution 
of  such  plans.  Sickness,  trouble,  and  death 
may  intervene  to  prevent  their  accomplish- 
ment. "Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to 
do,  do  it  with  thy  might."  (Eccles.  ix.  10). 
Hence  the  folly  and  unreasonableness  of 
the  friends'  counsel  and  promises.  Their 
attempt  that  of  those  who  (verse  12)  "  change 
(or  make)  the  night  into  day "  (talking  of 
futuie  prosperity  in  such  dark  and  hopeless 
circumstances) ;  the  light  is  short  because  of 
darkness  (or,  they  make  *'  the  light  near  in 
the  very  presence  of  darkness," — talk  of 
light  when  there  is  only  darkness  and 
death ;  the  same  idea  repeated  according  to 
Hebrew  parallelism).  Like  that  in  the  Pro- 
verbs, under  another  figure, — "As  vinegar 
upon  nitre,  so  is  he  that  singeth  songs  to  a 
heavy  heart"  (Prov.  xxv.  20).  Words  in 
order  to  be  useful  must  be  spoken  in  season. 

Re-asserts  the  certainty  and  nearness  of 
his  end,  to  show  the  vanity  of  his  friends* 
counsel  (verse  13).  "If  I  wait  (indulge, 
hope,  or  expection),  the  grave  is  mine  house 
(the  only  home  I  can  look  for,  instead  of  the 
pleasant  and  prosperous  habitation  you 
hold  out  to  me) ;  "  I  have  made  my 
bed  in  darkness  "  (have  already  taken  pos- 
session of  the  tomb  as  my  abode,  by  spreading 
my  couch  in  its  darkness).  (Verse  14) — "  i 
have  said  to  corruption  (or  *  the  pit,'  i.e.^  of 
the  grave),  Thou  art  my  father  (as  being 
now  bethrothed  to  death,  and  so  made  a 
108 


member  of  his  family),  and  to  the  worm 
(that  preys  upon  the  lifeless  corpse — an  idea 
frequent  in  Arab  poetry),  Thou  art  my 
mother  and  sister"  (as  already  allied  to  these- 
pulohral household).  (Verse  15). — And  where 
IS  now  (or  where  is  then)  my  hope  (the 
hope  you  counsel  me  to  entertain) ;  as  for 
my  hope,  who  shall  see  it?"  (such  a  hope 
would  be  soon  quenched  in  death  without  any 
seeing  its  realization).  (Verse  16) — "They 
(or  it,  viz.,  my  hope)  shall  go  down  to  the 
bars  of  the  pit  (to  the  gates  or  chambers  of 
the  grave),  when  our  rest  together  is  in  the 
dust "  (or,  "  it  [or  we]  shall  lie  down  together 
in  the  dust,"  my  hopes  should  be  buried  with 
myself  in  the  grave).     Observe  . — 

1.  The  grave  viewed  hy  a  believer  with 
calmness  and  with  comfort.  To  such,  a  home 
or  resting  place,  where  "the  wicked  cease 
from  troubling  and  the  weary  are  at  rest." 
To  a  believer,  death  is  "of  all  pain  the 
period,  not  of  joy." 

"  Death  is  the  privilege  of  human  nature, 
And  life  without  it  were  not   worth  the 
taking." 

Relationship  with  the  grave (i.)of  ^nendearivg 
kind.  In  a  sense,  our  father,  mother,  and 
sister.  Contains  the  dust  of  some  of  our 
dearest  friends.  A  husband  or  a  wife,  a 
parent  or  a  child  j  these  give  the  grave  a 
m  regard  to  it.  Contains  the  bodies  of  a 
home-like  aspect,  and  inspire  a  home- feeling 
believer's  brethren  and  sisters,  while  heaven 
contains  their  spirits,  (ii.)  Of  a  humbling  kind. 
Man  himself  a  worm,  sprung  from  the  same 
ground.  Worms  the  companions  and  sharers 
of  his  final  resting  place.  Worms  his  future 
guests  who  shall  feed  upon  himself. 

2.  Man^s  duty  to  guard  against  delusion 
in  the  matter  of  his  hope.  Good  to  ask  with 
Job 

Wliat  is  my  hope  ? 

The  hope  of  many,  only  such  as  to  be 
buried  with  them  in  the  same  grave.  Such 
the  case  if  our  hope  is  only  of  an  earthly 
nature,  or  resting  on  a  false  foundation. 

**  Who  builds  on  less  than  an  immortal  base, 
Fond  as  he  seems,  condemns  his  joys   to 
death." 

Our  hope  may  be  either  a  cable  or  a  cobweb ; 
may  either  rest  on  solid  rock  or  yielding 
sand.  Ti;e  believer's  hope  is — (i.)  "a  good 
hope,"  as  having  [a)  a  good  object — the 
heavenly  inheritance;  {b)  a  ^oodi fou?idationt 
— Christ  himself  and  his  finished  work,  (ii.) 
A  "  lively  hope,"  as  one  that  shall  survive  the 
grave.  Havmg  Christ  "as  our  hope,'  we 
plant  our  foot  on  the  grave  and  sing  our 
paean  over  it :  O  grave  where  is  thy  victory  P 
0  death  where  is  thy  sting  P 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTAHY :  JOB. 


CHAP.  xvm. 


CHAPTEE  XYHL 

BILDAUS  SECOND  SPEECH, 


Bildad  the  bitterest  and  most  hostile  of 
tlie  three  friends.  No  speech  as  yet  so  in- 
solent and  provokinj?.  I'ull  of  fiery  scathing 
denunciation  against — the  wicked — intend- 
ing, of  course,  its  application  to  Job, 
without  even  the  exhortation  or  promise  to 
repentance, 

T.  His  introduction.  Contains  only 
angry  and  vehement  reproof.  Reproves 
Job — 

1.    For    his    loqiiaciiy    and    captiousness 
(verse  2).     "How  lon'o:  will  it  be  ere  ye 
make  an  end  of  words  (or  how  long  will  ye 
lay  snares  for  words  ?)  mark  {Heb.  '  under- 
stand/ i.e.,  consider,   viz.,  our  arguments; 
perhaps,  '  be  temperate,'  or  '  speak  clearly  '), 
and  afterwards  we  will  speak"  (or,  "that 
afterwards  we  may  speak").    Bildad's  lan- 
guage and  tone  not  only  passionate  but  con- 
temptuous.    " How  long  will  ye"  &c.,  in- 
stead of  "  thou:'    A  great  part  of  wisdom  is 
to  govern  one's  temper.     "A  fool's  wrath  is 
presently  known ;  but  a  wise   man  keepeth 
it  in  till  afterwards."     "  Better  is  he  that 
ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city." 
Yet  a  wise  man,  from  the  weakness  of  human 
nature,  may  allow  himself  to  be  surprised 
into  angry  and  contemptuous  words.     True 
wisdom    characterized     by     meekness    and 
gentleness— ''meekness  of   wisdom."     The 
tongue  and  temper  never  more  in  need  of  a 
bridle  than  in  a  controversy.     Easy  to  lose  a 
religious  spirit  in  a  religious  dispute.  Christ, 
incarnate  wisdom,  a  model  in  controversy — 
calm,  patient,  loving;   always    "meek  and 
lowly  ;"*_  reviled,    without     reviling    again. 
Bildad  impatient  of  Job's  reproof  and  de- 
preciatory remarks  in  reference  to  liis  and 
his  friends'  speeches,      llepresents    Job  as 
only  catching  at  words;  as  like  those  Jews 
who  "lay  in  wait  for  Jesus,  seeking  to  catch 
something  out  of  His  mouth,  and  to  entauule 
Him  in  His   talk"  Observe— (1)  Fa,ssw.^  is 
seldom  truthful.     (2)  Loss  of  temper  gcneralli/ 
proves  weakness  in  argument.     Consciousness 
of  truth  gives  calmness  in  dis[)ute.   To  bully 
an  opponent  is  to  confess  yourself  beaten. 
(3)  Patience  and  courtesy  always  due  to  an 
adcersary. 

2.  Tor  his  pride  and  contempt  (verse  3). 
"Wherefore  are  we  counted  as  beasts 
(ignorant  and  brutish),  and  reputed  vile  in 
your  sight  ?"  Too  much  ground  given  in 
Job's  language  for  Bildad's  reproof.  His 
spiiit  broken  by  trouble,  and  exasperated  by 


their  unfeeling,  unjust,  and  deceitful  con- 
duct, Job  had  treated  his  friends  with  too 
much  severity  and  contempt.  Bildad  par- 
ticularly stung  by  Job's  contemptuous  lan- 
guage in  ch.  xvii.  4,  10.  Observe— (1) 
*•  Grievous  words "  to  be  avoided,  as  always 
stirring  up  anger.  In  controversy,  hard 
things  apt  to  be  said,  and  to  be  made  harder 
than  they  are.  (2)  Man's  moral  as  well  as 
physical  \goodliness  as  the  flower  of  the  field.* 
Job  not  always  able  to  answer  with  the 
"meekness  of  wisdom,"  as  in  ch.  ii.  10. 

3.  YovhAs passion {y^v^Q  4i).  "Heteareth 
himself  (or,  'he  that  teareth  himself,*  or, 
'thou  that  tearest  thyself)  in  his  anger.'* 
Job  represented  as  a  raging  maniac.  Pro- 
bably too  much  foundation  for  the  remark. 
Anger,  according  to  a  heathen  sage,  a  short 
madness.  Job's  appearance  and  demeanour 
probably  that  of  a  man  not  only  deeply  dis- 
tressed but  greatly  excited.  "Oppression 
maketh  a  wise  man  mad."  Arabs  usually 
grave,  solemn,  unperturbed  ;  yet  capable  of 
great  excitement.  Held  highly  discreditable 
for  a  good  man  to  allow  himself  to  be  in  a 
passion.  Passion  always  injurious  to  the 
subject  of  it,  both  spiritually  and  physically. 
"He  teareth  himself  m  his  anger;"  Heb., 
"he  teareth  his  soui:*  Wrathful  disposi- 
tions, says  a  Greek  poet,  are  justly  most 
painful  to  the  parties  themselves.  "  Wrath 
killeth  the  foolish  man"  (ch.  v.  2). 

4.  For  his  self-conceit.  "  Shall  the  earth  be 
forsaken  for  ihee  ?  and  shall  the  rock  be  re- 
moved out  of  his  place?"  More  bitter 
words.  Cruel  and  unfeeling  as  addressed  to 
a  crushed  and  afflicted  man.  Proverbial  ex- 
pressions with  the  Arabs  in  reproving  piide 
and  arrogance.  Reference  to  Job's  wiaii  for 
a  trial  of  his  case  by  God,  and  his  complaint 
of  undue  severity.  Seemed  as  if  he  expected 
some  special  dispensation  in  his  favour.  The 
government  of  the  world  not  to  be  abandoned 
for  the  sake  of  any  individual's  concerns. 
The  Almighty  not  to  go  out  of  the  way  of 
his  usual  procedure  to  meet  any  man's  wishes. 
The  course  of  nature  and  the  principles  of 
the  Divine  government  not  to  be  arrested  for 
any  one's  special  accommodation.  For  any 
to  think  so  implies  vain  conceit  of  his  own 
inporiance.  Yet  Job's  wish  and  complaint 
excu  able.  His  circumstances  peculiar.  His 
tre anient  not  in  accordance  with  God's 
ordinary  procedure,  and  with  the  conscious- 
ness of  his  own  character.  Bildad's  ques- 
tions founded  in  ignorance.     Unnecessary 

109 


CttAl>.  xviii. 


BOMtLEflC  COMMENTAkY:  JOB. 


for  God  to  neglect  the  government  of  the 
universe,  or  contravene  the  course  of  nature, 
in  order  to  attend  to  the  concerns  of  an  in- 
dividual. Such  attention  a  part  of  that 
government.  The  fall  of  a  sparrow,  as  M'ell 
as  of  an  empire,included  in  God's  providence. 
Numbers  the  hairs  of  our  head  equally  with 
the  stars  of  the  firmanent.  Man,  in  igno- 
rance or  forgetfulness,  transfers  his  own  u  eak- 
ness  and  limitation  to  God's  Almightiness 
and  infinity.  The  Divine  government  based 
on  unchanging  principles.  Judgment  and 
justice  the  habitation  of  God's  throne. 
Impossible  and  unnecessary  to  depart  from 
these  principles  to  meet  any  particular  case. 
"  God  is  a  rock — His  work  is  perfect ;  a  God 
of  truth  and  without  iniquity."  God  Him- 
self, and  the  principles  of  His  government,  an 
immovable  rock.  His  own  unchangeable- 
ness,and  that  of  His  "  immortal  government," 
the  foundation  of  His  people's  confidence. 

II.  Body  of  the  Speech.    Describes  the 
experience  and  fate  of  the  wicked   (verse 

5—20). 

A  favourite  subject  with  these  wise  men 
in  their  dealing  with  Job.  The  object  to 
terrify  him  into  a  penitent  acknowledgment 
of  guilt  and  supplication  for  forgiveness. 
The  description  meant  to  depict  Job's  cir- 
cumstances, and  so  to  suggest,  if  not  prove, 
his  guilt.  This  and  those  similar  ones  in 
ch.  viii.  11 — 22,  and  ch.  xv.  20 — 25,  probably 
recitations  from  the  ancients,  or  the  produc- 
tions of  the  inspired  poet,  the  author  of  the 
book.  Extemporary  versification,  however,  a 
highly  valued  accomplishment  among  Arab 
poets  and  philosophers.  The  object  of  Satan 
in  these  horrifying  descriptions  to  irritate 
Job  to  cast  oflf  his  religion  in  despair,  as  of 
no  use  to  him.  The  class  described — that 
of  hardened  transgressors,  secret  or  open, 
who  had  enriched  themselves  by  oppression 
or  abused  their  power  to  the  injury  of  others 
—  men  who  neither  feared  God  nor  regarded 
men.  Job  notoriously  the  reverse.  Hence  the 
mystery.  The  solution,  according  to  the 
friends,  in  the  secret  iniquity  of  his  heart 
and  life.  Job  himself,  conscious  of  his  in- 
tegrity, perplexed  and  distressed,  and  long- 
ing for  a  Divine  explanation  which  should 
vindicate  his  character.  Hence  his  occa- 
sional excitement  and  apparently  extrava- 
gant language.  Had  to  fight  against  ap- 
pearances, manifest  facts,  and  popular  belief, 
or  to  confess  himself  a  bad  man.  His  out- 
ward and  inward  experience  seldom,  if  ever, 
found  except  in  notorious  transgressors. 
Probably  more  frequent  the^i  than  now. 
The  following  a  highly-wrought  picture,  full 
of  tragically  sublime  poetry.  One  image  of 
horror  followed  by  another  still  more  terrific. 
The  description  that  of  a  guilty  man  chased 
110 


by  the  avenging  justice  of  God — the  Furies 
of  the  Greeks.  The  elements  in  the  descrip- 
tion— 

1.  Great  reverse  in  circumstances  (verse  5). 
"Yea  (notwithstanding  your  complaint;  or 
*  also,"*  take  another  descri[)tion  of  the  fate 
of  the  ungodly),  the  light  of  the  wicked  shall 
be  put  out,  and  the  spark  (or  flame)  of  his 
fire  shall  not  shine."  Perhaps  more  than  a 
mere  figure  for  the  extinction  of  his  pros- 
perity and  affluence.  Probable  allusion  to 
the  practice  of  rich  Arabs  kindling,  towards 
evening,  a  fire  in  the  neighbourhood  of  their 
dwelling,  to  invite  and  direct  travellers  to 
their  hospitality.  Such  fires  the  glory  of  a 
wealthy  Arab.  Mark  of  the  deepest  adver- 
sity when  no  longer  sustained.  A  frequent 
allusion  in  Arab  poetry — 

"  Now  by  deepest  want  opprest ; 
Though  once  my  hospitable  light 
Was  blest  by  travellers  at  night." — 

Hckriri. 
Job's  fires  of  hospitality  also  now  extin- 
guished. (Verse  6). — "The  light  shall  be  dark 
in  liis  tabernacle,  and  his  candle  (or  lamp) 
shall  be  put  out  with  him  "  (or  ''over  him  ;" 
Arab  houses  and  tents  always  having  a 
lamp  burning  during  the  night,  that  of  the 
principal  apartment  hanging  from  the  ceiling 
or  from  the  centre  of  the  tent ;  hence  the 
lamp  a  figure  for  prosperity  and  happiness, 
its  extinction  indicating  utter  desolation). 
Death  and  misfortune  darken  the  dwelling. 
Job's  present  bitter  experience.  The  expe- 
rience of  most  at  times.  Only  Jehovah  him- 
self an  "  an  everlasting  light."  Is  so  to  His 
people,  even  in  the  midst  of  trouble.  "When 
I  sit  in  darkness  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light 
unto  me  "  (Mic,  vii.  8). 

2.  Removal  of  power  and  dignity  (verse  7). 
"The  steps  of  His  strength  (his  steps  formerly 
strong,  as  of  a  man  in  full  health,  prosperity, 
and  power)  slia'l  be  straitened"  (confined as 
of  a  man  in  chains  or  imprisonuK  nt,  or  suf- 
fering from  personal  affliction).  Image 
taken  from  a  noble  lion  caught  in  the  toils, 
and  now  lying  prostrate.  Picture  of  the 
contrast  between  Job's  former  and  present 
condition.  For  his  former  "  steps  "  see  ch. 
xxix.  0,  7.  Now  lying  on  an  ash-heap. 
Steps  of  strength  soon  changed  into  the 
feebleness  of  disease.  Plans  the  most  likely 
to  succeed,  of  ten,  in  Divine  providence,  im- 
peded and  rendered  abortive.  The  misfor- 
tune of  the  wicked  referred  to  their  own  sin 
as  the  cause.  "  His  o\vn  counsel  shall  ca^t 
i)im  down."  The  lion  caught  in  the  toil 
vviien  wandering  about  for  prey.  The 
wicked  "snared  in  the  work  of  their  own 
hands."  Pharaoh's  counsel  against  Israel 
his  own  destruction.  Cruel  thrust  at  J  oh  as 
a  secret  transgressor  now  caught  in  the 
rr.iast  of  his  ill  gotten  gains. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP,  xvm 


3.  Sudden  and  accumulated  calamity  (yersQ 
8).  "  He  is  cast  into  a  net  by  his  own  feet, 
(entanuled  with  his  feet  in  a  net) ;  he  walkcth 
upon  a  snare  (walks  unconsciousiy  into  a  pit 
fall).  The  iJ:in  (or  trap)  shall  take  him  by 
the  heel,  and  the  robber  shall  prevail  against 
him  (or,  'the  snare  lays  hold  upon  him,'  so 
that  he  is  unable  to  escape).  The  snare  (or 
cord)  is  laid  (or  hidden)  in  the  ground  for 
him,  and  a  trap  for  him  in  the  way.''  Ir^age 
of  a  wild  beast  caught  by  the  various  strata- 
gems of  the  hunter.  Men's  calamities, 
especially  those  of  the  impenitent  trans- 
gressor, often  sudden.  "  As  the  fishes  that 
are  taken  in  an  evil  net,  and  as  the  bit  ds 
that  are  caught  in  the  snare,  so  are  the  sons 
of  men  snared  in  an  evil  time  when  it  falleth 
suddenly  upon  them  (Eccles.  ix.  12 ;  see 
also  Luke  xxi.  34—35,  and  Thp^s.  v.  3). 
The  worst  troubles  those  which  come  un- 
foreseen. Job's  actual  circumstances.  Over- 
taken by  sudden  calamities  in  the  very  hey- 
day of  his  prosperity.  Variety  of  expression 
in  the  text  to  indicate  the  certainity  and 
terribleness  of  the  doom.  "  He  who  fleeth 
from  tlie  noise  of  the  fear  shall  fall  into  the 
pit,  and  he  that  cometh  up  out  of  the  midst 
of  the  pit  shall  be  taken  in  the  snare  "  (Is. 
xxiv.  17,  18). 

5.  hiward  terrors  (verse  11).  "Terrors 
shall  make  him  afraid  on  every  side,  and 
shall  drive  him  to  his  feet."  The  terrors  of 
an  awakened  and  alarmed  conscience  among 
the  consequences  of  persistent  sin.  Such 
terrors  known  in  every  land  as  overtaking 
the  secret  or  notorious  transgress(ns.  "Who 
intent  on  evil  ways  will  be  able  to  defend 
his  mind  against  the  darts  of  conscience  ?  " 
[Sophocles],  God's  scourge  in  tiie  sinner's 
own  bosom.  No  rest  or  peace  under  its 
lashes.  Attempts  made  to  escape  these 
"terrors,'*  but  in  vain.  All  flight  nieffectual 
except  flight  through  the  cross.  The  terrors 
of  conscience  only  quenciied  in  the  atoning 
blood  of  Christ.  Job  distressed  at  present 
by  the  "  terrors  of  God,"  but  not  those  of  an 
evil  conscience  (ch.  vi.  4). 

Q.  Dread/al disease  {verse  12,  13).  "His 
strength  shall  be  hunger-bitten  (famished  ; 
or,  'his  disease  shall  be  voracious'),  and  de- 
struction shall  be  ready  at  his  side  (or, '  pre- 
pared for  his  side,'  or  body, — ready  to  de- 
vour him).  It  shall  devour  the  strength  of 
his  skin  (the  firm  members  of  his  body);  even 
the  first-born  of  death  (one  of  the  most 
dreadful  of  mortal  diseases)  shall  devour  liis 
strength"  (or,  "prey  upon  his  powerful 
limbs.")  Disease,  with  its  feebleness  and 
emaciation,  personified  as  the  executioner  of 
Divine  vengeance — the  hungry  hound  of 
justice.  Disease  the  result  of  sin;  and  oil  en 
inflicted  as  a  chastisement  on  the  good  and 
a  punishment  on  the  bad.    Herod,  the  per- 


secutor, seized  and  devoured  by  one  of  these 
dogs  of  vengeance  in  the  midst  of  his  pride 
and  splendour  (Acts  xii.  21 — 23).  Job's 
terrible  disease  also,  a  "first-born  of 
death,"  to  all  appearance,  and  in  the  thought 
of  his  three  friends,  preying  on  him  as  a 
guilty  tran>gressor.  No  creature,  animate 
or  inanimate,  but  may  be  made  the  instru- 
ment of  Divine  just  ice  in  punishing  obstinate 
and  impenitent  offenders.  Creatures,  ani- 
mal or  vegetable,  invisible  to  the  naked  eye, 
often  the  oau^e  of  nn)st  dreadful  diseases. 
Cholera  and  the  plague  among  the  "first-born 
of  death." 

7.  (Jller  want  and  desolation  (verse  14, 
15).  "His  confidence  (whatever  he  trusted 
in — wealth,  power,  family)  shall  be  rooted 
out  of  his  tabernacle  (utterly,  violently,  and 
for  ever  removed,  as  a  tree  torn  up  by  the 
roots),  and  it  shall  bring  him  to  the  king  of 
terrors  (or,  *  terrors  like  a  king  shall  urge 
him  forward').  It  (the  terror  or  desola- 
tion) shall  dwell  in  his  tabernacle,  because 
it  is  none  of  his ;  brimstone  shall  be  scat- 
tered upon  his  habitation"  (as  that  of  a 
man  lying  under  Divine  wrath,  or  as  a  place 
doomed  to  a  {)erpetual  curse ;  made,  like  the 
Cities  of  the  Plain,  a  monument  of  Divine 
vengeance).  "The  rich  man's  wealth  is 
his  strong  city,  and  as  an  high  wall  in  his 
own  conceit  (Prov.  xviii.  11).  This  im- 
plied to  have  been  Job's  case.  Expressly 
denied,  however,  by  him  (ch.  xxxi.  24). 
Such  confidence  to  be  rooted  out,  as  his 
now  ai)pfared  to  be.  Chaldeans,  Sabeans, 
and  the  fire  of  God  had  left  only  a  single 
servant  to  carry  the  tale.  Terror  and  deso- 
lation, like  a  victorious  and  relentless 
general,  had  marched  him  out  of  his  strong 
city,  to  sit  like  a  captive  among  the  ashes. 
Observe — (1)  "  Riches  profit  not  in  the  da.y 
of  wrath."  A  man's  house  is  his  castle,  but 
is  unable  to  hold  out  against  the  judgments 
of  God.  Chaldeans  ana  Sabeans  only  God's 
instruments  in  stripping  a  man  of  his  ill- 
gotten  wealth,  and  sending  him  out  of  a  dwell- 
ing to  which  he  has  no  ju^t  right.  (2 j  Alas  lor 
him  of  whom  it  is  to  be  said :  "  Lo,  this  is  the 
man  that  made  not  God  his  strengtl),  but 
trusted  in  the  abundance  of  his  riches " 
(Ps.  Hi.  7).  The  lightning  that  strikes 
down  his  cattle  as  truly  God's  nn  ssenger 
as  the  brimstone  that  was  scattered  ou 
tl;e  houses  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha. 
(2  )  Death  emphaticady  a  "  king  of  terrors** 
to  the  impenitent.  The  terrors  of  death  only  to 
be  dissipated  by  faith  in  Llim  who  "  through 
death  destroyed  him  that  hud  the  pouir  of 
death,  that  is  the  devil;  and  delivered  them, 
who  through  fear  of  death,  weie  all  their 
lileiime  subject  to  bondage"  (lieb.ii.  14,  15). 

8.  Rniii  of fandlij  and  estate  {\'vv^e  iC  — 
19).     "  His  roots  shall  be  dried  up  beneath 

111 


cfiAj.  xvni. 


BOMILP.TIC  COMMEKTAUT:  JOB, 


(as  under  the  influence  of  a  mighty  curse), 
and  above  his  branch  shall  be  cut  off."  His 
property  and  family  alike  annihilated  by 
divine  judgments.  The  narrative  in  Chap,  i., 
a  mournful  commentary  on  this  verse.  Job's 
case  ap|)arently  the  doom  of  the  wicked; 
destroyed  "  root  and  branch  "  (Mai.  iv.  1). 
**  He  shall  be  driven  from  light  into  dark- 
ness (violently  driven  away  out  of  life  and 
luxury  into  death  and  despair),  and  chased 
out  of  the  world  (as  a  malefaetor  not  fit  to 
live).  He  shall  neither  have  son  nor  nephew 
(or  progeny)  among  his  people,  nor  any 
remaining  in  his  dwellings  (either  as  relations 
to  inherit  his  estate,  or  dependents  who  had 
been  supported  by  his  bounty).  His  remem- 
brance shall  perish  from  the  earth  (or  the 
land),  and  he  shall  have  no  name  in  the 
street "  (in  the  places  of  concourse  in  the 
city,  or  in  the  fields  anmng  shepherds  and 
husbandmen).  The  great  desire  among  the 
godless  rich  to  make  themselves  a  name,  and 
perpetuate  their  memory  and  their  family  in 
the  world.  *'They  call  their  lands  after 
their  own  names"  (Ps.  xlix.  1]).  But 
"the  memory  of  the  wicked  shall  rot." 
Oidy  the  righteous  are  worthy  to  be,  and 
shall  be,  "held  in  everlasting  remembrance." 
Job  formerly  the  greatest  man  in  the  1*  ast, 
and  h".s  praise  in  everybody's  mouth.  Now 
likely  soon  to  be  forgotten,  and  his  nnme 
never  to  be  mentioned  but  with  a  shudder. 
So  his  friends  thought.  But  Job  was  not  a 
wicked  man,  and  a  different  fate  awaited 
him.  His  patience  and  piety  have  dillused 
a  fragrance  throughout  the  world.  His 
name  one  of  the  brightest  constellations  in 
the  firmament  of  Holy  Scrij)ture. 

9.  An  asionisltmejit  and  horror  to  contem- 
'pories  and  'poster it y  (verse  20).  "They  that 
come  after  him  (succeeding  generations,  or 
'those in  western regions')sliall  be  astonished 
at  his  day  (his  history,  and  the  awful  fate 
that  overtook  him},  as  they  that  went  belbre 
(his  contempories,  or  'those  in  eastern 
regions'),  were  aflVighted."  Men  in  opposite 
quarters  of  the  world,  and  even  future 
general i(ms  should  be  struck  with  horror  at 
his  secret  or  open  wiekedness,  and  the 
terrible  doom  that  followed  it.  Suffieiently 
harrowing  to  poor  Job,  who  nsiglit  see  his 
present  experience  ponrfrayed  in  the  de- 
scription. His  calamities  already  a  matter 
of  astonishment  and  horror,  as  they  have 
been  in  ail  ages— (1)  Eor  then*  terriblencss 
and  extent ;  (2j  Their  unlikeliness  to  happen 
to  such  a  man;  (8)  Their  suddenness;  (4) 
The  rapidity  with  which  they  followed  each 
other ;  (5)  Their  singularity  and  unusual- 
ness ;  (6)  Their  contrast  with  his  former 
prosperity;  (7)  Tlie  mark  they  bore  of  the 
Divine  anger,  notwithstanding  his  pious  and 
upright  character.  Job  ah'eady  a  byword 
by  his  own  confession.    Awful  prospect  of 


what  would  be  the  case  hereafter,  nnlest 
God  vindicated  his  character  in  time.  Op- 
pression in  all  this  description  sufficient  to 
drive  a  wise  man  mad.  Obs(Tve — (i.)  Satan 
terribly  skilful  in  the  means  hv'5  employs  to 
allure  a  man  to  his  ruin,  or  goad  him  to 
despair,  (ii.)  Blessed  proof  of  the  reality 
of  religion,  that  Job,  notwithstanding  all 
this,  still  held  fast  his  integrity,  (iii.)  God's 
thoughts  in  regard  to  his  people  not  as 
man's  thoughts.  Job's  sufferings  have 
thrown  around  his  name  a  halo  of  imperish- 
able glory,  while  man  thought  they  would 
only  surround  it  with  horror. 

III.  Conclusion  of  the  speech. 

Bildad  clenches  the  terrible  description 
with  an  emphatic  application,  by  which  Job 
was  to  approp4uate  it  to  himself,  or  at  least 
to  take  warning  from  it.  "Surely  such  are 
the  dwellings  ot"  the  wicked,  and  this  is  the 
place  of  him  that  knoweth  not  God."  This 
with  Job's  desolate  dwelling  before  his  eyes  ! 
Not  always  true,  however,  in  this  life.  Bad 
men  not  always  hamited  with  terrors  and 
tracked  with  misfortunes  in  this  world.  All 
the  worse,  however,  if  the  vengeance  is 
deferred  to  another.  Awful  picture  pre- 
sented in  this  description,  of  the  experience 
awaiting  the  impenitent  transgressor  in  a 
future  slate.  The  New  Testament,  as  well 
as  the  Old,  declares  that  "God  is  not 
mocked ;  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth, 
that  shall  he  also  reap."  Righteous 
vengeance  to  overtake  all  that  "  know  not 
God,  and  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ."  To  sin  wilfully  after  receiv- 
ing the  knowled'jc  of  the  truth  is  to  bring 
down  a  fiery  indignation  which  shall  devour 
the  adversaries. 

Bildad's  vehemence,  however,  overshot  it- 
self. His  closing  sentence  such  as  unin- 
tentionally to  bring  consolation  rather  than 
despair.  Cons(  ience  could  whisper, — Thou 
art  not  the  man.  Job  neither  wicked  nor 
one  who  knew  not  God.  This  certain  to 
himself,  though  perhaps  more  than  doubtful 
to  his  vehement  assailant.  Observe: — (1) 
Certainty  as  to  our  character  and  standing 
needful  to  bear  up  against  Sutan^s  terrible 
blasts.  The  scathing  storm  of  B.klad's 
iiery  denunciations  keinly  felt,  but  Job 
conscious  he  was  a  child  and  servant  of  God. 
(2)  Blessed  to  be  able,  amidst  Satanic  huffet- 
i7ir/s,  still  to  cli?ig  to  God  as  a  Father.  (3) 
The  believer  safe  even  in  the  pelting  of  the 
most  pitiless  storm.  The  righteous  in  Christ 
is  an  *  everlasting  foundation,*  which  floods 
of  temf)tations  and  hellish  assaults  are  un- 
able to  sweep  away.  The  name  of  the  Lord 
is  a  strong  tower  ;  the  righteous  runneth 
into  it,  and  is  safe.  That  name  blessedly 
known  to  Job  (ch.  xix.  25).  Is  it  so  to  w 
reader  P 


EOMILETIC  COMMMTART:  JOB. 


CfiAP.  XIX. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


JOBS  REPLY.TOBILDAiyS  SECOND  SPEECH. 


This  chapter  the  crowning  part  of  the 
controversy.  Both  in  form  and  in  fact  the 
centre  of  tlie  whole  book.  Like  the  eighth 
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  the 
jewel  in  the  ring.  Job's  faith  soars  like  an 
eagle  through  clouds  and  tempests  into  the 
open  heaven,  and  gazes  for  a  few  moments 
on  the  sun.  Tiie  culmination  of  all 
the  preceding  conflict.  What  follows  of  a 
considerably  diiferent  character.  Job  after- 
wards descends  again  into  the  arena,  but 
mucli  more  tranquillised  in  spirit. 

1.  His  complaint  of  his  friends'  con- 
tinued reproaclies  and  unkind  treat- 
ment. 

^  Their  treatment  of  him  was— 1.  Distres- 
sing (verse  2).  »»How  long  will  ye  vex  my  soul, 
andbreak  me  in  pieces  (*  bruise  or  pound  me  as 
in  a  mortar ')  with  words  (unkind  and  re- 
proachful words,  or  with  speeches  and  recita- 
tions which  contain  only  words  instead  of 
arguments)  P"  The  bruising  of  Job's  sorrow- 
ful spirit  the  natural  effect  of  his  friends' 
speeches ;  especially  of  their  long-drawn  and 
highly-coloured  quotations  about  the  fate  of 
the  wicked.  Job  put  down  in  them  for  a 
wicked  man,  suffering  the  righteous  conse- 
quence of  his  sins,  and  threatened  with  still 
more  dreadful  ones.  Bruised  in  soul  by  his 
friends'  words,  as  in  body  by  Satan's  blows. 
His  internal  afflictions  thus  made  to  rival 
his  external  ones.  More  grievously  robbed 
by  his  friends  than  by  either  Chaldeans  or 
Sabeans.  Worse  to  be  robbed  of  our  peace 
and  good  name  than  of  our  property.  "  Who 
steals  my  purse  steals  trash."  The  experience 
of  David,  or  whoever  wrote  Psalm  cxix: 
"Bands  of  the  wicked  robbed  me"  (Ps. 
cxix.  61).  Reproach  the  bitterest  of  Christ's 
sufferings,  next  to  the  hiding  of  His  Father's 
face  (Ps.  Ixix.  20).  Job's  affliction  reaches 
its  heiglit  in  this  chapter,  as  also  his  faith 
and  his  consolation.  Observe— (1.)  Truth 
misapplied  as  mischeoious  as  error.  (2.)  A 
sin  not  to  soothe  a(jliction ;  a  still  greater 
one  to  agfjraoate  it.'  A  high  offence  iii  God's 
sight,  to  "  talk  to  the  grief  of  those  whom 
God  has  wounded"  (Ps.  Ixix.  26).  'J'he 
part  of  the  wicked,  to  "  help  forward  the 
affliction  "  of  God's  suffering  people  (Zech. 
i.  15). 

2.  Persistent  (verse  3).  "These  ten 
(many)  times  have  ye  reproaclied  me." 
Each  of  the  three  friends  had  now  attacked 
him,  and  two  of  them  a  second  time.    Their 

8 


speeclies  all  partaking  of  the  same  reproach- 
ful character  Tiieir  harshness  and  vehe- 
mence only  increased  as  they  advanced.  The 
complaint  of  David  as  typical  of  the  Messiah, 
"  Reproach  hath  broken  mine  heart"  (Ps.  Ixix. 
20). 

3.  Shameless.  **Ye  are  not  ashamed." 
A  sin  to  act  harshly  to  any ;  a  shame  to  act 
harshly  to  the  afflicted ;  still  more  shameful 
when  the  afflicted  one  is  a  friend.  An  ag- 
gravation of  any  sin  when  it  is  committed 
without  shame. 

4.  Their  treatment  was  cruel.  "  Ye  make 
yourselves  strange  to  me,"  margin^ 
"  harden  yourselves  against  me  " ;  or,  "  treat 
me  cruelly;  "  or,  "stun me  "  [with  your  re- 
proaches]. Unfeeling  conduct  towards  a 
friend  held  base  even  among  the  heathen. 
The  light  of  nature  teaches  that  "  he  who 
hath  friends,  must  show  himself  friendly." 
The  effect  of  false  religious  views, to  render 
men  cruel  and  unfeeling  towards  others. 
Religious  persecutions  especially  malignant. 
True  religion  a  religion  of  gentleness  and 
love.  The  more  of  it,  the  more  gentle  and 
loving.  The  more  of  a  false  religion,  the 
more  cruel  and  unfeeling.  Herod  put  one 
or  two  of  Christ's  disciples  to  death  because 
it  pleased  the  Jews :  Saul,  with  more  re- 
ligion, kept  "  breathing  out  threatenings  and 
slaughter  against  them"  (Acts  xii.  1 — 3; 
ix.  1). 

II.  He  wards  off  their  reproaches. 

Does  so  with  three  considerations — 

1.  That  he  suffers^  alone,  the  effect  of  his 
error^  if  he  has  committed  a7iy  (verse  4). 
"And  be  it  indeed  that  1  have  erred  ('gone 
astray'  from  God  and  His  coinmand- 
ments),  mine  error  (in  the  consequences  of 
it)  remaineth  with  myself."  SuJJicient  to  a 
man  to  suffer  the  effect  of  his  error,  without 
his  having  to  bear  the  additional  pain  of 
reprca:Ji.  The  rejn'oach  of  friends  often 
harder  to  bear  than  the  violence  of 
enemies. 

2.  That  his  offence,  if  committed,  was  an  un- 
comcious  one.  ^  *'  Mine  error."  Marked  dif- 
ference made  in  the  law  between  sins  com- 
mitted presumptuously  or  deliberately, and 
those  committed  in  error  or  ignorance. 
Job's  among  the  latter.  Such  found  in  the 
best.  "Who  can  understand  his  errors?" 
Yet  even  then  calling  for  humiliation,  and 
requirinG:  the  blood  of  atonement.  One  ob- 
ject of  aiilicLion  to  bring  sins  of  ignorance  to 

113 


C2AP.  XIX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMmTARY:  JOB, 


©ur  consciousness  in  order  to  their  confes- 
sion. Many,  perhaps  most,  of  our  sins,  like 
letters  written  with  invisible  ink  and  requir- 
ing the  fire  to  brins:  them  to  view;  or,  like 
the  characters  traced  with  phosphorus,  only 
made  visible  in  the  dark  chamber  of  trouble. 
Clransing  to  be  sought  *'from  secret  faults" 
(Ps.  xix.'  12). 

3.  T/iat  his  offlirfions  were  from  the  hand  of 
God  (verse  5).  ''  If,  indeed,  ye  will  magnify 
yourselves  against  me,  and  plead  against  me, 
my  re})roach  (make  my  calamities  which 
you  reproach  me  with  an  argument  to  prove 
my  guilt;  or,  prove  to  me  my  reproach, 
that  I  am  guilty  and  suffer  deservedly), 
know  now  (on  the  contrary,  or,  as  a  thing 
1  fully  admit,  but  which  ought  to  move  your 
pity),  that  God  hath  overthrown  me  (hath 
thrust  me  down  and  brought  me  low,  doing 
it  of  His  own  free  will  and  pleasure,  with- 
out reference  to  any  guilt  of  mine  as  the 
cause),  and  l)ath  compassed  me  with  His 
net  '*  (as  a  hunter  the  animal  that  he 
wishes  to  take).  Bildad  had  said  the  wicked 
are  entangled  in  a  net:  Job  admits  he  was 
taken  in  a  net;  but  that  net  was  God's. 
Observe: — (1.)  A  Godly  man  sees  and  ac- 
knotcl edges  God  in  his  troubles,  as  well  as  in  his 
triumphs.  In  the  Iriends'  view,  as  well  as 
Job's,  his  afflictions  from  God  ;  the  difference, 
that  in  theirs,  they  were  retributive  ;  in  his, 
arbitrary  and  mysterious.  This  pleailed  by  Job 
as  a  reason  for  their  pity  and  more  gem  le 
treatment.  Enough  for  God  to  lay  on  His 
hand,  without  man  adding  his  also. —  (2.) 
That  our  afflictions  are  from  God  may  be 
either  an  alleviation  or  an  aggravation.  An 
alleviation^  when  tliere  is  faith  in  His 
Fatherly  love ;  an  aggravation,  when  tliere 
is  only  appreiicr.sion  of  His  wrath.  1  he 
hand  of  a  loving  Tat  her  seen  in  our  trouble 
takes  away  its  sting;  the  apprehension 
of  His  auger  exas])erates  the  wound. 
— (3.)  Sin,  and  not  suffering,  in  itself  a 
** reproftchf^  Suffering  no  reproach,  but  as 
the  effect  of  sin.  *'  Sin,  a  reproach  to  any 
people." 

4  That  he  ran  obtain  no  redress  from  God 
(verse  7).  "Behold,  I  cry  out  of  wrong 
(of  violence  done  to  me  in  these  afflict  ions 
sent  without  any  guiltiness  as  the  rause), 
but  I  am  not  lieard:  I  cry  aloud  (from  in- 
tensity of  suffering  and  earnestness  to  be 
heard),  but  there  is  no  judgment  "  (no  impar- 
tial trial  afforded  of  my  case,  and  no  redress* 
of  my  wrongs).  One  of  the  hardest  things 
spoken  by  Job  in  regard  to  God  Seemed 
to  charge  God  foolishly.  Even  Moses,  the 
meekest  man  on  earth,  "spake  unadvisedly 
with  his  lips."  One  of  the  sayings  for  which 
Job  was  at  last  repioved  by  God,  and  for 
which  he  humbled  himself  in  dust  and  ashes. 
Yet  the  language  in  a  sense  true,  though 


both  rash  and  irreverent.  According  to 
God's  own  testimony.  Job  was  "destroyed 
withfiut  cause  "  (ch.  ii.  3).  Job  correct  as 
to  the  fact  itself  ;  not  correct  as  to  the  con- 
duct he  ascribes  to  God  in  the  matter.  God 
might  have,  as  He  actually  had,  the  holiest, 
kindest,  wisest,  best  reasons  for  treating, 
or  allowing  others  to  treat,  him  as  He  did. 
But  to  ascribe  wrong  or  violence  to  his 
Creator  was  only  the  suggestion  of  his  Ad. 
versary,  and  enouu'h  to  bring  Job,  as  it  did 
afterwards  bring  him,  to  the  dust.  Job's 
language  sinfully  presents  God  in  the  view 
of  the  unjust  judge  in  the  parable.  Observe 
— (I.)  God^s  oufward  dealings  not  alwuys 
the  crit  ri  n  of  His  character  or  His  heart. 
Seems  at  times  to  wink  at  the  sins  of  His 
enemies  and  to  disregard  the  cry  of  His 
friends.  May,  however,  bear  h)iig  with  His 
people,  but  in  the  end  will  avenge  tliem. 
Their  part  to  believe  this,  and  still  to  cry 
and  wait  on  (Luke  xviii.  I — 8)  (2.)  God's 
silence  to  His  people's  cry  ofie  'f  their  greatest 
trials.  Experienced  by  David  and  by  David's 
Antitype  (Ps.  xxii.  1,  2). 

III.  Enlarges  on  God's  severe  treat- 
ment of  him  (verse  8 — 19'.     Specifies — 

1.  His  bringing  him  info  itiextricable  straits 
(verse  8).  "He  hath  fenced  up  my  way 
that  I  cannot  pass,  and  he  hath  set  darkness 
in  my  paths."  Describes  his  troubles — (1) 
Externally;  as  of  the  nature  of  an  impassable 
fence.  By  the  character  of  his  disease,  ex- 
eluded  from  society  and  confined  to  his  ash- 
heap.  His  disease  an  incurable  one.  All 
his  troubles  apparently  irremediable.  (2) 
Internally  ;  his  mind  full  of  darkness  and 
confusion.  Saw  no  way  of  escape.  Acknow- 
ledges that  "the  steps  of  his  strength"  were 
"  St)  atened,"  but  straitened  by  God,  for 
what  cause  he  knew  not.  Observe — One 
usual  way  in  which  God  afflicts  and  tries  His 
peopL-  is  to  bring  them  into  straits,  out  of 
which  they  can  find  no  escape.  Hedn:es  up 
their  way  that  they  cannot  find  their  paths 
(Hos.  ii.  6;  Lam.  iii.  7;  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  8). 
Thus  shuts  them  up  to  Plimself — (i.)  to 
humble  submission  to  Him ;  (ii.)  to  entire 
depencience  upon  Him. 

2.  His  so  deeply  humbling  and  abasing  him 
(verse  9).  "  He  has  stripped  me  of  my  glory, 
and  taken  the  crown  from  my  head.'*  Similar 
complaint  in  ch.  xvi.  15.  '1  he  change  in  his 
circumstances  here  ascribed  directly  to  God. 
The  Chaldeans  and  Sabeans,  the  fire  and  the 
whirlwind,  and  finally,  the  loathsome  leprosy 
itself,  only  God's  instruments.  Observe — • 
(1)  The  part  of  faith  and  piety,  to  view  all 
our  adversities,  whatever  the  ins fru 'nerds,  as 
coming  from  God  himself  (Ps.  Ixvi.  11,  12; 
Ixxi.  20).  (2)  All  earthly  '\glory"  such  as  a 
man  can  be  stripjped  of  by  Divine  ProvidencCt'^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMEmARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XIX. 


children,  friends,  wealth,  fame,  influence,  rank. 
That  only  the  true  "glory"  of  which  a  man 
cannot  be  stripped,  even  by  death  itself.  God 
himself  the  believer's  unfading  glory  (Isaiah 
Ix.  19).  (3)  The  brightest  ear t lit t^  crown  such 
as  maj/,  like  Job's,  be  SH<ldenly  laid  in  the  dust, 
T!ie  j)()oicst  believer  the  heir  of  "a  crown 
that  fudeth  not  away"  (1  Pet.  v.  4)  A 
man's  crown,  whatever  is  his  ornament  and 
honour.  Por  Job's  earthly  crown,  read  ch, 
xxix. 

3.  His  tdterly  extirpating  him  and  blighting 
his  hopes  (verse  10).  "  He  hath  destroyed 
me  ('plucked  me  up*)  on  every  side,  and  I 
am  gone ;  and  mine  hope  he  hath  removed 
hke  a  tree."  The  figure  that  of  a  tree 
thoroughly  torn  up  by  the  roots.  Job's  case, 
both  in  regard  to  person  and  progeny,  pro- 
perly and  position.  All  his  expectation  of 
comfort,  prosperity,  and  usefulness  hopelessly 
blasted.  For  his  hope,  sec  chap.  xxix.  18. 
The  frustration  of  his  hopes,  a  part  of  his 
trial  (chap.  xiv.  19  ;  xvii.  11).  Hard  to  give 
up  our  hopes  and  see  our  expectations 
blasted.  All  earthly  hopes  liable  to  dis- 
appointment. Joh's  previous  condition  and 
character  such  as  might  warrant  such  hopes, 
if  any  could. 

4.  His  treating  him  as  an  enemy  (verse  11). 
"  He  hath  also  kindled  his  wratli  against  me, 
and  he  counteth  me  unto  him  as  one  of  his 
enemies."  Job  had  lived,  like  Abraham,  as 
the  "  friend  of  God ; "  had  experienced  his 
friendship  and  familiarity  (chap.  xxix.  4,  5) ; 
had,  like  Enoch,  "  walked  with  God,"  and 
souglit  to  please  Him  (chap.  vi.  10).  In- 
tensely trying  to  oe  now  treated  by  Him  as 
an  enemy  (chap.  xiii.  24).  Yet  God's  secret 
testimony  of  him  :  "My  servant  Job."  The 
same  borne  openly  at  the  close  of  the  trial. 
Observe — (1)  Love  and  haired,  on  the  part  of 
God,  and  His  estimate  of  individuals, not  known 
from  Ills  dealings  with  men  in  this  world 
(Eccles.  ix.  1).  (2)  Apprehended  wrath  on  the 
part  of  God,  the  believer's  greatest  trial. 

5.  His  appearing  to  employ  His  creatures 
for  his  destruction  (verse  12).  "His  troops 
(His  creatures  whom  He  employs  as  a  general 
does  his  troops)  come  together  (as  if  sum- 
moned from  different  quarters  to  the  siege), 
and  raise  up  their  way  against  me,  and  en- 
camp round  abowt  my  tabernacle."  The 
Sabeans  and  Chaldeans,  lightning  and  whirl- 
wind, hostile  friends  and  neighbours,  good 
and  bad  angels,  all  viewed  as  God's  armies, 
employed  by  Him  for  his  destruction.  All 
nature,  animate  and  inanimate,  rational  and 
irrational,  visible  and  invisible,  capable  of 
being  employed  as  His  forces,  either  for  mercy 
or  judgment.  The  Roman  troops  besieoing 
Jerusalem  spoken  of  as  God's  armies  (Mat  1°. 
xxii.  7).  So  tlie  swarms  of  locusts  devastat- 
ing Judaea  (Joel  ii.  25).    Creation  but  «*a 

8—3 


reservoir  of  means"  made  ready  for  the 
Creator's  use.  Man  being  in  rebellion  against 
God, 

"  The  very  elements,  though  each  be  meant 
The  minister  of  man  to  serve  his  wants, 
Conspire  against  him." 

Holy  angels  especially  God's  troo[)s  (Ps. 
ciii.^21).  These  pitch  their  tent  around 
God's  servants  for  their  protection  (Fs.  xxxiv. 
7;  xci.  10,  11).  Appeared  now  to  do  so 
around  Job's  tabernacle  for  his  destruction. 
"  Bliiid  unbelief  is  sure  to  err,"  &c.  Job's 
affliction  now  apparently  chronic.  The  minis- 
ters of  destruction  had  not  only  raised  up 
their  way,  as  troops  advancing  to  the  siege, 
but  had  sat  down  around  the  beleaguered 
fortress. 

6.  His  alienating  from   him  his  friends y 
domestics,  and  others  (verses  13 — 15).     "He 
hath  put  my  brethren  far  from  me,  and  mine 
acquaintance  are  verily  estranged  from  me. 
Uj  kinsfolk  have  failed  (ceased  from  their 
kind  offices  as  such),  and  my  familiar  friends 
have  forgotten  me      They  that  dwell  in  my 
house  (servants  and  dependents,  or  stranners 
partiiking,  according  to  Arab  custom,  of  his 
hospitality  and  protection,  ch.  xxxi.  17,  18), 
and  my  maids  (from  whose  sex  more  tender- 
ness and  respect  might  have  been  expected) 
count  me  for  a  stranger.     I  am  an  alien  in 
their  sight,''— instead  of  being  regarded  as 
the  master  in  my  own  dwelling.     A  painful 
aggravation  of  adversity  and  affliction  when 
relations  are  more  kin  than  kind.     Job  en- 
larges  on  this   distresMug    change    in    his 
domestic  and  social  relations  (verse  ]6).  "I 
called  my  servant  and  he  gave  me  no  answer 
(thus  treating  me  not  only  with  disrespect 
but  contempt) :  I  entreated  him  (instead  of 
commanding  him,   as   a   master)   with    my 
mouth"  (with  my  own  mouth   instead  of 
another's,  or  with  a  loud  call  instead  of  a 
mere  whisper ;  or  rather,  instead  of  summon- 
ing him  with  my  hands,— servants  in  the  liast 
being  summoned,  not  by  the  voice,  but  by 
clapping  the  hands).     A  still  greater  trial, 
however,  than  this  humiliation  in  his  own 
house,  was  his  (verse  17).     *'My  breath  (or 
my  spirit)  is  strange  (odious  and  disgusting) 
to  my  wife  (causing  her  to  withdraw'from  ail 
nearness  to  me  and  intercourse   with  me), 
though  I  entreated  for  the  children's  sake 
of  mine  own  body"  (or,  'and  I  stink  in  the 
nostrils  of  the  children  of  my  womb ;  i.e.  of 
the  womb  that  bare  me,  viz.  my  own  brothers 
and  sifters;  or  the  children  of  my  own  body 
—  cither  grandchildren,  or  the   children  of 
concubines;    or,  *my    praver   is   loathsome 
to  the  children,'  &c.).     The    contemptuous 
treatment  extended  beyond  his  own  house 
(verse  18).     "Yea,  young  ciiildren  (possibly 
those  of  his  slaves  or  domestics,  or  according 

U5 


CEAf .  XEL. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB, 


to  margiuy  'the  wicked,*  the  idle  rabble, 
drawn  from  curiosity  to  such  a  spectacle  of 
misfortune  and  disease)  despise  me;  I  arose 
(or  *  1  rise*  or  'stand  up*  to  speak,  treating 
them  with  courtesy  and  respect,  or  command- 
ing; them  away),  and  they  spake  against  me.** 
Sad  contrast  with  his  former  treatment 
(cliap.  xxix.  8—10,  21—23).  One  of  tlie 
greatest  indignities  in  the  East  to  be  treated 
by  young  persons  and  inferiors  with  dis- 
respect. Deference  to  seniors  and  superiors 
a  prominent  feature  in  Oriental  manners. 
— Verse  19'All  my  inward  friends  {Eeb.^\\\Q 
men  of  my  secret,'  my  most  intimate  and 
confidential  friends)  abhorred  me ;  and  they 
whom  I  loved  are  turned  against  me."  Job's 
treatment  by  his  three  friends  a  specimeu  of 
this  part  of  his  affliction,  and  probably  now 
alluded  to.  Their  feeling,  instead  of  sym- 
pathy, one  of  abhorrence.  Their  abhorrence 
from — (1)  His  loaihsome  disease;  (2)  The 
appearance  of  his  being  treated  as  a  wicked 
man  and  a  hypocrite,  whom  Divine  justice 
was  only  now  overtaking  and  bringing  his 
secret  wickedness  to  liglit.  A  duty  suggested 
by  the  light  of  Nature  to  wi*^hdraw  from 
such.  This  treatment  one  of  J  )b's  keenest 
suil'eiings.  The  bitter  complaint  of  David 
and  of  David's  Antitype,  Messiah.  (Ps.  xli. 
9  ;  Iv.  13,  14,  20).  This  treatment,  like  his 
other  trials,  ascribed  by  the  patriarch  to  God. 
So  with  David — "  Lover  and  friend  hast  thou 
put  far  from  me  "  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  18  ;  xxxviii. 
1 1 ;  xxxi.  11).  "The  Lord  hath  said  imto  him, 
Curse  David"  (2  Sam.  xvi.  10).     Observe — 

1.  The  sinful  and  undiitiful  conduct  of 
men  to  be  ascribed  to  God  only  as  secretly 
permitted,  and  for  wise  and  holy  ends  pro- 
videntially appointed,  but  neither  as  com- 
manded nor  histigated  by  Ilim.  So  Joseph's 
treatment  by  his  brethreUj  and  the  Crucifixion 
of  Jesus  by  the  Jews. 

2.  The  bonds  of  affection  and  friendship 
in  God's  hands.  These  He  has  but:  to  h)Ose 
and  friends  turn  foes.  The  social  as  well  as 
phys  cal  system  under  His  control,  and  de- 
pendent on  His  will. 

3.  Satan  a  willing  and  powerful  agent  in 
producing  evil  as  soon  as  he  obtains  permis- 
sion. His  part  that  of  the  tale-bearer,  to 
"  separate  chief  friends,"  and  "  sow  discord 
among  brethren.'*  His  name  Diabolus,  or 
Devil,  "  the  slanderer,"  indicative  of  his 
character  and  employment. 

4.  Evil  latent  in  every  heart,  and  only  re- 
quiring the  removal  of  restraints  in  order  to 
its  breaking  forth.  These  restraints  m  God's 
hand,  who  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to 
praise  Him,  while  the  "remainder"  of  that 
wrath  He  restrains  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10). 

5.  Civil  and  domestic  concord,  and  the 
dutiful  conduct  of  subjects  and  inferiors, 
due  to  God's  overruUng  Providence.    The 

116 


sins  of  rulers  and  heads  of  families  often 
punished  by  the  removal  of  Providential 
restraints,  and  the  abandonment  of  the 
heart  of  subjects  and  children  to  its  own 
corruption.  Hence  insubordination,  aliena- 
tion, disobedience,  discord.  On  the  other 
hand,  "  when  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord, 
he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace 
with  him**  (Prov.  xvi.  7). 

6.  Job,  in  these  verses,  a  manifest  type  of 
God's  Riiihteous  Servant,  the  Messiah,  in  His 
last  sufferings.  (Read  Matthew  xxvi.  and 
xxvii.) 

IV.  Touching'  appeal  to  his  friends 

(verses  20-22). 

1.  Describes  his  reduced  condition  (verse 
20).  "My  bone  cleaveth  to  my  skin  and  to 
my  flesh  (or  *  as  to  my  flesh,* — his  flesh  gone, 
and  his  bones  adhering  to  and  appearing 
through  his  skin) ;  and  I  am  escaped  with 
the  skill  of  my  teeth  "  (with  only  the  skin 
about  the  teeth  and  gums  left  free  from 
ulcers, — proverbial  expression  denoting  ex- 
treme emaciation  ami  ))eril  of  life).  Saian 
goes  the  utmost  length  of  liis  permission 
(ch.  ii.  6).  Job's  emaciation  already  alluded 
to  (ch.  xvi.  8)  The  result  partly  of  his 
disease,  partly  of  liis  continued  grief.  Man's 
beauty  soon  made  to  consume  away  under 
God's  rebukes  (Ps.  xxxix.  11). 

2.  Ent reals  the  pity  of  his  friends  {vexsQ 
21).  "  Have  pity  upon  me,  have  pity  upon 
me,  0  ye  my  friends ;  for  the  hand  of  God 
hath  touched  me."  Job's  spirit  calmer  and 
more  humble.  The  heart  a  flinty  rock  that 
could  resist  his  appeal.  Yet  resisted  by  his 
friends.  Left  to  himself  man  has  "no  flesh 
in  bis  obdurate  heart.'*  Pity  no  less  his 
duty,  and  the  want  of  it  his  sin  (ch.  vi.  14). 
Job's  appeals  for  pity  on  the  ground — (1) 
Of  their  relation  to  him  as  his  "friends** 
Natural  for  a  man  in  trouble  to  cast  himself 
on  the  sympathy  of  his  friends.  Even  an 
enemy  will  pity  in  deep  distress.  A  brother 
born  for  adversity.  Men  bearing  the  name 
and  profession  of  friends  to  be  careful  to 
act  as  such  (Prov.  xviii.  2i).  Jesus  the 
"Eriend  of  sinners"  (Matt.  xi.  I'J) ;  a  Eriend 
that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother  (Prov. 
xviii.  21).  Appropriated  by  believers  as 
their  Eriend  ((iant.  v.  IG).  Touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  (Heb.  iv.  15). 
Precious  privilege  to  possess  a  true  and 
tried  friend.  Such  to  be  grappled  to  our 
soul  "with  hooks  of  steel.'* 

"  Poor  is  the  friendless  master  of  a  world ; 
A  world  in  purchase  for  a  friend  is  gain." 

(2)  On  the  ground  of  his  great  afliction, 
"  The  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me."  When 
God  smites,  man  should  pity,  not  reproach. 
The  heavier  the  blow,  the  more  tender  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  t  JOB. 


CHAP.  xn. 


sympathy.  Observe — All  Job's  afflidiom  but 
the  touch  of  God's  hand.  Tliat  touch  all  that 
Satan  craved.  Able  in  a  moment  to  turn 
our  joy  into  sorrow,  our  comeliness  into  cor- 
ruption. Can  in  a  few  days  strip  us  of  our 
property,  bereave  us  of  our  children,  alienate 
our  friends,  deprive  us  of  our  health,  and 
render  us  an  object  of  loathing  to  all  who 
see  us.  "A  fearful  tiling  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God." 
.  3.  Deprecates  their  severity  (verse  22). 
"Why  do  ye  persecute  me  as  God  (adding 
your  groundless  severity  to  His),  and  are  not 
satisfied  with  my  flesh"  (whichyouseemangled 
and  consumed,  but  will  add  your  rejiroaclies 
and  thus  lacerate  my  spirit  as  well).  Ap- 
peals to  conscience  and  humanity  as  well  as 
to  friendship  and  pity.  God's  apparent  se- 
verity towards  any  of  Ilis  creatures  no  reason 
for  man's  severity  to  his  suffering  fellow- 
creature.  In  all  circumstances  God  m.akcs 
humanity  man's  duty.  "To  love  mercy" 
one  of  the  three  grand  requirements  on  the 
part  of  man  (Micah  vi.  8).  Mercy  "twice 
blessed."  Neil  her  man's  sins  nor  God's 
strokes  intended  to  turn  the  "milk  of  human 
kindness  "  into  gall.  The  more  God  wounds 
in  His  Providence,  the  more  man's  duty  to 
heal  with  his  pity,  his  prayers,  and  if  need 
be,  his  purse.  Christ's  parable  of  the  Good 
^Samaritan  to  be  the  Christian's  practice  as 
it  was  Uis  own. 

V.  An  impassioned  wish  (verses  23,  24). 
"  O  that  my  words  were  now  written  !  Oh 
that  they  were  printed  in  d  book  (or  public 
register) !  That  they  were  graven  with  an 
iron  pen  and  lead  in  the  rock  for  ever!" 
Observe — 

1.  Reference  made  to  the  various  modes 
of  writing  then  practiced — (1)  On  linen  or 
papyrus ;  (2)  On  leaden  tablets  ;  (3)  On  rocks 
or  stone  pillars,  the  characters  formed  with 
an  iron  graver  and  filled  up  with  lead  for 
greater  preservation  and  distinctness.  Papy- 
rus rolls  still  exist  from  the  remotest  age  of 
the  Pharaohs.  Such  mode  of  writing  com- 
mon in  the  age  of  Cheops,  the  founder  of  the 
Great  Pyramid,  2000  years  before  Christ. 
Moutfaucon,  in  1699,  purchased  a  book  in 
Kome  entirely  of  lead.  Wady  Mokatteb, 
along  the  route  of  the  Israelites  in  the  Desert, 
full  of  inscriptions  cut  in  the  rocks.  At 
Hisn  Ghorab,  on  the  shores  of  South  Arabia, 
on  a  high  rock  terrace,  is  a  large  inscription 
of  ten  lines  in  Himyaritic  characters,  the 
letters  four  inches  long  by  one-third  of  an 
inch  broad,  and  one-tenth  deep,  cut  in 
notches,  and  having  apparently  been  "graven 
with  an  iron  pen."  The  inscription  is  made 
on  a  very  light  grey  or  lead-coloured  stone,  a 
vein  of  the  quarry  coming  out  on  the  face  of 
the  cliff.    It  is  as  follows:  "  We  believed  in 


the  miracle- mystery,  and  in  the  resurrection- 
mystery,  and  in  the  nostril -mystery."  The 
name  of  Aws  at  the  foot  of  the  inscription 
indicates  it  to  be  a  relic  of  the  long-lost 
tribe  of  Ad,  the  son  of  Aws  or  Uz,  the  son 
of  Aram  and  grandson  of  Sliein,  and  connects 
it  closely  with  the  country  in  which  Job 
lived. — {Sermons  in  Stones), 

2.  Reference  to  writing  as  already  well 
known.  Practised  long  anterior  to  tlie  time 
of  Moses.  Originally  in  hicroglvphies  ;  then 
in  letters  formed  from  these.'  'J'hree  kinds 
of  writing  practised  among  the  ancient 
Egyptians — tlie_  hieroglyphic,  the  hieratic 
(used  by  the  priests),  and  the  demotic,  used 
by  the  people.  Printing  originally  by  car- 
ving in  stone. ^  Printing  by  blocks"  long 
practised  in  China.  Printing  by  fypes  only 
invented  in  1440  a.d.  ;  the  art  begun  at 
Haarlem,  in  Holland,  and  perfected  at 
Mainz,  in  Germany.  The  first  printed  book, 
with  a  date,  a  Psalter  printed  by  John 
Faust  in  1457.  The  first  printed  Bible 
with  a  date,  produced  by  the  same  person, 
in  1460. 

3.  Job's  spirit  elevated  to  a  high  pitch  of 
sublimity  and  faith.  Looks  into  the  future 
with  calmness  and  triumph.  His  language 
that  of  conscious  integrity,  and  of  certainty 
as  to  his  ultimjite  vindication.  Desires  the 
perpetuation  of  his  words  to  all  generations. 
His  words  either  those  in  which  he  had 
already  declared  his  innocence,  or  those  in 
which  he  was  about  to  declare  the  certfiinty 
of  his  faith  in  his  Divine  Redeemer  and 
Vindicator.  Wished  to  tell  out  his  confi- 
dence  and  confession  of  Him,  without  the 
fear  of  having  a  single  word  to  efface. 

4.  Job's  wish  fulfilled  to  an  extent  un- 
dreamt of  at  the  time.  His  words  written 
in  the  imperishable  records  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture. Printed  by  the  British  and  Foreign 
Bible  Society  fifty  millions  of  times  in  more 
than  a  hundred  languages,  and  spread  over 
all  the  earth,  during  the  last  seventy  years. 
The  last  lans^uage  in  which  they  have*^been 
printed,  viz  ,  in  this  present  year  1875,  by  the 
Pilgrim-Mission  Printing  Press  at  St.  Chris- 
chona,  near  Bale,  is  the  Amharic,  the  modern 
Ethiopic  or  Abyssinian,  nearl.v  lelated  to  the 
language  which  Job  spoke.  The  Himyaritic, 
already  mentioned,  is  closely  allied  to  the 
Ethiopic  and  Hebrew ;  and  the  Amharic  has 
chiefly  helped  to  interpret  it.  May  conlain 
the  remains  of  the  lauL'uage  of  the  earlier 
races  of  Arabia,  as  the  Adites  and  Amalekites, 
and  is  considered  a  form  of  Arabic  which 
preceded  the  Ishmaelitic,  the  Ku fie,  and  of 
course  the  ordinary  Arabic  of  the  Koran. 
Hmyar,  from  whom  it  lias  its  name,  was  a 
grandson  of  Kahtan  or  Joktam  the  broiher 
of  Peleg;  and  from  hitn  were  all  the  princes 
descended  who  reigned  in  Yemen  or  Arabia 

117 


CHAP.    III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


Felix,  till  the  time  of  Mahomed.  His  father 
Yarab  is  said  to  have  been  the  inventor  of 
the  Arabic  language  and  the  progenitor  of 
all  the  Arabs  of  Yemen.  Abyssinia,  whose 
language  is  the  Amharic,  is  called  by  the 
natives  Habesh, or 'mixture/  from  the  united 
descendants  of  Shem  and  Ham  w)io  peopled 
it,  liam  having  probably  fl  d  at  once  from 
his  father's  presence  across  the  Desert  into 
Egypt,  iiis  posterity  multiplying  in  the  valley 
of  the  Nile  and  in  Abyssinia. 

All  our  words  graven  as  in  a  rock  for 
ever  as  a  testimony  either  fur  us  or  a^rainst 
us.  By  our  words,  as  well  as  by  our  deeds, 
we  shall  be  justified  or  condemned  at  the 
fijial  assize  (Matl.  xii.  36,  37  j  Jude  15). 

VI.  Job's  triumphant  testimony  and 
joyful  assurance  (verses  25—27).  "  For  I 

know  {Heb.  *  And,'— 'even,  or  also,  I  know/) 
that  my  lledeenier  liveih  (or,  'is  living,'  or 
•is  the  living  One '),  and  that  He  shalfstand 
at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth  (or,  that  He 
at  last,— hereatier,  or  as  the  last  One,— shall 
arise  upcmthe  dust  or  earth,— or  'shalt  stand 
over  the  dust,'  viz.,  my  dust,  or  the  dust  of 
the  grave,  or  mankind) ;  and  though  after 
my  skin  worms  destroy  this  body  (or,  'and 
afier    my    skin    shall     be    mangled    thus: 
or,    'even    this,'   pointing    to    it),    yet   in 
my    flesh    {Heb.    'out    of    my    flesh,'    i.e., 
as   my   habitation    or  point   of  vision,— or, 
'without  my    flesh,'  i.e.,  in  a  disembodied 
state)  shall  I  see  God;  whom  I  (emphatic, 
*Even  1  myself  shall  see  for  myself— to  my 
advantage,  on  my  side,  or  as  my  own),  and 
mine^  eyes  shall  behold  and  not  another  (or, 
'  not  estranged '  as  he  now  appears  to  be) ; 
though  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me  " 
{Heb.  "my    reins,— without   ' though'— v^vq 
consumed  in  my  bosom,"  viz.,  either  from 
disease,  or,  as  margin,  with  desire  for  that 
iay).      One   of  the   most   remarkable   and 
magnificent  passages  in  the  Bible.     Observe 
~(1)  the  solemnity  with  which  in  the  pre- 
vious verses  it  has  been  introduced ;  (2)  The 
place  which  it  holds   in   the  Book  as  the 
climax  in  Job's  speeches.     Job's  faith  here 
rises  to  its  loftiest    triumph.     The   words 
uttered    when,  to   outward  sense,    all   was 
cheerless   despair.     A  glorious  example  of 
Christian  faith.     Job's  faith  "  the  substance 
of  (or  what  gives  reality  to)  things  hoped 
for,  the  evidence  (or  certain  conviction)  of 
things  not   seen"  (Heb.  xi.  1).     Believes 
what  it  sees  not.     Hopes  even  against  hope, 
or  contrary  to  all   appearances  against   it. 
His  faith  and  hone  the  cordial  in  his  trouble. 
All  calumny  ana  suffering  easily  borne   in 
the  certain  possession  of  a  personal  Redeemer 
and  the  assured  hope  of  a  blessed  deliver- 
ance.     The  passage  early  incorporated  in  the 
Church's  burial  service,  as  the  expression  of 
US 


her  faith  and  hope  of  a  glorious  resurrectiou. 
The  opening  words — 

"1  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth," 

Among  the  most  memorable  sayings  of 
Scripture.  Worthy  to  be  written  in  gems 
and  gold.  Perhaps  more  familiar  to  Chris- 
tians than  any  other  text  either  in  the  Old 
or  New  Testament.  Repeated  over  the 
open  sepulchre  for  hundreds  of  years,  pro- 
claiming death  a  conquered  foe,  and  the  grave 
rifled  of  its  spoils.  A  cheering  and  joyous 
light  to  millions  in  the  dark  valley  of  trouble 
and  of  death  itself.  Job  amply  compensated 
for  all  his  suffering  in  being  made  thereby 
the  author  of  these  blessed  and  imperishable 
words.     Consider  under  the  passage — 

1.  The  assured  knowledge  which  Job  asserts: 
"  I  know."  The  language  of  absolute  cer- 
tainty. The  thing  no  mere  guess,  or  con- 
jecture,  or  vague  hope.  No  hesitation  or 
doubt  about  the  matter.  Known  by  Job  as 
certainly  as  that  the  sun  was  shining  in  the 
heavens.  His  faith  neither  to  be  shaken  by 
his  terrible  losses,  nor  his  wife's  reproaches, 
nor  his  friends'  suspicions  and  accusations. 
Like  the  life-boat,  which  buried  for  a  few 
moments  in  the  surging  billows,  comes  again 
to  the  surface.  Christian  faith  is  certain 
knowledge  (Rch.Ki.l). 

Job  glories  in  his  knowledge.  /  know. 
The  "I"  emphatic.  /,  who  am  so  reduced 
in  body  and  in  circumstances,  so  despised, 
so  wretched,  so  loathsome.  /,  who  am 
standing  on  the  very  brink  of  the  grave.  1 
know,  wliatever  you  may  do,  and  whatever 
your  unfavourable  opinion  concerning  me.  I 
know  it,  as  my  unspeakable  comfort  and  my 
glorious  privilege.  The  believer's  knowledge 
of  Christ  something  to  glory  in,  "I  know 
whom  I  have  believed." 

The  grounds  and  sources  of  this  assurance. 
Both  internal  and  external.     Internally — (1) 
Divine  enlightenment.     All  true  and  saving 
knowledge  of  God  as  our  Redeemer  the  re- 
sult of  Divine  teaching  (Is.  liv.  13).     "No 
man  knoweth  the  Son  but  the  Father ;  neither 
knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save  the  Son, 
and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal 
him/*      "Blessed    art    thou,   Simon    Bar- 
jonas ;  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed 
this  [knowledge  of  me]  unto  thee,  but  my 
Father  who  is  in  heaven."     "  It  pleased  God 
to  reveal  his  Son  in  me."     "  We  know  tha. 
the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us 
an  understanding,  that  we  may  know  him 
that  is  true"  (Matt.  xi.  27;  xvi.  17;  Gal.  i. 
15,  16;  1  John  iv.  20).     (2)  Previous  per- 
sonal  acquaintance  with  God,  experience  of 
His  grace,  and  habitual  walking  with  Him 
(lios.  vi.  3).— Externally:  (1)  The  original 
promise  iu  Eden.     That  promise  one  of  a 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XIX. 


Redeemer  who  should  avenge  on  the  serpent, 
the  devil,  the  injuries  he  had  inflicted  on  the 
human  race,  to  be  claimed  therefore  by  Job 
as  his  Redeemer.     This  promise  the  germ  of 
all   redemption  acts  and  offices  performed 
by  Jehovali  towards  mankind.    Handed  down 
from  father  to  son  and  extended  through  the 
world.     Eound  in  various  tribes  and  nations 
in  a  distorted  form.     Preserved  pure  in  the 
hne  of  Shera.     The  Fall  through  the  Serpent 
represented   on    the  temple    of    Osiris    at 
Phvle,  in  Upper  Egypt.     The  resurrection 
exhibited  on  the  tomb  of  Mycerinus  in  one 
of  the  Pyramids  four  thousand  years  ago. 
(2)  Enoch's  prophecy,  preserved  by  tradition 
and  quoted  by  Jude  in  his  epistle  (verses  14, 
15).     (3)  Enoch's  translation  to  heaven  be- 
fore the  Flood.     (4)   The   preservation  of 
Noah  and  his  family  in  the  Ark.     (5)  The 
continually  offered  sacrifices,  which  told  of  a 
Redeemer  who  by  death  should  destroy  him 
that  had  the  power  of  death  (Heb.  ii.   14). 
Observe— (1)  Job's  certainty  as  to  a  living 
Redeemer  in  that  early  age  more  than  2000 
years  before  his  appearance  on  the  earth,  a 
solemn   witness  against  all  unbelief  in  our 
own,  nearly  2000  years  after  it.     (2j  Job's 
happiness  and  comfort  in  the  knowledge  of 
a  personal  Redeemer  before  he  came,  rather 
to  be  exceeded  by  our  own  so  long  after  lie  has 
done  so.    (3)  The  sweetest  and  surest  know- 
ledf?e  of  God  as  in  Christ  our  own  gracious 
Redeemer  obtained,  in  the  time  of  trouble 
and  affliction.     A'  eventide  light. 

2.  The  conte7ii,  of  Job's  knowledge,  or  (he 
thing  asserted  to  be  known.     Has  reference — 
(] ).  To  God.    "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer 
hveth,"^  &c.     J  ^garding  God,  he  kn^w— 

(i.)  That  He  was  his  Redeemer.   Tie  name 
{Heb.  Goel),  ]  pplied— (a?)  To  the  kinsman, 
whose  duty  uuder  the  law,  was,  as   lext-of- 
kin,  to  redeem  a  captive  or  enslav  d  rela- 
tive ;  to  buy  back  his  sold  or  forfe  ted  in- 
heritance; to  marry  his  childless  widow  if 
unmarried  himself;  and  to  avenge  his  innocent 
blood.     The  institution  recognised  and  esta- 
blished in  the  Mosaic  law,  but  doubtless  in 
existence  long  before.   Still  existing  more  or 
less  in  the  East.    Like  others  under  the  law, 
typical  of  the  Messiah  and  His  redemption- 
work.     The  name  applied— (^)  To  God  as 
the  Redeemer  and  Deliverer  of  His  people, 
especially  of  Israel  from  Egyptian  bondage 
and  Babylonian  captivity.   Peculiarly  applied 
— -(c)  To  God  the  Son,  who,  as  the  promised 
Deliverer  of  the  human  race,  should  become 
incarnate  as  the  woman's  seed,  and  through 
His  own  death  bruise  the   Serpent's  head. 
The  name  not  expressly  applied  to  Him  in 
the  New  Testament,  but  the  thing   every 
where.     (See  Rom.  iii.  24 ;  Eph.  i.  7 ;  Gal. 
m.  13;  iv.  5;  Titus  ii.  14;  Heb.  ix.  12; 
Rev.  V.  9).    The  name  proper  to  a  kinsman. 


Under  the  law,  only  such  had  the  right  to 
redeem.     Pointed  to  tlie  fact  that  He  who 
was  to  be  man's  Redeemer  was  to  be  also 
his  Brother.    The  human  kinsmanship  of  the 
Divine  Hedeemer,  a  subject  of  express  pro- 
phecy:    "Awake,   0    sword,    against    my 
shepherd,  against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow'^ 
(Zech.  xiii.  7).   Such  kinmanship  ascribed  to 
Him  by  the  Apostle  as  necessary  for  His 
undertaking.     "Forasmuch  as  the  children 
were  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  like- 
wise himself  also  took  part  of  the  same,  that 
through  death  he  might  destroy  him   that 
had  the  power  of  death,  and  deliver  them," 
&c.  (Heb.  ii.  14).     God  the  Son  the  Author 
of  all  redeeming  acts  towards  Israel.     (Ps. 
Ixviii.  17, 18,  compared  with  Eph.  iv.  8—10). 
God  the  Son  regarded  by  Job  more  or 
less    distinctly   as    his    Redeemer,   in— («) 
Delivering   him   from    troubles   (so   Jacob, 
Gen.  xlviii.  16);    {b)  Vindicating  his  cha- 
racter  and  avenging  his  wrongs ;  [c)  Deliver- 
ing him   from   death  and  the  grave;    {d) 
Delivering  him  from  the  hand  of  the  great 
adversary,   the   devil.     His  words    uttered 
under  a  deep  sense  of  his  wants  and  neces- 
sities.    His   spirit   at  the  time   more   than 
ordinarily   elevated   and    illuminated.      His 
language,  perhaps,  primarily  referring  to  the 
divine  vindication  of  his  character,  but  ex- 
tending much  beyond  it.  Appears  to  triumph 
over  death  and  the  grave,  of  which  he  had 
the   nearest  prospect.      The  language  only 
understood  in  its  fullest  sense  in  ^t^  Testa- 
ment times.     Words  uttered  by  the  prophets 
with  a  meaning  not  fully  apprehended  at  the 
time  by  themselves  (1  Pet.  i.  10—12).     Re- 
demption the  term  most  generally  employed 
in  the   New  Testament  to   designate    the 
Saviour's  work.    Viewed  as  redemption  from 
the  curse  or  condemning  sentence   of  the 
Divine  law  (Gal.  iii.  13)  ;  the  power  of  Satan, 
who  had  acquired  a  right  over  us  through 
that  sentence  (Heb.  ii.  14) ;  death  and  hell, 
as  the  punishment  awarded  by  the  Divine 
law  to  transgression  (Cor.  xv.  56,  57) ;  and 
very  specially  from  sin  itself  (Tit.  ii.  14 ;  1 
Pet.i.  18, 19;  Eph.  V.  25-27;  Matt.i.  21). 
Israel's  national  and  external  redemption 
typical  of  that  of  mankind  as  sinners,  by  Jesus 
Christ.     The  great  redemption  by  the  Son 
of  God  effected— (1)  By  purchase ;  (2)  By 
power.    The  price  of  human  redemption  the 
blood  of  Christ,  His   substituted  suffering 
and  death.    The  power  employed  in  it  that 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  sent  in  virtue  of  the  price 
paid  upon  the  Cross.     His  power  required— 
(1)  In  quickening  the  soul  to  a  new  spiritual 
life  ;  (2)  Preserving  and  perfecting  it  in  the 
image  of  God. 

Job  declares  his  ^personal  interest  in  the 
Redeemer:  ".%  Redeemer."  Thelanguaire 
— (1)  Of  appropriation;    (2)  Of  faith;   (3) 

119 


CflA^.  XIX. 


MMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JO^. 


Of  choice;  (4)  Of  love;  (5)  Of  knowledge 
and  past  experience;  (6)  Of  satisfaction. 
Something  to  say  the  Redeemer ;  more  to 
say  our  Redeemer;  most  and  best  to  say 
my  Redeemer.  Devils  able  to  say  the  first  j 
unsaved  men  the  second ;  only  saved  believers 
the  last.  ^ My'  the  word  that  links  the  lost 
sinner  to  the  djing  Saviour.  I  may  well  re- 
joice that  Christ  is  a  Redeemer  ;  immensely 
more  that  He  is  my  Redeemer.  This  little 
word,  like  the  honey  on  the  point  of  Jona- 
than's staff,  enlightens  the  eyes  and  puts 
strength  into  the  soul.  Inexpressibly  more 
sweetness  and  satisfaction  in  two  such  words 
as  "My  God,"  &c.,  than  in  all  the  pleasures 
of  the  world  since  its  creation  [^John  Brown 
of  Haddington].  His  last  words  were:  "My 
Christ."  My  does  not  engross  the  Redeemer, 
but  claims  its  share  in  Him  with  others. 
Faith's  first  act  is  to  believe  Christ  to  be  a 
Redeemer;  the  second  to  take  Him  as  my 
Redeemer  The  privilege  as  well  as  duty  of 
each  human  soul  thus  to  appropriate  Ciirist 
as  his  Redeemer.  The  world's  as  well  as 
Israel's  sin  and  condemnation  not  to  do  so. 
"  He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  re- 
ceived Him  not;  but  to  as  many  as  received 
Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God"  (John  i.  11,  12). 

(ii.).  Job  asserts  that  this,  his  Redeemer, was 
living,  or  "  the  living  One."  "  My  Redeemer 
liveth."  The  Redeemer  thus  viewed  as — {a) 
Personally  living.  (6)  Continuing  to  exist  be- 
yond the  bounds  of  time.  Able,  therefore,  to 
redeem  him  from  death  and  the  grave.  Lived 
to  vindicate  His  character  after  his  body 
had  mingled  with  the  dust.  Able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost,  or  to  the  end.  {c)  The  Mighty 
One.  Life  the  expression  of  strength  and 
power.  "  Mine  enemies  are  lively,  and  they 
are  strong ^^  Job's  Redeemer  and  our's 
possessed  of  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth. 
"  Has  power  over  all  flesh  to  give  eternal  life 
to  as  many  as  the  Father  hath  given  Him  " 
(John  xvii.  2).  {d)  The  Author  and  Giver  of 
life.  Having  life  in  Himself  and  able  to 
communicate  it  to  others.  The  living  and 
life-giving  Redeemer  set  over  against  Job's 
state  as  dying,  or  virtually  dead.  The  epithet 
one  proper  to  God.  Called  '*the  living 
God  ;"  He  that  "liveth  for  ever  and  ever." 
Appropriated  by  Christ :  "  I  am  He  that 
liveth  and  was  dead,  and  am  alive  for  ever- 
more." Christ  the  Resurrection  and  the 
Life.  The  Way,  the  Truth,  and  Life.  The 
true  God  and  eternal  life  (Rev.  i.  18 ;  John 
ii.  25  ;  xiv.  16  ;  1  John  v.  20).  A  living  and 
life-giving  Redeemer  our  comfort  in  a  dying 
body  in  a  dying  world,  and  with  the  remains 
of  death  in  our  soul.  Christ,  as  our  Redeemer, 
lives — {a)  To  plead  our  cause  in  heaven  (Heb. 
vii.  25)  j  {b)  To  send  down  supplies  of  needt  d 
grace   (2  Cor.  xii.  9) ;    (c)  To  prepare  a 

120 


place  for  us  in  Paradise  (John  xiv.  2) ;  {d) 
To  attend  to  all  our  concerns  (Heb.  iv.  14 — 
16) ;  {e)  To  overcome  all  our  enemies ;  (/*) 
To  deliver  us  out  of  all  our  troubles ;  (g)  To 
give  victory  over  temptation  and  sin  ;  (A)  To 
make  us  partakers  of  his  life ;  (f)  To  receive 
us  to  Himself;  {j)  To  come  again  in  glory. 
Christ  as  an  ever- living  Redeemer,  the 
hope  and  trust  of  the  believer.  That  our 
Redeemer  lives,  an  antidote  against  the  fear 
of  man,  of  troubles,  of  death,  of  judg- 
ment (Isa.  Ii.  12,  13;  xliii.  2,  3;  Rev.  i. 
17,  18).  Our  case  safe  in  the  hands  of  a 
living  Redeemer.  Enough  for  a  dying  saint 
that  his  Redeemer  lives.  One  at  least 
whom  death  cannot  remove  from  us.  His 
life  a  pledge  of  His  people's   (John  xiv, 

19):.. 

(iii.)  That  He  should  '^  stand  {or  rise  up) 
at  the  last  day  [or  'as  the  last  one')  upon 
{or  over)  the  earth.''  Job  elevated  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  the  place  and  oflBce  of  a  pro- 
phet. The  book  a  part  of  those  Scriptures 
which  *'  testify  "  of  Christ,  and  out  of  which 
Christ  expounded  to  the  disciples  the  things 
concerning  Himself.  The  testimony  of  Jesus 
is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  The  prophets 
testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ, 
and  the  glory  that  should  follow  (1  Pet.  i. 
11).  The  testimony  of  Moses  and  the  pro- 
phets that  Christ  should  suffer,  and  should 
be  the  first  that  should  rise  from  the  dead 
(Aetsxxvi.  22,  23).  Job's  present  lane:uage  a 
prophecy,  as  well  as  the  expression  of  his  faith 
and  assurance.  Declares — (1)  That  God  as 
his  Redeemer  would  one  day  appear  on  behalf 
of  his  suffering  servant.  *'  Standing  "  or 
"  rising  up  "  the  Scripture  expression  for  a 
a  Divine  appearance  as  the  deliverer  and 
avenger  of  His  people  (Ps.  vii.  6;  x.  12; 
xii.  5  ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  10).  (2)  That  he  would 
appear  on  or  over  the  earth.  Appears  to  be 
a  double  prophecy,  viz.,  of  the  Redeemer's  in- 
carnation and  His  coming  to  judgment.  These 
often  united  in  the  prophets,  being,  as  here, 
viewed  together  as  one  event.  The  first 
necessary  to  the  second,  the  second  the  com- 
pliment of  the  first.  His  coming  to  suffer 
necessary  in  order  to  His  coming  to  reign. 
His  second  coming  completes  what  His  first 
began.  Christ  called  by  the  apostle,  speak- 
ing of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  last 
Adam,  or  second  Man,  as  apparently  here, 
the  last  or  latter  One  (1  Cor.  xv.  21,  22, 
45,  47).  The  first  Adam  brought  man's  body 
to  the  dust ;  and  second  comes  to  raise  it 
from  it.  Observe — (1)  Faith  comforts  by 
turning  the  sufferer's  eye  from  God's  present 
dealings  with  him  to  his  future  ones.  (2) 
The  consolation  of  the  Church  is — (i.)  That 
Christ  has  suffered  for  our  sins,  the  Just 
One  in  the  room  of  the  unjust ;  (ii.)  That 
he  has  risen  as  the  first-fruits  of  them  that 


MOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAP.  XIX 


slept ;  (iii.)  That  to  them  that  look  for  Him 
He  will  appear  tlie  second  time  without  sin 
unto  salvjition ;  (iv.)  That  them  that  sleep 
in  Jesus  God  will  bring  with  Him  (1  Pet. 
iii.  18;  ]  Cor.  xv.  20,  23;  Heb.  ix.  28; 
1  Thess.  iv.  14). — The  knowledge  asserted 
by  Job  has  reference  also — 

(2)  To  /ilmselfivevse  27).  "  And  though 
after  my  skin,  &c.,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I 
see  God ;  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,"  &c. 
The  centre  of  his  faith  and  hope,  not  only 
that  his  Redeemer  lives,  and  should  one 
day  appear,  but  that  as  the  result  of  it  he 
should 

See  God. 

Two  ways  of  seeing  God— (i.)  Mentally  and 
spiritually ;  (ii.)  Physically  and  corporeally, 
God  seen — (i.)  In  His  character  and  works ; 
(ii.)  In  His  person.  The  former  only  our 
privilege  here,  while  in  the  body ;  the  latter, 
hereafter,  out  of  the  body  and  after  the 
resurrection.  God  seen  in  His  Person  in 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  "He  that  hath  seen 
Me  hath  seen  the  Pather."  In  Christ  is  seen 
"all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily." 
Isaiah,  in  vision,  beheld  the  Lord  (Jehovah) 
sitting  on  His  throne  in  the  temple  (Is.  vi. 
1).  He  beheld  the  "  glory  "  of  Christ  (John 
xii.  41).  As  distinct  from  the  glorified 
Redeemer,  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father, 
Stephen  beheld  "the  glory  of  God"  (Acts 
vii.  55).  In  heaven  the  angels  always  behold 
"the  face"  of  the  Father  (Matt,  xviii.  10). 
The  vision  of  God,  anticipated  by  Job,  gene- 
rally understood  to  be  a  corporeal  one  in 
His  restored  body.  Appears  to  emphasize  it 
in  this  view — "  Whom  mine  eyes  shall  be- 
hold.*' Christ,  at  His  second  appearing,  the 
object  of  bodily  vision.  "  Every  eye  shall 
see  him,  and  they  also  that  pierced  him." 

The  prospect  re-asserted  and  dwelt  upon 
from  its  sweetness  and  certainty.  I  shall 
see  God — see  Him  for  myself — mine  eyes 
shall  behold  Him.  Contrasted  with  his  pre- 
sent experience, — unable  to  perceive  God. 
God  hiding  Himself  from  him,  his  greatest 
trial  (ch.  xiii.  24;  ix.  11;  xxiii.  8,  9). 
Observe — (i.)  The  vision  of  God  the  blessed- 
ness of  the  glorified  (Ps.  xvii.  15 ;  Matt.  v.  8 ; 
1  John  iii,  2;  Rev.  xxii.  4).  Implies — (I) 
A  much  higher  and  clearer  knowledge  of 
God  (I  Cor.  xiii.  9—12).  (2)  Enjoyment 
of  immediate  and  uninterrupted  fellowship 
with  Him.  (3)  More  blissful  consciousness  of 
His  favour  and  love.  (4)  Fuller  under- 
standing of  His  providential  dealings  here. 
— (ii.)  The  nature  of  faith  to  believe  that 
though  God  now  hides  His  face,  yet  we  shall 
again  behold  it  (Micah  vii.  8 ;  Hab.  iii.  17 — 
19).  Faith  trusts  in  the  dark  and  hopes 
for  what  it  sees  not, — (iii.)  Joyful  anticipa- 
tion of  seeiui^God  the  peculiar  privilege  of  a 


believer.  Implies — (1)  A  conscious  state 
of  peace  and  reconciliation  with  God.  (2) 
A  renewed  nature,  capable  of  delighting  in 
God  and  in  His  fellowship.  (3)  Purity  of 
heart,  and  conscious  integrity  of  character. 
Only  the  pure  in  heart  capable  of  seeing 
God  (Matt.  V.  8).  Evil  cannot  dwell  with 
Him.  A  hypocrite  shall  not  come  before 
Him.  To  see  God's  face,  coupled  with  serving 
Him,  the  blessedness  of  the  glorified  (Rev. 
xxii.  4).  The  sight  of  God  and  the  Lamb  at 
His  second  appearing,  the  world's  greatest 
dread  (Rev.  vi.  15 — 17).  The  comfort  of 
believers  that  when  God  shall  appear,  it  will 
be  "for  them,"  as  their  Friend  and  Re- 
deemer, for  their  full  and  everlasting  salva- 
tion (Heb.  ix.  28). 

The  api)earing  of  his  Redeemer,  and  the 
future  sight  of  God  as  his  friend,  the  ob- 
ject of  Job's  intense  longing.  "My  reins 
are  consumed  in  my  bosom " — with  desire 
for  that  day  (margin).  Contrasted  with  the 
object  of  desire  held  forth  by  his  three 
friends — health  and  prosperity  in  this  life. 
The  salvation  of  God,  perfected  at  the 
Saviour's  second  appearing,  the  Church's 
desire  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 
Jacob's  experience :  "  I  have  waited  for  thy 
salvation,  O  Lord."  David's:  "My  flesh 
shall  rest  in  hope,  for  thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
soul  in  hell"  (wilt  not  leave  me  in  the  grave). 
"  I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I  awake  in  thy 
likeness."  Isaiah,  and  the  Church  in  his 
day :  "  With  my  soul  have  I  desired  thee  in 
the  night; "  the  answer :  "  Thy  dead  men  shall 
live,  together  with  my  dead  body  shall  they 
arise.  Awake  and  sing  ye  that  dwell  in  dust ; 
for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs,  and  the 
earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead"  (Is.  xxvi  9, 
19).  The  last  words  of  the  spouse  in  the 
Song :  "  Make  haste,  my  beloved,  and  be 
like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountain 
of  spices."  Christ's  glorious  appearing  the 
blessed  hope  and  desire  of  the  early  Chris- 
tians, exposed  as  they  were  to  death  and  all 
kinds  of  suffering  for  the  truth's  sake.  "  The 
Spirit  and  the  Bride  t>ay.  Come — the  Spirit 
in  the  Bride  '  (Rev.  xxii.  17 ;  Rom,  viii.  23). 
In  reply  to  the  promise :  "  Behold,  I  come 
quickly ; "  the  Cliui'ch's  last  recorded  prayer 
is:  "Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus."  The  cry 
of  the  souls  under  the  altar :  "  How  long,  O 
Lord,  wilt  thou  not  avenge  our  blood  on  the 
earth." 

The  Lord's  second  appearing,  and  the 
resurrection  consequent  on  it,  to  be  desired 
and  longed  for,  as— (1)  The  time  of  full  re- 
demption and  salvation  in  body  and  soul  to 
believers  themselves ;  (2)  The  same  to  their 
brethren  in  Christ,  whether  living  or  long 
departed;  (3)  The  time  of  deliverance  to 
the  whole  creation  from  the  bondage  of  cor- 
ruption entailed  upon  them  by  man's  sin; 

121 


chai".  xii. 


UOMlLElW  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


(4)  The  time  when  Christ  shall  be  marifested 
in  glory,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  fully 
come ;  (5)  The  period  for  the  creation  of 
the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  wherein 
dwelleth  righteousness  (Rom.  viii.  19 — 23 ; 
1  Thess.  iv:  16,  17;  2  Thess.  i.  10;  2  Tim. 
iv.  1 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  12,  13). 

"  He  whose  car  the  winds  are,  and  the  clouds 
The  dust  that  waits  upon  his  sultry  march, 
"When  sin  hath  moved  him,  and  his  wrath  is 

hot, 
Shall  visit  earth  in  mercy  ;  shall  descend 
Propitious  in  his  chariot  paved  with  love  ; 
And  what  his  storms  have  blasted  and  de- 
faced 
For  man's  revolt,  shall  with  a  smile  repair. 
Come  then,  and,  added  to  thy  many  crowns, 
Eeceive  yet  one,  the  crown  of  all  the  earth, 
Thou  who  alone  art  worthy  1 " 

yil.  Addresses  remonstrance  and 
warning  to  his  friends  (verse  28,  29). 

1.  The  Remonstrance  (ytxst  28).  "But 
ye  should  say  (or,  '  because  ye  say' )  why  per- 
secute we  him  P  (or,  *  how  shall  we  persecute 
him,')  seeing  the  root  of  the  matter  is  found 
in  me,"  [margin  "  and  what  root  of  matter 
is  found  in  me  ?  " — or,  "  and  how  shall  we 
find  a  ground  of  accusation"  \^Heb.  'the  root 
of  a  word  or  thing']  against  him?)  The 
great  ofi'ence  of  Job's  friends  their  persecu- 
tion of  a  suffering  brother.  Their  desire  and 
aim  to  prove  him  a  wicked  man  and  deserving 
the  calamities  sent  upon  him.  Sought  there- 
fore to  find  ground  of  accusation  against 
him.  Hence  Job's  name  :  "  the  persecuted 
one."  In  this,  as  in  other  things,  a  type  of 
Christ.  Job's  friends  the  representatives  of 
the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  priests  and  elders 
of  the  Jews  (Matt.  lii.  14;  Luke  xi.  54; 
John  viii.  6). 

Persecntion 

Bequeathed  to  all  Christ's  members  (John 
XV.  20  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  12).  Its  endurance  by 
the  Church  a  characteristic  of  the  reign  of 
Antichrist  (Rev.  xi.  2—5;  xii.  11—17). 
Satan  the  great  persecutor.  Persecution  in 
accordance  with  the  original  promise  of  a 
Saviour  (Gen.  iii.  15).  May  be  either  bloody 
or  unbloody — from  the  openly  profane  or 
the  professedly  godly.  Petty  persecution 
in  the  family  or  the  workshop  often  as  trying 
as  that  of  the  dungeon  and  the  scaffold. 
Almost  one  continued  persecution  of  the 
Church  from  Jews  and  Pagans  during  the 
first  three  hundred  years  of  its  existence. 
The  Church  nursed  in  blood.  That  blood 
made  the  means  of  its  increase.  Like  Israel 
in  Egypt  (Ex.  i.  12).  Ten  great  persecu- 
tions enumerated  before  the  establishment 
of  Christianity  as  the  religion  of  the  liomau 

122 


Empire.  Persecution  frequently  that  of  one 
part  of  the  professing  Cliurch  by  another. 
The  dominant  section  often  a  persecutor  of 
the  rest.  The  spirit  and  ground  of  persecu- 
tion— (1)  Enmity  to  the  truth;  (2)  Desire 
for  supremacy ;  (3)  Intolerance  of  opposi- 
tion ;  (4)  Blind  and  misguided  zeal  (Gal.  iv. 
29;  3  John  ix.  10;  John  xvi.  2,  3).  Baby- 
lon the  great,  the  mother  of  harlots,  the 
mystical  seven-hilled  city,  drunk  with  the 
blood  of  the  saints  (Bev.  xvii.  6).  Note 
in  Rhemish  Testament  on  this  passage  (Rev. 
xvii.  6), — "  Their  blood,"  viz.,  that  of  here- 
tics, *'  is  not  called  the  blood  of  saints,  no 
more  than  the  blood  of  thieves,  mankillers, 
and  other  malefactors ;  for  the  shedding  of 
which  by  order  of  justice,  no  commonwealth 
shall  answer."  More  blood  shed  in  Chris- 
tian persecutions  than  in  Pagan  ones.  A 
long  blood-stained  history  of  Inquisitions, 
Crusades,  Massacres,  and  Star-chambers.  Be- 
tween the  twelfth  and  eighteenth  centuries, 
about  a  million  of  non-conforming  Albigenses 
and  Waldenses  put  to  death  by  armies  sent  for 
that  purpose  with  the  Pope's  blessing  and 
the  promise  of  eternal  salvation.  Nearly 
a  million  more  sufi'ered  death  on  the  same 
grounds,  within  fifty  years  after  the  institu- 
tion of  the  order  of  the  Jesuits  in  1540.  In 
the  Netherlands,  the  Duke  of  Alva  boasted 
that  thirty-six  thousand  heretics  had  been 
put  to  death  by  the  common  executioner. 
Within  thirty  days  from  the  Massacre  of  St. 
Bartholomew's  day  (1572),  thirty  thousand 
at  least  calculated  to  have  been  butchered  in 
Paris  and  throughout  Erance.  Public  thanks 
ordered  by  the  Pope  to  be  given  in  one  of 
the  churches  at  Rome,  and  a  medal  to  be 
struck  for  its  commemoration. 

2.  The  threatening  (verse  29).  "Be  ye 
afraid  of  the  sword ;  for  wrath  (such  as  you 
manifest  against  me)  bringeth  the  punish- 
ments of  the  sword  (or,  *is  one  of  the  iniqui- 
ties [deserving  and  meeting  with  the  punish- 
ment] of  the  sword '),  that  ye  mav  know  that 
there  is  a  judgment."  The  sword  the  symbol 
of  justice,  here  the  justice  of  God  (Rom.xiii. 
4;  Deut.  xxxii  41).  An  invisible  avenger 
takes  the  part  of  the  persecuted  and  oppres- 
sed. Persecutors  especially  threatened  in 
the  New  Testament  Christ's  second  ap- 
pearing especially  terrible  to  such  as  smite 
their  fellow  servants  (Matt.  xxiv.  49).  A 
righteous  thing  with  God  to  recompense 
tribulation  to  them  that  trouble  His  people 
(2  Thess.  i.  6 — 10).  The  judgments  of  the 
last  days  especially  inflicted  on  the  persecu- 
tors ot  the  saints  (Rev.  xviii.  6,  24).  Ob- 
serve : — (1)  Persecution  a  hard  and  terrible 
enterprise.  Pagan  persecutors  noted  as 
having  generally  died  by  horrible  deaths. 
Charles  IX.,  who  authorized  the  Parisian 
massacre  of  1572,  died  in  despair  in  a  bloody 


ROMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAP.  IX. 


sweat.  Christ's  words  to  Saul  addressed  to 
all  persecutors :  "  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick 
against  the  pricks."  (2)  The 'part  of  charily 
and  piety  to  setk  to  turn  'persecutors  frcm 
their  sin,  and  so  avert  their  doom.  (3) 
Anger  against  the  servants  of  God,  though 
shewn  only  in  words,  viewed  by  God  as  a  sin 
equivalent  to  murder.  The  sin  of  Job's 
friends.  Hence  to  be  atoned  for  by  sacrifice 
at  the  close  of  the  controversy.  (4)  Men 
not  secured  from  JDivive  judgment  by  a  reli- 
gious profession.  (5)  The  treatment  given  to 
Christs's  servants  and  brethren  one  great  cri- 
terion by  to  hick  men  will  hereafter  be  judged 
(Matt.  XXV.  34—46).  (6)  The  comfort  of 
God's  people  that  they  can  appeal  from , man' s 
judgment  to  God's.     (7)  A  day  coming  when 


mens  character  and  doings  will  he  clearly 
revealed  (Mai.  iii.  18).  Men  to  be  "  brought 
out  ill  their  blacks  and  whites  "  \S.  Ruther- 
ford'].  {^)  A  day  of  judgment  terribly  cer- 
tain, (i.)  From  the  testimony  of  Scripture. 
The  first  recoided  inspired  declaration  such 
a  testimony  (Judc  xiv.  15).  Enoch's  pro- 
phecy doubtless  known  to  Job.  Such  testi- 
mony greatly  accumulated  since  then  (Eccles. 
ii.  9;  xii.  14;  Matt.  xii.  36;  Acts  ii.  30, 
31 ;  Rom.  ii.  16 ;  xiv.  10,  12  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  5 ; 
2  Cor.  V.  10.  (ii.)  Erom  the  universal  voice 
of  conscience,  (iii.)  Prom  God's  providential 
dealings  in  the  world.  Sin  punished  here 
so  far  as  to  shew  that  God  marks  and  pun- 
ishes it ;  left  unpunished,  so  far  as  to  sliew 
that  "  there  is  a  judgment "  to  come. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

ZOPHAR'S  SECOND  SPEECH. 


Produces  nothing  new ;  much  more  out- 
spoken than  before.  Enlarges  on  the 
miseries  overtaking  the  wicked,  insinuating 
that  Job  was  such.  His  argument, — like  in 
condition,  like  in  character. 

I.  The  introduction  to  the  speech. 

His  reason  for  speaking  again,  viz..  Job's 
charges  of  cruelty  and  unkindness,  and  his 
denunciation  of  Divine  wrath  against  them 
on  account  of  it  (verse  2).  "Therefore 
(because  of  thy  charges  and  denunciations), 
do  my  thoughts  (cogitations  as  to  what  I 
ought  to  do)  cause  me  to  answer,  and  for 
this  I  make  haste  {margin,  'my  haste'  [or 
earnestness]  is  in  me).  I  have  heard  the 
check  of  my  reproach  (reproof  that  is  a 
reproach  to  me),  and  the  spirit  of  my 
understanding  (my  spirit  which  has  intelli- 
gence regarding  the  subject  in  question) 
causeth  me  to  answer."     Observe — 

1.  The  part  of  a  wise  man  not  to  speak 
without  sufficient  reason.  Zophar  had  a  rea- 
son for  speaking,  but  not  a  correct  one. 
Job's  charges  and  denunciations  were  true 
and  just. 

2.  Pride  ill  brooks  reproof.  Men  seldom 
willing  to  take  the  reproach  which  they  give 
to  others.  "Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not 
judged." 

3.^  Right  to  think  well  before  uttering  one's 
sentiments  on  more  serious  subjects.  Better 
that  our  thoughts  cause  us  to  answer  than 
our  feelings. 

4.  Insensibility  no  part  of  piety.  Zophar 
felt  as  well  as  thought.  Spoke  from  ardour 
as  well  as  reflection.  Good  to  be  zealously 
affected  in  a  good  thing.  What  is  not  spoken 
earnestly  may  as  well  remain  unspoken. 

5.  Earnestness  fo  be  grounded  on  just  con- 
tideratioH*.     Thou^^ht   to    lead,   feeling    to 


follow.  "  While  I  was  musing  the  fire 
burned."  Zophar's  feeling  called  "haste." 
Often  too  much  haste  both  in  our  feeling 
and  our  words.  With  less  haste  in  Zophar's 
spirit,  there  had  been  more  humanity  in  his 
speech.  "He  that  hasteth  with  his  feet 
sinneth."  Not  less  he  that  hasteth  with 
his  tongue.  "Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth." 
"  Slow  to  speak,  swift  to  hear."  What  ia 
spoken  in  haste,  frequently  not  according  to 
truth.  Hasty  words  make  matter  for  repent- 
ance. Hastily  spoken  not  always  hastily 
forgotten.  Hasty  words  often  make  deep 
wounds.  The  hasty  to  speak  the  slowest 
to  learn     (Prov.  xxix.  20). 

6.  A  spirit  of  intelligence  to  he  prized  and 
cultivated.  Natural  understanding  the  gift 
of  God,  but  may  either  be  fed  or  famished. 
The  best  way  to  a  good  understanding  is  a 
good  life.  "  An  honest  man  has  half  as  much 
more  brains  as  he  needs."  "A  good 
understanding  have  all  they  that  keep  His 
commandments."  Christ  made  "wisdom" 
to  those  who  are  in  Him,  as  well  as  righte- 
ousness and  sanctification  (1  Cor.  1.  30). 
Wibdom  given  to  believing  prayer  (Janiea 
i.  5,  6).  To  have  a  good  understanding  one 
needs  to  keep  both  eyes  and  ears  open.  A 
spirit  of  intelligence  necessary  to  a  good 
answer.  A  light  needful  for  entering  a  dark 
chamber.  Safe  not  to  speak  on  a  subject  till 
you  are  conscious  of  understanding  it. 

II.  The  speech  itself. 

The  gist  of  it— Job  must  be  a  wicked  man. 
The  reasoning — Wicked  men  are  miserable, 
either  now  or  afterwards  ;  Job  is  very  miser- 
able ;  therefore  Job  is  a  wicked  man.  The 
question :  Are  only  wicked  men  miserable  in 
tliis  life?  Job  maintains  that  the  wicked 
are   not  always  nor  alone  miserable ;  that 

J?3 


CHAP.  XX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMIIJSTARI:  JOB. 


"  time  and  chance  come  alike  to  all." 
Zophar's  second  speech  another  example  of 
lofty  Oriental  poetry.  Contains  solemn  and 
weighty  truths,  quoted  and  verified  to  this 
day.  His  opening  statement  such  (verse  5). 
"  The  triumphing  (or  sonu)  of  the  wicked  is 
short  {Heb.,  from  near ;  like  water  taken  from 
the  surface  instead  of  a  deep  well,  tlierefore 
ending  quickly  and  abruptly) ;  the  joy  of  the 
hypocrite  (or  profane)  is  but  for  a  moment." 
The  allusion  to  Job's  case  too  obvious.  The 
statement  true,  but  not  always  in  the  sense 
of  Zophar.  The  joy  of  the  wicked  short- 
lived. May  last  through  life,  but  not  beyond 
it.  The  pleasure  of  sin  but  for  a  season. 
The  joy  of  the  ungodly  short,  as — (1)  It  has 
no  solid  foundation — built  only  on  earthly 
things  that  perish  with  the  using;  (2)  Is 
based  upon  a  falsehood,  viz.,  that  sin  and  the 
creature  are  able  to  give  happiness ;  (3) 
Can  only  exist  in  the  present  lite.  Creature- 
enjoyment  no  longer-lived  than  the  creature 
itself.  Sin  in  its  own  nature  opposed  to 
lasting  enjoyment.  Divine  justice  engaged 
to  terminate  it  in  this  life.  Sin  a  tree  with 
branches  enough,  but  no  root ;  with  plenty 
of  blossom,  but  no  fruit.  Observe — 1.  The 
longest  life  but  ^^for  a  moment.*^  (1)  In  com- 
parison with  eternity ;  (2)  In  the  view  of  the 
individual  himself  towards  its  close.  Sad, 
for  the  pleasure  of  a  moment  to  throw  away 
the  joys  of  an  endless  life. — 2.  The  joy  of  the 
hypocrite  or  'profane  "  but  for  a  moment" — 
(1)  As  confined  to  this  life ;  (2)  In  com- 
parison with  the  joy  of  the  righteous,  which 
IS  lasting.  The  joy  of  a  false  religion,  or  of 
a  mere  external  profession  and  shallow  ex- 
perience of  the  true,  a  lamp  that  goes  out 
from  want  of  oil. — Zophar  refers  to  all  past 
history  for  confirmation  (verse  4).  "  Know- 
est  thou  not  this  of  old,"  &c.  The  history 
of  the  past  most  useful  when  serving  as  a 
guide  to  the  present.  History  full  of  ex- 
amples of  the 

Short-lived  prosperity  of  An, 

The  memory  of  the  Flood  and  its  terrible 
lessons  still  fresh  in  the  days  of  Zophar. 
The  truth  solemn  and  salutary,  but  Zopliar's 
application  of  it  cruel  and  unjust.  His 
statements,  too,  require  a  wider  field  of 
vision  than  the  present  world. 

1.  The  prosperous  ungodly  sooner  or  later 
overthrown  with  contempt  and  infamy  (verse 
6).  "Though  his  excellency  (loftiness  or 
exaltation)  mount  up  to  the  heavens,  and 
his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds  (though  he 
attain  the  highest  pitch  of  earthly  prosperity 
and  grandeur),  yet  he  shall  perish  for  ever 
like  his  own  dung  (east  away  with  contempt 
and  abhorrence ;  or,  according  to  some,  'in 
the  midst  of  his  splendour')  j   they  that  have 

1^4 


seen  him  (beholding  with  admiration  his 
prosperity)  shall  say,  *  Where  is  he  ? '  Ob- 
vious allusion  to  Job's  former  dignity  and 
prosperity.  Prosperous  wickedness  is — (1) 
One  of  the  mysteries  of  Providence ;  (2)  One 
of  the  trials  of  good  men ;  (3)  One  of  the 
proofs  of  a  future  judi^ment.  The  perplexity 
of  Asaph  till  he  "  went  into  the  sanctuary  of 
God,"  and  understood  the  end  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  17). 
No  man  to  be  called  happy  till  the  end  of  his 
life,  a  maxim  of  the  ancient  heathen.  Re- 
velation adds.  Nor  till  after  the  end  of  it. 
Christ  lifts  the  curtain  and  shows  what  is 
beyond.  Humbling  contrast  with  former 
haughtiness  and  magnificence  implied  in 
Zophar's  simile  (so  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  10).  Con- 
tempt and  infamy  attach  to  wickedness, 
however  prosperous.  A  day  coming  when 
God's  despisers  shall  be  an  abhorring  to  all 
flesh  (Is.  Ixvi.  24). 

2.  The  prosperous  ungodly  vanish  from 
sight  and  memory  (verse  8).  "He  shall  fly 
away  as  a  dream,  and  shall  not  be  found ; 
yea,  he  shall  be  chased  away  as  a  vision  of 
the  night.  The  eye  also  which  saw  him 
(looked  on  him  with  admiration)  shall  see 
him  no  more,  &c."  The  life  of  the  ungodly 
especially  a  dream,  as — (] )  Without  solidity 
and  reality ;  (2)  As  quickly  terminating ; 
(3)  As  soon  forgotten.  No  trace  left  that 
men  care  to  cherish.  No  pleasing  and  pro- 
fitable "footprints  on  the  sands  of  time.' 
Good  men  only  the  truly  "  great"  who 
"  remind  us  we  can  make  our  lives  sublime." 
"The  memory  of  the  wicked  shali  rot." 
Associated  with  nothing  excellent,  noble,  or 
benevolent.  The  presence  of  bad  great  men 
on  earth  a  nightmare,  which  men  would  fain 
"chase  away  "  and  tlien  forget.  Seen  espe- 
cially in  the  case  of  tyrants,  ambitious  and 
unprincipled  rulers,  men  climbing  to  power 
by  forbidden  ways  and  employing  it  for  evil 
ends. 

3.  Their  children  affected  by  their  sin 
(verse  10).  "His  children  shall  seek  to 
please  the  poor  (to  propitiate  the  poor,  whom 
their  father  oppressed  or  defrauded;  or, 
shall  be  so  reduced  as  to  court  the  favour 
even  of  the  poor ;  margin^  *  the  poor  shall 
oppress  his  children';  Coverdale — 'his  child- 
ren shall  go  a-begging ')  j  and  his  hand  (or, 
*' their  hands")  shall  restore  their  goods" 
(the  goods  of  which  their  father  had  plun- 
dered them).  Observe — (1)  An  inheri- 
tance of  trouble  bequeathed  by  the  ungodly  to 
their  offspring.  In  the  Providence  of  God, 
the  eflects  of  a  man's  oppression  made  to 
extend  to  his  children.  The  child  often 
reaps  what  the  father  sows,  good  or  bad. 
(2)  Ill-gotten  wealthy  sooner  or  later,  'proves 
ill-gotten  woe.  llestitution  of  unjust  gains 
follows  cither  in  a  man's  own  life-time  or  his 
childrcQ's.    Made  voluntarily,  the  curs^  i§ 


UOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JOB, 


CHAP.   XX, 


averted  both  from  himself  and  them. 
Zaccheus  the  publican  (Luke  xix.  I,  &c). 
The  reference  here  to  the  rich  man's  chikl- 
rcn  cruel  towards  Job,  still  mourning  the 
loss  of  his  seven  sons  and  three  dauf^hters. 

4.  Effects  of  their  sin  enf  ailed  on  their  own 
person  {\&v&Q  11).  "His  bones  are  full  of 
the  sins  of  his  youth  (or  of  his  secret  sins, 
or  of  youthful  vigour),  which  shall  lie  down 
with  him  in  the  dust."  Apparent  allusion 
to  Job's  diseased  body.  Observe — (1) 
Bodily  disease  often  the  result  of  b}/-gone 
excesses.  Age  often  made  to  inherit  the 
sins  of  vouth  (cli.  xiii.  26).  Hence  David's 
prayer  (Ps.  xxv.  7).  Seeds  of  disease  sown 
in  sinful  indulgences.  The  drunkard  carries 
the  effects  ol  his  cups  to  the  grave.  Secret 
sins  often  followed  by  open  sufferings.  A 
cruel  insinuation  on  the  part  of  Zopliar  that 
this  was  Job's  case.  (2)  Tlie  sinner  often 
smitten  with  disease  and  death  in  the  midst 
of  prosperity  and  apparent  strength.  Herod 
at  Cesarea  (Acts  xii.  21—23).  (3)  Sad 
when  a  man's  sins  lie  down  with  him  in  the 
dust.  Certain,  if  not  prevented  by  repent- 
ance, faith,  and  forgiveness.  To  lie  down 
with  him  in  the  dust  is  to  continue  his  com- 
panions for  ever  (Rev.  xxii.  ]1).  Separation 
from  our  sins  either  now  or  never. 

5.  Terrible  miser i/  after  temporary/  enjoy- 
ment (verse  12—14).  "  Though  wickedness 
(especially  in  the  acquisition  and  enjoyment 
of  ill-gotten  wealth),  be  sweet  in  his  mouth; 
though  he  hide  it  under  his  tongue  (either 
for  secrecy  or  continued  enjoyment) ;  though 
he  spare  it  and  forsake  it  not ;  but  keep  it 
still  within  his  moutii :  yet  his  meat  in  his 
bowels  is  turned ;  it  is  the  gall  of  asps  (the 
most  deadly  poison)  within  him."  Sin  sweet 
to  the  unrenewed  heart.  Stolen  waters 
sweet.  Such  sweetness  short-lived.  Honey 
in  the  mouth  becomes  gall  in  the  bowels. 
Sin  in  itself  a  deadly  poison.  Death  itself, 
and  death  its  wages.  David's  sweet  sin 
with  Bathsheba  broke  his  bones.  The 
blood  of  Drijah  brought  blood  into  his  house. 
The  effect  of  sinful  enjoyment  is  to  *'  mourn 
at  the  last "  CProv.  v.  11-  14).  Poison  no 
less  deadly  because  sweet  to  the  taste.  The 
sweetest  things  often  the  sourest  after- 
wards. 

6.  Forced  surrender  of  acquired  wealth 
(verse  15).  "He  hath  swallowed  down 
riches,  and  he  shall  vomit  them  up  again; 
God  shall  cast  them  out  of  his  belly.'* 
Apparently  Job's  case.  Riches  eagerly 
pursued,  abundantly  obtained,  and  fondly 
enjoyed,  to  be  sooner  or  later  unwillingly 
surrendered.  The  worldling  and  his  wealth 
part  company,  if  not  before,  yet  on  a  dying 
bed.  The  glutton  coini)elled  to  vomit  up 
his  dainty  morsels.  "  Thou  fool,  tliis  night 
thy  soul  bh^li  be  rcc^uired  of  thee."    The 


sumptuous  table  then  gladly  exchanged  for 
a  drop  of  water.  The  worldling  unable  to 
keep  his  wealth  a  moment  beyond  God's 
pleasure.  A  thousand  means  at  His  disposal 
of  making  him  quit  his  grasp  on  this  side  of 
death.  The  failure  of  a  bank,  the  fall  of  a 
mercantile  house,  the  explosion  of  some 
promising  speculation,  sufficient  for  the 
purpose.  "But  even  now  worth  this,  and 
now  worth  nothing  1 " 

7.  Biath  in  some  distressing  form  and 
circumstances  (verse  16).  "He  shall  suck 
the  poison  of  asps  (the  most  deadly  one) ; 
the  viper's  tongue  (put  out  when  about  to 
bite),  shall  slay  him."  All  animate  and  in- 
animate nature  only  instruments  for  the 
execution  of  God's  purposes,  whether  of 
judgment  or  of  mercy.  The  effect  of  the 
intoxicating  cup,  that  at  last  it  bites  like  a 
serpent  and  stings  like  an  adder  (Prov.  xxiii. 
32).  To  suck  the  pleasures  of  sin  now  is 
to  suck  the  poison  of  asps  hereafter.  The 
Bible  draws  aside  the  veil  and  reveals  man's 
tempter  become  his  tormenter  (Luke  xvi. 
19—26). 

8.  Bitter    disappointment     and   exclusion 
from  future    happiness    (verse    17).     "He 

shall  not  see  the  rivers,  the  floods,  the 
brooks  of  honey  and  butter."  A  blessedness 
even  in  this  life,  of  which  the  worldling 
deprives  himself.  Still  more  in  the  life  to 
come.  The  river  of  life,  the  wine  of  the 
kingdom,  the  fruits  of  paradise,  the  joys  at 
God's  right  hand,  the  pleasures  for  ever- 
more, all  forfeited  for  the  momentary  plea- 
sures of  sin.  To  the  cry  at  the  closed  gates : 
"Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  us,"  the  only  re- 
sponse: "Depart  from  me,  I  never  know  you." 

9.  No  real  enjoyment  of  his  riches  even 
here  (verse  18).  *'That  which  he  laboured 
for  shall  he  restore,  and  shall  not  swallow  it 
down  (or  enjoy  it) ;  according  to  bis  sub- 
stance shall  the  restitution  be,  and  he  shall 
not  rejoice  therein."  Riches  gathered  often 
become  riches  scattered.  To  obtain  wealth 
one  thing,  to  enjoy  it  another.  Great  gains 
not  always  great  gain.  ^Man  gets,  God  gives. 
Ill-gotten,  ill-gone,  [Latin  Proverb'].  Wealth 
often  the  parent  of  woe.  A  canker  in  a 
s timer's  gold  (James  v.  3).  Wages  earned 
without  God  only  put  into  a  bag  with  holes. 
The  world  a  lie,  especially  to  those  who 
trust  in  it.  Money  outside  the  heart  a 
blessing,  inside  of  it  a  curse. 

10.  A  troubled  conscience  (verses  19,  20). 
"  Because  he  hath  oppressed  and  hath  for- 
saken the  poor;  because  he  hath  violently 
taken  away  an  house  which  he  builded  not 
(obtaining  it  by  fraud  instead  of  honest  in- 
dustry) ;  surel^r  he  shall  not  feel  quietness 
in  his  belly  (his  mind  or  conscience),  he 
shall  not  save  of  lliit  which  he  desiretl  "  (or, 
shd^l  not  escape  with  his  coveted   but  ill- 

i25 


CUAF.   XX. 


HOMILETIC  C0M31ENTARr:  JOB. 


gotten  wealth).  Another  cruel  and  unjust 
allusion  to  Job.  The  charge  of  oppression 
alterwards  directly  made  by  Elipliaz  feh.  xxii. 
5 — 9).  Taken  generally,  thestaicmeiit  rrue. 
Ill-gained  wealtii,  like  the  hoiu-ded  manna, 
breeds  worms ;  the  worm  of  an  accusing 
conscience.  The  rust  of  dishonest  gain  eats 
into  the  flesh  like  fire  (James  v.  3).  A 
house  built  by  oppression  gives  a  voice  to 
its  stones  and  timber  (Hab.  ii.  9 — 11).  A 
quiet  conscience  better  than  a  well-filled 
coffer.  Naboth's  coveted  vineyard  a  curse 
both  to  Ahab  and  his  wife  (1  Kings  xxi. 
1—19). 

11.  Loss  of  property  and  of  children 
(verse  21).  There  shall  none  of  iiis  meat 
be  left  {margin^  "  there  shall  none  be  left 
for  his  meat '  ) ;  therefore  shall  no  man  hiok 
for  his  goods."  A  cutting  sentence  for  im- 
poverished and  bereaved  Job.  Jol)'s  lull 
house  now  an  empty  one.  His  goods  gone, 
and  none  to  inherit  the  miserable  remnant. 
The  richest  man  in  Uz  now  penniless.  The 
man  wit  h  ten  adult  children  now  without  even 
one.  Able  lately  to  leave  an  ample  inherit- 
ance to  his  children,  now  without  cither 
estate  or  sons  to  inherit  it.  One  of  the 
world's  vanities  the  desire  to  enricli  one's 
heirs.  God  and  man  often  robbed  while 
living  to  leave  larger  sums  when  dead.  A 
worldly  man's  great  affliction  to  lose  the 
heir  of  his  hoarded  wealth.  The  rich 
worldling  often  compelled  to  leave  his  riches 
to  those  for  whom  he  cares  not,  and  who 
care  not  for  him. 

12.  Ferplexity  mid  trouble  in  the  midst  of 
his  riches  (verse  22).  *'  In  the  fidness  of 
his  sufficiency  he  shall  be  in  straits  :  every 
hand  of  the  wicked  (or  of  the  mischievous ; 
every  kind  of  mischief;  or  every  blow  that 
comes  upon  the  wretched)  shall  come  upon 
him.*'  A  sad  and  cutting  remembrancer  to 
Job  of  his  various  calamities  and  the  quarter 
from  which  some  of  them  had  come.  God, 
in  His  providence,  visits  the  prosperous 
wicked  with  sudden  and  unexpected  mani- 
festations of  His  anger  (verse  23)  *'  When 
he  is  about  to  till  his  belly  (or,  *  there  shall 
be  wherewith  to  fill  his  belly ')  God  shall 
cast  the  fury  of  His  wrath  upon  him,  and 
shall  rain  it  upon  him  (as  literally  on  Sodom 
and  Gomorrha ;  also  implying  the  vehemence 
aad  abundance  of  the  judgments)  while  he 
is  eating"  (in  the  midst  of  his  enjoyment; 
or,  "as  his  food").  A  bitter  sarcasm. 
The  worldling  sits  down  to  his  sumptuous 
table,  but  the  wrath  of  God  sliall  be  his 
dish.  Vengeance  shall  be  iiis  viand.  He 
shall  be  fed  with  fury  for  his  food.  Case  of 
the  rich  fool  (Luke  xii.  16 — 20).  Experi- 
enced by  Israel  in  the  wilderness  (Num.  xi. 
33;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  30,  31.  Appeared  to  have 
been  n-niised  in  Job.  Overtaken  by  apparent 

l<?o 


judgments  in  the  midst  of  his  prosperity, 
rire  rained  on  his  cattle  as  on  the  cities  of 
the  Plain  (ch.  i.  16;  Gen.  xix.  24).  Fiery 
rain  instead  of  refreshing  showers  an  awful 
sign  of  judgment  (Ps.  1.  3). 

13.  Inability  to  effect  escape  (verse  24). 
"He  shall  flee  from  the  iron  weapon  (the 
weapon  employed  in  close  combat, — visible 
judgments),— and  the  bow  (discharging  its 
arrows  from  a  distance, — invisible  judgments) 
of  steel  {Heb.  of  brass  ;  therefore  with  all  the 
more  force)  shall  strike  him  throujih." 
Seeking  to  escape  from  one  evil  he  falls  into 
another.  Fleeing  from  the  pit  he  falls  into 
the  snare.  God  at  no  loss  for  means  to 
punish  the  ungodly.  Vain  attempt  to  es- 
cape when  God  purposes  to  destroy.  The 
only  place  of  refuge  for  a  sinner  the  wounds 
of  Jesus  opened  to  satisfy  justice  for  his 
sins.  Submission  to  God  and  faith  in  His 
Son  the  only  but  certain  safety  for  the 
guilty. 

14.  Rapid  and  effectual  execution  of  God*s 
purposes  of  vnigea7ice  (verse  25).  "  It  is 
drawn  (viz.,  the  arrow  or  the  sword  with 
which  to  punish  the  ungodly),  and  cometh 
out  of  the  body  (having  passed  through  it) ; 
yea,  the  glittering  sword  (of  Divine  ven- 
geance, l)eut.  xxxii.  41;  Ez.  xxi.  9,  10) 
cometh  out  of  his  gall  (or  gall-bladder, 
having  thus  inflicted  a  deadly  wound) :  ter- 
rors are  upon  him"  (the  terror  of  death 
which  now  stares  him  in  the  face,  and  the 
terrors  of  judgment  immediately  to  follow). 
The  language  rapid,  elliptical,  and  in  the 
past  and  present  tense,  to  indicate  the  sud- 
denness and  certainty  of  the  blow.  A  fear- 
ful thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living 
God.  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect 
the  great  salvation  ?  (Verse  16. — *'  All 
darkness  (all  kinds  of  calamity,  or  accumu- 
lated misery)  shall  be  hid  in  his  secret 
places,"  (hid  amongst  his  choicest  treasures, 
or  secretly  laid  up  for  him  in  places  where 
he  expected  safety).  Observe — (1)  God's 
judgments  find  the  sinjier  in  his  most  secret 
and  secure  retreat.  "  When  they  shall  say, 
peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction 
cometh  upon  them."  (2)  Among  a  sinner's 
most  valuable  possessions  lies  a  hidden  curse. 
"  A  fire  not  blown  (requiring  no  blowing,  or 
not  kindled  by  man,  viz.,  the  '  fire  of  God  ' 
or  lightning,  as  ch.  i.  16)  shall  consume 
him."  Terrible  word  for  poor  Job,  who  had 
seen  his  sheep  and  the  shepherds  consumed 
in  this  very  way.  A  similar  judgment  on 
the  household  of  Korali,  &c.  (Num.  xvi.  35). 
*'  It  shall  go  ill  with  him  that  is  left  (or,  *  it 
shall  consume '  what  is  left)  in  liis  taber- 
nacle." Words  cruelly  telling  in  the  case 
of  Job.  The  fire  of  God  had  h  ft  but  one 
shepherd  to  tell  the  tale  of  the  disaster. 
Stroke  after  stroke  had  fallen  on  his  property 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARr:  JOB, 


CHAP.    XXI. 


and  household,  till  all  were  consumed 
but  his  wife  and  three  servants.  Job,  if 
any,  seemed  marked  out  by  Divine  judg- 
ments as  a  secret  and  guilty  transgressor. 
Terrible  trial  for  faith.  "  Who  may  stand  in 
thy  sight  when  once  thou  art  angry  ? " 
(Ts.  Ixxvi.  7). 

15.  Secret  sins  discovered  {\tvsQ  27).  "The 
heavens  shall  reveal  his  iniquity;  and  the 
earth  shall  rise  up  against  him."  Apparently 
verified  in  Job's  case.  The  lightning  from 
heaven,  and  the  Chaldean  and  Sabean  ma- 
rauders, with  the  whirlwind  of  the  desert, 
from  the  earth,  seemed  to  proclaim  him  a 
wicked  man,  whom  -vengeance  was  at  length 
overtaking  (Acts  xxviii.  4).  Observe — (1) 
Animate  and  inanimate  creation  made  at  God's 
pleasure  to  conspire  against  his  enemies.  (2) 
Iniquity,  however  secretly  committed,  sooner  or 
later  revealed.  ■  No  darkness  or  shadow  of 
death  where  the  workers  of  iniquity  may 
hide  either  themselves  or  their  sins.  Secret 
iniquity  not  only  open  to  God's  view,  but 
one  day  to  be  so  to  that  of  the  universe. 
Hypocrisy  only  now  "the  only  evil  that 
walks  invisible,  except  to  God  alone."  No 
cloak  of  religion  able  to  hide  sin  from  God, 
or  by-and-by,  from  our  neighbour  either. 
Terrible  exposure  awaiting  secret  evil-doers. 
(3)  Our  sins  either  to  he  found  out  now  by 
ourselves  and  brought  to  the  throne  of  grace 
to  be  "pardoned,  or  to  he  found  out  hereafter 
by  God,  and  brought  to  the  throne  of  judgment 
to  be  punished. 

16.  Destruction  of  all  belongings  in  a  day 
of  wrath  (verse  28).  "  The  increase  (pro- 
geny, or  natural  products)  of  his  house  shall 
depart,  and  his  goods  shall  flow  away  (be 
swept  away  as  by  a  torrent,  suddenly  and 
irrecoverably)  in  the  day  of  his  wrath."  Sad 
verification  of  this  apparently  afforded  in  the 
case  of  Job.  The  whole  progeny  of  his  house, 
with  all  his  goods,  swept  away  as  by  an  in- 
undation. A  day  of  wrath  now  surely  over- 
taking this  prince  of  Uz.  Difficult  for  him 
and  his  friends  to  believe  otherwise.  To  the 
latter  the  thing  was  clear.  To  Job  it  seemed 
so ;  but  if  actual  wrath,  it  was  undeserved. 
Job's  error  in  sometimes  inclining  to  the 
Utter  alternative.     His  apparent  '*  day  of 


wrath"  was,  in  reality,  a  day  of  love. 
Observe — (1)  The  province  of  faith  to  believe 
against  all  appearances.  "Behind  a  frown- 
ing providence,"  &c.  (2)  Easy  with  God  to 
sweep  arc  ay  all  the  increase  of  a  mari^s  house. 
(3)  ^  day  of  wrath  coming,  in  which  all  earthly 
possessions  will  fow  away.  "The  earth  and 
the  works  therein  shall  be  burned  up"  (2  Pet. 
iii.  10). 

HI.  The  summing- np  (verse  29). 

"This  is  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man 
from  God,  and  the  heritage  appointed  unto 
him  by  God"  {Heb.,  the  heritage  of  the 
decree  of  the  Mighty  One  ;  decreed  by  Him 
who  is  Almighty,  therefore  irresistible). 
Similar  language  in  Ps.  xi.  6.  The  conclu- 
sion apparently  unavoidable  in  relation  to 
Job.  The  portion  of  a  wicked  man  mani- 
festly meted  out  to  him.  If  J®b  is  not  such 
a  man,  all  our  notions  of  the  Divine  govern- 
nient  in  this  world  are  upset— the  rock  is 
"removed  out  of  his  place."  Strong  faith 
and  a  sound  conscience  required  by  Job  to 
believe  that  God  would  yet  clear  his  character. 
The  statement  of  Zophar  both  true  and 
untrue.  Viewed  in  relation  to  this  life,  not 
always  true.  Yiewed  in  relation  to  the  next, 
far  short  of  the  fact.  A  more  terrible  portion 
awaits  the  impenitent  in  another  world.  The 
harrowing  things  mentioned  by  Zophar  only 
a  foreshadowing  and  prelude  to  the  sinner's 
future  doom.  Wrath  rarely  exhibited  in  this 
world,  because  reserved  for  the  next.  Days 
of  wrath  here  sent  as  specimens  and  warnings 
of  that  which  is  to  come. 

**  That  day  of  wrath,  that  dreadful  day, 
When  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away. 
What  power  shall  be  the  sinner's  stay  ? 
How  shall  ye  meet  that  dreadful  day  ? 
Jesus,  be  Thou  my  spirit's  stay, 
Though  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away." 

Observe — (1)  A  sinner* s  portion  not  what  he 
wishes,  but  what  God  appoints.  (2)  His  por- 
tion a  heritage — (i.)  As  contrasted  with  his 
earthly  possessions  and  enjoyments  ;  (ii.)  As 
certain  to  find  him  as  its  heir ;  (3)  Solemn 
contrast  between  this  portion  and  that  of  the 
believer  in  Jesus  (Ps.  xvi.  5,  6;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  4. 


CHAPTER  XXL 
JOFS  REPLY  TO  ZOPHAR S  SECOND  SPEECH. 


The  ungodly,  instead  of  experiencing  the 
miberies  indicated  by  Zophar,  often,  ])erhaps 
generally,  enjoy  continued  ease  and  pros- 
perity in  this  life. 

I.  Introduction  (verse  2—6). 


"Hear  diligently  my  speech."  Men  of  wis- 
dom and  experience, especially  pious  sufferers, 
worthy  to  be  seriously  listened  to.  Solemn 
and  weighty  truiJis  to  be  heard  with  corre- 
sponding attention.  Heb.,  "Hear,  hear." 
Serious  matters  call  for  double  or  diligent 
1.  JSes]peaki  earnest  attention   (verse   2).      hearing.     Deep  attention  to   be   given  to 


CHAP.  XXI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


truths  concerning  God's  mysterious  provi- 
dence, still  more  to  those  regarding  u  }))-ovidcd 
Saviour  and  tiie  great  salvation  (lleb.  ii.  1). 
An  aggravated  sin  when  God  stretches  out 
His  hand  and  no  man  regards  it  (Prov.  i. 
24). 

A  reason  given  for  such  attention:  ''And 
let  this  be  (or,  'and  this  shall  be')  your  con- 
solations." Allusion  to  Zophar'sboastedconso- 
lations  (cli.  xv.  11).  Sometimes  mourners  more 
relieved  by  our  listening  to  their  sentiments 
than  by  uttering  our  own.  Better  to  be 
silent  in  the  presence  of  the  afflicted  than 
to  dispute  or  censure.  Consolation  due  lo 
sufferers  from  their  frit  nds.  A  brother  born 
for  adversity.  Professed  comforters  may 
become  real  tormentors. 

2.  Solicits  patience  (verse  3),  "  Suffer  me 
that  I  may  speak."  Patience  especially  due 
to  sufferers.  Persons  who  speai<:  n>uch 
themselves  generally  most  impatient  of 
others.  The  Scripture  rule — "  Swiit  to  hear, 
slow  to  speak." — "  And  after  that  I  have 
spoken,  mock  on."  A  troubled  spirit  often 
eased  by  utterance.  Sad  when  those  who 
ought  to  be  comforters  in  our  affliction  be- 
come mockers  (ch.  xvii.  2).  One  of  Job's 
greatest  trials  to  be  mocked  by  his  friends 
(ch.  xii.  4).  As  much  patience  required  to 
endure  mockings  as  scourgings  (Heb.  xi. 
36). 

3.  Justifies  his  displeasure  (verse  4).  "As 
for  me,  is  my  complaint  to  man?  And  if  it 
were  so,  why  should  not  my  spirit  be  trou- 
bled ?  "  {margin^  *'  shortened ; "  same  word 
rendered  "discouraged,"  Num.  xxi.  4} 
"grieved,"  Jud.  x.  16;  "vexed,"  Jud.  xvi. 
16 ;  "straitened,"  Mic.  ii.  7  j  "hasty,"  Prov. 
xiv.  29;  "anguish,"  Exod.  vi.  9).  Sorrow 
contracts  the  heart  as  joy  enlarges  it  (Ps. 
cxix.  32).  The  flesh  is  soon  angry,  while 
grace  is  long  suffering.  Job  complains  not 
to  man,  but  to  God,  as  the  author  of  his 
troubles.  His  complaint  both  of  God  and 
to  God;  the  former  the  complaint  of  the 
fleshy  the  latter  that  of  the  spirit.  Grace 
teaches  to  look  away  from  instruments  and 
second  causes  to  God  Himself.  So  David 
(2  Sam.  xvi.  10). 

Job  justifies  Ids  displeasure  on  the  ground 
that  God  dealt  so  hardly  with  him.  His 
language  too  much  that  of  the  prophet  at 
Nineveh  and  Elijah  under  the  juniper-tree. 
The  flesh  always  and  in  all  alike.  Thinks  that 
under  severe  trouble  we  "  do  well  to  be 
angry."  Grace  enables  us  to  kiss  the  rod 
that  smites  us,  and  to  say,  "Abba,  Eather; 
not  my  will,  Ijut  Thine  be  done."  Jesus 
rather  than  Job  our  pattern  in  affliction.  Our 
privilege  in  Christ  to  be  strengthened  with 
all  might,  according  to  God's  glorious  power, 
unto  all  patience  and  long-suffering  with 
joyfulness  (Col.  i.  11). 

128 


4.  Invites  solemn  atteniioji  to  the  astounding 
fact  of  suffering  saints  and  prosperous  sinners 
(verse  5).  "Mark  me  and  be  astonished, 
and  lay  your  iiand  upon  your  mouth"  [in 
silent  awe  and  wonder].  God's  dealings  in 
Providence  to  be  regarded  with  reverence 
and  awe.  Habakkuk's  experience  (Hab.  iii. 
16) ;  David's  (Ps.  cxix.  120).  The  sufferings 
of  saints  and  prosperity  of  sinners  a  subject 
mysterious  and  inscrutable  till  read  in  the 
light  of  inspired  Scripture  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  17). 
Anomalies  in  God's  government  awaiting  the 
explanations  of  eternity. 

Expresses  his  own  feelings  in  reference  to 
this  mysterious  fact  and  its  influence  upon 
himself  (verse  6).  "  Even  when  I  remember 
I  am  afraid,  and  trembling  taketh  hold  on 
my  flesh."  Our  own  expciience,  as  well  as 
that  of  others,  often  to  be  remembered  with 
trembling  (Lam.  iii.  19,  20)  The  part  of 
grace  not  only  to  tremble  at  God's  wordy 
but  God's  works  (Is.  Ixvi.  2).  The  speaker 
to  be  duly  affected  himself  b}  the  truths  he 
addresses  to  others.  Must  weep  himself  if 
he  would  have  his  hearers  weep. 

II.  Problem  proposed.  Commences 
with  a  question  implying  an  undoubted  fact 
(verse  7). 

"  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live  (or,  en 
joy  life),  become  old,  yea  mighty  in  power  " 
(or  wealth).  Three  facts  implied  regarding 
the  ungodly  in  this  life  : — 1.  They  "live  ;  " 
are  permitted  to  continue  in  life  and  to  enjoy 
it.  2.  In  many  instances  "become  old;" 
ordinarily  viewed  as  an  element  of  pros- 
perity and  a  mark  of  Divine  favour.  The 
hoary  head  not  always  found  in  the  way  of 
righteousness.  3.  "Become  mighty  in 
power  "  and  substance  ;  enjoy  great  worldly 
prosperity  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  12).  Such  facts 
hardly  to  be  expected  under  the  government 
of  a  riditeous  God.  The  perplexity  and 
almost  despair  of  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2  13). 
The  73rd  Psalm  a  commentary  on  this 
chapter  of  Job.  Such  facts  suggest  inquiry 
as  to  the  cause.  Scripture  furnishes  the 
reply.  (See  Rom.  ii.  4;  1  Tim.  i.  16; 
Ps  Ixxiii.  18 ;  Ecc.  viii.  11 — 13  ;  Luke  ii. 
35,  &c.;  Ps.  xvi.  4;  Rom.  ix.  22).  The 
present  not  the  only  state  of  man's  existence. 
This  life  a  state  of  probation  and  discipline, 
not  of  retribution.  The  present  a  time  of 
forbearance  and  mercy ;  God  waiting  for  the 
sinner's  repentance  in  order  to  be  gracious  to 
him.  God's  goodness  intended  to  lead  to 
repentance.  The  ungodly  spared  in  order 
to  have  time  for  ^epenianee;  "the  long- 
suffering  of  God  IS  salvation;"  not  willing 
"that  any  should  perish  (2  Peter  iii.  9 — 15). 
Thi'ir  prosperity  an  exercise  for  the  faith  of 
the  godly.  A  standing  evidence  of  a  time 
of  r.  ture  retrib-utioii.    A  monuiueut  to  ihe 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARr:  JOB. 


CRi-P.    XXI. 


glory  of  the  Divine  patience  and  long-suffer- 
ing. Renders  the  impenitence  of  men  inex- 
cusable and  justifies  all  their  future  pun- 
ishment. Demonstrates  the  inferiority  of 
earthly  to  heavenly  blessings. 

III.  Description  of  the  prosperity  of 
the  ungodly  (verses  8 — 13). 

1.  In  relation  to  their  children  (verse  8). 
**  Their  seed  is  established  in  their  sight  with 
them,  and  their  offspring  before  their  eyes." 
Their  children  obtain  a  firm  and  prosperous 
position  in  the  world,  and  that  while  they 
themselves  still  live  to  see  and  enjoy  it.  Im- 
portant elements  in  a  man's  earthly  felicity : 
— (1)  To  have  a  numerous  offspring;  (2) 
To  see  his  children  prosperous  and  established 
in  the  world  j  (3)  To  have  them  continuing 
to  live  with  or  near  him  ;  (4)  To  live  to  see 
and  rejoice  in  their  earthly  prosperity  and 
happiness.  Some  of  these  elements  formerly 
enjoyed  by  Job,  though  no  longer  so.  The 
happiness  ot  the  ungodly,  in  relation  to  their 
children,  again  touched  upon  under  another 
aspect  in  verse  11.  "They  send  forth  their 
little  ones  (out  of  doors,  under  a  guardian 
or  guide),  and  their  children  dance  "  (frisk 
sportively  as  lambs  in  the  pasture).  Pleasing 
picture  of  domestic  happiness  and  prosperity. 
The  children  viewed  as  still  young  and  under 
their  parents'  guardianship.  Healthy,  happy, 
frolicking  children  a  pleasant  spectacle, 
especially  to  parents'  eyes.  A  lar^j^e  in- 
gredient in  the  cup  of  earthly  bliss.  Homes 
lighted  up  with  children's  innocent  hilarities 
the  gift  of  a  gracious  God. 

2.  Domestic  security  and  freedom  from 
affliction  and  trouble  (verse  9).  "Their 
houses  are  safe  from  fear  (of  any  hostile 
attack  or  elemental  violence),  neithtr  is  the 
rod  of  God  upon  them."  The  contrast  to 
the  case  of  Job  and  his  children.  Sons  ex- 
perience  chastisement  from  which  slaves  ar»* 
exempt.  Freedom  from  afflictions  ana  iriaii> 
no  mark  of  a  child  of  God.  The  ungodly 
'*  have  no  changes,  therefore  they  fear  not 
God"  (Ps.  Iv.  19).  Ill  sign  for  a  man  when 
God  will  not  spend  a  rod  upon  him  [^Brookes], 

3.  Success  in  business  and  freedom  from 
worldly  losses  (verse  30).  "Their  bull  gen- 
dereth  and  faileth  not ;  their  cow  calveth 
and  casteth  not  her  calf"  (by  an  untimely 
birth).  Matters  in  which  Imman  skill  and 
industry  seem  to  have  but  little  to  do.  As 
if  a  blessing  rested  on  all  the  work  of  their 
hands,  and  on  all  their  belongings.  Their 
very  cattle  prosperous  and  fruitful.  People 
in  everything  fortunate,  and,  as  the  world 
say,  lucky. 

4.  Enjoyment  of  music  and  festivity  (verse 
12).  "  They  take  (or  *  lift  up '  [their  voice] 
to)  the  timbrel  and  harp,  and  rejoice  at  (or, 
trip  merrily  to)  the  sound  of  the  organ  "  (or 


pipe — musical  instruments  of  greatest  anti- 
quity [Gen.  iv.  21 ;  xxxi.  271 ;  the  "organ" 
with  us  a  comparatively  modern  invention). 
The  life  of  the  persons  in  question  one,  to  a 
large  extent,  of  festivity  and  enjoyment. 
Their  dwellings  abundantly  enlivened  with 
the  sound  of  music,  vocal  and  instrumental. 
The  ungodly  no  strangers  to  the  hilarity  of 
music  and  dancing.  '*  The  harp  and  viol, 
the  tabret  and  pipe,  are  in  their  feasts,  while 
they  regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord"  (Is. 
V.  12).  "They  chant  to  the  sound  of  the 
viol  and  invent  to  themselves  instruments  of 
music  like  Uavid,  but  are  not  grieved  for 
the  affliction  of  Joseph  "  (Amos  vi.  5,  6). 
Musical  instruments  an  invention  of  the 
descendants  of  Cain  (Gen.  iv.  21).    Yet 

Music 

one  of  God's  choicest  earthly  blessings.  Its 
influence  beneficial  on  the  individual  and  the 
household.  Its  effects  on  man's  nature 
manifold  and  important.  Rests  fatigue. 
Relieves  pain.  Subdues  passion.  Soothes 
suffering.  Mitigates  sorrow.  Allays  ner- 
vous irritation.  Resists  melancholy.  Saul's 
evil  spirit  yielded  to  the  sweet  sounds  of 
David's  harp  (1  Sam.  xvi.  23).  Inspires 
courage  and  inspirits  the  brave.  The  rousing 
strains  of  Highland  bagpipes  helped  to  win 
the  day  at  Waterloo.  Music  powerful  in 
the  conflict  of  life.  A  means  of  moral  cul- 
ture. Assists  devotion  Calms  and  elevates 
the  mind  for  the  communication  and  recep- 
tion of  Divine  truth.  The  prophet  calls 
first  for  the  aid  of  a  minstrel  (2  Kings  iii. 
15).  Music  a  Divhie  art  and  heavenly  em- 
ployment. Heaven  filled  with  music.  Some- 
thing of  divinity  in  music  more  than  the  ear 
•'Uscovers  \_Sir  T.  Browne'].  The  beneficial 
effect  of  soft  and  sweet  sounds,  especially 
^f  sacred  music,  upon  the  sick,  an  acknow- 
ledged fact.  Music  "  whispered  to  the 
weary  spirit"  sometimes  the  only  sound  to 
be  endured  by  the  sick  and  sorrowful 
Music  to  be  consecrated  to  the  glory  of  its 
Divine  Author.  "  A  table  without  music  little 
better  than  a  manger"  [Epictetus'].  Espe- 
cially true  of  the  song  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving. Music,  like  other  Divine  gifts,  often 
desecrated  to  the  service  of  the  god  of  this 
world.  The  Enemy's  object  to  make  a  sinful 
and  worldly  life  as  agreeable  as  possible. 
Helps  men  to  forget  death  and  a  judgment 
to  come  in  the  sweet  sounds  of  earthly 
music.  Nero  played  on  his  harp  while 
gazing  on  Rome  in  flnnes,  the  pri)bable 
effect  of  his  own  wickedness. 

5.  A  joyous  life  and  an  easy  and  painless 
death.  Verse  13. — "  They  spend  their  days 
in  wealth  (prosperity  or  j)leasure),  and  in  a 
niouiuut  go  down  to  the  grave  "  (without 

129 


CHAP.  XXI. 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


any  painful,  lingering  disease,  or  without 
inward  terrors  of  conscience).  A  case  pro- 
bably at  least  as  frequent  as  that  described 
in  such  tragic  terms  by  Zophar  (chap.  xx. 
16 — 28).  Exemplified  in  the  rich  fool  (Luke 
xii.  16 — 20),  and  in  Dives  (Luke  xvi.  19 — 
22).     Observe— 

(1),  The  main  concern  of  a  godless  man  is 
about  his  wealth  or  worldly  happiness.  In 
regard  to  wealth,  his  care  is — (1)  To  get  it ; 
(2)  To  keep  it;  (3)  To  enjoy  it. 

(2).  An  easy  death  after  a  prosperous  life 
one  of  the  desires  of  the  ungodly,  and  fre- 
quently experienced  by  them.  Such  a  death 
a  blessing  to  the  godly ;  to  the  ungodly  a 
curse.  An  uneasy  death-bed  a  thousand 
times  better  than  an  undone  eternity. 

(3).  A  godless  life  often  finished  with  a 
sudden  and  unpreparedfor  death.  The  sin- 
ner's greatest  misery  only  to  discover  iiis 
misery  when  too  late  to  escape  it.  To  a  be- 
liever sudden  death  is  sudden  glory. 

IV.  The  hardening  eifect  of  this 
prosperity  on  the  wicked  themselves. 

Verse  14. — "  Therefore  they  say  (in  works 
if  not  in  words)  :  Depart  from  us,  for  we 
desire  not  the  knowledge  of  Thy  ways. 
What  is  the  Almighty  that  we  should  serve 
Him  ?  And  what  profit  should  we  have  if 
we  pray  to  Him?"  {Heb.:  "If  we  meet 
Him  ?  " — i.e.,  in  a  way  of  prayer).  God's 
goodness  often  perverted  by  the  ungodly  to 
an  end  the  opposite  of  that  intended.  That 
goodness  improved  leads  men  to  repentance ; 
abused,  drives  them  farther  from  it.  Un- 
sanctified  wealth  a  blessing  perverted  into  a 
curse.  Riches,  with  the  heart  in  them,  sepa- 
rate men  still  farther  from  God.  One  effect 
of  Divine  grace  is  that  men  *'  fear  the  Lord 
and  His  goodness."  The  tendency  of  fallen 
human  nature  is  to  grow  proud  and  indepen- 
dent of  God  in  prosperity.  "  Jeshuruu  waxed 
fat  and  kicked"  (Deut.  xxxii.  15).  The 
terrible  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  against 
God  perhaps  most  conspicuous  in  prosperity. 
Ordinarily,  gifts  and  kindness  attract  and 
attach  to  the  giver. — The  text  an  awful  ex- 
hibition of  man's 

Natural  Depravity. 

That  depravity  displayed — 

1.  In  ingratitude  and  enmity  towards  God. 
"  Depart  from  us." 

2.  In  dislike  to  God's  ways.  **  We  desire 
not,"&c. 

3.  In  pride  and  independence  in  regard  to 
God.    "  What  is  the  Almighty  ?  "  &c. 

4.  In  infidelity  and  unbelief.  **What 
profit  should  we  have  ?  "  &c. 

These  verses  a  comment  on  David*s  testi- 
l?9* 


mony  concerning  the  ungodly  in  every  age* 
"The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart.  There  is 
no  God"  (Ps.  xiv.  1).  An  illustration  of 
the  Apostle's  language  in  reference  to  the 
unrenewed:  "Alienated  from  the  life  of 
God ;  "  "  Without  God  in  the  world  "  (Eph. 
ii.  12  ;  iv.  18).  The  history  of  mankind,  the 
literature  of  every  land,  and  the  observation 
of  every  day,  a  humbling  confirmation  of  the 
patriarch's  description  of — 

*'  An  impious  world, 
Who  deem  religion  frenzy,  and  the  God 
Who  made  them  an  intruder  on  their  joys.** 

From  the  whole  passage  observe— 

1.  The  misery  of  the  ungodly  that  they  are  far 
from  God,  and  desire  to  be  still  farther.  "  They 
say  unto  God:  Depart  from  us."  To  be 
weary  and  impatient  of  God's  presence  the 
strongest  evidence  of  a  wicked  heart.  What 
constitutes  the  joy  and  desire  of  a  saint  is 
the  torment  and  aversion  of  an  impenitent 
sinner.  Awful  result  to  the  ungodly  man 
when  God  grants  him  the  wish  of  his  unre- 
newed heart. 

2.  Impenitent  men  do  not  desire  to  know 
God's  ways,  much  less  to  walk  in  them.  "  We 
desire  not  the  knowledge  of  Thy  ways." 
God's  ways  are — (1)  His  own  doings  and 
procedure ;  (2)  The  conduct  He  prescribes 
to  His  intelligent  creatures.  The  mark  of  a 
gracious  heart  to  desire  to  know  God's  ways  j 
still  more  to  walk  in  them.  Men's  sin  and 
misery  not  to  know  God's  ways  ;  still  more 
not  to  have  the  desire  to  know  them. 

3.  God's  service  founded  on  a  just  con- 
sideration of  the  Almighty.  "What  is  the 
Almighty  that  we  should  serve  Him  ?  "  Ir- 
religion  the  result  of  spiritual  blindness  and 
ignorance  of  God.  The  Almighty  infinitely 
worthy  to  be  served — (1)  For  what  He  is  in 
Himself — good,  holy,  just,  wise,  faithful,  and 
powerful  i  (2)  For  what  He  is  to  us — our 
Creator,  Preserrer,  Benefactor,  and  in  Christ 
our  Redeemer. 

4.  The  part  of  infidelity  and  ungodliness  to 
question  the  utility  of  prayer.  "  What  profit 
should  we  have  if  we  pray  to  Him  ?  "  God's 
purpose  and  plan  to  give  to  the  humble  and 
believing  asker  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  37  ;  Matt.  vii. 
7 ;  Phil.  iv.  6,  7 ;  James  i.  5,  6 ;  iv.  2,  3). 
For  answer  to  the  question :  "  What  profit 
should  we  have?"  &c.,  a >k— (1)  Those  who 
live  a  life  of  prayer  5  (2)  A  dying  bed ;  (3) 
The  day  of  judgment.  If  religion  costs 
something,  the  want  of  it  one  day  found  to 
cost  much  more.  The  mark  of  a  depraved 
nature  to  ask,  not  "What  is  right?"  but 
"  What  profit  should  we  have  ?  "  The  profit- 
able only  found  in  the  right.  Duty  first  5 
utility  next. 

5.  The  whole  Bible  and  the  history  of  the 
Church  of  God  on  earth  an  answer  to  th4 
question  of  infidelity  in  the  te^(. 


flOMILETIC  COMUmTAliY :  JOB. 


CHAF.  Xtl, 


Abraham's  servant  prayed  to  God,  and 
God  directed  him  to  the  person  who  should 
be  a  wife  to  his  master's  son  and  heir  (Gen. 
xxiv.  10—20). 

Jacob  prayed  to  God,  and  God  inclined 
the  heart  of  his  irritated  brother,  so  that 
they  met  in  friendship  and  peace  (Gen.  xxxii. 
24—30  ;  xxxiii.  1—4). 

Samson  prayed  to  God,  and  God  showed 
liim  a  well  of  water,  wliere  he  quenched  his 
burning  thirst,  and  so  lived  to  judge  Israel 
(Judges  XV.  18—20). 

David  prayed,  and  God  defeated  the  counsel 
of  Ahithophel  (2  Sam.  xv.  31  ;  xvi.  20—23; 
xvii.  14—23). 

Daniel  prayed,  and  God  enabled  hitn  both 
to  tell  Nebuchadnezzar  his  dream  and  the 
interpretation  of  it  (Dan.  ii.  lb — 23). 

Neheraiah  prayed,  and  God  inclined  the 
heart  of  the  King  of  Persia  to  grant,  him 
leave  of  absence  to  visit  and  rebuild  Jeru- 
salem (Neh.  i.ll ;  ii.  1 — 6). 

Esther  and  Mordecai  prayed,  and  God 
defeated  the  purpose  of  Haman,  and  saved 
the  Jews  from  destruction  (Esther  iv.  15 — 
17;vi.  7,  8). 

The  believers  in  Jerusalem  prayed,  and 
God  opened  the  prison-doors  and  set  Peter 
at  liberty,  when  Herod  had  resolved  upon 
his  death  (Acts  xii.  1 — 12). 

The  profit  from  prayer,  however,  not  con- 
fined to  direct  answers. 

Paul  prayed  that  the  thorn  in  the  flesh 
might  be  removed,  and  his  prayer  brought  a 
large  increase  of  spiritual  strength,  while  the 
thorn,  perhaps,  remained  (2  Cor.  xii.  7  —  10). 
Prayer  like  the  dove  that  Noah  sent  forth, 
and  which  blessed  him  not  only  when  it  re- 
turned with  an  olive  leaf  in  its  mouth,  but 
when  it  never  returned  at  all. 

The  question  which  the  Patriarch  puts 
into  the  mouth  of  the  ungodly  and  infidel 
in  his  day  boldly  repeated  in  our  own;  as 
indicated  in  the  famous  prai/er-test  lately 
proposed  by  a  Professor  in  one  of  the  Scotch 
Universities,  and  a  leading  member  of  the 
British  Association  for  tlie  Promotion  of 
Scientific  Knowledge. 

Observe  in  regard  to— 

Prayer, 

(1.)  The  profit  from  prayer  taught  hy  the 
natural  instinct  of  the  human  race.  Natural 
to  men.  even  the  most  ungodly  and  unen- 
lighreneJ,  to  think  of  calling  upon  some 
superior  Being  in  the  time  of  danger  or  of 
trouble.  The  erection  of  the  altar  to  the 
unknown  God  at  Athens  due  to  this  feeling  on 
the  part  of  the  Athenians.  The  conduct  oi  the 
heathen  sailors  in  the  ship  wliich  was  to  con- 
vey Jonah  to  Tarshish,  an  indication  of  the 
feelings  and  views  of  humanity  (Jonah  i.  5). 


(2.)  Profit  from  prayer  a  natural  and 
necessary  conclusion  from  the  acknowledged 
-^atherhood  of  God.  An  instinct  of  nature 
for  a  child  to  apply  to  a  father  in  difficulty 
or  distress. 

(3.)  Answers  to  prayer  only  desirable  when 
our  prayers  are  according  to  the  will  of  God. 
If  otherwise,  answers  to  prayer  rather  a  bane 
than  a  blessing.  "He  gave  them  their  re- 
quest, but  sent  leanness  into  their  souls " 
(Ps.  cvi  15). 

(4.)  One  part  of  the  Holy  Spirit^ s  office  to 
teach  those  who  are  under  His  guidance  what  to 
ask  for  (Rom.  viii.  26,  27). 

(5  )  Profit  from  prayer  on  the  part  of  those 
who  are  living  in  rebellion  against  Gody  a 
matter  of  the  merest  mercy.  The  practice 
of  sin  a  sufficient  reason  why  prayer  may 
not  be  answered.  Righteous  with  God  to 
say  as  He  did  to  the  Jews :  "  Yea,  when 
ye  make  many  prayers  I  will  not  hear  j 
your  hands  are  full  of  blood "  (Isaiah 
1.  15).  Iniquity  only  regarded  in  the  heart 
sufficient  to  hinder  answers  to  prayer  (Ps. 
Ixvi.  18). 

(6.)  Access  to  God  and  assurance  of  an- 
swers to  prayer  the  precious  fruit  of  the 
incarnation^  death,  and  intercession  of  the 
Son  of  God  (Heb.  iv.  16).  Christ,  or  the 
Son  of  God  in  our  nature,  the  only  and 
divinely-constituted  medium  of  communi- 
cation between  fallen  men  and  a  righteous 
and  holy  God.  The  ladder  which  Jacob  saw 
in  his  dream  at  Bethel,  with  the  angels  of 
God  ascending  and  descending  upon  it  (Gen. 
xxviii.  12 ;  John  i.  51). 

(7.)  True  prayer  a  ^^  meeting  '*  with  God. 
{Heb.)  "What  profit  if  we  meet  with  Him?" 
Prayer  vain  if  not  a  meeting  with  God.  Christ 
the  meeting-place  between  a  Holy  God  and 
sinful  man  (Heb.  iv.  14 — 16.)  Figured  by 
the  mercy-seat  (Ez.  xxv.  22).  Christ  the 
only  way  to  the  Father,  and  only  Mediator 
between  God  and  men  (John  xiv.  6 ;  1  Tim. 
ii.  5).  God's  love  to  man  manifested  in  His 
providing  Christ  as  a  meeting-place  between 
Himself  and  sinners.  In  and  through  Christ, 
men  able  now  to  meet  with  God  on  a  throne  of 
grace;  apart  from  Christ,  God  only  to  be 
met  with  on  a  throne  of  judgment.  Men 
must  either  meet  with  God  in  prayer  now,  or 
meet  with  Him  in  judgment  hereafter.  A 
meeting  with  God  on  the  part  of  men  certain 
and  inevitable,  sooner  or  later.  The  ques- 
tion is,  of  what  nature  shall  the  meeting  be  P 
May  be  one  to  our  unspeakable  joy,  or  to 
our  everlasting  sorrow.  To  meet  with  God 
in  prayer  through  Christ  now,  is  life;  to 
meet  with  Him  in  judgment  without  Christ 
hereafter,  is  death.  Madness  to  put  away  a 
meeting  with  God  till  we  can  only  meet  with 
Him  as  an  angry  Judge.  God,  in  Christ,  a 
Father  waiting  with  open  arms  to   receive 

130 


CttAf.    XXI. 


nOMJLETrC  COMMENTAtlY:  JOB. 


His  penitent  and  praying  children  ;  God, 
apart  from  Christ,  a  consuming  fire  to 
devour  His  impenitent  and  prayerless  adver- 
saries. A  sinner's  blessedness  to  meet  V7ith 
God  as,  in  Clirist,  reconciled  and  reconciling 
the  World  to  Himself. 

Y.  Job's  protest  against  a  life  of 
prosperous  ung-odliness  (verse  J  6).  *'Lo, 
their  good  is  not  in  their  hand  :  the  counsel 
of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me."  Observe — 
1.  Worldly  prosperiti/  and  earthly  blessin/js 
not  less  a  good  because  ab/ised — a  good,  though 
not  tlie  chief  good.  The  part  of  sin — (1) 
to  pervert  what  is  good  in  itself  into  an  evil ; 
(2)  To  make  a  temporal  good  the  chief  good 
instead  of  an  eternal  one.  2.  The  good 
enjoyed  by  the  ungodly  neither  a  satisfying 
nor  a  lasting  one;  "their  good  is  not  in  their 
hand," — a  thing  neither  to  be  grasped  nor 
retained.  Mighty  difference  between  Ihe 
good  of  the  believer  and  the  worldling.  The 
one  substance,  the  other  shadow;  the  one 
lasting  and  eternal,  the  other  momentary 
and  perishing.  The  ungodly  unable  to 
retain  their  prosperity  and  happiness  a 
moment  beyond  God's  pleasure.  A  thousand 
accidents  able  fo  rob  tliem  of  it  at  any  mo- 
ment. No  real  good  in  their  hand,  and  still 
less  in  their  hope.  3.  Care  to  be  taken  not 
to  be  influenced  by  the  prosperity  of  the  god- 
less and  worldly.  (1)  By  consideration  of 
the  truth  and  reality  of  their  case  ;  their 
prosperity  only  temporary,  and  their  happi- 
ness unreal ;  "  their  good  not  in  their  hand  ; " 
(2)  By  steadfast  repudiation  of  their  princi- 
ples and  life.  *'  The  counsel  of  the  wicked  is 
far  from  me."     Consider,  in  regard  to — 

The  counsel  of  tlie  wicked, 

First :  what  it  is.  The  principles  upon  which 
they  act  and  by  which  their  hfe  is  governed. 
These  are  —  (1)  To  make  the  enjoyment  of 
the  present  life  their  chief  good, — their  first 
if  not  their  only  aim — take  care  for  this  life, 
and  let  the  next  take  care  of  itself.  (2)  To 
gain  that  enjoyment  in  any  way  they  can 
with  safety: — if  honestly,  well;  if  not,  in 
any  way  you  can.  (3)  To  depend  on  their 
Ovvn  endeavours  for  what  they  desire,  instead 
if  God  : — "  Mine  own  hand  hath  gotten  ine 
this  wealtli."  (4)  To  ignore  God  and  eternity, 
heaven  and  hell,  either  as  having  no  exist eiK  e 
or  no  relation  to  themselves.  The  woildling's 
creed — no  reality  but  what  is  visible  or  cog- 
nizable by  themselves.  The  seen  and  sensible 
only  substance,  all  else  shadow  and  moon- 
shine. (5)  To  despise  the  provision  of  a 
Saviour.  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas  ;  (6) 
To  care  for  one's  self  and  immediate  connec- 
tions, and  leave  others  to  do  the  same.  At- 
tend to  nu'nberone. 
130* 


Second :  Job's  conduct  in  regard  to  this 
counsel.  **  The  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far 
from  me."  The  principles  and  practice  of 
the  ungodly,  not  only  to  be  put  away,  but 
far  away  from  us.  Safest  to  stand  at  the 
greatest  distance  from  sin.  Joseph  kept  far 
from  it,  and  had  God's  blessing  in  the 
dungeon.  David  went  near  it  and  got  broken 
bones.  Sin  an  infectious  plague ;  therefore 
not  to  be  approached.  The  surest  way  not 
to  walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  to 
keep  far  from  it.  "  Enter  not  into  the  path 
of  tlie  wicked  ;  avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn 
from  it  and  pass  away."  Occasions  of  sin  to 
be  avoided  as  well  as  sin  itself.  The  harlot's 
door  to  be  avoided.  He  who  carries  gun- 
powder must  keep  far  away  from  sparks. 
God  only  keeps  from  acts  of  sin  those  who 
keep  from  occasions  of  it.  Look  not  intently 
on  what  you  may  not  love  entirely,  {Brookes.) 
The  counsel  of  the  wicked  to  be  put  far  from 
us — (1)  In  oViV  judgment.  To  be  viewed  in 
its  real  ciiaracter.  Condemned  and  repudiated 
as  what  it  reall»y  is — wicked,  abominable, 
destructive.  (2)  In  our  will  and  purpose. 
Our  language  to  be,  what  have  I  to  do  with 
idols  ?  (Hos.  xiv.  8).  To  choose  with  Mary 
the  good  part.  To  say  with  David  :  "  Depart 
from  me,  ve  evil-doers;  for  I  will  keep  the 
commandments  of  my  God."  "I  have  sworn, 
and  I  will  perform  it,  that  I  will  keep  thy 
righteous  judgments  "  (Ps.  cxix.  106,  115). 
So  Daniel  *'  purposed  in  his  heart  that  he 
would  not  defile  himselfwith  the  king's  meat" 
(Dan.  i.  8).  (3)  In  our  practice.  Purpose 
to  become  practice.  The  man  only  blessed 
who  *'  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  un- 
godly "  (Ps.  i.  1).  Our  life  to  be  governed 
by  opposite  principles. 

Third :  why  is  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly 
to  be  put  far  from  us  ?  From  its  character 
and  issues.  The  principles  of  the  ungodj 
and  worldly  are — (1)  Foolish  andunreasonble. 
Only  the  fool  says  in  his  heart,  no  God. 
Absurd  only  to  believe  what  we  see.  Mad- 
ness to  prefer  the  enjoyment  of  a  day  to 
that  of  a  hfe-time ;  the  enjoyment  of  a  short 
life-time  to  that  of  an  endless  eternity.  The 
part  of  a  fool  to  make  careful  provision  for 
the  body  and  neglect  the  soul  which  shall 
eternally  survive  it.  (2)  Wicked.  Intensely 
wicked  to  ignore  and  repudiate  the  God  that 
made,  preserves,  and  every  moment  sustains 
us ;  a  God  possessed  of  every  excellence — 
the  Author  of  our  Being  and  our  Well-being. 
(3)  Destructive.  Certain  and  endless  ruin 
the  result  of  a  sinful  and  worldly  life, — of 
despising  God  and  rejecting  His  Son,  Jesus 
Christ.  "  All  they  that  hate  me  love  death." 
What  is  sown  here  is  reaped  hereafter  (  Gal. 
vi.  7,  8  ;  Ps.  xvi.  4 ;  Is  1.  11 ;  Rom.  iii.  16; 
vi.  21,  23  ;  John  viii.  21,  24). 

Eouith :  How  is  the  counsel  of  the  wicked 


UOMlLiLTW  COMMENTAlir :  JOB. 


CllAP.  XXI. 


to  be  put  far  away  from  us  ?  Not  easily. 
Tlie  counsel  of  the  wicked  is — (1)  Natural 
to  a  depraved  heart.  Tlie  carnal  mind 
enmity  against  God.  To  follow  the  counsel 
of  the  wicked  is  to  swim  with  the  stream. 

(2)  Popular.  The  way  of  the  multitude. 
To  put  it  far  away  is  to  be  singular.  Not 
always  easy  to  come  out  and  be  separate. 

(3)  Pleasing  to  the  flesh.  Sin  wears  a  ser- 
pent's skin.  The  forbidden  fruit  pleasing  to 
the  eye,  and  sweet  to  the  taste.  The  princi- 
ples and  practice  of  the  wicked  and  worldly 
only  to  be  put  far  away  from  us — (1)  Bi/ 
a  change  of  heart.  A  corrupt  tree  only 
brings  fortii  evil  fruit.  "  Out  of  the  heart 
proceed  evil  thoughts,"  &c.  *'  Ye  must  be 
born  again."  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water 
and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  see  the  king- 
dom of  God.  (2)  By  acceptance  of  the  offered 
Saviour  and  reliance  on  His  grace.  In  look- 
ing to  Him  who  died  for  our  sin  we  are 
delivered  from  its  power,  and  receive 
strength  to  overcome  it.  The  cross  of 
Christ  our  only  deliverance  from  the  counsel 
of  the  ungodly  (Gal.  vi.  14).  (3)  Bi/  the  due 
use  of  means,  (i.)  Prayer.  Spiritual  strength 
given  to  waiting  upon  God  and  in  answer  to 
prayer  (Is.  xl.  22 — 31 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25 — 
27,  37).  (ii.)  Reading  and  meditation  in 
the  Scriptures  (Ps.  xvii.  4 ;  cxix.  1 1 ;  John 
XV.  3  ;  xviii.  17).  (iii.)  Contemplation  of 
the  Saviour's  character  and  cross  (2  Cor.  iii. 
18  ;  Gal.  vi.  14).  (iv.)  Consideration  of  the 
character  and  consequences  of  sin. 

Job's  practical  renunciation  of  the  counsel 
of  the  ungodly  already  a  fact.  Resolution 
is  to  become  reality.  The  future  to  be 
translated  into  the  present-  ''Let  it  be" 
to  become  "  it  is."  ^ 

VI.  The  final  misery  of  the  ungodly, 
notwithstanding     present     prosperity 

(verse  17).  "  How  oft  is  the  candle  of  the 
wicked  put  out."  May  be  read  either  as  a 
question  implying  the  rarity  of  the  case,  or 
as  an  exclamation  implying  its  frequency. 
The  "  candle,"  or  prosperity,  of  the  wicked, 
extinguished  by  death,  though  frequently 
before  it.  Job's  main  assertion,  that  the 
wicked  often  live,  become  old,  and  die  in 
prosperity  and  ease.  Yet  their  end  destruc- 
tion not  the  less.  Asaph  stumbled  at  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked  till  he  went  into 
the  sanctuary  and  understood  their  end 
{ Ps.  Ixxiii.  17). — "  How  oft  cometh  their 
destruction  upon  them."  Not  always,  nor 
even  usually,  visited  with  signal  judgment 
and  a  miserable  death.  Occasional  cases  as 
warnings,  and  as  indications  of  a  future 
judgment.  Examples:  the  Deluge;  destruc- 
tion of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha ;  Haman ;  Saul, 
Herod. — "  God  distributeth  sorrows  in  His 
anger.  Observe — 1.  Continuance  of  outward 
9—2 


prosperity  consistent  with  secret  wrath.  The 
abuse  of  Divine  gifts  the  greatest  provoca- 
tion of  Divine  anger.  God's  wratn  certain 
against  ungodliness,  however  long  its  mani- 
festation may  be  withheld.  God  angry  with 
the  wicked  every  day.  Wrath  treasured  up 
against  the  day  of  wrath.  (2)  The  sorrows 
of  the  ungodly  off  en  sent  in  anger ;  those  of 
the  godly  always  in  love.  Those  the  most 
terrible  sorrows  that  are  distributed  in  God's 
anger.  (3)  Sorrows  distributed  by  God  as 
well  as  mercies.  All  sorrows  distributed  by 
a  Divine  hand  ;  only,  some  distributed  in 
anger,  others  in  love.  Trouble  not  from  the 
dust.  Wisely  meted  out,  whether  in  mercy 
or  in  judgment.  The  cup  mingled  and 
measured,  and  sooner  or  later  put  into  the 
hand  of  each.  The  cup  of  sorrow  held  out 
to  a  believer  by  a  Father's  hand,  to  be  ex- 
changed ere  long  for  the  cup  of  joy.  To  be 
put  at  last  into  the  hand  of  the  ungr  dly  (Is. 
li.  22  23;  Luke  xvi.  25).  (4)  Terrible  end 
of  the  wicked  after  a  life  of  prosperity  and 
pleasure  {stx^^  18).  "They  are  as  stubble 
before  the  wind,  and  as  chaff  that  the  storm 
carrieth  away,  (niargin,  "  stealeth  away," 
rapidly  and  unexpectedly  as  a  thief  in  the 
night,  Matt.  xxiv.  43 ;  1  Thess.  v.  2 ; 
2  Peter  iii.  10;  Rev.  xvi.  15).  Frequent 
comparison  of  the  ungodly  to  the  fragments 
of  straw  and  the  chaff  separated  from  the 
wheat  on  the  open  threshing-floor,  exposed 
to  the  wind  on  a  lofty  situation,  and  thus 
carried  violently,  suddenly,  and  rapidly 
away  by  it,  while  the  wheat  is  left  for  the 
garner  (Ps.  i.  4;  Is.  xxix.  5;  Hos.  xiii.  3). 
Indicates — (1)  God's  long-continued  but 
exhausted  patience ;  (2)  The  worthlessness 
of  the  ungodly;  (3)  Their  final  separation 
from  tlie  godly ;  (4)  Their  utter  and 
irremediable  destruction. 

VII.  A  sinful  life  often  punished  in  its 
consequences  on  the  sinner's  children 

(verse  19).  "  God  layeth  up  his  iniquity  (or 
the  punishment  of  it)  for  his  children ;  he 
rewardeth  him  and  he  shall  know  (or  feel)  it 
His  eyes  shall  see  his  destruction  (implying 
more  than  mere  destruction  itself;  he  shall 
have  full  and  bitter  experience  of  it;  or  shall 
see  it  approaching  and  yet  be  unable  to 
escape  from  it),  and  he  shall  drink  of  the 
wrath  of  the  Almighty  [as  before  he  drank 
iniquity,  which  is  the  cause  of  it].  For  what 
pleasure  hath  he  in  his  house  after  him,  when 
the  number  of  his  months  is  cut  off  in  ihe 
midst?"  Perhaps  an  objection  to  his  state- 
ment here  anticipated  and  answered.  If  God 
does  not  punish  the  ungodly  man  in  this  life, 
yet,  say  the  three  friends,  He  punishes  him  iu 
his  children  after  him.  But,  replies  Job,  the 
punishment  ought  to  be  inflicted  on  himself; 
and  he,  not  his  children,  ought,  according  to 

131 


CHAP.   XXI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


your  principles,  to  feel  it.  His  eyes  ought 
to  see  his  own  destruction.  For  what  has 
he  to  do  with  his  family  after  him  when  he 
his  dead  ?  Observe — (1)  An  undeniable  truth 
that  a  marCs  sins  often  entail  their  conse- 
quences on  his  children.  Erahodied  in  the 
second  comniandnient  (Ex.  xx.  5).  Temporal 
consequences  often  entailed  apart  from  sins 
in  tlie  children.  The  parents'  sins  frequently 
inherited  by  the  children,  and  their  conse- 
quences along  with  them.  A  man  in  some 
degree  punished  in  the  person  of  his  children. 
His  children  closely  bound  up  with  him  as 
part  of  himself.  A  natural  desire  that  it 
should  be  well  with  them  after  his  deatli. 
His  children's  suffering  after  his  death  an 
aggravation  of  his  own.  (2)  Sin,  howeoer^ 
mainly  punished  in  the  person  himself  who 
commits  it.  Hence,  that  punishment  not 
always  inflicted  in  this  life,  as  Zopiiar  and 
his  friends  maintained.  No  less  certainly 
however  in  the  next,  as  maintained  by  Job. 

yill.  Assertion  of  God's  infinite 
wisdom  and  knowledge  (verse  22).  "  Shall 
any  teach  God  knowledge?  Seeing  he 
judge th  those  that  are  high."  God,  unable 
to  receive  any  accession  to  His  wisdom  or 
knowledge  from  the  most  intelligent  of  His 
creatures.  The  highest  intelligences  under 
His  government  and  control.  God  uni- 
versally acknowledged  as  the  Judge  and 
Ruler  of  heaven  and  earth  (Gen.  xviii.  25). 
Angels,  devils,  and  men  of  every  rank,  under 
His  sway  and  jurisdiction.  Hell  and  destruc- 
tion naked  and  open  before  Him.  The  hearts 
and  counsels  of  men  and  angels  exposed  to 
His  view.  The  expulsion  of  fallen  angels  an 
example  of  His  j  udging  *'  those  that  are  high. " 
The  judge  of  angels  not  to  be  directed  by 
puny  men  (Rom.  xi.  34 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  16).  He 
who  judges  angels  needs  no  instruction  how 
to  deal  with  men.  Hence — (1)  The  case  of 
each  safe  in  his  hands ;  (2)  No  room  for 
questioning  or  cavilling  on  the  part  of  any 
of  His  creatures  in  reference  to  His  provi- 
dential dealings  with  them. 

IX.  Sovereignty  and  inscrutableness 
of  Divine  Providence,  Men  variously 
dealt  with  both  in  life  and  death  without 
apparent  reference  to  character  and  desert 
(verse  23).  "  One  dieth  in  his  full  strength 
[with  unimpaired  health  and  vigour],  being 
wholly  at  ease  and  quiet  [in  the  hey-day  of 
prosperity].  His  breasts  {margin^  'milk 
pails ')  are  full  of  milk  (or,  his  vessels,  intes- 
tines, or  sides  are  full  of  fat),  and  his  bones 
are  moistened  with  marrow.  And  another 
dieth  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul  (with  an 
experience  the  opposite  of  the  former,  grief 
and  pain  pursuing  him  to  the  end),  and  never 
eateth  with   pleasure"  (or,  "never  enjoys 

132 


pleasure," — a  sufferer  during  his  whole  life) 
Varieties  everywhere  in  men's  experience, 
both  in  life  and  in  death.  These  varieties 
often  and  generally  due  rather  to  the 
sovereifjnty  of  the  Divine  Disposer  than  to 
the  character  and  merits  of  individuals. 
Love  and  hatred  not  to  be  discovered  by  the 
external  events  in  our  lot.  One  event  to  all 
(Ecc.  ix.  2). — Death  equally  the  end  of 
all  (verse  25).  "They  shall  lie  down  alike 
in  the  dust,  and  the  worms  shall  cover  them," 
Lessons  from  this  unversality  of  death : — 
(1)  Contentment  with  one's  lot.  External 
differences  only  for  a  short  period  of  this  pre- 
sent life.  These  assigned  now  in  infinite 
wisdom,  and  all  forgotten  in  the  grave.  (2) 
Humility.  The  dust  our  final  resting-place. 
Worms  by-and-by  our  principal  covering; 
(3)  Necessity  of  immediate  preparation  and 
constant  readiness  for  death.  Nothing  more 
certain  than  death,  and  more  uncertain  than 
the  time  and  circumstances.  The  grave  a 
resting-place  for  the  body ;  the  soul,  immortal 
and  immaterial,  has  its  dwelling  elsewhere. 
Its  place  in  the  spirit-world  according  to  its 
character  and  deeds  in  this.  After  death  the 
judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  31 — 46}  Rom.  ii.  6 — 
10).  In  the  eternal  world  the  rich  and  poor 
often  change  places.  Lazarus  comforted, 
Dives  tormented  (Luke  xvi.  25). 

X.  Job's  remonstrance  with  his 
friends  on  their  erroneous  and  un- 
charitable views  (verses  27 — 30). 

1.  Exposes  their  secret  cogitations  regard- 
ing him  (verse  27).  '*  Behold  I  know  your 
thoughts,  and  the  devises  which  ye  wrong- 
fully imagine  against  me.  Eor  ye  say  [within 
yourselves],  where  is  the  house  of  the  prince 
(the  rich  or  munificent  chief  —  alluding  to 
Job  himself,  whose  house  was  now  desolate, 
and  that  of  his  eldest  son  in  ruins)  ?  and 
where  are  the  dwelling-places  of  the  wicked?" 
{marginy  "  the  tent  of  the  tabernacles ;"  Heb.^ 
the  tent  of  the  dwelling-places ;  either  that 
of  the  rich  chief  in  the  midst  of  those  of  his 
household  and  clan,  [chap.  xxv.  29]  or  his 
house  as  divided  into  various  apartments). 
The  secret  surmise  of  Job's  friends  that  the 
desolation  of  his  own  house,  and  that  of 
his  son,  was  a  Divine  retribution.  From  this 
desolation  they  injuriously  conclude  they 
had  been  wicked  men.  The  errors  of  the 
Jews  in  Christ's  day,  in  reference  to  the 
slaughtered  Gahlseans  and  the  disaster  in 
Siloam  (Luke  xiii.  1 — 5.)  'I'hat  of  the 
Miletians,  in  regard  to  Paul  and  the  viper 
which  fastened  on  his  hand  (Acts  xxviii.  4). 

2.  Refers  them  to  the  testimony  of  men  oj 
travel  and  observation  (verse  29).  "  Have 
ye  not  asked  them  that  go  by  the  way  ? 
and  do  ye  not  know  their  tokens  ? " 
(or,  "  acknowledge  their  testimonies," — the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CUAP.  XXI. 


examples  met  with  in  their  travels,  and 
related  by  them  to  others,  or  their  written 
communications,  whicli  are  proofs  of  what  I 
now  advance).  In  the  early  ages  of  the 
world,  and  still  to  a  great  extent  in  the 
East,  most  of  the  information  as  to  events 
in  other  lands  obtained  by  travellers.  That 
information,  however,  probably  to  some 
extent  committed  early  to  letters,  here 
called  "  tokens," — signs  or  marks  (Gen.  iv. 
15).  Moses  directed  by  God  to  write  ihe 
song  he  delivered  before  his  death,  as  well 
as  the  law  of  commandments  (Dent,  xxxi  19 
— 21).  Letters  among  tlie  earliest  inventions. 
Probably  at  first  hieroglypiiics,  or  figures 
of  animate  or  inanimate  objects.  (See  eh.  xix. 
23,  24). 

3.  Testimony  of  travellers  iti  relation  to 
the  wicked  (verse  30).  "That  the  wicked 
is  reserved  to  the  day  of  destruction 
(spared  often  and  long  in  this  world,  even 
in  the  midst  of  calamities  that  overtake 
others,  though  sure  to  be  punished  in  the 
next,  if  not  ultimately  in  this,  as  in  the 
case  of  Pharaoh)  P  they  shall  be  brought 
forth  to  the  day  of  wrath"  (or,  "they  are 
led  [as  in  a  pompous  procession]  to  the  day 
of  wrath,"  which  sooner  or  later  overtakes 
them ;  or,  "  they  are  led  [in  safety]  in  the  day 
of  wrath"  which  comes  upon  the  community ; 
margin,  the  day  of  wraths — great  or  accu- 
mulated wrath,  as  Rev.  vi.  17).  Job's  first 
position — God  destroys,  by  external  calami- 
ties, the  righteous  and  the  wicked  indis- 
criminately (ch.  ix.  22,  23).  His  second — 
The  wicked  are  often  spared  in  the  midst  of 
such  calamities, —spared  in  ease  and  pros- 
perity,— and  spared  long.  Rests  his  asser- 
tions on  facts.  These  facts  not  invalidated  by 
occasional  examples  of  the  contrary.  These 
in  perfect  harmony  with,  and  even  when 
rightly  viewed,  a  confirmation  of,  a  future 
retribution.  Every  day  of  wrath  in  this 
world  points  its  finger  to  a  still  greater  one 
in  the  next. 

XI.  Returns  to  the  prosperity  and 
power  of  the  wicked  as  following  them 
even  to  the  grave. 

The  ungodly  often  so  powerful  as  to  escape 
all  reproof  and  punishment  for  their  crimes  in 
this  world  (verse  31).  "  Who  shall  declare 
his  way  to  his  face  ?  and  who  shall  repay 
him  what  he  hath  done  ?  *'  None  bold  enough 
for  the  one,  or  powerful  enough  for  the  other. 
The  case  of  John  the  Baptist  in  relation  to 
Herod  the  Tetrarch,  a  rare  one,  especially 
in  those  early  times.  Verse  32. — "Yet 
shall  he  (or  'even  this  man')  be  brought 
^conveyed  in  pomp  and  honour)  to  the  grave. 
[Margin,  *  graves,*  the  place  of  graves ;  or 
the  sepulchral  grot,  with  its  various  apart- 
ments and  numerous  niches  for  the  dead; 


or  an  eminent  and  magnificent  grave — a  large 
and  splendid  mausoleum,  perhaps  a  pyramid)  ; 
and  shall  remain  in  the  tomb,"  {Margin, 
"  shall  watch  in  the  heap ; "  shall  appear 
still  to  live  at  his  tomb,  as  embalmed  and 
preserved  from  corruption,  or  as  represented 
by  his  statue  or  other  memorial;  or  "watch 
shall  be  kept  [by  others]  at  his  tomb,"  to 
preserve  it  and  do  him  honour).  Honour 
not  only  attends  him  in  life,  but  follows  him 
to  the  tomb  both  in  and  after  his  death. 
So  "  the  rich  man  died  and  was  buried,"  i.e. 
had  a  large,  and  splendid  funeral ;  nothing 
said  of  the  burial  of  Lazarus  (Luke  xvi.  22). 
The  pompous  funeral  of  the  wicked  also  a 
noticeable  object  in  the  days  of  the  royal 
preacher  (Ecc.  viii.  10).  Verse  33.— "The 
clods  of  the  valley  shall  be  sweet  unto  him." 
Buried,  like  great  men,  at  the  foot  of  a 
mountain  where  the  winter  stream  keeps 
moist  the  sods  that  cover  him.  He  has  a 
pleasant  resting-place  for  his  remains,  and 
the  sod  lies  softly  upon  him.  Apparently 
as  enviable  in  his  death  as  he  had  been  in  his 
life.  Himself  still  supposed  to  enjoy  in  the 
spirit-world  the  honour  done  to  his  earthly 
remains,  and  the  a^n-eeable  circumstances 
which  attend  them.  Pleasing  delusion  of 
the  imagination!  The  experience  of  the 
rich  man  in  hell  (Hades  or  the  spirit-world) 
the  opposite  of  that  suggested  by  his  costly 
funeral  and  beautifully  adorned  grave. — "And 
every  man  shall  draw  after  him  as  there  are 
innumerable  before  him."  His  death  no 
solitary  case.  Death  the  common  lot  of 
fallen  humanity,  without  respect  to  character 
or  conduct.  The  wicked  abundantly  ac- 
companied in  the  spirit- world.  Company 
however  no  alleviation.  The  second  desire 
of  the  rich  man  in  Hades,  that  his  five 
brethren  might  not  come  also  to  that  place 
of  torment  (Luke  xvi.  28).  The  presence 
of  others  rather  an  aggravation  than  a 
rehef. 

XII.  Conclusion  (verse  34).  The  friend's 

consolation  vain  because  grounded  on  false 
principles.  "  How  then  comfort  ye  me  in 
vain,  seeing  that  in  your  answers  there  re- 
maineth  falsehood  "  (Margin,  "  transgres- 
sions," opposition  to  the  truth,  or,  malice 
and  evil  intent).  Consolation,  to  be  of  any 
value,  to  be  grounded  on  right  principles. 
Must  be— (1)  True,  in  the  matter;  accord- 
ing to  the  Word  of  God,  the  only  infallible 
standard.  (2)  Suitable  in  its  application; 
adapted  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case, 
and  of  the  individual  addressed.  Truth  mis- 
applied becomes  error.  (3)  Loving,  in  its 
manner — truth  spoken  in  love.  Truth, 
spoken  harshly  and  uncharitably,  irritates 
rather  than  heals  the  wounded  spirit.  "False- 
hood "  a  the  answers  and  arguments  of  Job*s 

133 


CHAP.   XXII. 


HOMIL/mC  COMMMTAItr:  JOB. 


friends,  inasmucli  as  they  maintained — (1) 
That  God  acts,  in  His  government  of  the 
world,  in  a  way  which  He  does  not ;  uniformly 
visiting  the  sins  of  the  ung(jdly  upon  them 
in  the  present  life,  and  rewarding  the  godly 
with  worldly  prosperity  and  ease.  (2)  That, 
according  to  these  principles,  those  who  are 
great  sufferers  must  be  great  sinners.  (3) 
That  the  only  way  to  be  delivered  from  such 
suffering,  and  to  enjoy  such  prosperity,  is 


by  acknowledgment  of  sin  and  a  turning 
from  it  to  God, — to  be  with  that  view  imme- 
diately made  by  tlie  sufferer,  and  therefore 
by  Job  himself.  Malice  or  evil  intent  in 
their  answers ;  their  aim  being  to  make  Job 
a  grievous  transgressor  in  the  sight  of  God, 
and  one  who  was  suffering  justly  the  punish- 
ment of  his  sins — the  "devices  thef  wrong- 
fully imagined  against  him"  (ch.  xxi.).  Their 
offence  not  only  against  truth  but  charity. 


CHAPTEE    XXn. 
THIRD    SPEECH   OF  ELIPHAZ  THE  TEMANITE, 


Remonstrates  with  Job  on  his  self -righte- 
ousness, and  plainly  charges  him  with  griev- 
ous transgressions  as  the  cause  of  his  present 
sufferings  j  concludes  with  promises  of  pros- 
perity and  blessing  on  his  repentance. 

I.  Reproves  his  apparent  pride  and 
self- righteousness  (verse  2—4)  God  laid 
under  no  obligation  by  his  piety.  **  Can  a 
man  be  profitable  unto  God  as  he  that  is 
wise  is  profitable  to  himself  ?  (or,  when  he  by 
acting  wisely  profits  himself;  Margin,  'if  he 
may  be  profitable,  docs  his  good  success 
depend  on  himself? ')  Is  it  any  pleasure  to 
the  Almighty  that  thou  act  righteous  ?  or 
is  it  gain  to  Him  that  thou  makest  thy  ways 
perfect  ?  Will  he  reprove  thee  lor  fear 
of  thee  (lest  He  suffer  injury  and  loss  by 
thy  conduct)?  Will  He  enter  with  thee 
into  judgment  (to  recover  His  right  as  an 
injured  person)  ?  "     Observe — 

1.  God  under  no  obligation  to  treat  men 
better  than  He  does.  God  no  man's  debtor. 
A  secret  feeling  at  the  bottom  of  men's  com- 
plaint against  His  providential  dealings,  as  if 
they  were  wronged  by  Him  and  had  a  right 
to  expect  better  treatment.  On  the  con- 
trary, all  treated  infinitely  better  than  they 
deserve.  All  good  in  men  is  from  God,  not 
themselves.  Men  come  infinitely  short  of 
rendering  to  God  what  He  has  a  right  to  as 
their  Creator,  Preserver,  and  constant  Bene- 
factor. 

2.  Go^s  glory  and  happiness  independent 
of  man^s  conduct.  God  no  loser  by  men's 
want  of  religion,  nor  gainer  by  their  practice 
of  it  (Ps.  xvi.  2).  God  reproves  men  not 
from  fear  of  them,  but  from  love  to  them 
(Rev.  iii.  19).  Men  never  too  bad  for  Him 
to  love  them,  nor  too  great  for  Him  to  fear 
them.  God  neither  rebukes  the  good  from 
unkindness,  nor  the  great  from  fear.  Still 
true — (1)  That  men  may,  through  grace,  pro- 
mote God's  glory  and  advance  His  kingdom 
in  the  world  ;  (2)  That  He  has  pleasure  in 
noly  men  and  in  their  holv  lives  (Ps.  cxlvii. 
11  ;  Prov.  xi.  20) ;    (3)  That  men  have  it 

134 


in  their  power  to  render  to  God  His  rightful 
claim,  or  to  rob  Him  of  what  is  His  (Mai. 
iii.  8).  This  the  grievous  sin  not  only  of 
the  Jews,  but  of  men  in  general  (Matt.  xxi. 
34,41). 

3.  True  wisdom  always  profitable  to  the 
possessor  of  it.  That  wisdom  the  fear  of 
God  and  a  life  of  godliness.  Wisdom  the 
knowledge,  choice,  and  pursuit  of  the  best 
end  by  the  best  means.  Here  equivalent  to 
being  '* righteous,"  or  "making  one's  ways 
perfect "  or  upright.  Profitable  in  regard 
both  to  body  and  soul,  time  and  eternity. 
Godliness  with  contentment  great  gain  (1 
Tim.  vi.  6).  The  gains  of  religion  infinitely 
greater  than  its  losses.  Wisdom's  ways 
pleasantness  and  peace.  Length  of  days 
in  her  right  hand,  in  her  left  riches  and 
honour.  Godliness  profitableness  unto  all 
things  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  No  good  which  is 
not  gained  by  it ;  nothing  lost  by  it  which 
we  are  not  the  better  by  losing. 

II.  Charges  Job  with  multiplied  and 
grievous  transgressions  (verse  5 — 9). 
1.  In  general  terms  (verse  5).     "Is  not 

thy  wickedness  great  and  thine  iniquities 
infinite  ?  "  True,  more  or  less,  of  all  men, 
Job  included.  Not  however  in  the  sense 
of  Eliphaz.  According  to  Eliphaz,  Job's 
wickedness  great  in  comparison  with  that 
of  other  men,  and  with  his  own.  The  thought 
that  of  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple. — Great 
and  multipHed  transgressions  humbly  ac- 
knowledged by  tlie  best  (Ps.  xxv.  11 ; 
xl.  12;  Ezra  ix.  61).  The  certain  result  of 
a  fallen  and  corrupt  nature  (Matt.  xv.  19; 
Gen.  vi  5 ;  viii.  21).  Corrupt  streams 
constantly  flow  from  a  corj^upt  spring.  Yet 
along  with  this,  in  Job  and  in  all  good  men, 
a  naiure  opposed  to  evil.  Hence— (D  the 
evil  resistctf,  held  in  check,  weakenea,  and 
more  or  less  overcome ;  (2)  Good,  though 
imperfectly,  yet  with  more  or  less  uniformity 
performed.  Truly  good  men,  in  virtue  of 
a  two-fold  nature,  bolh  saints  and  sinners. 
The  former  with  their  will,  the  latter  against 


HOMTIETTC  COSmENTARY .    JOB. 


citAP.  xxn. 


it.  Good  men  do  good,  but  not  all  tliey 
would,  or  any  as  they  would.  Do  evil,  but 
not  all  they  otherwise  would,  nor  would  they 
do  any  (Gal.  v.  17).  Observe— (i.)  All 
wickedness  great ,  as  committed — («)  Against 
a  great  God  ;  {b)  Against  great  obligations 
to  the  contrary ;  {c)  With  comparatively 
little  inducement  to  commit  it;  [d)  With 
great  evil  as  the  result  both  to  ourselves  and 
others,  (ii.)  The  wickedness  of  some  greater 
than  that  of  others  ;  as  committed — {a)  With 
greater  boldness;  {b)  Under  great  obligations 
to  the  contrary ;  (c)  With  greater  know- 
ledge and  means  of  resistance ;  (d)  With 
less  temptation  to  the  commission  of  it. 
(iii.)  Men' s  iniquities  hfmite — as  («)  Against 
an  infinite  God ;  {b)  Against  infinite  obliga- 
tions to  the  contrary ;  fd?)  Num'herless;  [d) 
Incessant  during  life;  (<?)  But  for  Divine 
grace,  continuing  to  be  committed  through- 
out eternity;  (/)  Attended  with  infinitely 
disastrous  results.  Sins  committed  against 
infinite  majesty  and  goodness  have  in  ihem 
an  infinite  malignity  and  greatness. 

2.  Charges  him  with  specific  crimes  (verse 
6 — 9.)  (1)  Cruelty  and  wrong  (verse  6). 
*'  Thou  hast  taken  a  pledge  from  the  poor  for 
nought," — unjustly,  when  nothing,  or  next 
to  nothing,  was  due; — taking  his  garment 
from  him  for  that  purpose  without  restoring 
it  to  him  by  sunset,  as  afterwards  required 
by  the  law  (Ex.  xxii.  26 — 27),  and  as  was 
always  the  part  of  a  right-minded  man, — the 
poor  man's  garment  by  day  being  also  his 
covering  by  night.  Somc-liines  the  bed 
itself  taken  as  a  pledge  by  rapacious  and  un- 
feeling creditors  (Prov.  xxii.  27).  The  sin 
of  not  restoring  the  pledge  spoken  of  as  not 
uncommon  among  the  Jews  in  the  days  of 
the  prophets  (Ezek.  xviii.  12;  Amos.  i.  8). 
This  alleged  sin  of  Job's  marked  by  Eliphaz 
as  particularly  heinous  from  its  being  com- 
mitted against  a  "brother."  The  "brother" 
not  necessarily  a  relative,  or  even  a  country- 
man. All  men  brethren.  All  wrong  done  to 
our  fellowmen  done  to  our  "  brother." 
"  Sirs,  ye  are  brethren," — a  powerful  reason 
for  not  wronging  one  another  (Acts.  vii.  26  ; 
Exod.  ii.  11),  &c.  —  The  charge  enlarged 
upon.  "Thou  hast  stripped  the  naked 
(the  poor  and  poorly  clad)  of  their  clothing," 
— the  large  upper  garment,  or  Arab  hyke, 
worn  as  a  garment  by  day  and  serving  as  a 
covering  to  sleep  in  at  night.  Among  the 
articles  taken  and  kept  by  rapacious  and 
hard-hearted  creditors.  This  charge  the  very 
opposite  of  Job's  character  fch.  xxix.  12 — 
17;  xxxi.  19,20).  (2)  Want  of  kindness 
and  charity  to  the  poor  and  needy  (verse 
7.)  "Thou  hast  not  given  water  to  the 
weary  to  drink,  and  thou  hast  witholden 
bread  from  the  hungry."  Acts  of  kindness 
and  hospitality  particularly  required  in  the 


East,  and  especially  at  that  early  period: 
no  inns  for  travellers;    people  often  poor; 
travelling    generally    performed     on    foot; 
climate    hot    and    creating     thirst;    water 
often    scarce    and    always    precious;     in- 
hibilants    often    plundered   by  marauders, 
and  forced  to  wander  from  house  and  home 
by  invaders.      Hence  duties  of  hospitality 
held     peculiarly    sacred    among  Orientals, 
especially  in  xlrabia  (Gen.  xviii.  4.  5  ;  xix,  2; 
xxi.  14,  15;  xxviii.  11;  Ex.  ii.  15).     Foun- 
tains   even  in  cities  often  bequeathed   by 
wealthy  Arabs  for  the  free  use  of  the  poor, 
as  well  as  money  to  provide  persons  to  dis- 
pense it  gratuitously  in  the  streets.     Job's 
actual   conduct  the   reverse    of  that    here 
ascribed  to  him    (ch.  xxxi.   17,    32).     (3) 
Partiality  to  the  rich  (verse  8).     "But  as 
for  the  mighty  man,  he  had  the  earth  (or 
land),  and  the  honourable  man  dwelt  in  it." 
Reference  probably  intended  to  Job's  judicial 
conduct  as  an  Arab  chief,  emir,  or  prince. 
The  charge  that  of  neglecting  and  wronging 
the  poor,  while  the  rich  and    mighty  were 
favoured.      The  former  expelled  from  their 
homes  and  inheritances  to  make  room  for 
the   latter.      Violence    and   wrong  on   the 
part  of  the  great  connived  at.      Partiality 
to  the  rich  a  grievous  off'ence  in  the  sight  of 
God  (Prov.  xxviii.  21).      Especially  on  the 
part  of  judges  and  magistrates  (Lev.  xix.  15). 
Condemned  as  existing    in  early  Christian 
churches  (James  ii.    1 — 9).    To   feast  the 
rich  and  neglect  to  feed  the  poor,  the  oppo- 
site  of  Christ's  rule    (Luke  xiv.  12 — 14). 
The  peculiar  temptation  of  the  rich.     (4^ 
Neglect    and   oppression  of  the  widow    and 
fithprless  (verse  9).     "  Thou  hast  sent  the 
widows  away  empty,  and  the  arms  of  the 
fatherless  have  been  broken," — their  support 
and  means  of  subsistence  taken  from  them, 
either  by  Job  himself,  or  by  others  with  his 
connivance.     His  alleged  conduct  either  as 
that  of  a  rich  and  powerful   man  in  private 
life,  or  of  a  judge  and  magistrate,  such  as 
Job  actually  was  (ch.  xxix.  7  —  17.       The 
conduct  here  ascribed    to   liim  that  of  the 
unjust  judge  in  the  Parable  (Luke  xviii.  2 — • 
5).    The  opposite  of  Job's  real  conduct  (ch, 
xxi.  12—17;  xxxi.  17,18,  21).    The  oft'ence 
laid  to  his  charge  one  of  the  most  aggravated. 
Neglect  of  the  cause  of  an  injured  person  a 
grievous  offence  on  the  part,  of  the  judge  or 
magistrate  ;  still  more  so  when  the  cause  is 
that  of  those  who  are  bereft  of  their  natural 
defenders  and  unable  to  defend  themselves. 
To   injure  any  a  sin  in  the  sight  of  God; 
an  agunavated  sin  to  injure  the  widow  and 
the  fatherless.  Widows  and  fatherless  children 
entitled  to  pity  ;  still  more  to  justice.     Not 
to  assist  sueh.  a  sin;  a  still  greater  one  to 
injure  them.      The    widow    and   fatherless 
especially   cared  for  by  God  (Ps.  Ixviii.  5). 

135 


CHAP.   XXIL 


BOMILETIC  COMMmTAttY :  JOB. 


The  same  required  by  Him  of  others,  both 
under  the  law  (Exod.  xxii.  22)  and  under 
the  Gospel  (James,  i.  27). 

These  cliarges  exhibit — (1)  Tlie  wronp: 
done  to  Job  by  his  friends;  (2)  The  trial 
thus  endured  by  himself.  Tiie  open  expres- 
sion of  what  had  been  their  secret  thoughts 
^om  the  first  of  their  visit  (eh.  xxi.  2/). 
False  charges  both  a  grievous  wrong  against 
men  and  a  heinous  sin  against  God.  An 
aggravation  when,  as  in  this  case,  laid  agaiubt 
a  2:ood  man  and  a  friend. 

The  multiplicity  and  magnitude  of  Job's 
offences  only  inferred  by  Eliphaz  from  his 
extraordinary  sufferings.  His  false  and  un- 
charitable charges  the  resull  of  a  false  philo- 
sophy and  mistaken  views  of  the  Divine 
eovernment.  Errors  in  religion  no  less  con- 
demnable  in  themselves  or  injurious  in  their 
consequences  from  being  sincerely  held  and 
earnestly  defended.  Christ's  followers  often 
put  to  cruel  deaths  under  the  impression  of 
doing  God  service  (John  xvi.  2).  No  new 
thing  for  God's  faithful  servants  to  have 
things  laid  to  their  charge,  of  which  they  not 
only  are  innocent,  but  which  they  utterly 
abhor.  Innocence  itself  no  security  against 
false  and  abominable  charges.  Christ  put 
to  death  under  a  charge  of  blasi)hemy. 
Stigmatized  as  a  drunkard  and  a  glutton,  a 
deceiver  of  the  people  and  exciter  of  sedi- 
tion. 


III.  Imputes  Job's  calamities  directly 
to  his  sins  (verse  9).  "Therefore  snares  are 
round  about  thee,  and  sudden  fear  troubleth 
thee ;  or  darkness  that  thou  canst  not  see 
[any  way  of  escape]  and  abundance  of  waters 
( —  overwhelming  troubles)  cover  thee." 
Refers — (1)  To  his  sudden  and  multiplied 
calamities  ;  (2)  To  his  inward  darkness  and 
distress ;  (3)  To  his  perplexity  and  confu- 
sion of  mind,  both  as  to  the  cause  of  his 
troubles  and  any  way  of  escape  out  of  them. 
Eear  and  consternation  the  natural  result  of 
great,  unlooked  for,  and  successive  calami- 
ties. Job's  present  experience.  His  case  an 
apparent  contravention  of  the  promise :  "  He 
shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings  (Ps.  cxii. 
7).  Calmness  and  fearlessness  in  reference 
to  calamity  and  trouble  the  believer's  duty 
and  privilege  (Phil.  iv.  67).  Christ  in  the 
midst  of  the  storm  :  "It  is  I,  be  not  afraid," 
— Job's  great  troubles,  according  to  Eliphaz, 
due  to  great  sins.  No  sins  likely  to  be  more 
severely  visited  than  those  falsely  charged 
upon  him — unmercifulness  to  and  oppression 
of  the  poor  and  needy.  He  shall  have  judg- 
ment without  mercy  that  hath  shewed  no 
Tnercy  (James  ii.  13).  No  louder  cry  than 
that  of  wrong  done  to  the  widow,  the  father- 
less, and  the  poor  (James  v.  4), 

136 


IT.  Charges  Job  with  infidel  princi- 
ples (verses  1 1—14).     "  Is  not  God  in  the 

height  of  heaven?  And  behold  the  height 
of  the  stars  how  high  they  are ! "  As  spoken 
by  Eliphaz  himself,  expresses  the  Divine 
supremacy  over  all — even  the  highest  created 
beings — and  the  ability  of  God  to  take  full 
cogjiizance  of  the  affairs  of  men.  As  possibly 
ascribed  by  him  to  Job  expressed  the  sup- 
posed distance  of  God  from  this  lower  world, 
and  the  consequent  unlikelihood  of  his  taking 
any  notice  of  human  affairs.  "And  ('vet' 
or  '  therefore ')  thou  sayest  [in  effect,  if  not 
in  so  many  words].  How  {Margin,  what) 
doth  God  know  ?  Can  he  judge  ( — rule  in 
the  affairs  of  men)  through  the  thick  cloud  ? 
Thick  clouds  are  a  covering  to  him  that  He 
seeth  not ;  and  He  walketh  in  the  circuit  of 
heaven.'*  The  sentiment  here  falsely  ascribed 
to  Job  that  of  a  heart  blinded  by  sin  and 
alienated  from  God, — God  too  far  off  and  too 
much  occupied  with  higher  things  than  to 
care  for  or  take  cognizance  of  human  affairs 
(Ps.  X.  11 ;  Ixxiii.  11).  Finite  man  thinks 
of  God  as  finite  and  imperfect  like  himself. 
Perhaps  in  this  case  the  wish  the  father  to 
the  thought.  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart, 
*'  There  is  no  God  " —  to  take  cognizance 
of  earthly  things  (Ps.  xiv.  1).  God's  omni- 
presence and  omniscience  little  realized  be- 
cause little  loved.  Hence — (1)  Indulgence 
in  a  course  of  sin  and  oppression  such  as  is 
here  falsely  ascribed  to  Job ;  (2)  Murmuring 
under  trouble  and  oppression  as  if  God  took 
no  heed  either  of  man's  doings  or  sufferings. 
Even  a  child  of  God,  under  deep  and  accu- 
mulated afflictions,  tempted  with  such  "unbe- 
lieving and  God-dishonouring  thoughts. 
Eaith  in  God's  omnipresence,  omniscience, 
and  all-superintending  Providence,  our  com- 
fort in  trouble  and  our  guard  in  temptation. 
The  worst  sentiments  often  falsely  ascribed 
to  the  children  of  God.  "Blessed  are  ye 
when  man  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against 
you  for  my  sake  "  (Matt.  v.  11). 

The  immense  height  or  distance  of  the 
stars  impressive  even  to  ordinary  observers. 
That  distance;  however,  probably  much 
gieater  than  could  be  dreamt  of  in  the  days 
of  Eliphaz.  The  nearest  fixed  star  thousands 
of  millions  of  miles  distant.  Millions  of 
stars  thousands  of  times  more  distant  still. 
The  Milky  Way,  " pondered  with  stars,"  an 
immense  cluster  of  stars  too  distant  to  be 
distinguished  as  such  bj  the  naked  eye. 
Stars  so  distant  that  their  light  travelling  at 
the  same  rate  as  that  of  the  sun  only  reaches 
us  so  as  to  render  them  visible  after  thou- 
sands of  years.  A  false  and  foolish  conclu- 
sion that  because  God  is  present  with  and 
governs  those  distant  worlds  or  suns,  he 
cannot  be  supposed  to  superintend  or  care 
for  the  affairs  of  this  minor  planet.    God 


BOMILEHC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CUAf.    XXIT. 


necessarily  equally  present  in,  antl  ciin.illy 
cognisant  of,  every  part  of  liis  bnuni.iles.s 
dominions.  The  most  distant  and  the  most 
minute  of  His  creatures  equally  and  at  once 
observed  by  His  eye  and  sujjported  by  His 
hand.  The  same  omniseience  that  uihnbers 
the  stars  numbers  also  the  hairs  of  our  head. 
Divinely  enlightened  reason  sees  everywhere 

"  The  unarabip^uous  footsteps  of  the  God 
Who  gives  its  lustre  to  an  insect's  wing, 
And  wheels  His  throne  upon  the  rolling 
worlds." 

Universal  government  no  burden  to  an 
infinite  God.  An  animalcule  shares  His  at- 
tention with  a  sun,  a  worm  with  a  seraj)h. 
God  higher  than  tiie  highest  star,  yet  nearer 
to  both  reader  and  writer  than  his  nearest 
friend.     Hence : — 

1.  God  infinitely  glorious  and  worthy  of 
all  adoration.  "  The  heavens  declare  the 
glory  of  God"  (Ps.  xix.  1). 

2.  Submission  to  God  in  all  circumstances 
the  creature's  duty. 

3.  Trust  in  God,  under  the  severest  trials, 
the  believer's  privilege. 

4.  Awful  intidelity  of  the  heart  to  ignore 
God  and  expel  Him  from  His  own  world. 

5.  Dreadful  nature  of  sin  that  despises 
and  rebels  against  a  God  at  once  so  infinitely 
great  and  good. 

V.  Adduces  as  a  warning  to  Job  the 
example    of    the    antediluvian    world 

(verse  15—20).  "Hast  thou  marked  the 
old  way  which  wicked  men  have  trodden  ? 
Wliich  were  cut  down  out  of  time  (or  pre- 
maturely), whose  found  ition  was  overflown 
with  a  flood  {M'ir(/in,  *a  flood  was  poured 
upon  their  foundations;  *  or,  'a  river  poured 
forth  was  their  foundation,'  i.e.,  their  dwel- 
ling which  seemed  most  secure,  or  all  they 
trusted  in) ;  which  said  unto  G(»d,  Dej)art 
from  us,  and  what  can  the  Almighty  do  for 
them  (or,  *  for  us,'  or  *  to  U3  ')  ?  "^  Yet  lie 
filled  their  houses  with  good  things:  but  the 
counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me  (eiiher 
the  protest  of  Eliphaz  himself  against  the 
principles  and  practice  of  those  antediluvian 
sinners,  and  others  like  them,  or  |)crhaps  the 
words  of  Job  repeated  in  irony).  Tiie 
righteous  see  it  (viz.,  the  destruction  of  the 
ungodly)  and  are  glad,  and  the  innocent 
laugh  them  to  scorn  (Ps.lii.  6;  Iviii.  10,  11). 
Whereas  our  substance  is  not  cut  down  (or, 
*  verily  our  adversary  is  destroyed');  but  (or 
*and')  the  remnatit  of  them  [Margin,  '  their 
excellency ')  the  fire  devoureth."  Possible 
allusion  to  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of 
the  Plain,  with  a  cruel  side-glance  at  Job's 
own  losses  and  the  occasion  of  one  of  them. 
Observe : — 

1.  Some  dealt  with  by  God  in  judgment 
for  the  warning  of  others  (2  Pet.  ii.  6). 


2.  Sin  an  "  old  way,"  older  than  the  world 
itself,  troddeti  by  the  angels  liiat  fell,  and 
then  by  the  world  before  the  Flood  (Cien. 
vi.  5.) 

3.  A  course  of  sin  sooner  or  later  ends  in 
sulVering.  Sin,  though  an  old  and  well- 
trodden  way,  us  dangerous  and  disastrous 
as  ever  (Kom.  vi.  23). 

4.  The  conduct  of  sinners  and  its  fatal 
conse(|uences  to  be  carefully  "marked"  and 
avoitled. 

5.  The  firmest  earthly  possession  e^ksily 
swept  away  by  the  judgments  of  God; 
*'  whose  foundation,"  &c. 

0.  Dislike  of  God  the  essence  of  sin  and 
the  root  of  a  sinful  life;  "'  Which  said  unto 
God,  Depart  from  us." 

7.  God  and  sin  unable  to  dwell  together 
at  peace  in  the  same  heart. 

8.  The  unrenewed  heart  unable  to  get 
God  far  enough  ;  the  renewed  one  unable  to 
get  Him  near  enough. 

9.  The  baseness  and  blindness  of  sin. 
Like  the  man  who  turns  his  best  friend  and 
benefactor  out  of  doors. 

10.  'Fhe  ungodly  often  the  most  prospeious 
in  tills  world.    "  lie  lilled  their  houses,"  &c. 

11.  The  part  of  the  impenitent  to  despise 
God's  goodness  as  well  as  defy  His  power 
(llom.  ii.  4). 

12.  God's  multiplied  favours  a  fearful 
aggravation  of  a  sinful  life.  "Yet  He  lilled 
their  houses,"  &c.  Sad  when  a  house  full 
of  good  things  is  not  accompanied  with  a 
heart  full  of  grace. 

13.  A  constant  protest  to  be  entered 
against  an  ungodly  life,  however  pros|)trou3. 
The  "counsel  of  the  wicked,'.'  however  fair 
and  flattering,  to  be  kept  far  from  us. 

It.  Prosperous  wickedness  and  suffering 
|)iety  only  for  a  time.  A  day  cometh  when 
the  tables  will  be  turned.  "  Blessed  are  ye 
that  weep  now,  for  ye  shall  laugh;  woe  unto 
you  that  laugh  now,  for  ye  shall  mourn  and 
weep  "  (Luke  vi.  21 — 25).  Abraham's— 
"Son,  remember"  (Luke  xvi.  25). 

15.  The  righteous  glad,  not  at  the  sinner's 
calamity  itself,  but  at  the  holiness  and  justice 
of  God  a])pearing  in  it.  The  Creator's  cha- 
racter dearer  to  holy  men  anil  angels  than 
the  creature's  comfort. 

If).  Proud  and  presumptuous  sinners  at 
at  last  put  to  shame  (Dan.  xii.  2). 

17.  Haj)py  when  we  can  truly  rank  our- 
selves with  the  godly.  "Whereas  o«r  sub- 
stance," &c.,  i.e.  that  of  the  righteous;  or, 
"  Truly  our  adversary,*'  &c.  God's  saints 
regard  His  adversaries  as  their  own. 

VI.  Exhorts  to  reponfanco  and  piety 

(verse  21—23). 

1 .  Ej/iuiiiition  to  .tuhmission  and  reconcilia- 
tion toith  God  (verse  21).    "Acquaint  now 

137 


CHAP.    XXII, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


thyself  (or,  'Submit  thyself,  and  cultivate 
friendship  and  fellowship')  with  Him,  and 
be  at  peace ;  thereby  f^ood  shall  come  unto 
ihee"  (or,  "thine  increase  shall  be  good"). 
Precious  exhortation,  but  unjustly  addressed 
to  Job,  as  if  still  estranged  from  God.  Con- 
tains : 

First,  the  Exhortation  proper.   Two  parts. 
Part  First. 

"  Acquaint  thyself  witli  God." 

Acquaintance  or  friendship  with  God  our 
first  duty  and  highest  interest.  Implies — 
(1)  Knowledge  of  God.  Knowledge  necessary 
to  acquaintanceship.  To  have  friendship 
with  God  we  must  know  Him, — as  far  as  He 
is  pleased  to  reveal  Himself,  and  as  far  as 
creatures  can  know  Him,  in  His  nature,  His 
attributes  and  His  relations.  God  to  be 
known  as  a  Spirit,  and  as  a  Unity  in  Three 
Persons, — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit.  To 
be  known  as  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchang- 
ing ;  as  omnipresent,  omniscient,  and  omni- 
potent ;  as  holy,  just,  wise,  and  good.  To  be 
known  as  our  Creator,  Preserver,  Governor, 
and  through  the  incarnation,  obedience,  and 
death  of  His  Son,  our  Redeemer.  To  be 
known  in  part  from  His  works,  but  most 
from  His  Word.  Only  rightly  and  savingly 
known  through  the  inward  illumination  and 
revelati(m  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  To  be  known 
as  revealed  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  (John 
xiv.  9).  Power  given  to  Christ  by  the  Father 
to  communicate  the  saving  knowledge  of 
Himself  to  men  (Matt.  xi.  27  ;  John  xvii.  2, 
3).  The  Son's  mission  to  reveal  the  Father 
(John  i.  18).  Knowledge  of  God  to  be 
obtained — (i.)  Through  attention  to  and  faith 
in  the  Word  that  reveals  Him.  The  Scriptures 
testify  of  Christ ;  therefore  to  be  s(  arched 
(John  V.  39).  (ii.)  Through  earnest  prai/er 
for  Divine  illumination  and  teaching  (Prov. 
ii.  3 — 5).  Wisdom,  including  the  true  know- 
ledge of  God,  given  by  God  Himself  in 
answer  to  believing  prayer  (James  i.  4). 
(iii.)  Through  application  to  and  acceptance 
of  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  One  part  of  His 
work  as  a  Saviour,  to  teach,  enlighten,  and 
communicate  the  saving  knowledge  of  God 
(Matt.  ii.  27—29  ;  John  xvii.  2,  8).  Christ 
Himself  made  wisdom  to  those  wlio  receive 
and  trust  in  Him  (1  Cor.  i.  30).— (2)  S?ilj- 
tnission  to  God.  Submission  io  (lod  the  first 
duty  of  a  creature.  Nece3>ary  to  acquaint- 
ance and  friendly  intercourse  with  G'.)d. 
God's  gracious  regard  directed  to  the  humble 
and  submissive  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  Submission 
the  first  lesson  in  the  school  of  Christ,  and 
the  first  step  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine 
favour  and  friendship  (Mali.  xi.  27—29).— 
(3)  Recoiu'iHation  with  God.  Man,  through 
sin,  in  a  state  of  eumitj  with  Uod.    As  a 

138 


transgressor  of  His  law,  is  under  condemna' 
tion.  Sin  to  be  forgiven,  and  man  reconciled 
to  God  before  any  enjoyment  of  acquaintance- 
ship or  friendly  intercourse.  Reconciliation 
with  God  the  object  of  the  Son's  incarnation 
and  vicarious  death.  Sin  a  separating  element 
between  God  and  His  creatures.  The  sword 
of  justice  between  God  and  the  sinner.  To 
be  sheathed  before  any  friendly  fellowship 
can  exist.  Only  sheathed  when  satisfaction 
has  been  made  to  law  and  justice  lor  trans- 
gression. To  be  first  stained  with  the  blood 
of  a  substitute.  Hence  the  oblation  of 
sacrifices.  Christ  the  only  true  Sacrifice  and 
Substitute.  Men  reconciled  to  God  by  His 
blood  (Eph.  ii.  13— 16  ;  Col.  i.  21,  22;  Rom. 
V.  10). — (4)  Conformity  to  God^s  will  and 
character.  Agreement  in  spirit  and  principles 
necessary  to  friendship  and  fellowship  (Amos 
iii.  3).  Conformity  to  God's  will  and  ways  a 
creature's  highest  duty  and  interest.  With- 
out it  man's  spirit  a  troubled  sea  that  cannot 
rest. — (5)  Friendly  walk  and  fellowship  with 
God.  The  end  of  all  the  preceding.  The 
highest  happiness  of  a  creature.  Our  privi- 
lege in  this  life,  our  blessedness  in  the  next 
(Rev.  iii.  4).  The  testimony  borne  to  Enoch 
and  Noah  before  the  Flood :  they  "  walked 
with  God."  The  third  duty  required  of  man 
(Mic.  vi.  8).  Abraham  the  friend  of  God. 
God's  friendship  and  fellowship  man's  highest 
happiness  in  Paradise  (Gen.  ii.  8).  Lost  by 
the  Fall,  but  restored  in  Christ  (John  xiv.  23). 
The  secret  of  happiness  in  a  suflfering  world 
and  of  contentment  in  every  lot.  He  cannot 
be  unhappy  who  has  the  Almighty  for  his 
friend.  Observe — (i.)  Our  honour  to  be  made 
capable  of  acquaintance  and  felloioship  with 
God.  Heaven,  its  endless  enjoyment ;  hell, 
its  irrecoverable  loss,  (ii.)  Ever  increasing 
acquaintance  with  God,  in  and  through  Jesui 
Clirist,  our  precious  privilege. 
Second  part  of  exhortation : 

"Be  at  peace.'* 

Peace  the  sweetest  word  in  any  language. 
Includes  all  good.  God's  best  gift.  God 
the  God  of  peace.  True  peace  the  "  peace 
of  God."  Peace  on  earth  the  object  and 
result  of  the  Saviour's  incarnation  (Luke  ii. 
14).  Peace  the  purchase  of  His  blood.  Christ 
Himself  our  peace.  His  title  *  the  Prince  of 
Peace.'  Peace  His  legacy  and  gift  to  His 
followers.  Imparts  His  own  peace  (John 
xiv.  27).  Gives  it  not  in  word  as  a  mere 
salutation,  but  in  reality  and  experience. 
Peace  either  external  or  internal.  The  former 
precious  j  the  latter  still  more  so.  In  this 
world,  the  believers  enjoy  the  latter  without 
the  former  (John  xvi.  33).  \w  the  next,  they 
enjoy  both.  Acquaintance  with  God  the 
only  way  to  peace.  The  world  without  peace 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CUAP.    XXII. 


because  without  God.  Sometimes  an  external 
peace  euioycd  without  tlie  internal.  True 
peace  only  to  be  found  in  Him  who  is  our 
peace.  No  peace  without  pardon,  no  pardon 
without  Clirist.  Peace  with  God  before  peace 
in  ourselves.  Peace  offered  by  God  ilu'ough 
the  deatli  of  Ilis  Son,  Tlie  Gospel  an  ain- 
bassage  of  peace  from  the  King  of  kings. 
God  in  Christ  reconciling  the  workl  to  Him- 
self, and  now  beseeching  men  to  be  reconciled 
to  Ilim  (2  Cor.  v.  19  -21).  Peace  with  God 
the  immediate  result  of  crediting  the  mes- 
sage and  accepting  the  offer  (Rom.  v.  1). 
Followed  by  internal  peace  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7). 
Preserved  by  trust  in  Christ,  and  obedience 
as  its  fruit.  Christ  trusted  in,  as  our  Surety 
and  Substitute,  our  peace  as  sinners ;  Christ 
followed  as  our  Master  and  Pattern,  our 
peace  as  saints. 

Second.  The  Promise  attached  to  the 
exhortation  proper :  "  Thereby  good  shall 
come  unto  thee."  Peace  witli  God  brings 
every  blessing  in  its  train  (Rom.  v.  1),  &c. 
No  good  withlield  "from  them  that  walk 
uprifjhtly,"  as  His  reconciled  and  obedient 
children  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11).  All  things  made 
to  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God  (Rom.  viii.  28).  Afflictions  and  trials 
converted  into  blessings  (Heb.  xii.  11).  To 
the  submissive  and  believing,  good  comes  in 
this  life ;  still  more  in  the  life  to  come. 
Present  good  to  believers  only  a  foretaste  of 
tlie  future.  Suffering  with  Christ  here, 
glorified  with  Him  hereafter.  Death  sepa- 
rates them  from  all  evil,  and  introduces  them 
into  all  good.  Peace  on  earth  crowned  with 
glory  in  heaven. 

2.  Exhortation  to  a  cordial  acceptance  of 
mid  altention  to  Divine  teaching  and  admonition 
[verse  22).  "  Receive,  [  pray  thee,  the  law  at 
Hismouth,andlayupHiswordsinthineheart." 
The  enjoyment  of  peace  to  be  followed  by  a 
.'ife  of  purity.  Friendship  with  God  in- 
uepaiable  from  obedience  to  Him.  Christ's 
yoke  accepted  with  rest  imparted  (Matt.  xi. 
ii8,  29).  The  rest  continued  as  the  yoke  is 
carried.  Mary  at  peace  sits  down  at  the 
Master's  feet  and  hears  His  words.  God  a 
King  as  well  as  a  Father  and  Friend.  Christ 
a  Master  as  well  as  a  S-aviour.  With  Christ, 
the  law  given  as  a  directory  of  conduct,  not 
as  a  covenant  of  life.  At  first  given  with 
— "Do  this  and  live;"  now  given  with, — 
"Live  and  do  this."  Our  happiness,  that 
the  law  is  to  be  received  at  the  hands  of 
Him  who  has  Himself  fulfilled  its  commands 
and  endured  its  curse  as  our  Surety.  The 
same  pierced  hands  that  purchased  peace 
for  our  enjoyment,  presents  the  law  for  our 
obedience.  The  peace  of  the  Gospel  pre- 
served by  obedience  to  the  law. 

The  law  from  God's  "mouth,** — spoken  and 
given  by  liiinself.  At  first  givcu  to  man  at  his 


creation;  afterwards  on  various  occasions, 
and  in  did'ercMit  ways.  God  spake  to  the 
fathers  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners 
(Ileb.  i.  1).  The  "law"  here  probably 
equivalent  to  "  His  words"  in  the  next  clause. 
The  directory  not  only  of  our  conduct  but  of 
our  faith.  Taken  in  a  general  sense  as  includ- 
ing both  law  and  Gospel,  precept  and  promise. 
— God's  Law,  not  our  own  will  or  reason, 
or  the  maxims  and  customs  of  the  world 
to  be  the  guide  of  our  pr;ictice  and  opinions. 
— God's  law  to  be  "  received," — (1)  By 
reverent  attention ;  (2)  Thankful  receptance ; 
(3)  Conlial  faith ;  (4)  Cheerful  obedience ; 
(5)  Humble  submission.  To  be  not  merely 
read  but  "  received."  God's  law  one  of  His 
most  precious  gifts  (Hos.  viii.  12 ;  Ps.  cxlvi. 
19,  20).  His  law,  properly  so  called,  as  much 
a  gift  as  his  Gospel. 

God's  "words"  to  be  "laid  up  in  our 
heart,"— for  remembrance,  meditation,  and 
use.  To  be  laid  up  as  our  most  precious 
treasure.  To  be  laid  up,  not  in  our  chest  or 
our  chamber,  but  in  our  heart.  To  be  hidden 
iu  the  heart  that  we  may  not  sin  (Ps.  cxix. 
11).  So  treasured  by  Christ,  and  ready  for 
use  in  the  hour  of  temptation  (Ps.  xl.  8  ; 
Matt.  iv.  4).  To  be  laid  up  in  the  heart, — 
(1)  By  deep  attention;  (2)  Frequent 
reading  or  hearing;  (3)  Serious  reflection. 
Not  only  to  be  learned  but  "  laid  up."  The 
mark  of  a  loving  child  to  prize,  ponder,  an  I 
preserve  the  words  of  an  absent  parent. 
God's  words  laid  upybr  us  in  the  Scripture, 
and  to  be  laid  up  by  us  in  our  heart.  Worthy 
to  be  so  laid  up  as  our  choicest  treasure 
(Ps.  xix.  10).  God's  words  both  words  of 
promise  and  precept,  wooing,  and  warning. 
Given  both  for  direction  and  comfort. 
Found  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 

VII.  Holds  forth  various  promises 
with  conditions  (verse  23 — 30). 

"If  thou  return  to  the  Almighty,  thou 
shalt  be  built  up  (more  especially  in  a  family, 
with  a  new  and  numerous  race  of  children) ; 
thou  shait  (rather,  *  if  thou  shalt')  put  away 
iniquity  (or  wrong  doing)  far  from  thy 
tabernacles  (plural, — Job  addressed  as  a 
chief  or  emir) ;  then  shalt  thou  lav  up  gold 
as  the  dust  (or,  as  Margin,  'and  lay  the 
precious  metals  on  the  dust,'  as  things  of 
no  value  and  only  to  be  trodden  on),  and  the 
gold  of  Ophir  (a  })lace  in  Arabia  distinguished 
for  its  gold)  as  (or  '  on*)  the  stones  of  the 
brooks;  then  shall  the  Almighty  be  lUy 
defence  {Margin,  *thy  gold'),  and  thou 
shalt  have  plenty  of  silver  (or,  'and  [he 
shall  be]  treasures  of  silver  unto  thee*). 
For  (or  'yea,* — a  still  greater  blessing) 
thou  shalt  have  thy  delight  in  the  Ahnii^hty, 
and  shall  lilt  up  thy  lace  unto  God.  Tlmu 
shult  make  thv  prayer  uuio  him  (as  incense), 

189 


CHAP.  XXII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


and  he  shall  hear  thee,  and  thou  shalt  per- 
form thy  vows  [on thy  prayer  being  answered]. 
Thou  shalt  also  decree  (or  purpose)  a  thing 
and  it  shall  be  established  unto  thee,  and 
the  light  [of  prosperity  and  the  Divine 
blessing]  shall  shine  upon  thy  ways.  When 
men  are  cast  down  (or  'shall  cast  [thee] 
down' ;  or,  '  shall  humble  tliemselves'), 
then  thou  shalt  say  [in  confident  assurance], 
there  is  (or  *  shall  be')  lifting  up ;  and  he 
shall  save  the  humble  person.  He  {i.e. 
God)  shall  deliver  the  island  (or  'the  country* 
or  'dwelling')  of  the  innocent  (or,  'He 
shall  deliver  him  that  is  not  innocent',  viz., 
at  thy  intercession),  and  it  is  delivered  (or, 
'he  shall  be  delivered')  by  the  pureness  of 
thy  bands."     Three  conditions — 

1.  Returning  to  God.  "If  thou  return  to 
the  Almighty, — return  home  to  Him  as  a 
prodigal  to  his  father,  so  as  again  to  be 
united  to  him  and  to  the  family, — return  to 
Him  in  submission,  obedience  and  love.  Job 
unjustly  regarded  as  having  forsaken  God 
and  cast  off  his  fear  (ch.  xv.  4.)  Always 
true  that  the  first  step  to  a  sinner's  hapfiiness 
is  returning  to  God  :  "  I  will  arise  and  fro  to 
my  Father."  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone 
astray.  God's  constant  call  to  the  uncon- 
verted: Turn  ye,  turn  ye;  for  why  will  ye 
die  ?  "  To  the  Almighty."  "  To"  emphatic, 
even  or  quite  to  Him ;  not  only  in  good  in- 
clinations and  beginnings,  but  fully  and 
thoroughly.  "  He  arose  and  went  to  His 
Father."  Not  enough  to  turn  from  sin,  but 
to  return  to  God  (Jer.  iv.  1 ;  Hos.  vii.  16). 
Christ  the  way  back  to  the  Father  (John  xiv. 
6).  Returning  to  God  a  necessary  condition 
of  God  returning  to  us  (Mai.  iii.  7).  Im- 
portant prayer  (Jer.  xxxi.  18). 

2.  Cutting  iniquity  far  from  us  and  from 
our  dwelling.  "  Thou  shalt  put  iniquity  far 
from  thy  tabernacles."  No  true  returning 
to  God  without  turning  from  sin.  God  and 
sin  at  opposite  poles;  the  face  to  the  one, 
the  back  to  the  other.  No  friendship  with 
God  without  a  falling  out  with  sin.  Sin 
the  abominable  thing  which  God  hates  (Jer. 
xliv.  4). — To  be  put  away  not  only  from 
ourselves  but  from  our  dwelling.  A  man 
responsible  for  what  is  done  in  his  house. 
David's  resolution  (Ps.  ci.  3 — 7).  Joshua's 
(Josh.  xxiv.  15).  Much  of  a  man's  sin  com- 
mitted in  his  own  house,  A  man  to  purify 
nis  house  as  well  as  his  heart.  Job's  piety 
seen  in  his  care  about  his  children's  conduct 
as  well  as  his  own  (ch.  i.  6). — Iniquity  not 
only  to  be  put  away  \i\ii  far  away  (ch.  xxi. 
16). — Sin  represented  here  as  "  i7iiquity." 
Sin  many-sided.  Here  especially  its  rela- 
tion to  our  neighbour.  Inj  ustice,  oppression, 
wrong,  retention  of  dishonest  gain,  incon- 
sistent with  the  enjoyment  Qi  tho  Divine 
fuvoui-  rnjd  blessing, 

,     140 


3.  Ceasing  to  love  and  trust  in  riches. 
**  Lay  gold  on  the  dust,"  {Margin).  The  heart 
to  be  withdrawn  from  covetousness.  Love 
to  the  world  incompatible  with  love  to  God. 
Trust  in  riches,  heart  idolatry.  No  man 
able  to  serve  two  masters.  God  not  to  be 
served  with  a  divided  heart  (Hos.  x.  2). 
Trust  in  riches  the  worship  of  Mammon. 
Solemnly  repudiated  by  Job  (ch.  xxxi. 
24,  25). 

Promises, 

1.  Upbuilding  (verse  23).  **Thou  shalt 
built  up."  God,  who  pulls  down,  able  also  to 
build  up.  Allusion  to  Job's  calamities,  both 
as  to  fortune  and  family.  Building  up  both 
external  and  internal.  Here  probably  rather 
the  former;  temporal  prosperity,  and  more 
espt^cially  in  relation  to  offspring.  U[)build- 
ing  in  spiritual  blessing,  and  soul-prosperity 
the  New  Testament  promise  (Acts  ix.  31). 
Implies  growth  in  grace,  comfort,  spiritual 
strength.  Upbuilding  in  Christ  (Col.  ii.  7); 
in  faith  (Jude  20);  in  love  (Eph.  iv.  16). 
Spiritual  growth  dependent  on  consistent 
walk  (Is.  Iviii.  9—12). 

2.  Enjoyment  of  God  as  our  portion  and 
defence  (verse  25).  "  The  Almighty  shall  be 
thy  defence"  (or  treasure).  The  believer's 
place  of  defence  is  the  munition  of  rocks. 
Underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms.  God 
Himself  the  portion  of  His  people  (Deut. 
xxii.  9 ;  Ps.  xvi.  5).  He  is  safe  who  has 
the  Almighty  for  his  defence,  and  rich  who 
has  God  for  his  treasure. 

"  Give  what  Thou  canst,  without  Thee  we 
are  poor ; 
And  with  Thee  rich,  take  what  Thou  wilt 
away." 

3.  Delight  in  God  (verse  26).  "Thou 
shalt  have  thy  delight  in  the  Almighty." 
God  the  fountain  of  joy  and  ocean  of  delights, 
more  than  enough  in  Him  to  fill  all  hearts 
with  pleasure.  God  a  sun  to  gladden,  while 
a  shield  to  guard.  Giving  u^  the  unsatis- 
fying short-lived  pleasures  of  sin,  we  receive 
those  which  are  perfect  and  enduring.  Only 
a  penitennt  and  renewed  heart  capable  of 
delighting  in  the  Almighty.  The  pore  in 
heart  see  God  (Matt.  v.  8). 

4.  Access  to,  and  confidence  in,  God  as  a 
reconciled  Father  {y^x^^.  26).  "Thou  shalt 
lift  up  thy  face  unto  God."  Implies  con- 
scious acceptance,  delight,  and  confidence. 
The  experience  of  one  conscious  of  forgive- 
ness and  acceptance  "in  the  Beloved."  The 
face  "  lifted  up  "  in  prayer  and  communion 
with  God.  The  spirit  of  adoption,  crying, 
Abba,  Father.  Boldness  of  access  to  a 
father  the  privilege  of  a  child.  The  be- 
liever's privilege  in  relation  to  God  (Eph. 
iii.  12).  Enjoyed  in  Christ.  Boldness  to 
enter  into  the  holiest  of  all  by  the  blood  af 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAUr:  JOB. 


CUAV.   XXllI 


Jesus  (Heb.  x.  19).  Believers  to  come 
boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  haviiif^  Jesus 
there  as  their  Hiii^h  Priest  (Heb.  iv.  16). 
Confidence  towards  God  connected  with 
consciousness  of  obeying  Him  (1  John  iii. 
21,  22).  Abiding  in  Christ  now  gives  con- 
fidence before  Him  at  His  appearing  here- 
after (1  John  ii.  28).  A  loving  heart  gives 
boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment  (1  John 
iv.  18). 

5.  The  spirit  of  prayer  and  acceptance  of 
our  petitions  (verse  27).  "  Tliou  shalt  make 
thy  prayer  to  him,  and  he  shall  hear  thee." 
Ability  to  pray,  and  to  pray  with  acceptance, 
the  gift  of  God.  Children,  not  slaves,  free 
to  bring  their  requests  to  the  master.  The 
spirit  of  prayer  connected  with  a  state  of 
acceptance.  Answers  to  prayer  given  to 
believers  along  with  the  spirit  of  prayer 
(1  Johnv.  14 — 16).  Answers  to  prayer  the 
privilege  of  the  upright  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18  ;  xv.  8). 
The  Lord  fulfils  the  desire  of  tiiem  that  fear 
Him  (Ps.  cxlv.  6).  Prayer  as  incense,  from 
the  Saviour's  merits  and  the  Spirit's  grace 
(Ps.  cxli.  2 ;  Rev.  viii.  3,  4).  Answered 
for  the  sake  of  the  Elder  Brother  (John 
svi.  23).  God  never  weary  of  blessing  His 
people,  because  never  weary  of  loving  His 
Son.  Universal  promise  made  to  prayer 
offered  believingly  in  the  Saviour's  name 
(John  XV,  7;  1  John  v.  15 ;  Mark  xi.  24). 

6.  The  grace  of  thanksgiving  with  answers 
to  prayer  (verse  27).  "And  thou  shalt  per- 
form thy  vows."  Grace  to  render  thanks 
for  mercies  received  no  less  a  mercy  than 
the  mercies  themselves.  Thanksgiving  both 
our  duty  and  our  privilege.  When  God 
graciously  fulfils  our  prayers  we  ought 
faithfully  to  fulfil  our  vows.  Thanksgiving 
for  answers  to  prayer  and  performance  of 
vows  practised  by  the  heathen  themselves 
(Jonah  i.  16). 

7.  Success  in  undertakings  (verse  28). 
"  Thou  shalt  also  decree  a  thing,  and  it  shall  be 
established  unto  thee,  and  the  light  shall  shine 
upon  thy  ways."  Prosperity  and  success  in 
our  undertakings  dependent  upon  God  (Rom. 
i.  8).    Promised  to  the  confiding  and  con- 


sistent believer  (2  Chrou.  xx.  20 ;  Ps.  i.  3; 
xxxvii.  5).  Promised  to  Joshua  (Josh  i.  8). 
Afforded  to  Jos(3pli  (Gen.  xxxix.  3,  23)}  and 
to  Daniel  (Dan.  vi.  28).  The  prayer  of 
Abraham's  servant  (Gen.  xxiv.  12) ;  and  of 
Nehemiah  (Neh.  i.  11). 

8.  Comfort,  hope,  and  deliverance  in,  time 
of  trouble  and  depression  (verse  29).  **  When 
men  are  cast  down  (or, '  when  they  shall  cast 
thee  down,'  or,  *  when  thou  art  depressed') 
then  thou  shalt  say  [to  thyself,  or  to  others], 
there  is  (or,  *  shall  be ')  lifting  up ;  and  he 
shall  save  the  humble  person."  Comfort  and 
confidence  of  help  and  deliverance  in  time 
of  common  as  well  as  personal  danger  and 
depression,  with  encouragement  to  others. 
Realized  by  Paul  in  the  ship  (Acts  xxvii. 
21 — 25.  The  Lord  a  light  to  His  people  in 
time  of  darkness  (Micah  vii.  8).  Confidence, 
joy,  and  hope,  in  seasons  of  trouble  and 
adversity,  the  fruit  of  faith  and  obedience 
(Hab.  iii.  17 — 19).  Job's  own  experience 
at  times  (ch.  xxiii.  10). 

8.  Usefulness  to  others  (verse  30).  "He 
shall  deliver  the  island  (country  or  dwelling) 
of  the  innocent  (or,  "  shall  deliver  Him  that 
is  not  innocent,  i.e.,  that  is  guiltj);  and  it 
(or  he)  is  delivered  by  the  pureiiess  of  thy 
hands."  God  honours  His  faithful  and  con- 
fiding people  by  not  only  blessing  themselves, 
but  making  them  blessings  to  others  So 
Abraham,  Joseph,  Daniel,  Paul.  Not  only 
makes  them  grow  themselves,  but  brings 
others  to  sit  under  their  shadow  (Hosea  xiv. 
6,  7).  Saves  them,  and  gives  them  to  share 
with  Himself  the  joy  of  saving  others  (James 
V.  23;  Jude23;  ITim.iv.  16).  The  accepted 
and  faithful  believer's  prayers  made  effica- 
cious even  for  the  ungoldly  (1  John  v.  16). 
So  Abraham's  would  have  been  in  the  care 
of  Sodom  (Gen.  xviii.  24).  A  community, 
company,  or  family,  often  saved  for  the  sake 
of  the  godly  in  it  (Acts  xxvii.  24).  Pureness 
of  hands,  both  in  practice  and  prayer,  neces- 
sary to  real  usefulness  to  others.  The  pro- 
mises in  the  text  realized  in  Job's  case  in  a 
way  not  anticipated  by  Eliphaz  (eh.  xUi. 
7 — 9).     A  praying  man  a  public  good. 


CHAPTER  XXin. 


JOB'S  THIRD  REPLY  TO  ELIPHAZ, 


Ceases  directly  to  address  his  friends.  His 
present  speech  rather  a  soliloquy.  Takes  no 
notice  of^  the  charges  laid  against  him  by 
Eliphaz.  Laments  the  want  of  access  to 
God  in  order  to  plead  his  cause  before  Him. 
Expresses  his  consniousness  of  integrity  and 
obedience  to  the  Divine  will,  as  well  ;is  his 
soleiau  awe  at  the  absolute  sovereignity  of 


God,  and  the  mysterious  character   of  His 
dealings  with  him. 

I.  Complains  of  the  continuance  of 
his  troubles  and  the  view  still  taken 
of  his  conduct  under  it  (verse  2).  "Even 
lo-day  [after  all  1  have  already  suffered]  i? 
my  complaint  bitter  (or,  *  even  to-dav  \:\kci 


CB,L£.  XXIII. 


HOJUILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


all  I  have  asserted  of  my  innocence]  is  my 
speech  [regarded  as]  rebellion  ') ;  my  stroke 
is  heavier  than  my  groaning  "  (or,  is  [viewed 
as]  heavy  on  account  of  my  groaning).  Ex- 
presses either  his  own  sorrowful  experience, 
or  the  views  of  his  friends  regarding  it.  His 
troubles  now  of  some  weeks,  or  perhaps 
months,  continuance.  No  relief  as  yet  either 
to  his  mental  distress  or  physical  di-sease. 
Observe — 

1.  Protracted  trouble  worst  to  endure.  The 
spiiit  worn  out  and  exhausted  by  continued 
suffering.  David's  complaint — "Day  and 
night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon  me"  (Ps. 
iii.  24).  The  misery  of  the  lost  that  time 
brings  no  change.  Eternity  the  only  lane  that 
has  no  turning.     As  the  tree  falls,  so  it  lies. 

2.  An  aggravation  of  trouble  when  com- 
plaint is  construed  into  rebellion.  Job's 
complaint  perhaps  not  always  entirely  free 
from  it.  His  spirit  not  always  what  it 
was  in  eh.  i.  and  ii.  To  complain  under  such 
sufferings  only  human.  Bitterness  of  com- 
plaint not  always  rebelliousness  of  spirit. 
JBitter  complaint  consistent  with  meekness 
and  submission.  A  bitter  cry  heard  on  the 
cross  from  the  lips  of  the  only  spotless 
sufferer  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  Job  alone  con- 
scious of  the  depth  of  his  distress.  The 
heart  knoweth  its  own  bitterness. 

3.  Grace  forbids  not  to  groan  under 
trouble,  but  puts  a  bridle  upon  the  lips. 
Job's  groanings  frequent  but  restrained.  He 
is  a  conqueror,  not  who  never  groans  under 
protracted  trouble,  but  who  holds  out 
patiently  to  the  end.  Terrible  conflict  some- 
times to  be  maintained — (1)  Against  suffer- 
ing ;  (2)  Against  sin ;  (3)  Against  suffering 
and  sinning  at  the  same  time. 

II.  Longs    for   free    access   to   God 

(verse  3).  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might 
find  him,  that  I  might  come  (ven  to  his 
seat.  I  would  order  my  cause  before  him, 
I  would  fill  my  mouth  with  arguments  [in 
proving  myself  an  innocent  sufferer]  j  I 
would  know  [without  fear  of  the  result]  the 
words  which  he  would  answer  me,  and  un- 
derstand what  he  would  say  unto  me"  [in 
answer  to  my  arguments,  and  in  reference 
to  my  character  and  the  cause  of  my  suffer- 
ing]. Perhaps  his  answer  to  the  exhortation 
of  Eliphaz  (ch.  xxii  21).  God  so  familiar 
to  Job's  thoughts  as  to  be  spoken  of  without 
being  named.  His  life,  like  Enoch's,  a 
walking  with  God.     Observe — 

1.  No  uncommon  thing  for  one  who  walks 
with  God  to  be  at  times  without  free  access 
to  Him.  God,  for  wise  purposes,  hides  Him- 
&elf  at  times  even  from  His  own  (Jer.  xiv.  8), 
No  finding  God  but  as  He  reveal.-^  Himself. 
Want  of  access  in  time  of  trouble  a  special 
trial  (>!  faith  and  patieuce. 


2.  Access  to  God  the  privilege  of  believers, 
A  time  for  finding  God  (Ps.  xxxii.  6 ;  Is. 
Iv.  6).  The  contrary  implied  (Prov.  i.  24— 
29).  God  found  nowhere  but  in  Christ. 
Clirist  the  way  to  the  Father  (John  xiv.  6). 
Free  access  to  God  for  sinners  through  Him 
and  His  shed  blood  (Heb.  iv.  15,  16 ;  x. 
19 — 22.  The  Holy  Spirit  given  to  believers 
in  order  to  their  free  access  and  approach  to 
God  through  Christ  (Eph.  ii.  18).  The 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication  (Zech.  x. 
12) ;  of  adoption,  crying:  Abba  Father  (Gal. 
iv.  6).  Helps  infirmities  of  the  saints, 
making  inward  intercession  for  them  with 
groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered  (Rom. 
viii.  26). 

3 .  God  not  always  found  immediately  (Prov. 
viii.  34,  35 ;  Luke  xviii.  17).  Yet  always 
found  where  there  is  earnestness,  humility, 
and  faith  in  seeking  Him  (Is.  xiv.  9 ;  Jer. 
xxix.  13).  In  the  time  of  Job,  the  way  to 
God  through  Christ  still  comparatively  ob- 
scure, and  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  Spirit  of 
supplication  and  adoption,  still  comparatively 
withheld.  God  found  the  sooner  the  more 
we  are  humbled  under  a  sense  of  sin  and  un- 
worthiness.  Job's  desire  still  rather  to  have 
access  to  God  as  a  righteous  man,  in  order  to 
have  his  irmocence  affirmed,  than  as  a  sinner 
to  have  his  sins  forgiven.  God  reveals  Him- 
self to  the  humble  and  contrite,  not  the  self- 
righteous  (Is.  Ixvi.  2 ;  Luke  xviii.  10 — 14). 

Job  still  persuaded  of  God's  favourable 
regard  (verse  6).  "Will  he  plead  against 
me  (overawe  me  or  put  me  down)  with  his 
great  power  [as  unable  to  prevail  by  words]? 
No,  but  he  would  put  strength  in  me" 
(enabling  me  to  plead  my  cause  successfully ; 
or,  "he  would  give  heed  to  me,"  affording  a 
iiracious  and  impartial  hearing  to  my  case). 
God  the  opposite  of  the  Unjust  Judge  in  the 
Parable.  Not  only  hearkens  to  our  pleading 
but  gives  strength  to  plead.  So  the  Divine 
angel  wrestling  with  Jacob  at  Penuel  (Gen. 
xxxii.  24— 30j. 

His  confidence  as  to  the  result  (verse  7). 
"  There  (in  such  a  case — on  being  admitted 
to  His  tribunal)  the  righteous  might  dispute 
with  him  (the  innocent  man — referring  to 
himself — might  freely  plead  his  cause) ;  so 
should  I  hw  delivered  for  ever  (come  off  vic- 
torious) from  my  judge."  (1)  God's  throne 
at  once  one  of  justice  and  grace.  (2)  The 
comfort  of  true  and  tried  believers  that  they 
shall  obtain  a  favourable  verdict  from  God. 
Believers  have — (i.)  The  testimony  of  a  good 
conscience;  (ii.)  The  consciousness  of  a 
personal  interest  in  Christ  as  their  Surety 
and  Advocate  wit'u  ihe  Father  (1  John  iii. 
21 ;  ii.  1).  The  believer  not  absolutely  righte- 
ous in  himself,  but  in  Christ  the  Righteous 
One  his  ITrad  and  Representative  (Rom.  v. 
14  j  2  Cor.  V.  21).    The  confidence  of  Mes- 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


CHAP.   XXIU. 


siah.  as  God's  righteous  servant  transferred 
to  His  believing  members  (Is.  1.  5 — 9;  Rom. 
viii.  32 — 34).  (3)  A  sinall  matter  that  man 
condemns  if  God  approves  (1  Cor.  iv,  3). 

III.  Laments  his  inability  to  find 
Ood  as  he  desired  (verse  8).  "  Behold,  i 
go  forward  (or,  *to  the  east')  but  he  is  not 
there;  and  backward  (or,  'to  the  west'),  but 
1  cannot  perceive  him ;  on  the  left,  hand  (or, 
on  the  north)  wlieie  he  doth  work  (the 
north  being  the  more  populous  part  of  the 
world,  the  region  of  stars  and  constellatious 
and  the  birthplace  of  storms  and  tempests), 
but  I  cannot  behold  him  ;  he  hideth  himself 
on  the  right  hand  (or,  on  the  south,  where 
all  is  solitude  and  waste),  but  I  cannot  see 
him."     Observe — 

1.  A  believer,  while  in  darkness  and  trouble, 
makes  continual  attempts  to  find  God  (Song 
iii.  2).  Nothing  satisfies  a  living  soul  but 
God  Himself  (Ps  Ixiii.  1,  2). 

2.  God  found  anywhere  with  humility, 
earnestness,  and  faith  ;  without  them,  nowhere. 
Found  neither  in  solitude  nor  society  unless 
He  graciously  reveals  Himself  in  Christ 
through  the  Spirit.  God's  absolute  presence 
everywhere;  His  gracious  manifested  presence 
only  as  He  is  pleased  to  afford  it.  The 
latter  promised  to  faithful  believers  (John 
xiv.  21 — 23).  God's  dealings  with  men  in 
Providence  with  a  view  to  their  seeking  Him, 
feeling  after  Him,  and  finding  Him  (Acts 
xvii.  26,  27). 

3.  God  often  graciously  near  us  when  we 
are  without  sense  or  consciousness  of  His  pre- 
sence. Job's  case  now  like  that  of  Hagar  in 
the  Wilderness  (Gen.  xvi.  13;  xxi.  19). 

4.  Frayer  answered  at  the  best  time  and  in 
the  best  way.  Job's  desire  ultimately  granted 
after  Elihu's  speech  had  prepard  him  for  it. 
Then  no  longer  has  a  case  to  plead,  but  con- 
scious of  personal  unworthiness  and  the 
Divine  perfection,  is  able  to  leave  it  entirely 
in  the  Lord's  hands.  Our  own  spirit  gene- 
rally the  greatest  hindrance  to  our  prayers 
being  answered. 

5.  God^s  manifested  and  enjoyed  presence 
the  greatest  happiness.  Happy  when  every- 
thing in  nature,  sunrise  and  sunset,  storm 
and  calm,  "  prompts  with  remembrance  of  a 
present  (Sod.'* 

"  His  presence  who  made  all  so  fair,  per- 
ceived, 
Makes  all  still  fairer.'* 

IV.  Comforts  himself  with  the  thouglit 
of  the  Divine  omniscience  and  tlie  assu- 
rance of  ultimate  triumph  (verse  10). 
*'  But  he  knuweth  the  way  that  I  take 
{Margin:  *  that  is  with  me,' — all  my  expe- 
rn'iic  and  conduct  in  lliis  affliction,  a>  ^v'cll 
tt5  oil  my  previous  course  of  life)  \  when  he 


hatli  tried  me  [sufiiciontly  by  these  troubles; 
or,  simply,  'he  hath  tried  me,  viz.,  by  these 
present  sufferings],  1  shall  come  forth,  out 
of  this  furriace  of  aflliction,  or  out  of  this 
probation  to  which  I  am  now  subjected]  as 
gold  "  [comes  out  of  the  fiie  that  tries  and 
purifies  it,  refined  from  the  dross  of  remaining 
corruption,  and  freed  from  all  charges  and 
su!s])icions  as  to  my  character  and  conduct] 
Observe — 

1.  The  mark  of  an  upright  believer  to  re- 
ioice  that  God  is  acquainted  with  all  his  ways. 

2.  A  believe/ s  comfort  under  affliction  and 
reproach,  to  know  that  God  is  perfectly  ac 
qua  luted  bothwith  his  character  and  experience . 
If  in  trouble  we  cannot  see  God,  it  should  be 
our  comfort  that  God  sees  us,  and  knows  all 
about  us.  Hagar's  happy  discovery  in  the 
wilderness:  "Thou  God  seest  me"  (Gen. 
xvi.  13). 

3.  Our  great  comfort,  ichen  reproached  by 
men,  to  know  that  our  conduct  is  approved  by 
God.  Our  main  concern,  therefore,  ought  to 
be  to  obtain  that  approval.  "  Let  them 
curse,  but  bless  Thou  "  (Ps.  cxix.  28). 

4.  God  tries  and  proves  all  his  children 
(Ps.  xi.  5  ;  Jer.  xx.  12).  The  di  sire  of  a 
sound  believer  to  be  tried  by  God  (Ps.  xvii. 
3;  xxvi.  2;  cxxxix.  23).  A  believer's  trials 
and  afflictions  often  only  the  divinely  intended 
means  of  proving  his  principles  and  faith  (1 
Pet.  i  7  ;  Jan.es  i.  12  j  Deut.  viii.  2). 

5.  The  result  of  a  true  believer's  tiials 
certain.  This  result  threefold:  (1)  The 
justification  of  his  faith;  (2)  The  confir- 
mation of  his  hope  ;  (3)  The  purification  of 
his  love  (Koni.  v.  4,  &c. ;  Is.  xxvii.  9;  Heb 
xii.  10,  11  ;  Dan.  xii.  10). 

6.  Genuine  believer's  like  gold.  (1)  Precious 
(Lam.  iv.  2  ;  Is.  xliii.  4)  ;  (2)  Rare  (Matt, 
vii.  14 ;  Luke  xii.  32) ;  (3)  Usually  found 
mixed  with  earth  and  dross  (Is.  i.  25)  ;  (4) 
Subjected  to  the  fire  of  purification  (Zech. 
xiii.  9) ;  1  Pet.  i.  7 ;  (5)  Able  to  endure  the 
fire  (1  Cor.  iii.  12;  i6)  Ultimately  made 
perfectly  pure  (Is.  i.  25). 

V.  Declares  the  ground  of  his  as- 
surance (verse  11,  12).  That  ground  the 
consciousness  of  his  cliaracter  and  conduct 
(1  John  iii.  21).     Job  con&cious  of — 

1.  Persevering  obedience  to  God's  will 
(verse  11).  "My  foot  hath  held  his  steps 
(followed  farthfully  and  persevci'ingly  the 
steps  he  prescribed  to  me,  and  which  were 
ph'asing  in  his  sight);  his  ways  have  I 
kept,  and  not  declined :  neither  have  I  gone 
back  from  the  connnandments  of  his  lips." 
God's  steps  not  only  prescribed  by  Him,  but 
trcfdden  by  Himself.  "Be  ye  followers  of 
God,  as  dear  children."  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I 
am  lu)ly."  "Be  niciciful,  as  your  lie:iv(  niv 
J;'HtUej:'is  merciiul"  (Eph.  v.  1;  1  Pe! .  1. 10 . 

14o 


OHAF.  XXIII. 


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


Luke  vi.  36).    Especially  trodden  by  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh  (John  xiii.  15  ;  Eph, 
V.  2 ;  Phil.  ii.  5 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  21 ;  1  John  ii.  6). 
Those  steps  marked  in  the   Scriptures  (1 
Thess.  iv.  2).      Observe — (1)    The  proof  of 
sincerity  not  merely  to  'put  our  feet  in  God's 
steps,  but  to  keep  them  there ;  not   only   to 
enter  upon  God's  way,  but  not  to  decline  or 
turn  aside  from  it.    (2)  God's  way  to  be  kept, 
not  our  own\  (3)  Many  temptations  to  decline 
from  God's  way.     These  are — (i )  From  the 
world;   (ii.)  From  our  own  heart.     Some- 
times the  frowns  of  the  world,  sometimes 
its  smiles,  prove  temptations.  Hence  Agur's 
prayer  (Prov.  xxx.  8,  9).    (4)  Possible  for  a 
man  to  keep  God's  way^  and  not  decline  from 
it.     True  generally,  though  not  absolutely. 
"Not  a  just  man  on  earth  that  doeth  good 
and  sinneth  not."     "  If  we  say  we  have  no 
sin  we  deceive  ourselves "  (Prov.  vii.  20 ; 
1  John  i.  8).    In  a  general  sense,  possible 
with  Paul  to  live  in  all  good  conscience  before 
God  (Acts  xxiii.  1).     So  David,  as  typical 
of  Christ  (Ps.   xviii.   21—23);    Hezekiah 
(2  Kings  xviii.  6 ;  xx.  3)  j  Josiah  (2  Kings 
xxii.    2 ;   xxiii.  25) ;  the   writer  of  Psalm 
cxix.  (Daniel?)  (Ps.  cxix.  22,  31,  51,  55, 
56).     God's  Word  given  and  to  be  attended 
to  for  this  purpose  (Josh.  i.  7,  8 ;  Ps.  cxix. 
11).     Requires — (i.)    Reflection  (Prov.  iv. 
26;  Ps,  cxix.  59  ;  (ii.)  Kesolntion  (Ps.  cxix. 
106);    (iii.)  Courage;    (iv.)  Watchfulness; 
(v.)  Dependence  on  Divine  strength  ;  (vi.) 
Prayer.     (5)  Job  in  the  Old,  ayi  example  to 
believers  in  the  New  Testament  dispensation. 
Much  more  light  and  grace  vouchsafed  in 
the  latter  than  in  the  former.     The  Gospel 
dispensation  especially  the   dispensation  of 
the  Spirit  (2  Cor.  iii.  8 — 11).     Hence  a  still 
higher  and  holier  life  to  be  expected.     Be- 
lievers to  be  "  filled  with  the  Spirit  '*  (Eph. 
V.  18). 

2.  High  esteem  for  the  2oords  of  God  (verse 
12).  **  I  have  esteemed  {Hebrew :  *  hidden, 
or  treasured  up ')  the  words  of  His  mouth 
more  than  my  necessary  food "  {Margin  : 
"My  appointed  portion;*'  or,  "than  my 
own  purpose,"  when  these  have  come  in 
collision).  Words  from  God's  mouth  known 
in  all  ages.  God,  at  sundry  times  and  in 
divers  manners,  spake  in  time  past  to  the 
fathers  (Heb.  1.  1).  The  words  of  God's 
mouth  treasured  up  in  the  Scriptures  of 
truth  (Deut.  xxxi.  19,  22,  24* ;  Is.  xxx.  8  ; 
Hab.  ii.  2).  Spoken  and  preserved  as  the 
rule  of  faith  and  practice.  To  be — (1)  Highly 
esteemed  as  our  most  precious  treasure  ;  (2) 
Chosen  and  adopted  as  the  only  rule  of  our 
faith  and  practice;  (3)  Carefully  treasured 
up  in  memory  and  heart;  (4)  Held  fast  and 
persevered  in. 

Reasons  for  highly  esteeming  God's  Word. 
(1)  Its  sourcef — God  Himself ;  (2)  Its  nature 

144 


and  character — (i.)  Pure;  (ii.)  True;  (iii.) 
Efficacious.  (3)  Its  tendency  and  end.  The 
Word  of  God  is — (i.)  A  means  of  convincing 
of  sin  and  error  (Ps.  xix.  11 ;  Heb.  iv.  12) ; 
(ii.)  A  means  of  conversion  (Ps.  xix.  7) ; 
(iii.)  The  Holy  Spirit's  instrument  in  regene- 
ration (James  i.  18);  1  Pet.  i.  23);  (iv.) 
Means  of  spiritual  enlightenment  (Ps.  xix. 
8 ;  cxix.  1 30) ;  (v.)  Directory  as  to  duty  and 
the  way  of  salvation  (2  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  John 
V.  39) ;  (vi.)  Means  of  spiritual  comfort, 
refreshment,  and  delight  (Ps.  cxix.  50,  54, 
111;  xix.  8,  10;  Jer.  xv.  16;  (vii.)  Means 
of  sanctification  (John  xv.  3;  xvii.  17;  2 
Cor.  iii.  18) ;  (viii.)  Means  of  spiritual  fruit- 
fulness  (John  XV.  7,  8);  (ix.)  Means  of  per- 
fecting Christian  character  (2  Tim.  iii.  17) ; 
(x.)  Means  of  preparing  for  usefulness  (2 
Tim.  iii.  17). 

Evidences  of  highly  esteeming  God's  Word 
— (i.)  When  it  is  attentively  read  or  heard 
(Prov.  viii.  34;  John  v.  39;  (ii.)  When 
seriously  and  frequently  pondered  (Luke  ii. 
19) ;  (iii.)  When  carefully  treasured  up  in 
the  memory  (Ps.  cxix.  11) ;  (iv.)  When 
preferred  to  earthly  comforts,  possessions, 
liberty,  even  life  itself;  (v.)  When  our  own 
views,  purposes,  and  practices  are  given  up 
because  in  opposition  to  its  teachings  ;  (vi.) 
When  suffering  and  loss  are  preferred  to  the 
violation  of  its  precepts. 

Examples  of  such  esteem :  David  (Ps. 
xix.  10;  cxix.  97);  Jeremiah  (xv.  16); 
Daniel  (Dan.  vi.  5,  10) ;  Mary  (Luke  x. 
39 — 42).  "  1  had  rather  be  without  meat, 
drink,  light,  everything  than  Matt  xi.  28." 
— Selneccer.  "  I  would  not  for  all  the  world 
that  John  xvii.  24  had  been  left  out  of  the 
Bible." — Baxter.  "  My  soul  hath  found  in- 
expressibly more  sweetness  and  satisfaction 
in  a  single  line  of  the  Bible,  than  in  all  the 
pleasures  found  in  the  things  of  the  world, 
since  the  creation,  could  equal." — John 
Brown  of  Haddington.  "I  would  not  live 
in  Y3iVdidi\?,&  without  the  Word,  and  could  live 
in  hell  with  it. — Luther. 

God's  Word  to  be  esteemed  more  than 
our  "  necessary  food,"  His  Word  the  food 
of  the  soul,  and  necessary  unto  health  and 
vigour  (1  Pet.  ii.  2).  The  spiritual  part  of 
our  nature  of  greater  consequence  than  the 
material.  Man's  life  not  sustained  by  bread 
alone,  but  by  every  word  of  God  (Matt.  v. 
4 ;  Deut.  viii.  3).  God's  favour  better  than 
life.  Spiritual  refreshment  sweeter  and  more 
valuable  than  corporeal.  Better  for  the  soul 
to  be  satisfied  from  God's  Word  than  for  the 
body  to  be  satisfied  from  the  best  spread 
table.  **The  flesh  profiteth  nothing;  the 
words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit 
and  Ihey  are  life"  (John  vi.  63).  Man  s  soul 
can  no  more  dispense  with  spiritual  than  the 
body  with  material  foowL     L  iassiikt  of  Ut» 


HOMILBflC  COMMMTAMr:  JOB. 


CHA.P.    IXlil 


Word  of  God  a  much  greater  calamity  than 
a  famine  of  bread  (Am.  viii.  11). 

VI.  Recals  with  awe  the  nnchangre- 
ableness  and   absolute  sovereignty  of 

God  (verse  13).  "But  he  is  of  one  mind 
(or,  'truly  He  is  one,'  the  only  Supreme 
Ruler  and  Potentate ;  or,  *  He  is  one  and  the 
same  *  [in  purpose],  i.e.  unchangeable ;  or, 
when  he  is  [set]  on  any  one  [object  or  pur- 
pose]) who  can  turn  HimP  and  what  his 
soul  desireth,  even  that  he  doeth.  And  he 
performeth  the  thing  that  is  appointed  for 
me;  and  many  such  things  (either  such 
sovereign  and  mysterious  purposes  and  pro- 
ceedings in  relation  to  His  creatures,  or  such 
severe  dealings  in  relation  to  Job  himself), 
are  with  Him.  Therefore  am  I  troubled  at 
His  presence  [in  my  thoughts,  or  at  His 
dealings  with  me] ;  when  I  consider  [His 
majesty,  power,  and  sovereignty],  I  am  afraid 
of  Him '*     Observe — 

1.  God  the  only  Potentate  or  supreme  Ruler 
of  the  universe  (1  Tim.  vi.  15).  Rules  and 
works  according  to  His  will.  None  able  to 
influence,  restrain,  check,  or  counteract  His 
procedure. 

2.  God  unchangeable  in  His  purposes.  Ever 
like  Himself.  The  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever.  Free  from  the  inconstancy 
and  variableness  adhering  to  creatures.  The 
Father  of  lights,  without  variableness  or  sha- 
dow of  turning  (James  i.  17).  Is  of  one 
mind,  character,  and  purpose.  Hence  our 
safety  and  comfort.  "I  am  the  Lord;  I 
change  not,  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are 
not  consumed"  (Mai.  iii.  6).  God  neither 
fickle  in  Himself,  nor  capable  of  being  in- 
fluenced by  persons  or  events  so  as  to  change 
His  purpose.  The  history  of  the  universe 
eternally  planned  and  mapped  out  by  His 
infinite  mind,  in  full  harmony  with  the 
freedom  of  the  creature's  will  and  the  opera- 
tion of  second  causes,  which  are  included  in 
it.  Eternity,  with  all  its  actualities  and 
possibilities,  every  moment  open  to  His  all- 
seeing  view.  His  being  one  eternal  now. 
Unnecessary  and  impossible  for  a  Being, 
omniscient  and  omnipotent,  all-holy,  all  wise, 
and  all-good,  to  change  His  purpose.  Such 
change  at  any  time  only  apparent.  Ascribed 
to  Him  in  condescension  to  our  capacity.  A 
change  in  His  external  procedure  no  change 
in  His  eternal  plan. 

3.  God  irresistible  in  His  purposes.  "I 
will  work,  and  who  shall  let  it "  (Is.  xliii. 
13).  ^  God  as  irresistible  in  His  power  as 
He  is  immutable  in  His  purpose.  No- 
thing too  hard  for  the  Lord.  For  creatures 
to  resist  His  will  is  for  thorns  and  briars 
to  oppose  a  consuming  fire.  God  as  able 
to  execute,  as  He  is  wise  to  construct, 
His  plan.     The  creature's  safety,  happiness, 


and  success,  in  falling  in  with  the  Creator's 
will. 

6.  God's  purposes  e.xtendto  all  His  creatures. 
No  creature  so  insigiiilicant  but  has  his  lot 
*' appointed"  for  him.  Nothing  in  the  uni- 
verse left  to  chance.  The  fall  of  a  sparrow 
under  His  goverance  as  truly  as  the  wreck 
of  a  world.  Nothing  either  too  minute  or 
too  vast  for  an  infinite  mind  to  direct  or  an 
almighty  hand  to  control.  Creatures  and 
events  linked  with  each  other  in  His  purpose 
throughout  the  universe,  the  chain  extending 
from  one  eternity  to  another.  The  combina- 
tion of  a  thousand  events  necessary  to  raise 
Joseph  to  his  designed  elevation,  in  order, 
among  many  other  things,  "to  save  much 
people  alive  "  (Gon.  1.  20). 

5.  God's  Being,  Purposes,  and  Providence 
such  as  to  beget  deep  reverential  awe.  Too 
deep  and  mysterious  for  man's  faculties  to 
fathom  or  comprehend.  The  constant  near- 
ness of  such  a  Being  to  us,  our  intimate 
relation  to,  and  absolute  dependence  upon. 
Him,  overwhelming.  Our  comfort  that  He 
is  at  once  infinitely  wise  and  holy,  and  just 
and  good.  The  interests  of  all  His  creatures 
safe  in  His  hands.  Only  disobedience  and 
rebellion  can  interfere  with  the  creature's 
happiness.  God  revealed  in  the  Gospel  in 
the  most  amiable  possible  light  as  love  itself, 
and  as  giving  the  most  unequivocal  evidence 
of  His  character  as  such,  in  assuming  our 
nature,  obeying  His  own  law,  and  enduring 
the  utmost  penalty  of  our  disobedience,  in 
order  to  our  eternal  redemption  (1  John  iii. 
16;  iv.  8—10). 

6.  Fear  the  natural  effect  of  thoughts  oj 
God  vieiced  apart  from  Christ  and  His  work 
of  redemption.  Man  inwardly  and  secretly 
conscious  of  sin  and  alienation  from  God. 
Fear,  Peter's  first  feeling  on  the  apprehension 
of  Christ's  Divine  character,  "  Depart  from 
me  ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord"  (Luke 
V.  8). 

VII.  Returns  to  his  own  particular 
case  (verse  16).  "For  God  maketh  my 
heart  soft  [with  fear  and  dismay  (Josh.  ii. 
11)],  and  tlie  Almighty  troubleth  (or  'con- 
foundeth ')  me  [by  His  mysterious  and  ap- 
parently cruel  procedure] :  because  I  was 
not  cut  off  [by  death]  before  the  darkness 
[of  these  calamities  came],  neither  hath  he 
covered  the  darkness  {Heb.  'thick  dark- 
ness* of  such  accumulated  trouble)  from 
my  eyes"  [by  hiding  me  in  the  tomb]. 
Observe — 

1.  God  able  by  His  providence  to  make 
the  stoutest  heart  soft  with  fear.  Able  also 
by  His  grace  to  make  the  hardest  heart 
soft  with  penitence  and  love.  Often  makes 
the  softness  of  fear  from  the  iron  rod  of  the 
law  a  precursor  and  preparative  to  the  soft- 

145 


CHAP.  XXIV. 


HOMlLimc  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


ness  of  love  from  the  golden  sceptre  of  the 
Gospel. 

2.  God  able  to  trouble  and  confound  the 
wisest  and  ?nost  daring  bi/  His  mysterious  and 
righteous  dealings  (Exod.  xiv.  24  ;  viii.  19). 

3.  God''s  dealings  with  ourseloes  often 
such  as  we  are  unable  to  comprehend. 

4.  A  mystery  that  a  benevolent  and  Al- 
mighty Being  brings  men  into  the  world 
who  are  destined  to  suffer.  But — (1)  No 
sulfering  which  is  not  in  some  way  the  con- 
sequence of  sinning.  (2)  All  things  made 
by  God  for  Himself  and  for  His  own  glorj. 
In  a  way  unknown  to  us,  every  creature 
made  to  contribute  to  the  end  of  its  crea- 
tion. Perhaps  God's  highest  glory  here- 
after from  those  who  suifer  most  here. 
God's  grace  often  greatly  glorified  by 
patient  suffering  even  in  this  life.  A 
patient,  submissive,   and  thankful  sufferer 


here  probably  one  of  the  brightest  jewels 
in  the  cabinet  of  God  hereafter.  (3) 
Suffering  the  appointed  path  to  glory  (Acts 
xiv.  22 ;  Horn.  viii.  17).  Probably  the 
greatest  sufferer  in  time  the  loudest  singer 
in  eternity.  The  crown  of  thorns  prepara- 
tory to  the  crown  of  glory.  As  with  the 
Head,  so  with  the  members  (Luke  xxiv.  26 ; 
Rom.  viii.  17).  (4)  The  sufferings  of  one 
made  to  contribute  to  the  beneCt  of  another. 
Paul's  testimony  in  reference  to  himself,  ap- 
plicable to  believers  in  general  (Col.  i.  24). 
The  members  thus  made  to  share  with  the 
Head.  Probably  the  happiness,  moral  ex- 
cellence, and  mutual  love  of  redeemed  men 
greatly  increased  by  such  a  Divine  arrange- 
ment. (5)  The  wisdom  and  the  love  of  God 
in  bringing  Job  into  the  world  where  he  had 
so  much  to  suffer,  long  ago  made  manifest 
both  to  himself  and  others. 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 
CONTINUATION  OF  JOB'S  REPLY  TO  ELIPEAZ, 


Prosecutes  his  own  view  of  the  Divine 
government.  Enlarges  on  the  crimes  of  one 
part  of  men  and  the  sufferings  of  another 
as  the  consequences  of  them,  to  shew  that 
judgment  is  not  executed  on  the  ungodly 
in  this  world,  and  that  men  often  suffi^r 
without  anything  in  their  own  conduct  to 
deserve  it.  The  ungodly,  however,  not  left 
unpunished  ;  and  their  prosperity  and  power 
only  for  a  time. 

I.  Pi'oposes  a  question  for  solution 
in  reference  to  the  Divine  government 

(verse  1).  **  Why,  seeing  times  are  not  hidden 
from  the  Almighty,  do  they  that  know  him 
not  see  his  davs  ? "  Or,  "Why  are  not 
[stated]  times  [of  judgment]  laid  up  (or 
kept)  by  the  Almighty,  and  [why  do]  they 
that  know  Him  not  see  His  days  "  [of  inflict- 
ing punishment  on  the  ungodly  ?]  The 
question  takes  the  fact  for  granted  and 
asks  the  reason  of  it.     The  fact  supposed — 

1.  Thai  stated  times  of  judgment,  or  Divine 
court-days,  for  trying  men's  actions  are  mani- 
festly not  held.  Men  not  brought  before  a 
Divine  tribunal  in  this  life.  The  great 
assizes  yet  to  come.  Such  a  day  appointed 
(Acts  xvii.  31;  X.  42;  Rom.  11.16;  xiv.  10; 
Rev.  XX.  12).  Men  only  registered  now  for 
judgment  and  public  trial  on  that  day. 
Sins  in  this  life  apparently  winked  at  by  God 
(Ps.  1.  21).  Sentence  against  an  evil  work 
not  speedily  executed.  The  fact  sometimes 
staggering  to  the  godly,  especially  in  earlier 
times.  Remains  as  a  trial  for  faith  and 
patience.  Abused  by  the  ungodly  to  im- 
penitence and  licentiousness. 

146 


2.  Times  for  the  visible  infliction  of  punish- 
ment on  the  vncked  not  seen  by  the  godly 
in  this  life.  For  the  most  part  sin  suffered 
by  God  to  pass  with  impunity  as  to  this 
world.  The  fact  noted  bv  Job  (ch.  xxi  7)i 
by  \3aph  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  5);  by  David  (Ps.  1.  21) ; 
by  Solomon  (Ecc.  viii.  11);  by  Jeremiah 
(Jer.  xii.  1) ;  by  Habakkuk,  (Hab.  i.  15, 16). 
Visible  judgments  rare.  Such  examp'es— the 
deluge  J  destruction  of  Sodom,  &c. ;  Herod's 
death  (Acts  xii.  23).  Acceding  to  the 
views  of  Eliphaz  and  his  two  friends,  such 
cases  should  have  been  of  frequent  occur- 
rence. 
From  the  text  observe — 

1.  Times,  in  the  sense  of  events ^  not  hidden 
from  the  Almighty.  All  actions,  bad  and 
good,  naked  and  open  before  Him.  Sin, 
though  not  punished,  not  the  less  perceived. 
"  Thou  God  seest  me,"  a  truth  both  for  the 
godly  and  the  ungodly. 

2.  Times  for  the  accomplishment  of  future 
events  not  hidden  from  God.  The  future  as 
truly  as  the  present  under  His  perfect  in- 
spection. The  times  and  seasons  reserved 
in  His  own  power  (Acts  i.  15).  Tiiough 
unknown  to  us,  not  the  less  certain  to  Him 
(Acts  XV.  18.) 

3.  Sufficient  to  describe  the  godly  as  "  those 
that  know  God''  Such  knowledge  one  of — 
(1)  Certainty  (1  John  iv.  16);  (2)  Divine 
communication  (John  xvii.  2,  3) ;  (Matt.  xi. 
27);  (3)  Experience  (1  Pet.  ii.  3);  (4) 
Regard  and  love,  as  Ps.  i.  6 ;  (5)  Acquaint- 
ance and  fellowship  (Job  xxii.  21 ;  Gen.  v., 
24,  vi.  9).  As  the  result  of  such  knowledge 
the  righteous  trust  in  God  as  a  Father  (Pj* 


nOMILETW  COMMMTARYt  JOB. 


CHAP.  XXIV. 


ix.  10).  Not  to  know  God  the  characteristic 
of  the  unj^odly  (1  Thess.  iv.  5 ;  2  Thess.  i. 
8).  Godly  men  the  friends  of  God. 
Abraham's  title  of  nobility  shared  by  each 
of  them.  (Compare  James  ii.  3 ;  Is.  xli.  8, 
with  Luke  xii.  4;  John  xv.  14,  15). 

4.  God^s  friends  made  acquainted  with  His 
purposes  and  procedure  in  the  world  (Gen. 
xvii.  17;  Ps.  xxv.  4;  Am  iii.  7;  John  xv. 
]  5).  The  characteristic  of  the  ungodly,  that 
they  "  regard  not  the  works  of  the  Lord  nor 
consider  the  operation  of  His  hands"  (Ps. 
xxviii.  5;  Is.  v.  12).  Wisdom  given  to  the 
children  of  God  to  discern  and  know  the 
times  (Luke  xii.  56;  1  Thess.  v.  1—4; 
Rom.  xiii,  11).  Times  and  seasons,  how- 
ever, while  still  future,  reserved  in  the 
Lord's  own  knowledge,  except  in  so  far  as 
He  is  pleased  to  communicate  them  (Acts  i. 
7 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  36 ;  Rev.  i.  1). 

II.  Describes  the  conduct  of  various 
classes  of  men  in  relation  to  their 
fellows,  with  its  consequences  (verses 
2-8). 

First :  Their  conduct  (verses  2 — 4). 

1.  Frauds  t hefty  and  violence  (verse  2). 
Exhibited  in — 

(1.)  Removing  "landmarks.**  Placing 
farther  back  the  stones  erected  to  dis- 
tinguish their  own  fields  from  their  neigh- 
bour's,— common  in  Eastern  and  other 
countries  where  hedges  are  not  frequent; 
and  doing  this  for  the  purposes  of  fraudu- 
lently enlarging  their  own  estate  at  the 
expense  of  their  neighbour's.  Expressly 
forbidden  in  the  law  of  Moses  (Deut.  xix. 
14).  Persons  guilty  of  it  pronounced  ac- 
cursed (Deut.  xxvii.  14).  Found  in  the 
days  of  Hosea  (Hos.  v.  10). 

(2.)  Stealing  sheep  and  feeding  them  as  if 
their  own  (verse  2).  "They  violently  take 
away  (or  steal)  flocks  and  feed  thereof 
{margin,  'feed  them')."  Job's  own  ex- 
perience in  reference  to  his  oxen,  asses,  and 
camels  (ch.  i.  14,  15,  17).  Pasturing  the 
stolen  sheep  an  aggravation  of  the  crime. 
Indicated  boldness  and  perseverance  in  sin. 
The  practice  common  among  the  Bedouins. 
Marks  an  uncivilized  state  of  society. 
Practised  even  in  Scotland  in  the  last 
century  in  regard  to  larger  cattle.  01)serve — 
(i.)  The  character  of  sin  to  sear  and  deaden 
the  conscience ;  (ii.)  The  ungodly  often 
apparently  permitted  to  enjoy  the  fruit  of 
their  sin. 

2.  Cruelty  and  hardheartedness  (verse  3). 
(1.)  \\\reieve\\eeioi\\e fatherless.     "They 

drive  away  the  ass  of  the  fatherless"  (in 
order  to  appropriate  it  to  themselves,  pro- 
JDably  on  some  pretended  claim,  perhaps,  as 
in  the  next  clause,  as  a  pledge  or  pawn  for 
some  loan  or  debt).  The  one  ass  of  the 
10—2 


fatherless  his  means  of  subsistence.  The 
fatherless  not  only  poor,  but  without  any  to 
defend  them  from  such  oppression.  An 
a.ss  still  the  means  of  subsistence  to  fatherless 
and  poor  children  in  the  East,  being  used 
both  for  riding  and  carrying  burdens. 

(2)  In  reference  to  the  widow.  "Take 
the  widow's  ox  for  a  pledge," — taking  it  in 
pawn  for  the  loan  of  a  trifling  sum,  an(f 
keeping  it  in  their  possession.  An  aggravated 
cruelty,  the  ox  being  the  only  means  of 
her  subsistence  by  ploughing  her  little  plot 
of  ground  and  yielding  her  milk.  The 
widow  herself  an  object  of  sympathy,  her 
poverty  having  necessitated  her  to  ask  a  loan 
or  incur  a  debt  with  her  hard-hearted  neigh- 
bour. The  sin  expressly  forbidden  by  the 
law  (Ex.  xxii.  26,  27;  Deut.  xxiv.  6,  10. 
"  No  flesh  in  man's  obdurate  heart." 

3.  Insolence  and  oppression  of  the  poor 
(verse  4).  "  They  turn  the  needy  out  of  the 
way,"— acting  towards  them  with  overbear- 
ing violence;  compelling  them  by  their 
cruelty  and  oppression  to  abandon  the  high- 
ways and  frequented  parts  of  the  country, 
and  thus  preventing  them  from  following 
their  ordinary  pursuits;  perhaps  removing 
them  in  order  to  take  possession  of  their 
little  fields  j  or  forbidding  them  the  highway 
for  their  ox  or  their  ass.  The  "clearances" 
of  modern  times.  A  sin  not  to  aid  the 
poor;  still  more  to  expel  them  from  the 
neighbourhood  as  burdens  and  nuisances. 
The  poor  never  to  cease  out  of  the  land 
(Deut.  XV.  11).  Left  as  objects  for  the  exer- 
cise of  kindness  and  benevolence  (Matt.  xxvi. 
11.  To  oppress  the  poor  is  to  reproach  their 
Maker. 

^  Second :  The  consequence  of  this  oppres- 
sion (verse  4).  "The  poor  of  the  earth  (or 
land)  hide  themselves  together;"  disappearing 
as  unable  to  endure  the  oppression  or  resist 
their  oppressors.  "When  the  wicked  rise 
[in  power],  men  hide  themselves"  (Prov. 
xxviii.  20).  Forced  by  oppression  into 
solitudes  where  they  congregate  and  enjoy 
comparative  safety.  The  godly  under  perse- 
cution thus  often  made  to  wander  in  deserts 
and  mountains,  and  in  dens  and  caves  of  the 
earth  (Heb.  xi.  38).  The  case  of  Elijah  and 
other  servants  of  God  in  the  days  of  Ahab 
and  Jezebel  (1  Kings  xvii.,  3,  xviii.  13). 
The  pilgrim  fathers  of  England  and  the 
Huguenots  of  France.  Bedouins  and  others 
in  the  East  often  obliged  to  seek  refuge  in 
the  desert  from  the  oppressions  of  tyrannical 
governors.  Their  life  in  such  circumstances 
made  one  of  privation  and  suffering  (verse 
5).  "Behold,  as  wild  asses  in  the  desert 
[instead  of  their  own  fields  as  formerly],  go 
they  forth  to  their  work,  rising  betimes 
[before  the  excessive  heat]  for  a  prey  (or 
to  obtain  food) ;  the  wilderness  yieldeth  food 

147 


ctikt.  xiiv. 


BOMILETIC  COMMmTARY:  JOB. 


[a  scanty  and  miseraWe  subsistence]  for 
them  and  for  their  children"  (wliole  families 
being  thus  driven  forth  from  their  homes 
and  from  society).  The  wild  ass  a  "  solitary, 
timorous  animal,  whose  only  defence  is  its 
heels."  The  reference  here  rather  to  their 
solitude  and  fear  than  to  savaoje  wildness. 
A  barbarous  and  uncivilized  state,  however, 
the  likely  consequence  of  the  treatment  they 
receive  (Gen.  xvi.  12,  xxi.  20). — (Verse  6J. 
They  reap  every  one  [by  himself]  his  corn 
{margin,  "  mingled  corn  or  dredge,"  a 
mixture  of  grain  ordinarily  used  as  fodder 
for  cattle,  and  so  generally  translated,  as  in 
Is  XXX.  24,  in  the  field  (or  perhaps,  '  they 
reap  [as  hired  or  forced  labourers]  every 
one  in  a  field  which  is  not  his  own') ;  and 
they  gather  the  vintage  of  the  wicked  (to 
obtain  as  hirelings  a  subsistence  for  their 
families ;  the  proprietors  of  the  vineyards 
characterized  as  wicked  from  their  cruelty 
and  oppression  of  the  poor,  but  in  time  of 
vintage,  glad  to  obtain  their  aid  in  gathering 
the  grapes;  or  possibly  obliged  to  render 
forced  labour  so  common  in  the  east).  They 
cause  the  naked  (the  poor  and  poorly  clad) 
to  lodge  (or  *pass  the  night')  without 
clothing  [havine:  taken  to  pledge  their  upper 
garment,  usually  serving  also  as  a  covering 
by  night  J  (Deut.  xxiv.  13),  that  they  have 
no  covering  in  the  cold  (the  nights  in  eastern 
countries  being  often  as  cold  as  the  days  are 
hot)  (Gen.  xxxi  40).  They  are  wet  (or 
drenched)  with  the  showers  (or  heavy 
driving  rains)  of  the  mountains  (where,  as 
travellers  often  experience,  such  storms  of 
wind  and  rain  are  comnion),  and  embrace 
the  rock  (clinging  to  some  cave  or  hollow 
•n  its  side)  for  want  of  a  shelter." 

The  picture  presented  in  the  eighth  verse 
suggests — 

The  True  Rock  and  its  Shelter. 

1.  As  sinners  men  are  by  nature  in  the 
condition  of  the  'persons  here  referred  to, — ex- 
posed to  a  storm.  That  storm  God's  righte- 
ous anger  on  account  of  sin.  The  wrath 
of  God  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  un- 
godliness and  unrighteousness  of  men  (Rom. 
1.  18;  Col.  iii.  6).  "Wrath  to  come" 
awaiting  the  unsaved  sinner.  The  day  of 
judgment  the  great  day  of  Divine  wrath — 
the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  (Rev.  vi.  16,  17). 
That  wrath  compared  to  a  storm.  "  On  the 
wicked  God  shall  rain  snares  {Margin^ 
'burning  coals'),  fire  and  brimstone,  and 
an  horrible  tempest"  (Ps.  xi.  6).  No 
storm  on  earth  ever  equal  to  it.  (i.)  Other 
storms  affect  only  the  body,  this  the  soul ; 
(ii.)  Others  endure  but  for  a  short  time, 
this  for  ever ;  (iii.)  Others  may  have  peace 
within ;  this  fills  with  anguish  and  despair. 

148 


Felt  at  times  in  the  sinner's  conscience  eveiv 
in  this  life.  Even  then  intolerable.  Escape 
from  it  in  this  life  possible.  Hereafter  rocks 
and  mountains  invoked  in  vain  for  shelter. 
Exposure  to  the  storm  wherever  sin  is  still 
unpardoned.  Though  now  unfelt,  yet  even 
ready  to  burst  upon  the  Christless  soul. 
The  case  of  men  universally.  Men  by  nature 
children  of  wrath,  even  as  others  (Eph. 
ii.  3). 

2.  Men  in  themselves  are  without  a 
shelter.  Have  no  means  of  averting  or 
screening  themselves  from  deserved  wrath. 
Wealth  unable  to  purchase  a  shelter  from  it. 
Power  unable  to  command  one.  Science 
unable  to  contrive  one.  Good  works  unable 
to  merit  one.  Our  own  works  like  Adam 
and  Eve's  fig  leaved  aprons.  Monarch  and 
mendicant  equally  powerless  to  screen  them- 
selves from  this  storm.  No  shelter  without 
satisfaction  to  the  demands  of  a  righteous 
law.  The  required  shelter  to  be  strong 
enough  to  resist  the  brunt  of  the  storm. 
Able  to  stand  between  the  sinner  and  the 
storm  that  must  otherwise  beat  on  his  de- 
fenceless head. 

3.  Such  a  shelter  provided  in  Christ.  Christ, 
given  by  God  the  Father  for  that  purpose, 
came  intt)  the  world  to  save  sinners  from  the 
storm.  Promised  as  an  hiding-place  from 
the  wind  and  a  covert  from  the  tempest  (Is. 
xxxii.  2).  Eitted  to  be  such  a  shelter.  God 
and  man  in  one  person,  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh.  As  man,  Christ  has  done  and 
suffered  in  our  stead  what  the  law  of  God 
demands  in  the  way  of  obedience  and  penalty. 
As  God  in  our  nature.  He  is  able  to  stand 
as  a  substitute  for  us,  and  to  give  infinite 
value  to  His  obedience  and  suffering  in  our 
stead.  Provided  for  us  in  pure  love  on  the 
part  of  God  (John  iii.  16).  God's  will  that 
all  should  flee  to  and  find  shelter  in  this 
rock.  Christ  as  a  rock — (1.)  Affords  perfect 
safety  to  the  soul  that  trusts  in  Him.  A 
rock  is  strong,  firm,  impenetrable.  None 
ever  trusted  in  Him  and  perished ;  (2)  Never 
changes.  A  rock  the  most  abiding  and  un- 
changing object  in  nature.  Christ  the  Rock 
of  Ages — the  everlasting  Rock.  The  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  (3)  Is 
sufficient  to  receive  and  shelter  all  who  betake 
themselves  to  Him.  Rocky  caverns  in  Juda;a, 
as  the  cave  of  Adullam,  large  enough  to  con- 
tain thousands  of  men.  Room  in  Christ  for 
millions  at  once.  Millions  sheltered  in  this 
Rock  already,  and  yet  there  is  room.  (4) 
Is  comfortable  and  well  reple7iished.  Caverns 
sometimes  found  already  furnished  with 
necessary  articles  left  there  by  previous  occu- 
pants; the  contrary,  however,  being  generally 
the  case.  In  Christ,  all  things  provided 
needful  for  comfort  and  well-being,  both  here 
and  hereafter.    Christ  made  of  God  to  those 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXIV. 


who  are  in  Him,  both  wisdom,  and  rigliteous- 
ness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption 
(ICor.  i.  30).  The  world,  life,  death,  all 
things,  ours  when  we  are  Christ*s.  All 
fulness  in  Him,  out  of  which  we  may  re- 
ceive even  grace  upon  grace.  All  our  needs 
supplied.  In  the  world  tribulation,  but  in 
Him  peace.  Grace  found  in  Him  sufficient 
for  daily  duty,  daily  temptation,  daily  tdal. 
(5)  Is  accessible  to  all.  Stands  open  and 
free.  Its  entrance  obstructed  by  no  for- 
midable barrier.  No  steep  and  rugged 
height  to  climb  in  order  to  reach  it.  Ac- 
cessible even  to  a  child.  Entered  not  by 
toil  or  merit,  but  by  faith^ — believing  God's 
testimony  true  concerning  it,  and  so  trusting 
in  it.  Over  its  portal  stand  the  words: 
Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved.  (6)  All  are  welcome  to  its 
shelter.  Entrance  without  money  and  with- 
out price.  No  qualification  required  but 
sense  of  need^  desire  for  shelter,  and  belief  in 
its  sufiiciency.  *'A  guilty,  helpless  sinner 
desiring  shelter,"  a  sufficient  passport.  All 
classes  without  distinction  invited  to  enter 
and  be  safe. 

4.  This  Rock  is  to  be  "embraced.'^  A 
rock  of  no  use  for  shelter  but  as  it  is  fled  to, 
entered,  and  clung  to.  Christ  is  for  personal 
acceptance,  appropriation,  and  trust.  The 
ark,  when  made,  to  be  entered  by  Noah  and 
his  family.  Not  enough  to  hear  of  the 
rock,  look  at  it,  understand  about  it,  or  be 
near  it.  Must  be  entered  and  "  embraced." 
"  Found  in  Christ "  gives  safety,  not  found 
near  Him.  No  time  to  be  lost  in  entering 
this  Rock.  Too  late  when  the  storm  descends. 
"Behold,  »02^  is  the  accepted  time!  behold 
now  is  the  day  of  salvation  !  '* 

Important  question.  Where  am  I?  In 
the  Hock?  or  still  exposed  to  the  storm? 
If  the  former,  then  "let  the  inhabitant  of 
the  Bock  sing,"  and  praise  aloud  the  God  of 
his  salvation  (Is.  xlii.  11).  If  the  latter  is 
still  the  case,  the  call  is.  Come  in  now.  The 
door  still  open.  Still  room.  Delay  not. 
Why  remain  outside  exposed  to  the  storm  ? 
Death  hastens.  The  door  will  soon  be  shut. 
Entrance  may  within  another  hour  be  im- 
possible. Then  no  shelter  from  the  storm 
for  evermore.  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his 
voice,  harden  not  your  heart." 


III.  Proceeds  farther  to  describe  the 
cruelty  and  oppression  of  the  ungodly 
richj  and  theii*  apparent  impunity  (verse 
9).  "  They  pluck  the  fatherless  from  the 
breast  (infants  whose  fathers  are  already 
dead,  and  whom  these  men  snatch  from  the 
widowed  mother's  breast  to  make  their  own, 
as  pledges  or  in  payment  of  some  real  or 
pretended  debt),  and  take  a  pledge  of  the 
poor  (either  the  poor  man  himself  to  be  their 


bondslave  till  the  debt  is  paid,  as  Lev.  xxv. 
39  ;  Matt,  xviii.  25  ;  or  his  garment y  as 
ch.  xxii.  6).  They  cause  him  (the  poor 
whose  garment  they  have  taken  in  pawn) 
to  go  naked,  without  clothing,  and  they  take 
away  the  sheaf  from  the  hungry  (the  hand- 
ful of  corn  they  have  plucked  to  satisfy 
their  hunger,  or  the  gleanings  of  the  harvest 
field,  which  were  usually  regarded,  and  were 
afterwards  by  the  law  of  Moses  expressly 
appointed,  as  the  perquisite  of  the  poor,  Lev. 
xix  9) ;  which  make  oil  within  their  walls 
(for  the  benefit  of  these  rich  oppressors ;  or 
'  who  toil  at  noontide  in  their  vineyards  * 
as  hired,  or  rather  as  forced,  labourers),  and 
tread  their  wine-presses  and  suffer  thirst " 
(not  being  permitted  to  allay  their  thirst 
with  the  j  uice  of  the  grapes  they  were  labori- 
ously expressing.) 

"Slaves  in  the  midst  of  nature's  bounty  curst, 
And  in  the  leaden  vineyard  suffer  thirst." 
Addison's  Letters  from  Italy. 

Cruelty  and  oppression  not  confined  to 
the  country  (verse  12j.  "  Men  (or  *  the 
dying')  groan  [under  injuries  and  oppres- 
sions] from  the  city  [where  justice  is  wont 
to  be  exercised,  and  where  fear  might  be 
supposed  to  restrain  evil-doers),  and  the 
soul  of  the  wounded — [not  only  having  their 
spirits  but  their  very  life  cruslied  out  of 
them  by  oppression]  crieth  out  [to  God  and 
men  for  help,  or  to  God  for  vengeance];  yet 
God  layeth  not  folly  to  them" — (apparently 
lays  it  not  to  their  charge,  or  appears  to  give 
no  heed  to  it ;  or,  "  does  nothing  absurd  "  or 
unbecoming  His  Divine  character  in  per- 
mitting such  things ;  or,  according  to  another 
way  of  reading  the  word  here  rendered 
"  folly,"  *'  pays  no  attention  to  their 
prayer,'*  viz.,  that  of  these  suffering  and 
oppressed  ones).  The  frequent  complaint 
in  the  Psalms  that  the  wicked  oppress  the 
godly  poor  with  impunity,  while  God  ap- 
pears to  take  no  notice  either  of  the  crimes 
of  the  one  party  or  the  suffcrmgs  of  the 
other  (Ps.  x.  1 — 14  ;  xxxv.  17  ;  xlii.  9 ;  xliv. 
23,  24).     Observe— 

1 .  Crimes  comm  it  ted  and  cruelty  perpetrated 
while  God  keeps  silence  (Ps.  1.  21).  Sentence 
against  an  evil  work  not  often  speedily  exe- 
cuted (Ecc.  viii.  11).  Yet  forbearance  no 
acquitance. 

2.  The  effect  of  sin  to  harden  the  heart  and 
deaden  the  feelings  of  humanity. 

3.  Love  of  power  or  gain  stops  at  no  crime 
or  cruelty  to  attain  its  object. 

4.  Sin  assimilates  men  to  Satan^  the 
"  murderer  from  the  beginning.** 

5.  Great  sufferings  often  superinduced  by 
other  men^s  sins  (verse  l2). 

0.  The  cry  of  oppressed  ones  terrible  for  Ih* 
oppressor  (James  v.  4). 

149 


CHAP.   XXIV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


7.  City  ns  well  as  country  the  theatre  of 
the  oppresftions  of  some  and  the  sufferings 
of  others  (verse  12).  Solemn  warning  in 
this  verse  for  such  cities  as  London. 
Eternity  alone  will  reveal  how  many  lives 
Imve  been  crushed  out  of  men  and  women 
by  oppressive  labour  and  scanty  remunera- 
tion. 

IT.  Describes  other  classes  of  wicked 

men,— 7^055  who  practise  sin  in  secrecy  and 
under  the  cover  of  darkness  (verse  13). 
"  They  (or  '  these/  as  distinguished  from  tiie 
former)  are  of  those  that  rebel  against  the 
light  (hating  and  shunning  it  as  unfavourable 
to  tiieir  wicked  deeds,  John  iii.  19,  20) ; 
they  know  not  the  ways  thereof,  nor  abide 
in  the  paths  thereof"  (prefer  darkness  to 
light,  and  night  to  day,  for  the  perpetration 
ol'  their  crimes).  The  first  of  these  classes, 
the  Murderer  (verse  14).  "The  murderer 
rising  with  the  light  (at  earliest  dawn) 
killeth  the  poor  and  needy  [as  unable  to 
resist  him  and  his  demands],  and  in  the 
night  is  as  a  thief"  (or,  "acts  the  thief"). 
In  the  East,  murders  are  committed  at  early 
dawn,  the  most  favourable  part  of  the  day 
both  for  travelling  and  work,  while  thieves 
or  housebreakers  practise  their  crimes  during 
the  night. — The  second  class,  the  Adulterer 
(verse  15).  "The  e.ye  also  of  the  adulterer 
waiteth  for  the  twilight  (the  evening  or 
night,  as  more  favourable  for  his  purpose, 
Pjov.  vii.  9,  saying,  No  eye  shall  see  me, 
and  disguiseth  (muffles  up  or  puts  a  mask 
on)  his  face.  In  the  dark  they  (the  two 
classes  already  mentioned,  or  perhaps  a  third, 
Burglars  or  Housebreakers)  dig  throuoh 
houses  (insinuating  themselves,  like  the 
adulterer,  or  literally,  digging  an  entiance 
for  themselves,  like  the  housebreaker, 
through  the  mud  walls  of  the  houses)  which 
they  had  marked  for  themselves  (or  'having 
shut  themselves  up')  in  the  daytime  5  they 
know  not  the  light  ( — hate  and  shun  it).  For 
the  morning  is  to  them  even  as  the  shadow 
of  death  (as  hateful  and  as  feared,  as  dis- 
covering and  detecting  their  evil  deeds  (Eph. 
V.  13) ;  or,  the  shadow  of  death  is  to  them 
as  morning, —  darkness  is  as  desirable  and 
delightful  to  them  as  morning  is  to  others) ; 
if  one  know  them  (or  discover  them,  or 
*when  one  can  recognize,  people,'  i.e.,  in 
the  light  of  the  morning),  they  are  in  the 
terrors  of  the  shadows  of  death"  (or,  "it  is 
the  terrors  of,  &c.,  to  them";  or,  "the  terrors, 
&c.,  are  upon  them.")     Observe — 

1.  The  character  of  sin,  that  loves  the 
darkness  for  its  commission.  A  reptile  that 
loves  the  darkness  of  caves  and  dungeons, 
A  work  of  darkness,  to  be  practised  only 
out  of  observation,  and  in  the  ignorance  of 
God  and  truth,     A  testimony  to  the  value 

]50 


and  excellence  of  godliness,  that  it  does  not 
fear  the  light  (John  iii.  21). 

2.  Sin  opposed  to  the  light  of  truth  as  well 
as  to  the  light  of  day.  Hence  hatred  to  the 
truth,  which  both  exposes  and  opposes  sin. 
^i'he  <ireat  condemnation,  to  have  the  light 
and  yet  hate  and  avoid  it  (John  iii.  20).  The 
sin  of  Christless  persons  in  a  Christian  land, 
neighbourhood,  or  family. 

3.  A  sovereign  authority  in  light  to  keep 
men  from  evil  deeds. 

4.  The  present  in  many  places  a  time  of 
light;  hence  corresponding  responsibility, 

5.  Murder  a  common  crime  where  not  re- 
strained by  fear  (verse  14).  "  Feet  swift  to 
shed  blood,"  part  of  the  inspired  description 
of  fallen  humanity  (Horn.  iii.  15). 

6.  Sin  aggravated  when  committed  with 
pnrpoi^e  and  deliberation  (verse  1 5). 

7 .  The  ungodly,  when  not  comm itting  iniquity y 
often  plotting  it. 

8.  Sin  committed  in  forgetfulness  of  God. 
**  No  eye  seeth  me." 

9.  The  wicked  often  tortured  between  lust 
and  fear.  Baging  lust  before  commission; 
deadly  fear  of  detection  in  and  after  it. 

10.  Pleasures  of  sin  dearly  bought.  The 
terrors  of  the  shadow  of  death  sooner  or 
later  the  consequence  of  it.  The  ways  of 
transgressors  hard. 

V.  Descrihes  the  experience  of  the 
wicked  (verse  18).  "He  is  swift  as  the 
waters  (or,  'light  on  the  face  of  the  waters  ;* 
carried  away  by  Divine  vengeance  as  the 
foam  or  other  light  substance  on  the  surface  of 
the  stream ;  or,  gradually  and  quietly,  though 
swiftly,  borne  along  to  the  grave  where  he 
finally  disappears) ;  their  portion  (or  estate)  is 
cursed  ( — ultimately  abandoned  to  desolation) 
in  the  earth  (or  land) :  he  beholdeth  not  the 
M^ay  of  the  vineyards  ( — is  cut  oif  ultimately 
from  his  former  haunts,  pleasures,  and  pur- 
suits, 'from  the  cheerful  ways  of  men'). 
Drought  and  heat  [in  summer]  consume  the 
snow  waters  ( — gradually  dry  up  the  torrents 
and  mountain  streams  formed  by  the  melted 
snow  (ch.  vi.  15,  18) ;  so  doth  the  grave 
( — death  and  the  invisible  world,  which  sooner 
or  later  swallow  up  and  cause  to  disappear 
from  the  earth)  those  that  have  sinned  [in 
the  gross  and  open  way  already,  and  yet  to 
be,  described].  The  womb  (even  the  mother 
that  bare  him)  shall  forget  him  (so  worth- 
less his  character,  and  utterly  aban- 
doned by,  and  cut  off'  from,  friends  and 
relatives) :  the  worm  shall  feed  sweetly  upon 
him  (or  'shall  be  sweet  to  him,'  his  only 
companion  now,  ch.  xxi.  33) ;  he  shall  be  no 
more  remembered  [having  done  nothing  to 
cause  his  memory  to  be  cherished,  but  the 
contrary  (Prov.  x.  7)] :  and  wickedness  (or 
the  wicked  man)  shall  be  broken  as  &  tree'* 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


cnAP.  XXIV. 


[useless  and  already  drcayrd].     Ohsorve — 

1.  The  character  of  the  selfish  and  ungodly^ 
however  rich,  a  worthless  one.  The  sinner  in 
his  best  and  most  prosperous  state  light  as 
foam  on  the  surface  of  the  stream. 

2.  All  the  sinner's  earthly  enjoyments 
speedily  brought  to  an  end.  Slowly  or 
suddenly,  the  j^rave  terminates  his  pleasures 
and  pursuits  (verse  19).  The  pleasures  of 
sin  but  for  a  season. 

3.  The  grare  only  formidable  to  those  who 
have  led  a  sinful  Ife,  and  die  without  renewal 
of  heart  and  removal  of  guilt. 

4.  Humbling  contrast  between  the  grave 
and  its  wormy  inhabitants,  and  the  sinful 
indulgences  and  worldly  pomp  of  a  godless  and 
prosperous  life.  The  rich  man  in  the  Gospel 
lifts  up  his  eyes  in  hell,  and  craves,  not  for 
deliverance,  but  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  his 
burning  tongue. 

5.  Sin  soon  covers  men^s  names  with  oblivion, 
and  makes  even  their  nearest  relations  to  for- 
get them  (verse  20).  "  The  righteous  is  held 
in  everlasting  remembrance,  but  the  memory 
of  the  wicked  shall  rot "  (Prov.  x.  7). 

TT.  Returns  to  the  character  and 
ways  of  the  ungodly  as  meriting  the 
punishment  already  mentioned  (verses 
21 — 24).  "He  evil  entreateth  the  barren 
that  beareth  not  (thus  adding  affliction  to 
the  afflicted,  barrenness  being  held  a  reproach 
and  at  the  same  time  leaving  the  widow 
without  natural  defenders),  and  doeth  not 
good  to  the  widow  (not  only  withholding  the 
sympathy  and  succour  which  her  circum- 
stances claim,  but  acting  towards  lier  in  a 
way  the  very  reverse).  He  draweth  also  the 
mighty  with  his  power  (attaching  him  to  his 
interest  s  for  the  purpose  of  oppressing  others); 
he  risetli  up  (for  the  purpose  of  completing 
his  wicked  designs ;  or,  he  rises  to  power), 
and  no  man  is  sure  of  life  (so  formidable  his 
power  and  so  regardless  of  right).  Though 
it  be  given  liim  to  be  in  safety  (by  God  him- 
self, who  bears  long  with  him  instead  of 
punishing  him  at  once  in  the  midst  of  his 
wickedness),  whereon  he  resteth  (living  at 
ease  and  in  security  in  consequence  of  this 
forbearance) ;  yet  his  (viz.,  God's)  eyes  are 
upon  their  ways  (though  iiow  keeping  silence 
and  apparently  winking  at  his  evil  deeds). 
They  are  exalted  for  a  little  while  but  are 
gone  {Heb.  and  Marg.  '  and  are  not,'  are  no 
more,  but  disappear  from  the  stage),  and 
(are)  brought  low  (by  death  which  termi- 
nates at  once  their  power  and  their  pride) ; 
they  are  taken  out  of  the  way  as  all  others 
(even  t  he  meanest  whom  they  have  oppressed), 
and  cut  off  as  the  tops  of  the  ears  of  corn." 
Observe — 

1.  Injin'y  done  to  a  fellow  creature  a  sin 
marked  by  God;  that  sin  aggravated  when  the 


injury  is  done  to  one  already  in  any  way 
afllicted  (verse  21).  Tlie  afflicted,  destitute 
and  reproached,  have  already  claims  on  our 
sympathy  and  succour. 

2.  A  sin  in  the  sight  of  God,  not  only  to 
injure  the  afflicted  and  destitute,  but  even  to 
withhold  our  sympathy  and  aid.  Not  to  do 
the  good  in  our  power,  a  sin  as  well  as  to  do 
evil  (Prov.  iii.  27;  xxiv.  11,  12).  Neglect 
of  the  fifth  commandment  a  sin  as  truly  as 
the  transgression  of  the  sixth.  Sins  of  omis- 
sion discover  the  character  and  bring  con- 
demnation as  truly  as  those  of  commission. 
The  sins  produced  at  last  day  for  judgment, 
especially  the  latter  (Matt.  xxv.  42 — 45.) 
Pure  and  un defiled  religion  before  God,  to 
visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their 
affliction  (James  i.  27). 

3.  A  high  aggravation  of  sin  when  we  not 
only  do  wrong  ourselves,  but  endeavour  by  our 
influence  to  draw  others  into  the  same  practice 
(verse  22).  Ahab  specially  branded  in  the 
Bible  as  not  only  having  sinned  himself,  but 
also  "  made  Israel  to  sin."  The  character  of 
the  ungodly  not  only  to  sin  themselves  but  to 
draw  others  into  partici[)ati()n  in  their  sin 
(Prov.  i.  10-14). 

4.  An  aggravated  sin  to  abuse  God's 
goodness  and  forbearance  to  ihe  practice  of 
evil  (verse  23).  God's  goodness  intended, 
on  the  contrary,  to  lead  to  repentance 
(Hom.  ii.  4).  Sin  persevered  in  on  the 
calculation  that  *'  to-morrow  shall  be  as 
this  day  and  much  more  abundant"  (Is. 
Ivi.  12)." 

5.  Sin,  though  passed  over  for  the  present, 
yet  marked  for  future  visitation,  if  not  pre- 
vented by  timely  repentance  (verse  23).  Sen- 
tence against  an  evil  work  not  speedily 
executed.  The  sinner  allowed  to  do  evil  a 
hundred  times  (Ex.  viii.  11,  12).  Yet  God's 
eyes  are  upon  men's  ways. 

6.  The  power  and  pride  of  the  ungodly  but 
of  short  coniinuatice  (verse  24). 

7.  Sinners  often  cut  offvjhen  their  prosperity 
has  reached  its  highest  pitch,  like  the  "  tops  of 
the  ears  of  corn'' 

8.  Men  spared  to  ripen  either  for  mercy  or 
judgment. 

VII.  Cliallenges  contradiction  or  re- 
futation (verse  25).  "If  it  he  not  so  now 
[that  the  case  is  as  I  represented  it],  who 
will  make  me  a  liar  (or  prove  me  in  error), 
and  make  my  speech  nothing  worth  ?  "  Job's 
position  that  of  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii.),  that  the 
ungodly  often  live  long  and  prosper  in  this 
world,  and  are  without  any  "  bands  in  their 
death,"  though  ultimately  brought  to  judg- 
ment. His  position  assailed  by  his  friends 
as  derogatory  to  God's  righteousness  as  the 
Governor  of  the  world,  and  as  savouring  of 
infidelity.     In  Job's  view,  ids  position  un- 

151 


IHAF.   XXV- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


affected  by  their  speeches  and  argumeuts. 
Observe : — 

1.  Our  duty  to  see  that  the  views  we  hold  in 
regard  to  Qod  and  His  moral  government  rest 
on  solid  grounds. 

2.  Our  duty  in  regard  to  subjects   upon 


which  there  is  room  for  doubt,  to  be  open  to 
conviction  and  argument  on  the  opposite  side. 
3.  Our  views  on  all  religious  subjects  to  be 
brought  to  the  touchstone  of  reason  and  Scrip- 
ture.   Truth  able  to  bear  testins:. 


CHAPTEE  XXV. 


THIRD  SPEECa  OF  BILDAD  THE  SHUHITE. 


His  speech  either  a  very  abortive  one,  or 
it  includes,  as  some  think,  the  following 
chapter  from  the  fifth  verse  to  the  end,  the 
first  four  verses  of  that  chapter  probably 
belonging  to  the  next  one,  but,  by  tlie  mis- 
take of  transcribers,  placed  at  the  beginning 
of  this. 

The  object  of  the  speech  to  show  Job's 
presumption  in  thinking  himself  righteous 
before  God,  and  in  wishing  to  debate  his 
cause  with  Him  as  an  innocent  sutferer. 

With  this  view  he  sets  forth  the  character 
and  attributes  of  God.  Appears  to  charge 
Job,  though  only  by  implication,  with  re- 
bellion against  the  Divine  Majesty,  and  to 
wish  to  overwhelm  him  with  a  view  of  the 
Divine  power  and  lioliness. 

The  speech  true  in  its  statements,  just  in 
its  sentiments,  sublime  in  its  poetry.  The 
argument  employed  in  it  solid,  and  similar 
to  that  ultimately  used  by  Jehovah  Himself 
to  silence  Job.  The  speech  wanting  in 
appropriateness  to  the  case  in  hand,  and  in 
sympathy  with  the  party  addressed. 

I.  Bildad  briefly  descants  on  the 
attributes  of  God. 

1.  His  sovereignty  (verse  2).  "  Dominion 
and  fear  are  with  him."  God  not  named. 
With  Him  whom  thou  challengest.  Him 
emphatic.  With  Him  and  no  other.  God 
"the  great  and  only  Potentate."  The 
Supreme  Ruler  in  heaven,  earth,  and  hell. 
Therefore  not  to  be  resisted  with  impunity. 
As  the  supreme  universal  Ruler,  God  must 
be  righteous  in  all  His  works.  Therefore 
wicked,  as  well  as  ruinous,  to  oppose  Him. 
God's  attribute  of  sovereignty  frequently  in- 
sisted on  in  the  Scriptures.  Examples : 
Ps.  ciii.  19;  Is.  xlv.  9;  Dan.  iv.  25,  34,  35. 
Fitted — (1)  To  silence  murmurings  under 
affliction  and  trial. — (2)  To  pacify  and  rest 
the  soul  under  dark  dispensations  and  myste- 
ricms  providences.  "Shall  not  the  judge  of 
all  the  earth  do  right?" — (3)  To  comfort 
the  heart  depressed  h'^  a  view  of  abounding 
sin  and  misery,  and  of  the  apparent  triumph 
of  iniquity  in  the  world.  God,  as  Sovereign 
Ruler,  able  to  make  the  wrath  of  man  to 
praise  Him,  and  to  restrain  the  remainder  of 
that  wrath.  Suffermg  only  the  discipline 
152 


employed,  or  the  punishment  inflicted,  by 
the  Supreme  Governor.  Hell  his  prison- 
house  for  rebellious  and  impenitent  subjects. 
His  sovereignty  consistent  with  the  permis- 
sion of  rebellion  and  evil  in  His  dominions. 
Will  one  day  bring  all  things  into  full  sub- 
jection. 

2.  Terrible  majesty.     *'  Dominion  dindifear 
are  with  him."     "  With    God    is    terrible 
majesty"   (ch.  xxxvii.  22).     God's   majesty 
fitted  to  awaken  fear.  All  the  earth  to  stand 
in  awe  of  Him.  "Who  shall  not  fear  Thee?" 
— the  song  in  heaven  (Rev.  xv.  4).     "  God 
greatly  to  be  feared  even  in  the  assembly  of 
his  saints  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  7).    Seraphim  cover 
their  faces  with  their  wings  before  Him  (Is. 
vi.  2).     The  posts  of  the  temple-doors  and 
the  granite  mass  of  Sinai  shook  at  His  pre- 
sence (Is.  vi.  4;    Ps.  Ixviii.  8).    John,  in 
Patmos,  from  fear  fell  at  His  feet  as  dead 
(Rev.   i.    17).      Sin   especially  makes   men 
afraid  of  God.     "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am 
a  sinful  man,  0  Lord  "  (Luke  v.  8). — As  a 
consequence  of  God's  sovereignty  and  Divine 
majesty,  lie  preserves  harmony  among  the 
highest  classes  of  His  creatures.  "He  maketh 
peace    in    His    high    places." — (1)  Among 
the  angels,  His  higher  intelligent  creatures 
(Ps.  ciii.  20).     God's  will  done  perfectly  in 
heaven.     JSJo   rebellious   thought,  word,  or 
action  found  there.     All  loving,  reverential 
submission  to,  and  acquiescence  in,  the  Divine 
will.    Rebellion  once  permitted  to  enter,  but 
immediately  subdued  and  expelled  for  ever. 
Heaven  a  place  of  peace  and  harmony,  order 
and  tranquillity, safety  and  felicity.  No  hostile 
attempts  suffered  to  be  made  upon  its  in- 
habitants from  without;  no  disturbance  or  dis- 
quiet to  arise  within. — (2)  Among  W\^  heavenly 
bodies.     These   preserved   by   the  Supreme 
Ruler  in  their  respective  orbits.  No  collision 
or  injurious  disturbance  permitted  from  each 
other.     "Music  of  the  spheres,"  an  idea  as 
true  as  it  is  beautiful. — Inferences:  (1)  Ij 
peace  prevails  in  His  high  places,  it  should 
also  do  so  in  His  lower  ones — the  earth  and 
its  inhabitints.    Moiiolrous  for  man  to  be  in 
rebellion  against  His  Creator. — (2)  If  God 
makes  peace  in  His  high  places.  He  wtll  ulse 
make  it  in  His  lower  ones      God's  will  to  be 
done  on  eai'th  as  it  is  in  heaven.    To  make 


HOmiETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    XXV, 


peace  on  earth,  the  object  of  His  Son's 
mission  into  the  world.  "  On  earl  li  peace  " 
(Luke  ii.  14).  —  (3)  God  the  great  peace- 
maker. His  nature  peace.  True  peace  the 
peace  of  God.  All  true  peace  from  Him. 
'Ilie  God  of  peace  The  author  not  of  con- 
fusion, but  of  peace,  order,  and  concord 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  38). — {^)No  rebellion  which  God 
is  not  able  to  quell.  The  continuance  of  re- 
bellion on  earth  not  tiie  result  of  God's 
weakness  or  indifference,  but  of  His  patience, 
compassion,  and  wisdom.  The  long-suffering 
of  God  is  salvation.  Not  willing  that  any 
should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to 
repentance  (2  Pet.  iii.  9, 15).  He  who  makes 
peace  in  His  places,  is  able  to  make  it  also 
in  His  lower  ones. — (5)  God's  rule  an  efficient 
one.  He  not  only  wishes,  but  makes  peace. 
Our  great  comfort.  Man's  efforts  to  make 
peace  in  the  world,  in  a  country,  in  a  family, 
in  himself,  ineffectual.  God  able  to  subdue 
all  things  to  Himself,  and  so  to  make  peace. 
He  maketh  wars  to  cease  unto  the  ends 
of  the  earth  (Ps.  xlvi.  9).  Shall  sepak  peace 
to  the  heathen  (Zech.  ix.  10).  Commands 
peace  to  raging  winds  and  threatening  waves. 
Speaks  peace  to  the  troubled  soul :  "Be  of 
good  comfort ;  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee : 
go  in  peace." 

3.  His  power  and  greatness  (ver.  3).  "Is 
there  any  number  of  his  armies  ? "  These 
armies  are — (1)  Angels  (Ps.  ciii.  2]).  These 
innumerable  (Ps.  Ixviii.  17;  Kev.  v.  11; 
Han.  vii.  10).  Angels  of  light  doubtless 
much  more  numerous  than  those  of  darkness. 
Yet  of  these  a  legion,  or  some  thousands, 
found  in  one  single  person  (Mark  v.  9,  13). 
Milton  rightly  sings — 

"Millions  of  spiritual  creatures  walk  the 
earth 
Unseen,  both  when  we  wake  and  when 
we  sleep." 

The  inhabitants  of  this  earth  probably  only 
as  a  drop  in  the  ocean  compared  with  the 
"  innumerable  company  of  angels."  —  (2) 
Heavenly  bodies  (Is.  xl.  26).  These  to  us 
literally  innumerable.  Vastly  more  nume- 
rous than  could  be  dreamt  of  by  Biidad 
at  that  time.  Only  a  very  few  of  these 
visible  to  the  naked  eye.  An  immense 
multitude  of  dense  clusters  of  stars  appa- 
rently scattered  throughout  all  space.  These 
clusters  like  so  many  vast  armies.  The  whole 
aggregate  of  these  starry  worlds  a  miglity 
host  drawn  up  in  endless  battalions,  probably 
only  visible  at  once  to  the  eye  of  the 
Almighty.  Our  Galaxy,  or  Milky  Way,  one 
of  those  immense  clusters  of  stars  or  suns, 
with  nearly  thirty  times  as  many  towards  the 
centre  as  near  the  extremities, — being  rather 
a  succession  of  irregular  masses,  more  or  less 
connected  by  isthmuses  or  bridges  of  orbs. 


stretching  from  the  one  to  the  other,  in  any 
one  of  which  the  number  of  stars  is  past 
reckoning.  Yet  this  immense  cluster,  or  com- 
bination of  clusters,  with  its  stars  scattered 
by  millions  like  glittering  dust,  is  only  one 
of  these  numerous  "armies''  that  compose 
the  celestial  host.  Upwards  of  two  thou- 
sand of  these  nebulous  clusters  discovered 
in  the  northern,  and  more  than  one  thousand 
in  the  southern  heavens,  which,  by  powerful 
telescopes,  have  been  resolved  into  innumer- 
able stars. — (3)  All  creatures  employed  in 
serving  God  and  ministering  to  His  will.  So 
locusts,  &c.,  spoken  of  as  Jehovah's  "  great 
army  "  (Joel  ii.  25).  The  army  of  the  Medes 
and  Persians  His  weapons  against  Babylon 
(Is.  xiii.  5;  Jer.  1. 14).  "  Fire  and  hail,  snow 
and  vapour,  stormy  wind  fulfilling  his  word," 
included  amonif  his  armies  (Ps.  cxlviii.  8 ; 
Job  xxxviii.  22,  23).  All  nature  His  ser- 
vants when  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  mustereth  his 
host  of  the  battle  '*  (Is.  xiii.  4). 

"  What  is  creation  less 
Tlian  a  capacious  reservoir  of  means 
Formed  for  His  use,   and  ready  at  Hii 
wiU?" 

4.  His  goodness   and  beneficence.      "On 
whom  doth  not  his  light  arise."  His  light  is : 

(1)  Literally  and  physically  the  light  of 
the  sun  in  the  heaoens.  "  His  going  forth  is 
from  the  end  of  the  earth,  and  his  circuit 
unto  the  ends  of  it :  notliing  hid  from  the 
heat  thereof "  (Ps.  xix.  6).  "He  maketh 
his  sun  to  shine  on  the  evil  and  on  tiie  good." 
All  lands,  classes,  characters,  individuals, 
partakers  of  the  precious  benefit.  Its  pre- 
ciousness  only  fully  realized  by  those  who 
have  long  felt  its  want — surrounded  by 
"clouds  instead,  and  ever-during  dark."— 

(2)  Figuratively,  His  favour  and  providential 
goodness.  This  universal.  "  The  Lord  is  good 
to  all,  and  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all 
His  works."  "  He  is  kind  unto  the  unthank- 
ful and  to  the  evil"  (Luke  vi.  35).^  "The 
Lord  loveth  the  stranger  in  giving  him  food 
and  raiment"  (Deut.  x.  18).  He  sendeth 
rain  both  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust. 
"Giveth  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful 
seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and 
gladness  "  (Acts  xvi.  17).  God  the  Father 
of  lights,  from  whom  cometh  down  every 
good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  (James 
i.  17).— (3).  "  The  light  of  truth  and  saving 
knowledge"  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  That  light 
designed  for  all  men.  Christ  the  Light  and 
the  Saviour  of  the  world.  The  true  Light 
which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into 
the  world  (John  i.  9).  A  hght  to  lighten 
the  Gentiles.  His  birth  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy,  which  should  be  to  all  people.  His  com- 
mission to  His  disciples,  Go  ye  unto  all  the 
world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  crea- 

153 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTABT:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXV. 


tnre.  In  Paul's  time  that  Gospel  had 
already  come  into  all  tlio  l<nown  world  (Col. 
i.  6).  Christ  lifted  up  to  draw  all  men  uuto 
Him.  The  duty  of  the  Church  everywhere 
to  hold  forth  this  light  (Phil.  ii.  15,  16). 
Though  the  light  may  arise  on  all,  men  may 
wilfully  shut  it  out,  or  not  care  to  come  forth 
and  enjoy  it.  Unbelief  closes  the  sli utters 
against  the  light  of  life.  Men  may  love 
darkness  rather  than  light,  their  deeds  being 
evil.  No  argument  against  the  unversality 
of  light  that  some  men  are  blind,  or  shut  up 
in  prison,  or  refuse  to  enjoy  its  beams.  The 
condemnation  of  many  that  light  is  come 
into  the  world  (John  iii.  19). 

5.  His  purity  and  holiness. — Verse  5. 
"Behold,  even  to  the  moon,  and  it  shineth 
not ;  yea,  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight." 
The  moon  and  stars  probably  visible  at  the 
lime,  the  dialogue  being  held  in  the  soft 
moonligiit  of  a  tranquil  evening  in  Arabia. 
Moon  and  stars  apparently  the  fairest  and 
purest  objects  in  the  visible  creation.  Yet 
even  these  impure  in  the  view  of  and  in  com- 
parison with  God.  The  moon  loses  its 
brightness  when  seen  beside  Him,  as  the 
stars  pale  before  the  rising  sun.  All^  even 
the  pureed  creahires,  impure  in  comparison 
with  God.  Seraphim  cover  their  faces  and 
their  feet  with  their  wings  while  standing 
before  Him.  Their  adoring  exclamation 
one  to  anotlier :  ''  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the 
Lord  of  Hosts"  (Is.  vi.  23.  The  song 
of  glorified  Saints :  "  Who  shall  not  fear  Thee, 

0  Lord?  for  thou  only  are  holy''  (Kev.  xv. 
4).  Isaiah,  in  the  view  of  Jehovah's  glory 
in  the  temple,  exclaims  :  "  Woe  is  me  !    for 

1  am  undone ;  for  I  am  a  man  of  unclean 
lips,  and  dwell  among  a  people  of  unclean 
lips"  (Is.  vi.  5).  Lnperfection  and  varia- 
bleness inherent  in  every  creature.  Spots 
on  the  sun  and  dark  shadows  on  the  surface 
of  the  moon.  Absolute  purity  and  perfection 
alone  in  God.  The  slightest  shade  of  evil 
or  imperfection  infinitely  removed  from  His 
spotlessly  holy  nature.  All  sin  His  perfect 
and  unchangeable  abhorrence.  The  lustre 
of  stars  and  the  holiness  of  angels  only  a  faint 
reflection  from  His  own. 

II.  Bildad's  inference  (verse  4 — 6). 

1.  From  God's  perfections  in  themselves. 
Verse  4. —  "How  then  can  man  {Hebrew^ 
*  weak,  miserable  man,' — enosli)  be  justified 
{Heb.,  'just'  or  righteous)  with  God?  Or 
How  can  he  be  clean  that  is  born  of  a 
woman?"  If  God  be  such,  how  can  man 
be  righteous  ^^  with  HimV  (1)  In  com- 
parison with  Him;  (2)  In  His  sight;  (3)  In 
controversy  with  Him  as  a  party  ;  (4)  Before 
His  tribunal  as  a  judge. 

Bildad's  inference  intended  to  have 
pecial  reference  to  Job.    Pounded  on  man's 

154 


character  as  a  creature,  — poor,  weak, 
niisrrable,  liable  to  suffering,  disease,  and, 
death.  I'he  reference  rather  to  his  physical 
than  to  his  moral  character.  The  latter 
however  bound  up  with  the  former.  Both 
the  result  of  the  Fall  in  Eden.  Bildad  in- 
fers man's  impurity  from  his  physical  in- 
firmity as  a  creature.  Man  in  his  best  estate 
necessarily  impure  in  comparison  with  God. 
His  moral  impurity,  however,  not  from  his 
being  a  creature,  but  d^  fallen  creature.  '*  God 
made  man  upright."  Adam  created  in  God's 
image  and  after  God's  likeness.  As  he  left 
His  Creator's  hands,  pronounced  by  Him- 
self "  very  good."  A  suffering  and  a  sinful 
state  the  twin  effect  of  the  first  disobedience. 
"By  one  man  sin  entered  the  world,  and 
death  by  sin."  *'  By  one  man's  disobedience 
many  were  made  sinners  "  (Kom.  v.  12,  19). 
Only  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the  obedience 
of  a  second  Adam  can  man  now  be  righteous. 
The  righteousness  in  which  a  man  can  now 
stand  that  of  one  who  is  both  God  and 
man, — one  "born  of  a  woman"  like  other 
men,  and  yet,  unlike  other  men,  begotten 
by  the  Father,  and  conceived  in  a  virgin's 
womb  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
man  Christ  Jesus  the  specimen  of  a  righteous 
man  without  sin.  All  believers  viewed  as 
righteous  in  Him.  Made  also  partakers  of 
His  holy  nature  and  character.  The  Gospel 
of  the  Grace  of  God  gives  the  only  answer 
to  Bildad's  question,  How  can  man  be  just 
with  God?  The  answer,  By  union  with  the 
God-man  Christ  Jesus,  effected  through  faith 
in  him  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
A  man  is  now  righteous  with  God,  legally, 
through  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteous- 
ness to  him ;  pure  in  God's  sight,  morally, 
through  the  regenerating  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  him.  Viewed  in  Christ,  God  sees 
"  no  iniquity  in  Jacob."  Washed  by  faith  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb  we  are  made  "whiter 
than  the  snow."  "  Thou  art  all  fair,  my  love; 
there  is  no  spot  in  thee  (Cant.  iv.  7).  Man, 
as  "born  of  a  woman,"  is  unclean;  as  born 
again  of  God,  is  or  shall  be  pure  as  God  is 
pure  (I  John  iii.  2,  3). 

2.  From  the  impurity  in  God's  sight  belong- 
ing to  the  purest  creatures.  Verse  6 — "How 
much  less  [pure  in  his  sight  is]  man  that  is  a 
worm  (or  maggot,  the  product  of  putridity), 
and  the  son  of  man  who  is  a  [crawling] 
worm  (kindred  terms  used  to  denote  the 
lowest  state  of  degradation  as  well  as  weak- 
ness and  defilement)."  If  the  purest  creatures 
are  not  clean  in  God's  sight,  how  then  can 
man  be  so  ?  Man  made  lower  than  the 
angels  (Ps  viii.  5).  A  worm — (1)  In  his 
place  as  a  creature.  (2)  In  his  character  as 
a  sinner. 

Bildad's  second  question  also  answered  by 
the  Gospel.  Man^  though  a  worm^  can  he  clean 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP    XXYI 


in  God's  sight.  Christ,  the  Holy  One  of 
God,  a  worm,  as  a  partaker  of  our  weak 
humanity.  Believers  made  one  with  Him 
are  partakers  of  His  pure  and  holy  nature. 
The  Son  of  God  became  a  worm  with  man,  to 
make  worms  sons  of  God  with  Himself.  Every 
believer  now  possessed  of  a  higher  and  holier 


nature  than  that  of  ans?els — the  nature  of  the 
Son  of  God  (Gal.  ii.  20;  Eph.  v.  30;  2  Pet. 
i.  4).  The  word  of  Clirist,  received  by  faith, 
the  instrument  in  producing  this  purity 
(John  XV.  3 ;  xvii.  17 ;  Eph.  v.  26 ;  1  Pet. 
i.  22). 


CHAPTEE   XXVI. 


JOB'S  RBPLY  TO  BILDAD. 


Job,  more  alive  to  Bildad's  want  of  sym- 
pathy than  to  the  excellence  of  his  sentiments 
in  regard  to  the  Divine  perfections,  speaks 
somewhat  petulantly, — certainly  with  irony 
and  sarcasm.  Job  not  yet  humbled.  He 
hears  of  God  "by  the  hearing  of  the  ear," 
but  as  yet  his  eye  does  not  see  him  (ch. 
xlii.  5).  Mere  verbal  representations,  even 
of  the  truth,  not  sufficient  to  humble  and 
pacify  the  soul.     God  must  reveal  Himself. 

Uncertain  whether  the  larger  portion  of 
this  chapter,  viz.^  from  verse  5  to  the  end, 
does  not  properly  belong  to  the  preceding 
one  as  part  of  Bildad's  speech.  Viewed  as 
belonging  to  Job,  its  object  would  be  to 
show  that  Job  could  as  easily,  and  more 
comprehensively,  descant  on  the  Divine  per- 
fections as  Bildad  himself.  The  sentiments 
contained  in  the  portion  not  affected  by  the 
question  as  to  the  speaker. 

I.  Job's  ironical  and  indignant  re- 
flection on  Bildad's  speech  (verses  2 — 4). 

1.  Us  want  of  sympathy  and  succour.  Verse 
2 — *'  How  hast  thou  helped  him  that  is 
without  power  !  How  savest  thou  the  arm 
that  hath  no  strength  ! "  Means  himself, — 
either  seriously,  as  really  without  power  and 
strength  ;  or  ironically,  being  so  in  the  esteem 
of  Bildad  and  his  friends.  Bildad's  speech 
contained  nothing  calculated  to  support  Job 
in  his  deep  prostration.  Its  object  rather 
to  convict  him  of  pride  and  self-right  eonsness, 
and  to  overwhelm  him  with  a  view  of  the 
Divine  perfections.  Job  needed  sympathy 
and  support,  and  found  none.  So  with  his 
great  antitype  (Matt.  xxvi.  40).  Observe — 
(1)  Our  duty  to  succour  by  our  words  those 
who  are  in  trouble  and  distress,  and  to  support 
those  who  are  weak  and  ready  to  fall.  Words 
sometimes  more  effectual  than  deeds  in  help- 
ing those  who  are  "without  strength,"  Job's 
own  practice  in  his  better  days  (ch.  iv.  3,  4). 
All  the  more  painfully  sensible  of  the  want 
of  it  in  his  friends.  (2)  Ministei-s  and  preachers 
to  be  careful  in  their  ministrations  and  ad- 
dresses to  come  up  to  their  profession.  One 
great  part  of  a  minister's  duty  to  support 
Sie  weak,  comfort  the  feeble-minded,  and 
strengthen   the  tempted   (Acts   xx.  35 ;   1 


Thess.  ii.  7;  v.  14;  Heb.  xii.  12).  Peter 
required,  when  converted  after  his  fall,  to 
strengthen  his  brethren  (Luke  xxii.  32).  The 
duty  best  discharged  by  those  who  have 
realized  their  own  weakness  and  need  of 
support.  According  to  Luther,  temptation 
one  of  the  three  things  that  make  a  preacher. 
Christ  Himself  able  to  succour  them  that  are 
tempted,  having  been  tempted  Himself. 

2.  Its  want  of  suitable  counsel.  Verse  3 
— "How hath  thou  counselled  him  that  hath 
no  wisdom  !  "  Still  refers  to  himself.  Ad- 
dressed by  Bildad  as  if  ignorant  of  the  Divine 
perfections.  Bildad's  speech  as  void  of 
counsel  as  of  sympathy.  Counsel  never 
more  needed  than  when  in  spiritual  darkness 
and  filHiction  One  of  the  blessings  of  true 
friendshii).  "  Ointment  and  perfume  rejoifte 
the  heart;  so  doih  the  sweetness  of  a  man's 
friend  by  hearty  counsel  "  (Prov.  xxvii.  9). 
One  of  the  offices  of  Jesus,  as  the  Saviour 
of  men  and  Head  of  His  Church,  to  give 
counsel.  Therefore  possess'  d  of  "  the  spirit 
of  counsel  and  might"  (Isa.  xi.  2).  One  of 
His  titles,  *'The  Counsellor"  (Isa.  ix.  6). 
One  of  the  believer's  privileges  to  enjoy  such 
counsel  (Ps.  xvi.  7).  Observe — (1)  The  part  of 
ministers,  preachers,  and  Christians  in  general, 
to  counsel  erring,  perplexed,  and  troubled 
souls  (i.)  Men  out  of  Christ  constantly  in 
need  of  right  and  loving  counsel.  Christ 
counsels  such  to  buy  of  Him  gold  tried  in 
the  fire,  &c  (Rev.  iii.  17,  18).  Preachers 
and  believers  to  do  the  same,  (ii.)  Anxious 
souls  in  need  of  sound  counsel.  The  question 
to  be  wisely  answered:  "  Sirs,  what  must  I  do 
to  be  saved?  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall 
we  do  ?  "  (iii.)  Believers  themselces  often  in 
circumstances  requiring  judicious  spiritual 
counsel.-  (2)  Ministers  and  others  to  seek 
to  be  well  qualified  to  give  true  spiritual 
counsel  both  to  perplexed  believers  and  to 
anxi(ms  inquirers.  The  tongue  of  tlie 
spiritually -learned  needed  "  to  speak  a  word 
in  season  to  him  that  is  weary"  (Isa.  1.  4). 

3.  Its  defectiveness  in  regard  to  the  matter 
in  hand.  "  How  hast  thou  plentifully  de- 
clared the  thing  as  it  is"  ("  the  real  truth," 
or  "  sound  wisdom,"  as  ch.  xi.  6  ;  Prov.  viii 
14).    Bildad  had  declared  the  truth,  but  not 

155 


CHAP.    XXVI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


the  whole  truth,  nor  yet,  in  Job's  view  at 
least,  the  seasonable  truth.  Job  did  not  re- 
quire to  be  instructed  by  Bildad  about  the 
Divine  perfections.  It  was  one  thing  for 
theee  to  be  set  forth  by  Bildad,  and  another 
for  them  to  be  exhibited  by  God  Himself,  as 
was  afterwards  done.  Observe  —  (1)  Not 
only  is  truth  to  be  spoken  in  addressing 
men  on  Divine  things,  but  the  whole  truth, 
and  especially  seasonable  truth.  (2)  Words 
and  hiu;h- sounding  descriptions,  however 
true,  not  suited  to  carry  conviction  to  the 
hearts  of  hearers.  General  declamations 
about  the  Diviue  perfections  not  such  as  to 
meet  the  case  either  of  the  careless  or  the 
concerned.  (3)  Preachers  to  be  careful  to 
give  just  representations  of  Dioine  things,  and 
such  as  are  adapted  to  meet  the  case  of  the 
hearers.  The  pulpit  not  the  place  to  indulge 
one's  taste  for  elegant  composition,  learned 
research,  metaphysical  subtleties,  or  poetic 
description.  Pompous  common-places  and 
flights  of  rhetoric  only  famish  the  hearers, 
and  render  the  preacher  himself  ridiculous. 
A  Nero  fiddled  while  Rome  was  burning. 
Paul  an  example  to  preachers  :  would  rather 
speak  five  words  in  the  Church  that  he  might 
teach  others  also,  "than  ten  thoujiaud  words 
in  an  unknown  tongue"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  19). 

4.  lis  conceit.  Verse  4. — "  To  whom  hast 
thou  uttered  words?  (verses  or  set  phrases)." 
Bildad's  speech  ridiculed  by  Job  as  rather 
mere  words  or  set  phrases ;  light-sounding 
diction,  rather  t4ian  plain  homely  truth  suited 
to  the  occasion.  Probably  more  of  the  tra- 
ditional poetry  of  the  country,  which  he 
pompously  repeats  to  a  man  crushed  under 
a  weight  of  sorrow.  Had  treated  Job  as  an 
ignorant  and  godless  man.  Had  set  him- 
self forth  as  his  teacher  in  regard  to  the 
Divine  character  and  works.  Had  spoken 
as  immensely  Job's  superior  both  in  piety 
and  knowledge.  Conceit  one  of  the  most 
repulsive  and  contemptible  things  in  a  preacher. 
Modesty  in  regard  to  himself,  and  due  respect 
for  his  hearears,  to  be  exhibited  by  every 
teacher  of  Divine  truth.  Paul's  example  : 
"  I  speak  as  unto  wise  men  ;  judge  ye  what 
I  say."  "I  am  persuaded  of  you,  my 
brethren,  that  ye  are  filled  with  all  know- 
ledge, able  also  to  admonish  one  another  j 
nevertheless  I  have  written  to  you  in  some 
sort,  as  putting  you  in  mind  "  (1  Cor.  x.  15  ; 
R,om.  XV.  14,  15).  Peter's  "  I  put  you  in 
remembrance  of  these  things,  though  ye 
know  them,  and  be  establislied  in  the  pre- 
sent truth.  I  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by 
way  of  remembrance  "  (2  Pet.  i.  12,  ii.  1). 

5.  Its  want  of  originality  and  divine 
unction.  '*  Whose  spirit  (breath,  or  in- 
spiration) came  from  thee."  Job  ridicules 
Bildad's  speech  as  either  an  echo  of  those  of 
his  brothers,  or  a  string  of  trite  maxims  of 

156 


the  sages ;  at  the  most,  the  effusion  of  his 
own  spirit,  not  that  of  the  spirit  of  God. 
Says  nothing  against  the  sentiments  them- 
selves. However  uttered  by  Bildad,  they 
are  recorded  bv  the  Spirit  of  God  for  oui 
instruction.  Observe  —  (1)  Preachers  to 
beware  of  giving  other  men's  productions  as 
their  own.  If  other  men's  sermons  are 
read  or  repeated,  it  should  be  acknowledged. 
(2)  Preachers  not  to  be  mere  imitators  or 
retailers  of  other  mea's  sentiments.  (3)  A. 
preacher  to  speak  from  his  own  heart,  if  he 
would  reach  the  hearts  of  his  hearers. 
(4)  Preachers  to  give  to  their  hearers  not 
merely  the  effusion  of  their  own  spirit,  but 
what  they  have  received  from  the  Spirit  of 
God.  Five  plain  words  uttered  from  the 
heart  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
worth  more  than  five  thousand  of  the  most 
polished  sentences,  whether  borrowed  from 
others  or  the  product  of  our  own  talent  and 
study.  The  preacher  who  would  win  souls 
or  edify  believers,  while  not  neglecting 
study  and  pre[)aration,  to  be  mainly  con- 
cerned to  receive  his  messages  from  God  in 
answer  to  prayer,  and  to  have  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  the  delivery  of  them.  Two  things 
to  be  sought  by  every  preacher — a  Divine 
unction  in  his  discourses,  and  a  Divine 
energy  with  them. 

Stray  hints  for  preachers : — 

He  who  desires,  according  to  Paul,  to  be 
apt  to  teach,  must  first  himself  be  taught  of 
God. — Erasmus. 

Those  are  the  best  preachers  to  the 
common  people  who  teach  with  the  sim- 
plicity of  a  child. — Luther. 

Let  your  discourses  be  neither  absolutely 
without  ornament,  nor  indecently  clothed 
with  it. — Augustine. 

It  requires  all  our  learning  to  make  things 
plain. — Archbishop  Usher. 

Preachers  are  to  feed  the  people,  not  with 
gay  tulips  and  useless  daffodils,  but  with  the 
bread  of  life,  and  medicinal  plants  springing 
from  the  margin  of  the  fountain  of  salvation. 
— Jeremi/  Taylor. 

Very  fine,  sir — very  fine  ;  but  people  can't 
live  upon  flowers. — Robert  Hall. 

I  liad  rather  be  fully  understood  by  ten, 
than  be  admired  by  ten  thousand. — Br.  John 
Edwards, 

Aim  at  pricking  the  heart,  not  at  stroking 
the  skin. — Jerome. 

Here  lies  the  secret  [of  the  actor's  greater 
power  in  moving  an  audience  than  the 
preacher's] :  you  deliver  your  truths  as  if 
they  were  flctions ;  we  deliver  our  fictions 
as  if  they  were  truths. — Garriclc. 

The  prayer  of  an  old  writer :  "  Lord,  let 
me  never  be  guilty,  by  painting  the  windows, 
of  hindering  the  light  of  thy  glorious  Gospel 
from  shining  powwfully  into  men's  hearts." 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


CHAP.  XXVI. 


Leif/h  Richmond*s  dying  message  to  liis 
son :  "  Tell  him,  his  father  learnt  his  most 
valuable  lessons  for  the  ministry,  and  ins 
most  useful  experience,  in  the  poor  man's 

cottage." 

"  I'll  preach  as  though  I  ne'er  shall  preach 

again, 
And  as  a  dying  man  to  dying  men." 

Jiiihard  Baxter. 

II.  Descants  more  largely  on  the 
Divine  perfections  and  works  both  in 
creation  and  providence  (verse  5 — 13). 

1.  His  sovereignty  over  the  dead  and  the 
invisible  world.  Verse  5 — "Dead  things  are 
formed  from  under  the  waters,  and  the 
inhabitants  thereof*'  (or,  the  dead  groan  from 
beneath  the  waters,  and  the  inhabitants 
thereof).  Bildad  had  represented  God  as 
exercising  sovereign  dominion  in  his  high 
places  (verse  xxv.  2).  Here  Job  (if  not 
Bildad  himself)  apparently  shows  that  sove- 
reignty extending  to  the  lower  world  or 
place  of  the  dead.  The  "dead,"  or  shades 
of  the  departed,  perhaps  more  especially  the 
wicked  dead,  and  in  particular  the  giants  or 
mighty  ones  before  the  flood  (Gen.  vi.  4). 
These  represented  as  groaning  or  trembling 
from  beneath,  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God 
upon  them.  Tlie  "waters"  probably  the 
"deep"  or  abyss  (Luke  viii.  31;  Rom. 
X.  7),  supposed  by  Jewish  rabbis  to  be  lower 
than  the  earth  ;  the  place  of  the  dead  (Rom. 
X.  7),  and  the  prepared  abode  of  the  fallen 
angels  from  which  they  recoil  with  horror 
(Luke  viii.  31).  Perhaps  the  "fountains  of 
the  great  deep,"  broken  up  at  the  time  of  the 
Deluge  (Gen.  viii.  11),  and  the  "water under 
the  earth  "  (Exod.  xx.  4).  Possibly  what 
shall  afterwards  constitute  the  "lake  that 
burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone"  (Rev.  xx. 
10,  14,  15;  xxi.  8). 

The  language  of  the  text  according  to  the 
Old  Testament  view  of  the  state  of  the 
dead  in  general.  According  to  it  the 
spirits  of  the  departed  still  in  conscious 
existence.  That  existence,  however,  one 
rather  of  pain  and  privation  than  of  enjoy- 
ment. The  place  of  the  disembodied  spirits 
represented  as  one  of  darkness  (chap.  x.  21, 
22);  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  12),  and  of  pain  (ch.  xiv. 
22).  Hence  the  great  shrinking  from 
death  on  the  part  of  Old  Testament  saints 
(Ps.  XXX.  8,  9;  Ixxxviii.  9 — 12;  Isa. 
xxxviii.  10—12,  17,  18).  Yet  Enoch  and 
Elijah  both  taken  to  be  with  God.  Abraham 
and  Moses  in  a  state  of  blessedness  (Luke 
ix.  30,  31;  xvi.  23).  Lazarus  comforted  in 
the  world  of  spirits,  while  Dives  was  tor- 
mented (Luke  xvi.  25).  The  doctrine  of  the 
state  of  the  dead  only  gradually  developed. 


Its  full  exhibition  reserved  for  the  advent  of 
the  Messiah  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  Possibly  a 
change  made  iu  the  state  of  departed  saints 
after  his  resurrection  (Matt,  xxvii.  52,  53). 
Perhaps,  in  more  senses  than  one,  Christ, 
after  overcoming  "the  sharpness  of  death, 
opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  be- 
lievers."—  (1)  A  separate  state  of  c(mscious 
existence  after  death  not  only  the  doctrine 
of  the  Bible,  but  the  general  sense  of  man- 
kind. Consistent  with  reason.  Mind  not 
necessarily  de|)eiident  on  matter  or  any 
material  organization.  (2)  The  state  of  the 
departed  ungodly  one  of  pain  and  trembling — 
"wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  The  con- 
sciousness of  God's  power  exercised  in  the  in- 
visible world  only  an  increase  to  their  suffering. 
2.  God's  perfect  cognizance  of  the  invisible 
world.  (Verse  6) — "  Hell  is  naked  before 
him,  and  destruction  hath  no  covering." 
"  Hell "  {Hebrew,  "  Sheol ;"  Greek,  "  Hades") 
used  in  Scripture  to  denote— (1)  The  grave, 
or  receptacle  for  the  dead  body.  (2)  The 
invisible  world,  or  place  of  departed  spirits 
in  general,  without  respect  to  character  or 
experience.  The  latter  supposed  by  the 
Jews  to  be  a  vast  cavern  far  in  the  interior 
of  the  earth.  Probably  the  prison  men- 
tioned by  Peter  as  enclosing  the  spirits  of  the 
disobedient  Antediluvians  (1  Peter  iii. 
19,  20).  May  include  both  prison  and 
paradise.  The  place  into  which  the  disem- 
bodied spirit  of  the  Saviour  went,  in  order 
to  satisfy  the  law  of  death  as  other  men. 
Yet  his  spirit  on  the  same  day  in  Paradise 
(Luke  xxiii.  43).  The  clause  in  the  so- 
called  Apostles'  Creed,  "  he  descended  into 
hell,"  not  found  in  the  early  Roman  or 
Oriental  creeds.  First  used  as  a  part  of  the 
Creed  by  the  Church  of  Aquileia,  not  quite 
400  years  after  Christ.  S(  e  Pearson  on  the 
Creed,  Art.  v.  "Destruction"  {Hebrew, 
"  Abaddon,"  the  name  given  to  the  Angel  of 
the  Bottomless  Pit  (Rev.  ix.  11),  like  "  hell," 
the  place  of  the  dead  or  of  departed  spirits, 
its  inhabitants  being  *'  lost  "  to  human  view  ; 
perhaps  more  especially  the  place  of  lost 
men  and  angels.  "  Hell"  and  "  destruction," 
as  synonymous  terms  denoting  the  invisible 
world  or  place  of  the  dead,  found  together 
also  in  Prov.  xv.  11 ;  xxvii.  20 ;  perhaps 
another  hint  as  to  the  period  of  the  com- 
position of  the  book.  "  Hell "  and  "  death  " 
mentioned  together  in  Rev.  i.  18  ;  xx.  13, 14. 
Their  keys  in  the  hand  of  Jesus  as  Lord  of 
the  invisible  woild  (Rev.  i.  18.) — (1)  Be- 
lievers need  have  no  fear  in  entering  the 
invisible  world.  Christ  their  Saviour  and 
Elder  Brother  has  been  there  before  them, 
and  now  holds  the  keys.  (2)  The  grave 
with  its  countless  dust,  as  well  as  the 
invisible  world  with  its  innLi.nerable  in- 
habitants,  ail  open    to   the    view   of    the 

167 


CHAP.  XXVI. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


Almighty.  The  dust  of  His  saints  precious 
in  his  sight  and  cannot  be  lost  (Ps.  cxvi.  15). 
(3)  The  most  secret  depths  of  earth  and  sea, 
with  their  countless  objects  and  inhabitants, 
open  to  the  same  omniscient  eye.  Not  an 
animalcule  or  infusiorium,  thousands  of 
which  are  contained  in  a  single  drop  of 
water,  but  is  the  object  of  His  inspection 
and  care.  (4)  *'Heli  and  destruction  are 
before  the  Lord ;  how  much  more  the  hearts 
of  the  children  of  men."  There  is  no  darkness 
or  shadow  of  death  where  the  workers  of 
iniquity  may  liide  themselves"  (Prov.  xv. 
11 ;  Job  xxxiv.  22). 

3.  His  power  and  wisdom  in  the  works  of 
Creation  and  Providence  (verses  7 — 1 3).  (1) 
In  giving  the  earth  and  heavenly  bodies  their 
present  situation^  and  suspending  them  in 
empty  space.  Verse  7 — *'  He  stretcheth  (or 
stretched)  out  [as  a  canopy]  the  north  (or 
northern  celestial  hemisphere,  the  only  part 
visible  to  Job  and  his  friends,  and  here  put 
for  the  heavens  in  general)  over  the  empty 
place,  and  hangeth  (or  hung)  the  earth  upon 
nothing."  The  former  clause  according  to 
appearance,  and  the  old  opinion  that  the 
heavens  formed  an  immense  arch,  or  vault, 
stretching  over  the  earth.  The  latter 
philosophically  true,  and  a  remarkable  an- 
ticipation of  the  Newtonian  theory  of 
gravitation.  The  earth  and  planets  sus- 
pended in  empty  space,  and  preserved  in  their 
orbit  by  the  operation  of  two  opposite  forces, 
one  (tlie  centripetal)  which  attracts  them  to 
the  sun,  or  centre  of  the  system,  the  other 
(the  centrifugal)  which,  in  consequence  of  the 
rotatory  motion  given  them,  keeps  them 
moving  on  in  a  circle  or  ellipse  round  the  sun, 
instead  of  being  drawn  absolutely  to  it.  The 
spherical  form  of  the  earth  thus  also  indi- 
cated. "Earth  self-balanced  on  her  centre 
hung."  (2)  In  forming  the  clouds  and  pre- 
serving  the  watery  particles  collected  in  them. 
Verse  8 — "  He  bindeth  up  the  waters  (or 
watery  vapours)  in  his  thick  clouds,  and  the 
cloud  is  not  rent  under  them."  Probably  an 
allusion  to  the  second  day's  work  of  creation 
—the  formation  of  the  firmament,  or  atmo- 
sphere, for  the  separation  of  the  waters 
beneath  from  those  above,  and  collecting  the 
latter  in  clouds,  and  preserving  them  in  their 
place.  An  obvious  manifestation  of  Divine 
wisdom,  power,  and  goodness.  The  provision 
made  for  the  earth's  fertility.  Reservoirs  of 
water  kept  far  above  the  earth  in  clouds  by 
the  operation  of  natural  laws.  These  clouds 
so  constituted  that,  notwithstanding  the 
quantity  of  water  contained  in  them,  they  do 
not  burst  and  discharge  their  contents  in  one 
vast  destructive  deluge.  Their  contents 
made  on  the  contrary  to  fall  in  such  gentle 
and  temporary  showers  as  to  meet  the  earth's 
requirements.  Such  discharge  made  to  result 
158 


from  a  change  in  the  temperature,  or  the 
influence  of  electricity.  The  clouds  on  one 
special  occasion  "  rent  under "  their  con- 
tents, when  the  "  windows  of  heaven  were 
opened  "  to  deluge  a  disobedient  world.  A 
partial  "  rending  *'  in  extraordinarily  heavy 
and  deluging  rains.  (3)  In  so  collecting 
dense  clouds  as  to  darken  the  sky  with  them. 
Verse  9 — "  He  holdeth  back  the  face  of  his 
throne,  and  spreadeth  his  cloud  upon  it.'* 
The  sky,  or  heaven,  viewed  as  God's  throne 
(Matt.  V.  34;  Isa.  Ixvi.  1).  Concealed  by 
Him  from  time  to  time  by  a  curtain  of  dark 
clouds.  These  clouds  of  His  own  formation, 
from  the  watery  particles  exhaled  by  the 
sun's  heat  from  the  earth  and  sea,  and 
directed  by  currents  of  air  into  one  locahty. 
Clouds  serve  various  and  important  pur- 
poses : — (i.)  In  irrigating  the  ground,  (ii.)  In 
moderating  the  heat,  (iii.)  In  beautifying 
the  sky.  The  beauty  of  the  sky,  especially 
at  sunset,  thus  made  to  vie  with  that  of  the 
earth.  Observe  —  God  himself  invisible, 
though  His  agency  is  everywhere  seen  and  felt. 
His  throne  still  there,  though  He  spread  a 
cloud  over  it.  God  to  be  trusted  and  to  be 
believed  in  when  we  cannot  see  Him.  (4)  In 
appointing  the  alternation  of  light  and  dark- 
ness, and  the  vicissitude  of  day  and  night. 
Verse  10 — '*  He  hath  compassed  the  waters 
with  bounds,  until  the  day  and  night  come 
to  an  end"  (or,  "He  hath  drawn  a  circular 
boundary  upon  the  waters  with  exact  pro- 
portion of  light  and  darkness  ; "  or,  "  even  to 
the  limit  of  light  with  darkness,"  i.  e.,  where 
the  light  ceases  and  darkness  begins  j — 
Margin,  "  until  the  end  of  light  with  dark- 
ness ").  Apparent  allusion  to  the  first  day's 
work  at  the  creation — the  dividing  the  light 
from  the  darkness,  and  appointing  the 
alternation  of  day  and  night  (Gen.  i.  3 — 5). 
The  *'  bound  "  here  mentioned  probably  the 
horizon.  The  earth  popularly  supposed  to 
be  a  plane  bounded  by  the  "waters"  of  the 
ocean  on  which  the  vault  of  heaven  appears 
to  rest  and  to  form  a  circular  boundary, — 
the  place  where  light  ends,  and  darkness 
commences.  The  sun  supposed  to  move 
from  the  eastern  to  the  western  boundary, 
where  it  disappears  till  the  following 
morning.  The  description  in  the  text,  like 
others  in  the  Bible,  given  popularly,  accord- 
ing to  appearance.  The  earth's  diurnal  rota- 
tion on  its  axis  not  then  generally  known. 
No  object  of  the  Bible  to  teach  the  facts  that 
progressive  science  was  in  due  time  to  dis- 
cover. The  language  of  the  Bible  popular, 
not  scientific  or  philosophical.  The  horizon 
an  apparent  boundary  between  light  and 
darkness.  That  boundary  a  part  of  God's 
work  in  creation  and  providence.  Science 
only  informs  us  how. 

The  alternation  of  light  and  darkness,  day 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    XXVI 


and  night,  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  and 
beneficial  arrangements  of  the  Divine  Creator. 
Among  its  benefits  are — (i.)  An  agreeable 
variety  instead  of  the  uniform  sameness  even 
of  constant  day.  "The  svireet  approach  of 
even  and  morn,"  the  joyous  thrill  of  sunrise, 
and  the  gorgeous  beauty  of  sunset,  due  to 
this  alternation.  (ii.)  Suitable  seasons 
afforded  for  the  varied  requirements  of  men 
and  other  animals.  Night  and  darkness  suit- 
able to  man  for  rest,  as  daytime  and  light 
are  for  labour.  The  darkness  of  night  neces- 
sary for  predaceous  animals  obtaining  their 
food,  (iii.)  Evening  valuable  as  tranquilliz- 
ing the  mind,  inviting  to  sober  meditation 
and  reflection,  and  affording  opportunity  for 
domestic  and  social  enjoyment.  Eventide 
the  season  chosen  by  Isaac  for  meditation  in 
the  fields  (Gen.  xxiv.  63). 

"  Eve  following  eve, 
Dear  tranquil  time,  when  the  sweet  sense  of 

home 
Is  sweetest !  Moments  for  their  own  sake 

hail'd ! " 

(iv.)  The  earth  kept  cool  and  moistened  with 
dew  through  the  same  wise  and  beneficent 
provision,  (v.)  Plants  and  animals  mutu- 
ally benefited  by  the  interchange  of  light 
and  darkness.  "  In  the  various  processes  of 
combustion,  and  by  the  respiration  of  animals, 
a  large  amount  of  the  oxygen  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, or  its  vitiil  part,  is  withdrawn,  and, 
united  with  carbon,  is  returned  as  carbonic 
acid — an  ingredient  deleterious  to  animal 
life.  But  this  deteriorating  process  is 
counteracted,  at  least  to  a  certain  extent,  by 
tiie  vegetable  tribes.  The  same  luminous 
influence  which  serves  to  generate  chromule 
(the  green  matter  in  plants),  hkewise  aids 
the  plant  in  decomposing  the  carbonic  acid 
which  has  been  absorbed  ;  appropriating  the 
carbon  to  the  construction  of  the  ligneous 
tissue,  and  returning  the  pure  oxygen  to  the 
atmosphere,  it  fits  it  again  for  the  purposes 
of  respiration.  Animals  may  therefore  be 
viewed  as  preparing  food  for  plants  by  the 
air  which  they  vitiate  j  while  plants,  on  the 
other  hand,  by  their  action  under  the  in- 
fluence of  light,  appropriate  to  themselves 
nourishment,  and  restore  the  air  to  its  normal 
state"  —  Professor  Fleming's  Temperature 
of  the  Seasons.  (6)  The  starry  sky,  with 
its  entrancing  beauty  and  elevating  lessons, 
thus  alone  made  visible.  To  the  alternation 
of  light  and  darkness — day  and  night — we  owe 
the  poet's  magnificent  description  of  Even- 
ing:— 

"Now  came  still  evening  on,  and  twilight 
gray 

Had  in  her  sober  livery  all  things  clad. 

Silence  was  pleased.  Now  glow'd  the  fir- 
mament 

With  living  sapphires :  Hesperus,  that  led 


The  starry  host,  rode   brightest,   'till  the 

moon, 
Rising  in  clouded  majesty,  at  length 
Apparent  queen,  unveil'd  her  peerless  light, 
And  o'er  the  dark  her  silver  mantle  threw." 

God  to  be  adored  as  the  author  of  this 
bencficcmt  interchange  of  light  and  darkness. 
"  Thou  makest  the  outgoings  of  the  morning 
and  the  evening  to  rejoice."  "The  day  is 
thine ;  the  ni^ht  also  is  thine :  thou  hast 
prepared  the  light  and  the  sun."  "  Thou 
makest  darkness,  and  it  is  night,  wherein  all 
the  beasts  of  the  forest  do  creep  forth " 
(Ps.  Ixv.  8;  Ixxiv.  16;  civ.  20).— (5)  In 
exciting  storms  and  disturbances  in  the  earth 
and  air.  Verse  11 — "  Tlie  pillars  of  heaven 
tremble,  and  are  astonished  at  his  reproof." 
The  visible  heavens  viewed  as  a  magnificent 
edifice  supported  on  columns.  These  imagi- 
nary pillars  personified,  and  poetically  re- 
presented as  in  some  tremendous  commotion 
of  the  earth  or  elements  standing  aghast  at 
the  apparent  reproof  of  their  Creator.  That 
reproof  supposed  to  be  directed  either  against 
themselves  or  mankind.  So  the  sea  said  to 
be  dried  up  at  His  rebuke  (Ps.  cvi.  9; 
Nahum  i.  4).  The  raging  wind  and  waves 
literally  rebuked  by  the  Saviour,  and  hushed 
into  a  calm  (Matt.  viii.  26).  Storms  and 
earthquakes  among  the  most  s'riking  inci- 
dents in  nature.  Especially  awful  and 
sublime  in  hot  climates  and  mountainous 
regions.  Naturally  strike  the  mind  as  indica 
tions  or  suggestions  of  Divine  displeasure. 
Strictly  due  to  the  Divine  will,  and,  though 
effected  through  the  agency  of  natural  laws, 
a  part  of  His  providential  government.  Serve 
various  and  important  purposes — (i.)  Morally: 
as — {a)  Reminding  us  of  the  existence,  at- 
tributes, and  agency  of  a  Divine  Ruler  and 
Judu'C.  Eew  persons  fail,  during  a  tremendous 
thunderstorm,  to  think  of  a  Supreme  Being. 
{b)  Tending  to  produce  elevating  and  re- 
verential thoughts  of  God.  One  of  the 
iublimest  descriptions  of  a  thunderstorm, 
with  its  effects  both  physically  and  morally, 
found  in  Ps.  xxix.  3 — 10.  {c)  Suggesting 
the  instability  of  earthly  things  and  the 
danger  to  which  human  life  is  exposed,  with 
the  importance  of  securing  the  favour  of 
God  and  the  assurance  of  a  better  world. 
{d)  Tending  to  elevate  the  mind  and 
strengthen  the  character  by  bringing  it  in 
contact  with  the  sublime  and  terrible  in 
Nature. — (ii.)  Physically  :  as — [a)  Purifying 
the  atmosphere.  (Jb)  Tending  to  the  greater 
irrigation  of  the  earth.  (<?)  Aiding  in  the 
processes  of  vegetation. — (6)  In  His  power 
over  the  ocean  in  exciting  and  stilling  its 
waves.  Verse  12 — "He  divideth  (or  cleaveth) 
the  sea  with  his  power ;  and  by  his  under- 
standing he  smiteth  through  the  proud  *  (or 
"stilleth  its   ^vidiQ''— Hebrew,  "Rahab"), 

159 


CHAP.   XXVI. 


UOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


The  sea,  so  uncontrollable  by  man,  entirely 
subject  to  the  will  and  power  of  God.  Already 
literally  divided,  so  as  to  form  a  pathway  in 
the  midst  of  its  waters  (Exod.  xiv.  21,  22  ; 
Is.  li.  10 — 15).  Ordinarily  divided  and  cleft 
by  storms  and  tempests.  By  the  same 
Divine  power,  its  towering  billows  and 
yawning  chasms  made  to  disappear,  and  the 
storm  changed  into  a  calm  (Ps.  Ixv.  7 ; 
cvii.  29).  Done  by  Christ  (Matt.  viii.  26). 
Observe  —  Power  more  conspicuous  ia  ex- 
citing the  storm  at  sea ;  understanding,  in 
quelling  it.  The  latter  frequently  in  answer 
to  prayer  (Ps.  cvii.  28,  29  ;  Matt.  viii.  25, 
26).  Prayer  in  such  circumstances  the  voice 
of  nature  (Jonah  i.  5,  6). — (7)  In  making  the 
sky  bright  and  serene  by  day  and  studding  it 
with  stars  by  night.  Verse  13 — "  By  his 
spirit  (or  *  breath,'  his  power  or  command  ; 
or  perhaps  the  Third  Person  in  the  Godhead, 
also  engaged  in  creation,  Gen.  i.  2)  he  hath 
garnished  the  heavens  (or,  *  the  heavens  are 
brightness  or  beauty,'  i.e.  bright  and  beau- 
tiful) ;  and  his  hand  hath  formed  (possibly 
*  wounded,'  or  'slain')  the  crooked  (gliding  or 
darting)  serpent "  (perhaps  the  Zodiac,  with 
its  twelve  signs  or  constellations,  anciently 
represented  as  a  serpent  with  its  tail  in  its 
mouth;  or,  more  probably,  a  northern  con- 
stellation, called  Draco,  or  the  Dragon,  the 
description  being  taken  from  the  living  ser- 
pent). Apparent  allusion  to  the  fourth 
day's  work  in  creation  (Gen.  i.  14 — 16).  The 
bright  clear  heaven  lighted  up  with  sunshine, 
a  beautiful  object,  especially  as  succeeding  a 
storm  or  the  darkness  of  night.  Still  more 
beautiful  is  the  nocturnal  sky,  spangled  with 
stars.  Affords  an  impressive  exhibition  of 
Divine  power  (Is.  xl.  26).  The  stars  count- 
less in  number.  In  themselves,  probably  so 
many  suns  and  centres  of  systems  like  our 
own.  Those  forming  any  of  the  constellations 
millions  of  miles  apart  from  each  other.  A 
nebula  or  white  fleecy  speck  in  the  belt  of 
Orion,  resolved  by  the  telescope  into  a  mass 
of  stars  at  incalculable  distances  from  us 
and  from  each  other.  Stars  early  grouped, 
for  convenience,  into  imaginary  figures  of 
men,  animals,  &c. 

Some  terms  and  ideas  in  the  preceding 
verse  also  brought  together  in  Is.  li.  9  ; 
XXV ii.  1 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  10.  Bahab  here  ren- 
dered "proud,"  or  ** pride;"  used  also  as  a 
proper  name  for  Egypt,  while  Pharaoh  is 
symbolized  by  the  dragon  or  leviathan — the 
crocodile  of  the  Kile. — Operations  in  the 
natural  world  analogous  to  those  in  the 
social  and  moral.  Tlie  natural  world  itself 
a  mirror  of  the  spiritual.  The  towering 
billows  of  the  ocean  a  picture  of  the  swelling 
pride  of  God's  enemies,  as  exemplified  in 
Egypt  and  her  hosts  at  the  time  of  the 
exodus  (Ps.  XV.  7).    Monsters  of  the  land 

ICO 


and  sea  symbolical  of  cruel  and  injurious 
men,  as  well  as  of  Satan  and  his  infernal 
legions.  The  power  that  quells  the  one 
employed  in  subduing  the  other.  A  reference 
in  the  text  supposed  oy  some  to  the  exodus, 
and  also  to  Gen.  iii.  15. 

III.  Reflection  on  the  greatness  of 
the  Almighty's  works.  Verse  14 — "Lo, 
these  are  parts  (outlines  or  extremities)  of 
his  ways ;  but  how  little  a  portion  (or, 
'  what  a  mere  whisper  *)  is  heard  of  him 
(or  of  what  is  *in  Him' — His  being  and 
perfections);  but  the  thunder  (or  full 
manifestation)  of  his  power  who  can  under- 
stand ?"  The  stupendous  works  and  opera- 
tions of  His  hands  which  are  visible  to  us 
only  a  small  part — the  mere  outline  or 
extremities — of  the  whole.  What  we  see  and 
hear  of  in  relation  to  God  and  His  works,  as 
compared  with  the  fulness  of  His  power, 
only  a  mere  whisper  in  comparison  with  the 
mighty  thunder.     Observe — 

1.  Much  more  to  be  known  of  God  and  His 
works  than  is  possible  for  us  to  know  in  our 
present  state.  Yet  all  His  visible  ordinary 
operations  would  be  regarded  as  miracles,  if 
not  seen  daily. 

2.  A  sound  and  deep  theology  grounded  on 
this  verse.  Man's  knowledge  confined  to 
parts  only  of  God's  ways.  The  extremities 
or  forthgoings  of  His  administration  on 
earth  only  visible.  The  springs,  principles, 
and  anterior  steps  above  and  out  of  man's 
sight. — Dr.  Chalmers.  The  humbling  ac- 
knowledgment of  those  who  have  penetrated 
farthest  into  the  mysteries  of  nature.  "  The 
phenomena  of  matter  and  force  lie  within  our 
intellectual  range.  .  .  .  But  behind  and 
above,  and  around  all,  the  real  mystery  of 
the  universe  remains  unsolved.'' — Professor 
Tyndall,  Lecture  to  Working  Men  at  the 
Dundee  British  Association  Meeting^  Sept., 
1867.  "Alike  in  the  external  and  the 
internal  worlds,  the  man  of  science  sees 
himself  in  the  midst  of  perpetual  changes, 
of  which  he  can  discover  neither  the  begin- 
ning nor  the  end.  In  all  directions  his 
investigations  eventually  bring  him  face  to 
face  with  an  insoluble  enigma;  and  he  ever 
more  clearly  perceives  it  to  be  an  insoluble 
enigma.—  Herbert  Spencer^ s  First  Principles. 
"Ail  our  science  is  but  an  investigation  of 
the  mode  in  which  the  Creator  acts;  its 
highest  laws  are  but  expressions  of  the  mode 
in  which  he  manifests  His  agency  to  us. 
And  when  the  physiologist  is  inclined  to 
dwell  unduly  upon  his  capacity  for  pene- 
trating the  secrets  of  nature,  it  may  be 
salutary  for  him  to  reflect  that,  even  should 
he  succeed  in  placing  his  department  of 
study  on  a  level  with  those  physical  sciences 
in  which  the  most  complete  knowledge  of 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARrt  JOB. 


OHAP.  XIVII. 


cansation  (using  that  term  in  the  sense  of 
'unconditional  sequence')  has  been  ac- 
quired, and  in  which  the  highest  generaliza- 
tions have  been  attained,  he  is  still  as  far  as 
ever  from  being  able  to  comprehend  that 
power  which  is  the  efficient  cause  alike  of  the 
simplest  and  most  minute,  and  of  the  most 
complicated  and  most  majestic,  in  the 
universe," — W.  B.  Carpenter ,  General  ahd 
Comparative  Fhysiology. 

3.  A  glorious  increase  of  knowledge  await- 
ing the  believer  in  another  world.  There  we 
shall  know  even  as  we  are  known  (1  Cor.  xiii. 
12).  From  this  ever-enlarging  enlightenment 
the  proud  unbeliever,  however  scientific 
and  philosophical  now  unhappily,  cuts  him- 
self off.  To  him  the  future  will  be  a  world 
of  darkness,  not  of  light. 


4.  "Exertions  of  Divine  power  yet  to  he  dis- 
played even  in  connection  with  this  earth  far 
beyond  what  has  been  already  witnessed.  W  hat 
tlie  Bible  declares,  observation  confirms,  sound 
reason  assents  to,  and  what  every  genuine 
Christian  cordially  believes,  of  a  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  is  only  an  example  of  such  power 
(Matt.  xxii.  26  ;  Eph.  i.  19, 20).  Resurrec- 
tion a  miracle ;  but  even  such  a  miracle  only 
something  of  *'the  thunder  of  Ilis  power.*' 
Why  thought  incredible  with  a  Being  who  is 
Almighty  (Acts  xxvi.  8)  ? 

5.  The  lower  exertions  of  God's  power  in  the 
universe  beyond  man's  comprehension ;  how 
much  the  higher  ?  In  the  presence  of  Divine 
declarations,  the  part  of  sound  philosophi/, 
as  well  of  true  piety,  b  to  believe  and 
adore. 


CHAPTER    XXVn. 
JOB'S  REPLY  TO  THE  FRIENDS  IN  GENERAL. 


Job  now  alone  in  the  field.  Zophar,  ^ho 
should  have  followed  Bildad,  and  to  whom  Job 
had  given  opportunity  to  speak,  has  appa- 
rently nothing  to  say.  Job,  therefore,  after 
a  pause,  resumes  his  discourse,  but  in  a 
different  tone.  Speaks  more  calmly,  and 
even  more  solemnly.  Declares,  even  with  an 
appeal  to  the  Almighty,  that,  notwithstand- 
ing all  he  still  suffers  at  the  hand  of  God, 
and  however  God  seems  to  treat  him  as  a 
guilty  person,  he  is  resolved,  as  a  sincere  and 
upright  man,  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  his 
past  life,  and  not,  for  the  sake  of  bettering 
ilis  condition,  as  his  friends  would  persuade 
him,  admit  hypocritically  the  justice  of  their 
reasoning  and  of  their  charges  against  him. 
Declares  His  utter  abhorrence  of  all  ungod- 
liness, oppression,  and  hypocrisy,  and  main- 
tains, along  with  the  friends,  that  however 
wickedness  may  appear  for  a  time  to  prosper, 
it  is  certain,  sooner  or  later,  to  end  in  misery 
and  ruin. 

Job  represented  (verse  1)  as  again  "taking 
up  his  parable,"  or  "  proverb  " — a  weighty, 
sententious  discourse  or  saying,  such  as 
uttered  by  sages  and  prophets  (Numb,  xxiii. 
7  ;  xxiv.  3 — 15  j  Ps.  xlix.  4  ;  Ixxviii.  2  ; 
Prov.  i.  16 ;  xxvi.  7).  In  the  New  Testa- 
ment used  in  the  sense  of  extended  simili- 
tude. The  latter  part  of  the  chapter,  from 
verse  11  to  the  end,  from  its  connection  and 
position,  one  of  the  most  perplexing  portions 
of  the  book. 

I.  Job's  resolution  to  maintain  his 
innocence.  Verse  26. — "As  God  Hveth, 
who  hath  taken  away  my  judgment  (has  for 
some  mysterious  purpose,  dealt  with  me  con- 
trary to  the  justice  of  my  cause  and   the 

11 


uprightness  of  my  character,  and  who  still 
refrains  from  declaring  my  innocence,  oi 
affording  me  an  opportunity  of  pleadiig 
my  cause  before  Him),  and  the  Almighty 
who  hath  vexed  (or  *  embittered  ')  my  soul 
(wilh  such  severe  afflictions) ;  all  the  while 
my  breath  is  in  me,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
in  my  nostrils  (so  long  as  I  have  life  continued 
1 0  me ;  apparent  allusion  to  Gen.  ii.  7),  my 
lip-i  shall  not  speak  wickedness  nor  my 
tongue  utter  deceit  (in  falsely  and  contrary 
to  my  conscience  admitting  myself  to  have 
been  a  secret  and  guilty  transgressor).  God 
forbid  that  I  should  justify  you  (in  your 
erroneous  reasoning,  and  your  consequent 
charges  against  me,  by  acknowledging  my- 
self a  wicked  man) ;  my  heart  shall  not 
reproach  me,  so  long  as  I  live"  (or,  "doth 
not  and  shall  not  reproach  me  for  any  of  my 
days,"  as  having  at  any  time  lived  in  the 
practice  of  secret  ungodliness,  or  for  now 
denying  the  truth  concerning  myself). 

Job  now  speaks  as  victor  in  the  contro- 
versy. More  solemnly  than  ever  declares 
his  purpose  to  maintain  his  innocence,  not- 
withstanding his  present  treatment.  Gives 
his  asseveration  the  form  of  an  oath — "  As 
God  liveth."  Here,  therefore,  the  controversy 
proper  between  him  and  his  three  friends 
takes  end.  Lauful  in  certain  circumstances 
to  appeal  to  God  for  the  truth  of  what  we 
affirm^  and  to  confirm  a  holy  righteous  resolu- 
tion by  a  solemn  oath.  So  Luther,  at  the 
Diet  of  Worms  :  "  Here  I  stand ;  I  can  do 
nothing  else ;  so  God  help  me."  "  An  oath 
for  confirmation  is  an  end  of  all  strife." 

Job  an  illustrious  example  of  a  man  suffer- 
ing innocently,  yet  resolutely  refusing  to 
utter  a   single  word  coutrary   to   his   cou- 

161 


CHAP.   XXVIL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


science.  Tims  confirms  the  testimony  given 
of  him  by  God  Himself.  Satan  thus  de- 
feated and  shown  to  be  a  lying  slanderer  in 
asserting  that,  if  only  sufficiently  afflicted, 
Job  would  renounce  his  religion — would 
*'  curse  God  to  his  face."  Job  thus  eminently 
belonging  to  "the  noble  army  of  martyrs." 
Would  rather  still  underlie  the  false  accu- 
sations of  his  friends,  and  suffer  as  an 
apparently  .wicked  man  the  severities  of  his 
present  distressing  condition,  than  speak 
or  act  contrary  to  the  dictates  of  his  con- 
science, or  deny  what  he  knew  to  be  true. 
Observe — 

1.  A  truly  good  man  will  be  driven  by  no 
sufferings,  threatened  or  endured,  absolutely 
to  renounce  his  religion.  Through  the 
weakness  of  the  flesh,  extreme  torture  may 
force  out  a  recantation,  which  by  the  strength 
of  grace  will  speedily  be  withdrawn.  Cranmer 
an  example — holding  over  the  flames  the 
hand  that  signed  the  recantation,  and  ex- 
claiming :  *'  Tliat  unworthy  hand !  "  "  Tor- 
ture me  if  you  will;  but  whatever  the  weak- 
ness of  my  nature  may  force  me  in  my 
suffering  to  confess  contrary  to  the  truth  of 
Christ,  I  will  recall  as  soon  as  the  torture  is 
withdrawn." — An  Early  Female  Martyr  to  her 
Persecutors.  The  spirit  of  the  martyrs  ex- 
pressed in  the  language  of  the  three  godly 
youths  in  Babvlon  (Dan.  iii.  16 — 18). 

2.  The  part  of  true  piety  to  wait  God's 
own  time  for  declaring  our  innocence,  and 
to  take  no  hasty  measures  for  clearing  our 
character  or  avoiding  suffering  and  re- 
proach. "Fret  not  thyself  in  anywise  to 
do  evil.  Commit  thy  way  to  the  Lord; 
trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to 
pass ;  and  he  shall  bring  forth  thy  righteous- 
ness as  the  light,  and  thy  judgment  as  the 
noon-day  "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5 — 8). 

3.  Lawful  in  certaii.  circumstances  strongly 
to  declare  the  sincerity  of  our  character  and 
the  integrity  of  our  life.  So  Paul  before  the 
Sanhedrim:  "Men  and  brethren,  I  have  lived 
in  all  good  conscience  before  God  until  ihis 
day  "  (Acts  xxiii.  1).  Our  own  uprightness 
to  be  maintained  on  such  occasions,  as  due — 
(1)  To  God.  (2)  To  our  neighbour.  (3)  To 
ourselves.  Our  own  righteousness  of  life 
valuable — (1)  As  a  fruit  of  Divine  grace  and 
tlie  work  of  God  s  Spirit  in  our  hearts.  (2) 
As  the  evidence  of  our  reconciliation  and 
sonship  to  God.  (3)  As  an  example  to  our 
fellow-men.  Worthless  as  the  ground  of  our 
justification  before  God.  A  twofold  righte- 
ousness belonging  to  the  believer— an  im- 
puted, and  an  inherent  or  personal  one.  The 
latter  to  be  maintained  for  our  justification 
before  men ;  the  former  for  our  justification 
before  God ;  viz.y  the  righteousness  of  the  man 
Christ  Jesus,  our  Head  and  Hepresentative, 
•'  the  Lord  our  righteousness "  (Is.  xlv.  24, 

162 


25  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  6 ;  Acts  xiii.  39 ;  Eom.  iii. 

20—24).  Imputed  righteousness  to  be  held 
fast  by  a  steadfast  faith ;  personal  righteous- 
ness by  holy  resolution,  dependence  on 
Divine  grace,  and,  if  need  be,  a  fearless 
declaration. 

4.  Believers  so  to  live  that  their  hearts 
may  not  condemn  them.  *' If  our  hearts 
condemn  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence 
toward  God  "  (1  John  iii.  21). 

5.  Job  in  his  suffering  from  false  charges, 
and  in  the  maintenance  of  his  integrity 
under  them,  a  type  of  the  Messiah  (Isa  liii. 
8  J  Acts  viii.  33  ;  Isa.  1.  5 — 9). 

II.  Declares  liis  abliorrence  of  un- 
godliness, and  his  assurance  of  being 
one  day  justified.  Verse  7. — "Let  mine 
enemy  be  as  the  wicked  (or  *mine  enemy 
shall  be  &c.'),  and  he  that  riseth  up  against 
me  as  the  unrighteous."  May  be  viewed 
either  as  in  the  form  of  a  wish  or  of  a 
declaration.  As  the  former — strongly  ex- 
presses his  abhorrence  of  un<zodliness.  A 
godless  character  the  worst  thing  he  could 
wish  to  his  enemy.  Thus  a  form  of  the 
assertion  of  his  integrity,  without  imply- 
ing any  evil  wish  against  his  enemies.  As 
the  latter — expresses  the  conviction  that 
the  day  would  come  when  those  who  now 
opposed  him  would  appear  to  be  the  guilty 
party.  This  conviction  ultimately  realized, 
cli.  xlii.  7,  8.     Observe — 

1.  Abhorrence  of  ungodliness  to  be  deeply 
cherished,  and  on  all  due  occasions  to  be 
boldly  declared. 

2.  Sin  to  be  regaided  and  avoided  as 
the  greatest  evil,  both  to  ourselves  and 
others. 

3.  Certain  that  God's  faithful  servants 
will  not  always  underlie  false  charges  (Isa. 
Ixvi.  5  ;  Eev.  iii.  9).  A  day  at  hand  when 
"  all  shall  be  brought  out  in  their  blacks 
and  whites." — S.  Rufherfurd. 

4.  A  good  man  to  be  careful  that  his 
enemies  are  only  the  ungddly.  A  faithful 
follower  of  Jesus  likely,  sooner  or  later,  to 
have  the  ungodly  for  his  enemies  and  calum- 
niators. A  woe  pronounced  on  the  disciples 
when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of  them ;  a 
blessing,  when  men  shall  revile  them,  and 
speak  all  manner  of  evil  against  them,  falsely, 
for  their  Master's  sake.  Christ  Himself 
hated  by  the  world,  because  He  testified  of  it 
that  its  deeds  are  evil.  His  followers  to 
imitate  His  example  and  partake  of  His  ex- 
perience (John  vii.  7;  xv.  18 — 21;  Matt.  x. 
24,  25). 

III.  Giyes  his  reasons  for  his  abhor- 
rence of  ungodliness  and  hypocrisy,  as 
well  as  a  proof  that  his  was  not  such 
a  character  (verses  8—10      I'our  things 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXVIl. 


not  found  in  a  hypocrite  or  godless  person, 
but  whicn  Job  possessed — (1)  A  p^ooa  hope. 
(2)  A  hearing  with  God.  (3)  A  holy  joy  in 
God  Himself.     (4)  A  heart  always  to  pray. 

1.  The  hope  of  the  ungodly,  however  pros- 
perous in  this  world,  doomed  to  disappoint- 
ment.  Verse  8. — "For  what  is  the  hope  of  the 
hypocrite  (or  godless  person),  though  he 
have  gained  (or,  'when  God  cuts  him  off,* 
as  in  ch.  vi.  9 ;  Is.  xxxviii.  12),  when  God 
takes  away  (or  draws  forth)  his  soul  ? " 
The  hope  of  the  prosperous  hypocrite 
doomed  to  perish.  Riches  profit  not  in  the 
day  of  wrath.  The  sinner  may  live  to  do 
evil  "  a  hundred  times,"  but  must,  if  impeni- 
tent, perish  in  the  end.  Tiie  rich  fool  in 
the  Gospel  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  his  pros- 
perity, and  in  the  height  of  his  hope.  Dives 
taken  from  his  sumptuous  table,  to  cry  in 
hell  for  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  his  tongue. 
The  Saviour's  problem  for  a  worldly  man, — 
What  shall  a  man  be  profited  if  he  shall  gain 
the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul? 
(Matt.  xvi.  26).  Solon's  maxim  not  far  from 
the  truth, — Call  no  man  happy  till  his  death. 
Observe — (1)  Our  course  of  life  to  be  con- 
stantly viewed  in  the  light  of  eternity  and  a 
dying  bed. 

"  Thrones  will  then  be  toys, 

And  earth  and  skies  seem  dust  upon  the 
scales." 

(2)  A  man  is  happy  according  to  his  cha- 
racter rather  than  his  condition.  (3)  The 
text  an  emphatic  testimony  to  a  future  Ife. 
But  for  this,  the  case  of  the  prosperous 
wicked  might  have  the  best  of  it.  If  in 
this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  then 
are  we  of  all  men  most  miserable  (1  Cor.  xv. 
19).  (4)  A  prosperous  life  often  suddenly 
cut  short  by  the  stroke  of  deatli.  Life  in 
God's  hands.  The  thread  cut  off  at  His 
pleasure.  (5)  The  soul  of  the  ungodly  man 
forced  to  quit  the  body ;  that  of  the  godly 
gladly  departs  from  it.  The  wicked  is  driven 
away  in  his  death.  Body  and  soul  must 
part ;  the  question  is,  how  ?  (6)  That  hope 
only  worth  having  that  looks  beyond  the 
grave.  "He  builds  too  low  that  builds 
beneath  the  skies."  (7)  The  gain  of  the 
world  a  poor  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the 
soul.  (8)  Awful  condition  for  a  man  to  be 
suddenly  called  into  eternity  in  the  midst  of 
his  earthly  enjoyments,  and  unprepared. 

"How  shocking  must  thy  summons  be,  O 

death, 
To  him  who  is  at  ease  in  his  possessions  ! 
Who,  counting  on  long  years  of  pleasure 

here, 
Is   quite    un furnish 'd    for  that   world    to 

come." 

(9)  Gold  able  to  procure  entrance  anywhere 
but  into  the  kingdom  of  God.     (10)  True 
wisdom  1o  ask,  What  is  mv  hope  in  the  event 
11—2 


of  a  sudden  death  P  Header,  what  is  yours? 
Only  faith  in  Christ's  blood  and  righteous- 
ness, confirined  by  a  life  of  love  towards  Gf)d 
and  men,  the  only  sure  foundation  of  a  good 
hope.  Christ  our  hope.  Such  hope  the 
anchor  of  the  soul  amid  the  storms  of  life 
and  "  the  swellings  of  Jordan." 

2.  The  prayer  of  the  ungodly  unheard  in 
the  time  of  trouble.  Verse  9 — "  Will  God 
hear  his  cry,  when  trouble  cometh  upon 
him  ?  "  Two  questions  implied — (1)  Will  the 
ungodly  pray  in  time  of  trouble  P  (2)  Will 
God  hear  him  if  he  does  P  A  heart  to  pray 
not  always  found  in  time  of  trouble.  The 
spirit  to  pray  a  gift  from  God.  Aprayerless 
life  often  followed  by  a  prayerless  death. 
Prayer,  even  if  offered,  in  time  of  trouble  not 
always  heard  (Prov.  i.  24 — 28;  Is.  i.  15). 
Acceptable  prayer  implies  both  repentance 
and  faith.  Botli  wanting  in  the  prayer  of 
the  ungodly  and  the  hypocrite.  An  accept- 
able time  when  God  may  be  found  and  prayer 
heard; — and  the  contrary.  A  time  when 
knocking  at  mercy's  gate  will  be  followed  by 
no  opening  (Matt.  xxv.  11,  12).  He  who 
will  not  pray  when  he  might,  perhaps  cannot 
pray  when  he  would,  or  is  unheard  when  he 
does.  To  shut  the  door  of  our  heart  in 
God's  face,  is  the  way  to  have  the  door  of 
his  heaven  shwt  in  ours.  Observe — (1)  A 
time  of  trouble  sure  sooner  or  later  to  come 
upon  each  one.  (2)  To  pray  in  the  time  oj 
trouble  the  language  of  nature.  So  the  heathen 
sailors  in  the  ship  with  Jonah  (Jon.  i.  5,  6). 
In  ordinary  circumstances  the  Athenians 
prayed  to  their  false  deities,  but  in  public 
distress  to  "the  unknown  God"  (3)  The 
ungodly  either  not  able  to  pray  in  time  of 
trouble,  or  not  heard  if  they  do.  (4)  The 
mark  of  a  hypocrite  to  pray  only  when  trouble 
comes  upon  him. 

3.  The  ungodly   has   no  delight  in   God, 
(Verse  10)— "Will  he  delight  himself  in  the 
Almighty?"    The  ungodly  would  have  God's V\| 
gifts,  but  not  Himself ;  thegodly  would  rather  jl  I 
have  God  than  His  2;ifts.     A  mark  of  grace 

to  delight  oneself  in  God.  An  unholy  heart 
unable  to  delight  in  a  holy  God. 

Delight  in  God. 

(1)  -^  leading  part  in  true  piety.  God 
desires  not  that  we  serve  Him  as  a  slave,  but 
that  we  delight  in  Him  as  a  child. 

(2)  God  Himself  the  chief  good  to  an 
intelligent  creature.  Everything  in  Him  for 
such  a  creature  to  delight  in.  The  source 
and  centre  of  all  good.  "  Of  all  Thy  gifts 
Thyself  the  crown."  All  the  beauty,  love- 
liness, and  sweetness  in  the  creature,  in 
comparison  wiih  what  is  in  God,  only  a  drop 
compared  with  the  ocean.  Not  to  delight  in 
God  is  either  not  to  know  Him  or  to  be 

163 


CHAP.  XXVII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  JOB, 


under  the  power  of  a  nature  that  hates  Hina. 
Tbey  that  know  Him  not  only  trust  but 
delight  in  Him.  The  greatest  misery,  as 
well  as  sin,  of  an  intelligent  creature,  not  to 
delight  in  God.  Not  to  delight  in  God  is 
either  to  be  ignorant  of  Him,  or  to  declare 
that  we  see  nothing  in  Him  to  delight  in.  If 
God,  only  as  God,  is  such  as  to  be  supremely 
delighted  in  by  unfallen  intelligent  creatures, 
much  more  is  He,  as  a  God  in  Christ,  to  be 
delighted  in  by  fallen  ones. 

(3)  God  the  delight  of  heaven.  Hence  no 
unregenerate  or  unholy  person  able  to  enter, 
or  find  enjoyment  there  if  he  could.  To  de- 
light in  God  hereafter,  we  must  first  learn  to 
dehght  in  Him  here. 

(4)  Delight  in  the  creature  only  right  when 
we  first  delight  supremely  in  God.  Delight 
in  the  creature  instead  of  God,  not  only 
idolatry  but  insult. 

(5)  ^  sinner  8  greatest  delight  often  his 
greatest  sin.  The  greater  the  delight  in  the 
creature  to  the  rejection  of  God,  the  deeper 
the  idolatry  and  the  fouler  the  insult. 

(6)  A  man's  character  proclaimed  by  what 
he  delights  in.  The  sow  delights  in  the  mire, 
the  crow  in  carrion,  the  cock  in  the  dunghill, 
and  the  worm  in  corruption.  The  deligtit  of 
the  holy,  in  God  ;  that  of  the  unholy,  in  the 
creature.  Important  question — JFhut  do 
I  delight  in  ?    God,  or  the  creature  ? 

(7)  Delight  in  God  not  affected  by  outward 
circumstances.  Often  highest  when  outward 
circumstances  are  lowest. 

(8)  The  mark  of  a  godly  man,  that,  when  in 
deepest  affliction^  he  can  delight  himself  in 
God.  Job's  case.  Here  apparently  ap- 
pealed to  by  Him  as  a  proof  of  the  sincerity 
of  his  piety. 

4.  The  prayers  of  the  ungodly  are  only 
casual  and  temporary.  *'  Will  he  always  call 
upon  GodP" 

Persevering  Prayer. 

1.  The  ungodly  man  prays  in  sickness  and 
trouble,  but  not  in  health  and  prosperity. 
Eitful  prayers  like  smoke  driven  aside  by  the 
wind  and  never  reaching  the  clouds.  An- 
swers to  prayer  often  withheld  to  prove  its 
faith  and  sincerity.  Some  pray  only  in  the 
sunshine,  others  only  in  the  storm;  the 
believer  prays  always. 

2.  The  ungodly  man's  prayers  not  per- 
severed in.  Prayer,  wanting  the  wings  of 
faith,  soon  tires  and  comes  to  the  ground. 
Prayer  proves  its  sincerity  by  it  s  continuance. 
Pallen  nature  prays ;  but  only  grace  prays 
always.  The  hypocrite  and  unbeliever  draws 
in  his  hand  if  not  immediat  ely  filled.  Many 
lose  their  prayers  by  not  drawing  the  how 
sufficiently  for  the  discharge  of  the  arrow. 
Suceesiiful    prayer    a   bolt    shot    up    into 

164 


heaven.  The  believer  stands  knocking  at 
God's  door,  and  waiting  His  own  time  of 
opening.  Christ  taught  His  disciples  always 
to  pray,  and  not  "to  faint"  (Luke  xviii.  1). 
Answers  only  promised  to  persevering 
prayer.  He  who  prays  successfully  finds 
enjoyment  in  the  exercise  which  brings 
him  back  to  it.  A  man's  religion  which 
is  only  by  fits  and  starts  wants  the  stamp 
of  divinity.  Prayer,  without  perseverance, 
not  current  at  the  gate  of  heaven. 

Job  able  to  stand  both  tests.  Prayed 
both  in  prosperity  and  adversity,  and  per- 
severed in  his  prayers. 

IV.  Declares  his  faith  in  the  recti- 
tude of  the  Divine  government, 

1 .  Speak  as  one  conscious  of  greater  illu- 
mination than  his  pretentious  friends,  Verse 
11. — **I  will  teach  you  by  the  hand  of  God 
(or,  concerning  God's  dealings  with  me  n ; 
and  what  is  with  the  almighty  (His  purposes 
and  procedure  in  regard  to  evil  doers)  1  wUi 
not  conceal."  Observe  —  Light  given  in 
order  to  be  communicated.  A  good  man  con- 
stituted by  God  himself  a  teacher  of  others. 
Made  a  light  in  the  world  to  hold  forth  the 
word  of  life  (Phil.  ii.  15,  16).  Truth  not  to 
be  concealed  from  selfish  love  of  ease  or 
slavish  fear  of  consequences. 

2.  Yet  appeals  to  their  own  observation, 
and  professes  only  to  communicate  facts 
with  which  they  themselves  were  already 
acquainted.  Verse  12.  —  "Behold,  all  ye 
yourselves  have  seen  it.'*  His  friends  had 
already  referred  to  the  facts,  but  failed  to 
make  a  right  application  of  them.  Their 
error  not  in  respect  to  the  facts,  but  the  use 
of  them;  not  in  asserting  that  hjpocrites 
and  oppressors  sooner  or  later  sutler  the 
punishment  of  their  sins,  but  that  Job,  who 
was  now  sufi'ering  apparently  at  the  hand  of 
God,  must  be  one  ot  them.  Job  asserts  the 
fact,  but  denies  the  inference.  Maintains 
that  all  oppressors  and  bad  men,  sooner 
or  later,  suffer  j  but  denies — (1)  That  tiiere- 
fore  all  oppressors  and  bad  men  suffer  in 
this  life.  (2)  That  all  that  suffer  are  op- 
pressors and  bad  men.  Observe — (i; 
Hearers  themselves  to  be  often,  appealed  to 
for  the  truth  of  what  is  asserted.      Appeals 

to  the  hearers'  own  observation  and  experi- 
ence often  the  most  convincing  argument. 
Hearers  frequently  do  not  so  much  require 
the  knowledge  of  truths  or  facts,  as  the  right 
use  and  application  of  them.  (2)  The  deal- 
ings of  Divine  Providence  open  to  men's 
view,  and  calling  for  observation  and  reflec- 
tion. 

3.  Hence  reprover  them  for  their  vain  and 
useless  arguments.  "  Why  then  are  ye  thus 
altogether  vain?"  (or  "babble  forth  such 
vanities  '*  P)     Their  vanity — (1)  In  address- 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXVII. 


iiig  Job  aa  if  ignorant  of,  or  absolutely 
denying,  the  facts  they  so  much  insisted  on 
in  regard  to  tlie  fate  of  the  ungodly.  (2) 
In  erroneously  arguing  from  those  facts  that 
Job,  who  sufferea  so  much,  must  be  a  bad 
man.  That  Job  could  maintain  the  facts 
as  decidedly  as  themselves,  a  proof — (1) 
That  he  was  not  the  wicked  man  they  had 
represented  him  to  be.  (2)  That  he  needed 
not  their  instruction  on  the  subject.  (3) 
That  they  had  only  been  vainly  insisting  on 
things  which  he  himself  admitted.  (4)  That 
they  had  been  one-sided  in  their  views  and  re- 
presentations. They  had,  therefore,  poured 
forth  their  eloquence,  whether  original  or 
second-hand,  only  "  as  one  that  beateth  the 
air."  (i)  Preachers  to  see  that  in  their 
discourses  they  are  aiming  at  a  right  object, 
and  employing  right  arguments  in  support 
of  it.  (2)  Preachers  not  to  dwell  on  known 
and  admitted  truths  without  shewing  the 
right  use  and  application  of  them.  Not 
enough  to  repeat  that  all  who  believe  and 
come  to  Christ  will  be  saved,  but  to  en- 
deavour to  shew  what  it  is  to  believe  and 
come  to  Him,  and  how  people  may  do  so. 
Not  sufficient  to  insist  that  Christ  died  for 
sinners,  but  to  show  how  a  man  obtains  a 
saving  interest  in  His  death. 

V.  Describes  the  lot  of  oppressors  and 
of  the  prosperous  ungodly.  Verse  13. — 
"This  is  the  portion  of  wicked  men  with 
God,  and  the  heritage  of  oppressors  which 
they  shall  receive  of  the  Almighty."  Seems 
to  take  up  the  language  of  Zophar  (ch.  xx. 
29).  Observe — (1)  Faith  and  piety  look 
to  the  end.  (2)  Each  man's  destiny  faith- 
fully meted  out  by  the  Almighty  according 
to  his  character  and  conduct.  (3).  The  main 
question  for  a  man — what  shall  I  receive 
at  the  hands  of  the  Almighty  P  Man  kills  the 
body ;  but  the  soul  still  in  God's  hands. 

The  lot  of  the  ungodly  described  in  refer- 
ence to — 

1.  'Yheix  children.  Versel4. — "If  his  child- 
ren be  multiplied  (or  become  great — a  mark 
of  propriety),  it  is  for  the  sword  (or  they  are 
doomed  to  the  sword — shall  fall  in  the  siege 
or  battle  as  threatened,  Hos.  ix.  13),  and 
his  offspring  shall  not  be  satisfied  with 
bread."  Misery  often  entailed  on  children 
by  tiieir  parents'  sin,  an  acknowledged  fact. 
'*  The  seed  of  evil  doers  shall  never  be  re- 
nowned"— a  standing  maxim.  Children 
usually  serve  themselves  heirs  of  their  parents' 
suffermgs  by  practising  their  parents'  sins. 
Effects  of  the  sins  of  parents  often  in  this 
world  more  visible  in  the  children  than  in 
themselves.  Proof  of  a  judgment  to  come 
and  a  future  life.  Effects  from  parents'  sins, 
suffered  by  children  in  this  life,  may  be  over- 
ruled by  a  gracious  Providence  for  their 


benefit  in  the  next.  Contrast  the  text  with 
what  is  stated  of  the  cliildren  of  the  godly 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  25,  26).  Job's  children  neither 
perished  by  the  sword  nor  suffered  want  of 
bread.  Verse  15. — "Those  that  remain  of 
him  (escaping?  the  sword^  shall  be  buried  in 
death  (immediately  on  their  death  as  in  a  time 
of  pestilence,  or  buried  by  the  pestilence  as 
the  cause  of  their  death) ;  and  his  (or  their) 
widows  shall  not  weep "  (as  in  an  ordinary 
case  of  burial,  the  want  of  such  funeral 
lamentation  being  with  Orientals  a  grievous 
misfortune — "  the  burial  of  an  ass,"  Jer. 
xxii.  18,  19). 

2.  Th&iv possessions.  Verse  16. — "Though 
he  heap  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  prepare 
raiment  (another  form  of  Oriental  ricnes)  as 
the  clay;  He  may  prepare  it,  but  the  just 
shall  put  it  on,  and  the  innocent  shall  divide 
the  silver."  The  answer  to  the  question  put 
to  the  rich  fool :  "  Then  whose  shall  those 
things  be  which  thou  hast  provided?" 
(Luke  xii.  20).  The  sinner's  wages  earned 
to  be  put  into  a  bag  with  holes.  Himself 
often  snatched  away  by  death  when  expect- 
ing to  enjoy  his  acquired  possessions.  In 
the  Providence  of  God  a  good  man  often 
made  to  reap  the  benefit  of  a  bad  man's 
gains.  Insecurity  and  transitoriness  the 
characteristics  of  the  prosperous  sinner's 
earthly  goods.  Verse  1 8. — "  He  buildeth  his 
house  as  the  moth  (which  is  easily  shaken 
out  of  the  garment  where  it  has  made  its 
nest,  and  which  often  devours  its  own 
house),  and  as  a  booth  (or  hut)  which  the 
keeper  [of  a  vineyard]  maketh  "  (intended 
only  to  last  for  the  season,  and  to  be  taken 
down  as  soon  the  fruit  is  gathered). 

3.  His  person.  He  is  often — (1)  Carried 
off  by  a  sudden  and  unexpected  death.  Verse 
19.— "The  rich  man  shall  lie  down  [at 
night  on  his  bed  of  rest],  but  he  shall  not 
be  gathered  (or,  according  to  another  read- 
ing, '  he  shall  not  do  so  any  more,' — he  lies 
down  for  the  last  time) ;  he  openeth  his  eyes 
(or,  as  quickly  as  *  one  opens  one's  eyes  '— 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye)  and  he  is  not " 
(is  no  more  in  this  world,  having  been 
carried  often  by  a  sudden  death  durmg  the 
night).  Exemplified  in  the  rich  fool  of  the 
Gospel,  and  perhaps  forming  the  foundation 
of  the  Saviour's  illustration:  "This  night 
thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee "  (Luke 
xii.  20).  (2)  Seized  with  sudden  fear  of 
approaching  judgment.  Verse  20. — "  Terrors 
take  hold  on  him  as  waters  (suddenly  over- 
whelming him  like  a  mountain -torrent  rush- 
ing down  with  widespread  ruin)  ;  a  tempest 
slealeth  him  away  in  the  night  (some  judg- 
ment carrying  him  away  like  a  sudden  tor- 
nado, never  dreaming  of  such  an  event).  The 
east  wind  (the  most  vehement  and  destructive 
in  Oriental  countries)  carrieth  him  away,  and 

165 


CHAP.   XXVIII. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


he  departeth  (no  more  to  be  seen),  and  as  a 
storm  liurleth  him  out  of  his  place  (his  fancied 
paradise,  where  he  expected  to  remain,  and 
long  enjoy  his  accumulated  wealth.  (3) 
Visited  with  calamity  from  wJiich  he  is  unable 
to  escape.  Verse  22. — **Eor  God  shall  cast 
[His  judgments]  upon  him,  and  not  spare; 
he  would  fain  nee  out  of  His  hand."  Un- 
sparing sin  prepares  for  unsparing  judgment. 
Escape  often  sought  only  when  too  late.  "  The 
prudent  foreseeth  the  evil  and  hideth  him- 
self ;  the  foolish  passeth  on  and  is  punished." 
"A  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
living  God."  (4)  Made  the  object  of  execration 
and  abhorrence  to  his  fellow-men.  Verse  23.— 
•*  Men  shall  clap  their  hands  at  him  (in 
abhorrence  of  his  character  and  joy  at  his 
fall),  and  shall  hiss  him  out  of  his  place  " 
(as  an  object  of  execration  and  a  nuisance 


to  society).  The  most  prosperous  evil-doer 
made  one  day  "  an  abhorrence  to  all  flesh." 
Some  to  leave  their  graves  unto  everlasting 
lite ;  some  "  to  shame  and  everlasting  con* 
tempt "  (^Dan.  xii.  2 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  24-).  Observe — 
l^i.)  Power  of  faith  and  a  good  conscience 
to  enable  a  man,  while  deeply  suffering  both 
outwardly  and  inwardly,  cahnly  to  contem- 
plate and  boldly  to  declare  the  consequences 
of  a  life  of  sin.  (ii.)  A  godly  man,  however 
tried  and  afflicted,  takes  the  part  of  God 
against  evil-doers,  liowever  prosperous  in  this 
world,  (iii.)  Terrible  consequences,  sooner 
or  later,  to  a  life  of  worldliness  and  ungodli- 
ness, (iv.)  The  tinsel  of  worldly  prosperity 
to  be  one  day  stripped  off  from  tne  godless 
possessor  of  it.  (v.)  Awful  madness  to 
peril  the  destinies  of  eternity  for  the  mo- 
mentarj^  pleasures  of  time. 


CHAPTEE   XXVm. 
JOB'S  DESCANT  ON  TRUE  WISDOM. 


The  place  occupied  by  this  chapter  one 
peculiar  to  itself.  Its  connection  with  the 
preceding  or  succeeding  portions  of  the  book 
by  no  means  obvious.  Appears  scarcely  to 
form  a  part  of  the  dialogue.  Seems,  as  it 
stands  before  us,  to  have  been  delivered  by 
Job  during  a  lull  in  the  controversy.  Forms 
a  poetical  descant  on  the  praises  of  true 
wisdom.  Job  left  alone  in  the  field,  and 
now  in  a  much  calmer  mood,  in  circum- 
stances to  enter  on  such  a  subject.  Perhaps 
led  to  it  by  what  he  had  stated  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter  in  regard  to  the  wicked,  as 
well  as  by  his  own  affliction  and  the  inabiltiy 
of  his  friends  and  himself  to  account  for  it. 
Strongly  expresses  his  approbation  of  true 
piety,  and  so  affirms  his  own  character. 
Himself  an  exemplification  of  his  own 
definition  of  true  wisdom.  That  definition 
the  character  secretly  given  him  by  God, 
and  which  Job  was  resolved  at  all  hazards  to 
hold  fast.  The  section  thus  appears  to  be 
introduced  by  the  author  to  give  prominence 
to  Job's  real  character.  Probably  indicates 
the  author's  design  in  the  book  to  give  an 
exhibition  of  the  nature  of  true  wisdom. 
Has  a  special  importance  in  connecting  the 
book  with  other  parts  of  Scripture,  especially 
with  the  writings  of  David  and  Solomon, 
and  the  wise  men  of  that  period  (1  Kings  iv. 
30,  31),  and,  in  the  New  Testament,  with 
those  especially  of  Paul  and  James  (1  Cor. 
xiii. ;  James  i.  3).  Its  similarity  to  passages 
in  the  Proverbs  at  once  obvious,  especially  to 
chapters  i.,  iii.,  viii.  The  last  verse  of  the 
section,  which  gives  the  key  of  the  whole, 
almost  an  echo  of  Ps.  cxi.  10  ;  Prov.  i.  7; 
and  Prov.  ix.  10.  Perhaps  an  indication  thus 
afforded  of  the  period  of  the  composition  of 

1% 


the  book,  as  one  when  tie  attention  of 
thoughtful  pious  men  was  especially  directed 
to  the  subject  of  true  wisdom.  The  section 
exhibits — (1)  The  inability  of  man,  by  his 
own  unaided  powers,  either  to  discover  or 
acquire  true  wisdom.  (2)  The  supreme 
excellence  of  that  wisdom.  (3)  Its  origin 
and  discovery  with  God  Himself,  the  Creator 
of  all  things.  (4)  Its  nature,  as  consisting 
of  true  piety — the  fear  of  God  and  the  con- 
sequent departing  from  all  evil. 

This  chapter,  the  oldest  and  finest  piece  of 
natural  history  in  the  world  [Adam  Clarke), 
Indicates  Job  to  have  lived  in  a  period  of 
considerable  advancement  in  civilization. — 
Barnes, 

True  Wisdom. 

I.  Man  nnable,  by  his  own  unaided 
powers,  either  to  discover  or  acquire  it. 

Wisdom  not  to  be  discovered  or  obtained 
like  metals  or  gems.  These  hid  in  the 
bowels  of  the  earth,  but  discovered  and 
obtained  by  human  art  and  industry. 
(Verse  1)  —  "Surely  (or,  *for  indeed* 
the  speaker  being  about  to  show  the  rarity 
and  excellence  of  true  wisdom  as  contrasted 
with  what  he  had  said  of  the  prosperous 
ungodly)  there  is  a  vein  (or  *  outlet,'  Margin^ 
'  mine ')  for  the  silver,  and  a  place  foJ*  gold 
where  they  fine  it  "  (or,  '*  which  they  smelt," 
to  render  it  fit  for  the  purposes  of  life). 
Gold  formerly  found  in  Arabia,  Abundant 
in  Judaea  in  the  time  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  x. 
12,  14,  15).  The  art  of  extracting  and 
refining  it  learned  at  an  early  period  of  the 
world.  Mortals  soon  became  metallaries. 
Trajpp.    The  discovery  and  earliest  manu- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP,  xxvin. 


facture  of  metals  apparently  ascribed  to  the 
descendants  of  Cam  (Gen.  iv.  22).  The 
search  for  gold  and  silver  poetically  ascribed 
by  Mnton  to  the  suggestion  of  Mammon,  a 
fallen  angel  whose  name  denotes  "  riches :  *' 
"  By  him  first 

Men  also,  and  by  his  suggestion  taught, 

Ransack'd  the  centre,   and   with   impious 
hands 

Rifled  the  bowels  of  their  mother  earth, 

For  treasures  better  hfd." 

According  to  Pliny,  gold  first  found  by 
Cadmus,  the  Phoenician.  According  to 
Herodotus,  first  coined  into  money  by  the 
Syrians.  Verse  2. — "  Iron  is  taken  out  of  the 
earth,  and  brass  (or  *  copper ')  is  molten 
out  of  [and  so  separated  from]  the  stone. 
He  (the  miner  or  metallurgist,  in  searching 
for  and  producing  these  metals  from  tlie 
earth)  setteth  an  end  to  darkness  [by  sinking 
shafts,  and,  with  the  aid  of  torches,  exploring 
mines],  and  searcheth  out  all  perfection  (or, 
*  searcheth  out  with  the  utmost  thorough- 
ness') the  stones  of  darkness  (lying  hid 
beneath  the  earth's  surface),  and  the  shadow 
of  death"  (or  places  of  deepest  darkness). 
Tubal-Cain,  probably  identical  with  the  Vulcan 
of  Greek  and  Roman  mytliology,  represented 
by  Moses  as  the  first  artificer  in  brass  and 
iron  (Gen.  iv.  22).  The  Chalybes,  or  Cyclops, 
said  by  Pliny  to  be  the  discoverers  and 
earliest  workers  of  these  metals.  Brass  and 
iron  said  by  Moses  to  be  found  in  the  rocky 
mountains  of  Palestine  (Deut.  viii.  9).  Iron 
appointed  by  Lycurgus  to  be  used  by  the 
Spartans  for  money  instead  of  gold,  to  pre- 
vent its  accumulation.  Verse  4. — "  The  flood 
breaketh  out  Iroin  the  inhabitant  (or,  'he' 
[the  miner]  openeth  a  channel  or  shaft  away 
from  the  liabitations  of  men, — or,  'from  the 
foot  of  the  mountain ')  ;  even  the  waters 
forgotten  of  the  foot  (or,  *  the  men  for- 
gotten of  the  foot,'  i.e.y  descending  to 
places  in  the  mine  untrodden  by  human 
or  any  other  feet,  —  nothing  in  the 
Hebrew  text  either  for  waters  or  men) : 
they  are  dried  up,  they  are  gone  away  from 
men  (or,  *  they  [the  miners]  are  suspended,' 
viz.^  by  ropes  from  the  mouth  of  the  mine  ; 
'they  swing  away  from  men'  [who  remain 
above  on  tlie  surface]).  As  for  the  earth, 
out  of  it  Cometh  bread  (or  bread-corn),  and 
under  it  (or  *  underneath,'  or  *  its  lower 
parts ')  is  turned  up  as  it  were  fire  (com- 
bustible materials,  as  sulphur,  bitumen, 
naphtha,  coal  (Gen.  xiv.  10) ;  or  perhaps 
precious  stones  glowing  like  fire  (Ezek. 
xxviii.  14).  Note  —  Underground  warmth, 
boiling  springs,  and  red-hot  mud,  are  be- 
lieved to  prove  that  fire  still  exists  within 
the  globe.-^"The  stones  of  it  are  the  place  (or 
bed)  of  sapphires,  and  it  hath  [belonging  to 
it]  the  dust  of  gold"  ('clods  or  lumps  of 


gold' — MargiUy  * ^o\di  ore*).  There  is  (or 
'it  is,'  viz.  the  mine)  a  path  wliich  no  fowl 
[however  keen-sighted]  knowetli,  and  which 
the  vulture's  eye  hath  not  seen.  The  lion's 
whelps  (or,  'the  proud  wild  beasts,'  in  their 
search  for  prey)  have  not  trodden  it,  nor  the 
fierce  lion  passed  by  it "  [being  deep  below 
the  surface  of  the  earth].  Yet  even  there 
man's  skill  and  enterprise  find  a  way.  Verse 
y. — "  He  [the  miner]  putteth  forth  his  hand 
upon  the  rock  {Heb.^  '  the  flinty  rocK,'  viz. 
with  a  view  to  its  excavation) ;  he  overturneth 
the  mountains  by  the  roots  [by  means  of 
wedges  and  hammers,  acid  liquids,  or,  as  in 
more  modern  times,  by  gunpowder — over- 
coming every  obstacle  that  stands  in  his 
way].  He  cutteth  out  rivers  (or  'channels') 
among  the  rocks  [in  searching  for  the  pre- 
cious metals  or  still  more  precious  gems] ; 
and  his  eye  [with  the  aid  of  torches]  seeth 
every  precious  thing  [whether  metal  or  gem, 
contained  in  those  dark  recesses].  He 
bindeth  the  floods  from  overflowing  (stops 
or  dams  up  the  water  to  prevent  them  from 
trickling  and  overflowing  the  mine) ;  and  the 
thing  that  is  hid  (the  metals  or  gems  he  is 
in  quest  of)  bringeth  he  forth  to  light." 
Observe — 

1.  The  remarkable  provision  of  Divine 
goodness  and  wisdom  in  making  the  earth 
itself  a  storehouse  of  substances  that  should 
contribute  so  largely  to  the  comfort ^  gratifica' 
tion,  and  improvement  of  the  human  race.  For 
example,  iron  and  coal,  not  to  speak  of  gold, 
silver,  and  precious  stones.  Beds  of  coal, 
many  feet  thick,  and  extending  over  an  area 
of  many  hundreds  of  miles,  stored  up  far 
below  the  earth's  surface.  These  beds  the 
remains  of  ancient  forests,  and  the  result  of 
changes  on  what  was  the  earth's  surface 
many  thousand  years  ago.  Iron,  so  import- 
ant for  man's  use  and  progress  in  the  arts  of 
civilized  life,  largely  embedded  in  rocks, 
slowly  formed  thousands  of  years  before 
man  was  upon  the  earth.  Remarkable,  too, 
tiiat  as  these  beds  of  iron-stone  required  fire 
both  for  the  extraction  and  working  of  the 
metal,  they  are  generally  found  in  close  proxi- 
mity to  beds  of  coal,  as  well  as  to  sulphur 
which  facilitates  its  production. 

2.  Man's  art  and  industry  necessary  to  the 
acquisition  and  use  of  those  materials  which 
God  has  stored  up  in  the  earth  for  his  benefit. 
Man  intended  for  work,  and  so  to  be  a  kind 
of  fellow-worker  with  his  Creator.  The 
materials  provided  for  him  by  God,  but,  in 
order  to  his  enjoyment  and  use  of  them, 
requiring  to  be  discovered,  obtained,  and 
elaborated  by  himself  through  the  intellect 
with  which  God  has  endowea  him.  Man  not 
only  to  exercise  his  art  and  industry  on  the 
productions  of  the  earth's  surface  in  order 
to  obtain  his  daily  food,  but  also  on  what  lies 

167 


CHAP.   XXYin. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB, 


beneath  it  for  the  purposes  of  civilized  life. 
in  the  one  case,  as  well  as  the  other,  man 
must  eat  his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow. 

3.  Remarkable  adaptation  between  the  pro- 
ductions and  contents  of  the  earthy  and  the 
faculties  given  to  man  for  their  discovery  and 
use.  Paculties  bestowed  on  man  to  fit  hira 
for  subduing  the  earth  and  turning  its  trea- 
sures to  his  advantage.  The  art  and  industry 
of  the  miner  and  metallurgist  from  the  same 
Creator  as  the  minerals  on  which  he  works. 
The  ant  operates  on  his  little  hill ;  the  bee 
on  its  comb ;  the  beaver  on  his  dam ;  man 
on  tlie  earth  itself,  with  all  that  it  contains. 
"  His  God  doth  instruct  him  to  discretion, 
and  doth  teach  him"  (Isaiah  xxviii.  26), 
Human  intelligence  and  skill  a  faint  reflection 
of  that  wisdom  with  which  God  made  the 
world,  and  part  of  that  Divine  image  in 
which  man  was  created.  "  This  also  cometh 
forth  from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  who  is  won- 
derful in  counsel  and  excellent  in  working  " 
(Isaiah  xxviii.  29). 

4.  MarCs  industry  in  searching  for  the 
precious  metals  an  example  of  the  earnestness 
and  perseverance  with  which  he  should  seek  for 
the  better  and  more  enduring  riches.  Trea- 
sures exist  for  man,  compared  with  which  all 
earthly  possessions  are  but  as  the  dust  of  the 
balance.  Heavenly  wisdom,  in  which  are 
durable  riches  and  unending  happiness,  to 
be  souglit  for  as  silver,  and  to  be  searched 
for  as  for  hid  treasures  (Prov.  ii.  4).  The 
earnestness  of  the  miner,  with  much  less  toil, 
under  the  direction  afforded  by  the  Gospel, 
sufficient  to  put  a  man  in  speedy  possession 
of  gold  which  no  thief  can  steal,  and  of  which 
not  even  death  itself  can  deprive  him. 
Eternal  riches  close  at  hand  wherever  the 
Gospel  is  revealed,  and  awaiting  only  the 
humble  and  earnest  seeker  (Rev.  iii.  18 ; 
Matt.  xiii.  44). 

II.  The  supreme  ralne  and  excel- 
lence of  true  wisdom.  Verses  12 — 19. — 
"But  where  shall  wisdom  be  found?  and 
where  is  the  place  of  understanding  [where 
it  may  be  found  like  gold  and  silver]  r  Man 
knoweth  not  the  price  thereof,  neither  is  it 
found  in  the  land  of  the  living  (not  only  not  to 
be  discovered  by  the  highest  human  intellect, 
but  not  to  be  purchased  with  anything  on 
earth).  The  depth  (or  abyss — waters  under  the 
earth — perhaps  the  ocean  with  its  *  deep  un- 
fathomed  caves ')  saith.  It  is  not  in  me ;  and 
the  sea  (waters  on  the  earth's  surface)  saith. 
It  is  not  with  me  (nothing  in  eithei  one  or 
the  other  able  either  to  discover  it  to  man 
or  aiford  him  a  price  to  buy  it  with).  I^te — 
The  ocean's  bed  covered  forLundreds  of  miles 
with  beautiful  seaweeds,  and  with  subniarine 
forests  and  jungles  thronged  with  living 
beings.  "  It  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold  (the 
168 


most  precious  and  pure,  1  Kings  vi.  20,  21) : 
neither  shall  silver  be  weighed  (as  in  ancient 
times.  Gen.  xxiii.  16)  for  the  price  thereof. 
It  cannot  be  valued  with  fhe  gold  of  Ophir 
(stamped  gold,  or  the  golden  wedge  or  ingot 
from  the  place  most  distinguished  for  its 
production),  with  the  precious  onyx,  or  the 
sapphire.  The  gold  and  the  crystal  (or 
vases  of  crystal  and  gold)  cannot  equal  it ; 
and  the  exchange  (or  barter  of  it,  according 
to  the  ancient  mode  of  traffic)  shall  not  be 
for  jewels  of  fine  gold  (vessels  or  ornaments 
of  pure  and  massive  go'd,  such  as  have  been 
recently  discovered  in  the  coflBn  of  an  Egyp- 
tian princess  living  in  the  time  of  Joseph, 
nearly  four  thousand  years  ago).  No  men- 
tion shall  be  made  of  coral  (some  costly  gem 
or  natural  production — long  uncertain  what), 
or  of  pearls  (always  held  in  highest  esteem 
among  men.  Matt.  xiii.  45, 46)  ;  for  the  price  of 
wisdom  is  above  rubies.  The  topaz  of  Ethiopia 
shall  not  equal  it ;  neither  shall  it  be  valued 
with  pure  gold."  Gold  so  abundant  in  Job's 
time  and  country,  and  so  variously  employed, 
that  five  kinds  or  forms  of  it  are  mentioned 
in  these  few  verses. 

Similar  language  to  that  of  the  text  in 
reference  to  tlie  excellence  and  preciousness 
of  true  wisdom,  found  in  Prov.  iii.  13 — 15 ; 
iv.  7 ;  viii.  10,  11,  18,  19.  That  exhibited 
in  various  particulars  by  Solomon  in  the 
Book  of  Proverbs,  which  is  only  asserted  by 
the  author  of  Job.  (Compare  Prov.  iii.  16 — 
18  ;  iv.  5—9  ;  viii.  20,  21,  35).  The  supe- 
riority of  Divine  wisdom  or  true  piety  over 
all  earthly  treasures  evinced — 

1.  In  its  intrinsic  excellence.  Other  trea- 
sures only  material,  and  of  the  earth ;  this 
spiritual— a  thing  of  the  soul— as  much 
excelling  material  treasures  as  spirit  excels 
matter,  and  as  moral  and  spiritual  beauty 
excels  material.  Gems  and  gold  adorn  the 
body,  wisdom  and  piety  the  soul.  Those 
beautiful  and  attractive  to  the  eye  of  sense ; 
these  to  the  spiritual  eye,  both  of  God, 
angels,  and  holy  men.  True  wisdom,  or  the 
fear  of  God,  assimilates  us  to  God  Himself, 
the  source  and  model  of  wisdom,  "the  only 
wise  God."  That  which  mainly  constitutes 
the  Divine  image  in  us  (Prov.  iii.  19,  20; 
viii.  22—31;  Col.  iii.  10).  Allies  us  to  all 
holy  beings,  the  unfallen  intelligences  of 
heaven.  Is  to  man  what  creative  and  pro- 
vidential wisdom  is  to  God.  Prepares  us 
for  correct,  satisfying,  and  ever-increasing 
knowledge  of  God  and  of  His  ways  and 
works.  Purifies  the  heart,  sanctifies  the 
will,  and  enlightens  the  understanding. 

2.  In  its  ability  to  afford  true  and  solid 
happiness.  Other  treasures  only  gratify  the 
senses,  or  furnish  the  means  of  gratifying 
them.  This  gives  peace  and  satisfaction  to 
the  soul.     Other  things  unable   to    repel 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CUAP.    XXVIII. 


sickness  and  trouble,  or  to  give  solace 
under  them.  This  acts  like  oil  on  the 
troubled  waters.  Divine  wisdom  like  the 
voice  of  Jesus  to  the  winds  and  waves : 
Peace  be  still.  Her  ways  pleasantness  and 
her  paths  peace.  Delivers  from  the  disturb- 
ing and  destructive  tyranny  of  the  passions. 
Secures  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour, 
which  is  life.  Wisdom  is  a  tree  of  life 
to  every  one  who  lays  hold  of  her.  Gives 
health  to  the  soul,  and  even  cojitributes  to 
that  of  the  body.  Profitable  to  all  things, 
having  the  promise  both  of  the  life  that  now 
is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come. 

3.  In  its  endless  durability.  All  earthly 
treasures  perishable.  Gold  and  gems  soon 
cease  to  delight.  At  most  only  follow  us  to 
the  grave.  Unable,  except  as  rightly  used, 
to  further  our  interests  or  promote  our 
happiness  in  another  world.  Wisdom  or 
true  piety  not  only  accompanies  its  possessor 
to  the  grave,  but  beyond  it.  The  greatest 
of  the  noble  triad — faith,  hope,  and  charity. 
Faith  ultimately  clianged  into  sight,  and 
hope  into  enjojment  ;  charity  or  love, 
another  name  for  wisdom,  lives  on  and  never 
dies.  A  cut  rather  than  a  comfort  in  the 
words  of  Abraham  and  Dives — "Son,  re- 
member that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst 
thy  good  things."  Sad  when  our  good  things 
must  end  with  our  life.  The  excellence  of 
heavenly  wisdom  that  it  not  only  gives  solid 
peace  here,  but  prepares  U3  for  eternal  joy 
hereafter.  Wisdom  not  only  accompanies 
her  children  through  the  chilly  waves  of 
death,  but  takes  them  by  the  hand  on  the 
other  side,  and  introduces  them  into  the 
presence  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  who  is 
wisdom  itself.  True  wisdom,  like  its  Author 
and  Archetype,  everlasting. 

III.  God  Himself  the  author  and 
revealer  of  true  wisdoui  (verses  20 — 
28).  "Whence  then  cometh  wisdom?  and 
where  is  the  place  of  understanding? 
Seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living 
(or  of  every  beast  or  animal),  and  kept  close 
from  the  fowls  of  the  air  (referring  to  verses 
7  and  8).  Destruction  and  death  (the 
regions  of  the  dead  or  under-world,  or  those 
inhabiting  it)  say,  We  have  heard  1  he  fame 
thereof  with  our  ears  "  (only  heard  of  it,  as 
neither  possessing  it  themselves  nor  able  to 
communicate  it  to  others,  but  as  if  approach- 
ing nearer  to  the  knowledge  of  it,  men  often 
having  their  eyes  opened  only  when  it  is  too 
late,  and  regretting  the  loss  of  past  oppor- 
tunities for  obtaining  the  knowledge  and 
possession  of  true  wisdom,  Prov.  v.  11 — 14). 
Observe — (1)  l^hat  of  which  earlier  genera- 
tions only  heard  the  report,  now  clearly  revealed. 
(2)  Sad  to  be  only  hearing  the  fame  of  a 
good  thing  which  can  make  us  happy ^  arid  to 


he  unable  to  obtain  it.  The  case  of  the  lost 
in  another  world;  happily  not  the  case  of 
those  in  this.  The  rich  man  in  hell  ^''  saw 
Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in  his  bosom," 
but  was  unable  to  reach  him.  Verse  23. — 
"  God  understandeth  the  way  thereof  (how  ii 
is  to  be  obtained),  and  He  knoweththe  place 
thereof  (where  it  is  to  be  found  and  in  what 
it  consists).  For  He  looketh  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth,  and  seeth  under  the  whole  heaven  " 
(penetrating  the  universe  with  one  glance  of 
His  omniscient  eye;  therefore  able  to  in- 
struct man  as  to  true  wisdom, — what  is  his 
highest  interest,  and  the  way  to  secure  it). 
God,  however,  not  only  omniscient  and  sur- 
veying all  things,  but  the  all-wise  creator  and 
disposer  of  universal  nature,  and  as  such  the 
fountain  and  model  of  wisdom  to  His  intel- 
ligent creatures.  For  the  same  thought  see 
Prov.  iii.  13—20;  viii.  11~29.  Divine 
wisdom  displayed  in  establishing  the  universe 
with  all  its  mysterious  laws  and  forces, 
assigning  to  each  department  of  nature  its 
bounds  and  operations.  Verse  25. — "To 
make  (while  making  or  about  to  make)  the 
weight  for  the  winds  (giving  due  weight  to 
the  atmospheric  air  when  at  rest — fifteen 
pounds  of  it  pressing  on  every  square  inch 
of  the  earth's  surface — as  well  as  proper 
momentum  to  it  when  in  motion  in  the  form 
of  wind,  through  the  earth's  motion  on  its 
axis,  and  more  especially  through  the  rare- 
faction of  some  parts  of  it  by  the  sun's  heat, 
and  the  rushing  in  of  colder  parts  to  take 
their  place  ;  so  as  to  be  not  only  not  hurtful 
and  destructive  to  the  earth's  inhabitants,  but 
in  many  respects  highly  beneficial  to  them) ; 
and  He  weigheth  the  waters  by  measure" 
(having  at  creation  assigned  their  respec- 
tive quantities  to  land  and  water,  so  that 
there  should  be  sufficient  of  the  latter  for 
the  irrigation  of  the  former,  as  also  to  the 
waters  on  the  earth,  and  those  suspended 
in  the  atmosphere,  whether  as  clouds  or 
invisible  vapour).  Observe — (1)  All  things 
in  nature  arranged  in  exact  measure  and  pro- 
portion^ of  which  chemistry  affords  an 
interesting  example.  (2)  As  wiyids  and 
waters,  so  also  trials  and  afflictions  are 
measured  (Isa.  xxvii.  8).  Verse  26. — "  When 
he  made  a  decree  for  the  rain  (constituting 
those  natural  laws  by  which  it  should  be 
formed  from  the  vapour  exhaled  from  land 
and  sea,  and  should  descend  in  showers 
according  to  the  earth's  requirements),  and 
a  way  for  the  lightning  of  the  thunder  (or 
the  lightning  which  precedes  the  thunder ; 
how  it  should  be  produced  as  the  electric 
flash  which  proceeas  from  t  he  clouds,  when, 
to  restore  the  equilibrium,  the  superabun- 
dant electricity  discliarges  itself  in  passing 
from  one  cloud  to  another,  causing  t|ie 
thunder  to  follow  it,  as  the  report  of  a  gun 

169 


CHAP.  XXVIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


follows  the  flash,  by  the  particles  of  the  rent 
atmosphere  suddenly  striking  together  again 
— electricity,  of  which  that  flash  is  the 
expression,  being  one  of  the  most  mysterious 
forces  in  nature).  Then  (even  when  at  the 
creation  He  prescribed  the  laws  by  which 
external  nature  was  to  be  governed)  did  he 
see  it  (contemplate  this  wisdom  in  its 
excellence  and  suitability  for  man's  welfare 
and  happiness),  and  declare  it  {Margin^ 
•number  it,'  as  carefully  considering  its 
nature  and  results, — take  an  exact  survey  of 
it,  noting  it  as  it  were  in  a  book  for  future 
communication) ;  he  prepared  it  (set  it 
before  him  for  contemplation,  or  established 
it  as  what  should  constitute  mans  true 
wisdom),  yea,  and  searched  it  out  (examined 
it  fully  in  all  its  properties  and  bearings, — 
actions  ascribed  to  God  in  condescension  to 
our  capacity,  in  order  to  indicate  the 
excellence  and  importance  of  the  thing 
spoken  of).  And  unto  man  [as  that  work  of 
His  hands  in  whom  the  image  of  His  own 
essential  wisdom  was  to  be  reflected]  he  said 
[on  the  day  of  his  creation,  eit  her  speaking 
by  an  external  voice  or  writing  it  internally 
on  his  conscience,  in  order  that  he  might 
know  wherein  his  true  interest  lay,  and  what 
was  the  true  wisdom  for  him  as  a  moral  and 
intelligent  creature],  Behold,  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  [not  the  proud  self-sufficient  scrutiny, 
or  even  the  mere  intellectual  study,  of  the 
Divine  operations,  whether  in  creation  or 
providence],  that  is  wisdom  [the  wisdom  for 
him,  as  a  finite  but  moral  and  intelligent 
creature] ;  and  to  depart  from  evil  [not  the 
knowledge  or  examination  of  my  secret  pur- 
poses in  dealing  thus  or  thus  with  any  of  my 
creatures]  is  understanding"  [that  fear  of  the 
Lord  and  departing  from  evil  being  at  the 
same  time  the  best  way  by  which  he  will 
come  to  know  and  understand  why  I  act  as 
I  do  in  my  providential  dispensations].  This 
emphatic,  cardinal,  and  ever  -  outstanding 
statement  introduced  with  a  "Behold,"  as 
indicating — (1)  The  importance  of  it.  (2) 
The  unlikeness  of  it  to  what  proud  man 
mioht  himself  have  conceived.  (3)  The 
backwardness  of  man  to  believe,  learn,  and 
embrace  it.     Observe — 

1 .  All  nature  under  laws  prescribed  by  God 
Himself.  Nature  itself  God's  work.  The 
universe,  with  all  its  laws,  only  the  material 
expression  of  His  being  and  attributes. 
Every  part  formed  and  placed  by  Him  in 
exact  fitness  to  each  other,  and  to  the  whole. 
Those  laws  established  by  Him  at  the  first 
in  infinite  wisdom,  and  preserved  in  their 
operation  according  to  His  own  will  and  for 
liis  own  purposes.  God's  kingdom  a  king- 
dom of  settled  law ;  not  of  chance  or  caprice. 
Hence  the  comfort  and  confidence  of  His 
intelligent   creatui-es.      Men    not    afflicted 

170 


capriciously,  but  in  wisdom.  The  execution  as 
well  as  constitution  of  natural  laws  with  God 
Himself,  who  may  suspend  or  contravene 
them  for  His  own  purposes  as  He  pleases. 

2.  Man  enabled  to  penetrate  far  into  the 
secrets  of  nature  and  the  facts  of  the  universe, 
but  unable  of  himself  to  discover  true  wisdom. 
The  greatest  philosophers  of  antiquity  in  the 
dark  in  regard  to  it.  Professing  themselves 
wise,  they  became  fools.  Man,  like  the  mole, 
does  all  his  works  underground  {Epiphanius). 
Homer  called  all-wise,  and  said  to  know  all 
things  human.  Aristotle,  for  his  soaring 
wisdom,  called  an  eagle  fallen  from  the 
clouds.  Yet  the  greatest  of  Grecian  sages 
professed  they  wanted  other  lights,  and  took 
it  for  granted  the  time  would  come  when 
God  would  impart  a  further  revelation  of  His 
will  to  mankind. 

"  The  first  and  wisest  of  them  all  (Socrates) 

profess'd 
To  know  this  only,  that  he  nothing  knew ; 
The  next  (Plato)  to  fabling  fell  and  smooth 

conceits ; 
A  third  sort  (Pyrrho)  doubted  all  things, 

though  plain  sense ; 
Others  (Aristotle)  in  virtue  placed  felicity, 
But  virtue  joined  with  riches  and  long  life ; 
In  corporal  pleasures   he  (Epicurus),  and 

careless  ease  ; 
The  Stoic  last,  in  philosophic  pride, 
By  him  called  virtue ;   and   his   virtuous 

man, 
Wise,  perfect  in  himself,  and  all  possessing, 
Equal  to  God,  oft  shames  not  to  prefer, 
As  fearing  God  nor  man." 

Paradise  Megained^  Book  iv, 

Jerome  said  to  have  known  all  that  was 
knowable,  yet  one  of  the  most  devoted 
students  of  revelation.  The  greatest  phi- 
losophers in  our  own  or  any  other  country, 
as  Newton,  Faraday,  and  Brewster,  have 
loved  to  sit  with  the  humility  of  a  child  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus,  to  learn  wisdom  out  of  the 
Scriptures  of  truth. 

3.  God  alone  able  to  inform  man  as  to  his 
true  interests.  One  of  the  great  problems 
among  the  sages  of  antiquity,  wherein  lies 
man's  chief  good.  A  question  naturally 
occurring  to  thinking  men.  God  answers  it 
for  man :  "  He  hath  shewed  thee,  O  man, 
what  is  good"  (Micah  vi.  8).  As  great 
diversity  of  opinion  among  ancient  sages 
about  wisdom  as  about  the  chief  good.  V\  ith 
those  of  Chaldsea,  it  was  the  study  of  the 
starry  firmament  and  its  interpretation  as 
declarative  of  the  events  ol  Providence ; 
with  those  of  Arabia,  that  of  the  designs  of 
God  in  His  dealings  with  men  and  the  whole 
system  of  the  Divine  government;  with 
those  of  Egypt,  the  origin  of  the  universe ; 
with  those  of  Greece  and  Rome,  the  nature 
oC  the  Deity,  with  the  problems  of  their  own 


HOMTLTHTW  COMMT.NTAUY:  JOS. 


CHAP.   XXVlfl 


existence  and  of  the  universe  around  them. 
Such  speculations,  apart  from  revealed 
truth,  represented  by  Milton  as  the  employ- 
ment, perhaps  in  part  the  punishment,  of 
some  of  the  fallen  angels. 

"  Others  apart  sat  on  a  hill  retired, 

In  thoughts  more  elevate,  and  reason'd 
high 

Of  Providence,  foreknowledge,  will,  and 
fate  ; 

Fix'd  fate,  free-will,  foreknowledge  abso- 
lute ; 

And  found  no  end,  in  wandering  mazes 
lost. 

Of  good  and  evil  much  they  argued  then, 

Of  happiness  and  final  misery, 

Passion  and  apathy,  and  glory  and  shame ; 

Vain  wisdom  all,  and  false  philosophy." 

In  opposition  to  all  this,  God  Himself  de- 
clares what  is  the  true  wisdom  for  man, — 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  as  its  consequence, 
to  depart  from  evil.  This  prescribed  by 
God  to  man  in  the  exercise  of  His  own  in 
finite  wisdom  as  Creator  and  Governor  of 
the  universe.  Made  the  law  for  man  by 
Him  who  gave  laws  to  universal  nature,  and 
at  the  time  that  He  did  so.  A  wisdom 
that  is  "earthly,  sensual,  devilish."  True 
wisdom  from  above, — the  gift  of  "  the  Father 
of  lights."  *'The  law  (or  revealed  will) 
of  the  Lord  maketh  wise  tiie  simple." 
The  Scriptures  able  to  make  men  "  wise  unto 
salvation."  The  Gospel  of  Christ  *'  the 
hidden  wisdom."  Christ  Himself  the  "  wis- 
dom of  God  "  and  the  "  light  of  the  world." 
Whoever  follows  Him  **  shall  not  walk  in 
darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life." 
Clirist  the  teacher  come  from  God.  Anoints 
with  eye- salve  the  eyes  of  the  spiritually 
blind,  "that  they  may  see."  Gives  "the 
unction  of  the  Holy  One,"  that  we  know  all 
things.  Nature,  in  all  its  departments,  tells 
of  a  God,  but  not  how  to  obtain  His  favour 
and  forgiveness.  Christ  reveals  both  in  His 
Word.  Himself,  as  the  Son  of  God,  eternal 
wisdom  ;  as  the  Son  of  Man,  incarnate  wis- 
doa\;  and  "of  God  is  made  wisdom"  to  all 
who  are  "in  Him"  (1  Cor.  i.  24,  30 ;  Prov. 
viii.  12-36). 

IV.    The    nature    of  true    wisdom. 

Verse  28.— "The  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is 
wisdom ;  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  under- 
standing." The  gold  and  the  silver,  the 
sapphire  and  the  ruby,  have  their  place  in 
the  bowels  of  the  earth.  Wisdom  has  Us 
place  in  the  "  lear  of  the  Lord"  and  the 
"  departing  from  evil."  The  one  the  root, 
the  other  the  stem  and  the  branches.  The 
former  the  spring,  the  latter  the  streams 
issuing  from  it. 

I.  The  ''fear  of  the  Lord  "  {Heb.  'Adonai,* 
denoting     'lord'    or     'governor,' — usually 


cv 


applied  to  the  Messiah,  and  by  the  Jews  sub- 
stituted for  Jehovah)  the  first  part  of  true 
wisdom.  That  fear  not  a  slavish,  but  a 
filial  one.  A  reverential  feeling  and  conduct 
as  much  allied  to  love  as  fear.  The  fciir 
rather  of  a  child  in  regard  to  a  beloved 
parent,  than  of  a  slave  in  regard  to  a  dreaded 
master.  When  genuine,  always  combined, 
if  not  identical,  with  love.  Love  as  directed 
to  a  superior,  especially  to  the  Supreme 
Being.  A  feeling  and  deportment  due  from 
an  intelligent  creature  to  his  Creator — a 
being  at  once  of  unbounded  goodness,  in- 
finite excellence,  supreme  majesty,  and 
almighty  power.  A  fear  that  shuaders  at 
offending,  not  so  much  from  the  dread  of 
punishment  as  from  an  inward  consciousness 
of,  and  love  to,  what  is  right.  A  principle 
originally  implanted  in  man  as  the  law  of  his 
being.  Obedience  to  it  his  wisdom  and 
interest.  The  violation  of  it  his  ruin. 
Actually  violated  and  cast  off  at  the  Fall. 
Now  universally  violated  by  fallen  humanity. 
Its  violation  the  cause  of  all  the  misery  in 
the  world.  Its  observance  the  harmony  of 
the  soul,  the  harmony  of  man  with  man,  and 
the  harmony  of  man  with  his  Maker.  May 
be  re-implanted  in  man's  breast.  Its  re-iiri- 
planting  the  object  of  the  Saviour's  mission, 
and  the  effect  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  grace  in 
the  soul  (Jer.  xxxii.  40). 

2.  To  '"  depart  from  evil^'  the  second  pari 
of  true  wisdom.  Moral  evil,  or  sin,  that 
abominable  thing  which  the  Lord  hates 
(Jer.  xliv.  4).  To  be  departed  from — (1) 
As  contrary  to  the  nature  and  will  of  our 
Creator.  (2)  As  opposed  to  our  own  interest 
and  happiness.  All  sin  the  opposite  of 
God's  character  which  is  goodness,  purity, 
and  holiness.  Moral  evil  the  necessary 
source  of  all  physical  and  social  evil.  The 
fear  of  the  Lord  necessarily  evinced  by,  and 
conducting  to,  a  departure  from  evil.  The 
two  combined  constitute  the  perfect  man. 
Job's  own  character  (ch.  i.  ],  8).  Evil  to 
be  departed  from — (] )  Earnestly.  (2)  En- 
tirely. (3)  Perseveringly.  (4)  At  all 
hazards.  Moral  evil  both  internal  and  ex- 
ternal— both  in  heart  and  life.  Both  to  be 
equally  departed  from.  Departure  from  evil 
necessarily  connected  with  the  practice  of 
good.  The  only  way  for  a  fallen  man  to 
depart  from  evil  is  by  the  implantation  of  a 
new  nature  through  the  operation  of  God  s 
Spirit  in  the  heart.  Hence  the  promise  (Jer. 
xxiv.  7;  xxxii.  39;  Ezek.  xi.  19;  xxxvi. 
20,  27). 

3.  The  fear  of  God  or  true  religion  the 
wisdom  of  man.  Wisdom  the  choice  of  the 
best  end,  and  employment  of  the  best  means 
for  attaining  it.  True  religion  both  aims  at 
and  secures  glory  to  God  and  our  own  best 
interests.     Seeks  and  secures  the  chief  end 

171 


cLiAp.  xxvm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  t  JOB. 


for  which  man  was  made — to  glorify  God 
and  enjoy  Him  for  ever.  The  only  means  of 
man's  happiness,  either  here  or  hereafter, . 
Godliness  favourable  both  to  his  physical 
and  spiritual,  temporal  and  eternal,  welfare. 
Has  the  promise  both  of  the  life  that  now 
is,  and  of  thai  which  is  to  come.  The  way 
to  make  the  best  of  both  worlds.  Gives 
much  in  the  hand,  more  in  the  hope.  Is  in 
harmony  with  man's  moral  nature  given  him 
by  his  Creator.  The  foundation  of  personal 
and  domestic,  social  and  civil,  peace.  Fits 
for  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  fellowship — 
man's  highest  happiness.  Smooths  the 
pillow  of  death.  Prepares  for  a  happy 
eternity  beyond  the  grave.  Preserves 
him  from  many  troubles,  and  enables  him 
calmly  to  meet  and  patiently  to  endure  those 
that  are  unavoidable.  Allies  him  with  the 
noblest  and  choicest  of  God's  intelligent 
creatures.  Opens  to  him  an  ever-brightening 
path  of  excellence  and  delight.  Renders  him  a 
blessing  to  others  and  a  fellow-worker  with 
God. 

4.  Lay  iestimonies  from  Statesmen ^  Philo- 
sojjhers,  and  Poets ^  to  the  value  of  true  religion 
in  promoting  men's  best  interests. 

"  That  summum  honum  which  is  only  able 
to  make  thee  happy,  as  well  as  in  thy  death 
as  in  thy  life ;  I  mean  the  true  knowledge 
and  worship  of  thy  Creator  and  Redeemer, 
without  which  all  other  things  are  vain  and 
miserable." — Lord  Burleigh  to  his  Son. 

"  I  have  lived  to  see  five  sovereigns,  and 
have  been  privy  councillor  to  four  of  them ; 
I  liave  seen  the  most  remarkable  things  in 
foreign  parts,  and  have  been  present  at  most 
state  transactions  for  the  last  thirty  years; 
and  I  have  learned,  after  so  many  years' 
experience,  that  seriousness  is  the  greatest 
wisdom,  temperance  the  best  physic,  and  a 
good  conscience  the  best  estate." — Sir  John 
Mason :  died  1566. 

"  Love  my  memory,  cherish  my  friends, 
but,  above  all,  govern  your  will  and  affections 
by  the  will  and  Word  of  your  Creator ;  in 
me  beholding  the  end  of  this  world  with  all 
her  vanities."  —  Sir  Philip  Sidney/  to  his 
Brother,  1586. 

"  Love  God,  and  begin  betimes.  In  Him 
you  shall  find  everlasting  and  endless  com- 
fort ;  when  you  have  travelled  and  wearied 
yourself  with  all  sorts  of  worldly  cogitations, 
you  shall  sit  down  by  sorrow  in  the  end." — 
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  to  his  Wife,  before  his 
execution,  1618. 

"  Living  in  an  age  of  extraordinary  events 
and  revolutions,  I  have  learned  from  thence 
this  truth,  which  I  desire  might  thus  be 
communicated  to  posterity  :  that  all  is  vanity 
which  is  not  honest,  and  that  there  is  no 
solid  wisdom  hut  in  real  piety.'* — John 
Evelyn — Epitaph  by  Himself  1706. 

172 


"  Depend  upon  this  truth,  that  every  man 
is  the  worse  looked  upon,  and  the  less  trusted, 
for  being  thought  to  have  no  religion,  in 
spite  of  all  the  pompous,  specious  epithets 
he  may  assume,  of  esprits  forts,  free-thinker, 
or  moral  philosopher  ;  and  a  wise  atheist,  if 
such  thing  there  is,  would,  for  his  own  in- 
terest and  character  in  this  world,  pretend 
to  some  religion." — Lord  Chesterfield — Letters 
to  his  Son. 

"  Philosophy  may  infuse  stubbornness,  but 
religion  only  can  give  patience." — Br.  S. 
Johnson. 

"  Hold  fast,  therefore,  by  this  sheet  anchor 
of  happiness,  religion.  You  will  often  want 
it  in  the  times  of  most  danger — the  storms 
and  tempests  of  life.  Cherish  true  religion 
as  preciously  as  you  would  fly  with  abhorrence 
and  contempt  from  superstition  and  enthu- 
siasm. The  first  is  the  perfection  and  glory 
of  human  nature ;  the  two  last  the  deprava- 
tion and  disgrace  of  it.  Remember,  the 
essence  of  religion  is  a  heart  void  of  offence 
towards  God  and  man;  not  subtle,  speculative 
opinions,  but  an  active  vital  principle  of 
faith." — Lord  Chatham — Letters  to  his  Nephew. 
"  To  religion,  then,  we  must  hold  in  every 
circumstance  of  life  for  our  truest  comforts ; 
for,  if  we  are  already  happy,  it  is  a  pleasure 
to  think  that  we  can  make  that  happiness 
unending ;  and  if  we  are  miserable,  it  is  very 
consoling  to  think  there  is  a  place  of  rest. 
Thus,  to  the  fortunate,  religion  holds  out  a 
continuance  of  bliss;  to  the  wretched,  a 
change  from  pain." — Oliver  Goldsmith. 

**  We  know,  and,  what  is  better,  we  feel 
inwardly,  that  religion  is  the  basis  of  civil 
society,  and  the  source  of  all  good  and  of  all 
comfort." — Edmund  Burke,  on  the  French 
Revolution. 

"  With  all  my  follies  of  youth,  and,  I  fear, 
a  few  vices  of  manhood,  still  I  congratulate 
myself  as  having  had,  in  early  days,  religion 
strongly  impressed  on  my  mind.  ...  I  look 
on  the  man  who  is  firmly  persuaded  of 
infinite  wisdom  and  goodness,  superintending 
and  directing  every  circumstance  that  can 
happen  in  his  lot,  I  felicitate  such  a  man  as 
having  a  solid  foundation  for  his  mutual  en- 
joyment, a  firm  prop  and  sure  stay  in  the 
hour  of  difhculiy,  trouble,  and  distress  ;  and 
a  never-failing  anchor  of  hope  when  he  looks 
beyond  the  grave." — Robert  Burns. 

"  Where  there  is  most  love  of  God,  there 
will  be  the  truest  and  most  enlarged  philan- 
thropy. No  other  foundation  is  secure. 
There  is  no  other  means  whereby  nations  can 
be  reformed,  than  that  by  which  alone  indivi- 
duals can  be  regenerated.  .  .  .  While  men 
are  subject  to  disease,  infirmity,  affliction, 
and  death,  the  good  never  will  exist  without 
the  hopes  of  religion;  the  wicked  never 
without  it*:  fears." — Southey. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAT.   XXIX. 


"  I  envy  no  quality  of  the  mind  or  intellect 
in  others ;  not  genius,  wit,  or  fancy.  But  if 
I  could  choose  what  would  be  most  delight- 
ful, and  I  believe  most  useful  to  me,  I  should 
prefer  a  firm  religious  belief  to  every  other 
blessing.  For  it  makes  life  a  discipline  of 
gooduess,  creates  new  hopes  when  all  earthly 


hopes  vanish,  and  throws  over  the  decay  and 
the  destruction  of  existence,  the  most  gor- 
geous of  all  rights ;  awakeus  life  even  in 
death ;  and  from  corruption  and  decay  calls 
up  beauty  and  divinity  ;  makes  an  instrument 
of  torture  and  of  shame  the  ladder  of  ascent 
to  paradise." — Sir  Humphrei/  Davy. 


CHAPTEE  XXIX. 
JOB'S    RETROSPECT. 


Takes  a  calm  retrospective  view  of  his 
past  experience  and  life.  Thus  disproves 
the  sus})icions  and  accusations  of  his  friends, 
and  shows  that  his  complaints  were  suffici- 
ently well-^roundfd.  The  character  secretly 
given  him  by  God  thus  alhrmed  out  of  his 
own  mouth.  Does  this  not  from  a  feeling 
of  vanity  and  pride,  but,  like  Paul,  as  com- 
pelled to  it,  for  self- vindication.  Probably 
resumes  his  speech  (verse  1,  *'  continued  his 
parable")  after  pausing  for  a  reply  which 
was  not  forthcoming. 

Commences  in  a  tone  of  lamentation  as 
he  looks  back  upon  his  former  happiness  and 
j)rosperity,  now  apj)arently  for  ever  fled. 
Verse  2.—"  0  that  I  were,"  &c.  Natural 
to  look  back  with  regret  from  a  state  of  pro- 
tracted suffering  and  depression  to  one  of 
happiness  and  comfort,  and  to  long,  how- 
ever vainly,  for  its  return.  The  believer,  in 
a  state  of  spiritual  darkness  under  the  loss 
of  God's  sensible  presence,  often  unable  to 
refrain  from  similar  language.  "  How  sweet 
the  hours  I  once  enjoyed."  &c.  Better  and 
safer  to  long  for  the  return  of  spiritual  than 
of  temporal  prosperity  and  comfort, 

I.  Job's  past  happiness  (verses  2 — ^11). 
Embraced — 

1.  His  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour  and 
fellowship.  Verse  2 — 4. — "  O  tliat  I  were 
as  in  months  past,  as  in  the  days  when  God 
preserved  me  !  when  His  candle  (or  lamp — 
symbol  of  favour  and  blessing,  chap,  xviii.  6; 
Psa.  xviii.  28 ;  cxxxii.  17)  shined  upon  (or 
over)  my  head  (the  lamp  in  Arab  tents  and  dwel- 
lings being  usually  suspended  from  the  top  or 
ceiling,  and  kept  burning  all  night),  and  when 
by  his  light  I  walked  through  darkness" 
(by  his  protection  and  guidance  escaping 
dangers,  and  overcoming  difficulties  and 
trials — like  the  caravans  travelling  through 
the  desert  by  night  with  hghts  burning  in 
their  front).  Note — All  a  believer's  present 
comfort  and  blessing  only  candle-light  com- 
pared with  the  future. — "As  I  was  in  the 
days  of  my  youth  (or  full  prosperity  ;  Ueb., 
'My  autumn,*  the  time  of  ripe  fruits  j  the 
reference  to  his  circumstances  rather  than  to 
bis  age),  when  the  secret  (or  intimate  fiieud- 


ship)  of  God  was  upon  (or  in)  my  tabernacle ; 
when  the  Almighty  was  yet  with  me  "  (pre- 
sent with  me,  or  on  my  side ;  or,  "  when 
my  vigour,"  &c.,  the  clause  in  this  case 
belongmg  rather  to  the  next  head). 
Observe — (1)  No  blessing  so  great  or  enjoy- 
ment so  sweet,  as  that  of  communion  with  God 
and  the  friendship  of  our  Maker.  These 
placed  by  Job  at  the  head  of  his  list  of 
mercies  and  the  retrospect  of  his  happiness. 
The  madness  of  the  world  seen  in  neglecting 
and  despising  this.  True  wisdom  in  making 
the  enjoyment  of  it  our  first  concern.  Its 
re-enjoyment  by  man  the  object  of  Christ's 
mission  into  the  world.  (2).  The  favour  oj 
God  the  fountain  of  all  real  blessing  and  true 
happiness.  "The  blessing  of  the  Lord 
maketh  rich,"  &c.  (3)  Intimate  fellowship 
a)id  personal  friendship  with  God  to  be  enjoyed 
in  this  life.  Abraham  the  friend  of  God. 
"  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing 
which  I  do  ?"  (Gen.  xviii.  17).  Henceforth 
I  call  you  not  servants  but  friends ;  for  all 
things  that  I  have  heard  of  my  Father,  I 
have  made  known  unto  vou"  (John  xv.  15). 
"  The  Lord  God  will  do  nothing ;  but  he 
revealeth  his  secret  unto  his  servants  the 
prophets"  (Amos  iii.  7).  "The  secret  of 
the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him,  and 
he  will  show  them  his  covenant"  (Psa.  xxv. 
14,  Prov.  iii.  32).  (4)  God's  presence  and 
favour  sweeten  every  blessing. 

"  Happy  who  walks  with  Him !     Whom 

what  he  finds 
Of  flavour  or  of  scent  in  fioiit  or  flower, 
Or  what  he  views  of  beautiful  or  grand 
In  nature,  from  the  broad  majestic  oak 
To  the  green  blade  that  twinkles  in  the 

sun, 
Prompts  with  remembrance  of  a  present 

God. 
His  presence  who  made  all  so  fair,  per- 

ceiv'd, 
Makes  all  still  fairer.    As  with  Him  no 

scene 
Is  dreary,  so  with  Him  all  seasons  please," 

2.  His  enjoyment  of  outward  merries  (verses 
5 — 11).  These  were — (1)  Dnmestic  comfort. 
Verse  5. — "When  my  children  (perhaps 
including  servants)  were  about  me."     Job's 

173 


CHA?.  XXIX. 


BOMILETIC  COMMWTAUT:  JOB. 


cliildren  now  dead,  aud  his  servants  partly 
killed  (ch.  i.  15,  17),  and  partly  fleeing  from 
him  in   his  affliction   (chap.   xix.   15,   16). 
Job's  home  once  a  snug  and  well-feathered 
nest,  with  an  abundant  brood  of  happy  young 
ones  in  it  (verse  IS).     Mentions  his  family 
before  his  fortune.    A  happy  home  a  greater 
treasure  than  a  wide   domain.     A   healthy 
and  happy  family    one   of   the  greatest  of 
earthly  comforts.     A  home,  when   what  it 
ought  to  be — the  sweetner  of  life.  Mercifully 
preserved  to  man  after  the  Eall.     Domestic 
happiness   impaired    by  sin.      Restored  by 
grace.     Realized  in  the  enjoyment  of  God's 
favour  and  blessing  in   Clirist  (Psa.  cxvii. 
15).     Job's  home  a  happy  one,  because  a 
holy   one  (chap    i.  5).     "Blest,  that  home 
where  God  is  felt." — (2)  Outward  prosperity. 
Verses  6,  19,  20. — "  When   I  washed   my 
steps  with  butter  (cream,   or  thick   milk), 
and  the  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of  oil " 
{Heb.  "poured  out,  &c.,  with  me," ».(?.,  along- 
side of  me,  wherever  I  went — like  the  rock 
tliat  followed  Israel  with  its  refreshing  stream 
all   through    the    desert).      Abundance    of 
milk  and  oil   Oriental   emblems  of    plenty 
(Deut.    xxxii.    13,    14).      Canaan    a    land 
flowing    with     milk    and     honey.      Rocky 
land,  as  in  Arabia  and  Syria,  most  favour- 
able for  the  cultivation  of  the  olive.     Oil 
a  great  part  of  Oriental  produce.     Verse  19 
— '*  My  root  was  spread  out  by  the  waters 
(imbibing  their  moisture,  as  Psalm  i  3)  and 
the  dew  (abundant  in  the  East,  and  com- 
pensating for  the  scarcity  of   rain)  lay  all 
night    upon    my   branch    (or   crops, — thus 
nourished  both  above  and  beneath  the  soil). 
My  glory  (reputation  for  wisdom,  piety  and 
justice;   or  simply,  my  prosperous  estate) 
was  ne      in   me  {Heb.^  '  with  me,'  always 
new,  hke  a  flourishing  evergreen),  and  my 
bow  was  renewed  in  my  hand"  (my  strength 
always  renewing  itself  after  exhaustion,  and 
acquiring  fresh  vigour  (Is.  xl.  31),  as  a  bow, 
after  shooting  its  arrow,  returns  to  its  forn)er 
position    and    strength).  —  Observe  —  (1) 
Job's  riches  ascribed  by  him  to  God's  blessing. 
The  lamp  of  God's  favour  was  over  his  head 
before  the  rocks  poured  out  oil  at  his  feet. 
"  The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich." 
"The  Lord  giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth." 
(2)  Riches  a  blessinf?  when  from  God,  with 
God,  and  to  God.  "When  richl enjoyed  God 
in  all ;  now  when  poor,  I  enjoy  all  in  God." 
3.  Public  honour  I  respect.    Verses  7 — 1 1 , 
21  —  25 — "  When  I   went    out — (from    his 
residence  which  was  probably  in  the  country) 
to  the  gate  through  the  city  (or  'up  to  the 
city,* — Oriental  cities  being  usually  on  an 
eminence,  and  the   city-gate  the   place   of 
justice,    deliberation    and    business,    Kuth 
iv.  12;  Prov.  xxxi.   23);  wiien  I  prepared 
my  seat — (sending  his  servant  before  wilh  his 
174 


cushion,  according  to  Oriental  manners,  to 
spread  it  for  him)  in  the  street  (or  broad 
open  space  in  front  of  the  gate,  used  both 
for  court  and  market,  such  as  is  found  in  the 
remains  of  Persepolis  and  Nineveh,  and  still 
exists  in  eastern  cities) .    The  young  men  (in 
the  forum  or  market -])lace)  saw  me  and  hid 
themselves   (from    modesty    and   reverence 
retiring  back  out  of  immediate  sight) ;  the 
aged  men  (the  elders  of  the  city  composing 
the   court   or   senate — Ruth  iv.   2  j    Prov. 
xxxi  23)  arose  and  stood  up  (from  respect, 
as  to  one  of  superior  wisdom  and  standing). 
The    princes   (sheikhs,    or   chiefs   of    their 
tribes)  refrained  talking,  and  laid  their  hand 
on    their    mouth    (h   token  of  silence  and 
expression  of  the  greatest  deference).     The 
nobles  (men  of  wealth  and  position  in  the 
country)  held  their  peace,  and  their  tongue 
cleaved  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth.     When 
the   ear  heard   me   [while    addressing  the 
assembly],  then  it  blessed  me — (pronounced 
him  blessed   for  the   wisdom,  justice,   and 
benevolence  that  shone  in  his  .speech) ;  when 
the  eye  saw  me,  it  gave  witness   to  me  [as 
the  friend  and  benefactor  of  my  country  and 
my  race].     Verse  21 — "  Unto  me  men  gave 
e-tr  (listening  to  my  opinion  or  counsel)  and 
waited ;    and   kept  silence   at   my   counsel 
(having  nothing   either  to  add,  correct,  or 
gainsay).     After  my  words  they  spake  not 
again    (not  even  replying,  much   less  con- 
tradicting,— satisfied  witii  the  wisdom  of  what 
iiad  been  advanced) ;  and  my  speech  dropped 
upon    them     (as     the    dew,    easy-flowing, 
pleasant  and    beneficial,   Deut.    xxxii.   2). 
And  they  waited  for   me   as  [the  parched 
earth  waits]  for  the  rain ;  and  they  opened 
their  mouth  wide  as  [the  earth  does]  for  the 
latter    rain"    (the    rain    in    those   eastern 
countries  falling  at  two  seasons  in  the  year ; 
the  former  rain  in  September  or  October,  the 
latter  rain  in  February  or  March).     Note — 
Salutary  instruction  frequently  represented 
in  Scripture  and  Oriental  poetry  under  the 
figure  of  rain   and   dew.     Copious  rain  or 
dew  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphic  for  learning 
and   instruction.     Ver.  24 — "If  I  laughed 
(or  smiled)  on  them  (relaxing  my  gravity, 
and  showing  a  token  of  pleasure  or  recogni- 
tion), they  believed  it  not  (as  too  great  an 
iionour ;  or,  *  did  not  thereby  become  bold 
and   familiar');    and    the    light    (smile  or 
serenity)  of  my  countenance  they  cast  not 
down — (grieving  or  displeasing  him  by  their 
undutiful    or  disrespectful   behaviour).      1 
chose  out  their  way  (as  their  counsellor  and 
guide  ;  or,  *  [If]  1  joined  their  society  '),  and 
sat   chief   (occupied    the    first  place,   and 
presided  in  all  their  public  deUberations), 
and  dwelt  [in  my  settled  residence]  as  a  king 
(or, '  a  very  king ')  in  the  army  (or  '  troop,^ 
in   whom   his    presence    inspires    life    aud 


r 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CUAP.  XXLX. 


courage,  and  to  whom  his  word  is  law),  as 
one  that    comforteth  the  mourners"  [who 
hang  upon  his  lips,  and  drink  in  his  every 
word].      Observe — (1)  Goodness   often    the 
shortest  as  well  as  the  safest  way  to  greatness. 
God's    standing     promise,  —  "Them     that 
honour  me  I  will  honour"  (1  Sam.  ii.  30). 
In  wisdom's  left  hand— only  her  left  hand- 
are  riches  and  honour.     (2)  A  good  man  sure^ 
sooner  or  later,  to  gain  the  esteem  and  con- 
fidence of  his  felloios.     A  wise  head,  a  warm 
heart,  and  a  willing  hand  likely  to  secure 
love  and  respect.     Christ's  promise, — "  He 
that  believeth  on  me,  out  of  him  shall  flow 
rivers  of  living  water  "  (John  vii.  37).     Job, 
from  his  piety,   benevolence,   and  wisdom, 
both    the    darling    and   the   oracle  of    his 
country.     (3)  A  man's  noblest  ambition — 
(i.)  To  excel   others   in  yirtue,  piety,  and 
benevolence,     (ii.)  To  act  as  the  counsellor 
and  guide  of  his  fellows,     (iii.)  To  comfort 
the  mourners  while  commanding  the  mul- 
titude. 

II.  Job's  character  (verses  11 — 17). 
His  reputation  not  without  just  grounds. 
The  fruit  not  of  his  riches  or  power,  but  of 
his  benevolent  and  upright  character. 

1.  His  benevolence  and  compassion  as    a 
private  individual.   Verses  11,  13,  15, 16. — 
"  Because  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried 
[under   suffering   or  oppression],   and   the 
fatherless,  and  him  that  had  none  to  help 
him.     The  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to 
perish    [from    want    or    oppression]    came 
upon  me  [as  his  deliverer],  and  I  caused 
the  widow's     heart   to   sing    for    joy    (by 
comforting,    relieving,  or    delivering    her). 
I  was  eyes  to  the  blind  (as  an  instructor, 
counsellor,  and  guide  to  the  ignorant,  inex- 
perienced, and  erring),  and  feet  was  I  to  the 
lame  (doing  for  the  weak,  infirm,  and  help- 
(less,  what  they  were  unable  to  do  for  them- 
selves).    I  was  a  father  to  the  poor  (coun- 
selling, defending,  and  providing  for  tliem) ; 
and  the  cause  which  I  knew  not  (or,  '  the 
cause  of   those    I    knew   not,'  «>.,  of    the 
stranger),  I  searched  out  (or  into,  in  order 
to  his  relief  and  defence — doing  this  as  well 
in  the  capacity  of  a  private  individual  as  of 
a  magistrate  or  judge).     Observe — (1)  Job's 
religion  not  one  of  mere  contemplation,  still 
less  one  of  mere  profession  or  outward  ob- 
servance.     His   the   "  pure    and   undefiled 
religion  before  God  the  Father — to  visit  the 
fatherless  and  the  widows  in  their  affliction, 
and  to   keep   himself    unspotted   from   the 
world  "  (James  ii.  27).     (2)  Job's  character 
an  exemplification  of  "the  wisdom  that  is 
from    above — first    pure,    then    peaceable, 
gentle,  full  of  mercy  and  of  good  fruits." 
(3)  In  Job,   the   fear  of  God   evinced  by 
active  love  to  man.    To  be  so  always. 


"  First  daughter  to  the  love  of  God 
Is  charity  to  man.'* 

"  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he 
hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he 
hath  not  seen  ?  "  (1  John  iv.  20).  (4)  The 
nature  of  that  love  which  the  law  requires, 
and  which  verifies  a  man's  religion.  A  love 
not  in  word  or  in  tongue,  but  in  deed  and  in 
truth  (1  John  iii.  18).  True  charity  is  kind 
and  seeketh  not  her  own  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4,  5). 
(5)  Job's  faith,  like  Abraham's,  made  per- 
fect by  his  works  (James  ii.  22).  \fi) 
Wealth  and  high  position  no  hindrance  to 
the  exercise  of  compassion  and  benevolence. 
Should  rather  be  a  help  to  it. 

2.  His  faithfulness  and  justice  as  a  magii- 
trate.  Verses  13,  14. — "The  cause  which 
I  knew  not  I  searched  out  (careful — (1)  that 
before  giving  sentence,  he  thoroughly  under- 
stood the  case ;  (2)  That  none,  even  the 
stranger,  should  have  his  case  neglected). 
I  put  on  righteousness — (practising  it  in  his 
daily  conduct,  and  especially  as  a  magistrate 
and  judge),  and  it  clothed  me  (or,  *  put  on 
me,' — wholly  filled  me,  made  me  righteous, 
— both  without  and  within).  My  judgment 
(or  upright  dealing)  was  [to  me]  as  a  robe 
and  a  diadem  "  (or  turban,  worn  as  a  head- 
dress by  kings  and  nobles.  Is.  Ixii.  3 ;  by 
the  high  priest,  Zech.  iii.  5 ;  and  even  by 
Jewish  ladies  of  fashion  in  the  days  of  Isaiah, 
Is.  iii.  20;  the  flowing  robe  and  turban 
still  the  prominent  articles  of  a  wealthy 
Arab's  dress).  Job's  character  as  a  magis- 
trate the  opposite  of  that  ascribed  to  him  by 
Eliphaz  (chap.  xxii.  5 — 9).  Job  not  less 
just  than  generous.  Observe — (1)  Justice 
and  benevolence  the  brightest  ornament 
either  of  public  or  private  life.  Wisdom  an 
ornament  of  gtace  and  a  crown  of  glory  to 
Jill  her  possessors.  Knowledge  is  a  youth's 
diadem — Arab  Prorerb.  (2)  Uprightness  of 
character  and  life  to  bo  worn  as  our  dress  ; 
cleaving  to  us  and  accompanying  us  at  all 
times  and  in  all  places.  To  be  our  hubit  in 
both  senses  of  the  word.  Patent  to  the 
eyes  of  the  world  like  our  outer  garments. 
(3)  Upright  conduct  to  be  regarded  as  oui 
honour.  To  be  neither  ostentatiously 
paraded  nor  pusillanimously  ashamed  of.  (4) 
A  better  righteousness  than  our  own  given 
us  in  Christ  as  our  ground  of  confidence  be- 
fore God  (Rom.  iv.  2—6;  Gal.  vi.  14;  Phil, 
iii.  7-9). 

3.  His  boldness  in  opposing  the  wicked  and 
oppressioe.  Verse  17. — Perhaps  also  be- 
longing to  his  character  as  a  magistrate.  "  I 
broke  the  jaws  (or  jaw-teeth)  of  the  wicked 
(especially  the  rich  and  powerful  oppressor, 
often  represented  as  a  beast  of  prey,  chap, 
iv.  10),  and  plucked  the  spoil  out  of  his 
teeth."  The  opposite  of  the  unjust  judge 
in  the  Gospel  (Luke  xviii.  3,  4).     Observe 

176 


CHAP.  XXIX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


— (1)  A  truly  good  man  a  comfort  to  the 
oppressed  and  a  terror  to  the  oppressor. 
"They  that  forsake  the  law  praise  the 
wicked,  but  such  as  keep  the  law  contend 
with  him"  (Prov.  xxviii.  4).  (2)  A  good 
man  not  deterred  from  duty  by  the  fear  of 
consequences.  Job  did  good  and  exe- 
cuted justice  at  the  risk — i.  Of  being  un- 
popular with  the  ^reat.  ii.  Of  incurring 
personal  danger,  lii.  Of  much  trouble  to 
himself. 

III.  Job's  anticipation.  Verse  18.— 
Perhaps  continued  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 
*'  Then  I  said  [within  myself,  while  reflect- 
ing upon  my  prosperity  and  character],  I 
shall  die  in  my  nest  (in  comfort  and  security, 
neither  by  a  violent  nor  untimely,  but  a 
natural  and  peaceful  death)  ;  I  shall  multi- 
ply my  days  as  the  sand"  (or,  according  to 
another  reading,  "as  the  Phoenix" — a  fabu- 
lous bird,  said  to  spring  from  a  nest  of 
myrrh  made  by  the  parent  bird  before  his 
death,  living  to  the  age  of  a  thousand  years, 
and  coming  from  Arabia  to  Egypt  once  in 
live  hundred  years,  and  then  burning  his 
fatlier, — a  hieroglyphical  mode  with  the 
Egyi)tians  of  representing  a  particular  chro- 
nological era  or  cycle).  Natural  in  Job's 
circumstances  to  cherish  bright  anticipations 
of  the  future.  The  tendency  of  continued 
prosperity  and  honour  to  beguile  into  false 
security  and  confidence.  David's  error 
(Ps.  XXX.  6,  7).  Job's  anticipations  to  be 
soon  apparently  blasted.  Yet  in  the  end 
abundantly  realized  (chap.  xlii.  16).  Ob- 
serve— 

1.  A  good  old  age,  and  a  comfortable  death 
in  the  bosom  of  one's  family  and  home, 
among  the  appointments  of  a  favouring 
Providence.  The  opposite  threatened  as  a 
punishment  (Is.  xxii.  17,  18;  Jer.  xxii.  18, 
19).  These,  however,  not  proofs  of  pardon- 
ing mercy,  nor  necessarily  belonging  to  the 
children  of  God.  Ishmael,  out  of  the  cove- 
nant, dies  in  the  midst  of  all  his  brethren; 
Moses,  in  it,  dies  alone  on  a  solitary  moun- 
tain (Gen.  XXV,  18  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  49,  50). 
B(  st  to  have  the  circumstances  of  our  death  as 
mtII  as  of  our  life  chosen  for  us  by  our  heavenly 
Eaiher.  The  everlasting  covenant  of  God's 
grace  in  Christ  the  softest  and  safest  nest  in 
which  either  to  live  or  die  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5). 
(2)  To  multiply  our  days  a  blessing  ;  to 
make  right  use  of  them  a  greater.  Days 
often  multiplied  onlv  to  multiply  shame  and 
sorrow  (Is.  li.  11).  The  longest  life,  if  ill- 
spent,  is  short  5  the  shortest,  if  well-spent, 
is  long.  Life  not  to  be  measured  by  the 
number  of  its  days,  but  by  the  character  of 
its  deeds.  (3)  Job's  anticipation,  a  long 
life  and  a  comfortable  death ;  that,  of  the  be- 
liever under   the  Gospel    dispensation,    an 

176 


eternal    blessedness   reserved  for   him   in 
heaven  (2  Cor.  iv.  18). 

IT.  Lessons  suggested  by  the  retro- 
spect as  a  whole. 

1.  Evidence  of  the  statement  that  "the  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  wisdom.^*  Job's  piety  the 
fountain  both  of  his  happiness  and  honour. 
None  ever  exhibited  more  of  the  former  or 
enjoyed  more  of  the  latter.  His  life  and  ex- 
perience a  verification  of  the  truth  that 
"  length  of  days  is  in  wisdom^s  right  hand, 
and  in  her  left  hand  riches  and  honour" 
(Prov.  iii.  16). 

2.  Proof  that  true  piety  towards  God  is 
accompanied  with  the  purest  morality  and  love 
to  men.  Job  as  much  distinguished  for  the 
one  as  the  other.  The  fear  and  love  of  God  the 
only  and  sure  guai-antee  of  faithfulness  and 
love  to  men.  True  piety  the  natural  foun- 
tain both  of  a  pure  morality  and  a  disin- 
terested benevolence.  Integrity  of  life  and 
love  to  our  neighbour  only  branches  of  that 
tree  whose  root  is  the  love  of  God.  Love 
to  God  the  first  table  of  the  Decalogue ;  love 
to  man  the  second.  The  two  twin  sisters  of 
the  same  parent,  the  nature  and  ima^e  of 
God  who  is  love.  He  who  loves  and  tears 
God  cannot  be  regardless  of  God*s  will  or 
God's  offspring. 

3.  An  example  afforded  of  what  grace  can 
effect  in  restoring  and  renewing  fallen  hu- 
manity. Job  a  specimen  of  the  power  of 
that  grace  of  God  which  teaches  us  to  "deny 
ungodliness,  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  pre- 
sent world."  His  virtues  not  the  product 
of  fallen  nature  but  of  renewing  grace 
Though  in  the  older  dispensation  and  before 
the  full  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  his  cha- 
racter and  life  the  fruits  of  that  Spirit, 
viz.,  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentle- 
ness, goodness,  faith  (Gal.  v.  17).  Exhibits 
the  features  of  the  new  man  created  in  the 
believer  by  the  Holy  Ghost  after  the  image 
of  God.  The  object  and  effect  of  Divine 
grace  to  produce  the  lineaments  of  Christ, 
the  perfect  man  in  the  renewed  souL  The 
polluted  but  believing  Corinthians  not  only 
justified  but  washed  and  sanctified  (1  Cor. 
vi.  11).  The  converted  cannibals  of  Fiji 
risk  health  and  life  to  comumnicate 
their  blessings  to  the  cannibals  of  New 
Guinea. 

4.  A  pattern  for  Chrisfians  both  in  public 
and  private  life.  Job's  daily  life  a  scatter- 
ing of  seeds  of  kindness.  Might  have  sat  for 
the  picture  of  the  Good  Samaritan.  Job's 
goodness,  if  not  his  greatness,  within  every- 
one's reach.  The  poor  always  with  us.  No 
large  estate  required  in  order  to  be  "  eyes 
to  the  blind,  feet  to  the  lame,  and  a  father 
to  the  poor,"    A  kind  word  or  a  trilling  gift 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARr:  JOB. 


CHAP.  XXX. 


often  able  to  make  the  widow's  heart  sing 
for  joy.  More  grace  provided  and  attain- 
able for  the  exercise  of  Job  s  virtues  in  the 
Christian  dispensation  than  in  that  under 
which  the  patriarch  hiniscH'  lived.  The 
follower  of  Jesus  both  required  and  enabled 
to  practise  every  virtue  and  every  praise 
that  adorned  Job's  character  (Phil.  iv.  8). 

5.  The  retrospect  of  a  holy  and  useful  life 
u  source  of  pure  and  elevated  comfort  in  sick- 
ness and  adnersitj/.  Job's  comfort  in  his 
afflictions  not  in  looking  back  on  his  wealth 
and  honours,  but  on  the  way  he  employed 
them.  The  seeds  of  scattered  kindness  in 
the  time  of  health  and  prosperity  often  bear 
their  fruit  in  this  life  in  the  season  of 
trouble  and  adversity.  Eriends  made  of  the 
"  Mammon  of  unrighteousness,"  both  for 
time  and  eternity  (Luke  xvi.  9).  A  man 
may  be  richer  in  the  retrospect  of  the  man- 
ner in  which  he  spent  his  money  than  others 
who  selfishly  hoard  it  are  in  its  continued 
possession. 

6.  Example  of  the  uncertainty  of  earthly 
comforts  and  riches.  None  ever  enjoyed 
more  of  these  than  Job,  and  none  ever  more 
thoroughly  stripped  of  them.  The  comfort- 
able nest  in  which  he  hoped  to  end  his  days 
now  rifled  and  torn  in  pieces,  and  himself 
sitting,  a  loathsome  leper,  on  an  ash-heap. 
Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow.  Madness 
to  pursue  a  fleeting  and  neglect  an  enduring 
substance.  Means  and  opportunities  of 
doing  good  to  be  faithfully  employed  while 
they  last.  Riches  not  for  ever,  nor  the 
crown  to  all  generations. 

7.  The  experience  of  believers  in  respect  to 
the  sensible  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  presence 
and  fellowship  liable  to  fluctuation.  Not 
only  Job's  outward  and  temporal  but  his  in- 
ward and  spiritual  comfort  now  in  an  ecHpse. 
The  sin  of  God's  countenance  may  for  wise 
reasons  be  hidden  beliind  a  cloud.  No  proof 
of  God's  anger  that  His  favour  is  not  sensibly 
enjoyed.  The  shining  of  the  sun  to  be  be- 
lieved^ though  not  seen.  The  path  of  a  be- 
liever through  the  world  like  that  of  the 


moon  among  sailing  clouds.  Darkness  and 
light  the  experience  of  a  believer  till  he 
reaches  the  land  where  there  is  no  more 
night. 

8.  An  exemplification  of  the  requirements  of 
the  moral  law  in  respect  to  our  neighbour. 
Love  to  man,  verified  in  continual  acts  of 
varied  benevolence,  the  characteristic  of 
Job's  life.  Such  love  the  requirement  of  the 
second  part  of  the  Decalogue.  Job's  life 
and  character  no  more  than  is  required  by 
the  law  of  God  from  each  individual  accord- 
ing to  his  means  and  opportunities.  Every 
shortcoming  of  it,  sin.  Hence  the  universal 
character  of  men  as  transgressors  of  the  Di- 
vine law  (Rom.  iii.  23).  Job  himself,  with 
all  his  integrity  and  benevolence,  still  a  sin- 
ner as  coming  short  of  that  law.  Every 
mouth  stopped,  and  the  whole  world  guilty 
before  God  (Rom.  iii.  19).  An  example  of 
perfect  obedience  to  the  law  of  love  found 
only  in  one  of  Adam's  children. 

9.  Job  exhibited  in  this  chapter  as  a  type 
of  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous.  The  picture 
Job  draws  of  himself  only  fully  and  perfectly 
realized  in  him  who  "  did  no  sin,"  and  who 
"  went  about,  doing  good  "  (Is.  xi.  1 — 5  ; 
Ixi.  1 — 3).  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  the 
only  perfect  man.  His  life,  even  more  than 
Job's,  an  exhibition  of  the  beauty  and  excel- 
lence of  the  moral  law,  as  well  as  a  fulfil- 
ment of  it.  Christ  fitted,  therefore,  to  be 
our  representative  and  head  in  a  new  cove- 
nant (Rom.  V.  12 — 19).  His  perfect  fulfil- 
ment of  the  law,  for  our  sakes — (1)  As  a 
pattern  for  our  imitation.  (2)  As  a  proof 
that  He  was  what  He  professed  to  be — the 
Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  men.  (3)  To 
give  value  to  His  death  as  a  sacrifice  and 
satisfaction  for  sin.  Himself  being  without 
spot,  and  a  sweet  savour  to  God.  (4)  As  a 
substitution  for  the  perfect  obedience  re- 
quired of  each  individual.  (5)  As  the  image 
and  character  to  be  reproduced  in  all  who 
are  united  to  Him  by  faith,  as  the  members 
of  that  family  of  which  He  is  the  head  and 
representative. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


THE  CONTRAST,— J  OF  S  SOLILOQUY,  CONTINUED. 


With  his  former  state  of  happiness  and 
honour  Job  now  contrasts  his  present  misery 
and  degradation.  His  object  as  well  to  show 
the  grounds  he  has  for  complaint  as  to  ease 
his  burdened  spirit.  Probably  now  sitting 
in  the  open  air,  near  his  own  residence,  out- 
side the  city.  Still  among  the  ashes,  and 
covered  from  head  to  foot  with  the  worst 
form  of  leprosy.  Abandoned  by  his  wife 
and    domestics,   and   viewed    by  his  pious 


visitors  as  suffering  the  penalty  of  past 
transgressions  perhaps  secretly  committed, 
he  is  at  the  same  time  frequently  surrounded 
by  a  rude  rabble,  especially  of  younger  per- 
sons, who  now,  like  the  young  men  who 
mocked  Elisha,  deride  him  for  his  former 
piety  and  present  affliction  ;  perhaps  taking 
a  spiteful  revenge  for  his  former  reproofs. 
These  persons,  whose  character  and  condition, 
as  well  as  that  of  their  fathers,  Job  describes, 

177 


CHAP.  XXX. 


UOMILETIG  COMMEJSTARY:  JOB. 


probably  the  remains  of  the  Horites  who  had 
Dcen  conquered  and  dispossessed  by  the 
Idumdans,  to  whom  Job's  ancestors  be- 
longed, and  who  had  now  for  some  time  been 
in  possession  of  the  country  (Gen.  xiv.  6 ; 
xxxvi.  20,  21  ;  Deut.  ii.  12,  22).  Some  of 
those  Horites  had  probably  been  enslaved  by 
their  conquerors,  while  others,  to  preserve 
their  liberty,  had  fled  into  the  desert  and 
taken  refuge  among  the  mountains. 

I.  Job  describes  the  class  of  persons 
by  whom  he  was  now  treated  with 
scorn  and  insult  (verses  1 — 8).  These 
were — 

1.  Younger  than  himself.  Verse  1. — 
"  But  now  they  that  are  younger  than  I 
have  me  in  derision."  Derision  a  bitter 
as^gravation  of  affliction.  Christ's  experience 
(Matt,  xxvii.  27—31 ;  Luke  xxiii.  34—37). 
Such  treatment  from  juniors  an  aggravation 
of  the  trial.  Seniors  habitually  treated 
with  respect,  and  veneration  paid  to  age 
among  the  orientals,  especially  in  Arabia. 
Another  aggravation  in  Job's  case  that  he 
had  formerly  been  treated  with  defer- 
ence, not  only  by  the  youth  but  even  by 
aged  men,  himself  being  still  comparatively 
young  (chap.  xxix.  8).  A  sign  of  great  cor- 
ruption in  morals  when  seniors  are  treated 
with  disrespect,  still  more  with  derision — 
especially  when  these  are  in  affliction  and 
distress.  Sad  state  of  society  when  the 
youth  are  rude  and  insolent,  and  particu- 
larly towards  those  who  suffer,  whether  from 
age,  poverty,  or  affliction.  David's  prayer 
(Ps.  cxliv.  11,  12). 

2.  Base-born.  "  Whose  fathers  I  would 
have  disdained  to  set  with  (in  the  same  em- 
ployment ;  or  *  to  set  over,'  as  keepers ;  or 
*  to  rank  in  equality  with ')  the  dogs  of  my 
flock."  A  large  number  of  dogs  required 
for  Job's  seven  thousand  sheep.  Dogs 
anciently  employed,  as  now,  both  for  watch- 
ing flocks  and  dwellings  (Is.  Ivi.  10).  Job's 
language  in  reference  to  these  men  probably 
from  their  character  and  conduct  rather 
than  their  condition.  Observe — (1)  Sad 
when  men,  made  in  the  image  of  God  and 
capable  of  engaging  along  with  angels  in  I  he 
highest  and  most  honourable  services,  are 
inferior  in  usefulness  and  condition  to  the 
dogs  that  guard  a  flock  of  sheep,  and  from 
want  of  principle  unfit  to  be  entrusted  even 
with  such  an  employment.  Dogs  in  the 
east  esteemed  unclean  and  treated  with 
little  consideration  (Ps.  lix.  14,  15).  (2) 
The  character  of  sin  to  degrade  men  beneath 
the  brutes.  Verse  8.— "They  were  the 
children  of  fools  (or  *  worthless,  wicked  men ' 
— both  by  birth  and  imitation)  j  yea,  child- 
ren of  base  men"  {Heb.y  "of  men  without 
R  namp  " — with  no  reputation  except  a  bad 

178 


one — men  of  low  birth  and  still  lower  cha- 
racter). Parentage  of  great  account  in  the 
east.  Felt  to  be  a  disgrace,  as  well  as  a 
loss,  to  be  born  of  base  and  wicked 
parents.  Children  unable  to  help  their 
birth;  yet  often  "like  father  like  child.", 
Persons  supposed  to  bear  the  character  as 
well  as  the  features  of  their  parents.  The 
education  and  moral  training  of  the  children 
of  bad  or  base  men  usually  neglected.  Such 
children  grow  up  in  a  morally  poisonous 
atmosphere.  The  taint  of  the  parent  usually 
attaches  more  or  less  to  the  children.  A 
man's  parentage  and  education  often  indi- 
cated by  his  character  and  conduct.  Children 
often  inherit  both  the  parents'  vices  and 
their  consequences.  To  exult  over  the 
wretched  sufficient  evidence  of  a  base  ex-' 
traction.  An  aggravation  of  Job's  trial  and 
degradation,  to  be  "held  in  derision"  by 
youths  of  such  low  and  base  parentage.  The 
contempt  of  the  vile  a  bitter  trial  to  an 
int;enuous  spirit.  David's  experience  (Ps. 
XXXV.  15).  Verified  in  that  of  Christ 
(Matt,  xxvii.  27—31).  The  class  of  per- 
sons here  described  such  as,  from  their  cha- 
racter,  were  unable  to  obtain  any  respectable 
— however  humble  —  employment.  Job's 
example  in  regard  to  them  to  be  imitated. 
Important  for  masters  and  heads  of  families 
to  look  well  to  the  character  of  those  whom 
they  employ,  even  in  the  humblest  situations. 
David's  resolution  (Ps.  ci.  6,  7). 

3.  Feeble  and  useless.  Verse  2. — "Yea 
whereto  might  the  strength  of  their  hands 
profit  me,  in  whom  old  age  was  perished  P  " 
(or,  "  in  whom  the  vigour  of  manhood  was 
lost;"  or,  "in  whom  there  was  no  expecta- 
tion of  their  ever  reaching  old  age,"  whether 
from  their  vices  or  their  mode  of  life, — 
neither  having  strength  to  work  themselves 
nor  wisdom  to  direct  others).  Job's  reason 
for  treating  them  as  he  did ; — in  this  case 
the  clause  applied  rather  to  the  fathers  than 
to  the  sons.  Observe — (1)  No  uncommon 
tiling  for  vices,  as  well  as  inadequate  means 
of  life,  to  enfeeble  the  frame  and  induce  pre- 
mature old  age  and  death.  Races  by  such 
means  often  stunted  in  stature  as  well  as 
enfeebled  in  mind,  and  often  die  out.  Often 
the  case  with  the  aborigines  of  lands  taken 
into  possession  by  a  foreign  race.  Well  if 
the  vices,  as  in  the  case  of  the  North 
American  Indians  and  others,  have  not  been 
imported  by  the  foreigners  themselves.  (2) 
True  religion  favourable  to  physical  as  well 
as  spiritual  growth  and  development.  Mus- 
cularity the  natural  outcome  of  a  healthy 
Christianity.  God's  truth  and  service 
beneficial  to  man  in  all  his  aspects.  (3) 
Godliness  no  less  profitable  to  races  than  to 
individuals.  Humanity  itself  either  dete- 
riorated by  vices  and  their  consequences,  or 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAP.   XXX. 


elevated  by  religion  and  morality.  (4)  Phy- 
sical vigour  and  longevity  among  the  features 
of  the  millennial  period  and  the  reign  of 
righteousness  upon  earth.  *'  The  child  shall 
die  an  hundred  years  old,  and  the  sinner, 
being  an  hundred  years  old,  shall  be  accursed. 
As  the  days  of  a  tree  shall  be  the  days  of  my 
people,  and  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  the 
work  of  theu"  hands  "  (Isa.  Ixv.  20—22). 

4.  Wretched  and  famUhed.  Verse  3. — 
"  For  want  and  famine  they  were  solitary 
(or,  *  afflicted,' — *  desolate,*  as  in  Isa.  xlix. 
21;  or,  in  'extreme  want  and  hunger'); 
fleeing  into  the  wilderness  (as  unfit  for 
civilized  life,  or  as  loving  the  solitude  and 
independence  of  the  desert,  or  finally  from  a 
sense  of  guilt  and  shame  as  evil-doers ;  or, 
*  gnawing '  and  feeding  on  the  wilderness), 
in  former  time  desolate  and  waste  (or,  *  the 
night  or  darkness  of  the  solitary  waste ') ; 
who  cut  up  mallows  (or  purslain,  a  species  of 
halimus ;  a  saltish  plant  growing  in  deserts, 
beside  hedges,  and  by  the  sea-shore,  and 
used  as  food  by  the  poor)  by  the  bushes,  and 
juniper  roots  (or,  *  roots  of  the  broom,'  a 
plant  abundant  in  the  sandy  plains  of 
Arabia)  for  their  food  "  (or  *  to  warm  them- 
selves,'— the  stems  of  the  juniper  or  broom 
being  used  for  fuel,  as  the  berries  and  roots 
were  for  food).  These  men  probably  worse 
off  for  food  than  were  Job's  dogs.  No  fault 
however  of  Job's.  Some  prefer  the  most 
wretched  fare  to  following  an  honest  calling. 
One  of  the  effects  of  sin,  somewhere^  that 
men  are  in  any  degree  destitute  of  the  proper 
means  of  life.  Abundant  provision  originally 
made  by  the  Creator  for  man's  comfortable 
subsistence  (Gen.  i.  29).  Man,  continuing 
in  obedience,  would  have  eaten  of  the  good, 
not  only  of  Paradise,  but  of  every  land.  The 
finest  of  the  wheat  and  honey  out  of  the 
rock  the  promised  portion  of  obedient  Israel 
(Ps.  Ixxxi.  16).  The  earth  in  consequence 
of  man's  sin,  made  to  yield  him  thorns  and 
thistles  (Gen.  v.  18).  Vice  and  indolence  in 
some,  with  tyranny  and  oppression  in  others, 
still  continue  want  and  misery  in  the  world. 
Among  the  blessings  of  the  better  time 
coming  under  the  Prince  of  Peace,  is,  that 
"  the  earth  shall  yield  her  increase,"  and  men 
"shall  eat  and  be  satisfied"  (Ps.  Ixvii.  6, 
22,  26 ;  Isa.  Ixv.  21,  22). 

5.  Excluded  from  civilized  society .  Verse  5. 
— "  They  were  driven  from  among  men, — to 
dwell  in  the  cliffs  (or  *  clefts,' — perhaps 
rather  *the  horrid  gloom')  of  the  valleys 
(ravines  or  torrent- beds),  in  caves  of  the 
earth  and  in  the  rocks.  Among  the  bushes 
they  brayed  (like  wild  asses,  for  thirst  or 
hunger;  or  'groaned*  from  want  and 
misery) :  under  the  nettles  (or  brambles) 
they  were  gathered  together  "  (they  huddled 
toget  her ;  or  "  stretched  themselves, "  as  all 

12—2 


the  resting-place  they  had).  To  dwell  in 
valleys  in  the  East  a  mark  of  vileness.  The 
rocks  of  stony  Arabia  abundant  in  cavea 
The  text  descriptive  both  of  ihe  country  and 
the  nianners  of  the  inhabitants.  A  people 
in  that  region  anciently  known  as  Troglo- 
dytes, or  dwellers  in  caves.  Such  places 
the  usual  resort  of  some  at  least  of  the 
inhabitants  of  a  subjugated  mquntainous 
country,  as  well  as  of  the  lowest  and 
most  lawless  among  the  people.  The 
fastnesses  of  the  mountains  in  Wales  the  last 
resource  of  the  ancient  Britons.  Dens  and 
caves  the  refuge  of  the  persecuted  wor- 
shippers of  Jehovah  in  the  days  of  Ahab 
and  at  other  times  (1  Kings  xvii.  4 ;  Heb. 
xi.  38).  The  retreat  of  the  Christians  of 
Madagascar.  The  parties  mentioned  in  the 
text  expelled  from  the  cities  and  inhabited 
parts  of  the  country  on  account  of  their 
vicious  conduct  and  disreputable  character. 
Evil-doers  in  a  state  to  be  improved  or  ex- 
pelled. The  diseased  limb,  however,  only 
to  be  cut  off  when  all  means  of  cure  have 
failed.  Time  not  to  be  lost  in  purging  either 
Church  or  State  of  corrupt  and  incorrigible 
members.  "  One  sinner  destroyed  much 
good."  "Evil  communications,"  &c.  David's 
resolution  as  king  of  Israel  and  type  of 
Messiah:  "I  will  early  cut  off  all  evil-doers 
from  the  city  of  the  Lord"  (Psa.  ci.  8). 

6.  Depraved  in  character  and  conduct* 
Verse  5. — "They  cried  after  them  as  after 
a  thief "  (in  the  way  of  threatening,  or  in 
order  to  their  apprehension,  or  to  warn 
others  of  their  character).  Verse  8. — "They 
were  viler  than  the  earth  "  (or,  "  they  were 
whipped  out  of  the  land,"  viz.,  for  their 
evil  deeds)  perhaps  one  of  the  results  of 
Job's  careful  administration  of  justice,  for 
which  the  wretched  vagabonds,  or  their 
sons,  now  make  retaliation  on  the  humbled 
magistrate  (Prov.  xx.  8,  26). 

The  section  brings  us  face  to  face  with  a 
portion  of  the  lowest  stratum  of  humanity 
and  the  dregs  of  society.  Such  found  in 
most  countries,  Britain  not  excepted.  The 
result  not  merely  of  vice  and  indolence  in 
themselves  and  their  fathers,  perhaps  for 
generations,  but  also  probably  of  oppression 
and  neglect  on  the  part  of  their  superiors. 
Their  existence  in  a  country  often,  under 
Divine  Providence,  a  retribution.  Probably 
due  to  Christianity  that  the  description  in 
the  text  was  not  verified  in  the  British 
refugees  among  the  mountains  of  Wales,  and 
even  in  the  Saxons  after  the  Norman  posses- 
sion. The  waifs  and  roughs,  thieves  and 
city  Arabs,  in  the  slums  of  London,  perhaps 
as  much  the  result  of  harsh  treatment  and 
neglect  as  of  personal  depravity.  Church 
and  State  in  general  only  now  beginning  to 
wake  up  to  a  sense  of  duty  in  regard  to  this 

179 


CHAP.  XXX. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


class  6?  society,  when  the  case  has  become 
Aext  to  unmanageable.  The  great  problem 
of  the  present  day — What  is  to  be  done  for 
the  reclamation  and  elevation  of  the  sunken 
masses  P  Much  capable  of  being  done  both 
by  Church  and  State,  under  the  impulse  of 
loving  hearts  and  the  direction  of  enlightened 
heads.  The  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God, 
suitably  presented  and  lovingly  applied,  the 
Divinely-appointed,  and  therefore  the  most 
efficient,  means  of  restoring  fallen  humanity. 
Embraces  in  the  contemplated  objects  of  its 
operation  the  lowest  grades  of  society  in 
every  land.  The  commission  of  its  Divine 
Author :  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature.*' 
rossesses  in  itself,  and  along  with  its 
faithful  ministration,  a  power  sufficient  to 
elevate  the  lowest  and  reclaim  the  most 
utterly  lost  of  the  human  family.  "The  power 
of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that 
believeth."  "Mighty  through  God  to  the 
pulling  down  of  the  strongholds  "  of  igno- 
rance and  vice.  Has  already  proved  itself 
adequate  to  this  end.  Has  achieved  its 
triumphs  both  among  the  profligates  of 
Corinth,  and  the  Bechuanas  of  Caffraria. 
The  glory  of  Christianity,  that  its  greatest, 
and  perhaps  most  numerous,  trophies  have 
been  from  among  the  lowest  classes  of  society. 
**  Not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many 
mighty,  not  many  noble  are  called  ;  but  God 
hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world 
to  confound  the  wise ;  and  God  hath  chosen 
the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound 
the  things  which  are  mighty :  and  base  things 
of  the  world,  and  things  which  are  despised 
hath  God  chosen,  yea  and  things  which  are 
not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  which  are" 
(1  Cor.  i.  26—28). 

Christianity  suited  to  all  classes  and  con- 
ditions of  men.  Views  all  men  as  brethren. 
Teaches  the  unity  of  the  race.  "  God  hath 
made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  "  (Acts 
xvii.  26).  The  Gospel  an  enemy  to  caste  of 
every  description.  AJl  nations  and  all  classes 
represented  oy  it  as  equally  the  purchase  of 
the  same  precious  blood  of  the  Son  of  God 
(]  Tim.  ii.  6).  The  countless  multitude  of 
the  redeemed  before  the  throne  gathered  out 
of  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  people, 
and  tongue  (Rev.  vii.  9).  One  of  the  pre- 
cepts of  Christianity,  **  Honour  all  men " 
(1  Pet.  ii.  17.  "Fraternity," and " equality,'* 
as  well  as  "liberty,"  emblazoned  on  the 
Gospel  banner.  Corresponding  responsi- 
bility involved  in  regard  to  its  possessors. 
Only  a  Cain  asks  :  "  Am  I  my  brother's 
keeper." 

Solemn  inquiry  for  every  possessor  and 
professor  of  the  Gospel:  Am  I  faithfully 
attempting  to  perform  my  part,  however 
humble,  in  raising  up  the  sunken  masses  of 

180 


my  brethren  at  home  and  abroad,  by  com- 
municating to  them  that  Gospel  which  has 
already  done  so  much  for  many  and  for  me  ? 
Am  I,  like  the  Master  I  profess  to  follow, 
while  contemplating,  whether  with  the  eye  of 
the  body  or  of  the  mind,  the  multitudes 
that  are  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd,  "  moved 
with  compassion  towards  them,"  and  so 
moved  as,  like  Him  also,  to  reach  forth  a 
helping  hand?  or.  Am  I  still  verily  guilty 
concerning  my  brother  ? 

II.  Tlio  treatment  received  from 
these  persons  (verses  9 — 14).  Enlarged 
on  by  Job,  as  indicating  how  deeply  he  ielt 
it.     Particulars  specified. 

'  1 .  His  sufferings  and  afflictions  made  the 
subject  of  their  coarse  jests  and  ribald  mirth. 
Yerse  9. — "And  now  I  am  their  song 
(accompanied  with  a  musical  instrument) ; 
yea,  I  am  their  byword"  (or  jest,  probably 
both  from  his  former  piety  and  present 
sufferings;  perhaps,  also,  as  the  rich  man 
brought  low,  the  proud  Emir  humbled,  and 
the  secret  oppressor  punished).  Similar 
treatment  experienced  by  David,  and  by 
David's  Lord  and  antitype  (Psa.  xxxv.  15 ; 
Ixix  12).  Christ,  in  His  deepest  affliction, 
taunted  with  His  former  trust  in  God  and 
charity  to  men,  while  now  neither  delivered 
by  God  nor  able  to  deliver  Himeelf  (Matt. 
xxvii.  43 ;  Luke  xxiii.  35).  The  prophet 
Jeremiah  in  his  humiliation  also  the  song 
of  his  ungodly  countrymen  (Lam.  iii.  14,  63). 
In  Job's  case  this  treatment  from  the  rabble 
less  to  be  wondered  at  after  the  conduct  of 
his  pious  friends.  Note — The  lower  classes 
of  the  Arabs  addicted  to  scurrility  and  abuse. 
Indulge  freely  in  the  streets  and  bazaars  in 
satirical  and  abusive  songs  upon  their  rulers 
and  superiors.  Clever  in  extemporising 
verses,  which  they  usually  accompany  with 
the  music  of  a  drum,  tambourine,  or  lute. 

2.  Shunned  with  abhorrence.  Verse  10 — 
"They  abhor  me;  they  flee  far  from  me.'* 
Their  abhorrence  of  him  from — (1)  His 
loathsome  disease.  (2)  His  lying  apparently 
under  the  Divine  malediction.  (3)  His  sup- 
posed wickedness  and  oppression  as  the 
cause  of  it.  His  miserable  disease,  instead 
of  evoking  sympathy,  caused  him  only  to  be 
avoided  as  a  pestilence  or  a  sight  too  loath- 
some and  shocking  to  be  looked  upon. 

3.  Treated  with  insult  and  contempt.  "  They 
spare  not  (either  as  doing  it  abundantly  and 
repeatedly,  or  as  casting  off  all  restraint)  to 
spit  in  my  face  "  (or,  in  my  presence).  Note  : 
Orientals  seldom  spit  but  for  the  purpose  of 
insult,  and  much  more  frequently  spit  on  the 
ground  before  the  party  they  wish  to  insult 
than  on  his  face  or  person,  though  both  are 
done.  To  spit  out  before  another  an  expres- 
sion of  the  greatest  contempt  (Deut.  xxv.  9). 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  I  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXI. 


Frequently  done  by  Mohammedans  in  re- 
spect to  Christians,  whom  they  regard  as 
infidels  and  dogs.  So  great  the  affront  in 
the  East,  that  when  done  even  by  a  father 
in  regard  to  his  daughter,  the  shame  of  the 
thing  required  her  to  shut  herself  up  in  her 
tent  or  apartment  for  a  whole  week  (Num. 
xii.  14).  Sad  contrast  in  Job's  case  with 
his  former  honour  (chap.  xxix.  8 — 11).  This 
deep  insult  put  more  than  once  upon  the 
Son  of  God  while  standing  as  our  substitute. 
Predicted  (Isa.  1.  6).  Re£.-l2ed  (Matt.  xxvi. 
67 ;  xxvii.  30). 

4.  All  restraint  in  regard  to  him  cast  off  by 
the  rabble  around  hin^  in  consequence  of  his 
affliction.  Verse  11. — "Because  he  (the 
Almighty)  hath  loosed  my  cord  (dissolved 
my  strength  and  authority;  or,  according  to 
another  reading",  *  his  cord/ — giving  loose 
reins  to  his  anger),  and  afflicted  (or  humbled) 
me,  they  have  also  let  loose  the  bridle  before 
me"  (have  cast  off  all  restraint  in  my 
presence,  and  treat  me  with  unbridled 
insolence).  All  Job's  afflictions  ascribed  by 
him  to  God  as  their  first  Author.  His  cord 
now  loosed  by  Him,  a  sad  contrast  to  his 
fond  anticipation  (chap,  xxxix.  8 — 11). 
Observe — The  wicked  sometimes  allowed  to 
say  and  do  whatever  their  pleasure  may 
suggest  or  their  malice  invent.  This  now 
done  by  Job's  enemies — (1)  As  if  it  were  a 
merit  to  treat  with  insult  one  who  appeared 
the  object  of  Divine  execration.  (2)  From 
the  absence  either  of  power  in  himself  or 
inclination  in  others  to  restrain  them.  The 
same  experienced  by  the  Saviour  from  the 
soldiers,  servants,  and  others,  when  in  the 
hands  of  his  enemies  (Mark  xiv.  65  ;  xv, 
16—20). 

5.  Violently  pushed  by  rude  youths,  who 
employed  every  method  to  annoy  and  distress 
him.  Verse  12. — "Upon  my  right  hand  ( — the 
place  of  accusers ;  also  where  he  should 
otherwise  have  been  most  able  to  defend 
himself, — thus  chosen  for  greater  insult  and 
contempt)  rise  the  youth  [Hebrew,  *  brood,* 
— so  called  in  disdain)  ;  they  push  away  my 
feet  (probably  stretched  out  as  he  sat  or  lay 
among  the  ashes),  and  raise  up  against  me 
the  ways  of  their  destruction"  (or,  "their 
destructive  ways," — the  ways  by  which  they 
may  attack  and  destroy  me,  like  the  raised 
ways  or  banks  of  a  besieging  army,  2  Kings 
xix.  32).  A  wicked  and  mischievous  band 
of  city  youths,  like  those  who  mocked  Elisha 
at  Jericho,  now  surround  and  assault  him  on 
set  purpose  to  annoy  and  do  him  injury,  as 
an  army  employing  every  means  they  can 
contrive  to  overthrow  the  beleaguered  for- 
tress. A  picture  of  deeper  degradation  and 
misery  hardly  conceivable;  all  the  darker 
from  the  contrast  afforded  by  the  previous 
ehapter.    Yet,  even  this  only  a  shadow  of 


the  outrages  endured  by  the  King  of  kings 
when  "  made  a  curse  for  us "  (Matt.  xxVi 
3,  4,  to  the  end  of  that  and  the  following 
chapter). 

6.  His  sufferings  increased  by  the  rabble ^ 
who  seemed  to  take  pleasure  in  adding  to  his 
affliction,  and  completing  his  overthrow.  Verse 
13. — "  They  mar  (cut  up)  my  path  (annoying 
me  whenever  I  attempt  to  walk,  and  pre- 
venting all  escape  or  access  to  me  from 
without),  they  set  forward  my  calamity  [as 
if  it  afforded  them  profit  as  well  as  pleasure], 
they  have  no  helper"  (persons  of  the  lowest 
and  most  worthless  character).  So  Christ  in 
His  last  sufferings  reviled  by  the  thieves 
that  were  crucified  with  Him  (Matt,  xxvii. 
44).  Observe — A  mark  of  deepest  de- 
pravity to  take  pleasure  in  another's 
calamity,  and  to  add  affliction  to  those 
already  afflicted.  Edom  and  other  nations 
severely  threatened  for  similar  conduct  in 
regard  to  humbled  Israel  (Ob.  x.  15  ;  Zech. 
i.  15).  The  experience  also  of  David  and 
David's  son  (Ps.  Ixix.  26). 

7.  His  utter  ruin  eagerly  sought  by  the 
rabble  multitude  about  him.  verse  14. — 
"They  came  (or  come)  upon  me  as  a  wide 
breaking-in  of  waters  (or,  *as  by  a  wide 
breach ' — the  figure  of  a  siege  still  con- 
tinued) ;  in  the  (or,  like  a)  desolation  (or, 
'under  the  crash  or  ruin,'  as  of  the  falling 
walls  and  buildings  of  the  breached  fortress  ; 
or,  *  with  a  tumult,'  or  *  shout '  of  triumph) 
they  rolled  (or  roll)  themselves  upon  me  " 
(as  a  storming  party  entering  the  breach). 
Implies — (1)  The  number  of  those  seeking 
to  distress  and  overthrow  him.  (2)  Their 
eagerness  in  their  wickedness.  (3)  Their 
actual  mischief. 

The  section  affords  an  affecting  view  of 
the  depths  of  Job's  aggravated  and  accumu- 
lated sufferings.  As  if  the  sudden  and  pe- 
culiarly melancholy  death  of  his  whole  ten 
children;  the  loss  of  his  entire  property;  his 
personal  suffering  from  a  most  loathsome 
and  distressing  disease  j  his  being  made  the 
object  of  aversion  by  his  wife  and  domestics, 
and  of  suspicion  and  reproach  by  his  friends 
— as  if  all  this  had  not  been  enougli,  he  is 
subjected  to  the  coarsest  treatment  and  most 
unfeeling  mockery  from  a  low  rabble,  who 
take  a  fiendish  pleasure  in  insulting  liim  and 
adding  to  his  affliction.     Observe — 

1.  Impossible  to  say  to  what  suffering  a 
child  of  God  may  be  subjected  in  this  world. 
Sometimes  all  the  powers  of  wickedness  in 
earth  and  hell  apparently  let  loose  against 
him,  while  at  the  same  time  suffering  under 
distressing  dispensations  of  Divine  Provi- 
dence. No  trial  so  sharp  but  a  godly  man 
may  meet  with  it.  If  Satan  has  one  dart  in 
his  quiver  more  fiery  than  another,  he  may 
shoot  it  at  him.     Xu  respect  to    outward 

181 


CHAF.  XXX. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


trials  and  sufferings,  but  for  the  inward 
comfort  and  future  hope  afforded  them,  be- 
lievers, sometimes,  of  all  men  the  most 
miserable  (1  Cor.  xv.  19).  Tribulation  and 
persecution  promised  by  the  Master.  This, 
at  times,  abundantly  and  amazingly  realized. 
Witness  the  sufferings  of  the  martyrs  of 
Lyons,  Smyrna,  and  elsewhere,  in  the  second 
century.  "  Tortures  by  racks,  by  pincers,  by 
faggots,  by  the  tossings  of  wild  beasts,  by 
being  seated  in  burning  [iron]  chairs,  that 
the  fumes  of  their  roasting  flesh  migiit  come 
up  about  them,  amid  scoffs  4nd  jeers  from 
the  rabble,  when  a  word  of  retraction  would 
have  saved  them."  See  Dickinson's  TheO' 
logical  Quarterly ^  July,  1875,  p.  389. 

2.  Nothing  strange  for  a  child  of  God  to 
fall  from  esteem  into  contempt  and  disgrace 
(Matt.  V.  11).  Haired  and  reproach  their 
promised  fare.  Mockery  not  the  least  pain- 
ful and  effective  species  of  persecution 
(Heb.  X.  32,  33 ;  Gen.  xxi.  9  compared  with 
Gal.  iv.  29). 

3.  The  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  which 
is  capable  of  conduct  such  as  is  ascribed  to 
Job's  rabble  persecutors.  *'Murder,"  in  its 
worst  form,  proceeding  out  of  it  (Matt.  xv. 
19).  Capable  of  inflicting  deliberate  injury 
on  those  already  deeply  afflicted  and  suffer- 
ing, from  the  mere  gratification  of  a  fiendish 
pleasure  in  witnessing  it,  or  from  a  dia- 
bolical hatred  of  moral  excellence  in  the 
sufferer. 

4.  The  intense  malevolence  and  cruelty  of 
Satan,  the  author  of  these  aggravated  suffer- 
ings on  the  part  ofJoby  and  the  instigator  of 
those  wretched  creatures  whom  he  found  or 
made  his  ready  tools,  in  rendering  his  suffer- 
ing as  bitter  as  it  could  possibly  be.  Nothing 
wanting  on  Satan's  part  if  men  are  not  as 
wretched  and  miserable  as  himself. 

5.  The  mutability  of  outward  happiness  and 
popular  favour.  None  ever  enjoyed  both  in 
a  higher  degree  than  Job,  and  none  ever, 
for  a  time,  so  entirely  stripped  of  them.  The 
fickleness  of  "  fortune  "  and  popular  applause 
proverbial.  The  "  Hosanna  '*  of  to-day  the 
"crucify  Him"  of  to-morrow.  To-day  a 
silken  couch — to-morrow  a  scaffold.  To-day 
Paul  is  ready  to  be  worshipped  as  a  divinity  j 
to-morrow  he  is  dragged  out  of  the  city  and 
all  but  stoned  to  death.  The  believer's 
comfort — (1)  That  all  these  vicissitudes  are 
under  his  Heavenly  Father's  appointment. 
(2)  That  his  real  happiness  is  elsewhere  and 
far  above  the  reach  of  change. 

6.  The  love  of  Christ  in  submitting,  for  our 
take,  to  sufferings  and  indignities  which  are 
only  foreshadowed  in  those  of  the  Patriarch. 
In  the  last  eighteen  hours  of  His  life  on 
earth  all  the  bitter  ingredients  indicated  in 
tills  chapter  were  infused  into  the  cup  of 
suffering  appointed  for  Him  as  our  substitute 

183 


to  drink.     **  He  was  made  a  curse  for  us,** 

and  therefore  abandoned  to  every  species  of 
human  endurance.  The  Gospel  narrative 
presents  us  with  a  scene  of  suffering  which 
only  finds  anything  approaching  a  parallel 
to  it  in  the  case  of  tlie  Patriarch,  as  ex- 
hibited in  this  and  preceding  chapters. 

III.  Reverts  to  his  personal  affliction, 
more    especially  as  from  the  hand  of 

God  (verses  15 — 18).     Laments. — 

1.  The  sad  reverse  in  his  condition. 
Verse  15. —  "Terrors  are  turned  upon  me 
(or,  'things  are  changed' — tables  are  turned 
with  me ;  or,  *  lam  overthrown,'  like  a  stormed 
fortress  ;  or,  *  trouble,* — carrying  con- 
sternation with  it,  like  the  terror  in  a  city 
taken  by  storm, — *  pursues  me ' )  ;  they  (the 
terrorsor  calamities)  pursue  (likethe  besiegers 
when  entering  the  breach  they  have  made  in 
the  walls;  or,  *thou  pursust')  my  soul 
{Heb.,  *  my  nobility  *  or  princely  state 
— perhaps  a  term  for  the  soul  from  its 
nobler  nature)  as  the  wind  [pursues  and 
drives  along  the  chaff — /.  e.  vehemently  and 
irresistibly];  my  welfare  (all  the  happiness 
and  comfort  of  my  life)  passeth  away  as  a 
cloud"  [which  leaves  no  trace  of  its  former 
presence  and  can  no  more  be  recalled]. 
Observe : — (1).  Sad  reverses  from  a  happy 
and  prosperous  condition  among  the  most 
painful  of  human  trials.  (2)  Soul  terrors  the 
greatest  troubles.  These  not  unknown  to 
a  child  of  God  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  15,  16).  Amaze- 
ment and  consternation  among  the  ingre- 
dients of  Christ's  cup  (Mark  xiv.  33,  34), 

2.  His  inward  grief,  expressing  itself  in 
continual  groans  and  lamentations.  Verse 
16. — "  And  now  my  soul  is  poured  out  upon 
me  (or,  'within  me,'  as  if  dissolved  in  grief; 
lleb.y  *  pours  itself  out,'  i.e.,  in  tears  and 
groans);  ihe  days  of  affliction  have  taken 
hold  (or  fast  hold)  of  me  "  (like  armed  men 
entering  a  besieged  city — denoting  the 
violence  of  his  troubles;  "days  of  affliction," 
as  indicating  its  continuance  and  the  sad 
contrast  with  his  former  happy  experience). 
Observe — Bays  of  affliction,  sooner  or  later, 
and  of  longer  or  shorter  continuance,  to  take 
hold  of  each  (Eccles  xi.  8).  Happy  then  to 
have  one  with  us  who  "  in  all  our  afflictions 
is  afflicted"  (Is.  Ixiii  9).  His  promise  (Is. 
xliii.  2).  Christ's  presence  with  us  in  the 
furnace  quenches  the  violence  of  the  fire 
(Dan.  iii.  25;  Heb.xi.  34). 

3.  His  bodily  sufferings.  Verse  17. — "My 
bones  are  pierced  in  me  {Heb.,  *  from  off  me ') 
in  the  night  season  (or  , '  nigiit  pierceth  my 
bones  from  off  me,' — i.e.  with  acute  pains, 
usually  most  severe  in  the  night) ;  and  ^  my 
sinews  (or  '  my  gnawing  pains  *)  take  (or  find) 
no  rest."  A.cute  and  gnawing  pains  added  to 
all  Job's   other  afflictions,     Satan  accom- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAF.  XXX. 


plishes  his  wish  and  goes  the  full  length  of  his 
permission, — "  Touch  his  flesh  and  his  bones.** 
The  bones  sensible  of  the  most  acute  and 
severe  pain.  The  affliction  carried  into  his 
very  bones.  Severe  suffering  usually  ex- 
pressed by  reference  to  the  bones  (Ps.  li.  8 ; 
Is.  xxxviii.  13).  An  aggravation  of  pain  and 
suffering  when  endured  in  the  night  while 
others  enjoy  rest,  and  wlien  one*s  own  ex- 
hausted nature  requires  repose.  Night  also 
the  season  in  which  sorrow  sinks  deepest. 

4.  The  pollution  of  his  garments  and  the 
changed  appearance  of  his  skin  in  conse- 
quence of  his  disease.  Verse  18. — "  By  the 
great  force  of  my  disease  is  my  garment 
(either  literally^  in  consequence  of  the  puru- 
lent discharge  from  liis  sores  ;  (^x  figuratively , 
his  skin  so  changed  in  its  appearance  that  he 
could  scarcely  be  recognized) :  it  bindeth  me 
as  the  collar  of  my  coat "  (vest,  tunic,  or  inner 
garment — his  loose  outer  garment  being  now 
so  stiff  with  gore  and  matter  as  to  sit  as  close 
to  his  person  as  liis  tunic ;  or,  '  it  —  the 
disease — bindeth  me  about  like  my  vest ;  * 
sitting  as  closely,  constantly,  and  completely 
upon  me  as  my  tunic).  A  sore  aggravation  of 
disease — (1)  When  it  pollutes  our  garments 
and  disfigures  our  persons — (2)  When  it  ap- 
pears likely  to  yield  neither  to  time  nor 
treatment. 

5.  Degradation  coupled  with  extreme  de- 
bility. Verse  10.—"  He  (God,  or,  *  it,'  the 
disease)  hath  cast  me  into  the  mire  (as  a 
wrestler  seizing  his  antagonist  by  the  throat 
and  throwing  him  to  the  ground ;  or,  hath 
rendered  me  filthy  and  abominable  as  one 
east  into  the  mire),  and  I  am  become  like 
dust  and  ashes  "  (as  low  and  mean,  as  weak 
and  powerless,  as  the  ashes  on  which  I  sit; 
or,  I  am  reduced  to  dust  and  ashes,  deprived 
of  vital  energ\ ,  and  more  like  a  corpse  than 
a  living  man ;  his  disease  such  as  to  give 
jhis  body  the  appearance  of  clods  and  ashes, 
from  its  dried  scabs  and  filthy  ulcers). 
Observe — Piety  enables  us  to  keep  an  eye 
upon  God  as  the  supreme  and  sovereign 
Author  of  all  our  troubles.  In  one  sense 
our  troubles  as  truly  from  God,  as  in  another 
from  Satan,  the  world,  or  ourselves.  God 
the  ultimate  Author,  whoever  or  whatever 
may  be  the  immediate  instrument  or  occasion. 
No  trouble  but  by  His  purpose  and  per- 
mission. Satan  and  the  world  only  God's 
.hand  in  afflicting  and  chastening  His  children. 
'Satan's  demand  in  regard  to  Job  :  "  Put 
forth  thy  hand  upon  him  ;  "  God's  answer, 
"  He  is  in  thine  hand."  Paul's  thorn  in 
the  flesh  from  Satan,  yet  given  by  God 
(2  Cor.  xii.  7).  Better  to  think  of  God  the 
first  cause  in  our  trouble,  than  of  man  or 
any  other  second  cause.  "  I  was  dumb,  I 
opened  not  my  mouth ;  because  Thou  didst 
it "  (Pi.  xxxix.  U). 


IT.  Dii'ects  his  complaint  against 
God  Himself  r verses  20—22). 

1.  As  disregarding  his  prayer  in  his  afflic^ 
tion.  Verse  20. — "  I  cry  unto  thee,  and  thou 
dost  not  hear  (or  hearken,  so  as  to  help  and 
deliver)  me ;  I  stand  up  (in  frequent  and 
earnest  supplication  ;  or,  I  stand,  continue 
waiting  and  expecting  an  answer),  and  thou 
regardest  me  not"  (or  "thou  considerest 
me  "  [and  my  case],  but  dost  not  answer  or 
afford  relief).  Observe— (1)  Crying  to  God 
a  familiar  exercise  with  Job.  Good  for  us 
to  have  the  path  to  the  mercy -seat  a  well- 
trodden  one.  (2)  Job  not  only  prayed  in  his 
affliction,  but  continued  to  do  so.  Unlike 
the  hypocrite  (chap,  xxvii.  10).  (3)  Stand- 
ing a  usual  and  Scriptural  posture  in  prayer 
(Gen.  xviii.  22  j  Jer.  xv.  1 ;  Matt.  vi.  5  ; 
Luke  xviii.  1] — 13).  The  early  Christians 
usually  knelt  in  prayer  on  every  day  of  the 
week,  except  the  Lord's  day,  when  they 
stood,  as  a  posture  more  befitting  a  day  of 
joy  and  triumph.  (4)  Sometimes  one  of  the 
most  painful  trials  to  an  afflicted  child  of 
God,  to  pray,  and  coniinue  praying,  without 
any  apparent  attention  to  his  prayer  on  tiie 
part  of  God.  The  trial  of  David  and  of 
David's  Lord  in  his  deepest  affliction  (Psa. 
xxii.  1,  2;  Matt,  xxvii.  40).  (5)  God's 
regard  to  our  prayer  not  to  be  judged  by 
immediate  appearances. 

Answers  to  Prayer. 

Believing  prayer  heard,  though  followed 
by  no  immediate  or  direct  answer.  Prayer 
offered  through  the  Holy  Spirit's  assistance 
never  unheard  or  unanswered.  Answers  to 
prayer  not  restricted  to  time  or  form. 
Sometimes,  the  thing  itself  not  granted,  but 
something  better  in  its  stead.  So  with 
Paul  (2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9).  With  Christ  (Luke 
xxii.  42,  43).  Sometimes  petitions  for  tem- 
poral benefits  not  granted,  that  those  for 
spiritual  and  better  ones  may  be  so.  The 
withholding  an  answer  sometimes  a  greater 
blessing  than  the  answer  itself.  God  nor  a 
mere  force,  but  an  intelligence  acting 
according  to  infinite  wisdom  and  judgment 
in  the  bestowment  of  His  mercies.  **  The 
absurdity  of  Tyndall's  famous  *  prayer-test ' 
was,  that  it  regarded  God  as  simply  a  force 
in  nature,  and  proposed  to  experiment  with 

it  to  see  just  wiiat  it  would  do 

The  impossibility  of  knowing  the  motives 
which  actuate  God  must  for  ever  render  the 
expectation  of  receiving  an  invariable  answer 
to  any  prayer  absurd  in  the  extreme.  The 
very  fact  that  our  prayers  are  sometimes 
answered  and  sometimes  denied,  and  that 
the  answers  when  granted  are  sometimes 
modified  and  often  delayed,  is  itself  proof 
that  we  are  dealing  with  a  great  intelligence, 

183 


CHAP.  XXX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


whose  acts  are  governed  only  by  his  own 
will  and  purposes." — Rev.  Jacob  Todd^M.A.y 
in  DickinsorCs  Theological  Qjiarterly^  July, 
1875,  p.  369.  True  and  acceptable  prayer 
carries  in  it  submission  to  the  Divine  will.  A 
part  of  every  such  prayer,  understood  if  not 
expressed, — Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done. 
Christ  our  exemplar  in  prayer  (Luke  xxii.  24). 
Himself  the  example  of  His  own  teaching 
(Matt.  vi.  10).  Believing  prayer  like  seed, 
whose  temporary  disappearance  in  the  earth 
is  necessary  to  its  production  of  fruit.  All 
the  tears  of  God's  people  put  into  His  bottle, 
and  all  their  prayers  recorded  in  His  book 
(Ps.  Ivi.  8).  All  Job's  prayers  at  length 
abundantly  answered,  even  in  this  life. 
Perhaps  the  most  of  believers'  prayers  only 
to  be  answered  after  they  have  ceased  both 
to  pray  and  live.  Better,  in  trouble,  to  pray 
for  patience  to  endure  it,  and  grace  to 
improve  it,  than  for  deliverance  out  of  it. 

2.  A»  acting  towards  him  with  apparent 
cruelty  and  hostility.  Verse  21. — "  Thou  art 
become  cruel  to  me  {HebreWy  *Art  turned 
into  a  cruel  one  unto  me') ;  with  thy  strong 
band  thou  opposest  thyself  against  me,"  (or, 

*  carriest  on  a  bitter  hostility  against  me  ;*  or 

•  liest  in  wait  for  me').     One  of  the  sevei  est 
things  Job  ever  uttered  in  regard  to  God, 
indicating  the  bitterness  of  his  grief  at  being 
thus  treated  by  Him  as  an  enemy.  Observe — 
(1)  The  flesh  has  never,  any  more  than  Satan, 
anything  good  to  say  of  God.      (2)  The  Jlesh 
makes   the    most    grievous   mistakes    in    its 
judgments  of  God  and  of  Dioi/ie  things.     Says 
of  God  what  is  exactly  true  of  the  devil,  and 
the  very  opposite  of  what  is  true  of  God. 
God  is  love,  and  Satan  the  impersonation  of 
vruelty.      His  name  Satan  denotes  "  an  ad- 
cersary,"  and  is  closely  allied  to  the  word  Job 
employs   in   speaking  of  God.      Satan  the 
opposer    of    every    man's    happiness,    and 
especially  the  adversary  of  believers  (1  Peter 
V.8).  (3)  Godmay,for  wisepurposeSjinalittle 
wrath  hide  his  face  from  his  children  "  for 
a  moment,"    and   in   apparent  wrath  may 
**  smite  them,"  thougli  really  in  love  (Isa.  hv. 
8 ;  Ivii.  17 ;  Rev.  iii.  19).     Even  this  not 
the  case  at  present  in  regard  to  Job.     While 
Satan  was  oruising,  God  was  praising  him. 
(4)  Job's  experience  in  the  text,  without  the 
sin,   realized  by  his   great  Antitype  when 
uttering  the  cry.  My  God,  my  God,   why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  For 
our  sakes,  that  satisfaction  might  be  made 
for  man's  sins,  God  obliged  to  assume  the 
aspect  of  "  a  cruel  one  "  to  His  own  beloved 
Son.    The  bitterest  element  of  the  cup  given 
him,  as  our  surety,  to  drink. 

3.  As  sporting  with  his  sufferings,  and 
giving  him  up  to  destruction.  Verse  22. — 
"  Thou  liftest  me  up  to  the  wind  (like  the  grain 
thrown  up  from  tlie  threshing-floor  by  the 

184 


winnowing  shovel  against  the  wind)  thou 
causest  me  to  ride  (tossest  me  up  and  down, 
or  carriest  me  away)  upon  it"  (as  the  chaff 
of  the  threshing-floor  when  separated  from 
the  wheat,  or  as  any  light  substance  made 
the  sport  of  the  wind  and  carried  away  by 
it).  Observe — (1)  Job,  under  the  misleading 
suggestions  of  the  flesh,  views  God  as 
sporting  with  his  sufferings,  while,  in  reality, 
glorying  in  him  before  principalities  and 
powers  as  his  faithful  servant,  who  had  not 
his  like  upon  earth.  (2)  What  Job  here 
ignorantly  and  unbelievingly  ascribes  to  God, 
very  like  what  Satan  desired  to  do  with  the 
disciples  of  Jesus  in  the  night  of  their 
Master's  betrayal  (Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  The 
thing  Satan  was  actually  doing  now  with 
Job. 

4.  As  filling  him  with  terror  and  making 
an  utter  end  of  him.  "  Thou  dissolvest  my 
substance  "  (or,  my  health  and  soundness,  as 
well  from  terror  as  disease ;  or  "  Thou  dis- 
solvest me.  Thou  terrifest  me;"  or,  according 
to  another  reading,  "  Thou  dissolvest  me  in 
the  tempest's  crash").  A  tragic  picture  of 
inward  as  well  as  outward  distress.  Vague 
terror  and  deep  depression  of  spirits  among 
the  effects  of  Job  s  peculiar  disease.  Trouble 
of  soul  the  soul  of  all  trouble.  Terrible  ex- 
perience, when  in  affliction  and  trouble  God 
is  viewed  as  dealing  with  us  in  anger.  Some- 
times the  temporary  experience  of  a  believer. 
Sure  to  be  the  unending  experience  of  every 
impenitent  unbeliever.  God's  terrors  able 
to  dissolve  the  firmest  substance,  and 
to  terrify  the  stoutest  heart.  '*  A  fearful 
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living 
God" 

V.  Reflects  upon  the  future  (verses  23, 
24). 

1.  Anticipates  death  as  the  result  of  his 
present  sufferings.  Verse  23. — **  For  I  know 
that  thou  wilt  bring  me  to  death,  and  to  the 
house  appointed  for  all  living  "  (the  grave, 
or  the  earth,  according  to  Gen.  iii.  19;  the 
book  of  Genesis,  in  some  form  or  other,  most 
probably  in  Job's  hands).  Job's  language 
that  of  dejection  and  despondency,  not  with- 
out an  alloy  of  petulance.  Paith  again  at  the 
ebb.  Despondency  one  of  the  effects  of  his 
disease.  Sense  and  sight  said :  "  He  will 
slay  me — this  disease  nmst  be  fatal ;  "  only 
faith  could  say :  "  I  shall  not  die  but  live. ' 
Observe — (1)  The  flesh  ever  apt  to  draw 
hasty  and  wrong  conclusions  from  God's 
dealings  in  Providence,  (2)  God  acknow- 
leged  by  Job  as  the  dispenser  of  all  His 
afflictions,  and  as  the  disposer  of  all  events. 
None  go  down  to  the  grave  till  God  brings 
them  there,  though  some  are  brought  before 
their  time.  The  keys  of  death  and  tha 
eternal  world  in  Chri&t't  handa. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


OHAF.  XXI« 


The  grraye  the  honse  appointed  for 
all  liying. 

Declares  the  general  law  relating  to  liu- 
manily.   Only  two  known  exceptions.    More 
to  be  made  at  the  Lord's  second  advent. 
Believers  then  changed   without  tasting  of 
death  (1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  15— 
17).    Till  Christ  shall  come,  the  grave  the 
appointed  receptacle  for  humanity.    Job  mis- 
taken as  to  the   time  and  occasion  of  his 
death;    no   mistake  as  to  the   fact   of  it. 
Every  disease,  if  not  strictly  "  unto  death," 
yet    brings    us    neai'er   to   it.     In    regard 
to    the   issue    of   our  trouble,  God  often 
better  than  our  fears.     Paul's  case  (2  Cor. 
i.  8 — 10).     God  as  able  to  bring  up  from 
the  grave  as  to  bring  down  to  it.    Tlie  times 
of  each  in  His  hand.     Useful  in  affliction  to 
remember  our  mortality,  and  to  regard  death 
as  the  possible,  if  not  the  certain,  result  of 
it.    From  the  universality  of  the  grave  as 
"  the  house  appointed  for  all  living,"   we 
learn— (1)  A  lesson  of  humility.    Pride  ill 
becoming  in  any  creature, — preposterous  in 
those  who  in  a  few  years  at  most  will  have 
only  a  dark  chamber  in  the  earth  of  a  few 
cubic  feet  for  their  dwelling,  with  the  worms 
as  their  nearest  companions,  and  actually 
making  a  banquet  of  their  flesh.      Such  a 
dwelling  awaiting  the  prince  equally  with 
the  peasant.     (2)  Earnestness  in  attending  to 
present  and  important  duty,  more  especially  in 
seeking   the  eternal  welfare  of  ourselves  and 
others  connected  with  us.      Opportunity  for 
attending  to  the  concerns  of  eternity  con- 
fined to  this  life.    The  exhortation  of  Divine 
wisdom — "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to 
do,  do  it  with  thy  might ;  for  there  is  no 
work,  &c.,  in  the  grave,  whither  thou  goest  " 
(Eccles.  ix.  10).     "  The  night  cometh  when 
no  man  can   work."     (3)    The  evil  of  sin. 
The  grave  not  originally  "the  house  appointed 
for  all  living."   Death  to  mankind  the  result 
of  transgression.    *'  In  the  day  that   thou 
eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."     "  By 
one  man  sin  entered  the  world,  and  death 
by  sin."    "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."     No 
grave  but   sin  has  dug  it.      Terrible   evil 
which  has  filled  the  world  with  sepulchres 
and  dead  men's  bones.   Sad  to  be  in  love  with 
that  which  has  proved  the  murderer  of  the  race. 
So  great  an  evil  must  require  a  correspond- 
ing means   for  its   expiation  and   removal. 
(4;)  The  inflexible  character  of  the  Divine  law. 
The  sentence  against  transgressors  of  that 
law  fulfilled,  though  a  whole  race  must  be 
reduced  to  death.     Adequate  satisfaction  to 
be  made  to  it  before  the  grave  can  close  its 
mouth  or  yield  up  its  dead  to  an  eternal  life. 
That  satisfaction,  through  Divine   compas- 
■ion,  already  made.     "  By  map  came  death; 


by  man  came  also  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead."  **The  wages  of  sin  is  death ;  but 
the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord."  "  I  am  the  resurrection 
and  the  life ;  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though 
he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live;  and  whoso- 
ever livetli  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never 
die."  "  He  suffered  for  our  sins,  the  just  One 
in  the  room  of  the  unjust.'*  "All  we  like 
sheep  have  gone  astray ;  and  the  Lord  hath 
laid  upon  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  He 
was  wounded  for  our  transgressions.  By 
His  stripes  we  are  healed.  Tor  the  trans- 
gression of  My  people  was  he  stricken.  He 
hath  made  his  soul  an  oll'ering  for  sin.  He 
bare  the  sin  of  inan^ "  (1  Cor.  xv.  21 ; 
Rom.  vi.  23  .  John  xi.  25 ;  Is.  liii.  5 — 12). 
(5)  True  wisdom  to  seek  a  better  than  an 
earthly  portion.  The  *  house  appointed  for 
all  living'  the  end  of  all  mere  earthly  enjoy- 
ments and  possessions.  Sad  to  spend  our 
time  only  in  the  pursuit  of  such,  and  to  be 
found  at  last  with  nothing  we  can  carry  with 
us  beyond  it.  (6)  The  grave  the  vestibule  to 
two  other  houses^  both  eternal  in  their  dura- 
tion^ but  immensely  different  in  their  character. 
The  one  of  these  a  home  of  light  and  beauty, 
peace  and  purity,  life  and  health,  joy  and 
song,  where  death  is  unknown  and  no  tear 
is  shed.  The  other  one  of  darkness  and  de- 
spair,— 'weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing  of 
teeth.*  Solemn  and  important  question  for 
each— which  of  these  shall  be  my  home? 
"Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God."  "  Without  holi- 
ness no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.** 

2.  Despairs  of  help  being  afforded  in 
answer  to  his  prayers^  and  looks  only  for  re- 
lief in  the  grave.  Verse  24. — "  Howbeit  (or 
surely)  he  will  not  stretch  out  his  hand  (in  the 
way  of  help  and  deliverance)  to  the  grave 
(now  when  1  am  already  on  the  verge  of  it ; 
or,  *  surely  prayer  avails  nothing  when  he 
stretches  forth  his  hand,*  viz.,  to  smite  or  to 
slay) ;  though  they  (or  men)  cry  in  his  de- 
struction" (the  destruction  sent  by  him — 
while  he  is  visiting  with  destruction).  The 
verse,  however,  may  also  be  read  as  express- 
ing the  assurance  of  rest  in  the  grave: 
'*  Howbeit  he  will  not  stretch  out  his 
[afflicting]  hand  to  the  grave  (so  as  to 
afflict  in  or  beyond  it) ;  in  the  destruction 
He  sends  there  is  deUverance.**  Or  even 
as  justifying  prayer  in  such  circumstances 
as  this  :  "  Howbeit,  do  not  men  [still]  stretch 
out  the  hand  [imploring  help]  in  ruin,  and 
utter  a  cry  on  account  of  it  in  the  destruc- 
tion which  is  sent  bv  Him  P  "  Observe — (1) 
The  language  of  unbelief — "  There  is  no  hope.'* 
The  flesh,  even  in  a  believer,  ever  ready  in 
protracted  trial  and  disappointed  hope,  to 
say,  with  Ahab :  '*  Why  should  I  wait  any 
longer?"     (2;  Faith  in  a  believer  has  its 

185 


CHAP.  XXX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB 


ebbs  and  flows.  Low  water  with  Abraham's 
faith  when  he  spoke  to  God  of  Eliezer  of 
Damascus  being  his  heir,  and  when  he 
prajed  that  Ishmael  might  live  before  him, — 
as  if  he  were  to  have  no  other  son.  Mounts 
and  triumphs  when  he  goes  forth  at  God's 
command  to  offer  up  to  God  the  heir  of 
promise,  believing  that  He  was  able  even  to 
raise  him  from  the  dead.  Faith  in  its  ebb 
with  David  when  he  said:  "I  sliall  one  day 
fall  by  the  hand  of  Saul."  At  its  flow, 
when  he  wrote  in  the  118th  Psalm :  **  I 
shall  not  die  but  live,  and  declare  the  works 
of  the  Lord."  Faith  high  in  Elijah  when  he 
sent  for  Ahab  and  told  him  to  gather  to- 
gether all  the  prophets  of  Baal;  Tow,  when 
he  fled  from  the  face  of  Jezebel  and  sat 
down  under  the  juniper  tree,  with  the  prayer 
"Take  away  my  life,  for  I  am  no  better 
than  my  fathers."  Hard  to  believe  when  all 
appearances  are,  and  continue  to  be,  clean 
contrary  to  our  prayers.  The  part  of  faith 
to  hope  against  hof)e,  having  to  do  with  a 
God  to  whom  all  things  are  possible,  and 
who  adopts  as  his  title — "  Thou  that  hearest 
prayer  "  (Ps.  Ixv.  2).  (3)  Sweet  consolation 
to  a  suffering  child  to  know  that  he  has  at 
least  rest  and  deliverance  in  the  grave. 
"Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord, 
for  they  do  rest  from  their  labours  "  (Rev. 
xiv.  13).  Man  cannot  lay  on  his  afilicting 
hand  in  the  grave,  and  God  will  not.  A  be- 
liever's faith  may  not  be  able  to  see  deliver- 
ance on  this  side  of  death,  but  clearly  sees 
it  on  the  other.  (4)  A  believer  prai/s, 
although  answers  are  withheld  and  there 
appears  little  prospect  of  any.  Prayer  a 
necessity  of  his  nature.  A  latent  faith 
always  in  the  renevred  heart  that  God  is 
gracious,  and  that  He  is  the  hearer  and 
answerer  of  prayer. 

VI.  Expresses  his  disappointment  and 
the  grounds  of  it  (verses  25,  26). 

1.  The  grounds  of  his  disappointment. 
Verse  25. — "  Did  not  I  weep  for  him  that 
was  in  trouble  ?  Was  not  my  soul  grieved 
for  the  poor?"  His  sympathy  deep  and 
real.  Conscience  bore  its  testimony  to  the 
sincerity  of  his  charity.  Could  appeal  to 
those  around  him  for  the  general  and  genuine 
character  of  his  compassion.  The  question 
affirmed  by  the  admission  of  Eliphaz  (chap, 
iii.  3,  4).  Having  shown  sympathy  and 
compassion  to  others  when  in  trouble,  he 
calculated  on  experiencing  the  same  himself 
when  in  similar  circumstances.  The  same 
thought  expressed  by  the  Psalmist,  speaking 
as  the  type  of  Messiah  (Ps.  xxxv.  13,  14). 
A  natural  as  well  as  Scriptural  law — "  With 
the  same  measure  that  ye  mete  withal,  it 
shall  be  measured  to  you  agiin  (Luke  vi. 
38).    True  in  respect  to  God,  ^.hough  some- 

186 


times  for  a  time  apparently  otherwise.  Onfi 
of  the  laws  of  His  kingdom,— "Blessed  are 
the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy'* 
(Matt.  v.  7).  Generally,  though  not  always, 
true  in  relation  to  men.  Job  and  Job's 
Antitype  remarkable  examples  of  the  con- 
trary. In  Christ's  case,  unbounded  com- 
passion and  tenderest  sympathy  repaid  with 
cruelty  and  insult.  An  aggravation  of 
trouble  when  sympathy  and  compassion  are 
withheld  where  there  is  a  just  right  to  expect 
them.  Mark  of  monstrous  depravity  when 
the  sympathizing  and  compassionate  are 
treated  with  unkindness  and  cruelty. 

Job,  according  to  the  text,  a  beautiful 
example  of  Christian  sympathy.  The  ex- 
emplification of  the  precept:  "Weep  with 
them  that  weep"  (Rom.  xii.  15).  Re- 
markable manifestation  of  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit  in  patriarchal  times.  May  well  put 
many  living  under  the  Christian  dispensation 
to  the  blush.  The  great  want  in  the  Church 
of  Christ,  the  Master's  sympathy  and  com- 
passion for  the  poor  and  afflicted.  Yet  the 
glory  of  Christianity  and  the  evidence  of  its 
Divine  character,  that  such  a  s[urit  has  been 
so  largely  produced  under  it.  Among  its 
characteristic  precepts  are  :  "Be  pitiful," 
"  Put  on  bowels  of  mercies"  (1  Peter  iii.  8  ; 
Col.  iii.  12).  Christ's  compassionate  spirit,  in 
a  greater  or  less  degree,  infused  into  all  His 
members.  The  privilege  as  well  as  duty  of 
believers,  to  be  filled  and  pervaded  with  it 
(Eph.  V.  18).  Provision  made  for  this  in 
the  present  dispensation  by  the  full  be- 
stowment  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Such  sym- 
pathy and  compassion  the  necessary  qualifi- 
cation for  Christian  usefulness. 

2.  The  disappointment  itself.  Verse  26— 
"  When  I  looked  for  good,  then  evil  came 
unto  me ;  and  when  I  waited  for  (or 
expected)  light  (happiness  and  joy),  there 
came  darkness"  (trouble  and  distress). 
Natural  to  expect  happiness  as  the  result  of 
piety.  Godliness  has  the  "promise  of  the  life 
that  now  is  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to 
come"  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  Wisdom's  ways 
pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  peace. 
Experienced  as  a  matter  of  fact.  The  expe- 
rience of  Job  himself  previous  to  his 
calamities,  and  again  after  they  were  past. 
Promises  of  temporal  happiness  and  comfort 
to  be  understood  with  an  exception  of  need- 
ful trials.  Fear  of  future  trials  not  foreign 
to  Job  in  the  time  of  his  prosperity  (chap.  iii. 
25,  26;  i.  5;  ii.  10).  Observe— (1)  Trials 
as  well  as  comforts  necessary  in  a  state  of 
discipline.  Darkness  as  well  as  light  needful 
in  the  spiritual  as  in  the  natural  world. 
(2)  A  believer's  expectation,  if  good,  always 
realized,  though  not  always  in  this  life  or  in 
the  things  of  it.  His  trials  and  disappoint- 
ments blessings  as  well  as  his  comforts. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAP.   XXX. 


VII.  Enlarg^es  on  his  troubles  (verses 
27-31). 

1.  Incessant  inward  as  well  as  outward 
affliction.  Verse  27. — "My  bowels  boiled 
(with  inward  distres«,  as  Lam.  i.  20,  or  as 
tlie  physical  effect  of  his  disease),  and  rested 
not  (continued  to  do  so  without  inter- 
mission, night  and  day) ;  the  days  of  afflic- 
tion prevented  me"  (met  me  or  came  upon 
me  suddenly  and  unexpectedly — an  aggrava- 
tion of  the  trouble). 

2.  Continued  grief.  Verse  28. — "  I  went 
(moved  about)  mourning  (or  black,  in 
person  or  attire)  without  the  sun."  Not  as 
the  effect  of  exposure  to  the  heat ;  or,  in 
gloomy  solitary  places;  or,  in  a  state  of 
dejection  and  sorrow.  Reference  perhaps  to 
his  exnerience  previous  to  his  disease,  which 
probably  kept  him  confined  to  his  dwelling 
or  the  vicinity  of  it ;  enough  in  the  loss  of 
his  ten  children  to  occasion  it. 

3.  Public  and  unrestrained  complaint. 
Verse  28. — *'  I  stood  up  [through  deep 
earnestness  and  angnish],  and  I  cried  (as 
the  expression  of  deep  and  uncontrollable 
grief,  or  as  imploring  relief  and  aid)  in  the 
congregation'*  (assembled  for  public  busi- 
ness or  Divine  worship).  Here  alsa  probable 
reference  to  the  period  in  which  he  w^as  still 
able  to  mingle  with  others  and  to  appear  in 
the  public  assemblies,  and  hence  previous  to 
his  beinoj  smitten  with  his  leprosy.  Lepers 
excluded  from  society  (Lev.  v.  2,  3).  Miriam, 
under  the  same  disease,  shut  out  from  the 
camp  seven  days  (Numb.  xii.  15).  King 
Azariah,  when  a  leper,  obliged  to  dwell  in  a 
"  several,**  or  separate  house,  and  "  cut  off 
from  the  house  of  the  Lord  *'  (2  Chron  xxvi. 
20,  21.  Usual  for  Orientals  to  give  vent  to 
their  feelings  in  public. 

4.  Solitary/  moaning.  Verse  29. — "I  am 
a  brother  (by  close  resemblance)  to  dragons 
(or  jackals,  which  roam  in  solitary  places  and 
utter  doleful  and  hideous  cries,  especially  in 
the  night),  and  a  companion  to  owls'*  (or 
ostriches,  also  remarkable  for  their  loud 
nocturnal  cries  (Mic.  i.  8). 

5.  The  disfigurement  of  his  person,  and 
internal  physical  suffering.  Verse  30. — "  My 
skin  is  black  upon  me  (or,  becomes  black 
[and  falls]  from  off  me,  among  the  effects  of 
his  disease,  hence  called  the  black  leprosy : 
the  skin,  however,  also  blackened  by  grief, 
Psa.  cxix.  83;  Jer.  viii.  21;  Lam.  v.  16); 
and  my  bones  are  burned  with  heat'*  (as  the 
result  of  internal  inflammation,  or  expressive 
of  inward  distress,  Psa.  cii.  3). 

6.  His  whole  experience  one  of  sorrow  and 
lamentation.  Verse  31.—"  My  harp  also  is 
turned  to  mourning,  and  my  organ  (or  pipe) 
into  the  voice  of  them  that  weep'*  (as  at 
funerals — the    early    practice    of    funereal 


wailing  still  continued  in  the  East).  The 
harp,  and  organ  or  pipe,  instruments  ot 
music  earliest  in  use.  Mentioned  Gen.  iv.  39. 
Indicative  of  the  period  in  which  the 
patriarch  lived.  Especially  employed  on 
joyful  occasions.  The  language  descriptive 
of  a  melancholy  change  from  a  joyous  to  a 
sorrowful  experience.  The  sudden  transi- 
tion from  previous  joy  an  aggravation  of 
present  sorrow.  Observe — (1)  Job's  pre- 
vious life  one  rather  of  gaiety  than  gloom. 
True  piety  the  sister  of  innocent  pleasure. 
Wisdom's  ways  those  of  pleasantness.  The 
voice  of  rejoicing  and  salvation  heard  in  the 
tabernacles  of  the  righteous.  (2)  The  holiest 
heart  and  the  happiest  home  liable  to  be 
overtaken  by  sudden  and  overwhelming 
sorrow.  The  major  key  often  exchanged  lor 
the  minor,  and  the  song  of  gladness  fcr  the 
wail  of  grief.  His  Father's  "house"  the 
only  place  where  the  believer's  sun  never 
goes  down,  and  his  moon  never  withdraws 
itself.  Heaven  the  only  land  where  the 
harp  and  the  organ  are  always  in  use,  and 
the  garments  are  always  white. 

Job  held  up  in  these  tragic  verses  as  an 
affecting  picture  of  human  distress.  The 
inquiry  sugsiested — why  such  grief  and 
trouble  under  the  administration  of  a  bene 
volent  Creator?  Why  its  existence  at  all? 
Why  in  connection  with  comparative  inno- 
cence ?  Why  in  the  experience  of  a  child 
of  God  ?  (1)  The  existence  of  suffering 
easily  accounted  for  on  the  ground  that  sin 
is  in  the  world.  Sorrow  and  suffering  the 
shadow  cast  by  sin.  Sin  and  suffering  in- 
separably linked.  Absence  of  sorrow  impos- 
sible in  a  world  of  sin.  Suffering  to  be  viewed 
either — (i.)  As  the  necessary  and  inevitable 
accompaniment  of  sin,  as  pain  accompanies 
inflamation;  or  (ii.)  as  the  infliction  of  a 
penalty,  as  punishment  follows  transgression 
in  the  state ;  or  (iii.)  as  a  kind  and  salutary 
discipline,  like  that  employed  by  a  father 
with  his  children.  No  absolutely  innocent 
person  in  the  world.  The  comparatively 
innocent  necessarily  suffer  along  with  the 
guilty.  Often  suffer  in  consequence  of  the 
sin  and  suffering  of  others.  (2)  Suffering 
in  a  child  of  God  part  of  the  treatment  ne- 
cessary ibr  his  perfection  and  preparation 
for  his  eternal  inheritance.  A  need-be  for 
his  heaviness  through  manifold  tempi  a- 
tions.  Gold  necessarily  tried  and  purihed 
in  the  fire.  The  believer's  troubles  necessary 
for  the  exercise  and  development  of  the 
graces  of  the  Spirit.  Jklade  to  conduce  to 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  benefit  of  others. 
God  sometimes  tilorified  more  in  His  patient 
than  in  His  prosperous  children.  Suffering 
a  theatre  for  the  disi)lay  both  of  the  excel- 
lence and  reality  of  true  religion.  Often 
the  very  result  ot  the  character  and  condition 

187 


CHAP.  XXXI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


of  a  child  of  God.  Such  the  special  object 
of  Satan's  temptations  and  the  world's  per- 
secution. By  his  renewed  nature,  made 
more  sensible  of  the  evil  of  sin  within  him- 
self, and  more  deeply  affected  with  the 
sufferings  and  sins  of  others.  The  glory  and 
privilege  of  a  child  of  God  to  be  made  a  par- 


taker of  the  afflictions  of  Christ,  and  for  the 
same  object  (Col.  i.  24).  (3)  Suffering  and 
sorrow  to  be  expected  in  the  world  as  long 
as  Satan  is  permitted  to  go  up  and  down  in 
it  (chap.  i.  7).  This  not  always  to  be  the 
case  (Rev.  xx.  1 — 3). 


CHAPTER  XXXL 

JOFS  SELF-FINDIOATION,— HIS  SOLILOQUY  CONTINUED, 


Concludes  his  speeches  by  asolemn,  particu- 
lar, and  extended  declaration  of  the  purity 
and  uprightness  of  his  life.  Especial 
reference  to  his  private,  as  before  to  his 
public^  conduct.  Intended  to  silence  his 
accusers  and  justify  his  complaints.  Affords 
a  picture  of  an  outwardly  and  blameless 
character.  A  specimen,  presented  in  beauti- 
ful language,  of  a  pure  morality  accom- 
panied with,  and  based  upon,  an  ardent 
piety  and  genuine  religion.     Job  asserts — 

\/  I.  His  chastity.  Verse  1. — "  I  made  a 
covenant  with  (or  laid  asolemn  charge  upon) 
mine  eyes :  why  (or  how)  then  sliould  I 
look  (or  that  I  would  not  look)  upon  a  maid" 
[to  lust  after  her,  as  Matt.  v.  28].  Speaks 
especially  as  a  married  man,  and  with  refer- 
ence to  the  sin  of  adultery.  Already  begin- 
ning to  prevail  in  that  early  period,  par- 
ticularly with  the  rich  and  powerful.  Hence 
Abraham's  apprehension  and  temptation 
(Gen.  xii.  11 — 15);  and  Isaac's,  (Gen.  xxvi, 
7—10).    Observe— 

1.  The  text  the  language  of  holt/  resolu" 
Hon.    The  soul  to  act  as  lord  of  the  body. 
The  body  with  its  members,  organs,    and 
senses,  to  be  kept  in  subjection  (1  Cor.  ix. 
27).     The    avenues    to    temptation    to   be 
guarded.     The  eye  the  inlet  of  lust.     Occa- 
sions and  temptations  to  sin  to  be  guarded 
against  as  well  as  sin  itself.     The  neglect  of 
Job's  resolution  the  occasion  of  David's  fall 
and  broken  bones  (2  Sam.  xi.  2 — 4;  Ps.  11. 
8).     The    Saviour's    rule — "If    thine    eye 
offend  thee" — prove  a  constant  or  frequent 
occasion  of  sin  by  awaking  lust—  **  pluck  it 
out  " — remove  the  occasion  of  sin  at  what- 
ever cost  (Matt.  V.  28).     Eve's  looking  on 
the  forbidden  fruit  the  occasion  of  her  own 
fall  and  the  ruin  of  millions  of  her  offspring. 
Lot's  wife  looking  back  on  Sodom  the  cause 
of   her   petrifaction  into   a  pillar    of   salt. 
Dinah's  idle  curiosity  in  visiting  a  heathen 
city  to  see  its  women,  the  loss  of  her  own 
chastity.     Achan's  looking    on    the  golden 
wedge  and  Babylonish  garments  the  loss  of 
his  life  (Josh.  vii.  21).     Samson's  sleep  on 
Delilah's  lap  the  loss  of  his  locks  (Judges 
xvi.  19).     "  Look  not  on  the  wine  when  it  is 

188 


red"  (Prov.  xxiii.  31).  David's  (or 
Daniel's  ?)  prayer  :  "  Turn  away  mine  eyes 
from  beholding  vanity"  (Ps.  cxix.  37). 
Christian  and  Faithful  in  Vanity  Fair  re- 
fused even  to  look  upon  its  wares.  The 
contrast  of  the  text  in  2  Peter  ii.  14, 
••  Having  eyes  full  of  adultery." 

2.  Job's  reasons  for  his   resolution.     (1) 
His  preference  for  a  better  portion.     Verse  2. 
— "For  what  portion  of  God   is  there  [in 
such  a  case]    from  above?    and   what    in- 
heritance from    the    Almighty  on   high  P  '* 
Job  taught  to  distinguish  between  present 
pleasure  and  future  bliss,  and  between  the 
mere  gratification  of  lust  and  the  enjoymeiit 
of  true  happiness.     No  gratification  of  the 
senses  to  be  compared  to  the  enjoyment  of 
God's  favour.      A  man  must  either  forego 
the  pleasures  of  sin  or  the  joys  of  heaven. 
Nothing  unclean  admitted  within  the  New 
Jerusalem.     The  gratiQcation  of  sinful  pas- 
sion   incompatible  with   the   enjoyment   of 
God's    presence.       Observe — (i.)    In  order 
to   the  resisting   of  temptation    and  avoid- 
ing of  sin,    important  to   *'  hane    respect   to 
the  recompense  of  reward**  (Heb.   xi.  26). 
Thus  Moses  chose  rather  to  suffer  affliction 
with   the   people   of   God,  than    to    enjoy 
the  pleasures  of  sin,  which  are  but  for  a 
season  (Heb.  xi.  25).     Having  this  respect, 
Mary  chose  the  good  part,  and  turned  her 
back  on  the  world ;  not  having  it,  the  rich 
young  man  chose  the  world,  and  turned  his 
back  upon  Christ,     (ii.)  Necessary  to  choose 
between    the    enjoyment    of     sin    and    the 
enjoyment    of    God,   and    between  a  por- 
tion   in   this    world    and  one   in  the  next. 
The  whole  tenour  of  a  man's  life  here,  and 
the  whole  eternity  of  his  experience  here- 
after, determined  by  the  choice  he  makes 
between  the  two.     (iii.)  God  not  only  the 
Bestower  of  a  believer's  portion,  but  the 
portion  itself  (Ps.  xvi.  5).     Such  portion  to 
be  desired  in  preference  to  all  earthly  and 
sensuous  enjoyment,  as — First:  More  excel- 
lent  in  itself,   and   more   becoming  man's 
better  nature   as  a  moral  and  intellectual 
being.     Second:  More  satisfying  to  such  a 
being,  and  to  one  made  capable,  as  man  is, 
of  enjoying  his  Maker's  friendship.     Third: 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXXI. 


More  enduring,  the  one  tenninating  at  the 
farthest  with  death,  the  other  extending 
throughout  eternity.  Fourth :  Attended  with 
no  remorse.  Fifth:  Followed  by  no  penalty. 
(2)  His  dread  of  the  consequences  of  sin. 
Verse  3 — "Is  not  destruction  to  the 
wicked  P  and  a  strange  punishment  (a 
terrible  calamitv  or  'alienation* — viz., 
from  God  and  all  good)  to  the  workers  of 
iniquity  P  *'  Reference  to  the  "  terrors  of 
the  Lord"  important  in  persuading  our- 
selves, as  well  as  others,  to  the  avoidance  of 
sin  (2  Cor.  v.  11).  Ciirist's  argument, 
"  What  shall  a  man  be  profited,  if  he  should 
gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  P  " 
Better  to  enter  into  life  with  one  eye  or 
one  foot,  than  having  two  eves  or  two  feet  to 
be  cast  into  hell.  Better  lose  everything 
than  lose  heaven.  Every  loss  light  compared 
with  the  loss  of  the  soul.  Observe — (i.) 
Destruction  certain  to  the  wicked  and  im- 
penitent. The  wicked  turned  into  hell,  and 
all  the  nations  that  forget  God  (Psa.  ix.  17). 
(ii)  No  earthly  calamity  equal  to  that  which 
must  one  day  overtake  the  ungodly.  The 
destruction  of  the  Old  World  by  water,  and 
that  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  by  fire,  only  a 
foreshadowing  of  the  destruction  of  the 
impenitent  at  the  final  judgment.  Incon- 
ceivable terrors  involved  in  the  sentence: 
"Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels."  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  "  Everlasting 
destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord, 
and  from  the  glory  of  his  power  (2  Thess.  i, 
9).  Such  destruction  the  righteous  penalty 
of  wilful  transgression  of  the  Divine  law, 
rebellion  against  the  Divine  government, 
and  refusal  of  the  Divine  mercy.  Natural 
that  whatsoever  a  man  sovveth  that  he  should 
also  reap.  Destruction  and  misery  the  flower 
and  fruit  of  sin.  Sin  is  misery  m  the  seed; 
misery  is  only  sin  in  the  bloom.  (3)  The 
recollections  of  God's  constant  inspection. 
(Verse  4.) — "  Doth  not  he  see  my  ways, 
and  count  all  my  steps  ?  "  (or  actions, — every 
separate  act  or  passage  in  my  course  on 
earth)  Omniscience  a  necessary  attribute 
of  godhead.  An  open  eye  the  Egyptian 
hieroglyphic  for  deity.  "  Thou  God  seest 
me,"  the  guardian  of  Job's  life.  Not  easy 
to  sin  under  the  gaze  of  the  broad  eye  of 
the  Almighty.  Few  so  hardy  as  to  break  the 
Queen's  commands  with  the  Queen  herself 
looking  on.  The  practice  of  sin  the  result  of 
forgetfulness  of  God.  The  lan<;uage  ol  the 
heart  if  not  of  the  lips  of  the  ungodly, — No 
eye  shall  see  me  (ch.  xxiv.  15).  To  walk 
before  God  the  easy  and  natural  way  to  be 
perfect  and  upright  (Gen.  xvii.  1). 

II.    His  honesty,  uprightness,  and 
freedom  from  covetousuess  (verses  5—8). 


"If  I  have  walked  with  vanity  (lived  in 
the  practice  of  falsehood  and  hypocrisy),  or 
if  my  food  hath  hasted  to  deceit  (to  the 
commission  of  a  fraud) ;  let  me  be  weighed 
{Heb.y  'let  him — or  any  one— weigh  me ' )  in 
an  even  balance  [Heb.  *  in  the  balances  of 
righteousness,')  that  God  may  know  my 
integrity  (should  there  be  any  doubt  in  the 
matter,  which  however  is  impossible).  If 
my  step  hath  turned  out  of  the  way  (the 
straight  way,  or  way  of  truth  and  upright- 
ness, the  only  way  that  men  shoula  walk 
in),  and  mine  heart  walked  after  mine  eyes — 
(gone  out  in  covetous  desire  after  the  posses- 
sion of  what  I  have  seen,  as  Ahab's  heart 
went  after  Naboth's  vineyard, — the  eye 
being  the  inlet  of  covetousuess  as  well  as  of 
lust),  and  if  any  blot  (or  stain  of  wrong- 
doino^,  unjust  gain,  or  bribe  for  the  perver- 
sion of  justice)  hath  cleaved  to  my  hands 
(in  the  transaction  of  any  business  with  my 
fellow-men,  or  in  the  discharge  of  my  duty 
as  a  magistrate  and  a  judge) ;  then  let  me 
sow,  and  let  another  eat ;  yea,  let  my  off- 
spring (or  my  produce)  be  rooted  out."  The 
language — 

L  Of  conscious  innocence  and  integrity. 
Job  able  unhesitatingly  to  appeal  to  his 
neighbours  and  to  God  Himself  in  the  declara- 
tion of  his  honesty  and  uprightness  both  in 
private  and  public  life.  So  Samuel  at  Gilgal 
(1  Samuel  xii.  3  ;  and  Paul  at  Miletus  (Acts. 
XX.  18—20,  33  —  35).  Job's  character 
as  here  given  by  himself  only  that  already 
given  him  by  God. 

2.  Of  in  some  degree  at  least,  self-ignorance 
and  pride.  Job  apparently  still  too  confident 
in  his  own  righteousness.  Though  upright 
in  his  external  dealings,  and  blameless  in 
the  eyes  of  men,  yet,  weighed  "  in  the 
balances  of  righteousness,"  even  Job  found 
wanting  (Rom.  iii.  9,  10,  19,  23).  Much 
self-knowledge  yet  to  be  gained  by  him.  Job 
vet  to  take  the  place  of  the  publican — "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner "  (chap.  il.  4  ,• 
xUi.5,  6). 

3.  Of  sincerity.  A  mark  of  uprightness, 
when  we  are  not  only  willing  but  wishful,  if 
we  have  done  wrong,  to  suffer  for  it. 
David's  case  (Ps.  vii.  3—5.  Paul's  Acts 
xxv.  11). 

Job's  imprecation  suggests  that,  in  the 
providence  of  God,  punishment  in  this  world 
is  often  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sin. 
Cruelty  and  wrong  done  to  others  often 
punished  by  the  same  being  experienced  by 
ourselves.  Injustice  in  our  gams  punished 
by  a  blight  on  our  substance.  Same  prin- 
ciple acknowledged  in  the  next  sin  specified. 

III.  His  freedom  from  adulterous 
desires  and  practices.  Verses  9—12.— 
«If  miite   heart   hath    been   deceived  by 

189 


CHAP.  XXXI. 


BOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:  JOS. 


(or  enticed  towards)  a  woman  (especially 
one  married — temptation  from  a  maid  spoken 
of  already,  verse  1) ;  or  if  I  have  laid  wait 
at  my  neighbour's  door  (watching  the  oppor- 
tunity of  his  absence) ;  then  let  ray  wife 
(my  own  wife)  grind  (become  an  abject 
slave  ;  Exod.  xi.  5 ;  Is.  xlvii.  2  ;  and  concu- 
bine) to  another,  and  let  others  bow  down 
upon  her." 

Adultery  apparently  prevalent  in  the  time 
of  Job  and  the  writer  of  the  book  (chap. 
xxiv.  15).  Job  declares  his  freedom  from 
the  sin  as  an  exceptional  thing  among  the 
great  men  of  his  time  and  country.  A  sin  to 
which  his  riches  and  power  afforded,  as  in 
David's  case,  a  strong  temptation.  Not  un- 
common in  patriarciial  times  for  the  great 
to  take  another  man's  wife,  though  at  the 
expense  of  her  husband's  life.  Hence  Abra- 
ham's and  Isaac's  fear  for  their  wives' 
chastity  and  their  own  lives — the  one  in 
Egypt,  and  both  in  Gerar  (Gen.  xii.  12 ; 
XX.  2  ;  xxvi.  7).  One  of  the  ten  command- 
ments in  the  Decalogue  expressly  directed 
atjainst  this  sin.  Its  commission  punished 
with  death  (Lev.  xx.  10;  Deut.  xxii.  22). 
The  sin  apparently  prevalent  in  the  time  of 
David  and  Solomon  (Ps.  1.  18 ;  Prov.  vi. 
24 — 29  ;  vii.  5 — 9;  and  of  the  later  prophets, 
Jer.  V.  8  ;  ix.  2 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  6).  Common 
among  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  the  Saviour 
(John  viii.  3 — 9).  The  Pharisees  and  Rabbis 
themselves  said  to  have  been  notoriously 
guilty  of  it  (Rom.  ii.  22).  The  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  and  the  Great  Captivity  under 
the  Romans  ascribed  by  the  Talmud  to  its 
prevalence  for  forty  years  previous  to  that 
event. 

Job's  reasons  for  abstaining  from  this  sin. 
Verse  11. — 

1.  The  heinousness  of  the  crime  itself: 
"  For  this  is  an  heinous  crime."  Sin  to  be 
avoided  on  account  of  its  heinousness  and 
malignity,  apart  from  its  consequences 
(Jer.  xliv.  4).  Adultery  the  most  heinous 
form  of  covetousness  and  theft.  The  most 
aggravated  wrong  that  can  be  done  to 
another.  Inflicts  the  deepest  wound  and  in 
the  tenderest  part.  Robs  him  of  honour 
and  home.  Covers  his  family  with  shame. 
Defilement  of  a  man's  wife  worse  to  endure 
than  her  death.  Adultery  a  species  of 
murder.  The  ruin  of  the  injured  man's 
peace,  and  often  leading  to  bloodshed  and 
death. 

2.  Its  consequences.  These  were — (1) 
Civil  and  judicial,  "  It  is  an  iniquity  to  be 
punished  by  the  judges  " — probably  authori- 
tative umpires  or  arbitrators  in  the  case  of 
any  serious  charge  between  man  and  man, 
with  power  to  inflict  appropriate  penalty — 
usually  the  elders  of  the  people  (Deut.  xxi. 
2  J  Josh.  XX.  4).    Adultery  a  capital  crime, 

190 


not  only  among  the  Jews  but  other  nations 
of  antiquity.  The  magistrate  appointed  by 
God  to  be  a  terror  to  evil  doers  (Rom.  xiii. 
1 — 4).  Some  sins  only  cognizable  by  God; 
others  punishable  by  man.  A  special 
h<='inousness  in  a  crime  punishable  by  the 
civil  magistrate.  (2)  Natural  and  provi- 
dential. "For  it  is  a  fire  that  consumeth 
unto  destruction,  and  would  root  out  all 
mine  increase."  Sin  in  general,  and  sins 
like  adultery  in  particular,  a  "fire  taken 
into  the  bosom"  (Prov.  vi.  27).  Its 
tendency  to  destroy  comfort,  health,  reputa- 
tion, family,  estate ;  and  ultimately  the  soul 
itself  in  endless  perdition.  One  single  act 
brought  constant  trouble  into  David's  house 
and  lasting  sorrow  into  his  heart.  Sin  de- 
structive in  its  own  nature ;  and  some  sins 
naturally  more  destructive  than  others. 
Many,  if  not  all,  sins  carry  with  them  their 
own  punishment. 

The  imprecation  in  the  text  strongly 
declarative  of  Job's  innocence.  The  evil 
imprecated,  the  very  last  a  man  would  wish 
to  himself.  The  penalty  invoked  m  accord- 
ance with  the  nature  of  the  offence.  *'  By 
what  a  man  sins  by  that  is  he  punished." 
— Jewish  Proverb.  David's  adultery  with 
Bathsheba  is  punished  with  incest  between 
his  son  and  daughter,  and  the  defilement  of 
his  concubines  by  his  own  son.  His  murder 
of  Uriah  is  punished  by  the  murder  of  his 
incestuous  son  by  the  hand  of  his  own 
brother  (2  Sam.  xiii.  16). 

IV.  His  justice  and  humanity  to  his 
servants  or  slaves.  Verse  13. — "If  I  did 

despise  the  cause  (or  rights)  of  my  man- 
servant, or  of  my  maidservant  (my  bondman 
or  my  bondwoman,  my  male  or  female  slave), 
when  they  contended  (had  any  controversy) 
with  me."  In  the  East,  masters  viewed  as 
having  absolute  right  over  their  servants  or 
slaves.  These  considered  a  portion  of  the 
master's  property.  Were  not  permitted  to 
appear  in  a  court  of  justice  against  him. 
Might  therefore  be  the  object  of  any  op- 
pression without  human  redress.  Job's 
Conduct  towards  his  slaves  the  opposite  of 
tiiat  of  an  oppressor.  Probably  exceptional, 
and  just  such  as  became  a  professed  servant 
of  tlie  true  God.  His  slaves  treated  by  him, 
in  the  case  of  any  complaint,  as  having  rights 
equal  with  his  own. 

The  grounds  of  this  treatment  of  his  slaves 
or  servants : — 

1.  The  consideration  that  for  his  conduct 
towards  them  he  was  amenable  to  God. 
Verse  14. — "What  then  should  I  do  when 
God  riseth  up?  (to  examine  into  my  conduct, 
or  to  execute  judgment  on  me  as  a  trans- 
gressor, or  finally,  to  plead  the  cause  of  the 
oppressed  slave),  and  when  he  visiteth  (foi 


EOMILF.TIC  COKMENTAUT:  JOB, 


CHAP.   XXXI. 


the  examination  of  conduct  or  the  punish- 
ment of  oil'cnces)  wliat  should  I  answer  him** 
(for  such  conduct,  so  as  to  escape  His  anger)  ? 
Observe — (1)  The  fear  of  God  an  effectual 
restraint  on  Job  atid  all  good  men.  Joseph's 
case:  " Ho ?f  shall  1  do  this  great  wicked- 
ness, and  sin  against  God  ?  *'  The  principle 
of  Nehemiah's  upright  and  disinterested 
conduct  (Neh.  v.  15).  (2)  A  day  coming  in 
which  God  makes  inquisition  into  the  conduct 
both  of  masters  and  servants^  rulers  and 
ruled.  The  highest  as  well  as  the  lowest 
amenable  to  His  tribunal.  (3)  God  viewed 
by  the  natural  conscience  as  a  righteous  and 
impartial  judge.  (4)  Justice  even  in  respect 
to  the  most  outcast,  a  duty  written  on  the  con- 
science  of  mankind.  (5)  Men  helpless  against 
God* s  determination  to  punish  the  transgressor. 
The  most  powerful  tyrant  leebler  than  the 
puniest  insect  before  Him. 

2.  As  hading  the  same  Creator,  and  mode 
of  creation.  Verse  15. — "Did  not  he  that 
made  me  in  the  womb  make  him  ?  '*  Master 
and  servant  the  similar  work  of  the  same 
Creator,  and  therefore  both  equally  valued 
and  cared  for  by  Him,  and  to  be  treated  on 
equal  terms  by  each  other. 

3.  As  having  the  same  nature.  **  Did  not 
one  fashion  us  in  the  womb  "  (or,  "  did  not 
He  fashion  us  in  one  and  the  same  womb — one 
by  similarity,  not  numerically).  Botli  formed 
in  tlie  same  manner  and  possessed  of  the 
same  human  nature.  A  woman's  womb  the 
origin  of  both  (Mai.  ii.  10).  The  funda- 
mental  equality  of  mankind  thus  strongly 
asserted.  The  sentiment  confirmed  by  the 
Apostle — "  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all 
nations  of  men,"  &c.  (Acts  xvii.  26).  The 
Negro  and  the  Papuan  with  the  same 
essential  features  of  humanity  as  the 
European.  The  slave  possessed  of  the  same 
faculties  and  powers,  both  moral  and  intel- 
|lectual,  as  his  master.     The  points  in  which 

men  naturally  differ  from  each  other  small 
and  few  compared  with  those  in  which  all 
are  alike.  Men  in  a  proper  sense  brethren, 
of  whatever  nation  or  class  in  society. 
The  language  of  Job  strikes  at  the  root  of 
slavery  as  justified  by  inferiority  of  race. 
Equality  between  master  and  servant,  in  the 
eyes  of  God,  tiie  teaching  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Slavery  not  expressly  forbidden,  but 
principles  inculcated  which  necessarily  lead 
to  its  overthrow  as  Christianity  advances. 
The  views  expressed  by  Job,  in  respect  to 
man,  of  an  advanced  character  for  that  period 
of  the  world.  Only  even  now  becoming 
universally  acknowledged  and  acted  upon  by 
the  Christian  Church.  Sentiments  and 
practice  of  an  opposite  kind  till  very  lately 
prevalent  in  a  large  portion  of  the  Christian 
world.  Even  Christians  justified  the  poet's 
satire— 


"  Man  finds  his  fellow  guilty  of  a  skin 
Not  coloured  like  his    own  ;  and  having 

power 
To  enforce  the  wrong,  for  such  a  worthy 

cause 
Dooms   and  devotes   him   as   his   lawful 

prey." 

y.  His  benevolence  and  kindness  to 
the  poor.  Verses  16, 17.—  "  If  1  have  with- 
held the  poor   from  their  desire  (their  due 
wages,  or  rather  the  perquisites  for  which 
they  looked  as  somei  hiug  belonging  to  them), 
or  have  caused  the  eyes  of  the   widow  to 
fail    [by  long   withholding   from    her    the 
expected  help  or  redress]  ;    or  have  eaten 
my  morsel  (or  bread)  alone,  and  the  father- 
less have  not  eaten  thereof."     Claims  of  the 
poor   constantly  recognized  in  the  law   of 
Moses.     Perquisites  appointed  for  them  in 
the  harvest  and  in  the  vintage  (Lev.  xix.  9; 
xxiii.  22)  ;  in  every  seventh  year  (Exod.  xxiii. 
11)  ;  and  in  every  third  year's  tithes  (Dent, 
xiv.  28,  29).  Kindness  and  readiness  to  help 
the  poor  strictly  enjoined  (Deut.  xv.  7 — 11). 
Their   wages   to    be   promptly    paid    them 
(Lev.  xix.  13).     Observe — Help  as  well  as 
justice  to  the  poor  to  be  not  only  rendered, 
but  rendered  promptly.     He  gives  twice  who 
gives  at  once. — Latin  Proverb.     Job's  con- 
duct the  opposite  of  that  of  the  unjust  judge 
in  the  parable  (Luke  xviii.  2,    &c.). — Pro- 
vision   made    by   the   Mosaic   law  for  the 
widow  in  common  with  the  poor  in  general. 
Their  perquisites  the  same  (Deut.  xix.  21). 
Her  raiment  not   to   be   taken   to   pledge 
(Deut.    xxiv.    17).       Herself    not    to     be 
harrassed  or  afilicted  (Exod.  xxii.  22).     A 
curse   pronounced    on    those    who    should 
wrong    her    or    "  pervert    her   judgment " 
(Deut.  xxvii.  19).    Job,  probably  long  before 
the  law  was  given,  careful  to  afford  the  poor 
and  the  widow  their  just  rights,  and  to  fulfil 
their    reasonable    expectations.       The    law 
from    Sinai    a  Divine   sanction    to    duties 
already    performed    by    many    without   it, 
through  the  law  written  on  the  conscience, 
and  the  princii)le  of  grace  infused  by  the 
Holy  Spirit. — Kindness  to  and  care  of  the 
fatherless  also  strictly  enjoined  by  the  Divine 
law.     These  objects  of  sympathy  and  com- 
passion usually  joined  with  the  poor  and  the 
widow.     Job's  table  open  to  the  poor  and 
needy.     Common  in  the  East  to  admit  poor 
persons  and  strangers  to  their  table  or  to 
send  them  portions  from  it.     Hospitality  a 
cardinal  virtue  among  the  Arabs.      To  be 
cultivated  as  a  Christian  grace  (Rom.  xii.  13; 
Heb.  xiii.  2).     Enjoined  as  a  (Christian  duty 
(Luke  xiv.  13).     "  Ready  to  distribute,"  a 
New  Testament   precept   (1   Tim.  vi.  18). 
The  section  suggestive  of  the  duty  of 

191 


OHAP.  XXZL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


Slndness  to  the  poor. 

Reasons  and  motives  for  its  exercise — 

1.  The  desire  to  relieve  suffering  and 
extend  liappiness. 

2.  The  claim  the  poor  have  upon  us  as 
fellow  -  creatures  and  partakers  of  our 
common  humanity.  A  Divine  principle  that 
wnere  there  is  lack  oq  the  part  of  any 
member  of  the  great  family,  it  should  be 
supplied  out  of  the  abundance  of  others 
(2  Cor.  viii.  13—15).  All  living  creatures, 
according  to  their  nature,  claim  our  help  in 
suffering  circumstances.  Still  more  those  of 
our  own  flesh.  Kindness  and  benevolence 
to  the  poor  and  destitute  allied  to  justice. 
Love  a  debt  we  owe  to  all  our  brethren. 
Kindness  to  the  poor  only  one  form  of  that 
love  (Rom.  xiii.  8 — 10). 

3.  The  principle  that  we  should  do  to 
others  as  we  would  that  they  should  do  to 
us  in  similar  circumstances  (Luke  vi.  31). 

4.  The  will  and  authority  of  our  common 
Maker  and  Parent. 

5.  The  example  of  the  heavenly  Father 
(Imke  vi.  35,  36). 

6.  The  special  example  of  Christ,  who 
**  for  our  sakes  became  poorthat  we  through  his 
poverty  might  become  rich"  (2  Cor.  viii.  9). 
His  life  a  going  about  doing  good. 

7.  The  manner  in  which  God  has  iden- 
tified the  cause  of  the  poor  with  His  own, 
and  in  which  Christ  has  done  that  of  His 
disciples  (Prov.  xix.  17 ;  Matt.  xxv. 
40,  45).  ^ 

8.  Active  kindness  to  the  poor  a  fruit  of 
the  Spirit,  and  an  instinct  of  the  new  nature 
created  in  a  believer  aft  er  the  image  of  God, 
(Gal.  v.  22;  Col.  iii.  10—12). 

Lower  and  less  worthy  considerations — 

1.  The  pleasure  in  the  exercise  of  the 
benevolent  affections,  in  relieving  the  suffer- 
ings and  contributing  to  the  happiness  of 
others.     The  luxury  of  doing  good. 

2.  The  remembrance  of  our  own  liability 
to  poverty  and  suffering,  and  our  possible 
need  of  the  help  and  sympathy  of  others. 

3.  The  reward  in  an  approving  conscience 
and  the  "  blessing  of  those  who  were  ready 
to  perish"  (chap.  xxix.  13.) 

The  exercise  of  kindness  and  benevolence 
marred  by  the  introduction  of  selfish 
elements. 

Kindness  to  the  poor  and  needy  to  be — 

1.  Free  and  spontaneous. 

2.  Disinterested  and  pure  from  selfish 
motives. 

3.  Sincere  and  undisserabled. 
4   Prompt  and  seasonable. 

5.  Unwearied  and  persevering. 

6.  Self-denying  as  far  as  is  necessary. 

7.  Impartial  and  general. 
192 


8.  Up  to  our  ability  and  opportunity. 

9.  Judicious  and  discriminating.  Help 
given  to  the  poor,  without  judgment  and 
discretion,  may  be  more  injurious  than 
beneficial.  Our  charity,  like  God's,  to 
be  directed  by  "  wisdom  and  prudence " 
(Eph.  i.  8).  Relief  not  only  to  be  ^iven, 
but  given  to  the  proper  objects  and  in  the 
proper  ybr/?^. 

10.  Hearty  and  cheerful.  Kind  deeds  to 
be  accompanied  with  kind  words  and  kind 
looks  (Rom.  xii.  8).  The  manner  of  the 
deed  often  as  important  as  the  deed  itself. 

Job's  reason  for  his  assertion,  with 
stronger  affirmation  of  it.  Verse  1 8. — "  For 
from  my  youth,  he  (the  fatherless)  was 
brought  up  with  me  as  with  a  father,  and  1 
have  guided  (helped  or  comforted)  her  (the 
widow)  from  my  mother's  womb  "  (a  strong 
hyperbole,  meaning,  "from  my  earliest 
years").  To  assert  more  strongly  his 
benevolence,  he  assigns  a  reason  for  it,  and 
adds  something  in  regard  to  its  exercise. 
With  him  the  practice  was  nothing  new. 
Benevolence  was  his  natural  disposition. 
Speaks  of  it  as  something  born  with  him. 
Kindness  to  the  widow  and  fatherless  had 
been  practised  by  him  from  his  earliest 
years.  Had  grown  with  him  into  a  habit  or 
second  nature.  Much  of  this  habit  probably 
due  to  the  character,  and  care  of  his  parents. 
Neither  the  name  of  his  father  nor  mother 
mentioned;  but  their  eulogy  unintentionally 
written  in  these  words.  His  home  a  pious 
one,  and  his  up-bringing  according  to  god- 
liness. Care  early  bestowed  by  his  parents 
on  his  moral  training.  Observe,  in  respect 
to — 

Early  moral  training — 

1.  Some  born  with  dispositions  naturally 
more  beneoolent  than  others.  Such  a  disposi- 
tion a  favour  from  the  Author  of  our  being. 
Responsibility  connected  with  its  cultivation 
and  exercise.  Natural  disposition  to  bene- 
volence not  necessarily  followed  by  the  wise, 
persevering,  and  self-denying  practice  of  it. 
In  Job's  case,  the  disposition  fostered  by 
his  parents,  and  improved  by  himself  through 
the  constant  exercise  of  kindness  to  the 
poor  and  needy.  All  probably  born  with 
more  or  less  of  such  a  disposition  to  begin 
with.  A  fragment  of  the  Divine  image  im- 
parted in  creation.  The  least  of  it  capable 
of  increase  through  cultivation  and  practice. 
Its  introduction  in  early  life  possible,  and  to 
be  expected  under  the  Christian  economy  and 
the  dispensation  of  tlie  Spirit.  The  natural 
disposition  of  children  often  an  inheritance 
from  their  parents. 

2.  Children  capable  of  being  trained  to  the 
lUBercise  of  the  benevolent  affections.    To  bf 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JOB, 


CHAP.   XXXI. 


trained  to  **  minister  "  and  to  show  kindness 
to  the  poor  and  suffering,  one  of  the  most 
important  parts  of  a  ciuld's  education.  Such 
education  more  especially  devolvinj^  upon 
the  parents,  and  particularly  the  mother. 
Under  the  parents'  careful  and  constant 
attention,  habits  of  good-doing  capable  of 
being  formed  in  early  life. 

3.  Early  habits  of  benevolence  among  the 
'principal  means  of  forming  the  character  in 
after  years.  A  child  trained  to  such  habits 
may  become,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  a 
Howard  or  an  Elizabeth  Fry.  A  Nero  only 
the  development  of  a  child  allowed  to  take 
pleasure  in  torturing  a  bird,  or  sticking  a  pin 
through  a  fly.  The  child  the  father  to  the  man. 

Job  resumes  the  declaration  of  his  humanity 
and  benevolence,  and  asserts  it  in  respect  to 
clothing  as  well  as  feeding  the  poor.  Verses 
19,  20. — "If  I  have  seen  any  perish  for 
want  of  clothing,  or  any  poor  without 
covering  (by  night  or  by  day)  ;  if  his  loins 
have  not  blessed  me  (in  gratitude  for 
my  clothing  them),  and  if  he  were  not 
warmed  with  the  fleece  of  my  sheep  '* 
(or  lambs,  woven  into  cloth  to  serve  him 
for  a  garment  by  day  and  a  coverlet  by 
night).  Clothing  the  poor  a  needful 
form  of  benevolence  in  Arabia  as  well  as 
in  Britain.  The  cold  of  winter  at  times 
severe,  all  the  more  sensible  after  the  ex- 
treme heat  of  summer.  The  nights  often 
as  cold  as  the  days  are  hot.  Clothing  especially 
manufactured  from  the  wool  of  sheep;  a 
coarser  kind  from  the  hair  of  the  camels. 
The  earliest  kind  of  clothing  the  skins  of 
animals  (Gen.  iii.  21).  The  nex^  step  a 
garment  made  of  the  wool  woven  im.o  cloth. 
Sheep  chiefly  valuable  in  the  EasI  on  this 
account.  The  wool  not  only  a  beneficent 
provision  for  the  animal  itself,  but  for  man 
who  was  to  be  its  keeper.  One  of  the 
sons  of  Adam,  and  the  first  martyr,  a  keeper 
of  sheep  (Gen.  iv.  2). 

Clothing  the  poor  repeatedly  mentioned 
in  Scripture  as  one  of  the  duties  of  charity. 
One  of  the  forms  of  loving  service  rehearsed 
by  Christ  from  the  judgment-seat,  as  having 
been  performed  by  the  righteous  on  Himself 
in  the  person  of  His  followers.  (Matt.  xxv. 
36).  The  duty  enjoined  by  the  Baptist  as  a 
proof  of  true  repentance — "He  that  hath 
two  coats  let  him  give  to  him  that  hath  none." 
The  name  of  Doicas  now  a  household  word, 
from  her  kindness  in  clothing  the  poor. 
Perhaps  as  many  perish  for  want  of  cloth- 
ing as  for  want  of  bread.  To  be  feared 
that  garments  lie  in  the  chest,  or  hang  in 
the  wardrobe,  which  ought  to  clothe  the 
"loins"  of  the  poor.  "The  boards  of  my 
floor  can  well  want  carpets  while  so  many 
of  tlie  poor  around  me  want  clothes  to  their 
backs"  {Fenelon), 

X3 


Declares,  further,  his  humanity  negatively. 
Had  never  used  intimidation  or  violence  in 
regard  to  the  fatherless,  nor  used  his  influ- 
ence in  court  to  their  disadvantage.  Verse 
21. — "  If  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  asrainst 
the  fatherless  (eith(T  to  threaten  or  oppress 
him, — to  'smite  with  the  fist  of  wicked- 
ness,' Is.  Iviii.  4),  when  I  saw  my  help  (or 
advantage,  or  those  who  were  ready  to  sup- 
port me)  in  the  gate  "  (or  court  of  justice, 
where  a  controversy  was  pending  between 
us).     Observe: — 

1.  Humanity  exercised  as  well  in  what 
we  refrain  from  doing  as  in  what  we  do. 

2.  A  strong  temptation  to  the  rich  and 
powerful  to  take  advantage  of  their  position 
in  a  dispute  with  the  poor.  Cases  of  com- 
plaint against  injury  usually  decided  in  the 
east  by  the  opinion  of  the  judge  or  Kadi,  or 
by  the  voice  of  the  majority  of  elders.  A 
man  of  power  and  influence  easily  able  to 
carry  a  case  in  his  favour  against  the  weak 
and  defenceless.  Such  cases  of  complaint 
probably  not  infrequent  where  one  man 
possessed  such  numerous  flocks  and  herds, 
and  carried  on  so  extensive  a  husbandry. 
The  greatest  man  in  the  land  of  Uz  might 
easily  have  used  his  power  and  influence  in 
such  a  case,  but  had  ever  refrained  from 
doing  so. 

3.  As  much  principle  often  required  to 
abstain  from  taking  advantage  of  our  posi- 
tion and  influence  in  a  dispute  with  others, 
as  to  bestow  a  positive  benefit.  Jezebel's 
wickedness  displayed  in  her  counting  upon 
her  power  with  the  elders  and  nobles  in  the 
court  to  obtain  the  vineyard  of  Naboth 
(1  Kings  xxi.  7—13). 

Closes  the  declaration  of  his  humanity  to 
the  poor  with  an  imprecation  in  case  of  guilt. 
Verse  22. — "  Then  let  mine  arm  (the  upper 
arm,  from  the  elbow  upwards)  fall  from  the 
shoulder  blade,  and  mine  arm  (the  fore-arm, 
between  the  wrist  and  the  elbow)  be  broken 
from  the  bone "  (or  upper  arrn  to  which  it 
is  attached).  Reference  to  the  whole  of  the 
preceding  declaration  in  regard  to  his  hu- 
manity to  the  poor,  but  more  especially  to 
the  last-mentioned  particular — "  If  I  have 
lifted,"  &c.  The  punishment  imprecated 
always  corresponding  with  the  offence  sup- 
posed to  have  been  committed.  On  the 
same  principle,  Cranmer  held  his  right  liand 
over  the  burning  pile  to  be  first  consumed, 
as  the  member  which  had  signed  the  recan- 
tation made  against  his  conscience  and 
against  the  truth.  The  penalty  conceived 
justly  to  fall  especially  on  the  member  or 
organ  which  was  more  especially  concerned 
in  the  offence,  Men  convicted  of  theft 
among  the  Copts  not  unfrequently  found 
with  their  hands  cut  off. 

Adds  a  reason  for  his  declared  conduct. 

193 


CHAP.  XXXL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY i  JOB. 


Verse  23.—"  For  destruction  from  God  was 
a  terror  unto  me,  and  by  reason  of  his 
highness,  I  could  not  endure "  (either  to 
commit  the  sin  or  meet  His  wrath).  Simi- 
lar sentiment  expressed  in  verses  3  and  14. 
The  reason  given  with  reference  to  all  the 
particulars  of  his  conduct  just  luentioned, 
but  more  especially  to  the  last.  Observe — 
The  fear  of  God  a  good  man^s  preservatioe 
against  sin.  Seen  in  the  case  of  Joseph  and 
Neheini;ih  as  well  as  of  Job.  The  considera- 
tiou  of  God's  displeasure  against  the  sin- 
ner and  the  punishment  threatened  against 
the  sin,  one  motive  for  resisting  temptation 
and  practising  good,  though  not  the  highest. 
Kather  the  List  source  of  defence  against 
temptation  when  others  fail.  Better  to 
abstain  from  sin  and  practice  good,  from 
hatred  to  sin  itself  and  from  love  to  God 
and  good-doing,  than  from  fear  of  His 
wrath.  _  In  Gospel  exhortations  to  resist 
temptation  and  to  do  good,  appeals  rather 
made  to  the  believer's  gratitude  for  mercies 
received,  to  his  position  and  privileges  in 
Christ,  and  to  the  example  of  his  Divine 
Master  and  Father,  than  to  his  fears  of  pun- 
ishment and  the  Divine  anger.  Fear  a  right 
and  important  motive,  but  rather  for  the 
servant  than  the  child.  "  Ye  have  not  re- 
ceived the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear, 
but  ye  have  received  the  spirit  of  adoption, 
whereby  we  cry:  Abba,  Father"  (Rom. 
viii.  15).  Yet  a  loving  and  right-minded 
child  will  fear  to  offend  a  father,  even  more 
than  a  servant  fears  to  oii'end  a  master.  Love 
a  more  powerful  principle  than  fear;  yet 
fear  may  be  called  in  to  help  when  love  is 
not  sufficiently  strong  in  itself. 

V.  Declares  his  freedom  from  idolatry 
both  iu  its  spiritual  and  external  form, 
both  secret  and  open,  in  heart  and  in 
life^  (verses  24—28).  Specifies  the  two 
leading  forms  of  idolatry — Mammonism  and 
Sabseism — the  trust  in  and  love  of  riches, 
and  the  worship  of  idols  in  the  ordinary 
sense  of  the  word  ;  iiere  that  of  the  sun  and 
moon.  The  one  the  idolatry  of  the  hearty 
the  other  that  of  the  outward  act.  Job 
clears  himself  from  both. 

1.  From  Mammonism^  or  the  trust  in  and 
love  of  riches.  Verses  24,  25. — "  If  I  have 
made  gold  my  hope,  or  have  said  to  the  fine 
Igold,  thou  art  my  confidence ;  if  I  rejoiced 
'because  my  wealth  was  great,  and  because 
mine  hand  had  gotten  much.'*  (Note — 
the  language  of  idolatry, — *'  Mine  hand  had 
gotten,"  instead  of — "  the  Lord  had  given  " 
—the  language  of  a  servant  of  God).  Job 
abjures  as  forms  of 

Heart-idolatry, 

1.  Trust  in  riches.    Riches  naturally  and 
194 


easily  trusted  in  by  an  unrenewed  heart. 
Money  ad(5lence  (Eccles.  vii.  12).  Ansvi^er- 
eih  all  things  (Eeclcs.  x.  19).  Trust  apt  to 
be  placed  in  riches  for  happiness  in  general. 
More  particularly— (L)  For  acquisition  of 
the  means  of  life  and  sources  of  enjoyment. 
(2)  For  defence  against  suffering  and  the 
assaults  of  others.  (3)  For  power  and  po- 
sition in  the  world.  Trust  in  money  a  com- 
mon form  of  idolatry.  "  Soul,  thou  hast 
much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years;  take 
thine  ease,"  &c.  Trust  in  Himself  required 
by  God  from  His  intelligent  creatures.  That 
trust  transferred  to  any  other  person  or 
thing,  in  God's  sight  idolatry.  Trust  in 
riches  contrasted  in  the  Scriptures  Mdth  trust 
in  God  (Ps.  lii.  7 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17).  The 
former  characteristic  of  the  ungodly;  the 
latter,  of  the  righteous.  Believers  cautioned 
not  to  trust  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the 
living  God  (1  Tim.  vi.  17).  Trust  in  riches 
incompatible  with  entrance  into  the  king- 
dom of  God  (Mark  x.  24).  The  rich  man 
not  to  glory  in  his  riches,  but  in  the  Lord 
(Jer.  ix.  23,  24;  1  Cor  i.  31).  God  and 
not  riches  to  be  trusted  in  for  our  daiiy 
bread.  Hence  the  petition:  "Give  us  this 
da;y,"  &c.^  Man's  life  not  in  the  abundance 
of  the  things  he  p'ssesses.  Liveth  not  by 
bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  of  God 
(Matt.  iv.  4).  liiches  not  given  to  be  trusted 
in,  but  to  be  employed  by  us  as  stewards, 
in  the  service  of  the  Master  and  for  tlie 
benefit  of  others  as  well  as  ourselves,  in 
obedience  to  His  will,aud  in  dependence  on 
His  blessing. 

To  trust  in  riches  instead  of  God  not  only 
wicked  but  foolish^  as— (1)  Riches  are  un- 
certain, and  may  soon  and  suddenly  cease  to 
be  ours.  (2)  They  are  unable  to  render  us 
either  safe  or  happy  even  while  we  possess 
them.  (3)  They  fail  to  meet  the  most  im- 
portant exigences  of  our  nature  as  moral 
and  responsible  creatures.  (4)  They  are 
unable  to  accompany  us  into  another  world. 

The  possession  of  riches  to  be  distin- 
guished from  trust  in  them.  Money  well 
employed,  a  blessing;  when  allowed  to  usurp 
the  place  of  God  as  our  trust  and  confi- 
dence, a  curse.  The  young  man  iu  the 
Gospel  an  example  of  trust  in  riches,  not- 
withstanding a  great  appearance  of  piety 
and  morality.  Unable  to  give  them  up  to 
follow  Christ,  because  looking  to  them  to 
make  him  happy  rather  than  to  God.  A. 
test  as  to  whethei  we  rre  trusting  in  riches 
— Am  I  ready  cheerfully  to  give  tliem  up  at 
God's  will  and  for  God's  service  ?  And, 
What  proportion  of  my  substance  do  1  give 
for  the  extension  of  His  kingdom,  and  the 
promotion  of  His  cause  in  the  world  ? 

2.  Love  of  riches.  Job  neither  trusted  in 
his  wealth  nor  rejoiced  in  it.    Riches  a  good, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT JHY:  JOB. 


CHA?.  XXII 


but  not  the  chief  good.  If  riches  increase, 
the  heart  not  therefore  to  be  set  upon  them 
(Ps.  Ixii.  10).  Observe — (1)  Nof  money,  but 
the  love  of  ity  the  root  of  all  evil  (1  Tim. 
vi.  10).  A  lawful,  as  well  as  an  unlawful, 
rejoicing  in  our  possessions  (Deut.  xii.  7; 
Eccles.  li.  7 ;  iv.  26).  Lawfully  rejoiced  in, 
when  viewed  not  as  what  our  own  hand  iias 
gotten,  but  as  what  God  has  given ;  and  not 
as  given  for  our  own  exclusive  enjoyment, 
but  also  for  the  benefit  of  others  and  the 
Master's  service.  Riches  loved  and  idolized — 
(i.)  When  their  acquisition  and  enjoyment 
afford  us  more  pleasure  and  delight  than 
the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  God.  (ii.) 
When  we  are  more  concerned  about  the 
acquisition  and  increase  of  them  than  about 
the  enjoyment  of  God's  favour  and  the 
advancement  of  His  cause,  (iii.)  When  we 
find  it  difficult  to  give  up  any  consi- 
derable portion  of  them  at  God's  will  and 
for  the  promotion  of  His  glory  in  the  world. 

(2)  The  love  of  money  incompatible  with  the 
love  of  God  (Matt.  vi.  24;  1  John  ii.  15). 
Hence  covetousness,  or  the  love  of  riches, 
idolatry  (Col.  iii.  5 ;  Eph.  v.  5).  Supreme 
love  to  God  as  the  All-good,  required 
of  His  intelligent  creatures,  as  truly  as 
as  undivided  trust  in  Him  as  the  Almighty. 

(3)  Love  of  riches  distinct  from  a  proper 
appreciation  of  them.  Riches  as  merely 
possessed  by  us,  a  blessing ;  a  curse,  when 
they  possess  us.  As  a  mere  possession, 
they  are  worthless;  as  a  means  of  doing 
good  and  glorifying  God,  invaluable. 

Job's  wealth  not  taken  from  him  either 
for  his  trust  in  it  or  his  fondness  of  it,  any 
more  than  for  his  unlawful  acquisition  of  it, 
or  any  evil  use  which  he  made  of  it. 

Job  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit  as  well  as 
by  the  light  of  nature,  to  view  heart-idolatry, 
or  the  worship  of  riches,  as  heinous  in  God's 
sight  as  outward  idolatry,  or  the  worship 
of  sun  and  moon.  The  view  confirmed  in 
the  New  Testament  (Eph.  v.  5). 

8.  Job  equally  abjures  the  second  form^  of 
idolatry, — the  worship  of  fictitious  divinities, 
or  of  idols  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word, 
— here,  that  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  especially 
the  sun  and  moon.  Verses  26,  27.— "If  1 
beheld  the  sim  {Heb.  *  light,'— a  poetic  name 
for  the  sun,  which  from  its  luminous  atmo- 
sphere has  been  constituted  a  fountain  of 
light  to  the  earth  and  other  planets),  when 
it  shined  [in  its  glorious  elTulgence],  or  the 
moon  walking  in  brightness  (advancing  like 
an  orb  of  burnished  silver  in  her  couise 
through  the  heavens);  and  my  heart  (the 
seat  of  the  affections,  and  required  in  wor- 
ship) hath  been  secretly  [while  I  have  out- 
wardly been  a  worshipper  of  the  only  true 
God,  and  because  afraid  of  the  consequences 
13—2 


of  open  idolatry,]  enticed  [by  their  appear- 
ance of  majesty,  glory,  and  beauty,  and  by 
the  false  views  already  beginning  to  be 
entertained  regarding  their  divinity],  or  my 
mouth  hath  kissed  my  hand"  [in  token  of  my 
adoration  of  these  luminaries  (1  Kings  xix. 
5  ;  Hos.  xiii.  2)]  ;  {Heb.,  "  My  hand  hath 
kissed  my  mouth" — the  heart  leading  in 
the  sin,  and  the  hand  following  ;  inward 
affections  being  manifested  by  outward 
actions).  The  idolatry  here  indicated  known 
as  Sabxism,  from  the  Hebrew  word  Tsaba^ 
"a  host,"  denoting  the  worship  of  the  "  host 
of  heaven,"  or  the  heavenly  bodies  (Deut. 
xvii.  8  ;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  3).  Originally  the 
worship  of  "light  "or  fire,  and  afterwards 
connected  with  that  of  the  sun,  moon,  and 
stars,  as  its  great  reservoirs  and  sources  as  well 
as  symbols.  The  heavenly  bodies,  especially 
the  sun  and  moon,  among  the  earliest 
objects  of  idolatrous  worship.  This  form 
of  idolatry  especially  prevalent  in  Chaldaea, 
where  probably  it  had  its  origin.  Babylon 
called  the  mother  of  harlots.  The  worship 
of  the  sun  and  moon  an  early  form  of  Arabian 
idolatry.  The  moon  the  great  divinity  of 
the  ancient  Arabians.  Still  an  object  of  great 
veneration  with  Mahon)medans.  Hence  the 
symbol  of  the  Crescent.  'I'he  Caaba  at  Mecca 
originally  a  temple  dedicated  to  the  moon. 
Abraham's  relatives  and  neighbours  in  Chal- 
daea addicted  to  this  form  of  idolatry.  His 
place  of  residence — "  Ur  of  the  Chaldees," 
probably  so  called  from  Ur,  "  fire ; "  or  from 
Or,  "  light."  At  Mugheir,  believed  by  some 
to  be  its  modern  representative,  the  ruins 
have  been  discovered  of  a  temple  dedicated 
to  the  moon,  and  resembling  that  of  the 
sun  at  Babylon. 

These  luminaries  worshipped  originally  as 
representatives  of  deity,  then  as  deities 
themselves.  Viewed  as  the  great  prolific 
powers  in  the  universe,  and  the  bestowers 
of  all  earthly  blessings. 

The  worship  of  the  sun  and  moon  ulti- 
mately that  of  almost  the  whole  known 
world.  Prevalent  among  our  own  ancestors. 
The  names  of  the  first  and  second  days  of 
the  week,  monuments  of  its  existence  among 
the  Anglo-Saxons.  Temples  of  ApoUo  or 
the  sun,  and  of  Diana  or  the  moon,  formerly 
stood  in  London,  the  one  on  the  site  of 
Westminster  Abbey,  the  other  on  that  of 
St.  Paul's  Cathedral.' 

The  object  of  Jehovah  in  making  Israel 
his  e'ect  nation  to  preserve  them  from  the 
practice  of  this  idolatry,  and  thus  to  have 
witnesses  for  Himself  and  His  truth  in  the 
world  (Deut.  iv.  19,  20).  The  practice  of  it  m 
Israel's  degeneracy  the  cause  of  their  cap- 
tivity in  Babylon  (Ezek.  viii.  16;  2  Kings 
xxiii.  5,  11).  Observe— (1)  Fallen  humanifj/ 
prone  to  put  the  creature  in  the  place  of  f/if 

195 


CUAP.   XXXI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


Creator.  Early  lost  the  true  idea  and  know- 
ledge of  God  throui^h  departure  from  and 
alienation  to  Him.  '*  Did  not  like  to  retain 
God  in  their  knowledge "  (Rom.  i.  28). 
Hence  objects  remarkable  either  for  majesty, 
beauty  or  utility,  worshipped  in  His  stead. 
The  source  and  essence  of  idolatry  (Rom.  i. 
25).  (2)  Difficult  for  fallen  human  nature  to 
use  the  creature  without  abusiug  it.  Objects 
of  nature  to  be  viewed,  not  with  idolatrous 
fondness  or  admiration  of  the  creature,  but 
with  admiration,  love,  and  praise  to  the 
Creator.  Nature  to  lead  up  to  nature's 
God,  not  away  from  Him.  Indication  of 
idolatry  in  man,  when 

"  The  landscape  has  his  praise,  but  not  its 
Author." 

(3)  A  mark  of  advanced  enlightenment,  that 
Job  mentions  with  the  same  breath,  trust  in 
and  love  of  riches,  with  the  worship  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  as  equally  idolatrous  and 
oftensive  in  the  siuht  of  God.  (4)  In  Job's 
time  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  the  true 
God  greatly  on  the  decrease  ;  yet  His  faith- 
ful worshippers  still  to  be  found.  "  Left 
no^  himself  without  witness"  (Actsxiv.  17). 
Job's  reason  for  abstaining  from  idolatry 
either  in  its  spiritual  or  external  forms. 
Verse  28. — "TIjis  also  were  an  iniquity  to 
be  punished  by  the  judge  (or,  *  a  judicial  in- 
iquity;' idolatrv  still  in  Job's  days  con- 
sidered a  punishable  crime ;  afterwards,  by 
the  law  of  Moses,  to  be  punished  with  deal  h. 
Dent.  xvii.  2—7);  for  I  should  have  de- 
nied ('lied  to'  or  against)  the  God  that  is 
above  "  (in  place,  power,  dignity,  and  excel- 
lence).   Observe — 

1 .  The  heinousness  of  a  sin  to  be  a  principal 
reason  for  its  avoidance. 

2.  That  heinousness  to  be  especially  seen  in 
its  relation  to  God. 

3.  Trust  in  and  love  of  riches,  as  well  as  the 
external  worship  of  a  created  object  or  imaget 
a  denial  of  the  true  God.  All  idolatry  a  ae- 
nial  of  God.  (1)  In  the  boundless  excel- 
lence of  His  being.  (2)  In  the  spirituality 
of  His  nature.  (3)  In  His  infinity  and 
omnipresence.  (4)  In  His  moral  as  well  as 
natural  perfections.  (5)  In  His  suflBciency 
for  our  happiness  and  safety.  (6)  In  His 
sole  right  to  the  trust,  love,  and  worship  of 
His  intelligent  creatures. 

4.  God  not  only  denied  by  our  words,  but  by 
our  works. 

5.  All  trust  in  and  worship  of  the  creature, 
a  lie  against  God.  A  lie  in  the  right  hand  of 
every  idol- worshipper,  whether  of  man,  money, 
or  of  the  sun  and  moon  (Is.  xliv.  20). 

TI.  Denies  aU  vindictivsness  in  refer- 
ence to  enemies.  Verses  29,  30. — "If  I 

rejoiced  at  the  destruction  of  him  that  hated 
196 


me,  or  lifted  up  myself  (in  exultation  or  in- 
sult) when  evil  found  him ;  neither  have  1 
suffered  my  mouth  to  sin  by  wishing  a  curse 
to  his  soul "  (or,  bj  asking  for  his  hfe,  i.e., 
the  removal  of  it  in  an  imprecation). 
Observe — 

1.  Ecen  a  good  man  not  without  enemies. 
Hatred  from  the  world  promised  by  Christ 
to  His  disciples  (Matt.  x.  22).  A  blessing 
pronounced  on  those  who,  for  His  sake,  ex- 
perience it  (Luke  vi.  22).  A  woe  on  those 
of  whom  all  men  speak  well  (Luke  vi.  26). 
Hatred  from  the  world  a  consequence  of  not 
being  of  it  (John  xv.  19).  Christ  Himself 
the  great  object  of  the  world's  hatred 
(John  XV.  18).  The  ground  of  that  hatred 
his  testimony  against  its  works  (John  vii.  7). 
Those  spared  the  world's  hatred  who  par- 
take of  its  character  (John  vii.  7).  "  I'hey 
that  forsake  the  law,  praise  the  wicked ;  but 
such  as  keep  the  law,  contend  with  him" 
(Frov.  xxviii.  4).  Hence  the  enmity  of  the 
wicked  against  the  good.  This  enmity  ex- 
perienced by  Job. 

2.  A  good  man  known  by  his  conduct 
towards  his  enemies.  The  mark  of  an  un- 
regenerate  heart  to  cherish  ill-will  against 
an  enemy  or  to  take  pleasure  in  his  misfor- 
tune. Hatred  of  a  foe  the  prompting  of 
fallen  nature  and  the  spirit  of  heathenism. 
"  Revenge  is  sweet," — the  language  of  the 
Great  Murderer.  To  rejoice  in  the  fall  of  an 
enemy,  the  sin  of  the  Edomites  in  relation 
to  Israel  and  the  cause  of  their  punishment 
(Obadiali  12,  13).  The  sin  forbidden  in 
Prov.  xxiv.  17.  The  contrary  disposition 
enjoined  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ments (Prov.  XXV.  21 ;  Rom.  xii.  20). 
Christ's  command  to  his  followers,  not  only 
not  to  rejoice  in  the  evil  that  overtakes  an 
enemy,  but  to  pray  for  and  promote  his  wel- 
fare (Matt.  V.  44).  Noble  minds  rejoice 
in  the  opportunity  of  befriending  a  foe. 
Instances  recorded  even  of  the  heathen  re- 
turning kindness  for  insult.  Pericles  having 
been  followed  to  his  door  by  one  who  had  been 
railing  against  him,  offered  him  his  servant 
to  light  him  home.  Auajustus  invited  to 
supper  the  poet  Catullus  after  he  had  been 
railing  against  him.  Nothing  more  com- 
mon among  men  than  vindictiveness,  and 
nothing  more  contemptible.  Our  best  re- 
venge on  an  enemy  is  to  forgive  him  and  treat 
him  kindly.  To  wish  evil  to  him  who  hates 
us  makes  us  as  bad,  or  worse,  than  himself. 
The  New  Testament  rule  in  such  cases, — 
"  Overcome  evil  with  good"  (Rom.  xii.  21). 
In  accordance  with  His  own  precept,  Christ 
prayed  for  his  murderers  (Luke  xxiii.  34). 
Commissioned  His  heralds  of  mercy  to  begin 
with  those  who  had  clamoured  for  His  blood 
(Luke  xxiv.  47).  His  spirit  and  conduct 
imitated  by  His  followers.  The  first  Christiaj? 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHA.P.  mi. 


martyr  died  with  a  prayer  on  his  h'ps  for 
tliose  who  were  stoning  him  to  death  (Acts 
vii.  60).  Job's  religion  alter  wards  embodied 
III  the  Gospel  Tliougli  living  in  the  patri- 
archal age.  Job  exemplified  the  spirit  of 
Christianity.  The  new  commandnuMit  only 
a  new  edition  of  the  old.  An  advance 
nowever  in  the  moral  teaching  of  the  New 
Testament  as  com])ared  with  that  of  the  (Jld. 
Job  instructed  net  to  hate  an.  enemy  ;  the 
Christian  taught  to  love  him.  Christianity 
teaches  not  only  not  to  wish  a  curse  to  an 
enemy,  but  to  pray  for  a  blessing  to  him. 

3.  The  teaching  of  God's  Spirit  and  the 
character  of  God's  children  always  essentially 
the  same.  Thaf-  teaching  and  character  a 
transcript  of  His  own  nature.  God's  example 
that  of  forgiveness  and  kindness  to  enemies. 
The  carnal  mind  enmity  to  God  Mankind 
enemies  to  God  in  their  mind  by  wicked 
works  (Rom.  viii.  7;  Col.  i.  21). 

4.  Special  guard  to  be  placed  upon  the 
mouth.  A  sinful  ihought  or  feeling  not  to 
be  allowed  utterance.  To  be  6?^/)pressed 
instead  of  being  ^jrpressed.  An  aggravation 
of  sin  in  the  heart  to  give  it  expression 
with  the  lips.  Bodily  organs  not  to  be 
employed  as  the  instruments  of  sin. 

YII.  Jol)  declares  his  humanity  as  a 

householder  (verses  31,  32). 

1.  In  his  kindness  to  his  domestics  and 
inmates.  Verse  31 — "If  tiie  men  of  my 
tabernacle  (those  residing  under  his  roof, 
whether  as  domestics,  retainers,  or  other 
inmates,)  said  not,  Oh,  that  we  had  of  his 
flesh  !  we  cannot  be  satisfied  "  (or,  *'  Who 
is  t,here  that  was  was  not  satisfied  with  liis 
flesh  ?"—2.<?.,  wi  h  his  hospitality,  1  iSam. 
XXV.  11 ;  or,  according  to  some  ancient 
versions,  **  If  tliey  said,  Who  will  uive  us  of 
his  flesh,  that  we  may  be  satisfied,"  as  com- 
plaining of  not  having  sufficient  food,  or 
longing  for  the  bi'tter  supplies  on  his  own 
table).  Job  able  to  appeal  to  his  own 
domestics  and  the  inmates  of  his  dwell- 
ing for  evidence  of  liis  humanity,  more 
especially  of  his  bounty  to  them  and  his 
liberality  to  others.  No  niggard  in  liis 
own  house.  Treated  his  servants  not  only 
with  justice,  but  kindness  Gave  them  not 
only  food,  but  of  the  best  kind,  and  plenty  of 
it.  Made  them  sharers  of  the  best  that  was 
on  his  own  table.  Had  no  feast  but  they 
partook  of  it.  Ob.^erve — (1)  A  good  man 
will  be  kind  and  liberal  to  his  domestics  (Col. 
iv.  1).  (2)  Well  when,  as  masters,  we  can  appeal 
to  our  servants  for  our  chararfer,  and  when 
they  can  bear  an  honest  testimony  in  our 
favour.  Servants  and  inmates  of  our  house, 
likely  to  be  the  best  judges  of  our  character 
and  conduct.     (3)  Good  to  make  our  house  a 


home  for  others  as  well  as  ourselves.  A 
Christian  duty  to  "bring  the  poor  that  are 
cast  out  to  our  house"  (Ua.  Iviii,  7).  "I 
was  a  stranger  and  ye  took  me  in'*  (Matt. 
XXV,  35).  Job's  house  never  without 
the  objects  of  his  chanty.  The  widow  and 
the  fatherless,  the  stranger  and  the  destitute, 
frequent  guests  at  his  table.  Note — Cus- 
tomary for  wealthy  Arabs  to  slaughter  slieep 
or  camels  for  the  supply  of  their  household. 
"Broad  dishes"  the  glory  of  an  Arab  chief, 
as  necessary  for  the  entertainment  of  his 
guests. 

2.  In  his  hospitality  to  travellers.  Verse  32 
— "  The  stranger  did  not  lodge  in  the  street 
(for  want  of  a  house  to  receive  him,  it  being 
diilicult  to  obtain  accommodation  in  Oriental 
towns  and  villages  then,  as  it  is  still,  except 
with  the  sheikh  or  a  Christi;m)  ;  but  1 
0|)ened  my  doors  to  the  traveller"  (or, 
as  margin,  "to  the  way,"  as  if  to  in- 
vite and  welcome  the  traveller  passing  by). 
Pleasing  picture  of  Oriental  manners,  corre- 
sponding with  those  of  patriarchal  times 
(Gen.  xviii.  1 — 4;  xix.  1,  &c.).  Job  an 
example  of  the  New  Testament  precept — 
"  Use  hospitality  without  grudging''  (1  Peter 
iv.  9).  "  Given  to  hospitality,"  more  than 
merely  **  showing"  it  (Uom.  xii.  13).  "Be 
not  forgetful  to  entertain  strangers," — not 
merely  vour  relatives  or  acquaintances 
(Heb.  xiii.  2). 

VIII.  Clears  himself  from  secret  and 
concealed  transgressions.  Verses  33,  34. 
— "If  I  covered  my  transgressions  as  Adam 
(in  allusion  to  Gen.  iii.  8;  or,  *like  men,' 
as  Uos.  vi.  7 — as  men  are  wont  to  do  after 
the  example  of  their  first  father),  by  hiding 
mine  iniquity  in  my  bosom  (from  impeni- 
tence or  hypocrisy,  or  both)  :  Did  I  fear  a 
great  muitnude  (or,  'because  I  feared,' 
&c.  ;  or  as  an  imprecation — 'Then  let  nn; 
fear,'  &c.),  or  did  the  contempt  of  families 
(or  tribes)  terrify  me  (so  as  to  conceal  my 
sin  or  neglect  my  duty  to  the  stranger;  or, 
'because  the  contempt,  &c.,  terrified  me  ;  ' 
or,  'let  the  contempt,  &c.,  terrify  or  crush 
me '),  that  I  kept  silence  [instead  of  ac- 
knowledging my  transgression,  or  opening  my 
mouth  in  i)ehalf  of  the  oppressed  stranger, — 
like  Lot,  Gen.  xix.  6 — 8,  or  the  old  man  of 
Gibeah,  Judges  xix.  22  —21],  and  went  not  out 
of  the  door  ?  "  (lor  fear  of  detection,  or  to 
avoid  th(!  danger  and  self-denial  connected 
with  my  duty  to  the  stranger ;  or,  as  con- 
tinuing the  imprecation,  "let  me  be  silent,'* 
&c.).     Observe — 

1.  The  best  not  free  from  transgressions, 
both  against  God  and  men.  Job  a  perfect 
man,  yet  acknowledges  transgressions.  "Not 
a  just  man  on  earth  that  doeth  good  and 
sinneth  nut "  ^Ecclcs.  vii.  20). 

197 


CHAP.   XXXI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


2.  Natural  to  men  to  conceal  their  trans- 
gressions. Adam's  conduct  imitated  by  all 
his  children  (Gen.  iii.  8). 

3.  Men  with  much  outward  morality  and 
religion  may  still  be  guilty  of  secret  sins. 
The  case  with  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  in 
the  days  of  the  Saviour.  Job  more  than 
suspected  of  it  by  his  friends.  Hence  his 
concern  now  to  clear  himself  of  such 
hypocrisy. 

4.  The  fear  of  man  often  more  powerful 
in  leading  men  to  conceal  their  guilt,  than 
the  fear  of  God  in  leading  them  to  confess 
it.  The  ungodly  more  afraid  of  man's  shame 
than  of  God's  wrath. 

5.  Just  that  secret  crimes  should  be 
followed  by  popular  contempt  and  ignominy 
as  their  penalty.  A  day  coming  when  secret 
transgressors,  who  have  successfully  covered 
their  crimes  in  this  life,  will  awake  to 
"  shame  and  everlasting  contempt "  in  the 
next  (Daniel  xii.  3). 

6.  A  good  man  has  no  need  either  to  fear 
the  populace  or  shun  the  public  eye.  A 
good  conscience  a  man's  best  armour.  "  Be 
just  and  fear  not." 

7.  A  good  man  more  afraid  of  God's  dis- 
plea<«ure  than  of  man's  contempt.  The  sin 
of  men,  that  they  are  more  afraid  of  man  and 
the  "multitude"'  than  of  their  Maker. 
"  Who  art  thou,  tliat  thou  shouldst  be 
afraid  of  a  man  that  shall  die,  and  of  the 
Son  of  man  that  shall  be  made  as  grass, 
and    forjjettest    the    Lord    thy    iMaker?" 

Is  h.  12,  13).  "Fear  not  them  which 
kill  tlie  body,  but  are  not  able  to  kill  the 
soul"  (Matt.  X.  23). 

8.  The  part  of  an  honest  and  sincere  heart, 
to  confj^ss  transgressions  both  before  God, 
and,  when  necessary,  before  man.  A  Chris- 
tian's first  duty,  to  confess  his  transgressions 
to  God ;  his  next,  to  confess  them  to  man 
if  he  has  injured  or  offended  him.  **  Confess 
your  faults  one  to  another,"  a  New  Testa- 
ment prect  pt  (James  v.  16).  Confession  to 
God  necessary  to  forgivenessy/-o»?  God  (Prov. 
xxviii.  13 ;  1  John  i.  8,  9 ;  Ps,  xxxii  3—5). 
Prank  confession  a  mark  of  true  repentance. 
Examples:  Zaccheus  (Luke  xix.  8);  the 
penitent  thief  (Luke  xxiii.  41)  j  the  converts 
of  Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  18,  19). 

9.  A  good  man  not  deterred  from  duty, 
either  by  the  fear  of  numbers  or  the  con- 
tempt of  neighbours.  Example :  Lot  in 
Sodom  (Gen.  xix).  Milton's  famous  picture 
of  the  Seraph  Abdiel — 

"  Faithful  found 
Among  the  faithless,  faithful  only  he  ; 
Among  innumerable  false,  unmov'd, 
Unshaken,  unseduced,  un terrified. 

198 


His  loyalty  he  kept,  his  love,  his  zeal; 

Nor  number,  nor  example,  with  him 
wrought 

To  swerve  from  truth,  or  change  his  con- 
stant mind, 

Though  single." 

VIII.  Job's  final  desire  and  chal- 
lenge. Verses  35— 37.— "0  that  one  would 
hear  me !  (or  *  O  that  I  had  one  to  hear 
me  1* — an  impartial  judge  or  umpire  in  the 
controversy  between  the  Almiglity  and 
himself,  so  that  his  case  might  be  fairly 
tried  and  decided  upon).  Behold,  my  desire 
is  that  the  Almighty  would  answer  me  (or, 
*  here  is  my  mark '  or  signature,  i.e.^  to 
the  declaration  he  made  of  his  innocence — 
*let  the  Almighty  answer  me,'  and  prove 
me  guilty  if  He  can) ;  and  that  my  adver- 
sary had  written  a  book  (or,  *  and  let  mine 
adversary  write  a  book  '  or  bill  of  indict- 
ment against  me,  as  in  courts  of  law ;  or, 
'and  [O  tiiat  I  had]  the  book  [or  indict- 
ment which]  mine  adversary  has  written 
against  me  !)  Surely  I  would  take  it  upou 
my  slioulder  (as  a  thing  of  which  I  was  not 
ashamed,  but  which  I  was  willing  that  every 
one  should  see  and  know),  and  bind  it  as  a 
crown  to  me  (as  a  thing  in  which  I  rather 
gloried  as  my  honour  and  ornament,  being 
persuaded  that  all  the  charges  contained  in 
it  would  be  found  to  be  groundless).  I 
would  declare  unto  him  (viz.,  the  umpire  or 
judge)  the  number  of  my  steps  (all  the 
various  passages  of  my  life) ;  as  a  prince — 
(with  the  boldness  and  confidence  of  an 
innocent  man  assured  of  coming  off  vic- 
torious, instead  of  the  faltering  step  and 
downcast  look  of  a  culprit)  would  I  go  near 
unto  him "  (instead  of  avoiding  him  like 
Adam  in  the  garden,  as  conscious  of  guilt). 

This  lofty  passage  is,  perhaps,  the 
strongest  declaration  of  his  innocence  that 
Job  had  yet  made,  probably  intended  as  the 
finale  of  his  pleadings,  and  the  climax  ot  his 
protestations.  The  three  following  verses, 
with  the  exception  of  the  last  clause,  pro- 
bably standing  originally  somewhere  before 
the  present  passage ;  or,  what  is  less 
likely,  as  a  still  farther  vindication  of  his 
character. 

The  passage  stands  as  a  proof  of  his 
conscious  integrity.  Expresses  his  con- 
tinued desire  to  have  a  fair  and  impartial 
hearing  of  his  case,  with  the  conviction  that 
lie  would  be  declared  free  from  the  sins 
which  were  either  operJy  or  by  implication 
charged  upon  him,  and  from  any  such 
transgressions  as  to  merit  his  present 
sufferings.  The  adversary  with  whom  he 
wishes  to  contest  the  matter,  mainly  God 
himself  who  seemed  to  treat  him  as  a  guilty 
person.     His  three  friends  also  his  adver- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXXI. 


saries,  but  only  as  taking  up  the  view  of  his 
rharacter  which  God  liimsclf  seemed  to  take 
from  the  way  in  which  He  was  now  deaUng 
with  him.  God  seemed  to  have  charges 
against  liim  of  which  he  was  entirely 
unconscious.  His  friends  declared  that 
such  charges  mii;t  exist.  Job  denied  there 
there  was  any  giound  for  them.  Hence  his 
great  desire  that  the  matter  may  be  fairly 
examined  into  and  decided. 

Tliis  desire  of  Job,  now  soon  about  to  be 
granted,  and  that  in  his  favour.  Not  liow- 
ever  to  be  done  till  he  has  been  tauglit 
some  necessary  and  important  lessons. 
Thougii  having  the  truth  on  his  side  in  the 
controversy,  his  vspirit  and  language  not 
alu  ays  wliat  they  ought,  to  have  been.  His 
error  in  declaring  his  innocence  in  too  de- 
cided a  manner,  and  in  carrying  his  declara- 
tion almost,  if  not  altogether,  to  the  point 
of  self-confident  glorying  and  self-righteous 
pride.  At  times  not  only  bitter  in  his 
spirit  and  language  towards  his  three 
friends,  but  petulant  and  irreverent  towards 
God.  The  present  winding  up  of  his 
speeches  sounded  like  a  declaration  that  he 
was  righteous,  whatever  God  might  be  in 
the  matter}  in  other  words,  that  he  was 
more  righteous  than  God.  Too  much  over- 
looked the  fact — (1)  That  he,  in  common  with 
all  mankind,  was  guilty  before  God,  and  had 
>iven  sufficient  occasion  to  be  visited  with 
Uripes  even  more  severe  than  thot>e  from 
which  he  was  now  suffering;  (2)  That  God 
is  infinitely  holy,  just,  and  good,  and  would 
do  nothing  with  any  of  His  creatures  but 
what  was  perfec'ly  right;  (3)  That  God 
might  have  wise  objecis  in  view  in  dealing 
with  him  as  He  did,  which,  though  now 
hidden  from  him.  He  in  Id  is  own  time 
would  show — as,  for  example,  his  own  purifi- 
cation, God  employing  his  sufferings  as  the 
goldsmith  does  tlie  furnace  for  purifying 
the  gold;  (4)  That  God,  as  Creator,  has  the 
right  to  do  with  His  creatures  as  He  pleases, 
without  doing  an_\ thing  either  unjust  or 
unkind,  and  tliat  it  is  the  creature's  part  to 
be  passive  and  submissive  in  His  hand — 
Job's  actual  conduct  at  the  beginning  of  his 
trials. 

The  steps  between  this  last  speech  of 
Job's  and  the  declaration  of  his  integrity  on 
the  part  of  the  Almighty,  occupied  in 
correcting  these  errors,  and  in  bringing 
him  to  a  juster  view  of  himself,  and  to  a 
better  state  of  mind  in  regard  to  God. 
Observe  : — 

1 .  No  flesh  allowed  to  qlory  in  God's 
p*-('sence  (i  (Jor.  i.  29).  One  of  the  great 
objects  of  the  Bible  to  teach  men  this  truth. 
The  proper  place  for  fallen  man  before  God, 
even  at  his  best,  is  the  dust.  Teudeucv  to 
pride  in  the  best.    Imperfection  stamped 


on  all  human  excellence.  Like  Moses,  Job 
speaks  unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  Utters 
what  is  rash  hefoie  (jod,  which  he  after- 
wards repents  in  dust  and  ashes.  Not  yet 
the  perfect  man  who  "  offendeth  not  in 
word  "  (James  iii.  2) 

2.  Onli/  one  way  of  going  near  to  God  as 
our  judge  with  boldnesa  and  confidence.  Not 
that  of  Job,  as  in  ourselves  righteous  and 
innocent;  but  as  sinners,  accepting  of  and 
trusting  in  the  blood  and  righteousness  of 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  only  ground  of  our 
acceptance  before  God  ( H  eb.  x.  22.)  "  Surely 
shall  one  say,  in  the  Lord  have  I  righteous- 
ness. In  hiin  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  be 
justified  and  shall  glory"  (Is.  xlv.  24,  25). 


IX.  Job  finally  clears  himself  of 
injustice  in  his  business  transactions 
with  his  fellow- men.  (Verses  38—40). — 
"  If  my  land  (probably  the  land  which,  like 
Isaac,  he  rented  and  culiivated  for  his  own 
use)  cry  against  me  (as  dishonestly  acquired 
or  oppressively  cultivated, — like  Abel's  inno- 
cent blood  shed  by  his  brother's  hand,  Gen. 
iv.  10),  or  that  the  furrows  likewise  thereof 
complain  {Hebrew,  *  weep  together,'  as  in 
sympathy  with  one  another,  and  with  the 
owners  whom  I  have  wronged  by  occupying 
their  land  without  paying  duly  for  its  use, 
or  with  the  labourers  whom  1  have  oppressed 
by  employing  them  wilhout  a  fair  remunera- 
tion for  their  work  ; — a  beautiful  and  bold 
personification  to  increase  the  effect)  :  if  I 
have  eaten  the  fruiis  thereof  without  money 
(in  payment  either  to  the  pioprietor  for  the 
occupancy  of  his  land,  or  to  he  labourer  for 
his  work  in  cultivating  it),  or  have  caused 
the  owners  thereof  to  lose  their  lives  (either 
directly  by  violent  means  in  order  to  obtain 
their  property,  or  indirectly  by  witldiolding 
the  just  payment  for  its  occupancy)  :  let 
thisiles  (or  thorns)  grow  instead  of  wheat, 
and  cockle  (or  noxious  weeds)  instead  of 
barley."     Observe — 

I.  One  of  the  most  testing  points  in 
reference  to  a  man^s  character,  how  he  carries 
on  his  business  and  conducts  his  transactions 
with  his  fellow-men.  Constant  tem[)tat ion 
to  over-reach  and  take  advantage.  Ten- 
dency in  fallen  human  nature  bolli  to  with- 
hold from  others  their  just  due,  and  to  exact 
more  than  our  own.  The  business  principles 
of  the  world  often  the  reverse  of  those  oi 
the  Bible.  That  of  "Buy  cheap  and  seH 
dear,"  liable  to  be  carried  out  to  the  extent 
of  fraud  and  extoriion.  Christianity  and 
sound  morality  te;ich  us  to  give  every  man  a 
fair  price  for  his  labour  or  his  goods,  and  to 
ask  no  more  than  a  tuir  price  for  our  own. 
The  maxim,  "Business  is  business,"  sinful 
if  understood  as  meaning  that  business  is 

199 


CHAP.  XXII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


exempted  from  the  same  rules  of  morality 
as  are  applied  to  other  branches  of  con- 
duct. Befectiveness  in  commercial  morality 
one  of  the  sins  of  (he  day  lu  the  race  for 
riches,  men  tempted,  even  in  a  Christian  land, 
to  co'Timii  the  Mns  which  Job  here  solemnly 
abjures — receiving  labour,  goods,  or  money, 
without  giving  a  just  equivalent.  The  temp- 
tation not  always  resisted,  to  sell  articles 
that  are  something  different  from  what  tiiey 
are  represented  to  be.  The  severe  reproof 
of  the  Almighty  directed  in  the  Bible  against 
those  who  oppress  the  hireling  of  their 
wages  (Mai.  ih.  5  ;  James  v.  4).  A  woe  pro- 
nounced on  him  "who  buildeihhis  house  by 
unrighteousness  and  bis  chambers  by  wrong ; 
that  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without 
wMges,  and  giveth  him  not  for  his  work," 
(Jer.  xxii.  13). 

2.  Hoen  professedly  religious  men  tempted  to 
follow  the  world  in  untruthful  and  unfair  modes 
of  conducting  business.  The  practice  of  over- 
reachiiig  and  extortion  apparently  prevalent 
in  Job's  time  and  country.  Extortion  on  the 
part  of  rulers,  proprietors,  and  dealers  in  the 
Kast,  notorious.  The  practice  of  a  Turk 
or  Arab  in  demanding  an  exorbitant  price 
for  his  goods,  as  conimon  as  that  of  the 
governor  or  employer  in  giving  the  merest 
pittance  for  the  labourer's  work.  Extortion 
and  excess  among  the  prevaiHng  sins  of  the 
Pharisees  in  the  aays  of  the  Saviour  (Matt, 
xxiii.  25).  Job  careful  to  resist  the  tempta- 
tion to  a  common  sin.  Renounced  filthy  gain. 
No  canker  in  his  gold  and  silver.  No  rust 
on  his  money  to  witness  against  him  either 
here  or  hereafter,  and  to  eat  his  flesh  as  it 
were  fire  (James  v.  3).  Had  neither  souf]:ht 
to  buy  cheaper  nor  sell  dearer  than  justice 
and  humanity  demanded. 

3.  Dishonesty  found  on  the  side  of  buyers 
as  well  as  of  sellers.  (1).  In  not  paying 
duly  for  goods  delivered;  (2).  In  depre- 
ciating and  cheapini ug  down  an  article,  in 
order  to  get  a  bargain,  or  to  obtain  it  at  a 
price  below  its  value.  "  It  is  naught,  it 
IS  naught,  saith  the  buyer ;  but  when  he  is 
gone  his  way,  then  he  boasteth "  (Prov. 
XX,  14). 

4.  The  mark  of  a  true  servant  ofGody  to  b§ 
^^  faithful  in  that  which  is  least** 

5.  The  pari  of  a  follower  of  Christ,  to  com' 
mend  his  Master\s   religion  by  exhibiting  a 
sterling  morality  in  his  daily  life.     "  What 
soever  things  arc  true,  honest,  just,  lovely, 
and  of  good  report,"  &c.  (Phil  iv.  8). 

6.  Murder  committed  in  'more  ways  than 
one.  Indirect  as  well  as  direct  murder.  The 
life-blood    of  the    poor   may    be    drained 


by  oppressive  work  and  inadequate  remu- 
neration. Hearts  broken  by  fraud  and  op- 
pression in  cinil,  as  well  as  by  inhumanity 
and  cruelty  in  domestic  life. 

7.  Wrong  done  to  another  often  recom- 
pensed by  loss  incurred  by  ourseloes.  A  curse 
imprec.itcd  by  Job  on  his  land  as  the  righte- 
ous penalty  of  wrong,  if  done  by  him  either 
in  acquiring  or  cultivating  it.  Another  ex- 
ample of  the  maxim  :  As  the  sin,  so  the 
punishment.  Job  probably  reminded  of  the 
curse  pronounced  on  the  ground,  first  for 
Adam's  sin  and  then  for  Cain's  (Gen.  iii.  17, 
18  ;  iv,  11, 12).  SuiTfiests  another  evidence 
that  Job  was  well  acquainted  with  Genesis. 

*'  The  words  of  Job  are  ended.'*  Probably 
followed  the  final  protestation  of  his  innocence 
in  verse  37.  Job's  "words"  spoken  partly  by 
the  flesh  and  partly  by  the  spirit.  Were  partly 
those  of  an  enlightened  and  sanctified  be- 
liever, and  partly  those  of  a  yet  unhumbled 
sinner.  W^ere  at  last  partly  commended  and 
partly  reproved  by  the  Almighty.  Have  been 
recorded  for  our  instruction  and  comfort, 
but  not  all  of  them  for  our  imitation.  Be- 
gan with  justifying  and  speaking  well  of 
God;  ended  by  speaking  well  of  himself. 
Contain  some  of  the  most  elevated  senti- 
ments and  glorious  truths  ever  conceived  by 
human  mind  or  uttered  by  human  li|)s. 
Viewed  in  connection  with  his  extraordinary 
sufferings,  and  the  circumstances  in  whicli 
they  were  uttered,  they  exhibit  a  marvel  of 
Divine  grace,  hi  enabUng  the  sufferer  to  pos- 
sess his  soul  in  patience,  and  "  to  glorify  God 
in  the  fires."  Afford  the  picture  of  a  man 
as  perfect  as  fallen  nature  admitted  of  in 
the  ages  previous  to  the  advent  of  Christ 
and  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  Observe — 
IFoi'ds  ended  in  their  utterance  not  ended  in 
their  effect.  By  these  words  of  Job,  he  "  be- 
ing dead  yet  s|)eaketli."  Ttie  effect  of  words, 
for  good  or  evil,  often  experienced  for  gcne- 
raticms  and  centuries  after  they  have  been 
spoken  or  written. 

"  Nothing  is  lost:  the  drop  of  dew, 

That  trembles  on  the  leaf  or  flower, 
Is  but  exhaled  to  tail  anew, 

In  summer's  thunder  shower; 
Perchance  to  shine  within  the  bow, 

Tliat  fronts  the  sun  at  fall  of  day  ; 
Perchance  to  sparkle  in  tlie  flow 

Of  Ibuntains  far  away. 
So  wr  th  our  words ;  or  harsh  or  kind, 

Utter'd,  they  are  not  all  forgot ; 
But  leave  some  trace  upon  the  mind, 

Pass  on,  yet  perish  not." 

/•  Critchley  Prince. 


200 


EO-MIfETIC  COMMSNTARY:  JOB 


CHAP,  xxxn 


CHAPTER  XXXTL 
INTRODUCTION  AND  SPEECH  OF  ELIHU. 


The  place  of  Elihu,  introduced  in  this 
cliapter,  that  of  an  umpire  steppino^  forward 
of  his  own  accord,  under  tlie  protiiptins^s  of 
zeal  and  conscious  knowledj^e,  to  decide  the 
controversy  between  Job  and  his  three  friends 
on  tlie  one  hand,  and  between  Job  and  the 
Almighty  on  the  other.  His  speeches  con- 
tribute to  the  solution,  as  showing  reasons 
why  Job  might  be  afflicted  as  he  was,  with- 
out being  wliat  his  friends  suspected  him  to 
be — a  secretly  bad  man,  and  also  as  pointing 
out  wherein  he  erred — namely,  in  his  too 
strongly  justifying  himself,  and  almost  cen- 
suring the  Almigiity.  His  speeches  pre- 
paratory to  the  appearance  and  address  of 
Jehovah,  who  follows  up  what  Elihu  had 
begun.  Elihu  in  relation  to  the  Almighty, 
like  John  the  Baptist  in  relation  to  Christ. 
Observe — (1)  An  honour  to  be,  like  Elihu, 
2i  peacemaker y  in  seeking  to  compose  disputes 
between  brethren,  and  to  remove  a  believer's 
controversy  with  God.  (2)  A  high  privi- 
lege to  be,  like  Elihu  also,  a  forerunner  in 
preparing  the  way  for  God  himself.  Pre- 
cious to  be  sent,  like  the  seventy  disciples, 
to  preacli  in  places  where  Christ  himself  is 
to  come  (Luke  x.  1). 

I.  The  occasion  of  Elihu's  introdnction. 

Verse  1. — "  So  these  three  men  ceased  to  an- 
swer Job,  because  he  was  righteous  in  his 
own  eyes." 

The  great  object  of  these  friends,  to  make 
Job  out  to  be  a  secret  transgressor,  and  so 
deserving  the  sufferings  inflicted  on  him. 
This  view  of  his  case  required  by  their  false 
theology  in  respect  to  the  Divine  govern- 
ment— God  viewed  by  them  as  necessarily 
punishing  sin  and  rewarding  virtue  in  this 
life.  Failing  to  convince  Job  that  he  was  a 
bad  man,  and  guilty  of  such  sins  as  had  justly 
drawn  upon  him  God's  severe  judgments, 
they  "  ceased  to  answer  Job."  Their  argu- 
ments only  in  the  direction  of  showing  that 
bad  men  suffer  in  this  life  the  consequences 
of  their  deeds,  however  secretly  committed, 
and  that  good  men  are  invariably  prosperous 
and  happy,  even  in  this  world.  They  had 
employed  the  last  arrow  in  their  quiver 
without  making  any  impression,  and  now 
desist. 

Their  final  charge  against  Job, — **  He  was 
righteous  in  his  own  eyes,"  partly  false  and 
partly  true.  False,  as  Job  acknowledged 
himself  a  sinner  (ch.  vii,  20,  21 ;  ix.  2,  3j. 


1.  In  a  right  sense.  In  the  ordinary  use 
of  the  term,  Job  a  "righteous"  man.  Tiiis 
the  Divine  testimony  giv(  n  of  him.  The 
testimony  also  of  his  own  conscience.  His 
own  heart ''  condemned  liiiu  not,."  Conscious 
of  having  served  God  sincerely,  earnestly,  and 
persevcriugly.  Like  Paul,  could  testify  that 
he  had  "  lived  in  all  good  conscience  unto 
this  day."  Had  exercised  himself  in  having 
**  a  conscience  void  of  offence  both  towards 
God  and  towards  men.'*  With  this  con- 
sciousness. Job  necessarily  and  justly  "  righ- 
teous in  his  own  eyes."  Could  not  truthl'ully 
deny  it,  or  honestly  confess  the  contrary. 
So  far  Job  simply  believed  and  maintained 
be  was  righteous,  because  he  was  so.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  Job's  sins  not  the  cause  of 
his  sufferings  (ch.  ii.  3). 

2.  In  a  wrong  sense.  (I)  As  insisting  too 
strongly  on  his  own  righteousness.  (2)  la 
ignoring  or  regarding  too  slightly  the  sins 
that  actually  adhered  to  him.  (3;  in  being 
too  prone  to  charge  God  with  cruelty  and 
injustice  in  dealing  with  him  as  He  did.  (4) 
In  being  much  more  careful  to  justify  him- 
self than  his  Maker.  His  eye  so  entirely  on 
his  own  integrity  and  uprightness  as  to  over- 
look and  forget  his  short-comings  and  offences 
against  the  Divine  law.  Kighteous  before 
men,  he  failed  to  see  and  acknowledge  him- 
self, as  he  ought,  guUty  before  God.  Job 
still  very  much  in  the  condition  of  Paul  before 
his  journey  to  Damascus — "alive  without  the 
law"  (Rom.  vii.  9).  The  commandment  was 
yet  to  "  come,"  in  order  to  his  dying  in  his 
own  eyes  as  a  sinner,  and  having  his  mouth 
stopped  as  guilty  before  God  (Rom  iii.  19). 
Job  yet  to  learn  and  realize  more  deeply  than 
he  had  yet  done,  that  in  God's  sight  no  man 
living  can  be  justiGcd  (Ps.  cxliii.  2).  This 
change  in  his  views  and  experience  soon 
about  to  take  place.  What  the  three  friends 
failed  in  doing,  God  Himself  was  about  to  ac- 
complish, first  and  in  part  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  Elihu  ;  afterwards  and  more 
especially,  by  the  manifestation  of  Himself 
(ch.  xlii.  5,  6).  Observe — (1)  Possible  to 
have  a  conscience  void  of  offence  towards  God 
and  men,  and  yet  to  require  to  be  humbled  as 
a  sinner  before  G'jd.  (2)  One  of  the  objects 
of  the  law  of  God,  to  strip  men  of  self -right  eous^ 
ness.  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin 
(Rom.  iii.,  2() ;  vii.  7).  (3)  0"-"  great  aim  in 
the  Holy  SpiriCs  mission  into  the  world,  to 
concince  men  of  sin  and  of  a  better  righteous- 
ness than  their  own^  in  order  to  their  accep- 

201 


Chap,  xxxil 


BOMILtJTTC  COMMENTART:  JOB. 


iance  with  God  (Jolm  xvi.  7,  10).  What 
was  to  be  done  in  Job's  case  by  the  appear- 
ance of  God  Himself  and  the  ministry  of 
Elihu,  now  done  by  the  inward  operation  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  ministry  of  the  word. 
(4).  Self -righteousness  the  great  enewy  to  ovr 
'peace,  as  well  as  to  our  acceptance  before  God 
through  the  righteousness  wrought  out  for  us 
bif  the  Sonof  Godinournature(Ko\x\.ii.  34  j 
Phil.  iii.  4,9). 

II.  Elihii's  Personality  (verse  26). 

1.  His  Name— "Elihu."  Denotes— "my 
God  is  he,  "or,  "  my  God  is  Jehovah."  Given 
at  his  birth,  implies  piety  on  the  part  of  his 
parents.  His  name  a  profession  of  the  faith 
of  his  parents,  and  probably  intended  to  be 
that  of  his  own.  Elihu  constantly  reminded 
of  the  true  God  by  his  very  name.  Probably 
given  him  to  serve  as  a  guard  against  advanc- 
ing idolatry.  That  object  gained.  Much  in  a 
name.  More  meaning  in  names  given  to  indi- 
viduals, and  more  importance  attached  to 
them,  in  early  times  and  in  the  East,  than 
now  and  with  ourselves  Scripture  names 
generally  significant.  Observe — (1)  Wise 
in  parents  to  impress  Divine  truth  by 
every  suitable  means  on  the  minds  of  their 
children  from  their  earliest  years  and  to 
keep  God  before  them  as  they  grow  up.  (2) 
Not  enough  to  know  that  Jehovah  is  the 
true  God,  but  that  He  is  our  God.  God  is 
to  be  appropriated  as  our  own  God  in 
Christ.  "My  God,"  the  languasre  of  faith 
and  love,— "O  God  thou  art  my  God"  (Ps. 
Ixiii.  1).  The  first  confession  of  Christ  al'ter 
his  resurrection :  "My  Lord  and  my  God" 
(John  XX.  28).  Such  appropriation  of  God 
and  self-cousecration  to  Him,  the  will  of  God 
concerning  us  (Jer.  iii.  4,  19,  22).  In  the 
covenant  of  grace,  of  God  gives  Himself  over 
to  the  believing  sinner  as  his  God  in  Christ 
(Jer.  xxxi.   33  ;  Heb.  viii.  10). 

2.  His  Parentage.  "  Son  of  Barachel.'* 
Elihu  the  only  individual  in  the  poem  whose 
parentage  is  recorded.  Possibly  in  order  to 
distinguish  him  from  others  of  the  same 
name,  or  because  his  father  was  a  well-known 
and  distinguished  man  in  the  country.  Pos- 
sibly because  Elihu  was  yet  a  ^oung  man, 
and  required  thus  to  be  distinguished.  The 
addition  of  the  father's  name  the  ordinary 
way  of  naming  men  in  the  East,  except 
when  the  party  was  advanced  in  years,  or  a 
person  of  great  distinction.  The  name  of 
Elihu's  father  significant  as  well  as  his  own. 
Denotes — "  the  blessing  of  God,"  or  "  God 
hath  blessed.**  God's  goodness  and  blessing 
probably  recognized  by  his  parents  in  the 
gift  of  a  son.  Well  to  mark  God's  hand  in 
in  our  ordinary  mercies.  Piety  not  only  in 
Elihu's  parents  but  his  grand-parents.  A 
precious  blessing  to  have  a  pious  ancestry. 

202 


— The  privilege  of  all  in  Christ  to  be  a 
'^^ Baracheiy  God  "  hath  blessed  us  with  all 
spiritual  blessings  in  Chr'st  Jesus"  (Eph.  i.  3). 
Barachel,  having  realized  the  blessing  ex- 
pressed m  his  name,  the  more  anxious  that 
his  son  should  do  the  same,  and  should  be 
able  to  say  :  "  The  Lord  is  my  God."  Hence 
called  him  Elihu.  Parents  enjoying  the 
blessing  of  a  covenant-God  themselves, 
likely  to  be  made  a  blessing  to  their  chil- 
dren. Elihu  the  worthy  son  of  a  worthy  father. 
"  Grace  does  not  run  in  the  blood,  but  often 
runs  in  the  line." — P.  Henry.  Elihu 
distinguished  for  his  piety  and  wisdom  even 
while  a  young  man.  Reflected  honour  on  the 
father  whose  name  was  connected  with  his 
own.  Only  truly  pious  children  a  real 
credit  and  honour  to  their  parents.  **My 
son,  if  thy  heart  be  wise,  my  heart  shall 
rejoice,  even  mine  "  (Prov.  xxiii.  15). 

3.  His  CouNTKY.  "  The  Buzite."  Buz 
the  second  son  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother 
(Gen.  xxii.  21).  A  city  of  this  name  in 
Arabia  Deserta,  mentioned  in  connection 
with  Dedan  in  Idunisea  (Jer.  xxv.  13).  The 
name  of  the  city  and  the  country  around 
probably  derived  from  Buz,  Nahor's  son. 
Buz  himself  a  Syrian.  Probably  some  of  his 
descendants  emigrated  south-westwards  into 
Idumsea  or  Arabia.  Buz  a  brother  of  Uz, 
from  whom  the  country  of  Job  probably  took 
its  name.  Job  and  Elihu  thus  perhaps  not 
very  distantly  connected.  The  Syrians  in 
general  already  tinged  more  or  less  with 
idolatry.  Hence  the  command  to  Abraham 
to  leave  his  country  and  his  kindred.  Idols 
or  images,  probably  kept  as  household  gods, 
found  in  the  family  of  Laban,  Nahor's 
grandson  (Gen.  xxxi.  19).  Strange  gods 
worshipped  by  Terah  the  father  of  Abraham 
and  Nahor  (Josh.  xxiv.  2,  15).  Barachel 
probably  an  exception.  Hence  the  piety 
and  wisdom  of  his  son.  Due  to  sovereign 
grace,  that  generally  some  are  "  among  the 
faithless,  faithful  found."  Saints  in  Nero's 
household. 

4.  His  Kindred.  "Of  the  kindred  (or 
clan)  of  Ham."  Ram  probably  the  same  as 
Aram  (1  Chron.  xxix.  10,  with  Matt.  i.  3,  4). 
Ram  or  Aram  a  son  of  Shem,  and  the 
father  or  l)rother  of  Uz  (Gen.  x.  23;  1 
Chron.  i.  17).  Another,  the  son  of  Kemuel 
the  son  of  Nahor,  and  the  brother  of  Buz 
and  Uz  (Gen.  xxii.  21).  A  third  and  later 
Ram  or  Aram,  the  father- of  Amminadab 
and  grandfather  of  Nahshou,  the  prince  of 
thechildrenof  Judah  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus 
(1  Chron.  ii.  9—10;  Num.  i.  7,  2,  3).  From 
Ram  or  Aram,  Syria  had  its  name  Meso- 
potamia, the  country  between  the  rivers — 
namely,  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  also 
hence  called  Padan  Aram,  or  the  Plain  of 
Aram.      Hence    the   Syriac  and    Chaldaic 


EOmi'ETlC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP,  xxxir 


language  called  the  Aramaic,  traces  of  wliich 
appear  in  the  Book  of  Job,  but  more 
especially  in  the  speeches  of  Elihu. — This 
particularity  in  tlie  description  of  Elihu 
significant,  as — (1)  An  evidence  of  the 
historic  truth  of  the  poem;  (2)  Indicative 
of  the  important  place  he  occupies  in  the 
controversy,  and  the  p;irt  he  contributed  to 
its  solution  ;  (J,])  Expressive  of  the  honour 
put  upon  Elihu  himself  as  the  most  en- 
lightened of  the  speakers.  "Them  that 
lionour  me   I   will   honour." 

5.  His  Age.  "  Young."  Probably  even 
younger  than  Job.  A  rcmaikable  peculiarity 
m  his  case.  The  other  speakers  elderly, 
and  even  aged  men  (verse  6).  Unusual 
in  Arabia  and  the  East  for  young  men  to 
take  part  in  a  religious  controversy.  Ob- 
serve —  Grace  and  wisdom  not  confined  to 
a^e.  John  the  most  beloved  and  devoted 
of  the  A))ostles,  believed  to  have  been  the 
youngest,  Paul,  when  chosen  to  be  the 
Apostle  of  tlie  Gentiles,  a  young  man. 
Timotiiy,  his  friend  and  deputy  while  but  a 
youth.  Jesus  among  the  doctors  in  the 
temple  at  the  age  of  twelve.  Daniel,  Shad- 
rach,  Meshach  and  Abednego,  distinguished 
for  piety  and  wisdom  at  an  early  age. 

III.  Elilm's  Character.  To  be  gathered 
from  the  history  and  from  his  own  speeches. 

1.  Ardent  and  zealous.  Hence  liis  anger 
both  against  Job  and  his  three  friends  (verse 
2),  and  his  eager  endeavour  to  correct  their 
mistakes.  Full  of  matter,  and  eager  to 
deliver  himself  of  it  (verses  18,  19). 

2.  Modest.  Conscious  of  his  youth,  he 
waits  till  all  the  other  Sf)oakers  had  nothing 
more  to  sav  (verses  4,  11).  Hesitating  and 
afraid  to  dtliver  his  opinion  (verse  6).  Spoke 
at  length,  only  because  inwardly  constrained 
to  do  so,  and  conscious  of  having  something 
to  say  on  the  subject  (verse  18).  Ascribes 
what  knowledge  and  understanding  he  had 
to  the  Spirit  of  God  (verse  8).  The  appear- 
ance of  inflation  in  his  language  probably 
due  to  Oriental  poetry,  and  to  the  apologetic 
style  which  he  assumes  in  introducing  him- 
self. 

3.  Enlightened.  Indicated  in  his  speeches. 
Answered  neither  by  Job  nor  his  friends. 
The  only  speaker  not  censured  by  the 
Almighty.  Jehovah's  address  to  Job  a  con- 
tinuation of  his  own. 

4.  Candid  and  impartial.  Neither  justi- 
fies Job,  though  desirous  of  doing  so;  nor 
yet,  like  the  three  friends,  suspects  and  con- 
demns him  as  necessarily  a  wicked  man. 
Speaks  his  mind,  without  either  fear  or 
favour,  as  amenable  to  his  Maker  (verses  21, 
22).  Reproves  Job,  without,  like  the  others, 
losing  his  temper. 

Elihu  may  be  viewed — (1)  As,  in  charac- 


ter, name,  and  the  attitude  he  assumes  in  the 
controversy,  a  type  of  Christ  in  relation  to 
the  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law,  as  well 
as  in  his  oOTioe  of  mediator  and  revealer  of  the 
Father;  (2)  As,  in  his  character  and  speeches, 
an  example  to  pastors  and  preachers  of  the 
Gospel. 

IV.    His    motives  and    reasons    for 
entering  into  tlie  controrersy. 

1.  His  displeasure  with  Job  and  his  thre& 
friends.  Verses  2,  3. — "  Then  was  kindled 
the  wrath  of  Elihu  (Oriental  expression  for 
strong  disapprobation  and  displeasure) 
against  Job  was  his  wrath  kindled,  beeaus 
he  justified  himself  rather  than  God  (or. 
'''made  himself  more  rightt-ous  than  God*'). 
Also  against  his  three  friends  was  his  wrath 
kindled,  because  they  had  no  answer  [to 
Job  which  was  solid  and  satisfactory],  and 
yet  had  condemned  Job  "  (as  a  hypocrite  arm 
secret  transgressor).  EMiu,  angry  with  J  h 
for  his  offence  against  God  ;  with  his  friends 
for  their  offence  against  Job. 

Obsr'rve — anger,  not  al/cai/s  otn/ul.  " 
ye  angry,  and  sin  not "  (Eph.  iv.  2 
Anger  may  be  either  holy  or  unln^ 
Shewn  by  God  Himself.  God  "angry  \ 
the  wicked  every  day."  Felt  and  ex'hib, 
by  Christ.  "Looked  ronnd  about"  ui)oi! 
his  Pharisaic  adversaries  and  opposers  "  with 
anger "  (Mark  iii.  5).  Anger  a  principle 
or  passion  implanted  in  our  nature  for  wise 
and  holy  objects.  Only  right  when — (1) 
Directed  against  a  proper  object.  This 
not  always  the  case  with  creature  anger.  (2) 
Excited  by  a  just  or  sufficient  cause.  Human 
anger  ofien  excited  by  a  bad  cause,  still 
more  frequently  by  an  insufficient  one. 
Jonah  first  angry  at  Nineveh's  repentance, 
and  then  at  the  loss  of  his  gourd.  (3) 
Held  under  due  control.  Uncontrolled  anger 
a  sinful  passion — a  sin  itself,  and  leading 
to  many  others.  (4)  Accompanied  with 
love.  Jesus  wept  over  the  objects  of  His 
anger  (Luke  xix.  41).  (  5  )  Not  long  continued. 
"  Let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your 
wrath"  (Eph  iv.  26).  Anger  may  enter 
the  breast  of  a  wise  man,  but  rests  only  in 
the  bosom  of  fools  (Eccles  vii.  9).  Anger 
in  fallen  creatures  apt  to  be  sinful.  Hence 
spoken  of  as  a  work  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  25). 
Believers  exhorted  to  put  it  away  (Eph.  iv. 
31).  Anger  in  fallen  men  like  gunpowder  in 
the  hands  of  children — useful  but  dangerous 
Often  sinful  even  in  good  men.  Excluded 
Moses,  though  the  meekest  man  on  earth, 
from  the  promised  land  (Num.  xx.  10,  12). 
Anger  safest  wnea  directed  against  the  sin 
rather  than  the  sinner.  Causeless  anger 
murder  in  the  heart,  and  often  leading  to 
murder  in  the  act.    Excessive  auger  a  species 

203 


CHIP.  xxxn. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


of  madness.  The  New  Testament  rule — 
"Slow  to  speak,  slow  to  wrath.*'  *'  Not 
soon  angry,"  a  precept  necessary  both  for 
ministers  and  people.  One  feature  of  charity 
or  love,  that  it  is  "  not  easily  provoked 
(1  Cor.  xiii.  5). 

2.  The  inability  of  the  three  friends  to 
answer  Job.  V<'rse  3 — "They  had  found  no  an- 
swer." Verse  16— "Then- fore  1  said,  hearken 
unto  me ;  I  also  will  shew  mine  opinion. 
Behold,  I  waited  for  your  words ;  I  gave  ear 
to  your  reasons  (your  arguments,  or  your 
views;  Margin,  *  your  understandings'), 
whilst  (or  till)  ye  searched  out  what  to  say. 
Yea,  I  attended  unto  you  (or  *  to  your  testi- 
monies'), and  behold,  there  was  none  of  you 
that  convinced  Job  (refuted  or  convicted 
him  of  error),  or  that  answered  iiis  words" 
(solidly,  suitably, and  satisfactorily).  Verse  15 
— "  They  [i.e.y  Job's  friends, — the  words  ad- 
dressed to  Job,  or  to  others  present  at  the 
controversy  as  by-standers),  were  amazed 
(' struck  down,'  either  by  Job's  arguments, 
his  confidence  in  God,  or  his  obstinacy  in 
maintaining  his  innocence),  they  left  off 
speaking.  When  I  had  waited  (or  simply, 
'I  waited' — spoken  after  an  interval  of 
silence,  leaving  room  for  remark),  for  (or 
but)  they  spake  not,  but  stood  still  (per- 
severed in  their  silence,  or  stood  as  dumb), 
and  answered  no  more ;  I  said,  I  will  also 
[though  so  much  younger]  answer  my  part 
(will  contribute  my  part  to  the  controversy) ; 
I  also  will  show  my  opinion."  Becoming  in 
juniors  to  be  silent  in  a  discussion,  till  others, 
older  and  likely  to  be  better  informed  on  the 
subject,  have  said  M'hat  they  are  able  to  say 
upon  it.  Modesty  an  ornament  to  all,  but 
especially  to  youth.  *'  Slow  to  speak,"  in 
most  cases  a  safe  rule.  Jesus  among  the 
doctors,  first  heard^  then  asked  questions, 
and  then  gave  answers. 

3.  The  general  hestowment  of  understanding 
by  the  Creator  on  mankind.  Verse  7. — *'  I  said, 
days  (men  of  advanced  age)  should  speak, 
and  the  multitude  of  years  should  teach  wis- 
dom (understanding  as  to  God's  dealings  and 
man's  duty).  But  there  is  a  spirit  in  man 
(mankind  in  general,  without  being  confined 
to  age),  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty 
giveth  them  understanding.  Great  men 
(great  either  in  age  or  position)  are  not 
always  wise;  neither  do  the  aged  (neces- 
sarily or  exclusively)  understand  judgment 
(what  is  right  either  in  doctrine  or  dutv). 
Therefore  I  said,  Hearken  to  me ;  I  also 
will  shew  mine  opinion."  Observe  :  (1)  To 
speak  on  great  and  important  subjects  con- 
nected with  Divine  truth,  the  especial  right 
and  duty  of  men  of  age  and  experience. 
Growth  in  wisdom  naturally  expected  to  ac- 
company growth  in  years.  (2)  Wisdom  not 
the  monopoly  of  any  age  or  class.     (3).  Intel- 

204 


ligence  the  gift  of  Ood.  Christ  the  light 
that  lighteth  every  man  that  comethinto  the 
world  (John  i.  9).  (4)  Apreacher  to  speak 
in  dependence  on,  and  as  the  result  of  Divine 
enlightenment.  "  If  any  speak,  let  him  speak 
as  the  oracles  of  God."  The  manifestation 
of  the  Spirit  given  to  every  [believing]  man 
to  profit  [others]  withal  (1  Cor.  xii.,  7 ;  1  Pet. 
iv.  11.  Three  things  necessary  for  every 
preacher  of  Divine  truth— (1)  A  message 
given  him  by  the  Spirit.  (2)  The  unction 
of  the  Spirit  in  delivering  it.  (3)  The 
power  of  the  Spirit  to  accompany  it  in  the 
hearts  of  the  hearers. 

4.  His  conviction,  in  opposition  to  the  self- 
conceit  of  the  three  friends,  that  the  subject 
under  discussion  was  capable  of  receiving  a 
more  satisfactory  treatment.  Versel3 — "  Lest 
ye  should  say  (or  *  do  not  say'),  We  have 
found  out  wisdom ;  God  casteth  him  down, 
and  not  man"  (his  affiictions  are  to  be  viewed 
as  coming  in  righteous  judgment  from  ihe 
hand  of  God,  and  not  from  man ;  or,  *'  God 
must  confute  or  overcome  him  and  not  man.") 
Either  the  language  of  the  friends,  as  if  they 
had  said  all  that  could  be  advanced  on  the 
subject,  Job  being  now  incorrigible  to  ail 
but  God  himself;  or  the  language  of  Elihu, 
as  indicating  that  what  he  was  about  to  ad- 
vance was  not  the  mere  argument  (»f  man, 
Ijut  the  teaching  of  God  himself,  by  whose 
inspiration  he  was  about  to  speak.  "  We 
have  found  out  wisdom,"  generally  the  lan- 
guage of  ignorance  and  pride,  as  if  we  our- 
selves had  seen  the  whole  truth  in  relation 
to  a  subject,  and  nothing  more  could  be  said 
about  it.  The  language  of  many  of  the 
philosophers  or  wise  men  of  antiquity.  "  Pro- 
fessing themselves  to  be  wise."  The  name 
"  philosopher,"  however,  denoting  a  lover  oj 
wisdom,  chosen  in  modesty  by  Pythagoras 
its  inventor,  to  indicate,  in  opposition  to  many 
who  called  themselves  "  wise  men,'  that  wis- 
dom was  not  yet  found  out,  and  that  all  that 
men  could  pretend  to,  was  to  be  lovers  or 
seekers  of  it ;  while  both  Socrates  and  Plato 
acknowledged  the  necessity  of  a  Divine  reve- 
lation, and  anticipated  the  bestowment  of  it 
at  some  future  period.  "  We  have  found  out 
wisdom,"  still  the  language  of  a  *  vain  philo- 
sophy,' and  of  •  science  falsely  so  called.*  The 
boast  of  some  modern  as  well  as  of 
ancient  schools  Especially  made  at  present 
in  reference  to  the  origin  of  man  and  of  the 
universe.  'Natural  Selection' to  lake  the  place 
of  a  personal  and  intelligent  Creator.  The 
Bible  account  of  creation  to  be  set  aside, 
according  to  some,  for  the  teachings  or 
guessings  of  science,  which  yet  is  obliged  to 
confess  that  it  neither  does  nor  can  know 
anything  certain  on  the  subject.  "I  say," 
says  one  ot  those  who  think  they  have 
'found  out  wisdom'  on  this  subject,  **  that 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


OHAP.   XXX  n 


natural  knowledge,  seeking  to  satisfy  na- 
tural wants,  has  found  the  ideas  which 
alone  can  satisfy  spiritual  cravings/*  On 
a  subject,  in  regard  to  wliich  science  pro- 
fesses it  has  and  can  have  no  evidence 
and  can  give  no  certain  account,  on  which  its 
teachings  are  far  from  being  in  harmony  wilh 
each  other,  and  one  connected  with  matters 
of  infinite  and  eternal  importance,  —  it 
would  seem  not  a  little  wiser  to  accept  the 
professed  and  sufiiciently -accredited  Divine 
testimony,  however  it  is  to  be  intrcpreted, 
which  has  been  preserved  and  handed  down 
to  us  through  nearly  four  thousand  years ; 
which  has  been  received  as  such  by  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  Apostles,  and  by  the  best  men 
in  every  age,  both  before  and  since,  who 
kave  had  the  opportunity  of  doing  so ;  and  is 
infinitely  more  calculated  to  meet  the  wants 
and  circumstances  of  humanity,  than  the 
theory  or  guesses  which  some  professors  of 
science  would  give  us  in  its  stead. 

5.  His  having  hitherto  stood  aloof foni  the 
controversy ,  and  having  arguments  to  produce 
which  had  not  yet  been  adtianced.  Verse  14. 
—  "  Now  lie  (Job)  hath  not  directed  his  words 
against  me  :  neither  will  I  answer 
him  with  your  speeches  "  (either  as  to  the 
matter  or  manner  of  them).  Elihu  pro- 
poses— (1)  To  bring  new  matter  to  bear  on 
the  subject  under  discussion,  viz.,  God's 
providential  dealings  with  men;  (2)  To 
speak  in  a  calmer  and  more  dispassionate 
tone  than  the  three  friends,  as  not  having 
had  anything  irritating  addressed  to  him  by 
Job.  The  argument  of  the  friends,  that 
Jcb's  suft'erings  proved  him  to  be  a  trans- 
gressor. Elihu's  object  to  show  that 
afflictions  and  trials  are  often  of  a  discijilinary 
character. — Necessary  in  a  discussion— (1) 
To  be  able  to  say  something  new;  (2)  To 
keep  one's  temper. 

6.  His  deep  interest  in  the  subject^  his  con- 
sciousness of  having  much  to  say  ttpon  it,  and 
his  earnest  desire  to  deliver  it.  Verse  18. — 
"  For  1  am  full  of  matter  :  the  spirit  within 
me  (Ileb.  *of  my  belly*  or  heart)  con- 
straineth  (or  straiteneth)  me.  Behold,  my 
belly  (or  heart,  as  John  vii.  38)  is  as  wine 
which  hath  no  vent  (or  outlet  for  the  escape 
of  the  gas  generated  in  the  course  of  fermen- 
tation); it  is  ready  to  burst  like  new  bottles 
(or,  like  skin-boitles  containing  new  wi-ne 
undergoing  fermentation;  old  skins  being 
more  liable  to  burst  than  new  ones.  Matt, 
ix.  17,  18).  I  will  speak  that  1  may  be 
refreshed  (relieved  of  the  inward  pressure  to 
deliver  what  I  have  to  say  on  the  subject) ; 
I  will  open  my  lips  and  answer.**  In  the 
East,  a  young  man  only  justified  in  speak- 
ing in  the  presence  of  seniors,  when  he  has 
much  to  say  on  the  subject  under  dis- 
cussion.   Observe — The  duty  of  (Miristians 


in  general,  and  of  preachert  in  particular : 

(1)  To  be  deeply  interested  in  subjects  per- 
taining to  the  Divine  glory  and  the  welfare 
of  men.  Well  to  be  **  zealously  affected 
always  in  a  good  thing  **  (Gal.  iv.  18).  (2) 
To  sympathize  with  the  sufferings  of  a  fel- 
low-creature, and  to  seek  in  every  way  we 
can  to  alleviate  them.  (3)  To  obtain  correct 
views  as  to  the  cause  of  afflictions,  and  the 
best  way  to  improve  them.  (4)  To  com- 
municate for  the  comfort  and  benefit  of 
others  what  we  ourselves  have  been  taught 
in  regard  to  Divine  things.  That  preacher 
likely  to  profit  who  feels  that  he  has  some- 
thing important  to  say,  and  is  inwardly  con- 
strained to  say  it.  Desirable  for  a  preacher 
to  have  the  prophet's  experience, —God'a 
Word  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  his  bones 
(Jer.  XX.  9).  *' We  cannot  out  speak  the 
things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard*'  (Acts 
iv.  20).  Paul  pressed  in  the  spirit  at  Co- 
rinth, and  so  testified  to  the  Jews  that  Jesus 
was  the  Christ  (Acts  xviii.  5).  Preachers 
needed  who  are  ready  to  burst  with  the  good 
news  they  have  to  communicate  to  their 
hearers  concerning  the  great  salvation  of 
God.  Such  the  preachers  of  the  Gospel 
who  at  first  turned  the  world  up-side- down, 
and  would  do  so  again  if  found  in  any  con- 
siderable number. 

y.  Elihu's  resolution  to  be  plain  and 
impartial  in  his  discourse,  and  his 
reason  for  it.     Verses  21,  22. — "  Let  mo 

not,  I  pray  you,  accept  any  man's  person 
(shew  partiality  to  any  on  the  ground 
either  of  age  or  reputation),  neither  let  me 
give  flattering  titles  unto  man  (employing 
titles  of  honour  and  compliment,  or  speak- 
ing blandly  and  flattermgly,  instead  of 
plainly  and  honestly,  and  calling  things  by 
their  right  names).  For  I  know  not 
(am  neither  able  nor  willing)  to  give  flatter- 
ing titles  ;  in  so  doing  my  Maker  would  soon 
take  me  away "  (by  some  s'gnal  manifesta- 
tion of  His  displeasure  ;  or  simply,  "  my 
Maker  will  soon  take  me  away,'*  i.  e.,  by 
death  :  I  shall  soon  appear  in  His  presence 
and  render  an  account  of  what  and  how  I 
have  spoken).  The  Orientals  remarkable 
for  their  employment  of  flattering  titles  in 
addressing  others.  Observe — (i)  JPlain- 
ness  of  speech  in  a  preacher  not  incompatible 
with  courtesy.      Paul   an  example   of  both. 

(2)  The  preacher  neither  to  be  influenced  by 
fear  nor  favour  in  delivering  his  message  or 
performing  his  office.  His  business  not  to 
please  but  persuade  men,  or  to  please  only 
in  so  far  as  it  may  tend  to  their  edification, 
and  with  that  object  (llom.  xv,  2 ;  1  Cor. 
X.  33;  ix.  22 1.  His  duty  to  declare  the  whole 
counsel  of  God  ;  to  speak  necessary  truth, 
however  unpalatable ;  to  deliver  his  message 

205 


CHAP,  xxxin. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOM. 


faithfully,  whether  men  will  liear  or  whether 
they  will  forbear.  (3)  Important  recollec- 
Hon  for  a  preacher'.  ^^  Mi/  M  ulcer  will  .soon 
take  me  away'*  Good  to  speak  *'  as  a  dying 
man  to  d}ing  men."  (4)  The  remeiiib ranee 
of  Christ's  presence  as  a  hearer  the  best  safe- 
guard to  the  faithfulness  of  the  preacher^  and 
the  best  means  of  delioerance  from  the  fear 
of  man.  Fear  or  flattery  of  man  on  the  [)art 
of  a  preacher,  an  insult  to  liis  Master. 
Foolish  as  well  as  base  to  court  the  page's 
favour  instead  of  the  sovereign's.     "  That 


man  preaches  before  me  as  if  he  had  the  AU 
miglity  standing  at  his  elbow!' — James  the 
Firsts  of  one  of  his  Court  Preachers.  Latimer's 
introduction  to  his  sermon  before  Henry  the 
Eighth:  "Remember,  Hugh  Latimer,  that 
thou  speakest  before  the  king,  and,  therefore, 
take  good  heed  to  what  thou  sayest  in  pre- 
sence of  his  majesty  ;  but  remember  also, 
Hugh  Latitner,  that  thou  speakest  before  the 
King  of  Kings,  whose  servant  thou  art,  and 
who  shall  one  day  call  thee  to  account." 


CHAPTER  XXXm. 


ELIHTTS    FIRST    SPEECH, 


Elihu  addresses  himself  to  Job  on  the  sub- 
ject of  God's  afflictive  dispensations.  Afflic- 
tions often  disciplinary  chastisements. 

I.  He  bespeaks  Job's  careful  attention 
to  all  that  he  has  to  advance. 

Verse  1. — "  Wherefore,  Job,  I  pray  thee, 
hear  my  speeches  and  hearken  to  all  my  words." 
Liiiiu  speaks  as  one  that  had  much  to  say.  His 
speech,  or  perhaps  rather  speeches,  much  the 
longestofany  in  the  controversy.  Probably  two 
speeches,  separated  by  a  pause  or  interval  of 
silence  (eh.  xxxv.  1 ;  xxxvi  1).  His  state- 
ment— "  I  am  full  of  matter,"  confirmed  by 
the  fact.  His  speeches,  in  this  respect,  per- 
haps in  accordance  with  his  age.  Youthful 
speakers  often  wordy.  The  work  of  time  and 
experience  to  learn  to  prune  down  our  dis- 
courses and  avoid  multiplying  words. — Elihu 
makes  good  his  promise  not  to  give  flattering 
titles.  Addresses  Job  by  his  plain  name.  A 
king  of  Spain  complained  that  he  lacked  one 
who  would  speak  plainly  and  faithfully  to 
him  without  flattery  and  partiality.— Elihu 
speaks  with  courtesy  and  respect  as  well  as 
earnestness, —  **Ipray  thee."  "  Be  courteous," 
— a  New  Testament  precept;  to  be  especially 
remembered  by  all  who  endeavour  to  per- 
suade others.  Paul  an  example  of  courtesy 
to  his  hearers.  Often,  like  Elihu,  employs  the 
language  of  entreaty  (Rom.  xii.  1 ;  Eph.  iii. 
4).  A  duty  to  give  serious  attention  to  all 
that  an  earnest  and  enlightened  preacher  has 
to  say;  still  more  that  the  inspired  Word 
itself  teaches  (Dent.  v.  27 ;  Acts  x.  35). 
Men  not  to  listen  to  only  as  much  as  pleases 
them,  or  accords  with  their  own  views. 

Elihu  bespeaks  attention  on  the  ground — 

1.  Of  his  own  earnestness^  and  purpose  to 
enter  fully  and  intelliyently  into  the  subject. 
Verse  2 — "Behold,  now  I  have  opened  my 
mouth ;  my  tongue  hath  spoken  (or  speaketh) 
in  my  mouth,"  {margin^  in  or  with  **  my 
palate;'*  the  palate,  or  roof  of  the  moutii^ 

206 


used  in  articulate  speech  j  perhaps  referring 
to  the  distinctness  with  which  it  was  his  pur- 
pose to  speak  on  the  subject  in  hand).  The 
expression  :  "  I  have  opened  my  mouth,"  an 
Oriental  one,  indicating — (1)  The  setting  of 
oneself  to  deliver  a  weiglity  and  important 
discourse.  Saidof  Jesus  (Matt.  v.  2).  (2)  Ful- 
ness of  matter  and  readiness  of  utterance, 
as  if  the  words  were  waiting  for  egress,  and 
flowed  forth  spontaneously.  Paul's  request 
for  the  Church's  prayers,  that  "  utterance" 
(freeness  of  speech)  might  be  given  him, 
that  he  might  "open  his  mouth  boldly,  as  he 
ought  to  speak"  (Eph.  vi.  19;  Col.  iv.  3). 

2.  Of  his  sincerity  in  what  he  says,  as  well 
as  the  clearness  with  which  he  will  speak. 
Verse  3. — "  My  words  shall  be  of  (or  from) 
the  uprightness  (or  sincerity)  of  my  heart ; 
and  my  lips  shall  utter  knowledge  clearly," 
(or  "they, '  i.  e.y  his  words,  "  shall  utter  the 
sentiments  of  my  lips  purely" — sincerely, 
clearly,  and  correctly).  Elihu,  anxious  to 
a[)pear  to  Job  and  the  rest— (1)  As  unpreju- 
diced and  sincere — points  in  which  the  three 
friends  had  appeared  to  him  to  fail.  Their 
views  one-sided,  and  their  minds  prejudiced 
against  Job  on  account  of  his  extraordinary 
afflictions.  Not  always  easy,  though  in  the 
highest  degree  important,  for  a  speaker  to 
divest  himself  of  prejudice,  partiality  and 
passion,  and  to  be  pure  and  sincere  in  his 
motives.  Truth  to  be  spoken  without  gall 
or  guile.  "  Speaking  the  truth  (literally, 
*truthing  it')  in  love."  Truth  often  dis- 
torted through  passion  and  prejudice.  (2) 
As  expressing  his  views  simply  and  distinctly. 
Using  plain  language,  and  uttering  exactly 
what  he  thinks,  without  fear  or  favour,  mis- 
tiness or  circumlocution.  Plainness,  sim- 
plicity and  directness,  important  in  every 
teacher  of  Divine  truth.  "All  our  learning 
necessary  to  make  things  plain.^^' — Arch- 
bishop Ussher.  Paui  again  an  example  to 
preachers, — "  We  use  great  plainness  of 
speech"   (2  Cor.  iii.  12).    The  vision  to  be 


nOMTlETlC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CitAt.  XXXIII. 


made  "  plain,  tliat  he  may  run  [at  once  for 
escape]  that  readeth  it/'  (liab  ii.  2).  (3) 
As  uttering  what  is  true  and  correct  on  the 
subject,  "  Shall  utter knovyhnlge'* — not  fancies 
but  facts,  not  rneie  opinions  but  truth. 
What  Ehliu  promised  he  appears  to  have 
performed.  No  fault  found  at  last  by  the 
Almighty  with  any  of  his  utterances,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  three  friends.  A  religions 
teacher  to  employ  the  greatest  possible  care, 
both  by  prayer  and  study,  to  have  his  dis- 
courses and  instructions  strictly  in  accordance 
with  revealed  truth  and  the  circumstances  of 
the  case.  " If  any  speak,  let  him  speak  as 
the  oracles  of  God'*  (1  Peter,  iv.  11).  Care  to 
be  taken  that  the  Word  of  God  be  not  cor- 
rupted or  adulterated  (2  Cor.  ii.  17). 
Preiichers  to  utter  not  merely  what  they  have 
heard  or  read,  but  what  ihey  "know"  (John 
iii.  11 ;  Acts  iv.  20). 

3.  Of  his  equatiti/  with  Job  as  a  creature 
of  God.  Verses  4— 7— "The  Spirit  of 
God  (either  the  Divine  power,  corresponding 
with  *  breath'  in  the  next  clause;  or,  the 
Divine  person  so  spoken  of  throughout  the 
Scriptures)  hath  made  me  [in  connection  with 
thyself],  and  the  breath  of  the  Almighty 
hath  given  me  life  (as  to  Adam  and  all  his 
children.  Gen.  ii.  7).  If  thou  canst  answer 
me,  set  thy  words  in  order  (produce  and  ex- 
hibit thy  arguments)  before  me;  stand  up 
[as  an  opponent  against  what  I  have  to 
say].  Behold,  I  am  accorduig  to  thy  wish 
(or,  *  mouth,'  —  referring  to  Job's  words, 
chap.  ix.  34,  35 ;  xiii.  21,  &c. ;  or  simply, 
*  like  thee  ')  in  God's  stead  (or,  '  for  God,' 
«'.(?.,  to  plead  in  his  name;  or,  *in  relation 
to  God,'  i.e.,  as  his  cr<  ature) ;  I  also  am 
formed  out  of  the  claji.  Behold,  my  terror 
(or  overpowering  majesty)  shall  not  make 
thee  afraid  j  neither  shall  my  hand  (or  power 
as  of  a  superior  being)  be  heavy  upon  thee." 
Elihu,  conscious  of  having  no  advantage  over 
Job  from  his  position,  wishes  him  to  listen 
at  ease,  and  to  answer  with  freedom.  Those 
engaged  in  a  di>cussion,  to  be  able  to  speak 
on  equal  grounds  and  without  fear  from  the 
authority  and  power  of  each  other.  **  He 
must  be  confessed  the  better  scholar  who 
has  thirty  legions  at  his  command," — 
Phavorinus  the  philosopln  r,  in  reference  to 
Adrian  the  Emperor.  Observe: — (1)  A 
sign  of  weakness  in  dealing  with  an  op- 
ponent, to  tai^e  undue  advantage  either  of 
learning  or  position.  (2)  The  wisdom  and 
kindness  of  God,  first  in  revealing  Himself 
by  one  who  became  a  partaker  of  our  own 
nature,  and  then  of  emploung  not  angels  but 
men  in  the  ministry  of  reconciliation.  Elihu 
possibly  designed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  a 
representative  and  type  both  of  Christ  and  His 
Apostles,  as  well  as  of  all  faithful  preacherg 
of  the  GospeL    (3j  liie  record  of  man's 


creation  as  found  in  the  Bible,  well  known 
in  the  days  of  the  writer  of  the  Book.  (4) 
The  Holy  (ihost  probably  known  as  a  dis- 
tinct person.  Personality  apparently  here 
ascribed  to  Him.  So  in  Gen.  i.  2.  Probably 
also  in  Gen.  vi.  3.  The  breath  or  wind  a 
Scriptural  symbol  of  the  Spirit,  as  proceeding 
from  God,  and  mighty  in  His  operation  (Ez. 
xxxvii.  9 — 14 ;  John  iii.  8 ;  Acts  ii.  2 — 4). 
A  plurality  of  persons  recognized  m  tlie  one 
Divine  Creator  (Gen.  i.  20;  so  Job  xxxv. 
10—'*  my  Maker,"  Hebrew,  "  my  makers  ;" 
so  Isaiah  liv.  5).  (5)  The  specialty  in 
man's  creation  here  referred  to,  such  as  to 
render  him  an  intelligent  being,  capable  of 
reasoning  and  uttering  important  truth. 

II.  States  his  complaint  against  Job 

(verses  8 — 11).  His  complaint  not  against 
Job's  former  life,  but  his  present  language. 
Verse  8. — "  Surely  thou  hast  spoken  in  mine 
hearing,  and  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  thy 
words."  Elihu,  till  now,  only  an  attentive 
listener.  The  best  listener  likely  to  be  not 
the  worst  speaker.  "  Swift  to  hear,  slow  to 
speak."  Keference  made  by  Elihu  to  such 
passages  as  chap.  ix.  17,  30;  x.  7,  &c.  The 
grounds  of  his  complaint  in  reference  to  Job's 
langua<:e — 

1  His  maintaining  his  sinlessness.  Verse 
9. — "  Saying,  surely  I  am  clean,  without 
transgression  J  I  am  innocent;  neither  is 
there  iniquity  in  me."  Given  as  the  sub- 
stance of  Job's  statements,  rather  than  his 
exact  language.  Perhaps  a  mistaken  or  ex- 
aggerated representation  of  it.  Yet  ac- 
cording to  the  impression  made  by  Job's 
speeches  on  the  mind  of  a  bystander.  His 
expressions  often  rash,  unguarded,  and  ex- 
treme. At  times  seemed  to  say  all  that  is 
here  imputed  to  him,  althouuh  not  intending 
it  in  the  sense  in  which  Klihu  understood  it. 
His  intention  probably  only  to  maintain  that 
he  was  not  conscious  of  living  in  the  known 
breach  of  any  of  God's  laws,  as  he  was  sus- 
pected of  doing,  and  that  he  was  free  from 
any  such  crime  as  to  deserve,  above  others, 
the  awful  calamities  with  w^hicli  he  had  been 
visited.  Observe  — (1)  Easy,  under  strong 
feeling,  to  utter  unguarded  language,  capable 
of  being  misunderstood.  (2)  Our  duty  to 
put  the  most  charitable  construction  on  the 
words  of  a  good  man,  uttered  at  a  time  of 
sulfering  and  excitement.  (3)  Job's  error, 
that  he  mainiaintd  too  vehemently  his  own 
innocence,  and  was  more  careful  to  vindicate 
himself  than  justify  God.  Personal  depravity 
and  imperfection  the  lesson  he  had  yet  to 
learn. 

2.  His  charging  God.  "Seises  10,  11. 
Job  seemed  to  charge  God — (1)  With 
fickleness  and  unkindness.  Verse  10. — * '  Be- 
hold,  he    lindeth    occasions  (quan-els  or 

mi 


CHAP,  xxxni. 


BOmiTlTlC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


breaches  of  friendship,  Num.  xix.  34) 
against  me  ;  he  countetli  me  lor  liis  enemy  " 
Kefereuce  to  Job's  Janguage  in  such  places 
as  chap.  ix.  17 ;  xiii.  24 ;  xvi.  9 ;  xix  11  ; 
xxxi.  21.  God's  former  friendship  and  re- 
gard viewed  by  Job  as  now  changed  without 
cause  into  enmity.  A  grievous  mistake, 
and  reflection  on  the  Divine  character.  God's 
love  unchangeable  (Jer.  xiii.  3  ;  John  xiii  1). 
H\sface  may  change,  but  not  His  heart  (Is. 
liv,  7 — 10).  God  may  seem  to  count  a  man 
His  enemy,  whom  He  really  regards  as  His 
friend.  Love  and  hatred  on  the  part  of  God 
not  to  be  always  gathered  from  His  external 
dealings.  Often  the  greatest  love  where 
there  appears  the  greatest  want  of  it.  "  You 
only  have  I  known ;  therefore,"  &c.  On  the 
other  hand,  often  the  greatest  anger  where 
there  appears  none.  Observe — The  pride  of 
the  natural  heart  leadinj^Mo  vehement  vindi- 
cation of  ourselves,  may  easily,  in  the  dark- 
ness and  confusion  of  our  spirit  under 
trouble,  lead  also  to  language  reflecting  on 
our  Maker  and  His  procedure.  (2)  With 
treating  Him  unjustly  as  a  crimitial.  Verse 
11. — "  He  putteth  my  feet  in  the  stocks  "  (or 
clog, — either  as  a  punishment  or  a  means  of 
preventing  escape).  Job's  actual  language 
(chap.  xiii.  27).  The  child  sometimes  placed 
under  temporary  confinement  while  the  ser- 
vant or  slave  goes  at  large.  (3)  With  acting 
towards  Him  with  undue  severity  and  strict- 
ness. Verse  11. — "  He  marketh  all  my 
paths  "  (as  if  watching  for  the  least  offence, 
in  order  to  punish  it).  So  Job  seemed  to 
say  (chap.  xiii.  17  ;  xiv.  16 ;  xxxi.  4).  The 
flesh  in  a  tried  believer,  constantly  liable  to 
mistakes  in  regard  to  God  and  His  dealings. 
God,  for  Christ's  sake,  forgets,  instead  of 
markingy  the  offences  of  those  who  take  hold 
of  His  covenant  (Jer.  xxxi.  34  j  Heb.  viii. 
12;  X.  17).  Casts  them  behind  His  back, 
and  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  (Is.  xxxviii. 
17 ;  Mic.  vii.  19).  Forgets  the  evil  deeds 
of  His  faithful  though  imperfect  servants,  but 
remembers  their  good  ones  (Matt.  xxv.  35  — 
40;  Heb.  vi.  10).  Treasures  up  their  tears, 
but  blots  out  their  transgressions  (Ps.  Ivi.  8  j 
Is.  xliii.  25). 

III.  Condemns  Job  for  such  senti- 
ments. Verse  12. — "Behold,  in  this  thou 
art  not  just."  Job  neither — (1)  Correct  in 
judging  according  to  the  facts  of  the  case; 
nor  (2)  Just  in  his  views  regarding  God.  A 
man  may  be  ordinarily  just  towards  his  fellow- 
men  when  he  is  very  unjust  towards  God. 
Improper  sentiments  in  regard  to  God  and  His 
dealings  are  injustice  towards  our  Maker. 
This  injustice  charged  upon  Job  rather  than 
aoy  iniquity  in  his  past  life. — Elihu  gives  his 
reasons  for  condemning  Job  for  hislanii,uage. 
"  I  will  answer  thee."  C)iir  speech  to  be  with 

208 


grare,  leasoned  with  salt  [or  wisdom],  that 
we  may  know  how  we  ought  to  answer  every 
man  (Col.  iv.  6.)  "Every  one  shall  kiss 
his  lips  who  giveth  a  right  answer."  Elihu's 
main  reasons  for  man's  silent  submission  and 
acquiescence  in  all  the  Divine  procedure — 

i.  God^s  greatness  in  comparison  with  tK>dn. 
Verse  12. — "God  is  greater  than  man."  God 
greater  than  man  in  wisck)rn,  power,  and 
justice.  Greater  than  man  as  his  Maker, 
Ruler,  and  Judge.  The  natural  inference 
from  this — man,  even  the  greatest  and  best, 
is  not  to  strive  with  Goa.  "  Why  dost  thou 
strive  against  Him  ?" — quarrelling  with  and 
disputing  against  His  procedure  (Is.  xlv.  9). 
God's  greatness  above  man  suflBcient  to  ex- 
clude all  murmurs  and  complaints,  as — (1) 
God  is  not  to  be  required  to  give  an  account  oj 
his  procedure  to  any  of  his  creatures.  Verse 
13. — "  For  (or  because)  he  giveth  not  account 
of  any  of  his  matters  "  (or  dealings).  The 
reason  why  Job  should  have  refrained  from 
the  sentiments  he  had  uttered  in  regard  to 
God,  and  why  neither  he  nor  any  one  ought 
to  "strive  against  Him."  God  a  sovereign 
who  acts  according  to  His  own  will,  though 
never  but  in  infinite  wisdom,  rectitude,  and 
holiness.  Monstrous  presumption  to  think 
that  the  Creator  is  to  be  called  to  His  crea- 
ture's bar  to  answer  for  what  He  does  (Ps.  cxv. 
3 ;  Dan.  iv.  35).  God  too  great  to  stoop  to 
defend  His  procedure  against  the  cavils  of 
rebellious  worms.  This  the  scope  of  Jehovah's 
own  answer  to  Job  afterwards.  (2)  God  is 
not  to  be  comprehended  by  His  short-sighted 
creatures.  Folly  and  presumption  for  man  to 
think  he  is  able  to  comprehend  God's  dealings, 
except  as  He  is  pleased  to  reveal  and  explain 
them.  Hence  the  weakness  and  wickedness 
of  censuring  them. 

"  As  if  upon  a  full-proportioned  dome, 

On  swelling  columns  heaved,  the  pride  of 

art! 
A  critic  fly,  whose  feeble  ray  scarce  spreads 
An   inch  around,  with  blind  presumption 

bold 
Should  dare  to   tax   the  structure  of  the 

whole." 

2.  God  employs  sufficient  means  for  man's 
instruction^  which  are  yet  unheeded.  Verse 
14. — "For  God  speaketh  (in  order  to  man's 
instruction  and  direction)  once,  yea,  twice, 
yet  man  perceiveth  (or  regardeth)  it  not." 
Man  does  not  ])erish  from  want  of  means 
on  God's  part  for  his  preservation,  but  from 
inattention  to  them  on  his  own.  Not  left 
without  sufficient  light  for  his  guidance,  were 
the  light  improved.  God  unwearied  in  His 
instructions  to  men.  Means  employed  ap;ii-t 
from  a  written  revelation  of  His  will  Some 
of  these  specified.  Verse  15. — "In  a  dream 
(^as  in  the  earlier  periods  of  the  world),  m  a 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXXIl. 


vision  of  the  night,  when  deep  sleep  falleth 
upon  men,  in  slumberings  upon  the  bed  (a 
state  between  sleeping  and  waking);  then  He 
openeth  tiie  ears  of  men  (communicates  His 
will),  and  sealeth  their  instruction  (impres- 
sing it  upon  their  hearts  as  wil  ii  a  seal,  or 
secretly  conveying  their  instruction  as  in  a 
sealed  document),  that  he  may  withdraw 
man  from  his  purpose  (or  intended  work,  as 
Abimelech,  Gen.  xx.  6 ;  Laban,  Gen.  xxxi. 
24;  Balaam,  Num.  xxii.  12,  20,  31),  and 
hide  pride  from  man  (by  keeping  him  back 
from  it)."  "He  [by  these  means  wiien  meekly 
and  attentively  received]  keepeth  back  his 
soul  from  the  pit  (ijrave  or  corruption, — 
emblem  of  future  punishment),  and  his  life 
from  perishing  by  the  sword  [of  Divine  judg- 
ment]." Thus  God  employs  sufficient  means 
of  instruction  to  supply  man's  necessity  though 
not  to  gratify  his  curiosity.  Means  still 
more  abundautlj  employed  in  connection 
with  inspired  prophecy  and  a  written  revela- 
tion (Ps.  cxlvii.  19,  20  ;  Is.  xxviii.  13 ;  Heb. 
i.  1).  These  means  often  uiilieeded  by  man— 
(l)Through  indifferenceand  sloth;  (2)  rhrough 
worldliness  and  love  of  sin  A  sufficient 
reason  why  Job  and  other  sufferers  should 
refrain  from  murmurs  and  complaints.  Man 
is  in  a  state  of  disobedience.  God,  in  the 
exercise  of  mercy  and  compassion,  employs 
means  for  his  recovery,  but  often,  through 
man's  waywardness,  without  effect.  No  just 
cause  for  striving  against  Him.  God  only 
kind  to  man,  till  compelled  to  be  severe.  At 
first  uses  gentle  means  for  his  restoration. 
Only  from  necessity  employs  more  painful 
ones,  and  still  from  kindness  to  man.  Acts 
towards  men  not  merely  as  a  governor  but 
as  a  father.  His  eye  constantly  upon  them 
for  their  good.  His  object  in  his  admoni- 
tions to  men — 

First:  To  "  withdraw  man  from  his  pur- 
pose "  or  work.  Sin  properly  man's  work. 
**  The  thoughts  of  the  imaginations  of  man's 
heart  only  evil  from  his  youth  "  (Gen.  vi.  5  ; 
viii.  21).  God  made  man  upright,  but  he  hath 
sought  out  many  inventions  ( Kccles.  vii.  29.) 
Man's  purposes  and  doings  often  such  as  if 
carried  out  would  be  ruinous  both  to  them- 
selves and  others.  Men  kept  back  by  God 
from  many  sins  which  they  would  otherwise 
commit. 

Second :  To  "hide  pride  from  man."  Pride 
fallen  man's  besetting  sin.  Exemplified  in 
the  building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel  (Gen.  xi. 
4) ;  in  Pharaoh,—"  Who  is  the  Lord  ?"  &c. ; 
in  Sennacherib, — "  By  the  strength  of  my 
hand  I  have  done  it"  (Is.  x.  13) ;  in  Nebu- 
chadnezzar,— "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon 
which  I  have  built?"  in  Herod,  eaten  up 
of  worms,  "  because  he  gave  not  God  the 
glory"  (Acts  xii.  23) ;  even  in  good  H<  ze- 
kiah, — "  his  heart  was  lifted  up  "  (2  Chr. 
14 


xxxii.  25).  Pride  at  once  the  subtlest  and 
most  hateful  of  sins.  Robs  God  of  His  glory 
and  man  of  his  peace.  Pounded  on  a  lie,  that 
we  are  sometliing  when  we  are  nothing. 
Loathsome  in  a  creature  hitherto  unfallen, 
monstrous  in  one  already  fallen.  Insinuates 
itself  into  man's  best  actions  and  holiest 
feelings.  Often  the  "fly  in  the  pot  of  oint- 
ment." Can  array  itself  in  the  garb  of  humility. 
"  Lowliness  "  often  made  "young  ambition's 
ladder.'*  Possible  to  be  proud  of  one's 
humility.  Such  a  thing  as  spiritual  pride. 
The  sin  of  the  Pharisee.  The  most  loath- 
some of  all  the  forms  of  pride.  Doubtful  if 
there  can  be  such  a  thing  as  a  "just  pride." 
To  be  elated  with  pride  the  next  step  to 
fallinn^  into  the  "  condemnation  of  the  devil" 
(1  Tim.  iii.  6).  "  Pride  goeth  before  destruc- 
tion, and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall  " 
God's  aim  to  keep  Israel  back  from  pride 
(Deut.  viii.  11 — 18).  The  sin  that  banished 
the  angels  from  heaven  and  our  parents  from, 
paradise. 

"  Cromwell,  I  charge  thee,  fling  away  ambi- 
tion. 
By  that  sin  fell  the  angels :  how  can  man 

then, 
The  image  of  his   Maker,  hope  to  win  by 
it?" 

God  hides  pride  from  men — (1)  By  show- 
ing the  hatefulnessof  it ;  (2)  By  discovering 
the  consequences  of  it ;  (3)  By  removing  the 
occasions  of  and  temptations  to  it.  Afflictions 
and  trials  often  sent  to  keep  men  hunible, 
and  mercies  withheld  or  removed  which  miL'ht 
prove  the  occasion  of  pride.  True  humility 
a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  and  a  feature  of  the  new 
man  in  Christ.  To  be  learned  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus  and  in  the  shadow  of  His  cross.  Christ 
the  only  example  of  perfect  humility  (Matt. 
xi.  29;  Phil.  ii.  5—8.) 

Third :  To  save  men  from  the  consequences 
of  transgressi(m, — to  "keep  back  their  soul 
from  the  pit."  Sin's  consequences,  the  pit 
of  the  grnve,  and  that  of  whicli  it  is  tiie  em- 
blem, the  "bottomless  pit"(Rev.ix.l).  Death, 
in  its  full  extent,  the  wages  of  sin  (Kom.  vi. 
23 ;  Gen.  ii.  17  ;  James  i.  15).  Some  sins 
lead  directly  to  temporal  death;  all  sin  to 
death  eternal.  Man  composed  of  body  and 
soul.  The  penally  of  sin  extends  to  botii. 
The  soul  that  sinncth  it  shall  die.  A  first 
and  second  death  (Rev  ii.  11).  The  former 
the  shadow,  the  latter  the  sul)stance.  The 
first  death,  man's  separation  from  the  light 
of  this  world;  the  second,  his  separation 
for  ever  from  the  light  and  glory  and  blessed 
ncss  of  the  next.  I'lie  first,  to  a  believer  in 
Christ,  bereft  of  its  sting  and  converted  into  a 
blessing  ;  tlxc  second,  only  remediless  unmiti- 
gated woe.  The  latter  a  necessity  as  well  as 
righteous  sentence.     Sin  its  own  miserv  and 

209 


CHAP.    XXXII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


punishment.  No  peace  possible  to  the  wicked. 
Without  holiness  no  man  see  the  Lord. 
God's  great  of)ject  to  save  men  from  eternal 
death,  and  from  sin  which  is  its  cause. 
Hence  the  givinj^  up  of  His  own  Son  as 
man's  substitute.  "Die  man  or  justice  must, 
unless,"  &c.  Christ  made  "sin  lor  us,  that 
we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  him."  "By  his  knowledge  shall  mj 
righteous  servant  justify  many,  for  he  sliall 
bear  their  iniquities  "  (Is.  lui.  11 ;  2  Cor. 
V.  21). 

Perhaps  another  reason  for  man's  acquies- 
cence in  God's  procedure  intimated  in  verse 
14.  "  God  speaketh  (decreeth  or  purposeth) 
once,  yea,  twice,  yet  man  perceiveth  it  not " 
(or,  "  but  twice,  or  a  second  time,  He  — God 
Himself — does  not  consider  it,  so  as  to  alter 
or  improve  it.)  God's  purposes  founded  on 
infinite  wisdom  and  holiness,  and  therefore 
unchangeable. 

IV.  Passes  to  personal  affliction  as  a 
means  employed  for  man's  benefit.  Verse 

19 — 22. — "He  (man  in  general,  or  the  man 
whose  spiritual  benefit  God  is  aiming  at)  is 
chastened  also  with  pain  upon  his  bed,  and 
the  multitude  of  his  bones  with  strong  pain 
(or,  *  and  with  incessant  racking  of  his  bones  * 
Ps.  xxxviii.  3 ;  Is.  xxxviii.  13) ;  so  that  his 
life  (or  appetite)  abliorreth  bread,  and  his 
soul  dainty  meat  {Heb.,  *meat  of  desire,* 
or  meat  otherwise  desirable).  His  flesh  is 
consumed  (or  pines)  away,  that  it  cannot  be 
seen,  and  his  bones  that  were  not  seen  stick 
out  (or,  'his  bones  are  wasted  away  [so 
that]  they  are  not  seen '),  yea,  his  soul 
draweth  near  to  the  grave,  and  his  life  to 
the  destroyers  "  Cthe  bands  or  pains  of  death 
as  Acts  ii.  24 ;  "  things  causing  death,"  as 
the  Latin  Vulgate',  or  simply,  death  itself, 
Hades  or  the  invisible  world,  as  the  Septua- 
gint  or  Greek  version ;  or  perliaps  the  angel 
of  death — "  him  that  hath  the  power  of  death" 
(Heb.  ii.  14).     Observe — 

1.  Affiiction  the  result  of  sin.  Afiliction 
in  general  the  consequence  of  the  first  trans- 
gression. Individual  cases  of  affliction  often 
the  chastening  for  some  particular  offence. 
Thus  the  leprosy  of  Miriam,  Gehazi,  and 
King  Azariah;  the  plague  in  Israel's  camp 
in  the  Wilderness  ;  the  emerods  of  the  Ash- 
dodites;  the  disease  of  Herod.  Diseases 
threatened  to  Israel  as  the  consequence  of 
disobedience  (Lev.  xxvi.  16 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  60) 
Sickness  and  disease  also  the  disciplinary 
consequence  of  sin  in  the  New  Testament. 
Distinctly  stated  in  1  Cor.  xi.  30 ;  implied  in 
James  v.  15. 

2.  Affliction  of  the  body  one  of  GorFs  re- 
medial measures  for  the  welfare  of  the  soul. 
Diseases  His  servants.  His  to  bring  down 
to  the   grave.     Diseases    His    rebuke    for 

210 


iniquity.  In  His  hand  as  the  Creator  and 
Ruler  of  the  universe.  Employed  by  Him  as 
a  father,  under  a  dispensation  of  mercy,  for 
the  benefit  of  His  children.  A  testimony  that 
God  is  gracious  and  has  purposes  of  mercy 
in  reference  to  man.  "  Whom  the  Lord 
loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son 
whom  he  receiveth."  "  He  that  spareth  the 
rod  hateth  the  child"  (Prov.  xiii.  24).  Afflic- 
tion no  less  employed  by  God  as  a  fatherlv 
chastisement  because  coming  through 
secondary  or  natural  causes.  The  causes 
themselves  in  His  hand  as  well  as  the  effects 
they  are  to  produce.  A  part  of  His  provi- 
dential plan  and  government  of  the  world  He 
has  made  and  cares  for.  His  to  l)ring  the 
causes  of  disease  to  bear  on  the  individual 
and  in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  the  end. 
The  Shunamite's  child  goes  out  to  the 
reapers,  and  returns  home  with  a  sunstroke 
fand  dies.  Of  God's  ordering  that  the  child  was 
there,  and  that  the  sunstroke  should  happen 
and  produce  the  effect  which  it  did,  while 
other  children  escaped.  Diseases  induced 
in  a  thousand  ways,  when  apparently,  but  for 
the  most  trifling  circumstance,  they  might 
have  been  avoided.  The  effect  of  a  cause 
in  producing  disease  dependent  upon  various 
circumstances,  the  same  cause  often  operating 
differently  indifferent  cases.  Thecircuuistance 
determining  the  effect,  in  God's  hands.  This 
no  reason  why  care  is  not  to  be  exercised  in 
order  to  avoid  disease  and  prolong  healtii  in 
ourselves  and  others.  Such  care  enjoined  as 
a  duty.  "  Do  thyself  no  harm."  "  Thou 
shalt  not  kill." 

3.  Afflictions  thus  often  made  blessings.  But 
for  a  dispensation  of  mercy  through  the  pro- 
vision of  a  Saviour,  disease  only  a  penalty  and 
part  of  the  curse  entailed  by  transgression. 
"  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt 
surely  die."  In  the  economy  of  grace,  the 
very  curse  converted  into  a  means  of  bless- 
ing. Blessing  connected  in  the  Bible  with 
chastening  (Ps.  xciv.  10;  Job  v.  17).  Cor- 
rections of  instruction  the  way  of  life  (Prov. 
vi.  23).  Designed  in  mercy,  not  to  ruin  but 
to  restore  "  Mercy,  when  an  affliction  is  a 
correction,  not  an  execution. — Brooks.  A  fflic- 
tion,  as  a  correction,  designed — (Ij  To  arrest 
the  sinner  in  his  sinful  career ;  (2)  To  sub- 
due pride;  (3)  To  lead  to  thought ;  The 
prodigal  "came  to  himself,"  and  said,  &c. ;  (4) 
To  exhibit  the  emptiness  and  unsatisfj/ing 
nature  of  a  present  world;  (5)  To  bring  to 
view  death,  judgment  and  eternity  ;  (6)  To 
bring  sin  to  remembrance  as  the  causeof  suffer - 
inq, — '^Father,  I  have  sinned'^  Sfc;  (7)  Ha  gii'e 
us  to  realize  God  as  our  Governor  and  Judge, 
on  whom  we  are  dependant  and  to  whom  we 
are  amenable  as  His  creatures ;  (8)  Thus  to 
bri'ig  to  repentance. 

Chastemng  the  theology  of  Christians. — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  t  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXXII. 


Luther,  The  workshop  of  the  virtues. — Ani' 
brose.  The  treasury  of  all  blessings. — Bren,- 
tins.  King  Alfred  prayed  that  God  would 
frequently  send  him  sickness.  Man  often  like 
the  top  that  moves  only  when  it  is  whipped.— 
Brooks.  David's  experience,  that  of  most : 
"  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray  ;  but 
now  I  have  learned  to  keep  thy  law.'*  Afflic- 
tion a  bitter  but  salutary  drug  in  the  hands 
of  a  heavenly  father.  The  digging  about  the 
tree  to  render  it  fruitful  instead  of  cutting  it 
down.  Manasseh's  iron  chain  better  to  him 
thau  his  goldeu  crown. 

V.  Describes  the  means  and  result  of 
sanctified  affliction.  Verse  23—28.—"  If 
there  be  a  messenger  with  him  (either 
divine,  angelical,  or  human;  here  probably 
the  last,  as  Hai^gai  i.  13  ;  Mai.  ii.  7  ;  Eccles. 
V.  6 ;  Rev.  i.  20 ;  same  word  usually  rendered 
angel,  and  applied  both  to  Christ  and  His 
ministers ;  here,  one  sent  or  employed  by 
God  for  the  patient's  spiritual  benefit) ;  an 
imterpreter  (one  able  to  explain  the  meaning 
of  the  affliction  and  the  way  of  improving  it, 
probably  a  human  spiritual  teacher  or  en- 
lightened friend,  without  excluding  either 
the  Great  Teacher, — the  Messenger  of  tiie 
covenant,  who  alone  teaches  to  profit,  or 
the  Holy  S[)irit  employed  by  Him  and  the 
Father,  whose  office  it  is  to  *  reprove  [or  con- 
vince] the  world  of  sin,  righteousness,  and 
judgment '),  one  among  a  thousand  (of  rare 
intelligence,  fidelity,  and  skill,  Ecc.  vii.  28) ; 
to  shew  unto  man  (here  the  afflicted  person) 
his  uprightness  (either — (1)  what  he  should 
have  done,  but  which  he  has  failed  to  do ;  or 
(2)  his  duty  in  his  present  circumstances; 
or  rather  (3)  what  may  now  restore  him  to 
a  state  of  uprightness  and  acceptance  with 
God,  viz.,  repentance  and  faith  in  Him  in 
whom,  as  our  propitiation  and  substitute,  we 
have  righteousness  and  strength.  Is.  xlv.  24<. 
Then  (when  these  means  have  been  employed 
and  have  operated  successfully  on  the  sick 
man's  mind  and  heart  in  bringing  him  to 
humiliation,  repentance,  and  faith)  He  is 
gracious  (or  favourable)  unto  him  (has  mercy 
upon  him  so  as  to  pardon  his  sin  and  pro- 
bably deliver  him  from  his  affliction,  James 
V.  1 5, 16),  and  saith  (decrees  or  commands — 
perhaps  to  an  angel  who  may  have  the  power 
given  him  to  remove  the  disease,  as  John  v. 
4,  or  to  Satan,  who  liad  the  power  of  death 
committed  to  him,  Heb.  ii.  14) :  Deliver 
from  going  down  to  the  pit  (in  the  first 
instance,  the  grave,  but  probably  including 
the  idea  of  the  bottomless  pit  (Rev.  ix  1),  of 
vvh^c^  it  was  the  symbol) ;  I  have  found 
(provided  or  accepted)  a  ransom  (what  makes 
satisfaction  for  his  sin,  so  that  I  can  rit:lite- 
ously  forgive  and  restore  iiim, — the  great 
atonement,  now  laid  hold  of  by  the  sick  man 


in  repentance  and  faith).  His  flesh  (as  one 
of  the  results  of  his  repentance  and  faith) 
shall  be  fresher,  or  more  tender,  than  a 
child's  (as  in  the  case  of  Naaman  when 
healed  of  his  leprosy,  2  Kings  v.  14).  He 
s  lall  return  to  the  days  of  his  youth  (as 
Ps.  ciii.  5).  He  shall  (as  a  second  result  of 
his  repentance  and  faith,  and  the  fruit  of 
his  sanctified  affliction)  pray  unto  God,  and 
He  will  be  favourable  unto  him  ( — shall  have 
both  access  to  and  acceptance  with  God) ;  he 
shall  see  His  face  with  joy  (rejoice  in  the 
Divine  favour  and  fellowship — a  third  and 
still  more  blessed  result) :  for  (in  confirma- 
tion of  these  statements  as  to  the  results  of 
sanctified  affliction)  He  will  render  unto  man 
His  righteousness  (will  deal  faithfully  with 
him  according  to  his  conduct ;  in  this  case 
according  to  his  repentance  and  faith;  or, 
will  restore  to  the  sick  man,  on  his  repent- 
ance and  faith,  the  rigiiteousness  which  he 
lost  by  the  Fall,  but  which  is  recovered  in 
Jesus  Christ  the  Second  Adam,  and  given 
to  the  penitent  believer).  He  looketh  upon 
men  (as  the  Omniscient  Father  and  Ruler, 
as  Ps.  xiv.  2),  and  if  any  say  (or  as  margin  : 
"  lie  [the  sick  man,  as  2l  further  result  and 
evidence  of  sanctified  affliction]  shall  look 
upon  men  and  say"  [in  confession  and  thanks- 
giving] ;  or,  perhaps  rather:  "he  shall  sing 
[in  praise  of  God,  who  has  been  so  gracious 
to  him]  among  or  before  men,  and  say")  :  I 
have  sinned  and  perverted  that  which  was 
right  (transgressed  God's  righteous  laws), 
and  it  profited  me  not  (or,  *  and  He  has  not 
requited  me  according  to  my  deserts') ;  He 
will  deliver  his  soul  (or  as  margin,  '  He  hath 
delivered  my  soul ')  from  going  into  the  pit, 
and  his  life  (margin,  *  my  life')  shall  see  the 
light"  [both  of  this  world  and  the  next]. 
Tlie  passage  indicates,  in  regard  to 

Sanctified  Affliction, 

First,  the  means  through  which  it  is 
effected,  viz. :  spiritual  teaching.  Verse  23. — 
"  If  there  be  a  messenger  with  him,"  &c. 
Spiritual  teaching  always  necessary  to  the 
improvement  of  affliction.  Ordinarily  through 
a  human  teacher ;  always  through  a  Biciiie 
one  (Ps.  xciv.  10).  Something  necessary  to 
be  shown  to  the  patient.  **To  show  unto 
man,"  &c.    Observe — 

1.  Affliction  in  itself  not  a  blessing.  Tiie 
blessing  de[)endaut  on  other  things  connected 
with  it.  Depends  on  the  manner  in  which  it 
works  and  in  which  the  patient  is  inwardly 
exercised  by  it.  "  Worketh  ihe  peaceable 
fruits  of  righteousness  in  tiiein  that  are 
(?.r(?mA(?fl?  thereby  "  (Heb.  xii.  11).  Spiritual 
teaching  necessary  in  order  to  this.  '*  Blessed 
is  the  man  whom  Thou  cha.stenest,  O  Lord; 
and  teachest  him  out  of  Thy  law  "  (Ps.  xciv 

211    ' 


CHAP.    XXXII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


10).    Affliction  may  either  soften  or  harden; 
as  fire  softens  wax  and  liardens  clay. 

2.  The  exhibition  of  Divine  truth  to  the 
patient  necessary  to  the  improvement  of  his 
affliction.  Not  only  prayer  to  be  madey^/* 
him  and  with  him,  hut  suitable  truth  to  be 
presented  to  him.  Implied  in  the  term  "  in- 
terpreter.'* His  office  to  ^^shoio"  to  tlie  sick 
man.  Tiie  spiritual  teacher  at  least  as  neces- 
sary to  the  patient  as  tiie  physician.  Truth 
to  be  exhibited  for  liis  miud^  as  well  as 
medirine  for  his  body. 

3.  The  spiritual  teaching  usually  through 
human  instrumentality .  The  Divine  Teacher 
absolutely  necessary;  ahuinan  teacher  usually 
the  instrument.  Tiie  New  Testament  rule 
(James  v.  l4).  *'  Is  any  sick  among  you  P 
Let  liim  call  for  the  elders  of  the  Church," 
— who  are  recjuired  to  be  *'apt  to  teach," 
and  of  whom  at  least  some  labour  "  in  the 
word  and  doctrine"  (1  Tira.  iii.  2;  v.  17). 
Therefore  not  only  to  pray  with  the  sick 
man,  but  to  instruct  him. 

4.  Great  skill  and  fidelity  required  on  the 
part  of  ministers  and  others  in  hjcaling  the 
sick.  **  One  among  a  thousand.**  Easier  to 
preach  to  a  thousand  hearers  than  to  minister 
wisely  and  faithfully  to  one  sick-bed  Study 
and  prayer  necessary  for  the  bed-room  as 
well  as  the  pulpit. 

5.  The  part  of  the  visitor  of  the  sick  to 
"show"  to  the  patient  '*  his  uprightness" — the 
personal  righteousness  in  which  he  has  failed, 
the  imputed  righteousness  which  he  may  yet 
obtain,  and  which  he  is  now  to  seek,  receive, 
and  rejoice  in,  and  the  present  duty  required 
of  him,  viz.,  humiliation,  repentance,  and 
faith  in  the  provided  sacrifice.  Hence  the 
visitor's  need  of  knowledge  both  of  the  law 
and  of  the  Gospel;  of  sin  and  the  way  of 
salvation  from  it.  By  the  law  is  the  know- 
ledge of  sin;  by  the  Gospel  the  knowledge 
of  salvation.  The  visitor  to  be  able  to  point 
the  patient  to  the  Saviour  as  God's  way  of 
righteousness  for  the  sinner — "tlie  end  of 
the  law  for  risjhteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth'*  (Horn.  x.  4),  ''and  made  righte- 
ousness to  all  wlio  are  in  him  **  (1  Cor.  i.  30). 

Second,  the  results  of  sanctified  affliction, 
or  of  repentance  and  faith  on  the  part  of  the 
patient.  Verse  24.—"  Then,'*  &c.  The  re- 
sults varied  and  precious.  Chiefly  spiritual, 
in  the  patient's  mind  and  soul;  partly  and 
frequently  also  in  his  body, 

1.  Experience  of  the  Divine  mercy  and  for- 
giveness.— '*  Then  he  is  gracious  unto  him.** 
God,  as  a  righteous  and  holy  God,  able  only 
to  exercise  forgiving  grace  and  mercy  in 
certain  circumstances  and  on  certain  con- 
ditions. **  Then  He  is  gracious  to  him," — 
when  these  things  have  taken  place.  The 
ffracious  inclination  and  purpose  already 
there;  the  outiui-  or  manifestation  of  it  pre- 

212 


vented  till  the  patient's  repentance  and  faith. 
Mercy  provides  the  means  for  its  own  out- 
flow to  sinners.  Uepentance  and  faith 
necessary  to  the  experience  of  pardoning 
mercy ;  but  even  these  of  mercy's  own  pro- 
viding (Acts  iii.  19  ;  V.  31). 

2.  Deliverance.  —  *'  Deliver  from  going 
down  to  the  pit.'*  This  deliverance  probably 
twofold  —  the  one  a  picture  of  the  other. 
(1)  Deliverance  from  temporal  or  physical 
death,  which  seemed  impending.  (2)  More 
especially,  deliverance  from  eternal  death, — 
the  object  of  the  chastening.  The  death, 
which  IS  the  consequence  and  wages  of  sin, 
now  averted  in  the  patient's  repentance  and 
faith.  Hence  the  ground  of  this  deliverance 
— '*!  have  found  a  ransom."  In  regard  to 
the 


Ransom. 


Observe — 


1.  The  meaning  and  application  of  the 
term.  In  Hebrew,  literally  a  covering. 
Hence  something  to  cover  transgression ;  a 
ground  of  pardon  (Ps.  xxxii.  I).  An  atone- 
ment, or  what  satisfies  justice,  and  makes  it 
righteous  to  forgive  transgressors.  The 
name  given  to  the  mercy-seat  or  lid  of  the 
ark  in  the  Holy  of  Holies;  called  also  in  the 
New  Testament  the  Propitiation,  from  the 
atonement  made  on  it  by  the  sprinkled  blood 
of  the  sacrifices  (Lev.  xvi.  14).  Hence  also, 
anything  done,  suifered,  or  paid  as  an  atone- 
ment or  ground  of  deliverance.  Thus  the 
intercession  of  Moses  for  Ibrael  (Exod.  xxxii. 
20) ;  and  the  censer  taken  into  the  camp  by 
the  zeal  of  Phinehas  (Numb.  xxv.  13).  Tii.e 
price  paid  for  the  redemption  of  a  captive. 
Egypt  given  for  Israel's  ransom  (Isa.xliii.  3). 
The  ransom,  in  reference  to  men,  whatever 
God  may  please  in  His  wisdom  and  good- 
ness to  appoint.  Appointed  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  case  and  the  deliverance 
afforded.  E.ef)entance  and  amendment  on 
the  part  of  a  nation,  made  a  ground  of  for- 
giveness and  deliverance  from  threatened 
punishment.  Thus  Nineveh  saved  from 
predicted  destruction.  The  existence  of  one 
truly  righteous  man  in  Jerusalem,  in  the  days 
of  Jeremiah,  a  ground  of  forgiveness  to  the 
whole  city  (Jer.  v.  1).  So  the  existence  of 
ten  righteous  men  in  Sodom.  Ahab's  hu- 
miliation the  ground  of  the  deliverance  of 
himself  and  the  kingdom  from  threatened 
punishment  during  his  own  life-time  (1 
Kings  xxi.  29).  Confession  of  sin,  with  the 
prayer  of  faith  on  the  part  of  the  sick,  made 
in  the  New  Testament  the  more  immediate 
ground  of  forjj^iveness,  and  consequent  resto- 
ration to  health  (James  v.  15,  16).  Christ's 
death  the  only  ransom -price  of  a  sinner's 
deliverance  from  eternal  death  (IMatt.  xx. 
28). 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB, 


CHAP.   XXXIIL 


2.  The  actual  ransom  in  the  text.  As  the 
ground  of  the  sick  inan's  deliverance  from 
eternal  death,  the  ransom  that  provided  by 
God  Himself  for  the  purpose — the  death  of 
His  own  Son  as  a  substitute  for  sinners — to  be 
exhibited  in  our  time  (1  Tim  ii.  6).  That 
death  typified  and  held  forth  as  tiie  ransom 
for  sinners  and  the  ground  of  their  forgive- 
ness and  deliverance  from  death  eternal,  in 
the  sacrifices  slain  and  offered  up  in  the 
patriarchal  and  Levitical  aj^e  (Lev.  xvii.  11). 
That  death  a  full  satisfaction  to  Divine  justice 
for  the  sins  of  the  world  (1  John  ii.  2). 
Through  it,  God  able  to  be  just  while  justify- 
ing the  ungodly  who  believe  in  it  (Rom.  iii. 
25,  26).  Without  shedding  ot  blood  no 
remission  (Heb.  ix.  22).  The  significance  of 
sacrifices  as  typifying  this  ground  of  forgive- 
ness understood  by  Job  (chap.  i.  5  ;  xlii.  8). 

3.  This  ransom  *' found "  or  provided  by 
God Himsef.  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that 
lie  gave  his  only-begotten  Son "  (John  iii. 
16 ;  Ro\M.  viii.  32).  The  ransom  found  in 
His  own  ^osom  (John  i.  18).  The  deliver- 
ance of  viie  sick  man  the  result  of  this 
ransom  appropriated  by  and  applied  to  him 
on  his  repentance  and  faith.  That  repent- 
ance and  faith  the  ground  or  occasion  of  his 
deliverance  from  temporal  death;  the  Lamb 
"  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world," 
the  ground  of  his  deliverance  from  death 
eternal  (1  Peter  i.  20).  Impossible  for  any 
but  God  to  provide  such  a  ransom.  Man 
unable  to  provide  a  ransom  for  his  brother 
even  from  death  temporal  (Ps.  xlix.  7 — 9). 
Christ  slain  as  the  Ransom,  the  power  and 
tlie  wisdom  of  God  (1  Cor.  i.  23,  24). 
The  words  in  the  text  the  language  oijoy^ — 
"  I  have  found,"  &c.  God  *'  delighteth  in 
mercy.**  Hence  rejoices  in  finding  a  righte- 
ous way  for  its  exercise.  The  father  rejoices 
over  the  return  of  his  prodigal  or  long-lost 
child,  and  the  means  of  securing  it.  Similar 
language  employed  in  reference  to  David  as 
the  type  of  Messiah  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  19,  20). 

3.  Restoration  to  healthy  among  the  results 
of  sanctified  affliction.  Verse  25. —  "His 
flesh  shall  be  fresher,"  &e.  This  probably 
included  in  the  command :  "  Deliver  from 
going  down  to  the  pit."  The  power  to 
deliver  from  temporal  death  and  to  restore 
from  the  brink  of  the  grave,  in  the  hand  of 
the  Almighty.  The  command  needs  only  to 
be  given  or  power  put  forth.  The  Divine 
command  as  eifeetual  in  restoring  to  life  and 
health  as  at  the  creation  in  producing  light: 
"Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light." 
The  centurion's  faith  in  regard  to  Jesus  as 
the  Son  of  God  :  **  Speak  the  word  only  and 
my  servant  shall  be  healed."  Diseases  God's 
servants,  to  come  and  go  at  His  bidding.  The 
leper's  faith :  "  Lord,  ii'  thou  wilt,  thou  canst 


make  me  clean."  All  nature,  visible  and  in- 
visible, under  the  Divine  control.  The  com- 
mand or  will  of  Jehovah  obeyed  through  all 
the  material  universe.  *'  He  spake  and  it 
was  done."  Recovery  from  sickness  dependant 
not  on  the  skill  of  the  physician,  but  on 
the  will  of  the  Almighty.  Till  God  sa\  s : 
**  Deliver  from  going  down,"  &c.,  all  remedies 
fruitless.  When  He  speaks  the  word,  the 
simplest  becomes  effectual.  A  plaster  of  figs 
laid  on  Hezekiah's  boil  at  the  pro|)het's  pre- 
scription, the  means,  at  God's  will,  of  saving 
the  king's  life  (Is.  xxxviii.  21).     The  power  o/" 

Healing  the  Sick, 

claimed  by  God  in  regard  to  Israel  (Exod. 
XV  26;  xxiii.  25;  Deut.  vii.  15).  Ascribed 
to  Him  in  regard  to  men  in  general  (Ps.  ciii. 
3 ;  cvii.  20).  Exercised  by  Christ  as  a  proof 
of  His  Divinity  and  Divine  mission  as  the 
Messiah  (Luke  vii.  20 — 22).  The  same 
power  communicated  by  Him  to  the  Apostles 
as  credentials  of  their  Divine  commission 
and  of  the  truth  of  their  doctrine  (Mark  iii. 
15).  The  power  communicated  also  to  the 
seventy  (Luke  x.  9j ;  and  promised  to 
believers  in  general  (Mark  xvi.  18).  Con- 
tinued in  the  New  Testament  Church  as  one 
of  the  "spiritual  gifts"  (1  Cor.  xii.  9,  28). 
Exercised  throuoh  the  elders  of  the  Church 
in  connection  with  the  prayer  of  faith  and 
anointing  with  oil  (James  v.  14 — 16).  Heal- 
ing still  imparted  in  the  Church  in  answer  to 
believing  prayer.  The  institution  at  Man- 
nedorf,  in  Switzerland,  an  evidence.  The 
healing  in  the  text  in  connection  with  repent- 
ance and  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  The  affliction 
sent  on  account  of  sin  and  with  a  view  to  the 
individual's  repentance  and  salvation,  most 
likely  to  be  removed  when,  and  only  when, 
the  end  has  been  secured.  Repentance  and 
faith,  followed  by  forgiveness  and  peace  with 
God,  even  on  natural  grounds  among  the 
most  likely  means  of  restoration  to  health. 
Sin  being  the  cause  of  sickness,  natural  that 
the  removal  of  the  cause  should  be  followed 
by  the  removal  of  the  effect.  Thus  forgive- 
ness of  sin  followed  by  restoration  to  health 
(James  v.,  15,  16 ;  Matt,  ix.,  2—6  ;  Ps.  ciii., 
3).  Hezekiah  restored  to  health  when  God 
cast  all  his  sins  behind  his  back  (Is.  xxviii., 

4.  Access  to  God  and  acceptance  wtth  Him 
in  prayer,  a  fourth  result  of  sanctified 
affliction.  Verse  26. — "  He  shall  pray  unto 
God,  and  he  will  be  farvourable  unto  him." 

Prayer 

the  natural  and  necessary  consequence  of  a 

graciously  awakened  conscience,  of  submis- 
tion  to  God,  of  repentance,  and  of  faith  in 

213 


CHAP,  xxxin. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


the  Divine  mercy.  The  testimony  concern- 
ing penitent  Saul  in  Damascus  :  "  Behold  he 
prayeth."  The  prayer  of  the  awakened  and 
penitent  sick  man  at  least  as  much  for  for- 
giveness of  sin  as  for  restoration  to  health. 
With  sanctified  affliction,  prayer  becomes  his 
**  vital  breath.**  The  penitent  and  believing 
unable  to  live  without  prayer.  Prayer  the 
happy  privilege  of  the  child  of  God.  A 
precious  mercy  in  itself,  as  well  as  the  means 
of  obtaining  more.  Accepted  prayer  the 
result  of  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  crying 
"  Abba  Father,**  and  of  the  Spirit  of  grace  and 
supplication  making  intercession  within  us 
(Rom.  viii.  15,  26;  Zech.  xii.  10).  A  heart 
to  pray  not  always  present  with  the  need  of 
prayer.  Prayer,  though  made,  not  always 
accepted  (Prov.  i.  28;  Is.  i.  15).  In  sanc- 
tified affliction,  prayer  not  only  made  but 
accepted :  "  He  will  be  favourable  unto  him.** 
Prayer  only  accepted  when  offered  in  peni- 
tence and  faith.  Believing  prayer  the  channel 
for  the  best  of  all  favours.  The  key  that 
opens  the  cabinet  of  God  and  unlocks  the 
treasures  of  heaven.  God's  favour,  the  foun- 
tain of  all  blessing,  experienced  through 
believing  prayer.  The  Divine  invitation: 
Seek  ye  my  face.  His  face,  or  favour,  not 
sought  in  vain  (Ps.  xxviii.  8 ;  xxiv.  6 ;  Is. 
xlv.  19).  A  mercy  to  be  able  to  pray ;  a  still 
greater  one  to  have  our  prayer  answered.  A 
prating  heart  both  preceded  and  followed  by 
Divine  mercy. 

5,  Beconciliation  with  and  joy  in  God. 
"He  shall  see  his  face  with  joy.**  So  the 
penitent  prodigal  in  respect  to  his  father 
(Luke  xiv.  22 — 24).  Reconciliation  with 
God  the  sinner's  greatest  blessing.  The  ob- 
ject aimed  at  by  God  in  the  gift  and  sacrifice 
of  His  Son  (2  Cor.  v.  18,  19;  Acts  x.  36; 
Eph.  ii.  16;  Col.  i.  20—22).  Aimed  at  in 
his  chastenings  (Hos.  ii.  6,  7,  11 — 20).  Re- 
conciliation with  and  joy  in  God  the  fruit  of 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  (Rom.  v.  1,  11).  The 
spiritual  healing  of  the  penitent  patient 
(Matt.  V.  8).  A  foretaste  of  heaven  thus 
enjoyed  as  the  result  of  sanctified  affliction 
(Rev.  xxii,,  4;  Ps.  xvii.,  15).  The  sight  of 
God's  reconciled  face  here  is  heaven  before 
coming  to  it — Chrysostom.  No  joy  like  that 
of  seeing  the  reconciled  face  of  God  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

6.  Confession  of  sin^  and  praise  to  God  for 
pardoning  and  restoring  mercy ^  a  sixth  re- 
sult of  sanctified  affliction.  Verse  27. — "He 
looketh  upon  men,  and  if  any  say,  &c. ;  he 
will  deliver  his  soul,**  &c.  Probably  better 
according  to  the  Jfar^m:  "  He  (?.<?.,  the  sick 
man  now  restored)  shall  look  upon  men  and 
say,  &c. ;  he  (God)  hath  delivered  my  soul,'* 
&c.  (1)  Confession  of  sin :  "I  have  sinned," 
A  result  and  evidence  of  sanctified  affliction. 
The  language  of  the  penitent  prodigal  (Luke 

214 


XV.  21).  Confession  of  sin  made  in  respect 
to  (i.)  Its  iniquity  and  turpitude :  "  I  have 
perverted  that  which  was  right.**  Observe 
— (fl)  God's  will  concerning  us  and  his  law 
given  to  us,  only  what  is  right,  {b)  All  sin  a 
perverting  of  what  is  right.  Sin  an  opposition 
to  God's  holy  will  and  righteous  law.  (ii.) 
Its  hurtful  consequences  :  "And  it  profited 
me  not ;  *'  or,  "  he  hath  not  rewarded  me  ac- 
cordingly." No  profit  in  sin.  Its  promises 
delusions.  Its  pleasures  but  for  a  season.  No 
profit  in  gaining  the  world  and  losing  the  soul. 
Not  only  no  profit  in  sin,  but  absolute  loss.  Its 
fruit  shame,  its  end  death  (Rom.  vi.  21).  An 
ill  exciiance  for  the  path  of  obedience  (Hos. 
ii.  7).  The  righteous  desert  of  sin  eternal 
death  (Rom.  vi.  23).  Sin  an  ill  paymaster 
that  sends  all  his  servants  away  weeping, 
— Trapp.  Observe — (i.)  Confession  of  sin 
an  evidence  of  genuine  repetitance.  Such  con 
fession  made  not  feignedly,  as  by  Saul  (1 
Sam.  XV.  24) ;  nor  forcedly,  as  by  Pharaoh 
(Exod.  X.  16),  andbyAchan  (Josh.  vii.  20); 
nor  despairingly,  as  by  Judas  Iscariot  (Matt, 
xxvii.  4) ;  but  sincerely,  freely,  and  hopefully, 
as  by  David  (Ps.  Ii.  3,  4,  12—14.  (ii.) 
Confession  of  sin  an  accompaniment  of  pardon- 
ing mercy.  Preceding  it  (Ps.  xxxii.  5 ;  1 
John  i.  9 ;  Prov.  xxviii.  13).  Following  it 
(Ezek.  xvi.  63). — (2)  F raise  for  pardotiing 
and  restoring  mercy.  Margin :  "  He  shall 
look  on  men  and  say,"  &c.,  or,  "  He  shall  sing 
among  men,"  &c.  Examples:  Hezekiah 
(Is.  xxxviii.  19,  20) ;  David  (Ps.  xxx.  1— 
12).  Praise,  God's  due  for  mercies  received 
(Ps.  1.  23 ;  cxvi.  12,  13).  Mercies  doubly 
sweet  when  accompanied  with  a  grateful 
heart  and  thanksgiving  to  their  gracious 
Author. 

TI.  Re-asserts  these  gracious  deal- 
ings of  Divine  Providence.  Verses  29, 
30. — "  Lo  (the  fact  worthy  of  careful  notice, 
both  from  its  truth  and  preciousness),  all 
these  things  worketh  God  oftentimes  with 
man,  to  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  pit 
(the  grave,  and  that  state  in  eternity  of 
which  it  is  the  symbol),  to  be  enlightened 
with  the  light  of  the  living"  (made  glad 
with  the  joy  of  those  who  are  truly  and 
spiritually  alive).  The  "things"  referred  to, 
God's  chastening  men  for  sin  by  bringing 
them  to  the  verge  of  the  grave,  and  then 
restoring  and  blessing  them  upon  repent- 
ance.    Observe — 

1.  The  frequency  of  such  dispensations, — 
"  Oftentimes."  Not  always.  All  not  visited 
alike  with  chastening  and  affliction.  God 
sovereign  in  his  dealings.  But  often.  Mul- 
titudes thus  graciously  visited.  God  merci- 
ful and  gracious.  Intent  on  man's  welfare. 
Chastenings  a  greater  proof  of  his  love  than 
the  want  of  them  (Rev.  iii.  19).     An  ill  sign 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAf .  XXXIV. 


for  a  man  when  God  will  not  spend  a  rod 
upon  him. — Brooks. 

2.  The  object  of  them, — "  To  bring  back 
his  soul,"  &c.  God's  object  in  chastening 
men,  their  present  and  eternal  welfare.  **  He 
[chastens]  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be 
partakers  of  his  holiness  **  (Heb.  xii.  6,  11^. 
This  is  all  the  fruit  to  take  away  his  sm 
(Is.  xxvii.  9).  Man  by  nature  in  a  state  of 
darkness  and  of  death.  God's  object  in 
affliction  to  deliver  hiiu  out  of  it.  Brings  his 
body  to  the  verpje  of  the  grave  to  save  his  soul 
from  going  to  a  deeper  pit.  Danger  of  tem- 
poral death  made  a  means  of  deliverance  from 
death  spiritual  and  eternal.  The  true  peni- 
tent, one  who  was  dead,  but  is  alive  again 
(Luke  XV.  32).  Life  only  in  the  favour  and 
image  of  God.  Heaven  rather  than  earth 
the  place  of  the  living  (Matt.  xx.  32). 

yil.  Invites  Job  to  reply,  and  urges 
attention  to  his  further  remarks. 

Verses  31— 33.— "Mark  well,  O  Job; 
hearken  unto  me ;  hold  thy  peace  and  I 
will  speak.  Tf  thou  hast  anything  to  say, 
answer  me:  speak,  for  I  desire  to  justify 
thee  (or  *  thy  justification'  or  'righteous- 
ness *),    If  not,  hearken  unto  me  :  hold  thy 


peace,   and   I   shall   teach    thee  wisdom.' 
Observe — 

1.  Opportunity  to  be  given  to  reply  or 
object  to  our  statements.  The  benefit  of 
inquiry  or  after-meetings  in  connection  with 
special  or  nussionary  services. 

2.  In  the  absence  of  objection  or  reply, 
respectful  attention  the  more  to  be  expected. 

3.  Hearers  to  be  convinced  that  we  speak 
from  a  simple  desire  for  their  own  benefit. 
The  desire  of  the  preacher  of  the  Gospel,  the 
justification  of  the  hearers  through  their 
acceptance  of  Jesus  as  the  Lord  their  Righte- 
ousness (Jer.  xxiii.  6).  Christ  the  way  of  a 
sinner's  justification.  The  way  provided  by 
God,  and  the  o?ily  way.  "  The  end  of  the 
law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  be- 
lieveth  "  (Rom.  x.  4). 

4.  The  hearer's  character  and  case  to  be 
viewed  in  the  most  favourable  light  that  truth 
admits  of.  The  contrary  the  case  with  Job's 
three  friends.  Hence  Job's  irritation  rather 
than  conviction.  Elihu  takes  up  a  contrary 
position,  and  Job  is  silent. 

5.  True  '*  wisdooi/'  to  understand  the  cha- 
raster  and  dealings  of  God,  and  to  act  in 
humble  submission  to  Him  under  those  dealings. 
This  wisdom  taught  by  Elihu,  and  ultimately 
learned  by  the  patriarch. 


CHAPTER  XXXrV. 


ELIUU'S  SECOND  SPEECH. 


Probably  after  waiting  for  a  reply  from 
Job,  and  none  being  forthcoming,  Elihu 
resumes.  Verse  1. — "Furthermore  Elihu 
answered  (took  up  speech),  and  said.'*  Job's 
silence  probably  indicative  of  the  effect  pro- 
duced by  Elihu's  first  speech.  Elihu  now 
addresses  himself  partly  to  the  three  friends 
and  others  present,  and  partly  to  Job  himself. 
The  first  part  of  his  speech  addressed  to  the 
former.  In  the  preceding  chapter,  Elihu 
vindicates  God's  goodness;  in  this,  His 
'justice. 

1.  His  introduction.    Verse  2 — ^. 

1.  Bespeaks  their  careful  attention^  and 
appeals  to  their  sound  judgment.  Verse  2. — 
'*  Hear  my  words,  0  ye  wise  men  (the  three 
friends,  and  perhaps  others),  and  give  ear 
unto  me,  ye  that  have  knowledge."  Observe 
—  (1)  Wisdom  and  knowledge  required  to 
judge  correctly  of  statements  made  respect- 
ing things  pertaining  to  God  and  His  moral 
governinent.  (2)  The  part  of  a  wise  man  to 
give  earnest  attention  to  what  is  advanced 
on  such  subjects.    (3)  A  wise  speaker  wilhng 


to  be  corrected  by  men  of  judgment  and 
understanding. 

2.  Invites  an  impartial  examination  of  hts 
statements.  Verse  3. — "For  the  ear  trieth 
words,  as  the  mouth  tasteth  meat.''  Observe 
— (1)  Miin  is  furnishsd  by  his  Creator  with 
means  for  testing  statements  on  moral  and  reli- 
gious truths  as  well  for  tri/iyig  the  food  which 
he  is  to  eat.  (2)  Private  judgment  in  reference 
to  such  subjects  man^s  duly  as  well  as  his 
right.  His  duty  carefully  and  imi)artially 
to  examine,  and  so  either  to  adopt  or  reject. 
The  Berseans  commended,  because  they  not 
only  "received  the  word  with  all  readiness  of 
mind,"  but  "searched  the  Scriptures  daily 
whether  these  things  were  so"  (Acts  xvii. 
11).  The  New  Testament  rule— "Prove 
all  things  ;  hold  fast  that  which  is  good." 
"  Believe  not  every  spirit ;  but  try  the  spirits 
whether  they  be  of  God."  "  Why  even  of 
yourselves  judge  ye  not  what  is  right?" 
"Judge  ye  what  1  say.'  (1  Thess.  v.  21; 
I  John  iv.  1 ;  Luke  xii.  57;  1  Cor.  x.  15). 
The  Old  Testament  rule:  "  Cease,  my  son, 
to  hear  the  instruction  that  causeth  to  err 
from  the  words  of  knowledge:"  "To  the 

215 


CHAP.    IXXIV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARtt  JOB, 


law  and  to  the  testimony ;  if  they  speak  not 
according  to  this  word,  it  Is  because  there  is 
no  light  in  them"  (Prov.  xix.  27;  Isaiah 
viii.  20). 

3.  Exhorts  to  a  faithful  treatment  of  the 
subject  in  hand.  Verse  4. — *'  Let  us  choose 
to  us  judgment  (let  us  examine  among  our- 
selves, and  choose  as  our  conclusion  what  is 
the  right  view  of  the  case):  let  us  know 
among  ourselves  (learn,  and  so  acknowledge 
and  adopt)  what  is  ^ood"  (right  and  true 
on  the  subject  in  hand).  Like  that  of  the 
Saviour :  "  Judge  not  according  to  appear- 
ance, but  judge  rigliteous  judgment "  (John 
vii.  24).  And  that  of  the  Apostle:  "Be 
transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind, 
that  ye  may  prove  what  is  the  good  and 
acceptable  and  perfect,  even  the  will  of 
God"  (Rom.  xii.  2).  Observe— (1)  The 
part  of  a  wise  mnn  to  contend,  not  for 
victory,  but  for  truth ;  (2)  What  is  right 
and  true  alone  is  good.  A  false  view  and  a 
wrong  course  never,  in  the  end,  a  profitable 
one. 

II.  Elihu's  charge  against  Job,  Verses 
6— 9.— "Eor  Job  hath  said,"  &c.  Job's 
language,  rather  than  his  life,  the  subject  of 
Elihu's  censure.  The  friends  had,  by  infer- 
ence, condemned  Job's  life  previous  to  his 
affliction;  Elihu  condemns,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  his  language  under  it.  His  general 
charge  against  Job,  that  he  seemed  to  accuse 
God  of  acting  unjustly  towards  him.  More 
especially — 

1.  That  he  justified  himself  as  righteous^ 
Verse  5. — "For  Job  hath  said:  'I  am 
righteous,' — *  without  transgression,*"  i.e.^ 
such  as  to  merit  such  treatment.  Reference 
to  such  parts  of  Job's  speeches  as  chap.  ix. 
17;  xiii.  18;  xvi.  17.  Job  maintained  his 
innocence  in  opposition  to  what  his  friends 
suspected  and  believed,  and  to  what  his 
present  calamities  seemed  to  indicate.  This, 
even  in  Elihu's  judgment,  improperly  main- 
tained by  Job,  as  reflecting  on  his  Maker's 
character  and  government.  Job's  language, 
though  relatively  true,  yet  too  strong  and 
unqualified,  and  apparently  uttered  in  a  self- 
righteous  spirit.  Declarations  of  personal 
righteousness  like  those  of  Job,  unbecoming 
in  a  sinner.  Lawful  for  a  man  boldly  to 
declare  his  righteousness  only  as  he  is 
righteous  in  Christ.  *'  Surely  shall  one  say 
In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness :  in  Him 
shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified,  and 
shall  glory"  (Is.  xlv.  25). 

2.  That  he  charged  God  with  injustice  and 
wrong  in  the  way  He  treated  him.  (Verse  6) 
— "God  hath  taken  away  my  judgment  (de- 
prived me  of  my  righteousness  in  treating 
me  as  a  guilty  person ;  or,  has  put  aside  my 
righteous  cause);   my  wound   is   incurable 

216 


(or  grievous)  without  transgression"  [on 
my  part  to  deserve  it].  Job's  actual 
language  (ch.  xxvii.  2).  Observe — (1) 
Complaint  against  God's  dealings  an  implied 
challenge  of  His  justice.  (2)  God*8  right- 
eousness to  be  acknowledged  in  all  the  circum- 
stances of  our  lot.  The  proper  language  of 
a  sufferer :  "  The  Lord  is  righteous : "  "  He 
hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins  (2 
Chron.  xii.  6 ;    Jer.  xii.    1 ;   Ps.  ciii.   10). 

3.  That  he  had  used  contemptuous  language 
in  regard  to  God.  Verse  7. — "  What  man  is 
like  Job  (or,  *  what  man  is  there  like  Job,' 
— a  man  having  so  high  a  character  for 
piety),  who  drinketh  up  scorning  like 
water  ? "  Reference  to  Job's  daring  and 
irreverent  language,  in  which  he  challenged 
God  to  a  controversy  on  his  case,  and  ap- 
peared to  make  his  own  righteousness  less 
questionable  than  God's  in  the  matter.  Such 
language  used  by  Job  frequently^  and  with 
apparent  eagerness  and  pleasure^  like  a  thirsty 
animal  taking  a  large  draught  of  w^ater. 
Same  metaphor  employed  by  Eliphaz  in 
reference  to  mankind,  and  with  respect  to 
sin  in  general  (ch.  xv.  16).  Job's  language 
unusual  in  any,  but  especially  in  a  person 
of  his  character.  Observe — (1)  Perse- 
verance and  pleasure  in  doing  or  saying  what 
is  wrong  a  serious  aggrava-tion  of  the  sin  ; 
(2)  A  grief  and  offence  to  the  godly  when  a 
pious  man  is  found  speaking  or  acting  in  a 
way  unlike  himself.  Thus  Abraham  in  Kgypt ; 
David  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  ;  Peter  in  the 
high  priest's  palace.  David's  prayer  always 
necessary :  "  Keep  back  thy  servant,"  &c. ; 
"  Set  a  watch  before  my  mouth,"  &c.  (Ps. 
xix.  12—14  ;  cxli.  3). 

4.  That  he  appeared  to  adopt  the  language 
and  sentiments  of  the  ungodly.  Verse  8. — 
"  Which  goeth  in  company  with  the  workers 
of  iniquity,  and  walketh  with  wicked  men," 
— namely,  in  using  such  language  and 
adopting  such  sentiments.  Observe — (1) 
The  part  of  the  ungodly  to  entertain  unjust 
thoughts  of  Gody  and  to  speak  irreverently  in 
regard  both   to  Himself  and  His   dealings. 

(2)  A  godly  man  to  be  careful  not  to  coun- 
tenance the  ungodly  in  their  views  and 
language^  either   by   what  he  says  or   does. 

(3)  The  views  and  language  of  the  ungodly 
in  reference  to  God  and  His  dealings  to  be 
carefully  avoided,  as  well  as  their  company. 

(4)  A  man  appears  to  be  the  companion  of 
those  whose  language,  viewSs  and  practices 
he  adopts.  The  proper  language  of  a  godly 
man :  "  I  am  a  companion  of  all  them  that  fear 
thee  "  (Ps.  cxix.  63).  His  prayer  :  "Gather 
not  my  soul  with  sinners"  (Ps.  xxvi.  9). 

5.  That  he  seemed  to  deny  that  there 
was  any  benefit  in  true  religion  (ver.  9). 
"For  he  hath  said,  It  profiteth  a  man 
nothing  that  he  should  delight  himself  ia 


HQMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAT.    XXXIV. 


God."  True  piety  also  cliaracterised, 
though  by  a  different  Hebrew  word,  in  cl». 
xxvii.  10,  as  a  dehghtivg  in  God.  The 
expression  in  tlie  text  indicates — (1)  To 
have  friendly  and  familiar  ir.trrcourse  with 
God ;  (2)  'I'o  have  pleasure  in  such  inter- 
course; (3)  To  make  it  one's  care  to  please 
God  ;  (4)  To  be  satisfied  with  lliin  as  one's 
portion.  The  character  of  tlie  godly  to 
walk  with  God,  and  have  deligiit  in  such 
walk  (Gen.  v.  22-24).  Oh^exvt-True 
religion  a  delighting  oneself  in  God  (eh.  xxvii. 
10). 

Delight  in  God 

Is— (1)  Characteristic  of  the  godly,  and  that 
which  distinguishes  them  from  the  world. 
(2)  Enjoined  as  a  duty  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5  ;  Phil, 
iii.  I :  IV.  4).  Gladness  required  in  serving 
him  (Deut.  xii.  12,  18;  xxviii.  47;  Ps. 
c.  2  ;  Is.  Ix'V.  5).  (3)  Promise  d  as  a  reward 
of  piety,  especially  in  regard  to  the  Sabbath 
(Job  xxii.  20;  Is.  Iviii.  14).    Implies — 

1.  The  excellence  and  loveliness  in  God. 
God  worthy  to  be  delighted  in — (1)  In  Him- 
self and  His  perfections;  (2)  In  what  He  has 
become  to  us  in  and  through  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  The  inwardness  and  spirituality  of  true 
religion.  True  religion  a  thing  of  the  heart  ; 
the  seat  of  delight.  Not  a  thing  oiform  or 
ceremony ;  or  of  bodily  service  \  or  of  mere 
morality  or  outward  obedience.  A  thing  of 
delight,  because  a  thing  of  lute. 

3.  The  happiness  and  pleasantness  of  true 
'piety.  Not  only  causes  delight^  but  is  itself 
^delighting.  Wisdom's  ways  pleasantness  and 
peace.  Delight  and  pleasure  a  necessary 
accompaniment  of  true  religion.  God  the 
object  of  true  religion,  not  as  a  Being  merely 
to  be  feared  or  served,  but  delighted  in. 
God  sufficient  in  Himself  to  fill  t  very  intelli- 
gent creature  with  joy.  His  favour  life ;  His 
loving  kindness  better  than  life.  Believers 
though  not  seeing  Christ,  vet  belied t^g  and 
so  loving  Him,  rejoice  in  Him  with  joy  un- 
speakable and  full  of  glory  (1  Peter  i.  8), 

Delight  in  God  shewn — 

1.  By  holding  ftdlowship  with  Him.  We 
cultivate  the  society  of  those  we  delight  in. 
Hence  true  religion  a  "walking  with  God,** 
(Micah  vi.  8;  Gen.  v.  22;  vi.  9). 

2.  By  obeying  His  will  and  seeking  to  please 
Him.  Impossible  willingly  to  disobey  or 
grieve  the  person  we  delight  in.  To  "walk 
with  God,"  and  to  "  please  God,"  spoken  of  in 
Scripture  as  one  and  the  same  thing  (Gen. 
V.  22,  54,  compared  with  Heb.  xi.  5). 

3.  By  ceasing  to  looe  and  delight  in  the 
world.  Impossible  to  love  and  please  two 
masters  of  opposite  characters.  The  love  of 
the  world  incompatible  with  the  love  of  God 
(Matt.   vi.   U\  1   Jobu   ii.  14,  15).     The 


world  a  crucified    thing   where    Christ    is 
delighted  in  (Gal.  vi.  14). 

4.  By  attending  upon  His  ordinances.  His 
ordinances  the  means  of  fellowship  with 
God,  and  helps  to  the  enjoyment  of  Him. 
His  banqueting  house,  where  His  banner 
over  us  is  love  (Cant.  ii.  4).  The  sanctuary 
and  the  Sabbath  a  delight  when  God  Him- 
self is  so  (Ps.  xxvi.  8;  Ixiii.  1,  2;  Ixxx.  1, 
10  ;  Is.  Iviii.  13). 

5.  By  cheerfully  acquiescing  in  His  appoint- 
ments. "  Delight  in  a  person  leads  to  delight, 
and  at  least  to  a  cheerful  acquiescence,  in 
what  he  says  and  does.  Strictly  true  in  re- 
gard to  God,  all  whose  sayings  and  doings 
are  known  and  believed  to  be  right. 

The  profitablen(  ss  of  true  religion,  or  "de- 
lighting oneself  wnth  God,"  apparently  de- 
nied in  some  of  Job's  expressions,  as  cli.  ix. 
22,  23 ;  xxi.  7 — 15.  The  reference,  how- 
ever, only  to  this  life  and  the  outward  dis- 
pensations of  Divine  Providence.  The  lan- 
guage ascribed  by  Elihu  to  Job  never  really 
used  by  him.  His  employment  of  it  Satan's 
great  object.  At  times  strongly  tempted  to 
it.  Suggested  by  his  wife.  Asapli  tempted 
in  like  circumstances  to  employ  it  (Ps.  Ixxiii. 
12 — 14).  The  language  of  unbelief  (Mal 
iii.  14).  Godliness  profitable  to  all  things. 
Has  the  promise  of  both  worlds  (i  Tim.  ii. 
8 ;  vi.  G). 

III.  Eliliu's  defence  of  God  against 
Job's  cavils  and  complaints. — (Verses 
10 — 30).  First  addresses  himself  to  the 
three  friends  and  those  present  at  the  debate. 
Verse  10. — "Therefore  hearken  unto  me, 
ye  men  of  understanding."  Afterwards 
addresses  his  discourse  to  Job  himself. 
Verse  16. — "  If  now  thou  hast  understand- 
ing, hear  this ;  hearken  to  the  voice  of  my 
words."  Elihu's  self-imposed  task,  "  to 
justify  the  ways  of  God  to  man."  Intelli- 
gence in  the  hearers  required  to  judge  of 
statements  made  on  such  a  subject.  Elihu's 
arguments  are — 

1.  Iniquity  and  injustice  incompatible 
with  the  Dioine  nature.  Verses  10 — 12. 
— "  Far  be  it  from  God  (as  a  thing 
profane  to  think  of)  that  He  should  do 
wickedness,  and  from  the  Almighty  that  He 
should  commit  iniquity.  For,  the  work  of  a 
man  (or  the  reward  of  his  work)  shall  He 
render  unto  him,  and  cause  every  one  to 
find  according  to  his  ways.  Yea,  surely 
God  will  not  do  wickedly,  neither  will  the 
Almighty  prevent  judgment"  (**act  un- 
righteously," or  "  pass  an  unrighteous  sen- 
tence ").  Injustice  not  merely  denied  of 
God,  but  denied  as  a  thing  not  for  a  moment 
to  be  thought— as  a  t  hing  utterly  incongruous 
with  His  nature  as  6(^1,  and  not  possible  to 
be   found   iu   Him.     The    idea  of  iniquity 

2J7 


CHAP.  XXXI7 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


incompatible  with  the  idea  of  God.  God*s 
ways  to  bo  believed  to  be  just  and  right, 
simply  because  they  are  His,  and  because 
they  cannot  be  otherwise.  The  thought  of 
injustice  and  wrong  in  God  to  be  repelled 
with  loathing  and  execration,  as  profane  and 
abominable.  Observe  -  (1)  Some  things  to 
be  not  simply  denied,  but  execrated;  as 
injustice  in  God.  Others  to  be  not  so 
much  argued,  as  simply  but  strongly  as- 
serted; as  tiiat  God  is  just  (Rom.  iii. 
4,  5).  (2)  A  man  finds  according  to  his 
ways  either  in  this  life  or  the  next.  Every 
work  brought  into  juilgment  (Ecc.  xi.  9 ; 
xii.  14;  2  Cor.  v.  10;  Rev.  xx.  12).  Sen- 
tence against  an  evil  work  only  not  speedily 
executed  (Ecc.  viii.  11).  Sin  sometimes 
punished  in  this  life  in  the  natural  course  of 
things  which  God  has  established.  Some- 
times punished  by  special  and  unexpected 
acts  of  His  Providence,  as  in  the  case  of 
Herod  (Acts  xii.  23).  The  impenitent 
sinner  escaping  punishment  all  through  life 
is  overtaken  at  last,  and  finds  "according  to 
his  ways.'*  The  rich  man  dies  and  is  buried, 
prosperous  and  luxurious  to  the  last :  but 
"  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  tor- 
ments "  (Luke  xvi.  23). 

2.  Injustice  incompatible  with  God^t  abso- 
lute supremacy  and  independence  as  the 
Creator  and  Governor  of  the  Universe.  Verse 
13. — "  Who  hath  given  hira  a  charge  over 
the  earth  (or,  committed  the  earth  to  his 
charge,  as  a  superior  commits  a  charge  to  a 
subordinate)  ?  or  who  hath  disposed  the 
whole  world  ?"  ( — placed  the  universe  in  the 
state  in  which  we  find  it).  Observe— (1) 
As  Creator,  Proprietor,  and  Supreme  Ruler 
of  the  Universe,  God  can  be  under  no 
temptation  to  injustice.  To  be  unjust  would 
be  to  wrong  Himself.  (2)  God  accountable 
to  no  superior.  That  the  world  exists  at  all, 
and  is  ruled  by  Him,  is  not  from  necessity 
imposed  upon  him,  but  from  the  benevolence 
of  His  own  nature.  God  therefore  to  be 
called  to  account  for  his  dohigs  by  none  of 
His  creatures. 

3.  Man  dependent  on  God's  mere  goodness 
for  life  and  all  he  enjoys.  Verses  14, 15 — "  If 
He  set  His  heart  upon  man  (or,  'against 
man,'  to  deal  strictly  with  him  according  to 
his  deserts ;  or,  *  if  He  directed  His  attention 
only  to  Himself);  if  He  gather  (or  *He 
would  gather')  unto  Himself  [as  its  author, 
(Ecc.  xii.  7)]  liis  spirit  ana  jis  breath  [which 
He  first  breathed  into  man's  nostrils  to 
make  him  a  living  soul.  Gen.  ii.  7]  ;  all 
flesh  shall  (or  should)  perish  together  (as  at 
the  general  deluge.  Gen.  vi.  3,  17),  and  man 
shall  (or  should;  turn  again  unto  dust"  [ac- 
cording to  the  original  sentence  pronounced 
on  man  after  the  Fall,  Gen.  iii.  19].  Observe 
— (1)  MarCs  life  and  breath  entirely  in  the 

218 


hands  of  Cod,  Given  by  God  at  first,  and 
only  continued  at  His  pleasure  In  Him  we 
live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being  (Acts 
xvii.  28).  (2j  A  sinner's  continuance  in  life 
the  fruit  and  evidence  of  Divine  goodness.  His 
life  forfeited  to  justice  as  a  transgressor  of 
the  Divine  law  (Gen.  ii.  17;  Rom.  vi.  23). 

(3)  Injustice  or  wrong,  therefore,  on  the 
part  of  God  to  His  creatures,  entirely  out 
of  the  question.  Hence  (4)  murmuring  and 
complaining  against  God  to  be  for  ever 
silenced:  "Wherefore  doth  a  living  man 
complain"  (Lam.  iii.  39). 

4.  Injustice  on  the  part  of  God  incompatible 
with  His  being  the  Ruler  of  the  Universe. 
Verses  17, 19—"  Shall  even  he  that  hateth 
right  govern  ?  {Heb.y  *  bind,'  as  with  au- 
thority and  law ;  or  *  bind  up,*  as  a  wound 
or  fracture,  a  ruler  being  properly  a  'healer,* 
Is.  iii.  7).  And  wilt  thou  condemn  him  that 
is  most  just  (or,  *  him  that  is  at  once  just 
and  mighty?')  Is  it  tit  to  say  to  a  King 
(even  an  earthly  sovereign),  thou  art  wicked 
{B.eb.  *  Belial,*  wickedness),  and  to  princes, 
ye  are  ungodly?  How  much  less  to  Him 
that  accepteth  not  the  persons  of  princes, 
nor  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor  ? 
for  they  all  are  the  work  of  His  hands."  Ob- 
serve— (I)  The  mere  fact  of  God  being  the 
Supreme  Ruler  of  the  Universe  a  sufficient 
proof  of  His  justice.  Justice  implied  in  the 
rule  even  of  an  earthly  sovereign.  An  un- 
just ruler  to  be  regarded  as  a  monster — an 
exception  to  the  ordinary  course  of  things, 
and  soon  therefore  coming  to  an  end.  The 
exercise  of  justice  necessary  to,  and  there- 
fore supposed  in,  the  continuance  of  govern- 
ment. "  He  that  ruleth  over  men  must  be 
just**  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  3).  Abraham's  plea: 
"Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do 
right?"  (Gen.  xvii.  25).  God  just,  because 
mighty.  (2)  Rulers  under  the  most  solemn 
obligation  to  be  just.  If  the  charge  of  ini- 
quity is  not  to  be  made  by  the  subject,  it 
is  not  to  be  incurred  by  the  sovereign.  (3) 
Rulers  to  be  not  only  just ^  but  beneficent.  A 
ruler  to  be  a  healer.  The  State  more  or  less 
sick  and  wounded  by  sin  and  its  consequen- 
ces (Is.  i.  5,  6;  Jer.  viii.  22).  The  part  of 
a  ruler  to  heal  and  bind  it  up— by  just  laws, 
wholesome  authority,  wise  institutions,  and 
godly  example.  The  ruler  a  healer  only  as 
he  rules  "  in  the  fear  of  God"  (2  Sam.  xxiii. 
3).     Examples  :  Hezekiah  ;  Josiah  ;  Alfred. 

(4)  Reverence  due  to  rulers  and  I  hose  in  au- 
thority. Rulers  not  to  be  reviled  by  their 
subjects  (Exod.  xxii.  28).  God's  vicegerents 
and  representatives,  and  therefore  called  by 
his  name  (Ex.  xxii.  2  ;  Ps.  Ixxxii.  1,  6).  (5) 
God  impartial  in  His  government.  As  His 
creatures,  all  on  an  equal  footing  in  His 
sight.  Differences  among  men  disregarded 
by  God.     No  difference  of  treatment  either 


nOMTLETIO  CO^niENTAUY:  JOB, 


CnAP.   XXXIT. 


from  fear  or  favour.  Hence  (i.)  warning  to 
the  sick;  (ii.)  comfort  to  the  poor;  (lii.) 
example  to  rulers  and  magistrates. 

6.  Judgments   inficted    on  sinners ^    espe- 
cially on  powerful  oppressors.  Verses  20 — 28. 
"  In  a  moment  (suddenly  and  speedily)  shall 
they  die  (or,  *  they — /.<?.,  tiie  ungodly— espe- 
cially the  rich  and  powerful— die/  viz.,  under 
the  infliction  of  Divine  judgments),  and  the 
people  (as  distinguished  from  the  princes) 
shall  be  troubled  (or  *are  troubled,'    viz., 
by  the  judgments  inflicted)  at  midnight  (un- 
expectedly and  in  a  time  of  quiet  and  security, 
as  1  Thess.  v.  2),  and  pass  away  (as  at  the 
Deluge,  and  the  destruction  of  the  Cities  of 
the  Plain,  or  as  by  earthquakes,  &c.)  :  and 
the  mighty  shall  be  (or  are)  taken  away  with- 
out hand  [of  man,  or  any  human  agency  or 
violence].     For  His  eyes  are  upon  the  ways 
of  man  (both  rulers  and  ruled),  and  He  seeth 
all  his   doings.     There  is   no  darkness  nor 
shadow  of  death  where  the  workers  of  ini- 
quity may  hide  themselves  [from  His  eye,  or 
elude  His  vengeance].    Eor  He  will  not  lay 
upon  nian  more  than  is  right,  that  he  should 
enter^  into  judgment  with  God  (giving  him 
occasion  to  complain  of  being  punished  be- 
yond his  deserts ;  or,  *  He  does  not  direct 
His  attention  long  to  a  man  for  Kim  to  go 
to  God  ^  in  judgment,'  as  if  needing  long  in- 
^  estigation  into  his  case  in  dealing  judicially 
with  him).    He  shall  break  (or  he  breaks)  in 
pieces  (by  His  judgments)  mighty  men  with- 
out number  (or  without  enquiry),  and  set 
others  in  their  stead  (putting  down  one  and 
setting  up  another,  as  Ps.  Ixxv.  7).     There- 
fore (or,  for)  he  knoweth  their  works,  and  he 
oyerturneth   them  in  the  night  (or   'in  a 
night;'  or  *he  turneth  night  upon  them,* 
i.e.  the  night  of  calamity  and  death,  as  in 
the   case  of  Belshazzar,  Dan.  v.  30;  and  of 
Herod,  Acts,  xii  23;  so  that  they  are  de- 
stroyed.    He  striketh  them  (by  His  judg- 
ments) as  wicked  men  (—as  other  wickedmen; 
or,  *  because  they  are  wicked  men')  in  the 
open  sight  of  others.     Because  they  turned 
back  from  Him  (or,  from   following  after 
Him,  viz.,  by  adhering  to  His  service  and 
obeying  His  commands),  and  would  not  con- 
sider [seriously  ^  and  attentively]  any  of  His 
ways  [whether  in  Providence  or  precept,  so 
as  to  *stand  in  awe  and  sin  not']:  so  that 
they  cause  [by  their  oppression]  the  cry  of 
of  the  poor  to  come  unto  Him,  and  (or,  so 
tliat)    He  heareth  the  cry  of  the  afflicted." 
Observe— (1)  Judgments  manifestly  ij/fided 
on  tyrants  and  oppressors,  a  proof  of  the  jus- 
tice of  the  Divine  government.     **  The  Lord  is 
kno\yn  by  thejudgment  which  He  execuleth" 
(Ps  ix.  16).    History  full  of  such  judgments. 
(2)  The  ungodly  often  overtaken  and  cut  off 
by  Divine  judgments  unexpectedly.     This  still 
to   be  the  case  (1  Tliess.  y.  3).    (3)  Impos- 


sihle  for  thp  wicked,  either  Ijy  power  or 
prudence,  to  escape  God's  righteous  judg- 
ments. God  omniscient  as  well  as  omnipo- 
tent. His  eye  as  penetrating  as  His  arm  is 
powerful,  (4)  Ungodly  men  and  oppressors 
often  visited  with  signal  and  manifest  judgments, 
as  a  warning  to  others  and  a  testimony  to  the 
justice  of  the  Divine  government.  "  So  that 
a  man  shall  say  :  Verily  there  is  a  reward  to 
the  righteous;  verily  tiiere  is  a  God  that 
judgeth  in  the  earth"  (Ps.  Iviii.  11).  Open 
sinners  off,en  made  open  suff"erers.  (5)  Per- 
severance in  His  service,  and  consideration  of 
His  word  and  works,  required  by  God  of  His 
intelligent  creatures,  whether  rulers  or  ruled. 
The  want  of  it  regarded  by  Him  as  a  grievous 
sin.  (6)  Disobedience  and  neglect  in  regard 
to  God,  as  well  as  oppression  and  cruelty  in 
regard  to  man,  the  frequent  ground  of  suffering 
in  this  life,  and,  if  unrepented  of,  the  certain 
cause  of  misery  in  the  next. 

6.  The  dependence  of  all  upon    God  for 
quietness  and  comfort.     Verse  29. — "  When 
He  giveth  quietness  (or  forgives),  who  then 
can  make  trouble  (or  condemn)  ?  and  when 
He  hideth  His  face  (as  in  displeasure,  or  as 
withdrawing  His  help  and  favour ;  or  '  When 
He  hideth  the  face,'  i.e ,  condemns,  or  treats 
as   a  condemned  criminal),  who  then  can 
behold  Him  (enjoy  His  favour,  or  reverse  the 
sentence  of  death)  ?     Whether  it  be  done 
against  (or  towards)  a  nation,  or  against  a 
man  only  ?  '*    Observe— ( I )  God  the  Sovereign 
Dispenser  of  quiet  and  comfort  to  individuals. 
His  to  forgive  or  to  condemn.     His  sentence 
irreversible.     Hence  the  prophet's  challenge 
in  the  person  of  the  Messiah  (Ps.  1.  7 — 9), 
and  the  apostle's  triumph  in  the  name  of 
believers  (Rom.  viii.  31—34).    The  part  of 
God  to  give  peace  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  8  ;  Is.  xlv.  7 ; 
Ivii.  19).    Able  to  make  even  a  man's  enemies 
to  be  at  peace  with  him  (Prov.  xvi.  7).  Speaks 
peace  and  gives  rest  to  an  awakened  sinner's 
conscience.  To  do  this,  the  object  of— (i.)  The 
atoning  death  of  Jesus,  (ii.)  His  resurrection, 
as  declarative  of  the  Divine  acceptance  and 
eflBcacy  of  His  death,    (iii.)  His  ascension 
into  heaven  and  session  at  God's  right  hand 
as  the  Advocate  of  believing  sinners,    (iv.) 
The  mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  Com- 
forter and  Witness-bearer  of  the  Saviour's 
work  (Rom .  viii.  34 ;  xv.  1 6).     Quiet  and  rest 
to  the  troubled  conscience  the  object  of  the 
Saviour's  mission  (Is.  Ixi.  1—3  ;    Luke  ii. 
10).     His  invitation  and  promise  (Matt  xi. 
28).     Peace  and  rest  the   fruit  of  faith  in 
Him  (Is.  xxvi.  3  ;  Rom.  v.  1 ;  xv.  13  ;  Heb. 
iv.  3).     (2)   God  the  Dispenser  of  rest  and 
quietness  to  nations  and  Churches.     To  nations 
(I  Chron.  xxii.  9,  18).     To  Churches  (Acts 
ix.  31).     Nations  and  men  equally  in  God's 
power  (Is.  xl    15-17).     His  to  make  wars 
to  cease  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  (Ps.  xlvi. 

219 


CHAP.  XXTTT 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


9) ;  to  make  peace  in  our  borders  (Ps.  cxlvii. 
14);  or  in  righteous  judgment,  to  stir  Hp 
one  nation  against  another  (Is.  xiii.  17). 
(3)  None  able  to  frustate  God's  work  and 
purpose,  whether  of  mercy  or  of  judgment 
(Is.  xxvii.  3,  4;  xliii.  14). 

7.  The  Dlcine  beneoolence  in  the  judgments 
inflicted  on  oppressors.  Verse  30. — "That 
the  hypocrite  (or  profligate)  reign  not,  lest 
the  people  be  ensnared"  (or,  "That  there  be 
no  ensnarings  or  offences  to  tiie  people"). 
Observe — (1)  Kings  and  rulers  subject  to 
God's  ordination  (Rom.  xiii.  i).  His  to  say 
who  shall  and  who  shall  not  reign.  His  pre- 
rogative to  put  down  one  and  set  up  another 
(Ps.  Ixxv.  6,  7).  Examples:  David  set  up 
instead  of  Saul  (2  Sam.  vi.  21);  Jeroboam 
as  ruler  of  the  ten  tribes  instead  of  Kehoboam 
(2  Chron.  xi.  4).  (2)  A  grienous  evil  to  a 
people  when  a  *'' profane^  wicked  prince"  rules 
over  them  (Ps.  xii.  8).  (3)  God's  benevolence 
seen  in  His  cutting  short  the  reign  of  profane 
rulers  (£z.  xxi.  25).  Men  usually  not  suf- 
fered long  to  continue  in  the  power  which 
they  abuse.  The  reason, — God  is  careful  of 
the  welfare  of  mankind.  (4)  A  people  apt 
to  imitate  the  example  of  their  rulers.  An 
ungodly  king  a  snare  to  his  subjects.  A 
dissolute  prince  makes  a  dissolute  people. 
Example :  Tiie  reign  of  the  second  Charles. 
(5)  God^s  benevolence y  as  seen  in  the  judgments 
He  inflicts  on  tyrants  and  oppressors,  an  evi- 
dence of  the  justice  of  His  government,  A 
benevolent  Being  cannot  be  unjust. 

IV.  Man's  duty  under  the  Divine 
chastisements.  Verses  31,  32. — *'  Surely 
it  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  God,  I  have  borne 
chastisement,  I  will  not  offend  any  more; 
that  which  I  see  not,  teach  thou  me :  if  I 
have  done  iniquity,  1  will  do  no  more." 
Elihu  performs  to  Job  the  part  of  the  mes- 
senger and  interpreter  he  himself  describes 
(chap,  xxxiii.  23),    Teaches  what  is  man's 

Duty  under  Chastisement. 

1.  To  turn  to  God.  Verse  31.—"  It  is 
meet  to  be  said  unto  God."  The  afflicted  to 
direct  himself  to  God,  who  is  dealing  with 
him,  and  against  whom  he  has  sinned.  God's 
object  in  chastisement  to  bring  the  individual 
to  Himself.  Thus  the  prodigal,  in  his  distress, 
returned  to  his  father.  God's  call  under 
chastisement :  "  Return  unto  the  Lord  thy 
God"  (Hos.  xiv.  1).  His  complaint  against 
Israel,  that  they  returned,  but  not  to  Him 
(Hos.  vii.  16,  10).  God  both  speaks  to  us 
in  chastening,  and  wishes  to  be  spoken  to  : 
"  It  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  God  :"  *'  Take 
with  you  words,  and  turn  to  the  Lord"  (Hos. 
xiv.  2).  No  benefit  from  affliction  till  we 
speak  to  God  in  it. 

220 


2.  To  acknowledge  and  accept  the  chastise- 
ment :  •'  I  have  borne  chastisement.'*  God's 
will  that  His  chastening  should  be  accepted 
and  acknowledged.  The  condition  on  which 
He  promised  returning  mercy  to  Israel  (Lev. 
xxvi.  41,  42 1.  The  language  of  penitent 
Israel:  "Thou  hast  chastised  me,  and  I  was 
chastised"  (Jer.  xxxi.  18).  The  mark  of  a 
humbled  heart,  to  accept  or  submit  to 
chastisement  (Lev.  xxvi.  41).  Divine  chas- 
tening neither  to  be  despised  nor  despaired 
under  (Heb.  xii.  5).  The  prophet  our 
example  under  chastisement  — "  I  will  bear 
the  indignation  of  the  Lord,  because  I  have 
sinned  against  Him"  (Mic.  vii.  9).  Divine 
chastisement  to  be  borne — (1)  submissively 
(2)  Patiently;  (3)  Humbly;  (4)  Lovingly; 
(5)  Thankfully.  The  chastisement  of  a  be- 
liever not  that  by  a  master,  but  by  a  father. 
To  be  borne  not  as  a  slave,  but  as  a  child. 
The  lesson  Job  now  needed  especially  to  be 
taught. 

3.  To  confess  our  sin,  "  I  have  done 
iniquity."  God's  aim  in  chastisement  to 
bring  us  to  confession  of  sin.  "  Only  acknow- 
ledge thine  iniquity  "  (Jer.  iii.  13).  Forgive- 
ness and  mercy  promised  only  upon  confes- 
sion (I  John  i.  9  J  Prov.  xxviii.  13). 

4.  To  resolve  upon  amendment.  "I  will 
not  offend  any  more.  If  I  have  done 
iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more."  The  language 
put  into  the  mouth  of  penitent  Israel : 
*'  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ? 
Neither  will  we  say  any  more  to  the  work  of 
our  hands:  Ye  are  our  gods"  (Hos.  xiv.  8, 
3).  Mercy  promised  to  those  who  confess 
?i,xiA.  forsake  their  sins  (Prov.  xxviii.  V6).  To 
abandon  what  we  confess,  the  only  proof  of 
sincerity.  The  offence  to  be  avoided  may  be 
either  one  of  omission  or  of  commission ;  may 
be  either  in  spirit  or  demeanour,  in  heart  or 
in  life.  God  jealous  over  His  people's  inward 
affection  as  well  as  their  outward  conduct : 
"  I  have  somewhat  against  thee,  because 
thou  hast  lelt  thy  first  love.  Kemember, 
therefore,  from  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and 
repent,  and  do  the  first  works  ;  or  else,"  &c. 
(Rev.  ii.  4,  5). 

5.  To  pray  for  Divine  teaching.  Verse 
32. — "WhaT.  1  see  not,  teach  thou  me."  A 
mark  of  humility  and  sanclified  affliction 
when  we  seek  and  ask  for  Divine  teaching. 
That  teaching  needed  and  desired— (1)  In 
regard  to  sin.  Sin  the  cause  of  suffering, 
and  occasion  for  chastisement.  To  be  seen 
and  known  in  order  to  be  confessed,  for- 
saken, and  foriiiven.  To  be  shown  both  as 
to  ils  nature  and  its  prevalence  in  ourselves. 
But  little  of  sin  seen  by  us  in  comparison 
with  tlie  sad  reality.  Much  both  of  the 
malignity  and  demerit  of  sin  at  first  un- 
known to  us.  Mucii  sin  unseen  by  us 
a6  existing  iu  ourselves,  both  in  heart  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP    XXXIT. 


in  life.  "Who  can  understand  his  errors?  " 
"Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults'*  (Ps. 
xix.  12).  David's  prayer  (Ps.  cxxxix.  23, 
24).  The  mark  of  sincerity  to  desire  to 
know  our  sin,  instead  of  cloaking  or  palli- 
ating it.  (2)  In  regard  to  duty.  The  penitent 
onlypartially  acquainted  with  his  duty.  His 
desire  to  know  the  Lord's  will  in  order  to  do 
it  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.  11).  The  penitent's  inquiry 
that  of  Saul  on  the  way  to  Damascus, 
"  Lord  what  wilt  thou  have  me  do  ?"  (Acts 
X.  6). 

V.  Elihn's  reproof  of  Job  (verses  33, 35). 
— The  reproof  directed — 

1.  Against  his  murmuring  and  discontent. 
Verse  33.—"  Should  it  be  according  to  thy 
mind?  he  will  recompense  it,  whether  thou 
refuse  or  whether  thou  choose,  and  not  I  ? 
(or,  *  According  to  %  mind,  shall  he  recom- 
pense  it,  i.e.,  thy  conduct, — because  ihou 
refusest  and  Mo2^ choosest,  and  not  IP' — the 
words  sup[)Osed  to  be  uttered  by  God  him- 
self) :  therefore  speak  what  thou  knowest  ** 
{i.e.,  as  to  how  God  sliall  treat  thee— spoken 
in  irony).  In  Elihu's  judgment  Job's  spirit 
and  language  under  his  afflictions  open  to 
severe  censure— (1)  On  account  of  its  rebel- 
liousness. ks>  if  not  God  but  Job  himself  were 
to  rule  in  the  matter  of  his  treatment  and 
appointment  of  his  lot.  The  part  of  rebellion 
to  wish  to  take  the  mode  and  measure  of 
our  chastisement  out  of  God's  hand  into  our 
own.  This  rebellion  implied  in  all  mur- 
muring? and  discontent  under  trials.  The 
language  of  piety  and  duty:  "  ]Vot  my  will, 
but  thine,  be  done:"  "the  cup  that  my 
Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink 
it?'*  (Luke  xxii.  42;  John  xviii.)  (2)  On 
account  of  its  pride.  The  highest  pride  to 
think  ^  to  arrogate  to  ourselves  the  dis- 
tribution of  rewards  and  punishments,  or 
to  prescribe  how  God  shall  deal  with  us. 
Murmuring  and  discontent  imply  the  sup- 
posed possession  of  a  wisdom  superior  to  our 
Maker's. 

2.  Against  his  ignorance.  Verses  34,  35. 
p "  Let  men  of  understanding  tell  me,  and 
let  a  wise  man  hearken  unto  me  (implying 
that  Job  had  not  spoken  as  such),  'job 
hath  spoken  without  knowledge,  and  his 
word^  were  without  wisdom."  Observe— 
(1)  To  cavil  with  our  Maker's  treatment  of 
us,  indicative  of  ignorance  both  in  regard  to 
God  and  ourselvt-s.  Job's  want  of  know- 
ledge and  wisdom  indicated  in— (i.)  Erro- 
neously judging  of  God's  dealings  with  him; 
(ii)  Sitting  in  judgment  on  those  dealings  at 
all ;  (lii.)  Wishing  to  enter  into  controversy 
with  God  on  the  justice  of  them;  (iv.) 
Charging  God  with  undue  severitv  in  them. 
Thereproof  given  by  Elihu  secoiided  alter- 
wards    bj  the    Almighty    himbelf.      Job's 


ignorance  and  want  of  understanding  in 
what  he  had  spoken  afterwards  acknow- 
ledged and  repented  of.  (2)  Humbling  to 
subject  ourselves  to  the  reproof  which  we 
have  administered  to  others.  Job  now  re- 
proved for  what  he  had  at  first  reproved  his 
wife.  (3)  God's  dealings  with  us  not  accord- 
ing to  our  ignorance,  but  His  wisdom.  (4) 
Tiie  disposal  of  our  lot  best  left  in  God's 
own  hands. 

VI.  Elihu's  desire  in  regard  to  Job. 

Verses  36,  37.— "My  desire  is,"  &c 

1.  The  desire  itself.  Verse  36.— "That 
Job  may  be  tried  unto  the  end  "  (fully,  or 
more  literally,  "unto  victory,"— until  the 
end  has  been  served  in  Job's  humiliation  and 
confession ;  the  wish  granted  (ch.  xli.  4,  5  ; 
xJii.  2—6.)  Observe — (1)  EUhu's  earnestness 
and  zeal  indicated  in  the  wish,  with  which  he 
concludes  his  final  speech.  A  speaker  should 
exhibit  warmth  as  well  as  wisdom.  People 
more  likely  to  be  persuaded  when  logic  is 
accompanied  with  feeling.  A  preacher's 
light  rather  to  resemble  that  of  the  sun  than 
the  moon.  (2.)  Elihu's  wish  apparently  ex- 
hibits more  &eal  for  the  truth  than  sympathy 
with  the  tried.  Wishes  Job's  trial  still 
further  to  be  continued.  Apparently  incon- 
sistent with  his  former  profession.  The 
wish,  however,  both  wise  and  benevolent, 
though  apparentl;^  harsh.  The  best  wisti 
for  the  afflicted  is  that  the  affliction  may 
produce  the  effects  intended  bv  it,— the 
spiritual  benefit  of  the  sufferer.  Better  the 
continuance  of  a  trial  than  its  premature 
removal.  To  have  affliction  removed  before 
the  heart  is  humbled,  a  curse  rather  than  a 
blessing. 

2.  The  ground  of  the  desire.  Verses  36,  37. 
— These  are— (1)  His  apparently  ungodly 
sentiments.  "Because  of  his  answers  for 
(among,  with,  or  like)  wicked  men."  Some 
of  Job's  utterances  apparently  in  favour  of 
ungodliness,  and  only  found  in  the  lips  of 
ungodly  men.  Sad  when  a  godly  man  ap- 
pears, even  for  a  short  time,  to  pass  over  to 
the  side  of  the  wicked,  either  in  the  senti- 
ments he  utters  or  the  conduct  he  exhibits. 
An  aggravation  in  the  open  sin  of  the  godly 
that  It  associates  them  for  the  time  with  the 
workers  of  iniquity  (Ps.  cxli.  4).  Care 
needed  under  temptation,  lest  we  utter  what 
may  appear  to  favour  ungodliness,  and  afford 
an  excuse  to  the  ungodly.  Job's  "  answers  " 
afterwards  recalled  and  deeply  repented  of. 
(2)  His  obstinacy  and  rebellion.  "  He 
addeth  (or  will  add)  rebellion  to  his  sin." 
A  distinction  between  sin  and  rebellion.  So 
between  the  sin  of  ignorance  and  the  pre- 
sumptuous sin.  The  latter  much  more 
heinous.      "Sin"  committed    throuixh    the 

221 


CHAP.   XXXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  JO]B, 


infirmity  of  our  nature;  "rebellion," 
through  the  perversity  of  our  choice.  Be- 
lievers sin ;  unbelievers  add  rebellion  to 
their  sin.  Noah  and  Abraham,  David  and 
Peter,  sinned ;  Pharaoh  and  Saul,  Judas  and 
Herod,  rebelled  in  their  sin.  Sin  greatly 
aggravated  by  rebellion  and  stubbornness  in 
it.  In  Job's  case,  rebellion  only  at  times 
approached.  Was  Satan's  desire,  and  would 
probably  have  been  his  victory.  Elihu's 
wish  to  prevent  this  result.  Rebellion  far 
from  Job's  heart  and  intention.  The  lips 
may  sometimes  utter  what  the  heart  abhors. 
(3)  His  pride  and  contempt.  "  He  elappeth 
(or  will  clap)  his  hands  among  us."  The 
token  of  triumph  and  contempt.  Job  vic- 
torious in  the  contest,  but,  in  Elihu's  judg- 
ment, had  carried  himself  unbecomingly  in 
his  victory.  Though  victorious  in  the  argu- 
ment, not  yet  humbled  in  his  spirit.  Had 
not  yet  recanted  his  bold  and  irreverent 
language,  and  seemed  still  to  glory  in  his 
innocence.  Carried  himself  as  victor  not 
only  over  men,  but  God  himself.  Elihu's 
desire  to  correct  this  unseemly  spirit.     (4) 


The  impiety  of  his  languar/e,  "  He  multi- 
plieth  (or  will  multiply)  his  words  against 
God."  Job's  language  had  at  times  ap- 
peared to  assume  this  character.  Irreverent 
and  rebellious  language  a  heinous  sin.  God's 
complaint  against  Israel  in  the  days  of 
Malachi :  "  Your  words  have  been  stout 
against  me*'  (Mai.  iii.  13).  Words  ordi- 
narily the  index  of  the  heart  (Matt.  xii.  34). 
The  characteristic  of  the  ungodly  to  speak 
against  God.  The  sin  as  early  as  the  days 
oF  Enoch,  before  the  flood  ( Jude  14).  That 
for  which  Christ  will  execute  judgment  on 
the  wicked  at  His  second  appearing  (Jude 
15).  For  every  idle  word  that  men  speak 
they  shall  give  account  at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment; still  more  for  every  rebellious  one 
(Matt.  xii.  37).  The  confession  of  Isaiah 
that  of  every  child  of  God  (Is.  vi.  5).  The 
character  of  men  universally.  The  believer's 
lips  touched  with  the  live  coal  from  off  the 
altar,  and  their  iniquity  taken  away  (Is.  vi. 
7).  A  "  pure  language  "  (or  lip)  one  of  the 
gifts  of  grace  (Zeph.  lii.  9). 


CHAPTER  XXXY. 


ELIHU'S  THIRD  SPEECH. 


After  a  second  pause,  and  no  reply,  Elihu 
again  resumes.  Kenews  his  reproot  of  Job, 
md  attempts  to  answer  some  of  his  cavils. 
Verse  1. — "  Elihu  spake  moreover,"  &c. 

I,  KeproTes  Job  for  his  improper 
language.  Verses  2,  3. — "  Thinkest  thou 
this  to  be  right  (or,  *  Dost  thou  reckon  this 
for  judgment ')  that  thou  saidst,"  &c.  Pro- 
bably a  sarcastic  allusion  to  Job's  vehement 
complaints  about  the  want  of  "judgment." 
Cure  necessary  that  we  do  not  ourselces 
offend  in  that  for  which  we  are  forward  to 
blame  others.  "  Judge  not  that  ye  be  not 
judged."  Job's  language  rather  than  his 
life  still  the  subject  of  Elihu's  reproof." 
Job  reproved — 

1.  For  maintaining  his  righteousness  to  be 
greater  than  God's.  Verse  2. — "  My  righ- 
teousness is  more  than  God's," — allusion  to 
such  passages  as  eh.  ix.  30—35  ;  x.  15.  The 
supf)osed  meaning  rather  than  the  exact 
words  of  Job's  speeches.  Job  had  main- 
tained that  his  life  had  been  pure  and  righ- 
teous, and  that  he  was,  notwithstanding, 
treated  by  the  Almighty  as  wicked.  The 
natural  inference  from  the  complaint — Job 
thinks  himself  more  righteous  than  God. 
Job,  judging  from  present  appearances,  often 
tempted  to  believe  this.  The  same  con- 
clusion only  avoided  bv  the  three  friends  by 

222 


their  falsely  maintaining  that  Job  must  be  a 
hypocrite  and  bad  man.  The  error  of  both  par- 
ties, that  of  judging  of  God's  justice  from  His 
present  dealings.  Neither  of  them  fully  aware 
that  God,  for  special  reasons,  may  allow 
a  godly  man  to  be  very  severely  tried.  Tlieir 
error  that  of  the  period  in  which  they  lived. 
A  future  judgment  not  yet  fully  revealed. 
The  pious  inclined  to  expect  rewards  and 
punishments  in  the  present  life.  The  pecu- 
liarity of  Abraham's  faith  that  he  acted 
as  one  **  that  looked  for  a  better  country, 
that  is,  an  heavenly  ;"  content  meanwhile  to 
live  as  "  a  stranger  and  pilgrim  on  the  earth" 
(Heh.  xi.  13 — 16).  Hence  Abraham,  not 
Job,  the  "father  of  the  faithful."  The  na- 
ture of  faith  to  give  substance  and  reality  to 
things  hoped  for,  and  the  certainty  of  con- 
viction as  regards  things  not  seen  (Heb. 
xi.  1).  Observe — (1)  In  judging  in  regard 
to  God  and  His  dealings,  apart  from  faithy 
men  certain  to  fall  into  error.  Job's  error 
and  consequent  irreverent  language,  the 
result  of  defective  faith.  (2)  Inferences 
from  our  language  often  such  as  we  ourselces 
should  be  shocked  at.  Probably  Job  himself 
would  have  recoiled  from  the  language  here 
ascribed  to  him,  (3)  A  good  man  rei>jo:i' 
sible  not  only  for  his  words,  hut  from  the  in" 
ference  that  may  justly  be  drawn  from.  them. 
2.  )^QT  appearing  to  maintain  that  pieiy  wa$ 


HOmiETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHA.P.    XXXV. 


profitless  to  its jwssessor.  Verse  3. — "For 
thou  saidst,  what,  advantage  will  it  be  uiilo 
thee  (viz.,  that  thy  life  has  been  rip^hteous 
and  pure)  ?  and  what  profit  shall  i  have  if 
I  be  cleansed  from  my  sin  (or  as  marr/in  — 
*  more  than  by  my  sin  ')  ?"  Another  in- 
ference from  Job's  actual  language,  closely 
connected  with  the  tbrmer  one.  Job  main- 
tained tl'at  his  life  had  been  pure,  and  that, 
notwithstanding,  he  was  a  most  grievous 
sufferer.  Inference :  Job  maintains  that 
piety  brings  no  profit.  True,  if  such  suf- 
ferings continued  through  life,  and  there 
were  no  hereafter.  Job's  real  a><sertion,  how- 
ever that  in  the  present  lite,  piety  did  no 
save  its  possessor  from  suffering.  "  If  the 
scourge  stay  suddenly.  He  n\ocketh  at  the 
trial  of  the  inuoccnr, "  (eh.  ix.  23j.  Satan's 
challenge  that  Job  only  served  God  for  pre- 
sent advanta,2;e,  and  that  when  this  was  with- 
drawn, he  would  cast  off  his  religion.  His 
great  object  to  accomplish  this.  The  temp- 
tation from  Job's  wife.  Against  this,  Job 
maintained  that  he  was  a  righteous  man, 
although  he  suffered  so  unusually,  and  that  he 
would  hold  fast  his  religious  character  and 
conduct  at  all  hazards  (eh.  xiii.  15).  Ob- 
serve— The  sentiments  ascribed  to  Job,  the 
language  of  unbelief.  Entertained  by  the  un- 
believing Jews  in  the  days  of  Malachi  (Mai. 
iii.  14).  Even  the  godly  tempted  at  times 
to  employ  such  language  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  13). 
The  opposite  of  the  truth.  Godliness  profit- 
able unto  all  things  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  Yet  the 
godly  often  called  to  suffer  severely  in  the 
present  life.  "  Through  much  tribulation 
we  must  enter  the  kingdom"  (Acts  xiv.  22 ; 
Rev.  vii.  14;  2  Tim.  iii.  11—12). 

II.  Elihu  answers  Job's  cavils.  Verse  4, 

&c. — "  I  will  answer  thee  and  thy  companions 
with  thee," — either  the  three  friends  and 
others  present,  some  of  whom  perhaps  ap- 
peared inchned  to  coincide  with  Job  ;  or 
more  generally,  all  those  who  entertained 
sentiments  similar  to  those  he  had  expressed 
— like  ch.  xxxiv.  8.  Observe — (1)  The  duti/ 
of  the  godly  to  be  read//  to  answer  for  God 
and  to  correct  the  errors  of  brethren.  "  Every 
one  shall  kiss  his  lips  that  giveth  a  right 
answer"  (Prov.  xxiv.  26).  Believers  to  know 
how  they  "  ought  to  answer  every  man" 
(Col.  iv.  6).  (2)  Believers  to  be  careful 
with  whom  they  associate,  and  whose  senti- 
ments they  espouse. — Two  considerations 
employed  by  Elihu  to  silence  Job's  cavils  : — 
1.  God's  infinite  superiority  to,  and  abso- 
lute independence  of.  His  creatures.  Verses  5 
— 8.  "Look  unto  the  heavens  and  see ;  and 
behold  the  clouds  which  are  higher  than 
thou  (hence,  God  who  dwells  above  them 
not  only  incomprehensible  to  His  creatures, 
tjut  indepeudent  of  and  unaffected  by  them). 


If  thou  sinnest,  what  doest  thou  against 
him?  if  thy  transgressions  be  multi})iied, 
what  doest  thou  unto  him  ?  Thy  wickedness 
may  hurt  (or  affect)  a  man  as  thou  art ;  and 
thy  righteousness  may  ))rofit  (or  affect)  the 
son  of  man"  (mankind,  thyself  or  others  like 
thee,  but  not  God).  Observe — (1)  iMen  apt 
to  think  they  lay  God  under  an  obligation 
by  their  piety  or  morality.  God's  happiness 
not  capable  of  bein<:  increased  or  diminished 
by  His  creatures  doings  (Ps.  xvi.  2;  Jer.  vii. 
19).  His  creatures  unable  to  give  Him  what 
is  not  already  His  own  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  14  ; 
Rom.  ii.  35,  36).  No  good  either  possessed- 
or  practised  by  man  but  is  received  from  God 
Himself.  (2.)  Man  apt  to  forget  the  distance 
between  the  creature  and  the  Creator.  Infinite 
condescension  on  the  part  of  God  to  regard 
man  as  He  does.  .  David's  language  that  of 
wisdom  and  piety :  **  Lord,  what  is  man  that 
thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?"  (Ps,  xviii.  4 ;  cxliv. 
3.)  Self-humiliation  in  God  to  behold  the 
things  that  are  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth 
(Ps.  cxiii.  6).  Condescension  and  love  on 
His  part,  that  He  receives  glory  from,  and 
has  pleasure  in,  those  that  fear  and  love, 
serve  and  trust  in  Him  (Ps.  1.  25  ;  cxlvii.  11). 
(3.)  Man  himself  affected  for  weal  or  woe 
by  his  own  conduct  (Is.  iii.  9, 11 ;  Prov.  viii. 
36 ;  ix.  12).  Reaps  what  he  sows  now, 
either  here  or  hereafter  (Gal.  vi.  7 — 9.)  Life 
and  death,  happiness  and  misery,  the  respective 
fruits  of  righteousness  and  sin  (Prov.  ii.  19) 
(4.)  ^  man's  conduct  not  only  productive  of 
weal  and  woe  to  himself  but  also  to  those 
around  him.  In  the  constitution  of  the  world, 
one  creature  made  to  depend  upon,  and  be 
affected  for  good  or  evil  by,  another.  Each 
made  either  a  blessing  or  a  curse  to  his 
neighbour.  One  man's  sin  likely  to  be 
another's  misery  as  well  as  his  own.  The 
piety  of  one  the  profit  of  another  as  well  as 
of  himself.  A  godly  man  a  blessing  to  the 
neighbourhood ;  an  ungodly  one  its  bane. 
Both  a  conscious  and  an  unconscious  in- 
fluence exercised  by  each  on  those  around 
him,  either  for  good  or  evil.  Unconscious 
olten  more  effective  than  conscious  influence. 
Each  responsible  to  God  for  both.  A  man 
with  a  loving  and  Christlike  spirit  a  perpetual 
benefaction.  Such  a  spirit  perceived  insociety 
as  the  perfume  carried  about  on  one's  person. 
All  men  like  boys  writing  with  invisible 
ink.  An  impression  left  upon  thousands  by 
our  spirit,  words,  and  conduct,  to  be  only 
known  and  seen  hereafter. — H.  W.  Beecher. 
(5.)  The  sky  over  our  head  fitted  to 
correct  man's  low  and  erroneous  conceptions 
of  the  Divine  Beinj^.  Profitable  to  "look  unto 
the  heavens,"  and  to  study  the  lessons 
taught  by  the  starry  firmament.  The  noc- 
turnal sky  *'  Nature's  system  of  Divinity." 
God's  ever  open  Bible 

223 


OH  A  p.   XXXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


"  His  universal  temple,  hung 
With  lustres,  with  innumerable  lights, 
That  shed  reliirion  on  the  soul,  at  once 
The  temple  and  tlie  preacher. — 
His  love  lets  down  these  silver  chains  of  light 
To  draw  up  men's  amUition  to  Himself, 
And  bind  his  chaste  affections  to  His  throne.— 
One  sun  by  day,  by  night  ten  thous^nd  shine, 
And  light  us  deep  into  the  Deity." 

2.  The  cause  of  men's  continued  misery 
and  God's  apparent  disregard,  to  be  found 
not  in  God  but  in  themselves.  Verses  8, 13. — 
"By  reason  of  the  multitude  of  oppression, 
they  make  the  oppressed  to  cry  (or  simply, 
*men  cry*);  they  cry  out  by  reason  of  the 
arm  of  the  mighty  (the  violence  of  tyrants  and 
the  ungodly  rich).  But  none  saith  (under 
his  trouble,  in  a  grateful  remembrance  of 
past  mercies  and  prayerful  dependence  for 
present  aid),  where  is  God  my  Maker  {Heb., 
•  my  makers,'  as  Is.  liv.  5 ;  Ecc.  xii.  1 ; 
probably  with  allusion  to  Gen.  i.  26 — in- 
dicating the  plurality  of  Divine  persons  and 
the  fulness  of  Divine  perfections  in  the  one 
God),  who  givetii  songs  in  the  night  ?  who 
teacheth  us  more  than  (or  *  above*)  the 
beasts  of  the  earth,  and  maketli  us  wiser 
than  the  fowls  of  heaven.  There  (in  their 
afflicted  and  oppressed  condition)  they  cry, 
but  none  givetli  answer,  because  of  the  pride 
of  evil  men  (who  cause  them  by  their  cruelty 
and  violence  to  cry  out  under  their  affliction). 
Surely  God  will  not  hear  vanity  (vain  prayers 
that  are  destitute  of  faith  or  piety,  and  only 
extorted  by  suffering) ;  neither  will  the 
Almighty  re^^ardit**  (viz.,  so  long  as  they 
remain  impenitent).  From  the  whole  passage, 
Observe — (1)  Me/i  often  made  to  suffer 
grievously  from  the  oppression  and  tyranny  of 
others.  Witness  tlie  Israelites  in  Eirypt 
(Ex.  i.  2).  Possible  allusion  made  by  Elihu 
to  the  case  of  Job  himself.  (2)  Meti^s  cries 
under  oppression  and  trouble  not  always 
followed  with  Dlcine  delioerance.  "  They  cry, 
but  none  giveth  answer.'*  (3)  The  reason  of 
such  unansicered  cries  not  in  God,  but  in  the 
sufferers  theniselces.    Elihu  indicates  some 

Reasons  for  continued  suifering. 

1.  Men  do  not  pray  to  God  in  their  afflic- 
tion. They  "  cry'*  and  "  cry  out,"  but  do 
not  pray.  Men's  cries  in  trouble  often  not 
to  God  but  against  Him.  Sufferers  often 
cry  to  men,  and  cry  out  of  men,  without 
praying  to  God.  All  cries  not  prayer.  Cries 
in  suffering  only  heard  and  answered  when 
they  are  cries  to  God. 

2.  Prayer  made  in,  trouble  not  answered , 
because  not  right  prayers.  "  God  will  not 
hear  vanity.'*  God  hears  only  the  prayer  of 
piety  or  of  penitence — the  prayer  of  His 
servants  or  of  those  who  desire  to  become 
such.     No  promise  to   impenitent    }>rci)ers. 

224 


"  God  heareth  not  sinners,**  continuing  such 
(John  ix.  31).  *'  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my 
heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me  '  (Ps.  Ixvi. 
18).  "When  ye  make  many  prayers,  1  will 
not  hear;  your  hands  are  full  of  blood'*  (Is. 
i.  15).  "  He  that  turneth  away  his  ear  from 
hearing  the  la?v,  even  his  prayer  shall  be 
abomination"  (Prov.  xxviii.  9;  i.  28 — 30). 
"Ye  ask  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask 
amiss,  that  ye  may  consume  it  upon  your 
lusts"  (James  iv.  3).  Penitence  and  purity 
necessary  to  prevailing  prayer.  *'  I  will  that 
men  pray  everywhere,  lifting  up  holy  hands 
without  wrath  and  doubting"  (1  Tim.  ii  8). 
The  prayer  of  the  upright  is  God's  delight 
(Prov.  XV.  8).  Tlie  sacrifices  of  God  are  a 
broken  spirit  (Ps.  li.  17).  Men  may  kneel 
upon  their  beds  without  being  humbled  in 
their  hearts  (Hos.  vii.  14).  Prayer  is  vanity 
when — (1)  Without  sincerity ;  (2)  Without 
repentance;  (3)  Without  faith.  Prayer 
without  faith  is  like  faith  without  works, — 
dead,  being  alone  (James  ii.  17).  Earnest 
and  believing  prayer  either  receives  the  thing 
asked  or  something  better. 

3.  Deliverance  not  experienced,  on  account 
of  forgetfalness  of  God.  Verse  10. — "  None 
saith,  where  is  God  my  Maker?"  Men 
suffering  at  the  hand  of  others  apt  to  think 
more  of  the  creature  than  the  Creator  (Is. 
li.  12,  13).  God  not  acknowledged  by  the 
unregenerate  either  in  their  meriMcs  or  their 
afflictions.  God's  object  in  afflicting  men, 
to  bring  them  to  Himself.  I'lie  prayer  of 
the  sufferer  unanswered  till  the  object  is 
secured,  or  answered  in  wrath  (Ps.  civ.  15). 
Affliction  blessed  when  men  turn  to  God  and 
inquire  after  Him.  Men,  since  the  fall, 
naturally  forgetful  of  God.  Forget  fulness  of 
God  the  sin  that  fills  hell  u^ith  inhabitants 
(Ps.  ix.  17).  Men  under  suffering  apt  to 
inquire  after  men's  help  rather  than  God's. 
Asa,  in  his  affliction,  sought  not  unto  the  Lord, 
but  unto  physicians  (2  Chron.  xvi.  12). 
llighteous  that  God  should  disregard  men 
who  willingly  forget  Him.  Seriously  to  in- 
quire after  Grod  the  first  step  in  true  repent- 
ance. Observe — God  to  be  remembered  in 
affliction  as  our  "  Maker."  Our  Maker,  who 
is  also  our  Redeemer,  has  the  best  right  to 
our  remembrance.  To  turn  to  Him  who 
made  us,  our  first  duty  in  affliction.  He  who 
made  us  cannot  but  be  able  to  helj)  and 
deliver  us.  Our  wisdom,  when  suffering  at 
the  hands  of  men,  to  turn  from  the  creature 
to  the  Creator.  Sin  to  be  acknowledged  in 
not  having  served  and  followed  our  Maker. 
In  consequence  of  the  Fall,  God  to  be  in- 
quired and  sought  after  as  one  who  is  lost. 
Affliction  naturally  finds  men  "without  God  in 
the  world"  (Kph.  ii.  12).  God  however  to  be 
found.  Not  far  from  every  one  of  us.  Savmgly 
Vound  in  Christ  (John  xiv.  6     2  Cor.  v.  17). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CH/LP.  xxxy. 


4.  Deliverance  not  vouchsafed  on  account  of 
ingratitude  for  past  mercies.  **  Who  givetn 
songs  in  the  night."  Past  songs  not  to  be 
forgotten  in  present  sufferings.  A  thankful 
remembrance  of  past  mercies  the  best  way 
to  obtain  present  deliverances.  Remem- 
brance of  past  triumphs  a  precious  help 
under  present  troubles.  "Because  Thou 
hast  been  my  help,"  &c.  (Ps.^  Ixiii.  7).  The 
recollection  of  God's  past  kindness  David's 
sweetest  comfort  in  his  most  crushing  trial 
(Ps.  xlii.  6).  Forgetfulness  of  Divine  mer- 
cies one  of  our  greatest  sins  CIs.  i.  2,  3). 
The  natural  heart  forgetful  of  God's  benefits 
as  well  as  His  being.  The  part  of  grace  to 
resist  this  tendency  (Ps.  ciii.  2). 

Two  reasons  on  the  part  of  God  why  He 
should  be  remembered  and  sought  to  under 
affliction  and  suffering : — 

First  reason :    He  gives 

Songs  in  the  Night. 

Observe— 

1.  What  He  gives.  "  Songs.'*  God  the 
giver  of  songs.  Songs  the  expression — (1) 
Oi  joy  and  gladness ;  (2)  Of  praise  and  t/ianks' 
giving.  God  happy  Himself,  and  delights  in 
making  His  creatures  happy.  According  to 
His  nature  to  give  sonf^^s  rather  than  sorrows. 
To  give  joy.  His  deliglit ;  to  cause  sorrow, 
His  strange  act.  God  is  love;  and  the 
nature  of  love  to  give  songs.  The  songs 
that  God  gives  are — (1)  The  sweetest;  (2) 
The  holiest ;  (3)  The  most  lasting.  Satan  also 
gives  songs, — short  songs  the  prelude  to 
lasting  sorrows.  The  world  gives  songs — 
songs  often  sung  to  a  heavy  heart.  All  songs 
but  those  that  God  gives  to  be  one  day 
turned  into  bowlings  (Amos  viii.  3).  The 
instrument  gives  forth  its  sweetest  music 
under  the  hands  of  Him  that  made  it. 

2.  When  He  gives  songs.  "  In  the  night." 
First:  In  tlie  natural  night  (Ps.  xlii.  8). 
Night  the  time  of  reflection  and  meditation. 
Satan  makes  men  howl  upon  their  beds ; 
God  makes  them  sing  upon  them  (Hos.  vii. 
14;  Ps.  cxlix.  5).  God  gives  songs  when 
there  is  nothing  else  to  give  them— in  tlie 
night.  Paul  and  Silas  sang  praises  at  mid- 
night (Acts  xvi.  25).  Musing  on  our  bed 
the  fire  burns,  and  we  rise  at  midnight  to 
give  thanks  (Ps.  xxxix.  3;  cxix.  62). — 
Second:  In  the  night  of  trouble  (chap,  xxxvi. 
20).  God  gives  sougs  in  the  night — (1)  Of 
personal  affliction;  (2)  Of  temporal  adver- 
sity ;  (3)  Of  painful  bereavement  j  (4)  Of 
persecution  from  the  world  ;  (5)  Of  spiritual 
darkness  and  desertion ;  (6)  Of  death  and 
its  solemn  approaches  (Hab.  iii.  17,  18; 
Acts  xvi.  25  ;  Hos.  ii.  14,  15 ;  Ps.  xxiii.  4). 
No  night  of  trouble  too  dark  for  God  to  give 
songs  in  it.    Jesus  sung  a  hymn  with  His 

15 


disciples  in  the  darkest  night  of  His  earthly 
life.  John  sung  songs  of  joy  and  praise  as 
an  exile  in  Patmos,  and  Paul  and  Silas  as 
prisoners  in  Philippi.  God  gives  songs  to 
His  people  when  it  is  night  to  others  as 
well  as  themselves.  Israel  l»ad  light  in  their 
dwellings  when  all  Egypt  was  covered  with 
darkness. 

3.  How  God  gives  songs  in  the  night. — (1) 
By  bringing  into  trouble ;  (2)  By  comforting 
under  it ;  (3)  By  delivering  out  of  it  (Hos. 
ii.  14  ;  Ps.  xxiii.  4).  The  songs  God  gives, 
generally  "  songs  of  deliverance  "  (Ps  xxxii. 
7).  God  puts  songs  into  the  mouth  by 
putting  gladness  into  the  heart  (Ps.  iv.  7). 
Puts  a  new  song  into  our  mouth  by  setting 
our  feet  upon  a  rock  (Ps.  xl.  2,  3).  God 
gives  songs  in  the  night  by  sending  and 
showing  us  a  Saviour  (Luke  ii.  8).  The 
office  of  Jesus  to  give  "the  oil  of  joy  for 
mourning,  and  the  garment  of  praise  for 
the  spirit  of  heaviness"  (Is  Ixi.  3). 

Second  reason  :  He  "  teacheth  us  more 
than  the  beasts,"  &c. — (1)  ]^\s  special  regard 
to  His  intelligent  creatures,  a  reason  for 
their  seeking  to  Him  in  time  of  trouble. 
God  cares  lor  the  lower  animals,  how  much 
more  for  man  ?  Man  made  rational  and  in- 
telligent after  his  Maker's  likeness.  (2) 
\.\\Q faculties  with  which  God  has  endowed 
man,  a  reason  why  he  should  seek  Him  in 
trouble.  Reason  given  to  enable  us  to  know 
God,  and  to  understand  that  He  is  the 
helper  and  deliverer  of  all  who  truly  seek 
Him.  To  be  in  trouble  without  inquiring 
after  God,  more  the  part  of  a  beast  than  a 
man.  Beasts  cry  in  their  sufferings,  but 
unable  to  think  of  God  in  them.  Sin  degrades 
men  below  the  brute  creation.  Beasts  howl 
but  cannot  pray  :  men  can  pray  but  do  not. 
Faculties  given  to  beasts  to  apprehend  the 
creature  ;  to  maa  to  apprehend  the  Creator, 
A  beast  able  to  know  the  will  of  his  master  j 
a  man  to  know  the  will  of  his  God.  Under- 
standing given  to  the  beasts  to  enable  them 
to  attend  to  their  bodily  wants  and  those  of 
their  offspring ;  a  higher  understanding  given 
to  man  to  enable  him  to  attend  also  to  his 
spiritual  wants  and  those  of  others.  Beasts 
endowed  with  sufficient  intelligence  for  the 
preservation  of  themselves  and  others  in  the 
present  life\  man  endowed  with  an  intelli- 
gence to  enable  him  to  secure  happiness  for 
himself  and  others  in  the  life  to  come.  The 
understanding  or  instinct  of  the  lower 
annimals  ever  the  same  ;  I  he  understanding 
of  man  capable  of  continual  increase. 

Ill,  Elihu  exhorts  Job  to  patience 
and  hope.  Verse  14. — "Although  (or  'even 
when ')  thou  sayest  thou  shalt  not  see  Him 
(enjoy  His  returning  favour;  or,  *thou  dost 
not  see  Him,'  t.^.,  understand  His  procedure), 

225 


CHAP.  IXIT. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB, 


yet  judgment  is  before  Him  (He  ever  acts 
according  to  judgment ;  or,  *  the  case  is 
before  Him  *  —  under  His  consideration) ; 
therefore  trust  thou  in  Him." 

Notice — 

1.  A  temptation  or  complaint  supposed. — 
(1)  A  temptation  to  despondency.  "Thou 
sayst  thou  slialt  not  see  him."  Job  at  times 
hard  pressed  with  it  (chap.  xvii.  15).  Yet 
enabled  to  overcome  it  (chap.  xix.  26,  27). 
The  part  of  believers  to  resist  temptation 
(Ps.  xlii.  5 — 11).  To  a  believer  the  sun  is 
only  hidden  by  a  cloud,  not  set.  The  hiding 
of  God's  face  no  proof  that  He  neglects  our 
cause.  Is  glorified  when  He  is  trusted  in 
the  dark  (Heb.  iii.  17,  18).  Or— (2)  A  com- 
plaint of  darkness.  "  Thou  say  est  thou  dost 
not  see  him."  Job's  trial  that  he  was  unable 
to  comprehend  God's  dealings  (chap.  ix.  11). 
God's  dealings  with  His  people  often  dark, 
mysterious,  and  incomprehensible.  Christ's 
words  to  Peter  spoken  for  the  consolation  of 
tried  believers  through  all  time, — "  What  I 
do,  thou  knowest  not  now  ;  but  thou  shalt 
know  hereafter  "  (John  xiii.  7). 

2.  A  truth  stated.  "Judgment  is  before 
him."  God's  dealings  may  be  dark,  but  are 
never  doubtful.  While  clouds  of  darkness 
are  round  about  Him,  justice  and  judgment 
are  the  basis  of  His  throne  (Ps.  xcvii.  2 ; 
Ixxxix.  14).  Purposes  of  wisdom  and  goodness 
in  every  event,  though  unknown  to  us.  A  God 
of  truth  and  without  iniquity.  The  cause  of 
the  poor  and  afflicted  believer  never  really, 
though  sometimes  apparently,  overlooked. 
"I  have  seen,  1  have  seen,  the  affliction  of 
my  people  in  Egypt,  and  I  am  come  down  to 
deliver  them."  Joseph's  case  in  the  pit  and 
then  in  the  prison.  Jacob's  in  Canaan : 
"All  these  thmgs  are  against  me."  Job's 
case  at  present.  Believers  made  to  pass 
through  fire  and  water,  but  are  brought  out 
into  a  wealthy  place  (Ps.  Ixvi.  12). 

3.  An  exhortation  addressed.  "  Trust  thou 
in  him." 

Trast  in  God. 

The  believer's  grand  recipe  in  darkness  and 
trouble.  Implies— (1)  Faith;  (2)  Hope; 
(3)  Patience.  Faith  in  God's  promise  and 
perfections ;  hope  of  His  deliverance ;  pa- 
tience to  wait  His  time  for  it.  God  delivers 
His  people,  but  in  His  own  time  and  way. 
Tairy  thou  the  Lord's  leisure.  The  vision 
is  for  an  appointed  time ;  though  it  tarry, 
wait  for  it  (Ps.  xxxvii.  7-34;  Hab.  ii.  3) 
Sinners  not  immediately  punished,  nor  saints 
immediately  delivered.  Trust  in  God  founded 
in  the  knowledge  of  Him.  They  that  know 
Thy  name  will  put  their  trust  in  Thee  (Ps. 
ix.  10).  God  to  be  trusted  in,  not  an  idol 
22a 


bearing  His  name ;  God  as  revealed  in  His 
Word,  not  as  formed  by  our  own  imagination. 
To  be  trusted  in  as  a  God  of  justice  as  well 
as  mercy.  True  trust  in  God  founded  on 
the  atonement  of  His  Son.  God  in  Christ 
the  revealed  object  of  a  sinner's  trust.  Christ 
the  only  way  to  the  Father.  Trust  in  God 
implies  trust  in — (1)  His  goodness ;  (2)  His 
wisdom ;  (3)  His  faithfulness ;  (4)  His  jus- 
tice ;  (5)  His  power.  God  in  Christ  to  be 
trusted  in  by  the  sinner  for  pardon  ;  by  the 
saint  for  purity.  To  be  trusted  in  by  believers 
— (1)  In  deepest  darkness  ;  (2)  Under 
greatest  discouragements ;  (3)  In  danger  and 
difficulty;  (4)  In  the  absence  of  all  help 
from  ourselves  and  others;  (5)  In  the  face 
of  all  appearances.  Trust,  the  grace  that 
brings  the  greatest  glory  to  God  and  the 
greatest  comfort  to  ourselves  (Isa.  xii.  2 ; 
Rom.  iv.  20). 

ly.  Elihu  reproyes  Job's  obstinacy. 

Verses  15,  16. — "  But  now  because  it  is  not 
so,  he  hath  visited  in  his  anger  (or,  *  because 
it  is  not  so  [that]  his  anger  has  visited,'  viz., 
Job,   for    his    irreverent    and    unbecoming 
speeches),  yet  he  knoweth  it  not  in  great 
extremity  (or,  *^nd  He  [viz.,  God]  hath  not 
taken  severe  cognizance  of  his  transgression'); 
therefore  doth  Job  open  his  mouth  in  vain 
(in  vain  and  foolish  complaints  against  God, 
without  either  reason  or  success) ;  he  multi- 
plieth  words  without  knowledge "  [either  of 
God  or  himself].    One  of  the  most  obscure 
passages  in  the  Dook.    Elihu's  object  to  re- 
prove Job  eitlier — (1)  Because,  w^iile  God  was 
chastising,  Job  was  still  sinning  by  his  rebel- 
lious murmurs;  or  (2)  Because  while  God 
was   forbearing  to   punish  Job's  irreverent 
speeches.  Job  still  continued  to  indulge  in 
them.   Observe— (1)  An  evil  case — (i.)  when 
God  chastises,  and  we  are  either  blind  to  thft 
chastening  or  harden  ourselves  under  it;  (ii.) 
when  God's  forbearance  is  abused  to  a  con- 
tinuance in  sin.     (2)  A  child  of  God  not 
always  like  himself  in  temptation  and  trial. 
Asaph's  confession  :  "  So  foolish  was  I,  and 
ignorant ;  I  was  as  a  beast  before  thee  "  (Ps. 
Ixxiii.  22).  A  believer  never  entirely  free  from 
his  old  carnal  nature  in  this  life.     Innate 
corruption  liable  at,  times  to  break  out  with 
great  violence.     God's  forbearance  required 
as  well  in  the  case  of  a  saint  as  of  a  sinner. 
David's  prayer  needful  for  every   child   of 
God :  "Keep  back  Thy  servant  from  presump- 
tuous sins  "  (Ps.  xix.  13).   A  strict  watch  re- 
quired to  be  kept  over  heart  and  lips  in  time 
of  temptation  and  trouble.     A  tendency  in 
the  best  to  impatience   under  intense  and 
protracted  suffering.     New  Testament  grace 
required  in  order  to  fulfil  the  New  Testament 
precept:  "Rejoice  evermore;  m  everything 
give  thanks  "  (i  Thess.  v.  16,  18).    The  be- 


HOMILEIIC  COMMENTARF:  JOB 


CHAP.  XXXVI. 


li«ver's  privilege  as  well  as  duty  to  "  glory  according  to  His  glorious  power,  unto  all 

in  tribulation"  (Rom.  v.  3).    Not  too  mucll,  patience  and  long  suffering  with  joyfulness  " 

under  the  New  Testament  supplies  of  the  (Col.  i.  11), 
Spirit,  to  be  "  strengthened  with  all  might, 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


ELIEITS  FOURTH  SPEECH 


No  reply  being  made  to  Elihu*s  preceding 
address,  he  resumes.  Verse  1. — "  Elihu  also 
proceded  and  said.**  His  object  to  bring  Job 
to  a  more  becoming  state  of  mind  in  reference 
to  God's  dealings  with  him.  Aims,  like  Job*s 
three  friends,  at  showing  that  God  is  not  to 
be  charged  with  injustice  by  any  of  his  crea- 
tures. 

I.  His  introdnction  (verses  2—4). 

1.  Bespeaks  Job's  farther  patience  and  at' 
iention.  Verse  2. — "  Suffer  (wait  for,  or  bear 
with)  me  a  little,  and  I  will  show  thee  that 
I  have  yet  to  speak  in  God*s  behalf"  (or, 
'*that  there  are  yet  arguments  for  God**). 
Elihu  makes  good  his  own  statement:  "lam 
full  of  matter.**  "The  words  of  a  man*s 
mouth  are  as  deep  waters ;  and  the  well- 
spring  of  wisdom  as  a  flowing  brook.** 
*'  Counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  is  like  deep 
water,  but  a  man  of  understanding  will  draw 
it  out  **  (Prov.  xviii.  4;  xx.  5).  The  promise 
to  believers  in  New  Testament  times :  "  Out 
of  them  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water*' 
(John  vii.  38).  On  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
believers,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  spake 
with  other  tongues  as  the  Spirit  gave  them 
utterance  (Acts  ii.  4).  Observe — (1)  Patient 
attention  to  spiritual  teaching  not  always 
easy  to  the  flesh.  (2)  Wise  in  a  public 
teacher  to  draw  as  little  as  possible  on  the 
patience  of  his  hearers.  Brevity,  as  far  as 
consistent  with  faithfulness  to  the  truth  and 
the  hearer's  interests,  to  be  constantly  aimed 
at.  The  matter  spoken  to  be  carefully  ar- 
ranged, and  the  words  employed  to  be  few 
and  well  chosen.  Prolixity,  digression,  and 
repetition  to  be  avoided.  (3)  Elihu's  wisdom 
in  making  breaks  in  his  discourse,  and  in 
pausing  at  times  for  a  reply.  His  speeches 
four  or  five  instead  of  one.  (4)  Well  to 
be  ready  to  speak  for  God,  in  the  presence 
either  of  friends  or  foes.  Elihu's  task  to 
speak  as  an  advocate  for  God  against  Job, 
who  had  appeared  to  take  the  place  of  an 
accuser.  The  part  of  wisdom  to  know  how 
to  speak  for  God,  and  to  give  a  suitable 
answer  to  men*s  cavils  and  complaints. 

2.  Promises  a  thorough  and  satisfactory 
treatment  of  the  subject  in  hand.  Verse  3. — 
"  I  will  fetch  my  knowledge  from  afar  "  (from 
the  widely-extended  departments  of  Gods 

15—2 


works ;  from  principles  long  and  everywhere 
acknowledged ;  from  deep  thought  and  mature 
consideration).  Elihu's  knowledge  like  Solo- 
mon's "  deep  waters."  Preachers  to  ponder 
and  study  well  the  subjects  on  which  they  are 
to  speak.  Dr.  Guthrie  commenced  his  pre- 
parations for  the  Sabbath  on  the  preceding 
Monday,  and  thus  kept  his  discourses  ^sim- 
mering *  in  his  mind  all  the  week  Sermons 
to  carry  evidence  of  close  thought  and 
thorough  acquaintance  with  the  subjects 
treated.  To  be  confirmed  by  solid  arguments 
and  commended  by  apt  illustrations. — The 
subject  and  aim  of  Elihu's  discourse:  "T 
will  ascribe  righteousness  to  my  Maker." 
His  subject — the  justice  of  God^s  dealings  in 
Providence ;  his  aim — to  exhibit  and  defend 
that  justice.  His  arguments  for  God  espe- 
cially in  relation  to  His  righteousness  as  the 
Governor  of  the  Universe.  Job  had  ap- 
parently questioned  that  righteousness  (ch. 
xxvii.  2 ;  xxxiv.  5 — 12).  Wise  in  preachers 
to  have  a  distinct  subject  and  a  clear  aim  in 
their  discourses. 

3.  Assures  Job  of  the  sincerity  as  well  as 
correctness  of  his  sentiments.  Verse  4. — "  Eor 
truly  my  words  shall  not  be  false  (either 
subjectively^  as  spoken  against  my  conscience 
to  serve  some  by-end  or  selfish  purpose — a 
sin  of  which  Job  had  accused  his  three 
friends ;  nor  objectively,  as  bein^^  untrue  in 
themselves  in  relation  to  the  subject  treated, 
as  if  vindicating  God's  ways  by  unsound 
arguments).  He  that  is  perfect  in  know- 
ledge (or,  one  sincere  in  his  opinions  and 
mature  in  his  knowledge  of  the  subject  in 
hand — no  novice  or  tyro,  albeit  young  in 
years)  is  with  thee.'*  Observe — (1)  A  reli- 
gious teacher  to  be  true  both  in  himself  and 
in  his  teaching.  Truth  to  be  spoken,  and  to 
be  spoken  as  truth,  and  not  as  fiction.  The 
speaker  to  be  true  both  in  the  manner  and 
matter  of  his  discourse.  The  truth  to  be 
spoken  in  truthfulness.  What  we  speak  to 
be  truth,  and  to  be  believed  and  accepted  by 
ourselves  as  such.  "  We  speak,"  said  the 
Model  Teacher,  "  what  we  do  know,  and  tes- 
tify what  we  have  seen."  (2)  A  preacher 
to  be  sound  in  his  knowledge  and  in  the  use 
he  makes  of  it.  Timothy  exhorted  to  "study 
to  show  liimself  a  workman  that  needeth  not 
to  be  ashamed,  rightly  dividing  the  word  of 
truth;"  Titus,  to  use  "sound  speech  that 

227 


"iRLt.  xxxn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


cannot  be  condemned  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  15 ;  Tit. 
ii.  8).  The  means  of  attaining  this :  "  Give 
attendance  to  reading ;  meditate  upon  these 
things;  give  thyself  wholly  to  them;  take 
heed  unto  thyself  and  unto  the  doctrine  " 
(1  Tim.  iv.  13,  15,  16).  Teachers  of  others 
to  be  not  babes  but  men  of  full  age  in 
understanding,  whatever  they  may  be  in 
years  (Heb.  v.  12 — 14).  The  Scriptures 
given  "  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect, 
thoroughly  furnished  unto  every  good  work  " 
(2  Tim.  Hi.  17). 

Ill,  Elihu's  defence  of  God  (verses 
5—15).  "Behold,"  &c.  What  is  about  to 
be  spoken  is — (1)  Worthy  of  all  attention ; 
(2)  Patent  to  everyone,  and  not  for  a  moment 
to  be  questioned.  Elihu  grounds  his  de- 
fence— 

1.  On  God*s  attributes.  Verse  5. — "God  is 
mighty,  and  despiseth  not  any ;  he  is  mighty 
in  strength  and  wisdom."      Adduces — (1) 
His  power.    "  God  is  mighty."    Omnipotent 
and   able   to    accomplish  all   His   pleasure 
throughout  tiie  universe.    Hence  under  no 
temptation   to  be  unrighteous.      Injustice 
allied  to  weakness.    The  mighty  scorn  to  be 
unjust.    (2)  His  kindness.    "He  despiseth 
not  any."    In  opposition  to  Job's  insinua- 
tion (ctiap.  x.  3;  xix.  7;  xxiii.  13).    Though 
mighty.  He  scorns  not  the  meanest.  Though 
high.  He  hath  respect  to  the  lowly.    Slights 
no  creature's  cause  or  interests.    The  con- 
trast of  earth's  mighty  ones.     No  creature 
too  minute  or  insignificant  in  God's  eyes  for 
His  care  and  attention.     A  sparrow  not  for- 
gotten before  Him.     His  power  no  impedi- 
ment   to  His   providence.     His   greatness 
enables  Him  to  pay  attention  to  the  tiniest 
insect  as  well  as  to  the  mightiest  angel.    To 
Omnipotence  and  Omniscience  an  atom  an 
object  of  attention  as  well  as  a  sun.    God 
the  universal  Parent,    All  creatures,  great 
and  small.  His  own.    All  created  by  Him 
and  for  Him.   All  dependent  on  Him  for  life 
and  all  things.    The  universe  a  proof  tliat 
He  is  mighty,  yet  "  despiseth  not  any."   The 
animalcule,   invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  a 
testimony  to  His  condescension  and  care,  as 
well  as  to   His  power  and   wisdom.    The 
animating  reflection  of  Mungo  Park  from  the 
appearance  of  a  small  moss  in  the  solitary 
African  desert :  "  Can  that  Being,  thought 
I,  who  planted,  watered,   and  brought   to 
perfection  in  this  obscure  part  of  the  world, 
a  thing  which  appears  of  so  small  importance, 
look  with  unconcern  upon  the  situation  and 
sufferings  of  creatures  formed  after  His  own 
image?    Surely  not."    The  attribute  in  the 
text  appropriated  by  Jesus  in  reference  to 
sinners    applying    to    Him    for    salvation. 
"Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out  '*  (John  vi.  37).   His  own  inoar- 
228 


nation  and  death  on  man's  behalf  the  most 
illustrious  confirmation  of  the  text  (Ps.  viii. 
4;  Heb.  ii.  6,  &c.).  {Z)  BX^  wisdom.  "He 
is  mighty  in  strength  and  wisdom  "  {Ueb.^ 
"in  strength  of  heart,"  perhaps  including 
generosity  and  kindness,  as  parallel  to  the 
preceding  clause).  God's  omniscience  as 
real  as  His  omnipotence.  His  wisdom  equal 
to  His  power.  In  God  infinite  power  di- 
rected by  infinite  wisdom  and  employed  by 
infinite  goodness.  Scripture  reveals  God'a 
heart  as  well  as  His  arm.  Hence  God  a 
Father  and  a  Friend,  instead  of  a  tyi  ant  and 
a  terror  to  His  creatures.  The  object  of 
love  and  trust  as  well  as  of  reverence  and 
fear.  The  tiniest  creature  the  monument  of 
His  skill.  All  nature  a  testimony  to  His 
heart  as  well  as  to  His  hand. 

2.  On  God's  dealings  in  Providence  (verse 
6).     His  dealings— (1)   In  respect  to  the 
ungodly.  "  He  preserveth  not  the  life  of  the 
wicked,"   ie.y  always.      Suffers,   or  causes 
them,  if  continuing  wicked,  sooner  or  later, 
to  perish.     Usually,  however,  not  till  after 
long  patience.  Examples: — Pharaoh;  Sodom 
and    Gomorrlia ;    the    antediluvian    world. 
The    ungodly    preserved    for    a    time    by 
God — (i.)    For    His   own    purposes   (Rom. 
ix.   17);    (ii).  To  afford  space  for  repent- 
ance   (Rom.  ii.    4;    2   Pet.    iii.    9—15). 
(2)  In  respect  to  the  poor:  "But  giveth 
right   to  the    poor," — the    oppressed    and 
afflicted;  not  without  respect  to  their  spirit 
as  well  as  their  circumstances.      Maintains 
their  cause  against  oppressors,  and  sooner  or 
later,  in  one  way  or  other,  delivers  them. 
Example:  Israelites  in  Kg.vpt.     Same  truth 
in  similar  language  (Ps.  cxl.  12,  and  else- 
where in  the  Psalms).    Applied  by  Jesus  to 
His  suffering  Church  (Luke  xviii.  8).  Main- 
tained by  Elihu   against  Job's    complaints 
and    frequent    appearances.      Might    often 
suffered  to  take   the   place  of  right.     Yet 
"  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth." 
The  language  of  Elihu  both  a  rebuke  and  an 
encouragement  to  Job.     If  poor,  he  should 
sooner  or  later  have  right  given  him,  not- 
withstanding his  complaint  (chap,  xxvii.  2). 
Observe — God's  people  "poor  "in  this  world, 
l)oth  in  respect  to  their  spirit  and  their  posi- 
tion.     Their  posture  one  of  patience  and 
hope.     Their  cause,  however,  maintained  by 
God.     "  A  righteous  thing  with  God  to  re- 
compense tribulation  to  them  that  trouble 
you,  and  to  you  who  are  troubled,  rest  with 
us,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed 
from  heaven"  (2  Thes.  i.  6,  7).     Then,  if  not 
sooner,   right  given  to  the  poor.     (3)   In 
respect  to  the  righteous.   First,  in  exercising 
continual  care  over  them.     Verse   7. — "  He 
withdrawethnot  His  eyes  from  the  righteous," 
however  they  may  seem  at  times  to  be  over- 
looked and  forsaken  by  Him.    The  case  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXXVI. 


Noah  already  a  well-known  example.  Joseph 
in  Egypt   an   example   of    a   later   period. 
Righteous  Abel  died  indeed  by  his  brother  s 
hand,  but  his  blood  not  forf];otten  by  Jehovah 
(Gen.  iv.   10).    The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are 
upon  the  righteous  (Fs.  xxxiv.  15).     The 
comfort  of  God's  people  in  all  circumstances. 
At  times  almost  forgotten  and  questioned  by 
the  afflicted  and  tempted  patriarch.     "  Thou 
God  seest  me/*  a  well  of  refreshment   for 
tried   believers. — Second;  in  ex(dting  them, 
"But   with  kings  are  they  on  the  throne; 
yea,  he  doth  establish  them  (or,  "  yea,  kings 
on  the  throne,  He  doth  even  make  them,  sit") 
for  ever,  and  they  are  exalted."  Even  on  earth 
the  righteous   often   exalted,   out   of  great 
affliction,   to   dignity   and    honour.     Joseph 
and  David  examples.     So  far  from  neglecting 
the  godly,  God  sooner  or  later  exalts  them, — 
sometimes  to  an  eartlily  throne,  always  to  a 
heavenly   one   (1  Sam.  ii.  3 ;  Ps.  cxiii.  8). 
"Out  of  prison  he  cometh  to  reign"  (Ecc. 
iv.  14).     Every  believer  made  a  king  as  well 
as  a  priest  (1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;   llev.  i.  6 ;  v.  10). 
Their  kingdom  an  everlasting  one  ( Dan.  vii. 
18),     God''s  providence  and  care  extended  over 
aodly  rulers.     His  eyes  not  withdrawn  from 
kings  on  the  throne.     Earthly  rulers  from 
God  Himself.     "He  putteth  down  one  and 
setteth  up  another."     "  By  Me  kings  reign  " 
(Prov.  viii,  15,  16;  Rom.'xiii.  1 ;  Ps.  Ixxv. 
7).     Human   rule   an   evidence   and   conse- 
quence of  the  Divine.    Perhaps  a  direct  allu- 
sion in  the  text  to  Job  himself. — Third;  In 
correcting    them.     Verses   8 — 12 — "And   if 
they  be  bound  in  fetters,  and  be  holden  in 
cords  of  affliction,  then   He  sheweth  them 
their  work,  and  their  transgressions  that  they 
have  exceeded  (or,  'wherein  they  have  acted 
proudly  *).    He  openeth  also  their  ear  to  dis- 
cipline (or,  •correction'— so  as  to  hear  the 
lesson  which  that  discipline  is  intended  to 
teach  them),  and  commandeth  that  they  re- 
turn from  iniquity.     If  they  obey  [the  voice 
of  the  rod]  and  serve  Him,  they  siiall  spend 
their  days  in  prosperity  and  their  years  in 
pleasures  (or  'delights  ').     But  if  they  obey 
not,  they  shall  perish  by  the  sword  [of  Divine 
judgment].     They  shall  die  without   know- 
ledge" (in  their  folly,  or  "  before  they  are 
aware,"  i.e.,  suddenly).     Observe  from  the 
whole  passage,  in  regard  to 

Divine  Chastisements, 

1.  Even  the  righteous  may  require  corree- 
Hon.  True  both'in  Old  and  New  Testament 
times  (1  Cor.  xi.  32;  Rev.  iii.  19).  In  Elihu's 
judgment,  Job's  case  at  present.  Though 
the  godly  may  not  live  in  sin,  they  may  fall 
into  it,  and  for  a  time  continue  in  it. 
Examples  :  Noah ;  Abraham  ;  David  ;  Peter. 
Every  sin  has  its  root  in  a  believer's  heart. 


"  Foolishness  bound  up  in  the  heart  of  a 
child,  but  the  rod  of  correction  driveth  it 
out "  (Prov  xxii.  15). 

2.  The  righteous  not  left  to  remain  in  their 
sin.  Correction  employed  to  raise  them  out 
of  it  (Prov.  xxii.  15).  "As  many  as  I  love 
I  rebuke  and  chasten  ;  be  zealous  therefore 
and  repent  "  (Rev.  iii.  12).  "  For  this  cause 
(viz.,  sin  in  reference  to  the  Lord's  Supper) 
many  are  weak  and  sickly  among  you,  and 
many  sleep" — are  dead  (1  Cor.  ii.  30). 
*•  VV  hen  we  are  judged,  we  are  chastened  of 
the  Lord,  that  we  should  not  be  condemned 
with  the  world"  (verse  32).  In  Elihu's 
view,  Job  not  proved  to  be  a  wicked  man  by 
his  suffering,  but  a  righteous  one  who  has 
sinned,  and  whom  God  in  His  love  is  chas- 
tening. 

3.  The  object  of  chasUsement  to  bring  sin 
to  our  remembrance  in  order  to  repentance. 
"He  sheweth  them  their  work  and  their 
transgressions."  God's  rod  a  speaking  one 
(Mic.  vi.  9).  "Art  thou  come  to  call  my 
sin  to  remembrance  ?  — the  question  of  the 
widi;)w  of  Zarephath  to  Elijah  on  the  death 
of  iier  son. 

4.  Chastening^  when  improved,  followed 
by  a  life  of  enjoyment  God's  rod,  like 
Jonathan's,  brings  honey  on  the  point  of  it. 
A  rich  blessing  attendant  on  sanctified  afflic- 
tion (Ps.  xciv.  12).  Believers  allured  into  the 
wilderness,  that  the  Lord  "  may  speak  com- 
fortably" to  them  {Heb,,  "to  their  heart"). 
Their  vineyards  given  them  from  thence,  and 
the  valley  of  Achor  made  a  door  of  hope 
(Hos.  ii.  14,  15). 

5.  Chastisements,  not  improved,  followed 
by  still  secerf^r  ones.  "If  they  obey  not, 
they  shall  perish  by  the  sword."  Divine 
chastening  neither  to  be  despised  nor  fainted 
under  (Heb.  xii.  5). 

III.  Elihu  administers  reproof  to  Job 

(verses  13 — 17). 

1.  By  adducing  the  case  of  the  ungodly.  Ver. 
13. — "But  the  hypocrite  (or  ungodly)  in 
heart  (whatever  they  may  appear  in  "their 
outward  life  or  in  the  eyes  of  their  fellow- 
men,)  heap  up  wrath  (increasing  the  Divine 
displeasure  against  them  by  their  continuance 
in  sin,  and  their  impenitent  stuhborness 
under  affliction — another  solemn  word  for  Job); 
they  cry  not  (to  God,  as  sinners  for  pardon- 
ing mercy)  when  He  bindeth  them  (with  the 
cords  of  affliction).  They  die  in  youth  (tiiat  is, 
prematurely),  and  their  life  is  (or  'becomes 
extinct')  among  the  unclean"  {Margin, 
"  Sodomites," — persons  who  by  prostituting 
their  bodies  abridge  their  lives;  with  possible 
allusion  to  the  men  of  Sodom,  or  more  likely, 
to  those  who  prostitut  ed  themselves  in  heathen 
temples  in  Ibe  service  of  their  abominable 

229 


OHAF.   XXXYI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


deities).  Observe — (1)  A  fearful  case  when 
a  man  is  *'a  hypocrite  in  heart. ^^  Christ's 
most  solemn  woes  pronounced  on  hypocrites. 
Sad  to  be  an  open  sinner ;  still  more  to  be 
a  secret  one.  Necessary  to  look  to  our  out- 
ward life ;  still  more  to  look  to  our  heart 
(Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24).  (2)  The  wrath  of  God 
the  reward  of  sin,  whether  open  or  secret. 
God  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  (Ps. 
vii.  11).  The  wrath  of  God  revealed  from 
heavenagainst  all  ungodliness  andunrighteous- 
ness  of  men  (Horn.  i.  18).  (3)  That  wrath 
capable  of  being  removed  by  repentance  and 
faith,  or  increased  by  impenitennce  arid  un- 
belief "  He  that  believeth  in  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life;  and  he  that  believeth  not 
the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of 
God  abideth  on  him"  (John  iii.  36).  Wratli 
treasured  up  to  themselves  by  the  impenitent 
against  the  day  of  wrath  (Rom.  ii.  5).  (4) 
The  mark  of  a  hard  and  impenitent  heart 
when  prayer  is  not  made  to  God  in  affliction. 
(5)  Sin  the  cause  of  an  unhappy  life,  and 
often  of  a  premature  death  (Ps.  Iv.  23 ;  1 
Cor.  xi.  30).  (6)  Awful  to  live  among  sin- 
ners ;  still  m.ore  awful  to  die  among  them. 

2.  By  showing  God 's  conduct  towards  the 
humble  and  afflicted.  Verse  15. — "He  de- 
livereth  the  poor  in  His  affliction,  and  openeth 
their  ears  in  oppression,"  to  receive  instruc- 
tion. A  reminder  to  Job  of  what  had  been 
liis  duty  and  what  might  have  been  his  ex- 
perience. Observe—  (1)  Affliction  of  various 
kinds,  whether  from  men  or  otherwise ^  allowed 
by  God  for  wise  purposes.  (2)  One  of  these 
purposes  is  to  receive  instruction.  Divine 
chastening  connected  with  Divine  teaching 
(Ps.  xciv.  12).  "  Hear  ye  the  rod"  (Micah 
vi,  9).  (3)  Accepted  chastisement  usually 
followed  by  imparted  deliverance  (Lev.  xxvi. 
41,  42).  Deliverance  may  be  either — (i.) 
By  removing  the  affliction ;  (ii.)  By  re- 
moving the  afflicted  to  a  better  world ;  or 
(iii.)  By  filling  his  soul  with  comfort  and 
raising  him  above  his  affliction. 

3.  By  applying  the  whole  to  JoVs  own 
case.  Verses  16,  17. — "Even  so  would  He 
have  removed  thee  out  of  the  strait  into  a 
broad  place  where  there  is  no  straituess  (or, 
*out  of  the  wide  mouth  of  distress  which 
has  no  bottom')  j  and  that  which  should  be 
set  on  thy  table  should  be  full  of  fatness. 
But  thou  hast  fulfilled  the  judgment  of  the 
wicked  (approving  their  way,  imitating  their 
example,  and  incurring  their  punishment) : 
judgment  and  justice  take  hold  on  thee  "  (or, 
"  will  hold  their  place," — causing  thee  still 
to  suffer  in  consequence  of  thy  rebellious 
speeches,  instead  of  being  delivered,  as  thou 
wouldst  have  been,  hadst  thou  meekly  sub- 
mitted to  the  Divine  chastening  and  justified 
God  in  thy  affliction.)  Job's  sin,  in  Elihu's 
judgment,  that  like  Israel,  instead  of  meekly 

230 


accepting  the  Divine  chastisement,  he  chafed 
and  kicked  against  it  "like  a  bullock  un- 
accustomed to  the  yoke"  (Jer.  xxxi.  18). 
Observe — (1)  The  way  to  have  chastisement 
removed  is  meekly  and  patiently  to  submit  to 
it,  and  to  seek  its  improvement  (Lam.  iii.  25  — 
32,  39—41 ;  Mic.  vii.  9).  (2)  An  easy  thing 
with  God  to  remove  us  out  of  the  deepest  dis- 
tress and  to  bring  us  into  enlargement  and 
comfort.  The  experience  of  the  Israelites  a 
common  one  with  God's  children  (Ps.  Ixvi. 
10 — 12).  (3)  A  well-supplied  table  a  gift 
of  God's  providence  to  His  obedient  children, 
God  able  to  give  richly  all  things  to  enjoy. 
Promises  that  our  bread  shall  be  given 
us,  and  our  water  shall  be  sure.  Teaches 
his  children  both  how  to  abound  and 
how  to  suffer  need.  Prepares  a  table 
for  them  in  the  presence  of  their  enemies, 
and  makes  their  cup  to  run  over  (Ps. 
xxiii.  5).  (4)  i/*  God's  people  sin  with 
the  ungodly,  they  must  expect  to  suffer  with 
them.  God's  dealings  characterized  by  "judg- 
ment and  justice,"  as  well  with  saints  as 
with  sinners.  Sin  shown  to  be  abominable 
and  malignant  wherever  it  is  found.  Sons 
not  exempt  from  stripes  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  32). 

IV.  EKhu's  warning'.  Verses  18 — 21. 
— "  Because  (or  since)  there  is  wrath  [on 
the  part  of  God],  beware  lest  He  take  thee 
away  with  His  stroke  (or  chastisement)  :  then 
a  great  ransom  cannot  deliver  thee.  Will 
He  esteem  thy  riches  ?  No,  not  gold,  nor  all 
the  forces  (or  exertions)  of  strength."  Ob- 
serve— (1)  Appearance  of  wrath  on  the  part 
of  God  not  necessarily  wrath.  Job's  afflic- 
tions not  the  effect  of  wrath.  Elihu,  in  this 
respect,  almost  as  much  in  the  dark  as  Job's 
three  friends.  Love  and  hatred  on  tlie  part 
of  God  not  known  by  present  treatment 
(Eccles.  ix.  1).  Yet  (2)  Suffering  often  an 
indication  of  displeasure.  "Eor  the  iniquity 
of  his  covetousness  was  I  wroth,  and 
smote  him."  "  in  a  little  wrath  I  hid 
my  face  from  thee  for  a  moment"  (Is. 
liv.  8;  Ivii.  17).  (Z)  Believers  and  others, 
under  chastening,  to  beware  of  further 
provoking  God's  displeasure  by  obstinacy  and 
rebellion.  (4)  Chastisement,  not  improved, 
may  end  in  death  (1  Cor.  xi.  30).  (5)  No 
human  power  or  worldly  riches  able  to  divert 
the  Divine  displeasure.  All  Herod's  wealth 
unable  to  save  him  from  the  worms  that  ate 
him  up  (Acts  xii.  23).  (6)  The  language  of 
Elihu  to  be  taken  as  in  general  a 

Warning  to  Sinners. 

1.  Their  danger.  "  There  is  wrath."  God 
angry  with  the  wicked  every  day.  The 
wrath  of  God  revealed  from  heaven  against 
all  sin.    Must  exist  till  sin  is  atoned  for,  re- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAr.  XXXVI. 


pented  of,  and  forgiven.  Sin  draws  to  itself 
the  lightning  of  Divine  wrath.  That  wrath 
displayed  in  the  expulsion  of  the  angels  from 
heaven,  of  man  from  paradise,  and  of  the 
Jews  from  their  own  land.  Exhibited  in  the 
destruction  of  the  Old  World  by  water,  and 
of  the  Cities  of  the  Plain  by  fire.  Most  of 
all  seen  in  the  suffering  and  death  of  the 
Son  of  God  standing  as  the  sinner's  Surety. 
God's  wrath  must  consume  either  the  sinner 
himself  or  his  substitute.  The  meaning  of 
sacrifices.  Christ  the  thunder-rod  that  drew 
down  that  wrath  on  Himself  in  order  to 
draw  it  off  from  man.  God's  wrath  is— (I) 
jBi^/^/(?o^^5— the  just  reward  of  sin;  (2)  Holi/ 
— infinitely   removed  from   sinful    passion; 

(3)  Intolerable — as  the  wrath  of  man's 
Creator  and  Judge ;  (4)  TJnahatable  and 
unremovable  by  creature  power.  That  wrath 
all  the  more  dreadful  to  the  impenitent  and 
unbelieving  as  the  *'  Wrath  of  the  Lamb  " 
(Rev.  vi.  16). 

2.  r/^^/rDUTT.  "  Beware,  lest  He  take  thee 
away  with  His  stroke."  Implies — (1)  An 
awaking  to  consciousness  and  consideration  of 
one's  peril.  *'  Stop,  poor  sinner,  stop  and 
think !  "  (2)  A  halting  in  one's  present 
course.  Illustrations:  The  prodigal  at  the 
swine-trough ;  the  penitent  thief.  (3)  Ear- 
nest inquiry  as  to  the  way  of  deliverance. 
Illustrations:  Tiie  converted  murderers  of 
Jesus  on  the  day  of  Pentecost— Men  and 
brethren,  what  must  we  do  P  Saul  of  Tarsus 
— Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  doP 
The  Philippian  jailer— Sirs,  what  must  I  do 
to  be  saved  ?  No  safety  but  in  the  Lord's 
own  way.    Any  other  ends  only  in  death. 

(4)  Immediate  obedience  to  Dioine  direction* 
That  direction — Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Behold  the  Lamb  of  .God.  Come 
unto  Me  and  I  will  give  you  rest.  No  safety 
for  a  sinner  but  at  the  cross  where  the  wrath 
alighted  and  was  extinguished.  Dangerous 
to  delay  in  obeying  the  direction.  Lot  not 
to  tarry  in  all  the  plain.  No  safety  till  in- 
side of  Zoar.  An  hour  after  God  shut  Noah 
and  his  family  in  the  ark,  too  late  for  refuge. 
A  step  outside  the  City  of  Refuge,  and  the 
manslayer  might  perish.  The  three  thousand 
at  Pentecost  gladly  received  the  Word  and 
were  baptized.  The  jailer  believed  and  was 
saved  before  daybreak.  *'  Behold,  now  is  the 
accepted  time;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of 
salvation!"  *' To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  His 
voice,  harden  not  your  heart." 

3.  Their  doom,  if  neglecting  it :  "  Then  a 
great  ransom  cannot  deliver  thee.'*  No 
chance  of  deliverance  after  death  to  the 
unsaved  sinner.  A  "  great  ransom"  already 
provided.  Nothing  less  than  the  blood  of 
God's  own  Son  made  flesh.  Able  to  satisfy 
Divine  justice  for  the  sins  of  a  world. 
Delivers  every  sinner  who  trusts  in  it.    De- 


livered the  thief  upon  the  cross,  Saul  the 
persecutor,  and  Christ's  own  murderers.  A 
cloud  of  witnesses,  both  in  heaven  and  on 
earth,  to  tiie  value  of  the  ransom.  Available, 
however,  only  on  this  side  of  death.  After 
death  the  judgment.  An  impassable  gulf 
fixed  between  heaven  and  hell.  Purgatory 
a  priestly  fiction.  Rejectors  of  Christ's 
proffer  here,  punished  with  everlasting  de- 
struction from  His  presence  hereafter.  Tlie 
hand  that  shut  Noah  in  the  ark  shut  all  the 
world  out.  The  blood  of  Jesus  pleads  for 
pardon  to  all  who  trust  in  it, — punishment 
on  all  who  trample  on  it  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14; 
X.  26—29).  A  day  when  even  the  blood  of 
God's  Son  cannot  save  a  soul.  Much  less 
anything  else.  How  shall  we  escape  if  we 
neglect  so  great  salvation  P 

y.  Elihn's  admonition.  Verses  20, 21. 
— "  Desire  not  the  night  (of  death, — probable 
allusion  to  Job's  wish,  chap.  vii.  15),  when 
people  are  cut  off  in  their  place  (or,  go  up 
[as  chaff  in  a  whirlwind]  *to  their  place'). 
Take  heed,  regard  not  iniquity;  for  this 
hast  thou  chosen  rather  than  affliction  "  (or, 
"meek  submission;''  or,  "in  consequence 
of  affliction").  Job's  temptation  twofold  : 
(1)  To  desire  death  rather  than  continuance 
in  his  present  affliction;  (2)  To  sin  or  cast 
off  religion  in  consequence  of  it.  The  latter 
especially  Satan's  aim.     Observe — 

1.  No  sin  to  which  a  believer  may  not  be 
tempted.  "  Scarcely  a  temptation  except 
that  of  covetousness,  which  Luther  did  not 
experience."— A^^^/y^o;j.  The  Head  tempted 
to  the  grossest  of  all  sins,  —the  worship  of  the 
devil  for  worldly  gain  and  worldly  glory  j 
no  marvel  if  the  members  should  be  so  too. 
No  attainment  in  grace  sufficient  to  exempt 
a  believer  from  temptation.  Christ  taken  to 
the  Eoly  City  to  be  tempted,  and  there  placed 
on  2^ pinnacle  of  the  temple.  Temple-pinnacles 
places  for  the  most  terrible  temptations.  The 
measure  of  grace  shown  not  in  being  free 
from  temptations,  but  in  overcoming  them. 
Gold,  not  pinchbeck,  submitted  to  the 
crucible. 

2.  Temptations  only  sinful  when  succumbed 
to.  Job  sorely  tempted  to  curse  God,  yet 
only  blessed  Him.  Tempted  to  renounce 
religion,  yet  only  clung  to  it,  the  closer. 
Not  temptation,  but  sinning  in  it,  hurts  the 
soul. 

3.  Common  to  be  tempted  to  sin  in  order  to 
escape  suffering.  Christ  tempted  to  distrust 
God  and  work  a  miracle,  to  escape  the  pangs 
of  hunger.  Daniel  tempted  to  abstain  from 
prayer,  to  escape  the  lion's  den.  The  three 
captive  youths  tempted  to  worship  the  golden 
image,  to  escape  the  fiery  furnace.  Peter 
tempted  to  deny  his  Master,  to  escape  his 
fate.    Cranmer  tempted  to  recant,  to  escape 

231 


CHjLP.  XXXVL 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


the  fires  of  martyrdom.  Believers  tempted 
to  choose  sin  rather  than  suffering,  yet, 
through  grace,  prefer  suffering  to  sinning. 
Peter  repented  of  his  sin,  and  met  a  martyr's 
death.  Cranmer  ncanted  his  recantation, 
and  embraced  the  flames. 

VI.  Elihii  directs  attention  to  the 
Diyine  perfections  (verses  22,  23). 
"Behold,"  &c.  With  a  view  to  bring  Job 
to  submission,  he  exhibits — 

1.  The  power  of  God.  Verse  22.— "God 
exalteth  (/.<?.,  men;  or  simply,  *  is  exalted') 
by  His  power.'*  God  exalted  in  Himself, 
and  exalts  the  lowly.  None  so  reduced  but 
Divine  power  can  restore  him.  Exalted 
Joseph  from  a  dungeon  to  the  throne  of 
Egypt.  God's  power  employed  as  well  in 
exaltinsr  the  humble  as  in  abasing  the  proud. 

2.  Hif  condescension.  *'  V\  ho  teacheth 
like  1  m  ? "  (or,  who  is  like  Him  as  a  teacher, 
ruler,  ui  master  ?)  God's  power  makes  Him 
a  ruler ;  His  condescension,  a  teaciier  of 
His  creatures  (Ps.  xciv.  10).  Observe  in 
reference  to — 

Divine  Teaching : 

1 .  lU  excellence.  As  a  Teacher,  God  is — (1) 
Perfectly  acquainted  with  the  subjects  which 
He  teaches,  and  which  we  require  to  be 
taught.  (2)  Understands  the  capacity  and 
capabilities  of  the  taught.  (3 )  Knows  the 
best  and  most  effectual  way  of  teaching  them. 
(4)  Able  by  liis  power  to  give  effect  to  His 
instructions.  Instructs  with  a  strong  hand 
(Is.  viii.  II).  (5)  Has  patience  with  the 
dulncss  of  His  scholars.  (6)  Carries  them 
to  the  highest  degree  of  knowledge.  Makes 
them  ultimately  to  know  even  as  they  are 
known  (I  Cor.  xiii.  12).  (7)  Exalts  them 
by  His  teaching  to  His  own  moral  excellence. 
Conformity  to  His  own  image  the  end  of 
His  teaching.  The  effect  of  human  teaching 
often  to  make  men  proud.  Knovv  ledge 
puffeth  up.  God's  teaching  humbles  while  it 
exalts.  Human  teaching  often  leaves  men 
depraved  and  immoral.  Attainments  in 
knowle^lge  not  always  attainments  in  virtue. 
Divine  teaching  puiides  the  heart,  while  it 
enlightens  the  mind.  God  teaches  men  in 
order  to  save  them. —  2.  The  necessity  Li  Y>WuiG, 
teaching.  As  fallen  men,  need  Divine  teach- 
ing to  restore  them.  "Alienated  from  the 
life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that  is  in 
ihem"  (Eph.  iv.  18).  Men  need  teaching 
that  gives  life  as  well  as  light.  One  of 
Christ's  offices  as  Kedeemer,  that  of  Prophet 
or  Teacher.  Is  made  "  wisdom  "  to  us  as  well 
as  "righteousness,"  &c. — 3.  The  means  of 
Divine  teaching :  God  teaches  (1)  By  His 
Word;  (2)  By  His  works ;  (3)  Fy  His 
Providential  dealings ;  (4)  By  His  Spirit. 
His  teaching  connected  with  His  chastening 

232 


(Ps.  xciv.  12). — 4.  The  subjects  of  Divine 
teaching  God  teaches  us  to  know — (1) 
Ourselves,  both  as  creatures  and  as  sinners. 
The  celebrated  maxim  :  "  Know  thyself," 
only  truly  learned  under  Divine  teaching. 
(2)  Our  duty^  both  to  God,  our  neighbour, 
and  ourselves.  (3)  Our  happiness — wherein 
it  consists,  and  how  it  is  secured.  (4) 
Virtue  or  holiness — its  nature,  excellence, 
and  means  of  attainment.  (5)  Sin — its 
nature,  malignity,  and  consequences.  (6) 
Salvation,  or  the  way  of  deliverance  from  sin 
and  its  effects.  (7)  God  Himself,  in  His 
being.  Bis  perfections,  and  the  relations  He 
sustains  to  mankind.  (8)  Jesus  Christ,  in 
His  person.  His  offices,  and  His  work  as  our 
Kedeemer  (John  xvii.  2,  3). 

3.  His  supremacy  and  independence. 
Verse  23. — "Who  hath  enjoined  Him  liis 
way  ?  "  (has  ciiarged  Him  how  He  is  to  act, 
and  may  call  Him  to  account  for  His  con- 
duct). Deity  admits  of  no  superior  or 
director.  From  the  Creator's  tribunal  no 
appeal  to  a  higher  court. 

4.  His  justice  and  holiness.  "Who 
can  (will  or  dare  to)  say  to  him,  Thou  hast 
wrought  iniquity?"  Connected  with  pre- 
ceding clause.  (1)  Tiiere  is  none  to  charge 
God  with  a  dereliction  of  duty.  (2)  There 
can  be  no  ground  for  such  a  charge.  Ini- 
quity  possibly  found  in  human  rulers ;  none 
in  the  Supreme.  The  creature's  interests 
safe  in  the  hands  of  the  Creator.  Iniquity 
in  God  the  ruin  of  the  universe.  The  blas- 
phemous presumption  supposed  in  the  text, 
im|)lied  in  all  quarrelling  with  God's  provi- 
dence. The  sin  to  which  Job  had  been 
chiefly  tempted.  The  temptation  to  which 
men  under  severe  trials  are  especially  ex- 
posed. 

VII.  Job's  duty  in  reference  to  the 
Creator  and  His  works.  Verse  24. — "  Re- 
member that  thou  magnify  his  work  (both 
his  actual  working  and  the  products  of  it), 
which  men  behold  (or  *  praise*).  Every 
man  may  see  it }  men  may  behold  it  afar 
off"  (so  glorious  and  conspicuous  is  it). 
Observe — (I)  Trouble  apt  to  shut  out  God 
and  His  work  from  our  thoughts.  The  ten- 
dency of  suffering  and  trial  to  draw  our 
attention  more  to  ourselves  than  our  Maker. 
In  dwelling  ^on  our  own  griefs,  we  are  apt  to 
forget  His  glory.  (2)  Our  duty,  as  intelligent 
creatures,  to  observe  and  magnify  God  *s  work. 
God's  works  made  to  be  remembered  (Ps. 
cxi.  4).  (3)  Man^s  distinction,  as  a  creature, 
that  he  is  capable  of  admiring  and  praising 
God*s  work.  Other  creatures  only  capable 
of  rendering  unconscious  praise.  The  lower 
animals  made  to  rejoice  in  the  effects  of  God's 
work  ;  man  to  praise  and  magnify  the  work 


EOMTIETIC  cmmENTAUT:  JOB. 


CHAP.    XXXVT 


itself.  Man  alone  of  terrestrial  creatures 
capable  of  perceiving  the  wisdom,  power, 
and  goodness  in  the  Creator's  work.  Hence 
(i)  his  greater  capacity  for  happiness ;  (ii) 
his  responsibility.  (4)  God^s  work  such  as 
to  demand  the  praise  and  admiration  of  in- 
telligent creatures.  His  work  honourable 
and  glorious  (Ps.  cxi.  3).  His  works  the 
reflection  of  Himself  and  the  exponents  of  His 
perfections.  The  heavens  declare  His  glory. 
All  His  works  praise  Him.  Infinite  wisdom, 
power,  and  goodness  impressed  on  the  work 
of  His  hands.  His  attributes  displayed  as 
well  in  His  work  of  Providence  as  of  crea- 
tion. (5)  God's  work  admired  and  praised 
by  men,  especially  the  good,  in  all  ages. 
"The  works  of  the  Lord  are  great,  sought 
out  of  all  them  that  have  pleasure  therein  " 
(Ps.  cxi.  2).  Some  of  the  earliest  poetry 
hjmns  in  praise  of  God's  work.  (6)  God's 
work  everywhere  visible  and  conspicuous. 
"  Every  man  may  see  it ;  man  may  behold  it 
afar  off."  God  never  without  a  witness  to 
Himself  from  His  works,  giving  rain  from 
heaven  and  fruitful  seasons  (Acts  xiv.  17). 
His  work  threefold — 

1.  Creation.  In  creation,  God  calls  into 
existence  and  gives  shape  and  character  to 
what  thus  exists.  Creation  itself  a  fact  of 
reason  and  revelation.  Everything  must 
have  a  cause,  and  marks  of  design  prove  a 
designer.  The  process  of  creation  briefly 
indicated  in  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of 
Genesis.  The  Scriptures  "  by  far  the  most 
ancient  and  the  only  thoroughly  trustworthy 
record"  of  the  work  of  creation.  Other 
accounts  preserved  in  various  heathen  coun- 
tries, doubtless,  in  their  origin  related  to  the 
Hebrew  one.  Nearly  all  commence,  like 
that  of  Genesis,  with  a  primitive  chaos  of 
matter,  empty  and  dark,  on  which  the 
Creator  acted.  Science  able  to  say  nothing 
as  to  the  one  first  cause.  Its  instruments 
inadequate  to  discern  the  spiritual  cause,  as- 
serted by  the  Bible  to  be  behind  all  natural 
phenomena.  Knows,  and  can  know  of 
itself,  nothing  of  the  origin  of  the  world, 
either  in  regard  to  the  matter  composing  it 
or  the  forces  operating  in  it.  The  language 
in  Genesis  that  of  accommodation.  Every 
creation-act  accon»plished  by  a  word  of  com- 
mand, as  the  fullest  representation  of  the 
kind  of  power  exerted.  The  work,  both  as  to 
matter  and  form,  simply  a  will  on  the  jmrt  of 
the  Creator.  Materials  for  later  stages  in 
creation  ready  at  hand  in  the  results  of  the 
earlier.  At  each  stage  a  special  fat,  con- 
sistent with  a  gradual  development,  and  new 
Divine  impulse.  A  perfect  universe  not 
created  at  once,  but  slowly  built  up  step  by 
step. —  Warrington's  Week  of  Creation.  What 
appears  at  first  as  the  results  of  one  period 
of  creation,  actually  that  of  many.   Tiie  rocks 


disclose  a  series  of  creations  previous  to  that 
of  man,  separated  from  each  other  by  thou- 
sands of  years.  The  rocks  themselves,  to  a 
large  extent,  the  result  of  those  previous 
creations.  Limestone  rocks  almost  entirely 
composed  of  the  remains  of  shell  fish.  The 
products  and  proof  of  God's  creation-work 
everywhere  before  us.  Embrace  both  the 
visible  and  the  invisible,  the  material  and 
the  spiritual.  Man  both  spiritual  and  mate- 
rial—a microcosm  or  universe  in  himself. 
God's  works  of  creation  claim  our  admiration 
both  for  their  magnitude  and  minuteness; 
their  multiplicity  and  variety ;  their  perfec- 
tion and  beauty ;  their  complexity  and  order ; 
their  extent  and  mutual  adaptation. 

2.  Providence.    Consists  in   the   preserv- 
ing and  governing  the  creatures  made,  and 
conducting  them  to  the  end  for  which  they 
were  created.     The  creatures  dependent  on 
God  for  their  preservation  as  well  as  their 
creation.     In  Him  we  live  and  move,  as  well 
as  have  our  being.     The  end  of  creation  the 
Creator's  own  glory.     His   work  of  Provi- 
dence the  steps  by  which  that  end  is  secured. 
Its  operation  discovered  in  what  at  first  sight 
appears  to  have  been  the  work  of  creation. 
The  creatures  whose  remains  lie  imbedded  in 
the  rocks,  and  to  a  considerable  extent  com- 
pose them,  the  ancient  objects  of  God's  pro- 
vidence.   The  formation  of  the  rocks  them- 
selves due  to  the  same  providence,    acting 
for  millions  of  years  previous  to  man's  ap- 
pearance on  the  earth.     Provision  made  by 
God's  providence,  in  those  distant  ages,  for 
man's  future  residence  and  comfort,  as  well 
in  the  coal-beds  prepared  for  his  fuel  by  the 
growth  of  primeval  forests,  as  in  the  rocks 
which,  should  furnish  the  soil  he  was  to  cul- 
tivate, and  th?  material  with  which  he  was 
to  build  his  dwelling.     God's  work  of  pro- 
vidence extends  to  the  lowest  as  well  as  the 
highest  of  His  iTeatures.    The  fall  of  a  spar- 
row under  His  direction  as  well  as  the  revo- 
lution of  a  world.    The  animalcule,  invisible 
to  the  naked  eyi%  cared  for  by  it  as  well  as 
the  sun  with  its  diameter  of  a  million  miles. 
That  work  embraces  the  rise  and  fall  of  em- 
pires, the  progress  and  decay  of  states,  and 
the  affairs  of  the  humblest  individuals  that 
compose  them.     All  history  but  the  exponent 
of  Divine  providence.     Its  operations  con- 
tinually before  our  eyes,  and  often  such  as 
to  arrest  the  attention  even  of  the  thought- 
less.    Visible  in  the  miseries  and  calamities, 
as  well  as  in  the  blessings  and  deliverances 
experienced  among  men.     Under  Divine  pro- 
vidence, virtue  in  general,  and  in  the  end, 
rewarded,  though  frequently  permitted,  for 
a  time,  to  be  tried  and  purified  by  suffering 
— the  case  exhibited  in  this  book.     Vice  in 
general,  and  in  the  end,  punished,  though 
often  allowed,   for  a  time,   to  prosper  and 

233 


CHAP.   XXXYl. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


triumph.  Many  tilings  in  God*s  work  of 
providence,  as  in  that  of  creation,  mysterious 
to  us  in  our  present  imperfect  condition. 
Among  these  the  permission  of  evil.  His 
providence  seen,  not  only  in  permitting  it. 
but  in  overruling  it  for  Rio  own  glory — 
"from  seeming  evil  still  educing  good." 

3.  Redemption. — Properly  a  special  part 
of  God*s  work  of  providence.  Its  most 
glorious  part,  and  that  to  which  both  crea- 
tion and  providence  are  subservient.  Re- 
demption the  deliverance  and  restoration  of 
fallen  men  by  the  incarnation  and  life,  the 
suffering  and  death,  the  resurrection  and  as- 
cension of  the  Son  of  God,  as  well  as  by  the 
mission  and  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
The  work  in  which  God  has  chosen,  most  of 
all,  to  exhibit  His  perfections.  "To  the  in- 
tent that  now  unto  the  principalities  and 
powers  in  heavenly  places,  mic^'it  be  made 
known  by  the  CLurcu,  i-ne  manifold  wisdom 
ofGod"  (Eph.  iii.  10,  11).  God's  work  of 
KedemptionestabHshed  upon  man's  fall,  which 
it  includes  as  its  foundation.  Embraces  tne 
call  of  Abraham,  and  the  selection  of  a  part 
of  his  posterity  to  be,  for  a  time,  the 
special  field  of  its  development,  preparatory 
to  the  extension  of  its  blessings  to  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  Included,  as  a  farther 
preparation,  the  union  of  the  nations  in  suc- 
cessive universal  empires,  culminating  in  the 
Koman,  in  which  the  work  was  to  receive  its 
principal  development.  Embraced  the  mis- 
sion of  the  Apostles  for  the  proclamation  of 
the  Redemption  among  all  nations,  and  the 
establishment  of  the  New  Testament  for  its 
experience  and  further  exhibition.  Included 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  dis- 
persion of  the  Jews,  thus  terminating  a  re- 
ligion of  symbols  after  it  had  served  its  pur- 
pose, and  affording  a  standing  evidence  to 
the  truth  of  the  Scriptures  which  announce 
and  unfold  the  Redemption.  Comprehends 
the  spread  of  the  Gospel  and  the  conversion 
of  the  nations  to  Christianity,  with  all  the 
events,  movements,  and  arrangements  of 
Divine  providence  conducing  to  it ;  as — the 
general  diffusion  of  the  Greek  language  as 
the  channel  for  the  early  promulgation  of 
the  Gospel ;  the  free  communication  among 
the  nations,  through  the  extension  of  the 
Koman  empire  and  its  universal  net-work  of 
roads ;  the  breaking  up  of  the  Roman  Empire, 
and  the  settlement  of  the  Northern  nations 
in  the  provinces  of  Southern  Europe;  the 
persecutions  of  the  Church,  and  the  disper- 
sion of  its  members  and  teachers;  the  pre- 
servation of  a  faithful  remnant  in  the  midst 
of  corruption  and  apostasy  in  the  Church 
itself;  the  Reformation,  and  the  various 
steps  conducting  to  it,  as  the  revival  of 
learning,  the  invention  of  printing,  and  the 
general  aspiration  after  liberty ;  the  discovery 
2^4 


of  America,  and  the  planting,  in  its  northern 
portion,  of  a  nation  of  Protestants  who  should 
occupy  it  with  the  Gospel,  and  disseminate 
it  in  its  purity  and  power  in  other  laiwls ;  the 
inr»reasing  power  and  influence  of  Protestant 
nations,  as  England  and  Prussia,  and  the 
decay  of  Popish  ones,  as  Spain  and  Portugal ; 
the  discovery  of  the  maritime  passage  to 
India,  and  the  subsequent  transfer  of  its 
numerous  millions  from  the  sway  of  a  Popish 
to  that  of  a  Protestant  nation ;  the  defeated 
attempts  of  Mahommedanism  to  overspread 
Europe,  and  of  Popery  to  crush  Protestantism 
in  England  and  the  Netherlands  ;  the  French 
Revolution,  which  aroused  both  the  Church 
and  the  world,  preparing  the  one  to  communi- 
cate and  the  other  to  receive  the  Gospel ;  the 
almost  simultaneous  formation  of  societies 
for  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  in  foreign  lands, 
as  the  Bible,  Tract,  and  Missionary  Societies 
of  Great  Britain ;  the  overthrow  of  the  Pope's 
temporal  sway  by  the  Italian  people,  and  the 
crippling  of  the  power  of  Erance  which  had 
been  its  chief  s'  pport.  The  work  of  redemp- 
tion the  sum  of  all  God's  dealings  in  provi- 
dence. All  past  history  but  the  unravelling 
of  God's  eternal  plan  concerning  our  race, 
and  the  working  out  of  that  redemption  pro- 
vided for  it.  Redemption  both  the  key  and 
the  keystone  of  history.  Runs  through  its 
entire  course,  like  the  scarlet  cord  said  to 
run  through  all  the  cables  of  the  Royal  Navy. 
Finds  its  realization  in  the  conversion  of 
every  believer's  soul. 

VIII.  Returns  to  the  perfections  of 
God  as  exhibited  in  the  operations  of 
nature,  especially  in  the  production  of 
rain  and  the  phenomena  of  a  thunder- 
storm. Verses  26—33.—"  Behold,  God  is 
great,  and  we  know  Him  not  (or,  '  and  we 
know  not'— how  great  He  is),  neither  can 
the  number  of  His  years  be  searched  out 
(is  from  everlasting,  and  therefore  incompre- 
hensible to  us).  For  he  maketh  small  the 
drops  of  rain  (or,  *draweth  up  [by  evapora- 
tion] the  watery  particles'  from  land  and 
sea  to  be  formed  into  rain)  :  they  pour  down 
rain  according  to  the  vapour  thereof  (or, 
*  according  to  His  vapour' — the  quantity  of 
vapour  thus  collected  by  Him  ;  or,  '  they 
fine  [or  filter]  the  rain  from  His  vapour ;  or, 
'instead  of  His  mist,'  alluding  to  Gen.  ii.  5, 
6),  which  the  clouds  do  drop  and  distil  (in- 
stead of  pouring  them  down  in  destructive 
and  overwhelming  floods)  upon  man  abun- 
dantly. Also,  can  any  understand  (or,  does 
any  consider)  the  spreadings  of  the  clouds 
(either  as  to  mode  or  measure),  or  the  noise 
of  His  tabernacle  (the  thunder-crash  that 
proceeds  from  the  clouds,  which  form  His 
pavilion,  Ps.  xviii.  11)?  Behold,  He 
spreadeth  His  light  (or  lightning)  upon  it 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP,  xrrvn. 


(or,  *  over  Himself,*  Ps.  civ.  2),  and  covereth 
the  bottom  {Marg.y  *the  roots*)  of  the  sea 
(namely,  with  the  light  or  lightning  which 
penetrates  the  ocean's  depths,  or  with  the 
dense  cloud  spread  over  its  surface ;  or,  '  he 
covereth  Himself  with  the  bottom  of  the  sea, 
».*.,  with  the  waters  exhaled  from  it,  and 
formed  into  clouds).  For  by  them  (the 
clouds,  or  these  operations  in  the  atmosphere) 
judgeth  He  the  people  (either  in  the  bestow- 
ment  of  benefits  or  the  infliction  of  chastise- 
ment); He  giveth  meat  in  abundance  (by 
imparting  fertility  to  the  earth).  With 
clouds  He  covereth  the  light  (or  the  sun,  the 
great  reservoir  and  source  of  light  to  the 
earth,  its  opaque  body  being  surrounded  with 
a  luminous  atmosphere ;  or,  *  He  covereth 
both  His  hands  with  lightning ') ;  and  com- 
mandeth  it  not  to  shine  by  the  cloud  that 
Cometh  betwixt  (or,  *  commandeth  concern- 
ing it — the  lightning — in  its  striking,*  or  as 
to  where  it  shall  strike).  The  noise  thereof 
sheweth  concerning  it  (or,  *His  thunder 
declares  concerning  Him, — His  presence, 
power,  and  majesty),  the  cattle  also  concern- 
ing the  vapour  '*  (or  concerning  Him  as  He 
ascends  [in  the  storm]  ;  or,  "  a  magazine  of 
wrath  against  iniquity  *'). 

The  wliole  paragraph  sublime,  but,  on  that 
account,  obscure  and  difficult. — Contains  a 
highly  poetical  description  of  a  gathering 
thunder-storm,  probably  the  storm-cloud  out 
of  which  the  Almighty  was  about  to  speak, 
and  which  was  already  making  its  appearance 
and  giving  forth  its  pealing  thunder.  From 
the  whole,  observe — 

1.  God  in  Himself  infinitely  above  our 
comprehension,  bur,  discernible  in  His  works 
of  creation  and  providence. 

2.  Eliliu's  first  illustration  of  God's  power 
and  wisdom  drawn  from  Meteorology.  God 
seen  in  objects  and  operations  the  most  minute 
as  well  as  the  most  majestic.  The  phenome- 
non of  rain  one  of  the  most  interesting 
evidences  of  His  being  and  perfections.  The 
atmosphere  the  Divine  laboratory  for  the  ir- 
rigation and  fructifying  of  the  earth.  To  fill 
the  cloudy  reservoirs  with  water  exhaled 
from  the  land  and  sea,  and  then  to  form  the 
contents  into  rain,  and  send  it  down  in  re- 
freshing and  fertilizing  showers, — a  process  as 
interesting  and  wonaerful  as  it  is  loeneficial 


and  little  regarded.  The  whole  operation 
carried  on  by  the  Divine  Ruler  according  to 
laws  of  His  own  establishment.  The  process 
no  less  His  own,  and  no  less  requiring  His 
hand  and  direction,  that  it  is  carried  on  ac- 
cording to  established  laws. 

3.  The  formation  and  descent  of  rain 
generally  understood  by  the  scientific,  though 
much  of  the  process  still  remains  a  mys- 
tery. "Can  any  understand  [fully]  the  spread- 
ings  of  the  clouds?'*  The  operation  intended, 
like  all  other  works  of  God  in  nature,  to  en- 
gage the  attention  and  employ  the  study 
of  His  intelligent  creatures.  Engaged  the 
thoughts  of  devout  men  in  Job's  day,  when 
natural  processes  were  much  less  unaerstood 
than  at  present.  Not  considered,  because 
so  common.  *'  Doth  any  consider  the  spread- 
ings  of  the  clouds  ?" 

4.  All  nature  a  magazine  of  means  pre- 
pared by  the  Almighty,  to  be  employea  by 
Him,  either  in  judgment  or  in  mercy.  His 
goodness  exhibited  in  the  copious  or  softly 
falling  shower;  his  terrible  majesty  and  awful 
displeasure  against  sin,  in  the  forked  light- 
ning and  crashing  thunder.  Even  the  irra- 
tional creatures  gladdened  by  the  one,  but 
alarmed  and  terrified  by  the  other.  AH  the 
elements  of  nature  under  the  Almighty's  con- 
trol. The  lightning-flash  or  thunderbolt  has 
its  commission  from  the  Creator.  **  He  com- 
mandeth concerning  it  where  it  shall  strike." 
Alexis,  the  friend  of  Luther,  is  struck  dead 
by  a  flash  of  lightning,  while  Luther  himself, 
close  by  his  side,  remains  unhurt. 

5.  The  voice  of  Nature  as  well  as  of  Re- 
velation, that  the  Almighty  is  present  in  the 
thunder-storm.  *'  The  noise  thereof  showeth 
concerning  him."  God  no  less  in  the  thun- 
der because  its  reverberation  is  according  to 
natural  and  tolerably  understood  laws.  The 
report  of  a  musket  no  less  dependent  on  the 
hand  that  draws  the  trigger,  that  it  is  pro- 
duced by  the  same  laws.  Every  reason  why 
the  thunder-cloud  should  be  designed  and 
employed  by  its  Divine  Author,  among  other 
purposes,  as  his  celestial  artillery  against  His 
impenitent  and  rebellious  adversaries  (ch. 
xxviii.  22,  23). 

6.  Unspeakably  blessed  to  have  the  Al- 
mighty for  our  Father  and  friend ;  terrible 
beyond  conception,  to  have  Him  for  our  foe. 


CHAPTEE  XXXVn. 
ELIHirS  FOURTH  SPEECH  CONTINUED. 


Elihu  contmues  nis  discourse,  apparently 
in  the  midst  of  loud  thunder-claps,  suddenly 
issuing  from  the  storm-cloud  out  of  which  the 
Almighty  was  about  to  speak,  and  which  had 


already  been  seen  gathering.  The  scene  sub- 
lime and  terrific.  Elihu  sensibly  affected  by 
it.  (Verse  1) — **  At  this  (the  thunder  he  had 
justspokeuof,  ch.  xxxvi  33),  and  which  was 

235 


CHAP.  XXXVII. 


HOMILETIC  C03IMENTART:  JOB. 


now  heard)  my  heart  trembleth  (beats  with 
awe)  and  is  moved  (or  leaps)  out  of  his  place." 
Awe,  a  natural  effect  of  loud  reverberating 
thunder,  even  when  its  cause  is  better  un- 
derstood than  it  was  in  the  days  of  Elihu. 
Pealing  thunder  intended  as  a  display  of  God*s 
solemn  majesty  as  Ruler  and  Judge  of  man- 
kind. Hence,  accompanied  the  giving  of  the 
law  on  Mount  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  16).  Only 
a  consciousness  of  having  the  Almighty  for 
our  Father  and  friend  through  Jesus  Christ, 
can  or  ought  to  give  assurance  and  compo- 
sure amid  the  cracking  thunder  and  flashing 
of  the  storm. 

I.  Eliha  calls  Job's  attention  to  the 
thunder-storm.  Verses  2 — 5. — "  Hear  at- 
tentively the  noise  of  His  voice  (in  the  thun- 
der), and  the  sound  that  goeth  out  of  His 
mouth.  He  directeth  it  (the  tli under,  or  the 
flash  that  precedes  it)  under  the  whole  heaven 
(or,  *  under  the  whole  heaven  is  its  darting), 
and  His  lightning  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth. 
After  it  {i.e.y  the  flash)  a  voice  goeth  j  He 
thundereth  with  the  voice  of  His  excellency, 
and  He  will  not  stay  (or  delay)  them  (the 
lightning,  or  other  accompaniments  of  the 
tiiunder)  when  his  voice  is  heard  (or,  "  one 
cannot  track  them,  though  His  voice  hath 
been  heard").  God  thundereth  marvellously 
with  his  voice ;  great  things  doeth  He  which 
we  cannot  comprehend."  The  magnificence 
and  terror  of  a  thunder-storm  similarly  de- 
scribed by  the  Psalmist :  "  The  voice  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  the  waters,"  &c.  (Ps.  xxix.  3, 
10).  Also,  but  with  less  sublimity,  by  the 
Poet  of  the  Seasons : — 

"  '  Tis  listening  fear,  and  dumb  amazement  aU, 
When  to  the  startled  eye,  the  sudden  flame 
Appears  far  South,  eruptive   through  the 

cloud ; 
And  following  slower,  in  explosion  vast, 
The  thunder  raises  his  tremendous  voice. 
At  first  heard  solemn,   o'er  the  verge  of 

Heaven, 
The  tempest  growls ;  but  as  it  nearer  comes. 
And  rolls  its  awful  burden  on  the  world. 
The  lightnings  flash  a  larger  curve,  and  more 
The  noise  astounds :  till  overhead  a  sheet 
Of  lurid  flame  discloses  wide ;  then  shuts 
And  opens  wider ;  shuts,  and  opens  still 
Expansive,  wrappin  g  ether  in  a  blaze. 
Follows  the  loosened  aggravated  roar, 
Enlarging,   deepening,   mingling;   peal  on 

peal 
Crush'd   horrible,    convulsing  heaven   and 

earth." 

Observe — 

1.  The  terrors  of  a  thunder-storm  to  be 
viewed  as  manifestations  of  the  Almighty. 
The  thunder,  however  caused,  truth  and 
piety  regard  as  '*the  noise  of  His  voice." 
•*God  thundereth  marvellously."  The  teach- 
ing of  universal  consciousness  as  well  as  of  the 

t^86 


Bible.  No  reason  why  the  Almighty  should  not 
have  witnesses,  in  His  own  universe,  to  His 
terribleness  as  well  as  to  His  tenderness. 
God  no  less  in  the  thunder-storm,  because 
we  are  allowed  to  understand  a  little  of  the 
way  in  which,  and  the  laws  by  which.  He 
is  pleased,  ordinarily,  to  produce  it. 

2.  Those  sublimities  in  nature  to  be  atten- 
tively regarded  by  us,  "  Hear  attentively  the 
noise  of  His  voice."  The  thunder-peal  to  be 
listened  to  as  proclaiming— (1)  The  presence 
of  God  in  the  Universe ;  (2)  His  power  and 
majesty;  (3)  The  terribleness  of  His  displea- 
sure; (4)  The  vengeance  awaiting  the  im- 
penitent. Fitted  and  intended,  among  other 
things,  to  arouse  the  sinner  to  a  sense  of  his 
guilt  and  danger.  God's  voice  calling  him  to 
secure,  in  time,  a  place  of  refuge  for  his  soul 
in  Christ — "  the  covert  from  the  tempest " 
(Is.  xxxii  2).  "This  voice  came  ioi your 
sakes"  (John  xii.  30). 

3.  The  elements  of  nature  all  under  God^s 
control.  **  He  directeth  it  under  the  whole 
heaven." 

4.  The  omnipresence  of  6od  suggested  by 
the  velocity  and  reach  of  the  lightning-fash. 
"  His  lightning  [is]  to  the  ends  of  the  earth." 
The  passage  of  the  electric  fluid  over  thou- 
sands of  miles  instantaneous.  Hence  its  won- 
derful and  now  extensive  employment  in 
telegraphy. 

5.  God^s  operations  in  the  atmosphere,  as 
elsewhere^  marvellous,  and  even  still  full  oj 
mystery.  "  God  thundereth  marvellously  : 
great  things  doeth  He  which  we  cannot 
comprehend."  The  thunder  marvellous — 
(1)  In  its  production;  (2)  In  its  terrible- 
ness ;  (3)  In  its  effects.  The  nature  of  that 
which  produces  the  thunder,  and  to  which 
we  give  the  name  "  electricity,"  still  a  mys- 
tery. Philosophers  uncertain  as  to  whether 
it  is  a  fluid  or  a  force,  matter  or  a  mere 
affection  in  matter.  The  latter  now  regarded 
as  the  more  probable  opinion,  though  for 
convenience,  electricity  is  still  spoken  of  as 
a  fluid.  Like  heat,  it  appears  to  pervade  all 
material  substances,  existing  in  each  in  a 
certain  ordinary  proportion,  then  impercep- 
tible to  the  senses.  Bodies  capable  of  being 
overcharged  with  it,  or  made  to  have  more 
than  their  ordinary  proportion,  and  then  of 
discharging  the  excess  into  some  neighbour- 
ing body,  so  as  thus  to  regain  their  usual 
condition.  Its  discharge  or  passage  from 
one  body  to  another,  accompanied  with  a 
shock  and  a  spark,  or  flash  of  light.  The 
shock  produced  by  electricity,  artificially  col- 
lected, able  to  throw  down  the  strongest 
ox ;  and  the  heat  produced  by  the  spark  or 
flash,  able  to  melt  the  hardest  metals. 
Lightning,  the  flash  accompanying  the  pas- 
sage of  the  fluid  from  a  surcharged  cloud 
either  to  another  cloud  or  to  the  ground,  iti 


HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY t    JOB. 


CHAP.  XXXVII. 


general  reservoir.  Tlie  excess  of  elect.ricif-y 
collected  in  a  cloud  during  the  heat  of  Sum- 
mer, sometimes  immense.  Hence  the  terrible 
effects  often  attending  its  discharge.  Thunder 
the  sound  produced  by  the  explosion.  Such 
explosions  ordinarily  made  to  serve  a  bene- 
ficent purpose,  by  restoring  the  air  to  a 
iiealthy  condition.  Capable,  however,  un- 
der the  Divine  direction,  of  serving  other 
ends.  All  nature  but  the  Almighty's  in- 
strument— 

"A  capacious  reservoir  of  means, 
Framed  for  His  use  and  ready  at  His  will.** 

Man  acquainted,  in  some  measure,  with 
what  are  the  forces  operating  in  natural 
phenomenon,  and  what  are  the  effects  they 
produce  ;  but  the  nature  of  the  forces  them- 
selves a  mystery.  How  they  come  to  exist, 
and  how  they  act  and  produce  their  effects,  a 
greater  mystery  still. 

II.  Describes  other  Divine  operations 
in  nature.  Verses  6 — 13. — "  For  He  saith 
to  the  snow,  be  (or  fall)  thou  on  the  earth ; 
likewise  to  the  small  rain,  and  to  the  great 
rain  of  His  strength  {Marg.y  *and  to  tlie 
shower  of  rain,  and  to  the  showers  of  rain  of 
His  strength  ;'  or,  *  to  the  heavy  shovA'^cr  of 
rain,  and  to  the  heavy  shower  of  His  violent 
rains ').  He  sealeth  up  (by  these  vehement  rains 
or  by  the  cold  of  winter  about  to  be  described) 
the  hand  of  every  man  (stopping  his  labour 
in  the  field  (Pr.  xx.  4) ;  or  'He  putteth  His 
seal  on  the  hand  of  every  man,'  as  a  door  or 
bag  is  sealed  so  as  not  to  be  opened  but  by 
the  authority  of  Him  who  sealed  it) ;  that  all 
men  may  know  His  work  (or  agency;  or, 
*  that  all  men  whom  he  hath  made  may 
know' — that  is,  the  effect  of  His  power  as 
operating  in  nature,  and  their  dependence 
upon  Him).  Then  (at  the  time  of  these 
rains  and  cold  of  winter)  the  beasts  go  into 
dens  and  remain  in  their  places.  Out  of  the 
South  cometh  the  whirlwind  (from  tlie  sandy 
desert  of  Arabia,  such  as  overthrew  the  house 
of  Job's  eldest  son,  ch.  i.  19  ;  Zech.  ix.  14; 
Is.  xxi.  1)  ;  and  cold  out  of  the  north  (or 
"  from  the  scatterers ;'  Marg.^  *  the  scatter- 
ing wind,*  the  north  wind,  which  disperses 
the  clouds  and  driveth  away  rain,  Prov.  xxv. 
23).  By  the  breath  of  God  is  frost  given 
(or,  'ice  congealeth*),  and  the  breadth  of 
the  waters  is  straitened  (or,  'the  expanded 
waters  are  made  solid,*  namely,  by  being 
congealed).  Also  by  watering  (or  *  in  irri- 
gating,' i.e.^  the  earth).  He  wearieth  the 
thick  cloud  (by  causing  it  to  move  from  place 
to  place;  or  'He  burdeneth'  it,  t>.,  with 
moisture;  or,  'He  presseth  it,'  in  order  to 
yield  its  contents,  like  a  water-skin,  which 
is  pressed  in  order  to  empty  it ;  otherwise, 
•the  brightness  dispelleth  the  thick  cloud'): 


He  scattereth  His  bright  cloud  {Marg.  "the 
cloud  of  His  light,"  the  cloud  on  which  He 
causes  the  light  of  His  sun  to  shine  ;  or, 
*  His  ligiit  [or  sun]  scattereth  the  cloud' — 
cumulous  or  stack  clouds  being  usually  dis- 
persed at  noon ;  otherwise,  '  the  cloud  of 
His  lightning' — that  from  which  the  lightning 
issues).  And  it  is  turned  round  about  by 
His  counsel  (or,  'it  moves  round  in  cir- 
cuits by  His  guidance' — literally,  *by  His 
steerings'):  that  they  may  do  whatsoever 
He  commandeth  them  upon  the  face  of  the 
world  in  the  earth  (over  the  whole  habitable 
giobe).  He  causeth  it  (»>.,  the  cloud  with  its 
watery  contents)  to  come  {Heb.^  'to  find,* 
•'.<?.,  its  place  or  object),  whether  for  correc- 
tion, or  for  His  land,  or  for  mercy"  (or, 
"  whether  it  be  for  a  rod  or  tribe,  or  for  His 
land  or  earth,  viz  ,  to  fructify  it, — verily  [it  is] 
for  mercy ; "  or,  "  whether  for  correction  to 
His  land,  or  for  mercy").  The  last  verse,as  the 
text  stands  at  present,  obscure  in  the  con- 
nection of  its  aifferent  clauses,  while  the 
general  sense  is  sufficiently  obvious.  On  the 
whole  section,  observe — 

1.  All  naiure^  with  its  various  operations 
and  phenomena^  under  God's  direction  and 
subject  to  His  will.  (1)  Snow.  "  He  saith 
to  the  snow,  be  thou,  and  snow  and  vapour 
as  well  as  stormy  wind  fulfil  His  word  (Ps. 
cxlviii,  8).  '*He  giveth  snow  like  wool" 
(Ps.  cxlvii.  16).  Snow  and  hail  reserved  by 
Him  against  the  time  of  trouble  (ch.  xxxviii. 
22,  23).  The  snow  no  less  the  Almighty's  ser- 
vant, because  we  happen  to  know  that  when 
the  condensed  moisture  in  the  atmosphere  is 
congealed  by  the  temperature  being  reduced 
below  the  freezing  point,  its  particles  descend 
in  the  form  of  snow.  Serves  a  beneficial  pur- 
pose in  regard  to  the  earth,  in  contributing 
to  its  irrigation,  and  especially  in  keeping  it 
at  a  moderate  degree  of  cold,  and  so  protect- 
ing the  germs  of  vegetation  from  the  effects 
of  frost.  Made  to  serve  other  purposes  of  a 
providential,  and  sometimes  of  a  judicial 
nature.  Snow  remarkable  for  the  beautiful 
and  variously-shaped  crystals  of  which  it  is 
composed.  (2)  Rain — "  Likewise  to  the 
small  rain,"  &c.  The  rain-cloud  parts  with 
its  contents  onlv  when  God  commands  it,  and 
as  He  commands,  whether  in  the  soft  gentle 
shower  or  in  the  drenching  down- pour  that 
floods  the  fields  and  obstructs  the  labours  of 
the  husbandman.  Every  cloud  does  not 
necessarily  descend  in  rain.  If  the  cloud 
happens  to  be  made  warmer,  either  by 
the  sun  or  by  a  current  of  dry  warm 
air  mixing  with  it,  the  watery  particles 
are  again  dissolved  into  invisible  vapour. 
Although  we  can  explain  tlie  circumstan- 
ces under  which  clouds  are  formed,  *  there 
is  a  difficulty  in  understanding  how  the 
minute  particles  of  water,  of  which  they 

237 


CHAt.  xxxvn. 


ilOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


are  composed,  are  upheld  so  long  in  the  air 
as  we  often  see  them,  without  any  tendency, 
apparently,  to  descend.  It  is  only,  as  would 
appear,  when  some  unknown  cause  brings 
several  of  the  particles  together,  so  as  to  form 
drops  of  some  size,  that  they  begin  to  fall ; 
and  then,  in  their  descent,  they  meet  more 
and  more  particles,  and  thus  become  larger 
as  they  approach  the  ground. — Chambers'  In- 
troduction to  the  Sciences.  (3)  Heat  and 
Cold.  "  Out  of  the  south  cometh  the  whirl- 
wind, and  cold  out  of  the  North."  The 
waters  poetically  said  to  be  congealed  by  the 
breath  of  His  mouth.  Heat  and  cold  con- 
tinued to  the  earth  according  to  His  promise 
made  after  the  flood.  Their  degree  in  any 
particular  part  of  the  earth's  sur^ce  depen- 
dent on  the  situation  of  that  part  in  relation 
to  the  sun,  so  as  to  receive  its  rays  more  or 
less  directly  or  obliquely.  The  cold  most  in- 
tense and  continued  at  the  poles,  as  from  the 
obliquity  of  the  earth's  axis  they  receive  so 
little  of  the  solar  rays.  The  heat  greatest 
about  the  equator,  for  the  opposite  reason. 
The  air  there,  becoming  rarefied  by  the  heat. 
Ascends,  from  its  greater  lightness,  to  occupy 
higher  regions,  while  the  cold  air  from  about 
the  poles  rushes  in  to  fill  its  place.  Inter- 
mediate places  rendered  colder  by  the  cold  air 
thus  passing  over  them.  Frost  and  ice  no  less 
from  God,  that  we  know  that  when  the  heat 
of  the  atmospheric  air  falls  below  a  certain 
point,  hence  called  i\iQ  freezing  pointy  water 
begins  to  freeze  and  is  changed  into  ice.  (4) 
Clouds. — Here  said  to  be ''turned  round,  or 
in  circuits,  by  His  counsels,"  or  literally.  His 
steerings.*  God  the  almighty  and  omniscient 
pilot  of  the  universe,  whose  hand  is  ever  on 
the  helm,  and  who  steers  those  mighty  ves- 
sels with  their  watery  contents,  according 
to  His  will.  Every  motion  of  the  clouds 
directed  bv  Him  and  made  to  serve  the  pur- 
pose which  He  designs.  Each  little  speck  of 
light  fleecy  cloud,  as  well  as  the  huge  heavy- 
leaden  stack,  observed  by  His  omniscient 
eye,  and  guided  by  His  almighty  hand.  The 
clouds  among  the  most  important  ministers 
of  Divine  providence  in  nature.  No  less  so 
because  we  know  that  they  are  formed  by  a 
portion  of  air,  saturated  with  vapour,  having 
Its  temperature  bj  any  cause  reduced,  and 
so  having  its  invisible  changed  into  visible 
vapour. 

2.  The  purposes  for  which  God  employs  the 
agencies  of  nature  such  as  to  serve  His  moral 
gocernment  of  the  world.  "  IVhether  for 
correction,"  &c.  These  purposes  always 
beneficent,  or  "  for  mercy,"  in  the  end,  but 
sometimes  in  the  way  of  correction,  or  a 
"rod."  God's  procedure  towards  mankind 
both  judgment  and  mercy.  Judgment  His 
strange  act;  mercy  His  delight.  *' Mercy 
re'oiceth  against  judgment"  (James  ii.  13). 

238 


Yet  judgment  and  correction  necessary  in  a 
world  of  sin.  The  clouds  ordinarily  discharge 
their  contents  for  the  irrigation  of  the  earth ; 
but  occasionally  also  for  the  destruction  of 
person  and  property,  man  and  beast.  The 
ancient  deluge,and  inundations  not  uni'requent 
in  our  own  time,  examples  of  what  ordinarily 
serves  a  beneficent  purpose  being  employed 
also  in  a  way  entailing  serious  suffering  and 
loss.  Such  corrections  necessary  and  im- 
portant— (1)  As  a  testimony  to  Divine 
justice;  (2)  As  proofs  of  the  power  of  God 
to  punish  transgression ;  (3)  As  warnings 
against  a  course  oF  sin.  Punishment  and  its 
instruments  no  less  necessary  and  proper  in 
the  Divine  than  in  a  human  government. 
Yet,  even  in  such  cases,  mercy  remembered 
in  wrath,  and  good  to  mankind  educed.  As  in 
earthly  governments,  tlie  inflicting  of  punish- 
ment one  means  of  promoting  the  general 
good.  Yet,  in  the  Divine  administration 
such  corrections  not  always  indicative  of 
special  demerit  on  the  part  of  the  sufferer. 
Sent  for  the  trial  and  purification  of  the 
good,  as  well  as  for  the  chastisement  and 
punishment  of  the  bad. 

III.  Elihu  calls  Job^s  special  atten- 
tion to  the  works  of  God  as  seen  in 
creation  and  providence.  Verse  14. — 
**  Hearken  unto  this,  O  Job ;  stand  still  and 
consider  the  wondrous  works  of  God."  The 
object  of  this  summons,  Job*s  humiliation  and 
the  silencing  of  his  murmurs  against  God's 
procedure,  from  the  consideration  both  of  his 
Ignorance  and  impotence.  Verses  15 — 18. 
— "Dost  thou  know  when  God  disposed 
them  (or  *  put  His  hand  to  them ;  *  or,  *  gave 
command  concerning  them,*  in  allusion  to 
Gen.  i.  3,  &c. ;  or,  *  imposed  laws  upon  them,' 
in  order  to  their  preservation  and  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  end  for  which  He  created 
them),  and  caused  the  light  of  His  cloud 
(the  liglit  that  should  illuminate  His  cloud, 
referring  to  the  original  command  :  '  Let 
there  be  light ;  *  or,  *  made  the  lightning  of 
His  cloud  to  shine,'  as  it  was  probably  now 
flashing  from  the  storm-cloud  in  their  view). 
Dost  thou  know  the  balancings  of  the  clouds 
(the  manner  in  which  they  are  poised  and 
suspended  in  the  air — probably  another 
allusion  to  the  creation,  in  reference  to  the 
waters  above  and  below  the  firmament.  Gen. 
i.  7),  the  wondrous  works  of  Him  Who  is 
perfect  in  knowledge  ?  How  thy  garments 
are  warm  (felt  to  be  too  warm  by  the  greatly 
increased  temperature  of  summer),  when  He 
quieteth  the  earth  by  the  south  wind  (tran- 
quillizing the  atmosphere,  and  causing  the 
piercing  north  winds  to  cease)  ?  Hast  thou 
with  Him  (as  His  associate  and  companion 
in  the  work  of  creation — like  the  Divine 
Person  designated   Wisdom   in  Prov.   viiL 


UOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


CHAP.    XXXVIl 


22 — 31)  spread  out  the  sky  (or  firmament, 
Gen.  i.  7)  whicli  is  strong  (as  supporting  in 
it  the  heavenly  bodies)  and  as  a  molten  loolc- 
in^-glass"  (or  mirror — those  in  the  East 
being  usually  of  polished  metal,  either  brass 
or  steel — the  sky  at  different  times  resembling 
the  one  or  the  other,  as  the  yellow  or  blue 
predominates).     Observe — 

1.  Serious  attedlion  to  hegioen  to  the  works 
of  God  around  us.  "  Hearken  unto  this,  O 
Job,'*  &c.  Those  works  in  themselves  mar- 
vellous displays  of  power  and  wisdom.  Every 
department  of  creation  teems  with  evideuces 
of  Divine  skill  and  Almighty  power.  The 
works  of  God  in  nature,  both  on  the  earth 
and  above  it,  a  study  as  interesting  as  it  is 
profitable.  Such  study,  according  to  oppor- 
tunities afforded,  a  duty  we  owe  to  God  as 
well  as  to  ourselves. 

2.  Much  ifi  the  commonest  phenomena  of 
nature  we  are  unable  even  still  to  understand. 
Among  these  is  heat.  "  Knowest  thou  how 
thy  garments  are  warm  when  He  quieteth 
the  earth  by  the  south  wind  ?'*  Heat  both  a 
sensation  and  the  cause  producing  it.  As  a 
cause  of  the  sensation,  its  exact  nature  not 
known.  Like  electricity,  pervades  all  the 
material  world ;  but  whether  a  thin  and 
subtle  fluid,  or  only  a  property  or  affection 
of  matter — motion  of  some  kind  among  the 
component  atoms  of  bodies,  philosophers 
not  agreed,  though  now  generally  inclining 
to  the  latter  opinion.  Mystery  still  con- 
nected with  its  operation  as  well  as  its 
nature.  Sometimes  a  great  deal  of  it  enters 
a  body  and  disappears,  or  produces  no  ap- 
parent effect,  the  body  feeling  no  hotter  to 
the  touch,  nor  shown  to  be  any  hotter  by  the 
thermometer.  Thus  a  great  deal  of  heat  re- 
quired to  melt  a  piece  of  ice,  yet  the  water 
.from  the  ice  feels  as  cold  as  the  ice  itself 
land  affects  the  thermometer  in  the  same  way, 
the  heat  not  having  warmed  the  ice,  but  only 
changed  it  into  a  liquid  state.  The  alternation 
of  heat  and  cold,  summer  and  winter,  now 
known  to  be  occasioned  by  a  remarkable  pro- 
vision on  the  p;irt  of  the  Creator — the  obli- 
quity of  the  earth's  axis  in  its  revolution 
round  the  sun,  that  axis  being  twenty-three 
and  a  half  de<>Tees  out  of  the  perpendicular. 

3.  Creation  intended  as  a  school  fur  man^s 
instruction.     "Stand  still  and  consider  the 

I  wondrous  works  of  God."  Some  of  man's 
most  useful  lessons  to  be  learned  in  the 
school  of  nature.  These  lessons  both  in  re- 
ference to  God  and  ourselves.  God's  great- 
ness and  our  own  littleness  never  more  rea- 
lized than  in  the  intelligent  contemplation  of 
the  arrangements  in  nature  in  relation  to  the 
earth,  and  ol  the  mechanism  of  the  heavens, 
of  which  the  earth  forms  a  part.  Of  God's 
work  in  creat  ion  we  understand  but  little : 
8tdl  less  of  ills  secret  purposes  and  provi- 


dential procedure  j  least  of  all,  of  Himself. 
The  origin  of  the  universe,  except  as  God 
reveals  it,  entirely  hidden  from  our  know- 
ledge. Science,  of  itself,  able  to  teach 
nothing  as  to  the  fact  of  creation,  or  of  the  first 
great  cau^e,  except  that  there  is  one — an 
intelligence  infinite  in  power  and  wisdom. 
The  distance  of  the  time  when  God  first  'Mis- 
posed,"  or  put  His  Almighty  hand  to  tiie 
work,  far  beyond  man's  conception,  millions 
of  years  benig  revealed  in  the  earth's  strata 
as  antecedent  to  man's  existence. 

IV.  Elihu    ironically  reproyes  Job's 

Presumption.  Verse  19. — "Teach  us  what 
we  shall  say  unto  Him  (as  you  are  so  much 
wiser  than  we  are,  and  are  able  to  enter  into 
controversy  with  the  Almighty)  ;  for  we  [for 
our  part]  cannot  order  speech  (so  as  to  argue 
with  Him)  by  reason  of  darkness  (in  our- 
selves generally,  and  in  relation  to  God's 
purposes  and  procedure  in  particular).  Shall 
it  be  told  Him  that  I  speak  ( — be  declared  as 
by  a  messenger  sent  to  Him  that  I  will  speaK. 
and  debate  the  matter  with  Him)P  if  a 
man  speak  (attempt  so  to  debate  with  the 
Almighty),  surely  he  shall  be  swallowed  up 
(confounded  and  overwhelmed  by  the  Divine 
Majesty).  And  now  (at  the  very  time  Elihu 
was  speaking — either  the  storm-cloud  then 
hiding  the  sun  from  view,  and  obscuring  the 
sky,  or  a  rising  wiud  having  cleared  away  the 
clouds  and  revealed  the  sun  in  his  effulgence ; 
or  speaking  figuratively — now  in  this  present 
lil^e,  or  in  this  present  time  of  trouble  in 
which  Job  then  was,)  men  see  not  the  bright 
light  (or  the  sun  shining  brightly)  whicli  is 
in  the  clouds  (or,  men  cannot  look  upon  the 
light,  or  the  sun,  as  it  shines  brightly  in 
the  sky) ;  but  the  wind  passeth  and  cleanseth 
them"  (/.(?.,  the  clouds,  thus  revealing  the 
sun  which  before  had  been  hidden  by  them  ; 
or,  "after  the  wind  has  passed  and  cleansed 
it,"  i.e.y  the  sky).     Observe— 

1.  Man^s  duty  to  cherish  becoming  views 
of  his  creature-unworthiness,  and  to  cultivate 
reverence  in  speaking  of  and  to  the  Almighty, 
"  Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth,  and  let  no^ 
thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  anything  before 
God;  for  God  is  in  heaven,  and  thou  upon 
earth ;  therefore  let  thy  words  be  few  '* 
(Eecl.  V.  2).  The  Lord's  Prayer  an  example 
of  the  mode  in  which  to  address  the  Almighty. 
Teaches  us  to  go  to  God  as  our  Father,  yet 
with  deep  reverence  and  humility.  Contains 
only  seven  petitions,  the  three  first  having 
relation  to  God  Himself,  and  each  of  them, 
with  one  exception,  expressed  in  about  half 
a  dozen  words.  In  the  New  Testament,  God 
especially  revealed  as  our  Father  through 
Christ;  while  through  Him,  as  our  Advocate 
with  and  our  way  to  the  Father,  we  enjoy  the 
privilege  of  a  free  access  to  and  filial  fellow- 

239 


CHAP.   XXXVII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


ship  with  God  not  generally  known  to  the 
patriarchs  and  Old  Testament  saints  (Eph. 
ui.  12;  Heb.  iv.  16;  xi.  40). 

2.  External  nature  to  be  viewed  as  a  symbol 
of  spiritual  and  Divine  things.  (1)  In  refer- 
ence to  God  Himself.  The  brightness  of 
the  unclouded  sun  apparently  intended  by 
Elihu  to  be  viewed  as  a  symbol  of  the  ma- 
jesty and  glory  of  God.  God's  dwelling  in 
that  light  which  no  man  can  approach  to 
(1  Tim.  vi.  16).  If  men  are  unable  to  con- 
template the  material  sun  without  being 
blinded  by  its  dazzling  effulgence,  how  much 
less  the  glory  of  the  Almighty  Himself! 
Yet  our  happiness  to  see  God — in  a  manner 
even  here,  and  more  fully  hereafter.  Eor 
this  end  God  reveals  Himself  in  Christ.  The 
splendour  of  the  Divine  glory  softened  in 
the  Son  of  God  by  the  veil  of  humanity. 
Christ^s  name,  *'  Emmanuel — God  with  us." 
In  Christ,  who  is  also  our  Brother,  we  see 
the  Eather  (John  xiv.  9).  His  glory  beheld 
even  here,  as  that  of  the  only  oegotten  of 
the  Father  (John  i.  14).  Purity  of  heart, 
given  us  in  Christ,  necessary  in  order  to  see 
God  (Matt.  V.  8  ;  1  Cor.  i.  2).  (2)  In  refer- 
ence to  our  own  experience.  Elihu's 
language  in  verse  21  suggestive  of  the 

Life  of  Faith. 

1.  The  believer* s  experience  on  earth  often 
resembling  a  clouded  sky.  "  Now  men  see  not 
the  bright  light."  The  face  of  the  sun  often 
hidden  by  a  thick  cloud.  Times  when  even 
believers  cannot  see  the  light  of  God's 
countenance,  and  when  His  dealings  with 
them  are  dark  and  mysterious.  At  best, 
while  here,  we  know  but  in  part,  and  see 
through  a  glass  darkly.  God's  face  often 
apparently  hidden  from  believers  in  time  of 
trouble.  "  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face 
from  thee  for  a  moment"  (Is.  liv.  8). 
David's  complaint :  "  Why  hidest  Thou  Thy- 
self in  times  of  trouble  "  (Ps.  x.  1).  Job's 
case  at  present.  A  dark  and  cloudy  day 
with  Abraham  on  his  way  to  Mount  Moriah  j 
with  Jacob,  on  the  apparent  loss  of  his  three 
sons ;  with  Joseph  in  the  prison ;  with 
Moses  in  Midian;  with  David  at  Ziklag; 
with  Jeremiah  in  the  dungeon ;  with  Jesus 
on  the  cross.  Believers,  as  well  as  men  in 
general,  find  themselves  while  on  earth 
liedged  in  by  mystery  on  every  side.  Clouds 
and  darkness  contingent  to  us  as  creatures — 
still  more  as  sinful  ones.  "  What  I  do  thou 
knowest  not  now.** 

2.  To  the  believer  there  is  bright  light  be- 
hind the  clouds.  "  Now  men  see  not  the 
bright  light  which  is  in  the  clouds."  The 
bright  light  therCy  though  men  see  it  not. 
The  sun  still  in  the  heavens,  though  a  cloud 

240 


hide  him  from  our  view.  Wliatever  clouds 
hide  God  from  his  sight  or  rest  upon  his 
path,  a  threefold  light  still  shining  to  the 
believer.  (1)  God's  unchanging  lote  in 
Christ  (Jer.  xxxi.  3;  John  xiii.  1;  Bora, 
viii.  38,  39) ;  (2)  God's  everlasting  covenant 
made  with  him  in  Christ,  ordered  in  all 
things  and  sure  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5 ;  Is.  liv.  10, 
Iv.  3)  ;  (3)  God's  gracious  purpose  in  Christ, 
to  save  him,  and  to  make  all  things  work 
together  for  his  good  (Rom.  viii.  28 — 32 ; 
Eph.  i.  3 — 14).  The  wheels  of  Divine  Pro- 
vidence ever  going  straightforward  to  a  be- 
liever's full  salvation,  however  things  may  at 
times  appear  to  himself.  "  Behind  a  frowning 
Providence  He  hides  a  smiling  face,"— one 
of  the  truths  intended  to  be  taught  by  this 
very  book. 

3.  The  time  comes  when  the  clouds  are 
chased  away.  "The  wind  passeth  and 
cleanseth  them."  The  light  of  God's  coun- 
tenance not  always  to  be  hidden  to  the  be- 
liever. Cloud  and  mystery  not  always  to 
rest  upon  his  path.  David's  comfort  in  a 
time  of  darkness  :  "I  shall  yet  praise  Him 
for  the  help  of  His  countenance;"  "the 
Lord  will  command  His  loving-kindness  in 
the  daytime  "  (Ps.  xlii.  5,  8).  Micah's  confi- 
dence :  "  When  I  fall,  I  shall  arise  j  when  I 
sit  in  darkness,  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light 
unto  me"  (Mic.  vii.  8).  He  will  not  always 
chide.  "  For  a  small  moment  have  I  for- 
saken thee;  but  with  great  mercies  will  I 
gather  thee"  (Is.  Hv.  7).  "I  will  see  you 
again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice."  "What 
I  do,  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt 
know  hereafter"  (John  xiii.  7;  xvi.  22X 
The  cloud  passed  away  from  Abraham  or^ 
Mount  Moriah,  and  he  rejoiced  in  the  re 
newed  assurance  of  God's  gracious  purposes 
concerning  his  seed;  from  Joseph,  and  he 
saw  himself  next  to  Pharaoh  on  the  throne 
of  Egypt,  preserving  much  people,  and 
among  them  his  own  father  and  brothers, 
alive ;  from  Moses,  and  he  found  himself  at 
the  head  of  all  Israel,  leading  them  out  of 
Egypt,  and  worshipping  with  them  at  the 
mount  where  God  had  appeared  to  him ; 
from  David,  and  he  saw  himself  occupying 
the  throne  of  Saul  and  made  a  blessing  to 
the  people.  So  the  cloud  ultimately  passed 
away  from  Job,  and  he  saw  himself  richer 
than  ever,  not  only  in  possessions,  but  in 
the  affection  of  his  friends  and  esteem  of  all 
his  neighbours.  A  day  coming  which  shall 
clear  away  all  obscurity,  and  solve  every 
enigma  both  in  the  Book  of  Revelation  and 
Providence.  Hence  the  lesson — (1)  of  hu- 
mility and  modesty  in  judging  both  of  God'*» 
word  and  works  j  (2)  of  patience  and  resig- 
nation to  the  Divine  will:  (3)  oi  faithy  so  as 
to  walk  in  comfort  and  hope  even  in  the 
darkest  dispensations. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAF.  XXXVIL 


T.    Winding  np   of   Eliha's   speech. 

Verses  22— 24.— '*  Fair  weather  {Marg.i 
'gold;*  i.e.  golden  splendour  or  effulgence 
— a  bright  or  golden  sky)  conieth  out  of  the 
north  (or  from  the  north  wind  which  dis- 
perses the  clouds,  Prov.  xxv.  23)  ;  with  God 
is  terrible  majesty  (of  which  that  visible 
splendour  is  but  a  shadow).  Touching  the 
Almighty,  we  cannot  find  Him  out  (neither 
in  His  being  nor  His  procedure)  ;  He  is  ex- 
cellent in  power  and  in  judgment,  and  in 
plenty  of  justice  (whatever  men  may  at  any 
time  think  of  His  dealings) :  He  will  not  afflict 
(or  'oppress,' though  Job  was  ready  at  times 
to  think  so  in  reference  to  himself,  or  *  He 
will  not  answer  *  or  *  give  account '  of  His 
procedure  to  any  of  His  creatures).  Men 
do  therefore  fear  Him  (or  *  let  men  therefore 
fear  Him ' — the  conclusion  of  ihe  whole 
matter,  Eccl.  xii.  13);  he  respecteth  (or 
*  feareth ')  not  any  that  are  wise  of  heart  "  (as 
Job  thinks  himself  to  be;  or  *' let  each,"  or 
"shall  not  each"  of  the  wise-heartrd  fear 
Him;  otherwise,— "none  of  the  wise-hearted 
seeth  or  comprehendeth  Him  ").    Ooserve — 

1.  The  end  of  all  true  teaching,  as  of  all 
revelation,  that  men  may  fear  God.  Elihu 
concludes  his  speeches  as  the  Royal  Preacher 
his  discourses  :  "  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion 
of  the  whole  matter, — Pear  God  and  keep 
His  commandments,  for  this  is  the  whole 
duty  of  man  "  (Eccl.  xii.  13).  A.11  consi- 
deration of  God  and  His  works,  whether  of 
creation  or  Providence,  to  conduct  to  the 
same  conclusion.  Everything  in  God  and 
His  works  fitted  to  lead  men  to  fear  Him. 
That  fear  a  holy  reverence, — the  fear  of  a 
loving  chi'd  in  reference  to  a  worthy  father ; 
not  that  of  a  trembling  slave  in  reference  to 
a  severe  master.  God's  being  and  perfec- 
tions,— His  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice, 
goodness,  and  truth, — such  as  to  render  Him 
the  object  at  once  of  fear  and  love.  A 
loving  fear  required  by  God  from  His  intel- 
ligent creatures.  The  rational  creature's 
whole  duty  summed  up  in  such  fear.  Por- 
yivin;^  mercy  intended  to  produce  it  (Ps. 
cxxx.  4).  Such  fear  not  the  growth  of  fallen 
nature,  but  the  production  of  Divine  grace 
(Jer.  xxxd.  39,  40).  The  object  of  Christ's 
redemption  to  deliver  us  from  slavish  fear 
and  implant  the  filial  (Luke  i.  74 ;  Rom.  viii. 
15  ;   1  John  iv.  18  ;  1  Peter  i.  17—20). 

2  God  too  glorious  to  be  contemplated  by 
fallen,  and  too  great  to  be  comprehended  by 
finite,  man.  A  terrible  majesty  with  God, 
only  pictured  by  the  dazzling  brightness  of 
the  unclouded  sun.  Seraphims  veil  their 
faces  with  tlieir  wings  as  they  stand  before 
Him.    Fallen  men  conscious  of  being  unable 


to  look  on  Him  and  live  (Gen.  xxxii.  30) ; 
Judges  xiii.  22).  Declared  by  God  Himself 
(Ex.  xxxiii.  20).  Hence  Peter's  exclama- 
tion on  beholding  the  traces  of  Christ's 
divinity  (Luke  v.  8).  In  Christ,  however, 
God  contemplated  even  by  sinful  men. 
Heaven  in  beholding  the  glory  of  God. 
Stephen's  vision.  Christ's  prayer  for  His 
people.  The  glorified  see  God's  face  (Rev. 
XX ii.  4).  God  not  more  to  be  comprehended 
than  contemplated.  His  thoughts  a  great 
deep.  Only  the  smallest  portion  of  His 
works  at  all  understood  by  men.  The 
greatest  among  scientific  men  compared  him- 
self to  a  child  gathering  bubbles  on  the  sea- 
shore, while  the  ocean  of  knowledge  lay 
unexplored  before  him.  The  attempt  to  com- 
prehend God  compared  by  Augustine  to  that 
of  a  child  scooping  a  hole  in  the  sand,  and 
attempting  with  its  tiny  shell  to  empty  the 
sea  into  it.  God  to  be  apprehended  for  our 
own  comfort  and  His  glory  by  the  humblest 
peasant  that  sits  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  who 
reveals  the  Father;  not  to  be  comprehended 
by  the  highest  seraph  that  folds  his  wings 
before  the  t  hrone.  Heaven  filled  with  adoring 
wonder  (Rev.  xv.  3,  4). 

3.  The  interests  of  His  creatures  safe  in  the 
hands  of  the  Almighty.  *'  He  is  excellent  in 
power,  and  in  judgment,  and  in  plenty  of 
justice."  In  God  is  power  to  execute  all 
His  will,  and  defend  all  who  trust  in  Him  ; 
judgment,  ajid  justice,  to  make  only  a  right 
use  of  that  power.  Justice  His  nature,  and 
judgment  His  administration.  "  He  will  not 
afflict."  In  another  sense  He  afflicts,  but 
even  then  not  willingly  (Lam.  iii.  33).  He 
afflicts  as  a  chastening;  does  not  nfflict  as  an 
oppression.  "To  crush  under  His  feet  all 
the  prisoners  of  the  earth,  the  Lord  ap- 
proyeth  not"  (Lam.  iii.  34).  God  may 
punish  but  not  oppress.  Has  no  pleasure  in 
the  sinner's  death.  Judgment  His  strange 
act,  mercy  His  delight.  Binds  up  the  bruised 
reed  instead  of  breaking  it  (Is.  xiii.  3). 

4.  Comfort  to  Job  and  every  tried  believer 
in  Elihu' s  last  words :  *'  He  will  not  afflict," 
or  oppress.  How  much  less  any  of  His  own 
children!  *'  Fair  weather  cometh  out  of  the 
north."  The  tempest  may  howl,  and  the 
clouds  lower,  and  the  thunders  roll ;  but 
after  the  storm  comes  a  calm  and  serene 
sky.  The  wind  shall  chase  away  the  clouds 
— albeit  a  north  wind  with  its  piercing  cold. 
Troubles  are  to  a  believer  but  a  ))assing 
storm.  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  ui^^lu  ; 
joy  cometh  in  the  morning.  We  sow  in 
tears ;  but  in  a  little  while  we  shall  reap 
with  joy. 


16 


241 


CHAP.    XXXVIU. 


UOAIILETIG  COiMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAPTEE  XXXVm. 


JEHOVAH'S  ADDRESS  TO  JOB, 


Elihu  had  now  said  all  he  intended. 
Possibly  interrupted  by  the  storm  which  had 
been  gathering  during  his  speech.  Out  of 
the  storm-cloud,  from  which  already  issued 
thunders  and  lightnings,  the  Almighty  was 
now  to  speak.  The  grandeur  and  sublimity 
of  the  scene  not  to  be  surpassed.  Its  only 
counterpart  at  the  giving  of  the  law  on 
Mount  Smai  (Exod.  xix.  18). 

I.  The  announcement  of  the  Al- 
mighty's speech.  Verse  1. — "Then  the 
Lord  answered  Job  out  of  the  whirlwind" 
(or  storm-cloud).    Observe — 

1.  The  Speaker.  "  The  Lord  "—Jehovah. 
A  name  (1)  Mysterious  \  expressive  of  the 
mysterious  attributes  of  Godliead — eternity, 
self-existence,  unchangeableness,  self-de- 
pendence— He  Who  was,  is,  and  is  to  be. 
Equivalent  to  that  given  by  God  Himself  at 
the  burning  bush  :  "I  am,"  or  "I  am  that 
I  am."  (2)  Gracious  ;  a  covenant  name. 
Assumed  by  God  in  relation  to  Israel  as  His 
chosen  and  covenant  people — **  Jehovah,  the 
God  of  Israel."  Indicates  unchangeable 
faithfulness  in  the  performance  of  His  pro- 
mises and  covenant  obligations.  Especially 
revealed  to  Moses  at  the  bush  as  expressive 
of  the  relationship  to  be  established  between 
God  and  Israel  from  that  period.  The  pro- 
nunciation of  the  name  lost  to  the  Jews, 
together  with  their  covenant  relationship  to 
the  Almighty.  Now  known  by  them  only 
as  the  name  of  four  letters.  "Adonai" — 
Lord  or  Master — substituted  for  it.  The 
name  as  given  in  the  text,  probably  indicative 
of  the  Israehtish  authorship  of  the  book,  as 
well  as  in  some  degree  of  the  period  of  its 
composition.  The  name  applied  in  the  Bible 
to  three  distinct  persons  in  the  Godhead — 
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Here  the  Son  intended  as  "The  Word,"  or 
He  by  Whom  the  Godhead  speaks  and  re- 
veals Himself  to  man  (John  i.  1).  Unspeak- 
able condescension  on  the  part  of  Jehovah 
to  address  Himself  to  fallen  man  in  any 
other  way  than  one  of  judgment. 

2.  The  speech.  "  Answered."  God's  ad- 
dress to  Job  an  "answer."  Mercy  implied 
in  God's  speaking  to  man  at  all.  "  God, 
who  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners 
spake  in  time  past  to  the  fathers,"  &c. 
(Heb.  i.  1).  Might  have  treated  men  as  the 
fallen  angels — with  eternal  silence.  One  of 
the  greatest  trials  and  griefs  to  the  godly 
when  God  appears  to  be  "  silent  to  them  " 

242 


(Ps.  xxviii.  1).  Saul's  great  misery  that 
God  answered  him  no  more  (1  Sam. 
xxviii.  15).  Especial  mercy  when  God 
answers  men.  Implies  felt  need  and  desire 
on  man's  part — sense  of  darkness,  perplexity, 
want.  God  still  answers  men — by  His 
written  word,  His  Spirit,  the  lips  of  His 
servants,  His  providence.  Especial  mercy 
when  G^oc? answers  men.  Job's  three  friends, 
and  then  Elihu,  had  answered  Job,  but  with- 
out effect.  The  answer  from  God  Himself 
needed.  "None  teacheth  like  Him."  "I  am 
the  Lord  that  teacheth  thee  to  profit."  He 
speaks  and  instructs  "with  a  strong  hand" 
(Is.  viii.  11).  His  word  with  power.  The 
proper  posture  of  men  in  relation  to  God 
that  of  Samuel:  "Speak,  Lord,  for  thy 
servant  heareth ; "  or  that  of  David  :  "  1 
will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak" 
(1  Sam.  iii.  10;  Ps.  Ixxxv.  8).  God's 
answer  to  Job  given  according  to  his  desire, 
yet  not  such  as  he  expected.  Intended  not 
to  vindicate  Himself  or  His  procedure,  but 
to  instruct  and  humble  Job.  Given  to  con- 
vince him  of  the  sinfulness  of  his  complaints 
and  questionings,  by  showing  him  his  own 
ignorance  and  littleness  in  contrast  with 
Jehovah's  omniscience  and  almightiness. 
Designed  to  show  him  his  inability  even  to 
judge  of  His  Maker's  procedure,  from  his 
inability  to  explain  the  commonest  opera- 
tions in  nature.  The  answer  a  prosecution 
of  the  argument  of  Elihu.  Job  apparently 
silenced^  but  not  convinced^  by  Elihu's 
speeches.  The  address  unequalled  for 
majesty  of  sentiment  and  sublimity  of  lan- 
guage by  any  uninspired  production  either 
of  ancient  or  modern  times.  The  speech  a 
daring  flight  for  a  poet,  but  sustained  because 
inspired.  The  book  of  Job  the  sublimest 
poem  in  the  world.  "  One  of  the  grandest 
things  ever  written  with  pen — nothing 
written,  I  think,  in  the  Bible  or  out  of  it,  of 
equal  literary  merit." — Carlj/le.  This  speech 
the  sublimest  part  of  the  book. 

3.  l^h^i  party  addressed.  "Job."  Others 
present;  possibly,  however,  without  hearing, 
or  at  least  understanding,  what  was  spoken. 
Saul's  companions  on  the  way  to  Damascus 
saw  the  light,  but  "  heard  not  the  voice  of 
Him  that  spake  to  him"  (Acts  xxii.  9). 
Yet,  they  "  heard  a  voice,  but  saw  no  man" 
— hearing  it  without  understanding  its  utter- 
ance (Acts  ix.  7).  A  Divine  voice,  like 
thunder,  spoke  to  Jesus  in  the  presence  of 
the  people,  understood  by  Him,  but  not  by 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB, 


CHAP.   XXXVIII, 


them  (John  xii.  28,  29).  Observe— (1) 
Divine  sovereignty.  The  three  friends  in 
greater  error  than  Job,  yet  Job  only  answered. 
Yet  (2)  sovereignty  exercised  in  justice  and 
goodness.  Job  alone  desired  an  answer  from 
God,  and  alone  believed  that  such  would  be 
given.  (3)  Divine  mercy  and  kindness  in 
answering*  Job.  His  spirit  at  times  all  but, 
if  not  acLually,  rebellious,  and  his  language 
petulant  and  irreverent — such  as  called  for 
deep  repentance.  God  does  not  turn  away 
from  His  sincere^  though  sinning^  servants. 
(4)  God*s  fuiihfulness  to  His  people.  His 
answer  a  sharp  reproof  to  Job.  "As  many 
as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten."  God  loves 
His  people  too  well  to  suffer  sin  upon  them. 
Saints  often  dealt  with  in  an  apparently 
roughermanner  than  even  sinners.  (5)  The 
particularity  of  God's  de;ili  g  with  men. 
Job  singled  out  in  this  address,  as  if  the  only 
person  present.  So  always  when  God  speaks 
effectually.  "Thou  art  the  man."  "Zac- 
chaeus,  make  haste  and  come  down.*'  The 
Good  Shepherd  "  calleth  His  own  sheep  by 
their  name.** 

4.  The  place.     "  Out  of  the  whirlwind.** 
The  tempest  raised  for  this  special  purpose. 
Perhaps  an  ordinary  storm-cloud  now  pro- 
duced in  the  providence  of  God  to  be  em- 
ployed as  His  pavilion  whence  to  issue  this 
address.     Matural  for  a  storm  to  be  chosen 
for  such  a  purpose.     Perhaps  a  similar  storm 
employed  in  the  giving  of  the  law  (Exod. 
xix  16).     All   nature  under   God's  control, 
and  ready  at  His  call.     The  lightnings  His 
servants,  saying :  Here  we  are  (verse  35). 
A  storm  the  symbol  of  judgment  and  the 
expression  of  power.     The  descent  of  the 
Spirit  at  Pentecost  like  the   sound  of  "a 
rushing  mighty  wind"  (Acts  ii.  2).     Divine 
interposition  on  behalf  of  David  and  David's 
Lord  represented  as  connected  with  a  storm 
of  wind  and  hail,  thundering  and  lightning 
(Ps.  xviii.  9—14).    Clouds,  fire,  and  tempest 
accompany  the  Judge's  descent  at  the  last 
day  (Ps.  1.  3  ;  Dan.  vii.  10  ;  2  Thess.  i.  8; 
Kev.  i.  7).     The  whirlwind,  or  storm-cloud, 
now  employed   as   expressive   of — (1)  The 
majesty  of  the  Speaker;  (2)  The  weightiness 
of    the    matter ;    (3)  The    power    of    the 
Almighty    to    accomplish    His    purposes, 
whether  of   mercy  or  judgment;    (4)  The 
terribleness  of   His  displeasure.    Intended 

(1)  To    awaken    more    solemn  attention; 

(2)  To  convey  a  deeper  impression  of  the 
power  and  majesty  of  God ;  (3)  To  cojitribute  to 
the  object  of  the  speech,  Job's  conviction  and 
humiliation.  Suitable  as — (1)  Accompany- 
ing a  Divine  reproof ;;  2)  On  an  occasion  in 
which  the  power,  justice,  and  providence  of 
God  had  appeared  to  be  called  in  question. 
The  present  case  compared  and  contrasted 
with  God's  voice  to  Elijah  in  the  wilderness 

16—2 


— a  wind,  earthquake,  and  fire,  yet  the  Lord 
in  none  of  them,  but  in  "  a  still,  small  voice  " 
which    followed   (1   Kings    xix.    11,    12). 
Observe — (1)  All    nature    used    as     Ood'i 
instruments.     The  storm-cloud  employed  as 
His  pavilion,  and  the  whirlwind  as  His  car 
(Ps.  xviii.  10, 11).     (2)  Terrible  to  have  such 
a  Being  for  our  enemy  ;  blessed  to  have  Him 
for  our  friend.     "  A  fearful  thing  to  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  living  God"  (Heb.  x.  31). 
(3)  God  occasionally  speaks  to  His  people  out 
of  a  storm.     Storms  in  the   experience  of 
believers ;  but  the  Lord  is  in  the  storm,  and 
speaks  out  of  it.    An  ancient  version  of  the 
text  reads  ;  "  The  Lord  answered  Job  out 
of  the  whirlwind  of  grief."    A  Father's  voice 
in  every  tempest  of  trouble  that  overtakes  a 
believer.     The  voice,  as  in  Job's  case,  may 
be  one  of  reproof  but  is,  at  the  same  time, 
one  of  love.     "  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid.**     "  I 
will  allure  her  into  the  wilderness,  and  I  will 
speak  comfortably  unto  her  '*  {Marg. :  "  to 
her  heart").     What  appears  only  to  betoken 
wrath,  and  to  threaten  destruction,  made  to 
believers  to  be  a  channel  of  mercy.     In  Job*s 
case  the  storm-cloud  prepared  the  way  for 
the  sunshine  that    followed.    Blessed    for 
God  to  speak  to  us,  though  out  of  a  whirl- 
wind.   A  storm  of  any  kind  a  blessing,  if 
God  speaks  to  us  out  of  it.    If  God  only 
speak  to  us,  we  may  well  leave  the  mode  of 
His  doing  so  to  Himself.     The  same  loving 
Father  and  faithful  covenant-God,  whether 
He  speak  in  a  whirlwind,  an  earthquake,  a 
fire,  or  a  "  still,  small  voice.** 

II.  The  Reproof.  Verse  2.—"  Who  is 
this  that  darkeneth  counsel  b^  words  with- 
out knowledge?'*  The  question  expressive 
of  wonder  and  reprehension.  "  Who  is 
this?"  Who  so  bold,  foolish,  and  pre 
sumptuous  P  The  wisest  and  best  incom- 
petent to  sit  in  judgment  on  the  Divine 
procedure.  The  ground  of  God's  reproof — 
"that  darkens  counsel  by  words  without 
knowledge.**  Job  not  reproved  for  his  pre- 
vious life,  but  his  present  language.  His 
language  blamed  not  for  its  impiety,  but  its 
presumption  and  ignorance.  Job  "darkened 
counsel " — (1)  By  casting  reflections  on  the 
Divine  procedure,  and  so  obscuring  its 
brightness ;  (2)  Making  that  which  is 
mysterious  to  us  still  darker  by  cavils  and 
short-sighted  reasonings.  Great  force  in 
the  expression.  Man,  by  his  carnal  reason- 
ing, and  still  more  by  his  complaining, 
instead  of  clearing  up  what  is  dark  in  the 
Divine  procedure,  only  makes  it  darker. 
Observe — 

1 .  All  God*s  ways  are  "  counsel** 
"  Counsel  is  mine  and  sound  wisdom." 
Nothing  in  God's  dealings  but  what  is  the 
result  of  an  infinite  wisdom  and    eternal 

243 


CHAP.  XXXVIII. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


forethought.  "Known  unto  God  are  all 
His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world." 
Everytliing  both  actual  and  possible  taken 
into  view  by  Him  at  one  glance.  His  per- 
fections enable  Him  not  only  to  know^  but  to 
choose  and  accomplish,  whnt  is  best.  No- 
thing unforeseen  or  unprovided  for.  A  spar- 
row's fall  not  without  God.  His  purposes 
called  His  "  counsel,"  because  the  result  of 
wisdom  and  forethought  (Ps.  xxxiii.  1 1 ; 
Piov.  xix.  21 ;  Is.  xxviii.  29 ;  Acts  ii.  23). 
God's  grace  in  Christ  abundant  towards  us, 
but  "in  all  wisdom  and  prudence"  (Eph.  i. 
8).  Every  event  in  Providence  and  every 
trouble  in  a  believer's  experience,  the  filling 
up  of  a  wise  and  well-calculated  plan,  with- 
out any  prejudice  to  man's  freedom  or  lessen- 
ing of  his  responsibility. 

2.  Ilarty  by  reasoning  about ,  and  cavilling 
aqainst,  God's  dealings,  only  darkens  the  subject. 
Our  duty  in  reference  to  God's  procedure 
not  to  reason  and  question,  but  to  submit 
and  adore.  The  more  that  man,  in  his  own 
carnal  wisdom,  reasons  about  God  and  His 
providence,  the  greater  His  perplexity  and 
confusion.  To  teach  man's  duty  in  reference 
to  the  Divine  procedure,  the  object  of  the 
Almighty's  present  address.  Its  meaning, 
"Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God"  (Ps. 
xlvi.  10). 

3.  Human  reasonings  in  regard  to  God 
and  his  dealings^  apart  from  revelation,  only 
**  words  without  knowledge ."  Such  reasonings 
the  mere  thoughts  and  prattle  of  children 
in  regard  to  the  administration  of  a  kingdom, 
God  and  His  ways  known  only  as  He  is  pleased 
to  reveal  them.  *'  What  I  do,  thou  knowest 
not  now ;  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter." 
Our  knowledge,  while  on  earth,  at  best  but 
"  in  part" — fragmentary  and  piecemeal.  God's 
providential  dealings  seen  hereafter  as  a 
transparent  sea  of  glass  (Rev.  xv.  2). 

4.  All  cavils  and  complaints  against  God*s 
dealings  in  providence  only  the  result  of 
ignorance — "words  without  knowledge." 

III.  The  Challenge.    Verse  3.— "Gird 

up  now  thy  loins  like  a  man  (a  valiant  man, 
ready  to  enter  on  a  contest,  as  Job  had  wished 
to  do  with  the  Almighty  (ch.  xiii.  22), — 
spoken  in  irony  and  humbling  reproof)  ;  for 
I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  answer  thou  me." 
Job's  desire  now  granted,  but  not  in  the  way 
he  expected.  God  "calls"  (ch.  xiii.  22),  but 
not  to  enter  into  a  suit  with  Job  in  regard  to 
his  past  life.  The  questions  put,  not  as  to 
what  he  has  done,  but  what  he  knows  and 
is  able  to  do.  The  object  of  them  to  shew 
his  folly  and  presumption  in  questioning  his 
Maker's  dealings.  His  knowledge  shown  to 
be  ignorance,  and  his  power  perfect  weak- 
ness. These  contrasted  with  the  wisdom 
»nd  power  of  God,  as  seen — (1)  In  His  work 
244 


of  creation ;  (2)  In  His  work  of  providence. 
A  series  of  questions  proposed  which  follow 
each  other  like  claj)s  of  thunder  in  the  ear  of 
the  silenced  patriarch.  The  challenge  in- 
tended to  show  Job  his  utter  incapacity  to 
sit  in  judgment  on  God's  procedure,  and  his 
arrogance  in  arraigning  it.  Job  reminded 
by  it  that  he  is  but  of  yesterday  and  knows 
nothing,  and  that  he  is  unable  to  put  a 
finger  to  the  commonest  processes  of  nature, 
either  in  the  inanimate  or  animate  world ; 
while  all  has  been  seen,  planned,  and  executed 
ages  before  lie  was  born,  and  is  continually, 
every  moment,  and  in  all  places,  executed  still 
by  Him  who  is  both  Creator  and  Governor  of 
the  universe.  The  questions  such  as  to  teach 
us  true  Christian  wisdom  —silence  and  sub- 
mission in  the  presence  of  God 's  most  mysle- 
rious  and  painful  providences.     Observe — 

1.  MarCs  proper  character  and  behaviour  in 
relation  to  God's  procedure,  rather  that  of  a 
child  than  of  a  "man.**  The  things  of  God 
hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  but 
"revealed  unto  babes."  Our  duty  and  in- 
terest in  relation  to  God's  dealings,  to  be- 
have ourselves  like  "a  weaned  child ''  (Ps. 
cxxxi.  2).  "  In  malice  be  ye  children,  but 
in  understanding  be  ye  men "  (1  Cor.  xiv. 
20). 

2.  In  the  presence  of  Gody  man's  posture 
to  be  rather  that  of  a  child  than  of  a  "  man.'* 
In  relation  to  our  duty  as  Christians  in  the 
world,  we  are  to  "quit  ourselves  like  men 
and  be  strong,"  but  in  the  presence  of  God 
to  take  the  place  of  children.  When 
Jeremiah  took  the  place  of  a  child,  God 
made  him  "  an  iron  pillar  and  a  brazen  wall 
against  the  whole  land"  (Jer.  i.  6,  18).  The 
"  worm  Jacob"  taken  by  God  and  employed  as 
a  "new  sharp  thrashing  instrument  having 
teeth,  to  thrash  the  nations"  (Is.  xli.  15). 

3.  Mans  duty  to  *'* gird  up  his  loins**  in 
order  to  work  for  God,  not  to  debate  with 
Him.  The  mightiest  but  a  sorry  match 
for  his  Maker.  "  Let  the  potsherd  strive  with 
the  potsherds  of  the  earth;  but  woe  unto 
him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker"  (Is.  xlv. 
9).  "Who  will  set  the  thorns  and  briars 
against  me  in  battle."  Man's  glory  and 
honour,  to  contend  for  God ;  his  disgrace 
and  ruin,  to  contend  with  Him. 

IV.  The  Questioning.  Verses  4—41). 
— Embraces  a  wide  field  both  in  nature  and 
Providence.  As  suitable  and  appropriate  to 
humble  man's  pride  in  the  present  age  of 
advanced  science,  as  in  the  days  of  the  patri- 
arch.    The  questions  have  relation  to — 

1.  Job's  antiquity  and  God's  creation  oj 
the  world.  Verses  3 — 7. — "Where  wast 
thou  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
earth?  declare,  if  (or  *  since '—ironically) 
thou  hast  understanding.      Who   hath  laid 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB 


CHAP,  xxxvin 


the  measures  (assigned  the  dimensions  and 
proportions)  thereof,  if  (or  since)  tliou 
knowcst  ?  or  ulio  hath  stretched  the  line 
upon  it  (the  measuring  line,  in  order  to 
reguhite  its  form  and  dimensions  for  beauty 
and  use)  ?  AVhereupon  are  the  foundations 
thereof  fastened  ('its  bases  sunk')?  or 
who  laid  the  corner-stone  thereof  (render- 
ing the  fabric  so  firm  as  not  to  fall  to  pieces) ; 
Wlien  the  morning  stars  (angels,  figura- 
tively so  called  from  their  splendour  and 
early  place  in  creation ;  or  perhaps,  literal 
stars,  by  personification)  sang  together  (like 
the  Priests  and  Levites  at  the  foundation  and 
finishing  of  the  second  Temple  (Ezra  iii. 
10,  11 ;  Zech.  iv.  7),  and  all  the  sons  of  God 
(angels,  so  called  from  their  Divine  origin 
and  resemblance)  shouted  for  joy?"  (partici- 
pating with  their  Maker's  joy  in  the  perfection 
of  the  work  and  the  prospects  connected  with 
it  (Kxod.  xxxi.  17;  Ps.  civ.  31;  Prov.viii.  31). 
Observe — (1)  Ma?i  incapacitated  from  his 
very  creaturehood,  and  especially  his  compara- 
tireli/  recent  creation,  for  forming  a  judgment ^ 
apart  from  revelation^  concerjwig  God's  pur- 
poses  and  procedure.  The  plan  of  the  world's 
government  formed  in  connection  with  the 
creation  of  it.  To  form  an  unaided  judgment 
of  the  former,  man  should  have  been  present 
at  the  latter.  (2)  Every  thing  connected  with 
the 

Formation  of  the  Earth, 

indicative  of  i?fnife  wisdom  and  power ^  but 
lying  beyond  m  an' s present  knowledge.  Science 
confessedly  iirnoraiit  of  such  a  thing  as  crea- 
tion, and  of  the  origin  of  the  universe.  The 
rocks  probably  intended  here  as  the  "  founda- 
tions "  of  the  earth.  These  ascertained  to 
descend  several  miles  below  the  surface.  The 
earth's  crust  known  to  the  depth  of  eighi  or 
ten  miles.  Supposed,  from  calculation,  to 
extend  nearly  t\venty  miles  lower.  The  globe 
itself  believed  to  have  been  at  the  beginning 
a  mass  of  metal  resembling  quicksilver,  and 
to  have  been  launched  into  space  in  a  state 
of  extreme  heat — being  first,  by  a  natural 
process,  covered  with  rust  and  then  with 
water.  Tlie  first  really  solid  ground  believed 
to  have  been  granite — a  hard,  fire-baked 
substance,  prepared  in  the  interior  furnace  of 
the  globe  for  the  pavement  of  the  water- 
covered  earth,  and  pressed,  while  in  a  soft 
state,  by  some  enormous  weight  occasioned 
by  the  hot  and  burning  metals  that  rested 
over  it.  Its  hard  stony  masses  afterwards, 
by  some  mighty  agency,  forced  up  to  the 
surface ;  some  portions  being  left  under  the 
waters,  while  others  were  driven  up  through 
them,  and  formed  mountains  and  hills.  The 
granite  subsequently  covered  by  various 
earths  placed  on  it  by  the  Creator,  so  as  to 


form  the  earth's  crust.  The  granite  itself 
formed  out.  of  eight  of  the  sixty  materials 
found  in  the  crust  of  the  globe,  these  form- 
ing three  distinct  bodies  (quartz,  mica,  and 
feldspar),  each  so  constituted  as  to  answer 
the  purposes  lor  which  it  was  required,  viz. 
— to  form  by  its  union  with  the  other  sub- 
stances a  solid  pavement,  suitable  to  go 
round  the  globe.  Streams  of  electricity 
supposed  to  have  accompanied  the  mighty 
forces  that  lifted  the  granite,  in  mountain 
piles,  up  through  the  waters,  causing  it  to 
crack  and  rend  into  four-sided  blocks.  The 
granite  thus  uplifted  at  various  periods  of 
the  world's  existence,  and  made  the  great 
storehouse  whence  mud,  sand,  and  fragments 
have  been  supplied  for  the  building  up  of 
the  greater  number  of  our  rocks ;  its  blocks 
grinding  one  against  another,  and  its  moun- 
tain surfaces  being  broken  and  crumbled  into 
dust  by  the  united  action  of  frost,  wind, 
and  rain.  The  particles  rolling  down  the 
rocky  steeps,  and  falling  into  innumerable  rills 
trickling  down  the  mountain's  side,  believed 
to  have  been  washed  by  them  into  the  val- 
lejs  below,  to  meet  the  river-floods;  where 
they  were  ground  and  smoothed,  through 
constant  friction,  into  masses  of  sand,  mud, 
and  rubble,  swept  into  the  ocean,  and  driven 
still  onwards  by  tides  and  currents,  till  they 
gradually  sank  down  and  formed  flat  beds  or 
strata.  Some  of  these  strata  thousands  of 
feet  in  depth.  Hardened  into  rock  by  the 
pressure  of  new  beds  over  them,  by  the 
effects  of  heat,  and  by  dissolved  iron  or  lime 
percolating  in  water  through  the  masses. 
Some  of  the  loosened  particles  of  granite 
failing  into  the  surrounding  waters,  believed 
to  liave  been  spread  in  beds  over  the  hot  ocean 
floors,  or  piled  up  in  liollow  places  between 
the  sea-mountains ;  and  having  been  there 
baked  by  the  hot  granite,  to  have  formed 
what  are  called  crystalline  rocks  of  gneiss 
and  mica  slate,  sometimes  two  miles  in 
depth;  while  clay  slate,  several  hundred 
feet  in  thickness,  was  further  made  from  the 
same  materials,  and  divided  into  its  thin 
plates  by  the  electric  fluid  having  been  sent 
through  the  mass  of  the  slate  mud.  The 
earth  thus  said  in  Scripture  to  have  been 
"  founded  upon  the  seas  and  established  upon 
the  floods"  (Ps.  xxiv.  2) ;  an  ocean  of  water 
having  been  the  original  covering  of  the 
globe,  before  the  rocks  were  heaved  up 
through  its  waters.  In  another  sense,  the 
earth  without  foundations,  being  hung  "  upon 
nothing  "  (ch.  xxvi.  7),  and  kept  in  its  place 
while  moving  round  the  sun,  by  the  two 
opposite  centripetal  and  centrifugal  forces. 

(3)  The  formation  of  the  earth  and  its  pre- 
paration as  a  habitation  for  man,  especially 
when   viewed  in   connection  iciih  its  future 

245 


CHAP.  xxivnL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


history y  a  work  of  such  glory  and  excellence  as 
to  call  forth  the  joyful  songs  of  angelic  specta- 
tors. The  earth  itself,  before  sin  defaced  it, 
and  as  it  appeared  on  the  day  on  which  God 
rested  from  His  work,  a  scene  of  matchless 
beauty.  That  must  have  been  beautiful,  and 
worthy  of  the  songs  of  angels,  which  the 
Divine  Creator  himself  pronounced  "very 
good.'*  From  that  earth,  as  probably  in  some 
degree  made  known  at  the  time  of  its  forma- 
tion, angels  themselves  were  to  derive  a  large 
accession  both  to  their  knowledge  and  their  joy 
(Eph.iii.  10 ;  1  Pet.  i.  12  ;  Luke  ii.  10—14  ; 
Rev.  V.  12).  (4)  Angels  of  inconceivable 
antiquity.  Millions  of  ages  since  the  founda- 
tions of  the  earth  were  laid  in  its  granite 
rocks.  Angels  apparently  spectators  during 
the  laying  of  those  foundations  as  well  as 
through  the  whole  process  of  the  earth's  for- 
mation. Hence  probably  called  "morning 
stars."  God's  elder  children.  Full  of  know- 
ledge as  the  elder-born  of  creation.  Happy 
they  are  who  made  to  resemble  them  in  cha- 
racter and  to  spend  eternity  in  their  society  ! 
(5)  That  in  God's  works  of  creation  on  earth 
sufficient  to  occuj)y  the  songs  of  the  highest 
created  Intelligences.  How  glorious  then  those 
W(»rks,  and  how  worthy  of  our  contemplation 
and  praise !  A  lesson  here  intended  for  Job. 
The  angels'  joyful  adoration  exhibited  for  his 
and  our  imitation.  God's  works,  whether  of 
creation  or  providence,  to  be  commended, 
not  complained  against  nor  cavilled  at.  A 
privilege  to  be  the  inhabitants  of  a  world 
whose  formation  awakened  the  joyful  songs 
of  angels.  If  angels  rejoiced  and  sung  on 
account  of  its  formation,  how  much  more 
ni  ly  we,  if  savingly  interested  in  the  redemp- 
tion-work of  Him  by  whom  and  for  whom  all 
things  were  made,  and  who,  to  save  us,  took 
our  nature  and  became  our  elder  Brother ! 

2.  The  sea  and  its  barriers  of  sand  and 
rock.  Verse  8 — 11.—"  Or  who  shut  up  the 
sea  (probably  the  waters  that  covered  the 
earth  at  the  beginning  of  the  Mosaic  crea- 
tion, Gen.  i.  2)  with  doors,  when  it  brake 
forth  (perhaps  from  an  underground  abyss), 
as  if  it  had  issued  out  of  the  womb  ?  When 
I  made  the  cloud  the  garment  thereof  (per- 
haps the  darkness  or  thick  vapour  that  was 
*  upon  the  face  of  the  deep,'  Gen.  i.  2),  and 
thick  darkness  a  swaddling  band  for  it  (the 
waters  viewed  as  a  new-born  infant) ;  and 
brake  up  for  it  my  decreed  place  (or,  *  ap- 
pointed my  decree  over  it '),  and  set  bars  and 
doors  (in  the  sand  and  rocks,  while  preparing 
the  sea  and  dry  land.  Gen.  i.  9);  and  said  : 
Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  farther  j 
and  liere  sliall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed." 

The  operations  here  referred  to,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  account  of  the  creation  given 
in  the  book  of  Genesis.  Darkness  and  dense 
vapour  enveloping  the  globe  and  its  vvatery 


surface,  the  natural  effect  of  the  earth's  in- 
ternal heat  acting  upon  the  waters  that 
covered  it.  According  to  geologists,  the 
fiercest  heat  of  the  glowing  globe  probably 
checked  from  ascending  into  the  air  through 
the  rusty  covering  spread  over  it ;  the  change 
in  temperature  thus  causing  the  steaming 
vapours  in  the  atmosphere  to  fall  down  upon 
that  covering  in  the  shape  of  water,  and  so 
to  surround  the  whole  of  tlic  globe  with  one 
general  primeval  ocean.  The  "doors,"  or 
sandy  and  rocky  barriers  of  the  ocean  after- 
wards formed,  the  result  of  upheavals  and 
subsidencies  at  subsequent  and  different 
periods.  The  whole  process  the  work  of  a 
wisdom  and  power  surpassing  our  conception, 
and  one  far  beyond  the  knowledge  and  com- 
prehension of  men.     Observe — 

The  restraint  imposed  upon  the  rolling  and 
dashing  waves  of  ocean  by  a  barrier  of  sand 
and  rocks,   the  emblem  of  the   restraint  put 
upon  the  pride  and  rebellion   of  intelligent 
creatures.    Fallen  angels   restrained   within 
the  bounds  assigned  them  by  the  Almighty. 
*  Reserved  in  everlasting  chains  under  dark- 
ness unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day 
(Jude  6).     Their  liberty  to  tempt   and  do 
mischief  only  such  as  He  is  pleased  to  allow. 
Such  restraining  power  frequently  exhibited 
by  the  Saviour  when  on  earth.     In  their 
endeavours  to  crush  the  Church,  allowed  to 
proceed   so   far  and  no   farther.     So   with 
wicked  men  and  the  Church's  human  adver- 
saries.    Herod  "  stretched  forth  his  hand  to 
vex  certain  of  the  Church."     Had  already 
slain  one  apostle  and  was  intent  on  the  mur- 
der of  another,  when  he  is  smitten   by  an 
invisible  hand  and  miserably  dies  (Acts  xii. 
1,  &c.).     The  reformation  under  Luther  took 
place   immediately  after  the  Pope  and  his 
adherents,  at  the  Lateran  Council  in  1514, 
rejoiced  that  not  a  single  voice  was  raised 
against  his  authority  throughout  the  whole 
world.     The  power  of  the  Moslems  arrested 
at  Tours  by  Charles  Martel  in  1492,   when 
it  threatened  to  subdue  the  whole  of  Europe, 
as  it  had  already  done  a  large  portion  of  it. 
The  Invincible  Armada,  by  vvhicli  Philip  II.  of 
Spain  expected  to  crush  the  Reformation  in 
England,   with   its   troops   drawn   from   all 
quarters,  after  three  years  of  preparation, 
carrying,  as  it  did,  the  instruments  of  tor- 
ture by  which  the  heretics  of  England  were 
to   pay  the   price   of  their  desertion  from 
Rome,  was  destroyed  almost  without  hand 
when  on  the  very  eve  of  accomplishing  its 
purpose.     Deusfavit,  et  dissipantur.     "  God 
blew  and  they  are   scattered."     "Hitherto 
shalt  thou  come,  but  no  farther,  and  here 
shall  thy    proud   waves  be    stayed."    The 
"gates  of  hell"  may  send  forth  its  raging 
legions  against  the  Church  of  Christ,   but 
"  shall  not  prevail  against  it."    The  interests 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XXIVIII. 


of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  and  of  everj 
believer  composinf^  it,  safe  in  the  hands  of 
such  a  God  and  Saviour. 

3.  The  vicissitude  of  dai/  and  night.  Verses  12 
— 15. — "Hast thou  commanded  the  morning 
(to  succeed  tlie  night)  since  thj  days  (since 
thou  wast  born,  or,  because  thou  hast  seen 
many  days)  ;    and  caused  the  day-spring  to 
know   his   place    (the  exact   time  through- 
out  the  year   when  it  should   arise) ;   that 
it  might  take  hold  of  tlie  ends  of  the  earth 
(spreading    its  light   from  one  end    of  the 
earth  to  the  other — from  the  eastern  to  the 
western  horizon),   that   the  wicked    might 
be  shaken  out  of  it  (as  no  longer  able  to 
pursue    their  deeds   of  darkness  after  the 
morning  light  has  risen)  ?  It  (the  earth)  is 
turned  as  clay  to  the  seal  {Heb.^  'as  clay  of 
the  seal,'  as  the  clay  under  the    impression 
of  the   seal,   exhibiting  forms  and   appear- 
ances which  were  not  visible  upon  it  before); 
and  they  (the  objects  on  the  earth's  surface) 
stand  [forth]    as    a    garment  (a  beautiful, 
parti-coloured,    and    variously -figured   robe 
clothing  the  earth,  which  during  the  night 
was  entirely  unseen).     And  from  the  wick(3d 
their  light  is  withholden   (these    being,   as 
the  result  of  their  evil  deeds,  deprived  of  the 
light  either  by  imprisonment  or  death),  and 
the  high  arm  (their  mighty  power,  or  the 
arm^  uplifted  for  deeds  of  violence,)  shall  be 
(or  is)  broken  "  (in  consequence  of  the  light 
exposing  their  deeds   and  leading   lo   their 
detection  and  punishment,  and  from  courts 
of  justice  being  in  those  countries  usually 
held   in  the  morning).     Observe — (1)    One 
of  the  most  striking  examples  of  Divine  wisdom, 
power,  and  goodness,  qforded   in  the  succes- 
sion of  day  and  night.     The  result  of  the 
earth's  daily  rotation  on  its  axis  in  its  annual 
rovolution  round  the  sun,  and  the  inclination 
of  that  axis   from  the  perpendicular.     The 
return  of  light  every  morning  a  mercy  de- 
manding devout  thankfulness,  and  calling  for 
adoring  consideration  of  the  Divine  wisdom 
and  goodness;  all  the  more  as  this  has  been 
going   on   ever    since   the   creation   of    the 
world.      (2)    Man's  feebleness    exhibited  in 
connection  with  the  return  of  each  morninr/s 
light.    Man   unable   to   promote   or  hinder, 
hasten    or    retard,   its   return   by   a  single 
moment.    (3)  Among  other  beneficial  objects 
accompiislied  by  the  return  of  morning  light, 
is  its  subserviency  to  God's  moral  government 
of  the  world,  in  checking  the  commission  of 
evil  deeds  which   can  only    be   perpetrated 
under  the  cover  of  night,  and  in  leading  to 
their  detection  and  punishment.    (4)  As  every 
morning  throughout  tiie  year  exhibits  afresh 
to  nrian's  view  the  earth  arrayed  in  its  beau- 
tiful garments,  our  duty  is  thankfully  to  recog- 
nize the  goodness  of  God  in  an  arrangement 


which  conduces  so  much  to  our  comfort  and 
enjoyment,  as  well  as  to  our  convenience. 

4.  The  depths  of  the  ocean.     Verse  16. — 
*•  Hast  thou  enter^jd  into  the  springs  of  the 
sea  (the  'fountains  of  the  great  deep,'  Gen. 
vii.    11 J    or   *  the   entangled   thickets '     or 
jungle  in  the  ocean  beds)  ?    or  hast   thou 
walked  (as  on  dry  land)  in  the  search  of  tlie 
depth?"    (penetrated    and    examined    the 
depths  of  the  ocean  or  its  caverued  recesses). 
Three  facts  connected  with  the  ocean-depths 
exhibiting  God's  greatness  and  man's  little- 
ness.    (1)  The  unexplored  vegetation  found  in 
the  bottom  of  sea.     The  bed  of  the  ocean  in 
many    localities     luxuriantly    clothed    with 
marine  vegetation,  to  the  extent   of   many 
hundred   miles.      These    submarine    forests 
and   jungles  thronged   with    living    beings, 
while  no  eye  of  man  rests  on  their  hidden 
beauties.     (2)    The  great  depth  of  water  in 
some  parts  of  the  ocean.     Probable  that,  con- 
sidering the   greater  extent   of  the    ocean 
than  of  the  land,  the  bed  of  the  former  de- 
scends  to  a  def)th   considerably   exceeding 
the  highest  mountains  of  the  latter.     In  the 
North  Atlantic,  no    bottom   found  in  1849 
with  a  line  of  34,200  feet,  nearly  equal  to 
six  and  a  half  miles  in  length.    In  the  South 
Atlantic,  the  depth  reached,  in  1853,  of  eight 
miles  and  three  quarters.     In  these  almost 
u!i fathomable  depths,  not  a  plant  that  vege- 
tates,  nor  a  creature  that  finds  a  home  in 
those    ocean-caves,   but   is   open   to   God's 
Omniscient  eye,  and  is  the  object  of  his  provi- 
dential care.      (3)  The  existence  of  fountains 
in  the  bottom  of  the  sea.     These   fountains 
emit  their  streams  of  fresh  water  into  the 
ocean  from  underground  sources.      In  many 
places   the   water  of  the   sea  is  fresher  at 
great  depths  than  at  tlie  surface,  owing  to 
the  presence  of  such  springs.     A  powerful 
jet    of  fresh    water    found   in    the  Gulf  of 
Spezzia,  and  others  in  the  Persian  Gulf  and 
in  the  Bay  of  Xagua,  south-east  of  Cuba. 

5.  The  earth's  interior  and  tlie  net  her  icorid 
of  spirits.  Verse  17. — "Have  the  gates  o'" 
death  been  opened  unto  thee  ?  or  hast  i  hou 
seen  the  doors  of  the  shadow  of  death  ?  " 
Two  ideas  suggested  in  these  interrogatories. 
(1)  T/ie  earth's  interior  hidden  and  unknown 
to  men.  The  place  of  departed  spirits  often 
represented  as  in  the  interior  of  the  earth, 
probably  from  the  body  being  buried  beneatii 
its  surface  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  8 — 15).  Tlie 
earth's  interior  entirely  unknown  lo  man. 
Rocks  of  various  kinds  known  to  constitute 
its  crust  to  the  depth  of  eiglit  or  ten  miles. 
This  crust  supposed  to  extend  perhaps  fifteen 
miles  further — an  extent,  liowever,  of  which 
nothing  is  known.  The  space  beyond.  |)ro- 
bably  an  immense  cavern  of  subterranean 
fire,  heating  the  lower  parts  of  the  crust,  and 
occasioning  hot  spriugs  and  volcanoes,  which 

2A7 


\ 


CHAP,  xxxvin. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


from  time  to  time  force  up  flames,  lava,  and 
red-liot  mud.  (2)  The  world  of  spirits 
unknown  and  uvpenetrated  by  men  while  in 
Ihe  body.  Of  tliat  world  nothing  is  certainly 
known  except  as  revealed  in  ihe  Word  of 
(itjd.  Man  unable  to  penetrate  its  hidden 
regions  except  by  bursting  the  bars  of  his 
corporeal  enclosure.  Views  of  the  abode 
of  happy  spirits  sometimes  vouchsafed  to 
favoured  men  on  earth,  probably  while  in  an 
ec>talic  state  (2  Cor.  xii.  2 — 4;  l^ev.  iv. 
1  — 11 ;  vii.  9 — 17).  Persons  miraculously 
restored  to  life  unable  to  report  tlieir  obser- 
vation and  experience  in  the  spirit-world. 
Glimpses  of  heaven  occasionally  afforded  to 
to  believers,  especially  when  already  arrived 
at  its  confines,  tiumau  power  or  science 
unable  to  draw  aside  the  veil  that  conceals 
tlie  world  of  spirits  from  our  view.  Mysteries 
connected  with  the  state  of  the  dead  not 
revealed.  One  thing  certain ; — a  heaven  of 
joy  or  a  hell  of  woe  awaits  men  after  death, 
according  as  their  character  prepares  them  for 
one  or  the  other.  Fallen  angels  "reserved  in 
chains  under  darkness  to  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day,"  with  temporary  liberty  allowed, 
in  the  mean  time  to  perhaps  a  part(Jude  6; 
Luke  viii.  28—31). 

6.  The  ear Uis  extent.  Verse  18. — "Hast 
thou  perceived  (as  in  one  glance)  the  breadth 
of  the  earth?  declare  if  (or  since)  thou 
knowest  it  all.''  The  language  adapted  to 
the  ideas  then  prevalent  in  regard  to  the 
earth.  Its  form  and  extent  equally  unknown 
in  the  days  of  the  patriarch.  The  earth 
then  thought  to  be  avast  plain  with  inequali- 
ties on  its  surface,  streiching  to  an  unknown 
extent,  and  bounded  on  all  sides  by  the 
ocean.  More  recent  observation  and  study 
have  ascertained,  with  sufficient  accuracy, 
botii  the  figure  and  the  dimensions  of  the 
earth.  In  consequence  however  of  its 
spherical  figure,  man's  eye  able  to  rest  at 
any  moment  on  but  a  small  portion  of  its 
surface.  The  Eye  of  Omniscience  every 
moment  equally  on  every  part  of  that  sur- 
face, as  well  as  on  its  secret  depths. 

7.  The  origin  and  diffusion  of  light.  Verses 
19—21,  24.  "Where  is  the  way  [to]  where 
[the]  light  dwelleth?  and  as  for  darkness 
(viewed  as  a  substance,  rather  than  as  the 
absence  of  light),  where  is  the  place  thereof 
(from  whence  it  comes,  or  where  it  exactly 
begins)  ?  that  thou  shouldst  take  it  to  (or 
*  seize  it  at')  the  bound  thereof  (where  it 
begins  and  terminates),  and  that  thou 
shouldst  know  the  paths  to  the  house 
thereof?  Knowest  thou  (or  '  thou  knowest ') 
it,  because  thou  wast  then  born?  or  because 
the  number  of  thy  days  is  great?  By  what 
way  is  the  light  parted  (diffusing  itself  over 
the  earth  every  morning),  which  scattereth 
the  east  wind  upon  the  earth  ?  "  (the  solar 

248 


heat  causing  the  air  to  ascend  while  colder 
air  rushes  in  to  fill  its  place,  thus  causing  the 
wind,  especially  the  trade  winds,  which  blow 
for  months  from  east  to  west;  or,  "which 
the  east  wind  scatters  upon  the  earth/' — the 
light  rising  in  the  east). 

Li^ht 

naturally  an  object  of  special  attention  to 
early  sages.  Its  emanation  from  the  sun 
and  other  heavenly  bodies  obvious.  The 
subject,  however,  still  a  mysterious  one. 
According  to  Genesis,  light  created  before 
either  sun  or  moon.  These  bodies  merely 
reservoirs  or  reflectors  of  light.  The  ques- 
tion still  arose :  Wliat  is  light,  and  what  is 
its  origin  ?  Philosophers  still  uncertain  as 
to  its  nature.  Doubtful  whether  an  ex- 
tremely thin  and  subtle  fluid  substance,  or 
merely  an  agitation  or  undulation  of  the 
ether,  producing  its  effects  in  a  similar  way 
to  that  in  which  sound  is  produced  j  the  un- 
dulations in  the  one  case  striking  the  ear 
and  in  the  other  the  eye,  and  so  producing 
the  sensation  of  sound  or  light  respectively. 
The  former,  till  lately,  generally  believed  ; 
the  latter  now  the  prevailing  theory.  Light 
now  viewed  by  men  of  science  as  radiant 
force.  Uncertain  whether,  by  the  creation  of 
light  at  the  beginning,  we  are  to  undei stand 
the  creation  of  the  actual  force  itself,  or  that 
of  the  particular  condition  or  medium  of 
radiation,  technically  known  as  ether ^  sup- 
posed to  permeate  space  and  substance. 
The  latter  thought  more  probable.  Of  the 
source  of  light,  the  account  in  Genesis  says 
nothing.  Its  existence  or  appearance  fol- 
lowed the  command:  "Let  there  be  light." 
That  it  came  from  an  external  source,  pre- 
vious to  the  sun's  formation  or  appearance, 
seems  evident  from  the  alternation  of  light 
and  darkness  during  the  intervening  days. 
Light  ascertained,  from  the  testimony  of  the 
rocks,  to  have  operated  on  the  earth  ages 
before  man's  residence  on  it.  I'he  sun  the 
centre  of  light,  only  as  endued  with  a  lumi- 
nous atmosphere  which  envelopes  its  opaque 
body,  but  through  which  portions  of  that 
body  are  distinctly  visible.  The  manner  in 
which  the  light  is  "  parted,"  or  separated 
from  its  great  solar  centre,  as  much  a  mystery 
now  as  in  the  days  of  the  patriarch.  Known 
to  occupy  a  certain  time  in  reaching  the 
earth.  Its  rate  of  travel  ascertained  to  be 
about  thirteen  millions  of  miles  in  a  minute, 
and  the  period  required  in  reaching  the  earth, 
about  eight  minutes.  Some  of  the  laws 
according  to  which  light  operates,  in  recent 
times  satisfactorily  ascertained.  Known  to 
be  composed  of  dilt'erent  coloured  rays — red, 
yellow,  and  blue ;  their  composition  afford- 
ing the  white  light,  and  their  "  parting "  or 


y 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JOB 


CHA.P.  xxxvin. 


separation,  and  partial  blcndiiip^,  giving  the 
various  colours  presented  by  difl'erent  objects. 
Exliibited  in  tlieir  pure  and  blended  form  in 
the  rainbow;  the  raindrops  separating  the 
rays  and  refracting  them  at  difTerent  angles 
after  the  manner  of  a  prism,  and  so  pro- 
ducing the  three  primary  and  four  secondary 
colours.  The  light  emanating  from  the  fixed 
stars  generally  like  that  of  our  own  sun, 
but  in  some  cases  coloured ;  difl'erent  stars 
appearing  to  be  difl'erent  colours 

The  question  in  regard  to  the  abode  of  the 
liglit,  perhaps  referring  rather  to  the  sun 
itself,  frequently  called  "  the  light,"  as  being 
the  centre  and  source  of  it  to  the  earth. 
Represented  as  coming  forth  as  a  bridegroom 
"from  his  chamber"  (Ps.  xix.  5).  The 
question:  Where  is  that  chamber?  The 
earth's  annual  revolution  round  the  sun  and 
daily  rotation  on  its  own  axis,  not  then 
known.  The  sun  supposed  to  move  from 
east  to  west,  as  it  appears  to  do.  But 
whence  he  rose,  and  where  he  remained 
after  settinir,  a  mystery.  The  Ptolemaic 
theory  of  the  earth  being  the  centre  of  the 
system,  and  the  sun,  &c.,  moving  round  it, 
finally  succeeded  by  the  Copernican  or  New- 
tonian, which  places  the  sun  in  the  centre, 
at  the  distance  of  ninety-five  millions  of 
miles  from  the  earth.  The  sun  appears  to 
rise  in  the  east  and  move  towards  the  west, 
from  the  earth  moving  on  its  axis  from  west 
to  east.  The  opposite  hemispheres  of  the 
globe  naturally  illuminated  and  in  darkness 
alternately  once  in  twenty-four  hours,  the 
|)eriod  of  one  rotation  on  its  axis. 

8.  The  snow  and  hail.  Verses  22,  23. 
"Hast  thou  entered  into  the  treasures 
of  the  snow?  or  hast  thou  seen  the 
treasures  of  the  liail,  which  I  have  re- 
served against  the  time  of  trouble,  against 
the  day  of  battle  and  of  war?"  Snow 
and  hail  known  to  be  the  effects  of  cold  in  the 
higher  regions  of  the  atmosphere;  the  former 
being  condensed  vapour  congealed  before 
it  is  formed  into  drops,  and  the  latter  the 
drops  themselves  congealed  in  their  descent 
to  the  earth.  Usually  brought  by  cold  winds 
from  the  north;  their  treasures  therefore, 
to  those  living  north  of  the  equator,  appa- 
rently in  the  northern  regions.  These 
regions  probably  unknown  in  the  days  of  Job. 
The  treasures  of  the  snow  and  hail,  however, 
rather  in  the  higher  parts  of  the  atmosphere, 
where  man  has  not  been  able  to  penetrate. 
Spoken  of  as  "treasures"  from  their  vast 
abundance,  and  as  being  apparently  stored 
up  in  the  clouds.  Snow  and  hail  among  the 
Creator's  instruments  in  His  government  of 
the  world,  employed  often  in  a  way  of 
judgment.  Hail  especially  an  instrument 
of  destruction  to  the  crops  of  the  field.  Em- 
ployed as   one   of  the   plagues    on   Egypt 


(Exod.  ix,  18) ;  and  as  the  means  of  discom- 
fiting the  combined  forces  of  the  Canaanites 
(Josh.  X.  11).  To  be,  perhaps,  still  more 
grievously  employed  among  the  judgments  to 
be  inflicted  on  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist, 
forming  part  of  the  seventh  and  last,  vial 
(Rev.  xvi.  21).  The  sufferings  and  destruc- 
tion of  Napoleon's  Grand  Army,  in  1812, 
mainly  due  to  the  snow  and  cold  of  a  Russian 
winter.  Snow  and  hail  among  the  Almightv's 
reserved  treasures  for  the  discomfiture  of  His 
and  His  Churches'  adversaries,  to  be  probably 
employed  in  the  "battle  of  that  great  day  of 
God  Almighty, — in  the  place  called  in  tlie 
Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon'*  (Rev. xvi.  14 
—16). 

9.  Rain.  Verse  25—28,  34,  37,  3S.— 
"Who  hath  divided  a  water-course  (conduit 
or  channel)  for  the  overflowing  (inundation 
or  pouring  forth)  of  waters  [in  the  form  of 
rain],  or  a  way  for  the  lightning  (or  flash) 
of  thunder  (the  usual  precursor  of  rain  in  the 
east,  ch.  28,  26:  Zeeh.  x.  1):  to  cause  it  to 
rain  on  the  earth  where  no  man  is  [to  care 
either  for  the  ground  or  the  beasts  that  live 
upon  it] ;  on  the  wilderness,  where  there 
is  no  man  [but  only  the  inferior  animals  to 
be  provided  for] ;  to  satisfy  the  desolate  and 
waste  ground ;  and  to  cause  the  bud  of  the 
tender  herb  to  spring?  Hath  the  rain  a 
father  ?  Canst?  thou  lift  up  thy  voice  to  the 
clouds,  [commanding]  that  abundance  of 
waters  may  cover  thee  ?  Who  can  number 
the  clouds  in  wisdom  (or  *  muster  '  them  as  an 
army  for  the  purpose  for  which  he  requires 
them  (2  Kings  xxv.  19j?  Who  can  stay 
(or  '  lay,'  so  as  to  empty)  the  bottles  of 
heaven  (the  clouds,  resembling  in  their 
form  and  use  the  dark-coloured  water-skins 
employed  in  the  East),  when  the  dust 
groweth  into  hardness  (is  fused  into  a  solid 
mass),  and  the  clouds  cleave  fast  together 
(thus  forming  soil  for  cultivation,  instead  of 
mere  dust, — the  efl'ect  of  continued  drought)?" 
Still  points  to  the  mysteries  of  meteorology, 
even  yet  but  imperfectly  understood,  but 
evincing  a  wisdom  and  a  power  altogether 
Divine. 

Four  circumstances  connected  with  rain 
here  alluded  to  as  exhibiting  God's  great- 
ness and  man's  littleness.  (1.)  That  the  rain 
does  not  descend  in  one  mass  of  water  from 
the  clondsy  but  in  innumerable  channels 
or  tiny  rills.  Who  makes  these  channels  P 
what  has  man  to  do  with  the  forming  of 
them  ?  Man,  as  in  Egypt,  makes  channels 
for  conveying  the  water  from  the  well  to 
irrigate  his  garden  or  his  field  ;  but  who 
makes  those  channels  that  convey  the  water 
down  from  the  clouds?  (2)  The  mi/steriovs 
production  of  (he  rain,  by  the  conversion  of 
invisible  into  visible  vajionr,  and  its  condensa- 
Uon  iato  drops,  which  increase  in  size  as  they 

249 


CHAP.   XXXVIU. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


fall  to  ihe,  ground.  This  atmosplieric  pro- 
cess uukiiowu  in  llie  days  ot  Job,  and  still  a 
mystery  of  Divine  power  and  wisdom, 
"ilulli  the  rain  a  fat  her?"  (3)  The  pre- 
pttradon  fur  the  ruin  by  the  lightning  or 
electric  Jtash,  dissolcing  the  rain-cloud  by 
reducing  its  temperature,  or  othermse.  Drops 
of  water  known  to  resnlt  ho\\\  the  combina- 
tion of  the  two  gases  of  which  water  is 
composed,  through  the  introduction  of  an 
electric  spark.  But  what  power  is  it  which 
so  nianau'cs  that  mysterious  element  or 
force  called  ekclrirUy,  as  to  produce  tlie 
copious  and  fertilizing  showers  ?  "  Who 
hath    made    a    way    for    the    lightning?" 

(4)  That  the  wihlernesn  receioes  a  supply  of 
ram  a.s  well  as  inhabited  places.  Proof  of  its 
abundance  and  the  riches  of  Divine  goodness. 
Ko  stinting  with  God,  neither  from  want  of 
ability  nor  willingness  to  bestow.  Enough 
and  to  spare  with  Him.  Even  tiie  beasts 
in  the  solitary  waste  provided  for.  His  also 
to  make  even  the  solitary  place  to  be  glad 
for  His  people,  and  to  cause  the  desert  to 
rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose  (Is.  xxxv.  1). 
Divine  power  and  goodness  able  to  turn  the 
wilderness  into  a  fruitful  field  as  seen  in  the 
oases   in  African   deserts    (Is.   xxxii.    ]5). 

(5)  That  the  clouds  are  so  managed  as  to  be 
made  the  means,  by  their  filling  and  emptying, 
like  so  many  huge  water  skins,  of  irrigating 
ihe  earth  and  ministering  to  man^s  necessities. 
Who  so  musters  those  clouds,  like  a  general 
his  forces,  taking  account  of  their  number, 
size,  &c.,  as  to  have  them  ready  for  his 
service,  and  to  bring  them  together  when- 
ever he  pleases  to  employ  theni  P  Who  dis- 
pones and  empties  those  bottles  of  heaven? 

10.  The  dew.  Verse  18.— "  Who  hath 
begotten  the  drops  of  dew  ?"  Another  of 
the  mysteries  of  nature.  Dew  long  sup- 
posed to  fall  on  the  ground  during  the 
night.  But  whence  its  fall  ?  There  is  no 
cloud.  No  one  ever  saw  it  fall.  The  pro- 
cess better  understood  in  modern  times. 
The  dew  rather  a  formation  or  deposit  than 
a  descent.  The  moisture  in  the  saturated 
air,  in  consequence  of  the  greatly  reduced 
tempcature  during  the  night  and  its  con- 
tact with  the  cooler  ground,  condenses  ou 
certain  substances  and  forms  drops,  like 
those  which  stand  on  the  wall  of  a  room, 
wlien  the  air,  wliich  has  been  saturated  with 
inoislure,  is  suddenly  cooled  by  the  reduc- 
tion of  ihe  temperature.  Usually  tails,  or  is 
deposited,  in  clear  cold  nights  after  a  warm 
day.  Hence  found  with  us  especially  in 
autumn.  iMobt  copious  in  warm  climates, 
ivhere  the  dass  are  hot  and  the  nights  often 
cold.  In  eastern  countries,  as  in  Judaea,  the 
want  of  ram  often  compensated  by  the 
abundant  dew,  in  coohng  and  moistening  the 
jffound,  and  in  refreshing  and   promoting 


vegetation.  Hence  the  frequent  allusion  to 
it  and  to  its  beuchcial  effects  found  in  the 
Scriptures  (Gen.xxvii.  28  ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  13, 
28  ;  Ps.  cxxxiii.  3 ;  Prov.  xix.  1 2 ;  Is.  xviii.  4). 
Frequently  employed  for  comparison  and 
metaphor.  The  Word  of  God  compared  to 
it  from  its  influence  on  the  soul  (Dour, 
xxxii.  2).  The  people  of  God  compared  to 
it  from  their  infiutmce  on  the  world  (Mio.  v. 
7).  God  Himself  compared  to  it  in  relation 
to  his  people  (Hos.  xiv.  5).  The  converts 
of  Christ  compared  to  it  both  from  their 
number  and  beauty,  especially  as  seen  in 
tiie  morning  of  the  resurrection  after  the 
night  of  the  tomb  (Ps.  ex.  3). 

11.  The  ice  and  hoarfrost.  Verses  29,  30. — 
"Out  of  whose  womb  came  the  ice?  and 
the  hoary  frost  of  heaven,  who  hath  en- 
gendered it  ?  The  waters  (in  consequence 
of  the  cold)  are  hid  as  with  a  stone  (or, 
*  being  made  as  a  stone'),  and  the  face 
of  the  deep  (any  collection  of  water)  is 
frozen"  ('held  bound'  or  'holds  itself  to- 
gether,' i.  e.  is  congealed).  Ice  known  to 
be  water  rendered  solid  by  the  loss  of  its 
natural  heat,  which  keeps  its  particles  sepa- 
rate and  so  preserves  it  in  a  liquid  state, 
but  which  the  water  gives  out  to  the  atmos- 
phere in  contact  with  it  in  consequence  of 
the  great  reduction  of  its  temperature. 
Hoar-frost  simply  the  dew  frozen  before  it 
has  been  formed  into  drops.  The  tempera- 
ture of  the  atmosphere  that  to  which  these 
and  almost  all  the  phenomena  of  meteorology 
are  due.  This  again  due  to  the  radiant 
force,  or  light,  as  including  heat,  imparted 
by  the  sun  to  the  earth,  and  then  again  dis- 
persed into  space.  Heat  an  element  or  force 
pervading  all  bodies,  and  keeping  their  par- 
ticles at  a  certain  degree  of  expansion. 
Suddenly  withdrawn  from  nature,  the  globe 
would  shrink  into  a  much  smaller  compass ; 
what  is  now  in  a  gaseous  state  would  become 
liquid;  the  liquid  would  become  solid;  and 
all  vegetable  and  animal  life  on  the  earth's 
surface  would  instantly  perish.  On  the 
other  hand,  an  opposite  result  would  ensue 
from  a  much  increased  degree  of  heat. 
Solids  would  become  liquid  or  be  consumed, 
while  liquids  would  be  converted  into  vapour. 
The  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of  God 
seen  in  so  tempering  the  heat  given  forth 
from  the  sun,  that  both  the  atmosphere  and 
the  earth  are  in  their  present  ordmary  con- 
dition. Times  indicated  by  the  rocks  when 
a  different  state  of  things  existed.  A  time 
indicated  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth,  when 
it  will  be  otherwise  again  (2  Pet.  iii.  10,  12). 

12.  The  heaoenly  bodies.  Verse  31 — 33.^ 
"Canst  thou  bind  (restrain,  or  perhaps 
unite)  the  sweet  influences  (or  delights,  or 
according  to  another  reading,  'bonds')  of 
Pleiades  (,Marg.,  *Chimah,   or   the  Seven 


EOmiETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP,  xxxvm 


Stars'),  or  loose  the  bands  of  Orion? 
{Marg.y  *Cliesil/  or  the  Fool  or,  Im|)ious 
one;  a  magnificent  constellation  appearini^ 
in  winter,  and  therefore  connected  with 
stormy  weatlier,  hence  probably  the  lIol)revv 
name.  Orion  a  warrior  in  Greek  myt  hology ; 
the  name  given  from  the  supposed  resem- 
blance of  the  constellation  to  a  giant  or  hero  ; 
the  'bands'  of  Orion  either  the  rigours  of 
winter,  which  bind  up  vegetation,  or  the 
invisible  tie  which  connects  ttie  numerous 
stars  that  compose  it,  the  telescope  re- 
vealing myriads  more  than  are  visible 
to  the  naked  eye,  particnlarly  in  the 
nebula  seen  in  the  belt  of  the  figure). 
Canst  thou  bi'ing  forth  Mazz.iroth  {Marg.y 
*  the  [twelve]  signs  of  the  Zodiac,'  appearing 
successively  through  the  twelve  months  of 
the  year),  in  his  season?  or,  canst  thou  guide 
Arcturus  with  his  sons  ?  (probably  the  con- 
stellation known  as  the  Great  Bear,  or  the 
Plough ;  the  Hebrew  and  Arabic  name  Aish 
denoting  the  Bier,  the  four  stars  in  the  body 
of  the  Bear  forming  the  Bier  itself,  and  the 
three  in  the  tail,  its  *  sons '  or  attendant 
mourners :  the  constellation  appropriately 
said  to  be  '  guided,'  not  brought  forth, 
— being  visible  all  through  the  year,  and  ap- 
pearing continually  to  move  round  the  centre 
which  we  call  the  North  Pole).  Knowest 
thou  the  ordinances  of  heaven  (or  laws  of 
the  heavens)  ?  Canst  thou  set  the  dominion 
(or  influence)  thereof  in  the  earth  ?  " 

The  attention  of  eastern  sages  directed  at 
an  early  period  to  the  stars,  their  time  of 
appearing,  and  their  supposed  influence  on 
the  earth.  Their  successive  appearance 
indicative  of  the  seasons  of  the  year  and  the 
time  suitable  for  agricultural  and  other 
pursuits.  Stars  early  grouped  into  figures 
or  constellations,  to  which  names  were  given 
from  their  supposed  resemblance  to  terres- 
trial objects.  Twelve  of  these  appeared  to  rise 
or  come  into  view  successively  in  the  course 
of  the  year,  thus  marking  the  twelve  months. 
Their  names,  the  llara,  the  Bull,  &c.  These 
twelve  groups  or  constellations,  called  the 
twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  probably  what  is 
here  meant  by  Mazzarotli.  The  name  perhaps 
identical  with  one  denoting  "abodes,"  as 
indicating  the  different  stages  of  the  sun  in 
his  apparent  annual  course.  Said  to  be 
"brought  forth,"  because  apparently  so  j  their 
appearance  being  probably  due  to  the  earth's 
progress  round  the  sun.  Natural  things 
spoken  of  in  the  Bible  rather  as  they  appear 
to  be,  than  as  they  are  in  reality. 

The  Pleiades  or  Seven  Stars,  a  group  or 
cluster  of  stars  in  the  constellation  or  Sign 
of  the  Bull.  Their  Hebrew  name  Chimahy 
denoting  a  heap  or  cluster,  probably  given 
from  their  appearance.  Appears  about  the 
middle  of  April.    Hence  associated  with  the 


season  of  spring,  whence  its  Latin  name — 
Vergiliaj.  The  name  in  the  text  its  Greek 
one,  from  a  word  denoting  to  "sail";  as 
indicating  the  time  when  navigation  might 
be  safely  commenced.  The  "sweet  influ- 
ences," or  dehghts,  ascribed,  according  to  the 
present  text,  to  the  Pleiades,  as  marking  the 
arrival  of  Spring.  The  genial  change  in  the 
weather  accompanying  the  appearance  of 
this  constellation,  hailed  as  not  merely 
necessary  to  vegetation  and  the  sustenance 
of  man  and  beast,  but  as  also  contributing  in 
a  high  degree  to  man's  comfort  and  enjoy- 
ment.   The  season  of 

Spring 

loved  and  celebrated  in  all  ages,  as  the 
season — (1)  Of  returning  bright ness  and 
sunshine,  after  the  clouds  and  gloom  of 
winter.  (2)  Of  warmth  and  comforty  after 
the  cold  and  tempests  of  preceding  months. 
(3)  Of  revived  lifey  both  in  the  vegetable 
and  animal  creation — the  natural  world  ap- 
pearing to  burst  forth  as  from  a  state  of 
death.  (4)  01  freshness  and  beauty,  as  seen 
everywhere  in  the  verdure  of  the  fields,  the 
foliage  of  the  woods,  and  the  flowers  of  the 
garden  and  the  meadow.  (5)  Oi  jot/ousness 
and  gaiety,  exhibited  in  the  melody  of  birds 
and  hum  of  insects  that  fills  the  air,  the 
flitting  butterfly  and  the  sportive  fish.  (^6) 
Of  iove,  as  seen  especially  in  the  birds  that 
now  pair  and  build  their  nests,  and  warble 
their  affection  to  one  another.  All  nature 
appears  to  rejoice  and  put  on  festal  attire, 
and  man  participates  largely  in  the  "  sweet 
influences  "  of  Spring. 

**  Now  that  the  winter's  gone,  the  earth  hath 

lost 
Her  snow-white  robes ;  and  now  no  more  the 

frost 
Candies  the  grass,  or  calls  an  icy  cream 
Upon  the  silver  lake  or  crystal  stream  ; 
But  the  warm  air  thaws  the  benumbed  earth, 
And  makes  it  tender;  gives  a  second  birih 
To  the  dead  swallow ;  wakes  in  hollow  tree 
The  drowsy  cuckoo  and  the  humble  bee. 
Now  do  a  choir  of  chirping  minstrels  bring 
In  triumph  to  the  world  the  youthful  spring 
The  valleys,  hills,  and  woods  in  rich  array 
Welcome  the  coming  of  the  long'd-for  May 
Now  all  things  smile." 

Spring  fitted  and  intended — (1)  To  awaken 
gratitude  to  its  Divine  and  bountiful  Author, 
who  gives  us  again  to  rejoice  in  "the  sweet 
influences  of  the  Pleiades."  Then,  if  ever,  it 
is  to  be  said :  "  All  thy  works  shall  praise 
Thee,  0  Lord ;  and  thy  saints  shall  bless 
Thee  "  (Ps.  cxlv.  10).  (2)  To  serve  as  an 
emblem  of  the  spiritual  spring — (i.)  When  the 
tout  w  renewed  and  quickened  to  spiritual  life 

251 


CHAP.   XXXVIII. 


UOMlLT^nC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  Jesus  arises  on  it  as 
"  the  Sun  of  rii^hieousness  with  liealing  in 
His  wings."  Miin's  natural  state,  in  C()nse- 
quence  of  the  Fall,  one  of  winter  and  spiritual 
death.  Christ  came  into  the  world  and 
comes  into  the  soul  as  the  reviving  Sun,  to 
impart  life,  and  fruitfulness,  and  joy.  The 
Spn-it,  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life,  em- 
ployed by  llim  to  breathe  upon  the  soul  and 
renew  its  life,  (ii.)  When  the  believer,  under 
the  same  Divine  influence,  is  restored  to 
liveli/iess  and  comfort,  and  to  the  "joys  of 
God's  salvation,"  after  a  season  of  darkness, 
deadness,  and  tempest,  (iii.)  When  both 
the  Church  and  the  earth  itself  shall  be  re- 
newal in  life  and  beauty  at  the  Lord's  advent 
and  the  resurrection  of  the  just.  A  new 
life  then  imparted  to  the  believer's  body 
after  the  winter  of  the  tomb,  and  a  new 
earth  created  out  of  the  ashes  of  the  present 
one,  wherein  shall  dwell  righteousness  (2 
Pet.  iii.  12,  13  }  Rom.  viii.  21—23).  The 
Bridegroom's  call  to  the  Church  then  fully 
realized  :  "  Lo,  the  winter  is  past ;  the  rain 
is  over  and  gone  5  the  flowers  appear  on  the 
earth  ;  and  the  time  of  singing  is  come,  and 
the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land : 
Arise,  m\  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away" 
(Cant,  ii';  11—13). 

The  Pleiades,  especially  the  brightest  star 
in  the  cluster,  called  Alcyone,  recently  as- 
certained to  be  the  centre  or  axle  round 
which  the  Solar  System  revolves,  the  sun 
carrying  with  it  the  earth  and  other  planets 
with  their  satellites,  and  moving  in  the 
direction  of  the  constellation  Hercules.  The 
number  of  stars  seen  in  the  cluster,  with  the 
aid  of  a  good  telescope,  nine  or  ten  times  as 
many  as  those  visible  to  the  naked  eye.  The 
distance  of  the  group  from  the  sun,  thirty- 
four  millions  of  times  greater  than  that  of 
the  cun  from  the  earth.  The  "influences"  of 
the  Pleiades  upon  the  earth,  in  so  attracting 
it  with  the  whole  Solar  System  as  to  carry  it 
round  it  at  the  rate,  it  is  supposed,  of  four 
hundred  and  twenty-two  thousand  miles  a 
day,  in  an  orbit  which  it  will  require  many 
thousands  of  years  to  accomplisi),  probably 
unspeakably  greater  than  was  dreamt  of  in 
the  days  of  Job.  Yet  perfectly  known  to 
Him  who  asked  the  question  :  Canst  thou 
bind  the  sweet  influences  of  the  Pleiades  ? 
and  who  Himself  communicated  to  the  group 
its  mighty  power  of  attraction.  The  Hebrew 
name,  interpreted  by  some  as  denoting  a  pivot 
or  hinge,  in  striking  accordance  with  this 
recent  discovery  of  science.  —See  an  article 
on  the  subject  from  Dr.MrMillan  in  Uickimon's 
Theological  Quarterly  for  April,  1875. 

The  _  "  ordinances   of    heaven,"   or    laws 

governing  the  motions  and  influences  of  the 

heavenly    bodies,    much   better    understood 

now  than  in  the  time  of  the  patriarch.    The 

«5« 


discovery  of  these  laws  one  of  the  greatest 
achievements  of  modern  science,  associated 
with  the  names  of  Newton,  Kepler,  and 
Laplace.  The  laws  themselves  of  a  different 
nature  from  that  contemplated  by  early 
sages.  The  law  of  gravitation, — by  which 
bodies  and  the  particles  which  compose 
them  act  upon  each  other  according  to 
their  bulk,  with  an  attracting  force  which 
increases  as  the  squares  of  their  distance 
from  each  other  decrease, — found  so  far  a? 
observation  has  been  able  to  penetrate,  to 
operate  through  all  space.  This  law,  in  con- 
nection with  another, — that  of  the  vis  inertias 
of  bodies  operating  as  a  centrifugal  force,  or 
the  tendency  of  a  body  to  move  on  in  a 
straight  line  when  once  put  in  motion — that 
by  which  the  earth  and  other  planets,  with 
their  attendant  moons,  are  preserved  in  their 
orbits  and  carried  round  the  sun.  The  same 
law  in  operation  among  the  fixed  stars,  some 
of  which  are  observed  to  revolve  round  each 
other.  Each  star  thus  preserved  in  its  own 
place  in  the  heavens.  The  same  law  that 
which  carries  our  solar  system  round  its 
centre  in  the  Pleiades,  and  which  probably 
carries  the  Pleiades  themselves  round  some 
other  centre  hid  far  away  in  the  unexplored 
depths  of  our  galaxy ;  and,  possibly,  the 
galaxy  itself,  with  its  countless  millions  of 
worlds,  ronnd  some  other  centre, — perhaps 
the  glorious  throne  of  their  Almighty  Creator. 
The  conservation  offeree — or  the  fact  that 
none  of  the  natural  forces — heat,  light, 
electricity,  mechanical  motion,  magnetism, 
and  chemism, — is  either  created  or  anni- 
hilated in  any  of  the  material  processes  of 
the  universe,  but  is  only  transformed — either 
taking  the  place  of  or  giving  place  to  an 
equivalent  amount  of  some  other  force — pro- 
nounced by  the  late  Professor  Faraday  to  be 
"the  highest  law  in  physical  science  which 
our  faculties  permit  us  to  perceive."  Yet,  how 
little  it  is  that  we  know  of  the  *'  ordinances  of 
heaven,"  or  laws  of  the  material  universe, 
we  are  reminded  by  the  well-known  language 
of  one  of  the  greatest  discoverers  of  those 
laws.  According  to  the  authority  just 
quoted,  the  idea  of  gravity  as  varying 
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance, 
apparently  in  direct  opposition  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  conservation  of  force  j  involving, 
as  it  appears  to  do,  the  creation  and  anni- 
hilation of  power  to  an  enormous  extent, 
simply  by  the  change  of  distance, — a  result 
equal  to  the  "highest  acts  our  minds  can 
appreciate  of  infinite  power  upon  matter." 
Here  science,  notwithstanding  her  amazing 
progress  in  unfolding  the  mysteries  of  the 
universe,  is  at  a  stand.  Besides  her  igno- 
rance of  the  nature  of  the  forces  which  she 
has  succeeded  in  discovering,  she  is  unable 
to  explain  the  apparent  opposition  between 


nOMlLETlC  CO^fMMTARr:  JOB. 


CHAP.  XXXVIII. 


the  two  highest  physical  laws  with  wliich 
she  is  acquainted.  These  "ordinances  of 
heaven,"  as  not  only  "  known "  but  estab- 
lished by  the  Almiglity,  singularly  expressive 
of  the  infinite  power  and  glorious  majesty  of 
"Hira,  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 

The  "dominion"  or  influence  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  upon  the  earth,  also  a  sub- 
ject transcondin""  man's  present  knowledge. 
The  influence  or  the  sun  alone  upon  the 
earth  still  full  of  mystery.  Science  teaches 
us  that  on  the  light  or  radiant  force  (includ- 
ing heat)  imparted  by  the  sun,  depend  well 
nigh  the  whole  of  the  phenomena  of  meteor- 
ology ;  being  the  cause  not  only  of  the  tem- 
perature of  the  earth,  but  of  the  moistness 
of  the  atmospliere,  of  winds,  of  clouds,  of 
dew,  of  rain,  of  ocean-currents,  and  of 
"every  one  of  the  elements  which,  variously 
combined  and  conditioned  by  the  earth's 
external  features,  go  to  make  up  climate. — 
WarringtorCs  Week  of  Creation.  Changes  in 
the  condition  of  our  own  atmosphere,  and 
so  of  the  weather,  believed  to  be  connected 
with  changes  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  sun. 
The  influence  of  the  moon  upon  the  earth, 
especially  upon  its  waters,  well  known.  A 
portion  of  heat  discovered  to  reach  us  even 
from  the  fixed  stars.  The  chemical  influ- 
ence of  the  solar  rays  on  bodies  exposed  to 
tlie  light  also  well  known.  The  very  exist- 
ence of  vegetation  dependent  on  that  ele- 
ment or  force  in  those  'rays  called  actinism 
or  chemism.  Even  metals  and  rocks  unable 
to  be  exposed  to  its  influence  without  under- 
going a  change  in  consequence  of  it.  The 
"dominion"  or  influence  of  the  heavenly 
bodies,  especially  of  the  sun,  doubtless 
intimately  connected  with  the  physical  forces 
now  known  to  man,  and  found  to  be  so  cor- 
related as  to  be  capable  of  producing  and 
being  resolved  or  transformed  into  each 
other.  Man  so  far  from  "setting"  that 
"  dominion  "  in  the  earth,  that  he  even  yet 
very  imperfectly  understands  it. 

13.  Lightning  and  meteors.  Verses  35,  36. 
— "Canst  thou  send  lightnings  tliat  they 
may  go  and  say  unto  thee*:  Here  we  are? 
Who  hath  put  wisdom  in  the  inward  parts 
(perhaps  '  into  the  dark  masses  '  of  cloud  or 
*  into  the  airy  dartings ')  ?  or,  who  hath  given 
understanding  to  the  heart  (not  here  the  word 
always  translated  'heart,'  but  one  elsewhere 
denoting  a  picture,  image,  or  imagination, 
as  in  Is.  ii.  16  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  1 ;  Ps.  Ixxiii,  7, — 
perhaps  the  forms  of  the  clouds,  or  the  shoot- 
ing meteors)  ?  "  Human  powerlessness  seen 
in  relation  to  the  iisrht  nine:.  Man  able  to 
draw  down  electricity  from  the  thunder- 
cloud, and  by  a  suitable  apparatus  to  obtain 
vivid  electric  sparks  and  flashes  from  the 
atmosphere.  But  his  feebleness  in  the  pre- 
Beace  of  this  mysterious  ageut  shown  in  the 


fact  that  such  attempts  have  been  known  to 
be  followed  by  instant  death.  Although  un- 
controllable by  man,  the  liglitningyet  obedient 
to  the  command  of  its  Maker,  its  origin  in 
the  electricity  of  which  the  earth  is  the 
reservoir.  The  earth  thus  shown  to  contain 
within  it  the  elements  of  its  own  destruction, 
which  only  await  the  bidding  of  their 
Creator  to  do  their  work. 

The  allusions  in  the  36th  verse  uncer- 
tain. The  reference  to  celestial  phenomena 
favoured,  if  not  rendered  certain,  by  the  con- 
text. Clouds  or  meteors  probably  in  view, 
as  objects  far  beyond  man's  control,  but 
serving  the  wise  purposes  of  their  Creator 
as  if  themselves  endowed  with  intelligence. 
The  first  clause  possibly  a  reference  to  the 
Aurora  Borealis,  the  well-known  lights  aris- 
ing from  electricity,  and  seen  sometimes  at 
night  shooting  up  in  streams  from  the 
northern  part  of  the  sky;  their  motions, 
especially  as  seen  in  more  northern  latitudes, 
sometimes  amazingly  quick  and  their  forma 
rapidly  changing.  The  second  clause  of  the 
verse  may  be  an  allusion  to  the  phenomenon 
known  as  Meteoric  Showers  or  Falling  Stars. 
These  meteors  usually  visible  in  clear  weather 
about  the  middle  of  Noveniber.  Myriads  of 
small  stars  appear  to  shoot  out  in  all  direc- 
tions with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  and  then 
suddenly  disappear.  The  nature  and  origin 
of  the  phenomenon  still  undetermined.  To 
man  the  motions  of  these  meteors  appear  in 
the  highest  degree  arbitrary.  But  even 
these,  like  the  lightning-flash,  are  under  the 
direction  of  infinite  wisdom  and  in  accord- 
ance with  the  will  of  their  Creator.  "  Not 
an  object  in  nature  left  to  the  reckless  sway 
of  chance.  All  tilings  adjusted  with  un- 
erring wisdom,  managed  by  infinite  power, 
and  overruled  for  good  with  paternal  care."— 
Duncan's  Philosophy/  of  the  Seasons. 

According  to  the  English  version,  the 
questioning  in  the  36th  verse  will  relate  to — 

14.  Human  reason  and  intelligence.  "Who 
hath  put  wisdom  in  the  inward  parts,"  &c. 
"  Wisdom  "  and  "  understanding  "  used  to 
denote  reason  and  intelligence,  or  the  first 
of  the  three  great  classes  of  mental  faculties 
— the  intellect,  the  emotions,  and  the  will; 
the  intellect  including  both  the  cognitive  or 
knowing y  and  the  reflective  or  reasoning 
faculties.  The  "  inward  parts  '*  and  the 
"heart"  spoken  of  as  the  seat  of  these 
faculties.  The  brain  now  more  correctly 
regarded  as  the  seat  and  organ  of  the  mind. 
Three  things  suggested  by  the  questions  in 
reference  to  the 

Human  Intellect. 

(1)  Reason  and  intelligence  proper  to  man, 
"Wisdom"  found  in  man's  "inward  parts," 

253 


CHAP.  XXXVIII. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


and  "  understanding  "  in  his  "  heart."  Man 
distiuguislu'd  froni  the  brute  creation  by  the 
possession  of  tliese  faculties  of  the  intellect. 
Thus  qualifuMl  to  know,  love,  and  intelligently 
to  serve  his  Creator,  to  contemi)late  the  works 
of  God  around  him,  to  reason  on  subjects  of 
the  most  varied  and  hij^hest  import,  and  to 
prepare  for  another  and  a  better  life.  Only 
so  Miuch  "  understanding  "  possessed  by  the 
lower  animals  as  to  qualify  them  for  the  pre- 
servation and  enjoyment  of  the  present  life, 
and  for  the  propae^ation  aiid  preservation  of 
offspring,  as  well  as  to  render  them,  in 
various  respects,  serviceable  to  man.  Reason 
and  intelligence  in  man  not  something 
merely  differing  in  degree  from  the  instinct 
of  other  animals,  but  differing  from  it  in 
kind.  Intellect  that  which  allies  him  both 
to  angels  and  to  God  Himself.  Constitutes 
a  large  portion  of  the  image  of  his  Creator 
in  wiiieh  he  was  created.  Existed  in  a  much 
higher  degree  before  sin  disordered  and  de- 
praved his  nature.  Men  now  "alienated 
from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance 
that  is  in  them,  because  of  the  blindness  of 
their  heart"  (Eph.  iv.  18).  The  faculties 
themselves,  however,  still  in  existence  as 
man  enters  the  world.  Their  development 
the  work  of  time.  That  development  affected 
by  circumstances,  and  the  means  employed 
for  it.  Education  the  great  means  of  de- 
veloping the  mental  faculties.  The  intellect 
of  races  and  families  progressive  or  retrograde 
according  to  such  development.  The  degree 
of  intellect  different  in  different  individuals, 
constitutionally  and  from  birth.  This  differ- 
ence, doubtless,  in  some  cases  the  result  of 
circumstances,  but  more  generally  from  the 
good  pleasure  of  the  Creator,  who  even  in 
this  respect  "  divideth  to  every  man  severally 
as  He  will  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  11).  The  degree  as 
well  as  the  development  of  intellect  connected 
with  the  condition,  size,  and  configuration 
of  the  brain,  which  forms  its  seat,  and  is  the 
organ  through  which  it  acts.  (2)  Reason 
and  intelligence  imparted  to  man  by  the 
Creator.  Wisdom  ''put"  into  the  inward 
parts  ;  "given  "  to  the  heart.  The  mind  or 
intellect  entirely  different  and  distinct  from 
the  material  organ  through  which  it  acts 
and  manifests  itself.  Reason  and  thought 
not  a  mere  force  existing  in  and  belonging  to 
the  brain  as  a  material  substance.  The  brain 
the  seat  and  organ  of  thought,  not  its  cause. 
Mind  not  the  production  of  other  physical 
forces,  as  heat  is  transformed  into  electricity; 
but  something  superadded  to  the  material 
organization.  Man's  physical  frame  formed 
out  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  after  which 
God  "breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath 
of  life,  and  man  became  a  living  soul"  (Gen. 
ii.  7).  Man  thus  made  to  partake  of  an 
intellectual  as  well  as  an  immortal  nature. 
254 


which  rendered  him  what  his  Maker  designed 
him  to  be — a  reflection  of  His  own  image 
(Gen  i.  26).  The  art,  science,  and  skill  of 
man  mediately  or  immediately  the  gifts  of 
God.  The  language  of  the  prophet  applicable 
not  merely  to  agriculture,  but  to  all  the  arts 
and  manufactures,  and  to  all  the  sciences 
which  elevate  the  human  mind  and  distin- 
guish the  most  enlightened  of  the  human 
species :  "  This  also  cometh  from  the  Lord 
of  Hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in  counsel  and 
excellent  in  working"  (Isa.  xxviii.  29).  The 
language  of  the  Almighty  concerning  Bezaleel, 
the  son  of  Uri,  true  of  any  other  similarly 
eminent  in  any  of  the  arts  of  civilized  life  : 
"  1  have  filled  him  with  the  Spirit  of  God 
in  wisdom,  and  in  understanding,  and 
in  knowledge,  and  in  all  manner  of 
workmanship,  to  devise  cunning  works," 
&c.  (Exod.  xxxi.  3).  *'In  the  hearts  of  all 
the  wise-hearted  I  have  put  wisdom " 
(verse  6).  (3)  IVie  impartaiion  of  reason 
and  intelligence  to  man  a  special  exhibition 
of  Divine  power  and  wisdom.  "  Who  put 
wisdom  in  the  inward  parts?"  Thought 
and  reason  the  highest  manifestation  of 
power  in  a  creature.  Man  thus  placed  far 
above  other  creatures  greatly  his  superior 
in  size  and  physical  strength.  Able  thus  to 
fulfil  his  Maker's  purpose  concerning  him 
and  the  commission  given  him,  to  "subdue" 
the  earth  and  "have  dominion"  over  all 
other  living  creatures  (Gen.  i.  28).  Made 
by  the  possession  of  his  mental  faculties  a 
fellow-worker  with  God.  Enabled,  by  work- 
ing upon  the  materials  placed  at  his  hand, 
to  produce  other  works  of  power,  both  of  a 
material  and  an  intellectual  nature.  Qualified 
to  invent  and  construct  works  which  are 
themselves  the  admiration  of  others  and  the 
multiplication  of  power.  A  Watt  and  an 
Arkwright  enabh'Q  to  produce  machines  by 
which,  with  a  little  water  and  fuel,  one  man 
is  able  to  do  the  work  of  twenty  or  a  hun- 
dred, and  the  strength  of  draught-horses 
can  be  entirely  dispensed  with.  By  a  simple 
apparatus,  provided  through  the  human  in- 
tellect, man  is  enabled  to  employ  the  lightning 
to  convey  his  messages,  and  to  hold  almost 
immediate  fellowship  with  distant  countries 
and  continents.  As  a  co-worker  with  his 
Maker,  he  is  enabled,  by  the  faculties  which 
God  has  given  him,  to  convert  the  wilderness 
into  a  fruitful  field,  and  to  cause  the  desert 
to  "rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose."  If 
God  thus  puts  wisdom  and  understanding 
into  man,  and  endows  him  with  so  much 
power,  how  great  the  wisdom  and  power  of 
the  Creator  Himself ! 

15.  Beasts  and  birds  of  prey.  Verses  39 — 
41 — "  Wilt  thou  hunt  the  prey  for  the  lion 
(or  lioness),  or  fill  the  appetite  of  the  young 
lions,  when  they  couch  in   their   dens   and 


BOMIIETIC  COMMENTABJ:  JOB. 


OHA?.  XXXJX. 


abide  in  the  covert  to  lie  in  wait  P  Who 
provideth  for  the  raven  his  food  ?  when  his 
young  ones  cry  unto  God,  they  wander  (or, 
*  and  wander,'  or  *  are  famished ')  for  lack  of 
meat.'*  Passes  from  inanimate  to  animated 
nature.  The  present  seetion  properly  be- 
longing to  the  next  chapter.  Begins  with 
beasts  of  prey.  Their  food  provided  for  them 
by  the  Creator  Himself,  by  bringing  other 
animals,  which  they  are  enabled  to  overcome 
and  feed  upon,  within  their  reach.  Some 
animals  formed,  by  their  physical  structure,  to 
live  upon  others.  Their  character  as  carni- 
vorous given  them  by  God,  who  provides  for 
them  the  sustenance  for  which  their  bodily 
organization  is  adapted.  Even  the  fierce 
lioness  provided  with  her  food  by  God. 
Beasts  of  prey,  with  all  their  ferocity,  only 
a  portion  of  the  great  family  for  which  the 
Creator  daily  provides.  But  how  powerless 
is  man  in  their  presence!  How  unable  to 
provide  for  them  !  Man,  since  the  entrance 
of  sin  into  the  world,  obliged  to  employ  his 
intellect  in  destroying,  instead  of  supporting, 
such  animals. 

The  "raven'*  probably  mentioned  in  con- 
trast   with    the   lion.    The  largest  of  the 


sparrow-order  of  birds.  Eeeds  on  carrion  aa 
well  as  fruit  and  small  animals,  and  is  known 
even  to  carry  off  poultry.  An  unclean  bird, 
and  of  little  apparent  significance ;  yet  the 
raven  cared  for  by  the  Creator  equally  with 
the  noble  and  majestic  lord  of  the  forest. 
His  Divine  providence,  directed  even  to  the 
young  of  the  raven,  when  forsaken  by  the 
parent  bird,  or  early  expelled  by  it  from  the 
nest.  Not  a  cry  of  these  young  ravens  but 
enters  into  the  ears  of  the  great  and  gra- 
cious Creator  (Ps.  cxlvii.  9).  Their  cry 
viewed  as  directed  to  Himself  as  their 
parent  and  provider.  God  cares  and  pro- 
vides for  the  meanest  as  well  as  the  mightiest 
of  His  creatures.  A  twofold  lesson  for  man. 
(1)  To  be  kind  to  animals,  and,  when  not 
injurious  or  destructive,  attentive  to  their 
wants.  (2)  To  trust  in  God  while  doing  His 
will.  The  lesson  taught  by  Jesus  to  his 
disciples  :  "  Consider  the  ravens ;  for  they 
neither  sow  nor  reap ;  which  neither  have 
store-house  nor  barn  :  and  God  fcedeth  them  : 
how  much  are  ye  better  than  the  fowls?** 
(Luke  xii.  24).  "  The  young  lions  do  lack  and 
suffer  hunger ;  but  they  that  seek  the  Lord 
shall  not  want  any  good  thing  "  (Ps.  xxxiv.  10). 


CHAPTER  XXXIX 


JEHOFAWS  ADDRESS  CONTINUED, 


Continuation  of  the  questioning.  Job  now 
pointed  to  the  animal  creation ;  the  passage 
from  inanimate  to  animated  nature  having 
been  made  at  the  39tli  verse  of  the  previous 
chapter,  instead  of  the  beginning  of  this. 
Specimens  or  representatives  of  the  various 
great  classes  of  animals  adduced — first  beasts, 
then  birds,  then  the  inhabitants  of  the  water, 
or  of  both  land  and  water.  The  animals 
referred  to  mostly  those  of  the  wild  cbiss, 
or  in  a  wild  state,  rather  than  domestic  or 
domesticated  ones.  Exhibited  for  the  most 
part  in  their  native  character  as  coming  from 
the  hand  of  their  Creator.  The  animals 
selected  distinguished  for  some  special  pro- 
perty, habit,  or  instinct,  as  indicative  of  the 
Creator's  power  in  making,  and  His  Providence 
in  caring  for  them.  The  object  of  the  re- 
ferences to  reprove  and  humble  Job,  by 
remmding  him  of  the  greatness,  majesty, 
sovereignty,  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness 
of  Him  whose  providential  dealings  he  had 
been  tempted  to  arraign.  Many  things  in 
connection  with  the  lower  animals  mysterious 
and  incomprehensible  to  man ;  why  not  in 
connection  with  man  himself?  The  mani- 
festation   of  Divine  power  in  the  animal 


creation,  as  well  as  of  Divine  wisdom  and 

goodness  in  providing  for,  sustaining,  pre- 
serving, and  governing  the  various  tribes  of 
living  creatures,  a  sufficient  argument  to 
silence  all  objections  and  murmurs  as  to  the 
justice  of  His  providential  dealings. 

The  appeal  here  made  by  Jehovah  to  animated 
nature  an  indication  of  man  s  duly,  as  far  as 
he  has  opportunity,  to  observe  and  make  him- 
self acquainted  with  the  structure  and  habits 
of  the  lower  animals.  The  visible,  and 
especially  the  animal  creation,  moreover,  to 
be  observed  and  studied  as  works  of  God, 
and  as  expressive  of  His  attributes  a7id  per- 
fections, both  as  Us  Creator  and  Gove) nor. 
Man  always  and  everywhere  surrounded  with 
memorials  and  lessons  of  God's  character 
and  providence.  The  works  of  nature,  both 
animate  and  inanimate,  intended  by  their 
Creator  to  be  so  observed  and  studied  by 
men,  that  He  may  derive  praise,  and  they 
both  pleasure  and  profit.  The  language  of 
an  eminent  philosopher  (Sedgwick)  as  true 
of  natural  history  as  of  the  Newtonian  phi- 
losophy :  "A  study  affecting  our  moral 
powers  and  capabilities ;  teaches  us  to  see 
the  finger  of  God  in  all  things,  animate  and 

255 


CHAP,  xxxrx. 


ffOMTLETIC  COMMBA'TAJtr.-  JOB. 


inanimate,  and  ^ives  us  an  exalted  concep- 
tion of  His  attributes,  placing  before  us  the 
clearest  proofs  of  their  reality;  and  so  pre- 
pares, or  ought  to  prepare,  tlie  mind  for  the 
reception  of  tliat  higlier  illumination  which 
brings  the  rebellious  faculties  into  obedience 
to  the  Divine  will"  Constant  reference  m 
Scripture  to  the  animal  creation  as  illus- 
trative of  God's  cliaracter  and  man's  duty. 
Nature,  or  creation— God's  own  Book— ever 
open  to  our  view.  "  Go  to  the  ant,  thou 
slugi^ard;'*  "Consider  the  ravens  ;"  "Behold 
thcTilies  of  the  field,"— recorded  specimens 
of  Divine  teaching. 

The  reference  here  mafJe  to  the  various 
animals,  such  as  to  indicate  the  pleasure  and 
tatisf action  with  which  the  Almighty  conf em- 
plates  the  visible  works  of  His  hand.  In  ac- 
cordance with  the  Mosaic  narrative,  "God 
saw  everything  that  He  i)ad  made,  and 
behold,  it  was  very  good"  (Gen.  i.  31). 
"The  Lord  shall  rejoice  in  His  works" 
(Ps.  civ.  31).  Asuffjcient  reason  why  man 
should  rejoice  in  them.  The  better  a  man 
is  acquainted  with  God's  works  in  general, 
and  with  the  animal  creation  in  particular, 
the  greater  the  pleasure  he  will  derive  from 
them.  After  the  lion  and  the  raven.  Job  is 
pointed  to — 

1.  The   Wild   Goat  or  Ibex.    Verse   l.— 
"Knowest  thou  the  time   when  the  wild 
goats  of  the  rock  bring  forth  ?"     The  wild 
goat,   probably   the   animal   known    among 
naturalists  as  the  Ibex — the  Bedin  of  the 
Arabs — a  bold  and  powerful  animal,  armed 
with  two  huge  sweeping  horns,  curving  over 
its  back  and  often  three  feet  long.     Inhabits 
the  most  elevated  summits  of  the  highest 
mountain  ranges  in  the  whole  eastern  con- 
tinent.    Stands  two  feet  six  or  eight  inches 
in    height,    and    is   extremely    active    and 
vigorous.     Vigilant   and   wary,  it    only  de- 
scends during  tlie  night  to  pasture  in   the 
woods,   repairing    again  at  sunrise  to  the 
bleak  mountain  summits.     "Its   chase  very 
arduous  ;  the   animal   leading  its    pursuer, 
unless  he  can  steal  upon  it  unawares  with 
his  rifle,  a  dangerous  track  over  steep  and 
rugged  mountain  pinnacles,   along  the  brink 
of  precipices,  and  over  fearful  chasms;  and 
wlicn  at  last,  hard  pressed, often  turningupon 
its  foe  with  impetuous  rapidity,  and  hurling 
him  down  the  steep  rocks."     Its  favourite 
haunts  in  Europe  the  Alps,  the  Apennines, 
the  Pyrenees,  and  the  Tvrolese  mountains. 
Doubtful    whether  it  or  the  Paseng  of  the 
Caueasus  and  of  Persia  (the  Capra  yEgagra 
of  Cuvier),  is  the  original  stock  of  our  domestic 
goat.  The  svild  goat. referred  to  as  being  so  far 
beyond  man's  power  to  manage  it,  or  even 
become  familiarly  acquainted  with  its  habits. 
The    ''knowledge"    intended  probably  not 
256 


simply  that  of  mere  acquaintance,   but  of 
care.     "Knowest  thou,"  &c.,  so  as  to  attend 
to,  watch  over,  &c.     Certain  animals  so  con- 
stituted that  man  may  both  become  easily 
and  thoroughly  acquainted  with  them  and 
their  habits,  and  be  able  to  attend  to  their 
wants  and  aid   them  in  their  emergencies. 
The  case   with   others    the  reverse.      The 
shepherd  knows  the  time  when  his  ewes  are 
to  lamb:  but  who  knows  "the  time  when 
the  wild   goats  of  the  rock  bring  forth?" 
Hence,  observe— (I)  A  proof  of  the  Creator* s 
care  over   the  animal    creation.     With    no 
human  eye  to  observe  the  wild  goats,  and  no 
shepherd's  hand  to  aid  them,  God's  eye  marks 
and  His  hand  helps  them  in  their  greatest 
difficulties.      (2)   A  lesson  of  humility  and 
modesty.     Man  ignorant  of  the  time  when 
the  wild  goats  of  the  rock  bring  forth  ;  how 
then  shall  he  be  able  to  fathom  tlie  designs 
and  understand  the  reasons  of  God  in  His 
providential  dealings?      What  presumption 
for  a  creature  of  so  limited  knowledge,  even 
of  the  humbler  works  of  God,  to  question 
the  wisdom  and  justice  of  His  moral  govern- 
ment !     (3.)  A  comfort  for  God'' s  tried  people. 
Even  the  wild  goats  of  the  rock  have  their 
time  of  parturiliion  assigned  them  by  their 
Creator.     That  time  known,   marked,    and 
attended  to   by    Him.     How   much    more 
everything   connected  with   His   intelligent 
offspring,  and  most  of  all  with  those  who  love 
and  fear  Him  !     If  God  so  watches  over  and 
cares  for  the  wild  goat,  will  He  not  much 
more  watch  over  and  care  for  you  ? 

2.  The  Hind,  or  Female  Stag  or  Antelope. 

Verses  1 — 4. — *'  Canst  thou  mark  (or  watch) 

when    the   hinds    do   calve?      Canst   thou 

number  the  months  that  they  fulfil  (knowing 

the   period  of  their   gestation,  and  waiting 

like  the  shepherd  in  regard  to  his  ewes,  till 

they  bring  forth  their  fawns)  ?  or  knowest 

thou  the  time  when  they  bring  foith  ?    They 

bow  themselves  (or  go  down  on  their  knees 

in  their  labour),  they  bring  forth  their  young 

ones,  they  cast  out  their  sorrows  (put  forth 

their   young   which    occasion    their   pains). 

Their  young  ones  are  in  good  liking  (sleek 

and  in  good  condition) ;  they  grow  up  with 

corn  (or,  in  the  deserter  open  country);  they 

go  forth  (to  obtain  food  for  themselves),  and 

return  not  again  unto  tlifem  (viz.,  to  the  hinds, 

their  mothers)."     The  animal  more  especially 

alluded  to  doubtless  the  gazelle,  or  Arabian 

antelope.     Formerly  numerous  in  Syria  and 

Arabia.     Seen  in  large  herds,  bounding  over 

the  plain  with  amazing  fleetness.    Resemble 

the  stags  in  the  lightness  of  their  figure  and 

the  swiftness  of  their  course.    In  Africa,  the 

usual    prey  of   the   lion   and  the   panther. 

Remarkable  for  their  timidity,  as  well  as  for 

their  elegance  and  beauty ;  especially  for  the 


'  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  jOB. 


CHAP.   XXXEf 


soft  expression  of  tlicir  large,  dark,  lustrous 
eyes.  The  hind  or  fomale  referred  to  is, 
like  the  ibex,  an  animal  beyond  human 
care  and  attention,  but  oljscrved  and  provided 
for  by  its  Creator.  The  providence  of  God 
moted  in  not  only  delivernig  the  mother  in 
her  pangs,  but  in  caring  for  her  oftspring. 
Without  either  man  or  mother  to  attend  to 
its  wants,  th'^  young  fawn,  under  tiie  care  of 
its  Creator,  grows  up  sleek  and  well-condi- 
tioned. Observe — (1.)  The  tenderness  of  the 
Creator's  care.  Indicated  by  the  suecial  refer- 
ence to  the  animal's  labour— the  time  of  its 
maternal  "sorrows."  Its  labour  said  to  be 
natuially  witli  diUiculty  and  pain.  The  animal, 
however,  said  to  be  taught  by  tlie  instinct 
given  to  it,  to  employ  an  herb  called 
Siselis  in  order  to  facilitate  the  birth.  (2.) 
Comfort  to  suffering  bclieoers.  The  Creator 
not  indifferent  to  the  pangs  of  the  hind. 
Will  He  be  indifferent  to  the,  sorrows  and 
pains  of  His  intelligent  creatures,  made  after 
His  own  image,  and  especially  of  His  own 
redeemed  and  adopted  children?  If  He  at- 
tends to  the  labour  of  the  irrational  creatures, 
and  marks  the  time  when  it  takes  placf,  is 
anything  connected  with  His  own  children 
b(!yond  his  observation  and  regard  ?  (3.) 
Humbling,  that  while  the  Creator  makes  the 
sufferings  of  such  creatures  tiie  object  of 
his  care,  man  should  occasion  them  in  the 
prosecution  of  his  sport.  Touching  picture, 
drawn  by  the  greatest  of  uninspired  poets, 
of  a  dying  stag  shot  by  the  hunter : — 

"  The  wretched  animal  heav'd    forth    such 

groans 
That  tlieir  discharge  did  stretch  his  leathern 

coat 
Almost  to  bur.*ting  ;  and  the  big  round  tears 
(,'oursed  one  another  down  his  innocent  nose 
In  piteous  chase." 

3.  The  IFildAss.  Verses  5—8.— "Who 
haih  sent  out  ihe  wild  ass  free  (unrestrained 
to  roam  at  large)?  or  who  hath  loosed  the 
bands  of  tlie  wild  ass  (a  diffeient  name  in 
the  original  text  from  the  former ;  that  em- 
ployed  more  in  Pulesiine,  this  in  Chaldea  ; 
both  indicative  of  a  rapid  flight;  the  latter, 
perhaps,  also  of  tlie  aninial's  noi.^e  in  bray- 
ing) ?  Whose  house  I  have  made  the 
wilderness,  and  the  barren  laud  {Marg., 
'salt  places')  his  dwellings  (or  haunts). 
He  scorneth  the  multitude  (or  din)  of  the 
city,  neither  regardeth  he  the  crying  of  the 
driver  (or  officer  compelling  to  f)ublie  service 
—  ihe  animal  enjoying  his  liberty  in  the 
desert,  and  defying  all  attempts  to  subdue 
and  domesticate  him).  The  range  of  the 
mountains  is  his  pasture  (or  '  he  searches  or 
roams  the  mountains  as  his  pasture'),  and 
he  sf'arclieth  out  every  green  thing  (as  rare 
in  the  desert,  his  proper  habitation)."  'i'he 
wild  ass,  an  aniuiai  met  with  in  great  nuui- 

17 


bers  in  Arabia  Pctraea.  According  to  the 
Arabs,  perfectly  untamable.  In  fleetness 
equal  to  the  gazelle ;  to  overtake  it  a  feat 
which  only  one  or  two  of  the  most  celebrated 
mares  have  been  known  to  accomplish.  Its 
food  the  saltest  plants  of  the  desert.  In 
the  East,  the  symbol  of  uncontrolled  free- 
dom. Its  name  assumed  by  Persian  kings. 
The  wild  independence  of  Ishmael  and  his 
descendants  (the  Bedouin  Arabs)  indicated 
by  the  same  figure :  "  He  will  be  a  wild 
(lleb.,  wild  ass)  man"  (Gen.  xvi.  12).  A 
picture  also  of  the  wayward  and  self-willed 
(ch  xi.  12  ;  Jer.  ii  24  ;  Hos.  viii.  9).  The 
wild  ass  here  selected  by  the  Almighty  on 
account  of  its  natural  freedom  from  restraint 
and  its  wild  enjoyment  of  its  d'  sert  haunts. 
Referrcdtoin  order  to  show — {\)  The  Creator*  a 
sovereignty^  in  not  only  making  somt;  species 
of  animals  naturally  wild  and  others  tame, 
but  making  a  similar  difference  in  the  same 
species.  (2)  The  Almighty's  power  over 
animated  nature.  (3)  His  universally  extended 
providence.  The  wild  ass,  though  beyond 
man's  power  to  overtake  or  ca[)ture,  yet  only 
one  of  the  innumerable  objects  of  Jehovah's 
care.  Its  freedom  and  wildness  given  by 
Him.  Its  abode  in  the  wilderness  appointed 
by  Him.  The  salt  plants  of  the  desert  given 
by  Him  for  its  support.  Hence  observe 
— (1)  Man  himself  entirely  in  the  Ai- 
mighty's  hands.  (2)  Jehovah's  right  to 
dispose  of  His  creatures  as  He  sees  good. 
The  potter  has  power  over  the  clay  to  make 
out  of  the  same  mass  vessels  of  various 
kinds  and  for  various  purposes  (Jer.  xviii.  6  ; 
liom,  ix.  21.)  (3)  Man,  unable  to  give  law 
to  the  wild  ass,  how  much  less  to  His 
Maker?— (//6V/ry).  (4)  G.  d,  who  has  the 
wild  ass  entirely  under  His  control,  can  easily 
subdue  the  wildest  and  most  wayward  human 
spirit,  (5)  Variety  a  characteristic  in  the 
Creator's  works.  Wildness  and  independence 
given  by  Him  to  the  wild  ass.  The  Al- 
mighty tied  to  no  uniform  type.  (6)  Man's 
true  liberty,  not  that  of  the  wild  ass, — an 
unrestrained  independence;  but  to  bounder 
willing,  intelligent,  and  loving  subjection  to 
his  Maker's  laws.  The  liberty  of  a  child  of 
God  not  to  be  "  wii  hout  law  to  God,  but 
uudei  the  law  to  Christ "  (1  Cor.  ix.  21). 
The  true  liberty  that  with  which  Christ 
makes  his  people  free  (Gal.  v.  1).  His 
yoke  easy,  and  his  burden  light  (Matt.  xi. 
30). 

4.  The  Unicorn.  Verses  9—12.—"  Will  the 
unicorn  be  willing  to  serve  thee,  or  abide  by 
thy  crib  (or,  spend  the  night  at  thy  stall, 
like  an  ox  or  other  domestic  animal)  ?  Canst 
thou  bind  the  unicorn  with  his  band  in  the 
furrow  (guide  him  with  a  rope  or  rein  in 
ploughing  thy  held)  ?  or  will  he  harrow  the 
valleys  (or  low  grounds,  especially  suited  for 

257 


CII.VP.    XX  XIX. 


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


tillai^e)  after  tlice  (after  thy  direction  and 
following  thy  steps  like  the  quiet  ox,— the 
husbaudnian  going  before  the  harrow,  though 
behind  the  plough)?  Wilt  thou  trust  him 
(have  confulence  in  him  as  an  animal  helpful 
in  the  labour  of  the  fields)  because  his 
strength  is  great?  or  wilt  thou  leave  thy 
labour  to  him  (thy  grain,  the  fruit  of  thy 
labour, — to  watch  it  by  night  while  remain- 
ing on  the  threshing  floor)  ?  Wilt  thou 
believe  him  that  he  will  bring  home  thy  seed 
(or  grain,  from  the  field  after  being  reaped 
or  threshed,  like  an  ox  yoked  in  the  waggon j, 
and  gather  it  into  thy  barn  (or  granary)?" 

The  animal  here  intended  apparently  one 
of  the  ox  kind,  probably  the  wild  ox  or  oryx 
[aurochs), — the  urus  of  the  ancients,  "  gfcne- 
rally  but  erroneously  considered  as  the  wild 
stock  of  our  horned  cattle."  A  savage  animal 
that  has  now  taken  refuge  in  the  great  marshy 
forests  of  Lithunia,  the   Krnpacs,   and  the 
Caucasus  ;  but  which  formerly  inhabited  all 
the  temperate  parts  of  Europe.     The  largest 
quadruped    proper    to   Euro[)e  —  {Cuvier). 
The   animal   subdued  with   difficulty.     Ex- 
tremely powerful :    hence  the  reference  in 
the  text.     Probably  the  "strong  bulls   of 
Bashan  '*  (Ps.  xxii.  12).   Once  roamed  freely 
in  the  forests  of  Palestine.     Large  herds  of 
them  still  in  the  region  beyond  Jordan.  Often 
mentioned  by  Arabian  poets.     Its  two  horns 
include  a  space  of  ten  feet  from  tip  to  tip. 
The  animal  thought,  however,  by  some  to  be 
a  species  of  anteh)pe  with  two  horns,  for- 
merly abundant  in  Egypt  and  the  south-west 
of    Asia;    described    by   Aristotle   as   one- 
horned,    and   appearing    on    the    Egyptian 
monuments  sometimes  with  one  and  some- 
times with  two  horns.     By  others,  the  uni- 
corn, or  reem,  thought  to  be  the  rhinocerus, 
one    species   of   which— the   rhinoceros    of 
India— has  only  one  horn.     This  well-known 
animal  also  one  of  enormous  strength,  being 
scarcely  less  in  size  than  the  elephant.   That 
of   India,   sluggish    in   his   movements,  and 
wandering  through  his  native  plains  with  a 
heavy   step.     At   certain    times  very   dan- 
gerous, impetuously  attacking  every  animal 
that  attracts  his  notice.     The  African  rhino- 
cerus has  a  double  horn,  the  principal  one 
rising  about  nine  or  ten  inches  above  the 
nose,  and  inclining   backwards;   the   other 
immediately   behind  it,   a  short  thick  one. 
The  Hebrew  name  ireem)   generally   trans- 
lated in  our  English  Bible  the  "unicorn," or 
one-horned.      The    animal,   however,    appa- 
rently spoken  of  as  having  two  hor::s  (Num. 
xxiv.   8;    Deut.   xxxiii.   17;   Ps.  xxii.  21) 
Frequently  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  dis- 
tiuLMiished   for  its  strength.      The  reem  of 
the  .'Vrabs  an  animal   with   two  horns.     The 
name   apparently   significant  of  its  loftiness 
ind  p'v.rcr.      The  unicorn  of  heraldry  long 
2od 


thought  a  merely  fabulous  animal.  Its  exist- 
ence, however,  now  contended  for  by  some, 
who  allege  ancient  and  modern  eye-witnesses 
of  it.  Ifs  figure — a  head  like  a  horse,  cloven 
feet,  the  tail  of  a  boar,  and  one  horn  in  the 
forehead.  The  representation  of  such  an 
animal  found  among  the  ruins  of  Persepolis. 

The  animal  referred  to  in  the  text  as  one 
of  huge  strength,  but  beyond  the  power  of 
man  to  render  it  serviceable  to  him  in  the 
works  of  the  field.  Fitted  by  its  physical 
structure  and  great  strength,  to  be  em- 
ployed like  the  ox  or  ass  in  agricultural  pur- 
suits; but,  from  its  intractable  disposition, 
not  to  be  subjugated  by  man  for  that  pur- 
pose. The  reference  intended  by  the  Al- 
mighty to  remind  Job  of  his  own  littleness 
and  the  power  of  his  Creator.  Observe — 
(1)  A  lesson  of  humility  and  modesty  for  man. 
If  unable  to  bind  and  bring  into  his  service 
an  animal  like  the  reem,  how  should  he  be 
able  to  contend  with  his  Maker  ?  If  unable 
to  rule  a  mere  creature,  how  unfit  to  ques- 
tion the  dealings  of  his  Creator !  (2)  The 
effect  of  sin.  The  animals  originally  designed 
to  serve  man.  Dominion  over  them  given 
him  by  the  Creator  (Gen.  i.  26,  28 ;  Ps  viii. 
6).  That  dominion  forfeited  by  the  Fall. 
(3)  The  Didne  sovereignty.  Some  animals 
apparently  such  as  by  nature  to  be  more 
useful  and  serviceable  to  man  than  others. 
God's  reasons  for  endowing  the  animals  with 
their  various  properties  uuknown  to  us. 
Mysteries  in  creation ;  no  wonder  if  we  find 
similar  mysteries  in  providence, 

5.  The  Ostrich.  Verses  13— 18.— "  Gavest 
thou  the  goodly  wings  unto  the  peacocks? 
or  wings  and  feathers  unto  the  ostrich? 
{Marg.,  *the  feathers  of  the  stork  and 
ostrich?'  Or  the  whole  verse  may  read 
thus:  'The  wing  of  the  ostriches  moveth 
gaily  :  hut  is  it  the  wing  and  feathers  of  the 
stork?" — a  bird  remarkable  for  maternal 
affection,  of  which  the  ostrich  appears  to  be 
so  deficient).  Which  (or  because,  since) 
she  leavcth  (or,  deposits)  her  eggs  in  the 
ground,  and  forgetteth  that  the  foot  may 
crush  them,  or  that  the  wild  beast  may 
break  them  (in  the  ex[)osed  place  where  she 
lays  them).  She  is  hardened  (or  acts  hardly) 
against  her  young  ones,  as  though  they  were 
not  hers  (or,  '  for  those  which  are  not  her 
own') :  her  labour  (in  preparing  her  nest,  and 
sitting  on  her  eggs)  is  in  vain,  without  fear 
(*'he  being  without  solicitude  for  the  preser- 
vation of  her  youu'i).  Because  God  hath 
deprived  her  (or,  'made  her  forgetful')  of 
wisdom  (the  prudence  necessary  for  pre- 
serving her  young),  neither  hath  he  im- 
parted unto  her  understanding  (such,  or  so 
much  as  he  has  implanted  in  tlie  animals  in 
general,  usually  called  instinct).  What 
time  she  lifteth  up  (or  rousetii)  herself  on 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAF.  XXXTX 


high  (erecting  her  head  and  body  as  well  as 
her  wings,  the  latter  being  used  to  aid  her 
in  runnina  /ather  than  flying),  she  scorneth 
the  iiorse  and  his  rider  (when  pursuing  her 
in  the  chase)." 

The  ostrich   referred    to  as    an    animal 
generally  regarded   as  deficient   in  natural 
forethought,  especially  in  refer(>nce  to  the 
perservation  of  her  young  (Lam.  iv.  3),  while 
endowed  witli  extraordinary  speed,  so  as  to 
be  able  to  secure  her  own  safety  by  {li.u'it. 
One  of  the  two  known  species  (tiie  strutluo 
canielus)  abounds  in   the   sandy  deserts  of 
Arabia  and  Africa.     This  the  ostrich   m(>n- 
ti(med   here   and  elsewhere   in    the    Bil)Ie. 
Attains  the  height  of  eiglit  feet.     So  swift 
that  no  animal  is  able  to  overtake  it.     The 
wings  white  and  black,  not  unlike  those  of 
the  stork;  furnislied  with  the   well-known 
loose    and    flexible,    elegant   and    slender- 
stemmed  feathers ;  and  sufficiently  long  to 
increase    the    animal's   speed    in    running, 
serving  both  for  sail  and  oar.     Being  found 
in  hot  countries,  the  ostrich  is  content  to 
lay  its  eggs,  from  thirty  to  fifty  at  a  time, 
each  weighing  nearly  three  pounds,  about  a 
foot  below  the  surface  in  the  sand.    Outside 
the  tropics,  however,  she  is  said  to  brood 
over  her  eggs  with  great  care,  and  courage- 
ously  to  defend    her    young.      Prom    the 
animal's    known  neglect   of  her  young  in 
Arabia,  it  is  designated  by  the  Arabs  the 
**  impious    bird/'   as    in   contrast  with  the 
stork,    which  is   called    the    "pious'*   one. 
Said  to  hatch  her  eggs   only  for  a   time, 
and    to     leave     them    frequently     during 
the  day  at    the   least    noise,    going    to    a 
great  distance  and  sometimes  never  return- 
ing to  them.     Plays  and  frisks  about  on  all 
occasions,  *'  moving  her  wings  gaily,"  and 
would  be  always  fanning  and  hiding  herself 
with  them.     Her  eggs   left  exposed  to  the 
view  of   the  traveller  and  the  foot  of  the 
wild  beasts  that  frequent  the  desert.     Often 
addled   before   she  returns    from   her  long 
absence   in   scearch  for   food.     Sometimes, 
during  her  absence,  found   sitting  on   the 
eggs  of  another  bird.     Its  sense  of  taste  so 
obtuse  that  it  swallows  rags,  leather,   &c., 
and  even  pebbles  and  pieces  of  metal,     'i'he 
bird   proverbially   stupid.      "  More    foolish 
than   an   ostrich,"   an  Arab    proverb.     Its 
speed  calculated  by   Dr.  Livingstone  to  be 
about  twenty-six  miles  an  hour.     The  stride 
of  one   iu   the    Sahara  found   to    be   from 
twenty-two  to  twenty-eight  feet. 

The  "  peacock  "  probably  not  intended  in 
the  verse.  The  word  so  rendered,  quite  dif- 
ferent from  that  in  1  Kings  x.  22.  Literally, 
denotes  "  singing  ones,"  and  probably  given 
to  characterize  the  ostrich,  distinguished  for 
us  cries.  The  peacock  distinguished  not  so 
muc!i  for  the  beauty  of  its  wiays  as  of  its 
17—2 


tail,  Originally  brought  from  India.  Eirst 
known  in  Palestine  and  Arabia  in  the  time 
of  Solomon,  who  imported  it  into  his  king- 
dom. Introduced  into  Europe  by  Alexander 
the  Great.  Its  magnificent  plumage,  most 
splendid  in  a  wild  state,  like  the  flowers 
of  the  field, — indicative  of  the  Creator's 
pleasure  in  the  beautiful,  and  of  the  beauty 
residing  in  Himself.  In  the  peacock,  the 
beauty  apparently  not  accompanied  with 
other  excellencies. 

From  the  wholesection,  observe — (1)  God's 
providential  care  of  His  creatures.     Provides 
for  the  young  of  the  ostrich  even  when  the 
care  and  affection  of  the  parent  fail.     (^2)  His 
sovereignty  in  the  endowments  of  His  creatures. 
Instinctive  care  for  the  preservation  of  off- 
spring strong   in    the    animals  in  general ; 
weak  in  the  ostrich.     "  Wisdom  and  under- 
standing"—  whether  in  the  lower  form  as  in 
the  brute  creation,  or  in  the  higher,  as  in 
man — the  gift  of  God.     Its  degrees  in  both 
cases  accoidiiig  to  His  own  pleasure.     The 
ostrich  endowed  with  remarkable  speed,  but 
with   little   sense.     The    stork,  with    much 
humbler    plumage,   yet   gifted    with    much 
greater  natural  affection.     An  example  re- 
lated of  two  which  had  built  their  nest  on 
the  roof  of  a  house  in  Delft,  a  town  of  Hol- 
land, and  which,  when  the  house  was  on  fire, 
first  endeavoured  to  carry  off  all  their  young, 
and  when  unable  to  do  this,  kept  flapping 
their  wings  over  them  as  if  to  cool  the  air  j 
and  at  last,  as  the  flames  drew  nearer,  sat 
down  over  the  nest  to  die  with  them.     (3) 
The  various  endowments  of  animals  designed 
for  man's    instruction.     Intended   to   teach 
man    both    concerning    God    and    himself. 
Some   of    those   endowments    designed    for 
man's  imitation ;   others  the  reverse.     The 
stork  SiW  example  io  parents  in  regard  to  their 
children;  the  ostrich  a  warning.  Indifference 
and  neglect  in  regard  to  those  committed  to 
our  care  monstrous  even  in  irrational  crea- 
tures :  much   more  so   in    man.     Like    the 
"  labour  "  of  the  ostrich,  that  of  parents  and 
teachers  often  "in  vain,"  from   the  want  of 
"  fear  "  and  solicitude  for  the  preservation  of 
those  for  whom  they  have  laboured.     "  Thoae 
most  likely  to  lose  their  lafjour  who  have  least 
fear  of  losing   it.'*     While    men   sleep,  the 
enemy    sows    his    tares.     Such     solicitude 
especially  needful   in   the  case  of  children 
leaving  the   parental   roof.     Watchful   care 
always  necessary  to  guard  the  young  against 
the  influence  of  evil  company,  and  the  dangers 
incident  from  an  ungodly  world.     Prayerful 
solicitude   constantly  required  on   behalf  of 
those  for  whose  spiritual    benefit  we   have 
laboured,  and  in  whom  have  appeared  the 
beginnings  of  grace.     Early  grace  watched 
over  by  God,  but  not  therefore  the  less  to  be 

watched  ove^'  by  wau. 

259 


CHAF.   XXXIX. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


6.  The  Horse.  Verses  19— 25.— "  Hast 
thou  given  the  horse  strength  (or  courage, 
or  rather  both  combined)?  Plast  thou 
clothed  his  neck  with  thunder  (with  the 
terror  of  liis  neighings;  or,  *wilh  lofty 
quivering  mane  ' — the  indistinctness  of  the 
figure  heightening  its  sublimity)?  Canst 
thou  make  liim  afraid  as  a  grasshopper  (or, 
♦bound  like  a  locust')?  The  glory  of  his 
nostrils  (or  neighini^s)  is  terrible  (or,  'a 
terror* — more  especially  to  the  Hebrews, 
little  acquainted  witii  war-liorscs,  Jer.  viii. 
16).  He  paweth  in  tlic  valley  (or  '  plain' — 
usually  selected  for  the  battle-field  wliere 
cavalry  were  to  be  employed);  and  rejoieeth 
in  his  strength.  He  goetii  on  to  meet  tiie 
armed  men  (or,  '  boldly  he  advanced  against 
the  weapons').  He  mocketh  at  fear  (what 
would  cause  fear  in  others),  and  is  not 
affrighted  (by  all  the  terrors  of  the  battle- 
field) ;  neither  turncth  he  back  from  the 
[face  or  presence  of]  of  the  sword.  Tlie 
quiver  (or  its  contents,  the  arrows)  rattleth 
against  (or  upon)  him :  the  glittering  spear 
and  the  shield  (or,  '  the  flush  of  the  spear 
and  the  lance').  He  swaUoweth  the  ground 
witli  fierceness  and  rage  (in  his  impetuous 
eagerness  for  the  fight):  neither  believeth 
he  that  it  is  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  (or, 
*  standeth  still  when  there  is  the  sound  of 
the  trumpet').  He  saith  among  (or  at  the 
blast  of)  the  trumpets.  Ha,  ha:  and  he 
smelleth  the  battle  alar  off — the  thunder  of 
the  captains  (animating  the  hosts  to  the 
fight),  and  the  shouting"  (of  the  warriors). 

The  reference  to  the  horse  apparently 
suggested  by  the  mention  made  at  the  close 
of  the  preceding  paragra])h,  of  "the  horse 
and  ills  rider."  The  war-horse  here  especially 
referred  to.  The  description  acknowledged 
to  be  unequalled  anywhere  for  sublimity. 
Suflicient  in  itself  to  place  the  writer  among 
the  first  of  poets.  The  war-horse  referri  d 
to  as  an  example  of  courap:e  and  noble  bear- 
ing. The  reference  intended  to  impress  Job 
with  the  majesty  of  Him  whose  creature  this 
noble  and  courageous  animal  is. 

The  horse  exhibited  in  the  text  as  the 
noblest  specimen  among  inferior  animals. 
Those  of  Arabia  and  Egypt  especially  famous. 
The  horse  believed  to  exist  in  Arabia,  the 
home  of  the  patriarch,  in  a  finer  condition 
than  in  any  otiier  country.  Still  the  chief 
treasure  of  the  Bedawin  Arab.  Formerly 
many  of  them  in  a  wild  slate  in  the  Arabian 
deserts ;  only  caught  in  pits,  and  then  sub- 
jugated through  iiunger  and  fatigue.  Be- 
lieved by  the  Arabs  to  be  endowed  \vith  a 
nature  superior  to  that  of  other  animals,  and 
to  be  next  to  man  himself.  At  lirst  employed 
by  fallen  man  chielly  in  war,  y(.k(d  to  a 
chariot  in  which  the  warrior  stood.  The 
earliest  mention  of  them  iu  councoliou  with 

260 


the  exodus  of  the  Israelites  from  Egypt 
(b^xod.  xiv.  6 — 9).  Probably  employed  in 
Egypt  and  elsewhere  on  state  occasions 
(Gen.  xli.  43).  Used  also  early  in  the  chase, 
apparently  intended  in  verse  18.  Among 
Egyptian  monuments,  only  one  of  a  horse  and 
its  rider,and  that  comparatively  recent.  Horses 
mentioned  among  the  valuable  possessions 
of  Solomon  brought  up  by  him  from  Egypt. 
Among  the  ancient  Assyrians  used  indiscrimi- 
nately for  war  and  hunting.  Israel  spoken 
ot  by  Jehovah  as  His  "  goodly  horse  in  the 
battle;"  as  endowed  by  Him  with  strength 
and  courage,  and  employed  for  the  conquest 
of  heathen  adversaries  (Zech.  x.  3).  The 
horse,  as  distinguished  for  its  beauty  as  well 
as  its  strength  and  courage,  Cinployed  as  a 
simile  for  the  Church  of  Christ  under  the 
figure  of  a  beautiful  woman  (Cant.  i.  9). 
Elsewhere  noticed  in  Scripture  for  his 
strength  and  eagerness  for  the  battle  (Ps. 
cxlvii.  10;  Jer.  viii.  6).  Yet  a  vain  thing 
for  safety  (Ps.  xxxiii.  17). 

From  the  description  of  the  war-liorse 
observe — (1)  The  example  of  the  Alniightif  in 
contemplating  and  admiring  the  works  of  His 
hand.  God  represented  as  rejoicing  in  His 
works,  whether  the  featiiers  of  the  ostrich  or 
the  spirit  of  the  war-horse,  the  intelligence 
of  a  seryph  or  the  piety  of  a  man.  A  refined 
pleasure  in  contemplating  and  admiring  the 
works  of  God ;  a  Divine  pleasure  in  contem- 
plating them  as  such.  God's  example  to  be 
imitated  by  His  intelligent  children.  (2) 
An  example  exhibited  in  the  war-horse^  of 
courage  and  fearlessness  in  the  discharge  of 
duty  and  in  the  sercice  of  our  Divine  Master 
(See  again  Zech.  x.  3  ;  Cant.  i.  9).  The 
courage  and  impetuosity  of  the  war-horse 
too  often  iniitated  in  a  contrary  direction 
(Jer.  viii.  6).  Man  capable  of  being  em- 
ployed as  Satan's  war-horse  as  well  as  Jesus 
Clirist's.  The  latter  his  glory  and  felicity  ; 
the  former  his  disgrace  and  ruin.  (3)  The 
war-horse^  in  some  respects^  a  faint  refection 
of  his  Maker's  excellence.  "  Who  would  set 
the  briars  and  thorns  against  Me  in  battle  ?  " 
(Is.  xxvii.  4).  All  creature  excellence 
only  a  shadow  of  the  infinite  and  uncreated 
excellence  of  the  Creator.  All  endowments 
and  excellencies  found  in  the  creature  in- 
tended to  lead  the  thoughts  to  the  Creator 
as  the  source  and  sum  of  all  excellence.  (4) 
Mystery  .connected  with  all  God's  works. 
Tiie  horse,  the  noblest  of  God's  irrational 
creatures,  yet  here  admired  by  his  Maker  as 
displaying  his  excellence  in  what  cannot  but 
be  regarded  as,  in  many  respects,  Satan's 
work.  The  battle-field,  usually  the  theatre 
of  evil  passions,  and  the  delight  of  the  enemy 
of  God  and  man.  Sin,  the  origin  of  all  strife 
and  warfare  ;  yet  war  and  battle  not  always 
siniul.     Souictimcb   man's   duty,  and  coui- 


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.  XXXII. 


manded  by  God.  In  some  respects,  the 
battle  is  the  Lord's.  The  Lord  of  hosts 
mustereth  the  hosts  for  tlic  battle.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar God's  servant  in  liis  war  against 
Tyre  (Ezek.  xxix.  17—20.  War  employed 
by  God  as  His  own  terrible  instrument  in 
His  government  of  the  world.  God's  glory 
in  overruling  man's  sin  and  Satan's  malice 
to  his  own  praise  and  the  wellare  of  the 
universe.  Napoleon  and  his  battles,  God's 
scourge  for  the  benefit  of  Europe  and  the 
world.  Yet  on  the  field  of  Waterloo,  "  those 
terrible  grey  horses  '*  a  terror  to  him  who 
had  been  the  terror  of  the  nations.  "  I  have 
created  the  waster  to  destroy."  A  prospec- 
tive use  in  many  of  God's  creatures.  The 
creature  "  made  subject  to  vanity  "  through 
Adam's  fall.  The  time  to  come  when  the 
creature,  groaning  and  travailing  in  pain 
until  now  througli  man's  sin,  "  shall  be  de- 
livered from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into 
the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God" 
(Rom.  viii.  20—22).  The  day  hastening  on, 
when  the  noble  horse  shall  find  other  em- 
ployment than  rushing  with  its  rider  into  the 
din  of  the  battle,  and  careering  among  gar- 
ments rolled  in  blood.  The  promise  in  con- 
nection with  Christ's  kingdom  to  be  fulfilled  : 
"  They  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plough- 
shares, and  their  spears  into  pruning  hooks ; 
nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation, 
neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  more." 
"  He  maketh  wars  to  cease  unto  the  end  of 
the  earth ;  he  breaketh  the  bow,  and  cutteth 
the  spear  in  sunder  ;  he  burnetii  the  chariot 
in  the  fire."  (Is.  ii.  4;  Ps.  xlvi.  9).  The 
last  inspired  mention  of  the  war-horse,  and 
perhaps  the  last  use  of  him  as  such,  made  in 
connection  with  "the  battle  of  the  great 
day  of  God  Almighty,"  in  the  place  "  called 
in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon ; "  and 
with  the  symbolical  appearance  of  the  Eaith- 
ful  and  True  witness  upon  a  white  horse, 
clothed  in  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood,  in 
righteousness  judging  and  making  war  as 
King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of  Lords,  and  fol- 
lowed by  the  armies  of  heaven ;  these  also 
"  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen, 
white  and  clean"  (Rev.  xvi.  14 — 16;  xix. 
11—14,  18— 2L 

7.  The  Hawk.  Verse  26.— "Doth  tlie 
hawk  fly  by  thy  wisdom,  and  stretch  her 
wings  towards  the  south  ?  "  The  reference 
to  birds  of  prey  and  those  feeding  on  carrion 
probably  suggested  by  the  battle-field  men- 
tioned in  the  previous  section.  The  hawk,  or 
falcon,  selected  as  a  specimen  and  represen- 
tative of  the  feathered  tribe,  from  the  rapidity 
of  its  flight,  and  perhaps  also  from  its  being 
migratory  in  its  habits.  Birds  of  the 
hawk  order  {accipitres),  placed  by  naturalists 
highest  in  the  list,  including  not  only  hawks 
aud  falcons,  but  eagles  and  vultures.     Are 


among  birds  what  the  lion  and  other  car- 
nivorous animals  are  among  quadrupeds. 
Known  by  their  talons  and  hooked  beaks,  by 
which  they  seize  and  devour  otiier  birds  and 
even  the  weaker  quadrupeds  and  reptiles. 
Plumage  dense  and  quills  strong,  giving  them 
great  power  on  the  wing,  and  enabling  them 
to  pursue  or  pounce  at  once  upon  their  prey. 
Perhaps  the  name  in  the  text  one  of  a 
generic  kind,  including  all  such  birds  of 
prey.  Falcons,  with  naturalists,  the  second 
and  by  far  the  most  numerous  division  of 
those  predaceous  birds  that  pursue  their 
prey  in  the  daytime.  The  greater  number 
prey  on  living  animals.  The  falcon  proper, 
the  most  courageous  bird  in  proportion  to 
its  size. — Two  things  in  the  text  referred  to 
as  indicative  of  the  wisdom  of  God  in  rela 
tion  to  the  hawk  : — 

First :  Its  F%i5^—"  Doth  the  hawk  flv  b^ 
thy  wisdom  ? "  The  hawk  mentioned  by 
Homer  as  the  swiftest  of  birds.  The  rapidity 
with  which  the  hawk  and  many  other  birds 
occasionally  fly,  probably  not  less  than  at  the 
rate  of  150  miles  an  hour.  A  falcon  escaping 
from  Fontainbleau,  in  France,  found  to  have 
reached  Malta,  1350  miles  distant,  after 
twenty-four  hours.  The  common  falcon  for- 
merly employed  in  hunting,  chiefly  from  its 
rapid  flight.  Builds  her  nest  in  the  most  ele- 
vated and  inaccessible  cliffs,  wlience  she  darts 
down  with  rapid  wing  upon  her  prey,  descried 
at  a  distance.  An  inhabitant  of  northern  lati- 
tudes, whence  her  flight  towards  the  South. 

Second :  Its  Migration.  -  "  Stretcheth  her 
wings  towards  the  south," — as  if  for  a  warmer 
climate.  Many  animals,  unfit  to  provide 
against  the  vicissitude  of  the  seasons  by  vary- 
ing the  quantity  or  colour  of  their  dress, 
enabled  by  the  providence  of  God  to  protect 
themselves  by  shifting  their  quarters,  so  as 
to  live  throughout  the  whole  year  in  a  tem- 
perature suited  to  their  constitution,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  obtain  an  abundant  supply 
of  food.  The  migration  of  birds  an  object 
of  observation  from  an  early  period.  "  The 
stork  in  the  heavens  knoweth  her  appointed 
times;  and  the  turtle,  and  the  crane,  and  the 
swallow  observe  the  time  of  their  coming" 
(Jer.  viii.  7).  Birds  of  passage  not  confined 
to  any  particular  order  or  tribe ;  nor  distin- 
guished by  similarity  in  habits  or  kind  of 
food.  Some  birds  stationary  in  one  district, 
migratory  in  another. 

Observe — (1)  The  wisdom  of  God  in 
adapting  birds  for  flight.  The  general  form 
of  the  body  of  birds,  one  best  calculated  for 
gliding  with  the  last  resistance  through  the 
air.  Everything  in  its  structure  contrived 
to  give  it  tightness.  The  horny  materials  of 
the  feathers  formed  into  hollow  cylinders, 
exceedingly  strong  when  coni])ared  with  their 
weight.     A  similar  shape  given  to  the  cylin- 

261 


CIlAP.   XXXIX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JOB. 


drical  bones,  wliich  are  fashioned  into  tubes, 
with  dense  but  thin  sides ;  most  of  the  other 
bones  likewise  made  liollow,  but  containing 
only  air.  The  neck  exceedingly  long  and 
flexible,  to  enable  tlie  bird  in  flying  exactly 
to  balance  itself,  by  bringing  the  centre  of 
gravity  precisely  to  the  pi oper  point.  The 
feathers  of  the  bird  a  marvellous  contrivance. 
Made  to  consist  of  three  parts — tlie  quill, 
the  shaft,  and  the  vane.  A  mould  made  for 
every  featlier,  "in  what  may  be  called  a 
feather  manufactory."  This  manufactory 
not  merely  in  action  once  durin;;  the  life  of 
the  bird,  but  at  every  time  of  moulting — 
generally  once  a  year.  The  feather  remark- 
able for  its  strength  as  well  as  its  lightness. 
The  vane  of  the  feather  so  disposed  that  the 
iiiijiulse  of  the  air  occurs  first  where  the 
feather  does  not  yield.  The  wing  adapted 
for  flight  by  its  striking  the  air  below  it 
with  a  certain  force,  and  so  causing  a  re- 
action of  the  air  upwards  exactly  equal  to  it, 
the  bird  rising  or  sinking  as  the  force  of  the 
stroke  is  greater  or  less  than  its  weight. 
The  wings  also  employed  by  the  bird  in  steer- 
ing its  course,  as  tlie  rower  turns  his  boat  by 
using  only  his  right  or  left  oar.  The  tail 
made  to  act  as  a  supplementary  organ  for  the 
same  purpose.  The  tail,  however — in  addi- 
tion to  its  serving  as  the  rudder  of  a  ship, — by 
expanding  and  offering  a  considerable  sur- 
face to  the  air,  fulfils  some  of  the  offices  of 
a  third  wing,  and  serves  also  to  poise  the 
body  of  the  bird.  (2)  The  wisdom  and  good- 
ness of  God  in  the  migration  of  birds.  An 
admirable  instance  of  tiie  Creator's  care,  that 
birds  are  endowed  with  an  instinct  which 
enables  them  to  know  where  and  when  to 
direct  their  flight,  so  as  to  find  a  more  genial 
climate  during  the  colder  season  in  their 
native  home.  (3)  The  hawk,  as  well  as  other 
migratory  birds,  an  example  to  men,  in  relation 
to  God  their  Saviour.  "  The  stork,  &c., 
know  the  time  of  their  coming :  but  my 
people  know  not  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  ^* 
(Jer.  viii.  7).  Christ  provided  by  the  love 
of  God,  as  the  sinner's  shelter  from  the 
certain  storm  of  Divine  wrath  against  sin. 
Men  invited  to  dwell  in  Him  as  "  in  a  peace- 
able habitation,  and  in  sure  dwellings,  and  in 
quiet  resting-places;  when  it  shall  hail, 
coming  down  on  the  forest"  (Isa.  xxxii. 
2,  19).  The  Saviour's  complaint  that  sin- 
ners "  know  not  the  time  of  their  merciful 
visitation."  "0,  Jerusalem!  how  often 
would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  toge- 
ther, as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under 
her  wings,  but  ye  would  not "  (Luke  xix. 
41—44;  Matt,  xxiii.  37). 

8.  The  Eagle.  Verses  27— 30.— "Doth 
tlie  eagle  mount  up  at  thy  command,  and 
make  her  nest  on  high.  She  dwelletli  and 
abid(;th  on  the  rock,  upon  the  crafj  of  the 

262 


rock,  and  the  strong  place  (or  mountain" 
castle).  From  thence  she  seeketh  her  prey, 
and  her  eyes  behold  afar  off.  Her  young 
ones  suck  up  blood,  and  wlu-re  the  slain  are, 
there  is  she."  The  eagle  a  species  of  tlie 
same  order  of  birds  as  the  hawk  (accipitres), 
and  belonn;ing  to  the  falcon  genus.  The 
largest  of  the  genus,  and  the  most  powerful 
of  all  the  birds  of  prey.  Probably  intended, 
however,  to  include  vultures  as  well,  espe- 
cially the  bearded  or  eagle- vulture  (G^jtJ^^^?^*), 
which,  rather  than  the  eagle,  feed  on  car- 
rion. The  bearded  or  eagle-vulture,  though 
differing  both  in  head  and  body  from  the  eagle, 
yet  resembling  it  in  its  robust  form  and 
general  habits,  except  that  it  feeds  on  dead 
flesh,  which  the  eagle  rarely  does.  Equals, 
or  exceeds,  the  largest  eagle  in  size,  and  is 
found  throughout  the  great  mountain  chains 
of  the  Old  World.  Apparently  referred  to 
in  Mic.  i.  16 ;  as  its  head  and  neck  are 
entirely  destitute  of  feathers,  which  those  of 
the  proper  eaL^le  are  not.  The  eagle  referred 
to  in  the  text  on  account  of — (1)  Its  loftjf 
flight.  "Doth  the  eagle  mount  up,"  &c. 
Its  great  bodily  power  and  ample  wing  fit 
the  bird  for  a  lofty  and  majestic  flight.  The 
eagle-vulture  about  four  feet  from  the  beak 
to  the  tip  of  the  tail,  and  from  nine  to  ten 
feet  in  the  extent  of  its  wings.  The  pecu- 
liarity of  the  eagle,  to  fly  directly  upward  till 
out  of  sight.  Its  flight  referred  to  by  the 
prophet :  "  They  shall  mount  up  with  wings 
as  eagles  "  (Isa.  xl.  31).  Hence  also  said  to 
have  an  eye   fitted  to  gaze  upon  the  sun. 

(2)  Its  inaccessible  abode.  "  She  maketh 
her  nest  on  high,"  &c.  The  eagle,  and  the 
eagle-vulture,  both  select  the  most  inacces- 
sible pinnacles  as  the  site  of  their  eyrie. 

(3)  Its  acute  vision.  "  Her  eyes  behold 
afar  off."  The  sight  of  the  eagle,  as  of  birds 
of  prey  in  general,  remarkably  acute.  Such 
birds  endowed  with  the  power  of  pushing 
out  and  drawing  in  the  lenses  of  the  eye,  as 
the  object  is  more  or  less  distant,  so  as  to 
discern  from  its  lofty  abode  the  prey  far 
beneath  it,  and  to  see  it  no  less  distinctly  as 
it  descends.  (4)  Their  appetite  for  fesh  and 
blood.  "Her  young  ones  also  suck  up 
blood,"   &c.      The  greater   number   of  the 

falcon  class  of  birds,  to  which  the  eagle 
belongs,  feed  on  living  prey,  while  the  eagle- 
vulture,  like  birds  of  the  vulture  genus,  also 
fteds  on  carrion.  Hence  the  battle-field  tho 
great  attraction  for  the  latter.  Eagles  said 
only  to  drink  blood.  The  young  ones  trained 
to  this  in  the  nest,  to  which  the  parent-bird 
brings  the  prey. 

Observe  from  the  section — (1)  The  wisdom 
of  the  Creator  in  respect  to  birds  and  beasts 
of  prey.  Exhibited — (i.)  in  providing  that 
one  class  of  animals  prey  upon  another. 
According  to  the  preseui   constitution  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHUP.  XL. 


nature,  no  other  system  could  long  exist 
except  that  which  operated  as  a  check  on 
animal  production,  and  preserved  a  balance 
of  power  between  all  creatures,  (ii.)  In 
providing  by  means  of  such  animals  for  the 
removal  of  dead  bodies  left  on  the  surface  of 
the  earth.  Vultures,  and  even  eagles, 
among  birds  and  wolves,  jackals,  and 
liyaenas,  among  quadrupeds,  employed  by 
the  Creator  as  the  earth's  scavengers —in 
removing  its  offal,  and  especially  the  carcases 
of  animals,  which  would  otherwise  tend  to 
corrupt  the  air  with  pestilential  exhalations, 
diid  unfit  parts  of  the  earth  for  the  abode  of 
the  living.  (2)  The  eaf)le  viewed  as  an 
emblem.  May  be  regarded  as  an  emblem — 
(i.)  Of  Ood  Himself,  in  His  tender  care 
of  and  attention  to  the  wants  of  His  crea- 
tures. "  Her  young  ones  suck  up  blood." 
**  As  the  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest,  fluttereth 
over  her  young,  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings, 
taketh  them,  bcareth  them  in  her  wings; 
so  the  Lord  alone  did  lead  him'  (Dent. 
xxxii.  11,  12).  (ii.)  Oi  believers,  (a)  In 
their  upward  ascent.  "Tiiey  shall  mount 
up  with  wings  as  eagles."  Believers' 
journey  a  heavenward  one.  Believers  not 
to  have  their  affection  set  on  things  on  the 
earth,  but  to  "  seek  those  things  that  are 
above,  where  Christ  sitteth  "  (Col.  iii.  1,  2). 
The  unregenerate  burrow  in  the  earth,  as 
moles  and  worms ;  believers  mount  upwards, 
as  with  eagles'  wings.  The  disposition  to  do 
so,  from  their  new  spiritual   and  Divine 


nature ;  their  ability,  imparted  by  the  Holj 
S[)irit  in  connection  with  their  waiting  upon 
God  (Isa.  xl.  31).  {!))  In  their  lofty  and 
safe  abode.  "They  shall  dwell  on  high; 
tlioir  place  of  defence  is  the  munitions  of 
rocks  "  (Isa.  xxxiii.  16).  Their  dwelling  in 
God  Himself,  the  Rock  of  Ages.  Their 
abode,  the  secret  [)lace  of  the  Most  High, 
under  the  shadow  of  the  Almiglity.  Jehovah 
Himself  their  refuge  and  fortress.  Their 
safe  shelter,  the  Hock  that  is  higher  than 
they  (Ps.  xci.  1,  2, ;  Ixi.  2,  3).  {c)  In  their 
spiritual  vision.  Believers  enabled  to  "  see 
afar  off"  (2  Pct.i.9).  Once  blind,  but  now  see. 
Their  eyes  anointed  with  Christ's  eye-salve 
(Rev.  iii.  17).  Believers  behold,  as  in  a  glass, 
the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Behold  the  glory  of 
Jesus,  as  that  of  the  Onlv  Begotten  of  the 
Father  (2  Cor.  iii.  18;  John  i.  14).  En- 
dure, as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible.  Sen 
promised  glory  afar  off.  Look  at  the  things 
that  are  unseen  and  eternal  (Heb.  xi.  13,  27 ; 
2  Cor.  iv.  18).  Behold,  by  the  eye  of  faith, 
the  King  in  His  beauty,  and  the  land  that  is 
very  far  off  (Isa.  xxxiii.  17).  {d)  In  their 
feeding,  by  faith,  on  the  fesh  and  blood  of  the 
Lamb  that  was  slain  for  them.  "Whoso 
eateth  My  flesh,  and  drink eth  My  blood, 
hath  eternal  life  ;  he  that  eateth  My  flesh, 
and  drinketh  My  blood,  dwelleth  in  Me,  and 
I  in  him.  The  bread  that  1  will  give  is  My 
flesh,  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the 
world"  (John  vi.  51,  54,  56). 


CHAPTER  XL. 


JEHOVAH'S  ADDRESS  CONTINUED. 


A  pause  in  the  Almighty's  address  ap- 
parently indicated  in  the  commencement  of 
the  present  chapter.  The  language  in  which 
it  is  resumed,  together  with  the  reply  of  Job 
immediately  following,  implies  also  a  suspen- 
sion of  the  argument,  which  seems  only  to  be 
taken  up  at  the  fifteenth  verse — when  the 
Almighty  spoke  a  second  time  out  of  the 
whirlwind.  This  is  usually  explained  on  the 
ground  that  Job's  conviction  and  repentance, 
though  expressed  in  verses  4  and  5  in  reply 
to  the  Almighty's  appeal  in  verse  2,  were  not 
yet  sufficiently  deep,  and  that  the  argument 
and  means  of  correction  are  on  that  account 
resumed.  It  is  conjectured,  however,  by 
some  that  an  accidental  dislocation  of  the 
parts  has  taken  place,  and  that  the  first  four- 
teen verses  of  the  chapter  originally  followed 
the  description  of  Leviathan  and  the  first  six 
verses  of  the  succeeding  chapter.  In  this 
way  the  narrative  is  believed  better  to  corre- 
spond with  the  seventh  verse  of  the  forty- 


second  chapter,  which  seems  to  make  the 
Almighty  the  last  speaker;  while  the  four- 
teenth verse  of  the  present  chapter  forms  a 
manifestly  appropriate  and  impressive  con- 
clusion to  the  Divine  address.  Taking  the 
narrative,  however,  as  it  stands  in  the  text, 
we  have — 

I.  The  application  of  the  preceding 
address.  Verses  1,  2. — "  Moreover  the 
Lord  answered  Job  and  said  :  Shall  he  that 
contendeth  with  the  Almighty  instruct  Him 
(or,. '  will  the  corrector  of  the  Almighty  still 
contend  with  Him?'  Or,  ' is  the  disputer 
with  the  Almighty  yet  instructed')?  He 
that  reproveth  God,  let  him  answer  it  "  (viz., 
the  questions  just  proposed).     Observe — 

1.  A  sin  most  offensive  to  God,  to  contend 
with  Him  by  disputing  the  equity  of  His 
government  and  the  reasonableness  of  His 
providential  dispensations.  This  Job's  sin. 
The  sin  to  which  fallen  human  nature,  even 

263 


CHAP.   XL. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


in  believers,  is  always  liable.  The  sin  into 
which  Asaph  felt  himself  falling  (Ps.  Ixxm. 
2—15).     Conspicuously  the  sin  of  Jonah. 

2.  The  contemplation  of  the  greatnfif^s  and 
sovereigntj/  of  God  as  Creator  and  Rtder^  of 
the  nniv''rse,  fitted  to  silence  all  questionings 
and  complainings  in  regard  to  Eis  providential 
procedure.  Tliis  the  object  of  the  Aliuighty's 
address,  and  of  the  reierence  made  by  Him 
to  His  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  as  seen 
in  the  creation,  preservat  ion,  ;ind  government 
of  the  earth,  with  all  the  tribes  of  its  inhabi- 
tants, as  well  as  of  the  worlds  above  and 
around  us,  and  of  all  the  various  forces  and 
phenomena  of  nature.  Such  a  Being  can 
require  no  instruction  from  any  of  His 
creatures;  and  for  even  the  highest  of  them 
to  think  to  reprove  Him  for  any  of  His 
doings  can  only  be  the  summit  of  presumption 
and  folly.  All  ground  of  complaining  against 
God  on  the  part  of  His  creatures  removed  by 
His  infinitely  glorious  perfections.  Those 
perfections  sufficient  foundation  for  ourmost 
assured  conddence  in  the  Divine  procedure. 
A  Being  possessed  of  such  perfections  able 
only  to  do  what  is  wise,  and  just,  and  good. 
Enough  to  hear  in  the  darkest  dispensations : 
**Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God"  (Ps. 
xlvi.  10). 

II.  Job's  Confession.  Verses  3—5. — 
"Then  Job  answered  the  Lord  and  said: 
Behold,  I  am  vile  (mean  and  contemptible) : 
what  shall  I  answer  Thee  (either  as  to  these 

Juestions  or  Thy  conduct  and  procedure)  ? 
will  lay  mine  hand  upon  my  mouth  (in 
token  of  silence  and  conviction).  Once  have 
I  spoken,  but  I  will  not  answer :  yea  twice, 
but  1  will  proceed  no  farther."  In  this  con- 
fession observe — 

1.  T lie  discovery.  "I am  vile."  Abraham's 
acknowledgment — "  Am  but  dust  and  ashes." 
All  flesh  grass.  Man  a  worm.  His  days  on 
earth  as  a  shadow.  But  of  yesterday,  and 
knowing  nothing.  Even  the  nations  less 
than  nothing,  and  vanity.  The  question 
appropriate  and  becoming :  "  What  is  man 
that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  P  "  Vile  in  his 
origin,  and  creature-nature  j  much  viler  still 
in  his  character  as  a  sinner.  His  proper 
place  therefore  in  the  dust,  with  his  hand 
upon  his  mouth.  Murmurings  and  complain- 
ings against  God's  procedure  monstrous  in 
any  creature,  but  especially  so  in  one  so  vile 
as  man.  Note — (1)  God  made  man  in  his 
own  image,  but  sin  has  made  him  vile.  The 
character  of  sin  to  debase  ;  that  of  righteous- 
ness to  exalt.  Sin  rendirs  man  rebellious 
ayainst  his  Creator,  injurious  to  his  neigh- 
bour, brutish  in  himself.  Sin,  the  abominable 
thing  which  God  hates.  (2)  Repentance 
changes  merCs  views  of  themseloes  as  well  as 
((I'  Ood.     Job's  former  language :  **  I  am  not 

264 


wicked."  "  I  would  go  as  a  prince  before 
God  ;  "  Now  it  is  :  *'  Behold,  I  am  vile." 
The  language  of  Saul,  the  Pharisee  :  "  God, 
I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men 
are  ; "  that  of  Paul,  the  penitent :  *'  I  am 
the  chief  of  sinners."  (3)  Job^s  discover^  a 
blessed  one.  The  result  of  Divine  teaching 
and  of  God's  revealing  himself  to  the  soul. 
Isaiah's  acknowledgment  when  he  beheld 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  the  temple :  "  Woe 
is  mc!  for  I  am  undone,  because  I  am  a 
man  of  unclean  lips."  That  of  Peter  on  the 
discovery  of  Christ's  divinity  in  the  fishing 
boat :  "  Depart  from  me  ;  for  I  am  a  sinful 
man,  0  Lord."  This  discovery  the  first  step 
to  Job's  exaltation,  and  the  exaltation  of  any 
sinner.  "He  giveth  grace  to  the  lowly." 
"  He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted." 
Pride  and  self-righteousness  the  greatest 
hindrances  to  a  man's  peace. 

2.  Job's  silence.  *'  What  shall  I  answer 
thee?  I  will  lay  mine  hand  upon  my 
mouth."  No  plea  to  offer  (chap.  xxi.  5  ;  Jud. 
xviii.  19).  A  Divinely  taught  self-knowledge 
the  effectual  cure  of  a  murmuring  spirit. 
God's  government  of  his  creatures  of  such  a 
character  as  to  stop  the  mouth  of  every 
objector.  A  day  at  hand  when  every  mouth 
will  be  shut,  and  all  the  world  become  guilty 
before  God.  The  immediate  result  of  the 
Spirit's  work  in  conviction.  Examples :  The 
thief  upon  the  Cross ;  Saul  of  Tarsus. 

3.  His  resolution.  *'  Once  have  I  spoken, 
but  I  will  not  answer,"  &c.  The  proof  of 
repentance  to  resolve  not  to  repeat  the 
offence.  "  If  I  have  offended,  I  will  not 
offend  any  more."     "  He  that  confesseth  and 

forsaketh  his  sin  shall  obtain  mercy."  "  Go 
and  sin  no  more."  Complete  and  uncon- 
ditional surrender,  the  aim  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  the  sinner's  conviction.  Note — Job's  sin 
that  of  his  lips,  and  especially  in  relation  to 
God.  Sins  of  the  lips  to  be  repented  of  as 
well  as  sins  of  the  life.  Unbecoming  thoughts 
and  words  in  regard  to  God  at  least  as 
punishable  as  injustice  towards  our  neigh- 
bour. "  Uprightings  of  judgment  towards 
God  as  much  a  duty  as  uprightness  of  con- 
duct towards  man." — Kitto. 

III.  The  Almighty's  Challenge.  Verses 
6 — 14. — *'Then  answered  the  Lord  unto 
Job  out  of  the  whirlwind,  and  said  :  Gird  up 
thy  loins  now  like  a  man  (a  hero  or  mighty 
man,  as  thou  imaginest  thyself  to  be — spoken 
in  irony) :  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  declarti 
thou  unto  me.  Wilt  thou  also  disannul  ray 
judgment  (judicial  sentence,  or  justice  in 
governing  the  world)  ?  wilt  thou  condemn 
me,  that  thou  mayst  be  righteous  (in  order 
to  esiablish  thy  innocence — which  Job  ap- 
peared on  the  point  of  doing)  ?  Hast  thou 
an  arm  like  Goa  ?  or  canst  thou  thunder  wjtt 


myniETic  comfEXTjnr:  job. 


CHA?.  Xt. 


a  voice  like  Him  P  Deck  thyself  now  with 
majesty  and  excellency,  and  array  thyself 
[like  a  God]  with  glory  and  beauty.  Cast 
abroad  (manifest  on  every  side,  or  d  irt  forth 
as  lightnings)  the  rage  (or  overflowings)  of 
of  thy  wrath  [against,  the  ungodly  for  their 
dcstruc:ion]:  and  behold  [with  a  withering 
glance]  every  one  that  is  proud,  and  abase 
him.  Look  [with  omniscient  eye  from  the 
throne  of  the  universe]  on  every  one  that  is 
proud,  and  bring  him  low  (by  the  infliction  of 
condign  punishment,  and  for  the  manilesta- 
tion  of  thy  power  and  justice)  ;  and  tread 
down  the  wicked  in  their  place  (on  the  spot, 
however  high  in  power  and  station).  Hide 
them  in  the  dusr.  [of  the  grave],  and  bind 
their  faces  in  secret  (without  public  process, 
or  in  the  darkness  of  a  prison,  like  so  many 
doomed  malefactors — Est.,  vii.  8).  Then  will 
I  also  [as  well  as  others]  confess  unto  thee 
[with  praise],  that  thine  own  right  hand  can 
save  thee." 

The  Almighty's  address  from  the  storm- 
cloud  renewed,  not  to  explain  and  remove 
the  mysteries  in  His  providential  dealings, 
for  which  there  will  be  time  enough  here- 
after, but  still  to  further  convince  Job  of  his 
error  in  questioning  the  Divine  justice,  and 
more  fully  to  humble  him,  by  the  exhibition 
of  His  own  almightiness  and  man's  little- 
ness. From  the  challenge  in  the  above 
section,  observe — 

1.  The  spirit  and  tendency  of  all  murmur- 
ings  against  God's  dealings  with  us  is  to 
"  disannul "  His  decisions,  and  to-  manitain 
our  own  righteousnes  as  deserving  better 
treatment. 

2.  Discontent  and  rebellion  against  the 
Divine  procedure  is  virtually  to  "  contend  " 
with  God,  and  enter  the  lists  with  the 
Almighty.  "Let  the  potsherds  strive  with 
the  potsherds  of  the  earth ;  but  woe  unto 
(he  man  that  striveth  with  his  Maker." 
A  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
the  living  God.  *'  Who  can  abide  when  once 
he  is  angry."  The  wrath  of  a  king  like  the 
roaring  of  a  lion;  what  then  the  wrath  of  a 
God  ?  The  sinner  must  either  submit  by 
grace  or  be  subdued  by  judgment.  *'Kiss 
the  Son,  lest  Ik^  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from 
the  way." 

4.  Pride  the  object  of  God's  special  dis- 
pleasure.    The  sin  of  fallen  angels. 

5.  Every  sinner  *' beheld"  by  the  omnis- 
cient eye  of  the  Almighty.  *'  No  darkness 
or  shadow  of  death  where  the  workers  of 
iniquity  may  hide  themselves." 

6.  The  proudest  to  be  one  day  *'  brought 
low."  Proud  sinners  humbled  either  in 
mercy  or  judgment.  Those  happy  who 
willingly  humble  themselves  before  God, 
before  they  are  luiirillhifiU/  humbled  />yHim. 

7.  Tlioruugh  humUiuiiuu  a/id  self-uOasemetit 


required,  in  order  to  (he  reception  of  full  sal- 
valion  and  spiritual  comfort.  Job  for  a  time 
only  partially  humbled.  The  ploughshare  of 
conviction  to  be  driven  deeper  into  his  soul, 
before  the  seed  of  Divine  consolation  is  cast 
into  it.  The  knife  to  be  still  further  applied, 
before  the  wound  is  finally  bound  up.  God's 
kindness  seen  in  thoroughly  humbling  the 
saint  as  well  as  the  sinner.  A  crowning 
blessing,  to  be  divested  of  the  last  remains 
of  pride  and  self-righteousness  God  empties 
in  order  to  fill ;  humbles  in  order  to  exalt. 

8.  The  tendency  of  fallen  humanity  always 
to  save  itself  The  essence  of  all  infidelity, 
Pharisaism,  and  self-righteousness.  The 
spirit  of  Cain  with  his  offering  of  first  fruits, 
in  cont  rast  with  that  of  Abel  with  his  bleed- 
ing lamb.  The  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  with 
his — "  God,  I  thank  thee  I  am  not  as  other 
men  \  "  in  contrast  with  the  Publican  and  his 
— "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Self- 
salvation  the  aim  of  most  of  the  religion  in 
the  world,  whether  Pagan,  Mahometan, 
Jewish,  or  Christian.  Much  of  the  religion 
of  the  cloister  as  well  as  of  the  synagogue. 
Penances,  prayers,  almsgivings,  and  so-called 
good  works,  often  only  so  many  different 
forms  of  self-salvation.  Self  salvation  usually 
the  first  attempt  of  an  awakened  sinner. 
Salvation  by  self  the  great  impediuient  to 
salvation  by  Christ. 

9.  Attempts  to  save  ourselves  only  cured  by 
the  discovery  of  our  own  weakness.  To  save 
ourselves  implies  a  power  nothing  less  than 
Divine.  To  be  our  own  Saviour  we  must 
possess  the  attributes  of  Deity.  The  Saviour 
of  humanity,  when  fallen,  must  be  God  as 
truly  as  the  Creator  of  humanity  itself. 
"God  our  Saviour" — two  ideas  necessarily 
connected.  Salvation  includes  — (1)  Satis- 
faction to  Divine  justice  for  sin;  (2)  ile- 
peneration  or  the  renewal  of  a  sinful  nature. 
Satisfaction  for  sin,  which  deserves  endless 
death,  only  to  be  made  by  one  possessing  in- 
finite dignity .  Regeneration,  or  the  creai  ion 
of  a  ncAV  and  holy  nature  in  a  fallen  man,  the 
work  of  a  Divine  power.  The  power  re- 
quired to  save  ourselves,  that  which  c  .n 
punish  sin  anywhere  and  banish  it  from  the 
world.  The  sinner  made  to  see  his  inability, 
in  order  to  abandon  his  attempts  at  self-salva- 
tion, and  to  cast  himself  entirely  on  God 
the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  The 
glory  of  the  Gospel,  that  it  reveals  a  Divine 
power  put  forth  lor  man's  salvation  ;  and 
actually  put  forth  in  the  case  of  all  who 
believe  it.  Man's  inability  to  save  himself 
the  ground  of  Christ's  redemption.  To  ex- 
hibit ihat  inability  one  of  the  objects  of  t}iis 
book.  "  God,  and  not  man,  the  sinner's 
Saviour — the  substance  of  all  revelation." 
— Townsend 

IV.  Description  of  Bclicmoth.    Verses 

265 


CHA?.  XL. 


EO'snmnc  commi^xtauy :  job. 


15— 24.— "Behold  now  Behemoth,  which 
I  made  with  thee  (or  in  thy  neig-lihourhood) ; 
he  eateth  grass  as  an  ox.  Lo  now,  liis 
strength  is  in  his  loins,  and  his  force  is  in 
the  uiivel  (or  muscles)  of  his  belly.  He 
nioveth  (JA//;-;.,  "setteth  np  ")  his  tail  like 
a  cedar:  the  sine>vs  of  his  stones  (or  thighs) 
are  wrapped  together  (or  interhiced).  His 
bones  are  as  strong  pieces  (or  tubes)  of  brass 
(or  copper)  ;  his  bones  (a  diifi-rent  word 
from  the  prcci-ding— prol)ahly  a  Syriac  or 
Chaldaic  one,  and  rather  denotmg  the  larger 
bones — his  liinhs)  are  like  bars  of  iron.  He 
is  [in  bulk  and  strength]  the  chief  of  the 
ways  (or  works)  of  God :  he  that  made  him 
can   make   his  sword  to  approach  him  (or, 

*  hath  given  to  him  his  sword  ' — tiie  weapon 
—probably  his  hooked  teeth  or  tusks  with 
which  he  might  defend  himself  and  attack 
others,  but.  which  he  only  uses  in  mowing 
down  the  grnss  for  his  food).  Surely  the 
mountains  bring  him  forth  food,  where  all 
the  beasts  of  the  field  play  (the  animal 
haVmless  and  herbivorous,  notwithstanding 
liis  sword).  He  lieth  under  the  shady  trees 
(or  lotuses),  in  the  covert  of  the  reed  and 
fens  (or  marshes  abounding  on  the  banks  of 
the  Nile).  The  shady  trees  (or  lotuses) 
cover  him  with  tlieir  shadow  ;  the  willows  of 
the  brook  compass  him  about.  Behold,  he 
drinkethupariver  (or  a 'river  rages*  or  over- 
flows its  banks),  and  [he]  hasteth  not  (to 
escape  from  fear  of  the  consequences) :  he 
trusteth  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan  with 
his  mouth.      He  taketh  it  with  his  eyes  (  or 

*  will  any  take  him  before  his  eyes  ?  ' — in- 
stead of  using  stratagem) :  his  nose  pierceth 
through  snares"  (or,  "  will  any  pierce  his 
nose  with  hooks?"— as  2  Kings  xix.  28; 
JEzekiel  xxxviii.  4). 

Uncertain  what  animal,  if  any  one  in  par- 
ticular, is  intended  by  the  description.  The 
name  "  Behemoth,"  as  a  Hebrew  word, 
simply  denotes  "  beasts,"  or  viewed  as  the 
plural  of  majesty,  "  the  beast."  So  rendered 
in  some  of  the  ancient  versions.  The  word, 
however,  thought  by  some  to  be  rather  the 
Hebrew  form  of  an  Egyptian  name  for  the 
animal,  viz.,  P-ehe-moth,  or  the  water-ox. 
The  elephant  generally  understood  by  the 
older  commentators  to  be  the  animal  in- 
tended. Modern  interpreters,  however, 
decidedly  in  favour  of  the  /lippopofamics,  or 
river-horse.  The  description  believed  to 
agree  better  with  the  latter;  while  the 
hip|)opotamus,  being  an  inhabitant  of  the 
Nile  and  its  banks,  was  much  more  likely  to 
be  familiary  known  to  the  patriarch  and  the 
poet  than  the  elephant. 

Both  the  elephant  and  the  hippopotamus 

belong  to  the  class  of  animals   termed  by 

naturalists  Parhi/dermata,  or  thick-skiuned. 

The  eUiphant  comprehends  the  largest  of  the 

266 


living  terrestrial  animals  that  suckle  their 
young.  Its  food  is  strictly  vegetable.  It  is 
of  a  mild  disposition,  and  lives  in  herds, 
which  are  conducted  by  old  males.  Those 
of  the  present  day  clothed  with  a  rough 
skin,  nearly  destitute  of  hair.  Are  only 
found  in  -the  torrid  zone  of  the  eastern  con- 
tinents ;  the  Indian  elephant  being  found 
from  the  Indus  to  the  Eastern  Ocean, 
and  in  the  large  islands  of  the  south 
of  India ;  and  the  African  one,  from  Senegal 
to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  The  African 
elephant  not  novv  tamed,  although  the 
Carthaginians  appear  to  have  employed  it  in 
the  same  way  t  hat  the  inhabitants  of  India 
do  theirs.  The  hippo()otamus  has  a  very 
massive  and  naked  body,  with  very  short 
legs,  so  that  the  belly  reaches  to  the  ground, 
an  enormous  head,  and  a  short  tail.  It  lives 
in  rivers  and  their  neighbourhood,  feeding 
on  roots  and  other  vegetable  substances,  and 
exhibits  much  ferocity  and  stupidit,y.  Now 
confined  to  the  rivers  of  the  middle  and 
south  of  Africa.  —Cucier. 

T^he    description   apparently   agreeing   in 
every  particular  neither    with  the  elephant 
nor  the  hippopotamus,  the  animal  has  been 
conjectured  by  some  to  be  a  now   extinct 
genus ;  and  by  others  to  be  rather  a  poetical 
personification  of  the  great  pachydermata — 
the  idea  of  the  hippopotamus  being  predomi- 
nant.    Extinct  species  of  t  his  class  of  animals 
found  in  a  fossil  condition.     The  great  mas- 
todon the  type  of  the  elephant,  though  of  a 
different   species — the  principal   distinction 
being  in  the  shape  and  structure  of  the  teeth ; 
while  the  mastodon  also  possessed  short  tusks 
in  its  lower,  in  adilition  to  those  in  its  upper, 
jaw.     This  animal  equalled  the  elephant  in 
size,  but  with  still  heavier  proportions.  Its  re- 
mains found  in  a  wonderful  state  of  preser- 
vation  both   in   America   and   the   Eastern 
Continent.     The    skeleton    of    one,   almost 
entire,  found  in  the  valley  of  the  Missouri, 
now  to  be  seen  in  the  British  Museum.     The 
animal    supposed   to    have   been    more    an 
aquatic,  or  swamp-hunting,  quadruped  than 
the  elephant.     A  mammoth — a  more  recent 
animal  of  the  same  class — measuring  from 
the  fore-part  of  the  skull  to  the  end  of  the 
tail  sixteen  feet  four  inches,  and  twelve  feet 
in   height,   discovered  in   Siberia  in   1801, 
imbedded  in  ice,  with  its  flesh,  skin,  and  hair 
as  perfect  as  if  recently  dead.     The  remains 
of  another  found,  which  is  supposed  to  have 
been  twenty-five  feet  high  and  sixty  feet  in 
length.     Gigantic  elephants,  of  nearly  twice 
the  bulk  of  ihe  largest  elephant  of  Afnca  or 
Ce}'lon,  b(4ieved  by    Professor  Owen,  from 
the   abundanee   of  their    remains,   to    have 
roamed  in  herds  over  the   British  Islands  in 
the  period  immediately  before  the  creation 
of  man.     The   fossil  remains  of  an  animal 


EOMIl'ETIC  COMMENTAPiT:  JOB. 


CHAP.  XLL 


discovered  in  the  gypsum  quarries  of  Paris 
and  other  parts  of  France,  to  which  has  been 
given  the  ndiruQ  Palieotherium,  or  the  *  ancient 
beast/  and  which  seems  to  have  combined  the 
characters  of  the  rhinoceros,  the  liippopota- 
mus,  tlie  liorse,  the  })ig,  and  the  camel;  while 
its  external  ap|)earanee,  as  restored  hv  Cuvier, 
approaches  more  nearly  to  that  of  the  tapir. 
Tile  animal  supposed  to  have  lived  in  marshy 
ground,  and  to  have  fed  on  the  roots  and 
stems  of  trees. 

The  Almighty's  object  in  the  description 
of  Behemoth,  to  present  to  Job,  in  this 
gigantic  and  powerful  animal,  an  evidence  of 
His  Divine  power;  and  at  the  same  time 
to  teach  him  his  own  littleness,  and  the  pre- 
sumption of  thinking  to  dispute  with  his 
Maker,  or  of  questioning  the  justice  of  His 
procedure.  Tlie  Cieator,  Preserver,  and 
Governor  of  such  creatures  must  be  one 
who  possesses  sufficient  power,  wisdom,  and 
rectitude  to  govern  the  world. 


Observe — (l'^  Not  merely  do  the  heavens 
and  tlu;  fiimatuent  over  our  head  declare  the 
glory  of  God,  but  every  creature  which  His 
hands  have  made.  The  huge  mammotti 
points  to  the  irresistibleness  of  His  power, 
wliile  the  almost  invisible  animalcule  tells  of 
the  universality  of  His  Providential  care. 
(•2)  The  largest,  as  well  as  the  least,  of  His 
creatures  dependent  on,  and  provided  for  hi/y 
the  Creator.  "  He  giveth  the  beast  his 
food."  How  much  more  will  He  care  and 
provide  for  His  own  children  made  after 
His  image!  He  Who  constantly  feeds  the 
gigantic  monsters  of  the  land  and  sea  can  be 
at  no  loss  to  supply  the  wants  of  His  trusting 
people.  The  happiness  of  believers  that  they 
are  able  to  testify  with  David:  "He  hath 
made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant, 
ordered  in  all  things  and  sure"  (2  Sam. 
xxiii.  5). 


CHAPTER  XLL 


JEHOVAirS  SECOND  ADDRESS  CONTINUED, 


Nearly  the  whole  of  the  chapter  occupied 
with  the  description  of  *'  Leviathan.*'  The 
section  remarkable  for  its  grandeur  and  sub- 
limity. The  idea  of  terribleness  and  power 
conveyed  in  a  variety  of  striking  particulars. 
The  image  of  a  formidable  monster  vividly 
placed  before  our  eyes.  The  details  naturally 
often  obscure.  The  most  extended  descrip- 
tion in  the  Almighty's  address  and  in  the 
whole  book.  The  object  to  exhibit  the  might 
and  majesty  of  the  Creator.  "  Such  a  power 
of  description  as  to  constitute  in  my  mind  an 
evidence  of  its  inspiration." — Dr.  Chalmers. 

I.  The    description    itself.     May    be 

divided  under  various  heads. 

1.  The  creature's  fierceness  and  indomit- 
ableness.  Verses  1 — 10. — "Canst  thou  draw 
out  leviathan  with  an  hook  ?  or  his  tongue 
with  a  cord  which  thou  letlest  down  (or, 
*  press  down  his  tongue  with  a  rein,'  or  per- 
haps 'a  fishing-line')?  Canst  thou  put  an 
hook  into  his  n<^se  ?  or  bore  his  jaw  through 
with  a  thorn  {i.e.,  an  iron  hook  resembling 
one — so  as  to  lead  him  about  as  thou  wilt, 
like  3ther  wild  beasts,  as  Ezek.  xxix  4  ;  Is. 
xxxvii.  29).  Will  he  make  many  supplica- 
tions unto  thee  [to  spare  him]?  Will  he 
speak  soft  words  [of  ))ersuasion]  unto  thee  ? 
Will  he  make  a  covenant  with  thee  ?  Wilt 
thou  take  him  for  a  servant  for  ever  ?  Wilt 
thou  play  with  him  as  with  a  bird?  or  wilt 
thou  bind  him  for  thy  maidens  (as  a  play- 
thing for  thy  little  girls)?     Shall  the  com- 


panions (the  partners  employed  in  taking 
him)  make  a  banquet  of  (or  on  account  of) 
him  (after  taking  and  killing  him,  or,  will 
they  'make  a  bargain  over  him,'  or  *dig  pits 
for  him,  in  order  to  take  him)  ?  Shall  they 
part  him  among  the  merchants  (to  be  sold 
like  other  animals)  ?  Canst  thou  fill  his 
skin  with  barbed  irons  ?  or  his  head  with  fish 
spears?  Lay  thine  hand  upon  him;  remem- 
ber the  battle  [which  thou  hast  rashly  entered 
on],  do  no  more  ( — do  not,  or  thou  wilt  not, 
repeat  it).  Behold,  the  hope  of  him  (of 
taking  him,  or  overcoming  him)  is  in  vain 
(will  be  disappointed).  Shall  not  one  be 
cast  down  [with  terror]  even  at  the  sight  of 
Ihui.  None  is  so  fierce  that  dare  stir  him 
up"  (or  awake  him  when  sleeping). 

2.  flis  po'cerful  sfructure  and  terrible  as 
prct.  Verses  12 — 2i. — "  I  will 'not  conceal 
his  parts  (or  members),  nor  his  power,  nor 
his  comely  proportions  (or,  'the  grace  of  his 
array  ').  Who  can  discover  the  face-  of  his 
garment  (strip  off  his  skin  or  the  scales  that 
cover  ii)  ?  or  who  can  come  to  him  with  his 
double  bridle  (or,  'enter  into  the  doubling 
of  his  jaws,'  or  his  double  row  of  teeth)  ? 
Who  can  open  the  doors  of  his  face?  His 
teeth  a>"e  terrible  round  about  (or,  *the 
circuits  of  his  teeth  are  a  terror').  His 
scales  {Marg.,  'the  strong  pieces  of  h.is 
shields,'  i.e.,  his  strong  shields  or  scales)  are 
his  pride,  shut  up  together  as  with  a  close 
seal  for,  'as  a  close  seal' — a  seal  sticking 
closely  to  the  material  on  which  it  is  im- 

267 


CttAP.   XliT. 


BOMIL^TW  COMMmTART:  JOB, 


pressed).  One  is  so  near  to  another  that  no 
air  call  come  between  them  ;  they  are  joined 
one  to  anoiher;  they  stick  together  that 
they  cannot  be  sundered.  By  his  neesings 
a  light  doth  shine,  and  his  eyes  are  like  the 
eyelids  of  the  morning  (as  he  lifts  his  head 
above  the  water.)  Out  of  his  mouth  go 
burning  lamps,  and  sparks  of  fire  leap  oat 
(expressive  of  his  hot  fiery  breath).  Out  of 
his  nostrils  goeth  smoke,  as  out  of  a  seeth- 
ing pot  or  caldron.  His  breath  kindleth 
coals  (live  burning  coals),  and  a  flame  goeth 
out  of  his  mouth.  In  his  neck  remaineth 
(lodgeth)  strength,  and  sorrow  is  turned 
into  joy  before  him  (,)/^r^.,  *rejoiceth;* 
or  *  terror  danceth  before  him'— a  bold 
personification,  indicating  the  terror  and 
dismay  occasioned  by  his  appearance).  The 
flakes  (or  pendulous'  parts)  of  his  flesh  are 
joined  together;  they  are  firm  in  themselves; 
they  cannot  be  moved.  His  heart  is  as  firm 
as  a  stone ;  yea,  as  hard  as  a  piece  of  the 
nether  millstone  (or  'as  the  lower  mill- 
stone')." 

3.  His  invincihleness  and  inimlnerahleness. 
Verses  25—29.—*-  When  he  raiseth  up  him- 
self (out  of  the  water)  the  might}-  are  afraid; 
by  reason  of  bieakings  (which  he  makes 
while  plunging  in  the  water,  or  '  from  the 
destruction'  which  his  appearance  threatens, 
or  the  'terror'  which  it  causes)  they  purify 
themselves  (or  lose  their  recollection — are 
bewildered).  The  sword  of  him  that  layeth 
at  him  cannot  hold  (or  stand)  :  the  spear, 
the  dart,  nor  the  habergeon  (coat  of  mail,  or 
perhaps  the  javelin).  He  esteemeth  iron  as 
straw,  and  brass  (or  the  brazen  weapon)  as 
rotten  wood.  The  arrow  cannot  make  him 
flee;  slingstones  are  turned  with  him  into 
stubble.  Darts  (or  clubs)  are  counted  as 
stubble;  he  laugheth  at  the  shaking  of  a 
spear." 

4.  His  habits,  motion,  and  supremaci/ 
among  beasts.  Verses  30 — 34. — "  Sharp 
stones  are  under  him  (or,  *  his  lower  parts 
are  sharp  potsherds ' — the  scales  on  his  belly 
resembling  such) ;  he  spreadeth  sharp  pointed 
things  (,or,  *a  threshing  cart,' — his  sharp 
spikes  resembling  the  teeth  of  one)  upon 
the  mire  {i.e.,  when  he  moves  upon  liis  belly, 
whether  on  tlie  soft  shore  or  on  the  bed  of 
the  river.  He  maketh  the  deep  (the  water 
in  which  he  mostly  lives — whether  sea,  lake, 
or  river)  to  boil  like  a  pot  (from  the  agita- 
tion which  he  causes) ;  he  maketh  the  sea 
(or  river,  to  which  the  term  is  also  applied) 
like  a  pot  of  ointment  (seething  on  tlie  fire, 
and  emitting  a  smell  which  that  of  the 
crocodile  is  said  to  resemble).  He  maketh 
a  path  to  shine  after  him  (like  the  phos- 
phorescent light  sometimes  produced  by  the 
rapid  motion  of  a  ship) ;  one  would  tliink 
the  deep  to  be  hoary  (from  the  white  froth 

268 


and  foam  which  the  creature  occasions  by 
his  motions).  Upon  earth  there  is  not  his 
like  (or  *any  dominion'  to  which  he  is 
subject,),  who  is  made  without  fear  [of  any 
assailant].  He  beholdeth  all  high  things 
(looks  down  upon  the  loftiest  creature  with 
disdain;  or 'terrifies  every  boaster ')  ;  he  is 
king  (holds  supremacy)  over  all  the  children 
of  pride"  (or,  'ferocity' — all  proud  fero- 
cious animals,  such  as  the  lion  and  other 
beasts  of  prey). 

II.  The  creature  described.  Opinions 
various.  According  to  the  Greek  transla- 
tion used  by  the  Apostles,  a  dragon.  With 
some  a  sea-monster.  By  almost  all  the  old 
commentators,  understood  to  be  the  whale, 
as  in  Ps.  civ.  26.  Now  generally  believed 
to  be  the  crocodile.  The  name  apparently 
denoting  the  twisting  ox  folding  one,  and  so 
applicable  either  to  a  serpent  or  a  crocodile. 
The  description  more  suitable  to  the  crocodile 
than  any  other  known  living  animal.  The 
crocodile  also,  as  an  inhal)itant  of  the  Nile, 
likely  to  be  known  both  to  Job  and  the 
writer  of  tlie  book.  The  more  likely  to  be 
the  crocodile  as  connected  with  Behemoth; 
if  that  creature  be  supposed  to  be  the  liip- 
popotamus,  also  a  native  of  that  river.  A 
familiarity  with  Egypt  and  its  productions 
on  the  part  of  the  writer,  apparently  indi- 
cated by  the  poem. 

The  animal  intended,  however,  conjectured 
by  some  to  be  one  of  an  extinct  species  of 
the  order  of  Saurians,  the  description  corre- 
sponding in  all  particulars  neither  to  the 
whale  nor  the  crocodile.  By  others,  the 
description  thought  to  be  rather,  like  that 
of  Beliemoth,  a  poetical  generalization;  in 
this  case,  for  all  monsters  of  the  whale,  ser- 
pent, or  lizard  tribes,  the  idea  of  the  crocodile 
being  the  predominant  one. 

The  crocodile,  an  amphibious  animal  of 
the  order  of  Saurians,  has  a  single  range  of 
pointed  teeth  in  each  jaw.  The  tongue 
fleshy,  flat,  and  adhering  close  to  the  edges 
of  the  jaws  a  circumstance  which  induced 
the  ancients  to  believe  that  the  animal  was 
destitute  of  a  tongue  altogether.  The  back 
and  tail  covered  with  very  stout,  large, 
square  scales  or  plates,  so  thick  as  easily  to 
repel  a  musket  ball,  those  on  the  belly  being 
smooth  and  thin.  The  crocodile  inhabits 
rivers  and  lakes,  and  is  extremely  ferocious 
and  carnivorous.  Found  nearly  twenty  feet 
long  and  five  feet  in  circumference. 

Anoiher  family  of  the  same  order  is  the 
dragon  (draco,  Linnceus),  supposed  by  some 
to  be  the  Leviathan,  which  is  also  mentioned 
in  Is.  xxvii.  as  "  the  dragon  that  is  in  the  sea." 
The  dragon  of  the  naturalists  distinguished 
from  all  other  animals  of  the  order,  by  their 
first  six  false  ribs ;  which,  extending  outwards 


HOMILETtC  COMMMTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.    XU 


in  a  straight  line,  and  supporting  a  produc- 
tion of  the  skin,  form  a  kind  of  wing,  like 
that  of  a  bat,  but  not  connected  with  the 
four  feet ;  and  having  sufficient  power  to 
enable  them  to  leap  from  one  branch  to 
another,  but  not  to  rise,  like  a  bird,  into  the 
air.  They  are  completely  covered  with 
scales.  The  tongue  fleshy  and  somewhat 
extensive;  while  a  long  pointed  dewlap 
hangs  under  their  throats.  To  this  tribe  of 
Saurians  probably  belongs  the  long-extinct 
reptile  oidy  found  in  a  fossil  state,  and 
known  by  the  name  of  Fterodadylus.  This 
animal  of  a  bygone  world  had  a  short  tail, 
an  extremely  long  neck,  and  a  very  large 
head.  The  jaws  armed  with  equal  and 
pointed  teeth.  The  second  toe  of  the  fore 
foot  so  elongated  as  to  make  the  foot  double 
the  length  of  the  trunk,  and  probably  serving 
to  support  some  membrane  which  enabled 
the  animal  to  fly.  Enormous  eyes  enabled  it 
to  see  in  the  dark  twilight,  while  its  jaws 
were  furnished  with  sixty  pointed  teeth. 
Some  specimens  must  have  had  a  spread  of 
wing  exceeding  sixteen  feet.  The  Greek 
term  draco,  or  dragon,  generally  used  to 
designate  a  large  serpent;  while  some 
ancient  Greek  writers  speak  of  fl..ying 
dragons.  Some  of  them  speak  also  of 
dragons  with  a  crest  or  beard;  which  can 
only  apply  to  the  Iguanas,  properly  so  called, 
and  belonging  to  the  same  family  as  the 
dragons.  In  these  the  head  is  covered  with 
plates,  and  the  body  and  tail  wil  h  scales ; 
while  along  the  entire  length  of  the  back  is 
a  range  of  spines,  or  rather  recurved,  com- 
pressed, and  pointed  scales  ;  and  under  the 
throat  is  a  pendant  compressed  dewlap, 
whose  edge  is  supported  by  a  carlilaginious 
process  of  the  hyoid  bone.  Each  jaw  is  sur- 
rounded with  a  row  ol"  teeth,  while  two 
small  rows  are  on  the  posterior  edge  of 
the  palate.  An  iguana,  common  in  South 
America  and  the  West  Indies,  measures 
about  five  feet  in  length.  To  the  same 
family  belongs  the  enormous  fossil  reptile 
known  as  the  Igtianodon,  a  monstrous  lizard, 
sixty  or  seventy  fec't  long;  its  form  resembling 
the  iguana  of  the  West  Indies,  with  the  addi- 
tion of  a  horn,  situated  like  that  of  the 
rhinoceros,  and  of  about  the  same  size. 

Other  monstrous  animals,  living  at  the 
same  period,  and  found  as  fossils,  were 
equally  or  even  more  terrific  in  appearance. 
The  hylosaurus,  or  forest-lizard,  had  a  row 
of  scaly  fringes  on  its  back  seventeen  inches 
long,  which  it  had  the  power  of  erecting 
when  advancing  to  attack  its  enemy  or  to 
seize  its  prey.  The  megalosaurus  exhibited 
the  structure  of  the  crocodile  and  monitor, 
from  forty  to  fifty  feet  in  length.  The  plesio- 
sanrus  united  to  the  head  of  the  lizard,  the 
teeth  ol  the  crocodile,  a  neck  of  enormous 


length  resembling  the  body  of  a  serpent, 
with  a  body  and  tail  of  the  proportions  of  an 
ordinary  quadruped,  and  the  paddles  of  a 
whale.  The  ichlhyosauruSy  or  fish-lizard, 
was  the  ruling  monster  of  the  waters.  In 
some  of  these  the  eye  must  have  been  twelve 
inches  long  and  nine  broad,  protected  by 
scales.  The  jaws,  armed  with  one  hundred 
and  eighty  conical  teeth,  were,  in  the  larger 
species,  six  feet  long,  the  whole  length  of 
the  animal  being  thirty  feet. 

III.  The  Lessons  from  the  Descrip- 
tion. 

1.  The  resistless  power  and  universal 
dominion  of  the  Almighty.  This,  the  lesson 
mainly  intended  to  be  taught  the  patriarch 
himself.  Indicated  expressly  by  the  Al- 
mighty in  verses  10,  11 :  "  None  is  so  fierce 
that  dare  stir  him  up :  who  then  is  able  to 
stand  before  me  ?  Who  hath  prevented  me 
(in  rendering  any  service,  so  as  to  lay  me 
under  an  obligation  to  him),  that  I  should 
repay  him?  (words  referred  to  by  the 
Apostle  in  Rom.  xi.  35).  Whatsoever  is 
under  the  whole  heaven  is  mine."  The 
inference  obvious:  If  you  are  unable  to 
stand  before  or  resist  any  of  these  monsters 
of  the  land  or  sea,  how  can  you  stand  before 
me,  from  whom  they  all  live,  and  move,  and 
have  their  being?  How  vain  to  think  to 
lay  Him  under  obligation  to  us,  to  whom  all 
creatures,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest, 
belong  as  His  own  property,  and  on  whom 
t  hey  depend  every  moment  for  existence ! 
Hence — (1)  Humility  and  submission  to  God, 
loilh  confidence  in  the  justice  of  His  govern  - 
ment  and  the  wisdom  of  His  providential 
dealings,  marCs  duty  in  all  circumstances. 
The  Creator,  Possessor,  and  Ruler  of  uni- 
versal nature  may  well  be  believed  to  be 
infinite  in  His  perfections,  and  trusted  in  as 
righteous,  wise,  and  good  in  all  His  pro- 
cedure. (2)  Terrible  to  have  Him  for  a  foe 
to  whom  the  mightiest  monsters  of  sea  or  land 
belong,  as  only  an  inugnificant  portion  of  His 
creatures.  "  A  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God."  Unspeakably 
blessed  to  have  Him  for  our  friend.  Our 
highest  wisdom  to  secure,  without  delay,  a 
personal  interest  in  His  favour  and  friend- 
ship, through  the  redemption  and  mediation 
of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  The  mysterious  sovereignty  of  God  in  the 
formation  of  His  creatures.  The  same  Divine 
hand  the  former  of  the  harmless  dove  and 
the  terrible  dragon.  The  Creator  of  the 
lamb  pleased  also  to  produce  the  Leviathan. 
The  useful  ox  and  the  destructive  crocodile 
made  to  inhabit  the  same  locality.  Why 
God  should  have  formed  creatures  of  such 
terrible  aspect    and  ferocious  dispositions, 

2^9 


ciup.  xn. 


HOmiETW  COMMENTAUT:  JOB. 


clotlied  them  witli  sncli  impenetrable  armour, 
and  furnished  iheiu  with  such  destructive 
weapons, — among  the  secrets  of  His  Divine 
wisdom.  All  thintjs  made  for  Himself;  eventlie 
wicked  for  tiie  day  of  evil.  Eor  His  pleasure 
all  thiuf^s  are,  and  were  created.  No  crea- 
ture but  made  to  sliow  forth,  in  some  way  or 
other,  the  glory  of  His  Divine  perfections, 
and  to  secure  some  purpose  or  other  in 
His  all-comprehensive  government.  Variety 
everywhere  displayed  in  the  works  of  the 
Creator's  hands.  That  variety  directed  by 
infinite  wisdom,  goodness,  and  justice. 

3.  God^s  works  of  creation  worthy  of  all 
admiration.  His  works  such  as  to  bear  to 
be  taken  to  pieces  and  viewed  in  detail. 
1'he  better  known,  the  more  admired.  Ex- 
hibited by  God  himself  for  our  admiration. 
'*  I  will  not  conceal  his  parts."  The  crocodile, 
or  the  dragon,  as  truly  worthy  of  admiration 
as  the  noble  war-liorse.  Job  pointed  to  the 
Leviathan  as  an  object  of  beauty  and  grace- 
fulness as  well  as  strength  and  power.  If  God 
sees  beauty  in  the  crocodile,  what  beauty 
then  in  many  of  His  other  works  !  Objects 
in  creation  doubtless  viewed  otherwise  by 
God,  angels,  and  unfallen  men,  than  they 
are  by  creatures  in  a  state  of  rebellion 
against  their  Creator,  and,  therefore,  with 
their  faculties  impaired,  and  themselves  at 
enmity  with  the  rest  of  creation.  Things 
viewed  with  terror  by  the  consciously  guilty 
and  condemned,  which  might  otherwise  have 
only  excited  admiration.  God's  standard  of 
beauty  the  true  one.  What  God  views  with 
admiration  and  complacency  certain  to  he 
viewed  by  His  children  with  the  same  feel- 
ings, but  for  the  effects  of  sin  in  their  nature, 
'i'hose  effects  entirely  removed  in  a  better 
state,  when  the  universal  song  will  be, 
"  Great  and  marvellous  are  Thy  works.  Lord 
God  Almighty;  just  and  true  are  all  Thy 
ways,  thou  King  of  saints"  (Rev.  xv.  3).  In- 
teresting to  mark  in  the  above  section  the 
delighted  contemplation  by  God  on  His  own 
works.  "Stamps  a  warrant  of  sacredness  on 
our  tasteful  admiration  of  them."— Z)r. 
Chalmers. 

4.  The  fact  and  effects  of  the  fall  seen  in 
man's  relation  to  the  creatures.  Man  orio-i- 
nally  n)ade  to  have  dominion  over  all  tJie 
terrestrial  works  of  the  Creator's  hands 
INIan  fitted  for  such  dominion,  as  created  in 
his  Maker's  image.  That  dominion  an 
obvious  part  of  his  natural  right  as  a  child 
of  God.  His  intellectual  nature,  placing 
linn  so  immensely  above  the  brute  creation, 
such  as  to  warrant  the  expectation  of  it! 
Tliat  dominion  enjoyed  by  Adam  in  a  state 
ot  mnocence,  when  he  gave  names  to  all  the 
creatures.  Naturally  and  justly  forfeited, 
however,  and  lost  by  man's  rebellion  against 
his  Creator.    Rebellion  justly  followed  by 


attainder.  Rights  naturally  forfeited  by  re- 
bellion against  an  eailhlv  sovereign.  Hence, 
but  for  sin,  the  crocodile  and  the  tiger  as 
harmless  to  man,  and  as  much  under  his 
subjection,  as  the  cow  or  the  dog.  The 
dominion  forfeited  by  the  first  Adam,  re- 
gained and  restored  by  tlie  second.  Christ, 
the  Second  Man,  without  sin,  made  Ruler 
over  all  the  creatures  as  man's  representa- 
tive. Was  in  the  wilderness  forty  days  with 
the  wild  beasts,  as  Adim  was  with  them  in 
Paradise  (Mark  i.  13).  The  lions  at  the 
feet  of  Daniel  in  the  den,  a  specimen  of  what 
may  be  "in  the  regeneration."  All  things 
reconciled  in  Christ.  The  members  made 
partakers  with  the  Head  in  the  restored  rule 
of  creation.  In  the  kingdom  of  Messiah,  a 
state  of  things  indicateii  which  will  probably 
have  its  external  and  physical,  as  well  as  its 
internal  and  spiritual,  aspect:  "The  wolf 
also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the 
leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid,  and  the 
calf,  and  the  young  lion,  and  the  fatling 
together,  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them ; 
and  the  sucking  child  shall  play  on  the  hole 
of  the  asp,"  &c.  (Isa.  xi.  6 — 9). 

5.  An  emblem  afforded  of  the  great  adver- 
sary of  man.  That  adversary  named  in 
Scripture,  "the  Dragon,  that  Old  Serpent, 
which  is  the  Devil  and  Satan"  (Rev.  xx.  2). 
Under  the  figure  of  Leviathan,  "  the  dragon 
that  is  in  the  sea,"  mention  made  by  the 
prophet  (Isaiah  xxvii.  1)  of  some  powerful 
adversary  and  oppressor  of  the  Church 
and  people  of  God:  whom  the  Lord, 
when  he  comes  "out  of  his  place  to 
punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 
for  their  iniquity,"  will  punish  and  slay 
"  with  his  sore  and  great  and  strong  sword." 
Perhaps  some  human  oppressor  of  the 
Church  thus  indicated,  as  Pharaoh,  the 
great,  enemy  of  Israel,  is  spoken  of  under 
the  same  figure  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  13, 14  j  Is.  li.  9). 
The  king  of  Egypt  expressly  called  **the 
great  dragon  that  lieth  in  the  midst  of  his 
rivers "  (Ezek.  xxix.  3).  These,  however, 
exhibited  as  tvpes  of  the  great  oppressor  of 
num,  called  by  Peter,  "  Your  adversary,  the 
devil,  [that]  goeth  about  like  a  roaring  lion, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  The  chosen 
form  of  that  adversary,  in  his  first  and  suc- 
cessful attempt  upon  the  human  race,  that 
of  a  serpent.  The  Leviathan,  as  some  kind 
of  dragon,  very  generally  understood  by 
early  Christian  writers  as  allegorically  repre- 
senting the  dragon  and  old  serpent  of  the 
Revelation.  Parts  of  the  descrij)tion  im- 
pressively applicable  to  our  grea*;  adversary, 
and  very  frequently  employed  by  evangelical 
writers  and  preachers  as  illustrative  of  his 
character.  Leviathan  may  be  viewed  as  an 
emblem  of  Satan  in  respect  to — (1)  His 
loftiness  and  dignity  as  a  creature,     Satan  a 


BOMIIETIC  CO}rMnNTARY:  JOB. 


CHA.P.  XLIt 


fallen  angel;  probably  one  of  tlie  higliesf,,  if 
not  the  very  liii>-hi'st  of  the  heavenly 
liierarchy.  (2)  His  fierce>/fiss  and  cruelly. 
Satan  a  murderer  froiii  the  bcuinniiig,  sparing 
neitiier  aq^e,  sex,  nor  condition.  (8)  His 
power  of  iiifliclirig  mischief  and  working 
destruction.  One  of  Satan's  names  Apollvon 
or  Abaddon,  viz.,  the  Destroyer.  (4)  The 
difficulty  of  ooercoming  him.  Satan  not  to 
be  overcome  by  any  mere  human  effort.  The 
strong  man  armed  who  is  only  to  be  ever- 
come  by  one  stronger  tiian  he  (Luke  xi.  21). 
(5)  The  unicersalily  of  his  sway.  Satan  the 
god  and  prince  of  tliis  vi^orld  ;  the  spirit  that 
worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience  ;  the 
ruler  of  the  darkness  of  this  world.  Keeps 
his  palace  (our  fallen  race),  and  has  his  goods 
in  peace  until  the  stronger  than  he — the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mighty  God,  or  God 
the  Champion  (Is.  ix.  6) — comes  upon 
him,  overcomes  him,  and  "  divideth  the 
spoils "  (Luke  xi.  22).  "  He  is  so 
strong  that  if  all  of  us  should  combine 
against  him,  he  would  laugh  at  us,  as  Levia- 
than 'laugheth  at  the  shaking  of  a  spear.' 
.  ..  .  He  is  well  armed  at  every  point, 
and  he  knows  how  to  arm  his  slave,  the 
sinner,  too;  he  will  plate  him  from 
head  to  foot  with  mail,  and  put  weapons 
into  his  hand  against  which  the  puny 
might    of    Gospel    ministers    and    human 


conscience  can  never  prevail.  Prejudice, 
iq-norance,  evil  education — all  these  are  the 
chain-armour  with  which  Satan  girds  him- 
sclt".  A  hard  licart  is  the  impenetrable 
breastplate  which  this  evil  spirit  wears;  a 
seared  consoience  becomes  to  him  like 
greaves  of  brass ;  habitude  in  sin  is  a  helmet 
of  iron.  Tiie  demon  who  possesses  men  is 
not  to  be  wounded  by  our  artillery." — Metro- 
politan Pulpit^  Feb.  5,  1SG5.  Bunyan's 
description  of  Apollyon,  partly  taken  from 
that  of  Leviathan  in  the  text.  "  Now  the 
monster  was  hideous  to  behold :  he  was 
clothed  with  scales  like  a  fisli  (and  they  are 
his  pride) ;  he  had  wings  like  a  dragon,  feet 
like  a  bear,  and  out  of  his  belly  came  fire 
and  smoke,  and  his  mouth  was  as  the  mouth 
of  a  lion."  But  one  conqueror  of  the  great 
Leviathan — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  who  took 
our  nature,  "  that  through  death  he  might 
destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death, 
that  is,  the  devil ;  and  deliver  them  who, 
through  fear  of  death,  were  all  their  lifetime 
subject  to  bondage  "  (Heb.  ii.  14;,  15).  But 
one  weapon  by  which  he  can  be  wounded, 
"  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word 
of  God"  (Eph.  vi.  17).  "  I  have  written 
unto  young  men,  because  ye  are  strong,  and 
the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  and  ye 
have  overcome  the  wicked  one "  (1  John 
ii.  14). 


CHAPTER  XLn. 
THIRD  GREAT  DIVISION  OF  THE  POEM.— THE  CONCLUSION, 


The  Almighty's  address  immediately  fol- 
lowed by  the  catastrophe  of  the  poem, — the 
repentance  of  Job,  and  the  consequent 
chan2:e  of  his  condition.  What  the  three 
friends,  and  Elihu  himself,  had  tailed  to  do, 
Jehovah's  voice  at  once  accomplishes. 
"  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is,  there  is 
power."  No  explanation  given  by  the  Al- 
mighty of  the  mystery  of  Job's  sufferings, 
and  those  of  other  good  men,  or  of  the 
prosperity  of  the  ungodly  in  this  world.  By 
the  mere  exhibition  ot  the  Divine  pd'fec- 
tions,  objection  is  silenced  and  discontent 
removed ;  while  the  objector  confesses  his 
error,  and  deeply  humbles  himself  on  account 
of  his  presumtion  and  folly. 

From  verse  seven  to  the  end,  the  narra 
tive  is  given  in  prose,  in  the  same  style  as 
the  introduction  in  the  first  two  chapters. 
The  chapter  stands  connected  with  the  pre- 
ceding parts  of  the  book,  as  the  capital  of 
the  magnificent  column  of  which  the  intro- 
duction is  the  base. 

1.  Job's  Repeutance.     Verses  1—6.— 


"Then  Job  answered  the  Lord,"  &c.  Ke- 
pentance  the  happy  fruit  of  sanctified  afflic- 
tion (Isa.  xxvii.  9).  Job's  repentance  ex- 
pressed in  few  words.  God  requires  not 
many  words,  but  much  faith.     We  have — 

1.  A^elieinug  acknowledgement  of  God's 
omnipotence.  Viu'se  2. — "  I  know  that  Thou 
canst  do  everything,  and  that  no  thought 
can  be  withhohien  from  Thee  {3Iarg.y  *no 
thought  of  thine  can  be  hindered'  ;  or,  *no 
purpose  is  too  high  for  Thee '  [to  accom- 
plish]." One  of  Job's  errors,  apparently,  that 
he  had,  in  his  heart  at  least,  doubted  God's 
omnipotence,  as  if  He  were  unable  either  to 
punish  the  wicked  as  they  deserved,  or  to 
deliver  His  servants  out  of  trouble,  or  keep 
them  from  falling  into  it.  Much  of  this 
secret  infidelity  lurking  in  the  natural  heart. 
Apparently  easy  and  natural  to  believe  that 
God  is  almighty  and  able  to  *'  do  all  things." 
Easy  to  profess  it,  but  not  so  easy  to  act 
always  upon  the  belief,  and  to  have  our  heart 
and  life  powerfully  influenced  by  it.  The 
belief  of  God's  alinightiness  at  the  bottom  of 
all  true  religion.    The  faith  that  characterized 


en  A  p.  rux. 


ffOMTLETIC  COmrENTARY:  JOB. 


the  wortliies  of  the  Old  Testament  (Heb.  xi). 
Ntnih  believed  that  God  could  destroy  the 
world  by  a  flt^od,  and  preserve  himself  and 
Ills  faiiiily  by  the  ark;  Abraham,  that  He 
could  i?ive  him  a  sou  when  Sarah  was  past 
child-bearing,  and  that  lie  could  raise  that 
son  from  the  dead  j  iMoses,  that  He  could 
op^^n  a  way  for  Israel  through  the  Red  Sea ; 
Joshua,  liial  He  could  cause  the  walls  of 
Jericho  to  fall  to  the  ground  ;  Shadrach,  Me- 
siiach,  and  Abednego,  that  He  could  deliver 
them  from  the  fiery  furnace;  Mary,  that, 
without  her  knowing  a  man,  God  could,  ac- 
cording to  His  Word,  make  her  the  mother 
of  the  promised  Saviour.  Tliis  faith  directed, 
in  the  New  Testament,  to  Christ.  "Lord, 
if  Thou  wilt.  Thou  canst  make  me  clean." 
"Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this?" 
"If  Thou  canst  do  anything,  have  compas- 
sion on  us  and  help  us.  Jesus  said  unto 
him  :  If  thou  canst  believe  \  all  things  are 
possible  to  him  that  believeth."  The  Koman 
centurion  commended  for  believing  that 
Jesus  had  but  to  speak  the  work,  where  He 
was,  and  his  servant  should  be  healed. 
When  God  speaks,  faith — 

"  Laughs  at  impossibilities, 
And  cries,  It  shall  be  done;" 

Mighty  works  wrought  by  means  of  faith  in 
God's  almightiness.  The  part  of  such  faith 
to  "remove  mountains."  "Nothing  shall 
be  impossible  to  you.''  The  virtue  of  faith, 
that  it  arms  itself  "  with  that  omnipotence 
it  trusts."  Faith  honours  God,  and  God 
honours  it  (Rom.  iv.  20,  21).  Hence, 
through  faith,  men  "  subdued  kingdoms, 
wrought  righteousness,  obtained  promises, 
stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  qurnched  the 
violence  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of  the 
sword,  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong, 
waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight  the 
armies  of  the  aliens"  (Heb.  xi.  33,  34). 
Peace  and  restfulness  of  heart  the  fruit  of 
such  faiih.  "Tliou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect 
peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee,  because 
he  trusteth  in  Thee"  (Isa.  xxvi.  3).  The 
ch  iracter  of  unbelief  and  infidehty  that  it 
doubts  God's  omnipotence.  "If  the  Lord 
should  open  windows  in  heaven  might  this 
thing  be."  "  Why  should  it  be  thought  an 
incredible  thing,  tliat  God  should  raise  the 
dead?" 

God's  "  thoughts  "  only  known  to  us  as  they 
are  revealed  by  Him.  When  known,  faitli 
rests  assured  tliat  they  shall  be  accomplished; 
however  unlikely  and  impossible  they  may 
appear  to  carnal  reason.  His  "thoughts" 
or  purposes  respect— (1)  Himself;  (2)  His 
Son,  Jesus  Christ ;  (3)  His  Church  as  a 
whole;  (4)  Each  individual  member  of  that 
Church  ;  (5)  The  creation  at  large  (Rom.  viii. 
21).  His  thoughts  those  of  an  infinite  and 
eternal  Being,  who  sees  the  end  from  the 

272 


beginning;  of  one  perfect  in  knowledge* 
wisdom,  justice,  gooctness,  and  truth.  His 
thoughts  the  foundation  of  His  procedure, 
and  (he  plan  according  to  which  He  acts  in 
Providence. 

The  front  of  Job's  offending  in  God's 
sight,  and  that  of  which  he  has  now  so 
deeply  to  repent, — his  unworthy  thoughts  of 
God,  and  especially  his  unbelief  in  regard  to 
God's  almightiness.  Observe  — (1)  Grievous 
sin  often  in  the  heart  in  reference  to  Gody 
when  none  may  appear  in  the  life  in  reference 
to  men.  (2)  The  cause  of  bitter  repentance 
to  a  child  of  God,  to  find  that  he  has  sinned 
by  ifidulging  unworthy  thoughts  of  his  heavenly 
Father.  (3)  Much  of  God's  PFord  and 
works  intended  to  teach  His  children  that  He 
is  able  to  do  all  things. 

God's  right  as  well  as  might  probably  in- 
cluded in  Job's  acknowledgment.  A  maxim 
in  law,  that  a  man  can  only  do  what  he  has  a 
right  to  do.  God  not  only  can^  but  justlj 
may,  do  whatever  He  pleases.  Has  a  sove- 
reign right  over  all  His  creatures.  May 
dispose  of  them  and  deal  with  them  as  He 
pleases.  Job  tempted  at  times  to  question 
this  right,  or,  at  least,  to  doubt  whether  it 
was  righteously  exercised.  His  language  at 
the  commencement  of  his  trials  not  main- 
tained to  the  close — "  The  Lord  gave,  and 
the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord."  God's  pleasure  in  re- 
gard to  His  creatures,  always  and  necessarily 
only  what  is  right. 

2.  Humble  acceptance  of  Divine  reproof. 
Verse  3. -"Who  is  he  that  hideth  (or 
obseureth)  counsel  (or  wisdom)  without 
knowledge  (or  which  is  beyond  his  know- 
ledge) ?  "  Supply  :  Thou  speakest  justly ; 
I  am  that  foolish  and  presumptuous  person. 
Reference  to  the  Almighty's  question  in 
chap,  xxxviii.  2.  Observe — A  truly  penitent 
heart  humbly  accepts  of  God's  reproof.  An 
impenitent  one  rejects  it  and  maintains  its 
own  innocence.  Israel's  sin  greatly  aggra- 
vated in  God's  sight  by  saying,  when  re- 
proved by  Him  :  "  I  am  innocent  "  (Jer.  ii. 
35).  The  fifty-first  Psalm  David's  penitent 
acceptance  of  the  Divine  reproof.  Adam's 
impenitence  seen  in  charging  his  sin  upon 
Eve,  and  Eve's  in  charging  hers  upon  the 
serpent.  Saul,  instead  of  accepting  Samuel's 
reproof,  laid  his  sin  upon  the  people  (I  Sam. 
XV.  1 — 26.  To  accept  the  punishment  of 
our  iniquity  a  proof  of  a  humbled  heart 
(Lev.  xxvi.  41.) 

3.  Penitent  acknowledgment  of  ignorant 
and  rash  speaking.  Verse  3. — "Therefore 
(this  being  true  of  me,  I  acknowledge  that) 
I  uttered  that  I  understood  not ;  things  too 
wonderful  for  me,  which  I  knew  not." 
Observe  : — (1)  Much  of  our  discontent  and 
mmrmuring  at  God's  procedure^  the  result  of 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


CHAP.   XLII. 


ignorance.  Asaph's  acknowledgment:  "So 
foolish  was  I,  and  ignorant;  I  was  as 
a  beast  before  Thee  "  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  22).  (2) 
Most  of  what  we  sai/  of  God,  except  as  guided 
by  His  Spirit,  that  which  we  do  not  under- 
stand. Oar  words  concerning  God  and  His 
dealings  in  Providence  mostly  only  the 
prattling  of  a  child,  without  its  innocence. 
(3)  God^s  purposes  and  waj/s  in  Prooidence, 
^  too  wonderful"  for  us,  in  our  present  state, 
to  comprehend.  His  thoughts  "a  great 
deep."  For  that  deep,  human  reason  unable 
to  furnish  a  sounding-line.  The  part  of  piety 
and  faith  to  trust  God  without  seeking  to 
trace  Him  ;  and  to  be  assured  that  He  does 
all  things  well,  however  much  appearances 
may  appear  to  speak  to  the  contrary.  Even 
God's  dealings  in  reference  to  ourselves 
often  "  too  wonderful "  for  us ;  much  more 
those  deahngs  in  reference  to  the  world  at 
large.  His  operations  in  respect  to  outward 
and  common  things  often  such  as  we  know 
not ;  much  more  those  in  respect  to  the  re- 
newing of  our  nature  and  the  salvation  of 
our  soul.  **' As  thou  knowest  not  the  way  of 
the  Spirit  (or  of  the  wind,  John  iii.  8),  nor 
how  the  bones  do  grow  in  the  womb  of  her 
that  is  with  child;  even  so  thou  knowest  not 
the  work  of  God,  who  maketh  all "  (Eccles. 
xi.  5). 

4.  His  desire  to  take  the  place  of  a  humble 
inquirer  and  learner.  Yerse  4. — "  Hear,  I 
beseech  Thee,  and  I  will  speak :  I  will  de- 
mand (or  ask)  of  Thee,  and  declare  (or  tell) 
Tliou  unto  me  '*  [things  of  which  I  am  so 
ignorant].  Observe — (1)  The  mark  of  true 
repentance  to  desire  to  know  the  Lord's  will. 
**  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " 
(2)  Man^s  proper  place,  in  relation  to  God 
and  His  dealings,  that  of  a  learner  and  in- 
quirer. (3)  A  humble,  docile,  and  childlike 
spirit,  man's  true  nobility.  The  spirit  and 
f)Osture  of  a  child,  that  of  the  great  philoso- 
pher whose  name  has  become  inseparably 
connected  with  the  achievements  of  modern 
science.  (4).  Enough  in  God  and  His  ways 
to  give  room  for  inquiry  and  learning  through- 
out eternity.  Into  the  mystery  of  redemp- 
tion with  its  glorious  results,  the  angels 
represented  as  desiring  studiously  to  look. 
(5)  Wise  to  take  all  our  difficulties,  whether 
in  regard  to  Providence  or  grace.  His  work 
or  His  Word,  to  God  Himself  for  their  solu- 
tion. God  His  own  interpreter.  Those  the 
most  proficient  in  knowledge  who  go  most 
to  God  and  His  Word  for  instruction. 
The  disciples  to  be  imitate«l  who  inquired 
in  private  the  meaning  of  the  Master's 
teaching  in  public.  "What  may  this  parable 
mean  ?  '*  (6)  Necessary  to  be  inquirers  and 
learners  ourselves  in  order  to  be  teachers  of 
others.  (7)  Tn  Divine  things  especially, 
nothing  rightly  known  except  as  we  are  taught 

X8 


it  of  God.  Divine  teaching  the  special 
bestowment  on  God's  elect,  and  the  first 
step  in  a  man's  salvation  (John  vi.  45). 
That  teaching  imparted  to  the  humble 
(Matt.  xi.  25  ;  Isa.  xxviii.  9  ;  Ps.  xxv.  9). 
The  privilege  of  a  child  of  God  through  life 
(Ps.  xvi.  7  ;  xxxii.  8). 

5.  His  confession  to  a  different  kind  of 
knowledge  of  God  from  what  he  had  before. 
Verse  5  — "  I  have  heard  of  thee  (or  *  lieard 
thee')  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear  j  but  now 
mine  eye  seeth  thee."  A  perception  of 
God's  visible  glory  probably  vouchsafed  to 
Job,  as  to  Tsaiah  in  the  temple  with  similar 
results  (Is.  vi.  1 — 5).  An  inward  and 
spiritual  apprehension  of  the  Divine  perfec- 
tions doubtless  mainly  intended.  This  the 
object  of  the  Almighty's  address.  Observe — 
(1)  Knowledge  of  God  and  His  Son  different 
in  different  persons,  and  in  the  same  person  at 
different  periods.  That  difference  twofold  : 
(i)  In  degree.  Among  believers,  some  are 
babes  in  knowledge,  others  full-grown  men 
(Heb.  V.  13,  14.)  All  our  knowledge  here 
comparatively  that  of  a  child  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9 
— 11.  Knowledge  obtained  by  "  seeing," 
much  more  clear  and  satisfactory  than  that 
by  '*  hearing."  Same  contrast  in  chap.  xxix. 
11 ;  Ps.  xlviii.  8.  Much  of  our  knowledge 
here  obtained  by  hearing  or  report.  Hence 
rather  faith  than  knowledge.  Knowledge 
hereafter  rather  from  seeing  than  hearing. 
"They  shall  see  God."  "Now  we  see 
through  a  glass  darkly,  but  then  face  to 
face."  "  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is."  (ii.)  In  kind.  This 
difference  probably,  as  well  as  the  former, 
indicated  in  the  contrast.  The  difference 
between  a  believer's  knowledge  of  God  and 
that  of  an  unbeliever,  one  of  kind  rather  than 
of  degree.  The  believer  sees  with  the  eye 
of  faith  what  before  he  had  only  heard  by 
report.  Knowledge  of  Divine  things  by 
mere  report  rather  that  of  a  blind  man  in 
relation  to  colours.  A  knowledge  of  Christ 
after  the  flesh  the  utmost  that  a  man  in  his 
unrenewed  state  can  attain  to.  This  super- 
seded in  a  believer  by  a  spiritual  divinely 
given  knowledge  (2  Cor.  v.  16  ;  Gal.  i.  15  ; 
Matt.  xvi.  17).  The  testimony  of  the  men 
of  Syehar :  "  Now  we  believe,  not  because 
of  thy  saying ;  for  we  have  heard  Him  our- 
selves, and  know  that  this  is  indeed  the 
Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  Mere 
traditional  and  educational  knowledge  of 
Divine  things  to  be  distinguished  from  that 
which  is  spiritual  and  saving.  The  defec- 
tiveness of  the  former  as  compared  with  the 
latter  exhibited  in  Job's  case.  The  invita- 
tion of  the  Gospel :  "  Come  and  see." 
"  Taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good." 
The  knowledge  of  the  believer  an  experi- 
mental one, — not   only    a   hearing,   but    a 

273 


CHAP.   ILII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


tasting  of  the  salvation  of  God.  '*If  so 
be  ye  have  tasted  tliat  the  Lord  is  gra- 
cious "  (1  Tctcr  ii.  3).  (2)  Murh  of  God's 
dealing  with  believers  and  others,  with  a 
view  to  bring  them  to  an  experimental  know- 
ledqe  of  Himself  aiid  His  truth.  This  the 
object  of  His  dealings  with  Job.  "  Now 
mine  eye  sceth  tliec."  God  oficn  pleased 
to  reveal  Himself  most  in  the  rebukes  of 
His  providence,  "  I  will  allure  her  into 
the  wilderness,  and  will  speak  comfortably 
to  lier"  {Marg.y  Mo  her  heart'— in  an  effec- 
tual way  of  instruction).  Spiritual  know- 
ledge often  one  of  the  most  blessed  fruits 
of  sanctified  affliction.  Often  more  know- 
ledge of  Divine  things  gained  in  one 
month  or  one  week  on  a  sick  bed  than 
in  many  years  of  previous  experience. 
Such  teaching  one  of  the  ends  of  afflic- 
tion. "  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou 
choosest,  O  Lord,  and  teachest  him  out  of 
thy  law"  (Ps.  xciv.  12).  (3)  A  good  man's 
knotcledge  of  God  and  Divine  things  progres- 
sive. The  hearing  of  God  to  conduct  to  the 
seeing  of  Him.  The  path  of  the  just  like 
the  shining  light,  shinhig  more  and  more 
unto  the  perfect  day.  Knowledge  under 
Divine  teaching  hke  the  river  in  Ezekiel's 
vision — fir^t  up  to  the  ankles,  then  the 
knees,  tiien  the  loins,  and  at  last  a  river  to 
swim  in.  Saving  knowledge  like  the  restored 
sight  of  the  blind  man  in  the  Gospel— first 
men  seen  as  trees  walking,  then  all  things 
seen  clearly.  The  greatest  increase  of  know- 
ledge awaiting  the  believer  in  another  world. 
"Now  I  know  in  part  (in  fragments  or 
piecemeal),  but  then  shall  I  know  even  as 
also  I  am  known  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  (4)  Ban- 
ger of  slipping  short  of  a  spiritual  and  expri-. 
mental  knowledge  of  God  and  Divine  things. 
Job's  "  now''  to  be  desired,  whatever  it  may 
cost  us.  Paul's  resolution — "  Henceforth 
know  we  no  man  after  the  fle^h  ;  yea,  though 
we  l)ave  known  Chri^t  after  the  liesh,  yet 
henceforth  know  we  him  [so]  no  more" 
(2  Cor.  V.  16).  Professing  Christians 
especially  counselled  by  Christ  to  come  to 
Him  for  the  eye-salve  of  His  Spirit,  that 
they  may  anoint  their  eyes  and  see  (Hev. 
iii.  18. 

6.  His  self  abhorrence,  as  the  result  of  his 
perception  of  the  Divine  perfections.  Verse 
6.—"  Wherefore  1  abhor  myself  (or,  *  I  loath 

Smy  conduct  and  language]' )."  Observe — 
1)  The  result  of  the  Divine  manifestation 
and  address  immediate.  But  little  time 
retpiired  for  the  Spirit's  teaching.  Nothing 
unnatural  in  sudden  conversion.  Ccmviction 
and  conversion  the  ell'eer,  of  the  same  teach- 
ing as  in  the  case  of  Job.  Other  examples 
of  the  same  suddenness:  Isaiah  in  the 
temple;  Zacchseus;  the  penitent  thief;  the 
three  thousand  on  the  day  of  Pentecost; 
274  ' 


Saul  on  the  way  to  Damascus ;  the  Ethio- 
pian eunuch;  the  jailor  at  Philippi,  &c. 
(2)  Job's  language  the  effect  of  the  apprehen- 
sion of  the  Divine  character  and  perfections. 
The  natural  etfect  of  such  apprehension  is 
the  perception  of  the  enormity  of  all  sin,  and 
the  discovery  of  our  own  depravity  in  par- 
ticular —  more  especially  of  our  sinful 
thoughts  and  words  in  respect  to  God 
and  His  dealings  with  us.  Similar  effect  in 
the  case  of  Isaiah  in  the  temple:  "  Woe  is 
me,  for  I  am  undone  :  because  I  am  a  man 
of  unclean  lips,  and  I  dwell  among  a  people 
of  unclean  lips  :  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  the 
King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts  "  (Isa.  vi.  5).  S;  me 
effect  on  Peter  at  the  miraculous  draught  of 
fishes  :  *'  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful 
man,  0  Lord."  That  in  ourselves  and  others 
which  needs  only  to  be  rightly  known  to  be 
abhorred. 

"  Vice  is  a  monster  of  such  hideous  mien, 
That,  to  be  hated,  needs  but  to  be  seen." 

That  is,  to  be  seen  as  Job  saw  it,— in  the  light 
of  God's  character  and  perfections.  All  sin 
in  itself  filthy  and  abominable.  Probably 
seen  to  be  such  even  by  the  lost, — "  an  abhor- 
ring to  all  flesh."  The  right  abhorrence  of 
sin  and  of  ourselves,  that  accomnanied  with 
true  repeiitance.  Judas  abhorred  himself, 
and  committed  suicide.  (3)  Self  abhorrence 
a  part  of  true  repentance  The  pardoned  and 
accepted  penitent  is  ashamed  and  loathes 
himself  for  his  sins  (Ezek.  xvi.  60 — 63 ; 
xxxvi.  25 — 32).  Self-abhorrence  a  part  of 
the  believer's  sweetest  experience,  and  will 
always  accompany  it.  (4)  Sin  infinitely 
loathsome  to  a  holy  God.  Sin  seen  by  God 
exactly  as  it  is.  If  loathsome  to  Job,  still 
infected  with  it,  how  much  more  to  his  spot- 
less Creator!  Hence  (i.)  The  long-suffering 
patience  and  forbearance  of  God,  in  bearing 
with  a  world  of  sinners,  (ii.)  The  riches  of 
His  fjrace  in  providing  for  such  loathsome 
creatures  a  Saviour  and  a  substitute  in  the 
person  of  His  own  Son,  and  in  taking  them 
again  for  His  own  children,  (iii.)  The  mighti- 
ness and  preciousness  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
operation,  that  renews  and  sanctifies  the 
objects  of  the  Divine  abhorrence.  (5)  Not 
the  least  favourable  sign  when  we  are  most 
loathsome  in  our  oion  eyes.  Cannot  be  worst 
with  us  when  we  see  ourselves  as  God  sees 
us.  We  are  often  worst  when  we  think 
ourselves  best.  The  Pharisee  in  the  temple 
contrasted  with  the  Publican.  "God  be 
merciful  to  me,  a  sinner,"  a  better  sign  than 
— "  God,  I  thank  Thee  tliat  I  am  not  as  other 
men  are."  Job  most  commended  by  God 
when  most  loathed  by  himself.  The  be- 
liever most  beautiful  in  God's  eyes  when 
blackest  in  his  own  (Cant.  i.  5)  (6^  Self- 
abhorrence  a  benefit  to  ourselves.     Has  the 


E021ILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


CHAP.  XLII. 


tendency — (i.)  To  keep  us  from  pride,  (ii.) 
To  render  us  forbcariuii^  and  compassionate 
towards  others,  (iii.)  To  prepare  us  to  act 
as  intercessors  on  behalf  of  fellow-sinners. 
Job  not  directed  to  pray  for  his  1  liree  friends 
I  ill  he  was  broui^lit  to  abhor  himself. 

7.  His  declaration  of  repentance  and  humilia- 
tion. Verse  6. — "  I  repent  in  dust  and  ashes" 
— t  hat  is,  sitting  in  them — a  token  of  humilia- 
tion and  repentance  (Job.  ii.  8  ;  Luke  x.  ]3). 
The  catastrophe  of  the  poem  in  these  kst 
words  of  Job.  Probably  one  of  the  secret 
purposes  of  God  in  permitting  the  tempta- 
tion and  trials.  Not  intimated  at  the  first; 
but  "  known  unto  God  are  all  his  works 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world."  One  of 
God's  objects  in  all  the  temptations  and  suf- 
ferings of  his  children,  their  perfection. 
That  perfection  connected  with  their  self- 
humiliation  and  repentance  (EzeK.  xvi.  61 — 
63  ;  xxxvi.  31).  The  aim  of  God  in  His 
dealings  with  His  people,  to  humble  them  in 
order  to  their  exaltation — to  empty  in  order 
to  fill  them  (Is.  Ivii.  15 ;  Ixvi.  2).  Observe, 
in  regard  to 

Repentance — 

1.  The  Nature  of  it.  A  change  of  mind — 
of  views,  feelings,  dispositions ;  with  a  cor- 
responding change  of  conduct.  This  change 
mainly  in  relation  to  God :  hence,  "repentance 
toward  God."  Job's  repentance  inward,  but 
manifesting  itself  oatwardlij,  both  in  his  w^ords 
and  actions,  negatively  and  positively.  No 
more  murmuring  and  discontent  with  his  lot. 
No  more  unworthy  thoughts  of  God.  No 
more  bitterness  against  his  three  friends. 
•'  Fruits  meet  for  repentance." 

2.  The  Author  of  it.  God  himself,  through 
the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Repentance 
directed  to  God  is  a  repentance  proceeding 
from  God.  The  exercise  of  it  our  own;  the 
grace  of  it,  God's.  Every  good  and  perfect 
gift,  and  true  repentance  among  them,  from 
the  Father  of  lights.  "Then  hath  God 
granted  unto  the  Gentiles  repentance  unto 
life."  "  Peradventure  God  will  give  them 
repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the 
truth."  The  Son  of  God  the  author  of 
saving  repentance  equally  with  the  Father. 
Christ  "exalted  by  the  Father's  right  hand 
to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repen- 
tance unto  Israel  and  the  remission  of  their 
sins."  The  Holy  Ghost  sent  both  by  the 
Father  and  the  lion  for  this  purpose.  God 
himself  the  Author  of  Job's  repentance, 
when  the  three  friends  and  Elihu  had  la- 
boured for  it  in  vain. 

3.  The  Means  of  it.  The  truth,  as  exhi- 
bited by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  exhibition  of 
the  truth  regarding  God  and  ourselves.  The 
prodigal  "came  to  himself" — had  his  eyes 


opened  to  the  truth  as  to  his  conduct  and 
condition,  as  well  as  to  the  character  of  his 
father,  and  said:  "I  will  arise  and  go  to  my 
father."  Job's  repentance  after  the  Divine 
exhibition  of  the  truth  to  him  regarding  God 
and  his  own  sin.  The  aim  of  the  Almighty 
in  his  prolonged  address  and  the  manifesta- 
tion of  Himself.  "  After  that  I  was  in- 
structed, I  smote  upon  my  thigh"  (Jer.  xxxi. 
19).  Ministers  and  preachers  directed  "in 
meekness  to  instruct  those  that  oppose 
themselves,  peradventure  God  will  give  them 
repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the 
truth."  Repentance  and  reniission  of  sinis 
to  be  preached  in  Christ's  name.  The  preach- 
ing of  Christ  as  the  Father's  gift  of  love  to 
sinners,  and  as  the  sinner's  Substitute  through 
whom  we  are  invited  back  to  God,  one  of 
the  most  effectual  means  of  producing  "re- 
pentance unto  life." 

4.  The  Effects  of  it.  The  reception  of 
blessing.  Job  prepared  by  his  repentance 
for  the  turning  of  his  captivity,  with  all  the 
blessings  that  followed  it.  "Repentance 
unto  life."  Job  further  prepared  for  be- 
coming a  blessing  to  others.  Only  directed 
to  intercede  for  his  friends  when  he  repented 
himself.  Deep  personal  repentance  neces- 
sary as  a  preparation  for  usefulness  to 
others.  Christ's  most  useful  and  honoured 
servants  usually  those  who  have  been  brought 
through  the  deepest  exercises  of  S(  If- 
humiliati(m  and  repentance  ;  witness  Paul, 
Luther,  John  Bunyan.  Isaiah's  self-abase- 
ment and  repentance  in  the  temple  prepara- 
tory to  his  answering  :  "  Here  am  I ;  send 
me."  Peter's  commission  as  a  fisher  of 
men  preceded  by  his  exclamation  :  "  Depart 
from  me  j  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord." 

II.  The  Divine  Yerdict.  Verse  7  — 
"And  it  was  so  that  after  the  Lord  had 
spoken  these  words  unto  Job,  the  Lord  said 
to  Eliphaz  the  Temanite,  My  wrath  is 
kindled  against  thee  and  against  thy  two 
friends;  lor  ye  have  not  spoken  of  me 
{Hebrew,  *  to  me;'  Greek  Version,  'before 
me,' — the  controversy  viewed  as  carried  on 
in  the  presence  of  the  Almighty  as  umpire, 
as  all  controversies  should)  the  thing  that  is 
right  (solid  or  true),  as  my  servant  Job  hath  " 
{Greek  version,  'against  my  servant  Job  ), 
Eliphaz  particularly  named  in  the  verdict  as 
having  been  the  fir^t  and  chief  si)eal<er,  and 
probably  the  oldest  and  most  distinguished 
of  the  three  friends.  Peihaps  the  others 
influenced  by  his  sentiments  and  example. 
llesyonslhilttii  connectei  with  age,  position, 
and  attainments,  Job  spoken  of  by  the 
Almighty  as  " my  servant"  in  presence  of 
the  three  friends,  as  before  in  the  presence 
of  Satan  and  the  angels.  Observe — (1) 
God's  judgment   of  his  servants  often   very 

275 


CHAF.  JUJI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


diff'erint  from  that  of  men,  and  even  of  their 
fellow-servants.  (2)  God  fiever  ashamed  to 
acknowledrfe  his  fail hf id  servants.  One  of 
the  rewards  of  the  faithful  servant  to  be  so 
acknowledged  at  the  last  day  (Matt.  xxv. 
21;  Rev.  iii.  5).  (3)  True  godliness  a  thing 
that  stands  the  fire.  Comes  out  as  it  went 
in,  only  purer.  (4)  God  often  most  pleased 
with  us  when  ice  are  least  pleased  wilh^  our- 
selves. Job  now  loathing  himself,  and  sitting 
in  ashes.     From  the  verdict  itself  observe— 

1.  All  disputes  sooner  or  later  settled  by 
God  Himself  A  reason  for  patience  and 
forbearance,  meekness  and  moderation  in 
controversy.  "Judge  nothing  before  the 
time,  until  the  Lord  come,  who  both  will 
bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness, 
and  will  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the 
heart  '*  (1  Cor.  iv.  5).  One  great  lesson  of 
tiie  book  to  teach  us  to  wait  patiently  for 
that  day  (James  v.  7—11).  The  cause  of 
God's  servants  sooner  or  later  righted  by 
God  Himself.  He  wlio  has  a  good  and 
righteous  cause  may  afford  to  wait. 

2.  Godh  decision  often  very  different  from 
man's  expectation.  The  decision  apparently 
expected  by  all  but  Job  to  be  in  favour  of 
the  three  friends.  God's  judgment  entirely 
the  reverse.  Job  magnified  and  the  friends 
mortified.  "Man  looKeth  on  the  outward 
appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the 
heart."  "  Not  he  that  commendeth  himself 
is  approved,  but  whom  the  Lord  com- 
mendeth" (2  Cor.  X.  18).  Job's  cause 
essentially  good,  though  marred  by  many 
unbecoming  utterances  ;  the  friends'  cause 
essentially  bad,  thougli  supported  by  many 
precious  and  excellent  truths. 

3.  God's  views  in  regard  to  individuals  and 
their  conduct  not  to  he  readily  gathered  from 
appearances.  The  three  friends  seemed  to 
be  enjoying  God's  favour,  and  only  Job  to 
be  lying  under  His  displeasure.  Exactly 
the  reverse  of  the  reality.  So  with  Jesus, 
and  the  priests  and  rulers  who  condenmed 
him.  "  We  esteemed  him  stricken,  smitten 
of  God,  and  afflicted"  (Is.  liii.  4).  Men 
often  stand  differently  in  God's  account 
from  what  they  do  in  their  own  and  that  of 
their  fellow  men.  "A  light  thing  to  be 
judged  of  you  or  of  man's  judgment"  (1  Cor. 
iv.  3).  God  often  most  angry  when  there  is 
least  appearance  of  it.  May  be  angry  with 
men  for  what  they  are  most  proud  of  them- 
selves. 

4.  God  sometimes  displeased  with  otherwise 
good  men,  and  those  bearing  a  high  character 
for  piety  and  morality.  Such  apparently  tlie 
character  of  the  three  friends.  What  then 
the  case  of  men  living  in  constant  and  open 
rebellion  against  Him?  *'lftlie  righteous 
scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  tiie  ungodly 
and  the  sinner  appear  P  "  (1  Pet.  iv.  18). 

2?a  *-       ^  i 


5.  God  angry  with  men  on  account  of 
things  not  rightly  and  truly  spoken.  God's 
displeasure  as  truly  against  sinful  words  as 
sinful  actions.  "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt 
be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be 
condemned  "  (Matt.  xii.  37).  The  reason — 
"Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  speaketh."  Generally,  as  a  man's 
words  are,  so  is  he. 

6.  God  jealous  of  his  own  glory  and  the 
character  of  his  servants.  The  things  not 
rightly  and  truly  spoken  by  the  three  friends 
were — (1 )  In  regard  to  God  Himself.  So  Eng- 
lish version.  (2)  In  regard  to  His  servant  Job. 
So  Greek  version.  Their  sin  in  regard  to 
Himself,  that  they  gave  an  unjust  view  of 
God  as  always  visiting  the  ungodly  in  this 
life  with  tokens  of  his  displeasure,  and  that 
the  righteous  are  uniformly  free  from  out- 
ward strokes.  Their  sin  against  Job  the 
consequence  of  this — in  making  Job  out  to 
be  a  great,  though  perhaps  secret,  trans- 
gressor. The  character  of  God's  servants 
as  dear  to  Him  as  His  own.  "  He  that 
toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple  of  His 
eye "  (Zech.  ii.  8).  God  requires  that  we 
not  only  speak  zealously /or  Him,  but  truth- 
fully of  Him. 

7.  God's  anger  against  sins  of  omission  as 
well  as  sins  of  commission.  "  Ye  have  not 
spoken,"  &c.  Not  enough  that  we  do  not 
speak  stoutly  and  blasphemously  against 
Him.  Do  we  speak  truly  and  faithfully  of 
him  ? 

III.  The  Direction.  Verses  8,  9.— 
"Therefore  take  unto  you  seven  bullocks 
and  seven  rams,  and  go  to  my  servant  Job, 
and  offer  up  for  yourselves  a  burnt  offering; 
and  my  servant  Job  shall  pray  for  you  :  for 
him  will  I  accept ;  lest  I  deal  with  you  after 
your  folly  (or  '  impute  folly  to  you,  so  as  to 
punish  it),  in  that  ye  have  not  spoken  of  me 
the  tiling  which  is  right,  like  my  servant  Job. 
So  Elipnaz  the  Temanite,  and  Bildad  the 
Shuhite,  and  Zophar  the  Naamathite,  went 
and  did  according  as  the  Lord  commanded 
them  :  the  Lord  also  accepted  Job  "  [in  his 
intercession  for  his  friends,  according  to 
verse  8].  The  direction  twofold,  having 
reference  to  both  parties  in  the  controversy ; 
involving  humiliation  to  the  one,  and  giving 
honour  to  the  other. 

1.  In  reference  to  the  ^/^r^(?ynV;?(/*.  These 
directed  as  penitents  to  seek  pardon  and 
reconciliation  with  God  through  Job's  media- 
tion. Observe — (1)  God  reproves  only  in 
order  to  reconciliation  (2)  Pardon  and  re- 
conciliation with  God  possible  under  a  dis- 
pensation of  mercy.  Our  happiness  that 
God's  anger  against  us  for  sin  may  be 
turned  away.  Unspeakably  awful  were  that 
an^er  to  be  everlasting.     Yet  this  the  case 


BOMILFjTIC  COMMF.NTART:  JOS. 


CHAP.  XLtl. 


of  all  who  continue  impenitent,  and  who 
reject  the  Saviour  that  God  has  provided 
(John  iii.  36),  (3)  God  takes  the  first  step 
in  the  matter  of  a  sinner's  reconciliation  with 
Him,  Gives  direction  to  Eliphaz  about  the 
means  of  securing  it.  Our  quarrels  with 
God  begin  on  our  part ;  reconciliation  on 
His.  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  tlie 
world  unto  himself.  Now  then  we  are  am- 
bassadors of  Christ  as  though  God  did 
beseech  you  by  us ''  (2  Cor.  v.  19,  20).  (4) 
With  God  aloney  not  only  to  say  whether 
there  should  be  reconciliation  with  Him  on  the 
'part  of  sinners,  but  how  the  reconciliation  was 
to  be  effected.  "In  vain  they  do  worship 
me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  command- 
ments of  men  "  (Matt.  xv.  9).  To  be  recon- 
ciled with  God  we  must  comply  with  God's 
prescription. 

The  friends  directed  to  offer  sacrifice. 
Repentance  implied;  yet  the  direction  not 
to  repent  as  Job  had  done,  but  to  take  a 
burnt-offering.  No  reconciliation  between 
God  and  man  without  sacrifice.  No  recon- 
ciliation without  forgiveness  of  sin,  and  no 
forgiveness  without  satisfaction  to  justice, 
and  no  satisfaction  without  sacrifice.  Hence 
all  covenants  made  by  God  with  men  accom- 
panied with  sacrifices.  Animal  sacrifices 
appointed  before  and  under  the  Law  of 
Moses  as  the  means  of  reconciliation  with 
God.  These  only  types  or  figures,  for  the 
time,  of  the  true  sacrifice,  the  woman's  Seed ; 
the  bruising  of  whose  heel  by  the  Serpent 
in  his  suffering  and  death  was  to  take  away 
sin  (Gen.  iii.  15).  Impossible  that  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  goats  should  make  satisfaction 
for  human  transgression.  Its  object  im- 
pressively to  teach  that  without  shedding  of 
blood  and  the  substitution  of  life  for  life, 
there  is  no  remission  (Heb.  ix.  18 — 23). 
The  promise  of  a  Divine-human  Saviour  and 
Substitute  never  to  be  lost  sight  of.  Every 
slaughtered  victim  but  pointed  to  that 
Substitute. — Seven  bullocks  and  seven  rams 
here  prescribed ;  to  indicate  (1)  The  heinous- 
ness  of  sin  which  is  to  be  atoned  for ;  (2) 
The  sufficiency  of  the  great  Sacrifice  provided 
to  take  it  away;  (3)  The  insufficiency  of 
every  other,  TJie  same  number  frequently 
offered  under  the  law  (Lev.  xxiii.  18).  Ob- 
serve— Alt  sin  to  be  at  once  confessed  and 
taken  to  the  blood  of  Christ  for  its  forgive- 
ness, "If  we  confess  our  sin,"  &c.  (1  John 
i.  7,  9).  The  conscience  kept  clean  and 
peace  maintained  by  constant  confession  to 
God  (not  to  a  priest),  and  faith  in  the  sacri- 
fice offered  on  Calvary. — The  friends  to  go 
to  Job  with  their  offering.  Thus  expressing 
both  their  penitence  and  their  faith.  The 
act  humbling  to  themselves,  but  honouring 
to  Job.  The  first  last,  and  the  last  first. 
Job  had  humbled  himself  before  God ;  they 


must  humble  themselves  before  v^/ot.  Having 
joined  in  accusing  him,  they  must  join  in 
seeking  his  mediation.  Job  alone  to  be  re- 
garded in  the  matter  of  acceptance ;  yet  the 
friends  to  *'  ijo  '*  to  him.  So  Christ  alone 
regarded  as  the  ground  of  a  sinner's  accept- 
ance with  God,  yet  sinners  to  go  to  Him  in 
penitence  and  faith.  "To  him  shall  men 
come;  in  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel 
be  justified,  and  shall  glory  ^'  (Is.  xlv.  24, 
25).  Job  apparently  to  officiate  as  priest 
in  presenting  the  friends'  sacrifices  to  God. 
This  usually  done,  before  the  law,  by  the 
head  of  the  family  or  the  eldest  son ;  under 
the  law,  by  Aaron  and  his  sons  after  him, 
as  types  for  the  time  being  of  the  great 
Priest — one  not  after  the  order  of  Aaron, 
but  of  Melchizedec,  who  was  at  once  both 
priest  and  king,  and  made  a  priest  imme- 
diately by  God  himself,  without  either  pre- 
decessor or  successor  in  the  office.  Job  here 
exhibited  as  another  type  of  the  great  High 
Priest,  through  whom  we  draw  nigh  to 
God. 

2.  In  reference  to  Job.  Job  directed  to 
"  pray'*  for  the  friends,  and  to  mediate  with 
God  on  their  behalf,  with  a  view  to  their 
pardon  and  acceptance.  In  a  sinner's  recon- 
ciliation with  God,  sacrifice  not  to  be  with- 
out prayers.  As  a  priest.  Job  must  pray  as 
well  as  offer  the  sacrifice  for  the  friends. 
So  Christ,  the  true  Priest  of  our  profession, 
ofi'ered  in  the  midst  of  this  sacrifice  on  the 
cross,  the  prayer :  '*  Father  forgive  them  ;" 
and  on  the  night  immediately  preceding  it, 
the  prayer  in  the  Upper  Room — a  specimen 
of  tlie  intercession  which  He  is  ever  making 
for  His  people  within  the  veil.  In  the  prayer 
as  well  as  in  the  sacrifice  offered  up  by  Job, 
the  friends  doubtless  united.  So  we  are  ex- 
horted, "having  such  an  High  priest  who 
is  passed  into  the  heavens,"  to  "  come  boldly 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain 
mercy,  and  find  j^race  to  help  us  in  every 
time  of  need"  (Heb.  iv.  16).  God's  pro- 
mise in  regard  to  Job — "  Him  will  I  accept." 
Him,  not  you.  Him,  and  you  in  him,  or 
for  his  sake.  So  men  accepted  with  God 
not  in  themselves  or  on  their  own  account, 
but  in  Christ  and  on  Christ's  account.  Be- 
lievers made  "accepted  in  the  Beloved." 
"  The  Lord  is  well  pleased  for  His  righteous- 
ness sake."  (Eph.  i.  6 ;  Is.  xlii.  21).  Ob- 
serve— (1).  Believers,  being  accepted  in  Christy 
not  only  find  acceptance  for  themselves  in  their 
prayers,  but  for  others  also.  The  honour  put 
upon  Job,  that  put  upon  all  Christ's  mem- 
bers, who  in  Him  are  made  "kings  and 
priests  unto  God."  (2)  Acceptance  with 
God  the  thing  to  be  aimed  at  in  all  our 
prayers  and  services.  Duties  not  only  to  be 
discharged  and  prayers  offered,  but  their 
acceptance  to  be   sought   and  looked   for, 

277 


CHAP.   XLII. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JOB, 


(3)  Acrepfance  certain,  tchere  there  is  obedi- 
ence to  God's  commands  and  faith  in  His  Son. 
"Him  will  I  accept."  Acceptance  itself 
pprtain— the  time  and  manner  of  its  manifes- 
tation with  God  Himself.  Part  of  the 
Spirit's  work  to  testify  it.  Also  made 
known  by  its  effects,  and  indicated  in  Pro- 
vidence. God's  promise  sufficient.  (4)  The 
person  to  be  first  accepted,  then  the  prayer  or 
service.  "  Him,"  h\sperson,  "  will  I  accept." 
(5)  God's  method  to  accept  and  bless  one  man 
for  the  sake  of  another.  So  in  temporal 
matters — God  blessed  Laban  for  Jacob's 
sake,  and  Potiphar  for  Joseph's  sake  (Gen. 
XXX.  27 ;  xxxix.  5).  This  principle  at  the 
foundation  of  the  Gospel  and  the  scheme  of 
redemption.  Sinners  pardoned,  accepted, 
and  blessed  on  Christ's  account, — the  whole 
plan  of  salvation.  The  Gospel  thus  found 
in  Job  as  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament. 
The  Scriptures  testify  of  Christ. 

Job  honoured  by  bein^  made  a  priest  in 
behoof  of  his  friends,  after  his  deep  humilia- 
tion, his  severe  suffering,  and  their  proud 
contemptuous  treatment  of  him.  So  with 
Christ  —  sufferinG:s  first,  then  "the  glory 
which  should  follow"  So  with  Christ's 
members — "  If  we  suffer  with  Him,  we  shall 
also  be  glorified  tof]^ether."  Job  prepared, 
by  his  previous  sufferinj^  and  humiliation, 
lor  the  honour  now  put  upon  him.  Much 
of  the  painful  discipline  of  God's  children 
doubtless  intended  to  qualify  them  for  the 
exercise  of  their  priestly  office.  Believers 
thus  much  more  able  to  sympathize  with 
others.  "  A  deep  distress  hath  humanized 
my  soul." — Wordsworth.  So  Christ  Himself 
suffered,  that  He  might  be  a  merciful  High 
Priest.  Prosperity,  honour,  and  extensive 
usefulness,  only  safe  when  preceded  by 
humiliation.  Christ's  most  honoured  ser- 
vants usuallv  those  who  have  been  most 
humbled  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God. 
"Before  honour  cometh  humility."  Job 
thus  honoured  after  his  rejection  by  his 
friends,  a  type  of  Christ  exalted  at  God's 
right  hand,  as  "  a  Priest  upon  His  throne," 
after  His  rejection  by  the  priests  and  rulers. 
"The  stone  wliich  the  builders  rejected  is 
become  the  head  of  the  corner." 

The  honour  put  upon  Job,  God's  highest 
testimony  in  favour  of  His  servant.  The 
Divine  testimony— (1)  To  \\\^  faith  ;  (2)  To 
the  sincerity  of  ):i\^  repe7itance -,  (3)  To  the 
uprightness  and  excellence  of  his  general 
character.  To  be  a  priest  and  an  intercessor 
for  others,  implies—  (1)  Deep  consciousness 
of  the  evil  and  demerit  of  sin  which  neces- 
sitates such  an  arrangement ;  (2)  High  re- 
gard for  the  honour  and  interests  of  God, 
and  the  claims  of  His  justice  and  govern- 
ment; (3)  Tender  compassion  and  love 
towards  those  for  whom  the  duty  is  exer- 
278 


cised ;  (4)  A  forgiving  spirit  towards  those 
who  are  enemies  to  ourselves.  Believers 
most  Christlike  when  interceding  for  others. 
To  pray  for  ourselves  is  human ;  to  pray  for 
others,  Divine.  Job's  general  character  and 
power  as  a  man  of  prayer  and  intercession 
for  others,  indicated  in  the  only  other  passage 
in  the  Old  Testament  where  his  name  occurs. 
Mentioned  as  such  in  connection  with  Noah 
and  Daniel,  in  Ezekiel  xiv.  14.  The  privilege 
and  duty  of  believers  in  the  New  Testament 
to  pray  for  others,  and  to  mediate  their  re- 
conciliation with  God  by  publishing  Christ 
and  persuading  men  to  be  reconciled  to  God 
through  Him  (2  Cor.  t.  19-21).  Only 
known  in  eternity  how  great  the  blessing 
derived  by  the  world  and  individual  men 
from  the  intercession  of  faithful  and  loving 
believers.  In  answer  to  their  prayers,  sick- 
ness removed  and  life  spared ;  prison  doors 
opened;  nations  preserved  in  tranquillity; 
preachers  of  the  Gospel  aided  and  blessed  in 
their  work ;  sinners  awakened  and  souls  saved 
(Gen.  XX.  7,  17;  James  v.  14 — 36;  Acts 
xii.  4—7;  1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2;  Col.  iv.  3,  4; 
1  John  V.  14—16  ;  James  v.  16—20). 

Job's  praying  for  his  friends  an  evidence — 
(1)  Of  the  heartiness  of  his  forgiveness  of 
them ;  (2)  Of  the  sincerity  of  his  repentance. 
His  prayer  the  most  effectual  means  of 
opening  their  eyes  and  softening  their  heart. 
Ministers  often  more  useful  by  their  prayers 
than  by  their  preaching,  Saul  probaoly  im- 
pressed more  by  Stephen's  praying  than  by 
his  disputing. 

IV.  Job's  Deliyerance.  Verse  10. — 
"And  the  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of 
Job,  when  (or  while)  he  prayed  for  his 
friends."    Observe — 

1.  The  Author  of  the  deliverance.  "  The 
Lord  turned,"  &c.  Job's  trouble  began 
from  Satan's  malice  j  his  deliverance,  from 
God's  mercy.  No  mischief  done  by  the 
serpent,  but  can  be  undone  by  the  woman's 
Seed.  God  able  to  deliver  from  Satan's 
malice,  but  Satan  not  able  to  hinder  God's 
mercy.  God  Himself  the  deliverer  both  of 
His  Church  collectively  and  of  His  people 
individually.  "  When  the  Lord  turned  again 
the  captivity  of  Zion,"  &c.  (Ps.  cxxvi.  1). 
"  1  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
lion :  and  the  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from 
every  evil  work"  (2  Tim.  iv.  17,  18).  See 
also  2  Cor.  i.  10. 

2.  The  Deliverance  itself.  "Turned  the 
captivity  of  Job."  His  trouble  a  captivity. 
His  outward  condition  resembling  such. 
Stripped  of  all  his  property ;  separated  from 
his  friends ;  sitting  on  an  ash-heap,  as  in  the 
mire  of  a  dungeon ;  his  body  covered  with 
sores  and  filth.  Strictly  a  captivity,  as 
being  for  the  time  delivered  into  Satan's 


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


CHAP.  XLIl 


hands,  who  treated  him  with  all  the  rigour  he 
was  capable  of.  Bodily  affliction  and  outward 
trouble  perhaps  more  frequently  from  Satan 
than  we  are  aware.  **  Ou^ht  not  this  woman 
whom  Satan  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eighteen 
years,"  &c.  (Luke  xiii.  16).  Job's  captivity 
an  inwardy  as  well  as  an  outward  one.  Job, 
in  his  affliction,  held  bound  by  his  own  spirit, 
as  well  as  the  spirit  of  evil.  To  a  child  of 
God,  the  most  real  and  painful  captivity,  to 
be  shut  out  from  God's  sensible  favour  and 
fellowship,  and  to  be  shut  up  in  spiritual 
darkness  and  desertion.  Job's  captivity 
"turned,"  as  being  now  released  both  from 
Satan's  hand  and  his  multiplied  sufferings, 
whether  external  or  internal.  His  disease 
removed,  according  to  Elihu's  teaching 
(ch.  xxxiii.  24,  25).  What  His  servants 
say  in  words,  God  Himself  confirms  by 
deeds.  His  disease  probably  removed  as 
quickly  as  it  had  been  inflicted.  Diseases 
ofteu  instantaneously  removed  by  the  finger 
of  God.  Examples  ;  The  leprosy  of  iVIiriam, 
Gehazi,  and  the  lepers  in  the  Gospel.  God's 
plaister  as  broad  as  Satan's  sore.  Job  now 
also  restored  to  the  light  of  God's  counte- 
nance and  the  sensible  enjoyment  of  His 
favour  and  friendship.  Also  according  to 
Elihu*s  doctrine  (ch.  xxxiii.  2G).  These 
deliverances  and  blessings  followed  by 
others  afterwards  narrated :  plenty  instead 
of  poverty ;  the  affection  of  friends  instead 
of  their  alienation ;  a  numerous  and  happy 
family  instead  of  a  desolate  household. 

The  deliverance  of  Job  a  type — (1)  Of  the 
deliverance  wrought  by  the  Father  for 
Christ,  in  terminating  His  sufferings,  raising 
Him  from  the  dead,  and  exalting  Him  to 
His  own  right  hand  in  glory.  (2)  Of  the 
deliverance  of  believers  at  death.  Their 
departure  a  release  ;  a  harvest  of  joy  after  a 
seed-time  of  tears ;  a  morning  of  gladness 
after  a  night  of  weeping.  (3)  Of  the 
deliverance  to  be  wrought  for  the  Church 
and  for  creation  at  large  at  the  resurrection 
of  the  just, — t  he  binding  of  Satan,  the  emanci- 
pation of  the  creature  from  the  bondage  of 
corruption,  and  the  creation  of  the  new 
heavens  and  the  new  earth  "  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness." 

3.  The  Time  of  (he  deliverance.  "  When 
he  prayed  for  his  friends."  Observe — (1) 
JFe  are  often  bed  promoting  our  own  welfire 
when  praying  for  that  of  others.  According 
to  the  prmciples  of  the  Divine  government, 
that  we  should  be  most  blessed  ourselves 
when  most  solicitous  about  the  happiness  of 
our  fellow-men.  *'  The  liberal  soul  shall  be 
made  fat."  "  He  that  watereth  others  shall 
be  watered  himself."  "  There  is  that  scat- 
tereth  and  yet  increaseth ;  and  there  is  that 
withhoideth  more  than  is  meet,  and  it  ten- 
deth  to  poverty."    Selfishness  the  greatest 


hindrance  to  our  happiness.  The  ocean  re- 
ceives the  influx  of  rivers  as  it  exhales  its 
waters  into  the  air.  The  earth  receives 
rain  as  it  gives  its  moisture  to  the  plants  that 
grow  on  it.  The  clouds  are  replenished  as 
they  distil  their  treasures  on  the  earth.  To 
seek  mercy  and  deliverance  for  others  often 
the  shortest  way  of  obtaining  it  ourselves. 

(2)  Job,  in  experiencing  deliverance  when 
praying  for  his  so-called  friends  (often  to 
him  real  enemies),  typical  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  His  deliverance  and  exaltation  im- 
mediately subsequent  to  His  prayer,  "  Father 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do." 

y.  Job's  increased  possessions.  Verses 
10,  12. — "Also  the  Lord  gave  Job  twice 
as  much  as  he  had  before.  So  the  Lord 
blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job  more  than  his 
beginning  :  for  he  had  fourteen  thousand 
sheep,  and  six  thousand  camels,  and  a 
thousand  yoke  of  oxen,  and  a  thousand  she- 
asses."  The  '*end  of  the  Lord"  now  seen, 
"that  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful"  (James 
V.  11).  God's  thoughts  towards  his  suf- 
fering people,  "  thoughts  of  peace  and  not 
of  evil,  to  give  them  an  expected  end" 
(Jer.  xxix.  11).  Job  seen  to  be  right  in 
blessing  God  both  while  giving  and  taking 
away.  God  takes  away  from  His  own  only 
in  order  to  give  more.  Every  apparent  loss 
to  a  believer  a  real  gain.  As  easy  with  God 
to  give  riches  as  to  take  them  away.  His 
to  give  power  to  get  wealth,  by  blessing 
honest  endeavours.  Made  Jacob  rich  in 
spite  of  all  Laban's  endeavours  to  prevent 
it.  Easy  with  God  to  restore  what  either 
Satan  or  man  may  take  from  us.  Observe — 
(1)  God  takes  care  that  none  loses  by  serving 
Him.  What  is  lost  in  Gods  service  is  made 
up  with  more  than  compound  interest  (Matt, 
xix.  29).  God  a  liberal  re  warder.  Gave 
Job  not  only  as  much  as  he  had  lost,  but  its 
double,  liaised  faithful  Joseph  from  a  dun- 
geon to  a  palace ;  and,  from  a  slave,  made 
him  prime-minister  of  Egypt.  Valentinian 
lost  his  tribuneship  for  Christ,  and  was  ulti- 
mately made  Emperor  (2)  The  faithful  be- 
lie cer's  latter  end  always  belter  than  his 
beginning.  Bildad's  words  true  of  every 
believer  (chap.  viii.  7).  A  good  man's  last 
days  and  last  comforts  generally  his  best.  At 
eventide  light.  The  best  wine  reserved  by 
God  for  his  obedient  children  to  the  last. 
As  yet  unknown  what  He  has  prepared  here- 
after'for  them  that  love  Him  (1  Cor.  ii.  9). 

(3)  God  able  to  do  more  than  we  either  ask  or 
think.  Job  only  a^ked  to  he  shown  why  he 
was  so  severely  afflicted  and  wherein  he  had 
sinned.  God  removes  the  affliction  itself, 
and  makes  him  twice  as  rich  as  he  was  be- 
fore.    Job  only  thought  to  remain  jMactisin"^ 

279 


CUAt.   XLlI. 


mmmTic  commentary:  job. 


repentance  in  dust  and  aslies.  God  not  only 
withdrew  him  from  his  ash-heap,  but  restored 
him  to  more  than  his  former  dignity  and 
prosperity.  (4)  Believers  often  prepared  for 
greater  blessinq  by  previous  suffering  and 
humiliation.  Pros|)erity  more  difficult  to 
bear  than  adversity,  and  requires  preparation 
for  it.  Job  prepared  for  his  great  increase 
of  wealth  by  his  previous  troubles,  and  the 
selfabasenieut  which  preceded  it.  Believers 
prepared  for  being  glorihed  with  Christ  by 
oeiiig  made  first  to  suffer  with  Him.  Com- 
fort m  the  thought  that  present  troubles  may 
be  only  the  preparation  for  future  triumphs. 
(5)  The  history  of  the  Church  and  the  world, 
as  well  as  qfindividual  believers,foreshado?ced 
in  the  experience  of  Job.  The  sufferings  of 
the  Church  and  of  believers  in  this  present 
time  "  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the 
glory  that  shall  be  revealed/*  The  creation 
Itself  to  be  "  delivered  from  the  bondage 
of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty 
of  the  children  of  God."  The  new  earth 
*' wherein  dwelleth  righteousness,"  to  ex- 
perience a  blessing,  and  yield  an  abund- 
ance, unknown  since  the  entrance  of  sin 
(Rom.  viii.  18—22;  2  Pet.  iii.  13;  Ps. 
Ixvii.  4—7). 

VI.  The  changed  conduct  of  friends. 

Verse  11. — "  Then  came  unto  him  all  his 
brethren,  and  all  his  sisters,  and  all  they 
that  had  been  of  his  acquaintance  before, 
and  did  eat  bread  with  him  in  his  house : 
and  they  bemoaned  him,  and  comforted  him 
over  all  the  evil  that  the  Lord  had  brought 
upon  him  ;  every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece 
of  money  {Greek  version,  *an  ewe-lamb;' 
Latin  version,  *a  sheep;'  same  word  used 
only  in  Gen.  xxxiii.  19,  and  Josh.  xxiv.  32), 
and  every  one  an  ear-ring  of  gold. '  This 
friendly  conduct  due  to  the  favour  of 
God.  Included  in  the  turning  of  Job's  cap- 
tivity. "When  a  man's  ways  please  the 
Lord,  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at 
peace  with  him,"— much  more  his  friends. 
Job's  relations  and  acquaintances  probably 
now  more  influenced  by  God's  hand  on  them, 
tiian  by  the  removal  of  His  hand  from  him. 
God's  favour  shown  to  Jacob  in  turning 
Esau's  heart  towards  him,  and  causing  Jacob 
to  "see  His  face  as  the  face  of  an  angel." 
God's  iiand  formerly  recognized  by  Job  in 
1  he  alienation  of  some  of  his  friends;  now 
doubtless  acknowledged  by  him  in  the  affec- 
tion of  others.  The  hearts  of  men,  whether 
friends  or  enemies,  "in  the  hand  of  the 
Lord,  who  turneth  them  whithersoever  He 
will."  The  former  alienation  of  friends  no 
small  ingredient  in  Job's  cup  of  sorrow. 
Their  present  affection  no  trifling  element  in 
his  restored  happiness.  Friendship  the  wine 
of  life.  "  Poor  is  the  friendless  master  of  a 
2oO 


world."      Heaven  itself   sweetened  by  the 
presence  of  loving  friends. 

They  "  did  eat  bread  in  his  house."  No 
small  joy  to  Job  after  his  long  isolation, 
that,  his  leprosy  being  now  removed,  he 
could  have  his  friends  partaking  of  a  meal 
with  him  in  his  own  house.  Type  of  Jesus 
with  His  friends  around  Him  at  the  marriage- 
supper  of  the  Lamb.  So  also,  after  His 
resurrection,  the  scattered  disciples  gathered 
again  to  Him,  and  "ate  and  drank  with 
Him  "  during  the  forty  days  of  His  sojourn 
with  them  (Acts.  x.  41). 

The  visit  one  of  congratulation  as  well 
as  condolence.  "They  bemoaned  him  and 
comforted  him,'*  &c.  Talk  of  past  griefs 
an  enhancement  of  present  joy.  Observe — ■ 
(1)  God  gives  not  only  compensation  but  con- 
solation to  His  suffering  children.  "  As  one 
whom  his  mother  comforteth,  so  will  I  com- 
fort you  "  (Isa.  Ixvi.  13).  God  at  no  more 
loss  for  instruments  to  comfort  His  children 
than  to  correct  them,  (2)  Consolations  come 
best  in  God's  time.  Satan's  malice  in  keeping 
back  these  friends  before,  now  over-ruled  for 
the  enhancement  of  Job's  restored  happiness. 
(3)  Patience  to  have  her  perfect  work.  "The 
Lord,  after  ye  have  suffered  awhile,  make 
you  perfect,  strengthen,  stablish,  settle  you." 
The  consolation  of  these  friends  all  the 
sweeter,  now  that  Job,  after  the  dark  night 
is  over,  can  rejoice  in  the  sunshine  of  God's 
favour.  Yet  Job  still  a  mourner  and  needing 
consolation.  His  hearth  still  desolate,  with 
neither  son  nor  daughter  at  his  board.  No 
absolute  freedom  from  trouble  till  we  reach 
the  land  where  the  inhabitants  shall  no  more 
say,  I  am  sick;  and  where  all  tears  are 
wiped  away. 

They  comforted  him  "  over  all  the  Lord 
had  done  unto  him."  God's  hand  in  Job's 
troubles  acknowledged  by  the  friends  as  well 
as  himself.  Observe — (1)  God  the  Author 
and  Dispenser  of  our  trials,  whatever  the 
instruments.  Safest  and  best  in  our  trouble 
to  regard  the  first  cause,  rather  than 
secondary  and  subordinate  ones.  God  to  be 
acknowledged  in  all  events  as  ordering  all 
things  by  his  His  Providence,  even  to  the 
fall  of  a  sparrow.  Evil,  as  well  as  good, 
from  the  Lord,  however  He  may  phrase  to 
send  it.  Acknowledged  even  by  Satan— 
"  P»it  forth  thine  hand  now,"  &c.  (2)  Praise 
due  to  God  for  His  grace  in  sustaining  under 
past  troubles,  and  His  mercy  in  delivering  out 
of  them.  These,  as  well  as  sending  the 
troubles,  among  the  things  which  the  Lord 
had  done  to  Job.  Such  praise  to  mingle 
with  our  consolations.  So  Jethro,  after 
coming  out  to  meet  Moses,  praised  God  on 
hearing  of  "all  that  the  Lord  had  done  unto 
Pharaoh  and  to  the  Egyptians  for  Israel's 
sake,  and  all  the  travail  that  had  come  upon 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ,  JOB. 


CHAF.   XLII. 


them  by  the  way,  and  how  the  Lord  delivered 
them  "  (Exod.  xviii.  8—11).  A  picture  of 
heaven  and  the  enhancement  of  its  joy. 

The  friends  brought prese ids  to  Job,  aecord- 
ing  to  the  custom  of  the  country.  These 
probably  intended — (1)  To  testify  their 
affection  and  esteem;  (2)  To  contribute 
to  the  restoration  of  his  estate.  The 
sincerity  of  our  friendship  and  affection 
evinced  by  what  it  costs  us.  The  extent  of 
our  sympathy  with  the  suffering  measured 
by  what,  according  to  our  ability,  we  con- 
tribute to  their  relief. 

VII.  Job's  Second  Family.  Verses  13 
—15.  "He  had  also  seven  sons  and  three 
daughters.  And  he  called  the  name  of  the 
first,  Jemima  ;  and  the  name  of  ihe  second, 
Kezia ;  and  the  name  of  the  third,  Keren- 
happuch.  And  in  all  the  land  were  no 
women  found  so  fair  as  the  daughters  of 
Job  :  and  their  father  gave  them  inheritance 
among  their  brethren."  Children  given  to 
Job  to  take  the  place  of  tlie  former  ones, and 
to  sooth  the  sorrow  for  their  removal. 
Given  in  the  same  number  and  proportion 
of  sex.  As  easy  with  God  to  give  children 
as  riches.  Observe — (1)  God/ s  compassion 
and  liberality  towards  His  childreji.  Job  to 
have  every  loss  made  up  to  him,  even  to  his 
deceased  children.  God  keeps  account  of 
His  servants'  losses,  in  order  to  make  them 
up,  either  here  or  hereafter.  (2)  Fious 
children  not  lost  but  gone  before.  The  reason 
why  Job's  cattle  are  doubled,  but  not  his 
children.  Tlie  former  strictly  lost,  but  not 
the  latter.  Those  dying  in  the  Lord  not 
lost,  but  hidden  from  our  view.  Job's  godly 
children,  buried  under  the  ruins  of  their 
dwelling,  now  only  waiting  to  welcome  him 
to  the  Father's  iiouse.  All  to  be  received 
again  in  body  and  spirit  at  the  resurrection 
of  the  just.  His  children,  therefore,  really 
doubled,  as  well  as  his  riches— ten  with 
himself  on  earth,  and  ten  with  God  in  the 
better  country.  Precious  comfort  to  pious 
parents  in  the  death  of  their  infant  or 
believing  children.  These  only  separated 
from  them  for  a  time  by  a  tiiin  veil.  The 
star  goes  out  of  sight  with  us  only  to  shine 
in  another  hemisphere.  Those  not  lost  who 
are  sleeping  in  Abraham's  bosom.  Those 
not  to  be  considered  as  lost  to  us  who  are 
found  to  Christ.  Those  hardly  absent  who 
are  in  their  Father's  house.  Such  removals 
sanctified  to  believing  parents.  Children 
and  friends  departing  in  the  Lord,  only  a 
part  of  the  "  plenishing "  of  our  future 
home,  making  heaven  more  uome-like.  Help 
to  make  up  the  "  sublime  attractions  of  the 
grave."  A  purifying  and  elevating  influence 
in  tlie  thought,  that  while  a  part  of  us  is  on 
earth,  another  part  is  glorified  in  heaven. 


The  fact  fitted  to  turn  our  natural  sorrow 
into  a  sacred  joy. 

"  Who  could  sink  and  settle  to  that  point 
Of  selfishness— so  senseless  who  could  be, 
As  long  and  perseveringly  to  mourn 
For  any  object  of  his  love,  removed 
From  this  unstable  wild,  if  he  could  fix 
A  satist^ing  vieAV  upon  that  state 
Of  pure,  imperishable  blessedness 
Which  reason  promises,  and  Holy  Writ 
Ensures  to  all  believers  ?  " —  Wordsworth. 

Job,  as  made  the  father  of  a  new  family  after 
his  restoration,  a  type  of  Christ  after  His 
resurrection  and  ascension — receiving,  as  the 
eternal  Father,  or  Father  of  eternity,  the 
Gentiles  as  His  children  in  the  place  of 
the  Jews,  who  had  previously  constituted 
the  covenant  family,  but  who  through  un- 
belief were  now  for  a  time  cut  off.  "  Behold,  I 
was  left  alone ;  these,  where  had  they  been  " 
(Isa.  xlix.  20—23).  "Instead  of  the  fathers 
shall  be  the  children." 

Job's  second  daughters  distinguished  for 
the  beauty  of  their  persons.  God  not  only 
gave  children,  but  well-favoured  ones.  An 
enhancement  of  the  gift,  God's  gifts  to  his 
tried  people  often  come  with  a  special  mark 
of  their  origin  upon  them.  A  beautiful 
countenauce  pleasant  to  look  upon.  A  re- 
flection of  the  beauty  which  is  in  Him  who 
is  the  sum  and  source  of  all  beauty.  Beauty 
vain  as  compared  with  grace,  but  in  itself 
no  mean  gift  and  a  fit  accompaniment  to  a 
gracious  spirit.  A  shadow  or  image  of  the 
beauty  of  holiness.  The  sweetest  counte- 
nance, that  which  is  lighted  up  by  the  inward 
grace  of  the  Spirit.  The  beauty  of  the  out- 
ward man  made  prominent  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment ;  that  of  the  inward  man  in  the  K^w. 
New  Testament  females  not  praised  for  their 
beauty,  but  for  their  love  and  good  works 
(Rom.  xvi).  Christ's  second,  or  Gentile 
family,  given  Him  after  his  ascension,  dis- 
tinguished for  their  spiritual  beauty.  The 
Holy  Spirit  only  then  given  in  his  fulness. 
The  promise  then  fulfilled:  "Thy  people 
shall  be  willing  (liberal,  princely,  or  free-will 
offerings)  in  the  day  of  thy  power,  in  the 
beauties  of  holiness"  (Ps.  ex.  3). 

The  names  of  Job's  second  daughters 
recorded.  A  mark  of  honour.  The  names 
of  many  of  Christ's  daughters  recorded  in 
the  New  Testament;  those  of  all  of  them 
in  the  Book  of  Life  (Rom.  xvi.  1 — 15  ; 
Phil.  iv.  3).  The  names  of  Job's  daughters 
significant,  and  probably  given  to  indicate 
at  once  the  beauty  of  their  person,  and  the 
sweetness  of  their  disposition;  as  well  as  to 
commemorate  the  mercy  of  God  in  his  own 
deliverance.  "  Jemima  "  denotes  "a  dove," 
or  dovelike ;  but  may  include  in  it  the  idea 
of  "  day."  "  Kezia"  is  the  Cassia,  a  fragrant 
spice.      " Kereu-happuch"    is    either    "the 

^81 


CHAP.  xm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


Horn  of  Paint,"  or  "  the  Inverted  Horn ;" 
according  to  the  Greek  version,  the  Horn  of 
Plenty.  Thus  perhaps  Job  praised  the  God  of 
his  life  for  clianging  his  night  into  day,  giving 
him  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  and  turning 
again  his  captivity  as  the  streams  in  the  south. 
True  piety  will  not  forget  God's  benefits. 

Job's  estale  divided  among  his  daughters 
as  well  as  his  sons.  Indicative— (1)  Of  his 
riches ;  (2)  Of  the  excellent  character  of  his 
daughters;  (3)  Of  the  harmony  and  love 
existing  in  his  family.  Job's  second,  no 
less  than  his  first  children,  distinguished  for 
their  unity  and  mutual  affection.  Children 
a  blessing  when  love  unites  them  to  one 
another,  and  to  God  as  their  common  Father. 
Believing  women,  as  well  as  men,  made  heirs 
of  God  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ  the  Elder 
Brother.  In  Christ,  neither  male  nor  female, 
bond  nor  free  (Gal.  iii.  28;  Col.  iii.  11). 

Job's  Age  and  Death.  Verses  16, 17. — 
"  After  this  lived  Job  an  hundred  and  forty 
years,  and  saw  his  sons  and  his  son's  sons, 
even  four  generations.  So  Job  died,  being 
old  and  full  of  days."     Observe — 

1.  Ills  Age.  His  years  thought  to  have 
been  doubled  as  well  as  his  estate.  In  this 
case,  seventy  years  old  at  the  time  of  his 
trouble,  and  two  hundred  and  ten  at  the 
time  of  his  death.  Thus  attained  a  greater 
age  than  either  Abraham  or  Isaac.  Hence 
earlier  than  either  of  them,  though  probably 
during  part  of  his  life  contemporary  with 
one,  if  not  both.  Corresponds  with  the  in- 
ternal evidence  of  the  iDook.  To  be  re- 
membered in  reading  his  speeches.  His 
troubles  all  the  more  keenly  felt  as  occurring 
before  he  had  reached,  for  that  period  of  the 
world,  the  meridian  of  life.  His  death  not 
until  he  had  reached,  even  for  that  period,  a 
good  old  age.  Length  of  days  a  part  of 
wisdom's  wages  (Prov.  iii.  16).  Job's  short 
season  of  trouble  and  adversity  succeeded 
by  a  long  life  of  comfort  and  prosperity. 
God  a  rich  rewarder  of  his  faithful  servmits. 
Joseph  thirteen  years  a  slave;  eighty  a 
prime-minister.  Our  light  affliction,  which 
IS  but  for  a  moment,  woiketh  for  us  a  far 
more  exceeding,  even  an  eternal  weight  of 
glory.  Weeping  endureth  for  a  night,  joy 
Cometh  m  the  morning  of  a  nightless  day. 
Short  toil,  long  repose ;  short  conflict,  end- 


less triumph.  A  temporary  cross,  an  eternal 
crown.  Every  tear  of  God's  faithful  servants 
a  seed  which  shall  one  day  produce  a  rich 
harvest  of  ceaseless  joy. 

2.  His  Experience.  Spared  to  see  not  only 
his  children,  but  his  children's  children, 
'*  even  to  the  fourth  generation."  The  pro- 
mise of  the  Old  Testament  (Ps.  cxxviii.  6  ; 
Prov.  xvii.  6).  Mentioned  as  the  happiness 
of  Joseph  in  Egypt  (Gen.  I.  23).  Job  still 
more  abun'^antly  compensated  for  the  loss  of 
his  former  family.  The  words  of  Eliphaz 
made  good  in  his  experience  (chap.  v.  25). 
Died,  not  only  old,  but  "  full  of  days." 
Satisfied  with  the  days  given  him,  both  as  to 
their  number  and  character.  Now  as  willing 
to  die  as  ever  he  had  been  wishful  to  live. 
Ready  now,  like  Simeon,  to  depart  in  peace, 
his  eyes  having  seen  God's  salvation.  Had 
experienced  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in 
the  land  of  the  living ;  and  now,  like  Jacob, 
waited  for  his  salvation  in  a  better  world. 
Had,  like  David,  "  served  his  generation  by 
the  will  of  God  ;"  and  now  ready,  like  a  tired 
and  happy  child,  to  fall  asleep.  Comes  to 
his  grave,  as  Eliphaz  had  said,  "  like  a 
shock  of  corn,  fully  ripe."  The  evening  of 
his  days  a  tranquil  sun-down.  At  eventide 
li^ht.  Typical  of  millennial  blessedness  in 
the  evening  of  the  world.  A  numerous 
family  of  the  '*  Everlasting  Eather,"  like  the 
drops  of  dew  from  the  womb  of  the  morning. 
His  children  all  in  holy  and  happy  fellow- 
ship. No  more  falling  out  of  the  brethren 
by  the  way.  No  adversary  nor  evil  occurrent. 
No  Canaanite  in  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
Satan  bound,  and  no  more  allowed  either  to 
deceive  the  nations  or  molest  the  Church. 

3.  Bis  Death.  ''So  Job  died."  Piety 
no  exemption  from  death.  Till  Christ  Him- 
self comes,  the  grave  receives  the  members 
as  well  as  the  Head.  Death  to  Job  no  king 
of  terrors.  The  messenger  from  hisEather's 
house  with  a — '*  Well  done,  good  and  faithful 
servant ;  enter  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord," 
The  good  fight  fought,  the  weary  warrior 
only  called  off  from  the  field.  Had  already 
experienced  great  deliverances,  but  was  now 
to  experience  the  greatest  of  all.  A  king 
and  a  priest  on  earth.  Job  died,  like  all 
believers,  to  exercise  his  royal  and  priestly 
office  in  a  land  never  stained  with  tears,  and 
in  a  temple  never  defiled  with  sin. 


Ti^INIS. 


282 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


NOTES 


%tAt%. 


CHAPTEE    L 


Verse  5  :  **  Have  sinned  and  cursed  God  in 
their  hearts"  Various  opiniona  as  to  the 
meaning,  in  this  passage,   of  the   Hebrew 

word    here    rendered    "cursed."       ^^"1? 

(berechoo)  the  Piel  (transitive  or  intensive) 

form  of  the  verb  T^^  {bdrach)  to  kneel, 

generally  meaning  to  "  bless ;"  i.e.,  to  cause 
to  kneel,  such  being  the  usual  attitude  in 
receiving  a  blessing.  The  word,  however, 
generally  believed  to  have  also  the  oppo- 
site meaning  of  "cursing."     So  Gesenius, 

who    compares   it   with    the   Arabic  ^J^} 

{ibtaraka),  and  the  Ethiopic,  barakay  both 
having  the  opposite  meanings  of  blessing 
and  cursing.  1  Kings  xxi.  10,  where  the 
same  form  of  the  verb  occurs,  is  referred 
to  as  a  clear  case  in  which  it  is  used  with 
the  meaninj^  of  cursing.  The  same  word 
which  is  twice  employed  by  Satan  (chap, 
i.  11;  and  ii.  5),  and  once  by  Job's  wife 
(chap.  ii.  9) ;  where  it  is  no  doubt  used  in 
the  same  sense  as  in  the  verse  before  us. 
This  use  of  the  word  in  two  opposite  senses 
variously  accounted  for.  Leigh,  in  his 
"  Critica  Sacra,"connects  these  opposite  mean- 
ings on  the  ground  that  the  word  expresses 
what  a  man  ardently  wishes  or  calls  for, 
whether  it  may  be  good  or  evil,  salvation  or 
perdition.  Carey,  in  his  "  Notes  on  Job," 
connects  them  by  observing  that  both  bless- 
ing and  cursing  are  acts  of  religious  worship 
represented  by  "  kneeling,"  the  relation  be- 
tween them  being  like  that  of  precor  and 
imprecor  in  Latin.  Others  account  for  this 
use  of  the  word  on  the  principle  of 
Euphemism ;  blasphemy  having  been  so 
abhorred  by  the  ancients  that  they  avoided 
the  very  term,  as  the  Latins  used  sacrum 
for  execrandum.  So  Vatablus,  Drusius, 
and  CoccEiTJs.  Perhaps  a  better  way  of 
accounting  for  these  opposite  meanings  of 
the  word,  is  that  adopted  by  CoDuacus, 
who  classes  it  with  those  verbs  in  which  the 
Piel  form  gives  a  privative  meaning,  and  so 
makes  it  convey  an  idea  the  opposite  of  that 
originally  implied  in  it.  Thus  ^^^  {khata) 
to  "sin"  has  its  Piel  form,  i^^H  {khitle), 
^Q  "put  away  sin,"  to  expiate  it  or  free 


from  it;  Djy  {'etsem),  a  "bone,**  gives  a 
verb  in  the  piel  form  U^V  {'itsem)  to  "  break 

the  bones."  "Wemyss  explains  this  double 
and  opposite  meaning  on  the  ground  of 
irony  or  antiphrasis;  "they  may  have 
blessed  God,"  ».«.,  "may  have  offended 
Him"(!)  The  most  satisfactory  way  for 
the  word  being  used  in  this  sinister  sense, 
and  one  very  generally  adopted  by  modern 
interpreters,  is  that  of  giving  it  the  meaning 
of  "  bidding  farewell  to,"  and  so  of  "re- 
nouncing ; "  it  being  customary  on  partmg 
with  a  friend,  to  wish  him  farewell.  So 
valere  in  Latin  and  x^^9^*-^  iii  Greek  are 
known  to  be  used  (Terence,  Andria  iv. 
14;  Euripides,  Medea,  1044).  This  view 
of  "renouncing"  is  adopted  by  Schultens, 
J.  H.  Michaelis,  Lowth,  De  Wette,  &c. 
HuENAGEL  renders  the  word  "forgotten." 
EwALD  andHiRZEL:  "forsaken."  Zockler, 
in  Lange's  Bible-work,  observes  that  it  indi- 
cates a  hostile  farewell. 

Many,  however,  prefer  to  retain  the 
original  meaning  of  blessing,  but  under 
various  aspects.  So  Ambrose,  Jerome, 
Aquinas.  Mayer:  Have  sinned,  and  blessed 
God  for  their  good  cheer.  Cocceius  :  Have 
sinned,  and  blessed  God  for  their  success. 
Sanctius  :  Have  sinned  in  the  way  they 
blessed  God ;  viz.,  being  puffed  up  by  their 
riches  and  prosperity.  Broughton,  Caryl, 
and  Poole  :  Have  blessed  God  too  little, 
or  have  lightly  regarded  Him;  thus  ap- 
proaching to  the  sense  of  cursing.  Some 
supply  a  negative  particle,  or  give  a  nega- 
tive meaning  to  the  copula  {vaw),  as  in  Ps. 
ix.  18 ;  Prov.  xvii.  26 ;  "  have  sinned  and 
not  blessed  God."  So  Calvin,  Good,  and 
ISanctius.  Booth ro yd  and  Young  retain 
the  idea  of  blessing  by  giving  the  copula  the 
sense  of  "  though ;  "  "  have  sinned  though 
they  blessed  God."     Others  do  the  same  by 

rendering  D^"t'?^?  {elohim)  not  "  God,"  but 

"  the  gods ;  " — meaning  the  idols  of  the 
heathens  or  angelic  beings ;  "  have  sinned 
and  blessed  the  elohim  or  gods."  So  Adam 
Clarke,  Parkhurst,  and  Dr.  Lee,  who 
explains  by  ;  "  Have  inclined  to  idolatrous 
practices,"  and    refers  to  Isa.  IxvL 

283 


NOTES. 


HOMILETIC  COMMEXTART :   JOB. 


givmi?  the  same  expression.  The  word, 
however,  beinjj  without  the  article,  would 
seem  to  require  to  be  rendered  eitlier  *'  God  " 
or  simplv  "  god  ;  "  and,  as  Scott  the  trans- 
lator of' Job  has  observed,  no  mention  is 
made  in  the  book  of  any  other  god  or  gods 
than  the  true  one. 

The  ancient  and  later  versions  vary  m 
their  way  of  rendering  the  word.  The  Sep- 
TUAGINT,  according  to  the  ordinary  edition, 
has  :  "  Have  thought  evil  against  God,"  in 
which  it  has  been  followed  by  the  Coptic  ; 
while  the  Complutexsion  has:  "Have 
blessed  God."  In  the  Itala,  or  older  Latin 
version,  it  is :  "Have  cursed  the  Lord;" 
while  the  Yulgate  has:  "Have  blessed 
God."  The  SYRiAchas:  "Have  mocked." 
The  Arabic:  *•  Reproached."  The  Chal- 
DAic  :  "  Provoked  to  anger."  Coveedale  : 
"  Have  been  unthankful  to  God."  Luther, 
like  the  Yulgate:  " Have  blessed  God." 
Martin's  French  version :  "  Have  blas- 
phemed God."  DiODATi's  Italian :  "  Have 
spoken  evil  of  God." 

Yerse  11.  "And  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy 
face."  {Margin  :  "  If  he  curse  thee  not.") 
The  clause  susceptible  of  a  variety  of 
interpretations.     The  two  particles  at  the 

commencement   N7  QK  {im   lo)  "  if  not," 

variously  rendered  and  understood.  By 
most  they  are  regarded  as  expressive  of  an 
oath,  with  the  rest  of  the  form  of  impreca- 
tion understood;  as,  "may  I  perish,"  or 
such  like ;  i.e.,  "  if  he  will  not  curse  thee,"  &c. 
So  Yatablus,  Piscator,  Hufnagei-,  and 
ZocKLER,  who  makes  the  expression  equiva- 
lent to  "verily."  Dathe  supplies,  "Let 
me  be  accounted  a  liar,"  i.e.,  "  if  he  do  not 
curse  thee,"  &c.     Schultens  thus   views 


the  words  as  expressive  of  Satan's  impu- 
dence and  contumacy.  Others  supply  "  see  ;" 
i.e.,  "  if  he  will  not,"  &c.  So  Carey.  Some 
who  retain  the  sense  of  "  blessing  "  in  the 
verb,  render  tlie  particles,  "  if  not ;"  i.e.,  "  if 
thou  do  no  smite  him,  then,  no  doubt,  he 
will  bless  thee  to  thy  face,  or  in  thy  pre- 
sense."  So  Dr.  Lee,  Coleman,  Young, 
&c.  Sanctius,  following  the  Yulgate, 
renders  the  verb  in  the  past  tense,  as  ex- 
pressive of  hadit, — "[See]  if  he  hath  not 
[merely]  blessed  thee  to  thy  face,"  t'r., 
hypocritically.  Adam  Clarke  :  "  He  will 
bless  thee  (or  be  pious)  according  to  thy 
appearances  for  him."  Good  and  Booth - 
ROYD  interrogatively :  "  Will  he  still  bless 
thee  ?"  TowNSEND  :  "  Then  he  will  bless 
thee  in  thy  presence,"  as  he  has  hitherto 
done  Job  thus  to  be  proved  a  mercenary 
worshipper  according  to  either  sense  of  the 
verb  :  If  thou  smite  him  he  will  curse  thee 
to  thy  face  j  if  not,  he  will  still  bless  thee, 
but  only  to  thy  face.  The  same  meaning  of 
"  renouncing,"  however,  probably  attached  to 

'sl"2^    (l^erech)  here  as  in  ver,  5;  only,  as 

has  been  remarked  by  Koyes  and  others, 
the  phrase  is  stronger  here,  as  importing  an 
utter  and  public  renunciation  of  religion  as 
a  vain  thing.  So  Schultens,  Dathe, 
Umbreit,  Kosenmuller,  Stickel,  &c. 
Barth,  in  his  "Bible  Manual,"  has:  "He will 
renounce  or  even  blaspheme  thee  to  thy 
face."  Mercer  :  "He  will  curse  thee,"  i.e., 
deny  thy  providence,  and  say  it  is  vain  to 
serve  thee.  Similarly  Poole  :  "  He  will 
ref)roach  thy  providence."  It  is  well  known 
that  the  heathen  frequently  reproach  their 
gods  in  misfortune :"  Deos  atque  a&tra  crudelia 
vocat" 


CHAPTER    IL 


Yekse  4.  "SJci7i  forsHn;  yea,  all  that  a 
man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life.''  The  ex- 
pression *'  skin  for  skin  "  acknowledged  to  be 
a  proverbial  one.  Its  precise  meaning  not  so 
obvious,  though  its  general  drift,  as  used  by 
the  Evil  One,  is  sufficiently  apparent.  The 
Sepiuagint  and  Yulgate  translate  as  we  do ; 
the  one  rendering  the  preposition  by  wTrep,  and 
the  other  by  pro.  The  Chaldaic  has  :  "  Mem- 
ber for  member."  So  Bernard,  who  renders 
the  words:  "Limb  for  limb."  Martin's 
french  Yeision  has:  "Every  one  will  give 
skin  for  skin."  Some,  as  Parkhurst  and 
Wemyss,  render  the  phrase:  "Skin  after 
Bkin."  Others,  as  Pineda  and  Tirinus: 
"  Skin  upon  skin,"  i.e.,  all  skins  ;  or,  accord- 
ing to  Poole,  all  outwaid  things.    Young 


translates  :  "  A  skin  for  a  skin."    The  mean- 
ings tlius  reducible  to  four : — 

1.  The  skin  of  another  for  one's  own  skin. 
So  Yatablus,  Tirinus,  Seb.  Schmidt, 
Maier.  "  Skin,"  in  this  view,  is  regarded 
by  some  as  equivalent  to  "body,"  as  in 
chap.  xvi.  15;  xviii.  13;  xix.  26;  like 
Horace's  ''  Pelliculam  curare  jubet."  So 
KosENMOLLER  and  Hufnagel.  By  others 
it  is  viewed  as  equivalent  to  "life  : "  what  a 
man  holds  as  dear  to  him  as  his  skin,  t.<?., 
his  life,  he  will  give  to  save  his  life.  So 
Gesenius  and  Hupeeldt,  after  Origen, 
who  says  :  "A  man  will  give  a  skin,  which  is 
sold  for  money,  to  save  his  own  skin,  f<?., 
his  ]ife."  Others:  Job  will  give  the  skin 
of  his  cattle,  even  that  of  h^  children,  to 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


NOTES. 


Bave  his  own.  So  Gregory,  Epiirem  Syuus, 
Mercer,  Piscator,  Drusius,  Noyes,  &c. 
Like  that  of  Terence :  "  Proximus  sum 
tgomet  mihi.''  In  this  view,  the  proverb  is 
explained  bj  what  follows. 

2.  Like  for  like ;  i.e.,  any  one  gives 
that;  men  part  with  anything  for  a  full 
equivalent.  So  CoDurcus,  Hikzel,  Conant: 
Equivalent  for  equivalent.  Maurer:  Job 
may  well  give  up  the  rest  to  keep  his  life. 
Fausset  :  One  thing  for  another.  Ewald  : 
All  is  subject  to  barter.  Umbreit:  One 
article  is  given  for  another;  but  life  is 
dearest  to  all :  Job  is  satisfied  so  long  as  he 
is  not  obliged  to  give  up  that.  Codurcus  : 
The  origin  of  the  proverb  in  the  general 
practice  of  barter,  or  in  the  use  of  animals 
instead  of  men  in  sacrifice.  Poole  :  Skins 
or  spoils  of  beasts  in  early  ages  the  most 
valuable  property  men  could  acquire ;  hence 
became  the  chief  representative  of  property. 
Good  andBooxHROYD  :  "Skin "an  equivalent 
for  riches,  lurniture,  &c.  So  Pineda  and 
Schultens.  In  the  expression  "skin  for 
skin,"  Good  thinks  the  word  issued  in  two 
different  senses, — property  is  given  for  life. 
CoBBiN  remarks  that  probably  ransoms  used 
also  to  be  paid  in  skins.  Carey  sees  in  the 
proverb  a  sort  of  reductio  ad  ahsurdum:  a 
man  will  not  part  with  his  skin  unless  you 
supply  him  with  another ;  on  no  terms  will 
he  part  with  his  life  :  hence  Job,  to  save  his 
hfe,  will  part  with  his  religion. 

3.  Limb  for  limb ;  or,  one  thing  parted 
with  to  save  the  rest :  a  less  noble  member 
will  be  given  up  for  a  nobler  one,  as  an  arm 
for  a  head.  So  Menochius,  Munster, 
A.  Clarke,  &c.  The  view  of  some  of  the 
Fathers:  a  man  will  put  np  his  hand  to  ward 
off  a  blow  from  his  eve.  So  Gregory,  Olym- 
piodorus.  Dr.  Lee:  Men  willingly  give 
up  a  worse  thing  for  a  better  :  hence,  much 
more  will  a  man  give  up  all  he  has  for  his  life. 
CoccEiTJS :  Job  can  easily  afford  to  part 
with  all  while  he  keeps  his  life, — his  posses- 
sions being  as  it  were  a  skin  or  covering  to 
his  person  to  protect  and  warm  him :  the  one 
of  tliem — the  less  valuable — he  easily  lets 
go  to  keep  the  other.  So  Schlottmann, 
Delitzscii,  and  Zockler  in  Lange,  who 
regards  the  lite  to  be  preserved  as  not  so 
much  the  animal  or  life-function,  as  the  soul 
which  causes  and  conditions  it. 

4.  Skin  upon  skin.  So  Dr.  Thomas,  in 
The  Homilist :  "  like — sovereign  after  sove- 
reign ;  all  the  sovereigns  a  man  has,"  &c. ; 
"skin,"  equivalent  to  property  ;  life  dearer 
than  all.  Job  willing  to  have  skin  upon  skin 
taken  from  him  to  save  his  life.  Schultens 
remarks  that  the  Arabs  call  possessions 
the  outer  skin — friends  and  relations  the 
inner  one.  According  to  Olsiiauskn,  the 
meaning  is;  So  long  as  ihpu  dost  not  touch 


his  person,  he  will  not  attack  thee.  Cole- 
man thinks  an  allusion  is  made  to  the 
terrific  skin-disease  with  which  Satan  pur- 
posed to  afflict  Job.  CoNANT  regards  the 
rendering  of  the  copula  vaw  before  "all" 
by  **  yea,"  as  embarrassing  the  sense,  by 
anticipating  the  reader's  judgment  of  the 
relation  of  the  two  clauses,  and  proposes  to 
read  it  as  usual  :  "y/r^c?  all  that  a  man  hath," 
&c.  Umbreit,  and  after  him  Fausset, 
would  put  "skin"  and  "life"  in  the  two 
clauses  in  antithesis  to  each  other,  and  render 
the  copula  "  but."  So  De  Wette  :  People 
give  up  other  things ;  but  they  take  care  of 
their  hfe — the  highest  value  put  upon  that. 
According  to  Barnes,  the  idea  is :  If  Job 
was  so  afflicted  as  to  have  his  life  endangered, 
he  would  give  up  his  religion  to  save  it. 

Verse  7.  *  Smote  Job  with  sore  boils." 
The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  followed  by 
Martin  and  Diodati  in  their  French  and 
Italian  versions,  render  the  words  which 
describe  Job's  disease,  "  a  bad  or  malignant 

ulcer."     The  word  V^^  ishekheen)  which  we 

render  **  boils,"  derived  from  a  root  not  used 

in  Hebrew,  but  appearing  in  the  Arabic  'X^ 

[sakhanci)  to  be  hot, inflamed,  fevered.  Job's 
disease,  according  to  Gesenius,  Noyes,  and 
others,  a  kind  of  black  leprosy,  formerly  pre- 
vailing in  Egypt  (Deut.  xxviii.  27);  called 
Elephantiasis,  from  the  skin  being  covered 
with  black  scales,  and  from  the  mouth,  feet, 
and  legs  swelling  enormously,  while  the  body 
becomes  emaciated.  The  disease  not  attended 
with  great  pain,  but  with  much  debility  of 
the  system,  uneasiness,  and  mental  depres- 
sion. Both  Pliny  and  Lucretius  speak  of 
it  as  a  disease  peculiar  to  Egypt ;  the  former 
calling  it,  "  ^gypti  peculiare  malum.** 
Piscator  and  Castalio  render  the  singular 
noun  collectively  "  ulcers  ;"  as  our  English 
version,  "  boils."  Morus  renders  it :  An 
inflammation.  Vatablus  :  Pustules, — boils 
from  neat,  such  as  were  inflicted  on  Egypt 
(Exodus  ix.  10),  and  threatened  to  Israel 
(Deut.  xxviii.  27).  Gryn(EUS,  after  Schul- 
CENS:  An  inflammation,  of  which  the  ulcers 
were  the  effect.  Adam  Clarke  queries 
wiiether  it  was  not  the  small-pox.  Good 
makes  it:  Burning  ulcerations, —  the  baras 
of  the  Arabs.  Wemyss  :  Foul  ulcers.  Lee  : 
A  burning  disease.  Fry:  A  sore  ulcer. 
Carey  :  A  malignant  ulceration, — the  dis- 
ease nearly  proving  fatal  in  the  case  of 
Hezekiah  (Isaiah  xxxviii.  1 — 21) ;  in  Job's 
case,  of  a  very  virulent  form.  The 
Homilist,  :  One  universal  inflammation. 
Fausset  :  A  burning  sore.  Conant,  after 
EwAi,i),  observes  that  the  singular  here  has 
the  ( fl'cct  of  a  collective.  So  Hkiligstedt  : 
Malignant  ulcers.  Zocklek,  in  Lange, 
regarding  it  as  the  Elephantiasis^  speaks  of  it 

^85 


NOT£S. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


as  the  Arabian  or  worst  kind  of  leprosy; 
called  also  lepra  nodosay  or  tuberculosa,  from 
Uie  greatly  swollen  lumps,  or  boils,  which 
give  10  the  extremities  the  appearance  of  an 
elephant's  legs,  whence  its  name.  Barnes, 
after  Good,  calls  it  a  universal  ulcer,  attended 
with  violent  pain  and  constant  restlessness; 
named  by  the  Arabs,  gudham,  and  said  to 


produce  a  grim,  distorted,  lion-like  set  of 
features,  hence  called  Leontiasis.  Chrysos- 
TOM  observes  that  it  made  Job  like  Lazarus, 
but  in  a  far  worse  condition.  The  Jcvdsh 
doctors  say  that  the  disease,  in  Job's  case, 
lasted  a  whole  year ;  while  Suidas — we  know 
not  on  what  grounds — makes  it  to  have  con- 
tinued seven. 


CHAPTER  nL 


Verse  5.  "Let  the  blackness  of  the  day 
terrify  it'*  Marein,  " Let  them  terrify  it  as 
those  who  have  a  bitter  day."  The  expression 
DV'nnpi)  {chimrire-yom)  gives  rise  to  two 

classes  of  interpretations,  according  as  the 
initial  letter  is  regarded  as  a  part  of  the 
noun,  or  as  a  particle.  In  the  former  case,  it 
is  best  rendered  "  obscurations,  or  darken- 

ings  of  the  day  t"  from  "^PJ  {chamar),  an 

unused  root,  signifying  "to  be  dark,  or 
blackened,  as  with  heat."  So  Gesenius, 
who  thinks  the  reference  is  to  eclipses,  al- 
ways regarded  by  the  ancients  as  portending 
calamities.  The  view  also  of  Bochart, 
NoYEs,  Fausset,  Zockler  in  Lange,  &c. 
The  first  of  the  two  nouns  is  thus  regarded  as 
an  augmentative ;  the  simple  form  KT'DD 

{cJiemira,  from  "^?5  chemary  "  to  be  dark,  or 

sad  "),  being  applied  in  Syriac  (^f  att.  xvi.  3) 
to  a  dark  and  lowering  sky.  So  Scott,  who 
translates  it  "greatest  sorrows,"  and  in  his 
metrical  version :  "  Boding  signs  from  all  the 
quartered  sphere."  Lee  classes  it  with  a 
sort  of  superlative  in  Arabic  words  signify- 
ing colours,  &c.,  formed  by  reduplicating  the 
last  radical  letter,  and  occasionally  intro-. 
ducing  a  long  vowel ;  and  so  renders  the 
expression  "  blackest  things  of  the  day  " — 
blackest  terrors.  Of  the  earlier  interpreters, 
Junius  and  Tremellius  render  the  words  : 
"  Darkness  of  the  day."  Cocceius  :  "  Black- 
nesses of  the  day,"— dark,  hot,  pestilential 
vapours.  Pagninus,  Vatablus,  and  Pisca- 
tor:  "  Heats,  or  vapours,  of  the  day."  The 
Tigurine  translators :  "  Most  burning  heats 
of  the  dog-days."  Bishop  Hall:  "A  con- 
tinued darkness."  Among  later  expositors. 
Good  has:  "Blasts  of  noontide  "—the 
timoom,  or  hot  wind  of  the  desert.  Fry  : 
"  Black  blasts  of  the  day."  Boothroyd  : 
"Thunder-clouds,  blackening  the  day." 
Jenour:  "  Black  darkness  by  day."  Carey 
and  Conant,  after  Gesenius  :  "Darkenings 
ot  the  day."  Bernard  :  "  Black  vapours." 
Oi-suAusEN,  Dillmann,  and  Delitzsch; 
"Darknesses  of  the  sun,"  as  from  clouds. 
286 


Herder,  viewing  the  expression  figura- 
tively :  "  Blackness  of  misfortune."  Um- 
BREIT  understands  by  it :  "  Magical  incanta- 
tions which  darken  the  day."  Grotius  and 
CoDURCUs  regard  the  first  noun  as  used  for 

..Pr  ichimre)  or  Cliemaiims,  a  name  given 

in  the  Old  Testament  to  certain  idolatrous 
priests  (Zeph.  i.  4;  Hos.  x.  5  ;  2  Kings 
xxiii.  5),  and  thus  denoting  *'  priests  of  the 
day," — astrologers,  who  distinguish  the 
character  of  days  as  lucky  and  unlucky,  like 
the  Roman  '^^  prefecti  fastorum** 

If  the  initial  letter  J,  however,  be  viewed 
not  as  a  part  of  the  noun,  but  as  a  particle, 
it  may  be  regarded  either  as  one  of  com- 
parison, or  of  emphasis.     In  this  case,  the 

noun  ^7.''"?^  {merire)  will  be  viewed  as  de- 
rived from  Ty^  imarar)  "  to  be  bitter,"  as 

in  Deut.  xxxii.  24.  So  the  translators  of  the 
ancient  versions  appear  to  have  understood 
the  expression.  The  Septuagint  has  :  "  Let 
the  day  be  cursed ;"  or,  according  to  Grabe's 
emendation:  "Let  the  day  be  troubled." 
The  Vulgate  :  "  Let  the  day  be  involved  in 
bitterness."  The  Targum,  Syriac,  and 
Aquila  :  "As  bitternesses  of  the  day."  So 
Martin's  French  :  "  As  the  day  of  those  to 
whom  life  is  bitter."  Diodati' s  Italian : 
"The  bitterest  days."  Mercer  andMoRUS, 
like  our  marginal  reading :  "  As  those  bitter 
in  days."  Monster,  after  the  Syriac: 
"The  bitternesses  of  the  day."  See. 
Schmidt  :  "  As  bitternesses  of  day," — rather 
to  be  so  called  than  day  itself.  Schultens  : 
"  As  it  were  the  bitter  things  of  the  day," 
— viz.,  misfortunes.  RosenmOller :  "Ac- 
cording to  the  bitternesses  of  the  day " — 
calamities  which  render  a  day  black  and  ill- 
omened,  as  Amos  viii.  10.  Adam  Clarke  : 
"The  bitterness  of  a  day."  Young:  "As 
the  most  bitter  of  days."  Le  Clerc  derives 
the  word,  as  the  Septuagint  appears  to  have 

done,  from  "'"]^?  {ai-ar)  "to  curse:"  "as 
those  who  curse  the  day." 

Verse  8.  "  Who  are  ready  to  raise  up  tkeir 
mouruiny ;''   Margin:    "A    leviathan.'*      A 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


NOTEb. 


clause  which  has  also  two  classes  of  interpre- 
pretations,  according  as   the    noun    \\^^ 

{livi/athan)  is  regarded  as  derived  from  * '" 
(Jtavah)  "  to  twist  into  folds,"  and  so  mean- 
ing a  serpent,  or  sea- monster,  as  in  all  tlie 

ancient  versions;  or  from  n,J  {lay ah)  "to 
mourn,*'  and  so  denoting  lamentation,  as  in 
our  authorised  version.     Of  the  other  two 

words  in  the  clause,  0^7  .^*7  {Jia-^ atUdhim^ 

from  "^Oy  {^athadh)y  unused  in  Hebrew  but 

found  in  Chaldaic;  in  the  Pael  form,  '-f?^ 
{atiedh)  "  to  appoint  or  prepare,*'  like  the 
Arabic  jjc  {attuda,  Vth.  conjugation,  to  be 
skilled  in  an  art),  rather  denotes,  "those  who 
are  skilled,  or  expert."  So  Schultens, 
Gesenius,  Notes,  and  Zockler.  The 
Septuagint  has  :  "  He  who  is  to  rouse  up," 
&c.  The  Vulgate  :  "  Those  who  are  pre- 
pared," &c.  So  the  Targum,  Aquila,  and 
Symmachus,  as  well  as  Luther,  Martin, 

and  DiODATi.  *^1^^  {'orer),  properly  "  to 
raise  up  from  sleep,"  as  Ps.  xliv.  23.  So 
De  Wette  :  "To  wake  up."  Scott,  ob- 
serving that  the  sign  of  the  infinitive  is 
omitted,  views  the  expression  as  a  peri- 
phrasis for  the  future  tense  of  the  indicative, 
according  to  the  Syriac  idiom.  The  same 
appears  to  have  been  done  by  the  translator 
of  the  Septuagint. 

Of  those  who  regard  the  noun  as  derived 

from  nV?  [lavak  =    /])   "to  twist,"  with 

the  final  syllable  1^  (ian)  as  the  terminative 

form  of  the  noun,  are  Bochart,  Schultens, 
Dathe,  and  Gesenius,  who  understands  by 
the  word  a  serpent  of  the  larger  kind,  espe- 
cially, as  in  chap.  xli.  1,  a  crocodile.  The 
Septuagint,  followed  by  the  Coptic  and 
the  Itala,  renders  it,  "the  great  whale." 
The  Vulgate  leaves  the  word  untranslated, 
"  Leviathan."  According  to  Notes,  the 
word  is  a  common  name  to  denote  monstrous 
animals  of  different  kinds,  here  perhaps  a 
monstrous  serpent.  Barnes  :  Used  here  to 
to  represent  the  most  fierce  and  powerful  of 
animals.  Zockler  :  The  great  dragon — the 
enemyof  the  sun  and  moon — which,according 
to  an  ancient  superstition,  seeks  to  cause 
darkness  by  swallowing  them  up.  Accord- 
ing to  Grotius,  Codurcus,  and  Seb. 
Schmidt,  the  persons  in  the  text  are  repre- 
sented as  skilled  in  stirring  up  monsters  by 
magic  incantations.  Doderlein  and  Um- 
BREIT  understand,  "  charming  of  serpents." 
According  to  Osiander,  Notes,  Barnes, 
and  others,  the  reference  is  to  sorcerers,  or 
persons  supposed  to  possess  the  power  of 


making  any  day  fortunate  or  unfortunate, 
or  even  to  call  forth  terrific  monsters  from 
the  forest  or  the  deep,  in  order  to  gratify  their 
own  malice,  or  that  of  others,  of  whom 
Balaam  is  viewed  as  an  example.  Wemtss 
has  :  "  Skilled  in  conjuring  up  Leviathan." 
Dr.  Chalmers  understands :  "Magicians  and 
conjurers  who  raise,  or  pretend  to  raise  up, 
infernal  spirits  by  their  spells.  Hirzel, 
HAHN,andScHLOTTMANN  :  the  Constellation 
called  the  Dragon,  between  the  Great  and  the 
Little  Bear,  or  some  other  of  the  same  name. 
So  Maurer,  who  refers  to  the  words  of 
Horace  as  a  parallel :  "  Qux  sidera  excantata 
voce  Thessala  lunamque  cceIo  deripity  Lee, 
understanding  the  whale,  or  some  other 
monster,  translates :  "  Who  are  ready  to  stir 
up  a  leviathan," — which,  he  adds,  none  but 
the  most  desperate  would  do.  Bernard: 
"  Ready  to  arouse  the  crocodile."  Conant  : 
Skilled  to  rouse  the  Leviathan."  Hufnagel 
observes  that  the  expression  is  probably  em- 
ployed to  denote  the  undertaking  of  a  most 
perilous  task.  Jenour  renders  it,  "  Prepared 
to  stir  up  the  Leviathan  to  battle ; "  i.e.^ 
persons  who  hate  life,  and  are  prepared 
to  expose  themselves  to  certain  death.  So 
Boothrotd,  who  observes  that  in  chap.  xli. 
8 — 10,  to  arouse  Leviathan  is  represented  as 
inevitable  destruction.  Various  other  allu- 
sions are  conjectured  to  be  made  in  the  ex- 
pression. Reference  is  supposed  by  some  to 
be  made  to  the  invocation  of  Typhon,  the 
author  of  destruction,  whose  symbol  was  the 
crocodile,  such  as  is  found  on  a  papyrus  roll 
from  Thebes.  So  Caret,  who  also  thinks  an 
allusion  may  be  made  to  an  ancient  custom 
of  the  Egyptians  in  hunting  the  crocodile 
on  a  particular  day,  and  then,  after  killing 
it,  throwing  its  dead  body  before  the  temple 
of  their  god.  Fausset  thinks  a  reference 
is  made  to  those  who  claimed  the  power  of 
controlling  or  rousing  up  wild  beasts  at  their 
will.  Calmet  sees  an  allusion  to  the  A  tlantes, 
a  people  of  Ethiopia,  who  were  ready  to 
kill  and  eat  the  crocodile.  Sir  G.  Wilkin- 
son, quoted  by  Carey,  refers  to  the  Tinty- 
rites,  who  were  expert  in  catching  and  over- 
coming the  crocodile  in  the  water.  Adam 
Clarke  thinks  that  persons  are  meant  who 
are  desperate  enough  to  provoke  the  croco- 
dile to  tear  them  in  pieces.  M.  Henry 
thinks  allusion  is  made  to  fishers  who,  being 
about  to  strike  the  whale  or  crocodile,  curse 
it  with  the  bitterest  curses  tiiey  can  invent, 
in  order  to  weaken  its  strength  (!)  Some  of 
the  older  interpreters,  as  Cocceius,  Tirinus, 
and  Cartwright,  thought  the  allusion  also 
to  fishers,  but  as  cursing  under  the  vexations 
and  disappointments  of  their  calling.  Hutche- 
SON,  of  Edinburgh,  regarded  the  allusion  as 
made  to  mariners,  who,  in  a  storm,  curse  the 
day  they  went  to  sea,  and  are  ready  by  their 

287 


N0T£8. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOB, 


wishes  to  evoke  the  sea-monsters  to  swallow 
them  up.  CuAPPELow,  followed  by  Cobbin, 
thinks  those  persons  meant  whose  business 
it  was  to  curse  the  days  esteemed  ominous 
and  inauspicious.  Sanctius  accounted  for 
the  expression  on  the  ground  that  in  ^  ex- 
ecrations men  commonly  introduce  thin^^s 
that  are  most  horrible,  as  the  leviathan. 
Scott,  in  his  metrical  translation,  has : 
*' House  fierce  Leviathan  from  his  oozy  bed  ;" 
and  adds,  that  probably  the  crocodile  is 
meant,  and  that  as  it  is  natural  to  lament 
those  who  so  miserably  perished  with  bitter 
imprecations  on  the  disastrous  day,  Job  calls 
for  the  assistance  of  such  language.  Another 
construct  ion  of  the  words  has  been  proposed, 
and  has  been  adopted  by  Schultens,  and 
KosENMiJLLER:  "Let  those  who  are 
skilled  in  tliat  art,  curse  or  brand  it  (his 
birthday)  as  the  day  that  rouses  up  Leviathan" 
— as  the  dire  mother  of  direst  evils.  Simi- 
larly Coleman  :  "  as  men  promptly  curse  the 
day  that  evokes  the  crocodile  from  the  deep." 
Leviathan  was  regarded  by  Ambrose,  and 
the  Fathers  in  general,  as  another  name  for 
Satan,  whom  Christ  was  to  encounter  and 
overcome.  Gkegory  thought  the  persons 
in  the  text  to  be  those  who  fell  by  the  devil's 
deceit.  Gualther  supposes  them  to  be 
those  who  evoke  Satan  by  incantations  and 
witchcrafts.     Osiander  regards  the  word  as 

equivalent  to  D^Nt3"1(r^j9/irfl5m)  the  "spirits 

of  tiie  dead"  mentioned  in  chap,  xxvi,  5.  (in 
the  E.V.  "dead  things'*) ;  and  considers  it 
here  as  denoting  the  Evil  One,  and  spect  res  in 
general.  By  most  of  the  earlier  interpreters, 
who  regarded  the  word  as  denoting  some 
monster,  the  whale  was  the  creature  under- 
stood.     So    COCCEIUS,    SCDLTETUS,  JUNIUS 

and  Tremellius,  &c. 
The  sense  of  "lamentation,"  as  in  our 

authorised  version,  from  Hv  (^layah)=t^y^ 

(alah)  "  to  mourn,"  was  generally  preferred 
by  the  earlier  translators,  as  Piscator, 
Mercer,  Pagninus,  Morus,  Montanus, 
and  Vatablus.  Martin,  in  his  French 
version,  has:  "Who  are  ready  to  renew 
their  mourning."  Diodati,  in  his  Italian  : 
"  Always  ready  to  make  new  lamentations." 
Fry  renders  the  passage :  "  who  are 
ready  at  raising  their  lamentations;"  but 
supposes  that  the  word  is  derived  from  ^  {loo), 
"Othat;" —  this  syllable  perhaps  being 
the  con)mencement  of  the  solemn  dirges  or 
ululations  of  hired  mourners,  still  common 
in  the  East ;  like  the  AtXeXeXtXtv  of  lo  in 
Prometheus  Vinctus,  the  ululu  of  the  Irish, 
and  the  ^'h^  {ululu)  of  the  Arabians.  Ac- 
cordmg  to  Townsend,  the  ideas  of  mourning 
audLeviath;iu  are  combined,— the  mourniu^ 
and  that  which  was  the  cause  of  it;  the 
^88  ' 


allusion  bein^  to  the  idolatrous  persecuting 
power  that  afflicted  the  Church  of  God  be- 
tween the  commencement  of  tlii3  empire  of 
the  first  Ninus,  or  Nimrod,  and  the  calling 
of  Abraham  ;  and  to  the  too  late  repentance 
of  those  who  cursed  the  day  when  they 
gave  their  assistance  to  the  founding  and 
consolidating  of  that  empire. 

Verse  14.  "  Which  built  desolate  places  for 

themsehesy  D^J^i^  {hahbnnim),  "  who  built 

up,'*  not  "  who  built  again."  So  Zockler,  as 
against  Castalio,  Good,  and  others.  Carey: 
"  Who  were  building,"  i.e..,  when  overtaken 

by  death.  -^^^IQ  {Uardbhoth),  plural 
of  "^^-IfJ  {hhorbah)  dryness,  desolation, 
frouj  ^1''^  (kharehh),  to  be  dried  up,  de- 
vastated; waste  places,  ruins :  "who  built 
ruins  for  themselves,"  i.e.  splendid  edifices, 
as  palaces  or  tombs,  soon  to  become  ruins  or 
great  stone  heaps.  So  Gesenius,  Umbreit, 
Winer,  Noyes,  Conant,  Zockler,  and 
most  moderns.  Vulgate:  "Who  build 
solitudes  for  themselves."  The  Settuagint 
appears  strangely  to  have  read  the  word  as 

the  plural  of  ^^J)  {hherebh),  a.  sword.  The 

Targum,  Syriac,  and  Arabic,  like  the  Vul- 
gate, have  :  "  Solitudes,"  or  "  desert  places." 
So  i^ARTiN  and  Diodati.  Luther:  "The 
wilderness."  Pagninus  :  "  Solitary  places." 
Drusius:  "Destroyed  places."  Castalio : 
"  Ruins,"  fallen  palaces  or  towers.  Merger 
and  Vatablus,  like  the  Vulgate :  "  Soli- 
tudes." Junius  :  "  Splendid  buildings  in 
desolate  places,  where  no  one  would  have 
expected  such."  Jenour  :  "  Waste  places." 
Boothroyd  :  "  Ruins  of  former  cities." 
Good:  "Ruined wastes."  Young:  "Wastes." 
Lee:  "Places  now  desolate."  Pineda, 
followed  by  Schultens,  Doderlein,  Carey, 
and  others,  thinks  the  reference  is  to  sepul- 
chral monuments,  as  the  pyramids.  Pakk- 
hurst  :  "  Dreary  sepulchral  mansions,  where 
the  body  is  wasted,  or  consumed."  Scott, 
the  translator,  thinks  that  sepulchral 
grottoes  are  meant,  such  as  those  at  Thebes, 
or  the  pyramids  :  "  Whose  burial  mansions 
load  the  desert  plains."   Michaelis  regards 

the  words  as  equivalent  to  ^"^^"^Q  {khard- 

moth),  and  translates  it,  "temples,  shrines, 
mausoleums."  Zockler  observes  that, though 
TTi-xpafx  {pi-chram,  "  the  temple "),  is  the 
name  given  to  the  pyramids,  it  is,  perhaps, 

not  the  same  with  •^^^^17 ;  and  that  if 
mausoleums  are  intended,  they  are  not 
necessarily  those  of  Egypt.  Hirzel,  with 
Ewald,  Delitzsch,  St'ickel,  &c.,  thinks 
mausoleums  or  pyramids  are  to  be  under- 
stood,  and  points"  to  the  ruins  of  Petra. 
Barnes  observes  tliat  some  of  the   wo^t 


ttOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  JOH 


Koti;§, 


wonderful  sepulchral  monuments  are  found 
in  the  land  of  Edoni  to  this  day.  Towns - 
END  thinks  the  reference  may  be  to  tlie 
building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel.  The  ex- 
pression '^~  (lamo),  "for  themselves/'  is 
understood  by  some  as  meanini^  :  "To  make 
their  name  immortal."  So  Mkrcer,  Va- 
TABLUs,  Drusius,  Adam  Glarke.  Codur- 
cus  :  **  In  order  to  display  their  wealth  and 
power,    enjoy     retirement,    or    form    new 


colonies."  Grynceus:  "To  resist  all- 
destroying  death."  Carky:  **  For  their  own 
tombs."  CoLKMAN  :  "As  habitations  for 
themselves,  either  while  living  or  dead." 
No  YES  thinks  that  tlie  expression  is  so  nearly 
pleonastic  that  it  may  be  omitted.  Barnes, 
on  tiie  other  hand,  thinks  it  full  of  emphasis  ; 
the  ruinous  structure  being  made  for  them- 
selves alone.  Umbreit  sees  in  it  Job's  irony 
breaking  out  from  the  black  clouds  of 
melancholy. 


CHAPTER   XIX. 


Verse  23.  **  0  that  my  words  were  now 
written  /"  The  "  words "  understood  as 
eitlier — (1)  Those  now  to  be  uttered.  So 
JeromEjPiscator,  Caryl,  Henry,  &c.  As 
an  everlasting  monument  of  his  faith  in  the 
resurrection. — Mayer.  Such  as  would 
come  within  the  inscription  on  a  rock ; 
therefore,  those  contained  inverses  25 — 27. 
— Scott.  Or  (2)  Those  which  he  had  already 
uttered  in  defence  of  his  innocence.  So 
Mercer,  Noyes,  &c.  All  the  declarations 
he  had  already  made  of  his  integrity,  to- 
gether with  his  solemn  appeals  to  God. — 
Wemyss.  Barth,  in  his  "  Bible  Manual," 
combines  both  :  "  The  words  of  his  lamenta- 
tion and  sorrow  misunderstood  by  his  friends, 
as  well  as  those  of  his  hope,  which  he  was 
now  about  to  utter."  Gregory  understood 
not  so  much  his  "  words,"  as  his  sufferings. 
"Words  "  put  for  the  things  themselves. — 
PoLYCHROMius.  Instead  of  "  written," 
Wemyss  and  Kitto  would  read  "recorded." 
Carey:  "Engraven."  Scott  says:  "Writ- 
ten, perhaps,  on  linen:  painting  on  linen 
very  ancient  among  the  Egyptians  ;  the  use 
of  papyrus  a  later  invention." 

"  0  that  they  were  printed  in  a  book  ! " 
"^3??  {bassepher)  "in  the,  ora,  book ;'  '"I?? 
(jse/jher)  from  'PP  {sdphar)  to  shave,  en- 
grave, write.      )  T »:  {veyukhdkoo)  "and  were 

printed,  or  engraved ;"  Hophal  form  of  {^PTl 

{khdkak)  to  cut,  make  an  incision,  engrave. 
So  Gesenius.  PiscATOR,  howcvcr,  thinks 
that  the  verb  ppH  does  not  mean  to  "  en- 
grave," but  to  "  delineate  "  or  "  paint,'*  and 
refers  to  Isaiah  xxx.  8  ;  xlix.  16 ;  Ezek  iv.  1. 
Merge II  observes  that  the  order  of  the  words 
is  inverted,  and  translates :  "  That  they 
might  be  engraven  in  a  book."  Junius  and 
Tremellius:  "Carved  out."  Pagninus  : 
"  Written  out."  Scultetus  thinks  that  the 
first  clause  indicates  simnle    writing;  the 


second,  writing  in  an  entire  book,  or  among 
histories  or  public  records.     So  Schultens 

understands  '^'??' :  "  in  a  public  record,  in 
which  more  remarkable  events  were  regis- 
tered." J.  H.  MiciiAELis  translates:  "Who 
will  put  them  into  the  book,  that  they  may 
be  engraven  ?"  Grynceus  :  "  Engraven  for 
eternal  remembrance  in  all  time  to  come." 
Adam  Clarke  :  "  l^'airly  traced  out  in  a 
book,  formed  either  of  the  leaves  of  the 
papyrus  or  on  a  sort  of  linen  cloth."  Kitto  : 
"Engraven  on  a  tablet  of  wood,  earthen- 
ware, or  bone."  Scott  observes  that  letters 
were  supposed  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton  to  have 
been  invented  by  the  Edomites,  from  whom 
Moses  learned  them  when  he  fled  into 
Midian.  Noyes  renders  the  words :  "  0 
that  they  were  marked  down  in  a  scroll !" 
Conant:  "In  the  book,  where  all  might 
read  them,"  as  indicated  by  the  presence  of 
the  article.  Carey  thinks  some  particular 
book  intended,  perhaps  that  part  of  the 
Bible  then  extant,  containing  the  records  of 
the  Creation  and  the  history  of  the  Ante- 
diluvian World.  Zockler,  however,  thinks 
this  unnecessary,  and  translates :  "  In  a 
book,"— any  book,  or  skin  prepared  for 
writing. 

"  That  they  were  graven  with  an  iron  pen 
and  lead  in  the  rock  for  ever!"  \*\'yiVV 

{yekhatsebhoon),  Niphal,  or  passive  form  of 
^^V  {khatsable),  to  cut,  or  cut  out;  "were 
cut."  So  Gesenius  and  J.  H.  Miciiaelis. 
Kitto  :  "  Graven."  Wemyss  : "  Sculptured." 

Boothroyd:   "Cut  deep."    '^V^   {la-adh) 

from  niV   i^adhah^  to  pass;      '^V   (adh), 

primarily,  a  passage  or  progress ;  then 
perpetuity.  Grotius  conjectures  the  read- 
ing to  have  been  '^7  {ie*-edh)  "  for  a  testi- 
mony," which  agrees  with  the  ver.sion  of  the 

289 


KOrES. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


Septiiagint.  WIl  {he-ef),  "with  a  pen;" 
toy  [et)  being,  according  to  Gesenius,  a  pen 
for  writing  on  stone  or  metal.  "  And  with 
lead,"  i.e.y  ])Oured  into  the  letters  carved 
with  tlie  iron  pen  for  greater  distinctness. 

So   JaRCHI,     PiSCATOll,    BOCHART,    JUNIUS, 

ScHULTENS,  Umbreit,  and  «nost  of  the 
moderns.  The  Tigurine  version,  however  : 
"In  lead."  So  the  Vulgate:  "With  a 
plate  of  lead."  Luther  :  "  Upon  lead." 
A.  Clarke  :  "  On  leaden  tablets."  Wemyss, 
BooTiiROYD,  andKiTTO  :  "On  rolls  of  lead." 
TowNSKND  quotes  Pausanias,  who  says  that 
near  Helicon  he  was  shown  some  leaden 
tablets,  on  which  were  engraven  the  works 
of  Hesiod.  Tirinus  observes  that  writing 
tablets  among  the  ancients  were  made  not 
only  with  wax,  but  lead,  as  is  seen  in  the 
ancient  tombs  of  Fabricius  and  Valesius, 
near  Naples.  It  is  known  that  with  the 
Romans  public  acts  were  inscribed  on  leaden 
plates,  as  well  as  brazen  ones.  Pliny 
("Nat.  Hist.,  xiii.  II)  says:  "Formerly 
people  wrote  on  the  leaves  of  the  palm  and 
the  inner  bark  of  certain  trees :  afterwards, 
pui)lic  monuments  were  written  on  rolls  of 
lead;  and  soon  aftei,  private  ones  on  linen 
and  wax."  Scultetus  observes  that  for 
security  against  fire,  Job  wishes  the  inscrip- 
tion to  be  also  in  a  rock.  So  Mercer, 
PiscAToE,  Junius,  and  Tremellius. 
Pagninos  and  Montanus,  however,  trans- 
late: "In  stone."  Pineda:  "On  a  pillar 
of  stone."  CoDURCUS  and  Schultens 
think  the  allusion  is  to  sepulchral  pillars, 
witii  epitaphs  inscribed  on  them.  See. 
Schmidt  translates:  "On  tables  of  stone." 
PocoCKE  remarks  that  hieroglyphical  cha- 
racters are  cut  in  the  rock  in  ithe  tombs  of 
the  kings  at  Thebes.  Scott  observes,  from 
Greaves,  that  an  inscription  of  one  line  in 
the  same  characters  is  found  in  the  second 
pyramid.  Lee,  after  Schultens  and 
Hales,  notices  that  it  was  customary  with 
the  ancient  Arabs  of  Yemen  to  inscribe  their 
precepts  of  wisdom  on  the  rocks,  in  order 
1 0  preserve  them.  Huenagel  observes  that 
Orientals  appear  to  have  been  accustomed 
to  make  inscriptions  on  the  rocks.  Niebuhr 
saw  such  in  his  travels.  Those  high  up  on 
the  rocks,  atthe  NahrelKelb,  nearBejroot, 
now  pretty  well  known.  A.  Clarke  re- 
marks that  all  the  modes  of  writing  then 
in  use  are  apparently  alluded  to  in  this 
passage. 

Verse  25.  "  For  I  know;'  &c.  Various 
opniions  as  to  the  nature  and  object  of  Job's 
present  declaration.  It  has  been  viewed  (1) 
a*  a  confession  of  his  faith,  in  opposition  to 
the  calumnies  of  his  friends.  So  Drusius, 
&c.  More  especially  of  his  faith  in  the 
promised      Kedeemer.       So     Schultsns, 

290 


MicHAELis,  Rosenmuller,  Hales,  Good, 
Pye  Smith,  &c.  Of  his  faith  in  a  future 
judgment  for  the  vindication  of  his  charactei. 
So  Scott.  Of  his  faith  and  hope  in  refer- 
ence to  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  So 
Carey,  &c.  Of  his  faith  in  the  Redeemer, 
and  an  assured  expectation  of  a  happy 
resurrection. — Caryl.  M.  Henry  calls  it 
"Job's  creed  or  confession  of  his  faith," 
declaring  that  he  sought  a  better  country 
(Heb.  xi.  14),  and  appealing  to  the  coming  of 
the  Redeemer.  A.  Clarke  says:  "Job 
speaks  prophetically  ;  pointing  out  the  future 
redemption  of  mankind  by  Jesus  Christ,  and 
the  general  resurrection  of  the  human  race." 
Dr.  Chalmers  observes  that — "  To  the  con- 
solations of  a  good  conscience,  Job  adds 
those  of  a  far-seeing  faith."  Others  view  it 
as  (2)  the  declaration  of  an  expectation 
which  the  close  of  the  book  shows  to  have  been 
fulfilled.  So  Kitto.  An  expression  of  the 
conviction  that  he  should  himself  see  the 
restoration  of  his  honour  and  health;  and 
that,  although  reduced  to  a  perfect  skeleton, 
he  should  be  gladdened  by  an  appearance  of 
God  on  his  behalf,  and  not  on  that  of  the 
others.  So  Chrysostom,  John  of  Damas- 
cus, and  some  of  the  early  Greek  Fathers; 
also  some  of  the  Reformed,  as  Mercer, 
Grotius,  Le  Clerc  ;  those  on  the  Conti- 
nent with  rationalistic  tendencies,  as  Justi, 
Knobel,  Hirzel,  Stickel;  supernaturahsts, 
as  Dathe,  Doderlein,  Baumgaeten- 
Crusius,  Knapp,  Augusti,  Umbreit  ;  even 
some  of  the  directly  orthodox,  as  v.  Hoff- 
aiANN  and  Hahn  ;  and  in  our  own  country 
Wemyss,  Stuart,  Barnes.  Some  regard 
it  as  (3j  the  expression  of  his  hope  of  seeing 
G'^d  in  a  spiritually  glorified  condition  beyond 
thi.  grave.  So  Ewald,  Schlottmann, 
DEi.iTzscH,  Dillmann,  Zockler,  David- 
son in  his  Introduction;  and  of  Jewish 
interpreters,  Arnheim  and  Lowenthal. 

The  force  of  the  Copula  at. the  beginning 
of  the  sentence  has  been  variously  under- 
stood. "Por:"as  in  our  English  version. 
So  the  Vulgate,  Dutch,  Geneva,  Cover- 
dale,  and  Schultens.  "  Since,"  or  "be- 
cause :" — the  older  Hebrew  interpreters. 
"Indeed  :"  so  the  Syriac,  Arabic, 
Castalio,  Piscator,  Cocceius,  Junius, 
and  Tremellius.  "  But :"  Luther,  De 
Wette,  Ewald,  Lee,  Conant,  &c. 
DioDATi  has :  "  Now."  Mercer  and 
Pagninus  :  "  Also."  Montanus  :  "  And 
truly."  Scultetus  :  "  Yet" — notwithstand- 
ing my  complaints.  Menochius  and 
Drusius  :  "  Yet," — whatever  you  object  to 
me,  and  although  you  continue  wicked. 
Delitzsch  :  "  But  yet."  Coleman  :  "Verily." 
Pye  Smith:  "Surely."  Ery  :  "That." 
Zockler  :  "  And."  Pineda  observes: 
"The  expression  ^^Vl]  (j/adha*U)  *  I  know,* 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


VOTES. 


excludes  all  doubt,  as  in  Gen.  xlviii.  19.** 
ScuLTETUS:  "Implies  the  faith  which  is 
both  knowledge  and  trust."  Gkyn(Eus  and 
ilmzEL :  "  The  conviction  that  will  not  be 
shaken  by  opponents."  Tlie  "I,"  em- 
phatic— "  I  know,  if  you  do  not,"  So 
Fausset,  Hirzel:  "I,  for  my  part,"  in 
opposition  to  those  who  deny  him.  Gryn(EUS: 
"  I,  in  whom  the  arrows  of  God  and  man 
are  now  sticking,  as  in  a  wicked  person." 

" Ml/  Redeemer  liveth''    vX^ {goali)  from 

''^^  {gaaV)  to  redeem,  deliver;  my  Re- 
deemer.    So  Gesenius.     Cocceius  :  Prom 

^v:^  {gaal)  to  claim  as  one's  own,  as  Ps. 
cxix.  154;  Isa.  xliii.  1;  Ruth  iv.  6;  Fs. 
Ixxiv.  2  ;  Isa.  xlviii.  20  ;  used  also  of  things 
sold  and  consecrated :  hence    to  redeem ; 

"  ^^  {3oel\  a  relative  who  can  claim  or 
vindicate  the  honour,  life,  goods,  &c.,  of 
another  as  his  own  (Lev.  xxv.  25 ;  Ruth 
iii.  13).  ScuLTETUS  ;  Properly,  a  blood  re- 
lation, who  claims  or  recovers  the  alienated 
goods  of  a  near  relative,  or  himself,  from 
slavery ;  or  demands  his  blood,  if  slain,  at  the 
hands  of  the  slayer  (Num.  xxxv.  12). 
Grotius  :  A  deliverer,  in  a  general  sense. 
ScHULTENS  and  Rosenmuller  :  An  avenger. 
Grynceus  and  Pye  Smith  :  A  deliverer  or 
avenger;  here  pointing  to  the  Messiah. 
Umbreit  :  A  blood-avenger — meaning  God, 
who  should  appear  as  his  avenger  before  his 
death.  Lee  and  Hales  :  An  avenging  Re- 
deemer; viz.  God,  who  should  clear  him  of 
all  charges.      Townsend  :   His  Redeemer, 

(1)  As  the  restorer  of  his  temporal  prosperity; 

(2)  The  vindicator  of  his  innocence ;  (3)  The 
redeemer  of  his  soul  from  sin  and  death  : 
the  several  offices  of  the  Goel  united  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  took  our  nature 

and    became   our  Kinsman.      ^*? '-^    {goel) 

originally  applied  to  a  person  whose  duty  it 
was  to  maintain  the  rights,  interests,  and 
reputation  of  a  near  relative,  either  by  re- 
purchasing his  mortgaged  inheritance,  by 
marrying  his  widow  and  saving  his  family 
from  extinction,  by  redeeming  him  from 
servitude,  or  by  avenging  his  blood  ;  applied 
elsewhere  to  God  ac  a  Deliverer  from  any 
kind  of  calamities.  This  believed,  by  some, 
to  be  the  application  here,  without  any  re- 
ference to  Christ.  So  Mercer,  Calvin, 
Grotius,  Le  Clerc,  Patrick,  Warburton, 
Heath,  Kennicott,  Dathe,  Doderlein, 
De    Wette,    Barnes,    &c.      Gesenius  : 

'Q  ;  ^?^  {goali  khat)y  "  my  Redeemer 
liveth," — God  Himself  will  deliver  me  from 

these  calamities.     Stickel  observes  :    '^5^ 


igoet)  here  used  without  D^*^  {haddam\ 
*'of  blood;"  hence  employed  in  the  more 
general  sense  of  a  judicially  valid  intercessor 
and  deliverer  of  lite  and  property.  So 
Olshausen  and  Conant  :  Here  a  deliverer, 
not  an  avenger  of  blood.  On  the  other 
hand,  Pausset  observes  :  Job  uniformly 
despairs  of  restoration  and  vindication  in 
this  life  (chap.  xvii.  15,  16) ;  therefore  the 
allusion  here  to  a  vindication  in  a  future  life. 
According  to  Mercer,  the  Redeemer  here 
is  God  the  Father.  So  called  as  delivering 
the  godly  from  their  troubles.  Grotius  : 
The  view  of  the  Jews  and  Socinians;  but 
the  office  only  appropriately  ascribed  to  God 
the  Son,  man's  Kinsman;  and  so  always 
understood  elsewhere.  Redemption  peculiarly 
ascribed  to  Christ.  Job's  Redeemer  the 
God-man,  the  "  living  one,"  yet  standing  on 
the  earth.  Pfeifeer  :  The  Incarnate  Word. 
Pineda,  Tirinus,  Scultetus,  &c.  :  The 
opinion  of  the  Pathers  as  well  as  of  the  earlier 
and  modern  evangelical  interpreters  in 
general.  Ephrem  Syrus  :  A  prediction  of 
the  incarnate  Emmanuel.  Munster  :  "Of 
the  Messiah,  as  the  first-fruits  of  them  that 
slept."  Cocceius  :  Christ  is  Redeemer,  as 
(1)  Near  of  kin,  (2)  Redeeming  by  that 
right ;  (3)  Taking  the  prey  from  the  unrigh- 
teous possessor,  and  that  without  paying 
him  any  price  j  (4)  Paying  a  price  to  the 
true  Proprietor.  AH  redemptions  and  de- 
liverances of  the  Church  and  people  of  God 
ascribed  to  Christ,  as  Zech.  ix.  11 ;  Isa. 
Ixiii.  9 ;  Gen.  xlviii.  IG.  Townsend  ob- 
serves :  Job,  in  the  age  of  error,  may  be 
considered  as  the  faithful  witness  in  his  day 
to  the  hope  of  the  Messiah.  Barth,  in  his 
**  Bible  Manual,"  remarks:  Though  having 
no  w^ell-defined  conception  of  the  Messiah  as 
his  Redeemer,  Job  yet  expresses  his  expec- 
tation that  God  would  prove  a  Redeemer  to 
him,  and  the  Vindicator  of  his  innocence. 
Pineda  :  In  the  expression  *'  My  Re- 
deemer," Job  declares  his  singular  love  to 
Christ,  as  in  the  expression  "  My  brother  " 
(1  Kings  XXX.  32).  Cartwrigiit  :  Job  ap- 
propriates Christ  to  himself,  and  calls  Him 
his  own. 

U  {khai)  "  liveth  "  or  "  living ; "  always 
lives,  is  immortal  and  eternal.  So  Drusius 
and  Menociiius.  Cartwrigiit  :  "Liveth," 
without  distinction  of  time  as  past  or  future; 
God,  the  Eternal  lam  :  Christ,  as  God,  fives 
from  eternity,  \\hile,  as  man,  he  lives  to 
eternity:  "Liveth," — hath  life  in  Himself 
as  the  Prince  of  life;  also  denotes  His 
strength  and  power,  as  Ps.  xxxviii.  ]y. 
Cocceius  :  "  Job  opposes  the  Redeemer's 
life  to  his  own  death :  perhaps,  also,  alludes 
to  the  death  of  the  Redeemer  Himself"  (Rev. 
1.18).     ScuLTETUS:  Although  he  shall  d'e 

291 


50TES. 


tiOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOS, 


for  me,  yet  is  He  the  true  and  living  God ; 
the  faith  of  the  Old  Testament  saint  is  a 
true  and  saving  faith  in  Christ  (Gen.  xlviii. 
16;  Actsiv.  12;  xv.  11).  Junius:  "My 
Kedeemcr  liveth;"  therefore,  though  men 
may  bury  my  cause  in  oblivion,  it  remains 
safe  witli  God.  Others  read  :  My  Redeemer 
is  the  Living  One.  So  Scott,  Pye  Smith, 
Dr.  Henderson.  Hales  translates:  My 
Redeemer  is  living.  Dr.  Thomas,  in  the 
"  Homilist "  :    My    living  Redeemer  ;   like 

TT  b)^  the  living  God,— having  life  in  Him- 
self. 

"  And  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day 
upon  the  earth"     A  clause  very  variously 

iutei-preted  and  understood.  V^Vi^  {akharon) 

from  "'^^  {akhar)y  to  remain,  tarry,  or  be 
behind;  iiere  rendered  "at  the  latter 
day  ; "   properly   "  the  last,"   but   may   be 

used  adverbially,  with  ?  or  <  understood,  as 

in  Isa.  viii.  23;  xxx.  8,  &c. ;  and  then 
meaning  "at  last."  "At  length  he  shall 
stand  (or  appear)  on  the  dust,"  i.e.y  on  the 
earth.  So  Gesenius,  Heiligstedt, 
Maurer,  Noyes.  Or  "  Over  the  tomb," 
as  EwALD,  Zockler,  and  others.  To 
witness  for  him :  Delitzsch.  To  protect 
him :  Fausset.  To  deliver  him :  Zockler. 
Ancient  translators  seem  to  have  read  the 

verb  variously;  as  Q*'P\^  "I  shall  rise." 
So  the  Vulgate  :  "  At  the  last  day  I  shall 
rise  from  the  earth."  ^  P^  "  He  shall  raise 
up."  So  the  Septuagint  :  "  He  shall  raise 
up  my  skin  on  the  earth."  ^^P^  "  He  shall 
stand  up  or  appear."  So  the  Syriac  and 
Arabic  :  "  In  tiie  end  he  shall  appear  on 
the  earth."  The  Targum:  "And  after- 
wards  his  redemption  shall  rise  upon  the 
earth."  In  this  way  Theodoret  read  the 
word :  "  The  last  one  shall  rise  upon  the 
dust,  or  the  tomb."  So  most  of  the  transla- 
tors at  and  since  the  Reformation.  Luther, 
however,  following  the  Septuagint,  has : 
"  He  shall  hereafter  awaken  me  out  of  the 
earth."  But  the  Dutch  and  Trench 
(Martin's)  versions :  "  He  shall  remain  the 
last  on  the  earth."  Diodati's  Italian: 
"  At  the  last  day  he  shall  stand  over  the 
dust."  Vatablus:  "He  shall  stand  over 
the  earth,"  i.e.y  in  heaven.  Grotius,  Cas- 
talio,  Le  Clerc:  "At  the  last  he  shall 
stand  over  the  dust,"  or  earth.  Mercer, 
CoccEius,  Scultetus  :  "The  latter  or  last 
One,  he  shall  stand  over  the  dust,"  «.<?.,  on 
the  earth,  as  bein^  to  remain  for  ever.  The 
Tigurine  :  "In  the  last  time  he  shall  stand 
over  the  dust,"  applying  his  power  over  it. 
Broughton;  "He  shall  rise  upon  the 
292  ^ 


dust,"  i.e.y  from  death.  Junius  "  The  latter 
one  or  last  man,"  &c.,— living  again  in  the 
resurrection  and  at  the  coming  of ,  Christ, 
compared  with  the  former  or  first  man,  as 
in  1  Cor.  xv.  42;  perhaps  Christ  under- 
stood. Montanus  :  "  The  last  one  shall 
rise  again  from  the  dead,"  alluding  to 
Christ,  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept ; 
or,  "He  shall  stand  over  the  dust,"  i.e., 
those  lying  in  the  dust.  Cocceius  :  "  The 
last,"  as  never  leaving  us,  or  as  remaining 
after  all  enemies  are  destroyed ;  or,  last  in 
life,  alone  immortal,  ruling  over  death  and 
the  dust;  or,  as  my  deliverer,  demanding 
me  from  the  dust,  having  abolished  the  claim 
of  death.  Scultetus  and  Grotius  :  "  Shall 
stand  over  the  dust,"  as  conqueror,  raising 
it  to  life.  CoDURCUS :  "  The  last  shall  stand 
over  the  dust,"  at  the  last  judgment — the 
Son  of  God  and  the  goel  of  our  race. 
Drusius  and  Caryl:  "The  last  one,"  viz., 
the  Redeemer.  So  Schultens  :  "  The  last 
man" — an  epithet  of  Christ — "He  shall 
stand  over  dust," — the  dust  of  the  grave,  to 
claim  this  flesh  from  the  spoiled  prison  of 
death ;  shall  come  as  the  avenger  of  a  good 
cause  and  of  oppressed  innocence,  and  will 
)ut  the  crown  of  righteousness  upon  my 
lead.  Gryn(EUS  :  "  The  last,"  for,  "  At  the 
ast  day."  So  Wemyss,  Good,  Dathe, 
'.  )6derlein  :  "  At  last  he  shall  appear  on  the 
earth."  Hales:  "At  the  last  day  he  shall 
stand  over  the  dust,"  i.e.j  over  mankind — 
shall  rise  in  judgment.  Fry:  "At  the  end 
he  shall  stand  upon  the  earth."  Lee  :  "  In 
the  last  age  or  hereafter"  (the  "last  days" 
of  the  prophets  and  apostles).  Con  ant  : 
In  after  time.  So  Noyes,  Barnes,  Hen 
derson.  Kitto  :  "  Hereafter  or  at  last." 
Many  of  the  moderns,  however,  prefer  the 

other  rendering  of  P"^Qo*  viz.,  "the  last 

one."  So  both  the  Michaelises,  Stickel, 
Maurer,  Heiligstedt,  De  Wette,  De- 
litzsch, Scott,  Pye  Smith,  Dr.  Alexan- 
der, Eausset.  Zockler  says :  "  As  the 
last  one,"  surviving  all,  with  special  refer- 
ence to  Job  himself.  Rosenmuller  :  "  He 
shall  stand  to  assist  or  avenge  the  dust,  i.e., 


the    dead.* 


Hufnagel,     viewing 


■)H)j; 


i^aphar)  as  from^ac  "  an  enemy,"  has  :  "  He 
shall  stand  over  or  overcome  my  enemies." 
A.  Clarke  :  He  shall  be  manifest  in  the  flesh, 
and  shall  stand  over  them  who  sleep  in  the 
dust,  or  who  have  been  reduced  to  dust. 
CoNANT:  "He  shall  stand  up,"  &c.,  as  a 
judge,  and  will  decide  the  case  in  my  favour, 
as  Ps.  xii.  5  ;  xliv.  26  ;  or,  "  On  the  dust," 
i.e.y  on  the  earth,  including  the  sense  of 
vileness.  Noyes:  "Dust,"  probably  em- 
phatic, as  constrasted  with  heaven,  the 
residence    of    the    Creator.       Doderlein 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


HOTEa 


understands  by  "dust"  the  patriarch  him- 
self reduced  to  dust  and  ashes.  So  Zock- 
LER:  "The  dust  of  my  decayed  body  or  of 
my  grave."  Kennicott  :  "  Over  this  dust." 
Dr.  Alexander  :  "  By  my  dust." 

The  drift  of  this  sublime  declaration  thus 
variously  understood.      By   most  the  sen- 
tence is  viewed  as  declarative  of  Job's  as- 
surance regarding  the  promised  Redeemer 
and  future  resurrection  of  the  body.     Cas- 
TALio :  The  reference  is  to  the  resurrection 
of  Christ,  to  be  followed  by  that  of  all  men. 
The  arguments  in  favour  of  this  view,  as 
given  by  Cocceius,  Sciiultens,  and  others  ; 
(1)  The  sublime  preface;  (2)  A  final  judg- 
ment threatened  by  Job  to  his  friends  (verse 
26) ;  (3)  His  thoughts  obviously  lifted  above 
this  world,  and  the  tone  of  his  discourse 
now  and  henceforth  more  hopeful  than  be- 
fore ;  (4)  All  hope  in  this  life  already  given 
up  (xvii.  5) ;  (5)  The  opinion  of  the  t  athers, 
as  Jerome,   Augustine,   Cyprian,   Gregory, 
&c. ;  (6)  The  interpretation  of  the  Targum 
and  the  Septuagint ;  (7)  The  wish  that  this 
testimony  should  be  read  after  his  death, 
perhaps  on  a  sepulchral  pillar ;  (8)  The  cer- 
tainty expressed  by  him  as  resting  on  the 
immovable   foundation  of   faith,    that    his 
Redeemer  would  come ;  (9)  The  simplicity 
of  this  interpretation;  (10)  Its  agreement 
with  the  argument  and  scop-e ;    (11)   The 
truth  of  the  thing  itself;  (12)  The  majesty 
of  the    words;    (13)   The  joyful   hope  ex- 
hibited by  the  patriarch ;  (14)  The  oneness 
of  the   Spirit  in   patriarchs,    apostles,   and 
all  the  faithful.   Townsend  observes :  These 
words  have  always  been  interpreted  by  the 
Church  as  expressive  of  the  patriarch's  faith 
and  hope  in  a    spiritual  Redeemer,    who 
should  restore  him  after  the  death   of  his 
body;  hence  embodied  by  the  Churches  of 
Rome  and  England  in  their  offices  for  the 
dead.    Lee  speaks  of    the  passage  as  "a 
recognition  of  the  first  promise  made  to  Eve, 
and  therefore  a  prediction  of  the  Messiah." 
Jerome,  in  his  Epistle  to  Pammachus,  says  : 
"  None  speaks  so  plainly  of  the  resurrection 
after  Christ,  as  Job  does  before  Him."    The 
passage  was  also  applied  by  some  of   the 
Rabbis  to  the  Messiali.  Thus  R.  Hakkodesh  ; 
"God  shall  be  seen  in  our  flesh;    as  Job 
testifies  :   Out  of  my  flesh  I  shall  see  God." 
The  reference  to  an  existence  beyond  the 
grave,   apart  front  the  resurrection  of  the 
body,  understood   by  some   modern  inter- 
preters, asSCHLOTTMANNjZoCKLER,  CoNANT, 

&c. 

According  to  an  opposite  view,  the  refer- 
ence is  to  a  figurative  resurrection  of  Job, 
and  his  restoration  to  a  better  condition  in 
this  life.  So  Grotius,  Mercer,  Calvin, 
(who  yet  fluctuates  between  the  two  opinions,) 
CiiRYsosTOM,  Ambrose,  Theophylact,  &c. 


The   argument   in  favour  of  this  view,  ar 
given  by  Mercer,  Rosenmuller,  Barnes 
and   others:    (1)    Its  agreement  with  thf 
history ;  (2)  Its  harmony  with  other  passage.* 
of  Scripture  where  a  resurrection  is  spoken 
of,  as  Ezekiel  xxxvii. ;  (3)  The  views  of  the 
Hebrew  writers,  who,  in  searching  for  prooi5 
of    the  resurrection,    never    mention    this 
passage ;  (4)  The  doctrine  of  the  resurret  - 
tion  not  likely  to  be  found  in  this  place  ol 
the  Old  Testament  alone,  nor  in  the   Ola 
Testament  at  all;  (5)  Job*s  restoration  to 
prosperity  and  happiness  solves  the  difficultv 
of  suffering  innocence ;  (6)  The  expectation 
of  restored  health  naturally  kept  by  the  poet 
before  Job's  mind;    (7)  The   assurance  of 
restoration  natural  to  one  conscious  of  suf- 
fering innocently ;  (8)  The  language,  fairly 
interpreted,  not  necessarily  implying  a  refer- 
ence to  a  future  and  literal  resurrection; 
(9)    Such  a    view  inconsistent    with    the 
argument,  and  with  many  other  places  in  the 
book;   (10)  The  resurrection  never  referred 
to  as  a  topic  of  consolation  either  by  Job  or 
his  friends;  (11)    Such  a  view  wholly  in 
advance  of  his  age ;  (12)  All  that  the  words 
fairly  convey  met  by  tiie  supposition  that 
they  refer  to  the  events  at  the  end.  Stickel 
observes,  that  the  decision  of  the  mystery  is 
given  in  tlie  Epilogue  without  the  immor- 
tality of  the  spirit  being  in  the  remotest 
manner  touched ;  and  adds,  that  Job's  vindi- 
cation required  to  be  on  the  earth,  and  before 
those  who  were  acquainted  with  the  matter, 
or  the  inscription  would    be  meaningless. 
Notes  :  The  idea  of  the  resurrection  incon- 
sistent with  the  general  design,  the  course 
of  the  argument,  the  connection  of  the  dis- 
course, and  several  express  declarations,  as 
vii.  7,  8;  X.  20—22;  xiv.,  passim.    Ewald 
however,   on  the   contrary,   asserts:    That 
through  the  certainty  of  that  truth   alone 
could  the  contest  be  victoriously  carried  on ; 
while  the  more  respectable  of  the  Reformed 
Biblical  interpreters  essentially  agreed  with 
the  Vulgate  in  understanding  the  passage  of 
a  literal  resurrection.     So  many  Orientalists 
and    Hebraists,    as  Schultens,   both  the 
Michaelises,Welthausen,Rosenmulleh, 
Good,  &c.     Conant  observes,  that  tlie  views 
of  early  Christian  ifathers,  who  differed  in 
their  interpretation  of  the  passage,  are  of 
little  account  on  either   side,  having   been 
based  on  the  defective  translations  of  the 
Septuagint,  the  Itala,  and  tlie  Vulgate. 
"  And  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy 

this  body''  (-nNT  ^3p^  niy  Tm^  ve-akhar 
^ori  nikkephoo  zoth.)  These  words  variously 
rendered  and  understood.      ^^1^'^    {nikkc' 

pJioo,  from  'liPJ  "  to  strike,  or  cut ; "  Fiel 
form,  to  destroy ;  or,  according  to  some,  from 

293 


NOTES. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


^R^^~^Pr  "*o  surronnd."  Gesenius,  in 
1829,  rendered  the  passage:  "After  they 
have  destroyed  my  skin  (equivalent  to, 
*  After  my  skin  has  been  destroyed '),  this 
shall  be,"  viz.,  that  God  shall  appear.  In 
1840,  he  preferred  to  render  it :  "After  my 
skin,  which  thev  shall  have  destroyed,  this 
shall  be."  The  Septuagint  has :  **  he  shall 
raise  up  my  skin  on  the  earth,  which  has 
endured  such  things."  The  Vulgate,  fol- 
lowed by  CovERDALE  and  Luther  :  "  Again 
1  shall  be  surrounded  with  my  skin."  Tar- 
gum  :  "  After  my  skin  shall  have  been  taken 
away,  or  burnt  up,  this  shall  be,"  viz.,  that 
my  Redeemer  shall  remain  the  last.  Syriac  : 
"  After  this  has  spread  all  over  and  around 
my  body."  Diodati  :  "  However,  after  my 
skin,  this  body  be  corroded."  Martin: 
"  When,  after  my  skin,  this  shall  have  been 
devoured."  Dutch:  "After  my  skin  has 
been  eaten."  Tigurine  :  "After  they  (t  he 
Trinity)  have  surrounded  this  with  my  skin." 
Castalio  :  "  After  this  (my  body)  siiall  be 
surrrounded  with  my  skin."  Montanus 
and  Pagninus  :  "After  they  have  bruised 
this  my  skin."  Munster  :  "  After  [worms] 
shall  have  gnawed  this  body."  Junius: 
"After  [worms]  shall    have  pierced    this, 

when  I  wake  up," — reading  pV  {'oori)  in- 
stead of  'y^  (ort).  Piscator  :  "  Although 
after  my  skin  they  (worms)  pierce  this," — 
supplying  ^^  (c/ii),  or  ^^  (m).     Mercer  : 

"After  my  skin  (corroded  and  consumed 
with  my  whole  body),  they  (the  worms  in  my 
ulcers,  or  my  extreme  pains)  have  shaken  this 
(viz.,  his  body, — not  named,  as  so  deformed, 
but  pointed  to)."  CoccEius:  "After  they 
have  stripped  this  that  remains  of  my  skin, 
or  this  my  skin, — the  whole  of  it,  even  to 
this  particle;  or,  after  my  skin  has  burst, 
there  shall  be  this, — pointing  to  his  body." 
"Vatablus:  "After  my  skin  (has  been  per- 
forated,) pains  have  broken  this  [mass  of 
bones]."  Grotius:  "Although  not  only  my 
skin,  but  also  this  (the  fat  that  is  under  it), 
disease  has  consumed."  De  Dieu  :  "After 
my  skin  has  been  consumed,  they  (my 
redeemer)  shall  make  this  to  follow,"  viz., 
that  I  shall  see  God.  See.  Schmidt: 
"  After  my  skin  has  ceased  to  be,"  viz.,  after 
my  death.  Calovius  and  Gerhard: 
"  After  my  being  raised  up,  this  (all  I  see 
with  my  bodily  eyes)  shall  be  destroyed."  J. 
H.  MiCHAELis :  "  When,  therefore,  after  my 
skin,  worms  shall  have  despatched  this." 
Le  Clerc:  "If  after  my  skin  they  have 
crushed  this  to  pieces."  Hales  :  "  After 
my  skin  has  been  mangled  thus."  Schul- 
TENS:  "After  they  (my  pains  and  ulcers) 
Lave  bruised  my  skin  in  this  manner."  Stock  : 
294 


"After  they  shall  have  swathed  my  skin, 
even  this."  Kennicott:  "After  they  (my 
adversaries)  have  mangled  me  thus."  J.  D. 
Michaelis,  and  Scott  the  translator:  "My 
skin,  which  is  thus  torn,  shall  become  an- 
other," i.  e.y  shall  be  renewed.  Doderlein  : 
"  I  shall  cast  away  my  skin,"  understanding 
'^T^'^  for  "inXi^.  Wemyss:  "Though 
this  skin  of  mine  is  thus  corroded.'*  Good  : 
"  After  the  disease  has  destroyed  my  skin." 
Pye  Smith  :  "  Has  cut  down  my  skin." 
Adam  Clarke:  "After  my  skm  they 
(diseases  and  afflictions)  destroy  this 
[wretched  composition  of  misery  and  cor- 
ruption]." Rosenmuller:  "When  after 
my  skin  this  [body]  has  been  broken  into 
fragments."  Boothroyd:  "If  after  my 
skin  this  [body]  be  destroyed."  De  Wette  \^ 
"After  my  skin,  which  has  been  mangled, | 
even  this  here."  So  Ewald,  Hirzel,  and 
ZocKLER.  NoYES  :  "  Though  with  my  skin 
this  body  be  wasted  away."  Delitzsch  : 
"After  my  skin,  Mhich  is  thus  mangled.*' 
Conant,  Schlottmann,  and  Carey:  "After 
this  my  skin  shall  be  destroyed."  Barnes  : 
"Tiiough  after  my  skin  the  flesh  be  de- 
stroyed ; "  or,  "after  my  skin  has  been  pierced 
through  thus."  Fausset  :  "Though  after 
my  skin  (is  no  more),  this  [body]  is  de- 
stroyed,"— the  body  not  deserving  to  be 
named.  Pry  :  "  After  I  awake  shall  this  be 
brought  to  pass," — reading,  like  Junius  and 

Calovius,  ^1^^  instead  of  H^^i^  • 

"  Yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  GodP  ^"]^?P 
{mihbesari), — literally,  "from  my  flesh,'^ — 
variously  translated  and  understood.  The 
Vulgate  has:  "in  my  flesh."  The  Tar- 
gum  :  "  Out  of  my  body."  Martin  (French) : 
"From  my  flesh."  Diodati  (Italian): 
"With  my  flesh."  Pagninus,  Montanus, 
Mercer,  Piscator,  Junius  and  Tremel- 
Lius:  "Out  of  my  flesh."  Castalio : 
"  From  my  body."  Vatablus:  "After  my 
flesh  has  been  wasted,"  or,  "After  the 
afiliction  endured  in  my  flesh."  So  R. 
Nachmann.  Mercer:  "Out  of  so  great 
afiliction  of  my  flesh."  Cocceius:  "Out 
of  my  flesh,"  not  put  off,  but  received. 
Calvin  :  "  In  my  flesh," — after  I  have 
been  restored  to  a  new  state, — uncertain 
what.  So  Grynceus  :  "Out  of  my  revivi- 
fied flesh."  Broughton  :  "  From  my  flesh, — 
I  being  raised  and  clothed  with  flesh."  Gus- 
set :  "Out  of  my  flesh,  as  n»y  abode.  J.  H.  Mi- 
chaelis :  "  From  out  of  my  flesh."  Kenni- 
cott :  "  Even  in  my  flesh."  Adam  Clarke  : 
Either,  "  See  Him  in  my  renewed  body," 
or,  "  See  Him  as  my  kinsman  in  my  flesh 
and  blood."  Fry:  "Of  my  flesh,"  •>.,  of 
my  nature  and  kindred,  as  Gen.  ii.,  23. 
Lee:  "From  or  out  of  my  flesh,"  f>.,  while 


HOMTIETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


NOTES. 


still  in  it.  KiTTO :  "  In  his  flesh  before  he 
died,  or  in  his  flesh  restored  to  soundness." 
Barth  (Bible  Manual):  "When  the  flesh 
is  raised  up  " — in  the  re-animated  glorified 
body.  Fausset  and  Rosenmuller  (Second 
Edition) :  "  From  my  renewed  body,"  as  the 
starting  point  of  vision,  as  Cant.  ii.  9, — the 
next  clause  proving  bodily  vision  to  be 
meant.  Stickel  :  "  Without  my  flesh," — 
as  a  mere  skeleton ;  Job  now  come  to  the 
point  in  which  God,  according  to  Satan's 
desire,  "touched  his  bone  and  his  flesh ;" 
with  only  his  life  spared.  Maurer  :  "  After 
my  flesh  has  been  all  wasted  away,  yet  still 
in  the  body."  So  Ciirysostom,  Umbreit, 
Hirzel,  Heiligstedt,  Hahn,  and  Notes. 
Barnes  :  "  Yet  even  without  my  flesh." 
Coleman  :  "Apart  from  my  flesh."  Ewald: 
"  Without  my  flesh,"  «>.,  as  a  glorified  spirit. 
So  Vaihinger,  Schlottmann,  Dillmann, 
Delitzsch,  Zockler. 

"I shall  see  God.**  According  toPiscATOR, 
OoDURCUs,  and  others.  Job  foretells  the  incar- 
nation of  the  Divine  Word.  Mercer:  "I 
shall  contemplate  him," — discern  His  power, 
providence,  and  goodness  in  preserving  me.'* 
Grotius  :  "  Shall  experience  him  propitious 
to  me."  So  HuFNAGEL  and  Kosenmuller. 
CoccEius:  "Shall  behold  him  in  beatific 
vision,"  as  Ps.  xvi.  11;  xvii.  15;  Matt.  v. 
8  ;  1  John  iii.  2.  Menochius  :  Shall  see 
Christ  with  bodily  eyes,  but  his  Divine 
Esssence  with  the  eyes  of  the  mind.  Schul- 
tens  :  Shall  then  see  God  face  to  face,  since 
access  to  him  is  denied  me  in  this  Hfe  ;  shall 
see  God  in  glory, — not  the  God-man  "who  is 
the  Goel.  Seb.  Schmidt:  Shall  see  God 
incarnate  as  the  Messiah.  Doderlein: 
From  my  condition,  I  shall  understand  that 
God  wishes  well  to  me  and  approves  my 
life.  Le  Clerc  :  The  expectation  fulfilled 
when  God  spoke  to  him  out  of  the  whirl- 
wind. Stickel  :  Expresses  the  expectation 
of  a  vindication  of  his  innocence  before  his 
death,  though  it  should  be  only  in  the  last 
moments  of  his  life.  So  Hofmann.  Notes  : 
Shall  see  God  interposing  in  my  favour. 
Delitzsch  :  Shall  see  God  spiritually  after 
death  ;  Job's  hope,  not  that  of  a  resurrec- 
tion, but  of  a  life  beyond  the  grave,  and  so  a 
breaking  through  the  idea  of  Hades. 
Ewald  :  Kefers  to  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  in  the  spirit- world.  Dr.  Thomas,  in 
the  Homilist :  Refers  to  bodily,  not  mental, 
vision  ;  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  found 
taught  here  as  resulting  upon  the  advent 
of  the  Messiah.  So  Augustine  :  Job  pro- 
phesies of  the  resurrection  ;  "  I  shall  be  in 
my  flesh  when  I  see  God."  So  Clemens 
Romanus,  Origen,  Ctrill  of  Jerusalem, 
Ephrem  Strus,  Ambrose,  Epiphanius, 
Jerome,  Luther,  &c. 

Verse  27.    "  Whem  I  shall  tee  for  myself:' 


**See,"  repeated  for  emphasis:  Lee.  / 
(/t),  literally  "  for  me  or  myself,"  variously 
understood.  The  Septuagint  renders  the 
passage  :  "  Which  tilings  I  know  in  myself." 
Vulgate:  "Whom  I  myself  shall  see." 
Mercer:  "Whom  I  shall  discern  to  be  for 
me,  by  His  kindness  in  preserving  me." 
Scultetus  ,  "  For  me,"  i.e.,  for  my  good. 
So  MoNTANus,  Piscator,  Pagninus,  and 
CoccEius.  Junius  and  Trkmellius:  "The 
same  that  I  shall  see  for  me."  Castalio: 
"  Whom  I  indeed  myself  shall  see."  Vata- 
blus:  "I  shall  enjoy  the  sight  of  Him  to 
my  salvation."  Cocceius  :  "  Whom  I  shall 
see,  not  angry  but  abounding  in  love,  to  my 
life  and  joy,  or  as  mine."  Munster  :  "On 
my  side."  So  Kennicott,  Hales,  Scott, 
Wemtss,  Boothrotd.  Codurcus  :  "  Whom 
I  even  contemplate  as  standing  by  me." 
Grotius  :  "  1, 1  say,  with  these  eyes  shaU 

see  him," —  /  being  emphatic.  GRTNffius : 
"  Whom  I  shall  see  as  favourable  to  me,  or 
as  eternally  mine."  J.  D.  Michaelis  : 
"For  myself."  So  Good,  Barnes,  Dr. 
Alexander.  Dr.  Chalmers:  "For  my- 
self and  my  own  comfort."  Dr.  Thomas: 
"In  my  proper  personaUty."  Coleman: 
"  As  my  own."  Notes  :  "  As  my  friend." 
Kitto:  "  Interposing  on  my  behalf." 
Fausset  :  "For  my  advantage."  So  Heilig- 
stedt, Maurer,  Pte  Smith.  Zockler: 
"  For  my  salvation."  Delitzsch  : "  Whom 
I  shall  see,  I,  for  my  salvation."  De 
Wette:  "Yea,  I  shall  see  Him  myself." 
Conant:  "Whom  I,  for  myself,  shall  see." 
So  Schlottmann.  Scott :  "Expresses 
more  explicitly  and  emphatically  his  faith 
that  in  a  disembodied  state  he  should  see 
God."  Caret:  "Whom  that  I  may  see 
as  my  own," — the  object  of  the  desire  in 
the  last  clause.  Barth :  "Anticipates 
partly  his  justification,  and  partly  compensa- 
tion for  his  sufi'erings."  Adam  Clarke  : 
"Speaks  as  having  a  personal  interest  in 
the  resurrection, as  in  the  Redeemer." 

"And  my  eyes  shall  behold!'     The  Sep- 
tuagint   translates   ^'"^^   {raoo^     as     past: 

"  Which  things  mine  eve  hath  seen."  So 
MoNTANUs,  CoDUKCUS  and  Cocceius  : 
"  My  eyes  have  seen."  The  latter  explains 
by  saying:  "The  eyes  of  my  mind  have 
seen  and  tasted  beforehand  in  my  heart 
the  vision  of  God  by  the  illumination  of 
the  Holy  Spirit."  Codurcus  translates: 
"  I  myself  have  seen  with  these  eyes  ;  "  and 
adds,  "  applying  to  himself  the  resurrection 
common  to  all  the  saints."  Mercer  renders 
the  verb  as  present :  "  Whom  my  eyes  see 
— not  corporeally  but  spiritually :  I  con- 
template His   power  with  the  eyes   of  my 

295 


FOTES. 


HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOS. 


mind."  Junius,  followed  by  Caryl,  has: 
"  Wlioin  1  myself  shall  see  with  these  eyes, 
beiug  restored,  though  now  I  be  entirely 
dissolved."  Munster  has  :  "  Inasmuch  as 
I  myselt  shall  behold  him."  Schultens 
views  the  words  as  equivalent  to— "I  be- 
lieve the  resurrection  especially  of  myself." 
KosENMULLER :  "  I  shaU  see  with  the  eyes 
of  my  renewed  body."  Hufnagel:  "I 
shall  yet  experience  that  God  makes  me 
happy."     Dr.  Thomas,  in    the  Homilist, 

observes  that  ^^"J  {jraah)  implies  bodily 
vision. 

"And  not  another"  "TJ  {zar)  from 
y\\  {zoor)  to  "  turn  aside ; "  a  stranger. 
The  word  differently  understood.  Gesenius 
renders  it  here  "an  adversary."  "So 
Pineda,  Bolduc,  Stickel,  Carey.  Mer- 
cer, MoNTANUS,  and  Pagninus:  "A 
stranger."    So  De  Wette  and  Michaelis. 

CoNANT  observes  that  "^J  denotes  only  a 
national  enemy,  and  translates  ;  *'  Another." 

So        SCHLOTTMANN.  VaTABLUS         haS    I 

"  Another,"  with  "  for  me  "  understood.  So 
Drusius,  Cocceius,  Grotius.  Mercer: 
"  I  who  know  my  pain  and  grief  and  not  a 
stranger."  Osiander  :  "  Not  a  hypocrite," 
a  stranger  in  faith  and  hope.  Scultetus 
and  CoDURCUS :  *'  In  this  body  and  not 
another,"  as  Isa.  xxvi.  ]9.  Henry:  "He 
and  not  another  for  him  shall  be  seen ; "  or, 
"I  and  not  another  for  me."  Caryl:  "I 
myself,  the  very  man  who  now  speaks,  and 
not  changed  into  another ; "  intimating  a 
personal  resurrection.  So  Gregory  and 
^EZA.  Mayer:  "To  show  that  as  Christ 
lives  again  after  death,  so  shall  all  the  faith- 
ful, and  that  in  the  same  bodies  in  which 
they  Uved  before."  Grynceus  :  "  Not  only 
your  eyes,  who  in  this  might  think  you  had 
a  precedency  over  me."  Hales :  "Not 
estranged  from  me."  So  Kennicott,  Dathe, 
Umbreit,  Wemyss,  Scott,  Pye  Smith. 
A.  Clarke  :  "  Not  a  stranger,  who  has  no 
relation  to  human  nature."  Boothkoyd  : 
"Not  another's  [eyes]."  Delitzsca:  "I 
and  not  another  person." 

"  Though  my  reins  be  consumed  within  ?»<?," 

''i?0?  '*'0'' Xr^  ^^?  {caloo  chilyothai  hekheki) 
literally  :  **  My  reins  are  consumed  in  my 
bosom."  So  Gesenius  and  others;  under- 
standing :  "  From  desire  and  longing  for  this 
consummation."  The  Septuagint  has: 
"  All  things  have  been  fuliillcd  to  me  in  my 
bosom."  Vulgate:  "This  my  hope  has 
been  laid  up  in  my  bosom."  Targum  :  "  My 
reins  are  consumed  in  my  bosom."  Syriac  : 
"  My  reins  are  consumed  on  account  of  my 
cause."  Coverdale:  "My  reins  are  con- 
sumed within  me,  when  ye  say,"  &c.  Geneva 
version  :  "  My  strength  has  been  consumed 
296 


and  destroyed."  Vatablus:  "My  bowels 
have  failed  from  affliction."  Scultetus: 
"  From  sorrow  and  pain."  Le  Clerc  : 
"  From  indignation."    Mercer  :  "  My  reins 

have  been  consumed  in  my  bosom  " —  )?U^ 

(in  my  bosom)  expressing  the  greater 
violence  of  his  pain.  Piscator  and  others 
supply,  as  in  our  authorized  version :  "  Al- 
though." CoDURCUs  has :  "  My  desires 
have  been  fulfilled  in  my  bosom."  The 
Tigdrine  translators  view  the  expression  as 
equivalent  to :  "  Which  alone  is  my  desire." 
Similarly,  Caryl  and  Henry:  "I  have 
nothing  more  to  desire."  De  Dieu  :  "  My 
reins  are  consumed  with  desire  in  my  bosom," 
as  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  3.  So  Scultetus  :  "  I  also 
faint  with  desire  of  seeing  him."  Cocceius 
and  Schultens:  "With  desire  of  seeing 
him  clearly  and  openly."  Dutch  Annotators: 
"  With  desire  of  obtaining  so  great  a  bless- 
ing." Seb.  Schmidt  connects  with  what 
follows :  "  Because  ye  say,"  &c.  Schultens 
regards  the  words  as  part  of  the  desired 
inscription.  J.  H.  Michaelis:  "From 
desire  of  him,  or  of  it,  my  reins  are  consumed 
in  my  bosom."  So  Gregory  :  "  I  burn  with 
desire  of  enjoying  that  wished-for  time."  To 
the  same  effect,  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Dathe, 
Kusenmuller,  De  Wette,  Patrick, 
Wemyss,  Scott,  and  Zockler.  A.  Clarke  : 
"  My  reins,  «.tf.,  my  desires  are  spent ;" 
equivalent  to  :  "  Though  now  apparently  at 
the  point  of  death."  Kennicott :  "  All  this 
have  I  made  up  in  my  own  bosom."  Pye 
Smith  :  "  The  thoughts  of  my  bosom  are 
accomplished."  Boothroyd  :  "  Accom- 
plished shall  be  the  desires  of  my  breast." 
Lee:  "When  my  reins,"  &c.;  connecting 
with  the  preceding.  Homilist  :  "  Should 
my  reins  have  been  consumed,"  &c. 

Verse  18.  "Seeing  the  root  of  the  matter 
is  found  in  me."  For  ^^  {bi)  '*  in  me,"  up- 
wards of  a  hundred  of   MSS.  have  '^  {bo) 

"  in  him."  The  expression  ^^^  ^"Ij^ 
(jshoresh  dabhar)^  literally,  "the  root  of  a 
word  or  matter,"  very  variously  understood. 
The  interpretations  reducible  to  four: — (1) 
A  ground  of  accusation;  (2)  A  ground  of 
dispute;  (3)  The  true  faith  ;  (4)  A  holy  life. 
The  first  and  second  are  the  most  probable, 
and  now  generally  adopted:  "[How]  shall  we 
find  the  root  of  the  dispute  or  ground  of  accu- 
sation in  him  ?  "  So  Gesenius,  Delitzsch, 
NoYES,  Carey,  Zockler,  and  others,  reading 

^?P.^  i^^i^^tsa)  as  firs*  person  plural  in  Kal. 
The  Septuagint  has:  "And  find  the  root 
of  the  word  in  him."  Vulgate  and  Targum: 
"  And  let  us  find  the  root  of  a  word  against 
him."  Luther:  "And  find  a  matter 
against  him."      Coverdale :    "We  have 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


KOTRB 


'bund  an  occasion  against  him."  Martin 
(French);  "Since  the  foundation  of  my 
words  is  found  in  me."  Diodati  (Italian): 
"Since  the  root  of  the  word  is  found  in  me." 
So  MoNTANUs,  Mercer,  Vatablus,  Pagni- 
Nus,  PiscATOR,  Junius,  and  Tremellius. 
CoccEius :  "  And  the  root  of  the  matter  has 
been  found  in  me,"  or  is  in  me ;  cliange  of 
person  for  "  in  him."  Mercer  understands 
the  expression  as  implying  Job*s  innocence. 
CoDURCUS:  "And  tliat  the  cause  of  the 
quarrel  is  in  me."  So  De  Dieu,  Poole,  and 
ScflULTENS.  Grynceus  :  "  The  cause,"  &c. 
viz.,  that  I  am  a  wicked  man,  and  so  deserv- 
ing the  calamities.  Hufnagel  :  "  Why 
sought  we  the  cause  of  his  misfortune  in 
himself  ?  "  Aquinas,  Jerome,  Bede,  Sanc- 
Tius,  understand  by  "  The  root,"  &c.,  the 
words  which  JobJiad  spoken,  or  some  other 
charge  which  the  friends  brought  against 
him.  According  to  Tirinus  :  "  An  occasion 
of  calumniating  him."  Osiander:  "Of 
chiding  him."  The  Dutch  Annotators  regard 
it  as  the  affliction  he  endured,  or  the  confes- 
sion he  had  just  made.    Cocceius  :  "  The 


ground  of  speaking  boldly."  Vatablus: 
"  Truth  and  innocence."  Piscator  :  "  Sohd 
arguments."  Grotius  :  "  A  good  founda- 
tion." CoDURCUS  translates :  "The  root  of 
the  question;"  and  understands  it  of  the 
faith  and  liope  of  the  resurrection.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Assembly's  Annotations:  "The 
root  of  the  Divine  Word,  or  promise  of  a 
Redeemer."  J.  H.  Micijaelis  and  See. 
Schmidt  understand  the  expression  as  :  "  The 
foundation  of  his  faith."  Kennicott  and 
Scott  have :  "  Tiie  truth  of  the  matter." 
Hales,  with  the  Dutch  Annotators  :  "  The 
strength  of  the  argument."  The  Tigurine  : 
"  The  foundation  of  tlie  matter  of  salvation." 
Cartwright:  "Integrity  of  heart;  the 
grace  of  God;  true  faith."  So  Mayer, 
Simon,  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Barnes,  and 
Fausset.  Le  Clerc  :  "  The  Word  of  God." 
Barth:  "The  assurance  he  lias  just  ex- 
pressed." Good  translates :  "  When  the  root 
of  the  matter  is  disclosed  in  me."  Wemyss: 
"  Since  there  is  no  ground  of  accusation  in 
me."  Ery  :  "  A  ground  of  accusation  is  in- 
vented against  me." 


CHAPTER  XXXn. 


Verse  2.  **Elihu'*  ^^^^^^^J,«  my  God  is 

He ;"  or,  according  to  some  :  "  My  God  is 
Jehovah."  Various  opinions  concerning 
him,  both  as  to  his  personality,  speeches,  and 
character.  He  has  been  considered  by  some 
as  Balaam,  the  son  of  Beor.  So  Jerome, 
Bede,  Lyra,  and  some  Rabbins.  Bede  saw 
in  him  a  type  of  the  enemies  of  the  church. 
Bishop  Warburton  thinks  him  to  have  been 
Ezra,  the  scribe.  Some,  as  Collman,  have 
supposed  him  to  be  the  Son  of  God — a  mani- 
festation of  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity 
in  the  form  of  a  man  ;  a  prelibation  of  His 
incarnation ;  what  Melchizedech  was  to 
Abraham.  Hodge  regards  him  as  a  repre- 
sentative character  of  the  Messiah.  Kitto 
makes  him  a  coniparatively  obscure  and  un- 
known person.  According  to  Kiel  and 
others  he  was  a  fourth  friend  of  Job. 
ZocKLER  understands  him  to  have  been  a 
near  kinsman  of  tiie  Patriarch,  and  not  be- 
longing to  the  party  of  friends.  According  to 
Gregory  :  A  mere  braggadocio ;  full  of 
pride  and  vainglory ;  had  the  knowledge  of 
God,  and  boasted  of  it  not  a  little :  from  his 
pride  and  self-conceit,  a  type  of  those  who, 
being  left  to  themselves,  become  proud 
of  their  knowledge.  So  Codurcus  and 
Michaelis  regard  him  as  "  highly  con- 
ceited." Strigelius  sees  in  him  an  example 
of  an  ambitious  orator,  full  of  ostentation 
and  audacity.  So  Herder,  Umbrext,  Hahn, 


DiLLMANN.  Professor  Turner  speaks  of 
him  as  manifesting  a  degree  of  veneration  for 
Job  and  his  friends,  but  speaking  as  an  in- 
flated youth,  wishing  to  conceal  his  self- 
sufficiency  under  an  appearance  of  modesty. 
According  to  Vaihinger  and  others,  he 
attempts  to  give  a  solution  of  the  problem, 
but  cannot.  An  entirely  opposite  view,  how- 
ever, is  taken  of  him  by  Augustin,  Chry- 
sostom,  Aquinas,  Brentius,  Calvin, 
Schultens,  Schlottmann,  Zuckler,  and 
most  of  the  defenders  of  the  authenticity  of 
the  speeches  ascribed  to  him.  According  to 
Cocceius  and  others, he  "excelled  in  modesty, 
as  in  wisdom."  Carpzov:  "Younger,  but 
not  inferior  to  the  others  in  piety."  Sculte- 
Tus  :  "  Rightly,  but  too  severely  blames  Job's 
speeches."  Scott,  the  translator,  observes 
that  the  sacred  writer  bears  witness  to  his 
modesty,  and  that  Job's  attention  evidences 
the  pertinence  of  his  speeches;  while  his 
plan  for  humbling  Job  was  pursued  and  com- 
pleted by  the  Almighty  Himself.  According 
to  Hufnagel,  he  defines  the  state  of  the 
question ;  hits  the  true  pcint  of  view  in  rela- 
tion to  Job's  conduct  more  than  his  prede- 
cessors, neither  suspecting  his  piety,  nor 
charging  him  witli  vice,  but  objecting  to  his 
impatience,  and  a  finding  fault  with  Divine 
Providence :  with  much  power  of  compre- 
hension and  real  goodness  of  heart,  he  nas, 
however,  too  little  experience.    Keil,  who 

m 


NOTES. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOB. 


defends  him,  observes  that  it  was  not  neces- 
sary to  mention  hira  in  the  preface;  as 
parties  were  only  introduced  when  they 
were  to  act  or  speak.  According  to 
ZocKLKK,  he  is  only  introduced  to  point  out 
the  sinfulness  and  perversity  of  Job's 
speeches,  and  to  humble  his  pride ;  his  part 


in  the  poem  no  breach  of  the  connection  be- 
tween Job's  speeches  and  God's,  and  not 
superfluous,  though  leaving  the  mystery  un- 
solved. Elihu  the  only  one  of  the  speakers 
whose  genealogy  is  given :  hence,  thought  by 
LiGHTFOOT  and  Kosenmullek  to  have  been 
the  author  of  the  book. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


Verse  13.  **  Gavest  thou  the  goodly  wings 
unto  the  peacock,  or  wings  and  feathers  unto 
the  ostrich  r  (Margin  :  "  The  feathers  of 
the  stork  and  ostrich.")  The  whole  verse 
very  variously  rendered.  In  the  first  mem- 
ber, instead  of   "the    peacock,"  the  term 

^^'?51  {renanim)  is  more  correctly  translated 

"  ostriches,"  being  derived  from  y^  (ranan) 
to  "  sing,  or  utter  a  shrill  sound,"  and  ap- 
pHed  to  the  ostrich  from  its  shrill  nocturnal 
cry.  So  BocHART,  Schitltens,  Gesenius, 
and  others.  Other  reasons  given  for  this 
translation :   (1)  The  authority  of  Jerome ; 

(2)  The  resemblance  in  the  meaning  of  0  JJ ', 
and   D^2p^    (ya'anim),—the    latter    being 

the  ordinary  name  of  the  ostrich ;  (3)  The 
alacrity  of  the  ostrich  depending  all  on  its 
wings ;  (4)  The  ostrich  otherwise  not  named. 
The  ostrich  is  hterally  the  "  crying  bird ;" 
the  Arabs  being  accustomed  to  name  things 
rather  from  their  character.  So  Keiske  and 
Fausset.  The  word  in  the  text  first 
rendered  "  peacock,"  by  Pomarius,  and  then 
hesitatingly  adopted  by  Pagninus,  Monta- 
Nus,   Vatablus,    Mercer,     &c.,    and    all 

modern  versions:  Boothroyd.  *^p7v'v 
{ne'elasah)  here  rendered  "  goodly,"  is  rather 

the  Niphal  of  the  verb  DyP  (^alas)  to  "  re- 
joice, exult,"  as  in  chap  xx.  18  ;  or,  according 
to  others,  to  make  a  vibrating  noise. 
Gesenius  renders  the  word :  "  Moveth  joy- 
fully." ScHDLTENs :  "  Is  full  of  exultatiou ; 
is  always  moving."  According  to  Mercer, 
the  word  is  rarely  found  in  Scripture,  but  is 

cognate  with  Y/^  {'alatz)  or  P^  {'alaz)  to 
"exult,  or  triumph."  Drusius,  Cocceius, 
and  ScuLTETUS  render  the  clause:  "The 
wing  of  the  peacocks  is  joyful,  or  moves  joy- 
fully. ^ATAiiLus:  "Is  full  of  joy  and 
pleasure."  Mercer:  "Does  the  wing  of 
the  peacock  exult  joyfully  from  thee?" 
pAGNiNUs :  "Tiic  peacock  exults  in  its 
willy's."  GiiOTius:  "Canst  thou  give  the 
ci  ulting  wings  of  the  peacocks  P"  Munste^  t 


"A  wing  to  exult,  or  to  be  exulted  in." 
Montanus  :  "  The  wing  of  the  exulting 
ones  is  joyful."  Doderlein  :  "  She  is  one 
that  exults  with  sounding  wing" — supply, 
"  does  she  fly  by  thy  wisdom  P"  Stickel  : 
"  The  ostrich  rejoices  with  fluttering  win^s." 
Hufnagel:  "Joyfully  move  the  sounding 
feathers  and  wing."  Michaelis  :  "  To  the 
morning  dawn  the  ostrich  lifts  its  win^." 
Umbreit  :  "  The  wing  of  the  ostrich  [which] 
lifts  itself  joyfully."  Herder  :  "  A  wing 
with  joyous  cry  is  uplifted  yonder."  Scott 
and  Boothroyd  :  "  The  wing  of  the  ostrich 
is  triumphantlv  expanded."  Stock  :  **  Is  set 
to  flutter."  Good  and  Wemyss:  "The 
wing  of  the  ostrich  tribe  is  for  flapping." 
Parkhurst  :  "  Quivers,  or  flutters  up  and 
down."  Rosenmuller  :  "  Exults."  Cole- 
man :  "  Elaps  exultingly."  Noyes  and 
Fausset  :  "  Moveth  joyfully."  Lee  :  "  In 
the  exulting  wing  of  the  ostrich  [wilt  thou 
put  thy  trust  ?]"  Barnes  :  "  The  wing  of 
the  exulting  fowls  moves  joyfully;"  not  their 
beauty,  but  their  exulting,  joyful,  triumphant 
appearance  being  the  object  of  attraction. 
Fry  :  "  Is  the  flapped  wing  of  the  ostrich 
from  thee.  ? "  Carey  :  "  The  wing  of  the 
ostrich  thrilleth  joyously."  Conant  :  "Waves 
exulting."  De  Wette  :  "  Swings  joyfully." 
Zockler  :  "  Flaps  joyfully."  Of  the  ancient 
and  earlier  versions,  the  Septuagint  has : 
"  The  wing  of  the  rejoicing  ones ; "  leaving 

*^P7^9  untranslated.   The  Vulgate:  "The 

wing  of  the  ostrich  is  extolled."  Syriac: 
"  The  wing  of  those  that  praise  is  lifted  up." 
Arabic  :  "  The  wing  of  praise."  Targum  : 
"  The  wing  of  the  wild  cock,  which  sings 
and  exults."  Symmachus:  "The  wing  Ot 
exultation  grows  around."  Aquila  :  "  The 
wing  of  the  praising  ones  folds  up."  Cover- 
dale  :  "The  ostrich,  whose  feathers  are 
fairer,"  &c.  Luther  ;  "  The  feathers  of  the 
peacock  are  finer,"  &c.  Martin  (French) : 
"Hast  thou  given  to  the  peacock  that 
plumage  which  is  so  brilliant,  p "  Diodati 
(Italian):  "The  wings  of  the  peacock,  are 
they  beautiful  by  thy  doing  ?  " 

The  rendering  of  the  second  member  of 


(  HOMILETIC  COJIMEXTARF:  JOB. 


KOTES. 


the  verse  {^^]  nTDQ  ^12}^  DN  (^im 
ebhrah  hasidhah  ve-notsaK)  equally  various. 
According    to    Gesekitjs,   '^^p^    [ebhrah) 

from  the  unused  Root  '^^^  (abhar), 
probably  "to  be  strong,  able  to  mount  aloft ;" 
a  pinion  or  strong  feather  :     distinguished 

^rom  N^5  {canaph)  a  wing,  and  •^J 
{natsah)  a  common  feather.  Piscatob,  and 
some  earlier  interpreters,  make  the  word, 
which  is  elsewhere  a  '*  feather,"  to  be  here 
an  "ostricli."  The  Septuagint  leaves  the 
words  rijij  and  rrPDH  untranslated.  The 
Vulgate  has :  "  [  the  wing  of  the  ostrich  is 
extolled]  like  the  wing  of  the  heron  and  the 

hawk;"  reading  n^^  as  if  V3  o"*  •^^J-  Syriac 
and  Arabic  :  "It  flies,  and  comes,  and  builds 
its  nest."  Coptic  :  "If  the  stork  and  ostrich 
could  comprehend  it;"  which  seems  to  be 
as  destitute  of  meaning  as  the  Septuagint 
Itself.  Co^'ERDALE  :  "  [Fairer]  than  the 
wings  of  the  sparrow-hawk."  Luther  : 
"  Than  the  wings  and  feathers  of  the  stork." 
Martin  (French)  :  "Or  to  the  ostrich 
[gavest  thou]  the  wings  and  the  feathers  ?  " 
Diodati  (Italian)  :  "  Has  the  ostrich  its 
feathers  and  plumage  from  thee?"  Mercer, 
Yatablus,  and  Pagsinus  :  "  Is  the  win^  of 
the  stork  and  its  feathers  so  ? "  i.e.,  is  it  joy- 
ful or  a  cause  of  pleasure  f  or, "  has  the  stork 
such  a  wing  and  plumage  P"  or,  "  is  it  from 
thee?"  MuKSTER  :  "Or  hast  thou  given 
wings  and  plumage  to  the  stork  ?  "  Scultetus  : 
"Or  the  wing  of  the  stork  and  ostrich?" 
GROTruSjPiscATOR,  Ju3rius,andTREMELLnjs : 
"Or  feathers  to  the  stork  and  ostrich?" 
CoccEius :  "  Or  if  you  wish  a  larger  wing, 
that  of  the  stork  and  ostrich."  Castalio, 
including  the  preceding  memoer:  "Which 
are  more  noble,  the  wing  of  the  ostrich,  or 
the  feathers  and  plumage  of  the  stork  ?  " 
So  OsiANDER  :  "  Are  the  wings  of  the 
ostrich  more  elegant  than  the  wing  and 
feather  of  the  stork  ?  "  Tigurintb  version : 
"  The  wing  of  the  ostrich  bears  the  palm,  if 
fou  compare  with  it  the  wing  or  feather  of 
(he  stork."     Bochabi  :  "  [The  wing  of  the 


ostrich  exults]  ;  verily  the  wing  of  the  stork 
and  the  feathers ; "  •*.«.,  which  are  verily  a 
wing  and  plumage  as  is  in  the  stork ;  or,  "  the 
wings,  I  say,  of  the  stork  ?  "  ^  being  under- 
stood as  in  Genesis  xix.  9  ;  the  ostrich  being 
not  so  much  a  bird  as  a  beast  j  whence  the 
Arab  proverb:  "The  ostrich  is  neither  bird 
nor  camel ;"  and  its  name  among  the  Persians, 
the  camel-bird; as  resennbling  a  camel  in  its 
neck,  height  and  walk,  and  a  bird  in  its  bill 
and  feathers.  Simon  :  "  Does  it  resemble 
the  tail  and  feathers  of  the  stork  ?  " 
ScHULTENS :  "Is  its  win^  and  plumage  an 
affectionate  one  ?  "  with  allusion  to  the  stork. 
Hupnagel  and  Michaelis  :  "  The  ostrich 
flies  like  the  stork  and  the  hawk." 
DoDERLEis :  "  With  the  feathers  of  the  stork 
and  the  hawk."  Stock  :  "  Hath  her  affection 
taken  win^  and  flown  away  ?  "  Parkhcesis 
"  But  is  It  the  wing  of  the  stork  and  its 
plumage?  "  Stickel  :  "Is  it  the  stork-like, 
affectionate,  pinions  and  feathers?  "  Ewald: 

"  Is  it  a  pious  pinion  and  plumage  ?  "  P^ 

being  interrosative.  De  Wette  :  "  Is  his 
wing  also  affectionate,  and  his  plumage?" 
Scott  :  ••  Is  it  the  pinion  and  feathers  of  the 
stork  ?  " — not  lite  the  stork,  providing  for 
the  security  of  its  young.  Umbkeit  :  "  Is  it 
like  the  quiU  and  feathers  of  the  • 
bird  the  stork?  " — is  it  like  the  pious  bird  ? 
surely  not.  Koyes  :  "  But  is  it  with  loving 
pinion  and  feathers  ?  "  Caret  :  "  Is  the 
leather  and  plumage  that  of  the  stork  ?  " 
Barnes  :  "  Has  it  the  wing  and  plumage  of 
the  stork  ?  " — flying  without  being  endowed 
with  the  wings  of  the  stork,  and  contrasted 
in  its  habits  with  those  of  that  bird.  Booth- 
EOID :  *'  Her  pinions  and  feathers  as  those 
of  the  stork."  Cglem.ajn  :  "  Truly  they  have 
goodly  pinions  and  plumage.''  Fry  :  "  Or 
is  the  swollen  pinion  and  plumage  from  thee?** 
Lee:  "Or  are  her  choice  feathers  and  head- 
plumage  from  thee  ?  "  Good  and  Wemyss  : 
"  But  the  wings  of  the  stork  and  the  falcon 
are  for  flight."  Rosenhuller:  "Truly  its 
wing  and  plumage  is  like  that  of  the  stork." 
ZocKLER :  "  Though,  13  it  a  pious  pinion  and 
plumage  P  " 


CHAPTER  XL. 


Verse  15.  ''Behold now  behemoth."  Various 
opinions  as  to  what  is  meant  by  the  term 
**  behemoth."      According     to     Gksenius, 

ririT}^  [behemoth)  is  the  plural  of  ^?'7f 
(^^wa^,  from  the  unused  Root  ^'^^{baham) 
^='^.  in  the  Xth  conjugation,  "to  be  dumb"), 


a  quadruped  of  the  larger  sort,  Kving  on  the 
land;  here  the  plural  of  majesty,  denoting  a 
large  quadruped  :  the  hippopotamus.  So 
Bochart  :  the  river-horse  or  hippopotamus-, 
like  the  Leviathan,  an  inhabitant  of  the  Nile : 

the  termination  ^ '  [oth)  however,  being,  ac- 
cording  to   Bochart,  not   the    sign  of  the 

299 


NOTES. 


BOMILETIC  C03niENTARJ '.  JOB. 


plural,  but  of  the  Egypticin  singular,  tlic 
auiiiial  being  Egyptian.  The  Septuagint 
has:  "Beasts."  Targum:  "Theaniinal."  The 
Vulgate,  Syriac,  and  Arabic,  like  the 
English  Version,  leave  the  word  untrans- 
lated. Mercer,  Castalio,  and  Cocceius, 
like  Gesenius,  consider  the  plural  to  be  used 
on  account  of  the  great  size  of  the  animal. 
Grotius  tiiinks  it  equivalent  to  '*  the  animal 
of  animals  ;  "  i.e.,  the  most  excellent  animal. 
According  to  Maimonides,  tlie  term  in- 
cludes all  land  animals  of  monstrous  size. 
So  apparently  the  Septuagint.  Dr.  Lee,  in 
like  manner,  renders  it  "  the  beasts."  The 
term,  however,  generally  regarded  as  de- 
noting a  distinct  species  of  animal,  as — (I) 
distinct  species  are  described  in  the  former 
chapter  ;  (2)  It  is  here  compared  with  other 
species ;  (3)  The  description  is  not  suitable 
to  all  beasts  of  the  field.  The  animal  in- 
tended formerly  regarded  very  generally  as 
the  elephant.  So  most  of  the  earlier  inter- 
preters, both  Catholic  and  Reformed,  and  all 
the  Hebrew  expositors.  So  the  Geneva  and 
Dutch  versions,  and  the  Italian  of  Diodati. 
According  to  Mercer:  "Some  auimallarger 
and  more  monstrous  than  the  elephant. 
Modern  interpreters  generally  consider  the 
hippopotamus,  or  river-horse,  as  especially  in- 
tended. Bishop  Patrick  says  :  "  Not  the 
elephant,  which  never  lies  among  the  reeds, 
but  an  animal  of  that  region — the  hippopota- 
mus.   CoNANT:  "The  river-ox,  the  appro- 


priate name  of  itie  animal  commonly  known 
as  the  hippopotamus,  or  river-horse,  the  word 
being  probably  its  Egyptian  name.  Robinson 
and  Calm  ET  derive  thenamefrom  the  Egyptian 
*'pe  "  (the  definite  article  "  the  "),  "  ehe,''  an 
ox,  and  "  mouth,"  water ;  the  water  or  river- 
ox,  the  name  being  modified  like  other  foreign 
words.  According  to  Kitto,  the  word  is  the 
plural  of  excellence ;  denoting  the  chief  and 
most  powerful  of  herbivorous  animals  known 
to  Job,  and  living  in  his  neighbourhood.  Good 
thinks  neither  the  elephant  nor  the  hippo- 
potamus exactly  intended,  but  an  animal 
now  extinct.  So  A.  Clarke.  Eausset  thinks 
the  description  agrees  partly  with  the  elephant 
and  partly  with  the  hippopotamus,  but 
exactly  in  all  the  details  with  neither ; 
and  that  it  is  rather  intended  as  a 
poetical  personification  of  the  great 
Pachydermata  or  Herbivora,  the  idea 
of  the  hippopotamus  being  predominant. 
According  to  Reiske  and  Bythner,  the 
word  indicates  "  beasts "  in  general  ;  the 
peculiar  name  not  being  here  given,  as  un- 
necessary from  the  description.  Cocceius, 
Fry  and  others,  view  the  animal,  called  "the 
beast  "  by  way  of  eminence,  as  one  and  the 
same  with  Leviathan.  Samuel  Wesley 
queries  whether  it  is  not  the  animal  alluded 
toby  the  Psalmist  (Psalm  Ixviii.  30):  "Rebuke 
the  company  of  the  spearman  ;  "  Margin : 
"  The  beasts  of  the  reeds ; "  Boothroyd  ; 
"  The  wild  beasts  of  the  reeds." 


CHAPTER  XLL 


Verse  1.  **  Canst  thou  draw  out  Leviathan 
with    a   hook."      The    term   "Leviathan" 

O-Pt]:)  rendered  here  by  the  Septuagint, 
Syriac,  and  Arabic,  "  the  dragon."  The 
Vulgate  and  Targum  leave  it  untranslated. 
Almost  all  the  earlier  interpreters  understood 
the  Whale  to  be  the  animal  intended. 
Beza  and  Diodatus  among  the  first  to  in- 
cline for  the  Crocodile.  Grotius  remarks  : 
"From  terrestrial  he  passes  to  marine 
animals.'*  Sanctius  is  uncertain  which 
annual  of  the  whale  kind  is  meant ;  and  ob- 
serves that  the  Balcena  would  not  be  un- 
known to  Job,  as  being  found,  according  to 
Pliny,  in  the  Arabian  Gulf.  Codurcus  re- 
marks that  the  whale  is  found  in  the  Medi- 
terranean Sea.  According  to  Drusius,  some 
large  unknown  fish  akin  to  the  dragon  is 
meant.  Schultens,  with  the  Hebrew  in- 
terpreters,  thinks  the  animal  to  be  a  terres- 
trial  dragon.      Lee  :    "A   sea  monster  in 

b'^'"™  '  lUough  the  description  rather  suits 
300  * 


the  whale,  and  more  particularly  one  of  the 
Dolphin  tribe,  the 2)(?//;Am2^5  Orcus  Communis^ 
or  common  Grampus."  Kitto:  "A  sea 
monster  :  here  the  crocodile.  Fausset  : 
"  Literally,  the  twisted  animal,  gathering  it- 
self into  folds  :  a  poetic  generalization  for  all 
cetacca,  serpentine,  and  saurian  monsters, 
especially  the  crocodile ;  described  after  the 
river  horse,  both  being  found  in  the  Nile. 
Bishop  Patrick  observes  that  the  whale  is 
not  cirmed  with  scales,  nor  impenetrable,  nor 
creeping  on  the  earth  ;  and  that  therefore  the 
crocodile  is  the  animal  intended.  S.  Wes- 
ley remarks  that  the  crocudile  was  probably 
once  in  Palestine ;  a  town  named  Crocodilo- 
polis,  or  the  city  of  the  Crocodile,  having 
stood  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount  Carmel. 
A.  Clarke  thinks  some  extinct  animal  of  the 
waters  is  probably  intended.  Doderlein 
thinks  the  word  a  general  name  of  a  very 
large  and  cruel  beast,  the  real  naine  being 
gathered  from  its  attributes. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOB. 


NOTES. 


CHAPTER  LXIL 


VersiII.  "A  piers  of  monei/y  According 
to  Gcsenius  and  others,  » •p'^li^P.  {kesitah), 
from  the  unused  root  tOIi^p  —   ^^^  {kasata) 

to  "  be  just  or  true  ;  '*  whence  \^j^  {Kistoon) 

"  balances ; "  a  certain  weight  of  money, 
equal  to  about  four  sliekels  {(jtxi.  xlii.  35 ; 
xxxiii.  19,  compared  with  xxiii.  16).  Accord- 
ing to  ScHULTENS,  a  stater,  or  lump  of  gold 
exactly  weighed.  Septuagint  :  "  A  lamb." 
So  Abulwalid and  Aben  Ezra.  Vulgate: 
"  A  sheep."  So  Syriac,  Arabic,  and  Coyer- 
dale.  Luther:  "  A  finegroschen.*'  Mar- 
tin and  DiODATi :  "  A  piece  of  money."  So 
the  early  translators  and  expositors  in  general. 
Grotius  and  Mercer,  after  the  Rabbins: 
"  A  coin  with  the  figure  of  a  sheep  struck 
upon  it.'*  Scott  :  "  Some  species  of  current 
coin,"  from  Gen.  xxxiii.  19,  compared  with 
Acts  vii.  16.  Hufnagel  :  *'  Apparently  a 
piece  of  silver,  not  a  coin. "  Noyes  :  '*  Pro- 


bably a  lump  of  silver  of  a  certain  weight." 
Umbreit:  "The  metal  weighed  out,  not 
coined.  *'  Michaelis  :  "  A  weight  which  can- 
not be  defined."  Lee  :  "  Not  a  stam|)cd  coin 
but  a  certain  weight"  Carey  :  "A  weight 
in  the  form  o;  a  iamb,  used  for  weighing 
money;  as  seen  on  Egyptian  monuments, 
one  being  weiii^lied  against  three  rings." 
TowNSEND :  "  Something  weighed  ;  each 
piece  weighing  four  shekels."  Kitto  :  *'  Pro- 
bably a  present  of  silver,  the  value  of  a 
lamb."  Bartk  :  "  A  piece  of  money  ;  a 
weight  of  gold  or  silver :  a  coin  probably 
with  the  figure  of  an  animal  upon  it."  Eaus- 
SET  :  "  The  terra  used  instead  of  a  shekel : 
a  mark  of  antiquity. "  Magee  and  Horn  : 
"  Good  reason  to  understand  it  as  signifying 
a  lamb."  Wemyss  :  "  A  girdle."  Booth- 
ROYD :  **  Term  derived  from  a  Hebrew  word 
denoting  '  to  be  pure ; '  hence  *  pure  metal,' 
proved  money."  Grynceus  :  "  Symbol  of 
Job's  tried  fideUty." 


bOl 


^xviitx  d  Bnhjtth  mou  or  Itss   pionuU&alljr   ^xtnitti. 


icceptance  with  God,  the  way  of— 

1.  A  necessity,  arising  out  of  man's  state 

as  a  sinner. 

2.  The   necessity    acknowledged   by  Job 

without  notice  of  the  provision. 

3.  That    provision  witnessed   to  by  the 

Law   and    the   Prophets,    but    only 
manifested  in  the  Gospel 

4.  The  way  of  acceptance  with  God  the 

great  question  for  humanity. 

5.  God  s  way  of  accept auce  with  Himself 

every  way  suited  to  meet  the  case. 

6.  Righteous,    in    the  righteousness    of 

another y — the  only    way   left   for  a 
sinner's  acceptance  with  God  ...  58,     59 

Acceptance  with  God,  the  want  of — 

1.  Krom  ignorance  ot  God's  plan  ; 

2.  From  unwillingness  to  accept  of  it; 

3.  From  inability  to  trust  in  it ; 

4.  From  indiflference  to  the  matter        ...     59 

Acceptance  with  God,  in  our  prayers 
and  services — 

1.  Believers,    being  accepted   in   Christ, 

find  acceptance  also  in  their  prayers, 
both  for  themselves  and  others. 

2.  Acceptance  with  God  the  thing  to  be 

aimed  at  in  our  prayers  and  services. 

3.  That  acceptance  certain,  where  there  is 

obedience   to  God's  commands  and 
faith  in  His  Son. 

4.  The  person  to  be  first  accepted,  then 

the  prayer  or  service. 

5.  God's  method,  to  bless  aud  accept  one 

man  for  the  sake  of  another  ...  277 

Access  to  God — 

Our  privilege  in  Christ 140,  142 

Want  of  it  142 

Acquaintance  with  God;  implies — 

1.  Knowledge  of  God  :  to  be  obtained — 

(1)  Through  attention  to  and  faith  in 

the  Word  that  reveals  Him  ; 

(2)  Earnest  prayer  for  Divine  illumina- 

tion and  teaching ; 

(3)  Application  to   and   acceptance  of 

Christ  as  a  Saviour  and  Teacher. 

2.  Submission  to  God. 

3.  Reconciliation  with  God. 

4.  Conformity  to  God's  will  and  character. 

5.  Friendly  walk  and  fellowship  with  God  188 

Affliction;  is — 

1.  The  result  of  sin  ; 

2.  One  of  God's  remedial  measures  i 

3.  Thus  often  made  a  blessing    ... 
Affliction,  as  a  correction,  designed — 

I,  To  wrrest  the  sinner  in  his  career ) 


••• 


210 


2.  To  subdue  pride ; 

3.  To  lead  to  thought; 

4.  To  exhibit  the  emptiness  and  unsatisfy- 

ing nature  of  the  present  world  ; 

5.  To  bring  death,  judgment,  and  eternity 

to  view ; 

6.  To  bring  sin  to  remembrance  as  the 

cause  ot  suffering  ; 

7.  To    give    us    to   realise   God   as  our 

Governor  and  Judge ; 
8.  To  bring  us  thus  to  repentance         ,.,  210 
Affliction,  the  b  fin  jit  of     ...  ...         ...     25 

Affliction,  sanctified — 

1.  The  MEANS  of  it: 

(1)  Affliction  in  itself  not  a  blessing. 

(2)  Exhibition  of  Divine  truth  neces- 

sary to  its  improvtmeut. 

(3)  Spiritual  teaching  usually  through 

human  instrumentality. 

(4)  Hence  skill  and  fidelity  required  in 

dealing  with  the  sick. 

2.  The  RESULTS  of  it : 

(1)  Experience   of  Divine   mercy  and 

forgiveness  ; 

(2)  Deliverance —  (i.)   possibly    from 

death  temporal ;  (ii.)  certainly  from 
death  eternal  ; 

(3)  Possible  restoration  to  health ; 

(4)  Access  to  God,  and  acceptance  with 

Him; 

(5)  Reconciliation  with  God,  and  joy 

in  Him; 

(6)  Praise  to  God  for  pardoning  and 

restoring  mercy 211,  214 

Angels — 

Their  names  and  designations; 
Their  resemblance  to  God  ; 
Their  ranks  and  orders  ; 

Their  offices  and  ministrations      ...      10,     34 
No  trust  put  in  them  by  their  Creator,  as 
being— 

1.  Mutable  and  unstable  ; 

2.  Imperfect  and  liable  to  error 32 

Their  Fall ,  32,  132 

Not  to  be  prayed  to  or  employed  as  inter- 

cessors     ...         ...         ...         ...         »••     "^ 

To  be  imitated  as  our  examples—' 

1.  In  obedience  to  God  ; 

2.  In  submission  to  Him; 

3.  In  humility  ; 

4.  In  reverence    ...         •••         •••         •••    3'* 

Angels  under  God's  control...         •••         ...  132 
Of  inconceivable  antiquity 246 

Anger ;  ouly  not  sinful — 

1.  When  directed  against  a  proper  object ; 

2.  When  excited  by  a  just  or  sufficient 

causey 


u. 


EOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


132 


ib. 


64 


8.  When  held  under  due  control ; 

4.  When  Hccompaiiied  with  love; 

5.  ^Vhen  not  long  continued       ... 

Arrows  of  the  Almighty:— 

Their  nature  and  character  ; 

Irresistible  hut  by  faith  ; 

Incur.ible  but  by  the  blood  of  Jesui; 

When  felt  by  the  siuner  ; 

What  to  the  believer  ; 

In  whose  hands  now  lod'jed        ...  ...     42 

Attributes   of  God-37,  59,  72,  145,  J 52 

1.  His  Omnipotence; 

2.  His  Goodness ; 

3.  His  Wisdom ; 

4.  His  Compassion; 

5.  His  Power  and  Majesty         52 

His  Incomprehensibleness  ...  ...  ...     61 

His  Sovereignty  and  Irresistibleness  ... 

His  Wisdom  and  Benevolence ;  seen — 

(1)  In  restraining  evil ; 

(2)  In  overruling  it  for  good  ; 

(3)  In  employing  it  for  the  exhibition 

of  His  own  Perfections... 
His  MU\h\iUi  unsearchable  ;  whether — 

(1)  Natural ;  asHis  omnipresence,  om- 

niscience, and  omnipotence ;   or, 

(2)  Moral ;  as  His  justice  and  good- 

ness       ...         ...         ...         ...     7-^ 

The  Attributes  of  God,  arguments  for  repent- 
ance ;  more  especially — 

(1)  His  Almighty  power; 

(2)  His  Omniscience  ...         ...         ...     73 

Adduced  in    defence  of  His  dealings ;    es- 
pecially— 

(1)  His  Power ; 

(2)  His  Goodness ; 

(3)  His  Wisdom         228 

B 

Believers,  as  priests,  and  intercessors  {^see 

Priests) i277 

Their  comfort  in  time  of  darkness...         ...   1  i3 

Their  life  {see  Life  of  Faith) 

C 
Cliastiseiuent  (Divine);  duty  under — 

1.  To  turn  to  God  ; 

2.  To  acknowledge  and  accept  the  chas- 

tisement ; 

3.  To  confess  our  sin  ; 

4.  To  resolve  upon  amendment ; 

5.  To  pray  for  Divine  teaching 220 

Chastisement  to  be  borue^ 

(1)  Submissively; 

(2)  Patiently; 
rS)  Humbly; 
(4^  Lovingly; 

(5)  Thankfully  220 

Chastisement — observations  in  regard  to  it — 

1.  Even  the  righteous  may  require  correc- 

tion ; 

2.  The  godly  not  left  to  remain  in  their 

sin; 
8.  The  object  of  chastisement  to  bring  sin 
to  remembrance  in  order  to  reneut- 
tnot 


4.  Chaslisemeut,  when  improved,  or  other- 
wise, followed  by  corresponding 
results  229,  230 

Choice  to  be  made,  of  God  and  Heaven  as 
a  portion,  as — 

1.  More  excellent  in  itself,  and  more  be- 

coming man's  better  nature; 

2.  More  satisfying  to  a  rational  creature ; 

3.  More  enduring ; 

4.  Attended  with  no  remorse; 

5.  Followed  by  no  penalty         ...         ...  188 

Comfort,  objects  to  be  aimed  at   in 
giving — 

1 .  To  strengthen  the  mourner  to  bear  his 

trouble  ; 

2.  To  lighten  his  grief ; 

3.  To  lead  him  to  the  right  use  and  \m- 

provement  of  his  trial         ,,,         ♦,,     98 
{See  Consolation.) 

Comforters,  true,  require — 

i .  To  be  able  to  sympathize  with  those  in 
trouble ; 

2.  To  understand,  generally,  the  meaning 

and  use  of  trouble  ; 

3.  Personal  and  experimental  acquaintance 

with  the  truth  with  which  we  are  to 
comfort  others ; 

4.  To  possess  the  spirit  and  imitate  the 

conduct  of  Christ,  the  great  Com- 
forter ; 

5.  To  speak  truthfully,  and  suitably  to  the 

case  ..         ...         ...         ...         ...     98 

Comforters,     "  miserable^*    Who  ?    Those 
who — 

1.  Comfort  with  error  and  falsehood ; 

2.  Direct  to  improper  means  of  relief; 

3.  Seek   merely  to  divert  the  mourner*! 

mind  from  his  trouble ; 

4.  Fail  to  point  to  Christ,  the  true  source 

of  comfort  ...         ...         ...         ...     98 

Commercial  Morality — 

1.  One  of  the  testing  points  in  reference  to 

a  man's  character ; 

2.  Professedly   religious  men  tempted  to 

transgress  its  rules  ...         ...         ,„   199 

Confession  of  Sin ;  to  be  — 

(1)  Free; 

(2)  Frank; 

(3)  FuU; 

(4)  Particular; 

(5)  Serious  and  heartfelt        ...         ...     52 

To  be  made  in  sight  of  the  laver  of  a  Sa- 
viour's blood       ...  ...         ,,,  ...     ih. 

The  benefit  of  it      ...         ...         „,         ,,.     ih. 

Injury  from  the  want  of  it — 
Growth  of  sin — 

(1)  In  strength  I 

(2)  In  guilt; 

(3)  In  terror ,     66 

Confession  of  sin,  a  result  as  well  as  means 

of  sanctified  affliction,  as — 

1.  An  evidence  of  genuine  repentance  ; 

2.  An  accompaniment  of  pardoning  mercy  214 


HOMlLBTtCAL  INDEX, 


111. 


Confession  to  be  made  in  regard  to — 

1.  The  iniquity  and  turpitude  of  sia  ; 

2.  Its  disastrous  consequences    ...  ...  214 

Includes — 

(1)  Discovery  as  to  our  character  and 

conduct ; 
(2^  Repentance  of  the  sin  coufessed  ; 
(3)  Resolution  of  amendment  ...  264 

Consolation  in  affliction,  topics  of — 

1.  I'he  character  of  God  as  compassionate 

and  faithful  ; 

2.  The  hand  of  God  in  all  our  afflictions  ; 
fS.  His  gracious  purposes  in  trouble  ; 

4.  The  comparative  shortness  and  lightness 

of  all  earthly  affliction  ; 

5.  The  Divine  promiseaof  needful  grace,  &c. ; 

6.  Christ  as  our  Redeemer,  ia  whom  we 

have  everything ; 

7.  His  example  as  a  sufferer  ; 

8.  His  sympathy  in  our  affliction  ..•     28 
Consolation,  requirements  of ;  must  be— 

(1)  True ; 

(2)  Suitable; 

(3)  Loving      133 

Consolation  of  the  Church.  "What  ?— 

1.  That  Christ  has  suffered  for  our  sins  ; 

2.  That  he  has  risen  as  the  first-fruits  of 

them  that  slept ; 

3.  That  he  will  appear  the  second  time  to 

their  salvation  ; 

4.  That  them  that  sleep  in  Jesus,  God  will 

bring  with  Him       ...         ...         ...  121 

Consolations  of  God.    What  ? — 

1.  His  purposes  in  trouble  ; 

2.  His  promises  of   support  and   deliver- 

ance ; 

3.  The  benefits  resulting  from  it ; 

4.  The  examples  of  the  saints,  and  especi- 

ally of  the  Son  of  God  ; 

5.  The  fellowship  of  believers, and  especially 

of  Christ ; 

6.  God  Himself  as  our  shield  and  portion  ; 

7.  His  love,  as  the  origin  of  our  trouble  ; 

8.  The  glories  of  eternity  as  infinitely  com- 

pensating for  the  griefs  of  time       ...     92 
Consolations  of  God,  how  conveyed — 

(1)  By  His  Spirit; 

(2)  By  His  Word  ; 

(3)  ^y  His  Providence  •••         ...    ib. 
Their  character ;  are — 

1.  True  and  solid  ; 

2.  Holy  and  satisfying ; 

3.  Suitable  and  adequate  ; 

4.  Lasting  and  durable    ...         ,,,         ,,,     ib. 
To  be  highly  valued^  on  account  of— 

1.  Their  origin,  the  love  of  God  ; 

2.  Their  costliness,    the    purchase    of   a 

Saviour's  blood  ; 

3.  Their  efficacy,  as  able  to  meet  our  case  ; 
4*  Their  freencss  on  God's  part  and  un- 

deservedness  on  ours  ...         ...     93 

Controversy,  God's  grounds  of — 
1.  With  nations  and  unconvertt^d  men  : 
1)  Rebellion  against  His  authority ; 
(2)  Untbankfulness  for  His  mercies; 


(3)  Apostasy  from  His  religion  ; 

(4)  Persecution     of     His    cause    and 

people; 

(5)  Contempt  of  His  ordi nances  ; 

(6)  Rejection  of  His  Son. 

2.   With        Churches      and      individual 
Chriatians :—' 

(1)  Departure  from  first  love; 

(2)  Formality  and  hypocrisy  ; 

(3)  Pride  and  self- satisfaction  ; 

(4)  Lukewarmness  ; 

(5)  Untbankfulness ; 

(6)  Covetousness  and  worldly-minded 

ness     ...         ...         ...  67 

Correction,  Divine:  how  adminUlered — 

1.  By  His  Word  ; 

2.  By  His  work  in  providence. 
Its  Blessedness  :  seen — 

1.  In  its  origin — Divine  love; 

2.  In  its  object — our  spiritual  benefit. 
Its  Improvementi  how  obtained — 

1 .  By  consideration  of  its  object ; 

2.  By  examination  into  its  cause ; 

3.  By  endeavour  after  its  fruit 38 

Correction  of  the  Almighty^  suggests — 

1.  His  benevolence  in  sending  the  correc- 

tion ; 

2.  His  ability— 

(1)  To  sustain  us  under  it; 

(2)  To  sanctify  us  by  it ; 

(3)  To  deliver  us  out  of  it     ...         ...     38 

Corrections  on  a  large  scale,  necessary  and 

important,  as — 

1.  A  testimony  to  Divine  justice ; 

2.  A  proof  of  the  power  of  God  to  punish 

transgressors  ; 

3.  A  warning  against  a  course  of  sin    ...   238 

Counsel  of  the  Wicked,  Whae.f  130 

1.  To  make  the  enjoyment  of  the  present 

life  the  chief  goo  1  ; 

2.  To  gain  that   enjoyment  in  any   way 

they  can  with  safety  ; 

3.  To  depend  on  their  own  endeavours  for 

what  they  desire  ; 

4.  To  ignore  God  and  eternity,   heaven 

aud  hell ; 
6.  To  make  light  of  the  provision  of  a 

Saviour ; 
6.  To  care  only  for  themselves  and  their 

immediate  connections. 
Our  duty  in  regard  to  it ;  to  put  it  far  from 
us — 

1.  In  our  judgment; 

2.  In  our  will  and  purpose ; 

3.  In  our  practice. 

Why  to  be  thus  put  far  from  us.     Beca     C — 

1.  Foolish  and  unreasonable; 

2.  Wicked; 

3.  Destructive. 

How  to  be  put  far  from  us — 

1.  By  a  change  of  heart ; 

2.  By  accei>tauce  of  the  offered  Savioor 

and  reliance  on  His  grace  ; 

3.  By  the  due  use  of  appoiuted  means  i— 
(1)  Prayer; 


IT. 


HOMTLETICAL  TNDEX. 


(2)    Reading  and  meditation    on    the 
Scriptures  ; 
4.  By  coiileiii plating  the  Saviour's  charac- 
ter Ruil  cross  ; 
6.  By  consideration  of  the  nature  and  con- 
sequences of  sin       ...         ...         ...  130 

Croation,  God's  work  of  322 

Creation  and  Providence,  viewed  as  display- 
ing God's  power  and  wisdom  : — 

1,  In    triving    the   earth    and     heavenly 
bodies  their  present  situation,  and  sus- 
pending thfcui  in  empty  space  ; 

2.  In  forming  the  clouds  and  preserving 
the  watery  particles  collected  in  them  ; 
these  clouds  serving  — 

(1)  To  irrigate  the  ground  ; 

(2)  To  moderate  the  heat ; 

(3)  To  beautify  the  sky. 

8.  In  appointing  the  alternation  of  light 
and  ilarkness,  and  the  viscissitude  of 
dayandaiuht;  affordiug — 

(1)  An  agreeable  variety  ; 

(2)  Suitable   seasons   for   the  require- 

ments of  man  and  beast  ; 

(3)  Means  of  cooling  and  moistening 

the  ground  ; 

(4)  An    opportunity    for    the   mutual 

benefit  of  plants  and  animals  ; 

(5)  An  exhil)ition  of  the  starry  sky  with 

its  beauty  and  its  lessons  ; 
4.  In  exciting  storms  and  disturbances  in 
the  earth  and  air;  these  serving — 

(1)  Important  physical  purposes,  as — 

(i.)  Purifying  the  atmosphere;  (ii.) 
Contribnting  to  the  greater  irriga- 
tion of  the  earth ;  (iii.)  Aiding  in 
the  processes  of  vegetation. 

(2)  Valuable  moral  purposes,  as — (i.) 

Eeminding  us  of  the  existence, 
attributes,  and  agency  of  a  Divine 
ruler  and  judge ;  (ii.)  Tending  to 
produce  elevating  and  reverential 
thoughts  of  God  ;  (iii.)  Suggesting 
the  instability  of  earthly  things, 
and  the  importance  of  securing  the 
favour  and  friendship  of  God  ;  (iv.) 
Tending  to  elevate  the  mind  and 
strengthen  the  character ; 
6.  In  agitating  the  ocean  and  again  stilling 

lis  waves ; 
6.  In  making  the  sky  bright  and  serene 
by  day,  and  studding  it  with  stars  at 
^''&^^  158,  261 


•..  127 
...  209 


D 

Day  of  Judgment 

Death,  The  tvro  kinds  of 
Death  and  the  grave — 

1.  Death  a  state  of  quiet  sleep; 

2    The  grave  a  place  of  general  rendezvous ; 

8.  A  place  of  absolute  equality 

4.  A  place  where  the  wicked'  cease  from 

troubling; 

5.  A  place  of  rest  for  the  suffering  and 

weary ; 


6.  A  place  exhibiting  the  vanity  of  earthly 

glory  and  riches      ...         ...         ,.,     24 

Death,  its  universaliti/  {see  Grave). 

Death,   its    certainty    and    nearness    {see 

Grave). 
Death,  in  reference  to  the  time  of  its  arrival, 

and  the  issues  attending  it  ,,,         ...     25 

Death,  ai  an  object  of  desire  26 

Death,  to  the  believer         ...         ...  104 

to  the  impenitent  ...         .,,         ...  m 

Deceivableness  of  sin,  as  promising — 

1 .  Pleasure ; 

2.  Profit; 

3.  Impunity        ^         „,     97 

Delight  in  God— 

1.  A  mark  of  grace; 

2.  Its  reasonableness; 

3.  Unaffected  by  outward  circumstances     163 
{See  Joy  in  God). 

Depravity  of  Human  Nature  86,  93,  130 

Disease,  Job's  ;  lessons  from  it— 

1.  The  power  of  Sat<n  ; 

2.  The  effects  of  sin  ; 

3.  The  character  of  our  mortal  body; 

4.  Believers'  liability  to  the  most  loath- 

some  diseases  ; 

5.  The  love  of  Christ  in  assuming  a  body 

with  such  liabilities ; 

6.  The  prtciousness  of  a  glorious  resurrec- 

tion ; 

7.  An  affectiug  picture  of  the  loathsome- 

ness of  sin  ...  ..  ...  ...     49 

Dream,  the  life  of  the  ungodly  compared  to  a  124 


E 

Eagle,  emblem  of  believers  (jsee  Eagle). 
Earth,  formation  of  the 


245 


Evil  (moral);  to  be  departed  from,  as — 

1.  Contrary  to  the  i»ature  and  will  of  our 

Creator ; 

2.  Opposed  to  our  own  interest  and  hap- 

piness. 
How  to  be  departed  from— • 

1.  Earnestly ; 

2.  Entirely  ; 

3.  Perseveringly; 

4.  At  all  hazards  ,         ...  171 

Evil  (physical);  its  existence  in  the  world, 

how  to  be  accounted  for — 

1.  From  the  existence  of  sin,  as  being — 

(1)  Its  necessary  and  inevitable  accom- 

paniment ; 

(2)  Its  riihteous  penalty  ; 

(3)  A  kind  and  salutary  discipline. 

2.  Suffering  in  a  child  of  God  part  of  the 

treatment  necessary   for  his  perfec- 
tion ; 

3.  Suffering  and  sorrow  the  consequences 

of  Satan's  presence  and  agency  in  the 
world  ...         ...  183 


Faith  in  God        29,  53,  272 

Faith  of  a  believer,  subject  to  fluctuation  ...   185 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


▼. 


Faith,  life  of  240 

Fear  of  God       ...  6,29,92,171.  194 

Fear  of  God,  the  end  of  all  true  teaching  ...  241 

Fear  of  the  Future — 

1.  Rijiht  and  profitable,  when — 

(1)  Preserving  from  carnal  security; 

(2)  Inciting;  to  the  use  of  right  means 

for  the  avoidance  of  future  evil ; 

(3)  Leading  to  prepare  for  it  by  seek- 

ing strength  to  endure  it ; 

(4)  Arising  from  the  conviction  of  the 

uncertainty  of  earthly  good ; 

(5)  Producing  earnestness  in  securing 

a  better  and  enduring  portion  ; 

(6)  Leading  to  fidelity  iu  the  improve- 

ment  of  present  henefits  ; 

2.  Wrong  and  hurtful,  when — 

(1)  Arising  from  undue  anxiety  about 

the  continuance  ofpresent  mercies; 

(2)  Attended  with  distrust  about  the 

future ; 

(3)  Preventing  the  thankful  enjoyment 

of  present  blessings ; 

(4)  Leading  to  undue  means  to  pre- 

serve them        ,„         ,.,         „.     27 

Festivity — 

When  lawful ; 
General  rule  regarding  it; 
Its  limitations ; 

When  unseasonable         ...  ,,,  „,       7 

Fighting  against  God,  seen — 

1.  In  persevering  in  a  course  of  sin ; 

2.  In  opposing  God's  cause  or  people  ; 

3.  In  contending  for  an  object  in  opposi- 

tion to  His  will,  or  by  means  which 
He  forbids 95 

Flesh,  the ;  its  views  of  God  and  His 
dealings  68,  69,  184 

Forgetfulness  of  God.    What  ?— 

1.  Not  to  think  of  Him  ; 

2.  Not  to  thank  Him  ; 

3.  Not  to  serve  and  obey  Him. 
Is  to  forget  — 

1.  His  presence ; 

2.  His  providence; 

3.  His  precepts. 

Its  sinfulness,  as  being — 

1.  The  root  and  essence  of  all  sin; 

2.  Forgetfulness   of    Him    who    has    aU 

claims  on  our  remembrance — 

(1)  From  what  He  is  in  Himself; 

(2)  From  what  He  is  and  has  been  to 

us; 

3.  The  transfer  of  our  heart  and  affection 

to  the  world            ...          ...          ...  57 

Forgetfulness  of  God,  the  reason  why  de- 
liverance from  trouble  is  not  vouchsafed 

224,  225 

Forgiveness  of  enemies       .„         190 

Formation  of  the  earth       245 

Fretting  against  God's   dealings : 

Its  fcli~„  sin,  and  consequences ;  "  kills," 


1.  Robbing  us  of  peace  ; 

2.  Affecting  the  health; 

3.  Injuring  the  soul ; 

4.  Bringing  greater  chastisement  ...     34 


God— 

The  Dispenser  of  quiet  and  comfort  to  indi- 
viduals ; 

The  Giver  of  rest  and  quietness  to  natious 
and  churches    ...  ...  ...  ...   2J9 

God  as  a  Teacher— 

1.  Is  perfectly  acquainted  wilh  the  subjects 

which   He  tenches,  and    which  we  re- 
quire to  know ; 

2.  Underst  inds  the  capacity  and  capabili- 

ties of  the  tauiiht ; 

3.  Kuows  the  best  and  most  effeclual  way 

of  teaching  them ; 

4.  Is  able  by  His  p)vver  to  give  effect  to 

His  instructions; 

5.  Has  patience  with  the  duluess  of  his 

pupils : 

6.  Carries  them  to  the  highest  degree  of 

knowledge ; 
7    Exalts  theni  to  His  own  moral  excellence  232 

God,  neither  to  be  comprehended   nor  con- 
templated ...  ...  ...         ...   241 

God,  Attributes  of.    {See  Attributes.) 

Gold,  believers  compared  to  it,  as — 

1.  Precious  ; 

2.  Rare; 

3.  Usually  found  mixed  with  earth  and 

dross ; 

4.  Subjected  to  the  fire  for  purification  ; 

5.  Able  to  eudure  the  fire  ; 

6.  Ultimately  made  perfectly  pure  ...    143 

Grave,  The ;  a  place  of  rest  to  believers, 
from  — 

1.  The  cares  and  troubles  of  life  ; 

2.  The  oppression  of  man  and  the  buffet- 

ing; of  Satan  ; 

3.  The    burden    of   a   carnal    and   sinful 

nature ; 

4.  The  conflict  with  sin  and  the  flesh; 

5.  Painful  labours  in  the  service  of  Christ 

and  humanity  ...  ...  ...      24 

Grave,  The,  as  "the   house    appointed  for 
all  liviug  ;  "  its  lessons — 

1.  Humility  ; 

2.  Earne^^tuess  in  attending  to  present  and 

important  duty  ; 

3.  The  evil  of  sin  ; 

4.  The  inflt  xible  character  of  the  Divine 

law ; 

5.  True  wisdom  to  seek  a  better  than  an 

earthly  portion         ...  ...  ...    185 

Grave,  The,  the  vestibule  of  two  other  houses, 

both  eternal  in  their  duration  ...     ib. 

Graves,  "  ready"  for  us  ;  as — 

1.  Death  is  appointt^d  to  us  ; 

2.  Death  is  near  to  us  ; 
Use  to  be  made  of  this  fact — 

1 .  To  make  careful  preparation  for  death ; 

2.  To  make  x\^i  use  of  time  while  it  lasts ; 


Vi. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


3.  To  sit  loose  to  the  things  of  a  present 

world ; 

4.  To  examine  faithfully  what  are  our  pros- 

pects beyoud  the  grave        ...  ...   104 

GroT^lIi    in    holiness    and    grace; 

Means  of  it — 

1.  "Waiting  on  God  in  ])rayer  and  other- 

wise ; 

2.  Converse   with   the  Word,  the  soul's 

food  ; 

8.  Faith  in  Christ  as  our  st-ength  and 
life; 

4.  Fellowship  with  God's  faithful  people, 
and  especially  with  Christ  Him- 
self; 

6.  Exercise  and  improvement  of  the  grace 

already  given ; 

7.  Discipline  of  Divine  Providence        ...  107 

H 
Hardening   oneself    against  God. 

What?— 

1.  Resisting  His  authority  and  disobeying 

His  commands; 

2.  Rebelling  and  murmuring  against  His 

dealings  in  Providence ; 

3.  Refusing   His  offers  of  mercy  in  the 

Gospel 
I  ts  fW/y ;  seen — 

1.  From  the  attributes  of  God ; 

2.  From  the  facts  of  history      ...         ,.,     59 
Heaven,  a  place  of  peace  and  harmony      ...  152 

I  lell,  sense  of  the  term  in  Scripture  ...   157 

I I  ell,  the  Descent  into         ...         ...         ...     ib. 

He  1,  as  the  invisible   world  or  state  of  the 

dead — 

1.  Subject  to  God's  sovereign  dominion  ; 

2.  Open  to  His  perfect  cognizance; 

3.  Its  keys  in  the  hand  of  Jesas  •••     ib. 

Hope,  the  Believer's ;  is — 

1.  A  good  hope;  as  having— 

(1)  A  good  object ; 

(2)  A  good  foundation  ; 

2.  A  lively  hope ;  as  one   surviving   the 

grave  108,  163 

Hope  of  the  ungodly  ...         ,„         ...  163 

Home — 

1.  A  pionso\\St\  where— 

(1)  God  is  daily  and  duly  acknowledged 

and  worshipped ; 

(2)  The  inmates  live  in  love  to  each 

other ; 

(3)  The  duties  of  morality  and  religion 

are  carefully  attended  to. 

2.  A  feacefnl  and  prosperous  one;  where — 

(1)  The  inmates  are  at  peace  with  God 

and  wiih  one  another  ; 

(2)  God  prospers  their  honest  endea- 

vours to  obtain  a  competent  live- 
lihood ; 

(3)  The  family  is  preserved  from  great 

domestic  troubles ; 

(4)  The  inmates  are  the  pardoned  and 

accepted  children  of  Gt)d  ...     53 


Idolatry,  its  two  leading  forms        ,..  194 

Idolatry,  a  denial  of  God — 

1.  In   the   boundless   excellence   of    His 

being; 

2.  In  the  spirituality  of  His  nature  ; 

3.  In  His  infinity  and  omnipresence; 

4.  In  His  moral,  as  well  as  natural,  per- 

fertions ; 

5.  In    His   sufficiency  for  our  happiness 

and  safety  ; 

6.  In  His  sole  right  to  the  trust,  love,  and 

worship  of  His  intelligent  creatures  196 
Influence,  conscious  and  unconscious  ...  75,  223 
Iniquities,  our,  "  infinite;  "  as — 

1.  Committed  against  our  infinite  God  ; 

2.  Committed  against  infinite  obligations 

to  the  contrary ; 
8.  Numberless; 

4.  Incessant  during  life ; 

5.  But  for  Divine  grace  continuing  to  be 

committed  throughout  eternity ; 

6.  Attended  with  infinitely  disastrous  re- 

sults ;  therefore  requiring  an  infinite 
expiatioB,  or  an  atonement  of  infinite 

value  ..  135 

Intercessory  prayer  •••         •••     277,  279 


Job,  his  disease  ;  lessons  from  it  t 

{^See  Disease). 
His  deliverance — 

1.  The  author  of  it ; 

2.  The  deliverance  itself; 

3.  The  time  of  it ; 

4.  Its  typical  sitjnificance,  in  reference  to-^ 

(1)  The   deliverance   wrought   by  the 

Father  for  Christ ; 

(2)  That  of  believers  at  death ; 

(3)  That  of  the  Church  and  creation 

at  large  at  the  coming  of  Christ    278 

Joy  in  God ;  indicates — 

1.  Friendly  and  familiar  intercourse  with 

God ; 

2.  Pleasure  in  such  intercourse ; 

3.  The  endeavour  to  please  God  ; 

4.  Satisfaction  with  God  as  our  portion. 
Such  joy  in  God  is — 

1.  Characteristic  of  the  godly,  and  that 

which  distinguishes  them  from  the 
world ; 

2.  Enjoined  as  a  duty ; 

3.  Promised  as  a  reward  of  piety,  espe- 

cially in  regard  to  the  Sabbath. 
Implies — 

1.  The  excellency  and  loveliness  in  God  ; 

2.  The  inwardness  and  spirituality  of  true 

religion ; 

3.  The  pleasantness  of  true  piety. 
How  shown : — 

1.  By  holding  fellowship  with  Him; 

2.  By   obeying  His   will  and  seeking  to 

please  Him  ; 

3.  By  ceasing  to  have  our  chief  joy  in  the 

world  aud  the  things  of  it ; 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


vu 


4.  By  attending  on  Ood*s  ordinances ; 

6.  By  cheerftilly  acquiescing  in  His  ap- 

pointments   217 

Joy  of  the  wicked  **  short  ;**  as — 

1.  Having  no  solid  foundation ; 

2.  Based  npon  a  falsehood ; 

8.  Only  existing  in  the  present  life ; 

4.  As  compared  with  the  eternity  beyond  124 

Jadgment,  Day  of ;  Its  certainty — 

1.  From  the  testimony  of  Scripture ; 

2.  From  the  universal  voice  of  conscience ; 
8.  From  God's  Providential  dealings  in  the 

world  ...        ...        •••        •••  128 

K 

Kindness  to  the  Poor : 

I.  Motives  for  its  exercise : — 

1.  The  desire  to  relieve  suffering  and  ex- 

tend happiness ; 

2.  The  claims  of  the  poor  apon  as  as  our 

fellow  creatures ; 
8.  The  principle  of  doing  to  others  as  we 

would  they  should  do  to  us ; 
4.  The  will  and  authority  of  onr  common 

Father ; 
8.  The  example  of  the  heavenly   Father 

Himself; 
8.  The  special  example  of  Christ ; 

7.  The  cause  of  the  poor  identified  by  God 

with  His  own ; 

8.  Active  kindness  to  the  poor  a  fruit  of 

the  Spirit  and  an  instinct  of  the  new 
nature ; 

9.  The  pleasure  in  the  exercise  of  the 

benevolent  affections ; 

10.  The  reward  of  an  approving  conscience ; 

11.  The  testimony  of  Christ  at  the  Last 

Day. 

II.  The  Chabactes  of  such  kindness :  to 

be — 

1.  Free  and  spontaneous ; 

2.  Disinterested ; 

8.  Sincere  and  undissembled ; 

4.  Prompt  and  seasonable ; 

5.  Unwearied  and  persevering ; 

6.  Self-denying; 

7.  Impartial ; 

8.  Up  to  our  ability ; 

9.  Judicious  and  discriminating ; 

10.  Hearty  and  cheerful  ...         192 

Knowledge ;  how  acquired — 

1.  By  observation ; 

2.  By  attention  to  the  instruction  of  others, 

whether  (1)  oral ;  or  (2)  written; 

3.  By  reflection  ...         ...         ...         ...     80 

Knowledge  (Job's)  of  a  Redeemer; 

"  I  know,"  &c. 
1,  The  knowledge  itself  i 

1.  Its  certainty ; 

2.  Something  to  glory  in; 

3.  Its  grounds  and  soarces-— 

(1)  Internal  —  (i.)  Divine  enlighten- 
ment ;  (ii.)  Previous  personal  ac- 
quaintance and  fellowship; 


(2)  External — (i.)  The  original  pro- 
mise in  Eden;  (ii.)  Enoch's  pro- 
phecy ;  (iii.)  Enoch's  translation; 
(iv.)  The  continually -offered  sacri- 
fices which  pointed  to  a  Redeemer, 
II.  The  contents  of  the  knowledge: 

1.  That  God  in  Christ  is  a  Redeemer; 

2.  That  He  was  His  own  Redeemer; 

3.  That  He  was  *'  living,"  or  "  the  Living 

One,"  as — 
fl)  Personally  living ; 

(2)  Having  an  endless  existence ; 

(3)  The  Mighty  One ; 

(4)  The  Author  and  Giver  of  Life ; 
(6)  Living  for  our  salvation  ;  as  — 

fi.)  To  plead  our  cause  in  heaven ; 
lii.)  To  send  supplies  of  needed  grace  ; 
(iii.)  To  prepare  a  place  for  us  in 

heaven ; 
(iv.)  To  attend  to  all  our  concerns ; 
(v.)  To  overcome  all  our  enemies  ; 
(vi.)  To  deliver  out  of  all  troubles; 
(vii.)  To  give  victory  over  temptation 

and  sin ; 
(viii.)  To  make  us  partakers  of  His 

life; 
fix.)  To  receive  us  to  Himself; 
(x.)  To  come  again  in  glory  ...  118 

Knowledge  of  God  ;  what  and  how  obtained  138 
Knowledge  of  God,  a  believer  s,  one  of — 

1.  Certainty; 

2.  Divine  communication  ; 

3.  Experience; 

4.  Regard  and  love; 

5.  Acquaintance  and  fellowship  ...  ...  146 

Knowledge  of  God,  different  kinds  and  de- 
grees of...         ...         ...         273 


Law  of  God ;  to  be  received — 

1 .  With  reverent  attention ; 

2.  With  thankfulness ; 

3.  With  cordial  faith ; 

4.  With  cheerful  obedience ; 

5.  With  humble  submission       .•«         ...   189 

Leviathan  ;  an  emblem  of  Satan,  in^ 

1.  His  loftiness  and  dignity  as  a  creature; 

2.  His  fierceness  and  cruelty ; 

3.  His  power  of  inflicting  mischief  and 

working  destruction  ; 

4.  The  difficulty  of  overcoming  him ; 

5.  The  extent  of  his  sway        270 

Life ;  why  continued  to  sufferers — 

1 .  For  preparation  for  death  to  those  unpre- 

pared for  it ; 

2.  For  wise  and  gracious  purposes  to  those 

who  are  prepared  for  it ;  as — 

(1)  For  proof  and  trial  of  their  state; 

(2)  For  further  sanctification ; 

(3j  For  enhancement  of  future  glory 

and  happiness ; 
(4)  For  the  benefit  and  edification  of 

others ; 
(6)  For  the  glory  of  God      2i 


Till. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX, 


Life,  II  uman :  viewed  as  *'  an  appointed 

time":  hence — 

1.  It»  trials  to  be  meekly  borne ; 

2.  Its  end  to  be  patiently  waited  for ; 

3.  Its  continuance  to  be  carefully  improTed    48 
Life,  a  WARFARE  :   As — 

1.  A  time  of  trouble  and  suffering  t 

2.  A  time  of  cojiflict ; 

3.  A  time  of  service. 
Hence  the  duty  of  being — 

(1)  Patient  of  hardship,  and  prepared 

for  trial  and  suffering; 

(2)  Careful  to  be  on  the  right  side ; 

(3)  Faithful,  obedient,  and  active; 

(4)  Hopeful,  courageous,  and  enduring    48 
Life,    the  term    of   a    hired    servant^   as 

having  — 

1.  Painful    and    self-denying    labour  to 

undergo ; 

2.  A  short  and  limited  time  to  do  it  in ; 

3.  Due  wages  to  receive  when  it  is  done« 
Hence  the  duty— 

(1)  Of  choosing  the  best  master; 

(2)  Of  being  diligent  in  that  Master's 

work,  and  watchful  in  looking  for 
His  coming       ...         ...         •••     48 

Life,  viewed  as  a  shadow ;  calls  for  — 

1.  Diligence  in  the  improvement  of  it; 

2.  A  loose  hold  of  the  things  of  time  ; 
8.  A  proper  estimate  of  its  troubles  and 

joys,  its  possessions  and  pursuits  ; 

4.  Earnestness    in   securing  a   solid  and 

lasting  happiness  beyond  the  grave        56 
Life,  viewed  as  a  Voyage — 

1.  Its  constant  and  rapid  progress; 

2.  Variety  in  its  length  ; 

3.  Uncertainty   of  its    continuance    and 

termination ; 

4.  The    importance    of    the  voyage   to 

each ; 
B.  The  freight,  an  immortal  spirit ; 

6.  Only  one  or    other  of  two  places  of 

destination ; 

7.  Each  vessel  under  the  direction  of  one 

or  other  of  two  invisible  conductors    64 
Life,  a   period   of  probation   and   time  of 
opportunity         ...  ...  ...  ...   128 

Life  of  believers — 

1.  Often  resembling  a  clouded  sky; 

2.  A  bright  light  behind  the  clouds — 

(1)  God's  unchanging  love  in  Christ ; 

(2)  God's  everlasting  covenant; 

(3)  God's  gracious  purpose; 

3.  A  time  when  the  clouds  are  cleared 

away  ;  hence  the  lesson  of — 

(1)  Humility  and  modesty  in  judging 

both  of  God's  Word  and  works ; 

(2)  Patience  and  Resignation   to  the 

Divine  will ; 

(3)  Faith,  so  at  to  walk  in  comfort  and 

hope  even  in  the  darkest  dispen- 
sations   240 

Life  of  the  ungodly,  a  dream  ;  as— 

1.  Without  solidity  and  reality; 

2.  Quickly  terminating ; 


Light,   God*s    precious   gift;    TiewMl 


as- 


3.  Soon  forgotten 


124 


1.  The  b'ght  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens} 

2.  Of  God's  favour  and  providential  good- 

ness ; 

3.  Of  truth  and  saving  kuowledgt         ...  158 
Lord,  the;  or  Jehovah        ,^        ^,  10,212 

M 

Mammonism  {see  Riches). 

Man ;  his  condition  and  circumstances, 
as — 

1.  Inhabiting,  a  frail  and  humble  body  ; 

2.  Formed  out  of  the  ground,  and  return- 

ing to  it  again ; 

3.  Weak  and  easily  destroyed  ; 

4.  Constantly  liable  to  death  ; 

5.  Cut  off  in  death  from  the  visible  world, 

without  ability  to  return  to  it ; 

6.  Unnoticed    in    his   death    by   higher 

orders  of  beings ; 

7.  Stripped  of  all  his  earthly  excellence; 

8.  Dying  without  attaining  to  wisdom  ...     33 
Man ;  his  character  and  condition  from  his 

birth — 

1.  Mortal; 

2.  Suffering; 

3.  Depraved        83 

Man ;  his  character  since  the  Fall— 

1.  Vain; 

2.  Froward  and  self-willed,  like   a  wild 

ass's  colt ;  hence — 
8.  Requiring  a  change  of  character  and 
disposition  in  order  to  his  happiness  ; 

4.  Such  a  change  nothing  less  than  a  new 

birth  73 

Man  compared  to  deflower — 

1.  From  its  origin,  the  earth  ; 

2.  From  its  beauty 

3.  From  its  delicate  texture  and  constrao- 

tion ; 

4.  From  its  frailty ; 

5.  From  its  end 86 

Man,  compared  to  a  shadow.  Why  ? 

Lessons  from  the  comparison — 

1.  To  form  a  true  estimate  of  the  things  of 

time; 

2.  To  improve  our  stay  in  this  world  by 

preparing  for  a  better; 

3.  To   make  a   diligent  use   of    present 

moments ; 

4.  To  stand  ever  prepared  for  life's  unex- 

pected termination  ...  ...  ...     86 

Man  ;  the  contrasts  found  in  him  ...  •«.     52 

Man,  "  magnified  "  by  God — 

1.  In  his  creation  ; 

2.  In  the  Providence  of  God  over  him; 

3.  In  his  redemption  ; 

4.  In  his  glorificatioa  in  heaven  ; 

5.  In  the  assumption  of  our  nature  by  the 

Son  of  God...         ...         .•«         ...     63 

Man,  a  worm,  indicative  of — 

1.  His  place  as  a  creature ; 

2.  His  character  as  a  sinner        ...     154,  201 
Man  ;  his  superiority  over  the  beasts         ...  2i5 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX, 


Ix. 


Mediator :  Christ  the  only  and  sufficient 

One     .••         •••         ...         ...         ...     65 

Ministers,  to  be — 

Comforters  28,     81 

Counsellors  ...  ...         ,,,  ...   155 

Mioisterial  consistency       ...         ...         ...     28 

Ministering  to  mourners  and  sin-sick  souls 
its  requirements — 

1.  Study  and  knowledge  of  cases  ; 

2.  Knowledge  of  requisite  remedies  ; 
S.  Skill  in  applying  them; 

4.  Sympathy  with  the  sufferer    ...  ...     81 

Ministry,  Christian ;  cases  especially  requir- 
ing  it — 

1.  Affliction,  personal  or  domestic  ; 

2.  Bereavement ; 

3<  Temporal  losses  and  misfortunes ; 

4.  Persecution  and  cruelty  from  others  ; 

5.  Spiritual  darkness  and  temptation  ; 

6.  Sorrow  and  contrition  for  sin  ; 

7.  Infirmities  of  age  and  approaching  dis< 

solution       ...         ...         ...         ...     28 

Money  5  apt  to  be  trusted  in — 

1.  Fur  acquiring  the  meaus  of  life,  and 

sources  of  enjoyment ; 

2.  For  defence  against  suffering  and  the 

hostility  of  others ; 

3.  For  power  and  position  in  the  world...  194 
Money  ;  the  love  of  it — 

1.  A  "root  of  all  evil;" 

2.  Incompatible  with  the  love  of  God ; 

3.  Distinct  from  a  proper  appreciation  of 

money  itself  ...         ...         ...   195 

Moral  Training,   especially  in  respect  to  be- 
nevolence; grounds  and  reasons  for  it — 

1.  Some    born    with    dispositions   more 

benevolent  than  others ; 

2.  Children  capable  of  being  trained  to  the 

exercise  of  the  benevolent  affections  ; 

8.  Early  habits  of  benevolence  among  the 

principal     means    of    forming    the 

future  character      192 

Morality,  Commercial         ,         „.  199 

Murder,  different  kinds  of 200 

N 
Nature ;  a  symbol   of  spiritual  and  Divine 
things — 

1.  In  reference  to  God. 

2.  In  reference  to  human  experience      ...  240 

O 

Obedience,   Persevering,  to   God's  will 
and  word  : — 

1.  Such  obedience  the  proof  of  sincerity  ; 

2.  God's  **  way  "  to  be  lollowed  rather  than 

our  own ; 

3.  Many  temptations  to  decline  from  it; 

4.  Possible  for  a  man  to  keep  it  t 

(1)  By  reflection  ; 

(2)  By  resolution  ; 

(3)  By  courage; 

(4)  By  watchfulness ; 
5)   By  dependence  on  Divine  strength  ; 


Ohedience  of  Christ ;  its  value — 

1.  As  a  pattern  for  our  imitation  ; 

2.  As  a  credential  of  His  claims; 

3.  As  giving  value  to  His  sacrificial  death; 

4.  As  a  substitution  for  our  own  ; 

B.  As  the  character  to  be  reproduced  in 

His  members  ...         ...         ...   177 

Obstinate  transgressors       ,,,  ...         ...     95 

Oppressors,  the  lot  of        ,         „.  165 


Pardon  of  Sin;  how  dispensed        53,  69 

Pardon  of  sin  ;  when  vouchsafed — 

1.  When  sin  is  rea'ized  and  sincerely  con- 

fessed ; 

2.  When  its  demerit  and  hell-deserving- 

ness  is  acknowledged ; 

3.  When  deliverance  is  desired  from  its 

practice  and  power  as  well  as  from 
its  punishment ; 

4.  When  pardon  is  humbly  accepted  as  a 

matter  of  pure  mercy  ; 

5.  When    accepted   as  bestowed   on   the 

ground  of  Christ's  atonement         ...     53 

Peace;  its  nature  and  source 138 

Peace,  how  communicated  ...          ...          ...  219 

Perfect  man,  a         ...          ...          „,          ...  5 

Perfect  man,  Christ  the  only         •••         ...  177 

Perfection,  Christian     5,     32 

Persecution ;  its  spirit  and  ground — 

1,  Enmity  to  the  truth  ; 

2.  Desire  for  supremacy ; 

8.  Intolerance  of  opposition ; 

4.  Blind  and  misguided  zeal      ...         •••122 
Its  nature  and  results         ...         ...         ...     ib. 

Persecutors;  their  conversion  to  be  sought    12:i 

Perseverance  in  holiness        107 

Physician,  the  Divine;  characterized 
by- 

1.  Readiness  ; 

2.  Tenderness ; 
3    Skill; 

4.  Success  in  His  operations      ...         ...     88 

Pity ;  to  be  shown  to  the  afflicted — 
1.  In  words  of  sympathy  and  kindness; 
2*   In  practical  aid  ; 

3.  In  tender  regard  for  the  sufferer's  feel- 


ings 


44 


6)  By  Drayer  for  Divine  aid  .. 


144 


4.  In  commending  his  case  to  God 
Poor,  kindness  to  the  {see  Kindness). 

Power  and  majesty  of  God ;    dis- 

playe^d  in — 

1.  The  sudden  overtlurow  of  moimtains  ; 

2.  Eavtiiqnakes,  landslips.  &c. ; 

3.  Obscuration  of  the  sun  ; 

4.  Veiling  the  starry  sky  with  clouds ; 

5.  The  extension  of  the  firnianunt ; 

6.  Controlling  the  svaves  of  the  sea; 

7.  Directing  and  preserving  the  apparent 

motions  of  the  stars  and  constellations     59 

Prayer;  its  nature  and  necessity:  is — 
1.  Natural; 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


2.  Universal ; 

8.  A  thing  of  the  spirit;  yet 

4.  Usually  accompanied  with  some  out- 
ward expression      ...         ...         ...     85 

Prayer  ;  when  pure  ?    When — 

l"   Not  offered  in  hypocrisy; 

t.  Not  accompanied  with  the  practice  of 
sin; 

3.  Offered  for  right  objects  and  from  right 

motives; 

4.  Addressed  to  the  only  true  God; 

5.  Presented  in  a  way  according  to  His 

will ; 

6.  Accompanied  with  right  feelings  and 

dispositions; 

7.  Made  with  humility; 

8.  Offered  through  the  One  Mediator,  and 

with  faith  in  His  atoning  sacrifice  101, 102 
Prayer ;  when  vain  ?     When — 

1.  Without  sincerity  ; 

2.  Without  repentance; 

8.  Without  faith  124 

Prayer,  in  time  vi  trouble ;  to  be  made  for — 

1.  Counsel  and  direction  in  it ; 

2.  Comfort  and  support  under  it ; 

3.  Deliverance  in  God's  own  time  and  way 

out  of  it ; 

4.  The  spiritual  benefit  and  improvement 

intended  ^y  it  ...         ...         ...     36 

Prayer ;  why  restrained  ?     From — 

1.  Distaste  for  and  dislike  to  it ; 

2.  Disbelief  in  its  efficacy  ; 

8.  Disdain  and  t elf- sufficiency  ..«         ...     92 
Prayer,  the  spirit  of  ...  ..«          ...   141 

Prayer,  its  necessity  to  a  believer  ...         ...  186 

Prayer,  to  be  persevered  in  ...         ...   164 

Prayer,  successful 164,  183,  224 

Prayer,  acceptance  of,  and  answers  to 

141,  183,  214 

Prayer  for  others 277,279 

Prayer  of  the  ungodly  and  the  hypocrite  ... 

168,  16i 
Prayer,  the  privilege  of     ...         ...         ...   214 

Prayer,  the  Lord's 101,239 

Prayer,  patterns  for,  in  the  Scriptures       ...   101 
Preachers,  hints  to  {See   Preachers,    in 

General  Index) 
Pride  209 

Priests  and  intercessors  for  others; 
the  privilege  of  believers  to  be  such  ; 
requires — 

1.  Deep  consciousness  of  the  evil  and  de- 

merit of  sin ; 

2.  High  regard  for  the  honour  and  interests 

of  God ; 

3.  Tender  compassion  for  our  fellow-meu  ; 

4.  A  forgiving  spirit  towards  enemies  ...   278 
Private  judgment,  the  right  and  duty  of  isee 

Right). 

Promises,  negative  and  positive        ...    39 
Promises  of  the  New  Testament  as  compared 

with  those  of  the  Old     74 

Promises,  made  to  repentance  : — 

1.  Cheerful   confidence  before    God   and 
men; 


2.  Deliverance  from  present  suffering ; 

3.  Abiding  peace  and  joy  ; 

4.  Safety  and  security  ; 

5.  Influeuce  for  good  among  men  ...     74 

Prosperity  of  the  ungodly  56,  77,  129 

Its  temporary  nature  ...  ...  .,,     56 

Prosperity  of  the  wicked — 

1.  One  of  the  mysteries  of  Providence ; 

2.  One  of  the  trials  of  good  men ; 

8.  One  of  the  proofs  of  a  future  judgment 

124,  128 

Providence,  God's  work  of        24,  36,  233 

Providence  ;  facts  connected  with  it — 

1.  The  ungodly  frequently  prosper  in  this 

life; 

2.  Their  prosperity  followed  by  a  speedy 

and  certain,  if  not  a  sudden,  fall ; 

3.  Their  children  often  sharers  in  their 

fall; 

4.  Their  wealth  often   the  prey  of  the 

rapacious  and  covetous       85 

Providence,  acts  of — 

1.  Causing  destruction,  as  in  the  Deluge; 

2.  Laying  restraints  on  individuals ; 

3.  Overruling  men's  mischief  and  misery  ; 

4.  Puuishing  nations  and  their  rulers  ; 

5.  Humbling  the  great ; 

6.  Disclosing  hidden  wickedness ; 

7.  Causing  a  nation's  increase  and  decay 

79,  80 
Providence ;  its  sovereignty  and  inscrutable- 

ness         132 

Its  irresistibleness  ...         ,••         ,••         ...  145 
Providential  dealings— 

1.  Probative; 

2.  Disciplinary  ...         ...         ,„         •••     68 

Providential  dealings,  with  respect— 

1.  To  the  ungodly; 

2.  To  the  poor ; 

3.  To  the  righteous — 

(1)  In  caring  for  them  ; 

(2)  In  exalting  them  ; 

(3)  In  correcting  them  ,,,         ••«  228 
Purposes  of  God     ,,«         •••  145 

R 
Ransom : 

1.  Meaning  and  application  of  the  term  ; 

2.  The  actual  ransom  in  Job      ...        24,     33 

3.  The  sinner's  ransom  found  or  provided 

by  God  Himself 212 

Reconciliation  with  God— 

1.  God's  reproof  with  a  view  to  it; 

2.  Possible  under  a  dispensation  of  mercy  ; 

3.  ¥irst  step  to  it  taken  by  God  Himself; 

4.  With  God  to  say,  whether  any  and  by 

what  means  ...  ...  ...  276 

Redeemer^  application  of  the  term — 

1.  To  the  nearest  kinsman  under  the  law  ; 

2.  To  God,  as  the  Redeemer  and  Deliverer 

of  1 1  is  people; 

3.  To  God  the  Son,  as  the  Redeemer  of  the 

Church   and  Saviour  of  the  human 
family  119 


EOMILETICAL  INDEX, 


H. 


Kedeemer,  Mj ;  the  language — 

1.  Of  appropriation ; 

2.  Of  faith; 
8.  Of  choice; 

4.  Of  love; 

5.  Of  knowledge  and  experience  \ 

6.  Of  satisfaction  ...         ...         •••  120 

Redemption  of  Christ;  one  from— 

1 .  The  curse  o(  a  broken  law ; 

2.  The  power  of  Satan  ; 

3.  The  punishment  of  sin  ; 

4.  Sin  itself; 

Redemption  of  Christ ;  effected — 

1.  By  purchase,  through  His  blood; 

2.  By  power,  through  His  Spirit — 

(1)  In    quickening  the   soul  to  a  new 

and  spiritual  life ; 

(2)  In  preserving  and  perfecting  it  in 

the  image  of  God  ...         ...  119 

Redemption,  God's  work  of,   what  it   in- 
cludes   234 

Religion,  true ;  its  excellence         l?i 

Lay  testimonies  in  favour  of  it      „•         •••  172 


...  276 


Repentaiic< 

1 .  Its  nature  % 

2.  Its  author ; 

3.  The  means  of  its  production  ; 

4.  Its  effects 
Repentance  ;  three  steps  in  it — 

1.  Preparation  or   right    disposition    of 

heart;  implying: 

(1)  Serious  consideration ; 

( 2)  Firm  purpose  ; 

(3)  Suitable  frame  and  disposition  j 

(4)  Removal  of  secret  sin  ; 

2.  Earnest  prayer ;  including— 

(1)  Confession  of  sin ; 

(2)  Supplication  for  mercy ; 

3.  Amendment ;  in  respect  to-* 

(1)  The  heart; 

(2)  The  hand ; 

(3)  The  house  74 

Repentance,  a  change  of  view  in  regard  both 

to  God  and  ourselves      ...         ...         ...  264 

Repentance,  Job's  ;  included — 

1.  A  believing  acknowledgment  of  God's 

omnipotence ; 

2.  A   humble  acceptance  of  Divine  re> 

proof ; 

3.  A  penitent  confession ; 

4.  A  sincere  desire  to  be  taught  of  God     271 

Rest  to  the  conscience ;  the  object — 

1.  Of  the  Saviour's  mission  ;  including— 

(1)  His  death ; 

(2)  His  resurrection ; 

(3)  His  ascension  into  heaven ; 

2.  Of  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

3.  Of  the  invitation  and  presence  of  Christ  219 

Resurrection ;  (the  result  of  a  New 

Dispensation  and  a  Second  Adam  ...     83 

Resurrection,  specimens  of  :— 

1.  Christ  Himself; 

2.  Those  restored  to  life  by  His  power ; 

t.  Those  who  rose  at  His  resurrection  ...     33 


Resurrection  not  unknown tothe  patriarchs...     50 
Resurrection,  an  example  of  the  power  of 

God         161 

Resurrection,  symbolized  in  spring...         ...  252 

Betarning  to  Ood ;  promises  annexed 

to  it : 

1.  Upbuilding; 

2.  Enjoyment  of  God  as  onr  Portion  and 

Defence ; 

3.  Delight  in  God  ; 

4.  Access  to  and  confidence  in  God  as  a 

reconciled  Father; 
6.  The  spirit  of  prayer,  and  acceptance  of 
onr  petitions ; 

6.  The  grace  of  thanksgiving  ; 

7.  Success  in  our  undertakings  ; 

8.  Comfort,  hope,  and  deliverance ; 

9.  Usefulness  to  others   ...         ...         ,„  140 

Riches      7 

Riches,  trust  in ;  a  common  form  of  idolatry  194 
Riches,  tmst  in ;  foolish  as  well  as  wicked  ; 
as — 

1.  Riches  are  uncertain,  and  may  soon  and 

suddenly  cease  to  be  ours  ; 

2.  They  are  unable  to  render  us  either  safe 

or  happy  while  we  possess  them  ; 

3.  They  fail  to  meet  the  most  important 

exigences  of  our  nature  ; 

4.  They  are  unable  to  accompany  us  into 

another  world         ...         ...         ...  194 

Riches,  loved  and  idolized  ;     When  ? 

1,  When  their  acquisition  and  enjoyment 

afford  more  delight  than  God  ; 

2.  When  we  are  more  concerned  about 

their   acquisition   and  increase  than 
about  God's  favour  ; 
8.  When  we  find  it  difficult  to  give  them 
up  at  God's  will  and  for  God's  Mr- 
vice  194 

Riches,  vain,  as — 

1.  Unable  to  satisfy  the  sonl ; 

2.  Sure  to  disappoint  those  who  troftt  ia 

them,  whether  for— 

(1)  Satisfaction ; 

(2)  Protection  ;  or, 

(3)  Continuance  ...         .•«         ...     97 

Right  of  Priyate  Judgment  78,  216 

1.  Men  possessed  of  a  faculty  by  which  to 

judge  of  statements   on  moral  and 
religious  subjects  ; 

2.  Man's  duty  to  exercise  that  faculty  in 

regard  to  such  subjects  ; 
8.  Human  authority  on  religious  subjects 

to  be  respected,  but  not  regarded  as 

paramount ; 
4.  The  right  of  private  judgment   to  be 

exercised  in   reference  to  moral  and 

religions  subjects — 

(1)  With  seriousuess  and  attention; 

(2)  With  candour  and  patience ; 
(8)  With  modesty  and  humility ; 

(4)  With    impartiality     and    without 

prejudice ; 

(5)  With  prayer  for  Divine  enlighten- 

ment      78 


nw. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


Kock,  the,  and  its  Shelter— 

1.  As  siuners  men  are  by  nature  exposed 

to  a  storm  :  this  storm  unequalled  by 
others,  as — 

(1)  Other  storms  aflfect  only  the  body  ; 

this  the  soul ; 

(2)  Others  endure  but  for  a  short  time  ; 

this  for  ever ; 

(3)  Others   may   leave   peace  within  ; 

this  fills  with  anguish  and  despair. 

2.  Men,    in   themselves,  are   without    a 

shelter. 

3.  Such  a    shelter  provided  in  Christ; 

Christ  as  a  Rock — 

(1)  Affords  perfect  safety  to  the  soul 
that  trusts  in  Him  ; 

(2)  Never  changes ; 

(3)  Is  sufficient  to  receive  and  shelter 

all  who  betake  themselves  to  Him; 

(4)  Is     comfortable    and    well-reple- 

nished ; 

(5)  Is  accessible  to  all ; 

(6)  Makes  all  welcome  to  its  shelter. 

4.  This  Rock  to  be  "embraced"  ...  148 

Rulers— 

1.  Their  justice  implied  in  their  office ; 

2.  Under  the  most  solemn  obligations  to 

be  just; 

3.  To  be  not  only  just  but  beneficent  ; 

4.  Reverence  due  to    them    from    their 

office  ; 

5.  Subject  to  God's  ordiuatiou  ...     218,  220 

S. 
Sacrifices.     What  P 
What  in  patriarchal  times,  and  under  the 

law ; 
Their  early  origin  ; 
Their  object  and  use  ; 
Their  meaning ; 
Different  kinds  of  sacrifices ; 
Their  naturalness ; 
Their  universality  ; 
Their  insufficiency ; 
The  Great  Sacrifice        9,  277 

Salvation;  including — 

1.  Satisfaction  to  Divine  justice  for  sin  ; 

2.  Regeneration,  or  renewal  of  our  nature  265 

Satan — 

1.  His  name  ; 

2.  His  personality  ; 

3.  His  nature  and  character; 

4.  His  works      ,         ,„     11 

The  accuser  of  the  good     ...     12 

His  lies       12,     20 

His  malignity  and  cruelty  ...       18,  19,  20,     51 
His  mysterious  power         ...         ...        15,     18 

Under  God's  control,  and  employed  for  His 

purposes         13,  61 

The  sphere  of  his  operation  ...  ..  14 

His  object 17,  19,  20 

His  power  in  regard  to  believers  limited  ...  18 
His  ingenuity  in  tempting  and  tormenting 

18,  51 

His  suggestions      ...         ,„         .^         ...  20 


His  defeat  ... 

His  character  as  a  deceirer 

As  a  slanderer 
As  an  adversary 
Symbolized  by  Leviathan   . 


23 

97 

116 

184 

270 


Second  Appearing,  the  Lord's ;  to  bo 

desired  and  longed  for,  as — 

1.  The  time  of  full  redemption  to  be- 

lievers ; 

2.  The  same  to  all  the  brethren,  living  or 

departed ; 

3.  The  time  of  deliverauce  to  the  whole 

creation ; 

4.  The  time  when  Christ  shall  be  mani- 

fested in  glory ; 

5.  The  period  for  the  creation  of  the  new 

heavens  and  the  new  earth 121 

See  God,  to— 

1.  The  blessedness  of  the  glorified ;  im- 

plies— 

(1)  A  much  higher  and  clearer  know- 

ledge of  God  ; 

(2)  Enjoyment  of  immediate  and  unin- 

terrupted fellowship  with  Him  ; 

(3)  More  blessful  consciousness  of  Hit 

favour  and  love  ; 

(4)  Fuller  understanding  of  His  present 

providential  dealings ; 

2.  The  joyful   anticipation  of    believers 

here ;  implies — 

(1)  A  conscious  state  of  peace  and  re- 

conciliation with  God ; 

(2)  A  renewed  nature,  capable  of  de- 

lighting in  God  and  His  fellow- 
ship ; 

(3)  Purity  of  heart  and  conscious  in- 

tegrity of  character       ...         ...   121 

Self- righteousness  ...  ...  ...         ...     62 

Servants  or  slaves ;  Job's  humane  treatment 
of  them,  grounded  on  the  considera- 
tion— 

1.  That  he  was  amenable  to  God  for  his 

treatment  of  them ; 

2.  That  they  had  the  same  Creator  and 

mode  of  creation  with  himself ; 

3.  That  he  and  they  possessed  a  common 

nature         190,  191 

Sick,  healing  of  the  ...         213 

Sin  and  its  consequences         30 

Its  deceivableness    ...         ...         •••         *•«     97 

Its  own  recompense  ...         •••         •••     ib' 

Its  short-lived  prosperity 124 

Sin,  as  injury  against  Cod — 

1.  Robs  Him  of  His  honour; 

2.  Tramples  upon  His  authority ; 

3.  Transgresses  His  laws  ; 

4.  Disturbs  His  dominions ; 

5.  Brings  disorder  into  His  government ; 

6.  Interferes  with  His  enjoyment  of  Hi« 

own  works ; 

7.  Obliterates  His  image  and  substitutes 

that  of  His  adversary         5S 

Son^s  in  the  Night,  given  by  God — 

1    T .  Tiie  SoNOS  themselves : 


HOMILETICAL   INDEX. 


XllL 


1.  Of  joy  and  gladness  ; 

8.  Of  praise  and  thanksgiving  \ 

Such  songs — 

(1)  The  sweetest ; 


(2) 
(8) 


)  The  holiest ; 
The  most  lasting. 


225 


II.  The  FIOHT,  when  given  >— 

1.  The  natnral  night ; 

2.  The  night  of  trouble  : — 
Q)  Of  personal  affliction  ; 
(2)  Of  temporal  adversity  ; 
(8)  Of  painfal  bereavement  ; 

(4)  Of  persecution  from  the  world; 

(5)  Of  spiritual  darkness  and  deser- 

tion ; 

(6)  Of  death  and  its  solemn    ap- 

proaches. 

III.  How  GiVKN  bv  God  : 

1.  By  bringing  into  trouble  ; 

2.  By  comforting  nnder  it ; 

3.  By  delivering  out  of  it  ,,,         . 
Sovereignty,  God's  ;  fitted — 

1.  To  silence  mnrmurings  undei*  afflictions 

and  trials  ; 

2.  To  pacify  and  rest  the  soul  under  dark 

dispensations  and   mysterious    pro- 
vidences ; 

3.  To  comfort  the  heart  in  the  view  of 

abonnding  sin  and  misery  ...         ...   159 

Speech,  a  Christian's  91,     92 

Spirit- World ;  what  to  believers 
under  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament 
dispensations  70,  90,  91,  157 

Its  Lessons — 

1.  The     comparative     insignificance      of 

worldly  prosperity  or  adversity  ; 

2.  The  importance  of  securing  a  place  of 

happiness  in  that  world  of  spirits  ; 
8.  The  value  of  the  Gospel  that  reveals  its 
character ; 

4.  The  necessity  of  an  interest  in  Him  who 

has  the  keys  of  it    ...         ...         ...     91 

"^he  spirit-world,  hidden  from  and  impene- 
trable to  men  while  in  the  body  ...         ...  248 

Spring ;  the  season  of — 

1.  Returning  brightness  and  sunshine  ; 

2.  Warmth  and  comfort ; 

3.  Revived  life,; 

4.  Freshness  and  beauty ; 

5.  Joyonsness  and  gaiety  ; 

6.  Love. 

Spring,  fitted  and  intended— 

1.  To  awaken  gratitude  ; 

2.  To  picture  forth  another  Spring,  vi«. : 

(1)  When    the    soul  is   renewed    and 

quickened  to  spiritual  life  ; 

(2)  When  the  drooping  believer  is  re- 

stored to  liveliness  aad  comfort ; 
(8)  When  both  the  Church  and  the 
earth  itself  shall  be  renewed  in 
life  and  beauty  at  the  Lord's 
Second  Advent  ...         ...  251 

State  of  the  Dead ;  light  regarding  it 
introduced  by  the  Gospel — 
1.  By  Christ's  teaching ; 


2.  By  his  death,  resurrection,  and  ascen- 
sion into  heaven ; 
Hence  the  threefold  duty  of  believers-^ 

1.  Of  thankfulness ; 

2.  Of  joyfulness ; 

3.  Of  heavenly-mindedness         70 

States  after  Death,  only  two  88 

Success  in  undertakings       ...         ...  ...   141 

Sufi'ering,  the  benefit  of,      25,  49 

Suffering  reconcilable  with  God's  goodness : 

as — 

1.  No  suffering  but  as  the  effect  of  sin ; 

2.  Suffering    overruled    for    God's    own 

glory ; 
8.  Suffering  made  conducive  to  our  own 
happiness ; 

4.  The  suffering  of  one  made  to  contribute 

to  the  benefit  of  another. 

TeacMng,  Diyine;  required  in  afflic- 
tion— 

1.  In  regard  to  sin  ; 

2.  In  regard  to  duty       .^         ,.,         ...  220 

Divine  Teaching : — 

I.  Its     EXCELLENCE    {jiee    '*  God     as     a 

Teacher  ") ; 

II.  Its  NECESSITY  ; 

III.  The  MEANS  by  which  it  is  carried  on  :— 

1.  God's  word ; 

2.  His  works; 

'6.  His  Providential  dealings  ; 
4.  His  Spirit ; 

IV.  The  SUBJECTS  embraced  by  it  :— 

1.  Ourselv'.s ; 

2.  Qui-  duty  ; 

3.  Our  happiness,  wherein  it  consists  and 

how  it  is  obtained  ; 

4.  Virtue  or  holiness; — 

(1)  Its  nature ; 

(2)  Its  excellence  ; 

(3)  Its  means  of  attainment ; 

5.  Sin,— its  nature,  malignity,  and  conse- 

quences ; 

6.  Salvation,  or  deliverance  from  sin  and 

its  effects  ; 

7.  God  Himself,  in  His  Being,  Perfections, 

and  Relations  to  mankind  ; 

8.  Jesus  Christ,  in  His  Person,  Work,  and 

Offices  as  our  Redeemer      282 

Temptation — 

1.  Believers  liable  to  all  kinds  of  it ; 

2.  Temptation  only  sinful  when  yielded  to  ; 
8.  Frequently  presented  in  order  to  escape 

suffering       ...         ...  ...         ...    231 

Thanksgiving,  the  grace  of,...  141 

Time— 

1.  Its  rapid  flight  and  short  duration; 

2.  Its  value ; 

3.  Danger  of  trifling  with  it       50 

Tradition     ...  ...  ...         ..«         ...     65 

Training,  early        ...         192 

Trials,  result  of,  to  a  believer— 

1.  Justification  of  his  faith ; 

2.  Confirmation  of  his  hope ; 

8.  Purificatian  of  his  1ot«         ...         »«•  148 


nv. 


IIOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


Trouble,  various  kinds  of       86 

Trouble,  uses  of,  to  a  believer — 

1.  Purifies  him  ; 

2.  Preserves  him ; 

3.  Makes  him  fruitful; 

4.  Teaches  him ; 

5.  Brings  him  richer  consolation; 

6.  Confurms  him  to  Christ        ...         ...     27 

Trouble  — 

1.  Its  origin; 

2.  Its  universality; 

3.  Its  certainty  ...  ...  ...  •••     36 

Trouble ;  our  duty  and  comfort  under  it   ...     55 
God  to  be  sought  to  in  trouble — 

1.  For  counsel  and  direction  in  it ; 

2.  For  comfort  and  support  under  it ; 

3.  For  grace  to  glorify  God  by  it ; 

4.  For  timely  deliverance  out  of  it ; 

5.  For  benefit  and  improvement  through  it     36 
Trouble,  an  inheritance      ...         ...         ...     48 

God  the  only  help  and  refuge  in  it  ...     5B 

Trouble,  to  a  believer ;  may  be — 

1.  On  account  of  past  or  present  sin; 

2.  For  trial  and  manifestation  of  grace; 

3.  For  purification  and  spiritual  growth  ; 

4.  For  exhibition  of  Divine  support      ...     67 

True  Keligion ;  man's  highest  wisdom  1 7 1 
Lay  testimonies  to  its  value  and  importauce   172 

Trust  in  God— 

1 .  Trust ;  implies— 
(1)  Faith; 

^2)  Hope; 
(3)  Patience. 

2.  Trust  in  Ood  /  is  trust— 

(1)  In  His  goodness; 

(2)  In  His  wisdom ; 

(3)  In  His  faithfulness ; 

(4)  In  His  justice ; 

(5)  In  His  power. 
Such  trust  to  be  exercised — 

1.  In  the  deepest  darkness ; 

2.  Under  the  greatest  discouragements ; 
8.  In  danger  and  difficulties ; 

4.  In  the  absence  of  all  help  from  our- 

selves and  others ; 

5.  In  spite  of  all  appearances 194 

U 
Unchangeableness  of  God 145 

Ungodly,  the  lot  of ;  in  reference — 

1.  To  their  children; 

2.  To  their  possessions; 

3.  To  their  persons        165 

Unseareliableness  of  God — 

1.  In  His  person  ; 

2.  In  His  perfections; 
8.  In  His  purposes; 

4.  In  His  procedure. 

Lessons  from  God's  unsearchableness— 

1.  Modesty  and  humility  in  judging  of 

God's  being  and  ways  ; 

2.  Submission  to  His  will  ; 

8,  Trust  in  His  wisdom  and  goodness ; 

4.  Loving  and  adoring  reverence  ,„     72 


W 
Warning"  to  Sinners —  230 

I.  Their    Dangbbs    "There    is  wrath;'* 
which  is — 

1.  Righteous; 

2.  Holy; 

8.  Intolerable ; 

4.  Irremovable  by  creature-power. 

II.  Their  Duty  t  "  Beware :  "  implying— 

1.  An  awaking  to  consciousness  and  con- 

sideration of  the  danger  ; 

2.  A  halting  in  our  present  course; 

3.  Earnest    inquiry   as    to    the   way    ot 

deliverance ; 

4.  Immediate  obedience  to  Divine  direc- 

tion. 

III.  The  DOOM  of  neglecting  the  duty: 

"Lest  He  take  thee  away,"  &c 230 

Water,  a  comparison  and  contrast ...         ...     94 

Whirlwind,  or  Storm-cloud,    spoken 
from  by  Jehovah  :  expressive  of — 

1.  The  majesty  of  the  speaker  ; 

2.  The  weightiness  of  the  matter; 

3.  The  power  of  the  Almighty  to  accom- 

plish His  purposes  ; 

4.  The  terribleness  of  His  displeasure. 
Intended — 

1.  To  awaken  more  solemn  attention  ; 

2.  To  convey  a  deeper  impression  ; 

3.  To    produce   deeper    conviction   and 

humiliation...         ...         ...         ...  243 

Believers  still  occasionally  addressed  out  of 
a  whirlwind        ,         ...     ib. 

Wicked,  The— 

1.  Their  character ; 

2.  Their  temporary  prosperity  ; 

3.  Their  subsequent  misery  95,  124,  151 
Their  experience  and  fate    ...        110, 131,  151 

Wickedness;  ^^ great^ — 

1.  Absolutely  :  as  committed— 

(1)  Against  a  ^r^a^  Godi 

(2)  Against  great  obligations  to  the 

contrary ; 

(3)  With  comparatively  little  induce- 

menl  to  commit  it ; 

(4)  With  great  evil  to  ourselves  and 

others  as  the  result  of  it ;  hence — 

(5)  Requiring  a  great  atonement  to 

expiate  it. 

2.  CoMPABATiVELT,  ou  the  part  of  some; 

as  committed — 

f  1)  With  greater  boldness ; 

(2)  With  greater  obligations  to  the 
contrary  ; 

(8)  With  greater  knowledge  and  meana 
of  resistance; 

(4)  With  less  temptation  to  the  com- 
mission of  it    ...         ...         ..•  186 

Wisdom,  true ;  Job's  descant  on  it — 

1.  Man's  inability   by  his  own   unaided 

powers  either  to  discover  or  acquire 

it; 

2.  Its  supreme  excellence ; 


UOMILETICAL  INDKX. 


XV. 


3.  Its   origin   and   discoveiy    with    God 

Himself; 

4.  Its  nature — the  fear  of  God  and  de- 

parture from  evil 166 

Wisdom,  true ;  its  superiority  over  all  earthly 
treasures  ;  evinced  by — 

1.  Its  intrinsic  excellence  ; 

2.  Its  ability  to  afford  true  and  solid  hap« 

piness ; 

3.  Its  endless  durability  168 

Wise  Man,  the.    Who? 

1.  That  understands  God's  character  and 

ways,  and  is  able  to  interpret  them 
to  others ; 

2.  Who  knows  what   both   himself  and 

others  ought  to  do,  and  does  it; 

3.  Who  faithfully  and  intelligently  aims 

at   the  best  interests  of  himself  and 
his  fellow-men        ...   108 

Words,  our — 

Our  responsibility  for  them  ...         ,.,     24 

The  index  of  the  heart        222 

Words,  Ri^ht ;  "  how  forcible,**  &o. — 
I.  Their  form  as  "  words:  "— 

1.  Argument; 

2.  Reproof; 

3    Instruction ; 

4.  Admonition; 

5.  Promise : 

il.  Their  character  as  "right"  words— 

1.  Eight  and  true  in  themselves ; 

2.  The  whole  truth,  so  far  as  necessary  in 

connection  with  the  subject ; 

3.  Correct  in  their  application; 

4.  Spoken  in  uprightness  and  sincerity  : — 
III.  Their  efficacy  or  Forcibleness — 

J.  In  enlightening  the  understanding; 

2.  In  awakening  the  conscience  ; 

3.  In  moving  the  affections  and  will; 

4.  In  imparting  comfort  ...        45,    46 

Words  of  God— 

I.  To  be  laid  up  in  our  heart:—" 

1.  For  what  purposes — 

(1)  For  remembrance ; 

(2)  For  meditation ; 

(3)  For  use ; 

2.  By  what  means — 


(1)  By  deep  attention  ; 
(2) 


By  frequent  reading  or  hearing ; 
(3)  By  serious  reflection. 
11    To  be  highly  esteemed — 

1.  Esteemed  as  our  most  precious  trea- 

sure ; 

2.  Chosen  and  adopted  as  our  only  rule 

of  faith  and  practice; 

8.  Carefully    treasured    \^    in  our  me- 
mory ;  \ 

4.  Held  fast  and  persevered  in  ...     139,  144   ) 


Words  of  the  Iloly  One;  in  the  shape 

of- 

1.  Doctrines; 

2.  Promises ; 

3.  Covenants       43 

Word  of  God— 

I.  Reasons  for  highly  esteeming  it : — 

1.  \i^  source  and  origin, — God  Himself; 

2.  Its  nature  and  character^  as — 

(1)  Pure  ; 

(2)  True ; 

(3)  Efficacious ; 

3.  Its  tendency  and  end, — as 

(1)  A  means  of  convincing  of  sin  and 

error  ; 
(2^  A  means  of  conversion  ; 

(3)  The  Spirit's  instrument  in  regenera- 

tion ; 

(4)  The  means  of  spiritual  enlighten- 

ment ; 

(5)  Our  directory  as  to  duty  and  the 

way  of  salvation ; 

(6)  The  means  of  spiritual  comfort  and 

refreshment ; 

(7)  The  means  of  our  sanctification; 

(8)  The  means  of  spiritual  fruitlulness; 

(9)  The  means  of  perfecting  (-hristian 

character ; 
(10)  The  means  of  preparing  the  believer 
for  usefulness  : 

II.  Evidences  of  our  highly  esteeming  it : 

1.  When  it  is  attentively  read  or  heard; 

2.  When   it  is   seriously   and  frequently 

pondered ; 

3.  When  it  is  carefully  treasured  up  in 

the  memory  ; 

4.  When  it  is  preferred  to  earthly  com- 

forts and  possessions  ; 
6.  When  we  make  our  own  views,  &c.,  to 

yield  to  it ; 
6.  When  suffering  and  loss  are  preferred 

to  the  violation  of  its  precepta        ...  144 

Work,  God's  :    Threefold  :— 

1.  Creation  ; 

2.  Providence; 

8.  Redemption 24,  86,  233 

God's  work  : — 

1.  Apt  to  be  shut  out  from  our  thoughts  ; 

2.  Our  duty  as  intelligent  creatures  to  ob- 

serve  it ; 
8.  Our  distinction  as  creatures  to  be  capable 
of  admiring  and  praising  it ; 

4.  His  work  such  as  to  demand  our  ad- 

miration and  praise ; 

5.  Admired  and  praised  by  good  men  in 

all  ages ; 

6.  Everywhere  visible  and  conspicuous 

86,  232,  183 
Worship  of  the  heavenlj  bodies     ,.,         ...  195 


(^tmxnl   Jntrjef* 


4belUl         l^S 

Abyssinia    ...         ...         ...         ...  ...    117 

Access  to  God,  a  result  of  sanctified  affliction  213 


46, 


Af-qnisition  of  knowledge 

Actinism 

Jc/am  C/arke,  sayings  of 

Addiwft,  a  snying  of  ...  .., 

A'lrian  Pope,  the  death  of  ... 

Adullam,  Cave  of  ...         ...         ... 

Adultery      

Adversity,  a  test  of  friendship 

Afflictions,  value  and  improvement  of 

Albigenses,  The      ...         ...         ... 

Alcyon,  a  star  in  the  Pleiades         ... 

Alfred  the  Or  eat,  anecdote  of 

Ahxander  the  Great,  his  burial-place 

Alexis,  the  friend  of  Luther  ... 

Alma,  battle  of       ...         ,„         ... 

Ambition,  quotation  on       ...         ... 

Ambrose,  a  saying  of         ...         ... 

America,  discovery  of         

Amhariclanguage,  The       

Angels 

not  to  be  prayed  to,  or  employed  as  in- 
tercessors         34,  132, 

Anger         

^«^/(?-5'a;ro«*,  deities  of     ... 

Animal  Creation,  The  ;  evidences  of  God's 
attributes  and  perfections        ,  . 

Animals  viewed  as  symbols  .. 

■    ■■        their  effect  on  the  atmosphere 

'  cared  for  by  the  Creator    ... 

designed  for  man's  instruction 


80 
263 
166 

67 

33 
148 
190 

21 

15 
122 
252 
211 

24 
235 

84 
208 
211 
234 
117 
9,  10,  32 


153 
109 
195 


...  255 
...     81 

...  159 
...  255 
...  259 
37,  158 
...  255 


Aniroakulse . 

Animated  Nature,  to  be  studied  by  man 
Anomalies    apparent    in    the    Divine   pro- 
cedure...        ...         ...         ...         ...     65 

Antiochus  Epiphanes,  persecution  under  ...     29 

Antelope,  The         256 

Jpollo,  temple  of,  in  London         195 

A  poll  yon,  Bunyan's  description  of...         ...  271 

Arab  jars 19 

proverbs        66,  73,  175,  259 

hospitality     HO,  115,  19? 

houses  and  tents        115,  173 

garments       135 

charity  ...         , ib, 

poems  84 

■  poets 31 

poetry  30 

Arabs,  their  incursions        ...         ...         .,,     14 

their  tokens  of  mourning 15 

thfciruse  of  salt      42 

their  fondness  for  poetical  and  pro- 
verbial maxims 55,  82 

their  belief  in  predestination  ...     87 

their  national  boast 94 


Arabs,  their  saying  in  regard  to  blood      .••  102 

their  usual  demeanour         ...  ...  109 

their  power  of  extempore  versification   110 

their  respect  for  age  ...         ...  178 

the  addictedness  of  the  lower  classes 

to  abusive  language         ...         ...  180 

Arabia,  famous  for  its  wise  men    ...         ...     94 

Arabian  Idolatry     195 

Aram,         ...         ...  ...         ...         ...  202 

Aramsean  language ...         ...         ...         ...  203 

Archbishop  Ussher,  saying  of        ...      156,  206 
ArchiaSy  death  of,   ...         ...         •••         ...     50 

Arcturus      ...         ...         60 

Aristides  the  Just  ...         ...         ...         ...     93 

Aristotle     ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  170 

Arkwriffht  ...  ...          ...  ...  ...   254 

Armngeddon,  battle  of,       ...         ...      249,  261 

Ass,  in  a  wild  state 42,  148,  25? 

Astronomy,  teaching  of,  in  regard  to  God...     72 

Athenians  and  the  Unknown  God 36 

Atmosphere,  the      ...       169,  235 

Augustine y  sayings  of,        ...  16,  20,  30,  31,  34 

his  admonition  to  preachers      ...   156 

incidents  in  his  history...  27,  50 

his   comparison  in  reference  to 

God      241 

Augustus,  anecdote  of  the  Emperor  ...  196 

Aurora  Borealis      253 

Avenging  Furies •        ...     96 

B 

Babel-builders         ...         87 

Babylon,  the  parent  of  idolatry     195 

Bacon,  his  famous  saying  in  regard  to  read- 
ing, &c.  81 

Barachel,  meaning  of  the  name,  „.         ...  202 

Barrow,  Dr.,  saying  of       80 

Basque  proverb,  a   ...         ...         ...         ...     14 

B.ittle  of  Armageddon         249,261 

iiaxier,  Richard,  a  saying  of         ...         ...   141 

Bear,  the  Great       60,  251 

Beasts,  man's  superiority  to  the     225 

Beauty         281 

Bechnanas  ...         ...         ...  180 

Bedin,  the 256 

Bedouins,  boast  of  the       ...         .,,         ...     34 

their  character     85,147 

their  independence  ...         ...  257 

Beecher,  Henry  W.,  sayings  of,     ...  24^  28,  224 

Behemoth,  what  P „  226 

Benevolence,  early  habits  of  ..«         ...  193 

Bible,  its  preciousness       ...         „,         ...  144 

the  first  printed      „,         ,„         ...  117 

— Society         ...         ,^         ib. 

Birds  861 

Birds  of  passage „        ...     ib. 

Birs  Nimroud        ...         ,,.         ,„         ...     87 
Bishop  Hall,  saying  of      ,         ...     27 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


ivu. 


Blood,  innocent      .. 
Body,  the  human   ... 
Book  of  Nature,  its  teachings 
its  deficiency 


102 

,..   67,  68 

77 

>•.   ...  78 

205 

254 

211 

179 

...22,23,  25 


Bottles,  skin 

Brain,  the  ...         

Breniius,  saying  of  ... 

Britons,  ancient 
Brookes,  sayings  of 

27,80,38,40,129,211,130 
Broom,  or  juniper,  roots  of  ...         ...  179 

Bulls  of  Bashau      ...         ...         ...         ...  258 

Burial,  want  of       ...         ...         ...         ...  165 

Burke,  Edmund,  his  testimony  in  regard  to 

true  religion    ...         ...         172 

BurnSf  Robert,  his  lines  in  regard  to  worldly 

pleasure  ...         ...         ...     50 

his  testimony  to  true  religion  172 

Butter        174 


Buz 


...  202 


Caaba,  the 195 

Cadmus,  the  Phenician      167 

Caffraria     ...         ...  ...         ...         ...  180 

Cain,  descendants  of  ...   167 

(7air{7,  cemetery  of ...         24 

Canaan,  the  seven  nations  of         ...         ...     80 

Cannibals  of  Fiji 176 

Ca'pra  ^gagra,  the  ...         ...  ...  256 

Caravans,  Eastern  ...         ...  ...        45,  173 

Carlyle,  sayings  of 106,  242 

6'ar/)^«/^r,  i)r.,  quotation  from     ...         ...   160 

Caryl,  Joseph,  sayings  of    ... 
Cave  of  Adullam     ... 
Caves,  dwellers  in  ... 

the  refuge  of  the  persecuted  ... 

Caverns      

Celestial  Council,  the         ...         ...         ... 

Cemetery  of  Cairo,  its  teachings 

Ceatrifugal  force    ... 

Cephren,  founder  of  the  Second  Pyramid  ... 

Casar  ...         ...         ...         ...         ... 

Ceesar  Borgia         ...  ...  ... 

Casar,  Julius,  death  of      ...         ...         ... 

Ceesar'fl  Golden  Palace  at  Rome     ...         ... 

Chaldeea     ...         ...  ,,,         ,,,         .,, 

Chaldeeans  ...  ...  ...         ,„ 

Chalmers,  Dr.,  quotation  from       ... 

Chalybes,  or  Cyclops 

Charles  IX.,  of  France,  death  of 

Charles  M artel 

Chastity 

Chemistry,  an  example  of  Divine  wisdom...  169 

Cheops,  the  founder  of  the  Great  Pyramid 

25,  117 

Chesid        14 

Chester,  inscription  on  a  house  in...         ...     39 

Children 16 

often     the     inheritors    of    their 

parents'  sins    and    punishment 

35,  124,  132,  165 
■     -  how  regarded  in  the  East  ...     40 

■'  an     element   of     prosperity    and 

happiness        ...         ...         ...  129 

-,  their  removal  by  death 281 


21,25,70,     96 

148 

179 

ib. 

148 

9 

24 

158 

25 

15 

...     50 

...     50 

I.         ...     25 

.         •••  195 

...     14 

...  160 

...  167 

30,  103,  122 

...  246 

...  188 


Christ,  the  Substitute       ...         ...    9, 42,  69 

the  One  Mediator  ...         ...         ...  65 

the  Physician  of  Souls       ...        66,  96 

our  Surety  and  Righteousness      ...  83 

the  First-fruits  of  Resurrection    ...  88 

our  Advocate         ...         ...         ...  103 

our  Hope  ...         ...         ...         ...  108 

our  Friend             ...  116 

our  Redeemer        119,  1 20 

a  Master 139 

a  Rock  for  Shelter            ...         ...  149 

the  Counsellor       ...         ...         ...  155 

our  Head  and  Representative    162,  177 

the  Perfect  Man 177 

— — —  the  Messenger  of  the  Covenant    ...  211 

;-—  the  High  Priest 277 

Christian  perfection            ...         5 

Chrysostom,  saying  of        ...         .••         ...  214 

City  Arabs 179 

Cities,  warning  for 150 

in  the  East 174 

gates  of         ...         •         ,,,  ib. 

Cleopatra's  Palace  at  Alexandria   ..«         ...  25 

Clothing,  materials  for       193 

the  poor ih. 

Clouds        ...          60 

their  uses    ...         ...         ...         ...  158 

mystery  connected  with  them 

235,  237,  238,  250 

Coal,  beds  of          167,  233 

Cold           238 

Comfort  of  believers  in  times  of  darkness...  143 

Copernican  theory  of  Solar  System           ...  249 

Couflict  between  God  and  Satan    ...         ...  83 

Conscience...         ...         ...         ,,,         „.  47 

"■  terrors  of          ...         ...         ...  Ill 

Conscious  innocence           .,,         ....        ...  47 

Consistency,  ministerial      ...          ...         ...  28 

Constantine^  the  Great,  saying  of...          ...  24 

Constellations         60,  160,  257 

Controversy             ...          ...          ...         ...  109 

Corinth,  the  profligates  of 180 

Council,  the  Celestial         ...          ...          ...  9 

Countenance,  an  index  of  the  heart           ...  47 

Courage,  true           61 

Courts,  where  held  in  the  East       174 

Covetousness           ...         ...         ...         ...  189 

Cowper,  quotations  from        115,  122,  180,  137, 

140,  143,  153,  173,  191,  196,  237 

Cranmer,  Archbishop,  anecdote  of  162,  193,  231 

Cm^*2<*,  a  Roman  General ...         ...         ...  95 

Creation,  account  of,  in  Genesis     ...         ...  68 

Crescent,  the           195 

Crocodile,  the         160,  268 

Cruelty         147 

Crust,  the  earth's    ...         , 245,  247 

Cuvier,  quotation  from       „,         „,         ...  266 

Cyclops       167 

Cyrus  the  Great „         ...  93 


D 


Day  of  wrath           

... 

...  127 

Day  and  night,  vicissitude  of. 

... 

168,  247 

Daysman,  a ... 

... 

...     65 

Dead,  state  of  the 

... 

...     70 

place  of  the   ...         ,,, 

■•• 

...  157 

rvTU. 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


Death,  the  origin  of ...  ,       85,86 

Deference  to  leniore  and  superiors  in  the 

East IJ^ 

Delay,  danger  of     J^ 

Di  liverance  from  temporal  evils     o9 

Dens,  the  refuge  of  the  persecuted 179 

Depravity,  human  ...         ..«         ...86,93,130 

Depths  of  the  ocean  216 

Dew 250 

in  the  East IH 

comparisons  to  it  in  Scripture  ...  250 

Diana,  temple  of,  at  Westminster 195 

Discovery  of  sin     ...         ...         ...         •••     8t 

Disease,  Job's         ...         ...         ...  19,  49 

. lessons  from  it         ...         ...     49 

Diseases,  often  the  result  of  sin     125 

often  iostantaneously  removed  by 

the  finger  of  God  278 

Dissimulation  ..«         ...         •••  81,  82 

Dogs  in  the  East 178 

Domestic  blessings •••        40,173 

Dorcas         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  193 

Dragon,  the  constellation  of  the    .,,         ...  160 

Dragon  or  Leviathan  160,  268 

Dreams,  diflFerent  kinds  of,...         ...         ...     51 

Dregs  of  society,  how  to  be  treated  ...  179 

Dnke  of  Alva  122 

Duncan's  Philosophy  of  the  Seasons,  quota- 
tion from        253 


Epicurus „ 

EpiphaniuSy  saying  of        ...         „ 
Erasmus^  saying  of 

a  saying  concerning  him 


Eagle,  the    ...         ...         ,.• 

viewed  as  a  symbol ... 

Early  devotion        

training        

Earth,  formation  of  the     .„ 
its  crust       ...         ... 

■  its  interior  ...         ... 

its  extent     ...         ... 

Earthquakes  

East,  the    ...         ...         ... 

men  of  the     ...         ,„ 

Eastern  manners 

mirrors     

produce     

■  cities  ...         ... 

'  towns  and  villages 

{See  Oriental). 

Education 

Egypt^        

Egyptian  kings  and  statesmen 

tombs       

hieroglyphics 


262 

263 

8 

192 

, 245 

...  245,  247 

, 247 

248 

...   60,  79 

7 

...    ...  ib. 

116,  174,  197 

239 

174 

.•*    ...  'o. 

*••       ...   Ivl 


»••     ••*  »54i 

>••    ...  80 

I*.     ••«  ^u 

ib. 

60.  174,  189 

Electricity,  a  product  of  Divine  wisdom    ...  170 

—  still  a  mystery            ...      236,  250 

Elephant,  the          266 

Elephantiasis          ,,,        19,  49 

EUhu\  his  place  in  the  poem         , 201 

his  personality        ...         202 

■  his  character           203 

his  motives  for  speaking     ib 

his  resolution          205 

■  viewed  as  a  type  of  Christ  and  an 

example  to  preachers      ...          ,.  202 

Eliphaz ;  viewed  as  an  example  to  preachers  4 1 

Ejnotetiu,%&y'\\igQi           129 


...  170 
...     t^. 

...  156 
_  ^  •••     28 

Evening      159 

jE'p^/^w,  t7(?A»,  his  epitaph  on  himself        ...  172 

Example,  influence  of        107 

Extempore  versification,  Arab        ...     110,  180 
Extortion,  common  in  the  East 200 


...  89 

...  118 

...  261 

...  253 

...  8 

...  252 

...  117 

...  101 

6,29,92,171,  194 

...  261 

...  162 

...  193 

7.  129 

...  167 

...  110 

...  159 

...68,  69,  184 

...  23 


Faith,  its  preciousness        ...        •••       16,  136 

its  nature      , 44 

-  Job  s  ...         «.•         «•• 

the  Christian's         

Falcon,  the 

Falling  Stars  ...         

Family  worship       

Faraday,  Professor^  on  natural  laws 
FaustyJohn  ... 

Faust  us,  son  of  Vortigern  ... 
Fear  of  God 
Feathers,  structure  of 
Female  martyr,  saying  of  a 
Fenelotty  saying  of  ...         ., 

Festivity      ...  

Fire,  subterranean  ... 

Fires  of  hospitality,  Arab  ., 

Flemivg,  Professor^  quotation  from 

Flesh,  the  ;  its  views  of  God 

Flesh  and  spirit  in  believers 

Flower,  man  compared  to  a  •••         ...     86 

Force,  Conservation  of       ...         ...         ...  252 

Forces,  centripetal  and  centrifugal ...      158,  252 
Fountains  bequeathed  by  rich  Arabs  ...  135 

in  the  bottom  of  the  sea  ..>  246 

France        80,80,  102 

Franklin,  saying  of 24 

French,  attempts  of,  against  England        ...     37 
■■    Revolution  ...         ...         ...  234 

Friends,  Job's  three  •         ...     21 

Friendship  proved  in  adversity      21 

the  blessing  of      21,  104, 116,  280 

true  and  false  ...         •••        ...    46 

G 

Galaxy,  the 

{See  Milky  Way), 
Galen,  anecdote  of  .,« 

Garments,  Arab      ...         .., 

<zd!mc^,  saying  of  ...         „, 
Gates  of  Oriental  cities       .., 
Gazelle,  the...  ...  ... 

Geology,  the  teaching  of    ... 
Ghizeh,  the  Great  Pyramid  of 
Gilpin,  Bernard,  anecdote  of 
Goat,  wild  ... 

Goel,  redeemer,  or  near  kinsman 
Gold  found  in  Arabia 

abundant  in  Job's  time 

believers  compared  to  it 

Goldsmith,  Oliver:  his    testimony  to  trac 

religion  172 

Gospel,  the;  as  contrasted  with  the  law    ...     69 
— — —  its     restorative    and     elevating 

power 180 


•M 

••• 

67 

••• 

.*• 

135 

••• 

156 

*•• 

174 

«•• 

256 

.*• 

72 

... 

25 

.•• 

39 

.*« 

256 

*•• 

119 

... 

166 

... 

168 

... 

143 

GENERAL  INDEX, 


xlx. 


Goipal  Age ...        ...        ...        ,„ 

Grace,  the  traest  heroism • 

Grace  and  Nature ,.. 

Grave,  the , 

Grarea  in  the  East  ...         ...         .., 

Graves  ready  for  us 

Graver,  iron,  used  for  rock-inscriptiont 
Gravitation,  law  of 

--  Theory  of,  anticipated... 
Greek  langnage,  diffusion  of           ... 
Gunpowder  plot,  discovery  of 
Guthrie,  Dr.f  practice  of,  in  regard  to 
sermoni  m 


his 


69 
51 
16 

24 
41 
104 
117 
252 
158 
234 
80 

227 


Hades,  or  the  spirit-world  ... 
Hail,  its  formation  and  use... 
Hall,  Bishop,  saying  of      ... 
Hally  Robert,  saying  of 
Hannibal    ...  ...         ,„ 

Hardened  transgressors      ... 
Hariri,  quotations  from     ... 
Hart,  quotation  from         .•• 
Hastiness  in  speech 
Hawk,  the  ...         ... 

Healing  the  sick     ... 
Heat  


50, 


••• 
••• 


133 
249 
27 
156 
59 
...  110 
86,  110 
...  32 
...  123 
...  261 
...  213 
238,  239,  250 


Heathen  philosophy,  its  views  of  life        ...     24 
Heathens,  their  conduct  in  misfortunes    12,     20 


their  views  of  God 
their  character 


Heaven,  a  place  of  peace  ... 
Heavenly  bodies 

Hell  

Henry,  Matthew,  sayings  of 

Henry,  Philip,  saying  of   ... 

Herbert,  Spencer,  quotation  from 

Hercules,  Constellation  of  ... 

Herod  AgrippUy  death  of    ... 

Heroic  faith 

Heroism,  true 

Hieroglyphic  mode  of  writing 

Hieroglyphics,  Egyptian 

Himyaritic  characters 

Hiods         ... 

Hints  to  Preachers  {^See  Preachers) 

Hippopotamus,  the... 

Hisn  Ohorab  ...         •,.         ., 

History,  key  to      

Hmyar       ...         •••         ,„         .. 
Hoarfrost   ...         ... 

Holt  Ghost,  tun  ... 

Homer 

Hopeful  and  Faithful 

Horites,  the 

Horse,  the  ... 

Hospitality,  Arab  ... 

Housebreakers        ...         ... 

Household,  Job's    ... 

Hugh  Latimer  before  Henry  VIII. 

Hugh  McKail 

Huguenots  ... 


...  15 

43,  93 

...  152 

152,  153 

...  157 

9,  87,  257 

...  202 

...  160 

...  252 

...  24 

•••  62 

...  51 

117,  133 

60,  174,  176,  189 

...  117 


256 


...  266 
...  117 
...  234 
...  117 
...  250 
...  207 
...  170 
...  107 
...  178 

260 

...110, 135,  191,  197 

150 

7 

...  206 

...  18 

102,  147 


••• 


••• 


Humanity  to  servants  and  strangers  ...  197 
Humboldt,  iiying  of  ...  .,,  ...  65 
liylosaurqs,  the      269 


I. 

Ibex,  the     ...         ...         ... 

Ice,  formation  of    ...         ... 

Ichthyosaurus,  the  ...         ... 

Idolatry       

Idols  

Iguana,  the 

Tguaiiodon,  the       ... 
Incomprehensibleness  of  God 
Infidelity     ...  ...  ... 

Influence,  Christian  ... 

luquiry  meetings    ...         ... 

Instinct 

Intellect,  human     ...         ... 

Intelligence,  spirit  of         ... 
Inundations  ...         ... 

Iron  

Iron  money  

Irrigation,  Egyptian  ... 


...  256 

...  250 

...  269 

...  194 

...  202 

...  269 

...  269 

...  61 

...  136 

75,  223 

...  215 

...  254 

...  253 

123.  253 

...  79 

...  167 

...  169 

...  249 


5,  6,  2S,  175,  188 
\\\        Z         6, 


206 

156 

156 

122 

102 

5 

ib. 

ib. 

ih. 

20 

60 

7 

6 

7 

ib. 

ib. 


James  /.,  saying  of 
Jeremy  Taylor,  saying  of   ... 
Jerome,  his  advice  to  preachers 
Jesuits,  as  persecutors 
Jews,  their  present  state     ... 
Job,  kiis  personality  ... 

his  actual  existence     ... 

his  residence    ... 

his  name 

his  character    ... 

his  prosperity 

his  children      ...         ,,, 

his  property     

his  household  ... 

his  dignity 

his  happiness  in  his  children 

his  spiritual  care  of  them 

his  faith  in  the  atonement       ...         ...     ib. 

his  accumulated  aud  aggravated  cal;)  mi- 
ties  14, 15,  69, 100, 112—116, 177—183 

his  disease       ...  ...  ...        19,     40 

his  age  at  the  time  of  it         ...         ...     49 

his  early  training        192 

his  speeches    ...  ...  ...  ...   200 

his  strong  language 20 

his  faith  and  patience  89 

his  joyous  anticipation  ...         ...     ib. 

his  usefulness   ..  ...  ...  ...   175 

his  character  as  a  magistrate  ...         ...     ib. 

an  object  of  astonishment  and  horror 

112,  180 

a  specimen  of  the  grace  of  God  ...   176 

a  pattern  for  Christians  ...  ...     ib. 

an  example  of  suflfering  patience         ...  106 

his  repentance  ...  ...         ...  271 

his  deliverance  ...  ...         ...  278 

his  restored  prosperity  279 

his  second  family        ...         ...         ...  2S1 

his  age  and  death        ...         ...  ...  2S2 

a  type  of  Christ  20,  22,  28,  43,  45,  67,  76, 

83,99,100,104,105,106,  113,  116,122, 
162,  177,  178,  180,  181,  187,  280,  281 

lessons  from  his  grief  and  the  occasion 

of  it  22 


XX. 


GENERAL  INDEX, 


Job,  Book  of ;  its  general  character         ...       1 

it8  author  ...         ...         ...     ii- 

—  period  of  its  composition  ...     ib. 

^— its  historical  nature  ...     ib. 

species  of  composition       ...       2 

its  genuineness  and  integrity     ib. 

— its  canonicity  and  inspiration     ib. 

its  subject  ...         ...  ...     ib. 

•^ its  design   ...  ib. 

its  divisions  ...         ...       3 

its  contents  ...         ...     ib. 

when  read  by  early  Church  1,  106 

opinion  of  Carlyle  regarding  it  242 

John  Brown  of  Haddington,  sayings  of  120,  144 
Johnson,  Dr.y  his  testimony  to  true  religion  172 
Joktan         ...  ...  ...  ,,.  ...     94 

Judge,  Job  as  a      ...         ...  175 

Julian  the  Ajpostaie^  anecdote  of  „,         ,,,     42 


K 

King  Alfred^  anecdote  of  „,         ••• 

James  /.,  saying  of   ...         ••• 

Kinsman,  near  ...  ,„  ... 
Kitto^  quotations  from  .••  ••« 
Knowledge,  how  made        ...         ••• 

progress  of       

acquisition  of  ...         ... 

Job's,  of  a  Redeemer  .,, 

iTf/^jz^/^,  sajiug  of  ...  ...          ,„ 

Kru7mnacher,  sayings  of     ...  ,,, 


...  211 

...  206 
...  119 
31,  265 
...  55 
...  ib. 
...  80 
...  1J8 
...  18 
32,  50 


110,  173 
...     ib. 


Lamp,  in  Arab  dwellings    ... 

an  emblem  of  prosperity      , 

Laud  and  water,  proportion  of       ...         ...  169 

Landmarks  in  the  East       ...  ...         ...  147 

Lateran  Council      ...  ...  ...  ...  246 

Latimer,  Hugh,  anecdote  of  206 

Lnvattr.  saying  of  ...  ...         ,,.  ...        9 

Law  of  Gravitation...         ...         ...  ...  252 

Laws  of  Nature       170,  25 Hi 

Lay  testimonies  to  the  value  of  true  religion  172 
Lead  used  in  engraving  on  rocks    ...  ...   117 

Leaden  tablets  used  for  writing  on...  ...     ib. 

Legh  Richmond,  dying  message  of...  ...   157 

Leviathan,  the         23,  160,  267,  268 

Liberty,  true  ...         ...         ...  ...  257 

Life,  its  solemnity  and  importance...  ...     24 

its  length  in  patriarchal  times  ...     55 

compared  to  a  shadow  ...  56,  86 

to  a  voyage  ...         ...     60 

to  a  flower...         ,.,         ,,.     86 

Life  of  the  believer  240 

Light,  its  nature,  &c.  248 

its  moral  importance  150 

and  d;irkness,  alternation  of  ...  158 

I^ij^l'tning 169,  235,  236 

Linen,  used  for  writing  on 117 

Liun,  the      ...  .  oripj 

Lions,  symbolical  of  oppressors     80 

Lives  of  the  patriarchs       55 

Z,orir^,  JbA».  saying  of       48 

J^o"t'«v'ty 176^  179 

Lord,  the,  or  Jehovah     10,  242 

Lord's  Prayer,  the 101.  239 

Uird  Burleighy  testimony  of,  to  true  religion   172 


Zi(?r(af  C%«^^«OT  on  true  religion      ...         ...  172 

Lord  Chester^eld,  sayings  of         ...         66,  172 

Lord  Rosset  telescope  of 72 

Ztt^^^r,  sayings  of  ... 

29,  53, 144,  155. 166, 161,  210 

-^— ^  his  temptations      ...         ...         ...  231 

anecdoteof ...  235 

Lycurgus     167 

Z.y<7»«,  Martyrs  of •         ...  182 


M 

Madagascar^  Christians  of...         .m         •••  179 
Magistrate,  Job  as  a  ...         ,.,         ...  175 

Mahomedans,    conduct    of    in  regard    to 

Christians       ...         ...         ...         ...   106 

their  veneration  for  the  moon  195 

179 

.  167 

,  266 

.     62 

.     67 

,  254 

...  213 

...     15 

18,  162 

...     ib. 

...     29 

second 

...  182 

...     94 

...  101 

30,  122 

...  180 


••• 


Mallows      

Mammon •         •••         ... 

Mammoth  ...         ...         

Man  

as  a  piece  of  Divine  workmanship 

his  distiuction  as  a  creature  ... 

Mannedorf,  Institution  at  ...         „• 

Mantle,  or  robe       ...         

Martyrs,  sayings  of 

their  spirit 

— — —  their  number       ... 

—  their    sufferings     in    the 
century 

Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus...         ... 

Masaniello ...  ...  ...  ... 

Massacre,  the  Bartholomew  ... 

Masses,  the,  how  to  be  elevated 

Mastodon,  the         266 

Maurice,  saying  of...         ...         ...         ...     98 

Mausoleums  ...         ...         ...         ...     25 

Mazzaroth  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  251 

McKail,  Hugh,  saying  of   ...         ...         ...     18 

Mediator,  a...         ...         ...  65 

Megalosauros,  the  ...         ...         ...         ...  269 

Mesopotamia  ...  ...  ,„  ...  202 

M  essenger  of  the  Covenant  211 

Metals        167 

Metallurgy ib. 

Meteors      263 

Meteoric  Showers  ...         ...         ...         ...     ib. 

Meteorology  235,  250,  253 

Metropolitan  Pulpit,  quotation  from  ...  271 

Microscope,  revelations  of  the       ...         ...     72 

Migration  of  birds 261 

Milk  174 


Milky  Way,  the      ... 
Milton,  quotations  from- 

on  substitution 

on  angels 


37,  136,  153,  252 


10, 


on  serving  God 


on  invisible  spirits... 

on  the  fall...  ...  „ 

on  knowledge         ...         „ 

on  man's  creation  ...         , 

on  mammon 

on  heathen  philosophy 

on  fallen  angels 

— ; —  -  on  the  Seraph  Abdiel 
Mines  ;  how  wrought  in  Job's  day 

•M  •••  ...  • 


Miners 


9 
31 
...  17 
31,  153 
...  36 
...  55 
...  89 
...  167 
...  170 
...  171 
...  198 
...  167 

...  a. 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


XXI. 


Mirrors,  Eastern     ,♦«        ••• 

Modesty,  youthftil , 

Mokatteby  Wady     

Money         .,,         ... 

Moon,  the,  an  object  of  worship 

Moral  sense... 

JSTorala,  heathen       ...         ... 

Morning  visitatioD,  Gbd't  ..• 
Mugheir      ,„         ...         ,,, 
Mungo  Parky  anecdote  of   ... 
Murder        ...         ...         .., 

Murmnring,  sinfolness  of  ... 
Music  ...         ...         ... 

Musical  instmraentt 
Mutability  of  earthly  enjoyments 


••• 

••• 
••• 
... 


••• 

t.. 
••• 
..• 
..• 
..• 
... 
••• 
••• 


N 
Names  in  the  East  ...         ..«         .•• 

how  given 

importance  of  

Napoleon     ...  ...  ...  24, 

Nations,  their  rise,  increase  and  decay 
Nature,  book  of,  its  teachings 

animated,  a  study  for  man 

Natural  Laws,  from  and  under  God 
Natural  Selection    ... 

Nebulae         ...         

NerOy  anecdote  of . . .  ...         ... 

Netherlands,  persecutions  in  the    ... 
Nineveh        ...  ...  ...  ... 

North  American  Indians     ... 
Northern    nations,    settlemeut    of,  in 
South  of  Europe  


...  289 

...  204 
.>.  117 
...  125 
...  195 

47,  105 
...  93 
...  52 

...  195 
...  228 
...  102 

•  ••    04> 

...  1^9 
...  lb. 
...  182 


...   5 
5.  202 

...  202 

239,  261 

...  80 

...  77 

...  255 

...  170 

...  204 

37.  160 

129,  156 

...  122 

...  174 

...  178 

the 

...  234 


Obstinate  transgressors      ,         ...     95 

Ocean,    bed  of        168 

depths  of 246 

its  unexplored  vegetation    ...         ...    ib. 

its  great  depth  of  water      ...         ...    ib. 

its  fountains  ...         ...         ...    ib. 

Offences,  different  kinds  of 84 

Oil 174 

Old  Testament,  how  to  be  read       ...         ...     73 

Olive,  cultivation  of  the      ...         ...         ...    174 

Oliver  Goldsmith^  testimony  of,    to    true 

religion  ...         ...         ...  ...   172 

Oppression  of  the  poor       ...         ...         ...  147 

Ordinances  of  heaven,  or  laws  of  nature    ...  252 
Oriental,  houses      ...         ...         ...         ...     14 

postures  of  grief ...     15 

sepulchres  70 


—  poetry 

wisdom  and  learning 


...73,94,203 

82 

Orientals,  habit  of,  in  regard  to  speech      ...     22 
Orion,  constellation  of        ...  ...  ...     60 

nebula  in  the  belt  of  ...       160,251 

Oryx,  the 258 

Ostrich,  the 258,  259 

Ox.  the  wild  258 


Padan-aram  ... 

Pain,  influence  of  ... 
Palseotheriurn^  lP:e  ... 
Papyrus,  the ;  how  used 


••«  ...   £\jo 

18 

267 

,,117.  56,  64 


Papyrus,  its  mode  of  growth 

as  a  symbol  ... 

ships  or  boats  of  ... 


Paradox,  the  believer's 
Parallelism,  Hebrew  .,,         ... 

Pardon  of  sin 

Parents;  their  duty  to  their  children 
their    sins    visited    on    their    off- 
spring             351,  178 


56 
ib, 
64 
47 
34 
53 
8 


their  responsibility... 


Parentage  in  the  East 

blessing  of  a  godly  one ..,         ... 

Park,  Mungo,  anecdote  of...         ... 

Pascal,  saying  of , 

Paseng,  the 

Passion 

Patience  of  Job      

Pau/us  EmiHus,  ssLving  ol ...         ,„         ... 
Peacock,  the  ...         .,,         ... 

Perfection,  Job's     ...  ...         

Christian  ...         ...         ... 

Pericles,  anecdote  of  

Persecution  of  the  Jews      ...         ... 

of  the  Christians 

of  the  Protestants 

of  the  Albigenses  and  Waldenses 

overruled  for  good 

Persepoiis 

Perseverance  in  grace         ...         ... 

Persia,  royal  sepulchres  of 

Persons  in  the  Godhead      ...         ... 

Peruvians,  conduct  of,   in  regard  to  their 
children  ...         ...         ... 

Phavorinus,  saying  of 

Philip  of  Macedon,  anecdote  of 

Philip  Henry,  saying  of 

Philopasmon  ...  ...         ...         ... 

Philosopher,  origin  of  the  name 

Philosophers,  vanity  and  conceit  of 

Philosophy,  true  and  false 

"■'  heathen  ...         ...         ... 


vam       ...         .., 

of  the  Seasons ... 


Phoenix,  the 

Physician,  the  Divine         ...         ... 

Pilgrim  Fathers,  the  ...         ... 

Pity,  to  be  shown  to  the  afflicted  ... 

Plants,  their  effect  on  the  atmosphere 

Plaio  

Pleiades,  the 

Plesiosaurus,  the 

Plough,  constellation  of  the  ... 

Ploughing  in  the  East         ...         .„ 
Pompey,  saying  of ^ 

Pope,  the  ;  his  temporal  power      

Pope  Adrian,  death  of 
Posture,  Oriental,  in  grief  ... 
Prayer        ...  36,  43,  87,  88,  92,  101,  130, 
Preachers,  Hints  for,  41,  54, 73,  76,  81,  92, 
98,  107,    133.    155,    156,    iri4, 
165,  204—207,    212,  221, 
Preachers,  how  made 

three  things  necessary  for 


178 
178 
202 
228 

51 
256 
109 

89 

2f) 

259 

5 

ib. 
196 

29 
122 

ib. 

ib. 
234 
174 
107 

25 
207 

18 
207 
104 
202 
57 
204 
ib. 
16 
24 
204 
253 
176 
38 
147 
44 
159 
...   170 
60,  251,  252 
...  269 
...  251 
...     13 
...     15 
...  234 
...     33 
...     15 
164 


227, 


Predestination 
Preparation  for  death 
Pride  


68, 


276 
155 
204 
87 
14 
a09 


IXll. 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Prince,  John  Critehley,  ({woihixon  from     ...  200 

I'rinting,  its  invention        234 

its  history  ...  117 

Prisoners  in  the  gold  mines  of  Egypt       ...     24 

Procrastination,  danger  of ^0 

Promises  of  Old  and  New  Testamento      38—41 

different  kinds  of 39 

conditions  of        ...         ...  ...     ib. 

Prosperity  of  the  ungodly,  symbols  of  the...     56 

Proslitutes  iu  heathen  temples       229 

Proverb,  Basque     ...         ...         .••         ...     1'^ 

Turkish    ...         *••         .••         ...     18 

Greek       .••         »*%         ...         •••     22 

Jewish      ...         •..   190 

Proverbs,  Arab       56,73,75,259 

Latin        125,  191 

Proverbial  maxims  ...         ...         ...         ...     82 

expressions  of  the  Arabs  ...   109 


Providence  of  God — 
Its  universality  ... 
Its  ceaselessness ... 
Its  effects 
Its  mysteriousness 
Its  unsearchableness 
Its  acts  ... 

Pterodactyle,  the    ... 

Ptolemaic  System,  the 


16,  137 

...  17 

...  35 

...  63 

72,  77 

...  79 

...  269 

...  249 


Punishment,  corresponding  with  the  sin,  1 89,  1 90 

Purslain      42,  179 

Pyramids ...        25,  ]  17 

Pyrrho        ,  170 

Pythagortu 204 


Queen  Elizabeth^  sayings  of  ...       13,     50 

Quotation  from  Addison     149 

Blair  (The  Grave) 163 

Burns        50 

Carpenter  (Dr.)     161 

Critchley  Prince     200 

Cuvier        266 

Duncan  on  the  Seasons     ...  253 

Fleming  (Prof.)      159 

Hariri         110 

Herbert  Spencer 161 

Kitto  264 

Pope  274 

Sedgwick  (Prof.) 255 

Spurgeon,  C.  H 171 

Towusend 265 

Tyndal  (Prof.)        161 

Warrington  (Week  of  Crea- 
tion)         233 

an   early    English   poet   on 

Spring     251 

Sir  R.  Blackraore  ...  19,  21 

Dr.  Chalmers         160,  267,  270 

Cowper,  115,  122,  180,  137, 

140,143,153,173,191,196.237 

Milton,  9,  10,  17,  31,  36,  89, 

153,  159, 167,  170,  171,  198 

Shakspeare,  49,  67,  91,  209,  257 

Sophocles 109,111 

— Thomson     208,  236 

Wordiworth     88,169.278,281 


Quotation  from  Young  ,16,  49,  50,  56,  104, 

108,  116,  163,  224 
Quotations  from  Scripture  to  be  rightly  ap- 
plied     82 

R 

Races,  deterioration  of       178 

Rain 37,  169,235,237 

its  mysterious  production  and  descent 

249,  250 

its  time  of  falling  in  the  East  ...  174 

JRam  ...         ...         ...         ...         ,,,  202 

Raven,  the 255 

Reading       81 

Reason ;  proper  to  man ...  253 

imparted  by  the  Creator   ...         ...     ih. 

— — •  a  special  exhibition  of  Divine  wis- 
dom        ...         ...         ...         ...     ib. 

Redeemer „        • 119 

Redemption ••         •••         ...  119 

God's  work  of  .„        „.  234 

Reeniy  the    ...         ...         •••         ••!         ••.  258 

Reflection    ...         •••         •«•         ••«         ••«     81 

Reformation,  the     ...         ,.•         ...         ...  234 

Rending  the  Robe 15 

Repentance,  late      ...         5ii 

Job's 271 

Reproof,  how  to  be  given    ...         ...         ...     2  ' 

Resurrection,  an  example  of  Divine  power ...  161 
Retribution  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...     30 

Revenge       ...         ...         •..196 

Revolution,  the  French       234 

Rhemish  Testament,  note  of  ...         ,..  12*2 

Rhinoceros,  the       ...         ...         ...         ...  258 

rvicnes         ...         *••         ..«         ...         ••*       / 

uncertain    ...         «••         ...         ...     16 

ill-gotten •         ...  125 

i?iM»?(7«fl?,  Z/<?^A,  dying  message  of...         ...  157 

Right  Words  45 

Roads,  Roman         ...         ...         ...         ...  234 

Robert  Hall^  saying  of       ...         ...         ...  156 

Robert  BurnSt  lines  from    ...         ...  ...     50 

his  testimony   to    true    re- 
ligion   172 

Rocks,  engraven       ...         .«•         ...         ...  117 

affording  shelter 148 

abounding  in  caves  ...         ...         ...  179 

Rocky  land 174 

Rolls,  papyrus,  used  for  writing  on...         ...  117 

Roman  Empire        234 

its  breaking  up       ...         ...     ib. 

Rome:  its  decay      ...  ...  80 

Rutherford,  Samuel^  sayings  of   27,  35,  44, 

123,  162 

anecdote  of 39 

S 

Sabeans       „         ...     13 

Sabeism       193,  195 

Sacrifices     8, 9,  277 

Snladin  the  Great ,  anecdote  of       ...         ...     24 

Salt,  how  viewed  by  the  Arabs        42 

Satan  ...         ...  ...  ,,,  ...     10 

Saying  of  Lavater    ...  ...  9 

Tahnage...  ...         ...  ...       9 

Queen  Elizabeth  ...       IS,     Sq 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


rxni. 


Saying  of  Seneca    ...  15,17,29,38, 

John  Wesley     ...  ...  16, 

Augustin,  16,  20,  30,  31,  33, 166, 

Ambrose  ...  ... 

Chrysostom 

Trapp,    8,  17,  18,  19,  23,  24,  28, 

Breatius 

H.  W.  Beecher 24,  28, 

Brookes      22,  23,25,  25,  30.  38, 

40,  50,129, 

Joseph  Caryl       ...       21,25,70, 

— Hugh  McKail 

Carlyle 106, 

Constantine  the  6rea(    «•• 

—  Pauliis  Emilius   ... 

Sam.  Ruthertord,  27,  35,  44,  123, 

Luther  ... 

•= Dr.  Barrow 


29,  53,  144,  156, 
..«         t*«        32, 


Krummacher      ... 

Themibtoclei      ...         ,,, 

Adam  Clarke , 

John  Locke        ...         ,,,         ... 

Csesar  Borgia     ...         ... 

Young     ...         ...         ...50,  56, 

Pascal     ...         ...         ,., 

Milton    ...  ...         ... 

Humboldt  ...  ,,, 

Ijord  Chesterfield  ...        66, 

•       -  Addison...  ...         ,., 

Bacon ... 

- — " Hariri    ...         ...  ... 

Matthew  Henry 9,87, 

Maurice... 

John  Brown,  of  Haddington,  120 

Sir  Thomas  Brown        ... 

Epictetus  ...  ,,, 

Richard  Baxter 144, 

Erasmus  ...  „, 

Archbishop  Usher         „,       156, 

Jeremy  Taylor  ...         ... 

Robert  Hall       ...  .,,  ,,, 

Garrick...  ...         ..,  ,,, 

Legh  Richmond  ...         ... 

Selneccar  ...         ,,,  ... 

Solon     ...  

Lord  Burleigh  ...  ,„         ,,, 

~~"      Sir  John  Mason  ,,,         ... 

Sir  Philip  Sidney  .,,  ... 

Sir  Walter  Raleigh         .,,         ... 

Dr.  Johnson      ...         ,„         „, 

Lord  Chatham  ...         ...         „, 

Oliver  Goldsmith  .,,         „, 

Edmund  Burke  ...         „,         „. 

Robert  Burns    ...  ...         ... 

Southey 

Sir  Humphrey  Dayy      ...         ... 

Fenelon  ..  ...  ,,,  ,., 

Philip  Henry     ...         

James  the  First ...         ,,,         ... 

Phavorinus         ...         ,,,         ... 

Mr.  Spurgeon 

Dr.  Kitto  ...         ...    • 

Dr.  Townsend    ... 

Sayings,  proverbial,  among  the  Arabs 
Science,  its  inability  to  explain  the  pheno- 
mena of  the  universe  ... 


50 
32 
241 
211 
214 
214 
211 
228 

211 
96 
18 

242 
24 
26 

162 

210 
30 
50 
33 
46 
48 
50 
77 
52 
55 
55 

173 
67 
81 
86 

257 

ys 

,144 
129 
129 
]56 

ih. 
206 
156 

ib. 

ib. 
157 
144 
163 
172 

ib. 

ib. 

ib. 

ib. 

ib. 

ib. 

ib. 

ib. 

ib. 
173 
193 
202 
206 
207 
231 
264 
265 

55 

156 


Sea,  formation  of  the 

Sedgwicki  Profeisor,  quotation  from 

Self-abhorrt-nce       ...         ...         ...         ... 

Self-perfectiou  ...  .«•  «••  ... 

Self-righteousness    ...         ...         .., 

Scir-salvatioQ  ...         ...  ... 

Selneccer,day\n^o{..,         ... 

Seneca,  sayings  of  15,  17,  29,  38, 

Sepulchres,  Oriental 

attention  paid  to         ... 

Servant  of  God 

hoQour  of  being  one  ... 

Servitude,  inseparable  from  man    ... 
Seven  stars  ...         ...         ...  6, 

bullocks  and. seven  rams 

Shakspeare,  quotation  from         49,  57,  9 1 , 
Shaving  the  head    ...  ... 

Sheikhs,  Arab         ...         ...  ...  ... 

Ships,  human  life  compared  to      ... 

SigQS  of  the  zodiac 

Silence,  internal  as  well  as  external 

Sin  ...         ...         ...         ..•  9, 

—  discovery  of     ...         ...         ...         ••• 

—  diflFerent  kinds  of         ...         ... 

—  its  nature  and  chnracter 

—  its  effects  descending  to  one's  children 
Sins  of  the  heart    ... 

some  more  heinous  and  disastrous  than 

others  ...  ...         ... 

Sinner,  the,  a  burden 

Sir  Humphreif  Davy,  his  testimony  in  favour 

of  firm  religious  belief 
Sir  Isaac  Newton^  his  estimate  of  his  own 

attainments     ...  ...  .«•  ... 

Sir  John  Mason,  remarkable  testimony  of 
Sir  thilip  Sidney,  his  advice  to  his  brother 
Sir  Thomas  Brown,  saying  of 
Sir   Walter  Raleigh,  his  testimo'y  to  true 

religion  ...  ...         ... 

Slaves,  how  treated  in  the  Eist      ... 

—  how  treated  by  Job 


9, 
24, 

51, 


Slavery 

Sleep 

Smyrna,  martyrs  of  ...  ... 

Snow  ...  ...         ...  ...         ... 

its  formation  and  use  ...         ... 

Societies,  Bible,  Tract,  and  Missionary 
Socrates      ,.•          ...  ...          ... 

Sodomites  ...         ... 

Solar  System  249, 

Solemn  inquiries     ...  103.  104,  149, 

iSo/ow,  sa>ing  of      ... 

Sous  of  God  ...  ...         .,, 

Sophocles,  quotations  from  ...      109, 

Southey y  his  testimony  to  true  religion 
Spain  •••  ...  ...  ...        30, 

Spanish  Armada     ...         ...  30,  37, 

Inquisitors  ...         ... 

Spectre        ...  ...  ...  ...         ... 

Spencer,  Herbert,  quotation  Irom  .,,         ... 
Spider's  web  ...  ...  ...         ... 

Spirits         ...         ...         ...         „,         ... 

Spirit-world  ...  ...  ... 

Spitting,  among  the  Arabs...  ...      106, 

Spring,  season  of    ... 

an  emblem  of  the  resurrection 


2i6 
250 

27^ 

65 

62 

265 

144 

50 

70 

25 

10 

32 

32 

251 

277 

257 

15 

174 

64 

251 

31 

bO 

84 

ib. 

94 

105 

9 

105 
53 

173 

83 
172 

lb. 
129 

172 

190 
190 
191 

68 
182 
237 
249 
234 

93 
22J 
252 
180 
163 
9 
111 
172 

8G 
2-^6 

47 

31 
KO 

56 

31 
218 
180 
251 
252 


IXIV. 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


Springs  in  the  bottom  of  the  ocean            ...  247 

S/iurfffon,  C.  If.,  quotatiou  from 271 

St.  Panl's  Cathedral            1^^^ 

Stas,  the      257 

Stars,  distance  of 136,160 

their  order      ...          ...          ...          •■•  ^^^ 

thtir  miniber ...          ...          ...          •••  153 

prouixd  iuto  constellations    ...       251,160 

falline 253 

Stoic         ^ 170 

Stone-pillars,  used  for  engraving  on           ...  117 

Stork,  the 259 

Storms,  uses  of       ...          ...          ...         ...  159 

Stoiin-cloiid             ...         ...         ...         ...  23o 

Study  of  Niiture     ...          255 

Substitute,  the  sinner's       42 

Substitution  9,  69 

SulTerings  of  imrtyrs          182 

Suicide        ...          ...         ...          ...         ...  51 

Sun,  the;  its  place  and  distance     ...          ...  249 

an  early  object  of  worship           ...  195 

Siirfty,  Christ  our  ...          ...          ...  83,  9'J 

Sympathy,  the  duty  and  benefit  of...    21,  42.  45 

U'cssary  in  a  preacher...         ...  73 

wanting  in  Job's  friends           ...  98 

exemplified  in  Job  himself       ...  186 

Sy/ia            ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  202 

S\riac  language       ...          ...          .„          ...  f6. 

System,  Solar;  theories  of  the      249 

T 

Talk,  unprofitable 91 

Talmage,  saying  of 9 

Taitlor,  Jeremu,  saying  of  ...          ,,,          ...  156 

Temperature  of  the  seasons...          ...          ...  159 

Temples,  heathen,  formerly  in  London       ...  195 

Teii  persecutions,  the          ...          ...         ...  122 

Testimonies,  lay,  to  the  value  of  true  religion  172 

Thanksgiving,  mniter  for    ...          .,,         ...  16 

Tfi'^bes,  tombs  of     ...          ...         •••         ...  25 

Theft,  how  punished  in  Egypt        ...          ...  193 

Themistocles,  saying  of       ...          ...          ...  39 

Thomson,  quotations  from  ...  ...       208,  236 

Thunder       235 

Thunder-storm         236 

Time             49 

Titles  flattering,  in  the  East          205 

Tombs,  Egyptian 25 

Tornadoes    ...          ...          ...          ,,,         ,,,  ]4 

Tiirqnemada             ...           ...          ,,,          ...  47 

Townseiifl,  Dr.,  qtiotations  from     265 

Tradition      ...         ...          ...          ...          ...  55 

Traditional  maxims...          ...          ...          ...  82 

Tiajqj,  sayings  of     ...  8,  17,  18,  19,  23,  24, 

2S,  166,  214 

Troglodytes 179 

Trouble'   ^ 27,  36,  48,  K6 

Tiil(i!-Cain..,          ...          ,,,          ...          ...  167 

Turbnn         ...           .,.          ...          ...          ,,^  175 

Turkish  proverb       ...          ...          ...          ...  |8 

Ty7i(lull,  Professor,  quotation  from              ...  160 

his  payer  test    130,  183 

U 

Unbelief,  the  language  of 184 

Understanding,  a  Divine  gift          105 

■ to  be  prized  and  cultivated...  123 

Ungodly,  the            95 


Unicorn,  the            247 

Universe,  the,  its  mystery  involved  by  science  160 

Unknown  God,  Tbe...          ...         .«•         ...  36 

Uprightness              6 

f/r,  of  the  Chaldees...          ...         ...         ...  195 

Urns,  the    ...           ...         ...         •••         ...  258 

Ussher  Ardibishop,  saying  of         ...      156,  2u6 

(/%,  laud  of ...          ...         ...         •••         ...  5 

V 

Vahdiinian,  the  Emperor,  anecdote  of      ...  27S 

Vice 274 

Vicissitude  of  day  and  night            ..•      158,  247 

of  fortune          ...         , 5? 

Viiidictiveness          ...         ...         .••         ...  196 

Vision  of  Eliphaz     ...         ...         ..«         ...  31 

Vite/lius,  the  Emperor,  anecdote  of           ...  57 

Voyage,  life  compared  to  a              ...         ...  64 

Vulcan         ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  167 

Vulture       ...         •••         ...  262 

W 

Wady  Mokatteb •  •••          •••   I'T 

Waifs  179 

Waldenses,  persecution  of  the         122 

Wales,  mountains  of  ...  .••  ...    179 

War  horse,  the       260 

Warrifgioii's  Week  of  Creation,  quotations 

from 233,  252 

Waterloo,  battle  of 129,  261 

Watt  254 

Week  of  Creation,  Warrington's  ...       233,  252 
Weeping,  not  unmanly       ...  ...  ...    J  01 

relief  in 102 

different  kinds  of  ...  ...    103 

Wesley,  Johuj  sayinjis  of  •••         .m  16,     32 

Westminster  Abbey  ..,  ...  ...   195 

Whirlwind 14,  243 

Wife,  Job's 19 

Wild  ass,  the  42,  73,  148,  25? 

term  of  reproach  among  the  Arabs     73 

Wild  beasts,  protection  from  ...         ...     40 

Wild  goat,  the        256 

Wild  ox,  the 258 

Wiud  169 

Wine  13 

Wing  of  birds         262 

Wisdom,  required  to  save  souls  and  comfort 

mourners         ...         ...  ...         ...  107 

two  kinds  of         ...         ...         ...     ib. 

Wolsey,  Cardinal  ...  .,,  ,„  ...   101 

Women  in  the  East  ...         •••         ...       8 

Words,  lasting  effect  of      ...  ...  ...   200 

Words  of  God        43 

Right      45 

^^'ordsworth,  quotations  from,  88, 159,  278,  281 
Worship,  idolatrous  ...  ...  ...  195 

Writing,  ancient  modes  of ...         ...         ...   117 

Y 

Tarab  118 

Young,  quotations  from,  16,  49,  50,  56,  77, 

104,  108,  116,  163,  224 
Young  men  in  the  East      ...         ...         ...  203 

Youth,  modesty  of,  among  the  Arabs      174,  205 
modesty  an  ornament  of     ...         ...  204 

Z 

Zodiac,  signs  of  the  ...         .••         *•.     160 


^RIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 


3  1197  21020  8028 


'm^^M'^'!' 


i</.Sw  <%<<*<'<'''•''■ 


W//M^//l 


